rOR OFFICIAL USE mu

JPN b/Il”
4 nanny 1979

AUTWTIM 0F mop CMTROL

  
    
 

U. S. JOINT MICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
"’.'O I 0:: ‘ ' s I. s'l ll" ‘tl'l ll2.l:lll llllll.

NOTE

JVRS publicati‘w» curtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agencv
transmissions and broadcasts. tutorials from foreign-languagt
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrn<i~g and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] or" -.p:!iyd by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
-r .nxccrpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

rniamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cles, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

. ANS 1WD SEG'JIATIOXS GOVERNING We‘IRSRIP 0F
1"” ' 2; § REPRODUCSD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMIXATION
" 1? H1“? 203 BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
. .. . . . _
"':I I 0:: ‘ ‘ e L... e‘ . II ‘-:I'. ll..l.llllll1ll.

mm Reruns. e. 'tWemue '—
Pﬂ JP” 1/3199

tV~~W IN”
4 Jenna 1979

  

 

 

amrml 0! moor (:0me e.
”WV. ".1 It I tmmmoeeleu.ne.
m W HI. 0.. M II WNW 0000 he
Joint Nblicetione Ieeeerch Service
moo North mm ma 2”” " °"""°’ ”'-
Arlin‘ton, Virginie 22201
(0)
amount-unmanne- Il'nedmt'evmm
Ae ebove
M.

I‘M”

AWTIZATSIYA UMVLMYA VOYSK, Holcav. 1977

‘WM~O~

Ihie report conteine infometion on the prerequisitel end ecientific beeee

of euto-etion; troop control end cum! in «:0th ee en object of euto-etion;
the poeeibilitiee of developent end the real etlte of Intonation: nethode

of euteutin; troop co-end; the role of the hmn eoldier in asw [eutoueted
eyetu of troop co-end and control]; the effect of eutonetion on the
develop-eat of IiIitery effeire, the etylee end methods of troop leederehip.

Inmw two

hatchet ion Optiniution
Troop Contra! Efficiency
Hethodoiogy Leedorehip

uW'e-ne

I. one“ new... 9" 150

 

announces—e nmmdmm ._ nee-then
roe orncuu. use on“. united umber _ WﬂtsﬂﬂﬂL _. m 22.5...
. lea-'7 cu- m- nen n.
of Copiee Available Iro- Jns UNCMSSIFIZD _
“Mn lee M e- m r“ n "I N
mi”

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL 083 MY

JPRS 3/8199
A January 1979

AUTOHATION 0F mop CONI’ROL

Moecov AMTISATSIYA UPRAVIBNIYA VOYSK in Rueeien 1977 eiqned
to preee 28 Sop 77 pp 1-302

[Book edited by VJI. Bonderenko, Voyenizdet, 22,000 oopiee]

Commas Pass
BriefAnnotntion ....... ...................1
Author collective O O O O O 0 O O O O D O O O O O O O O O I O O O 0 1
Introduction............................2

CHAPTER 1: me Objective Necessity end Scientific Doses of
Automcins Troop Cmtrol O O O O O 0 O O O O O O 0 O O O 5

1. Automation es n Return Stage in Developing
Systems of the "Menquuipnent" Me . . . . . . . . 5
2. Autoution es en Expression of the Historical
DevelopmentofTroopControl . . . . . . . . . . . . l3

3. Scientific Bases of Automating Troop Control . . . . 23

CHAPTER 2: Troop Control as e Specific Object of Autoution . . . . 36

1. Particular Features of Troop Control Systems as

ObjectsofAuto-ntion 36
2. Modern View on the Essence end Content of the

hoopControlPt-oceu ............... 36

[II - m3! - 1000‘

[OR OFFICIAL 083 m1
CHAPTER 3:

CHAPTER 6:

FOR OFFICIAL I188 ML!

Potential and Real. Possibilities for Autonating
mp cmtI'Ol O O O 0 O O O O O 0 0 O O O C 0 0 O O I O 0

1. Structure. Functions and Principles of Creating
AutoutedTroopControlSysten . . . . . . . . . . .
2. The Present State and Prospects for the
Developnent of Automated Troop Control Systems . . .
3. Potential Possibilities for Improving Automated
w.tm I O O I O O O O I O O O 0 0 D O O C O O O O 0

Specific Methods: for Autonating and Optimising Troop
contml Pmes'es O O 0 0 O O O O I O O O O O O O O O 0

l. The Modeling Method and Its Role in the Automation
and Optimization of Troop Control . . . . . . . . . .
2. The Necessity and Possibility of ﬂathmtical
Logical For-slisation of the Troop Control Process. .
3. Msthemstical Logical Pornalisstion es s Stage in
the Optilizing and Automating of Troop Control. . . .

The Place and Role of Man in Automted Troop Control
systm O O O O D I O 0 O O O O O O 0 O A D O O O O 0 0 O

l. The Problem of the Optima Coordination of Man
anquuiplentintheABUV..............

2. The Inﬂuence of Individual Qualities of the
Servicenen on the Reliability and Efficiency of ASUV

a. The Creativity of the Co-ander and the Automation
of mp control 0 0 O O I l 0 0 O 0 O O O I O I O 0

The Effect of Autonting Troop Control on the Further
Developmntofﬂilitsryhffairs . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l. The Effect of Control Auto-ntion on the nature of
ConbstandTroopOrganiution. . . . . . . . . . . .

2. 'lhe Content and Style of work of Conanders and
Staff Under the Conditions of Using ASUV . . . . . .

3. Criteria and Methods for Snluating the Efficiency
ofAutoIstingTroopCOuti-ol. . . . . . . . . . . . .

cmclu’ionooeessooo00000000000000.0000.

1)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

70

101

101
118

151

151

155
165

176

116
187

219
English title

Russisn title

Author (s)

Editor (s)

Publishing nouse

Place of Publication

Dste of Publication

Signed to press

Copies

COPYRIGHT

H" : {I’& H; OIII' OH Ii..-

IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' Pusucxnos nan

: AMTION OP TEMP CONTROL

AMTIZAT SI‘L‘. L'PP “WWW.

V. H. Bondsrenko

3 Voyenisdst

Moscow

1977

= 28 Sep 77

3 22,000

Voyenizdst , 1977

.c.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY

(Brief Annotation 1

[Text] The booh exanines the following pertinent nethodological questions:
The prerequisites and scientific bases of automation; troop control and
comnd in combat as an. object of automation; the possibilities of develop-
ment and the real state of automation; methods of autoaating troop contend;
the role of the Mann soldier in ASUV [automated system of troop cos-and ‘
and control]; the effect of auto-stion on the develop-ant of silitary af-
fairs. the styles and aethods of troop leadership.

These problems are examined on the basis of Marxist-Leninist aethodology
using materials from research in cyberneties, mathematics, psychology and
military science, using foreign and twpothetical ASUV as the examples.

The book is designed for officers. generals and other readers interested
in the problems of automting troop co-and.

(Author Collective]

The book has been prepared by a group of authors consisting of: Doctor of
Military Sciences, mgr-N Gen 1. I. Anureyev (Section 2 of Chapter 3);
Doctor of Philosophical Sciences,&:gr-Col V. A. Dokarev [posthuom] '
(Section 3 of Chapter 1); Candidate of Philosophical Sciences. Col V. M.
Bondarenko (Sections 1 and 2 of Chapter 1 and the Conclusion); Candidate

of Philosophical Sciences. mgr-Col A. P. Volkov (Section 3 of Chapter 3.
Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter 3. and the Introduction); Candidate of Military
Sciences. m Gen P. V. Grahovshiy (Section 1 of Chapter 3 and Section 2

of Chapter 6); Doctor of Philosophical Sciences, Col A. P. Nitriyev (Chapter
2 and Section 1 of Chapter 11); Doctor of Hilitary Sciences. Col I. A. Zuhhov
(Sections 1 and 3 of Chapter 6); Candidate of Philosophical Sciences. mgr-
Lt Col A. S. Pupko (Section 1 of Chapter 5); Doctor of Philosophical Sci-
encea, Col 1:. s. Tabunov (Section 2 of Chapter 5). Candidate of Military
Sciences. P. V. Shemanskiy (Chapter 2); Doctor of Philosophical Sciences,
MaJ Gen H. I. Yasyukov (Section 3 of Chapter 5).

The book is under the general editorship of Candidate of Philosophical
Sciences. Col V. H. Bondarenko and Candidate of Philosophical Sciences.

Encr-Col A. P. Volkov.

1
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
---:e

I O: t ' ' s as. s' 1 II" ' 30'; VIII Iftil Hi IN.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I N'I'RODUC'I'I ON

The creation of a aodern and most rational systea for organizing and con-
trolling all spheres of life in a socialist society occupies a prominent
place in the activities of the CPSU. In its practical work the CPSU is
guided by the Leninist requirements of scientificness of control, the
ability to correctly determine the prospects and sequence of the tasks to
be carried out, orientation toward the newest scientific and technical
achievements. advanced experience. flexibility. and the ability to respond
quickly and precisely to changing conditions. V. I. Lenin repeatedly
stressed that it is impossible to manage effectively without a knowledge
of the science of management. He steadfastly demanded that the adminis-
trative and scientific aspects be combined in management.

"...In order to manage." he wrote. ”it in essential to be competent. it is
essential to know all the production conditions completely and down to the
fine points. it is essential to know the equipment of this production at
its present-day level. and it is essential to have a certain scientific
education."x

The Leninist methodology of scientific management has been reflected in
the party documents and in the decisions of the congresses and plenums of
the CFSU Central Committee. "The dynamic nature of the development of
Soviet society,” cosmented L. I. Brezhnev at the 25th Party Congress, "the
growing scale of communist construction and our activities on the inter-
national scene urgently require a continuous rise in the level of party
leadership over economic and cultural development. over the indoctrina-
tion of people. as well as an improvement in the organisational and politi-
cal work in the masses.”2 The task posed by the 25th Party Congress of
further improving the scientific level of management applies fully to mili-
tary affairs. Leadership over the defense of the socialist fatherland is
most closely tied to a range of problems related to economic development,
to strengthening the sociopolitical system, and to raising the ideological-
political and cultural-technical level of the working masses. The Soviet
Anned Forces. has an integrated, complicated and dynamic system. are a
port of the socialist state. Consequently. the provisions elaborated by

the party on the scientific management of socialist society relate directly
and immediately to the sphere of troop command and control.

2
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The question of elaborating and using optimum methods and means of troop
control has alvays been and remains one of the basic questions of military '
science. The experience of the Great Patriotic Var, all military history
as well as present-day military science and practice indicate that a loss
or weakening of control can become the cause of failures and defeats.

The revolution in military affairs has placed new. higher demands upon the
efficiency and effectiveness of control. and consequently. also on the
level of operational and tactical thinking. and on the ideological-
political. moral-psychological and volitional qualities of the commanders
and officers of the comand level.

As the theory and practice of control have shown, the integrated automation
.of the control process is the most promising. making it possible to bring
the system of troop control into accord with those requirements vhich have
been placed on it by the increased combat capabilities of all the branches
of forces and services of the armed forces. Under the conditions of a .
modern var, if the imperialists start it, the task of mastering the scien-
tific methods of troop comand on a basis of new technical means asst-es
exceptional urgency. Troop conand should be improved in keeping with the
achievements of scientific and technical progress. Military science must
in every way contribute to improving control equipment and the conunica-
tions system. and should aid in further introducing computers and other
automation in the staffs and their skillful use.

Consequently. the realisation of the combat capabilities of the troops
depends substantially upon effectiveness and efficiency of control. and
automation is the most effective means for improving this.

The process of working out and introducing various automation facilities
into the practice of troop control at present is entering a qualitatively
new phase of its development. the stage of full automation of control.

In this stage. "large systems” are being developed and these include hush
collectives, automatic control complexes and servomechanisms vhieh have

a hierarchical structure that encompasses all levels of the military or-
ganization from the primary troop collectives to the superior connand of
the armed forces.

Naturally. the creation of such systems entails the achieving of a certain
level of economic. scientific-technical and certainly military potential.
and necessitates the solving of a whole series of theoretical and technical
questions. Along with this the methodological problems of the automation
of control are assuming ever greater. and in certain regards, determining
significance.

In the age of the rapid development of science. the elaboration of the
philosophical problems of modern natural science on the basis of dialeco

tical materialism. as a consistently scientific method of cognition, is
assuming ever greater urgency. The solving of methodological problems is

assuming particular urgency in a period of qualitative changes. dialecti-
nrn 1mm and transitional stages in the development of science and

3
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY
. .. .
1.. . 0‘. 0:... OH .0..-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technology. Automating troop command and the entire complex of related
scientific and technical problems are also subject to such stages.

Methodological analysis of the possibilities. ways and goals of automating
troop command should consider social factors. Certainly a person on any
level of ASUV [automated system of troop command and control] acts as a
social being. Inherent to him are creative thought. class awareness.
national feelings. emotional experiences. intuition. as vell as economic,
political and ideological motives of activity.

If in automating the control systems for weapons. tactical units and mili-
tary equipment, it is possible to partially disregard the social essence
of man, in automating troop control systems in which man is a most important

object and the main subject of control, it is virtually impossible to do
this.

Methodological analysis makes it possible to isolate and pose for the spe-
cific sciences the most important and urgent problems, to establish the
general conditions for solving them. and to outline the direction of the
corresponding research. It helps answer the questions of the essence, the
degree of possibility and the aim of automating troop control. The given
work is devoted to a scientific analysis of all these problems. It ex-
amines the basic general theoretical provisions stemming from the dialecti-
cal materialistic notion of the laws of nature, society and thought, the
Marxist-Leninist understanding of the patterns of scientific and technical
progress and armed struggle and determining the necessity, possibility and
direction of automating troop control.

Since the problem of automating control has an interdisciplinary nature.
the research on this problem requires a systems approach. Proceeding from
this the authors have set for themselves the task of examining as tho-
roughly as possible the methodological problems of automating troop control.
The book employs the achievements of Soviet military. military engineering
and military philosophical thought.

In working on the book. the authors have been guided by the requirements
of the CPSU Central Committee. the Soviet government and the USSR Minister
of Defense for improving the principles of scientific control. employing
progressive methods of control, and introducing electronic computers and
automated systems.

FOOTNOTES

1. Lenin, V. I., ”Poln. Sobr. Soch.” [Complete Collected works], Vol b0,
p 215.

2. "Naterialy XXV S"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress].
Moscow. 1976. p 65.

h
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1: THE OBJECTIVE NECESSITY AND SCIENTIFIC BABES OF AUTOMATINO
TROOP CONTROL

1. Automation as a Natural Stage in Developing Systems of the ”Han--
Equipment" Type

The full automation of control is an offspring of our times, the second
half of the 20th century. It was engendered by the present-day scientific
and technical revolution. and at the same time expresses its essence.

Any process or phenomenon in social life experiences the impact of the
scientific and technical revolution. It opens up for mankind nev hori-
zons in understanding the secrets of nature and in a profound comprehen-
sion of the objective patterns of social development.

Each phenomenon possesses an essence which determines its further develop-
ment. Research on the essence of the present-day scientific and technical
revolution is an important and complicated theoretical problem, the solu-
tion to which is possible only on a basis of applying the meuhodological

principle elaborated by K. Marx and F. Engels in analyzing the industrial
revolution at the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th centuries.

The founders of Marxism showed that the development of production, like
any other sphere of social activity, is based upon an improvement of the
system which links man as the principal of any type of activity and the
technical means. It is a question of a system of the "man-equipment"
type which is a united mechanism of labor. In it the equipment is simul-
taneously a certain antipode of man and his continuation. In the opinion
of K. Marx. equipment represents the artificial organs of a social man and
these complement and strengthen his natural organs.l Such an analogy pro-
vides an opportunity to view the history of the development of technology
not in isolation from man, but rather as an improvement of his artificial

organs.

The development of technology represents the process of the creation by man
of those devices which in an ever greater volume perform man's own func-
tions. The production process can be represented in the form of a definite
relationship of live and embodied labor. The former is carried out direct-
ly by the principal [man] vith the aid of its natural organs. Being in

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.- -. . _ . . . .. i .
.0 I O. . : I kl. I - II. :-.I . |.I.‘I.l.l.l |.I.l l|.I.-a

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

origin also human. the second type of labor is performed by people using
the technical means which they have created. While live labor can be
termed directly human. the embodied labor is the mediated and previous
labor of man. Live labor is the basis of embodied labor.

The volume of embodied labor is increased by reducing the volume of live
labor. The replacing of human strength by the forces of nature. the
gradual broadening of the volume of embodied labor and the replacing of
live, directly human labor by it comprise the basic principle in the inner
development logic of systems of the "man--equipment" type. "There is
nothing 'incongruous' in the replacing of manual labor by machine labor;
on the contrary, all progressive work of human technology consists in
this."2 wrote V. I. Lenin.

Externally the impression may be formed that man is being squeezed out of
diverse aret: of activity, including from the sphere of armed combat. How-
ever. the tenm "squeezing out" is still applicable. V. I. Lenin wrote:
"The higher technology develops, the more the manual labor of man is squeezed
out, in being replaced by a series of ever more complicated machines...."3
V. I. Lenin emphasized that not man is being eliminated but rather the
manual, routine, machine-like and unproductive labor. Consequently; it

is not a question of expelling man or not an antagonistic competition be-
tween man and technology, but rather a constant redistribution of functions
between them. In turning over unproductive operations to equipment, man
gains an opportunity to concentrate his activities on the performance of
more complicated duties which require the mobilizing of all his creative
possibilities. Expanding the volume of embodied labor in all spheres of
human activity significantly increases the productivity of live labor and
the efficiency of all production.

The change in the volume of live and embodied labor does not occur spon-
taneously, but rather in a definite direction. Here the qualitative shifts
in the "man--equipment" system occur in the creation of a technical device
which helps man more effectively perform one of his basic functions in

the production process or activity. Such basic functions are: The func-
tion of a source of energy, an engine, a transfer mechanism. and a direct
effect on the subject of labor and control. In terms of the nature of
execution, all of these differ from one another. The functions of the
direct processing of the subject of labor and control require from man

a definite mastery, skill and ability. The remainder are based upon simple
physical strength.

At the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th centuries, only the
functions of the direct processing of the subject of labor and control
were carried out by man. while the others had been taken over by equipment.
For this reason. there was the valid assertion by K. Marx that "the indus-
trial revolution starts by the use of a mechaism where man due to the very
nature of things does not act from the very outset merely as a simple
strength."“ In the first industrial revolution, this was a function of

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thufsday. June 18. 2009: CIAoRDP82-00850R0001000100064
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the direct processing or the subject of labor. The working machine re-
placed the human hand armed with a simple tool. Precisely this led to the
transition from artisan production to machine production. Any type oi‘
machine consisted of three elements: The engine. the transmission mechanism
and the labor force.5

use qualitative changes in the "man-oequipaent” system could not occur in
and of themseIVes. in isolation from the socioeconomic conditions. Thus.
the rise of machine production led to the necessity of breaking up the
socioeconomic relations of feudalism and to the establishing of the new.
capitalist socioeconomic formation.

The next step in improving systems of the "man--equipment” type was in the

technologizing or the materializing of the control function. In our times

there has been a transition from the machine as the technical basis of pro-
duction to the automaton. The control device becomes the fourth component

of the machine which is now turned into an automaton.

The creation of automatic machine tools and automatic lines is only the
starting point for the automation of production. Along with the develop-
ment of automatic production cells (machine tools. lines. plants. and in
the future. groups or plants). the automation of production is also ex-
pressed in the rise of automated systems for the accounting and control of
production. Such systems make it possible to automate the process of the
collection. transmission, and storage of production information. as well as
its processing according to a preprepared program. Being a historically
determined phenomenon. automation develops gradually. on the basis of the
existing production equipment and methods. The introduction of automated
equipment leads to the necessity of transforming the production equipment
and methods.

At present automated systems for collecting and processing information for
ateounting. planning and management have gained great development. They
encompass the work of not only the individual enterprises. but also entire
industrial complexes and even production sectors. In the nation there are
around three automated systems for the management of enterprises and organ-
izations in industry. agriculture. comunicatioas. transport and trade.

0n the basis of a planned socialist economy. a fundamental opportunity
appears of creating a statewide automated system for collecting and process-
ing data related to accounting. planning and managing the national economy.
The essence of the present-day scientific and technical revolution is
directly linked with the automation of production. and with the transition
from whchinﬁ production to fully automated. Automation. on the one hand.
in an indicator of the successes of science and technology. and on the
other. the most promising area for the application of their achievements.

An nnnlysir of the deVeIOpment of production systems of the "man-oequipnent"
type indicates that automation is a natural and historically necessary
stage of their improvement. The given trend is also inherent to such a
nnecific class or systems as "man-~military equipment.” The similarity

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I s: : . - . k. ,. . .,.. . . .. . ,
. . . .I . II..I.III III III.-

PON OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

between the production and military activities of man is obvious. On this
issue K. Marx at one time wrote: "War reached developed forms previously
than peace: a method by which in war and armies and so forth certain eco-
nomic relationships as hired labor the use of machines and so forth de-
Veloped before than within civil society. Also the relationship between
the productch “cross and the relationships of intercourse is particularly
apparent in the army.”6

1he designated similarity. in particular. derives from the biological spe-
cific features of man and his physical and mental capabilities. Initially
human production activity was simultaneously a struggle for existence.
Thus. even the hunting of wild animals by its nature in virtually no way
differed from the armed clashes between tribes. Only in the course of
historical development did the fundamental opposition between the purpose
of an army and production make a specific imprint on the functions per-
formed by man in combat.

At the same time this did not violate the general pattern inherent to all
classes of systems of the "man--equipment" type.

The functions performed 19 man in the process of combat can be classified

in Pwo groups. Those whicn are related to great energy expenditures com-
prise the first group. These include the functions of the source of energy.
the engine. the direct defeat of the enemy, the delivery of the weapon to
the target, and so forth. The second group is made up of control functions.
Although they also require certain energy expenditures for carrying them
out. they are based on the use of human mental features which determine

the possibility of processing information and controlling the troops.

Since the {uwsical capabilities of man are immeasurably more limited than
the mental ones. the process of materialization or objectification started
precisely with then. and above all wi'h the increase in the energy capacity
of the "man--militnry equipment” system. Per a long time animals (horses.
elephants. canola and so forth) were used fcr these purposes. Then steam
power began to be used in military affairs and this led to a qualitative
transformation of the navy. the development of a steam metal-hulled fleet.
The use of internal combustion engines led to the motorizaticn of all
services of the armed forces. and altered the nature of nilitary labor
(its technology). The appearance of electric power and its extensive use
in all areas of military affairs were of enormous significance. while the
energy base determines the nature and level of development of the weaponry.
it becomes the decisive force in the development of military affairs, al-
though in principle other weapons can be used, for example chemical and
bacteriolonical weapons against the enemy. The imperialist states are
presently dereloplnn such weapons. and for this reason the threat of their
use cannot be considered completely eliminated. however. tne history of
wars does not know the broad use of these weapons. For this reason it is
important to focus attention on the inner development'logic of military
affairs under the conditions of using energy-based weapons.

POI OPYICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The energy capabilities available to an arnv and navy also determine the
development of the delivery system which have undergone a historic path
of development from the bow to modern aissiles. The important turning

points on this path were the appearance of rifled weapons. artillery.
tanks and aviation.

The objectification in equipment of those functions of the activities of

a soldier on a battlefield which are based on large expenditures of physi-
cal energy is termed mechanization. its first stage can be termed partial
mechanization. This involved only individual operations. while a larger
portion was carried out by human auscle power. At this stage even the
servicing of the equipment required great physical strength and endurance
from a person. Here the soldier performed only narrow. special operations.

Mechanization in the armed forces remained partial right up to the end of
world Var It.

Gradually partial mechanization developed into full. Mechanisas replaced
human auscle power not in individual operations but in the complete cycle
of the combat activities of the soldier or troop collective. 1b a sig-
nificant degree full mechanization reduced the outlays of human mcle
power. and in a number of areas reduced huaan activity to a series of
monotonous and fatiguing operations.

Full mechanization is closely linked to the process of the automation of
control. in literature, automation is sometimes understood as the general
process of objectification in technolog of htnan functions in various
spheres of social activity. In this instance the concept of automation.
in essence. is considered identical with technical progress generally.

The rise of firearms. the motorization of an arts and other important
stage: in the development of military affairs. proceeding from such an
understanding. can be represented in the font of the early stages of auto-
mation. in this instance. mechanization operates as the initial period of
automation. and at the same time embodies its qualitative change and com-
plication. iie feel that such an approach is incorrect. for in this con-
cept two processes which differ in their quality-mechanization and auto-
mtionnare arbitrarily considered identical.

A specific feature of automation is the transferring of the functions of
data processing and control to special controlling technical systems.

The possibilities of auto-ition have existed in all stages of the develop-
ncnt of technology. iiowever the process of automation. and particularly
full avitoantion. actually began with the rise of electronic computers.

and with the possibility of not only transaitting and storing but also
processing the information. On this level. automation is a completely
definite historical stage in the development of production and am other

equipment. it embodies the present-day scientific and technical revolu-
tlon.

iience. automation i in contrast to aechanization) represents a process of
objectification or mtcrinlization of control functions in technical devices.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"-:e

. .0- . u . . . - .
. . s a... s. . I." ‘ :.'. 0.: If... IOU 0U..-

POK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The controlling technical devices and systems replace man in the control
processes and thereby improve the efficiency of human activity. Automation
crowns present-day technical progress and represents its apex in our times.
in terms of troop control. automation is the process of creating and intro-
ducing into staff work the electronic computer and various related highly
productive technical dtziccs with the corresponding softwear for the pur-
pose of raising the combat readiness of the troops and the efficiency of
their control.

in differentiating mechanization and automation. one must tee their close
relationship. 0n the one hand, mechanization becomes more effective. it
deVelops in breadth and depth and approaches its completion only in a
period of developed automation of troop control. On the other hand. auto~
nation could arise and gain extensive development only on a basis of the
sufficiently developed mechanization of the troop labor processes.

The qualitative transformations in the "man--military equipment" system

do not occur in isolation from the other aspects of military affairs. They
are linked to its general development in the cnti:- complexity-of its
sociopolitical. military-technical and specifically military aspects.
Revolutions in military affairs can occur both on the basis of'funda-
mental changes in equipment (weapons) as well as on the basis of funda-
mental changes in the social quality of a war. For example. revolutionary
changes in military affairs on a level of the qualitative changes in human
material were characteristic for the period of the Napoleonic wars. They

became possible due to the emancipation of man and to the appearance of
the free French citizen.a

Although the present-day revolution in military affairs is based upon a
ihndamcntal transformation of the military technical base. it does not

end with this. The fundamental changes in weapons of necessity lead to a
change in all other areas of military affairs. The inevitability of such
a process was profoundly elucidated by P. Engels in the example of analys-
ing the revolution in military affairs related to the appearance of fire-
arms. 1he mechanism of the present-day revolution in military affairs is
also based on fundamental changes in the weapons system which consists of
three basic components (see Figure l).

 

Fig. l

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The present-any revolution Ir military affairs (or the military technical
revolution In: in: technical base and material foundation) )euan with the
fundamental transformation of weapons. that in. with the appearance of
nuclear weapons. Such a start is completely natural. for the development
of weapons determines the level of efficiency in the entire "man--combat
weapons” system. In terms of the type of energy used to defeat the enemy.
history knows three weapons systems: cold steel. firearms and nuclear.

In the first. a mechanical blow of a sword. spear or arrcw was used for
causing defeat; in the second. an explosion of conventioral explosives;

in the third. a nuclear explosion. In nuclear weapons there has been an
increase in the number of destructive factors. These are the shockwave.
the thermal and light radiation. penetrating radiation and the radio active
contamination of the terrain. nuclear weapons have significantly broad-
encd the destructive possibilities of the modern armed forces.

The qualitative change in weaponry has upset the established equilibrium
between the elements of the weapons system.

In this regard a lag was discovered in the delivery systems and this was
eliminated only after the creation of a developed system of various types
of missiles. The combining of the enormous fire power of nuclear weapons
with the missile delivery systems comprised the system of nuclear missile
weapons. Its appearance disclosed the insufficiency of the traditional
methods and means of troop control. The need arose of a qualitative change
in the control of troop combat as well.

Thus. the present-day revolution in military affairs is undergoing three
basic logical stages of its development.

The appn-ranee of nuclear weapons and their fundamentally new capabilities
and new destructive properties have forced a revision in the reviews on the
conduct of combat.

There arose such a fundamentally new method of conducting combat as the
nuclear missile strike. The tactical and operational views on the conduct
of combat continued to be improved. The demands were increased on the
maneuverability of the formations and units and the views were altered on
the offensive and defensive. The balance between tactical. operational
and strategic operations was fundamentally altered. The nuclear missile
weapons. in essence. became the first means of strategic action. They
make it possible to achieve strategic success directly. and create favor-
able conditions for the other types of forces to develop this success.

1hc introduction of nuclear missile weapons in the troops led to a change
of their organizational structure. A new service of the armed forces
arose. the Strategic Nissile Troops. Nuclear weapons also appeared as
part of the other services of the armed forces. Missile subunits became
component elements in the motorized rifle formations.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New demands were also made on man. Under the conditions of nuclear mis-
sile warfare. surprise acquired particularly important significance.

The strengthening of the combat readiness of the troops and greater re-
nponsibility for each servicemen for carrying out his duty became a com-
mand of the times. Military activities became more intensive and taut.
In their nature they approached industrial labor. The intellectual level
of military labor rose and the number of military professions increased.

The development of nuclear missile weapons brought about a fundamental
reorganization in troop command. The enormous speed of the missiles. the
extreme fluidity of combat under the conditions of modern combat, the in-
crease in the amount of information. the complicating of the methods of
transmitting it. the reduction in the data processing time. and the sharp
increase in the demands made upon the soundness of the decision being
taken--all of this forced a revision in the traditional system of troop
control. The capabilities of man as the controlling link in the "man--
military equipment” system began to impede the development of the entire
system. and thereby military affairs. The way out could be found only in
a qualitative improvement in the process of controlling troop actions.
The development of automated control devices became the technical basis
for such a transformation. There was a new redistribution of functions
between the human and the technical components within the unified "man--
military equipment" system. Automation solved the most important problems
in the development of military affairs.

Being a necessary element in the inner logic of developing the "man-
military equipment” system, automation is a natural stage in the improve-
ment of the latter. The given notion is valid only by considering two
circumstances as well.

In the first place. it is essential to abandon the rigid correlation which
supposedly exists between automation and the nuclear missile weapon.
Certainly the broadening of the scale of armed combat, the greater fluidity
of combat. the increase in the number of factors which must be considered
in decision taking. the decisiveness of the goals and missions of troop
combat stemming from the irreconcilability of the socioeconomic and class
contradictions resolved in modern wars--all these factors during the years
of World war II showed the lag of traditional command and control and re-
quired a fundamental revision of this. The appearance of nuclear missile
weapons disclosed the fundamental unsuitability of the old means and methods
of controlling troop combat under the conditions of modern warfare. At

the same time. these weapons arose because the possibility of automating
their control had become a reality.

Secondly. the inner development logic of systems of the "man-omilitsry
equipment" type is realized under specific historical conditions on the
basis of a definite centuries-long evolution of the very process of troop
control.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Automation as an Expression of the Historical Development of Troop
Control

During the first stages of the existence of the armed forces. control was
dispersed among the other functions of people in armed combat. The com-
mander or military leader not only directed combat. but also himself took
an active and required part in it. During the period of a slave owning
system and in the early stages of the feudal system. the fate of an en-
gagement was determined on a small area (Just several kilometers along the
front). and by relatively small armies which were homogeneous in their
composition. The military leader had a complete view of the battlefield
and he gave comnnnds by voice or by signals. Under these conditions

there was no need for a complex system of troOp command.

The further development of military affairs led to a complicating of the
processes of controlling the troop combat. First of all with the rise of
the absolutist monarchies the size of armies increased. They began to num-
ber in the hundreds of thousands. All of this led to the necessity of
having a more diversified structure of the armed forces consisting of
armies. corps. divisions and tactical units. The complicating of the
organizational structure presupposes the assigning of independent missions
to each of the elements of the combat organization. the development of a
definite hierarchy, and the establishing of the levels of centralization,
the rules and standards of subordination between them. and so forth.

The complicating of control was also caused by the significant development
of the military equipment and weapons. The appearance of firearms and
subsequently the artillery sharply increased the combat capabilities of
the troops. it broadened the zone of combat. and raised the importance of
camouflage and field works for the troop battle formation. The involve-
ment of new weapons increased the number of factors which would determine
the course and outcome of combat. In taking a decision for combat. the
commander of any level should now specially think through the methods of
using firearms. and particularly the artillery. In this regard the func-
tion of control became separate and was turned into an independent process
of combat activity. The military leaders of all ranks were released from
direct participation in combat. Their functions now came down to troop
control or command. and this accelerated the process of improving the con-
trol system.

However. under such conditions a person would find it impossible to handle
the entire volume of control activities. Gradually a group of persons

grew up around the military leader and they helped him carry out control.
Initially their task was merely to transmit the orders of the military
leader to subordinate coimnanders. In essence they were liaison. In time
their duties grew more complex. As advisers they began taking part in
working out the dispositions for combat. to draw up the required documents.
and carried out the preliminary processing of infonmation received from

the troops. They were granted rather extensive powers to organize combat
on the spot where they arrived with orders from the commander. and so forth.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. .
U .. . ' ' s L... s' . H" ‘-:I'; ll; l:lll Ill IOU:-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The broadening of the amount of work and the complicating of missions in
troop command led to the rise of a specialized command body, the staff.
which at first performed a strictly auxiliary role in the command process.
EVen in the army of Napoleon. the role of the staff was secondary. The
chief of staff, Marshal Berthier. for example. was virtually without any
rights. His duties came down basically to the writing out of the orders
of the emperor.

The passive role of the staffs was determined by obJective and subjective
factors. The former were explained by the relative simplicity of command
as the commander could independently solve all the basic questions. But
the subJective factors consisted in a certain lack of confidence in the
staff on the part of the military leader. Moreover staff work was con-
sidered secondary and not having sufficient moral prestige.

The establishing of the staff as a fully empowered body of the comander
for troop command was caused by new changes in the armed forces. At the
start of the 20th century a rapid process of greater complexity of

weaponry in the army and navy commenced. and all the services and branches
of arms were motorized. The appearance of aviation, tanks. an armored
naval fleet and the motorization of the infantry not only changed the ap-
pearance of the armed forces but also sharply expanded the limits of their
combat capabilities. In spatial terms not only the surface of the land and
the see but also the air ocean became the sphere of armed combat. The
motorization of the army and navy altered the nature of combat which became
more fluid and mobile. While world Var I had a clearly expressed positional
nature (firing in it clearly predominated over movement), in Horld War II
maneuvering predominated. Troop command assumed a continuous nature.

The scale of combat and the size of the armies also grew significantly.

The armed forces became multimillion. There was a sharp change in the
qualitative composition of the army and navy which were also no longer a
homogeneous aggregate. Special knowledge was needed for controlling the
troop collectives consisting of persons with a high level of general edu-
cational and professional training. In taking a decision for combat. moral
and political factors assumed important significance. The decisiveness of
the aims of a war. its protracted and exhausting nature required a mobiliz-
ing of the moral forces of man. For this reason in the process of his
command activity. the military leader was obliged to consider the spiritual
potential of a soldier.

With the complicating of military affairs, the staff became an authoritative
command body granted extensive powers. At the same time, this led to the
complicating of its work. The staff bodies began to have a developed struc-
ture of services responsible for the activities of the branches of forces
and support subunits. The staff now collected information and processed

it, it prepared the data necessary for decision taking. and on a day to

day basis it controlled the troops. and so forth.

1h

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the years of Horld War II troop command experienced new difficul-
ties. Due to the Increased amount of control functions. the staff found

it difficult to handle the fulfillment of its tasks. The situation in
postwar times has not changed. Under the conditions of the present-day
scientific and technical revolution. there has been a new further compli-
cating of military affairs. This. certainly, has caused corresponding
difficulties in the control level. A whole series of contradictions has
arisen between the fundamentally new features of military affairs and the
traditional means and rethods of troop control in combat.

The present stage in the development of military affairs is characterized
by a sharp increase in the data important in decision taking. In addi-
tion to the information which the cosmander needed previously. now it is
essential to have information on the enemy's weapons of mass destruction.
their condition and position. as well as information on the radiation.
chesucal and bacteriological situation. and data on radar equipment. oper-
ational and tactical landing forces. At present. a divisional staff under
combat conditions will receive significantly more information than was re-
ceived by an analogous formation during the years of World War II.

It must also be pointed out that circulating information is extremely dynamic
and rapidly goes out of date. At the same time, the commander needs infor-
mation which precisely reflects the real situation for making a decision.
Moreover. he should receive extensive data on the situation more frequently
than before. The rate of advance of the troops in the period of the Great
Patriotic war made it possible to prepare a summary for the army commander
virtually twice a day. and for a divisional commander five or eight times.
Under the conditions of modern combat any level of commander. even up to

the superior level. will need to continuously study the situation and evalu-.
ate the importance of the changing information.

These particular features (the increased amount of information and its ex- '
treme dynamism) of the data needed for decision taking have necessitated
an increase in the time given for analyzing the incoming information. At
the same time. as never before. it is now important to take decisions in
the shortest possible time and in individual instances. instantaneously.
This is one of the contradictions in the connand of troop combat under the
conditions of modern combat.

A commander has always experienced a lack of information about the enemy.
The incompleteness of data on the enemy is a traditional feature in the
command activities of an officer at present. However. under today's con-
ditions. particularly with the threat of the use of nuclear missile weapons,
the absence of the necessary data on the enemy leads to ambiguity in the
decision to be taken and to mistakes in this. Although the commander
presently possesses a large number of technical reconnaissance devices.
nevertheless it is no easier but rather more difficult than before to ob-
tain exhaustive data on the enemy. This is explained by the special
measures undertaken by the enemy to conceal its true intentions. as well
as by the extreme mobility of the troops and the fluidity of their combat.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
O
n
n
I-
-
9
o
.

II:' :-:I'; Ul; .:III .3! IO..-

l-‘nk HFFHZIM. IISF. “NI”

At present the area from which reconnaissance information must be as-
sembled has increased significantly. For this reason the information
has a probable nature. and in a majority of instances will not contain
all of the information needed for the taking of a decision by the com-
mander. Thus. under present-day conditions the contradiction has been
substantially aggravated between the incompleteness of data on the enemy.
the hypothetical nature of the available data and the vital necessity of
exceptional accuracy and soundness in the decisions to be taken.

The intensive growth of the scale of combat. the broadening of the expanse
of combat and the increase in the distances at which a fire duel between
Opponents is possible have led to a significant increase in control com-
munications and to a broadening of the entire control system. It has now

come to encompass such a large number of elements that it has been named
a "large system."

On the one hand. the broadening of the scale and distance at which troop
command is carried out has led to an increase in the probability of a
breakdown of individual elements in the system and a distorting of the
signal in the command channels. On the other hand. modern armed combat
places increased demands on the reliability of the control system. Even
a brief failure is fraught with irrecoverable consequences.

In addition to the indicated ones there are also other contradictions.
Among them we could mention the contradiction between the necessity of
rigid centralization over troop control and the requirement of granting
greater initiative to the subordinate commanders. that is. to a certain
decentralization of command. In line with the increase in the factors
which should be considered by a military leader in his decision. the con-
tradiction has been aggrevated between the terse form of the order and
the content which must reflect the entire complexity of the situation and
explain the combat missions to subordinates.

Here it is essential to remember that an expectation of complete exclusion
of mistakes from control activity of man in general and the commander in
particular cannot be considered Justified. It is essential to work for
the creating of conditions under which the probability of mistakes would
be below the acceptable limits. However. considering the lack of informa-
tion on the enemy. the incomplete reflecting of the objective processes of
modern warfare in military theory. the possibility of gaps in the personal
professional training and experience of the commander. as well as the ac-
tion of factors related to a change in the physiological. mental and moral
state of a person under combat conditions. it is impossible to completely

exclude mistakes from the process of the taking of a combat decision by
the commander.

The aggregate of the abovementioned circumstances has caused certain dif-
ficulties in providing optimum and effective control over troop combat.
The given contradictions have been resolved in several says. One of them

16
Fox orncm use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

consisted in improving the work of all levels of staffs without a funda-
mental and qualitative change in their technical base. In the given in-
stance it would have been possible to achieve real results by increasing
the number of staff workers. In precisely this way the control activities
of the staffs were improved for a rather long time. However an increase
in the number of staff workers leads at a certain moment to the complicat-
ing of their leadership. The staff becomes overgrown with services, de-
partments. subdepartments and other subdivisions. It becomes cumbersome.
immobile and inefficient. Under the conditions of modern armed combat.

by such a method it is impossible to achieve a resolving of the arising
command contradictions. The other way also has tangible limits. that is.
improving the professional training of the staff workers. The problem

is that a person possesses completely definite and for certain indicators.
very low psychophysical characteristics which impose natural constraints
on the intensifying of human activity in the control area. Human reason,
in possessing colossal creative capabilities such as surprising flexi-
bility. dynamism and enonmous analytical and logical abilities, at the
same time is not marked by great speed and is subject to rapid exhaustion.
The capacity of the human memory is not great. A set of increased emo-
tionality which is so characteristic for human activity on the battlefield.
as a rule. has a negative influence on the use of human mental capacity in
the process of troop command.

Historical experience indicates that it is impossible to resolve the con-
tradictions in troop command under the conditions of the present revolution
in military affairs by intensifying command activities of a person with

the old methods and traditional equipment of command. This has become
particularly apparent after the introduction into the troops of missile
weapons which possess enormous speed and the capacity for crossing dis-
tnnces of tens of thousands of kilometers in scores of minutes. Naturally,
with any level of professional training. a person would be unable to meet
the task of controlling such objects. Moreover. the outfitting of the
troops with nuclear missile weapons has led to a sharp complicating of the
very processes of controlling troop combat. Of course. under these con-
ditions an improvement in the professional training of staff officers re-
mains an important means for raising the effectiveness of his work. How-
ever. in and of itself this cannot resolve the sharp contradictions which
characterize the present processes of troop control. This must be com-
bined with a new method of resolving the very complicated control problems.
And this method is the full automation of control.

The introduction of equipment into control processes has an ancient
history. Initially technical devices appeared as means for detecting the
enemy. Optical observation instruments for a long time were virtually
the only technical control devices. These underwent a significant evolu-
tion from primitive observation instruments up to a developed system of
advanced optical instruments used both for observing the battlefield as
well as for controlling artillery fire. navigation. bombing. aircraft
control and other purposes.

17
ron orricuu. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the eve and in the course of World War II there was an abrupt Jump in
the development of technical detection devices. Sound ranging appeared
and was deve10ped and this was employed in cambating enemy artillery as
well as in air defense for increasing the effectiveness of antiaircraft
artillery fire. However the limited capabilities of sound ranging were
soon apparent. The discovered shortcomings in the optical and sound rang-
ing detection devices caused the search for new equipment. Radar became
the basic technical means of detection. 0n the basis of radar instruments
for controlling artillery fire were designed. Radar became the basic
means for detecting the enemy in air defense and antimissile defense.

It has been widely used in the navy as well. It would be hard to imagine
modern military equipment or the process of controlling troop actions
without radar. At present the prospects of its development are linked
abroad to the use of laser equipment for superaccurate locating.

Along with the detection equipment, there was also active development in
the data transmission means (the means of communications). The complicat-
ing of military affairs and the command of troop combat required new means
of cenmnuucations. As is known. for a long time optical means of communi-
cations were used for this purpose including smoke signals. all sorts of
semaphores, flag signaling systems, and so forth. However the real in-
troduction of equipment into this sphere of control started with wire comp
munications. The development of the telephone, telegraph and radio became
an important stage in the development of communications equipment.

At present armed forces have at their disposal powerful means of cannunicap
tlons making it possible at any distance to ensure effectiveness and con-
cealment of troop command. It is impossible to imagine the modern process
of troop control on any level without communications.

While the area of obtaining information on the enemy, its troops. the
terrain. the meteorological conditions and also the transmission of infor-
mation became rather quickly technologized, in the sphere of data process-
ing this process occurred significantly more slowly. Initially rather
primitive instruments which facilitated calculations were used for this
such as slide rules, scales and so forth. Then calculators and navigation
instruments appeared. For aviation and the air defense troops, automatic
control devices were designed such as automatic pilots and APCE (antiair-
craft fire control equipment). The first models of the AFCE were not auto-
mntic. They were designed considering the use of a large crew of service-
men the duties of whom had been maximally simplified and consisted of lining
up numerous scales. dials and so forth. In the postwar period, electro-
mechanical and later electronic APCB appeared and these operated without
the interference of man. Subsequently automatic control devices appeared
in other areas of military affairs. However, these devices involved con-
trol over Just solitary technical elements such as an aircraft or gun
(battery). At the same time the control over large technical complexes

and the combat of troops largely remained traditional.

18 ‘
roe OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has been the creation and rapid development of high-speed electronic com-
puters, both digital and analog. Their appearance is usually linked with
the development of automation.

The first digital calculating machines were designed in the 17th century
by the French scientist B. Pascal. and later by the famous German scien-
tist and philosopher G. H. Leibnitz. In 187$. the arithmometer of V. G.
Odner was developed and this was widely used and has existed up to the
present. The development history of universal computers is interesting
and instructive. The idea of creating them was proposed by the English
mathematician C. Babbage. In 1883 he designed a gigantic arithmometer
with program control (an arithmetical and storage device). The version
of the machine presented by him was close to a modern one. However the
ideas of the scientists were so ahead of their time that his contempo-

raries could not appreciate their merit. Attention to his work was shown
only a century later.

The development of computers became a remarkable phenomenOn in the de-
velopment of technolop . In l9hh, a digital computer operating on electro-
magnetic relays was designed in the United ftates, and in 19h6, the first
ENIAC electronic computer was introduced. In the USSR, the first computer
was built in 1950.

Since then computers in our nation have undergone three stages of develop-
ment. The first generation of computers was developed in the period from
1955 through 1960. They used electron tubes as the basic element. The
second generation (1960-1965) was based on the use of semiconductor tech-
nology including transistors, diodes, and so forth. The method of printed
circuitry, block arrangement and other progressive methods were widely used
then. The third generation is the stage of microelectronics. At present
our nation is producing computers of this generation in the form of a unifie
system of machines which have valuable qualities such as small size, an
increased volume of the operational and external memory, increased relia-
bility. high speed of the central processor, the capacity for parallel op-
eration of the devices. and the possibility of connecting the machine to
peripheral points. The last two qualities are of particularly important
significance. for they make it possible for one machine to solve many prob-
lems asked by various control points a great distance apart. In this re-
gard the possibility has appeared of creating large data systems (LBS)
which could serve a large number of users on the basis of several large
computer centers connected by an automated cosmuniications system with the
peripheral points.

The third generation of computers has enormous speed on the order of sev-
eral tens of millions of operations per second. and a memory capacity up
to 16 million bytes (a byte is a unit of operation equal to eight binary
digits. or two bytes= 8 bits). At present the speed of the machines no
longer impedes their develOpment. The input and output systems as well as
the lag of the operational and external memory have become the bottleneck.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. -- . . .- . . _, - .
.I I 0.. II LI. I . I.I I... . .I.l.-I.II.I l.l.l I.|I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is expected that the fourth generation of computers will be character-
ized by a significantly higher degree of integration in the circuitry in
comparison with the third. Over the long run the use of fundamentally new
principles for electronic computer design is possible in the form of laser
elements. The imperative need of our times for increasing the memo of
the machines will be realized in developing external memories for 10 “
bytes of informatiOn. Of course, the sharp increase in the capacity of

the external memory should be accompanied by progress in the methods and
means of using it.

Computer technology during the short history of its development has been
able to prove its importance as an important basis for automating control.
The given notion can be seen with particular clarity in the rapid increase
of digital computers. ihe first such machine was developed in l9h6. In
1955 there were a tau more than 1,000 digital computers throughout the
world. In 1963, they numbeicd around 23,000, in l96h, 32,000, and in

1965. over h5.000. By 1967, $0,000 digital computers were functioning

in the world. The number of machines has been growing particularly rapidly
in the United States. In 1965, there were more than 22,000 of them. 32.000
in 1967, and 70.000 in 1970. The increase of capital investments into the
area of computer production in the United States, for example. has con-
tinued to grow. While in 1962, around 2 percent of all industrial expen-
ditures were invested into this sphere of production. in 1966, the figure
was already 6 percent, and in 1970, 10 percent. According to a statement
in the foreign press, in 1915, the number of computers in the United States
has risen up to 100,000.

Electronic computer technology cannot be identified with automation, al-
though it is the basis of automation. Without computers it would be im-
possible to automate the control of troop combat. Thus, the technical

prerequisite for full automation in the form of a computer was not only
an important one but also the conclusive one. After it the automation
of control began to develop rapidly.

The rise of computers made it possible to move from partial to fully auto-
mated trcop control. Partial automation encompassed the control of small
troop units, that is, small weapons complexes (an aircraft. antiaircraft
artillery battery. an antiaircraft guided missile complex, and so forth).
Often it made it possible to control combat units under the quietest work.
ing conditions and in the absence of an abrupt change in the situation.
The operation of an automatic pilot is an example of this.

The local nature of the operation of automatic control devices in a number
of instances has not facilitated but rather impeded the leadership of

large troop collectives. since the problem of maintaining integrity and

the monolithic nature of the entire troop control process has become more
complex. Certainly man provided such integrity. without his participa-
tion only individual, most often initial combat operations were carried out.
At this stage man was better than automatic devices in performing the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82M850R0001000100064
FOR OfFiClAL USE ONLY

control function in virtually its entire range. Only in the most acute
and Intense areas (for example. aviation. air defense. and so forth). be-
cause of the increased speed of the equipment. did constraints imposed
on the control process by man begin to be felt. Partial automation was
introduced precinniy in these areas.

Troop control in combat consists of two different processes. The first

is the control of the equipment. Any technical device or system of them
has a rather rigid program of operation. This feature makes it possible

to develop an automatic control device which controls it vithin the come
plete range of the entire accepted program for the activity of the tech-
nical system. Such control systems are called automatic (8A0). They or-
ganically combine a high and comprehensive level for mechanizing a certain
military action with the complete automation of its control. The automatic
military control systems do not require the direct participation of man.
The acting principal of control is outside such systems. He intervenes

in their work only in the event of emergency situations. the failure of

the equipment. for carrying out adjustments. and in the period of setting
up the system. Naturally a man creates automatic systems. he designs them.
he works out the program of their operatiOn. and so forth.

For a certain time in the literature on the problems of automating control.
there prevailed an overly optimistic notioa of the possibilities of de-
veloping automatic control systems. Thus. in particular. proposals vere
made on the possibility of creating automatic control systems for not only
large complexes of military weapons but also for troop combat. However.

it very quickly became apparent that the second type of control is sig-
nificantly more complicated than the first. Certainly it is the control
of people, the troop collectives. and includes consideration of such
processes as the moral-psychological state. the level of responsibility.
professional training. and so forth.

ror this reason the complete isolation of man outside the troop control
system is an impossible matter for many reasons. In the first place. re-
Sumrch on the fundamental possibilities of automation shoved the unsound-
ntls or completely eliminating the acting principal from the control sys-
tem. Secondly, even in assuming the probability of developing such syse
ﬁvrﬁ, thny must be given up due to their complexity and unreliability in
npvrntinnc. From all viewpoints it was significantly better with a given
level of automation to introduce man into the control system. and he would
assume the carrying out of the most crucial tasks requiring creative ef-
fort and luvs: skills in troop command. Such systems. in contrast to auto-
matic ones. are termed automated. Their appearance was the result of
noivinr the nbOVementioned contradictions arising due to the complicating
of the process of controlling troop combat. on the one hand. and the dif-
ficulties of devolopinn automatic systems. on the other.

Although the deVqunment of automatic weapons control systems has great
promise. the possibilities of it are not the same for the various types of
military equipment. 1hose types vhich are directly employed in combat.

21
FOR OFFIC'\L USE ONLY
FOR OPrICiAL USE "NLY

in a direct contact with the enemy. require direct articulation with man
and form n slnrin system with him. Thcne are tnnkn. guns. direct support
artillery. ﬂnan nhln'. a majority of combat aircraft. and no forth. ﬂcre
mun iuuznruuuuwitunl will anuume 1 direct part in control. being here the
main element of th rnntrnl nvatnm and the acting principal of the control
procenn.

The necessity of incorporating man as a direct element in the control sys-
tem is dictated not only by the specific features of one or another type
of weapon but also by the scale of combat. Hhilo on a level of the actions
of individual weapons units or small weapons complexes it is possible to
create closed automatic control systems. with an increase in the scale of
combat. they more and more express their social nature in acting as a spe-
cific area of the activities of human masses and troop collectives. It is
no longer a question of controlling equipment but rather controlling
people and troop collectiVet. This is why the automated troop control
syotems (ASUV) have been developed.

Precisely such systems for the control of troop combat make it possible to
achieve full automation of control. Pull automation of troop control is

a stage of automation whereby all the elements in the process of troop
control (the collecting. processing and analysis of data on the situation.
the working out of variations of optimum decisions. the issuing of orders
and instructions to the troops. as well as control over their fulfillment)
in all the control elements should be carried out using universal algorithms
and programs .

Full automation is characterized by a systems approach in solving the
problems of troop control. This cannot be reduced merely to the intro-
duction of automatic and automated equipment. If full automation is con-
ceived of as the simple technologisation of the control process with the
maintaining of the old style. methods and says of control. then such an
improvement in control has outlived itself. Automatic and automated con-
trol equipment bring an effect only in the event of the optimization of
control. an imprOVement in the structure of the controlling organs. and
the careful thinking out of their coordination and subordination. Pull
automation should lead to a fundamental revision of control over troop
combat. it the same time it is the expresner of this reorganization.

Consequently. full automation of control oVer troop combat is a compli-
cated process the occurrence of vhich is brought about by many factors.
Some of them deriVe from the difficulties and complexities in the develop-
ment of military affairs. Others are caused by nocial needs which en-
compass a broader area than military affairs. however. the need for a
pouitive change in control still does not mean an improvement in it. There
aunt be the scientific and technical prerequisites for solving this prob-
lem. The complex intertwining of the internal factors and the external
prerequisites for the rise of full automation in the control of troop
combat in an example of the relationship of science and social practice
and their dialectical interdependence.

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Scientific Bases of Automating Troop Control

The question of the scientific bases for automating troop control has been
and in posed more acutely than in other spheres. Thus. the designers of
the first automatic dvvlces relied almost exclusively on their inVentive-
ness. common . cnne and empirical choice. Even in the age of cyber-
netics. in the various spheres of automation. the degree of scientificncss
depends upon the complexity of the systems which are to be automated and
upon the level of responsibility of the design decisions.

in the area of automating troop control. the necessity of a high level of
scientificness is dictated by the particular complexity of the structure,
by the diversity of the functions and conditions in the activity of the
systems. by the fundamental newness and their high cost. and mainly by the
ever increasing dependence of the combat capabilities and readiness of the
troops upon the advanced nature and reliability of the control systems.

in automating relatively simple systems. the essence of the processes is
often disclosed by an empirical study. and a successful solution is sought
out by choice. in systems of such a level of complexity as the ASUV. the
seeking out of solutions is possible only on a basis of a scientific ap-
proach to automating troop control.

The given question would not require special discussion if there were not
a number of methodological difficulties which arise in solving it. As was
already pointed out. ASUV is systems which without fail include a principal
of control. For this reason the research is not restricted to analyzing
one or two relatively simple forms of the movement of matter. but rather
encompasses their entire spectrum. including biological and social aspects
of the processes. Thus. the scientific bases of automating troop control
cannot be restricted to a relatively narrow range of military technical
disciplines. For analyzing the fanctioning of the ASUV. the physiology of
sense organs. human factors engineering and the psychology of thought.
pedagogics. logic. semiotics, linguistics and so forth are involved. How-
ever many of these areas of knowledge themselves have not yet achieved the
necessary level of methodological maturity. Certain provisions of the
designated disciplines themselves need a further philosophicsl-methodological
and logical-gnoseological basis. All of this requires clarity and pro-
foundness in a methodological analysis of the scientific bases for auto-
mating trOup control.

First of all it is essential to bring out what a scientific approach to
automating control is. what is its difference from an empirical approach,
and what are the levels of the required and actually existing scientific
soundness of the design and organisational decisions in the various stages
of automating different control systems. The problem is that in recent
years. in line with the greater role of science in improving control. that
control which in its scale and methods is the traditional empirical type
is often defined as ”scientific.” In this instance. science becomes. in
the expression of V. I. Lenin. "a dead letter or a fashionable phrase."

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm iWi’lith. llSﬁ ONLY

but is not turned into "an element of everyday life completely and truly."
For this reason it is so important to disclose the distinguishing features
and traits of a truly scientific approach to automating control systems
generally and troop systems. in particular.

With each passing year :ne elaboration of the theories and disciplines
comprising the scientific basis of automation is extended. in accord

with this. the boundary between theoretical and empirical knowledge.
scientific and traditional activities in this area is shifted. Being
historically determined, the notion of ”scientific bases of automation"
changes along with the development of its theoretical base. with the intro-
duction and deVelopmcnt of new technology, and with a rise in the level

of training of the specialists Operating it.

HoweVer. regardless of this relativeness of the scientific and empirical
principles of control. they can be delimited rather clearly.

The making of auto-eta began long before the appearance of the theory
describing them. Over the centuries this has been based on common sense.
experience and practical skills. EVen when a theory of automatic control
had been created by the works of Maxwell, Chebyshev. Vyshnegradskiy and
others. automation did not gain a completely sound basis. At the outset
of its development science took more from practice than it gave it. In“-
tially science merely explained the practical achievements and performed
the function of instruction. Science began to outstrip practice only when
it learned how to forecast the processes and to predict and foresee the
specific trends and patterns. Only from this moment could the use of the
methods, conclusions and recommendations of science make a substantial
iaorint on practice and also make the expressions "scientific approach”
and "scientific bases" valid.

Moreover. along with a profound relationship. there is a substantial dif-
ferencc which exists between the manufacturing of individual automate and
the process of full automation which encompasses a rather extensive sphere
of industry or military affairs. For this reasM their scientific bases
are also somewhat different. For an analysis and synthesis of the indi-
vidual automate. the theory of automatic control is used as the basis along
with the theory of discrete automate and technical cybernatics. But the
scientific basis of automation is founded primarily on the theory of opera-
tions research. military and economic efficiency. queueing theory, the
methods of systems analysis. linear and dynamic programming. and so forth.

At the some time. for automating such complex systems as troop command.
there must be the aggregate knowledge of all sciences which comprise the
theoretical foundation of automation. That is. they should have a uniform
conceptual fund. a cannon apparatus and similar methods. According to
certain scientists. in automating "large systems." intuition and search
still prevail over theory and calculation. The basic reason for this re-
sides in the local or "patchwork" approach of the modern science on control
to describing systems and processes and to their mathematical treatment.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

What determines the gradualness of the transition from cmpiricism to
scientific methods of analysis and synthesis of various automated systems?
In the first place. the obJeetive complexity of the systems to be auto-
mated and the conditions of their functioning. Secondly, by the deVelop-
meat level of science in a given period. that is. by the availability of
the corresponding means and methods which ensure the study of the systems
and the processes of certain complexity. Thirdly. by the degree of prac-
tical necessity of automating systems of the studied class, by the concen-
tration of the forces and means of science in the given area.

In any concrete systems. it is not hard to isolate the elements for which
the degree of the scientiflcness of the approach to automation varies. The
history of automation shows that the technical. logical-mathematical and
economic problems of designing the ASU have reached the necessary level of
scientifieness far from simultaneously. In automating troop control. the
primary role is played by the particular features of the development of
military art. Initially the military researchers. as is known, did not
separate the processes of troop control in the course of solving a tactical
problems from its content. The question of "how to control?" was not sep»
arate from the question of "what to control?" and a differentiation of the
means and goal was also lacking. Since the goal positing in the control
element always prevails over the means and methods. the goal content of
control became a subject of scientific research before the technology of
control activity. Thus, troop control initially became scientific in terms
of its goal content and only later in terms of methods and means.’

since automation in the designated area is not an end in itself but rather
the means for improving the efficiency of troop control. it gains a firm
scientific basis from the moment of turning management activity itself into
an object of research. when thc formal-apparatus and structural aspect of
control begins to be specially analyzed.

The degree of the scientificness of troop control and the automation of
this process is directly dependent upon the entire system of modern scien-
tific knowledge on control. For example, a major contribution to elaborat-
ing the problems of troop control was made by military scientists before
the appearance of cybernetics. However in the research founded on a mili-
tary base per ac and on a conceptual apparatus of Just the theory of mili-
tary art. the nenernl was often subordinate to the specific and the essence
of the processes was not fully disclosed. For this reason the scientific
forces, knowledge and funds were frequently spent on the discovery of pat-
terns aiready known in other areas of control. Cybernetics created a com-
mon basis for transferring the ideas, it disclosed their reciprocal influ-
ence and intercausality. it avoided the primitive methods and exclusiveness.
and provided a strong conceptual and logical-mathematical apparatus. All of
this helped to raise the level of the scientificness of the approach to im-
proving the systems of troop control.

The degree 0‘ scientificncss of the approach to automation depends sub-
stantially upon whether or not auto-stable processes are being studied only

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.~~; e

.. . . .. . .
I 0.. ' I a... e' . H. ‘tl'. I...D:Ill ”'0'.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in a qualitative form or whether their strict quantitative relations are
being defined. In a number of instances. for creating the ASUV it may be
sufficient to thc only the qualitative characteristics of the controlled
process. However. in designing an optimum (in the tactical. technical and
economic sense). it is essential to know the quantitative dependences.

The scientific establishing of the principles of automating troop control
requires not only scientific cognition of the systems and processes of
control. but also scientific procedures and methods of human activities in
all stages of working out and designing the ASUV as well as in the course
of its exploitation and combat use.

At the same time. it is essential to distinguish scientificness in the
narrow. specifically military and military technical manifestation and on
the broad. general theoretical and philosophical methodological level.

The first level with the absence of the second can provide an effect only
in solving particular problems on the military technical and tactical level.
And often only the appearance of scientificness occurs. In actuality. the
incorrect solution to the question of the balance of the obJective and the
subjective in a war. the relationship of man and equipment. and the dialec-
tics of creative and algorithmic (reproductive) thinking will scarcely make
it possible to talk seriously of a scientific approach to the studied prob-
lems. although here an advanced logical and mathematical apparatus can be
employed and a high level of electronic machine building technology can be
ensured.

Thus. automating troop control can have a truly scientific character under
the condition of basing its principles on the dialectical materialistic

ideology and methodology. and on the theory of scientific control of the
socialist society and the Marxist-Leninist teachings of war and the army.

These. in our conviction. are the basic traits of a scientific approach to
the automating of troop control.

It is possible to isolate a number of specific traits which are character-
istic for the process of automating troop control in the armies of the most
advanced nations of the world.

1) The theoretical basis for the analysis and synthesis of automata and
systems is changing. Cybernetics and its related disciplines have made it
possible to commence a transition from the use of very simple automata
(program. tracking and stabilizing) to adaptive. self-adJusting. self-
instructing and self-organizing. In acquiring a reliable theoretical base

in n systems-cybernetic approach, automation is becoming a common scientific-
methodologicnl approach to solving the problems of raising the effectiveness
of weapon and troop control. All of this makes it possible to avoid primi-
tive inventiveness in solving each particular question.

2) The technical base of automation is changing. The pneumatic. hydraulic
and electromechenical devices have been replaced by electronic automate.

26
ron orncm. use our

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

initially vacuum tube, and then semiconductor, micromodule. printed, film
and solid-state circuits. As a result the speed and reliability of the
automata have risen, while their size and required power haVe declined.

3) The range of processes which can be automated have been substantially
broadened. while previously mainly the processes of the conversion of
matter and energy were automated. at present basic attention has begun to
be paid to automating information processing. A characteristic trait of
this new phase is the introduction of control automata. For them the very
control information is the obJect of control. Among such automsta one would
put calculating, information-logical, information retrieval. modeling and
other devices. Any automaton provides control by the receiving, processing.
transmitting and storage of information. Control automata differ from the
servomeehanisms in the obJect of control which for them is the control in-
formation. Thc appearance of control automata has led to the creation of
an hierarchy of automated devices which predetermine the conJugation and
coordination of the work of the automatic servodevices and, consequently,
have made possible the transition to full automation.

3) ihe sphere of use of nutomata has broadened. To the only previous

area of technical devices, two new ones have been added: the "Ian-~machine"
system and the "collective--machine" system. The components of the former
are man, the control and actuator automate and the object of control. The
second includes collectives of people, complexes of control and actuator
automata and complex obJects of control. Automation encompasses not only
weapons and individual models of military equipment, but also entire tacti-
cal units (ships, aircraft and combat complexes). as well as systems of
troop control. Herc precisely the creation of ASUV becomes one of the most
characteristic and specific traits in the period of automation in the armed
forces, since the systems of troop control are systems of the open type.

In literature a distinction is drawn between open and closed control systems.
A systems is termed closed when the choice of the questions to be solved

in the process of its functioning remains fixed. The data which are not
developed in the process of the functioning of the system are realized as

a result of a single elaboration, for example. an antiaircraft missile com-
plex. and so forth. A sysem is termed open if it develops with a set of
basic problems which changes in the process of functioning. Such systems
cannot be created as once and for all complete. ﬂy their very essence they
should he constantly self-improving in the process of their functioning.
Understandably it is significantly more complicated to automate such sys-
tens. hut systems of military-political leadership and troop control should
be precisely of this type.

S) The close tie of automation with other methods and measures related to
optimizing the systems and processes of control, and namely with the use of
the methods of operations research and combat efficiency, the scientific
organization of lahor [NOT], human factors engineering, industrial design,
and so forth. Automation acts as an element of the system of measures to
raise the combat capabilities of the troops. And this link is particularly
apparent in automating troop control.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.
as
as
I.
-
o

o

.. . .. .
ll. 2 .D . ll..l:lll III III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All these particular features of the present stage of automation in the
armed forces are vividly apparent in the course of automating troop control.
they mark an unusual broadening of the scientific base of automation. and
they are the source and impelling motive for the further development of its
scientific and technical bases.

Sometimes the problem of the scientific bases of automating troop centrol

is solved from extreme positions: either only military cybernetics is

viewed as such, or nearly all the presently existing scientific disciplines
and theories are put among the sciences comprising this base. In our opinion.
the problem of troop control and the principles of creating ASUV can be
worked out only on the basis of the dialectical materialistic understanding
of the general. the particular and the individual.

The patterns which determine the structure of the systems and the nature of
the processes of troop control can be divided according to the degree of
their commonness into several levels. First of all it is essential to iso-
late the general patterns of the material world which are not specific pre-
cisely for control systems but appear in them. Among such patterns are the
primacy of the material in relation to the spiritual, the determinacy of
processes and phenomena, and the objectivity of the development sources.

In analyzing the specific systems, the universal patterns must be considered.
Otherwise this analysis can be abstract or one-sided, since the individual
and particular will be viewed without the general. Marxist-Leninist
philosophy--dialectical and historical materialism-is the scientific basis
for examining the universal patterns which are apparent in the systems of

troop control.

It is also essential to isolate a group of patterns which are common to
all systems. regardless of their specifics. as is known. the term system
is given to sets of specifically related elements which possess a rela-
tively stable unity and a latent integrity. And the internal ties of the
system are noticeably more numerous and important than the external ones.
All of this gives rise to the so-called integrative or syrtem properties
which are not identical to the total of the properties of the elements of
the system.

Although the designated features are inherent to all systems, however a
consideration of them helps to more fully imagine the structure of the sys-
tems of troop control. The scientific basis for examining the given range
of patterns is the presently developing general theory of systems. within
which a systems approach to studyint complex objects is being established.
With the aid of this method. the correlation is disclosed between the com-
ponents of an integrated system. The dialectical materialistic principle
of the relationship of the phenomena and processes of the material world

is the methodological base of a systems approach.

The next group of patterns which are apparent in systems of troop control
is made up of the general laws of control which are inherent to all control

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

systems. without exception, for they are linked to the profound essence of
control as a procenn of the coal-directed effect of the control organ on
the controlled object and carried out by the transmission. processing and
storage of information. The scientific basis which provides for the study
of such patterns in troop control systems is theoretical cybernetics which
examines the systems and processes of control of any material nature and
complexity.

Equally important are the general patterns inherent to all social systems,
including control systems. The theory of the scientific control of society
operates as the theoretical basis for optimising and automating troop con-
trol systems. and this theory has its own scientific bases related to the
materialistic understanding of history. the interpretation of historical
determinism. the development patterns of the given socioeconomic formation,
and so forth. A truly scientific theory of control of society has formed
on the basis of historical materialism, the theory of scientific communism
and Marxist sociology. Its provisions, principles and theoretical bases
are the scientific basis for studying and improving all the troop control
systems in the USSR Armed Forces and in the armies of the other socialist
countries.

The common patterns of troop control determine the structure of the systems
and the nature of the processes occurring in them outside a dependence on
the service of the armed forces and the branch of forces. the rank of the
given command level. as vell as the presence or absence of automation and
equipment for employing logical and mathematical methods. All troop con-
trol systems are designed to function under the conditions of conflict
situations related to the opposition from the enemy. a shortage of time and
the enemy's desire to anticipate a control effect. to the increased re-
sponsibility of the decisions to be taken. the incomplete and partially
false information. to the presence of intentional interference and the
enemy's desire to knock out the controlled objects and the very control
system. For this reason. successful automation of such systems is possible
only on a scientific basis of the general theory of troop control and this.
in turn, is guided by the methodological principles of the Marxist-Leninist
teachings on the war and the army, by the tenets of military science. the
theory of military art. military pedagogies. military psychology. military
legal and other sciences. that is. the entire system of military knowledge
which directly or indirectly is used in studying and improving the troop
control systems.

A specifically separate group is made up of the patterns inherent to the
given service of the armed forces. branch of forces. and the specific level
of control and type of combat. They. respectively. are studied by the
theory of operational art and by the tactics of the given services of the
armed forces and branches of forces. and by the theory of the types of com-
bat (offensive and defensive operations and combat). Any attempt to create
an ASUV without considering these specifically concrete data of the theory
of military art vill be unsuccessful, for the individual is richer than

the common.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. . . . , . _ v . .
U C. . 1 I LO. I. . H! :-:.'. 00. 0:30! 0H 00..-

mm OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such are the dialecticn of the common. the particular and the individual
and. respectively. the subordination and coordination tie of the patterns

which determine the unnuttu:e and functioning of any control systems.

A most important feature of the ASUV is that these are automated systems.
in turn. automation in "n5 n.heru ha: its own patterns which require con-
nideratioa and study. Only having elucidated the link of automation with
the entire history of the development of technology and its genetic de-
pendence on mechanization. can one solve many cardinal questions on a
methodologically correct basis. For exaaple. the relationship of man and
equipment in the ASUV. the problem of the "replacing" of man by an automaton.
the relationship of mental and physical. creative ani routine labor in such
systems. or the prospects for automation and the dynamics of military pro-
fessions. The general theory of automation is becoming the scientific
basis for studying the patterns on this leve1.1°

Consequently. the scientific fourdation for the automation of troop control
is made up of theories which study the patterns of a specifically military.
general social and technical order. Attempts to ignore any of these can
cause undesirable consequences. Thus. in American military technical liter-
ature of recent years. quite legitimate complaints have appeared that
certain ASUV which have been put into effect did not Justify their hopes.

In the opinion of the specialists. the approach to their designing was "too
technical," and did not consider other aspects. A comprehensive consider-
ation of the patterns of all the above-listed levels is one of the important
methodological principles in the approach to automating troop control.

Military cybernetics is the direct scientific basis for the automation of
troop control. This arose as a section or offshoot of the science of
cybernetics. As is known. due to the works of I. Veiner and other scien-
tists. at the end of the 1950's a special science developed on the laws con-
cerning the structural organization and functioning of control systems of
any material nature and complexity. Cybernetics has as its task the analy-
sis. synthesis and automation of such systems for the purpose of their op-
timization. Initially it was an area of knowledge on the general laws of
control. At that time it would have been premature to speak of military
cybernetics as an independent area of knowledge. It was merely a question
of the use of cybernetics in military affairs. Later on a division was
noted into theoretical. technical and applied cybernetics.

Theoretical cybernetics is marked by a maximal commonness of problems and
in any control systems examines only the isomorphic and nonspecific phe~
nomena. Military specifics had not yet been manifested to the point where
the differences began to prevail over the similarity. Certainly in terms
of theoretical cybernetics even now it is proper to speak only of its use
in military affairs.

Technical cybernetics examines the problem of the engineering realization
of control. information. modeling and computatioaal systems of any (includ-
ing military) purpose. Naturally. the specifics of armed combat tell on

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the demands made upon the military cybernetic devices. as they require
high speed, resistance to Jamming. reliability, low weight and small size.
The questions of economy should be solved differently, and here the coordi-
nating of the equipment and man is carried out considering the mental

state of the soldier under the conditions of increased danger, responsi-
bility and a lack of time. Nevertheless, all these particular features

are considered mainly in the posing of the problems and in formulating

the tactical and technical requirements for these systems. But the methods
of the analysis and synthesis of systems do not undergo any essential
changes. The ordinary methods of technical cybernetics, human factors in

engineering and so forth are to be employed. For this reason, in these
instances one also speaks not of military cybernetics but rather of the
application of cybernetics in military affairs. ‘

Applied cybernetics is a different question. Its task includes examining
specific control systems in specific areas of activity and the elaboration

of effective methods for employing cybernetic means and methods in these
spheres.

A classification of the areas of applied cybernetics (economic cybernetics,
biocybernetics, and so forth) is determined by the specific features of the
subJect of examination. by the alteration caused by it in the methods,

means and tasks of study. as well as by the particular demands on training

research personnel. The specific features of military control systems
have caused the separating of military cybernetics as an independent off-
shoot of applied cybernetics.

Military cybernetics has redistributed the proportional amount of research
methods and tasks. it has hypertrophied some of them and shifted others to
the background. For example. game theory which was developed by J. van
Neumnnn and 0. Morgenstern, being one of the many disciplines of general
cybernetics. in the military area has moved into a situation of the leading
area of knowledge. This theory was specially created for solving problems
containing conflict situation. With its aid it is possible to create models
for the behavior of the enemy under various circumstances.

The basis of the arguments in game theory is the supposition of the enemy

as a rational opposing side which can upset our plans and prevent us from
achieving the set goal. Thus the specific features of armed combat are
manifested. Undoubtedly it is possible to represent the actions of a shop
foreman in a production process as a ”game." Such models are valid but

they are not necessary. But for disclosing the specific features of mili-
tary control. game theory represents the most suitable mathematical apparatus.

This offshoot of cybernetics also solves problems concerning the elabora-
tion of special methods of decision taking under the conditions of incom-
plete or even partially false information, the problems of evaluating relia-
bility, the promptness and completeness of combat information. as well as a
number of other specific military problems.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0 ‘ICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. military cybernetics is n offspring of applied cybernetics which
nhould solve opeclfically mili ary problems. Since specific military
features are most clearly app ent in the systems and processes of control-
Iann troOpn. comhnt complcxcu nd tactical units on the battlefield. in

the literature a tradition has developed of localizing the term "military
cybernetics" chiefly in this es of military affairs. But in terms of
the weapons control systems. t e “man--military equipment" systems and in
the control systems for troop apply and the military economy. the problems
of military cybernetics consis' in working out the tactical and technical
requirements and specification . of "linking" these to the strategic.
operational-tactical or tactic background. the formulating of the specif-
ically military characteristic of the control objects in the language of
cybernetics and the military 1 .erpretation of the results of their cyber-

netic examination. All these p oblems require special military knowledge.
and cannot be solved on the basis of Just the general provisions of cyber-

netics.

In structural tenns. military cybernetics is divided into a number of in-
dependent areas of knowledge: Information theory (the theory of military
information. ihe military applications of information theory. and so forth);
operations research (the theory of operations research. the theory of study-
ing combat. the theory of applying mathematical methods for solving military
problems); the theory of the algorithmisation of military problems (the
elaboration of algorithmic descriptions of combat and the processes of its

control); the theory of military-purpose control systems; the theory of
automating troop control; the theory of the military application of elec-

tronic computers. and so forth.

Modern military cybernetics is a most important element of the scientific
foundation on which the automation of troop control is developed. Obviously
its role can be noticeably increased if its structure is organized not by
the ”apparatus" principle but rather according to the specific functional
one. At present. the sections of military cybernetics unify an apparatus

of a single type: information theory, algorithmic. and so forth.

Each of them can exist independently of military cybernetics. For this
reason at present much work in operations research. the use of SPU [network
planning and management]. and the automation of troop control contains no
reference to military cybernetics. To put it figuratively. in the present
structure of military cybernetics. the research apparatus for the systems
and processes of troop control is represented in a march formation and not
in deployed battle orders. Possibly. uuch a structuring of the theory is
more economical in the sense of studying the logical and mathematical ap-
paratus used in military cybernetics. But the goals. tasks. objects and
the comprehensive approach to their examination remain undisclosed. 0b-
viously in the future there must be a reorganization of military cybernetics
precisely by the specific function principle. Then in one section it will
be possible to assemble everything that serves the purposes of analysis.
synthesis. optimization and automation of the control body. and in another.
the necessary information for examining the characteristics of the object
of control. and so forth.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R00010001W
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The designated structure of military cybernetics is characteristic only for
its present state. It will be altered. on the one hand. depending upon
what theories and scientific disciplines in the future will be more ef—
fective for solving control problems in the military area. and on the other.
upon the direction and development pace of the areas of military science
which come into contact with military cybernetics.

For example. even now modern statistical information theory successfully
solves problem for improving the resistance to Jamming in comunications.
optimum coding. reducing redundancy. and so forth. At the same time. it

is not sufficiently effective in determining the value. significance, re-
liability or promptness of the information. that is. the parameters which
are particularly important for military affairs. With the rise of a theory
which solves the designated problems. it can be incorporated as part of
military cybernetics. without reducing the importance of statistical in-
formation theory.

Military cybernetics, has the scientific basis for creating the ASUV. as a
whole depends upon the further development of military science generally

and each of its sections. In their aggregate they study the laws of armed
combat on the strategic. operational and tactical levels. and they elabor-
ate the principles. means. methods and forms of conducting combat. the
scientific bases of their planning. support and the organization of troop
control. Ultimately, the theory of military art and military science as

a whole must answer the practical question of "how must the troops be con-
trolled in all the stages of their activities in order to be victorious

over the enemy?" Consequently. not only military cybernetics is concerned
with the problems of troop control. Certainly there is a crucial differ-
ence between the mentioned areas of knowledge. Military science studies
armed combat and the armed forces completely. that is. from military. politi-
cal. moral-psychological. economic. scientific-technical and other positions1
including from the viewpoint of the ”technology" of troop control. Military
cybernetics examines the same problems. but on the level of control systems
and processes with the aid of specific logical and mathematical means. while
military science. proceeding from the policy of the state and its military
doctrine. determines the aims of combat and sets the criteria for evaluating
its military results, military cybernetics accepts these views as given from
the outset. and studies the troop control systems and the processes occur-
ring in them with the task of seeking out the most advantageous ways for

the practical implementation of the set decisions.

Military cybernetics examines the laws of armed combat as a mathematical
science, that is. from the viewpoint of their structure. forms and quanti-
tative relationships. It translates the semantic operational-tactical.
strategic and military economic problems into the language of algorithms.
information theory and mchine program. and solves them in an abstract

quantitative form, while the obtained knowledge becomes available for the
theory of military art. The given sector of science carries out the assign.-

ments of tactics. operational art and strategy. and serves them like the
other military technical sciences.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: ‘ ' I LI. I' I II: ‘II'; IISuIIIJIIIIIII..-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In recent years the theory of troop control has been consistently worked
out and organizationally shaped as part of military science. This theory
in terms of its problems and the range of studied phenomena overlaps and
incorporates military cybernetics, and serves as the next stage of its
development. This theory, being an organic part of military science,
studies the problem or troop control as a whole. Here a sound analysis

is made not only of specifically military but also methodological, socio-
logical, legal, moral-ethical, psychological. pedagogical and physiological
aspects of organizing control systems, their automation, the recruitment
and training of personnel, and so forth.

Obviously new areas will appear along with the development in the theory of
troop control. For example, these will be: The principles for the algo-
rithmization of troop control processes; studying the means and methods of
automating the receiving. transmission and processing of military informa-
tion; full automation of troop control systems; the organization of informa-
tion and computer centers and communications systems; studying the methods
for carrying out operational calculations; the use of SPU methods, mechani-
zation and NOT in control systems; the use of the methods of human factors
engineering, ergonomics and psychointellectualistics in ASUV, and others.

The common traits of the dialectics of the cognitive process are manifested‘
in the process of understanding the patterns of troop control. Cognition
moves from an undifferentiated approach, when the control problem has still
not become a distinct one, to an abstract cybernetic one which separates

the form of control from its operational or tactical content, and then to
the synthesis of a formal control and concrete military analysis which is
achieved in the modern theory of troop control.

In turn, the synthesizing theory of troop control reflects the general pat-
terns of the differentiation and integration of scientific knowledge.

Thus. the theory of troop control is genetically linked not only with mili-
tary cybernetics but also to other areas of military science. It can be
viewed as an unique result from the development of certain areas of tactics.
operational art and strategy. Being a substantive theory, it examines its
own systems and processes in the entire completeness of the general, partico
ular and individual, and thereby fills in the missing links in the scien‘
tific foundation of automating troop control.

The troop control systems and the processes occurring in them are the most
complex objects of automation. They possess traits which are common to
all control systems and processes, and at the same time haVe essential
features which must be considered in solving the problems of the possible
limits and ways of automation. Proceeding from this it is essential to
elucidate the general and particular features of troop control systems as
obJeets of automation. and to characterize the content and essence of the
troop control process for defining the conditions and limits of its automa-
tion.

3h
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006‘3
10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOGTROTES
See K. Marx and P. Engels, ”Soch." [Works], Vol 23. p 383.
V. I. Lenin. ”Poln. Solar. Soch..” Vol 1, p 100.
Ibid.
K. Men: and P. heels. "80ch..” Vol 30. p 26h.
mm. Vol 23. p 38h.
Ibid. , Vol 12. p 735.
See SOVEI‘SKAYA VOYBIMAYA MSIKLOPEIYA, Moscow. 1976. Vol 1. p 75.
See it. Marx and r. Eugen, "sock..." Vol 20, pp 170-178.
It is not difficult to be convinced of this in eat-mining regulations.

orders and manuals in a chronological order. An analogous sequence

can be ob. erved in the develop-ent of the theories of control of social
proceoueo, economics and technical devices.

It must he pointed out that the general theory of automation has not
yet developed as on independent diccipline. However one can definitely
point to a number of works on the methodoloy. history. the economic
(and military) effectiveness of automation. as well as on the fore-
casting of its prospects. and on technical cybernetics and these con-
princ the basis of this theory.

35
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OPIICIM. US! ONLY

mm 2: TROOP comon A8 A spasms seams OF mmunou
1. Particular Features of ‘i‘roop Control Systems as ObJects of Autonation

The questions of inrovim the systems for controlling social processes

occupy an isportant place in the theoretical and practical activities of
the CPSU. and the party has indicated the basic areas and nethods for solv-
ing this problen. One such area is the creating of sectorial autonated
control system, and over the long run. a statewide systea for the collec-
tion and processing of intonation. The naterials of the 25th and 25th CPSU
congresses particularly emphasised that this vork should be based upon an

analysis and inroving of the organizational structure of control and on
the establishing and clarification of the functions of the individual
bodies. All of this applies fully to troop practices.

The provisions formulated by the party are the initial principles for ex-
Mining and improving the control systems for the Arned Forces of the Soviet
state. In vieving then as obJects of autontion. it is essential to fora

a clear notion of the material substrate. the external ties. the internal
structure and the functions performed as integral syste- and as individual
clenents and bodies. here it is inortant to disclose the specific features
of troop control systems (80V) along vith the canon ones.

Cybernetics has defined the nest general lavs for the structure and fine-
tioning of all systens. On this level the SUV is a related aggregate of
control circuits vhich ensure the proper Mctioning of such conplex and
dymaic systems as troop formations are. Each circuit includes the control
both. the controlled obJect and the direct linkage and feedback channels
vhich connect then. In the process of the functioning of the system. the
control body receives and processes information. it generates progn- of
action and issues the corresponding cos-ands. The object of control by

a method specific to it alone carries out these co-ands. here over the
direct linkage channel comnd information is sent out from the control
body to the object. and over the feedback channel initial information is
returned be the state of the object and the surrounding media (including
the object of incdiate action). as vell as the nonitoring information on
the results of carrying out the received co-ands. This is the general
picture for the functioning of a SUV fro. the viewpoint of cybernetics.

36
M ONION]. ”8! ONLY
'
0
es
s
I.
P

‘0: IL; ..Z'1 :I‘. l.. .I... 0.. ....-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To this scheme it In possible to add only several refinements. As is known.
in any developed control system. the control body and the controlled object
themselves are complex nyntemn and at the same time frequently operate as
elements (components) of other, even more complex systems. Ordinarily the
control body is connected with several controlled obJects among which exists
a division of funcisonw. In turn. the control body itself operates as a
controlled object for the superior control body of the given system.

As was already pointed out, among the various controlled objects. some carry
out predominantly a material-energy interaction of the system with the
medium and other objects. others realise mainly informational interactions.
and provide for the collectiOn and transmission of initial. command and
monitoring information. Regardless of the close interaction and even the
interpenetration of both types of functions. it is essential to distinguish
them for correctly posing the question of automating their control.
Certainly the automation of control must encompass the information cycles
and elements of the system which in one way or another are related to the
receiving, storage. tranformation and transmission of information.

The further penetration into the problem of automating the SUV requires a
thorough structural and functional analysis of these elements in the control
body and the controlled objects. However, these demands lead us beyond the
limits of a general cybernetics approach. and direct us along the path of

the ever more complete consideration of the specific features of troop con-
trol systems.

The social nature of the systems is of fundamental significance for solving
the problems of automating the SUV. Being subsystems of the larger control
system. the Soviet state, tney embody the corresponding socioeconomic.

political and ideological traits of our system and the socialist way of
life.

A number of important consequences ensue from this particular feature of

the troop control systems. Since the material substrate of the SUV is people
and the equipment created by them. control in the systems is realized
through interhuman relationships as well as relationships between humans

and equipment. And man is the chief element of the social control system
and the interpersonal. group and class relations are the leading ones.

They express the production relationships which have come to be in a society.

Each individual is given an awareness and will. He is motivated by material
and spiritual needs which have accumulated in the aims and means of achiev-
ing them. For this reason. in describing the specifics of the SUV. it is
essential to particularly emphasize the role of the subjective factor, the
moral-political and military qualities, the mental capacities. knowledge
and experience. the purposefulness and will, self-discipline and organiza-
tion of all the personnel. The science of controlling social processes to
a significant degree is human science which requires consideration of the
social and psychological makeup of people, as well as the observation in

37
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their relationships of the legally established standards. rules of huan
intercourse and moral principles. The most important tasks of control in
this regard are the training and indoctrination of the personnel. the unit-
ing of them into a close-knit military collective capable of carrying out a
combat mission mder a situation of any complexity, and the creation of a
healthy psychological climate in it. All of this must not be forgotten for
even an instant in setting the tasks of automating troop control and in the
process of their practical realisation.

Another proof of the social nature of SUV is that. in addition to the sub-
JectiVe factors. in the SUV there is a complex intertwining of objective
ones. These are influenced by the natural phenomena (geographic. meteoro-
logical. and- so forth). At the same time. the SUV find themselves in a
complicated intersectim of social factors including: economic. political.
ideological and psychological which are not only different in terms of
their nature but also ﬁequently operate in different directions. In their
aggregate they form the objective conditions for the existence and function-
iny of the SUV. Only a correct understanding and consideration of the
listed features We it possible to mentally pose the question of the neces-
sity and possibility of automating troop control.

The designated traits are specific and at the same time they are cosmon to
all social control systems. We. certainly. are interested in those specific
features which distinguish SUV preciselyas military control systems. This
has been analysed in detail in the work by the collective of authors ”Prin-
ciples of Troop Control.M

Without taking up the generally known facts. we would like to treat those
notions which are of essential significance for solving automation problems.

Military control systems are designed 'for functioning in a typical conflict
situation. in that specific variety of this which is arled combat. The
specific focus of the SUV is aimed at providing the constant and high combat
readiness of the troops in peacetime. and in the event the aggressor starts
a war. to carry out the combat missions. to achieve victory. and to defeat
the enemy in the minimally short time. with the least losses and material
expenditures for one's troops.

However the enesv pursues the same goal in relation to our troops. Any
battle or operation in this regard is a very complicated two-sided process
in which each of the sides endeavors to destroy the enemy not only by the
force of arms but also by the force of hash reason. and impose one’s will
on the other side. As a result an mique control system arises in which
there are two subsystems at work which endeavor to extend the control effect
to the enemy and thereby to the entire process of armed combat.

This particular feature of the control of combat was precisely pointed out
by H. N. Mhachevskiy. "...0nly that side." he wrote. ”actually directs
its actions which achieves the development of them in accord with its own
plan. and this means the actual control of combat should be control over the

38
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.--;.

I C. . ‘ 0 Lo. s' . ll" ‘-:I'$ -IIZ.IIIII III III.—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

entire combat process. that is, not only over one‘s own actions, but also
to sons degree to the chem: actions iaposed on it by our actions.... The
art of controllix mnhnr. requires an understanding of this complex contra-
dictory process."

The use of weapons by In“. Hides gives rise to a situation of danger in
which not only controlled obJects operate but also the control bodies.
This complicates the work of the latter. it disrupts the co-unications
channels. it sharply alters the state of the controlled objects. it causes
both positive and negative emotions in the personnel. and so forth. Under
the given experimental conditions [sic] a particular straining of physical
and spiritual forces is necessitated from all the personnel in order to
correctly carry out the entire aggregate of control operations. The respon-
sibility of the conssanders and staffs is increased not only for carrying
out the combat mission but also for the life of subordinates. for the fate
of the civilian population, and on a strategic scale. for the fate of the
motherland as a whole.

The nature of the tasks and conditions of troop control poses sharply the
problem of the optimization (raising the efficiency and soundness) of the
decisions being taken. since mistakes in them can lead to severe. at tines
irreparable consequences. The taking of the most effective and sound de-
cisions under these conditions is a very coaplicated task. This is caused
by a nuber of circumstances: a) by the incolpleteness and unreliability
of a nusber of initial data concerning the situation, and particularly on
the enesu which will endeavor by all scans to conceal its grouping. the
plan of action, and confuse us; b) by the couplexity and limited possibili-
ties of a nthersatical description of coabat since it is difficult to give
any data a precise quantitative neasurenent', 'c) by the limited possibili-
ties for varyiying the degree of optiaality of the decision prior to coabat
in line with the essential incompleteness of am models by which the forth-
coming combat could be reproduced and played out.

All the listed factors in a definite nanner influence the solving of the
problems of autonating SUV. On the one hand. the resistance of the enemy.
the situation of danger, the intense nature of control work. and the coun-
plexity of working out a purposeful and sound decision under these condi-
tions necessitate the autos-sting of aental operations of an evaluation or
calculation nature and requiring nethodical work in a calm situation. 0n
the other hand the ensuing problen of social responsibility of the co-andcr
and control bodies and the coaplexity of the mental problems being solved.
place certain constraints on the process of automation. The taking of a
decision to a definite degree always remains an area of creativity and art
requiring an interaction of mind and will, logic and intuition. strict cal-
culation and risk.

Another specific feature of Iilitary control systeas is their high internal

and external (Unanicness. No other social control system possesses such
flexibility. nobility and nonolithicness as a troop control system. This

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R00010001000645
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

Particular feature of military nyntemn wnn pointed out by V. I. Lenin.

'Let us take n modern army.” he wrote. "Here is one of the best examples
of organization. And thin organization is good only because it is flexible
hcinu able at the same time to impose a single will on millions of people."

By internal dynamicness one understands the mobility and variability of the
specific SUV structures. This particular feature is determined by a number
of circumstances. In the first place. the organization of the subunits.
units and formations of the armed forces is changed periodically. The
structure is brought into accord with the developing weapons. military equip-
ment, with the new methods of using them and with the new views on military
art. Secondly. an organization used at a given moaent is changed in the
course of combat-oand in a rather broad range--in accord to the set combat
mission by the varying organization of the battle formation, by changing
the number of attached (supporting) means. by organizing temporary groups
such as forward detachments. vanguards, artillery groups. and so forth.
Under various conditions the same control body can unite the actions of a
varying number of controlled objects. The problem of control can be effec-
tively solved only by a system which possesses the necessary structural
flexibility and can easily reorganize itself for various specific variations
of the organization of cantrol.

The external dynamicness of SUV is manifested in the fact that its tactical
and operational elements possess high mibility and maneuverability caused
by the nature of modern combined arms combat (operation) and by the new
means of locomotion. Certainly in solving the problems of automation, the

given circumstance is the determining one. for the control systems which
are unable to reflect and embody such dynamicness. that is. those which do
not possess sufficiently portable and mobile equipment. cannot effectively
carry out their missions.

The conditions of armed combat. the opposition of the enemy. the use of
powerful weapons. and the high dynamicness of combat place increased den-ads
on the SUV. In our opinion. the most important of them are the following:

1) Constant combat readiness of the control systems which is equal to the
readiness of the troops themselves and making it possible to engage in ac-
tion in the event of the outbreak of war:

2) The reliability (survivability) of the systems in work. the ability to
provide continuous troop control under any conditions of a situation. includ-
ing the launching of nuclear strikes by the enemy against its elements. in
creating strong Jamming by the enemy. with a shortage of initial data. as

well as with great physical stresses;
3) Efficiency in work providing the prompt carrying out of control tasks;
h) The conformity of the control system's structure to the organizational
structure of the troops. to the weapons. to the nature of combat and the
existing technical control devices;

so

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: : 'sLo. r. H" ;.:I'; M: It.” III III.-

FOR 0F?1CIAL USE ONLY

5) The mobility of control systems conforming to the mobility of the troops.
the ability of the control bodies to rapidly shift their positions. and to
control troops in motion;

6) Universality in organization and flexibility in action making it pos-
sible. without complex reorganizations. to control the troops under chang-
ing conditions. in various types of combat (offensive, defensive and so
forth) carried out with the use of any weapons;

7) Concealment in work ensuring that the contents of the information circu-
lating in the system and the locations of the SUV elements are kept secret
from the enenv.

Moreover it is important that the control systems be comparatively simple
and not too expensive. It is rather difficult to reconcile all of this in
an iteal manner and obviously there is no such single universal means by
which the carrying out of all the listed requirements could be ensured.

Automation is also no such universal means. Under the conditions of the
dialectical development of military affairs. a portion of the mentioned
requirements can be carried out only by full automation of the control
processes. However. for carrying out another portion of the requirments.

it is essential to combine automation with other measures. These are: the
correct choice of personnel. thorough ideological-political. special mili-
tary and moralnpsychological training of the personnel of the control bodies;

improving the structure and methods of work of the control bodies; diverse
mechanization and technologization of the control labor. the further develOp-

ment of communications equipment. scientific organization of labor; improv-
ing the command posts and the correct combination of man and equipment.

The particular features of the SUV are clearly apparent in their unique in-
ternal structure and in the different relationships of subordination and
coordination between the interrelated elements of the SUV. Certainly the
structure of the contro1 systems in the armies of various states has its
specific features. It manifests the different and even directly opposing
class-political. economic, national and other relationships. within the

armed forces of one country it is possible to detect specific features in
the organization of the control systems in the various services of the armed
forces and branches of forces. since they differ in terms of organization,
technical equipping. and means of action. However. in all the SUV there are
also common elements. the elucidation of vhich in methodological terms vill
help to solve the problems of automation. As the basic object let us take
the control system which exists in the ground forces of a maJority of
modern armies.

The hierarchy of control systems vhich has been widely developed in them
makes it possible to establish an order of subordination of the inferior
control bodies and officials to the superior ones. Thus in the present-day
organization of many armies these are: the soldier-squad (crev)--platoon--

b1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
0'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

company (battery)«battalionuregimentuformation--field force—ground
forces as a whole.

The two adJacent intermediate levels (for example. platoon-«quad. company--
platoon) form a closed control circuit which is a subsystem in the broader
system of control (in the first instance. in the compw. and in the
second. in the battalion). A masher of control circuits corresponding to
the number of subordinate units is for-ed by the control body of each ele-
ment.

he s consequence of the division of functions and combat missions between
the elements and subsystem of control. they are interconnected. On the
level of coordination these are links of interaction. They do not corres—
pond to classical control circuits. since there are not relations of sub-
ordination between the adJacent units. the various echelons and the basic
and supporting means. However. between them comnications channels are
established and over these there is reciprocal information on the combat
situation and their actions. A circuit of interaction when necessary can

be turned (under combat conditions such a possibility is envisaged) into one
of the control circuits.

The initial element of the troop control system is the serviceman (soldier,
sergeant or officer) who controls the weapon. technical device or machine.
he sees to the work of the mechanisms. he fires. he controls the movement

of the weapons and equipment. he deploys them in a battle situation and
strikes them in a march formation. he provides camouflage. and so forth.
here control can be carried out nnually, semiautomatically or automatically.

In more complicated "man-weapons” and "man-achine" systems. control is
carried out by a collective or persons. a crew. team or group of operators.
In such systems. as in a primary tactical subunit (rifle squad). the prob.
lem arises of controlling the coordinated actions of the men, that is a
specific feature arises which is characteristic for the SW. A control
circuit is created which includes the comander and subordinates linked

by visual. sound or radio and telephone direct and feedback channels.

Such a control system is part of the superior subunit. the platoon. the
wing of aircraft and so forth. Here the control function is also exer-
cised by the comander, but his controlling effect is focused directly not
on the soldier (the operators) armed with weapons and equipment. but rather
at the persons whose specific duty is the control of persons. that is. the
comanders of the squads (crews or teams). For the platoon cossnander they
are the inediate obJects of control. The "cossnander--subordinate soldiers"
link even more clearly expresses the specific features of the troop control
systems. For fully describing its particular feattzres Just one element is
lacking. the group control body, the staff, which arises and is developed
in the last stages of the hierarchical ladder.

.352

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A":e

.. , . .
D O. . ' s as. at. H" ‘ :I'. ll. Itili lIl Ill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The last. evermore complicated control elements are: company--platoon
(and the subunits corresponding to them); battalion--company; regiment--
battalion, and so forth. The structure of these subsystems and elements
has a number of particular features.

In a maJority of modern armies. starting from such subunits as the company
and the battalion. the commander leads the subordinate troops not only per-
sonally but also with the help of specially created command bodies and
various equipment. Thus, in the 0.5. Army. the company commander already
has a command section consisting of an assistant company commander, a sup-
ply sergeant with an assistant, a communications sergeant, a company clerk
and three radiotelephone operators. In addition to the commander, the
control system of a battalion in the U.S. Army also includes such a body

as a staff consisting of a chief of staff and officers for personnel, re-
connaissance, operational questions and military training, for the rear and
communications. as well as a chemical officer, and others. For creating
direct and feedback channels as well as for other support functions on the
staff company of a battalion. there are special subunits (a section for
staff and ground observation, a signals platoon, reconnaissance platoon,
and others).

Starting from the regiment, Lhe basic command body is considered to be the
combined arms staff which has a rather complicated structure and under the
leadership of the commander carries out the entire aggregate of command and
control measures. The combined arms staffs usually consist of officials or
of departments (sections) created by the principle of the specialization of
labor and division of functions. For example, on a majority of the forma-
tion and field force staffs of modern armies in the capitalist states, there
are such divisions and departments as reconnaissance. operations. personnel,
communications, administrative, and so forth. Moreover, on these levels
there are also the chiefs of the corresponding branches of forces, special
troops and services who are responsible for the state and correct use of
the subunits and units of their own branch of forces, and they ensure con-
crete and skilled leadership of them.

Ordinarily they exercise control and command through their subordinate offi-
cers, sergeants and soldiers. Some of the chiefs of the branches of forces
can have their own staffs. The hierarchical ladder in this manner is de—
veloped not only along the vertical but also along the horizontal. fonming
additional control subsystems for the branches of forces and special troops.

In solving automation problems, consideration is given to the principles
which underlie the structure and functioning of SUV. The most important of
them are unity of command and centralization.

The principle of unity of command is a basic one in the organizational de-
velopment of the armed forces and in the command of troops in peacetime and
wartime. Its essence consists in the concentrating of all power in the
hands of one individual who takes the decisions and bears personal respon-
sibility for the combat readiness of the subordinate troops and for their

h3
ros orncm. us: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064!
mu (Wl'lClM. USE ONLY

successful execution of combat missions. The commander (troop commander)
is this person in each control element.

V. I. Lenin-repeatedly pointed to the objective necessity of unity of comp
sand in controlling large industrial and technical complexes. "No railroads,
nor transport, nor large machines and enterprises." he wrote, "can function
correctly at all if there is no unity of will which links all the available
workers into a single economic organ working with the exactness of a clock
mechanism."“ V. I. Lenin considered the observance of this principle par-
ticularly important in the organizational development of the armed forces
and in troop control. "Irresponsibility covered up by references to col-
lectivism," he stressed. "is the most dangerous evil which...in military

affairs leads constantly to catastrophe. chaos, panic. divided rule and
defeat."5

The principle of unity of couuand has an Opposite class-political nature,
content and focus in the armed forces of the imperialist and socialist
states. In bourgeois armies this expresses relationshins of social in-
equality. exploitation and suppression, and serves the reactionary and ag-
gressive aspirations of monopolistic groupings. In the socialist armies
it embodies the moral and political unity and cooperation of the working
classes and is aimed at achieving Just, progressive aims. In the USSR
Armed Forces unity of command is exercised on a party base and presupposes
the high political awareness of each officer. his constant execution of the
policy of the Communist Party and the Soviet government. and a reliance on
the party organizations in carrying out specific missions.

The principle of unity of command in no way means that the commander can ig-
nore the results of work or the opinion of the collective of a control body.
Such a practice would cause harm and would lead to subjectivism and an abuse
of power. Truly scientific leadership consists in the skillful combination
of strictest unity of command in taking a decision and carrying it out with
the fullest utilization of the experience. initiative and creativity of the

officers of the control body (in operational elements. persons who are a
member of the military council). the party and Komsomol organisations and
all the personnel.

Under the conditions of a further differentiation in the functions of the
officers of control bodies it is particularly important that the commander
correctly use the knowledge and experience of the specialists and the opinion
of the chiefs of the branches of forces. the officers of the corresponding
departments and services. V. I. Lenin cautioned leaders: "Really isn't it
shameful to correct offhandedly the work of hundreds of the best special-
ists. to resort to noisy Jokes and to boast of one's right 'not to approve'?"6

The instructions of V. I. Lenin have maintained their timeliness even now.
They focus on the correct use of collective reason in working out and estab-
Llshing decisions and in planning combat.

hh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t'-:o

I 0:: ‘ ' a a. l' Z 0'" ‘tl'; ll£.l:|ll III III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principle of unity of command is supplemented and organizationally
supported by the principle of the centralization of leadership. Its es-
sence consists in the consistent and strict subordination of the inferior
levels to the superior ones. and in the unifying of the actions of subordi-

nate troops according to a single plan for achieving the overall goal of
combat (an operation).

This principle also requires skillful and flexible application. and in par-
ticular. an understanding that centralization under certain conditions of
modern armed combat can be combined with decentralization of control. and
include the latter as a particular aspect. This means that in special
circumstances the independence of certain units and formations can rise.
particularly when they operate away from the remaining troops, in the ab-
sence of contact with a senior chief. as well as with acutely limited time
for preparing combat. It is also essential to bear in mind that too rigid
centralization can lead to an informational overloading of the superior
levels and to the thwarting of the initiative and creativity of subordinates.
Excessive interference has a hamnful psychological effect. It teaches the
subordinates to wait in all instances for instructions from a senior chief.
In emphasizing the danger of these tendencies. L. I. Brezhnev formulated
the following demand: "...A very important element in improving economic
leadership is an improving in the organizational structure and methods of
management. We must simultaneously strengthen both principles of democratic
centralism. On the one hand. it is essential to develop centralism thereby
creating an obstacle for departmental and local trends. 0n the other. it
is essential to develop the democratic principles. initiative on the spot.
to free the upper leadership echelons of unimportant matters. and ensure
efficiency and flexibility in decision taking.”7

The principles of centralism and unity of command have been considered in
working out the overall structure of the ASUV. in disclosing the links be-
tween its elements. in determining the control functions which can be auto-
mated. the degree of automation of the hierarchically linked elements of
the control system. in establishing the nature and volume of information re
ceived by each control element. and so forth.

The solving of automation problems is also influenced by the specific fea-
tures of organizing command posts. They can be stationary or mobile. lo-
cated on ammored personnel carriers. motor vehicles. airplanes. helicopters
and ships.

For ensuring the survival and continuous operation under conditions of modern
war. in foreign armies. in each element of the control system several com-
mand posts are organized and these are capable of taking over for one another
in the event of the knocking out of one of them. One of these posts is the
basic one. For example. in the U.S. and West German divisions. corps and
armies, a basic command post is created along with a reserve or forward of
rear command post. In addition. for the same purpose provision is made for
the shifting of control in the event of the knocking out of the basic and

hs
ron orncm. use 0va

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R00010001000645
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reserve cosmehd posts to the wand posts of the chiefs and subordinate
conmanders of the formations.

For ensuring the work of the «and posts and for maintaining uninterrupted
comicatiOns. the control bodies have at their deposal the corresponding

equipment for reconnaissance. co-unications. as well as for collecting.
processing and displaying information.

In all armies basic attention is given to developing such an element of the
control systems as the direct and feedback channels between the control
bodies and the controlled objects. Here an effort is made to ensure their
uninterrupted work considering the requirements of reliability of operation
with the necessary range and capacity, accuracy. speed and secrecy in trans-
mitting information and sufficient resistance to damning.

For meeting these requirements. it has been recounended that various types
and methods of conunications be used together. including: radio. radio
relay. wire, telegraph with letter printing. signal. high speed. and so
forth. In the opinion of foreign specialists. the recent achievements of
science and technoloy in the near future will make it possible to supply
the control bodies with Mdamentally new equipment.

‘lhis generally is a description of modern troop control systems. their na-
ture and purpose. the structure and functions. the design principles and
the operating conditions. From this total evaluation it is possible to
draw the following tentative conclusions on the automation of SUV. In the
first place. the very conditions and particular features of its function-
ing predetermine the further development and deepening of full automtion
of troop control processes. Secondly. the socioclasi- nature. the complexity.
multiplicity. and dynamicness of the SUV not only give rise to difficulties
on this path. but also impose definite limitations on the process of auto-
mation. and demand that it be combined with other directions for improving
the troop control systems and methods.

The concretization of this conclusion and a clarification of the possibili-
ties, ways. stages and depth of the automating of control require a more de-

tailed examination of the very process of troop control, as well as its es-
sence and content.

2. Modern Views on the Essence and Content of the Troop Control Process

The content of control in its cybernetic understanding was briefly examined
in the first section of the current chapter. In starting from this general

description, it is essential to bring out the specific features inherent to
the processes of troop control and thereby create additional prerequisites

for the specific conclusions on the fundamental and real opportunities for
automating control.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
D O: : i ' I La: 3' l II" 1 :D'i II; I:III III III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For solving this problem. a mere cybernetic description of the elements in
the informational cycle of control is not sufficient. There must be a

thorough evaluation of the content of the troop control process consider-
ing its aims, means and the sequence of scages. Going beyond the confines
of the informational aspect of the review nakes it possible to consider the
sociopolitical, the military-technical. moral-psychological and logical-
gnoseological aspects of the troop control process.

A correct definition of the essence of troop control is not s simple matter.
As an example. several definitions can be given. One of them. for example.
states: "Troop control (the control of combat and an operation) is the
preparation. conduct and support of the combat by the commander with the
aid of the staff and other command bodies."e But combat is not directly
carried out by the commander or the staff but rather by the troops they
control.

Another well known definition is also not without shortcomings. It states:
"Troop control is constant leadership by the commanders and staffs of all
levels over the activities of the subordinate troops (aviation or navy) and
aimed at carrying out the set missions."9 here there is indication of a
definite purposefulness in the control process, however its content is
transmitted by the words "constant leadership." The reasonable question
arises: what must be understood as leadership? Are not the concepts of
"leadership" and "control" identical? If this is the case. then the defini-
tion will he logically incorrect.

in our view. basic attention should be focused not on a comparison and criti-
cism of the various definitions. but rather on examining and describing the
very process of troop control. For this purpose it is essential to isolate
the control activities from the general activities of the troops. As is
known the latter are permeated by control. they comprise the basic spheres

of its applicationI and characterize the types of control problems. Never-
theless, control does not coincide with all troop activities. it does not
exhaust them, but rather comprises its inner core. it systematizea and

links these activities into a single whole.

Control is an active process, and it always in one way or another invades a
natural or spontaneous course of things. Its primary aim is to maintain a
given system. its integrity and the capacity to function. However. under

the constant changing conditions of the environment it is impossible to main-
tain the system without altering its structure and functions within certain
limits. And these changes should not reduce but rather increase the effi-

cient functioning of the system and its interaction with the environment.
A correspondingly secondary and more profound aim of control is to improve

the system and to ensure the development of its structure and functions.

Proceeding from this overall description of the essence of control, it can
be asserted that the sense and aim of troop control consists in those
changes of their organizational structure, state. battle formations and
methods of combat which provide for the maintaining and improvement of their

hT
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combat capability and readiness. and the carrying out of the combat mis-
sions (the defeat of the enemy) in the shortest time and with the least
losses and'matcriel expenditures. Thus. the preparation. execution and
support of combat in their aggregate comprise the sphere of control. Con-
trol itself~consists in optimizing these processes. directing the efforts
of the troops at carrying out the corresponding missions. coordinating their
actions and giving them purposefulness. planning and organisation.

In its content. troop control includes a significant number of measures

and forms of activity which differ in their nature. If it is viewed in

the various stages of troop activities. then it is possible to isolate the
preparation of troop combat and troop leadership in the course of combat.
with such a division the measures to support combat are not isolated in a
separate group, for they are part of the content of both the first and
second stage. The latter also are not always completely separated from one
another. In contrast to the past. under present-day conditions the troops
which carry out a previously received mission can simultaneously prepare to
carry out a new mission. since there will be no long pauses between periods
of combat. However. for analyzing the content of the troop control process.
the division made is completely acceptable and advisable.

During the period of preparing for combat, the commanders. the staffs. the
chiefs of the branches of troops (services) and the party political appara-
tus10 carry out measures aimed at implementing the following missions:
Maintaining constant combat readiness, including a high political and moral
state of the troops; the collecting and evaluating of situation data. the
taking of decisions and planning of combat; the issuing of missions to the
troops and the organizing of their cooperation; the military and political
preparing of the personnel to carry out the forthcoming combat'mission; the
organizing of all-round support for combat and the control process itself;
inspection of the readiness of the units and subunits to carry out their
missions with the providing of the necessary help for them.

The core of all this work is the maintaining of constant combat readiness of
the troops. This is the most important task of the commanders and control
bodies of all levels both in peacetime and in wartime. The level of troop
combat readiness is the basic criterion for the efficiency of control in
cuch of the designated periods.

High combat readiness under present—day conditions is a very vast concept.
It cannot be reduced merely to the rapid assembly of troops upon a combat
alert. although this is an important indicator. As Mar SU A. A. Grechko has
written. combat readiness "is that state of the Armed Forces whereby they
are ready at any moment and under the most difficult conditions to repel
and stop aggression. from wherever it might arise and whatever means and
methods be used. including nuclear weapons."11

The second group is made up of the measures for troop leadership in the
course of combat. In terms of their general content. at first glance they

may appear little different from the measures related to the preparation of

h8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_ I a... a. e H 1:0’~ H. ltlil III III.-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

combat. Certainly in the course of combat. for example, the task of main-
taining readiness of the troop and their high political and moral state re-
mains in force. Only here its fulfillment will be related primarily to
protecting the troops from mass losses and to restoring their combat capa-
bility in the chnt the enemy uses weapons of mass destruction. The neces-
sity also remains of the all-round support of combat. Only here great flex-
ibility and mobility are required in implementing the corresponding measures.

The basic content of the control process in the course of combat is made up
of: The continuous collection and study of current data on the changing
situation; the taking of particular decisions which ensure the fulfillment
or adjustment and eVen fundamental alteration of a previously taken general
decision; the posing of new (adjusted) missions for subordinate troops and
the maintaining of their cooperation; supervision over the course of combat
and the fulfillment of the given missions by the troops.

A general description of the essence and purpose of troop control as well
an the list of the basic measures camprising the content of the control
process in the period of preparing the troops for combat and in the course
of it make it possible to provide the following definition. TrOop control
is the activities of commanders and control bodies based on objective laws
and principles of military art and aimed at maintaining the high combat
readiness of the troops and directing their efforts at the successful exocu-
tion of the combat'mission in the course of combat. The process of troop
control is carried out by the continuous securing and evaluation of situa-
tional data. the taking of decisions. the issuing of tasks to executors,
and all-round organization and control of their fulfillment.

The given approach corresponds to the cybernetic understanding of control,
and at the same time makes it possible rather fully to reflect the specifics
of troop control. Here we have defined: who, on the basis of what and for
what purpose exercises control of whom. At the same time, the specific con-
tent of the control process, its elements and sequence of actions are dis-
closed and these form a closed and constantly renewed cycle.

Before describing the other aspects of the control process, it is essential
to mention the basic demands made on it and which stem from the particular
conditions of the functioning of troop control systems. Anong them we must
mention first of all the firmness of control, that is. the ability of the
commanders and control bodies to constantly carry out the taken decision,
to retain in their hands the leadership of men in a difficult situation. to
prevent panic and a mood of doom when being exposed to weapons of mass de-
struction. to restore the battleworthiness of the troops and ensure the
carrying out of the combat mission.

Another demand is the flexibility of control, that is. a rapid response to

a change in the situation. a prompt adJustment, and when necessary, a funds-
mental change in the taken decisions, the elaborated combat plan and the

very system of control.

’*9
ms orncm. use om!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLV

The great dynamicness of modern combat places on control the demand of high
efficiency. speed in implementing each element of the control cycle and in
solving control problems as a whole. The basic criterion of efficiency is
the time spent by the commander and the staff on the collection and process-
ing of situational data. on the taking of a sound decision and the issuing
of assignments to executors. This time should make it possible to anticipate
the enemy in making the strike.

In the course of modern combat. more complicated conditions arise for carry-
ing out such requirements as continuity and secrecy of control. the ability
to maintain uninterrupted contact with the troops. and to keep the plan of
one's actions and the order of carrying them out a secret from the enemy.
The particular urgency of this requirement is caused by the increased abil-
ity of the enemy to reconnoiter and destroy our command posts using nuclear
strikes. to disrupt communications by Jamming. as well as increase the dis-
tances between command posts and their extended remaining in motion.

An elucidation of the tasks and measures related to troop control in the
preparatory stages and in the course of combat is also needed for a correct
approach to the problem of the automation of control. However. such analy-
sis is not sufficient for solving this problem. It does not make it possible
to clearly isolate the forms of control activity which to a varying degree
require and allow their automation. For this reason. for a further analysis
of the content of the control process there must be a different basis for
isolating and describing its certain aspects and sides.

Such a basis can be the difference in the material (practical) and ideal
(mental or creative) activity of people. It is essential to bear in mind
that this difference is absolute only in the gnoaeological term. Certainly
the practical actions of people are also permeated with awareness. and
mental activity occurs on the basis of practice and at each step is checked
by it. Nevertheless. such a division is obJectively caused and is method-
ologically Justified.

Proceeding from the accepted basis. it is possible to break down the control
process having isolated the two forms (types) of activity inherent to the
solving of any control problem.

One type (form) of activity is comprised of ideal. mental activity. related
to the understanding of the combat situation. the taking of a decision and

the planning of combat. This makes it possible to define it as a cognitive
planning activity of the commanders and control bodies. This comprises an

inseparable element of any control process and itself consists of a number

of particular components.

its initial base is the process of cognition as a reflection of obJective

reality in the conscience of people. The elements of the cognitive activity
of a commander are: The obtaining of initial data on the combat situation
and the combat mission from a senior chief; elucidating the received combat
mission; acquiring additional (lacking) data on the situation. their

50
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
. ... , . , . . - ~
. . s a. s . H - :I'. .Ol..l:|lt OH IN.

FOR ”VFICIAL USE ONLY

generalization and depiction on charts, in documents and so forth; analysis
and synthesis of the obtained data on empirical and theoretical levels,

that is. a thorough eVaiuution of the situation.

The other part of this activity discloses the constructive and creative
abilities of our thinking which introduces into reality something unique

and not having a direct prototype. The basic sphere of the productive think-
ing of the commander is the elaboration of a decisioa, above all the formu-
lating of the aim and plan of the forthcoming battle (operation) and its
thorough and detailed planning. This activity is similar to scientific dis-
coveries. invention and designing. It includes aspects of intuition, reli-
ance on acquired experience and the use of the most recent scientific plan-
ning methods. including mathematical modeling of combat and the utilization
of computers and network schedules.

The particular features of the constructive and creative thinking of a com-
mander have been aptly described by Gen P. I. Batov: "Like any creation of
the hands and will of people, combat is carried out tvice-initially in
thought and later in reality. If the chief of staff is the mathematician

of the operation. this is not enough for the commander. He should by the
strength of imagination. in focusing his foresight, live through this first,
mental battle the details of which are imprinted in one's memory like frames
on a film.“2 This description is presently being complemented by new as-
pects related to the constructing of special mathematicological models of
combat and the use of the mathematical methods of operations research and
computers in the process of planning them.

Cognition and planning are two organically related processes. They accompany
one another in all stages of solving control problems. Thus the obtaining
and elucidation of a combat mission are accompanied by the tentative formu-
lation of one's own ndssion and plan for the forthcoming actions. This

aim directs the further process of securing information on the situation,

as well as the grouping and generalization of information. In turn, such
work makes it possible to clarify the initial plan and in general terms out-
line the decision for combat (an operation). From the viewpoint of the
adjusted plan and a sketch of the decision, an empirical and theoretical
analysis of the situation. its thorough evaluation and the elaboration of

a final decision are carried out. But from the very moment of formulating
the initial combat plan, the planning of combat also starts. In planning

a detailed program of troop operations to carry out the set decision is
developed and established step by step from the general aims.

11A: is a general description of the cognitive and planning activities of
the commanders and control bodies. 0n the basis of them another form (type)
of control activity is carried out and this could be termed the practical
organizational activities of the commanders and control bodies. This in-
cludes a number of measures aimed at implementing the taken decision. They
include: The giving of missions to the troops. the organization of their
cooperation and support. the carrying out of the necessary political work.
and the overseeing of the readiness of the troops and their fulfillment of

the given missions.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the practical and organizational activities of the commanders and con-
trol bodies one can also isolate two aspects. The first involves the spe-
cial military or technical aspect and encompasses the carrying out or a
multiplicity of tasks, starting from the starting or the combat units, the
assigning of personnel to them and ending with the all-round support of
combat. The range of these activities includes all questions related to
the organization of combat.

The other aspect is related to controlling the spiritual forces of the men.
to the ideological and psychological preparation of the personnel to carry
out the combat missions. and to maintaining a high political and moral state
or the troops in the course of combat. Even V. I. Lenin pointed to the im-
portance and necessity of stressing this aspect. "In any war." he stressed.
”victory ultimately is determined by the morale of those masters who shed
their blood on the battlefield."‘3 Hilitary historical experience indi-
cates that it is possible to take a correct decision to prepare for its
practical implementation properly in special mdlitary terms. but neverthe-
less be defeated if the personnel is not properly prepared in ideological
and moral-psychological terms.

In describing the problem or the style of leadership, L. I. Brezhnev in

the Accountability Report to the 25th Party Congress noted: "A modern
leader should organically combine party loyalty with profound competence.
discipline with initiative and a creative approach to the Job. At the same
time. in any area a leader must also consider the sociopolitical and indoc-
trinational aspects. he must be sensitive to other people. to their needs
and requests, and serve as an example in work and everyday life."‘“ The
given statement applies fully to the sphere of troop control. Organiza-
tional and indoctrinational work is an inseparable element or control. In
relying on the party and Komsomol organizations. this is carried out by the
commanders. the political bodies and all the officers. In structural terms
it is formed from the aggregate of the constantly carried out measures to
maintain a high political and moral state and a complex of measures related
to the special training of the personnel in line with a specific combat
mission.

The cogniti"e-planning and practical organizational activities are closely
interrelated. Cognition and planning in various forms permeate all practi-
cal and organizational activities. In turn. they themselves need a definite
organization and practical actions. however. the distinguishing or these
forms of activity reflects one of the real cross-sections of the control
process; it is particularly important for evaluating the possibilities of
automation.

The cognitive planning and practical organizational activities in control
to a varying degree require and permit automation. And to a varying degree
the individual elements of these activities are automatable: cognition of
the existing situation. the taking of a decision and planning future ac-

tions as a whole; the carrying out of measures of a special military nature
and the ideological and psychological preparation of the personnel. This

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: 1 ' s '0: s:. H" 1 :I'; It; ltllt I” III.-

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

is seen from a general comparison of them, but an analysis of the content
of each particular element of troop control gives even greater convincing-
ness to this conclusion.

For describing the cognitive activities of a commander it is important to
define their initial moment. In each specific instance the receiving of
the initial data and the combat mission from the senior chief can be con-
sidered as this. This is a powerful impetus for activating the process of
studying the situation. However its cognition actually begins before this
moment. The collecting of data on the situation is an uninterrupted process.
and the commander usually possesses a certain supply of information on it
even before the receiving of the combat mission. This information has been
acquired in preceding combat. in the process of the preliminary study of
the enemy and the terrain. and so forth. Moreover the cognition of the
situation starts even in the course of the general theoretical and practi-
cal training of command personnel. The knowledge acquired by them repre-
sents an unique information model of armed combat in the given theater of
operations. It also acts as the most general initial aspect in understand-
ing the actual combat situation. in logically directing the elucidation of
the mission, the collecting of lacking information on the combat situation.
a thorough evaluation, the forming of a plan for forthcoming combat (an
operation), the taking of a decision and the planning of combat as a whole.

It is important to consider all of this in defining the possibilities.
tasks and limits of automating the process of cognition and planning. The
potential objects of automation in one way or another are the following:
The three designated initial aspects--the general (the information model of
armed combat). the particular (the preliminary store of information on the
situation) and the specific (the mission and the initial data obtained from
the senior chief). as well as those elements from which the subsequent cog-
nitive and planning activities are formed. Let us briefly examine their
content.

The obtaining and analysis of the combat mission are a cognitive process in
which the cosmnnder receives and assimilates infonnation on the state and
trends in the change of the situation on the scale of the superior level;
on the plan of the superior chief, his intentions to use weapons and par-
ticularly nuclear weapons; on the procedure and order of combat; on the
role assigned to his unit or subunit and the given combat missions. Here
the brain of the commander performs in no way passive functions of a re-
ceiver or a living display device. His mental work does not have a formal
logical nature. Even in this stage there begins the countennovement of the
commander's thought. the shaping of his own plan and an understanding of
the essence of the pending combat which is possible only on the basis of
dialectical thought.

The collection of lacking information on the actual situation existing at
the moment of receiving the combat mission is an objectively necessary
condition for the working out of a sound decision by the commander. This
element in cognitive activity encompasses not only the securing of

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

information but also its transmission over the comaunications channels to
the superior control bodies and tn: required transformation. generaliza-

tion and systemtizntion of military information and the display of the
obtained information using sign systems (documents and charts) as well as
special equipment (screens. boards and so forth).

The commander and the control bodies study the following elements of the
situation: The enemy. their own troops. adjacent units. the terrain. the
radiation. chemical and biological situation. the hydrometeorological con-
ditions. the season and the time of day. as well as the economic condition
of the combat area. the socioclass composition of the population and its
attitude toward our troops. The volume and content of information on each
of these situation elements will differ depending upon the type of combat.
the nature of the obtained combat mission and the obJective conditions for
securing this information. He would point out that some of them depend

upon the decision and actions of the comander in the preparatory period

(the position and moving of his troops, their political and moral condition.
material-technical and other supply). But other indicators (the eneny group-
ing, the position of adjacent units. the nature of the terrain. and so forth)
before the start of combat do not depend upon the decision taken by the
commander.

All the designated processes require significant outlays of labor and time.
Certainly many operations which are carried out here are repeated. they are
standard and contain more formal than creative aspects. For this reason
here there is a significant area for technologization and automtion.

The evaluation of the situation and a thorough analysis of the information
obtained on its elements comprise the cognitive foundation of the comander's
decision.

The essence of this work consists in the' fact that the comnder reasons out
the conditions for carrying out the combat mission and the factors which de-
termine the possible development of combat and thereby influence the nature
of the decision to be taken.

Here the shaping of the plan of action can occur predominantly by analytical
mans with the subsequent reasoning out of each element in the situation.

In other instances a generalized synthetic approach can prevail when a
series of elegantn in the situation or even all of them are considered sinn-
taneously from the viewpoint of their influence on selecting the direction
of the main strike. on determining the battle formation of the troops. on
the distribution of combat missions between them. and so forth. Such an
approach is particularly effective when the contender possesses great ex-
perience. he knows the changes in the situation even before receiving the
mission. and possesses limited time for working out a decision.

The overall evaluation of the situation is made by the commander and the
chief of staff who always should be ready to report their conclusions on
MW element and on the situation as a whole. The remaining staff officers

510
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e- . . . ' . - -
0 O. . i I Lo. s; . H‘ :-:0'. II. .:III Hi Iii.-

FOK OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the chiefs of the branches of forces (services) evaluate the situation
from the viewpoint of carrying out their own functional duties.

he nvnluatioh of a ritusiion is a complicated creativ- process. Iﬁ ii dif—
icult to formalize it completely. It includes not o. f the logica} ppm:
nrﬂnrnn of thought (analysl' and synthesis. induction and deductinn. abstrac-
tion and generalization, and no forth) in their dialectical unity. but also
imagination and creative intuition. Since the commander evaluates the ele-
ments of the situation in their unity and reciprocal influence from the
viewpoint of the conclusions made by him in analyzing the combat mission.
the same factors of the situation can be given a differing eValuation in a
different context. Moreover. some data can be incomplete. fragmentary. ac—
cidental or even false and fabricated by the enemy. For this reason it is
essential to fill in the missing elements. to synthesize the contradictory
aspects. to weed out false ones. and so forth.

Moreover. in evaluating the situation a commander is forced to consider many
factors which at times go beyond the limits of the immediately arising combat
mission. He proceeds from the general political situation. and considers

the effect both on our troops and on the enemy troops of the sociopolitical
factor. economic conditions. ideological phenomena. the individual and
social psychology of people. and the social consequences of the forthcoming
combat (operation).

The dialectical nature of the evaluation process does not exclude uniform
and repeating formal logic operations. The preliminary material for a
thorough evaluation of the situation can often be obtained by formal and
relatively independent qualitative and quantitative comparisons for certain
parameters. The answers to the questions of who, where, when, how much.
what balance of forces. and what is the radiation level? and the logical
conclusions from them must be considered under any circumstances. The
analysis of such parameters and the elaboration of the criteria and algo-
rithms for evaluating them can become a basis for automating certain opera-
tions related to an analysis and evaluation of the situation.

The choice of the most effective And sound variation of a decision and the
planning of combat comprise the coneiuding. most complicated and responsi-
ble stage in the work of the cemmandel‘and the staff.

Since all the measures related to the control and actions of one's troops
are carried out in strict accord with the decision made by the commander,
this i" P‘ﬁhﬁii considered the basis of one entire control process. The
chief'3 derision determines the aim of the actions. the forces. means.
methods and tiles of achieving it. It )ecomes the basis and a component
part of the entire process of planning combat. Certainly the aim of plan-
ning consists in seeking out the best V838 for carrying out the combat
mission. Its content includes a determining of the sequence. times and
methods for the troops to carry out the received mission considering the
expected results of the use of weapons, the establishing of a firm order

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

of cooperation between the troops in terms of the target (objectives). the
time and place. as well as the organizing of all-round support for combat
and troop control. But precisely these questions are reflected primarily
in the commander's decision, and for this reason it is also the basis of
planning. 'In accord with the commander's decision and under his personal
leadership, the staff and the chiefs of the branches of forces (services)
detail and concretize the individual questions of organising combat. they
seek out the optimum variations and methods for carrying out the combat
mission and back them up with the needed calculations. The results of the
planning work are usually given a graphic depiction on maps, as a brief
explanatory note and in other documents.

In their aggregate decision taking and the planning of combat are a creative
process in which the cognitive and constructive activities of man are closely
intertwined with his volitional efforts. and they require not only know-
ledge. reason. developed intuition. imagination and military guile, but

also courage, boldness and the readiness to assume the entire burden of
responsibility.

In the aim of achieving surprise. a commander may consciously take a risk
and make a decision which mathematically cannot always be backed up. This
particularly applies to selecting the direction of the main strike. the
forms of maneuver, the time of actions and so forth. Such decisions are
often taken seemingly against the demands of the obJective conditions and
established views. This is done counting on the fact that the actions of
our troops would be a surprise for the enemy. The characteristic histori-
cal examples of such "illogical" actions were the choosing of the direction
of the main thrust of our troops in the Belorussian Operation. the night-
time attack on the defenses of the Nazi troops in the Berlin Operation, and
so forth. All of them were marked by surprise and high combat effectiveness.

The creative nature of the process of decision taking and planning of combat
does not exclude the possibility of automating them. The constructing of
the elements of the decision and the plan in several variations and a com-
parison of them in the present stage of scientific development can fully

be an object of algorithmization, planning. and conse4uently, automation.
There are particularly broad opportunities for this in carrying out various
calculations and playing through (verifying) the mathematical models of
forthcoming actions or certain episodes of them on a computer.

From the viewpoint of automation let us examine the practical organizational
activities of the conmmnder and control bodies. These begin by the issuing
of combat sunsions to subordinates. by instructions on cooperation and the
support of troop combat. The transmission of the corresponding informa-
tion can be carried out by the commander. through the staff officers, in
writing and using equipment and communications.

we must particularly take up the issuing of missions to subordinates with
personal contact between them and the commander and staff officers. The
practice of wars has showed the exceptional importance of this. No equipment

56
FOR orncm. use 0er
---:o

.. . . . - . .
I C.. ' s a. s' . I.” ‘.I'. t...':II'III UH.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

can replace the vital word of a commander. On the spot he is able to make
certain that his subordinates correctly understand the combat mission, he
can have the necessary moral and psychological impact on them, instill
confidence in victory and inspire them to a feat.

The basic criteria in seiuctinn one or another method of issuing a combat
order are speed, concealment and accuracy. In all instances the subordi-
natcofficer should receive a mission within a time which would allow him to
prepare the personnel and the equipment for combat and anticipate the enemy
in making the strike. Even before taking a decision the commander gives
preliminary orders. and informs his subordinates of the forthcoming actions
and the procedure for preparing for them in parallel with the superior
level.

The issuing of a decision to the executors is merely the start of the prac-
tical organizational activities of control. One of its important elements

is the manning and arming of the troops with personnel, weapons and equipment,
the strengthening of command personnel, and the uniting and rallying of the
units and subunits. Of course, these questions are solved continuously even
before the giving of the combat mission. However, such work is carried out
right until the start of combat, and sometimes these measures can become
necessary and possible precisely with the obtaining of the combat mission

in line with its special nature and importance.

Troop leadership includes the organizing and maintaining of cooperation and
these are carried out by the commander and the staff during all of combat.
"ere special attention is given to coordinating the actions of the troops
to effectively use weapons of mass destruction. air strikes and artillery
fire.

An important area of control is the organization of the all-round support
of troop combat. Usually the following basic types of support for troop
combat are distinguished: Reconnaissance, protection against nuclear
weapons, radioelectronic countermeasures, camouflage, security, engineer,
rear (material, technical and medical), topogeodctic and hydrometeorological
support and the organization of the commandant service.

In solving problems related to the organization of all-round support, the
commander gives particular attention to the key questions. The details of
this work are planned and organized by the staff, the deputy commanders and
the corresponding chiefs of the branches of forces and services.

A number of practical measures relates to the organization of the very con—
trol process. The commander, the chief of staff, the chiefs of the branches
of forces (services) and the chiefs of departments set up, disassemble and
move the command posts, they coordinate their work and provide continuous
communications with the troops, and they organize and ensure the smooth
work of the control bodies. The demands placed upon control as a whole will
be carried out to the degree to which the work of the control bodies has
been organized.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Finally. among the measures of apractical organizational nature are the
supervising of preparations to carry out a combat mission and the course
of its Nifillmsnt. The given element completes the control cycle in
solving any problem. In exercising supervision. the comnders and the
officers of the control bodies atom! the state of affairs in the troops.
they given instructions to eliminate the detected shortcomings. and provide
the needed help for subordinates. Here also an important role is played
by the direct contact of the co-anders and the officers of the control
bodies with subordinates. This is a general estimate of the special.

military-technical aspect of the practical organisational activities of
control.

The following can be said on the ideological and psychological sphere.
This includes the carrying out of a nunber of tasks and specific measures
aimed at strengthening the morale of the personnel and their readiness to
carry out the combat mission under difficult conditions.

The carrying out of these measures comrises the area of party political
work which must be vieved as an essential and important element of control
as a vhole. Party political work in the troops is related to indoctrinat-
ing them in a spirit of total loyalty to the socialist motherland and to
the cause of the Conunist Party. In a combat situation this mint ensure
a profound understanding by the personnel of the policy of the party and
the government. the aim and nature of the war. the tasks confronting the
Armed Forces. and it must instill a loyalty of the men to the oath and
high moral and psychological qualities. with the receiving of a specific
combat mission. this work is aimed at a comet conception of the mission
by each soldier. sergeant and officer. and at instilling in them combat
drive. boldness and valor, and a feeling of collectivism and mutual help.
These goals can be achieved only by the vital and creative activities of
the co-anders. the political workers. and all the officers of the control
bodies. the party and Komsomol organisations directly in the troops. in
the use of soldiers. '

Thus. in the general process of armed combat, along with the actions of
the troops themselves, activities related to their control are also car-
ried out. These are a goal-directed. creative process in which the cog-
nitive planning and practical organisational work of the commanders and
control bodies is inseparably linked. Its content is the complex of
measures to prepare for battle (an operation) and to direct the efforts of
the troops at carrying out the received combat mission in the course of
combat. Among the multiplicity of suessures. it is possible to isolate
core and constantly repeating ones. These are related to the collection
and stmlng of data on the situation, the taking of a decision. the
issuing of orders to executors. the practical organisation of their exe-
cution and overseeing the actions of subordinates.

Even a preliminary description of these shovs that some of these measures
require automation or have already been automted. At the same time one

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' ' ' ‘ " ‘ ‘ It OH.
"'.'O I O: t ‘ a LO. 3' . It ' .I . tl....tt.t

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cannot help but see that in the practical organizational activities, par-
ticularly in party political work, there must be a personal, vital con-

tact of the commanders and political workers with the personnel. This
must be considered in solving automation problems. '

However, in order to draw a completely sound conclusion on this question,

it is essential to examine in detail the potential and real possibilities

of automating each of the designated elements of the control process. the
principles for setting up ASUV, the real characteristics of modern ASUV and
the potential opportunities of developing them in the future. The materials
have been given using the views of specialists in foreign armies.

FOOTNOTES

1. See D. A. Ivanov, V. P. Savel'yev and P. V. Shemanskiy, "Osnovy
Upravleniya Voyskami" [Principles of Troop Control], Moscow, 1971.

.2. VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, N0 2, 1962, p 73.
3. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch.," Vol 26, p 258.
h. Ibid., Vol 36, p 157.

5. Ibid., V01 39. p h6.

6. Ibid.. Vol be. p 3hh.

T. "Materialy XXV S"yezda KPSS," p 60.

8. Sec "Malaya Sovetskaya Entsiklopediy " [Small Soviet Encyclopedia],
Vol 9. Moscow. 1960, p 17h. ‘

9. See "Slovar' Osnovnykh Voyennykh Terminov" [Dictionary of Basic Mili-
tary Terms], Moscow, 1965.

10. In the remaining text, instead of listing all the officials and bodies,
the term "commander and control bodies" will be employed.

11. A. A. Grechko, "Vooruzhennyye Sily Sovetskogo Gosudarstva" [The Armed
Forces of the Soviet State], Moscow, 1975. Pp 110-111.

12. P. I Batov, "V Pokhodakh i Boyakh" [On Campaign and In Combat], Moscow,
1962, P 52.

13. v. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sobr. Soch.," Vol bl, p 121.

l“. "Matcrialy SSV S"yezda KPSS," p 70.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
roe (WVICIM. "SI-i "POLY

CHAPTER 3: POTENTIAL AID REAL Mlubmﬁs FORAUMATIIUG HOOP CONTROL

1. Structure. Functions and Principles of Creating Automated Troop Control
Systems

The automating of troop control presupposes the integrated use of automated
and autontic devices and system. as well as modern scientific methods
asking it possible to sharply increase the efficiency of control in the

sis. of optimizing the use of the forces and means and freeing the co-anders
and staff officers from uncreative work.

Troop control is always carried out in a system which represents‘an aggre-
gate of interrelated direct links and feedback between the controlling and
controlled bodies with their col-and posts and technical equipping, and
must provide the attaining of the goals posed for the troops or the carry-
ing out of combat missions with the greatest efficiency.

By control bodies one understands a system of officials. the corresponding
troop formations. the necessary uteriel used in the interests of troop
leadership.

Proceeding from this it can he considered that an automated tr00p control
system (ASUV) represents an aggregate of interrelated control bodies

(points) equipped with modern highly productive control equipment which
ensures the optimal and intercoordinated use of the possibilities of man

and the automatic devices in the sin of achieving maximum effectiveness
of combat.

The ASUV can incluie subsystems for controlling subordinate troop forms-

tions with their weapons and equipment. ﬂoreover. the ASUV end the sub-
systems comprising them can include as their elements automated end auto-
matic weapons control systems.

Automated-weapons control system (ASHES) are complexes of the "man-
technical device-weapon" type which are used for achieving an optimum
mode of action and the most effective use of the weapons and military
equipment. Among them, for eagle, one could put the antitank guided
missile units. The automatic control systems (8A0) consists of controlling

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.o.. .. . ~ . . .
.0 I O. . ‘ s a. s' . t" - :I'. .tl..l:tlt It. '3‘.

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

and controlled devices which operate in accord with a previously elaborated
and set program, for examle, the SAU of an antiaircrai't missile complex.

The designated systems are set up considering the nature of armed combat,
the organizational structure of the troops, the development level of the
weapons and the technical control devices. The structure of the ASUV is

a dialectical unity of staff organisational. functional and technical ele-
ments which ensure the effective execution of the given missions. The
staff organizational elements of the structure are the hierarchical command
elements. The functional elements are represented in the structure by
clearly defined rights and duties of the officials, by the type and number
of cos-sand posts, by the work methods of the counders and staffs in the

area of troop control. The diverse types of control equipment not as the
technical elements.

Thus. the forces and means of control comprise the basis of the autonted

control systems. They can be divided into two basic groups: the control
personnel and the control equipment.

The control personnel is the personnel of the control bodies (points), and
above all the connnders and staff officers. The quality and level of
control depends upa: the level of their training, their creative approach
to solving questions. fimess. courage and resourcemlness.

In the ASUV the following can be used as control equipment:

l) The equipment for securing and collecting information: aircraft,
radios, radar and other reconnaissance equipment;

2) Machines which fix information: punches, typewriters, signaling equip-
ment, tape recorders, dictaphones, as well as equipment for reproducing
and copying documents;

3) Machines for data processing: electronic computers, keyed calculators
and tabulators; -

10) Equipment which converts information: readers and coders, devices
for transcribing from puch cards to punch tape and back, microfilming
and microfilm reading equipment;

5) Devices for putting out information: automatic printers and machines,
electronic displays, screens and automatic drawing and graphic devices;

6) Information retrieval and storage equipment: file sorters. machines
for document retrieval, special data and multipurpose electronic machines
which possess a large volume of accumulators;

7) Comnicationa equipment which transmits information: telegraph,
telephone, radio, radio relay and telecode equipment, switchboards,
selectors, document transmission equipment, and equipment for locating
(sunoning) officials.

61
m onxcuu. use om:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
POI OFPIC MI. USE ONLY

Electronic coaputers are the nost important technical device of automation.
‘ihey provide the couple): processing of data by arithnetical and certain
logical operations using nmber codes, and they also fulfill the functions
of autaatie correcting devices. Their use makes it possible to split the
operating time of the individual parts of complicated ASUV. m: provides
an opportunity to use the same elements for performing several functions
(see Figaro 2).

 

Pig. 2

Key: luAltimeter; 2--‘l'arget illuinating radar;
3--'I'arget tracking radar; h-COnputer (co-puter
coaplex): identification. calculation. generating
and preparation of firing co-snds; Sumssile
guidance radar; 6--Missile

The proposed diagra- proVides a visual notion of the Lasic technical con-
trol devices in term of a system for the automated control of air defense
weapons.

Pull mechanization of troop control accupsnies the ‘nechanisation of
control work and this presupposes the introduction and autonomous (sep-
arate) use of equipment vhich facilitates the manual labor of a person

in control processes. The mthentical logical methods are employed here
in the form of particular procedures which do not conprise a single con-
plex of interrelated data processing problems. 'lhe high level of nechan-
isation presupposes the couplete or almost conplete replacenent of nechani-
cal (annual) labor.

m nost imﬂmt functions of the ASUV are: A further rise in the combat
readiness and capability of the troops; an increase in the efficiency of
control and the effectiveness of using the forces and means in combat and
an operation; reducing the volule of manual labor of the officials in the
control bodies and freeing the comanders and staffs fron unproductive
technical vork for creative activity in the area of troop control. For

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: : ' l LI. s‘ A II" 1-:I'; ll; ltlll III III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

raising the combat readiness and capability of the troops. in using automa-
tion, it is possible to employ modern mathematical logical methods and com-
puter equipment in working out optimum plans and schedules using keyed
calculators. punch calculators and digital computers for carrying out the
necessary operational and tactical calculations and for improving the sys-
tem for collecting, processing and issuing information on the basis of
digital computers.

The rapid development of weaponry and the increased motorisation of the
troops have given combat high mobility, speed, surprise and decisiveness.

An acute need has arisen for reducing the time of handling information.

for raising effectiveness of control and increasing the efficient use of
the forces and means.

Reducing the time for handling information in the ASUV provides the prompt
attacking of the most important enemy objectives. and contributes to the
rapid shifting of efforts from one sector to another. the making of changes,
when necessary, in already taken decisions, the adjusting of combat missions
for the subordinate troops. the maintaining of close interaction between
the subunits of the various branches of forces, and the rapid coordinating
of their efforts. The obtaining of inforrmtion on the situation, the

state and nature of the Operations of cooperating troops at the needed

time provides for the rapid and more rational determining of the volume

and content of measures carried out by each of these troop organisms, and
increases the effective use of their possibilities under the specific con-
ditions of the situation.

An important function of the ASUV is to increase the efficient use of
weapons, to reduce the probability of their use against positions already
abandoned by the enemy, and to increase the accuracy of the attacks made
against the planned targets. For increasing the accuracy of hitting the
targets, there must be complete consideration of many factors, precise
information about the location of the target, the location of one's ovn

troops and on other conditions for carrying out the mission.

Automation makes it possible to extend weapons more economically. This is
achieved both by increasing the accuracy of fire as veil as by selecting
the most effective weapons and the methods of their use on the battlefield.

The possibility of rapidly analyzing different variations for hitting the
planned target ensures the selection of the most economic of them with the
set strike efficiency.

The problem of ensuring the most reliable defense of one's own troops
against enemy weapons and a maximum reduction of losses in personnel and
materiel is closely related to the problem of increasing efficient control
and the effectiveness of using the weapons.

63
FOR orncm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Automation makes it possible to increase the effectiveness of combat against
weapons of mass destruction. to ensure the rapid collection of information
on the radiation and chemical situation, and in a shorter time to take the
necessary measures to maintain the battleworthiness of the troops. At the
same time automation provides an opportunity to carry out calculations for
forecasting the radioactive and chemical contamination and to ensure the
prompt and even the selective warning of the troops which are threatened
with the danger of attack. The use of automation makes it possible to
quickly and rapidly evaluate the battleworthiness of the troops in strike
areas. and to take sound decisions to eliminate the consequences.

Another function of the ASUV is to improve the efficiency of creative ac-
tivities by all levels of commanders and staff officers by automating tech-
nical work. The efficiency of their activities is increased by using
modern automation equipment and methods in a number of troop control
processes. The ratio of the participation of a man in troop control and
the use of equipment is a fundamental problem in automating this complex
process. First of all automation is needed to ensure control over the
types of weapons and for countering those weapons which possess high speed.

A most important function of ASUV is to provide the commanders and staffs
with information on the situation using the results of carrying out operap
tional and tactical calculations in the various hierarchical levels of
control.

The system of technical automation makes it possible to realize on the com-
puters of each level a large number of previously elaborated informational
and calculation procedures which differ in the nature of collecting and
processing the information in the process of solving them. The informs»
tional methods are related to the securing, collection, processing. accu-
mulation, allocation and issuing of basic information on the situation and
the conditions for carrying out combat. The solving of the informational
procedures increases the effectiveness of control. The exchange of infor-
mation on one's own troops and the enemy forces is accelerated between

the subordinate, adjacent, cooperating and senior levels of control.

As a result of solving the informational procedures, it is possible to

set up a unified data field (bank) which frees the officials from the labor
intensive duty of inputting all the necessary initial data before solving
each computational procedure on the computers of the ASUV systems and sub-
systems.

Automating the process of the exchange of information between control
bodies as well as within them can make it possible with minimum expendi-
tures of manual labor and time to solve one of the most important problems
of control. the problem of interaction.

The information process in the ASUV should be organised considering the
needs of each level of control. A larger amount of information is concen-
trated and processed in the superior level than in the inferior one.

6!:
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
.. , . . .
. C. a 1 age. e' . II" 1-:I'. II. i:|ll III III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the general instance automatic and automated sensors and specialized
computers can be the prime sources of information in the ASUV. The auto-
matic sensors and computers determine the necessary information without
human involvement while the automated ones do this with the participation
of man.

The above-indicated primary sources of information. in keeping with the
occurring changes in the situation. either by the established times or
upon request. can transmit to the computers of the superior control levels
the information on the situation. nature and direction or actions. the
state and missions of one's own troops and enemy forces. as well as on the
weapons and meteorological situation and the engineering work on the
terrain. The information obtained from the primary sources is processed
(generalized. compared. analyzed and systematized) by the computers of
the superior starts.

The necessary information on the results of enemy reconnaissance. on the
position of cooperating trooys and the nature of actions can be trans-
mitted from the superior control levels to the subordinate ones. Moreover,
the basic data from a cormander's decision can be transmitted to them,
mainly in the form cf missions given to the subordinate level. Schemati-
cally this process is shown in the diagram (see Figure 3).

Subsystem A
W'WI ‘3':
2 I use

Anus
m '
lane

   

           
 

 

III-Ill 5| 6 Jun | 7 ;.y
Subsystem B

Wm
liﬂlllllhr alien-Ill» tau-nun. ‘-.~.-'
“mtg-lam '
I pulls-s

Fig. 3

Key: l--Inferior ASUV level; 2--Intermediste ASUV level;
3--Supcrior ASUV level; h--Automated (automatic) data
sensor; 5--Automated (automatic) receiver-transmitter;
6--Multipurpose or specialized computer; 7--Hulti-
purpose and specialized computers

Along with this. using the corresponding machine programs. information can
also be exchanged between the computers of adjacent units and the sub—
systems of the ASUV.

65
you onxcm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

The frequency of receiving information obviously depends upon its semantic
content and varies for each control level.

The degree of detailing of the information should also be set depending
upon the level of control and corresponds to the rules employed in the
troops.

Automation can be carried out: In the direction of the autonomous use of
the automation on the staffs; by creating individual systems of the dif-
ferent troop formations; in the direction of the integrated (systems)
approach in creating the ASUV.

The autonomous use of automation on the staffs can accelerate the carrying
out of operational and tactical calculations and other control work. How-

ever it does not properly increase the speed of handling the operational
and tactical information.

The individual ASUV. when isolated from one another. also do not solve the
problems. The automation of control of individual forces and means, even
those playing an exceptionally important role in the achieving of success
in combat (an operation), does not produce the desired results for raising
the efficiency of control as a whole, since control over the individual
forces and means to a significant degree is based upon the data of the
general situation.

Only a comprehensive approach in creating the ASUV provides an encompassing
of all levels fro. the interior to the superior. with the simultaneous
meeting of the needs of all the troops and the use of the equip-ant which
differs in purpose and capability.

Full automation presupposes a reciprocal link and interaction of the dif-
ferent equipment with the efficient use of the advantages of each of them
in the control process. This also envisages a reliable connection not

only between the individual elements of one level but also all levels of
command. The necessity of comprehensive automation is dictated by the

fact that the collection. processing and generating of information and above

all the taking of a decision, the issuing of combat missions to the troops
and the maintaining of their uninterrupted interaction represent a single
and unbroken process.

The results of the collection and processing of data are the initial data
for making the calculations, the result of which, in turn. operate as the
initial data for adJusting the decisions.

The integrated use of diverse automation equipment can permit the simultan-
cous solving of both numerous individual operational-tactical machine
procedures as well as a general mathematical model of combat (an operation).

and provides a rapid transition from centralized control to decentralized,
and vice versa.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"we

.. _ . .
D .i . ' s Lee a: . H" ' :I'. .‘l. ltlll ”I III.

mu OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

Proceeding fro- the practice of the designing or automated systeas for the
needs of the national econosv and considering the specific features or
ailitary affairs. it can be considered that the constructing of the ASUV
should be based upon general (operational-tactical) principles. the prin-
ciples for elaborating the software system. and the technical principles
of creating the ASUV.

the first group of principles.

1) The development of ASUV considering the decisive role of man in troop
control. The successful mnctioning of the ASUV depends upon the relia-
bility of a aultiplicity of diverse and extremely casplex devices designed
for the acquisition and acctuzlation or information, the transaitting of
it over cos-unicetions channels. the processing and generating or the re-
sults. however. regardless of the abundance of equips-est. Ian plays the
Iain role in the processes of troop control even with a very high level 01‘
automation; he evaluates the situation and takes the decision.

2) A conbination or centralized and decentralised troop control requires
the desigaing or the ASUV considering the providing of control functions

on each level for the directLv subordinate slenents, and when necessary.
one or two levels below. For this purose. for each level it is essential
to use a definite degree of detailing the intonation in providing for the
processing. generalisation and aggregating of operational-tactical interna-
tion as it is transmitted to the superior control levels. When it is nec-
essary to obtain lore detailed intonation on subordinates. an opportunity
is provided for u-soning such intonation trod a subordinate level. In
the subsystem and in each control level couprising the ASUV. their own
infomtion fields are created and these provide control within the sub-
system. These lake it possible. on the basis of initial data fed once into
the computer. to solve various machine procedures using new program
There are a link and intercausality between the informtion fields of the
various levels. subsystus and systeas. Such an organization of the in-
tonation process. along with the possibility of switching the auto-ation
equipment acmss one or several levels and the autonomous solving of prob-
lens in each control level, should provide an opportunity of both central-
ised as well as decentralized troop leadership.

3) The principle of nobility means that the A51” should ensure a possi-
bility of controlling all types of troop coabat characterized by a high
pace of advance. The actual realisation of this condition is achieved by
mounting the auto-ation equipment on a highly mobile transport base which
at the same tine provides work areas for the personnel. 0n the tactical
level it is desirable that the automtion and cosuunications complexes
exercise control while the means of transport are in notion.

It) 'lbe principle of ensuring flexibility. stability, secrecy and continu-
ity of control in the ASUV proceeds from a consideration of the nature or
nodern conbat under the conditions of the massed use or nuclear missile
weapons and other poweer weapons.

67
roe onrcm. use our

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5) The principle of an optinun combination of the possibilities of man
and sutoaation requires, in designing the ABUV, a rational assigning of
functions to each element of the system considering the particular fea-
tures of the equipaent and the psychophysiological characteristics of nan.
The ultisate sis of such an allocation consists in creating an efficient

ASUV which provides efficiency and convenient work for the connders and
staff officers.

For realising this principle in creating ASUV, in our opinion. it will be
necessary:

a) To determine those parts of the control process which can be entrusted

to the automtion and work out the corresponding nohine procedures for
solving than on a computer;

2.) To envisage automated work areas for personnel on the corresponding

highly reliable trsnsport base which possesses gcod cross-country capa-
bilities;

c) To ensure the giving of the results of coslputer data processing to the
officials in the conventional visual fora using the most rational equipment
and methods for putting out the infornation;

a) To aaintain contact for the omcmo with the unautomtcci control
areas and levels by equipping the work areas also with conventional neans
of control and communication ensuring a transition fron autonated control
to conventional in the event of a breakdown of individual sections and
levels of the ASUV;

e) To naintain a succession in the work nethods of the co-anders and
staffs ensuring a gradual transition to the new work nethods of the ASUV
without my decline in the coabat readiness of the troops and the quality
of work done by the control bodies.

6) The principle of successive stages of work in developing the ASUV
proceeds fro. the iaportance of the probleu solved by the system, the

presence of theoretical and technical studies and the possibilities of
organizational decisions. including the elaboration of a software system

for the ASUV and the training of special personnel for’operating the equip-
ment of the system and using it as s.-4hole.

The second group of principles.
1) The creation ahead of tine of the algorithmic languages and transla-
tors for the purpose of accelerating the elaboration of the machine pro-

ccdures (programs) and ensuring data compatibility for the various con:-
putcr nodels.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAI. USE ONLY

2) Determining the list and sequence of working out the individual machine
procedures (programs) and groups of programs up to mathematical models,
inclusively. ensuring the most efficient use of the ASUV as a whole and the
computer in particular.

3) The creation of data fields (files). the rules for their transforma-
tion and use. Consideration of the particular features of the software.

h) The development of an operations system ensuring the control of the
computer processes in the ASUV. and providing a link between the programs
and data files.

5) The elaboration of service programs which control the work of individual
elements of the system. including the peripheral ones, as well as the ASUV
as a whole.

6) Giving definite priority to the software. In line with the great labor
intensiveness and significant cost of this work, up to 70-80 percent of
the cost of developing and introducing the ASUV occurs in the area of

software.
The third group of principles.

1) Elaboration of the system's elements on a modern technical base. The ‘
high effectiveness of ASUV can be achieved only on the basis of applying
the most recent scientific and technical achievements.

2) The maximum possible standardization of the system's elements. This
principle is of exceptionally important significance from the viewpoint
of both organizing the production of automation equipment. its operation
and repair under field conditions. as well as ensuring the stability.
flexibility and reliability of the system's functioning under the condi-
tions of enemy action. The realization of this principle can also facili-
tate the linking of the individual subsystems. Hith a desire for maximum
standardization of the system's elements. one must also consider the spe-
cific requirements of the various troop formations, as a consequence of
which standardisation cannot be absolute and is applied in optimum limits.

3) The prospects of the system. In working out the structural system of
the ASUV and automation equipment, it is essential to provide an increase
in the equipment and the capabilities of the system without a fundamental
change in the structural system and the principles for organizing the in-
formation process in the system. New automation and communications equip-
ment should fit into the structural scheme of the ASUV and this. in turn,

; must provide for the connecting of new automated control elements and the

‘ extending of the degree of automation by increasing the list of solvable

~ machine procedures.

69
FOR OPVXCIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

h) The combining of the preparation of primary documents with putting into
the computer. The essence of this principle comes down to revising the
document processing and to establishing uniform standard (formalised) sam-
ples for putting in the information. This makes it possible to achieve
uniformity in the systems of accounting carried out by man and the computer,

and when necessary to move from automated data processing to conventional,
and vice versa.

5) Observing the principle of precise work by the automation equipment
should not complicate their design and operation. The number of equipment
types in automation and mechanization must be restricted within advisable
limits; the equipment which directly connect the commanders and staff
officers should be particularly simple to use. This can permit a reduction

in the number of service personnel and thereby a simplifying of the control
system.

Simplicity and standardization of design for automation equipment have a

direct influence on the speed for training the personnel of the units and
“subunits. They are of great importance also for connecting the various

elements of the control system. The simplier the devices for connecting

the various types of equipment, the more rapidly it is possible to bring
the control system to a state of combat readiness and disassemble it for

moving its individual elements. This is of important significance for in-
creasing stability and continuity of control, particularly with the high
pace of the advance of the troops and the rapid changing of communad posts.

The automation equipment should also ensure maximum convenience for the
locating, transferring and working of officials in all the control bodies.

6) One of the most important principles is economy. The introduction of
automation should ultimately lead to a reduction in the cost of the control
system as a whole with an overall rise in the efficiency of its operation.

In our opinion, the principle of economy can necessitate considering the
existing organizational staff structure of the troops and the staff in

working out, introducing and operating the ASUV equipment.

The structure, functions and principles for organizing the ASUV are realized
in the specific systems in accord with the development level of science and
technology and the requirements of military affairs. Naturally. the methods
and forms of this realization are not the same in the various stages.
Equally different are the levels of the possible and necessary automation.

For this reason it is particularly important to analyze the present state
and prospects for the development of ASUV.

2. The Present State and Prospects for the Development of Automated Troop
Control Systems1

In the 0.8. Armed Forces. starting approximately in 1965. there has been
the development of automated tactical and strategic control systems. The

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:“t0

..
I O. . t ' a £0: a; . H“ :-:I‘; M: It!” HI IN.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tactical ASUV are designed for controlling the combat of units, formations
and field forces within a theater of operations.

The measures to work out automated control systems for the 0.6. ground
forces were carried out in three stages.

In the first stage (l9Sb-l96l), scientific research was carried out and
work was done under the Fielddata Program. Under this program there were
plans to develop models of computers. programming devices. data transmis-
sion equipment, input and output devices, as well as studying the procedure
for utilizing all of this equipment in the troops. The carrving out of the
Pielddata Program continued up to 1966 and ended with the development of
the prototypes of individual automation devices wuch as the Moby Dick.
Basicpac. Compac and Fadac computers.

The second stage (1960-1965) involved the carrying out of the Armydata
Program according to which there was to be thorough field and troop testing
of equipment developed under the Fieldata Program. a generalization of the
results obtained in the testing process. the introduction of necessary
changes in the design of the individual automation models. as well as the
development of new types of equipment. However the given program was not
fully carried out. In the testing process serious design shortcomings were
detected in it.

The third stage (since 1965) started with work on the new Adsaf Program.
The system provided for three subsystems: The control of combat, the con-
trol of field artillery fire and the control of material and technical
supply. Around 1 billion dollars were spent on carrying out this program.

An ASUV for a field army often consists of three subsystems: Tactical,
artillery and rear. The first subsystem of the TOS is designed for col-
lecting, processing and displaying the information needed by the command
of a field army, corps and division for decision taking.

The tactical subsystem will consist of automated control centers for the
divisions, corps and the field army and a complex of technical devices
located in the units.

These technical devices which are the sources of primary information are
designed for obtaining data on the situation from subordinate units.

The T03 system envisages the automating of a significant number of troop
control processes. Among the tasks which should be carried out in the
automated system, the following are mentioned: Collection and evaluation
of data on the situation. composition and nature of the operations of one's
own troops and enemy troops; collection. analysis and generalization of
data received from strategic. air and field reconnaissance; the plenning
of troop operations (the use of nuclear weapons, the eliminating of the
consequences of an enemy nuclear attack. tactical air support, air defense

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00860R000100010006-8
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

for the troops and rear installations. the organisation of cosmmnications
and the carrying out of radio electronic countemeasures, engineering
support for combat and calculating the fire interaction lines); calcula-
tions related‘to conducting special types of warfare (chemical and bio-
logical contuination. operations in the eneny rear, psychological war-
fare); various calculations to support troop combat.

As a total the automated system is to solve 30 operational-tactical prob-
lems which will mks it possible more effectively to evaluate the situa-

tional data and prepare somd proposals needed by the co-ander for deci-
sion taking.

The structural scheme of the automated TOS system includes a network of
computer centers and terminals for the inputting and outputting of infor-
mation. The basis of the system is the main computer center of the field
army connected by cos-mieations channels to the local computer centers
of the subordinate corps and divisions; the latter centers are located at
cosmand posts. Each local computer center. in turn. is connected by com-
munications channels with the terminals; it is also equipped with techni-
cal data pickups which are located in the brigades and battalions.

The scheme for the receipt of data at the main computer center of a field
army is as follows. Information fro- the forward observation points. the
reconnaissance patrols and combat subunits is sent to the terminals of the
battalion and brigade control points located on armored personnel car-
riers. After this the generalized information is transmitted to the local
computer center of a division the equiment of which is located on two
2.5-ton vehicles. From the local computer centers the infornation is trans-
mitted to the main computer center both in the rough form and also par-
tially processed. The structure of the system makes it possible to ex-
change information between any computer complexes of the field arm.
Through the main computer center there is the possibility of exchanging
information with other armies and sounds of the ground forces in theaters
of operations and in the continental United States. At the end of 196?,

an experimental model of the automated system was developed. Its struc-
ture included the main computer center, it local computer centers and

18 terminals located on 21 carriers. The prototype was delivered to the
staff of the Seventh Field Army in Europe where the system underwent test-
ing. In 1969. the equipment of the computer centers and terminals was
distributed between the staffs of the American'ground forces in Europe

for carrying out field testing and this is still going on.

The main computer center is located in four trailers (one 12 meters long
and the other three 10.5 meters each). The computer center has a Control
Data CDC-3300 computer. It has a speed of h00.000 operations per second
and an operational memory of 65.535 alt-digit words. It is housed in four
units. The external magnetic disc storage has a capacity of 100 million
binary digits. A special device provides for the connecting of the com-
puter with 13 duplex connunications channels. The local computer center

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9:0: I2 ~ I." :-:I’; It. I:'l| 'H 3”.—

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is carried on two vehicles. It is equipped with a CDC-1700 computer with
a speed of 152.000 operations a second and an external storage of 590.000
binary units. A special device links the computer by communications
channels with eight terminals.

In the terminals two types of equipment are used: an individual display
unit and an electric typewriter. The individual display unit has a cathode
ray tube with a screen 15x20 cm in size making it possible to display up
to 1,000 alphanumerical signs (20 lines of 50 signs each). The data is fed
in by a keyboard in the following manner. The operator types in a com-
mand by which the fommat of a coded message is displayed on the screen
with the required working tag. Then, in using the keyboard, he fills in
the text of the message in the free areas. After checking the correct-
ness of the text and correcting the detected errors, the operator presses
the "Send” key. The message is automatically transmitted over the com-
munications channel to the local computer center. The same device is used
for receiving short coded messages.

Electricgtypewriters are used for receiving the basic bulk of coded mes-
sages. They operate at a speed of 150 lines a minute and print text in a
standard format of 120 signs per line. when necessary the required number
of copies of the received messages can be produced.

The basic equipment of the automated system has been developed on the basis
of integrated circuits. This makes it possible to make the equipment com-
pact. to achieve high reliability in work. and due to this the average
accrued working time per failure of the entire system is not less than

150 hours. and the average time for correcting the malfunction is 30 min-
utes. The exchange of data between the computer centers and the terminals
can be carried out also by special control programs. Any of the users con-
nected to the system has an opportunity to turn to the computer center and
receive the data of interest to him. indicating in his requests the nature
of the required information, the period of time and the region of combat.
In finding the reauired information in the storage units, the computer
forms the reply coded message and sends it off to the user. For the con-
tinuous receipt of current information, an official can send an instruction
request which gives the time for the delivery of the needed information.
After receiving the instruction, this information is sent out to him auto~
matically. In addition to requests from the terminals. data coded mes-
sages will be received continuously and these contain new information on
the situation. The data files of the computer centers are renewed by them.

American specialists feel that the achievements in the area of communica-
tions systems and ratio electronics will make it possible by the time the
TOS system is put into service (by the middle of the 1970's) to carry out
an exchange of data between computer centers at a speed of 38,h00 bands
and permit not more than one mistake per million transmitted signs.

T3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Tacflre artillery fire control subsystem is designed to automate the
processes of controlling artillery units starting from the command of the
divisional artillery and ending with the forward artillery spotters. Such
a system will make it possible to solve 2h different problems in the artil-
lery battalions. The main ones are: the processing of reconnaissance data
on the targets as received from the forward spotters and from other ele-
ments of command; the carrying out of ballistics calculations for the three
coordinates and the preparing of fire control commands; the collecting of
data on the state of the fire subunits (the number of personnel, position,
combat capabilities, availability of weapons. ammunition supply. and so
forth). It is felt that with the availability of data on the position of
one's troops. isolated targets, the contents of the missions and the avail-
able ammunition. the subsystem makes it possible to draw up a firing plan
in 15 minutes. The Tacfire Subsystem has been developed by the Layton
firm. using the experience of developing and using in the troops analogous-
purpose equipment with a Padac computer which in artillery battalions auto-

mates the processes of fire preparations and its correcting (the Fadac
computer was developed under the Pieldata Program).

In December 1967. the command of the 0.3. Ground Forces allocated 122 mil-
lion dollars for manufacturing the equipment of the Tacfire Subsystem for
for the fire control centers of the artillery battalions and the command
posts of the divisional artillery. In addition to developing this, the
Layton firm has developed a family of computers with programming devices
which in the future could be used in other subsystems, in particular in
the combat control subsystem of the TOS.

Before the troops had received the Tacfire Subsystem, the command of the
0.3. Ground Forces planned to use equipment with the Padac computer which
began to be received by the troops in 1961. In 1965, the American troops
had already 1&8 such machines which after repeated improvements received
high praise in the troops. The Tacfire Subsystem includes computers and
peripheral equipment used in artillery battalions and at the command posts
of divisional artillery, as well as the battery console and a data input
device from the forward spotters. The peripheral equipment includes: The
fire control console, a data display device, a printer. a mechanism for
storing and feeding in programs and data output terminals.

The L-3050M electronic computer was developed on the basis of the 3050?
aircraft integrated circuit computer. Its basic data are the following:
Binary number system. digit configuration--32 signs plus parity check
sign, speed--220,000 Operations per second. and mean time between failures
--l,000 hours. The operational storage is on magnetic cores and the ca-
pacity of each of its four blocks is 8,192 words. The design of the ma-
chine uses up to 6,000 integrated circuits. The logical elements are made
using circuits of the transistor--transistor type having a speed of 5-6
nanoseconds (l nanosecond-~l billionth of a second).

7h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.--:e

.. i _ _ ‘ . _ . .
O O. . ' a La, st . II' ‘ :I'. .II. I3III III III.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tne high operating stability of the computers in the Tacfire Subsystem is
achieved by using high reliable integrated circuits and other components

as well as by the possibility of duplicating their work. It is proposed
that the fire control centers of the artillery battalions would have one
computer each. In the event of the failure of a computer at any fire con-
trol center. the solving of the basic problems would automatically be trans-
ferred to one of the machines at the divisional artillery command post.

The divisional artillery command post should have two computers which
could function both simultaneously or one operating and the second in re-
serve. Along with the computer there are also plans to use a magnetic
drum external storage with a capacity of around 10 million binary signs.

The fire control panel is used for the work of the operator in controlling
all the equipment of the system and for feeding the necessary data into the
computer. Moreover from the board there is the assigning of targets among
the batteries and data are issued needed by each battery for firing. The
control board has two cathode ray tubes (one for recording the input data

and the other for displaying the output parameters in an alphanumerical
form) and a standard keyboard.

As the data display devices in the Tacfire Subsystem. electromechanical
plotting boards are used (for displaying the tactical situation in the
entire area of troop operations) and a CRT display (for displaying the
situation in individual combat areas). On a plotting board with an area
of 0.37 m2 against a background of a topographical map using symbols the
sector boundaries. the engagement zones, the location of targets and so
forth are displayed. All the data or parts of them are renewed using the
computer and the fire control panel. The individual elements of the tac-
tical situation are shown on the display using lines and 250 various sym-
bols. The control of the CRT display with a diameter of no.6 cm is car-
ried out only by the computer.

It is assumed that the electronic plotting board will be used at the com-
mand post of the divisional artillery and in the fire control centers of
the artillery battalions; the CRT display will be used only at the command
post of the divisional artillery. The develOpment of a large-screen dis-
play using integrated circuits is considered promising.

The printer of the Tacfire Subsystem is of the noncontact (photoelectronic)
type. with a speed of 600 times per second. It employs a cathode ray tube
and fiber optics. The data are generated in an alphanumerical form by
photoprinting on paper.

Among the peripheral equipment which is not part of the basic equipment

one would mention the program storage and input device, the data output
terminals and the monitoring and testing equipment. In the fire control

centers of the artillery battalions and at the divisional artillery com—
mand post. several magnetic tape units are used for storing and feeding

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
FOR OHIO!“ USE ONLY

various programs into the computer and four terminal seniduplex data
tiansmission‘devices which transmit the data over the artillery conmuni-
cations lines at a rate of 600 and 1.200 bands.

The device for feeding in data fro- the forward observers is designed for
drawing up standard requests for opening fire and their subsequent trans-
mission to the fire control centers over the wire co-unications lines or
using the arw radios. The device has 25 switches by which the observer
compiles a' standard message and a shift register which has two circuits

with a high level of integration. Each of them uses up to 100 conponents.
The instrument weighs 2.3 kg.

The approximate operating scheme for the Tacfire equipIent is as follows.
The forward observers over the wire comications channels or by radio
transmit their messages to the fire control center and approxinately 2
seconds later receive an audio response signal which affirm the reception
of the message. The standard request for opening fire received fro- the
forward observer includes a call code which will be periodically changed
for maintaining secrecy. The infomtion signs contain data on the target
such as its location, altitude, type and dimensions.

The forward observers can also transmit certain recomendations. For ex-
ample, what type of projectile or type of explosion (air or ground-level)
would be better for destroying the detected target.

In the fire control centers the requests coming in from the forward ob-
servers are received by the terminal and fed into the computer where the
necessary calculations are made and the fire control commands are generated.
Then these coumands are sent to the control board and are shown on its
dispw while the target coordinates are entered on the plotting board.
"hen necessary, the operator from the fire control board at any time can
make changes or additions in the initial data. after which the computer
recalculates and puts out new control comands. After the taking of the
decision. the control comands are transmitted to each battery over the
comications lines where they are received by the board and shown on its
display.

All of the equipment of the Tacfire Subsystem designed for use in the artil-
lery battalions and at a divisional artillery cos-land post can be carried
in truck trailers or a staff armored vehicle.

The subsystem for the control of material and technical supply is designed
for controlling the rear- troop services. It provides the following:

Calculations for material and technical supply, technical supply of the
troops. accounting for personnel, weapons and equipment. and calculations

for financial and medical support.

In 1967. three experimental models of the subsystems were mnufactured.
In 1968. one of these was delivered to the U.S. Seventh Field W for

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
‘.... .. . . ' . .. - . . -
O I O. . a t. I . ﬂ. ‘ .I'. .UI....IUU III lll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

field testing. The subsystem included: an IBM-360/h0 electronic computer,
a magnetic disc storage and equipment for the data transmission lines.

All the equipment was to be located in four trailers. The first trailer.
along with the computer. was also to carry the auxiliary equipment (the
printers. the equipment for reading data and punch cards, and so forth).
The magnetic disc storage was to be in the second trailer. It would have
a capacity of 233.h million bytes (1 byte--a unit of information in a
machine corresponding to one letter. one symbol of the alphabet or two
decimal figures; it corresponds to eight binary signs). The retrieval and
selection of the data from the memory is made at a speed of 312,000 bytes
a second. And additional storage consists of several magnetic tape units.

The equipment of the data transmission lines is housed in the third trailer.
It provides two-way communications with the terminals used for the remote
digital data input and output as well as for connecting with other sub-
systems by wire and radio. The terminals are located on 2.5-ton army
trucks. The auxiliary equipment is carried in the fourth trailer. Also
there are the spare units and devices. In the opinion of American ape-
cialiats. the CS-3 subsystem will make it possible to automate a larger
portion of the processes involved in troop material and technical supply.
however. the most important functions. for example. the taking of decisions
or the canceling of requests will remain for the commanders.

In the assertioa of competent U.S. bodies. the development of a unified
automated system for controlling the ground forces not only entails great
outlay: of maney and time, but also requires definite experience both in
the development of technical devices and in seeking out effective methods
for using them. A particularly important and complicated problem is the
software of the automated system.

The hBSL automated tactical aviation control system is designed for auto-
mating the processes of controlling the operations of tactical air forma-
tions in a theater of operations. The system consists of the following
subsystems. The subsystem for controlling and guiding the tactical air- ‘
craft should ensure the solving of problems related to the automated de—
tection. identification and tracking of aircraft in the zone of operations.
it includes the following control elements: The tactical air control
center (the basic control body). the warning and control center (the main
body). the air observation point and the air traffic control center; two
warning posts and four forward guidance posts which provide direct guis—
ance of the aircraft to ground targets in carrying out air troop SDP'th.

The direct air support subsystem is designed for solving the problems of
the cooperation of tactical aviation with the ground forces. In struc-
tural terms. it combines: The direct air support center which is located

together with the operations center of an army corps; the tactical air
control groups and the control points for the formations and units of the
ground forces; an air traffic control subsystem which is designed for con-
trolling and monitoring air traffic in the area of airfields.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the development program of the system. there is to be the
development of mobile radio commications and radar equipment for out-
fitting the tactical air connand bodies. This equipment includes: Equip-
ment for the warning and control centers. the direct air support centers.
radars. single sideband shortwave radios. switching equipment and other
equipment. Basic attention has been paid to the compatibility of the new

equipment with the equipment for the tactical automated control systems
for ground forces and the navy.

Subsequently. as the system is gradually deVeloped. there are plans to
carry out work in raising the level of its automation. According to in-
formation i'rom the American military bodies. the full automation of the
system will be reached in the 1980's. The system will be based on a cen-
tral processor connected by data transmissic lines with small computers
located at the comand posts or the forward sir units. In carrying out
the basic work of data processing. the electronic computers free the central
processor for carrying out more cleicated tasks such as drawing up the
drafts oi‘ combat orders, analyzing possible variations of aviation opera-
tions. generalizing reports and correcting tan; plans of air operations
with a change in the combat situation.

American military specialists estinte (has the experience of the war in
Vietnam) that the time for planning operations in a number of instances
was reduced from 10 hours to 10 minutes, while the cycle for planning
transport flights (1.200 sorties per day) was reduced from 11: to ’1 hours.

The IBM-36050 computer which is part of the system has a speed of 250,000
operations per second. a capacity of the operational storage up to 16 mil-
lion binary units. and a capacity or the external storages of several bil-
lion binary units.

The automated control system for a i‘oramtion or NTDS ships is 'designed to
control combat of an operational-tactical formation of U.s."llavy ships.
This system makes it possible to autonte the most labor intensive proces-
ses of ship control. These include: The collecting and processing of
data on the situation, the carrying out of Operational-tactical calcula-
tions needed by the consander for decision taking. The automated system
solves the following proble-z Controlling the landing of carrier-based
aviation; controlling the operations of launches; making misrile and artil-
lery strikes against shore targets; air and AS! defense or the ships; the
intercepting or air targets. It has been proposed that the system include
t .ree computers and displays. In the system they plan to use a computer
with a speed of around 700.000 operations per second and a capacity of the
operational storage of 32.000 words.

The automated MTACS system is designed for controlling Marine operations
on the level ”expeditionary corps--division--air wing."

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
v--:e

I '3: “ ‘ e a. s‘ L It" ‘:I'; ||£.|.'i||3il Ill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The system which should be in operation by the end of the 1970's will in-
clude a network of mobile data processing centers and automated work areas
of the control bodies. The structure of the automated Marine control sys-
tem represents a combination of elements from the structure of the auto-
mated ground forces and tactical aviation systems.

The small computers and automated operator work areas are also among the
automation equipment of the systems.

The basic tasks carried out by the MTACS system are: Collection. process-
ing and analysis of data on the enemy, on the state and nature of the op-
erations of the Marine formations and units; displaying the sea and ground
situation for the purposes of quickly taking decisions on the rational use
of the Marine forces and means; the carrying out of calculations related
to the planning and execution of combat as well as to the organizing of
cooperation and all types of support.

At present the United States has set up a global automated armed forces
control system. According to a statement of American military specialists.
it provides the higher U.S. military political leadership with an oppor-
tunity to dependably and flexibly control the armed forces on a broad scale
in peacetime and wartime. Its main component is a national armed forces
control system which includes a complex of stationary and mobile command
centers and posts linked into a system by commuucations. The basic cen-
ters of this system are: The national command center, the emergency
national command center. the emergency floating command post and the
emergency air command post. as well as the command pests of the armed
forces in the zones and special commands of the United States. The National
Command Center located at the Pentagon is staffed by representatives from
all the services of the armed forces. It receives information from all
the centers and posts, from civilian institutions, and this is depicted

on large wall maps and light screens. The data received from the command
posts of the Strategic Air Command and from the automated NORAD air de-
fense system are automatically reproduced by the Iconorama system. These
include signals from the BMEHS Ballistic Missile Early Warning System and
the SPADATS Space Detection and Tracking System. The electrOnic computers
of the center make it possible to carry out rapid data processing and

put out the data on a printing and display unit. As was stated by the
American press. the National Command Center receives over 1,000 messages
daily. The emergency command centers and posts are designed for providing
uninterrupted coatrol of the armed forces in a nuclear missile war.

The strategic control ships "Northampton" and ”Wright" are used as an emer-
gency floating command post. For example, the ship "Northampton" has a
large communications center which includes 60 transmitters and 150 re-
ceivers. The capacity of the communications center is up to 3,000 tele-
grams a day. It provides radio telephone. teletype and phototelegraph
communications. as well as the exchange of computer data with all regions
of the world. The ship carries a tropospheric communicatioas radio station
which provides multichannel telephone conmmnciations and data transmission

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for computers (over a distance of up to 800 km). as well as a space com-
munications station. The ship has several cemputers for solving informa-
tion and computational problems. The emergency air command post of the
0.8. Armed Forces has been set up on five sr-135 aircraft. One of them
is constantly on a 15-minute alert at a base near Washington or in the air.
The cruising speed of the 30-135 turboprop aircraft is 850 km per hour.
the range without refueling is 10,000 km. The aircraft is equipped with
an AW/APC-89 radio operating in a band of 225-2h0 megahertz, as well as
shortwave transmitters. On board there are a total of seven-nine trans-
mitters with a power up to 1 kilowatt. a number of receivers and up to

30 special antennas. The AH/AP8-89 radio provides an opportunity for
simultaneous conversations over 51 telephone channels both with ground
centers as well as with the other air command posts over a distance of

direct line of sight. 0n shortwaves communications is possible at a dis-
tance up to 6,000 km.

The command posts of the services of the armed forces have automated equip-
ment for the collection, processing and transmission of data. The command
post of the ground forces is equipped with the DACC automatic control sys-
tem which provides the army leadership with the information necessary for
taking decisions and transmits orders and instructions to the executors.

At the command post of the naval forces is located an information center
with three computers and automatic and semiautomatic situation display
equipment. The center receives information on the location of 0.8. naval
ships and merchant vessels as well as those of other nations. The con-
tinuous updating of these data makes it possible at any moment to obtain
information on the ships and vessels located in a given area. The control
elements of the Joint commands are in touch with all the leading points
of the subordinate units and themselves are part of the global armed
forces control system.

According to the data of the foreign press. the most equipped is the NORAD
command post which since January 1966 has been located in underground
quarters near Colorado Springs.

The basic sources of information for the NORAD operational command center
for the questions of antiuircraft and antisussile defense are the follow-
ing automated systems: The stations of the BMENS Ballistic Missile Early
Warning System located in England, Greenland and Alaska; the stations of
the DE" Aircraft Early Warning System located somewhat to the north of

the Arctic Circle, along the northern coast of Canada and Alaska (the
length of the line is over 8,000 km), while its flanks are guarded by air-
craft ond ship radar pickets in the Atlantic and Pacific; the stations of
the mid-Canada Subsystem in the central part of Canada; the stations lo-
cated along the northern U.S. boundary. the Pinetree System; the stations

located along the eastern, southern and western frontiers of the United
States.

80
ms orncuu. use ONLY
.. , g . . _ . . .
I .i . 1 J 5.0. s; . II' :-.I'. II. It... I” III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the given automated systems, the NORAD Operational Command
Center is supplied with informatics from the SAGE System which has been

in operation since 1961 and monitors tho air space over the North American
continent.

The creation of such a complicated warning system, information equipment
and active defense cannot be done in a short period of time. For this
reason foreign military specialists have felt it necessary to deploy the

warning systems in peacetime and to maintain them in a high state of readi-
ness.

Thus, as is seen from foreign materials, modern ASUV make it possible to
automate a significant number of troop control processes. to carry out come
plex operational and tactical calculations for the use of forces and means
in operations, and to receive and process large amounts of information.

As was already mentioned, the third generation of computers has presently
been created and is being actively introduced. According to statements in
the foreign press, the electronic computers of the fourth generation will
be in practical use in the 1976-1978 period. Already their first models
are based on large integrated circuits, a large capacity semiconductor
memory, and large systems modules. In the machines of this generation,
the large integrated circuits will perform the functions of entire sub-
systems. The speed of these machines will approach a billion operations
per second. The hardware is to be realized according to the principle
"what is to be done?" and not "how is it to be done?" The use of natural
languages will be characteristic.

In recent years abroad there has been a stronger tendency toward the de-
velopment and introduction of small machines. Foreign specialists esti-
mate that the small and minicomputers together with large computers are

completely essential elements in an automated troop control system. The
many computers differ from the small, medium-sized and large ones in the
shortened length of the machine word, in smaller size, more limited com-
putational capabilities and lower cost.

Undoubtedly the automated control systems will incorporate a significant
number of small computers. particularly as peripheral components at auto-
mated work areas of control bodies.

The further development of the computers and the other automation equipment
and the improvement of their software will make it possible to more widely
apply ASUV in peacetime and wartime.

Considering what has been given above, the future development of computers
can be predicted.

The most important problems which must be solved in developing the future
electronic computers are a rise in speed and greater storage capacity.

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ilm-v Llw Mum-(rt. path down not. alwayu lead to the desired results. Many
difficulties have been encountered in moving on to a nanosecond mode in
the instance of carrying out numerous operations and also in intercon-
necting the individual components of electronic circuitry. No matter how
quickly the microprocesscs occur. they still have a finite limit. In us-
ing conventional data processing methods. the limit is approximately 101°
logical operations per second. The given operating speed is not absolute.
It can be increased by using parallel operations with images (machines
with a "picture logic"). As is known, in modern computers each switching
device at a given moment of time remembers one element (bit) of informa-
tion. However the speed can be increased if the data are processed in
whole files or "pictures" of information. In others words, the computer
system must be created in such a manner that each switchin component
simultaneously translated a "picture” consisting of 109-10 0 bits of in-
formation. Thus, the principle of "picture logic" makes it possible to
increase the computer speed approximately by 10 magnitudes (by lO'° times).

An increase in the computer memory capacity is achieved by employing vari-
ous storage units with a high data recording density.

In using coherent light sources. for example lasers, in a small crystal
volume it is possible to record as "pictures" an extremely large amount

of information. and then reproduce it with minimum distortions. In this
instance the density of the data recording tentatively reaches an amount
of 10'2-1013 bits per cm3. Thus in each cm3 of crystal it would be pos~
sible to contain information found in a library of 5 million volumes of
200 pages each. The problems of using coherent light sources for the pur-
pose of obtaining three-dimensional images are the concern of the young
science of holography (from the Greek "holos"--full, and "grapho”--I write;
literallyo-"full notation").

Holography is most widely used in computers. The density of data record-
ing in holograms (in a thick-layered emulsion) will reach astronomical
amounts of 1012-10'3 bits per cm3 as in crystals. This is three-four

magnitudes higher than the density of information recording in biologi-
cal neurons.

Holography opens up broad opportunities for constructing a new class of
storage units. The use of associative memory in a computer will make it
possible to reduce by manyvfold the volume of the program in comparison
with the ordinary presently used memory, where each word has a fixed ad-
dress recorded in the machine program. On a hologram it is possible to
record not only an image of objects, but also any other information given,
for example, in the form of tables, graphs, printed text and so forth.

it would be hard to overestimate the advantage of feeding information into
a machine in such a form. In this instance the cumbersome and extended
process of recording the information on a punch tape with the subsequent

feeding of it into the machine would be excluded. Here the information
could be recorded in the fonn of interference "pictures."

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
---:e

.. . . . . .
D 0.. ' 0 LI. 0' . '3' 'II‘. I...':ItI It. Ill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'I'lu- In'nmn. ul I'I-l I'll’th', Ini'nl'lIIlIlJulI l.’lDlll.||Ill|'|| III II hulographiu ULUI‘IH'J.‘
would he unrrivd nuL vIrLunIly nlmulLuneouuly for Itu entlre field, re-
gardless of how great or multidimensional it would be. Since interfer-
ence "pictures" created by lasers of other frequencies can be

stored in the same volume, the crystals as by their very nature would be
used for creating associative memory in the computer with an enonnous
volume of information. According to data in the foreign press, a number
of firms are already developing holography-based storage units.

The practical realization of industrial models of holographic storage units
will depend upon the solution to a number of problems, and in particular.
upon finding a material which would provide for the rapid recording and
destruction of the holograms.

Thin magnetic films with bismuthmanganese composition would be one such
material. Their use along with high output lasers (on the order of 100
kilowatts) would make it possible to actually realize a holographic memory.

The Honeywell firm has built an experimental holographic storage unit on
bismuthmanganese film with a data recording density of 20 million bits
per cmz. The information is recorded by the beam of a helium-neon laser
(a pulse of microsecond duration and a power of several milliwatts), and
readout is with the same laser. In design termm such a memory is a ro-
tating disc 15 cm in diameter with strips of the carrier material applied
to it 2.5 cm long.

The French firm Thomsa-CSF has developed a storage device in which one
hologram 1 mm in diameter will store 10,000 bits of information. One of,
the Japanese firms, Hitachi,has designed a holographic device on multi-
layered ceramics with a data storage density of 20,000 hits on an area

0.5 mm in diameter (this corresponds to a density of 207 bits square per cm).

The given examples show that the scientists of many nations are intensely
developing fifth generation computers and the scientific prospects are

being determined for creating super high-speed computers with enormous
memory capability.

The communications channels with the connecting devices are an important
element of any ASUV. without high quality communications channels linking

the computers to the peripheral sources, there can be no question of an
automated system. or course. autonomous use of computers is possible and

Justified, particularly in the area of scientific research. However, in
the process of troop control, automation provides a great impact in close
interaction with all the means of communications.

The output devices from the computers are the work areas of the control
bodies (usually at command posts), the equipment of which makes it possible
to communicate with the computers.

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The above-indicated equipment includes: Data input and request devices,
an arithmetic digital printer, a data visual display device, equipment
for documenting information and reproducing the documents.

The data input devices are used for inputting data related to the compe-
tence of the specific control body. In accord with the changing situa-
tion. particularly in the course of c.wbat, a large portion of the infor-
mation is continuously :hanged, some data grow out of date, and because
of this they must be replaced. The basic portion of information on the
situation will come from below, from the subordinate automated systems.
From the automated work areas it is possible to feed in information relat-
ing to maJor changes in the tactical and technical data, the methods of
employing weapons and military equipment, as well as operational and tac-
tical standards related to one or another branch of forces.

The request devices are designed for putting into the machine a coded re-
quest for solving informational and computational problems and providing
the obtained decisions to the automated work area. The results of the
solution are directly employed by the control bodies for analyzing and
evaluating data on the particular situation and for preparing proposals
for the taking of a decision by the commander.

The arithmetic digital center is a terminal element in any electronic

computer. It may also be located a distance away, at an automated work
area.

In this instance it is used to give the results of solving informational
and computational problems directly to the work area, and in the form of
printed documents which can be used directly by the officers of the con-
trol bodies.

According to foreign data, modern arithmetic digital printers operate at

a speed of boo lines a minute (the length of the standard line is 60 signs).
The further development of computers will make it possible to increase the
speed of generating infonaation from the machine.

The visual displays of the foreign ASUV are a complex of -creens, boards,
and electrified plotting boards on which the necessary information can be
produced in the form of graphic images of the situation on screens with

n cartographic situation. various reference tables, schedules,and so forth.
The visual display: are an important technical means for carrying out
troop control under the conditions of a rapidly changing situation.

Certainly such significance of the data visual display devices becomes
possible only with technically advanced sources of primary information
whis; quickly secure and transmit the situational data to the computers.
Foreign specialists feel that regardless of the fundamental possibility
of the graphic display of the situation concerning the enemy and one's own
troops on automated screens with a cartographic base, the map as the most

8h
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu
. :71‘
“ \‘7' '1‘” :

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064

s: l 00" 'fl'i ICI‘.’IIICH‘II.

FOR ”FFICIAL USE ONLY

important working document of the commander and staff will maintain its
significance. On it are plotted the variations of solutions. and it is
one of the basic documents used by the staff in planning operations and
combat. in giving missions to subordinate troops and in exercising control
over the course of the carrying out of the given missions by the troops.
For this reason. simultaneously with the development and improvement of
the automated control systems. it is considered essential to increase
staff efficiency. and in particular to improve in every possible way the

methods by which the officials work with a map.

The display devices are an important element in the automated control sys-
tem and can be used in control bodies in the fona of collectively used
screens or individual situation display devices. In the foreign ASUV,

for obtaining images on a large screen. four methods can be used: Direct
projecting from the screen of the cathode ray tube. proJecting using an
intermediate recording of the image. and an image based on discrete or
laser equipment. Thermoplastic, photoplastic. photochromdc. discrete and
laser technologies are promising ones which may find use in display units
abroad.

Thermoplastic technology consists in recording information by an electron
beam on a thermoplastic film. This provides a sufficiently high resolu-
tion and a short time'for holding the information on the screen (up to

0.5 second). Obviously this technology will be used on collective-use
screens of medium size with an area up to 2-3 m2. '

Photoplaatic technology uses a combination of the photocondueting and
thermoplastic properties of substances. The obtaining of a potential
relief is achieved by recording the image with a light beam, and the role
of the converter of light energy into electric is played by a photocon-
ducting layer. This technology can be used most in individual display
devices for graphic and letter printing information on the staffs of for-
mations and units.

Photochromy uses the property of substances to change color and trans—
parency when exposed to radiant energy of different areas of the spectrum.
The photochromic films excel in high clarity and good operating proper-
ties. This technology will obviously be used most in developing large
collectively used screens on the higher staffs.

Discrete technology is based upon the use of individual miniature elements
(modules) ordinarily reproducing one data symbol for its set on set-sized
screens.

Abroad it is felt that the modules can be developed on the basis of light-
emitting diodes, liquid crystals, plasma films and other elements. Light-
emitting diodes are semiconductor devices which use the phenomenon of
injection electroluminescence. The first examples developed in 1968
emitted Only red light. At present, a broad range of the spectrum has

85
- Ion OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been developed, and for this reason it is possible to create elements of
various colors. The light-emitting diodes are made in the fbrm of sep-
arate modules which are capable of displaying one sign. The set of indi-
vidusl modules provides an opportunity to create a screen of the necessary
size. The light-emitting diode screens will possess high reliability,
good clarity and resolution (up to three elements per mm). and a low data
display lag time (an inertia on the order of 10-8 seconds). The light-

emitting diodes will be widely used in display devices for both collective
and individual use on the staffs.

Liquid crystals can be used in display devices on the principle of a change
in their transparency under the effect of electric voltage. These are
placed in a thin layer 10 microns thick, between transparent plates and
electrodes to which a current is delivered with a power of several watts.
The change in the transparency of a liquid crystal is such that in illumin-
ating the plates a high contrast is achieved on the order of 20:1. The
chief merit of the liquid crystal displays is the insignificant energy
consumption (fractions of a milliwatt per displayed sign), and this makes
it possible to power them using small batteries. Among the drawbacks are
a certain delay in displaying the information (around 100 microseconds).
The resolution of the liquid crystals is two elements per mm. Liquid
crystals may also be used not only on large screens but also on individual
displays.

Plasma panels are based on the glowing of inert gases with their ioniza-
tion. Such a panel consists of three transparent plates. The inner plate
has openings which are filled with a mixture of neon and nitrogen. and
electrodes have been applied to the external plates. The total voltage
formed in the area of the intersection of the electrodes causes a process
of the ionization of the gas mixture or a halting of it. A merit of the
plasma panels is the great clarity and the significant service life. The
resolution is two-three elements per mm, and over the long run can be in-
creased by several-fold. Brightness reaches 3,000 nits and the data dis-
play lag time is tenths of a microsecond.

The designated technologies can be applied both for developing large
screens as well as fer individual displays.

The displaying of information in a graphic form and in a printed form will
make it possible fer the commander to be constantly up on the occurring

events, to respond promptly to all changes in the situation and to control
the troops efficiently.

An analysis of the present state of ASUV indicates that they have already
achieved a high level of development. According to the assertion of
foreign specialists. the armed forces in the developed capitalist states
could not function without the automated control systems. Great prospects
for their development and use are to be opened up in the future. For this
reason a methodological analysis of the question of the potential possi-
bilities of man and machine in the process of troop control is so important.

86
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
.0...

-. . . _ . .
I 0.. ‘ s o. 5' - .33 '-$.'. H..':'.l0l. OH.-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Potential Pussibilities for Improving Automated Systems

One of the central and most complicated methodological problems in the

full automation of troop control systems is to determine the degree of

the possibility and necessity of automated the functions carried out by
them considering the achievements in the economy, science, technology and
military affairs. A solution to this question is related primarily to

a methodological analysis of the potential possibilities of improving
cybernetic systems. For a clearer notion of this is it possible to examine
the following operational and tactical example.

In the course of an exercise or maneuvers held at night on 1 January, a
commander responsible for providing cover for a set area had to solve the
problem of intercepting enemy airborne targets approaching the defended
area. The targets had been detected, their coordinates, speed, altitude,
course and other parameters were known, and these were fed into the calcu-
lator. According to the calculations made squadron No l was in the best
situation for repelling the enemy attack.

however, the regimental commander taking the decision knows that in the
squadron a month previously the cornmnder had fallen ill, and his deputy

had not yet fully mastered the position held. The discipline of the per-
sonnel had somewhat weakened. Moreover it was New Year's Ewe. The squadron
consisted basically of young pilots who had recently mastered the new equip-
ment. would they be able under such conditions to carry out a combat mis-
sion? Wouldn't it be better to alert squadron No 27 In terms of time it
would carry out the mission. and it was significantly better prepared in
material and moral terms. In truth, if this squadron was alerted, the

area covered by it would be correspondingly stripped. A risk? Yes, but

a Justified one. As was known from analyzing the situation and certain
other sources, an attack in the direction covered by squadron No 2 was in-
probable at present. Thus, the decision was taken.

Could the machine have recommended this or a similar choice? Certainly the
commander took the decision considering additional information which the
machine had not received. For this reason he was under better conditions.
Let us endeavor to put them in circumsisnces which are relatively equal

for solving the given problem. For this purpose it is essential to put
into the electronic memory of the machine additional information which

was described above. However, in this instance, the researcher must over-
come an entire series of difficulties.

First of all, on the various levels of the development of science and
technology, any cybernetic system, like man, will possess finite oppor-
tunities in terms of the receiving, storage and processing of information.
It is essential to clarify Just what these possibilities are, and whether
they can be equal to or even surpass the capabilities of man.

The broadening of these possibilities always entails a complicating of the
cybernetic system, an increase in its size and, consequently, a reduction

8'!
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the reliability of its work. The time for processing the additional
information is also increased. The time factor, as is known. is one of

the most important ones in solving any problem, and particularly a military
one.

Thus, on any previously set level of science and technology, in solving a
whole series of complicated problems. it is essential to consider the con-
straits determined by the amount of information which must be fed into the

cybernetic system, by the time needed for processing it, and by the re-
liability in the functioning of the ASU.

In this regard there must be a special and thorough examination of the
question of how quickly and accurately can a person carry out these missions.

As is known. computers solve a large class of problems significantly faster
and more accurately than man. Ordinarily, these are termed uncreative
tasks. Along with them, there are also so-called creative tasks which for
one reason or another are inaccessible for machine solving but are success~
ful solvable by man.

The above-examined example could be classified among the creative tasks.
However. the decision taken by the commander was based on additional in-
formation. If this had been fed into the electronic memory of the machine,
it also could solve the problem. and in this manner the problem would

then be in the area of the uncreative ones. Here, however. another diffi-
culty arises.

The machine solving of the problem presupposes a formalization of it, that
is, the expressing of it in the form of a system of strict formal rules
which exclude multiple interpretation. In terms of our problem, it is
essential on a strictly uniform basis to "explain" to the machine what

New Year's Eve is and what is its relationship or possible relationship
to the carrying out of the combat mission, how the command qualities of
the deputy regimental commander influence the level of military training
and discipline among the personnel, and so forth.

Furthermore. the commander, in taking the decision to alert squadron No 2
and not squadron No l, consciously takes a risk and thereby assumes all

the responsibility for the decision taken. A person who does not possess
definite moral qualities in such a situation would possibly prefer not

to take the risk. And having chosen the first variation. the commander
would provide insurance against possible accusations of stupidity or ad-
vcnturism. Consequently, it is a question of the possibility of represent-
ing in a formalized form a whole series of qualities of a military leader
acquired in the process of social evolution.

[t is not difficult to note that in the above-given example. fundamentally
different possibilities are at work. Consequently, an analysis of the
questions of the possibilities of improving cybernetic systels must be made

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 Of: 1 ' I to: o: i ll" z-II'Z HZ IIIII III III.-

FOR OPVXCIAL USE ONLY

considering the varying magnitude of these possibilities. In the first
place. it can be a question of formal or abstract possibilities. the as-
sumption of which. while not contradictory to the development patterns of
nature and society. do not have real bases.

Secondly. it is essential to examine the real possibilities where the con-
ditions for realizing them already exist or can appear in a strictly his-
torically designated stage in the development of science and technology.

The relationship of the designated possibilities has a dialectical nature.
The boundaries betveen them are fluid. At a certain stage in the develop-
ment of society, a forsal possibility can become an impossibility or a
real possibility and then reality.

Hovever the mixing up of these philosophical categories inevitably leads
to confusion. and does not make it possible to solve the question of the

possibilities of improving cybernetic systems with sufficient clarity.

The result of such confusion is both the excessive optimism instilled of
the successes of theoretical cybernetics as well as the extremely pessi-
mistic views sometimes voiced in assessing the real technical difficulties
confronting practical workers in the attempts to design rather complicated
cybernetic systems.

The successful theoretical solution to a whole series of fundamental prob-
lems in cybernetics is tied to the extensive use of certain abstractions
(idealizations) possessing a rather high degree of commonness. Their in-
corporation makes it possible to successfully examine the potential pos-
sibilities of cybernetic machines. However. the transition from ideal
models to reel machines requires a weakening of certain abstractions. a
reduction in the degree of their commonness or an abandoning of them.

All of this gives rise to certain limitations in carrying out the corres-
ponding possibilities.

The concretization of the philosophical concept of fonmal possibility is
the abstraction introduced by A. A. Markov of potential feasibility which
"consists in an abstraction from the real limits of our constructive pos-
sibilities caused by the limitation of our life in space and time...."2
On the basis of using this abstraction. the ideal Turing machine was de-
signed. "In the Turing machine. a portion of memory...is displayed in
the form of a strip unlimited on both sides and broken up into cells.
Obviously. in no real machine could there be an infinite memory (an in-
finite strip). and in this sense the Turing machine is merely an idealized

scheme reflecting the potential possibility of increasing the volume of
memory."3

Certainly. it would be impossible to actually design a Turing machine.
However, formally. from the viewpoint of the abstraction of potential
feasibility. it is possible. for the patterns of its functioning do not
contradict the laws of nature.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In distinguishing the real and formal possibilities for improving cybernetic
systems, it is advisable to examine first of all the arguments in favor of
the constraints of the latter.

At present it is possible to consider the skepticism of certain specialists
caused by the technical imperfection of automate in comparison with the
human brain as overcome. The indications of the purely quantitative as-
pects of the problem, in being unconvincing on the philosophical level.

are contradictory to the technical achievements of today. Undoubtedly as
yet it would be very difficult to develo and provide reliability in an
electronic machine consisting of 10‘0-10 2 elements with sufficiently flex-
ible and complete links between them and with input and output devices

the capacity of which would be comparable with the possibilities of human
sensory organs. However, many technical difficulties at present are al-
ready resolved or are in the stage of being resolved. For this reason,

it is possible to boldly assert that the designated differences, in being

purely quantitative, at a certain stage in the development of science and
technology will be overcome.

however there are not only quantitative but also qualitative differences
between the processes occurring in a technical system and the functioning
ofthe bnnm. Consequently, the solution to the problem of the potential
possibilities of cybernetic systems to reproduce various aspects of thought
activity is possible only on the basis of the fundamental notions of dia-
lectical materialism on the essence of conscience. The idea of the suf-
ficiently complete modeling of the living, and particularly thought proces-
ses, has caused a number of arguments in certain philosophers, and the
essence of these questions can be reduced to the following theses.

The physical form of the motion of matter is simpler and inferior in re-
lation to the biological. The latter is characteristic for c qualitatively
different state of matter which is defined as living. Thinking is possible
only within the limits of the biological form of the movement of matter
under the condition of its achieving a sufficiently high level of organi-
zation. Moreover. it is not only a function of matter organized in a

particular manner but also the product of the sociohistorical development
of society.

For this reason the attempts at a more or less complete modeling of thought
on a nonprotein level should be qualified as a mechanism, for they clearly

represent a reduction of the higher form of the movement of matter to an
inferior one.

A logical consequence from such a viewpoint is the conclusion of the im-
possibility of modeling by technical means any processes whatsoever occur-
ring in the brain and being a property of organic highly organized matter.
However the given assertions are not valid since they contradict practice.
The simplest digital machine to some degree models one of the mechanisms
of the human memory which is a property of organic highly organized matter.

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"’.'O

.. . . .. . .
I 0.. i a a. 0' . '3‘ ‘-:I’. 3....f'0. H. H..-

 

P'Uii urruum USE ONLY

Moreo;er. it :nnnot be unsorted categorically that the prosess of n quali-
tative transition from one Porn of the movement of matter to another and a
corresponding rise in the level of its organization are possible only on
the paths of the nnturni evolution known to un. ObviOusly transitions

from one farm of motion to another can be qualitatiVe.y different. Natural
evolution brinnn nutter : "and the limits of the physical form of motion
through chenistry and liﬂlvgl. however. from this it in no way follows
that there is no other possibility for such a developMent. it can be as-
named that one of then i: realized in technical systems created by man.

In this path matter can attain a «cry high 1eVel of organization character-
ized by no less complexity. diveruity and richness of internal relation-
ships than in biology.

Certainly, the substantiVe basis of the carriers of the forms of action
examinei by us differs. However, an assumption of the possibility of model-
ing the processes occurring in one form of motion in a substratum which is
the carrier of another form of motion (under the condition of the same mag-
nitude of the degree n” their ornanization) will not ccntain any mechanism.
Such an approach makes it possible to look differently at the possibil‘tics
of modelinr thought. To the degree that it is possible to achieve a high
leVel in the organizaition of matter on a different substratum baaia than
the hrain, the real models of the brain and its mental functions are real
and sufficiently complete. in other words, in holdzna the viewpoint that
thought. like life, occurs only on a protein basis.~ and without resurrect-
ing the poorly formulated problem of the "thinking of machines,” neverthe-
less it is valid to speak of the modeling of thought processes on a differ-
ent substrata basis.

howeVer, in characterizing conscience as a property of highly organized
matter. only one aspect of to essence is touched upon. The social causal-
ity of conscience operates as the other aspect. and this "from the very
outset is a social product and remains this as long as people exist."5

The founders of Maraisx-Leninicm repeatedly emphasized that conscience is
a product of sociohistorical development, and that the brain does not
think ty it:elf. but rather it is social nan with the aid of the brain.

a cytrrsetic cachine of any complexity is not a social being. It remains
merely an unique implement in the hands of the conscious and purposefully
nctinr social being. man. The Viven concepts of dialectical naterialiau,
although eliminating the problem of creating a "thinking automaton” by the
forces of cyberneticn.‘ however do not exclude the fundancntal possibility
of modeling thinking. Its social nature can be understood and corresaoud-
inrly depicted in the program of n cybernetic machine. On this level. in
our opinion. the otntcnent of L. B. Bazhenov is valid. "5 machine in no
way tecones a social being, but man. having understood and proermuwed the
social cauca‘ity of thought, reproduces it in the machine." noted the
Soviet scientist. "if the social nature of thinking is natural and under-
standable. then in principle it can be artificially reproduced like the
other aspects of i‘.”7

9]

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 10. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR (WVICML lib'l-I "NLY

Thus, on the philosophical 1eVel the question of the formal possibilities
of automation merges with the gioseological problem of the cognisability
of the vorld, and these Very possibilities ultimately are determined by
the successes of cognition and the precise mathematical-logical expression
of the socially determined patterns in the functioning of the huran brain.

0n the natural scientific level. argtmients in favor of the limiting of the
formal possibilities of cybernetic systems are often linked to the pres-
ence of so-called algorithmically unsolvable problems. As it known there
are entire classes or problems for vhich no single algorithm exists for
their solution. Is not the strictly mathematically proven impossibility
of algorithmising certain classes of problems that fundusental limit which
determines the area for the action of cybernetic machines?

First of all. the fundamental impossibility of seeking out an algorithm
for the given class of problems can mean the absence cf a certain type of
relations between certain set conditions and the sought result. In such
an instance. the given class of problem cannot be solved by singular
methods either by man or a machine.

Furthermore, the absence of a single algorithm does not exclude the possi—
bility of solving any specific problem of the given class. iimsan intellect
finds particular instances of solving mass problems which are insoluble

algorithmical 1y. However this can also be done by a sufficiently powerful
cybernetic machine.

Recently attention of researchers has been attracted to heuristic program—
ming based on the study and use for programming of the methods and proced-
ures used by man for solving probleu the algoritlss of which is misnovn to
him. in the opinion of certain authors. the heuristic procedures can be

vi We: as approximate methods for solving algorithmically unsovable prob-
lens.

The simultaneous use of heur'iztics is caused by the fact that many algo-
rithmically solvable problems rennin virtually unsol:able due to the actual
impossibility of carrying out the volune of calculations. For this reason

the theory of heuristic programing to a certain degree can help to over-
come these difficulties.

At present only a few heuristic programs can be mentioned which make it
possible to solve In certain limited class of relatively simple problems
which are remote from broad practical use. however. even now it is clear
that the heuristic search provides an enormous gain in time in comparison
with the systematic checking of variations.

At the same time the assertion that "an algorithm does no‘ exist" can
mean only the impossibility of seeking it out in the givv -: logical system
of knowledge. that is. on a certain level of the development of science.
in using modern mathematics.

9?
70!! OPNCML USE ONLY
V9“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It may be proposed that with the corresponding broadening of the designated
logical system of knowledge the previously "nonexistent” algorithm will be
found.’ If a aachine is capable of itself broadening the logical system

in which it functions at the given moment, the absence of a single algorithm
for solving a certain clnsz; of problems is not an insuperable obstacle for
it. In broadening the urea of formalized knowledge. the machine can find
previously unknown relationships (if these exist at all) and on the basis
of them make up the necessary algorithm.

For clarity it is possible to give the example of how a machine can "dis-
cover" Maxwell’s equations independently of man. For this it is merely a
question of putting into the electronic memory a description of a series
of experiments on electrodvnsmics and the corresponding class of differen-
tial equations. After this the machine itself will select those which

best conform to the results of the experiments. In precisely the same
manner. with a rather complex system of hierarchically organised self-
instructing programs. it is possible to detect the relationships and pat-
terns previously unknown to man. On the basis of them, a conputer will
supplement and correct its programs and draw up new ones. All of this
applies fully not only to the algorithmically unsolvable but also to the
algorithmically solvable problems or to the creative problems the alroritln
of which. although existing. is however unknown to man. "In complicating
the program by utilizing nethods already found by the machine in the process
of searching for a new method. it is possible to successfully model cre-
ative activity on an ever higher order.” writes Academician V. ll. Olushkov
on this question. "In the process of such modeling. it is possible to
force the machine autaatically to pose new problems for itself and to
find their solution."‘0

It is frequently said that the ”world of the machine." its "universe.” and
the "horizons of its vision" are determined by an algorithm and by a pro-
gram. This of course is true enough. however. these notions must not be
understood in a sinified manner by identifying algorithmiution merely
with a rigidly determined once and for all set and unchanged line of be-
havior.

Any machine (including a heuristic one) requires a definite mathematical
support for its operation. The necessity of ever more complete formaliza-
tion is ceised precisely and primarily by the development and introduc-
tion of ‘arious cowuters into control practices. However. is this re-
quiremen- fundamental for solving the question of the limited nature of
the formal possibilities for improving cybernetic systems? The analysis
nde convinces one that a machine, in possessing a certain prop-am, can
extend the limits of formalization and find previously unknown algorithms.
In accord with this it is capable of changing and correcting the program
used in the smchine. Consequently. being limited in its actions by the
sphere of nor-mtive fornlisation. the mchine itself broadens it.

93

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. neither in philosophy nor in natural scientific research at present
are ,there sufficiently sound argtssents in defense of the notion of re-
stricting the formal pessibilities for improving cybernetic systems.

Bearing in mind the formal possibilities of improving cybernetic devices.
on the level of the abstraction of potential feasibility it is valid to
raise the question of modeling such clearly complex phenomena of conscience.
including the creative processes of thinking using technical system which
correspond to the human brain in terms of their complexity, the diversity
of fmctions carried out and problems solved.

Certainly we are sore concerned with the transition from formal to real
possibilities vhich can be turned into reality at any but not infinitely
distant stage of development.

A review of the real possibilities for improving cybernetic system should
be started by analysing the dialectics of the relationship: functiOn-m
structure-osubstratum.

There are two interrelated and at the same time in a definite sense oppo-
site directions in modeling the mind. One of them is characterized by
attempts to reproduce definite functions analogous to the brain mechanisms.
The other direction is aimed solely at reproducing the functions regardless
of the mechanism of their realisation. A researcher of the second direc-
tion vill be satisfied if the machine vill effectively perform one or
another complex problem of data processing. An experimenter who prefers
the first direction vill be satisfied if the smchine solves the problem

by the same method as man. For the former. the identicalness of the re-
sults is of great significance, while for the latter. the nature of the
process is equally important.

The first direction which is related predominantly to the functional ap-
proach can be defined as the cybernetic or mnctional modeling. and repre»
sents the cybernetic aspect of elaborating the problem of an "artificial
intellect." The second direction is based mainly on the data of psycho-
logical and neurophysiological research and to a greater degree uses the
structural analogies considering the knovn structural characteristics

of the modeled systems.

Regardlets of the designated difference. both approaches are interrelated.
In actuality. if the method is know: by vhich the brain solves a certain
data processing problem. then an opportunity is provided for creating 0
program with the same logic sm‘ting it possible for the machine to solve
this problem analogously to man . At the same time. the presence of a
program for solving certain problems may suggest the method of solving
similar problems by man.

In this regard there is particular interest in the assertion of special-
lsts that there is an isomorphic nature of the work of machine and an
In solving the problems of image recognition.u At the same time. a series

9’:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. ‘... . ; -. - -
a. II. ‘ f.‘. II. It... III III.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of psychological research has experimentally shown that the nature of the
processes of seeking the solution to one or another problem by a cyber-
netic system and man. regardless of a definite similarity as a whole.
significantly differs.12 All that has been said characterizes the unique
manifestation of the dialectical relationships betveen structure and func-
tion in complicated dynamic systems. The possibility and necessity of a
functional approach to their examination are caused by the fact that func-
tions possess a certain independence in relationship to structure. they are
linked to it indirectly. and this very relationship is not rigid and uni-
form. Nevertheless, "a definite function is performed not by any structure
generally. but only by any structure taken from a certain limited 'class of
structure ' all the elements of which contain certain necessary common prop-
erties.‘

Structural analogies can be very distant in modeling one or several func-
tions. Here. along with the limiting of some functions. others which are
very important and even crucial in one or another area of activity can be
sharply strengthened. The history of human progress knows many examples
when the best results were achieved precisely due to the abandoning of
precise structural analogies with living organisms.

And in a similar manner the operations carried out in a computer differ
from those occurring in the human mind. The structures of the systems
carrying out these operations differ substantially. Precisely because of
this modern computers greatly surpass the human brain in terms of the
speed and accuracy of calculations. In principle it is possible to cre-
ate a program which imitates the customary method of arithmetical calcu-
lations for mar. but it is extremely ineffective.

However. an increase in the number of modeled functions or their compli-
cating imposes ever more rigii constraints on the structure of the sys-
tems modeling these functions. Obviously the greater the number of func-
tions of one system which is reproducei simultaneously by another system,
the more complete their similarity of structures should be. A discon—
fcrmity of structures entails functional constraints. In any event it is
indisputed that the modeling of a certain set of functions necessitates a
corresponding level of complexity in the structure of the modeling system.
Here it is a question not so much of physiological structures as it is

of informational structures.'“ Precisely this aspect of the question has
been pointed up by the well known Soviet scientist P. X. Anokhin. in not-
ing that in terms of individual parameters of the human brain and its
activity it is possible to develop more advanced machines. however the
accent must be put not on individual capabilities. but ratner on the inter-
action of these abilities and the moves from one to another.15

At the same time, since the relationship between the structure and sub-
stratum of any system is a concrete expression of a dialectical relation-
ship between form and content. to this degree structure has only a rela-
tive independence. Consequently. the difference of the substrate to one
degree or another is also reflected in the nonidenticalness of the struc~
tures.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The question arises whether it is always possible to establish a definite
congruity of structures with a differing substantive base. that is. to
detect or design those elements (substrata) of the system which would
make it possible to provide the isomorphism (or in the general instance.
homomorphism) of the modeled and modeling structures on a level suffi-
cient for the reproduced function? It must be pointed out that modern
science is still very far from solving this problem not only on the prac-
tical leVel but also on the theoretical one. For this reason. a further
thorough investigation of the phenomena of life precisely from the aspect
of its substratum may provide a negative answer to this question. Thus
it may seem that certain structures and thereby the entire group of living
functions cannot be reproduced in any way but on a protein level. That
is. at a certain stage the corresponding constraints will be discovered.
Nevertheless the attempts at relatively complete modeling of thinking
using various cybernetic systems are not only valid but also essential,
for in the process of experimental search alone can any limiting patterns
be discovered if such exist at all.

Thus. the first difficulty in moving from formal possibilities for model-
ing thought to real possibilities is related to the necessity of artificial-
ly creating that material formation the structural organization of which
would be comparable with a biological one in terms of the richness of in-
ternal ties and relationships. And the question of the fundamental pos-
sibility of achieving such a high level in the organization of matter On

any other substratum basis than the brain itself is far from resolved.

The second and equally complex problem on the path of realizing the poten-
tial possibilities of modeling thought is related to the discovery and
accurate description of the patterns of the functioning of the brain con-
:idering the social causality of these patterns. The solution to this
requires efforts from the entire aggregate of the sciences studying the
essence of thought. the structure and organization of the brain. its func-
tions in the process of processing information as well as the development
of the corresponding mathematical logical apparatus which would be capable
of reflecting with sufficient completeness and accuracy the patterns of
brain functioning in a formalized form making it possible to create algo-
rithms and programs.

Dialectical materialism views conscience as a definite property of highly
organized matter and a product of sociohistorical development. ”...0ur
conscience and thinking." wrote 8. Engels on this question. "however super-
sensitive they may seen. are the product of a physical, corporeal organ.
the brain.”16 Conscience does not entail anything supernatural, incompre-
hensible or in principle inaccessible fer study. The Harxist-Leninist
methodological notions of the fundamental cognizability of the world pro—
vide reason to assert that in certain stages of the development of science
and social practice this property of highly organized matter has been
rather fully studied. The patterns of the functioning of the brain. in-
cluding the social causality of thinking. will be understandable and

96
FOR OFFICIAL use our
-- . . . . - . - -
U 0.. A s as. a. . Hi ‘.'I'. |0.0.'O|O llllll.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

descrihable to an ever greater degree of accuracy, and in accord with this
the possibilities for modeling thinking on each historical level will be
broadened. however, one must not forget the following. In the first
place, modern science is only on the distant approaches to solving these
problems, and secondly, in the course of the corresponding research (as in
an attempt to achieve u nigh organization of matter on a nonprotein base),
certain limiting patterns may be discovered. For example, it may turn out
that the number of rules for processing information by the human brain

is infinite.

MoreOVer, for creating systems of machines the functional efficiency of
which in all regards could be compared with the efficiency of human ac-
tivity, it is essential to formalize and turn over to the cybernetic system
all information acquired by mankind as a result of the millions of years

of biological and social, sociohistorical development. To the degree

that this information is incomplete, the real process of thinking will
differ from its model not only structurally but also functionally.

The comment made by Academician A. N. Kolmogorov in a Joking form of "pos-
sibly an automaton capable of writing verses on a level of the great poets
cannot be constructed more simply than having modeled all the development
of the cultural life of a society in which the poets actually developed,"l7
thus acquires profound meaning.

In analyzing this statement, 8. V. Biryukov and Ye. S. Geller correctly
emphasize that "for this it is essential to model the 'logic of history,’
to model the historical heritage in the area of the content and methods

of thinking which are assimilated by an individual entering life. And
this means to model the path of development of a modern individual and to
'supply' the corresponding 'model' with the needs of real social individu-
als, including ethical, aesthetic requirements with their biological pre-
requisites and social content."18

At any historically determined stage in the development of cognition,

there exist an area of formalized knowledge and an area of unformalized
knowledge which encompasses it. Both these areas are being constantly
transformed. The boundaries between them are mobile and historically
changeable. In precisely the same manner that in the objective world there
is nothing that is in principle incomprehensible but merely not understood,
in the process of the cognition of this world there is nothing in principle
that is unformalizable but merely unformalized. HoweVer, the sphere of
formalized knowledge always lies within the unformalized. The real pos-
sibilities of improving cybernetic systems at any specific stage of de-
velopment are rather strictly confined by the limits of the area of for—
malized knowledge. These limits over time can be extended, but a conputer
in principle cannot go beyond them. But a person not only extends the
sphere of formalized knowledge (including by the aid of machines) but also
goes beyond its limits. He functions efficiently in the unformalized
sphere, using the intuitively informative possibilities of thinking. And

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

thin, in particular, in one of the fundamental advantages of man over cy-
bernetic systems of any complexity.

At any, however distant stage in the development of a society its scien-
tific, technical and economic possibilities are not unlimited. And cor-
respondingly the real possibilities for improving cybernetic machines,
their technical. informational and material support are limited by defin-
ite specific historical limits. At the same time it mist not be forgotten
that the mental abilities of man are constantly developing, including by
using cybernetic equipment. Consequently. there will always exist a
rather broad class of problems the machine solution to which is impossible
or ineffective. Under the same conditions, a person. in using unformalised
knowledge, in making reasonable assumptions and in using less strict
methods. can solve these problems comparatively simply and with sufficient
accuracy. Thus, at any stage in the improving of cybernetic systems, tne
dominant and leading position of man in relation to them will be maintained.

The methodological analysis given above makes it possible to conclude that
along with progress in science, technology and military affairs, the real
possibilities for autormting troop control will constantly grov- At the
same time the functions of the personnel which in one way or another is
involved with automated control systems will be broadened and enriched.

In actuality, the achievements of the present-day scientific and technical
revolution and the revolution in military affairs even now make it possible
to algorithmise and prepare a number of control problems for machine solu-
tion. At present the automation of the control process encompasses not
only the sphere of mathematical calculations. but also such functions of
control organs as the selection and classification of information, its
display, a comparison of the existing combat situation with a previously
known one, and the exchange of information within the controlling body.
Certainly the carrying out of these functions in part does not require a
creative approach and is comparatively simple. mnosyllabic and already
technologized in the human brain. For this reason all these operations
can be precisely described and realized using automatic devices.

Along with them, the process of troop control includes such procedures as
evaluating information, discovering the plan of the enew and a final
selection of the variation of the decision.

The carrying out of these requires a creative approach, a dialectical
flexibility of thinking. social stimuli, and an emotional uplift, that
is. qualities in herent only to the human intellect. As vas pointed out

above, their precise formalization can be recognized as only potentially
possible.

For this reason. the aim of automation is not to replace man by a machine.
but rather to bring about a maximum rise in the efficiency of control
activities and the combat possibilities of the troops. Such a complicated
problem is solved by setting up control bodies which include collectives

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A ' '
.. . ‘. . ll" _.- .. . . p
' I . ll. l.lll Ill Ill.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Such systems have been named "large systems" of the "collective--maehine"
type. In automated systems the shortcomings of man and cybernetic machines
are reciprocally comcensntcd for, and their merits are maximally divulged
and emphasized. They in the best manner combine speed, accuracy and preci-
sion of automata with the flexibility and diversity of the mental, physio-
logical and social qualities of man. This becomes possible only with a
rational allocation of control functions between the machine and man. In
our opinion, the embodying of the real possibilities of full automation in
reality in any interval of time requires the formalization of the investi-
gated area of troop control and certain processes of mental activity re-
lated to the processing of information, as vell as the availability of the
technical devices for realizing the formalized moments of creative activity.
Considering these general methodological concepts it is_essential to ap-
proach the analysis of the present state and development prospects of auto-
mated troop control systems.

FOOTNUPES

l. The research on the questions of the given section has been -arried
out using the examples of the development and organization of automated
troop control systems in the United States. Here use has been made of
materials published in open foreign sources.

2. A. A. Markov, "The Theory of Algorithms," "Trudy Matematicheskogo
Instituta imeni v. A. Steklova" [Works of the Mathematical Institute
imeni V. A. Steklov], Vol h2, Moscow-Leningrad, 1959. P 15.

3. V. A. Trakhtenberg, "Algoritmy i Mashinnoye Resheniye Zadach" [Algo-
rithms and the Machine Solving of Problems}, Moscow, 1957, pp 60-61.

h. At present there are hypotheses on the possibility of life and thought
on a different substratum basis. For example, Yu. V. Orfeyev feels
that "dialectical materialism cannot help but recognize the fundamen-
tal possibility of the existence of life on a nonprotein substratum."
See Yu. V. Orfeyev, "Mental Labor of Man and Machine Thinking,"

II!

dauchnoye Upravleniye Obshchestvom" [Scientific Management of Society],
hbscow, 1970.'p 336.

5. K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 3, p 29.

6. The authors of the present work agree with the viewpoint of a number
of Soviet and foreign Marxist philosophers according to which: "Only
all sciences taken in their dialectical unity and in the closest tie
to social and scientific experimental practice can lead human thought
to the greatest victory, that is, to the creation of not simply a pro-
tein or other similar substance, but a living, thinking and purpose-
fully acting being." ("Leninskaya Teoriya Otrazheniya i Sovremennost'"
[The Leninist Theory of Reflection and Modern Times], Moscow-Sofia,
1969, p 20.)

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
7.

8.

10.

11.

12.

13.

1h.

15.

16.

17.

18.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Filosoi‘iya Yeatcstvoznaniya" [The Philosophy of Natural Science]. No 1,
Moscow. 1966. p 378.

Yu. V. Orreyev, "Heuristic Programing and Certain Aspects of Control

Theogy." ”Nauchnoye Uprswleniye Obshchestvcm.” No 1. Moscow. 1967,
p 27 .

This supposition is based. in particular, on Hadel's theorem. the
essence of which is as follows: within any sufficiently developed

formal system it is possible to formulate a thesis not proven in it
as well as its negation. Here it is possible to broaden the system
of formalism axioms in such a tanner that the sought prooi‘ will be

found. Then at least one supposition not presently proven in the
extended formal system will be discovered without fail. and so forth.

V. M. Glushkov, "Thinking and Cybernetics," ”Dialektika v liaukakh o

Nezhivoy Prirode" (Dialectics in the sciences on Inanilste Nature],
Moscow. 1961», p 517.

N. S. Sutherland. "Hm-Like Machines," ”Chelovecheskiye Sposobnosti
Mashin" [Human Abilities of Machines], Moscow. 1971, p 25.

0. K. Tikhomirov, "The Heuristics of ﬂan and Machine," VOPROSY
FILOSOFII, No ’0. 1968.

B. A. Glinskiy, et al., "Modelirovaniye kak Metod Nauchno Issledovaniys"
[Modeling as a Method of Scientific Research], Moscow. 1 59 P 138.

See B. V. Biryukov and Ye. S. Geller, "Kibernetika v Gmitarnykh
Naukakh" [ Cybernetics in the Kmnities], Moscow. 1973. P 132.

See P. K. Anokhin. "Problems of Modeling Living Processes and the
Physiology of the Brain." "0 Sushchnosti Zhizni" [On the Essence of
Life], Moscow. 19616, p 206.

K. Marx and F. Engels, "Soch.," Vol 21, pp 285-286.

A. N. Kolmogorov, ”Life and 'mought as Particular Forms of the histence
of Matter." "0 Suchchnosti Zhizni," p 51.

B. V. Biryukov and Ye. S. Geller. "Kibernetika v Gumsnitsrnykh Nsukakh.”
p 113.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’M! tWPIMAI. mm ONLY

CW '0: SPECIFIC METHODS FOR WT!” AD OPTIMIZIIO TROOP comm.
PROCSSES

l. The Modeling Method and Its Role in the Automation and Optimisation of
Prcop Control

The theoretical examination and practical solution to the problems arising
in the area of troop control necessitates the use of an entire armsn-
taritmn of scientific methods. hoover, the complex nature of the control
systems and processes necessitates the use of a systems approach to their
stuw and the integrated application of diverse mthods.

The principles of materialistic dialectics hold the fundamental role in the
system of employed methods. ‘lhey demnd the consideration of the diverse
ties and processes in developing troop control system. objective, concrete
and thorough research, the elucidation of the internal and external contra-
dictions. unified analysis and synthesis. informative and formal. quanti-
tative and qualitative approaches in solving the scientific and practical
problems in the sphere of troop control.

hovever, the general methodological principles do not exhaust the cognitive
means needed for solving such a comlicated problem. Within these means

it is essential to include the general scientific methods of imperical and
theoretical cognition. The defined for” of observation, experimentation.
and sociological investigation are organically linked with logical opera-
tions of analysis. synthesis. abstraction. fomlisation, idealisstion.
and so forth. They are applied on the basis of the natural and model,
quantitative and qualitative approaches. The systems approach and systems
analysis of troop control processes are the unique collecting link which
determines the specific method of using all these means.

In its content. systems analysis links the universal method of dialectics
with the methods of special sciences. A systems approach has tvo aspects.
Its essence is expressed, in the first place. in a definite understanding
of the very object precisely as a whole system interacting with other
system. and secondly, in the interpretation of the research process as

a systems one in terms of its logic and the applied means. It in a w

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-*-:e

.. . . , . r
I C. . ' I as. s‘ . II' ' :I'. II..I:III III III.

 

FnR OFF1CIAL USE ONLY

concretizes in terms of the particular tasks the initial concepts of dia-
lectics on the necessity of viewing any object as a unified deve10ping
whole consisting of interrelated parts and interacting with other objects
and with all objective reality. It realizes the dialectical principles
of objective, thorough and concrete research, the unity of analysis and
synthesis, and the unity of all empirical and theoretical means of re-
search. The use of modeling. formalization, the mathematical methods of

Operations research in the process of automating and optimizing troop
control must also be viewed from this standpoint.

The improving of the systems and processes of troop control includes the
solution to two fundamental problems. In the first place, the creation

of the necessary conditions and technical means which ensure high effi-
ciency of control processes, particularly the working out of a decision
and the planning of combat as the most difficult and requiring great out-
lays of time. In the second place, a rise in the efficiency of control
actions, and above all in the soundness and accuracy of the decision taken.

The basic ways for solving these problems lie in the automting of control
processes, the elaboration and application of scientific bases and quanti-
tative and qualitative methods for optimizing control actions. Automa-
tion and optimization are profoundly interrelated processes, for it is
obvious that a rapidly taken but incorrect or ineffective decision is just
as undesirable as a correct, even optimum decision but one not promptly
taken. The solution to either problem both separately and in their unity
is inconceivable without using modeling in its various forms and varieties.

In examining the role of this research approach which is widely used in
modern science and practice, it is essential to elaborate definite views
on at least the following questions:

1) why is it essential to use modeling in the various stages of research
and development of automated control systems and in the different stages
of working out and optimizing combat decisions?

2) What processes should and could become an object of modeling and what
are the possibilities for constructing their models?

3) What types of models can be used in solving automation problems and in
the interests of optimizing control?

The answers to these questions depend upon one or another understanding of
the essence of the method of models. For this reason, it is essential
first of all to clarify the notion in which the concept "model" and "model-

ing" are used.

Recently the greatest attersion has been given to the modeling method both
in the sphere of elaborating its special theory and applications, as well
as on the level of philosophical and methodological analysis. The essence
of modeling, its objective prerequisites, the classification of models and
their gnoseologica! functions have been examined in a number of works.

102
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOK OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The overall evaluation of many views is that a model is an analogue or
imitation of reality, that is, an object (process) similar in certain re-
gards to other objects (processes). The similarity (homomorphism, iso-
morphism or isofunctionalism) of two phenomena is a necessary prerequisite
in order that one of them can become the model of the other. Actual combat
and troop exercises, a topographic map and a portion of the terrain, field
firing and.a system of equations describing this, the brain and the com-
puter possess an objective similarity in certain regards. Under certain
conditions this makes it possible for them to act as models of one another.

However, the similarity of two objects (processes) is not sufficient for

one to actually become the model of the other. On the theoretical and cog-
nitive level, one of two similar systems can be viewed as the model of

the other only when: a) it actually assumes the functions of the replace-
ment of the other system; b) as such it becomes an object of direct investi-
gation or practical operation; c) is used as the principal of cognition

and action (of a third, modeling system)1 as an implement for systematizing
known information on another system and for gaining new information.

For example, combat and troop exercises, regardless of the similarity in
a number of features, do not operate automaticdlly as the original and
the model. The independent processes in the given instance can also be
examined independently of one another. Hovever, exercises become models
with their conscious use as an analogue of a certain type of combat, and
operate as a means for systematising the knOIn information about this and
for gaining new information. On the other hand, real combat (the most
typical instances) can serve as a model in working out the overall concept
and plan of the corresponding exercises.

Considering what has been said, a model can be defined as a systems object
A having a similarity in certain definite regards to the systems object 8
and serving for the principal of cognition (the modeling system) as a
means for fixing known information about object 3 or for obtaining and
transfonming new information about this.

Correspondingly, modeling is the reproduction of one object or process
(the original) using another (a model) or the constructing (finding),
examination and use of models. The subject of modeling "can be concrete
as well as abstract objects, both actually existing systems as well as
systems which are merely to be designed....”2 As a rule, with the aid of
models, complicated, inaccessible or expensive gpjects and processes are
reproduced and studied indirectly. Other objee s which exist or are
specially created and which may be physical or conceptual or aymtolic mqy
act as their models.

Being a scientific method, modeling incorporates a series of sequential
operations: The selection from existing objects or the artificial con-

structing of an object capable of performing the functions of a model;
theoretical investigation or practical testing of the model for the purpose

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"'.‘O D 07.. a s ' '
‘, . . . . .
ll - .I'. ll. lflll III III:

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of disclosing the fullest possible information on its properties; the
transferral of the obtained infomsation from the model to the original
on the basis of certain methodological concepts and logical rules.

The stated understanding of a model and modeling makes it possible to
answer the question of what the necessity of them is in solving the prob-
lems of automating and optimizing troop control. This is determined by
those common functions which models can perform and actually do perform
as a means of scientific research.

At the empirical stage of research, a model (or a model experiment). on
the one hand, serves as one of the sources of the initial factual data and
as a means for the preliminary processing or systematizing of these data,
and on the other, acts as an instrument for the intermediate or indirect
testing of the results of theoretical research, that is, within definite
limits performs a criterial function.

In the theoretical stage, the use of models makes it possible to describe
strictly the examined phenomenon, to depict it in a generalized, schematic
or symbolic form. Here the phenomenon can be explained, having repre-
sented the complex by the simple and the unknown by the known. It is
possible to go on to a quantitative analysis and to forecasting possible
changes in the studied phenomenon with the influence of various factors

on it, as well as determine the necessary changes in the studied phenome-
non, that is, to prepare and ensure its control.

All these general functions are concretized in analyzing the methods for
applying models in the interests of automating troop control. First of

all it is essential to point out that in principle modeling makes it pos-
sible in a more correct, economic and relatively faster manner to solve

the involved problems of studying and working out automated control systems.

Often it is necessary to develop fundamentally new technical systems with
an insufficiently developed theory for the processes to be reproduced and
very limited experience in designing such systems. The newness of the
problem and the presence of undetermined factors also cause definite dif-
ficulties. The use of models to some degree makes it possible to sur-
mount these difficulties, to have a clearer \otiOn of the problem being
solved, to feel out a correct direction of work, to obtain and test
certain data, and at the same time to acquire the necessary experience in
designing, and to generalize the theory for constructing and the function-
ing of control systems.

Since it is a question of developing not only complicated but also very
expensive systems, the search for the best variations of these systems

by the trial and error method in a full-scale experiment is completely
unacceptable. The use of models increases the economy of development for
both individual technical devices as well as an automated system as a
whole. The obtaining and testing of intermediate results using models

10h

,FOR OFFICTAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

make it possible to discard certain unpromiuing directions of work and
to shorten the distance from the idea to its complete realization.

Finally. modeling makes it possible to also respond to the time factor.

The exacerbation of contradictions in the sphere of troop control under

the effect of the present-day military and technical revolution as well

as the necessity of constant and high troop combat readiness necessitate
an acceleration of work in the area of automating control. The rational
utilisation of modeling procedures reduces the time of all the stages in
the research and development of autonmted systems.

On a more specific level. models. in the first place. create the masonry
prerequisites for a thorough analysis of complex systems. For example.

as is clear from foreign sources. the development of automated control
system of the Fieldata. Armydata and other types could not be carried out
as an isolated task. In the given instance it was essential to consider
the goals. structure and mnctions of both the more general. superior
control system as. well as the individual subsystem and elements of the
systems being designed. It is essential to consider a multiplicity of
interrelated factors. Consequently. even the first step of analysis pre-
supposes an integrated and if possible visual notion of the problem and
the system itself. its schematisation and within acceptable limits. also
simplification. The aggregate of the designated operations is achieved
using models which in the form of a description. block diagram or scenario
reproduce the system on various levels and in different aspects. and in-
terrelate the goals of the system. the means of achieving them. the ex-
ternal conditions for the functioning of the system and the expenditures
on its development.

Secondly. models also operate as a direct inplement or instrument of analy-
sis itself. As is known. a model can be developed and detailed. From in- ‘
formative. qualitative and schematicized descriptions of the system as a
whole it is possible to move on to a strictly formal, quantitative analy-
sis of individual subsystems. elements. and processes of the troop control
system. Models in the forms of tables. schedules. control systems and
algorithms open up the way to solving problems using mathematics.

'i‘hirdly. in all the intermediate stages as well as at the end of the en-
tire ASIN research and development process. models are a necessary means
for checking the results of testing of both the individual elements as
well as the entire system as a whole. At the same time. the models (in
the given instance it is a question of physical models) provide additional
data for posing new tasks aimed at the further development and improvement
of the ASUV. The necessity of using models for the purposes of optimizing
control and establishing the decisions taken is caused by these same cir-
cumstances. The basic aim of optimization is to ensure the elaboration of
not only a correct but also the most effective decision or effective plan
making it possible to carry out a combat mission in the best manner. that
.-. within the shortest tim and with the least expenditures of forces

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"':O

.. . . .. . .
I 0.. ' s s. s- . t. i-tl’. it...:i.' Oi. Ott.-

'-I|' Iii-'F'i’lM. l W. ONLY

and means. For this it in essential. on the one hand. to evaluate the
variations of the decisions urine mathematical methods. and on the other.
when sensible ‘n ruh'nnv irrn to - preliminary practical test.

however. the complexitv of n norhnt situation and the missions to be car-
ried out. er un" u: thy n-“ "it. of onuy characteristics of combat pre-
vent the direct application of quantitative methods. The need arises for
such anticipating opera'ionu as the schematization of the object. a precise
and if possible visual graphic or mathematical logic depiction of it. the
formalization of the very problem. the defining of the criterion of ef-
fectiveness. the parameters influencing this criterion. the basic con-
straints. and so forth. All of this requires the constructing and examina-
tion of the corresponding models of combat.

it is desirable to test the basic variations of the decision and the plan
by practice. "nuever, their tamperinon and selection in the course of com-
bat itself are virtually impossible. This circumstance also forces one to
follow the path of modeling and to carry out the corresponding forms of a
model experiment. But what objects (processes) should be modeled in solv-
ing the problems of automating and optimizing troop control and what are
the possibilities for constructing their models?

The very aim of automation which is to increase the efficiency of troop
control by having technical devices carry out the most labor intensive
operations in the control precess which require great time expenditures
indicates the basic objects of modeling. These are the operations of the
control process. that is. the specific and primarily mental actions. of
people (commanders. officers or control bodies) related to the cognition
and reflection of the combat situation. the elaborating of a decision and
the planning of combat. Ultimately in solving this problem. the organs
of perception and the brain. the organs of speech and human hands in one
way or another become the objects of the modeling.

Since among the control cperations the most important are the working out
and optimizing of a decision which presuppose an evaluation of the situa-
tion and determining the methods or action in it. to this degree (both
within the line of automation and independently of it). the most important
objects of modeling are the combat situation. the course of combat. and
the processes related to their preparation. execution and support.

If it is a question of just scientific research on the designated objects
or an understanding of the general. essential or natural in them. then
their relationship with the corresponding models appears as follows. The
object of modeling is the already existing reality or the original proto-
type; the model is an analogue secondary in relationship to it. a mental
or material depiction. or a reproduction of the prototype for the purpose
of understanding certain unknown characteristics of it.

But when research is combined with creativity. with the designing of new
objects and the reproduction of processes or with the planning of own

106
ton orncm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00860R000100010006-3
i‘Oli OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

actions, then the relationship of "original-model" becomes more complex.
Not only existing but also future reality is the object of modeling. and
this, in ourhopinion. could be defined as the original teleoty'pe (from

the Greek "teleos"--result. conclusion or aim) which embodies the goal of
creative activity (the designed technical device or the planned course of
combat). In relation to such an object. the model operates as the proto-

type making it possible to forecast its characteristics, to optimise them
or control them.

However the primacy of such models in relationship to the original is a
relative one. A model is an intermediary between two types of originals.
In reproducing the most essential or typical features of a certain class
of known phenomena (prototypes). it anticipates the creation of a certain
new variety of this class of phenasena (the teleotype). Here the model
which depicts the prototype and the model which is the prototype of th¢
teleotype can not only coincide but also differ. Most often the inter-
medicry is the series of models which in a varying way combine the features

of the depicted and designed phenomena. Moreover. through a series of
transformations they approach the original teleotype and in individual in-
stances change into it as .' n the working model of the prototype original.

The prototype original has the primary determining influence on the forma-
tion of the model. It acts as its obJectiwe prerequisite. A model should
first of all embothr information on the previously existing (presently ex-
isting) objects and processes. and serve as a means for broadening know-
ledge about them. Only on this basis can the model also embody the traits
of the original teleotype. The latter has a formative influence on the
model. as a goal to which the model should strive. and as an image of de-
sired future reality.

In the process of automating troop control. the necessity arises of the
multistage modeling of future technical devices which should carry out
certain operations of the control cycle. For this it is essential first
of all to consider and embody in the models the traits of real control
operations and the activities of people carrying out the designated opera-
tions. Among the basic operations of the control cycle one could put:

1) ﬁne collection and seeking out of initial and monitoring information
on the elements of a combat situation and the processes of its change;

2) The transforming of the information into a form suitable for transds-
sion and receiving over coununications channels, for its storage and use;

3) Transmission. receiving, storage and the putting out of initial, com-
mand and control information on the changes in the combat situation;

h) The visual display of this information in a written. graphic. physical
or symbolic form;

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.u...

.. . . _ . .. . .
I O. . s a... s . |.. '-:I'. .3.":.tl 3H '0.-

FUN lH-‘l’HZIAI. llSl-J ONLY

5) Analysis. generalization nnd evaluation of the information (an evalua-
tion of the situation) using qualitative and quantitative methods;

6) The Cor.ulatinu cl u raan of action. hypothetical variations of actions
in the existing situation. und their visual display;

7) Analysis and compari:)n of these variations. the forecasting of their
efficiency. and the carrying out of operational and tactical calculation;

8) The taking of the final decision and the detailed planning of combat;

9) The execution of control actions, the supervision of their fulfillment.
and the correcting of the taken decision and plan of action.

what are the possibilities for modeling such processes? Analysis indicates
that in terms ui tue chazactcr and Ucrtcc of complexity. these processes
can be divided at least into three groups.

The processes of the first group do not have a specifically mental charac-
ter. They are subordinate to physical lava which are common to any infor-
mational process. For example. these are the receiving and collecting of
information. the receiving and transmitting of it over commuucstions chan-
nels. and in part its transformation in the form of coding. decoding and

a visual display in a sign or symbolic form. A maJority of these processes
can be modeled and is technically embodied in the work of the correspoad-
ing devices. including: Information sources. photographic and movie equip-
ment. means of communications. coding. cOpying and display systems.

The third group of processes includes thinking operations which express
mainly a formal logical. machine-like aspect of it. These include: Com-
parison. generalization. the transformation of information according to
strictly determined fonmal rules; the solving of logical and computational
problems. operational-tactical calculations needed for evaluating the sit-
uation and decisiontahing. The models of such operations are created in
the form of algorithms and programs for solving the corresponding problems.
and are technically embodied in the work of universal computers using these
programs. The modeling of formolrgical operations is being developed and
is becoming more and more complete and diverse along with the improving of
computers. machine languages and the programming equipment and methods.

The third group of processes is related to the area of the higher abilities
of thought. to its heuristic and creative sets. These processes are de-
termined by the laws of not Just logic but also psychology of thought and
the lava of heuristics. Among these processes are: The very evaluation
of the situation. the forming of the plan of actions. the taking of the
decision and the planning of actions. and the correcting of the taken de-
cision in the course of combat. These are inseparably linhed with con-
ceptual perception of reality. to the work of memory and imagination. to
intuition and to constructive-creative. productive thinking. The possi-
bilities of modeling such processes also determine the possibilities

108
Iron 01mm. 05: ostr

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(degree or completeness) of automating control activities. At the same
time, the modeling of precisely those processes is of particular interest
for philosophy. since it touches upon the question of the essence and
functions of conscience.

The final solution to the problem of creating working models for the higher
functions of conscience is possible only in the course of attempts to solve
it. and in the process of discovering the laws for the functioning of the
brain and the constructing of ever more complex models of it. The com-
plexity of the full modeling of the higher functions of conscience requires
the construction of their partial models and the reproduction, for example,
of the heuristic abilities of thinking and the process of creativity in its
various manifestations. Such models are being created and it is even pos-
sible to speak of certain advances on this level.

For example, in automating certain processes of control activity, the
necessity arises of modeling the image perception of information and the
identification of images. Only under this condition can a machine isolate
information directly from the tables or diagrams proposed to it or from
written and oral speech. As it has been learned, it is not only diffi-
cult but in a number of instances still impossible to teach a machine to
recognize an object from different distances and aspects, to distinguish
one printed or handwritten sign from another, or to determine the meaning
of a word placed in differing context. Even here the heuristic, creative
possibilities of thought are apparent. Nevertheless the models for the
partial solution to such problems at present have been created and the
possibilities of improving them are gradually becoming apparent.

Image recognition and many other mental problems are determined by the
specific features of the human memory. For example, the retrieval and
reproduction of required information by ordinary computer programs are

done by the method of running through all the memory cells until the needed
information is retrieved. At the same time, man does this work differently.
more economically, considering the semantic relationships between the ele-
ments of knowledge, and utilizing the associations of'perception and heuris-
tic methods for retrieving the information.

Ultimately both image perception and memory are aspects of a single process
of creative thought. In line with the necessity of automating the labor
intensive preliminary work of evaluating the situation and working out a
decision, the task has been raised of modeling the process of situation
evaluation. forecasting the changes in the situation, working out varia-
tions of decisions, their comparison and the determining of the optimum.
The processes of creativity and the heuristic search for the best solu-
tion in a problem situation are now the subject of study of both
gnoseology, psychology. logic and cybernetics. A promising area of re-
search has appeared: heuristics and heuristic programming. Game theory
methods. the methods of the theory of decision taking and deductive
heuristics are being worked out and employed for research and modeling
creative thinking.

109
FOR OFFICIAL UGE ONLY
D 0:: 1 ' a a‘o‘ a’ ' II" - '." ' '
V . . . _.. . II. |.l|| I” III.-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In line with automation and independently of it (since the necessity
arises of optimizing decisions taken by the ordinary method), important
objects of modeling are:

l) The combat situation and the change in it (the course of combat);

2) The ideas and plans of the sides underlying the existing combat situ-
ation and its possible future changes.

Their models, in embodying the typical traits of combat or an operation
at the present historical stage of their development and the specific
characteristics of the existing combat situation (the prototype original),
make it possible to look ahead, to evaluate and in a certain sense deter-
mine the possible course of future combat (the teleotype original).

Since it is a question of modeling material and physical processes, this
can be more diverse and less complicated to carry out at least in its
individual varieties. Certain forms for the models of these processes
were used at the dawn of the development of military art. Since the
conscious actions of people and the control activities of the enemies are
organically incorporated in these processes, their correct and sufficient-
ly complete embodiment in the technical models encounters the same diffi-
culties as in modeling mental control activity itself.

Hhat types of models could be used in solving the problems of automation
and in the interests of optimizing control? For answering this question
it is essential to describe the basic types of models used in scientific
research and to classify them.

As is known, the most important functions of models are related to the
obtaining and use of information. For this reason, as the basis of
classification it is possible to propose, in the first place, the dif-
ference in the content and nature of information on the original, and
secondly. the diversity of forms in which this information is represented
in the model.

The first basis makes it possible to establish primarily the substrative,
structural and functional models. Substrative models must reproduce the
material of the original, and provide knowledge on its particular features
and properties. Thus, the plasma obtained under laboratory conditions
can serve as a model in studying the properties of stellar matter. how-
ever, in a pure form this type of model is rarely used. It least dis-
closes the specific festures of the modeling method. Structural models
reproduce not the material of the original but rather its structure.
Typical examples of structural models are diverse mockups, topographic
maps, diagrams, and so forth. They can be made from any material or con-
structed on paper, but without fail they should fix the inner or external
form of the original. and the aggregate of relationships between its ele-
ment. A functional model should reproduce the actions or behavior of the
original, that is, its functions. Thus, while models of the first and

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

second types can be static. the latter must be working models (for example,
computer-realized models).

Modeling practices indicate that the designated types of models. as a
rule, are employed in various combinations. This makes it possible to
distinguish between: a) Models of a unidimensional analogy, when the
substratu. structure or functions of the original are reproduced indi-
vidually; b) models of a two-dimensional analog making it possible to
create substrative-structural. substrative-functional or structural-
mnctional models; c) models of multidimensional or complete analog which

reproduce simultaneously both the substratu. the structure and functions
with more or less completeness and detail.

A classification by form in which the information of the original is em-
bodied in a model presupposes two basic types of models: physical and

mental or symbolic. These two trunks produce not only a multiplicity of
branches but also show a tendency toward a certain intertwining or inter-

penetration. This is observed particularly clearly in modeling using
universal computers.

Physical models are divided into natural models which are true. natural
obJects and processes performing the role 'of models because they operate
as typical examples of a certain class of phenomena; seminatural models
which combine natural and artificially created elements, for example.
experimental troop exercises. research military games. and so forth);
artificial. technical models represented by physically and geometrically
similar devices. by electric equivalent circuits and by analogue and
digital computers.

Conceptual or symbolic models include two basic varieties: the descrip-
tive logical models which are an aggregate of visual ideas. concepts and
Judgments from which a generalized. schematic or hypothetical i-ge of
the studied obJect is formed (the given image can be obJectified in the
form of a description. drawing, diagram, map and so forth) and the anthe-
matical logical models which are a further development of the descriptive
logical ones. These, as a rule, are formular dependences. systems of
equations. and diagrams reflecting not only the qualitative but also the
quantitative aspect of the examined processes. These would include also
the algorithms and programs by which the physical and conceptual processes
are reproduced on conputers.

Cybernetics has given rise to and actively uses a special form of model-
ing. the cybernetic models which embody certain traits of the above-
mcntioned types of models. A general description of cybernetic modeling
has been given in the works of the founders of cybernetics Ii. Hiener and
U. R. Ashby. It has also been developed in the works of the Soviet
scientists V. M. Glushkov, A. I. Berg. I. B. Novih and others.

111
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3

.. . . _ . . -
I O. . ‘ I 0. 3° . II‘ ' 3". .II..|.III III I...

 

.ns anTCIAL ynn nNLY

When cybernetic nodernu is established as a particular form, then in

some instances the accent in put on the nature of the reproduced processes.
and in others, on the "hr. 1 LHUC ul unleijng. Obviously, in the given
instance it is nnnenhiui to nonuidcr both these aspects equally. Cyber-
netic modeling is employed primarily for reproducing "large systems," and
particularly control y‘:y--..':' .‘iti. L’n: . 'gicul attributes for them: Com-
plexity, dynamicneus, reLative stability, purporcfulnesa of functioning,
and the presence of an information process, direct links and feedback be-
tween the subsystems.

At the same time, cybernetic modeling is a special method for reproducing
the above-named systems. Cybernetics as far as is possible abstracts it-
self from the substratum of the modeling systems and within the limits

of the necessary and possible reproduces their structure, but pays basic
attention to the functions, in endeavoring to reproduce in the models the
behavior of the system ioutputs) depending upon the various effects on

it (inputs). Predominantly a functional approach is one of the specific
characteristics of cybernetic modeling.

Cybernetics use: various types of physical and conceptual, symbolic model-
ing, but the specific features of its approach are most of all apparenc

in the creating of artificial, technical models, that is, cybernetic de-
vices, and particularly electronic computers by which the functions of
living or social systems are reproduced.

Finally, cybernetic modeling is mainly information modeling which includes
a strict description of the studied systems, the construction of algo-
rithms and programs, and the processing of information on the studied
objects (processes) using these programs and a computer. In processing
information on the original using the laws of its functioning, a comp
puter within certain limits is likened to the original, and in informa-
tional terms reproduces its functions and the results of functioning.

A general description of cybernetic modeling makes it possible to assert
that precisely the given form of modeling should play the decisive role
in the automation and optimization of troop control. In actuality, it
is impossible and even absurd to copy the physical substratum of the
human brain and sense organs which carry out control actions. There is
also no need to have an obligatory structural similarity of the technical
devices to the organs of the human body or the staff departments. 0f
significance primarily is the reproduction of control functions and
various operations related to information processing; the creation of
technical devices capable of achieving in the process of functioning the
same results as could be achieved by a man solving control problems.

Here. naturally, a major role is played by modeling in its information
form. Its essence is that the individual functions of people engaged

in a control system are described in ever greater detail, they are sub-
Jected to formalization, they are broken down into their component ele-
ments, into the elemants of these elements and so forth, that is, they

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWICIAL USE ONLY

are transformed into an algorithm. into a program of consecutive actions.
These programs also form the ”soul" of a cybernetic device and a universal
computer. The operation of a cosputer using such a program represents

the information modeling of the corresponding hulan functions. In this
manner the automation of the latter is carried out.

The automation of troop control is a complicated and many-sided process.
In its various stages all or any of the above-mentioned varieties of

modeling will be employed. within systems analysis this notion operates
en a cospulsory demand.

In modern literature it has been noted that the elaboration of complicated
systems assumes:

l) The determining of the goals which should be achieved by the given
system and which determine the sense of its functioning;

2) The defining of alternatives (variations) by which the proposed goals
can be attained;

3) The determining of the criterion by which the alternative variations
are compared and one of tha is selected;

In) The determining of the resources (means and expenditures) necessary
for creating and using one or another variation of the system;

5) The constructing of a model vhich schematically depicts the given
system which links the goals, the alternatives and the resources together.

The desiylated elements are the initial reference points in systems analy-
sis. Prom the list of that it can be seen that modeling acts as a neces-
sary and mndamental operation. If the essence of this operation is
brought out more widely and in greater detail. it can be seen that actually
it consists of a umber of operations: the consistent construction of

the mdels with the differing volume of an intonation content.

In the process of solving the problems of auto-ation, it is essential first
of all to construct an initial conceptual model, that is, to elucidate

and generalize the existing scientific notions on such systems. and to
elaborate a viewpoint on their essence, on the laws of their construction
and functioning. and on the possible ways for their elaboration and use.

Then the necessity arises for models of a higher level and for a schemati-
cized information which characterizes the goals and means. the structure
and functions of u broader, more complicated system. Such a model makes

it possible to correctly determine the place and role in it of the investi-
gated and planned system, and to express its goals and functions more ac-
curately.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. .:: I s » a . ' I. ’ '
I as. a. . II. I .‘I'. 0|. itlIO Ill Old;

 

FOR OFFICIAL (IF-I2 "NIX

The next step is the constructing of middle-level models which would re-
flect the alternative varintions of the very examined system and its
basic general characteristics (efficiency. cost. dynanicness. reliability.
and so forth). On this level it is inportant to work out the parametric
models which determine the hssic indicators of the system and which direct
the collection and processing of the necessary factual data.

Finally. the transition to more concrete and detailed research requires
the constructing of inferior-level subnodels which reproduce the indi-
vidual subsystem and elements. their structures and mnctions. their
place and role in the desimed system.

If one encompasses not only the theoretical but also the empirical level
and considers all the stages in the development of auto-ted control sys-
tems. then the role and diversity of the employed models becomes even
more amazing. In foreign sources. four basic stages have been established
in the elaboration of any A80: Scientific research in a broad and special
area. the designing of the system. its constructing. and. finally. pro-
duction. testing and adjustment of the system. All the known types of
models are employed in the stage of wide area scientific research. The
main thing here is a precise positing of the problems. an elucidation of
the conditions and the ways for solving them. Understandably. this re-
quires first of all a constructing and analysis of conceptual and sym-
bolic models. here not onLy the existing scientific information on the
modeled object is employed. but also intuitive guesses. analogies and
hypotheses. 'ihe constructing of such models shes it pouible to clariiy
and systematise the information on the object. to disclose gaps in the
knowledge about it and to a certain degree fill then. and at the same
time. to recognise the degree of complexity of the problem and the pos-
sible ways for solving it.

The elaboration and detailing of these models me it possible to move
on to a mathematical logical modeling of individual elements and opera-
tions. In the stage of special scientific research. and particularly in
the stage of desiyling a specific system. nthematical logical modeling
assumes decisive significance. A strict mthenatical description of the
individual processes in the form of syst-s of equations, matrices and
schedules makes it possible to clarify and optimize the indicators of
both the individual assemblies and processes as well as the device or

system as a whole. At the same tires. in the designing stage physical
modeling is also used in addition to the creation and testing of physi-

cally similar. physically analogous and particularly cybernetic models
realized on universal computers.

In the stage of constructiw automatic devices. physical, technical and
particularly cybernetic modeling assunes the basic weight. Here begins
the uterial embodiment of the design. laturally. some of its ideas
which my seem correct on the level of theoretical development may be
in conflict with practice and for this reason require checking out and

11’:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP32-00850R000100010008-3
mu «wvwm. use «mm

correction. The modeling on analogue and digital computers makes it pos-
sible to clarify many specifications. and to test out intermediate re-
sults without waiting for the completion of construction. It is essen-
tial to point out one particular feature of a universal computer. The
problem is that within its intrinsic structure it is possible to create
and test an information model of any other technical device. including
another computer. Such a possibility is of exceptional significance
since in the process of automation the crucial role is played by the

elaboration of different specialised informational. logical and compu-
tational devices.

Finally. in the stage of production. testing and adJustment. the techni-
cal embodiment of the design in life occurs. The modeling process ends
with the creation of a technically working model. an example of the de-
signed device. The testing and adjustment of the example in turn are
related to the use of certain varieties of plwsical modeling. For example.
the model can replace an obJect with which the developed sample directly
interacts or a system of which it is a part as a component element. and
it may also replace the mediu and conditions in which it functions.

Such a model or semimodel experiment with a sample can be carried out in
the form of stand testing, testing on analogue and digital computers. and.
finally. in the form of military games and military exercises through
which combat and the real conditions for the functioning of the created
devices are modeled.

In solving the problem of optimizing control. the some varieties of
models are employed, but in specific forms and in an unique sequence.

The constructing of a conceptual model (a model concept) of a combat
situation or the course of combat is the start of optimizing a combat
decision and its initial condition. In the early stages of the develop-
ment of military art. the constructing of such conceptual models and
their playing out in one's mind was generally the sole means for deter-
mining the suitable method of action. however. with the development of
military art. the use of such models with intuitive evaluations of pos-
sibilities became insufficient. For this reason more coaplex forms arose
for modeling combat as well as special procedures for optimizing decisions.

0n the basis of the primary model concept. it is possible to construct a
symbolic or graphic model of the existing sitution and a plan of actions
in it. In the 18th and 19th centuries. such models were constructed in
the form of the disposition of the engagement. Later on these were re-
placed by a working map with the situation and variation of decision.
a diagram or schedule with the accompanying descriptions. These made
it possible for an experienced «under or staff to make a quantitative
and qualitative evaluation of the decision variation and when necessary
to correct it. However. an evaluation of a decision variation on the
basis of a symbolic or graphic model was incomplete and to a very limited
degree permitted the use of mathematics. For this reason. the staffs
rcsorted, on the one hand. to military games. and on the other, to
special mathematical logical models making it possible to widely use the
mathematical methods of operations research.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Game models are the physical, seminatursl reproduction of combat. an
operation or any conflict situation generally. These include: troop
exercises and maneuvers, headquarters exercises, and military games on
maps. Troop exercises and maneuvers are too complex and cumbersome a
method for optimizing decisions and planning in the course of combat.

In this regard, headquarters exercises and particularly military games
on maps possess significantly greater opportunities under the conditions
of organising them on a modern scientific and technical basis.

In literature it is possible to encounter many examples of using mili-
tary games on maps precisely for the purpose of optimizing decisions
and planning combat. Mar SU G. K. Zhukov described a military strategic
game conducted for these purposes at the end of l9h0, and as a whole
highly praised the role of military games in raising the operational-
strategic level of the superior command.3 In the 0.8. military litera-
ture examples are given of the strategic games held in the autumn of
1951 by Japan for the purpose of working out the plan for the surprise
attack on Pearl Harbor. The effectiveness of these games was affirmed
by the subsequent course of action.“

Along with the game modeling of the course of combat for the purposes of
Optimizing decisions and planning, ever greater significance is being as-
sumed by the constructing and analysis of mathematical logical models
using operations research methods. As was already pointed out, a graphic
or symbolic model of a combat situation creates the necessary prerequi-
sites for operational and tactical calculations. However. for a more com-
plete and thorough application of mathematics, different models are needed
which schematically depict certain traits of the most characteristic situ-
ations which are repeated in different combat. For example, in many in-
stances it is essential to solve the problem of locating and detecting
the enemy, the allocating of targets among weapons. the attacking of the
enemy in a certain order and sequence, the choice of a method of action
considering the enemy's counteractions, and so forth. The commonness and
similarity of such situations and tasks make it possible to construct
abstract standard models which reproduce entire classes of events. and to
work out the mathematical apparatus corresponding to these models. In
Soxiet and foreign literature, several score such models have been de-
scribed and the mathematical methods of their analysis given.

Among the mathematical logical models, one must isolate two varieties which
are of fundamental difference: analytical and stochastic models. The for-
mer are mathematical descriptions of reality (systems of equations. matrices
and so forth) which are examined by theoretical analysis and the necessary
calculations. The latter are a logical copy of game models. These are
logical descriptions of studied situations with their subsequent playing
through using the method of statistical testing. Both varieties of models
complement one another and are often employed in different combinations.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: ‘l’hursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The improving of seminatural game modeling, on the one hand. and the
mathemtical logical of the mentioned varieties. on the other. makes it
possible t'o approach n solution to the problem of the complete modeling
of combat on electronic computers. The comuters open up the way to con-
structing and examining analytical models of high complexity. with them
it is possible to realise statistical models which rather completely re-
flect reality, and here to play through each of the variations of a de-
cision in as any times as is needed for obtaining reliable statistical
estimates. Finally, the comuters open up the w to an organic synthe-
sis of analytical and stochastic modeling, to reproducing combat in its
dynamics. _and this. in turn, makes it possible to prepare the quantita-
tive grounds for taking a decision in a time acceptable under the condi-
tions of modern high-speed combat.

Thus, the basic stages in the developent and use of models in the inter-
ests of optimizing a decision and automating this process are: The form-
ing of intuitive model cencepts on a combat situation and its changes;
the constructing and analysis of forumlized graphic or symbolic models;
the carrying out on their basis of seminatural, game and special mathe-
matical logical models; on the basis of synthesizing these procedures.
the elaboration of programs for modeling combat in its dynamics using a
computer.

In any modeling it is important to solve the question of the advisable
comleteness of the model. the level of its complexity, and the degree of
its conformity to the original. M trends can be observed in the solv-
ing of such a coqlicated question. One is in the desire to bring the
model as close as possible to reality. to consider in it as many factors
as possible which characterize the process. ﬂouever, this can lead to
undesirable results, such as: the main patterns are lost behind the
random form of their manifestation; the approximateness or probability
nature of the estimtes of many factors lead to an ambiguity of the over-
all result. The other trend is in the maxim simplification of the model.
and this facilitates the application of the mathematical apparatus to it
and the obtaining of sufficiently definite conclusions. But at times this
path leads to negative phenomena such as the accepted assumptions on a
certain level begin to distort the very essence of the examined phenome-
non or the nature of the patterns operating in it. For this reason the

choice of the necessary degree of approximation of the phenomenon and
the advisable complexity of a model requires a concrete approach, special

methodological analysis and certain experience in solving such problems.

The development of modern form of modeling and the ever fuller use of
mathematical methods for describing the crucial aspects and characteris-
tics of examined phenomena is impossible without their formalization. In
essence. such a necessary stage of any modeling has the constructing of
conceptual. symbolic or graphic Inodels of an object already represents
the process and result of formalization. In this regard there must be
more profound analysis of the method of formalization generally. and

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. . .. . . _ . .
O. . z a a... a. . II: : :I'. H. ﬂit” H0 000.-

FOR nFFIClM. "SF. ONLY

particular attention paid to the potential and real possibilities of

formalizing the processes of armed combat and the controlling activities
of commanders.

2. The Necessity and Possibility of Mathematical Logical Formalization
of the Troop Control :rccuss

The optimization and full automation of a control process make it possible
to bring the troop control system into accord with the increased demands
upon the speed and accuracy of its functioning. At present a fundamental
rise in the productivity of the command labor of a commander and staff of-
ficers is being carried out precisely on a basis of the extensive use of
modern technical devices and mathematical methods. However neither the
optimization nor the automation of control processes is possible outside
their mathematical logical formalization. The opportunities of optimiza-
tion and automation are determined by the broad use of mathematical logi-
cal methods and by the degree of formalization in the corresponding areas.
The questions of the mathematical logical formalization and the use of
mathematical logical methods for describing the processes of armed combat
and troop control have been widely taken up in our military theoretical
literature.5

What has caused such a broad penetration of mathematical logical methods

into the sphere of troop control? what is the tie between automating the
control process and its mathematical logical formalization?

Under present-day conditions, one of the most essential features of troop
control is the circulation of an enormous flow of information in the sys-
tem. and this flow is constantly rising because of the increase in the
scope of the operations conducted, the rise in the pace of armed combat
and the use of weapons of mass destruction. At the same time, under the
conditions of the extreme high speed of combat, the process of the rapid
aging of information occurs. Hence the need arises of a rational organi-
zation for the flows of information, for reducing the time spent on its
collection. receiving, transmission, display and processing, an increase
in the accuracy of processing, the excluding of possible errors as'a con—
sequence of random or organized interference, and so forth.

These demands can be formulated more precisely as problems of synthesiz-
ing the systems of information processing, coding and decoding, the pro-
viding of the greatest throughput capacity of the communications channels,
the finding of an optimum number of these channels for each specific con-
trol system. and finally, providing the necessary resistance to Jamming

in the system. The correct solution to the designated problems is pos-
sible only on the basis of the extensive use of quantitative methods

which have been worked within information theory and are expressed in a
whole series of mathematical concepts and strictly proven theorems. Their
practical use understands a simultaneous formalization of the descriptive

relations of the corresponding area, or more accurately the very procecs

118
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of applying these methods expresses one of the possible forms of mathe-
matical logical formalization.

However. the use of mathematical methods for the purpose of finding the
optimum values for parameters of data collection. processing and trans-
mission systems is far from limited to the area of their use in the troop
control process. The central operation of control generally and the

basis of troop control. in particular. is the taking of a decision. while
an optimum choice. the prompt transmission and efficient recoding of in-
formation play an important role in increasing the accuracy and reducing
the time of the complete control cycle. of even greater significance is
the use of this information for the purpose of optimizing the very deci-
sion to be taken by the «under. It is always desirable that the com-

mander's decision be an optimum one in relation to the specific conditions
and requirements of the combat situation.

In what manner can one be convinced that a decision taken is an optimum
one? Certainly in the same situation different decis‘ons could be formu-
lated and the person who has made them is confident that precisely his
variation is the optimum one. Moreover. each person points to definite
reasons for the choice made and gives the corresponding line of argument
on its behalf.

Certainly. under the conditions of the sharp complicating of the troop
control process. the greater responsibility for the decision taken and
the shortening of time for making it. such traditional bases as collec-
tive and personal experience. intuition. and logical arguents. while
being essential as before. are no longer sufficient. In this situation.
along with a qualitative evaluation of the possible plans of action.
quantitative estimates also assume decisive significance. Although at-
tempts at obtaining quantitative estimates for basing a decision occurred
in the past. however the truly broad and sufficiently effective use of
mathematical logical methods for this purpose have been related to the
present-day revolution in military affairs. This has been brought about
by the development of military science as a whole. by the high level of
elaboration for the corresponding formal apparatus. and by the objective
demands of troop control practice. At present one clearly feels the very
close tie between control. Optimization and automtion. on the one hand.
and mathematical logical formalization. on the other. In a certain sense
the aim of control consists in optimizing the process. At the same time.
optimization can be carried out only by a quantitative comparison of dif-
ferent control variations. and this. in turn. requires the most complete
formalization possible. Certainly for solving the problem by quantita-
tive methods, it: conditions mat be expressed in the language of mathe-
matics. that is. formalized.

Thus. the problems of optimizing the data processing and decision taking
processes determine the broad use of formal mathematical logical methods.

11‘?
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
... -- . . . . - . . .
' .0 I O. . ' s as s. . H! ‘ :I'. II. It... It. Ill.

 

FOR nrrn'w. ”SF. ONLY

Mathematical logical formalization is closely tied not only to optimiza-
tion, but also the automation of control.

Understandably. definite difficulties of a theoretical. technical and
practical nature arise on H~e path of automation the individual elements
of troop control and pa't‘cularly full automation. However, with other
conditions being equal. it is possible to automate only those control
operations which at the given moment permit formalization and can be
described by logical and mathematical means. The functioning of any
automated control system requires a definite mathematical logical de-
scription. algorithm and program, that is. a system of formal rules the
fulfillment of which makes it possible to solve the problem without eluci-
dating its content. For this reason. the possibilities of automating the
troop control process nt each specific stage are determined ultimately by
the successor in the fornal‘ra‘inn of one or another of its component
parts. It can be said that the degree and depth of automating control

are directly determined by the development level of the mathematical de-
scription of the processes of armed combat. At the same time. the tendency
toward formalization has been substantially strengthened precisely be-
cause of the development of automation which creates the prerequisites

for the extensive use of mathematical methods for solving control prob-
lems, it presupposes their development and is based on them.

All of this points to the necessity of introducing mathematical logical
methods into the theory and practice of the troop control process for the
purpose of its optimisation and automation. As for the possibility of
such an introduction. its realization requires the presence of a number
of conditions.

widely known are the remarkable words of K. Marx that science will reach
perfection when it succeeds in using mathematics. At the same time.
science can use mathematics only when it reaches a certain perfection.
when it penetrates deeply into its own subject, when it isolates and fixes
the fundamental relationships and ties of the studied phenomena. and cre-
ates a sufficiently clear and developed conceptual apparatus.

In linking the possibility of the mathematization with the approximation
of the corresponding science to simple. uniform elements of matter. V. I.
Lenin. for example. pointed out: "The unity of nature is disclosed in
the 'striking analogy' of differential equations...” and further: "'the
uniformity of matter' is not a postulate but rather the result of the
experience and development of science and the 'uniformity of the object
of physics' this is the condition for the applicability of measurements
and mathematical calculations 3"

Accuracy and the greatest possible uniformity of definitions. the aggre-
gate of which makes it possible with sufficient fullness to express the
content of concepts and terms. are indispensable conditions for mathemati-
cal processing.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Naturally.” writes the German Marxist philosopher 0. Klaus on this ques-
tion. "nthematics can be applied in a certain area of science only in the
instance that the posings of the problems and the systems of concepts in
this area of science have been formulated so clearly as to allow mathemati-
cal processing. A representative of a specific science or a philosopher
who has still a very hazy notion of one or another subject and who clearly
does not know what he. in essence. wants to say should not hope that this
still undigested product of his thinking could be treated by the precise
instrument of mathematics. And of course. he should not criticise mathe-
matics for the fact that in the given instance it cannot help him."7

Consequently. the use ofmathematical logical methods in studying the
sphere of troop control is possible in the instance when this sphere it-
self has been sufficiently well studied and defined in the concepts and
tens of the military science stuchving it.

Soviet military science ever more profoundly and completely is examining
the patterns of the processes of armed combat generally and troop control.
in particular. At present a nusber of laws of military science and prin-
ciples of military art have been formulated. Essential ties have been
disclosed between the course and outcome of a war and the economic. poli-
tical. moral and other factors. Attempts have been made to consider
chance in war. The basic provisions have been worked out for the theory
for troop control. A profound infomtive analysis. strictness and ac-
curacy in operational-tactical descriptions. and the development of the
corresponding conceptual apparatus within the theory of control and mili-
tary cybernetics make it possible to build that informational foundation
which is the basis for the use of mathematical logical methods.

Another inortant condition which determines the possibility of a mathe-
matical description of the processes of armed combat and troop control is
the presence of a corresponding forml apparatus which is capable of de-
picting the studied descriptive ties in an adequate mathemtical form.

The rapid development and definite advances in social sciences generally
and the various areas of military science and the theory of troop control
in particular have placed new demands on the mathematical disciplines,
and have demanded the improvement of the old formal apparatus and the cre-
ation of a new one capable of most fully reflecting the content and spe-
cifics of the corresponding areas in a nthemtical logical form.

However. regardless of certain advances in the area of mathematization,
even now there are frequent argments against the broad and systematic

use of mathematical logical methods in the sciences which study the higher
form or the movement of matter. Doubts are voiced particularly often on
the possibility of a mathematical logical formalization of processes occur-
ring in the social sphere (this includes the area of troop control).

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
»-':e I e:' - - -' ~' ' '
. . a. .. . H: -:s-. u; Iron In Ill.

 

F0“ ”FFICIAL USE ONLY

here it is ordinarily pointed out that the essence of mathematical logical
formalization consists in an abstraction from the content and qualitative
specifics of the studixd aubjccts and phenomena. Supposedly only quanti-
tative relationships and spatial forms of subjects, phenomena and proces-
ses can be studied in an abstract mathematical logical form, while their
essence remains undisclosed. In this regard, one must particularly point
out the fact that the nxndamental gnoseological possibilities of mathemati-
cal logical formalization are determined by such underlying postulates of
dialectical materialism as the thesis of the unity of the world, the unity
of quantity and quality. form and content, phenomenon and essence, and
abstract and concrete.

The broadening of the possibilities of a mathematical logical description,
and consequently, the automating of the troop control process, as was al-
ready pointed out, is most closely tied to the extending of the boundaries
of mathematics itself and mathematical logic, and abOVe all, to a change
in the very subject of mathematics.

Fundamental for an understanding of the essence of mathematics is the
classical of its subject given at one time by P. Engels. "Pure mathe-
matics," wrote Engels, "has as its object the spatial forms and quanti-
tative relationships of the real world...."8

however, the rapid development of mathematics over the last century makes
it possible at present to say that its subject is not only-the spatial
forms and quantitative relationships, but also similar relationships,
forms and structures taken in abstraction from their content. An analy—
sis of the process of the enrichment of the content and the ever greater
separation of the very concept of quantity and'quantitative relationship
in mathematics leads one to this conclusion. Modern mathematics is mov-
ing from relationships characteristic for numbers and amounts to any ab-
stract relations between any conditional objects, to an abstract rela-

tion generally.9

In other words, any relations abstracted from content are related to the
area of quantity and quantitative relationships. The laws of the inter-
connection of relationships like the forms abstracted from content are
characterized sufficiently adequately by abstract structures. Thus, we
approach an understanding of modern mathematics as a science dealing with
abstract structures and the laws of their functioning. From this directly
follows the conclusion that the structures of the weapons and troop con-
trol systems and the laws of their functioning on a certain level of ab-
straction can be described sufficiently fully using one or another mathe-
matical logical apparatus.

Let us now turn to the characteristics of quality. In the most general
sense. quality is the internal definiteness of a thing identical to its
being. At the sources of theoretical cognition, quality acts as the
primary, simplest and rather content-poor logical expression of sensory
experience. "Sensation is the foremost and most initial. and quality is
inevitable in it...," noted V. I. Lenin.lo

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OI’FICIM. USE ONLY

The attempt to concretisc the concept of quality, that is. to move from
quality generally to studying quality or qualities of a given thing for
specific phenomenon presupposes nn elucidation of a number of questions:
What makes it possible for us to identify or distinguish these phenomena,
what lies at the basis of their specifics. integrity or stability, and
what makes it possible for a thing to act in a given quality?

vdhile at the initial stages of cognition quality acts in the form of an
aggregate of sensorily perceived data. in then growing into an ordered
system of essential properties. a further deepening of cognition leads

to an understanding of quality as the integrated characteristics of a
ting. phenoaenon or process. But such characteristics can be given only
with a sufficiently complete description of the internal order and external
relationships of objects and phenomena. In others words. the qualitative
definiteness of a given obJect is most completely disclosed in the charac-
teristics of its organisation. structure. internal and external relation-
ships and ties.

The category of quality precisely reflects the difference and similarity
of corresponding structures. Consequently, a sufficiently cosplete and
integral description of quality is impossible without using formal. quan-
titative methods. and without using the language of matheaatics and mathe-
matical logic as a science dealing with abstract structures. In this in-
stance the mathematical logical methods not only make it possible for us
to investigate the variom structures of troop control systems. but also
provide an opportunity to a definite degree of Judging the quality of
control. to evaluate this quality and improve it.

Thus. any qualitative certainties with known conditions, with a certain
degree of accuracy can be expressed in a mathematical form. At the basis
of this possibility lies an objectively existing inseparable unity of
quantity and quality.

Mathematics and mathematical logic are the providers of the most diverse
mathematical logical abstract structures for the various areas of natural
and social sciences and theories. including for a number of areas of
military science and troop control theory. However. for the sciences and .
theories which use formal methods. it is very important precisely what
mathematical logical structures must be employed in each specific instance.
Here one can no longer speak of any abstraction from quality. On.the
contrary. the cousnness or specificness of quantitative relationships

is determined precisely by the counonness or specificness of the qualita-
tive certainties or certain properties of the examined processes and
phenomena. In other words. the isomorphicness of quantitative relation-
ships is to some degree the result of the similarity of qualitative cer-
tainties. For example, the following fact is an unique reflection of the
unity or quantity and quality: the mathematical apparatus which serves
one area of knowledge well is in no way necessarily acceptable in another
sphere. Previously mention was made of the necessity of working out and

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"'.'O I O: t ‘ ' a La. a'Z It" I :I': tlL.I:t'I II! IN.

FOR OFFICYAL USE OﬂLY

developing a mathematical logical apparatus which would adequately reflect

the specific patterns characteristic for the area of armed combat and
troop control.

An analogous conclusion is inevitable in analyzing the given problem in

a somewhat different aspect. and namely on a level of the unity of form
and content. Being an aggregate of elements, objects and processes. con-
tent expresses itself in a certain specific form: an organization, system
or structure.

However. the broadening of the sphere of use of artificial languages has
entailed a definite separation of the formal aspect of knowledge from its
content aspect. As is known. the same mathematical logical structure can
be a form for expressing a different content. It can be used for the ade-
quate description of phenomena belonging to different areas of knowledge.
and on the contrary, the same phenomena can be reflected by different ab-
stract structures. Nevertheless, the abstraction from content is never
absolute. In emphasizing this fact. Academician A. Aleksandrov has writ-
ten: ”An indifference of pure forms to content merely means that they
are encountered with a completely different content (in the same manner
that the same formula can express the laws of phenomena which differ in
their nature). But this in no way means that these forms always have an
external or purely quantitative nature."“

The presence of content ultimately is manifested within any formalism.
Any logical form is based on content and. in being constructed, returns

to the area of content relationships. An abstracting from content occurs
only in the process of constructing mathematical and mathematical logical
systems.

Hhen necessary it is possible to operate with signs or symbols, without

thinking of their sense. and considering only the preset rules for using
them. that is. formally. But when the necessity arises of interpreting

a system of signs, it turns out that the relationships between them are

a reflection of the ties between the content of the concepts. they oper-
ate as a mathematical logical form for the expression of these ties, and
consequently, assume the sense of content.

The place which the aggregate of signs occupy in one or another system.
their relationships and ties reflect the content ties and relationsips

of objects and phenomena, or more accurately their mental and sensory
images. Thus. a study of symbol forms encompasses a definite area of
content and specific aspects of content relationships. Since the particu-
lar feature of formalization consists in elucidating and clarifying con-
tent by the elucidation and fixation of form, to this degree the thesis

on the unity of form and content is a theoretical base for mathematical
logical formalization. Thus. mathematical logical methods make it pos-
sible not only to examine quantitative relationships and forms of phenomena.
but also to a definite degree to express their content and qualitative
specifics.

12h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'9

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82a00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he cognition of quantitatively determined quality and the content forms
of phenomena belonging to a certain actual area using mathematical logi-
cal methods provides an opportunity to isolate and study the essential
links, relationships and patterns inherent to a given area. The mathe-
matical logical form for expressing laws represents a necessary stage in
the cowition of essence.

Consequently, the indications of the narrowness of the sphere of using
the methods of mathematical logical formalization are unconvincing. 0n
the contrary. precisely the above-named general fundamental theses of
dialectical materialism are the theoretical basis for very broad oppor-
tunities of using these methods as well as for their future development.

In relying on this, it can be asserted that at a certain stage in the de-
velopment of cognition, a number of areas of military science will be so
thoroughly and soundly formalized as, for example, certain military tech-
nical disciplines presently are. In these areas and in military science
as a whole new directions and scientific theories will arise and at the

given stage they as yet will not be sufficiently widely used by mathemati-
cal logical methods.

What has been said applies mm to the uthematical apparatus used for
the optimisation and automation of the troop control process. At present
the corresponding apparatus is being intensely developed in such areas of
mathematical disciplines as information theory, the theory of algorithms,
game theory. queueing theory, linear and Mamie programing, and the
theory of statistical decisions which are widely used within a single
scientific direction, operations research theory.

The use of the ideas in operations research theory for the purpose of
optimizing and automating the troop control process through a strict
quantitative establishing of the taken decisions was a qualitatively new
stage in the application of mathematical methods in military affairs.

The theory of operations research acts as a concrete expression of the
method of mathematical logical formalization for a specific sphere of
cognition of purposeful and organizable processes, including primarily
the process of troop control. It is concerned not so much with the elab-
oration of the mathematical methods for describing and optimizing the
decision taking process, for these methods are developed basically within
the corresponding mathematical disciplines as it is with the question of
using these methods in a specific situation.

It is important to point out that within the application of operations
research theory and decision taking theory which derives from it, in mili-
tary affairs the entire complex of mathematical methods is developed con-
sidering the specific features of the processes of armed combat and troop
control.

125
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'lhe mass random phenomena of armed combat can be investigated and described
using the mathematical :ippnrtt‘ns of probability theory and mathematical
statistics. For examrlt, probability theory is widely used in evaluating
the effectiveness of new types of weapons and weapon control systems. in
solving the problems of controlling tact‘cal units, and so forth.

The specifics of troOp control in combat is most clearly manifested in
the fact that the decision must be taken in situations when the enesv en-
deavors to disrupt our control system or to cause maximum damage to it.

In such instances it is desirable to find and realize a model of actions
which would lend to the most favorable outcome for us. Here it is essen-
tial to consider the fact that the anew will seek out the least favorable
method of action for us. The described conflict situations can be evalu-
ated quantitatively with the mathematical apparatus of game theory, and
this makes it pensive to ﬁnd. the advisable methods of controlling one's
forces and means on a basis of detailed consideration of the possible vari-
ations for the enemy response actions.

Along with game theory, for solving a whole series of specific control
problems related to assessing the quality of the created systems and model-
ing combat, the rather fully elaborated mathematical apparatus of queueing
theory can be successfully applied.

The linear programing method is used for taking a decision under condi-
tions where the situation is known and the efficiency criterion represents
a linear function of independent variables. This apparatus is most widely
used in solving the problems of allocating targets. objectives, as well as
one's ovn forces and means.

However the specific features of troop control require, as a rule, a de-
tailed consideration of the continuously received additional data on the
changing situation. In such instances control is optimized each time only
for an immediate time interval, but in such a manner that at the conclud-
ing stage the greatest effect of obtained. Such problems are solved by
the cums-1c programming method.

when a decision is taken under the conditions of a definite ambiguity and
the random nature of the situation must be considered, statistical methods
are used.

At present the nathematical apparatus of information theory. the applied
theory of algorithms, algorithmic and informational languages and so
forth are assuming a particularly important role for formalizing the con-
trol process generally and troop control, in particular.

Thus. the complexity of the ties and relationships disclosed and studied

by military science and the necessity of optimizing and automating troo
control processes have necessitated the use of mathemtical logical methods.
At the same time. the depth of penetration of military science (and in

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

_

PPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
POI OHICIAL USE ONLY

particular. troop control theory) into its own subJect creates a real
opportunity for such use. and the mathematical logical apparatus which
in being intensely developed ewen now makes it possible to turn this to
a certain degree into a reality.

Since the question of the possibilities. was of development. basic direc-
tions and. sequence in realising automation and optimisation can be solved
only in its relation to foraalisation. to this degree the disclosure of
the essence and content of the very method of mathematical logical formal-
ization asst-es particularly inortant significance. The corresponding
general aethodological analysis will unite it possible to correctly define
the role and place of the method of natheaaitcal logical foraalization in
the process of optinising and autonating troop control.

3. Matheaatical Logical Fomlisation as a Stage in the Optimizing and
Automating of Troop Control

The method of forsalization was recognised as independent and gained its
most complete development within mtheaatics and mathematical logic. The
formation and development of this aethod was also greatly developed by
traditional fornologic. and in our times. by theoretical cybernetics.

The definite traits which are alrem characteristic for traditional form-
ologic of a formal approach to investigating the forms of thought. in be-
ing developed and assuming an ever lore apparent nature. grew up in rela-
tion to the rise and develop-ent of mathematical logic into an unique.
specific and at first special method of research. the lethod of fonaliza-
tion. The further developaent of this method led to a situation where a
rather conplete and consistent fomlization of entire areas of knowledge
or sections of sciences became possible by constructing coapletely or par-
tially formalized symbolic systems which operate with signs and symbols
according to previously deter-ined rules.

In a most general form. formalization is a precise description of a
studied phenomenon. process or obJect in a certain fixed or specified

(or even natural) language. In enphasizing this significance of the term
"formalization.” V. M. Glushkov has written: '"The task of scientific
cognition consists precisely in converting informal things into formal
ones. that is. to put it simply. into precisely described ones.":2

The level of fonnalization, depending upon the employed mathematical
logical neans and its end result. can vary. while the rise of language,
the imparting of a name to an obJect. the appearance of writing and the
rise of counting are the initial stage of formalization. the mthenati-
zation and algorithnization of various areas of knowledge can be considered
the following. higher level. The constructing of symbolic systems in a

calculation must be put among the third. most developed level of formal-
ization.

127
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, in accord with the varying conpletencss of the foraal transformations
of studied phenomena, it is possible to speak of three relatively inde-

pendent levels of formalization. Acting as the delimiters of these levels
are the description of the studied phenonena by the means of the fixed or
specified natural language, the nathsmatization and algorithnization of
the studied areas and processes! and, finally. the censtructing of syn-
bolic systems and calculations. 3

The particular, concrete aathenatical logical aethods act as specific

foras for the manifestation of the unified aethod of foraalisation. In
such an understanding. fomalisation represents a general scientific aethod
of cognition standing in the same line with such methods as analysis and
synthesis. abstraction and the ascent from the abstract to the concrete
and which are used with equal success in all areas of human activity and
on any levels of cognition.

In the given instance of particular interest 1’ s the mathematisation and
algorithnisation by which the partially fomlized theories oriented at
use in various natural. technical and social sciences are created. On
precisely this level, mathematical logical fornlisation penetrates broadly
into ailitary theory and practice, and is used for describing troop con-
trol processes for the purpose of their optinisation and automation.

Mathenatics operates with numbers, vectors, operators and other mathemati-
cal obJects which are the result of abstractiOn and idealisation. he
attempt to bring such a purely mathematical theory or its elements into
accord with certain relationships and obJects of the real world or an-
other theoretical systen can be classified as a partial fornalisation of-
the studied area. The partially formalized theory obtained in this manner
is no longer purely mathematical. It represents a portion of theoretical
natural science. Characteristic for the designated level of formalization
is the use of a nthenatical apparatus in accord with and in close rela-
tion to the definitions, concepts and assuaptions of the given descriptive
scientific theory. Consequently in the area of the optimisation and auto-
nation of troop control, it should be a question of the relationship of
the.nathenstical apparatus to the concepts and propositions of tactics,
operational art, the theory of troop control, and so forth.

Since the mthematical apparatus can be applied only to well defined ab-
stract objects, in automating the various elements of the troop control
process it is essential to isolate these abstract objects within the
examined area. Then they must be represented in the form of a certain
integrated system, and the underlying time, space, causal and other ties
and relationships inherent to then must be detected and fixed, that is,

the general abstract structure of the studied area of control or the
descriptive theory reflecting it must be determined. The isolating of

such elements and structures is the first step in the formalization process.

128

‘ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For obtaining practically signficant results. certain variables. func-
tionals. operators and other obJects of the selected mathematical lan-
guage are brought into direct accord with the previously isolated abstract
objects. The established ties and relationships between the elements.

in characterizing the structure of the given system. are expressed in
the form of functional and probability dependences. logical rules. sched-
ules. tables. and so forth. A system is formed of certain parameters
which subsequently figure as the initial. basic premises (factors) of
the investigated (designed) control theory or specific problem being
solved. The aggregate of the described operations can be considered the
second step of formalization.

The next step in the process of formalization consists in the following:
the previously isolated elements and structures of the investigated
processes and phenomena or the system of parameters reflecting them are

brought into adequate accord to certain mathematical structures relating
to definite areas of mathematics.

Thus. any formal (axiomatic. analytical. algorithmic, and so forth) de-
scription can act as a definite means for formalizing the phenomena of
armed combat and the troop control processes, and serves as the starting
point of their further optimization and automation.

The role and place of mathematical logical formalization becomes under-
standable in the process of optimizing and automating troop control.

In actuality. in solving any problems of optimizing and algorithmizing
troop control. the following stages can be isolated: The posing of the
mission. the selecting of the efficiency criteria. the determining of

the parameters of the operation and their relationships. the designing
and investigation of the formalised mathentical model of the operation.
the interpretation and testing of the theoretical conclusions in practice.
In each of these stages. with the exception of the last one. along with

a descriptive analysis. extensive use is made of the formalization method
which ultimately provides sin-opportunity of solving the problem by mathe-
matical means.

Even in the process of posing the problem. a clear and sufficiently accu-
rate exposition of the initial data. the conditions of fulfillment and
the required results of the decision makes it possible to disclose its
abstract, logical structure. This disclosure provides an Opportunity to
use one of the previously examined mathematical models for solving a
broad range of uniform specific problems. Let us illustrate this from
the eagles of a number of specific particular problems solved by the
means of operations research theory.

1. For example. a certain group of specialists is servicing the combat
of an air fighter regiment. Its task includes the inspection and repair-
ing of the aircraft arriving at the airfield in order in the shortest time

129
POI! OFFICIAL IISB ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday,

a as a‘ .' I" " " '
I. .I . ll..l.'lll III III.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to ready them for the next sortie. The insufficient size of the group or
lacking number of specialists in the individual services can lead to an
inacceptable delay of the aircraft in the parking area; an irrational
increase in this number leads to the irrational use of the personnel.

The question arises of an optimum composition and size of such a group.

2. A certain sector of an air defense system as a fixed number of forces
and means (antiaircraft missile units, interceptors, and so forth) for
repelling a bomber raid. It is essential to disclose how the_defense
system can be organized so that the greatest number of bombers in the raid
would fall under the action of the air defense forces.

3. Information from the site of combat is received at a command post via
the communications system. The time for the traveling of individual mes-
sages depends upon the number of communications channels. Considering
that the promptness of decision taking by the commander depends upon the
time required for the messages to pass through the communications channel.
to determine the number of channels which ensure the given speed.

The use of mathematical methods requires. as we have seen, the isolating
of certain common traits which characterize the abstract structure of
those processes to an analysis of which they are attempting to be applied,
particularly when it is a question of an attempt to solve a group of prob—
lems by one mathematical method.

In all three problems one can note a certain couon element which can be
termed a serving system. In the first instance this is a group of spe-
cialists. in the se:ond the air defense weapons. and in the third the com-
munications channels. In isolating this element, we disregard the con-
crete forms of service. the characteristics of the very servicing equip-
ment and in whose interest the servicing is carried out.

Another element which is inevitably present in all the given problems is
the flow of demands or the flow of clients coming in to the input of the
servicing system. In the first instance the aircraft arriving for servic-
ing must be considered the client. and in the second the bombers which
break through the air defense system, and in the third. the messages
passed through the communications channels. Here also it is of no im-
portance from whom the demands originate or who is interested in their
satisfaction. The term "client" or "demand" generalize all the possible
types of requests for service received from any object even the most dif-
ferent in their nature.

Finally, it is not difficult to notice the similarity in the very logical
structure of the processes described in the given problems. This simi-
larity consists in the fact that in all the instances the input of the
servicing system receives a flow of demands or clients which either are
satisfied immediately or form a line or leave the system. The similarity
of structures makes it possible to solve such a problem by uniform mathe-
matical methods which are grouped together under the common name of

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

queueing theory. Clearly the number of problems similar to the ones ex-
amined is virtually unlimited, while the sphere of application of the
general methods for solving them is extremely broad.

Let- us examine one other example. It is essential to organize an air
defense system for a certain installation. Here it is assumed that the
enemy possesses a whole series of possibilities for organizing an air
raid on the defended installation. In precisely the same way the defend-
ing side has types of defensive weapons which differ in terms of their
tactical and technical specifications. It is essential to resolve the
question of the best combination of these types of weapons under aw enew
actions.

The following situation is present. There are two sides, "players." which
pursue the opposite interests. The winning of one side or "payment” is

at the same time the losing of the other. Both sides have the possibility
to a certain degree of influencing the course of events. in choosing one
or another way of action. a strategy. For example. the attacking side
can use various types of aircraft. and vary the type of formation and the
method of approaching the target. The defending side uses various air
defense weapons and creates different groupings of them. Finally, there
is a number of factors which do not depend upon the procedure of the sides.
In the designated instances. for example. the meteorological conditions
can be put among these. Each side considers the reasonability of enemy
actions and endeavors to choose that strategy which would ensure the
maximum possible average winnings under any of the most unfavorable ac-
tions of the opponent.

Understandably in actual reality, and particularly in armed combat, it
would be possible to discover an enormous number of situations the struc-
ture of which was generally similar to the one described above. Moreover.
it can be said that the troop control process. both in its various parts
as well as on the whole. consists precisely of such situations. Since
the logical structure of all such problems is generally similar. to this
degree they are solvable within one mathentical method. game theory.

The situation is precisely the same in the event of using such mathemati-
cal methods as linear programming, dynamic programing, statistical de-
cisions theory, and so forth. For example in order to use the linear
programing method. it is essential to reduce the examined real situation

to a form permitting its description as an aggregate of linear equalities
and inequalities.

Thus. precisely the dismembering of similar abstract structures makes it
possible to employ uniform mathematical methods for solving an entire

series of seemingly very distant specific problems, and this is the theo-
retical foundation for optimizing and automating their solution.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0 C: .' ‘ ' a 'o. a‘ $ H" ' :0'; 0|; It... I” III.

 

run OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The next major stage upon which essentially depends the entire further
course and end result of the optimization and automation of any control
process is the selecting of the efficiency criterion. The question of
finding an optimum solution makes sense only in the instance that an opti-
mality criterion is established.

The choice of an optimum solution implies the necessity of a comparison
between several variations using a principle which is determined in turn
by the aims and tasks of each specific operation. For example, the success
of offensive operations by troop group in a certain sector of a theater of
operations can be Judged from the rate of advance and the amount of losses
of the enemy and our troops. The mathematical apparatus makes it possible
to find an optimum solution for any of these indicators, however the choice
of the criterion is made on the basis of a descriptive analysis of the
specific conditions for carrying out the operation in accord with its aims.

For example, during World War II, the Allies were confronted with the ques—
tion of the advisability of arming submarines with homing torpedoes. The
maneuvering of enemy subs sharply reduced the probability of a torpedo

hit. However, this also impeded the operations of tne subchasers. when
the percentage of subchaser losses was used as the efficiency criterion.

it turned out that the use of torpedoes was ill advised. But when the
ratio of sub losses before and after the arming of them with homing tor-
pcdoes was used as such a criterion, it turned out that the use of the

new weapons reduced sub losses by 3-fold. An analogous situation was
created in solving the question of the required number of transports in

a convoy. If the absolute losses of transports were used as the efficiency
criterion, then it might be concluded that the number of transports in a
convoy was of no significance. However, if one considers the ratio of
transport losses to the total number of escorted vessels, then the es-
sential advantages of large convoys immediately become apparent.

Thus, the optimum solution is directly dependent upon the aims of the
operations. For this reason for solving the problems of the optimization
and automation of various elements in the control process, it is essential
to incorporate these goals in the conditions of the problems. For this
they should be represented in a formalized form. The efficiency criterion
precisely represents a formalized expression of the goals of an operation,
and in the broader sense, a formalized expression of a practical need.
Consequently, without a formalized expression of the efficiency criterion
it is impossible to solve the problem of the optimization and automation
of control.

An equally important stage in the constructing of a formalized system is
the formalization of the factors which influence the occurrence of the
studied process and the incorporation of them in the form of quantitatively
determined parameters into the condition of the problem. It is essential
to disclose the space—tine, cause-and-effect and other relationships be-
tween the parameters and to fix them in the form of definite rules,

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
0’0“ iWHiZIM. "3% ONLY

mathematical formulas. functional dependences of schedules, tables. and
so forth. Since the number of factors and their ratios can be extremely
great. it is essential to select the most important of them which sub-
stantially influence the result of the solution. Here we disregard a
whole serids of less essential. secondary factors. Such a description
differs advantageomly from actual reality in its viewsbility and in the
clear fixing of the individual elements and their relationships.

Finally. it is essential to define the general rules on the basis of which
the parameters and particular constraints of such a transformation can
formally be transformed in the future for each specific problem or for a
limited number of control problems. The general rules are determined by
establishing the isomorphism (homomorphism or model relationship) of the
previously isolated structures vith certain mathematical structures.

For example. in gale theory the general rules of the game can be considered
the system of conditions which includes possible variations for the actions
of the sides. the amount of information of each side on the behavior of
the enemy. the sequence of moves. the result or outcome of the game to
which the given aggregate of moves leads. The particular asstmlptions

are determined for each specific problem considering its conditions and
the possibilities of the employed mathematical apparatus.

The examined constraints. as a rule, distort the real conditions of the
problem. with the accepting of them we remove ourselves from the examined
subject area and move from the study of the original to an examination of
an integral model.

Consequently. the process of formalization begins by isolating the similar.
uni form and abstract structures of different phenomena and ends by the
constructing and investigating of formalised mathematical models. It is

a necessary and very essential aspect which determines the possibility of
optimizing and automating the troop control process. Here mathematical
logical formalization acts as the theoretical basis and essential stage

of automation.

Vhile the analysis of the basic stages in solving the problems of the
optimisation and algorithmisation of the troop control process indicates
the possibility and necessity of a mathematical logical formalization.
the question of the degree of formalisation in each specific control
problem is determined by practice. The use of formal methods for the
purpose of a quantitative basing, optimisation and algorithmization of

a decision being made by a co-ander is preceded by a profound descrip-
tive analysis of the studied situatiou which is based completely on prac-
tice. Only on this basis is it possible to car?! out a correct posing
of the problem. its operational-tactical description. and the dividing

of factors into essential and nonessential. as vell as to determine the
necessary accuracy of the decision.

133

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
I 0:: - ' s as s‘ ' It" ' ‘ " ' ‘
. . .. . I...I.III H. 0“.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All of thin nchen an the informational foundation for constructing the
corresponding mathematical logical formalized system. and determines the

ways for optimizing and the mathematical means for automating the solving
of various control problems.

An essential condition of fonmalizstion is. for example, the dividing of
factors into essential and nonessential. The same factor can be essential
for some cases and nonessential for others. There are no essential parame-
ters generally or independently of a specific problem. Thus the question
of whether the obJect of an attack is a point or an area and what its di-
mensions are is extremely important in evaluating the possiblities of a
strike by conVentional weapons. However. in the event of using nuclear
weapons this parameter is secondary. Thus. precisely practical need de-
tcnnines what factors should be subjected to formalization in each spe-
cffic problem. And practice also solves the question of the number of
these factors. Consideration of a large number of factors causes a more
adequate reflection of the basic. essential properties of the studied
process in a mathematical logical form. Obviously in this instance one
might expect the obtaining of more accurate results. However. in practice
frequently such accuracy is simply not needed. and the attempt to con-
sider a larger number of parameters merely leads to a purposeless compli-
cating of the problem and the used mathematical apparatus. For example.
while for tactical troop control elements it is essential to consider

the location of the enemy targets with very great accuracy, for the op-
erational and strategic elements such accuracy is superfluous. Conse-
quently. the level of the decision. like the number of formalizable factors.
is determined by practical need.

The success of solving various control problems, like the automating of
this solution. to an essential degree depends upon how completely practical
needs will be reflected in one or another fonmalized criterion. An im-
provement in the formal methods makes it possible to consider these re-
quirements with ever greater cospleteness. At the same time. it is
perfectly obvious that the entire dialectical process of the development
of practical needs cannot in any satisfactory manner he expressed in a
single formalism. Moreover. even within a single problem. practical needs
cannot be completely considered by any fonmalized criteria. The latter
always are of a relative nature. The given circumstance forces one to
seek out solutions which are acceptable for a whole series of criteria.
considering the more column aims of conducting the operation. The exist-
ing mathematical methods do not provide an opportunity for fully consider-
ing these aims and for choosing the corresponding compromise solution
which remains the privilege of the commander. Thus. formalization is
based upon descriptive analysis, on experimentation and practice. and
also has descriptive analysis as its final point. and through it practice.
Control practices not only solve the question of the impossibility of
complete and absolute formalization of control problems. but also de-
termine the level and degree of necessary and possible formalization for
each specific problem. It must always be remembered that formalization

13:.
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDPBZ-00850R000100010006-8
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

is merely a portion of the work in establishing a decision. and one of
the aspects of this basing. and does not claim independent significance
for exhaustive analysis of the control process.

In light of what has been said. it is essential to examine the problem of
the ratio and correct combination of the unfonmalized and formalized
knowledge in military science and control theory, as well as the question
of the ways and specific conditions for realising the possibilities of
mathematical logical methods in the theory and practice of troop control.
and in particular. in solving optimization and automation problems.

The analysis made indicates that precisely proceeding from general method-
ological considerations one must not restrict the fundamental possibilities
of mathematical logical formalization. The real opportunities for each
historical stage are always limited by the general level of knowledge and
by the development of military science. troop control theory and mathe-
matical logical disciplines.

At the given. specific and fixed level in the development of military
science and the mathematical logical disciplines. the determined con.
straints create a complexity and specificness of the very subJect of re—
search. the troop control process. For this reason in characterizing

the real possibilities of mathematical logical methods in the sphere of
the optimisation and automation of control. it is important to point out
that the problem of formalising a whole series of qualitatively differ-
ent specific factors which substantially influence the occurrence of the
studied processes. the course and outcome of armed combat. and the effec-
tiveness of troop control as yet has not been completely solved. This
problem is particularly urgent in the sphere of troop control. Here there
is a large group of factors the quantitative expression of which as yet
encounters serious difficulties. For example. morale. discipline. the
training level of the personnel. the talents of the commanders. the quality
of leadership and the organization of control. and so forth. Their mere
listing indicates the enormous significance of these factors for any
sphere of combat. In a whole series of instances. they are determining
and ultimately settle the course and outcome of an operation. For this
reason the commanders of all levels carry out a compulsory qualitative
consideration and evaluation of them. Certainly their quantitative analy-
sis would significantly broaden the sphere of application of the method
of mathematical logical formalization. and would make it possible to more
fully reflect in the formalized models not only the general but also the
specific traits of the troop control process. This in turn would raise
the level and possibilities of automation.

The reality of armed combat is such that the listed factors are uniquely
woven into a fabric of a whole series of other ones. they are inseparably
linked and interact closely with them. For example. the solution to the
problem of the effectiveness of the specific type of weapons cannot be
complete without a knowledge of the degree of training of the personnel

135
FOR OFFIC‘AL USE ONLY
D O. .' ' ' 0 Lo. 0' I H" ' .‘D'; 30;.0300010000l.

1

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

operating this equipment. 0n the one hand. the given circumstance again
emphasizes the importance of these factors. and on the other. indicates
the specific ways for considering them. in disclosing the possibilities
of an indirect expression of qualitative factors through their quantita-
tive manifestations. Certainly inequality is manifested in properties
which in a definite manner influence the occurrence of the process as a
vhole. and. consequently. can be measured.

In the above-given example. the training of the personnel is manifested

in a reduction in aiming errors. This, in turn. influences the evalua-
tioﬂ of weapons efficiency. An analysis of the influence of the training
time on reducing aiming errors can underlie the determination of the
corresponding quantitative functional dependence. The political and moral
state of the troops is manifested in the ability to maintain battlevorthi-
nose with significant losses or to resist a numerically superior enemy.
Consequently. having established the corresponding standards for units of
measurement, it is possible to attempt to express this preperty quanti-
tatively.

Certainly the given examples are extremely oversimplified. In practice
the ways of quantitative evaluation for a whole series of factors as yet
are still unclear. Nevertheless. since such accounting is fundamentally
possible. in the future the number of qualitative factors which are
assessed quantitatively and considered in a mathematical logical descrip-
tion will rise. The search for the ways and means for obtaining such
evaluations is presently one of the most important tasks in the area of
control theory. automation and optimization of decisions being taken.

A maJority of the designated factors concerns the social sphere of human
activity. For this reason one of the most effective vays in this area.
in our view. is the extensive carrying out of various sorts of specific
sociological research. This research makes it possible to more profoundly
understand the general. specific and particular patterns in the sphere of
troop control. to disclose previously unknown relationships. to carry out
a quantitative analysis of a whole series of qualitative factors. that
is. to describe them mathematically. The mathematical processing of the
materials from the applied sociological research makes it possible to
interpret these data not only qualitatively but also quantitatively. to
profoundly analyze them, and to correctly understand and generalize them.
For example. correlation analysis makes it possible to ascertain whether
or not all the basic factors influencing the occurrence of the process
have been correctly considered.

One of the examples of how a formal approach makes it possible to pene-
trate more deeply into the content of the studied process is factor analy-
sis. The essential parameters which are to be subJected to a quantitative
evaluation are linked in such a manner that within each group the connec-
tion between them is closer (a higher reciprocal correlation coefficient)
than between the parameters of the different groups. This provides an

136
ms OFFICIAL use 0er

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100064
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opportunity to unify all the parameters of the group into a single factor
and determine its amount. As a result the quantity of considered factors
is sharply reduced and the studied model becomes more encompassable.
Moreover. factor analysis is often employed for disclosing unknovn factors.

The process of finding the quantitative patterns of studied phenomena is
most closely tied also to statistical analysis which. regardless of a
whole series of shortcomings inherent to it (the necessity of obtaining
information on a rather large number of uniform operations. the difficulty
of obtaining objective data. and the limited nature of the natural varia-
tions of the situation). can provide very valuable results which are of
independent significance. Thus. using statistical analysis during the
years of World War II the problems were solved of the optima composition
of ships in a convoy. the effectiveness of arming submarines with homing
torpedoes for hitting subchasers, the effectiveness of maneuvering ships
in escaping fran kamikaze attacks. and much else.

Nevertheless. the substantial limitationsl of the designated method neces-
sitate testing, experimental exercises. maneuvers, and so forth. In the
course of the testing it is possible to obtain nmerical data on the
dispersion. the probability of detection. the range and speed of move-
ment. The same thing can be said on detecting the influence of changes
in tactics. the properties of military equipment and the methods of its
use on the results of combat. Regardless of the inevitable simplifica-
tions in the course of carrying out experimental exercises and maneuvers,
the obtained results can be very valuable. here the researchers are con-
fronted with the possibilities of broadly altering the conditions for
carrying out the experiment and. consequently. emining and establishing
a broader range of possible parameters. Iiere it is important to bring
the conditions for carrying out the experiment as close as possible to
real combat and obtain reliable quantitative results.

The process of improving the mathematical apparatus plays a major role

in broadening the possibilities of formalization. optimisation and auto-
mation. The specific features of the processes investigated by military
science. and in particular the theory of troop control. require the elabor-
ation of a specific apparatus capable of adequately reflecting the studied
processes. Consideration of these specific features cannot help but en-
tail the rise of new original research methods.

The development level of the mathematical disciplines achieved in the
course of the present-day scientific and technical revolution has pre-
pared a sound basis for a quantitative description of the processes of
armed combat. Mathemtical methods are now becoming an inseparable aspect
of the troop control process. and they are closely interwoven with such
important elements of it as the evaluation of the situation. decision
taking. and forecasting the results of combat. 'l'hese help the cosaaander
to determine the balance of forces of the sides. to assess the combat
capabilities of his own troops. to mite an optimum allocation of forces

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
,o... . ~- , . - . .
. O. . s e. a . H‘ - :I'. JIS.O:III II! IN.

FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

and means. to calculate the possible losses of personnel and military
equipment. to assess the effectiVeness of nuclear strikes. to solve the
problem of optimum planning, target allocation, and so forth. It is
essential to more widely employ these methods and technical means for
realising them. Control practices indicate that officers who have pro-
found knowledge am rich experience in using modern mathematical methods
and computers make full use of the enormous potential possibilities of
the WV.

The effective use of the ABUV requires a developed, special mathematical
support [softvare]. that is. the early creation of complexes of mathemati-
cal models. algorithms and aschine programs for solving typical and spe-
cialised problems which at the necessary moment can be used by a control
bow. A library of such programs should be constantly replenished and
added to. This requires the presence of skilled specialists in the area
of systems analysis, decision taking theory, and the mathematical methods
of optimisation. that is. algorithmists and programrs who have definite
operational and tactical training.

Moreover. the effective use of autcnated systems and mathematical methods
necessitates the corresponding mathematical training and work habits using
computer information equipment on the part of the conanders and staff
officers. line level of this training should be sufficient in order to
axe it possible for the commander to give a mission for formalization and
solution on a computer. to determine the necessary data and criteria for
evaluating the obtained quantitative reco-endations in the iinal taking
of a decision. and to see the strong and weak aspects of the employed
mathematical methods. Here there must be knowledge in the area of deci-
sion taking theory, mathematical modeling. algorithmic languages and pro-
grming. This also necessitates definite skills. training. preliminary
preparation. the preliminary calculating of a number of quantitative in—
dicators. the comiling of calculations formulas. tables. graphs and so
forth. Such diverse preparation makes it possible in the midst of combat
to commas-e the existing situation with the previously calculated one, and
on the basis of the quantitative characteristics of a similar variation.
to rapidly take a decision which is close to the optima. Of course. the
possibilities of autasation equipment and aathematical methods mast not
be overestimated. No matter how mathematics and computers develop, these
possibilities are always limited. men the most advanced mathematical
methods cannot fill in the gaps in the knowledge of the very examined
area. For this reason by using them it is not possible to surmount a
potential limit of accuracy determined by the incompleteness of informa-
tion, or by the presence of a large number of unknown, undetermined.
random or hard-to-formalize factors. Consequently, the process of the
development and elaboration of the mathematical apparatus is related to
improving the operational-tactical apparatus. Both these processes
should occur simultaneously. in parallel, under conditions of reciprocal
influences and enrichment. Only the cossnander. in using all the diverse
informtion. including that which cannot be machine processed. assesses

138
roe onxcm. vs: ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-8
.2- . FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the combat situation. takes a decision. gives a mission to subordinates.
and organises the fulfillment of his decision. the fighting of the per-
sonnel for victory.

A victory cannot be calculated rather it must be won. Mathematical meth-
ods and electronic computers merely make it easier for the comaander to
take optimum decisions and carry them out efﬁciently. hey are not in
opposition to but rather combined with combat experience. the operational-

tactical knowledge. reason and will of the commander. It would be wrong
to assume that the extensive introduction of automation leads to a certain
leveling of the ham intellect. This is a profound error. Individual
features and the difference of creative possibilities of the control
principals will not be reduced but rather increased in the process of
automation. In other words. the advantages of a creatively strong com-
mander over a weak one will become even more apparent in the ASU. For
this reason. with other conditions being equal. the most successful in
combat will be the cosmmnders who skillfully use the possibilities of
modern mathematics. computers and automation.

In completing an analysis of the conditions needed for the broad and ef-
fective use of the method of mathematical logical formalization. we must
again stress its very close link with the development of full automation
and the introduction of the ASUV into troop control practices. In actu-
ality. on the one hand. the desire to use computers for solving various
problems of automation and optimization provides an impetus to the formal-
ization of these problems. and on the other. it turns out that the possi-
bilities for improving the autaated systems depend substantially upon
the successful formalization of the corresponding areas of control. The
central methodological premise is the presently generally recognized
notion that the aim of automation is not to replace man by a machine.

but rather to bring about a maximum rise in the efficiency of control
work. This. in turn. can be achieved only with a reasonable allocation

of the control functions between the machine and man. In line with the
need to determine for each specific instance the degree of the possible

and advisable formalization. optimisation and automation of the various
functions of a person included in an autonted control system. within

human factors engineering there must be the systematic carrying out of
quantitative research on the mental and psychophysiological possibilities
of man.

Thus. a necessary and sufficient condition for the effective use of mathe-
matical logical formalization for solving the problems of the optimization
and automation of troop control is an improvement and development of mili-
tary science as a whole. the elaboration of an operational-tactical ap-
paratus for a meaningful description of the studied problems. the study-
ing of the mental and psychopmrsiological capabilities of man using pre-
cise methods. the introduction of various methods and procedures for ob-
taining the necessary quantitative characteristics, interdependences and
values of parameters. the elaboration of an adequate mathematical logical

139
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
,a-u. .

.3: ' . » . . .. ,
‘ o o. . .I. '-.I . ll.o!.'000 0.! 0H.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apparatus. the broad use or calculators. and the presence of the corres-
pondingly trained personnel. The aggregate or these conditions determines
the specific possibilities of tornalization, and consequently. the opti-
mization and automation of the troop control process.

1.

2.

10.
11.

12.

13.

mm

Man acts as the modeling system in the process of cognition. Generally
speaking. the role of a modeling system can be carried out by a living
organism a brain or computer, and on a wider basis. by an cybernetic
system which is capable of receiving. storing and processing informa-
tion and utilising it for the purposes of self-regulation and control.

"Filosofskaya Entaiklopediya" [Philosophical mcyclopediﬂ, Vol 3.
Moscow, 196b, p 378.

See 6. K. Zhukov, "Vosponinaniya i Rawshleniya" [Rembrances and
Reflections]. Moscow, 1969, pp 192-1910.

"Issledovaniye Operataiy na Praktike. Materialy Konferentsii MTO"
[Operations Research in Practice. Materials of a 1mm Conference].
Moscow. 1962, pp 2112-2101;.

See I. Anureyev and A. Tatarchenko, "Prineniniye Matelaticheskikh
Metodov v Voyennon Dele” [The Use of Mathematical Methods in Military
Affairs]. Moscow, 1967; V. Abchuk. et al. . "Vvedeniye v Teoriyu
Vyrabotki Resheniy" [Introduction to Decision Taking 'lheory], Moscow.
1972-. V. Druzhinin and D. Kontorov, "Ideya, Algoritm. Resheniye"

[Idea, Algorithm and Decision]. Moscow. 1972; x. Tax-akanov, "htentika
i Vooruzhennaya Bor'ba" [Mathematics and Armed Conbat]. Moscow, 1973:.
v. I. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch.." Vol 18. pp 306. 313.

G. Klaus. ”Kibernetika i Filosoi‘iya" [Cybernetics and Philosophy].
Moscow. 1963. p 227.

K. Marks and F. 313915, "Soch.," Vol 20. p 37.

See "Filoeofsma mtsinapediyn," Vol 2, Moscow. 1961:, p 562.
V. I. Lenin. "Poln. Sobr. Soch.." Vol 29. p 301.
"Filosotskaya Entsiklopediya." Vol 3, p 329.

V. M. Glushhov. "Kibernetika i Unetvennyy 'I‘rud" [Ojbernetics and
Mental Labor]. Moscow, 1965, p 19.

See 3. V. Biryukov and Ye. S. Geller, "Kibernetika v Gunanitarnykh
New." 1) 132.

11.0
you onxcm. use om:

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100010006-3
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cm 5: mmcsmnotsormnmmﬁmooroomoneim
l. he Problem of the Option Coordinstion of Men end Equipsnt id the A81!!!

Il'he recognition of the deter-lining role of ssn in relstion to m. including
silitsry, equipent is the bssic nethodologicsl praise in solving specific
problem in the A807. People creste snd use sutonstic end sutouted devices
for schieving their sins in troop control. But in order for s person to
hold s deninsnt plsce in relstion to equip-ant. definite structursl chenges
nut be carried out in the equipent. ‘l'he ssin purpose of the letter is

to creste fsvorsble conditions for the effective sctivity of soldiers in
the W systen. Such s coqles problem in nodern science hss cone to be
celled. the proble- of the optim- coordinstion of ten snd equipsnt. Its
essence consists in the sexin- sdsptstion of the AM cosponents to esch '
other for the purpose of incressing the efficiency of esch of then sad the
entire systen es s whole.

This problen sssuss psrticulsr signifiosnce in the ABUV, where an sets

in s single finctionsl couple: with s counter snd other technicsl devices
cspsble of sssuing definite functions in the sres of troop control. For
this resson. before estsblishing the resl vevs for coordinsting an end
the technicsl device in the ASUV. it is essentisl to examine the possible
vsristions for sllocsting functions slang then. snd to coupes-e the possi-
bilities of these comnents to csrry out the basic elenents of the control
process. Here it must be pointed out thst the relationship of the possi-
bilities of an end the onto-ston any be investigsted on the level of reel
or potentisl fessibility.

In modern scientific litersture. ottelpts hsve been nde to coIpsre the
possibilities of sun snd the unto-ton for processing infornstion which is
the bseis of the control process.

The nein quslities inherent to husn sctivity.

l. A lisited cspscity. s snell snount of infomtiou processed per wait
of tine.

181
so: cruel». use on!
V”.

. .. .
I .I . H. ITIIO HI Old;

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.- A reduction in work efficiency as a consequence of fatigue and the-
wandering of attention.

3. Conparntivelv slow and inaccurate carrying out of computational opera-
tions.

la. The insufficient (incomplete) use of information and a limited possi-
bility of creating an integral notion of the phenomenon from individual
events.

5. The ability to work in unforeseen situations. great flexibility and
adaptability to changing external effects.

6. A broad opportunity for choosing the methods of action, speed in using
reserves and correcting mista..es.

Basic qualities in the work of an automatic device.

1. A zero capacity for awareness; a careml programsing of the structure
of material. _ ‘

2. Great couplexity of programing, since it is difficult to foresee all
the possible instances. and hence, to compile a prograa which foresees then.

3. Unsuitability for alternative thinking.

10. Virtually unlimited capacity.

5. A slow reduction in work efficiency.

6. Rapid and accurate execution of computational problels.

As for the quantitative characteristics of the abilities of nan and a
coaputer to process information. they have been given in a table the data

for which have been borrowed from several works.

A cowarison of the possibilities of man and automatic equipment indicate
that the nost rational way for using the qualities inherent to each of .
these components is the creation of automated control systens. In them
the Ian and equipment are united by canon participation in the troop
control process. and act as a single functional control complex, in con-
pleuenting the capabilities of each other in performing specific control
problems. The given notion has also predetermined the real ways for solv-
ing the problem of an optimum coordination of man and equipment. that is.
"from equipment to nan" and "from sun to equipment.” The first way con-
sists in working out these design decisions in developing control equip-
ment which would most fully conform to the psychophysiological and mental

. abilities of man who solves various problems using it in the process of

152
YOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010008-3
NI OWICIAI. US! ONLY

troop control. Such a progressive variation corresponds to the active de-
teraining role of an in relation to the implements of labor created by
his in any area of activity. including in ailitary affairs liovever,

such an approach to the problen of coordination cannot alvws he realised
due to the variom factors. for eagle, due to certain liaitations in
the develop-est or science and technology.

Quantitative Characteristics of human and Cosputer Data Processing

 
  

Paraseters

   

switching elensnts

    
       
 
 

   

Me Diodes. transistors. Neurons
ferrite cores. etc.
Quantity Up to 10 1. 5010‘0
Dilensions 104-10l ca’ 10- 3~10-5 ce’
Response tin 10" sec. 10-3 sec.
Mallory

Functioning Principle

   

Hysteresis of ferro-
sagnetic uterials
105 -10° bits

10-9-10*2 sec.

Change in synapses

   

10’-1013 bits

C cit
.p. y 10-2-10*|.ec.

Access tile

Data input and output
devices

Typo
Quantity of data

 
   
  

Printer. pmch, etc. Receptors, luscles.
glands, etc.
Unconsciously
109 bit/sec.
ConsciousLy (mm)
102 bit/sec.

10-30 bit/sec.

  
 

103-105 hit/ sec .

 
    

Transaission rate 6.000 bit/sec .

For this reason the necessity arises of realizing the second way of coordi-
nation, that is, "fro: man to the equip-ent." and this consists in adapting
nan to specific vorking conditions in the ASUV. Undoubtedly. Joint fum-
tioning with an sutouatic device in a single control couple: has a sub-
stantial iapact also on man, in placing exceptionally high demands not

only on his psychophysiological attributes, but also on the specific teen-
tal qualities. in determining the inner organisation of his aental ac-
tivity and requiring clarity of thought. All of this has required the.
adaptation of man to autontic equip-ant as expressed in the specific
methods and procedures for training and instructing the-personnel operat-
ing automatic equip-est as well as in iaproving professional recruitment
for work in the ASUV.

Although these two ways or optima coordination are inherent to all types
of activities of people in the ASUV, however the specific procedures and
aethods of realizing them are largely determined by the specific features

1103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.ee:.

.. , . _ . .
I 0.. . e no. I‘. . ll' Itl'. ||.l.'lll IIIIII.

FOR OFPKCIAI. "SI-2 ONLY

of those functions which the soldiers perform in relation to the automatic
equipment. This necessitates an analysis of the functional structure of
the troop collective in the ASUV for the purpose of establishing the most
characteristic groups of soldiers operating automatic equipment.

The extensive introduction of automatic equipment into troop control leads
to the development of ASUV the functional structure of which is an entire
hierarchy of subsystems united by a cos-on functional goal of controlling
subordinate units and subunits which mutually coordinate their activities

for ensuring the effective fulfillment of the missions assigned to then
and are subordinate to a single coriander.

At the same time. in addition to the personnel directly involved in the
ASUV, it is completely essential to have a definite establishment of troops
the functional duties of which are related to activities outside the given
local systems. For this reason we can represent an automated.control sys-
tem as a certain single integral system around which all the remaining
subsysteas of the control body are grouped. This makes it possible to
View the human material in the ASUV as a complex troop collective with an
extremely developed differentiation of troop specialties in vhich a funda-

mentally nev collective form of utilizing automatic equipment is carried
out.

In the most general form. in the human material of the ASUV in terms of
functional duties it is possible to isolate three basic groups of personnel:
The group carrying out extrasystem functions; the group carrying out intra-
system functions; the so-called command group2 (see Figure b).

Automated Troop Control System
(asuv)

     
      

"Man--Automaton" System

Intrasystem I Computer I Extrasystem
complex

group group

Fig. h

The first (extrasystem) group brings together those specialists who are
not directly involved in processing the information, but merely super—
vise the normal functioning of the automatic equipment and the computer

lhh
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
roe (W'lCMl. USE ONLY

dcviccn of‘the counnd post and the stuff. This includes all the en-
gineering and technical personnel which monitor the normal work of the
system. which provides adjustment and repair of the equipment. periodic
repairs and eliminates failures. as well as a large group of prograsmIer-
nthematicians. The specialists of this group are involved with all auto-
matic equipment as a whole. They are in a way outside the process of
processing 'the data flows which circulate within the system itself. they
are next to_it and monitor the correctness of data processing.

The extrasystem functions of man in the ASUV are marked by a great degree
of creativity. here in his activities are rather broadly represented all
the basic functions involved in processing the information related to the
state of the cosputer cleex: its receiving. the taking of the corres-
ponding decision and executor actions. The extrasystem functioning of
man is characterised by the necessity of working in unforeseen situations.

to respond quickly to signals. upon the indications of individual instru-
ments to clearly visualise the overall picture of the state of the equip-
ment. and so forth.

As a whole. the functional features of specialists in the extrasystsm
group are related to analyzing the reasons for the malfunction of computer
equipment. and the organising of the corresponding measures to localize
the emergency and quickly eliminate it. The work of a specialist in this
group entails involved intellectual activity related to responsibility for

the normal functioning of the equipment and for the effective operation
of the entire ASUV as a whole. An analysis of the basic functions per-

formed by the group of extrasystem specialists nukes it possible to iso-
late two basic forms of their activities:

1) The observation and monitoring of the normal work of the equipment
and the consecutive analysis of information on the functioning of its
basic elements under the conditions of the constant expectation of an

emergency signal;

2) Activities in situations of an abrupt disruption of the normal func—

tioning of the equipment. This requires an instantaneous analysis of the
existing situation, an assessment of the nature of the emergency and the
finding of the most effective methods of eliminating it.

Each of these two basic forms of activities by the men of the group of
extrasystem specialists in the ASUV influences the coordinating of man
with the automatic equipment. and determines the specific ways for cre-
ating the corresponding coordinating devices.

or exceptionally great significance for ensuring the effective function-
ing of the ASUV is the group of intrasystem specialists who are directly
involved in the process of processing the flows of intonation moving
through the co-mications channels within the system.

1»;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:-‘:0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday,

. . . . . , .
_ a o. s. - ll. £:I'. ll. it'll II! II..-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The intrasystem activities of a man in automated control systems represent
a completely new type of military activity and this has been terned
operator work and is becoming the most typical at the present stage in

the development of science and technology, in production and in military
affairs. K. Marx described a man in such a situation as the "main agent"
of a technological process and who (because of social or other conditions)
is forced to be an attribute of the machine, to be turned into a “living
automaton." to turn his body "into an automatically one-sided organ," and
to act as "the automatic implement of the given particular work."3

The most specific trait of the activities of an operator in an automated
control system is the difficulty. as a rule. of directly observing the
actual controlled combat installations. For a notion of the real state
of the controlled objects, the operator uses information received over
the conmunicationc channels. From it he draws up so-called information
models of the real objects and these are a structure of symbolic images
organized according to certain formal attributes and reflecting with a
definite degree of accuracy the properties of real objects and the rela-
tionships between them. The information received by the display devices
including indicators and meters, requires a correlating with the real
controlled objects. This process occurs in the stage of decoding the in-
formation and is the basis for taking the corresponding decision.

The activities of an operator with information models place high demands
upon the data display devices by which these models are created. This,

in turn, makes extremely urgent the problem of the optimum coordination
of man with the automatic equipment in the process of the exchange of
information between them.

An analysis of the intrasystem functions of man in an ASUV makes it pos-
sible to disclose a presently existing tendency for turning over these
functions to an automatic device. Remaining for man are the creative
functions of controlling the actions of the automatic equipment, check-
ing the correctness of decisions made by the machine, their correcting in
the needed directions, and so forth. All these operations are performed
by specialists of the extrasystem group. Consequently, with a rise in
the degree of automation and with the broadening of the capabilities of
computers, there will be a gradual decline in the intrasystem functions
performed by man in the ASUV. He will perform chiefly extrasystem func-
tions. To this fundamentally new trend can be applied the words of

K. Marx by which he described a similar process in the automation of

production: man is put next to the production process instead of being
its chief agent.

Thus. there is a tendency for transferring definite intrasystem functions
of man to the automatic devices. In this manner there is a transforma-
tion of all the separate automatic assemblies for dat: processing in the
control system into a single automatic complex. However full automation
in no way leads to the separating of the relationship between man and

1h6
ma orncm. use ONLY

June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the automatic device. The integrated system is not broken up. but rather
only the relationships between the components are altered in it. they be-
come more flexible and to the greatest degree confers to the development
prospects of the human personality. Man no longer is included in the'
data processing process as one of the elements which in all ways is simi-
lar to a technical clement. lie is freed from the necessity of being
adapted to the technical devices and correlating his activities with their
functions. Here the possibility arises of a rational allocation of func-

tions between man and the autoaeton whereby only creative functions re-
main for Inn.

with a rise in the degree of autenIation in the system. the role of the
extrasystes functions of the controlling principal. the functions of ob-
servation and monitoring. rises. 'ihe Nndamentsl necessity of huaan con-
trol over the correct functioning of an autosatic device exists at any,
however high level of development in automation. A person included in
the ASUV .‘.s a social being. This gives his activities a number of spe-

cific properties which cannot be fully modeled and turned over to a tech-
nical device.

Thus. the presence of social aspects in the activities of an individual is
a decisive factor in allocating functions between the controlling principal
and the automatic scvice as components of a unified system.

Let us examine the specific features in the functioning of specialists in
the third group of the military collective of the ASUV who perfon com-
stand functions. This rather sizable group plays an iaportant role in
troop control. It includes the officials responsible for the control of
the subunits which are part of the sutomted system as controlled sub-
systems.

In the ASU‘I. this group plays a special role in relation to the two desig-
nated groups. the extrssystem and intrssystem. In participating in the
general process of (ate processing. each mesber of the couand group can
be simultaneously the end element in the flow of initial inforaation and
the beginning element in the flow of cowand information the basis of
which is the coabat decision. This brings him close to the intrasystem
group of specialists. At the same time, since the comander functionally
and territorially is outside the limits of the "mam-automaton” system.
inherent to his activities are certain traits of the group of the extra-
systcn specialists. An important faction of his is supervising the work
of the entire systen, and above all the activities of the two indicated
groups.

In a general form the activities of specialists from the «mend group are
related to the task of ensuring the taking of a combat decision. They
clearly present the overall mission of the ASUV and the various aspects of
its solution. This is provided by the presence of an internal conceptual
model in a person. and this model contains a notion of the end result of
the work of the system and controls the process of the transfomstion of

11.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.o.. _ . . . .
.0 I .3: s e. 0' . 00" ‘fl'. ‘I...:l‘| III III.

Fnk ”FPICIAL "Sh nNLY

Information by man. A member of a command group using the conceptual model
formulated by him run cValuate the rationality of variations of a decision
which are presented by the used system and which reflect one of the aspects
of tr00p control. Here the problem arises of the relationship of the in-
formation model which 1r determined by the obJective characteristics of
the obJects of control and the conceptual model which is a subJective plan
of actions for the given chief. Precisely the conceptual model contains,
in addition to the transformed data of the information model. a whole
series of unformalized. creative and subjective aspects (a broader notion
of the combat mission and its significance for carrying out the mission.

an analysis of the consequences of implementing incorrect decisions. a

sion. The quantity and quality of specialists in this group are largely
determined by the organizational structure of the control body. by the

volume of incondng information and by the specific features of the combat
mission to be carried out by the controlled troops. At the same time it

and fonn a complex hierarchical structure which ensures centralized troop
control. For this reason, in a general form the functional structure of
the ASUV can consist of subsystems. Each of these is under a certain
chief. and it supplies him with the necessary data for taking the appro-
priate decisions which subsequently serve as the basis for the taking of
a combat decision by the solely responsible commander. Here the military

leader of an element superior in the control hierarchy can assume control
OVcr several inferior elements and use the decisions vorked out by them
when necessary .

The command group of the ASUV should include the chief of staff who is

responsible for its smooth and coordinated work. The chief of staff bears
responsibility for organizing the information flows from the controlled

and so forth.

In odditien to the chief of staff. a command group can include a number of
other officials. Each of them is responsible for a definite area of pre-

oituation. they take a decision for the use of equipment under their con-
trol by the troops. they plan the preparations for combat. and they direct
their subordinate services, relying on the control body at their disposal.

lbs
rm: urrxcm. use om

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR iWVlClM. USE "MN

The sound group must also include the party political apparatus which
ensures thedaily and integrated influence of the party on the life and
activities of the troops, and firmly and consistently carry out the CPBU
policy. The political bodies are confronted with the important mission
oi‘ indoctrinating the personnel in a spirit of a readiness and ability to
carry out the decision of the comnders. indoctrinating the men in a
spirit of the ideas of Marxism-leninism, total loyalty to their people.
the motherland and the party. in a spirit of the friendship of the Soviet
peoples. Soviet patriotism, high political vigilance and class hate for
the enemies of communism, and in a spirit of a conscious fulfillment of
military duty by each servicemen. Undoubtedly party political work under
present-day conditions is also impossible without using calculating equip-
ment which improves its flexibility and efficiency.

The introduction of automatic equipment into troop control not only does
not reduce the role of the specialists of the comnd group in raising
the efficiency of the troop control process. but also predetermines a
rise in its significance. An automation of the data processing processes
and above all the automating of the solution to numerous problem of a
computational and reference nature can substantially facilitate and alter
the work of the specialists in this group and make it more intellectual
and effective.

Among the specialists of the command group, a special place should be held
by the solely responsible comander who provides overall troop leadership.
lie bears full responsibility for the carrying out of the assigned combat
missions. The «under in his actions in the area of controlling troop
combat relies on his subordinate control bodies and above all on the ac-
tions of the cosmend group. For this reason his ability to unify and
organize the personnel to carry out the combat missions, and his capacity
to rely on the staff. the party and Komsomol organizations are essential
conditions for efficient troop control. At the same time, the colander
bears sole responsibility both for his own actions as well as for the
activities of his subordinate organs and troops. A decision taken by

him to carry out the combat missions confronting the subordinate troops

is the apex of all the work of the control bodies and is accepted for
execution by all servicemen.

The isolating of the basic functional groups of personnel in the A50"!
makes it possible to differentiate the general problem of an optimum co-
ordination of man and automatic equipment in the form of solving three
basic problems which correspond to the three basic groups of specialists.

As a whole, the necessity of the optimum coordination of man and a tech-
nical device necessitates a correlation between the data display devices
and the sensory system of man. Here the properties of the indicators
largely determine the effectiveness of human activities in detecting the
signal. ascertaining its meaning. recreating missed or distorted informa-
tion. and so forth.

11:9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"'70

I .3: ‘ ' s L. s‘ ' ti" . ‘ " ‘ '
. . .. . 'l..I.HI 'I' I...

FOR OFFICIAL llSl-Z ONLY

Undoubtedly the various types of instruments used as displays possess
varying visibility. For this reason the method and form of presenting
information to a person should correspond to the nature of his basic
functions in the ASUV.

Each of the previously isolated three basic groups of specialists in the
ASUV requires the designing and use of specific data display devices.

Using the examples of foreign ASUV, let us examine the specific features
of solving the problem of an optimum coordination of man and equipment

in the carrying out of intrasystem functions by man. In these ASUV, the
operator acts primarily as the receiver of information coming into him
through the sensory channels of varying modality. here the criterion for
selecting the nature of the channel is its throughput data capacity as
well as a person's reaction time to the given message.

According to the materials of modern research, the shortest reaction time
in a man is to tactile. olfactory and vibration signals. followed by
acoustical and visual.

At the same time, tie foreign press has pointed out that the designers of
military equipment often overload the visual channel and this leads to a
decline in the efficiency of the operator's activities. As has been es-
tablished by modern research, a person is capable of perceiving Just 70
bits of information per second over the visual channel. Specialists feel
that at present the possibility has appeared of distributing information
evenly between the various sensory channels.

Thus. in using the property of the tactile channel which possesses the
shortest reaction time. it is possible to place on the skin of the oper-
ator's arm instruments which would inform him of the position of the
controlled object in the form of vibration signals.

Such instruments can also play a particular role in the ASUV in which the
operator receives a large flow of information frequently requiring an
immediate reaction.

The next fundamental problem which must be solved for the optimum match—
ing of the human operator and the automatic device in the ASUV is the
problem of the language of their communication. In the opinion of foreign
specialists. one of the real ways for solving this problem at present can
be the use of cathode ray tubes built into the computers and having a
graphic display on which the operator graphically depicts the structure
of the problem to be solved using a special light pencil. The automatic
device carries out the necessary calculations, putting them out either on
a puncn tape or also graphically, and the research carried out has shown
the exceptional promise of such a design. particularly in planning combat
operations involving the use of maps. various diagrams. graphs, and so
forth.

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
I’OR OFI'ICIM. USE ONLY

Let us examine the specific features of solving the problem of an optimum
coordination with the carrying out of extrasystem functions by man. In
this instance the basic tasks of a man are monitoring the operations of
control equipment, ensuring the set operating cOnditions of the equipment.
monitoring the quality of its functioning, preventing and eliminating
emergencies. and so forth.

The problem of coordination obviously should consist of creating display
equipment which would reflect all the particular features of the function-
ing of the technical devices in the ASUV and would make it possible for
the person to carry out technical diagnosis and establish the reason and
nature of the emergency.

In such an instance the development of displays which reflect the entire
system of features in the functioning system can be of great importance
for raising the efficient activities of run. Usually information on each
most important parameter of a technical device is read off a separate in-
strument located on an instrument panel or control board.

In reading the indications from each separate instrument, a person should
imagine a complete picture of the functioning of the technical device.
Hovever the possibilities of a person to read the indications from the
indicators are rather limited. and an increase in their number merely im-
pedes the functioning of the operator.

In the opinion of foreign specialists. this problem has assumed great
significance in the ASUV with their cunbersome flows of very extensive
information on the state of each of the functional assemblies of the
"large system,” where an entire establishment exists observing a specially
equipped emergency board on vhich hundreds of instruments show the particu-
lar features in the functioning of the most characteristic assemblies of
the equipment. Of course, under such conditions a mental synthesizing

of their readings into a whole picture is virtually impossible. Special-
ists feel that at present. on the basis of the achievements in psycholog
and the development of equipment. it would be possible to develop indi-
cators which provide a person with the basic parameters of the automatic
device in the form of an already composed unified picture. In such an
instance the person would no longer be concerned with a mental synthesiz-
ing of the individual elements into a single picture, as this is done for
him by the instrument. Thus, several individual instruments which reflect
the functional paramters of a technical device could be replaced by a
single star the number of rays of which corresponds to the number of in-
struments, while the length. color and position of the rays provide in-
formation on the normal operation of the system. Here in the human mind
an image of the star is reinforced and this reflects the optimum function-
ing of the cormuter, and by using the controls he endeavors to obtain

this image, no longer comparing it each time with the specific conditions
of the ASUV.

151
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.ee:. -- . u . . . ' - ' '
. ... I e. . . .i' ':.'. I.. I:I.. |.. U...

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. the problem of keeping track of the functioning of a technical device
using a similar instrument would be significantly simplified and as a re-
sult of this the efficient activities of man in determining the state of
the systems would be increased.

Let us examine the specific features of solving the problem of coordinat-
ing the command group. For taking a sound combat decision. the commander
must correctly assess the problem situation and have a clear notion of
the time-and-space position of the controlled objects on the spot. The
realization of the principle of visibility in the display equipment in
foreign ASUV is achieved by developing indicators of the plotting board
type, mnemonic devices as well as using screen-type indicators which pro-
vide an all-round or sector view of space and on which the commander can

visually represent the position of the controlled objects relative to the
enemy.

Here the relationships between the objects are modeled in different sen-
sory features of the display elements which create a dynamic picture. the
subjective image of which is formed on the basis of the visually presented
image of the combat situation and is used in taking a combat decision.

Under real conditions of a combat situation, the commander should. in addi-
tion. receive definite information on the characteristics of each controlled
object and essential for solving a specific combat problem. Most often
such information is provided to the commander by the staff in a verbal or
written fonn. In the ASUV. for this purpose it is possible to use digital

or alphanumerical forms which are displayed on the indicator next to the
blip from the given object.

There is also another way of coordination, that is. from man to the automa-
ton, and the essence of this consists in a certain adaptation of man to
the particular features of the equipment.

The realization of this way also has its specific features depending upon
the particular features of each of the three basic groups of the ASUV
specialists.

Let us examine an example of solving the problem of optimum coordination
in the event of the carrying out by man of intrasystem functions which
have been most clearly expressed in operator work.

As a whole the conditions for the activities of an operator in the ASUV
are completely determined by the great dynamieness and by the probability
nature of a change in the combat situation. Abroad it is felt that oper-
ators can be exposed to stimuli related to the nature of the environment
such as: A change in temperature, constant vibration, the effect of noise,
and so forth. These conditions can have a substantial unfavorable in-
fluence on the human organism, in reducing the efficiency of its activi-
ties. It must be pointed out that the rigid limitations of the size of a

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: ThursdayI June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control board create serious difficulties for the rational placement 9“
equipment and impede the operator's work.

All of this requires from an operator the development of such psychologi-
cal qualitiss as the capacity to rapidly analyze the situation, emotional
stability, the capacity to allocate attention, high sensory qualities

and definite motor skills raised to the point of being automatic. For
this reason, in professional recruitment for operator positions and with
subsequent training. exceptionally high demands are placed on the service-
men. however, the most effective means for realizing this path of solv-
ing the problem of an optimum coordination is the training of the opera-
tor. In particular, this is manifested in the dependence of the reac-
tion speed of the operator to the information content of the signal.

Thus, in the first stage of training the reaction speed of a person de-
pends upon the physical characteristics of the signal, and above all on
the relationship of the signal to the background. In causing the orienta-
tion activity of an operator, this factor in a way conceals the informa-
tion content of the signal. and this definitely tells on the efficiency

of the Operator's work. Under these conditions the Operator begins to
respond in the same manner to the appearance of a secondary signal, for
example the blips from clouds, and to a signal of such enormous import-
ance as information on enemy strategic bombers.

However, at a certain level of the operator's training, the possibility
of the appearance of the given signal and the corresponding degree of its
expectation become the basic determinant in the speed of his reaction.
The dependence of the reaction time upon the information content of the
signal has a linear character which is described by the so-called Rich's
law. Here the operator considers the degree of importance of the infor-
mation contained in the signal received by him, and his response time
rises depending upon the degree of its importance.‘

In the course of further training of the operator, strong associative
ties are forimd between the displayed signals of increased importance and
the definite reactions to them. As a result. the reaction time to these
signals becomes constant. The operator who has achieved a high degree
of training responds to the signals simultaneously. He has no need of
making a choice between the information significance of the signal and

the reaction tw it.

1he solving of the problem of the relative coordination of man and equip-
ment assumes definite specific features in the event that the man or
operator performs extrasystem functions. The work of the specialists in
the extrasystem group under the conditions of the normal functioning of
the system comes down to monitoring the operating conditions of the equip-
ment. But in a critical situation. a rapid evaluation of the nature of
the emergency and the taking of a decision to eliminate it are demanded
from the person.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
s at: . - . ' - - " ‘
. .. . . u . .s . u. nun nu nu.

 

FOR (WFICMI. USE ONLY

For carrying cut these tnnkn the specialist in the extrasystem group
should possess profound knowledge or the equipment, of the essence of
the processes occurring in it and the interaction of its individual as-
semblies. He must also keep in mind a large number of quantitative char-
acteristics of the different variables and parameters, and skillfully use
them in making a technical diagnosis. This can be achieved both by the
vocational selection of servicemen for work in the extrasystem group of
the ASUV as well as by cOnstant training for the purpose of maintaining

the necessary professional skills brought up to the point of being auto-
matic.

This way of coordination plays a major role in the event that in the ASUV
the person carries out command functions. The vorking conditions of the
command group necessitate the ability to rapidly evaluate a changing
situation, and on this basis to take a sound combat decision and give it
to the subordinate troops. -

A person vho perfonms the functions of a commander should possess the
capacity for extended concentration of opinion. a great capacity of opera-
tional memory, a good sensory memory for complex signals, the ability to
analyze space-and-time states of the controlled objects (and on this

basis to take optimum decisions), decisiveness and an increased feeling
of responsibility for the consequences of the taken decisions, and so
forth. Herc of particular importance is the ability of the commander to
see the real objects behind the conditional signals. to recreate an in-
tegral picture of combat from the individual information signals, to
select the best variation from all the solutions proposed by the automatic
device and supplement this with the unformalized data. These abilities
are considered in appointing a person to cosmand positions in the ASUV
and are constantly developed in the process of carrying out all sorts of
training, games, exercises, and so forth.

Soviet scientists, in developing real ASUV, have endeavored to more fully
utilize the truly human properties of the individual which contain in-
exhaustible reserves for his efficient activity as the principal of labor.
For this reason. a solution to the problem of the optimum coordination of
man and equipment should be aimed not only at raising the reliability and
efficiency of the control system, but also at ensuring conditions for

the development of the creative abilities of an individual.

The solution to this problem in military affairs has its specific features
determined by the particular features of military affairs themselves and
by those tasks which a person carries out in the ASUV. The carrying out
of the principle of humanization is not always possible in solving the
specific tasks of military technical designing.

However, Soviet developers of modern military equipment have constantly
considered the specific influence of the individual qualities of the

servicemen on the efficiency of military equipment, and have been

15h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OWICML USE ONLY

constantly guided by this methodological principle in using the achieve-
aents of modern scientific and technical progress for creating highly
efficient ASUV.

2. The Influence of Individual Qualities of the Servicemen on the
Reliability and Efficiency of A801!

Being a most inortant element of the ASUV. nan participates in a system
not only as the carrier of certain professional labor qualities. but also
as an individual organically linked to the troop collective. the army.
all of society and its interests. In other words. in being an individual.
a person is part of new of .society's interrelated systems (subsystem)
of varying caplesity. for this reason the viewing of man as an elenent
of the MW in a broader and precisely social context is an indispensable
condition for a thorough analysis of the reliability of a control system.

In the works of bourgeois authors, the opinion is often voiced that the
role of man in a nodern var. particularly one using nuclear missile weapons.
is determined solely by his professional and technical preparation. for
example. the professor at the University of llichigan, A. Rapoport, in the
book "Strstey and Conscience" thus describes the state and activity of a
serviceman who has been turned into an attribute of the "weapons system”:
"He sits before the control board in cmfort. like a clerk at his desk.

he observes the signals which are totally devoid of drama and designating
cosmIands. He hears neither the noise of combat. nor the appeal to bravery
and self-sacrifice. he is not asked to stand under the destructive enew
fire or attack the enemy. he obeys only the colored lights which flash
on and off on the panel in front of him. he 'ideal' of a theraonuclear
war means the coqlete automation of under.“

Such a view of a soldier included in a "mam-equipment" system is extremely
one-sided and for this reason is nethodologically unsound. Certainly the
conditions of modern varfare have substantially changed. how a service-
man does not alwm directly perceive his enew, as they say. face to face.
This. however, does not mean that he is indifferent to social and moral

values (the aim of a war. its nature. the sense of one's life, goodness
and Justness).

The ASUV represents a complex sociotechnical system the reliability of
which depends not only upon the perfection of its technical ﬂuent but
also upon the social maturity of the people operating the system and con-
trolling the equipment. Marxist researchers who are working in the area
of ergonomics (an area of scientific knowledge concerned with studying
the interaction between man and equipment) consider this notion to be
methodologically fundamental in deteraining the ways for increasing the
reliability of the ASN.

In analyzing the human element of the ABUV, until very recenbl‘ i-‘he Siest-
est attention has been given to the psychological aspect per so. In the

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'fl'; |l1.|.’ll| III III.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

opinion of certain scientists. “psychological problems of the automation
of industrial control comprise one of the areas of future economic psy-
chology."5

however. comprehensive research on man generally and man as an element of
the system examined by us, in particular. is possible only within the
limits of Marxist-Leninist philosophy. This in no way does away with

the special methods of studying man. The philosophical approach "is of
determining methodological significance for all others. In the first
place. it fermulates the general methodological and ideological set in
studying such a complicated and many-sided phenomenon as man. Secondly.
in being based on special sciences of the system of human knowledge and
its synthesizing possibilities, it contributes to the development of

an integrated notion of man."6

Due to the fact that in Marxist literature a uniform understanding of the
structure of a personality and its qualities has not been achieved. it is
advisable to give one of the possible variations for solving this problem.
and on its basis disclose the basic lines for the impact of man on rais-
ing the reliability of the ASUV. Naturally the behavior of man and his
activities within the ASUV are subordinate to the general patterns which
determine his behavior and activity. This can only be a question of the
specific behavior and activity determined by the particular features of
functioning in the ASUV as well as the interpersonal relationships formed
in it.

In a man who represents a dialectical unity of two principles-natural

and social--there is the development of all the components and their
properties following two programs—-genetic and social. In realizing a
genetic program, man develops as a biological species and is subordinate
to the patterns of highly developed living beings. ”...The very fact of
the origin of man from the animal world." wrote F. Engels on this question,
"determines that man will never be completely free from the properties
inherent to an animal...."7 Obviously there is inherent to man a complex
of biological (natural) qualities manifested in his functions as a living
being (irritability, biological adaptation within certain limits to changes
in the environment. fatigue, the ability to restore vital functions. and
so forth).

Also inherent to man is a complex of qualities formed under the effect of
the genetic program but altered under the conditions of social development.
These include: The selective capacity of the analyzers to perceive sig-
nals from the outside. attention, speed of motor movements. and so forth.
The history of the biological adaptation of man to the environment which
has occurred over hundreds of thousands of years as well as social experi-
ence are reflected in their fonmation. According to the information of
the well known English physiologist, one of the pioneers in electroencepha-
lographic research on the brain, Halter Grey, the electric activity of the
brain in so-called identical twins in a state of quiet is maintained for

156
ros orncm. use ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82—00860R000100010006-3
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

years. that is. is aarked by great stability. However. in the responses
to stimuli inaccord 'vith the different social experience of these twins.
noticeable differences are observed in the patterns of electrical activity
in their brains.. For this reason. a number of the mental qualities of
nan. although predominantly determined by the genetic progran but also
nodified under the effect of the social program, should be terned bio-
social qualities. Undoubtedly the particular features of the biological

and biosocial qualities of man deteraine his reliability as an eleaent of
the ASUV.

At the sane time. can possesses qualities which he acquired in the process
of assinilating social experience. in the accmlating of material and
spiritual values and in the nnifeatation of his social activity. Pre-
cisely these qualities deter-ins the essence of nan as an individual.
"...The essence of the 'particular individual'.” wrote It. Mars. "is not

in his beard. not in his blood. and not in his abstract physical nature.
but rather his social quality. ..."9 The qualities of a person as an
individual have cone to be terned individual qualities. These are or-
dinarily divided into physical and spiritual. The fomsr arise on the
basis of natural properties and characterise nan precisely from the social
aspect. They consist in his physical endurance. work efficiency. the
ability to regulate the expenditure of his plwsical energy. to coordinate
body novenent. to direct the activities of analysers in accord with the
set goal. The movements of the hands of a surgeon. a composer or a setter
on an automatic line are not only and not so much the consequence of a
gift of nature as a result of skills acquired in the process of social
practice. Physical qualities are an inseparable cosponent of the indie
vidual. Thus. K. ﬂarx, in describing the individual qualities of a worker.
also pointed to his physical capacities which he considered to be determined
social qualities.”

In participating in the ASUV in the role of an element in it. a servicsman
broadly applies his physical individual qualities. liis ability to endure
physical stress. to work productively under the conditions of modern combat.
to proaptly overcome apathy and maintain attention under the conditions of
the lack of active stinuli, and to master the equip-estuall of this is
acquired in the process of long and specific training.

The spiritual qualities of the individual are marked by a significantly
more complex structure. 37 then a person carries out the following func-
tions: Cognitive-informational (a selective attitude toward the ordinary
flow of information. an evaluation of its significance. systentisation.
storage and reproduction as it is needed); creatively constructive (the
ability to make .1qu in cognition. to go beyond the limits of the patterns
and automtic actions developed in the process of training and self-
instruction); regulativc (the capacity to influence one's activity and
behavior. proceeding from existing knowledge. convictions. strength of
will. developed habits. the clash of natives and aood); commicative
(the capacity throud: various sign systems to transmit the content of
one's thoughts. desires and experiences to other people, as well as

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. a. . . .. . . . .
I . I! ’ .I'. DI. l.lll H. OH.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perceive the significance of the signs which others use); emotional-
aensory (the capacity to experience all acts of vital activity).

All the qualities of man are intertwined into the social activity of the
individual who does not act Just as the spiritual or exclusively as the
physical, but rather is a synthesis of both. However the concrete type
of an individual's activity can be related to the predominant expenditure
of spiritual or physical efforts. This circumstance makes it possible to
conditionally term certain types of activity as predominantly mental or
physical labor.

Depending upon the spheres and nature of applying spiritual and physical
forces of the socialist type individual, it is possible to isolate the
following complexes (groups) of its qualities: Sociopolitical (loyalty

to the cause of communism. socialist patriotism and internationalism,
intolerance of social injustice, and sociopolitical activity); professional-
labor where military qualities are a specific variety (competence, labor
activeness, and so forth); family-domestic which realize the rights and
duties of an individual in relation to other members of the family, rela-
tives and neighbors; cultural-aesthetic (general education, the ability

to use cultural values and participate in their creation); moral qualities
(the attitude toward moral values manifested in the conduct of the indi-
vidual .

In permeating all other qualities and in possessing the capacity for inte-
grating them, moral qualities usually act in combination with them (moral
political, moral labor, moral combat, and so forth). Cultural and aesthetic
Qualities possess the same property.

All of these spiritual qualities of man gain their integrated embodiment

in his ideology which is an integrated system of views on the world around
(reality) and his place in it. However an ideology can be ordinary (formed
in the process of daily practice and contact with other people) and scien-
tific, including idealistic or materialistic, religious or atheistic, and
so forth.

In tne armies of the socialist countries, a scientific communist ideology
is constantly and steadfastly instilled in the servicemen. Its influence
on the activity and conduct of the individual is so great that the 2hth
CPSU Congress defined the task of developing a communist ideology in all
workers as the core of all the party's ideological and indoctrinational
work.H This thesis was also reflected in the decisions of the 25th Party
Congress.

A scientific ideology of the individual12 represents a system of dialecti-
cal materialistic (philosophical), economic and sociopolitical convictions
and assimilated fUndamental conclusions of social and natural sciences
which provide an integrated and adequate notion of the world and the
place of the individual in the struggle for social progress and communism.

158
ms osncm us: 0va

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.. um"
'I'

Consequentlyt'with the present level of the development of knowledge, it
is impossible to speak of a scientific ideology of an individual if it
has not mastered Muxism-Ieninism as the basis of this ideology. At the
same time,"ii scientific ideolow cannot be considered complete if the
individual: along with this basis. has not assimilated the fundamental
conclusions of the natural (physics, biology, astronow, and so forth)
and social ilaw, ethics, aesthetics, and so forth) sciences. Ideologi-
cal knowledge gains true force and causes the individual to becoae socio-
politicalli”active in the struggle for coemmmisn only when this knowledge
becomes its conviction and its internal moral sets.

Philosophical and sociological knowledge and convictions which are one of
the components of the scientific ideology help a person participating in
ASUV to more profoundly understand the relationship of obJective condi-
tions and the aubJective factor and the laws of anmed combat. The indi-
vidual who does not know these laws feels himself to be the pawn of un-
bridled forces on the battlefield or in one or another section of the ASUV,
and does not have confidence in the possibility of subordinatihg circum-
stances to his will. 0n the contrary, philosophical and sociological
convictions make it possible for a soldier to have confidence in himself

as the creator of circumstances and impel him to maximally manifest his
activeness.

having assimilated scientific sociopolitical knowledge, a servicemen
clearly realizes that the policy of a state, being the concentrated ex-
pression of the economy, can be Just or inJust, and that the expansionis-
tic nature of imperialist were is ultimately detenained by the selfish
interests of the ruling classes. In having a decided influence on the
process of armed combat, new weapons cannot alter its political content.
For this reason the soldiers of a socialist army engaged in an ASUV are
convinced that were in the defense of the victories of socialism always
have a progressive bent and a Just character. Conviction in the Justness
of a war, as V. I. Lenin stressed, ”raises the morale of soldiers and
causes them to endure unheard of hardships."13 This is a pattern con-on
to all servicemen.

Legal knowledge helps a soldier who is carrying out the role of a definite
elanent in the ASUV to understand the sociopolitical nature of war from
the viewpoint of its legality; aesthetic knowledge helps understand the
elevated goals of a war in the defense of the victories of socialism.

Thus, ideological knowledge hones the social awareness of a soldier, and
develops in him a hate for those who are encroaching on the victories of
socialism. and they help him feel his involvement in the fate of the
motherland and personal responsibility for its defense. Ideological know-
ledge makes it possible for the soldier to go beyond the specific situa-

tion in which he is one of the elements of the ASUV, and see his role from
the heights of a scientific ideology. In this instance the humble role
of a component of the ASUV appears in a different light, and assumes a

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. .. .
‘ .I . ll. Uflll Ill Ill.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sore profound social content. Certainly this tells on the attitude of
the soldier to his immediate duties.

Ideological knowledge and convictions in military personnel are objecti-
fied and gain a material embodiment in their actions and deeds which, in
turn, show the professional and labor qualities of the individual. Al-
though the latter differ little from the analogous qualities of special-
ists working in national economic automated control and service systems,
however they are realized in specific and rapidly changing situations of
armed combat. Under these conditions the enemy can impede or completely
disrupt control. Moreover, the circumstances of combat strictly limit
the time for a person to take a sound decision, and create a constant
danger for life.

The mdlitary qualities of servicemen engaged in an ASUV depend to a sig-
nificant degree upon the training level, experience and skills in using
equipment. In turn, the effect from the manifestation of military quali-
ties is determined by the scientific organization of labor of all the
servicemen employed in the ASUV. It is generally known that the NOT is
determined by the conformity of the organizational forms of human activity
to the laws of this activity. In terms of the ASUV, this means to what
degree the organizational forms of the activities of the men correspond
to the laws of the successful functioning of the control system. NOT in-
cludes a system of intercoordinated measures which permit the constant
maintaining of high combat readiness and capability of the servicemen,

and the ability to attain maximum results with minimum outlays of time,
mental and physical energy of the servicemen, the least losses in per-
sonnel and equipment, optimum use of the equipment, and the constant main-
taining of it in operational readiness.

An improvement in control is tied to a further improvement in the auto-
mating of control processes and control qualities of the ASUV leaders as
well as all the servicemen working in it. The ability to plan one's own
activities and those of subordinates, to foresee a change in conditions,
and to Optimally allocate one's forces and means in accord with the gen—
eral and particular tasks is not acquired all at once. Under combat
conditions, the reliability of the ASUV will be higher the more complete
the control qualities of the comanders. One of the widely found short-
comings in the control of ASUV is the inability of the commanders of indi-
vidual elements in the control system to optimally allocate the load
(duties). Most often the greatest burden falls on the commanders and

the chiefs of staff. There have been frequent instances when under the
condition of continuous "battles" (exercises) after a short period of

time they were completely unsuited for work. Undoubtedly it is impossible
to evenly distribute the load due to the different functions performed

by the officers. Here the basic task is a desire to match the load on

the servicemen to the level of their preparedness, their psychological

and physiological capabilities and their functional duties. Skilled
specialists at times experience an uneven load when they are improperly
used.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'ﬂu' ﬁnally and daemntie nuniiticn of the servicemen have an indirect in-
fluvncc on the reliability of tho anuv. The information received by the
servicemen from home has a significant psychological impact on their atti-
tude toward carrying out their duties. Consequently. the reliability of
the ASUV cannot be restricted to Just military technical knowledge of the
operating personnel.

Cultural and aesthetic qualities of the individual also have a great effect
on the reliability of the ASUV. The concept of cultural and aesthetic qual-
ities is used in a broad and narrow sense. These qualities (in the broad
sense of their understanding) manifest the attitude of the individual to
society, to individual elements of its social structure, to the artificially
created objective world, toward material and spiritual values as well as
toward nature. Here it is a question of social man who possesses "the
richest possible properties and relationships.”‘“ In the narrow sense,
cultural and aesthetic qualities of an individual designate its capacity
to carry out its daily activities, to organize its relations with persons
in direct contact with it, proceeding not only from purely utilitarian
(considering exclusively practical benefit) considerations. but also on
the basis of the laws of beauty. Precisely on this level the monograph
will deal with cultural and aesthetic qualities of the individual which
are clearly apparent in its ability to bring the content and form of its
activity to harmony and perfection. and to feel and sense the measure in
communication. actions and deeds. Within the limits which cultural and
aesthetic qualities involve the sphere of communication between people.
they merge with the moral qualities of the individual. For this reason,

in the given instance it will be a question solely of the influence of

the cultural and aesthetic qualities of an individual on its attitude
toward technology.

The ability to perfectly use equipment in the ASUV depends both upon the
general and special training of the servicemen. "...In order to use a
multiplicity of things.” wrote K. Marx, "a person should be capable of
using them. that is, he should be a highly cultured person...."‘5 The
level of servicing equipment presupposes a coordination of the psycho-
physioiogical qualities of the servicemen with the equipment whereby its
optimum measure is found in relying on the reliability of the equipment
and bringing to perfection the skills of the scrviceman as an element of
the ASUV. it is impossible to deny the positive significance of automatic
responses and definite patterns in the actions of servicemen operating
equipment. in tnem is accumulated an extended process of the adaptation

of can to a specific piece of equipment and the search for the measure of
the technical level of the individual.

The cultural and aesthetic qualities of a servicemen engaged in an ASUV
nerve as an indicator of the perfection of "OT achieved in a specific area
of the control system. These qualities are manifested in numerous ”de-
tails" from which the functional activity is made up. These include:

The organization of working and resting conditions, the preparation of

161
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
.. _ g . , . _ . .
.a a i s a... s. . Il.’ : :I’~ H. 0:... H. 0.0.-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the work area, and so forth. EVen the correctly found stance of a service-
man at his vork area can be a reserve for increasing labor productivity.

A specialist who has mastered the equipment works not merely effectively
but also beautifully and artfully. If the individual has developed a
feeling for the beautiful, than it undoubtedly is also felt in the work.
Carelessness, sloppiness, an absence of punctuality and preciseness, un-

tidiness in work, on the one hand, and beauty, on the other, are incom-
patible.

The formation of the cultural and aesthetic qualities of an individual
occurs in the process of daily activity, in contact with other persons
and particularly in perceiving sensory and visual works of art. A high
aesthetic culture of a soldier is not an impediment but rather a powerful
catalyst for the successful fulfillment of his functional duties as an
element of the ASUV.

A serviceman in an ASUV can work autonomously or in contact with other
persons. whatever the degree of spatial contact of a soldier (through

the equipment or direct communication), he is linked with them as a member
of the military collective. A military collective is a specific variety
of a labor collective which represents a basic cell of a socialist society.

The place of a labor (including military) collective in the social

structure of a socialist society is determined by the contribution of
each individual to the creation of the material and spiritual values,

and to their multiplication and defense. The moral merit of a person is
materialized precisely in the active. creative and military spheres and
he is formed as an individual. In a labor collective a person realizes
both his rights and duties as a citizen and a member of various social
organizations (party, Komsomol and trade union). A labor collective has
a constant indoctrinational influence on individuality. In it the new,
socialist qualities of the workers are formed and the attitudes of friend-
ship and comradely mutual aid are established.

The regulation of the relationships between the members of military col-
lectives, including those which form the ASUV. is carried out by social
standards or norms (the demands made on the individual). The fundamental
portion of them is established in enforceable enactments (laws, manuals.
instructions and orders). However, all social norms. regardless of their
official legal reinforcement, are based on the strength of social and
collective opinion, and the self-awarness of the individual vhich is
formed under the influence of both objective conditions as well as all
forms (types) of social awareness (political views, legal awareness,
morality, aesthetic and other views). The moral and political views of
the servicemen have the greatest impact on their behavior and on the
relationships between them.

The special place of moral and political views in the system of control-
ling the behavior of servicemen is explained by the following factors.

162
m orncw. uss ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first place, in moral views and standards. in contrast to others
(for example. scientific). behavior is reflected in the most concentrated
form. For this reason, at times the sphere of behavior is viewed exclu-
sively through the prism of morality (such an approach toward behavior

is far from couplets). Secondly, the activities of the servicemen in
their specific manifestation. as representatives of a state body. are
political activities. They directly realize one of the foreign policy
functions of the state. and for this reason in their awareness political
views cannot help but hold a determining place. Consequently, such moral
qualities of Soviet military personnel as patriotism and internationalism
are simultaneously political ones. Loyalty to the cause of communism and
love for the socialist motherland and the socialist countries are an inte-
gral moral-political quality characterizing the personality of a soldier
of a socialist army generally and one employed in an ASUV. in particular.
however perfect professional and labor (military) qualities a servicemen
may possess. in and of themselves they are insufficient to ensure the
reliability of his activities as an element of the ASUV. Special profes-
sional training may have a negative effect if this instruction is not ac-
companied by and strengthened with communist indoctrination. One must not
be set in Opposition to the other. loyalty to the cause of conunism and
love for one’s motherland and the socialist countries are realized spe-
cifically through the attitude of a soldier toward the execution of his
functional duties.

The communist attitude toward labor on the part of military personnel
employed in an ASUV means: An awareness by them that their duties to a
higher degree are useful and socially necessary; the perfect mastery of
their functional duties; the constant ensuring of functional reliability
of that element of the ASUV which has been assigned to the various service-
men; a maximum providing of help to one's comrades in the interests of
maintaining the reliability of the entire control system.

No matter how perfectly an individual servicemen employed in an ASUV
carries out his professional duties. the reliability of the entire con-
trol system depends upon the synchronization and the reciprocal coordi-
nation of all its elements. Moreover, the reliability of an ASUV as a
whole is determined by the reliability of its weakest link. Por this
reason, the efforts of the entire collective aimed at maintaining the
high reliability of the control system may not provide the expected re-
sults. if the corresponding reliability is not provided in all the sec-
tions of the ASUV.

A solution to the problem of ensuring high reliability of the ASUV de-
pends not only upon the maintenance of the equipment in a working con-
dition. but also upon the moral and political qualities of the service-
men in the sphere of the ASUV, upon their awareness. morale, and the
feeling of collectivism and responsibility for the common cause. The
responsibility of each to the collective and vice versa becomes an in-
separable trait of our way of life and an imperative of the times.

163
roe orncm. use om
"':O I O: t ' ' 0 LI. s' L II" ' .‘D'l II; ITII‘ H! IN.

FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

The shaping of an awareness and feeling of collectivism occurs in the
process of the entire vital activity of an individual in a socialist
society. However. the degree of collectivism. as an individual quality
in military personnel, is not the same. For this reason. the contenders.
political workers. all the indoctrination officers, the communist and
Komsomol members engaged in the ASUV endeavor not only to develop collec-
tivist qualities in the men but also to further their set for self-
indoctrination.

One of the specific features in the activities of military personnel en-
gaged in the ASIA! is related to the ongoing scientific and technical
progress leading to ever greater spatial autonosv and isolation of one
another. In certain areas of the ASUV. a servicemen works surrounded
only by equipment and does not have an opportmity to directly observe
the activities of his comrades. This objective trend causes a shifting
of the perception of combat from the sensory sphere into the intellectual
and rational area. Depending upon individual qualities and upon the
strength of imagination of the men, in their awareness nonidentical in-
formation models of combat arise. One soldier clearly sees the panorama
of the engagement behind the readings of the indicators. and is clearly
aware of all the difficulties which have befallen his comrades, while
another may not have such images.

Compensating for the infomtional and sensory starvation in soldiers en-
gaged in ASUV is not an easy problem. Its solution is complicated by

the fact that the consunications channels of the ASUV are completely
filled with operational informtion directly linked to the carrying out
of specific combat missions. Moreover. all messages circulate in a coded
form. The use of these conunications channels for informing the men of
the moral state of comrades, their mood. heroism and courage is extremely
limited. The lack of such information weakens the feeling of closeness
and empathy and one‘s involvement in the fate of the collective. This
problem can be solved by employing variom forms and means for indoctrin-
ating a feelim of collectivism in the men. The most effective are
direct contact. the listening to reports of subordinates on their mood
and state of mind. as well as messages on the state of affairs within the
entire ASUV. the prompt supplying of newspapers. pamphlets. photographs.
tape recordings and so forth to the men.

Certainly. these measures will produce a proper effect in the instance
that collectivist sets have been shaped in the men prior to their entry

into the ASUV For this reason, it is advisable to select personnel for
carrying out strictly autonomous (in the spatial sense) tasks in the con-
trol system considering the formed collectivist qualities of the service-
men.

men the most intensive and accelerated operating conditions of the ASUV
do not prevent the personnel engaged in its individual elements from meet-

ing periodically in hall strength or with representatives at party and
Komsomol meetings. Personal contact is a very effective means for

16h
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
I’OR OFFICIAL IISH ONLY

indoctrinating a feeling of collectivisn and responsibility for the func-
tioning of the entire ASUV in the men. At the same time, such meetings

in a combat situation require careful preparations and consideration of
the conditions which exist on the battlefield. For this reason the men

in the ASUV can often function under stress conditions. A dangerous situ-
ation is reflected in their feelings. it causes negative enotions and
tells on their mood. Under these circumstances. only collected. aorally
strong and strong-willed soldiers can resist panic. the feeling of fear
and bevildernent.

Hill is the capacity of conscience to regulate and control the behavior
of a person. and is the concluding element in mental activity. vhen
thoughts and feelings turn into the actions and deeds of an individual.
will possesses relative independence in relation to ideology. A strong
will (like a vea's one) can be inherent to persons vith both progressive
and reactionary vievs. This circunstance cannot help but be considered
in ensuring the reliability of the ABUV.

Hill is formed in an individual in the process of instruction. indoctrina-
tion and particularly self-indoctrination under certain conditions. in

the process of overconing difficulties and victory over oneself. will

has a varying focus. A person can possess a strong will causing one to
shov a steady interest in training exercises. physical exercises or
mental labor. and at the same tins have a week will for decisive actions
in a dangerous situation. For bold actions in a dangerous situation it

is essential to shape the moral and volitional qualities of military per-
sonnel under conditions close to actual conbat. A strong will gives a
soldier confidence. it helps to overcome the feeling of fear. and makes

it possible to act decisively with unexpected changes in the combat situa-
tion. For this reason the tapering of the volitional qualities of service-
men involved in a control system is an important direction of preparing
them to fulfill their functional duties within the ASUV.

Thus. the professional and technical qualities of an individual, its
special knowledge and training are a very significant factor but far from
the only one influencing the reliability and efficiency of the ASUV. All
the social qualities of the individual are closely interrelated. For this
reason the solving of the problem of the reliability of an ASUV cannot be
considered sufficient if it is restricted merely to the special training
of the personnel. All the social qualities of the individual must be
developed. Only under this condition can the reliability of the ASUV in
its human element be considered ensured.

3. The Creativity of the Commander and the Automation of Troop Central
One of the urgent methodological problems brought to life by the military
and technical revolution is an examination of the relationship of creative

thinking by the comnder and the electronic computer in the ASUV. In
elucidating these relationships. inevitably different vievs have arisen.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Bone researchers have placed fundanental limitations on the path of using
electronic computers in troop control. Their basic argument is that the
creative portion of a conunder's Job cannot be automated. Others have
recognised the fundamental possibility of fornalizing the creative ac-
tivity of a nan. In their opinion. in military affairs intuition will
be replaced by "precise calculation."

At present basic attention is rightly being focused on the questions of
an optinsn conbination of the activities of nan and the conputer in modern
control system. and the conputers are viewed as a means for broadening
and strengthening the creative possibilities of the co-ander. In this
rewd greater interest has been shown in elucidating the essence of the
creative activities of nan. and in defining the content of such categories
as "creativity." "search." and ”intuition" of a commander. The difficul-
ties of solving the given probleas are related not only to the insufficient-
ly exanined "nechanisns" of hunn conscience. but also to the close inter-
twining of the discursive and intuitive in the thinking and activities of
we

Since thinking arises and develops in the process of labor activity, to
one degree or another this has a creative nature. At the same time not
each task carried out by nan is a creative one.

In particular, creative tasks can arise on a basis of contradictions be-
tween the goals and desires of a person and the means of attaining then
which are insufficient or when at the given time. These contradic-
tions cannot always be solved on the basis of ready-made rules. instruc-
tions or advice. Creativity presupposes the resolution of the contradic-
tions and the creation of something fundanentally new. let this be either
the result or the very method of obtaining this result. or both taken
together. that is. what did not exist previously at all. Such a defini-
tion makes it possible to emphasise the fundamental newness of the crea-
tive product. It is inportant to disassociate this from an understanding
of the new in the sense of the result of conveyor or routinized produc-
tion of new objects. things and ideas. In being new in terms of the re-
sult of the transformation of latter. each article which follows the
prototype is a precise copy. a reprint of the preceding and in this regard
is old. This is precisely fixed in the phrase: "Although the machine is
new. the model is old.” For this reason creativity must be understood as
a process of thinking and activity which is characterized not simply by

a new result. but rather by a fundamentally new, "previously unknown or
nonexistent result.”

Of course. such a categorical criterion for the result of creative activity
is of significance only as a principle. Certainly the degree of newness
of the result and. consequently. of the creativity in the specific types
of theoretical and practical activity can be extremely different. This
circumstance finds its corresponding expression in the concept of "craft."
"art." "invention." "rationalization." "talent." "geniality." and so

166
son onxcm. use ONLY
IOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

forth. For this reason the mount of a personal creative contribution to
the activities of various people can fluctuate almost from zero to high
limits.

Creative and uncreative activity are not isolated from one another by a
Great Hall of China. for the elaboration of the rules for solving a prob-
lem shifts the latter from the category of atypical and creative to typi-
cai md uncreative. This pattern underlies the further broadening of

the possibilities of counters vhich are being given ever new problems for
solving. and the algorithm for these problems have already been found.

At the same time the concept of "fundamentally nev" is alvays taken in

a concrete relation to definite persons. social strata or classes. When
it is a question of the fundamentally new. involuntarily the question
arises of for whom it is such. Is this for all mankind. a class. a state.
a group of people or for me alone? Consequently. creativity. as thought
and activity in the process of which something fundamentally nev is cre-
ated. can be assessed on two and more levels. that is. in relation to a
definite social group or even to all mankind.

Creativity in military affairs bears the imprint of the complexity and
certain mosaicness of military affairs themselves vhich include the dif-
ferent sectors of military labor. In any sphere the soldiers are con-
fronted with missions vhich do not have ready-made rules for solving
them. In automated systems the degree of the creative participation of
the various groups of personnel in the functioning of the ASUV varies
(the extrasystem. intrasystem and comand groups). In analyzing the bal-
ance of the creative activities of man and the coQuter in automated sys-
tems. it is advisable to understand by "man” the degree of the creative

involvement of people in vorking out the programs and preparing the com-
puter for operation. in the process of its operation and in taking the

decision.

Creative thought in the process of solving untypical. original problems
relies both on the formal logic as well as intuitive heuristic methods.
The former consist in certain operations of thought. including: Analysis
and synthesis. induction and deduction. comparison, abstraction. and so
forth. The latter presuppose the capacity of thought for imagination and
intuitive leaps. These methods are in a dialectical unity. and in the
various stages of the process of cognition and problem solving, one or
the other assumes predominant significance.

To the degree that a computer models primarily discoursive. reasoned
thought. it is important to analyze the balance of these methods in the
ASUV. to study the potential possibilities of modeling creative processes.
to trace the dialectics of the transition of creative problems into un-
creative ones. and on the basis of the obtained results. to clarity the
possibilities of the further introduction of automation in the various
stages of the comnder's activities in the area of troop control. At
each of the stages, the balance of the creativity of the comander

167
Iron orncm. use on?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(officer) and the work of the computer equipment varies. The degree of
attention for each operation in the chain of consecutive Operations in
working out a decision depends upon a nubcr of principles. on most
important of them is the following: the uchine is given what it does
better than man. The concept of "better than man" includes primarily
the indisputable advantages of the conuter in speed and accuracy of cal-
culating. The creative thought of man has enormous advantages over the
computer. and includes: The capacity for initiative. the setting of
tasks. the working out of intelligent decisions with insufficient data.
the generalizing of concepts. the capacity for intuition. and the possi-
bility of volitional and emotional activity.

For graphicness it is possible to examine the basic cycles in the mental
activity of a couander.

The first stage--the explanation of the combat mission-oremains almost
comletely the privilege of the creative thinking of a military chief.

The contender endeavors to penetrate the plan of the superior chief. If
it is a question of a regimental consander. then he ascertains the place
of the regiment in carrying out the combat mission of the division. here
he creatively processes the received information (the order of the superior
chief) and thinks out its basic provisions. As a result of the mental ac-
tivity. new information is elaborated. and the task posed by the senior
chief is remodeled by the contender. The problems of goal setting and
goal fulfillment assume the necessary concretisation considering the com-
bat experience, knowledge. character and temperament of the coaander.

The process of elucidating the combat mission is not only related to the
reasoning out of the obtained infomtion. but also to the necessary gen-
eralizations and the posing of new problems. All these aspects are cre-
ative acts of man alone. Although self-instructing machines do work out
programs for their own actions. man still stands at their sources.

The elucidation of a combat mission is a most inortant prerequisite for
using a computer in the process of collecting and processing information
as well as for selecting the optimi- variation of action. Certainly even
the most perfect matheamtical apparatus or an electronic machine will not
help if the contender has not elucidated the essence of the combat mis-
sion. if he has not formulated the goal of the actions or determined the
basic parameters for the forthcoming battle or operation. For example.
at one time in the United States certain types of tactical testing of the
ASUV were aborted due to the incompetence of the prograsncr mathematicians
in military affairs. They had completely mastered mathematical logic,
mathematical statistics, game theory and algorithm theory. but were un-
able to work out the methods for solving tactical and operational prob-
lems and an operating program for the computers on the staffs.

In elucidating a combat mission, the commander determines the volume and
quality of infomtion needed for working out a plan of the decision, and
designates the work procedure in the second stage involved in the collec-

ion and processing of operational and tactical data. The collection of

168
[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICMI. USE ONLY

data needed to elucidate the mission and take a creative decision is not
purely u technlcal problem. It presupposes without fail active creative
search. and a desire to solve the problem on the basis of a minimum of
information. Under the conditions of the present-day scientific and tech-
nical revolution and a definite information "explosion." it should be a
question of the optimum parameters of the quantity of information needed
for solving a creative problem. On this level a man can solve the prob-
lem of collecting and evaluating data "more economically." for in an in-
dividual fact he is capable often of seeing more than a computer can.

In the very perception of the world by a man there is a creative principle
and a capacity for selectiveness in depicting the world and a semantic
evaluation of the perceived facts. However. with a rise in the amount of
information needed for the correct creative solution to a problem, hunan
thinking cannot always handle its processing. Here machines come to help
and they provide a speed which is inaccessible for human thought.

At present there has been a continuous increase in the amount of data re-
ceived by the couander and a shortening of the time for processing them.

Here one must note the essential difference between the information cap-
able of providing an answer to the arisen question and that raw material

from which information must still be extracted. Some researchers have
proposed that this raw material (in contrast to effective information)

be tensed siny data. Others call it primary information. But they all
emphasize that with an abundance of primary information. a "information
starvation” develops. This is caused by the limited possibilities for
human thought to process directly the entire bulk of incoming data. Even
a creative mind hesitates when confronted with the avalanche of data
which should be systemtized. analyzed and evaluated before use. Often
with an abundance of primary information, a lack of the most important
data is felt dealing with the enemy. its position. fighting strength,
condition and intentions. As a result, creativity loses its gnoseological
base. that is the correct reflection of reality. Consequently. under
present-day conditions the most important prerequisite for creative deci-
sions is the turning over of the most labor intensive work of locating.
collecting and processing the information to equipment. and primarily the
cybernetic machines which complement man in creativity.

iiowever here as well the involvement of man is required in preparing their
activity. Only creative thinking by specialists on the basis of existing
experience and knowledge can determine ahead of time what data on a combat
situation are required and provide this in the machine program.

The commander sets the criterion for the suitability of information, and
only he and his staff in the concluding stage evaluates the data processing
results. In other words. an interaction arises between man and the machine,
and in this man maintains all the creative work of preparing the computer
for operation and interpreting the results obtained by it.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OHICIAL USE ONLY

As is known, the results of the processed information can be obtained by
the comder on a display screen in the form of diagrams, tables. graphs
and so forth. however the image on the screen is a schematic one, without
details. lo program can provide for the displaying of the entire diversity
of events which may exist in reality. Imagination helps the commander to
see behind the signs and symbols living people. real processes and the
intertwining of necessary and random ties.

The recreation of a combat situation in all its details and elements is
the result of the creative thinking of a co-ander. Regardless of the
successes of cybernetics. the problem of ensuring effective information
retrieval. the selecting of data. their analysis. storage, indexing. cor-
relation. abstracting and other transformations as well as its final for-
mation for use by man at present has only been partially solved. This
applies particularly to the military area. Certainly the very nature of
aned combat contains those aspects which can be understood only on the
basis of the creative thinking of nan. Sometime an insignificant fact
which the colputer was not progra-sed to display (a combat situation in
terms of its properties is infinite). can provide more for an experienced
comnder who possesses the necessary knowledge than does the result of
generalizing thousands of units of information.

The culmination point of the creative efforts of a conander is the work-
ing out of the plan for the forthcoming combat. the establishing of it.
including the mathematical calculations. decision taking and the planning
of forthcoming actions. The plan of the contender for combat is the re-
sult of enormous preparatory work in elucidating the combat mission and
evaluating the situation. Under present-day conditions the time allocated
for decision taking and elaboration has been sharply reduced. The time
factor determines the possibility of both proposing different variations
and analyzing them. In facilitating and accelerating the processing of
data on the situation which can be subjected to quantitative interpreta-
tion. the coaputers are unable to handle many factors which do not have a
precise mathematical expression. For this reason. the commander, in eval-
uating the possible variations of action. uses not only the computer data
but also a mass of additional information which cannot be considered in
constructing the mathematical models. All the more because on the path

to modeling social processes, including the troop control processes, there
still are great difficulties caused by the nultiple factor and stochastic
nature of these phenomena and by the complexity of their quantitative ex-
pression.

However. these limitations do not reduce the role of the precise calcula-
tions which determine the value of one or another decision variation.
Certainly the proof of it (in contrast to the proposing of a hypothesis)
relies on the means of feral logic and on mathematics. The commander
is aided by calculating devices which make it possible not only to test
out the "strength" of variations worked out by the coslmandcr, but also
can to son degree themselves propose corresponding variations. In the
given instance. the operation of the computer is externally reminiscent

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of a creative search as the machine proposes variations. However here
also the creative activity of man (programming) is shifted in time and
space to the sources of the machine’s operation. The programmer creates
a mathematical model of combat, while the machine searches for the state
of this model which test would ensure the achieving of the goal. Since
the constructing of a model requires the solving of complicated creatiVe
problems, the results of automation at this and other stages are not
only the condition for creativity but also its product. The accumulated
creativity in the computer program appears before us in fundamentally new
results now obtained without human participation. ”In the same manner
that in a storage battery we store electric energy, so in algorithms and
programs for computers, in slide rules, graphs, tables and namograms we
store mental labor so that at the required moment we obtain an instantan-
eous return,"'7 the Soviet researchers 1. Anureyev and A. Tatarchenko
have commented on this question.

The advantages of the machine-speed and accuracy of calculations-advance
the limits of creativity. It becomes possible to calculate not one or two
variations but ten and more. The computer does not conclude the process
of searching for a creative solution. The variations of the decisions
proposed by the machine on the highest level of control are not yet de-
cisions themselves but rather their plans. They should be evaluated and
supplemented by man, for a model never encompasses all the relationships
and aspects of the original. "For this reason the conclusions obtained

as a result of quantitative research are not a decision in the full sense
of the word, but only the basis for taking a decision which is as a whole
the result of the creative activities of the staffs and the will of the
commander,"18 writes V. Afanas'yew.

The commander. in reflecting on the decision variations calculated by
the cybernetic machine, can supplement the model parameters by such a
factor, for example. as the moral-political and psychological character-
istics of the enemy troops, and particularly their command personnel;

he can more precisely consider the general political situation in carry-
ing out combat.

At present the quality of control, the degree of combat readiness of the
troops. the state of their morale and other factors are best considered
by using coefficients. This is Just one of the measures which make it
easier for the cosmander and his staff to select the most rational varia-
tion of actions. However the complexity of considering a large number
of very fluid and indefinite factors and the limited time often necessi-

tate the taking of not only an optimum decision but also an acceptable
variation of a decision. It must not be forgotten that in a specific
combat situation instances are encountered which are completely new, unique
and which necessitate a creative approach on the part of the commander.
While repetition in combat missions and situations serves as the basis

for applying the regulations and consequently makes it possible to ferma -
ize the picture of forthcoming combat, the original features in combat

171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and an operation impose objective limits to the formalization and require
creative solutions from the comander.

It would be. wrong to feel that a creative decision is merely the result
of the direct logical conclusions from the process empirical material.
Although mehines using the corresponding programs do take decisions. the
latter. however. cannot be described as creative. Creativity remains the
privilege of man who creates the program of computer operations. The rise
of a creative idea which underlies a decision is always preceded by a
certain difficulty in mental activity showing the disruption of the forme-
logical chain of speculation. In this instance help comes from the forms
of mental activity. imagination and intuition which embow the specific
features of creative thought. With their aid the conscience analyzes not
only the actual data proposed as the premises for solving the given prob-
lem. but also all accumulated experience and all existing knowledge. A
problem situation forces the musory of man to work, and to seek out addi-
tional sources of informtion. All these states are not inherent to a
computer. the program and search limits of which have been rather precisely
defined and do not permit an arbitrary playing of fantasy.

Fantasy and imagination make it possible to use rather distant analogies,
hazy guesses and chance. A random factor ( for example, an abrupt change
in the weather) can serve as that additional influx of informatics: which
will make it possible to solve a creative problem as a whole. For this
reason the researchers of creativity problems have constantly emphasi zed
that chance does not replace a creative act, but merely contributes to
its dynamicness on the basis of rather complete factual data.

The delimitation of the intuitive-heuristic and formal logical methods in
solving creative problems is of great significance for correctly combining
the computer and the comander‘s thinking in troop control.

In keeping with progress in the area of formalizing the ever new processes
reflected by our conscience, certain mental operations which previously
were considered creativity have lost this quality and have been turned
over to cybernetic machines. Computers are constantly advancing the

limit of creative thinking of a commander toward new, more complicated
problems. One of them is the further development of heuristic program-
ming. that is. the working out of qualitatively new methods for solving
complex problems using computers. These models are constructed consider-
ing certain particular features of human creative thinking. In particular.
it has been proposed that not all the variations for solving a problem be
gone through. but rather the following of rules (heuristics) which at

each stage of computer operations make it possible to reduce the number

of trials leading to the proper decision. Heuristic programing provides
speed and sufficient efficiency of the found decisions under the conditions
of inconlete and current (variable) information and the particular com-
plexity of the problem. The further development of heuristic programming
will be evolutionary modeling which provides a certain capacity of'the

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

programs for "self-improvement.” This will make it possible to obtain
the necessary data more quickly for taking a more sound and effective de-
cision.

The need for heuristic and evolutionary progrmmning did not arise by
chance. It reflects objective difficulties standing on the path of ore-
ating a precise and couplets mathematical model of modern combat. The
actual process of armed combat contains an infinite number of such ele-
ments. many of which do not have definite significance for the course and
outcome of it. Undoubtedly. oversimplification and idealization in creat-
ing the formalised model of combat or operation would tell negatively on
the value of the obtained results. Regardless of the promise of heuristic
and evolutionary programming. they are not an analogue of the leading
"mechanisms" of creative thinking in man. for the method of constructing
their programs (the sorting of a definite number of variations and a reduc-
tion in the number of trials) differs fundamentally from the forms of ac-
tivity in human creative thought.l9

Research on creative human thought shows its amazing capacity to find the
shortest paths for solving untypical problems. and to make wide use of
fantasy. distant analogies, hazy guesses, emotions and chance. The dis-
closure of the secrets of the creative "mechanisms" of thinking entails
research on the di.lectics of the conscious and subconscious, the processes
of idea actualization, and the use of the truly unlimited possibilities of
the human memory which includes the social experience of mankind. The in-
tuitive and heuristic activities of the brain rely on formal logical
methods of thought and include these methods in a detached form. This
affirms the conclusion that human decision taking is characterized not

by deterministic logic but rather by probability model logic. At the same
time it is essential to bear in mind that ready-made types of mental prob-
lems are being programmed. Certainly only on the basis of detailed ver-
batim records of the human decision taking process is it possible to pre-
pare heuristic definite programs for computers.

A commander in each battle or engagement must take a decision under com-
pletely new situations in which the preceding schemes of action provide
little help. Here decisions are required considering the new demands of
precisely the given situation. Since heuristic programming. like ordin-
ary mathematical algorithms, does not reflect the entire completeness of
the situations of armed combat. since the emotional factors of the behavior
of the sides are completely alien to it. and since it is incapable of a
great upsurge of mental forces and inspiration at the moment of decision
taking, under present-day conditions it also has limited possibilities.

Nevertheless the value of heuristic programming in troop control is

great. Using a computer it helps to determine the most suitable of all
the possible decisions. However, a decision obtained on the basis of it

again needs evaluation and supplementing by the creative thinking of the
commander. This is the last and most important level of troOp control.

173
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the trends in the present stage of the development or military
affairs is the strengthening of the collective principle in the work
or the staffs in preparing data for decision taking. For this reason,
electronic computers will play an ever greater role in the activities
of the "integral consaander" which control. systems presently are.

Thus, the ASUV cannot replace the creative capacities of the comnder.
his initiative, critical thinking, developed logic and intuition. the
capacity for risk. the ability to use knowledge from different areas of
science and life. and so forth.

FOOTNOTES

1. See KI Shteynbukh, "Avtomat 1 Chelovek" [Automaton and Man], Moscow.
1967, p 226; "Chelovecheskiye Sposobnosti Mashin” [Human Abilities
or Machines], Translated from the English. Moscow. 1971, p 35.

2. Of course, other grounds could be selected for establishing the
group, however .the proposed method, in our View, most fully meets
the task or examining the particular features of military collec-
tives in the designated aspect. Certainly with a comprehensive analy-
sis ol’ a military collective. it is essential to consider the socio-
political aspect of it. For this reason, although on a certain level
of abstraction we can disregard this aspect, in real military collec-
tives it is necessarily present and in mny says is determining.

3. K. Marx and r. Engels, "Soch.." Vol 23, pp 351, 53h.

1:. A. Rapoport, "Strategiya i Sovest'" [Strategy and Conscience],
Moscow, 1968. pp 255-256.

S. "Chelovek i M (Psikhologicheskiye Problem Avtomatizatsii
Upravleniya)" [Man and Computer (Psychological Problems of Control
Automation”. Moscow. 1973. p 5.

6. A. T. Walivchenko, "Chelovek kak Predmet Pilosofskogo Poznaniya"
[Man as the Object of Philosophical Cognition], Moscow. 1972. p 5.

7. K. Marx and F. Engels. "Soch.." Vol 20, p 102.

8. See U. Gray, "Zhivoy Mozg" [The Living Brain]. Moscow, 1966. pp 226-
227.

9. K. Marx and F. Engels.. "Soch.," Vol 1, p 2&2.
10. Ibid., Vol 23. p 178.

11. See "Materialy XXIV S"yezda KPSS" [Materials of the 216th CPSU Congress],
Moscow. 1971, p 83.

17h
son OFFICIAL USE ONLY
12.

13.
1h.
15.
16.

18.

19.

FOR 0!?ICMI. USE ONLY

The concept or "individual scientific ideology" lust not be confused
with all the knowledge which an individual possesses. A scientific
ideolog cryntnllizos only the bsoeo of this knowledge.

V. I. Lenin. ”Poln. 80hr. Soch. ." V01 '01. p 121.
K. Msrx end 1’. Engels, "Sooh.,” Vol 56, Part I, p 386.
Ibid.

Discoursive is formal logicsl. reasoned end indirect cognition.
Intuitive is the direct cognition of truths, the solving of s cre-
ative problem without a clearly realized chsin of logicsl srmments.

I. Anuryev end A. Tstorchenko. ”Primeneniye Retenticheskikh Metooov
v Voyennou Dole” [The Use of Msthensticsl ﬂethods in Militsry Affairs].
P 170

V. Afsnss'yev, "leuehnoye Uprsvleniye Obshchestvos" [Scientific
Control of Society]. Moscov. 1973. p 133.

See K. A. Slsvskm. 'Wsl' v Deystvii" [Thought in Action]. Moscov.
1968. pp 110-111.

ITS
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 6: THE EFFECT OF ANTI” TROOP CONTROL 0!! THE FURTHER
08"!me OF MILITARY AFFAIRS

l. The Effect of Control Automation on the Nature of Combat and Troop
Organization

One of the main patterns in the development of military affairs has been
that the nature and methods of conducting combat have changed continuously
in keeping with the saturating of the troops with new types of weapons
and military equipment. The weapons and military equipping of the troops
have had a determining influence on the methods of combat and operations
and on military art as a whole. In solving the question of the influence
of automation on military affairs. of exceptionally important significance
are the methodological instructions of the founders of Marxism-Leninism
concerning the designated problems. ”...The successes of equipment,
having scarcely become applicable and actually applied in military affairs.
immediately-oalmost violently. and frequently moreover against the will
of the military coamand--have caused changes and even revolutions in the
method of conducting combat...."l wrote F. Engels on this question. And
this pattern in the development of military affairs was later pointed out
by V. I. Lenin. "Military tactics." he noted, ”depend upon the level of
the military equipment, and angels mulled over this truth and put it in
the mouth of the ”tourists."2 ‘

Having taken these statements as the basis, it is possible to establish
the changes in the development of weapons which h-"e occurred in the
present stage. to ascertain their relationship to the development of auto-
mation and propose how all of this can be reflected in the combat and or-
ganization of the troaps.

As was already pointed out. the present period in the development of mili-
tary affairs is characterized by the appearance and rapid development of
fundamentally new types of weapons and military equipment. by maJor im-
provements in all the previously known means of armed combat, by complete
motorization of the troops and their intensive mechanization. Here the
great achievements of scientific and technical progress lie at the basis
of developing the new types of weapons and military equipment. "A scien-
tific approach to solving all the questions of military organizational

176
ton orncm. use our
POI. OFFICIAL USE ORLY

development has become an imperative of the times."3 stmssed Mar 80 A. A.
Orechko. Among the most recent achichments of the scientific and technical
revolution. along with the discoveries in the area of the enery and trans-
port base of armed combat (the appearance of nuclear weapons and missiles).
one of the first places is held by the discoveries in electronics, the
appearance of computers and other automation which improve the efficiency
of con‘ml mks

The development of the existing weapons and the appearance of new more ef~
ficisnt ones are inseparably linked to the appearance and improvement of
automation. For example. the appearance of missile weapons was caused by
the most recent achievements not only in physics, chemistry. remts control.
metallurgy. but also in radio electronics and automation. Some of the most
isportant combat qualities of the guided sntiaircraft missiles are the
possibility of controlling their motion and the high strike accuracy.

This has been achieved by using various automation devices making it pos-
sible at enormous speed within a fraction of a second to detect and elim-
inate possible errors in the controlled missile. Precisely due to the

use of automation it has been possible to substantially increase the ac-
curacy of the guided missiles. Without computers and the development of
fundamentally new control systems on the basis of them the effective use
of modern missile technoloy would be impossible.

The development of modern aviation is also most closely tied to automation.
with the existing speeds of flight (up to 3,000 km per hour and more),

the mental and physiological abilities of the pilot do not make it pos-
sible for him to prosptly reflect all the diversity of the combat situa-
tion. For this reason for ensuring a response reaction (the detecting of
the target, evaluating the situation, carrying out the actions and even
taking a decision), man in aviation is aided by modern automated equipt-ent.
The use of automated control systems in aviation has led to a significant
rise in the speed of the aircraft and to an increase in their range. By
automating control, there has been a sharp broadening of the range of alti-
tudes at which flights and combat have become possible. Hodern aircraft
equipped with dependable automtsd control systems are capable of ascend-
ing to an altitude of 20-25 km and more. Along with this, automation
equipment makes it possible for modern aviation to operate effectively at
low and maximum low altitudes.

The some close tie between weapons and automated control systems can be
seen in the air defense troops. Modern antiaircraft artillery is equipped
with advanced automated fire control systems which provide an opportunity
of hitting airborne targets under any weather conditions both during the
day and at night. The antiaircraft guided missiles are a qualitatively
new means of modem air defense. The appearance and development of these
weapons are also completely tied to the use of automation. Electronic
calculating and other automation are used for guiding the antiaircraft
missiles to the targets. Due to the use of automation, the accuracy of
hitting the airborne enemy has been iueasurably increased. While in

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

world Har II the antiaircraft artillery expended an average of 600 rounds
and sometimes 1,000 rounds for each aircraft shot down. at present, due
to the automation used in the antiaircraft missile complex, the enemy air-
craft can be hit with Just one missile.

The improvement in naval weaponry is also inseparable from the development
of automation. Submarine cruises over thousands of kilometers to any point
of the world's ocean have become possible due to the use of not only nuclear
fuel but also new automated control equipment. The use of nuclear torpe-
dOes and submarine-launched ballistic missiles by modern navies would have
also been inconceivable without computers and other automation.

The automation of troop control has had a particularly strong influence on
the develOpment of nuclear missile weapons. The possibility of using these
weapons by both belligerents can fundamentally change the situation in the
course of combat. In addition to hitting troop groupings and other in-
stallations, the making of nuclear strikes can lead to enormous destruc-
.ion, to the formation of large areas of fire, flooding and to the creation
of extensive zones of radioactive contamination.

The situation in combat can be further complicated if the probable enemy
will use other weapons of mass destruction along with nuclear weapons.
Obviously in such a complex situation it would be impossible to get by
without automatic equipment for troop control.

Thus, the more advanced types of weapons and military equipment require
qualitatively new. predominantly automated control systems. At the same
time. the introduction of the new control systems should have a reverse
positive influence on improving military equipment. All of this, taken
together, can lead to a change in the nature of troop combat.

The specific traits of modern combat can be: High decisiveness and maneuver-
ability, dynamicness. rapid and abrupt changes in the situation, the uneven
development of events along the front and in depth. and great spatial

scope. The automation of troop control should have a determining influ-
ence on each of these traits, and this is manifested primarily through

the development of weapons and military equipment.

For example. the dccisiveness of combat is expressed in the aims of combat
and the methods of achieving them, in the ability of the commanders to take
bold decisions and to carry them out practically in the active, unstinting
and energetic actions of the troops, and their desire to achieve victory
by complete defeat of the enemy. In ensuring prompt responses to any
changes in the situation. the automation of troop control contributes to
the successful fulfillment of combat missions with the least expenditures
of forces, means and time.

One of the most important qualitative indicators of the new equipment has
always been its speed, that is, the speed of the processes carried out by

178
roe omcuu. use out!
JI;.|:|OO 'H O...

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

using it. The development of equipment has led to an increase in the speed
of its operation.

The importance of speed in military affairs is difficult to overestimate.
high speed is the main condition for achieving surprise and is one of the
most important factors in victory. Speed makes is possible to seize the
initiative. to impose one'a will on the enemy. to anticipate enemy actions
and to shift rapidly from one type of combat to another. Regardless of
what phenomenon or action in war we would take. in any of them speed holds
the primary role. For precisely this reason. both in peacetime and in
wartime. there has always been a struggle for superiority in speed. A
particularly great increase in speed in military affairs occurred after
World War II and this has continued in the present.

The introduction of automation makes it possible to clearly trace the de-
velopment of the most important trait of modern combat, a rise in its ef-
ficiency. For this reason in methodological terms, it is important to
analyze these relationships in which there is speed in the occurrence of
the major processes in combat and the development of troop control auto-
mation.

In using automated control systems it is possible to sharply increase the
speed of the movement of troops and materiel. These speeds depend upon a
number of objective factors. such as: The nature of the terrain. the
degree of enemy resistance. the state of one's transport. the season.
weather. and so forth. At the same time they are also determined by sub-
Jective factors, such as: By the ability of the commanders and the staffs
to organize and support the movement of forces and means, and by the abil-
ity to quickly orient oneself under complicated. frequently changing con-
ditions. Control automation in combat will make it possible to solve pre-
cisely this problem.

With the existing speed of the movement of troops, combat forCes and means.
man with his physical and mental abilities in many instances is unable to
control them. Here the automation of control comes to his aid. This ex-
pands the limits of his abilities.

In increasing the speed of movement. the automation of troop control should
thereby help to increase the maneuverability of combat and to create de-
cisive superiority over the enemy in the necessary sectors and within a
short time.

As a result of this. with the extensive use of automation, it is possible
to increase the rate of advance of the troops and the speed of conducting
counterstrikes and counterattacks by the second echelons and reserves. It
is also possible to increase the speed of concentrating and dispersing the
troops. This. in turn. can ensure the more successful carrying out of
measures to provide defense against enemy weapons of mass destruction.

An increase in the fluidity of combat can be largely aided by increasing
the speed of the destruction and annihilation of enemy installations as

179
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

well as by the speed of preparing weapons for use and the delivery of them
to the target. Before neutralizing or destroying the enemy. it must be
evaluated. the means of destruction must be determined. the quantity or
type of ammunition.and so forth. The automation of troop control can
sharply shorten the time for carrying out such Jobs.

The maneuverability of the troops in combat (an operation) also depends
upon the speed of creating and crossing various types of obstacles, for-
tifications and barriers. These speeds represent an involved complex of
various types of speeds related to the abilities of a man, the weapons and
other military equipment.

Abroad it is felt that the rapid automated collecting of information on
engineer works. the terrain and other conditions the computerized carrying
out of calculations for mine laying and mine clearing, the crossing of
other obstacles and the crossing of water barriers. as well as the use of
engineer equipment reduce the time for carrying out the measures to organ-
ize or cross obstacles. This leads to an increase in the fluidity of troop
combat.

Also of great importance is the speed in conducting reconnaissance. For
example, the following fact shows this. According to calculations made
abroad. it would take a modern reconnaissance aircraft 60 years to photo-
graph the earth’s surface. This task could be carried out by Just one
earth satellite lofted to a polar orbit in several days.“ The use of auto-
matic and automated equipment in organizing and conducting reconnaissance
is one of the most promising directions.

The possibility of formalizing and programming the process of collecting
and processing data on the combat situation has brought about the wide
use of computers and other cybernetic devices in troop practices.

Foreign specialists feel that over the long run. by using special techni-
cal devices. without any human participation it will be possible to collect
important information on nuclear strikes which have been made. Using elec-
tronic computers. data can also be processed automatically on the radia-
tion and chemical contamination of the terrain. Here a computer can not
only generalize the designated types of information. but also considering
information on the meteorological situation. forecast the radioactive and
chemical contamination and warn troops of the threat of exposure. It is
felt that it would also be possible to automate the collecting. processing
and generating of information on the position of one‘s troops. For this
purpose in the companies and other troop organisms it would merely be a
question of signing ordinary topographic surveyors with devices for trans-
forming the data produced by them and transmitting this to the computer.
Here the obtained information, again according to programs preViously put
into the computer. could be automatically processed and transmitted to the
superior levels or coasnand.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. ; .. - a- -
ll. ‘ .I . II. If... III III.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From the data of the foreign press, automation on an ever wider scale is
being employed in radar, air and other types of reconnaissance. As a
result, the time is reduced for acquiring, collecting. processing and
issuing reconnaissance information, and its reliability and accuracy are
increasing. In the opinion of foreign specialists, this increases the
efficiency of troop combat.

In using computers and other automation equipment, an opportunity arises

to more rapidly maneuver the nuclear strikes as well as the fire of con-
ventional weapons. In the not distant past the concentration or shiftiru
of fire over large distances entailed significant regroupings of the
weapons. Under the conditions of modern warfare, as foreign specialists
feel, the maneuvering of nuclear strikes and other weapons of mass destruc-
tion can be carried out virtually to any range without shifting the mis-
sile units. Here difficulties arise merely over the loss of time in taking
the corresponding maneuvering decisions. Autsmted control systems, in the
opinion of bourgeois military reviewers, make it possible to solve these
problems too. An opportunity appears in a short period of time to shift
the strikes to newly detected installations without moving the missile
units. Under these conditions, the primary task of the troops will be the
rapid penetration in depth behind the nuclear strikes for completing the
defeat of the anew and seizing important areas.

According to the announcements of the foreign press, the introduction of
automated control system has apositive impact upon the maneuvering of not
only nuclear (fire) strikes, but also the troops themselves, that is, the
subunits, units, formations and field forces. They will more promptly
and completely utilize the results of the nuclear strikes. At the same
time, the troops, in using automation, can more quickly escape from under
enemy nuulear strikes. The subunits, units and formations which have suf-
fered significant losses and have lost battle-worthiness will be replaced
by fresh forces in a shorter time. Great opportunities are opened up for
carrying out flanking and cnvelopment movements.

Abroad it is assmed that the rapid and accurate depicting of the situation
in using automated control systass can permit the connanders and staffs to
make more efficient use of the troops in making rapid strikes against the
enemy flanks and rear for the purpose of sharply altering the balance of
forces in their favor in the selected sectors and areas. Due to the auto-
motion of control (along with other factors). favorable conditions are
created for shifting from one type of combat to another, for increasing
the effort in the course of combat (the operation), for comitting second
echelons and reserves, for changing the battle formations, and so forth.
As a consequence of the faster and more effective response to changes in
the situation, casualties and the losses of military equipment are reduced.
Thus, the probability of carrying out the combat missions is increased.

At the same time, as foreign specialists feel, automted control equipment
may also be used in combat by the enenv which also will gain an opportunity
to more rapidly shift to decisive actions. For this reason, in using ASU

181
roa onlcm. use ONLY

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on ever greater scales, high dynamicness, flexibility and unevenness in
the development of combat along the front and in depth will be character-
istic. The methods and forms of troop combat will undergo substantial
changes. In some sectors the subunits, units and formations will advance
even more rapidly in depth; on others. active defenses will be employed;
on still others the troops may be forced to even retreat. As a result of
this, a focal character wi‘l more and more be inherent to combat. accord-
ing to the assertion abroad. For troop combat with the extensive use of
automation and more advanced weapons and military equipment, there will
be characteristically: The ever more significant dispersion of the troops,
the execution of bold outflanking and deep envelopment movements, rapid
thrusts in the enemy flanks and rear, and the making of surprise and de-
cisive strikes from various directions. Movements, marches, actions from
a march formation, and highly dynamic and mobile forms of combat and op-
erations will assume an ever more predominant significance.

In the opinion of bourgeois military specialists, the scale, conditions
and aims of a troop maneuver will be significantly broadened. A maneuver
will be employed not only to put the troops in a more advantageous situa-
tion in relation to the enemy, but also for the purposes of rapidly using
the results of decisive strikes by effective weapons. This will make it
possible to advance rapidly in depth, to bring ones troops from under

enemy strikes, and to replace troops which have suffered losses or lost
battleworthiness.

It is assumed that the use of A80 will also influence the increase in the
scope of troop combat. This is determined by a number of circumstances:

The automation helps to bring out more advanced and longer-range weapons,
and increases the scope of the control systems themselves by introducing

automatic equipment for transmitting information over long distances.

Possibly, in using more advanced weapons and full automation of troop con-
trol, combat will be carried out over more significant expanses than is
presently foreseen. The zones of operations and the concentration areas
of the units, formations and field forces can be broadened even more and
the distance between the echelons increased.

Abroad it is felt that one of the characteristic traits of modern opera-
tions is the tendency for an increase in the depth and the pace of the con-
ducted battles and operations. Here also one can trace a direct and im-
mediate influence of troop control automation. Being equipped with modern
weapons and advanced control systems, the troops are capable of carrying

out more complex combat missions, and their actions can be carried out to
a great depth and at a faster pace.

In the opinion of specialists, the use of full automation will lead to a
maximum reduction in the period of preparing for combat. The reduction in
the time available for collecting, processing and issuing information, for

182

FOR PF?IC!AL USE ONLY
.e-:. I ...
“ s e ,. ~ ..~. .
‘ ' ‘ ‘3': H‘ l'lll Ill
- . Ill.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

taking decisions. for drawing them up and issuing them to executors will
contribute to a further rise in the surprise of troop combat. Due to auto-
nation. the maneuvering capabilities of the troops are increased. and the
time is reduced for carrying out the necessary regroupings and for working
out measures related to the all-round support of combat.

Automated equipment on an ever broader scale will be used not only for
collecting. storing and processing information and for making operational
and tactical calculations, but also for determining the effectiveness of
the strikes to be made.

These are the basic directions by which even new foreign specialists are
tracing the influence of automation on troop combs . In keeping with the
advancement of troop and weapons control systems. in the future the influ-
ence of automation on troop combat will become. in their opinion. even more
significant. It is assumed that the ever greater saturating of the troops
and staffs with equipment for automating the processes of collecting.
processing and issuing information on the situation. for carrying out op-
erational and tactical calculations and for giving the decisions made to
the executors will contribute to the even greater complicating of combat.
The desire to anticipate the enemy in making attacks. with the broad use
of ASU. can lead to the appearance abroad of fundamentally new. even more
advanced weapons of mass destruction and other examples of weapons and
military equipment. A visible example is the appearance abroad of the
multiple-charge nuclear ammunition capable of making aimed strikes simul-
taneously against several objectives due to the use of automation.

According to the information of bourgeois military specialists. the use

of automation and other scientific and technical achievements will lead

to a further improvement in the air defense complexes, the antiaircraft
guided missiles, the launchers and various types of missiles with high
accuracy. For example. powerful small-sized nuclear charges and super-
small, low-power nuclear ammunition may appear. as well as types of weapons
using various forms of directed energy. For example, the United States is
already producing experimental missile bullets with a caliber from 1.6 to
20 me. Here there has been the atest spread of a 13-mm pistol rocket

35 mm long and weighing lh.8 kg. In all the developed capitalist nations,
ever more attention is being given to the development of missile weapons
for tanks. Here the achievements of radio electronics are being used to

a maximum degree. It is assumed that all the basic operations related co
the control of tank missiles will be carried out automatically.

In the future. in the opinion of foreign specialists, computers and auto-
mation will be ever more widely used in the processes of collecting infor-
mation on the enemy. In particular. there are plans for systems of minia-
ture electronic devices capable of detecting weak sound waves, the shaking
of the ground or changes in a magnetic field which occur inevitably with
the movement of people or transport. Such "electronic scouts" equipped
with radios can be secretly set by hand or dropped from the air into areas

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the probable appearance of the enemy. According to an announcement in
the bourgeois press. such a reconnaissance unit of a seismic type was
cheloped for the U.8. Army. The apologists of "electronic warfare" have
raised a real furor around the designated electronic devices. A special
program called "Igloo White" was approved and within this the Pentagon

has improved various types of electronic sensors, delivery devices. re-
laying aircraft. ground computer data processing centers and special
aviation. artillery and other combat subunits for effective fire resistance
against the discovered enemy.6

According to the evidence of bourgeois military theoreticians. the achieve-
ments of bionics are being used to an ever greater degree for control pur-
poses. Thus. the 0.8. Army. by analogy with the sensory organs of living
organisms. small-sized. highly sensitive and reliable attachments are be-
ing developed which provide automatic reconnaissance. as well as the forma-
tion, collection and processing of information on the combat situation.
Bionics is being widely used in research on the designing of homing equip-
ment. In the annies of the imperialist nations great hopes are being
placed on this science in the area of improving weapons and military
equipment control. For example, for the 0.3. Air Force, a muscular-
electric control system has been developed. This envisages the placing

of special pressure sensors on the human body, and these would be connected
to certain nerve endings. Such an automated system. in the opinion of the
developers. is an unique substitute for the muscles and can be used for
control.

In tactical elements. the development of radio electronic detection, con-
trol and communications devices is leading. in the opinion of American spe-
cialists, to the creation of an "automated battlefield." Many of the
foreign authors. in describing the battlefield of the 1980's, imagine
soldiers with Jet engines on their back, wearing bullet-proof vests,
moving rapidly through the air and firing pistols with atomic bullets.

One of the energetic supporters of this concept, Gen W. Hestmoreland de-
scribed such a picture of an "automated battlefield": "In the future on
the battlefield enemy troops will be detected and fired upon almost in-
stantaneously by systems which transmit data, evaluate reconnaissance
information on the computer and automatically control firing. Since the
probability of the initial strike will be close to 100 percent and detec-
tion devices will be used making it possible to constantly track the enemy,

to fix resistance physically will become a less important necessity for
large forces."7

This statement, like many other views of bourgeois authors, undoubtedly
contains elements of an exaggeration of the role of a machine and automatic
control systems. Bourgeois science always endeavors by any possible means
to play down the role of man. In particular, it has been specially stressed
that a future war will be a war of machines. a war of robots. Certainly.
the development of automation will have an ever more essential influence

18h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. . . . . - -
a.o. a. . H.‘ ‘-:.'. H. I:O0‘ OH III.-

 

IOI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on weapons. military equipment and the methods of conducting troop combat

and the war as a whole. In the future man with the help of computers will
be capable of developing weapons which to a maximum degree will raise its

efficiency.

The appearance of such weapons and their broad use in combat. in the opin-
ion of foreign specialists. will lead to a new stage in the development of
the nature of combat. Its decisiveness will be further increased and the
actions themselves will become more complicated.

Under the conditions of nuclear warfare. as military specialists abroad
feel. the use of modern. more advanced automatic equipment will make it
possible to master even more significant speeds in all the processes of
armed combat. In turn. this can lead to the even greater mobility and
flexibility of troop combat generally.

According to the information of the foreign press. the automation of con-
trol has a substantial impact also on the organisation of troops. The
given relationship is already notable in the stage of developing the means
and methods of armed combat. The appearance of new types of weapons. the
growth of the fire and striking power of the troops and the changing nature
and methods of conducting combat have necessitated new decisions in the
organization of the troops. 0n the other hand. one can trace a direct and
ﬂunediate influence of the automation of control on the organisation of

the troops. The introduction of computers and other automation has re-
quired additional organizational elements needed for their operation.

It is generally known that each new type of military equipment causes the
creation of new formations. The development of automation provides an
opportunity to prevent its excessive spread. Thus. if the rate of fire of
artillery weapons is doubled by automation. than the required number of
shells can be produced. having reduced the previous number of guns by one-
half. By this it is possible to more rapidly deploy the necessary quantity
of artillery and ensure the planning and execution of fire.

In contributing to an increase in the striking force of the troops. auto-
mation is one of the most important factors for improving the organiza-
tional structure of the subunits and units.

Striking power, as is known. consists of two basic components: the force
of fire and the degree of ”armoring" of the designated troop organism.

The possible solutions to the problem of increasing the fire power under

present-day conditions include an improvement in automation and on the
basis of it the achieving of a higher rate of fire and accuracy of the

weapons.

Foreign specialists feel that. being one of the most important ways for
increasing the maneuverability of troop combat. automation makes it pos-
sible to respond quickly to changes in the situation. in a brief period

185
so: onxcm. use 0va

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

of time to create an advantageous balance of forces on the decisive sec-
tors. and to constantly strengthen the independence of the units and for-
mations.

During the years of world War II. the division was the basic unit which
could carry out independent missions on the battlefield. The appearance
of new weapons. and in particular nuclear weapons, has led to a revision
of the given view. In the armies of the capitalist states, the demand is
being introduced more and more of the independence of actions of individual
subunits on the battlefield. Abroad it is felt that only this can help to
maintain the continuity of combat under the'conditions of the disrupted
centralized command of the troops.

The use of computers. it is felt abroad. raises the effectiveness of not
only centralized control, but also decentralized. In this manner automa-
tion provides great independence of the subunits and units.

A decisive role in the independent actions of troop organisms is played by
the possibility of having them carry out missions even in the event of the
failure to receive aid from the command of the superior level. Only the
presence in each troop organism of all the necessary elements for conduct-
ing independent combat can help achieve this. Control over such a large
range of various elements under the involved conditions of a combat situa-
tion becomes possible only with the extensive use of automation.

As bourgeois military authors assert, control over modern troop organisms
is becoming ever more complex. The time expenditures on the transmission
of the necessary information do not always satisfy the highly dynamic
nature of troop combat. For reducing the path of the information used in
troop control, recently a tendency can be seen abroad of reducing the total
number of troop levels subordinate to the connander.

According to information in the foreign press, such plans merit attention
in the instance that they do not reduce the combat capabilities of the
formations and units. The introduction of A80 helps to solve this complex
problem. Certainly the elimination of one of the levels of command would
cause a significant increase in the number of independent troop units
directly under one commander. The broad use of computers and other control
automation equipment will help to effectively coordinate their actions.

The automation of control processes has a positive influence on solving
organizational questions related to reducing the vulnerability of troops
to weapons of mass destruction. Abroad they have noted the important role
of automation in increasing the capabilities of the troops for rapid dis-
persion and concentration, and in organizing reconnaissance of the weapons
of mass destruction and the possible consequences of their use. The ex-
tensive use of computers and other automation providing for the automatic
collection of all the information needed to organize protection against
weapons of mass destruction can have a direct influence on the structure
of the reconnaissance units and subunits.

186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'nle influence of the automation of control. it is felt abroad, can be seen
also in the solving of such a problem as infantry armor. Thus, the broad
introduction of armored personnel carriers in the troops requires more ad-
vanced controls. It is seemed that under conditions of heavy destruction
the terrain can be altered beyond recognition. and for this reason the
highly fluid combat of troops in armored personnel carriers and tanks

is inconceivable without reliable equipment for ground navigation and
special autouted devices which ensure the correct actions of the subunits
and units. As the foreign press has shown, the influence of the automation
of control is particularly great on the organization of troops involved in
the use of nuclear missile weapons, aviation and air defense. here a large
portion of the control processes and combat itself is being automated. As
these processes are automated, the troop organisms carrying out these
processes are eliminated and are replaced by new ones. In using computers
and other automatic and semiautomatic devices, they carry out new functions.
Here an ever greater proportional weight is taken up by radio and radar
formations which provide effective use of weapons.

Abroad the automation of troop control is also having a great impact on
the organisation of the rear units and subunits. This leads to a reduc-
tion in the enormous supply apparatus. 'lhis reduction becomes possible
by the greater systematisation of rear supply, by reducing the inventories
of various freight, by mechanizing a nusber of labor intensive Jobs and
so forth. Abroad it is felt that in using comters and other automation,
for example, it is not necessary to draw up a large nmber of various
registers, tables, reports and calculations on the supply services or
other documents. Too narrow specialisation of many rear bodies is not
required. The automation of control will make it possible to consolidate
many of these rear services.

The complicating of the nature of combat will place even higher demands
upon indoctrination, skills, discipline, moral-psychological training and
the physical conditioning of each man. The commanders should possess
particularly high moral-combat qualities. Profound conviction in the right-
ness of Marxist-Leninist teachings, loyalty to the socialist motherland
and to the cause of comnisn. a high feeling of responsibility for the
successful execution of the combat mission, fim knowledge of the patterns
of armed combat, the manuals and regulations, the ability to master new
equipment and a clear understanding of the basic principles of automated
control--these are the basic factors which ensure decisive actions by the
cos-tenders and the effective use by than of the forces and means of armed
combat in any combat situation.

2. The Content and Style of Work of Comandcrs and Staff Under the
Conditions of Using ASUV

'ihe use of automated control systus influences not only the nature of
combat but also the content and style of the work done by the comander
and troop control bodies. Here it is essential to consider the following.

18?
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the first place. the Leninist style of leadership based upon such main
principles as party loyalty, scientificness and foresight, undoubtedly,

is to be maintained and will assume even greater significance under the
conditions of automating a number of the troop control processes. This

is caused by the fact that the class approach in solving the question of
using the armed forces as a whole and their component elements in particu-
lar increases its significance under the conditions of the presence of
two opposing social systems, and depends upon the level of the ever in-
creasing technical equipping of the troops and their control bodies.

At the same time, the principle of scientificness and foresight in ASUV
acquire a theoretical, technical and organizational basis of a higher scien-
tific level which provides for the use of the most recent achievements of
the scientific and technical revolution in the processes of collecting,
processing and issuing operational and tactical information.

In turn, this should predetermine a rise in the role of the scientific
soundness of evaluating the elements of the situation, a rise in the pos-
sibilities of carrying out operational and tactical calculations in a
shorter time and with greater accuracy, and the creation of a possibility
to optimize the use of the forces and means. As a result of improving
the quality of the process of working out a decision, the scientific
soundness of the decisions to be made can rise.

The possibility of modeling conbat using a computer and the forecasting
of its course and outcome can provide a qualitatively new and truly scien-
tific basis for prediction.

Secondly, centralization, unity of’comnand and collectivism, in our
opinion, will remain in the ASUV. Even broader opportunities will appear
for realizing these forms.

Thus, centralization for the purpose of unifying efforts in using the ASUV
can be carried out in a shorter time, with a smaller expenditure of re-
sources and more effectively.

Unity of command and ASUV do not contradict each other. The ASUV is cre-
ated for facilitating the work of the commander, and he controls and uses
it. For this reason the role of the comaander in the ASUV is not reduced
but rather increased. That is, as under ordinary conditions, the com-
mander's decision remains the basis of control. An ASU can create the
conditions under which the solely responsible commander will have more
time and opportunity for creative thinking by turning over to the computer
a multiplicity of technical and certain logical operations. The role of
the solely responsible commander can be increased also by another factor.
He is given an opportunity more often than under ordinary conditions to
personally elucidate the mission, to assess the situation and take deci-
sions in a short time, using the calculation and information machine pro-
cedures solved on a computer with the output of the corresponding results.

188
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
...
‘ .0 I 0:: s a.» s‘ 0“ '
. . l .I ‘n .V
.l . I!.lf!ﬂ0‘.. OH.

5% OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Joint work of the commander and his staff using the ASUV also in main-
tained, although it alters its form somewhat. The role of the "advisers"

in often turned ower to the computers. particularly in the area of carry-

ing out uncreative operations. Here the immediate assistants of the com-

mander. in having more time. along with him can be concerned with analyz-

ing the situation and the Variations for using the force: and means. that

is. they will help him in their intellectual and creative activities.

Thirdly, all the aboVe-given methods of control can be realized in the ASUV
on the basis of employing more adVanced equipment making it possible for
the cosmander and his staff officers to control subordinates with a smaller
outlay of energy and time.

Computers with displays and other technical devices in principle increase
the opportunity for more frequent contact with subordinates by personal
talks by all officials of the control bodies htaded by the commander.
Consequently, with an effective influence on subordinates in the ASUV.
depending upon the situation. any of the control methods or a combination
of them can be applied.

Fourthly. it is essential to stress that the professional and organiza-
tional skills of many officials in the control bodies can undergo great
change: with the ASHV. The process of thinking is somewhat formalised.

and is disciplined on the basis of the previously prepared standard ma-
chine procedures for carrying out the calculations, for providing informa-
tion and variations for using the forces and scans. At the same time it

is important to examine d'alectically the "routinitation" of evaluating the
elements of the situation. the actions carried out using the computer, and
not fall under their influence.

As a whole, the use of the most srdern technical control devices can re-
quire changes in many professional skills related to the particular needs
of dealing with the computer and processing the results obtained from it.
to the new methods of obtaining and analysing the elements of the situa-
tion. to taking a decision on the basis of a multiplicity of calculations
and information obtained from the computer. the transmitting of instruc-
tions using various signal devices. the elaborating of new dccuaents.
forms. their reproduction. storage, accounting. and so forth.

These professional and organizational skills can be improved in the process
of special training and then by practical work in the ASUV.

All the elementary acts of the control process. without exception. work
for a solution which is not only the basis of control. Being born in the
panes of complicated psychological experiences of not only the cocmander
but also the entire collective which prepares data for establishing the
decision to be taken, it permeates all the activities of a complex dynamic
system. The decision to be taken meets the needs of the greatest savincs
cf forces with the greatest effectiveness. For this reason the processes

189
m omcuu. use om

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL US}! ONLY

of the collection. processing and putting out of tactical information are
viewed fro. the standpoint of facilitating the taking of a prompt and sci-
entifically sound decision.

In autoaated systems. a saJority of the information needed for decision

taking and efficient troap control can be systematically accumulated.
processed and stored in a coaputer.

For this reason. the very procedure of collecting tactical information
may undergo a change. While without using automation a large portion of
the working tire of the staff 0"":cers is r rent on securing the necessary
inforaation and plotting it on topographic nape. in automated systems the
co-anders and staffs can receive all inportant information either from
special autoaated inforaation sources or. depending upon the nature of
the inforaaticn and the control eleaent. directly from the corsputer. All
information can be provided directly to the work areas of the officials.
The most valuable information can be provided in the form of a test using
a printer. A portion of the lacking information can be obtained in the

form of reference material from the computer through the data input and
output devices.

in the foreign A80. the collecting of informtion on the position of one's
troops to a significant degree is done autasatically. since this infome-
ticn is fed into the control system without hinan participation. using
various navigation equipment which has been developed on a mechanical.
clectroaechsnical or electronic basis. Such equipment can have special
devices for coding and transmitting the coordinates of the position direct-
ly to the superior couanders. or through the control eleaent directly

to the mmter of the superior. adJacent. or when necessary. inferior
control elcaents.

A‘ road the manual data input devices supplied with the navigation equip-
ment sake it possible froa the primary data sources to feed directly into

the automated systea all the remaining information which cannot be forau-
lated without huaan participation. Such can be the information on the

enesy. casmlties. and so forth. Using a coaputer all the information
on the situation is sorted. verified and consolidated (generalised) up
to the level of detail which is essential for the involved officials of
one or another control element (body).

The computer processed and generalized information in this systea. as
essential changes occur in the situation. is automatically transmitted

not only directly to the work areas (extension devices) of the officials.
but also to the counters of the senior chief. the staffs of adJacent

and cooperating troops. and when necessary. to the subdinaterz. Here an
autocmtic detailing and distribution of the information are carried out.

The possibility of storing a rather large mount of incoraing information
in the «outer of the described systea makes it possible for the officials

190
M 0"“:th USE ONLY
.'-:a

D O. . ' ' a re: a: i H." ' .‘I'; ll.‘ it‘ll IN dl‘.

VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the control bodies to obtain from it data on the situation. nature and
direction of actions of one's own and enemy troops under certain conditions.
information on the availability. losses and reserves of the rank-and-file.
sergeant and officer personnel, weapons. military equipment and other types
of support materiel.

Often in the foreign ASUV. the collecting of data on the situation can be
carried out by the transit method. that is the information is processed
for the purpose of obtaining the background for decision taking using the
given specific Operational and tactical inforhition.

Thus. abroad in an automated system the basic method for obtaining situa-
tional data is the automatic generation of them through special devices
or directly from the computer.

Certain foreign automation also makes it possible to assemble various

types of infonnation on a differentiated tine scale. depending upon the
degree of its importanCe or urgency. A portion of the information in an
automated system can be put out by a previously determined time. and the
other as the situation changes. in accord with definite standards (criteria).
For example. in the course of a march, after crossing a certain line or

a previously set number of kilometers; in crossing a river, in seizing

the bridgehead. the erecting of crossings and bridges; on an offensive,
after the taking of defensive lines. and so forth.

According to information in the foreign press, the collecting of tactical
information as carried out in the ASUV using automatic and automated pri-
nary data sources. high-speed intermediate receiving and transmitting
equipment, and devices for the automatic enhancing of data reliability
makes it possible to reduce the time for assembling cats on the situation.
to increase its reliability and free a large number of officials from
labor intensive technical work. in providing them time for the creative
processing of the obtained information.

a dual procedure for data processing in the ASUV abroad is used. Telecode
information is initially processed in the computers and then being sent
to the display or printer. is studied and evaluated by officers of the
troop control bodies. Information which has been received OVcr ordinary
communicctiona channels undergoes primary processing by hand. and then is
fed for .arther processing into the computers.

Since in certain foreign ASUV the most important information on the enemy
nuclear weapons as well as on the state. condition and possibility of
one'n own weapons can be put out using extension devices directly at the
work area of the commanders. when necessary the commanders can personally
solve a larger portion of the questions related to combating the enemy
weapons. In particular, using a computer. it is possible to determine
more quickly the enemy installations to be hit, the required quantity

and power of the ammunition for this. and their distribution between the

191
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: ThursdayI June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
'0'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

various delivery systems. Here, depending upon the set goals or the
criteria corresponding to them. an opportunity is presented to examine
several distribution variations and to select the optimum one.

Under the conditions of modern warfare, as foreign specialists feel, the
use of automation will provide the implementing of centralized planning
of nuclear strikes against the enemy, as a result of which the efficient
use of nuclear missile weapons will be significantly increased.

Other machine calculation procedures in foreigi systems are computer solved
in an established sequence. and the results are sent to the printer of

the officer who has made the request. After verifying the obtained data,
the officer responsible for the solving of the machine procedure, reports
them to his chief. Simultaneously the obtained information is sent auto-
matically to the printers of officials who are interested in them.

The results of solving all the machine procedures in these systems are
analysed and are reported in a generalized form to the couander. while

the most important and urgent are sent directly to the printer of the
comander, the chief of the branch of forces or service.

Such an organisation of the work, as the foreign press has pointed out.
ensures the rapid preparation of all the calculation data. Here a larger
portion of the work is prepared by the officers using the computer, and
only the most important and urgent data can be obtained by the comander
independently, without seeking the aid of subordinates and without spend-
ing surplus time on hearing reports.

Abroad it is felt that in determining the methods of troop operations,

the results are first evaluated for the computer solution to the problem
of defining the ratio of the forces and means of the sides. Then, in ob-
serving the situation on the display screen or on a map, the commander
evaluates the capabilities of the enew and his own troops. For increas-
ing the graphicness of the display and for raising work efficiency, the
situation can be presented on the screen in units. For example, first
the grouping of enew and own guns is shown, then the situation of the
combined-arms units and subunits. and soforth. The situation or. the
screen is changed upon the instructions of the comander.

According to information from bourgeois military specialists. in determin-
ing the methods and fonns of maneuvering the forces and means in the
course of combat. the conander first of all uses the results of a com-
puterised solution to the problems of forecasting the radioactive contam-
ination of the terrain. And the calculations for the regrouping of

forces should be done in several variations. For each of them the dura-
tion of the regrouping and the probable doses of radioactive irradiation
of the personnel are determined. The obtained results are analyzed and
the variation is selected which most fully meets the existing situation.

192
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to foreign (into. the ucqucnco and content of the comundcr's work
depends upon the conditions of the situation. For example. in working out
a decision to cross a water obstacle. determining the capabilities of one's
own troops to cross it will be the basic element in evaluating the situa-
tion, along with studying the enemy. For this purpose. on the computer the
demand for engineer forces and means is figured for supporting the crossing
of the water barrier in keeping with the pace of the offensive being car-
ried out. Then the possible duration of the ferrying of the troops is
determined with the differing formation of the troops and different varia-
tions for the allocation and use of ferrying equipment. A comparison of
the obtained results makes it possible to select the best method of troop
operations and engineer support in crossing a water obstacle.

In preparing for a march. in the opinion of foreign specialists. the com-
mander will be interested first of all in the quantity and quality of the
routes in the allocated area as well as the maneuvering capabilities of
his troops. For this the computer would first provide a machine procedure
for planning the advancement of the troops.

At the same time it is assumed that in repelling counterattacks or counter-
strikes the computer will be used to calculate the maneuvering capabilities
of the enemy. The realization of this procedure will make it possible to
determine the time of encountering the enemy and to plan the corresponding
measures. When necessary. in such a situation the computer should solve
the problem of the construction of field works. Moreover. the computer
may also be used for accounting for the manning of the formations. units
and subunits and for their material and technical supply.

Thus. in accord with materials from foreign sources. in all instances the
computer is used primarily for such machine procedures which make it pos-
sible to evaluate the basic element of the situation which has a determin-
ing impact on the methods of combat at the given moment.

The use of automation in the work of the commander and staff in preparing
data for decision taking. in the opinion of foreign military specialists,
requires high organization and clarity in the execution of functional
duties by all officials. The staff officers must know the scope and con-
tent of the calculation and reference information needed by the commander
in one or another combat situation. and be able to promptly prepare the
data needed by him on the computer depending upon the existing situation.
It is felt that this shows the systematicness of the work of the commander
and the staff. since their activities will rest on optimized working con-
ditions and on machine procedures developed on the basis of generalizing
the knowledge and experience of the best cosmmmders. staffs. scientists
and control science as a whole. For this reason the methods and content
of the work done by the commanders and staff officers. in being somewhat
limited by the confines of the automated system, will is fact be more
precise. rhythmical. consistent and sound. Here theoretically the pos-
sibility of taking irrational. unsound decisions is excluded.

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The putting out of tactical information in certain foreign ASUV includes
primarily the giving of missions to subordinates. For this reason the
automated system provides not only for the collecting of information and
its passage from the bottom up, but also the issuing of information from
the superior command levels to subordinate commanders and staffs in the
form of instructions, commands, signals and informational messages. The
information put out by the computers of the senior staffs is automatically
receiVed by the computers, relay devices and equipment of the subordinate
control bodies which are the primacy sources of the ASUV. An automatic
exchange of previously stipulated data on the situation is also possible
between officials within the staffs and command posts.

In such systems. over the telecode communications channels using the com-
puters and other automation, only the most important information is trans-
mitted and for which the feeding into the machine does not take a good
deal of time and does not require cumbersome forms. These are first of
all the basic combat missions for subordinate troops and signals relating
to cooperation, warning, target designation and identification.

The remaining instructions such as the commander's plan, the detailing of
the combat missions for subordinates, instructions on cooperation and en-
suring the fulfillment of the forthcoming mission, are transmitted over
the communications channels and by personal contact.

Abroad, the summoning of subordinates to the command post or the traveling
of the comander to visit the troops for the purpose of giving combat
missions is considered very effective. Staff officers can also be sent

to the troops for the same purpose. Such a method makes it possible to
give orders to the troops in a more accessible form, to clarify unclear
questions on the spot and to check the understanding of the given mission
by subordinates. However a visit by the commander to subordinates or the
summoning of them to him is not always possible or advisable, as this can
tell negatively on troop leadership as a whole. For this reason, abroad
the issuing of a decision is frequently carried out orally or in a written
(graphic) form using technical devices. And the commander gives the order
orally using technical devices when there is insufficient time for organ-
izing combat. In this instance he himself gives the missions only to those
who are in the main sector or require an explanation of the basic idea of
the mission. Staff officers give the missions to the remaining subordinates
using technical control equipment. The transmitting of orders over tne
teiecode communications channels holds one of the central places in the

use of automation on the staffs, particularly in issuing orders to sub-
ordinates in the course of combat.

The transmitting of instructions to the troops in the form of written and
graphic documents, according to the data in the foreign press, is also
practiced in the period of preparing for combat. In using automation,
this method can be widely employed also in the course of combat. In this
instance, the written and graphic documents containing the decision are

19h
FOR OFFXCXAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’lCIM. USE out":

issued using computers and other automation both to the subordinate troops
as well as to all officials of the given control body. and to adjacent
units, assigned and attached troops, and to the superior staff.

Abroad for accelerating the input of information into the computers, the
filling out of the machine blanks starts immediately with the receiving of
a combat mission. In the working part of the blank. they enter the ad-
dress of the recipients and the dispatch time. Then, in sequence, as the
data are received, their content is filled out. Here information is used
accumulated in the machine as a result of solving other problems as well
as that collected over the conventional communications channels. The
signals for interaction, warning and identification can be worked out in
the course of decision taking, and are also entered on blanks for being
put into the computer. And each element of the decision in being written
out on a blank is inundiately fed into the electronic "memory" of the
machine, and is transmitted immediately to the executors. Moreover, the
previously elaborated system of data addressing makes it possible to issue
the decision as a circular. that is, to all subordinates at once, as well
as in sequence. to individual executors in keeping with the importance of
the combat missions.

In the opinion of bourgeois military specialists, the choice of the method
for transmitting the decision to subordinates depends upon the conditions
of the situation and the availability of conmmnications. In the course of
combat, the missions, as a rule. will be given to subordinates in the form
of brief combat orders transmitted over the telecode and conventional
communications channels.

According to information in the Western press, the organization of coopera-
tion in the ASUV is also undergoing changes. If this is carried out using
extension devices of the computer, the coordinating of the basic questions
is done in the process of elaborating the decision. The given coordina-
tion is based on information received automatically almost simultaneously
in all the elements and for all officials at each command point.

Most frequently the clarification of the questions of interaction, both
in preparations and in the course of combat, in the opinion of foreign

specialists, can be carried out by brief orders fed into the computer and
issued from it in a conveniently perceived form to the extension devices

and with the subsequent clarification on the spot.

with a limited amount of time, when the decision is given to the troops
without preliminary approval by the senior chief, the clarification of
the questions of cooperation, like the giving of combat missions, is car-
ried out in the course of decision taking. In this instance there is the
sequential transmission to the troops of that information which is needed
for organizing cooperation for each element of the decision. At the same
time, the use of the troops is coordinated. Here the unsolved questions
of cooperation are clarified with the adjacent and cooperating troops in

195
FOR 0?FICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

such a manner that by the time the decision is taken, all the basic ques-
tions of troop use have been coordinated and fixed on a map of the decision.
It is felt that the automatic exchange of situational data between the vari-
ous command levels makes it easier for the commander and the staff to main-
tain cooperation in the course of cembat.

Bourgeois military specialists feel that the coordinating of the actions of
subordinate troops using weapons of mass destruction under the conditions
of rapid and abrupt changes in the situation should be carried out using
communications equipment on the basis of computer-obtained data. The use
of automation makes it possible even in this situation to go through one
or two variations of the possible development of events within acceptable

time. and to determine the basic questions for coordinating troop coopera-
tion.

The procedure for maintaining cooperation in the course of combat may vary.
It is felt that the commander or the chief of staff, in giving new missions
over the communications equipment to each subordinate in sequence, gives
instructions for coordinating his efforts with the actions of the support-
ing and adJacent troops.

Regardless of the procedure used, virtually the entire process of coordi-
nating combat, in the opinion of foreign specialists, is based on the re-
sults of solving informational and computational problems using computers.
In addition to the situational data which are continuously displayed on
the screens. as a result of solving informational problems, the extension
devices upon request can display information on the following: The compo-
sition of enemy forces in a set area; the quantity, nature and parameters
of enemy installations which can be in the given area or in a certain zone;
the combat capabilities of the enemy indicating the probable number of
nuclear ammunition, its caliber and overall power; the composition of
enemy reserves and their location on the terrain. Such data can also be
obtained on one's own troops.

It is assumed that in the course of combat, difficulties will arise in
coordinating the nuclear strikes with troop maneuvering. In using auto-
mation, the data needed for such coordination can be quickly obtained us-
ing electronic computers. In particular, the computers can detemnine the
capabilities of the enemy to bring up its reserves, the demand for nuclear
ammunition for destroying a counterattacking or counterstrike group and
the areas most suited for carrying out this missions, proceeding from the
awailable time and the readiness of the weapons. the cepabilities of the
troop to execute the maneuver and to utilize the results of the planned
nuclear strike. Then, having determined the capabilities of the enemy and
one's own troops to carry out a maneuver, the commander can quickly give
additional missions to the troops and organize cooperation.

At the same time, as foreign specialists assume, it is essential to organize
the exchange of new information with the subordinate, superior, adjacent

196
m orrtcm. use ONLY
"‘t.

. .-
‘-.I . IO. .7!!! l!’ .0...

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and cooperating staffs for the purpose of coordinating the methods of
troop operations in carrying out the adJusted decision. This is aided

by the presence of reliable telecode communications. display. printing
and automatic data copying equipment. This makes it possible for the com-
mander and the staff to get in touch with subordinates more frequently
over the equipment and thereby provide them with practical help in cor-
rectly understanding the occurring changes in the situation. the ensuing
missions. as well as the methods for carrying them out.

Abroad it is felt that in organizing cooperation under the conditions of

a shortage of time. personal meetings with the commanders (representatives)
of adjacent and coOperating troops can be carried out significantly less
often than in the existing control system. In the course of combat and

in situations of rapidly and sharply changing conditions. it is possible
to be completely limited to Just those data which will be sent automatical-
ly to the computer extension devices.

A most important condition for maintaining continuous cooperation is con-
sidered to be the providing of the continuous operation of the complex

of new control equipment. and particularly the computer. the telecode com-
munications equipment and the data input and output devices.

The processes of taking and drawing up a decision in an automated system
may coincide in time. For this reason. the working out and drawing up of
a decision using a computer. according to information from foreign spe-
cialists. represents a single logically and technically related process.
Due to the use of automation. the opportunity arises of drawing up virtu-
ally all the basic combat documents by the time decision taking is over.

Here the amount of work to be done by the officers manually is signifi-
cantly reduced. and the total quantity of combat documents worked out on
the staffs is also lessened. Since the missions are given to the troops
using the computer and are promptly fixed. this reduces the written combat
orders. The orders given orally also do not need to be fixed by hand.

as they are recorded using tape recorders (dictaphones).

Bourgeois military specialists are convinced that a combat order. being
the basic document by which the taken decision is given to subordinates.
particularly in the preparatory period. may maintain its significance
under the conditions of automation. The transmission of the basic pro-
visions of the decision over the automated equipment does not replace the
combat order but merely accelerates the familiarization of the executors
with its basic content. A written combat order even with a computer thus
remains a most important document.

Since the basic data on the situation. the nature. directions of actions
and state of one's troops and the enemy are systematically accumulated and
generalized in the computer in keeping with the essential changes in the
situation. in the opinion of foreign specialists. in an automated system

197
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDPGZ-OOBSOROOM00010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

there is no necessity For submitting operational, reconnaissance and
rear services reports in their traditional form to the superior control
elements. They may contain only the conclusions and proposals, and some-
times, as an exception, unformalized requests, since the necessary final
data are obtained in each control element from the computer.

Due to the fact that the most important information on the situation is
collected automatically, in an automated system there is a significant
reduction in the quantity of reports compiled manually and the content

and forms of these reports are changed. They reflect only those data which
are not transmitted by automation.

For this reason. for transmitting reports and instructions using automation,
abroad new standard foams of documents are being employed for each variety
of tactical information.

These forms are worked out together with the operational-tactical descrip-
tions of the machine methods designed for computer use. The standard
forms of combat reports and instructions are filled out either by the com-
manders themselves and the staff officers or by the technical personnel
operating the automated equipment.

Abroad it is assumed that the availability at the computer complexes of
large capacity storage units, high-speed printing equipment, situation
display screens with microfilming devices. equipment for plotting the sit-
uation on maps and copying equipment and. finally, sound recording equipment
make it possible to automate the documentation process and sharply reduce
the quantity and content of the documents, that is, to reduce the time
outlays on elaborating them. Here the organization and execution of super-
vision has certain particular features related to the use of the new tech-
nical control devices. The use of computers, automatic and automated
primary data sources as well as display and documentation equipment facil-
itates the monitoring process. since the most important functions of this
process (the monitoring of the position, state and nature of actions of
subordinate troops) can be done automatically.

The information automatically received by the computer is supplemented by
generalizations and conclusions from the staff officers. In this manner
a general picture of the position and state of the troops is created.

Here a comparatively greater accuracy and reliability are achieved in
depicting the actual situation, particularly in terms of the position of
the troops, the levels of radiation contamination, the types and epicenters
of the nuclear explosions and other data which are collected and trans-
mitted automatically.

As is felt abroad, the use of automation in a number of the troop control
processes makes it possible without any delay to evaluate the decisions
of subordinate commanders from the standpoint of their advisability and

198
you omcm. use may
.. .- , . . . . . .
.I I C. . ‘ I o. s' . II' I .I'. .II..I.III III III.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conformity to the existing situation. More data are automatically re-
ceived from subordinates on the selection of the direction and objectives
of onn's troopu; on determining the forces for carrying out the set mis-
sions; clarifying the forthcoming battle order; designating the beginning
and end of action; establishing the sector boundaries and the possible
position of control posts. All this infornation. in reflecting the de-
cisiOAu of subordinates, is presented in a graphic form on the extension
device of the superior commander. and thereby makes it possible to evaluate
the decision and rapidly make the necessary corrections. However. such a
method of work in no way excludes the other generally recognized and prac-
tically tested forms of supervision.

Only a person who directly observes and checks the position of the troops
and their state can most correctly and completely evaluate the entire ag-
gregate of the situation on the battlefield and provide the necessary aid
to subordinates in using automation. This applies first of all to estab-
lishing the combat capability and readiness of the troops. and this is
formed from a whole series of interrelated factors which in part cannot

be given a mathematical expression and automated. It is a question mainly
of the moral and political state of the troops, and the possibilities and
capabilities of a person to act under the difficult conditions of destruc-
tion and contamination caused by the enemy's use of nuclear weapons.

For this reason, under any conditions, it is desirable to combine syste-
matic inspection carried out using technical means with visits by offi-
cials directly in the troops.

The supervision carried out directly in the troops makes it possible to
eliminate a majority of the detected shortcomings ismmdiately on the spot.
Abroad it is assumed that such a method provides an opportunity to give
the necessary practical aid to subordinate conumnders and staffs in organ-
izing combat and carrying out the set missions.

Abroad the possibility of carrying out supervision using small groups of
officers within a short period of time is considered to be a particular
feature of organizing and carrying out inspection of the troops in using
automation. Certainly many data obtained by the superior levels automatic-
ally will not require inspection.

here the total time for the visits of staff officers to the troops will
be significantly reduced. The basic purpose of these trips will consist
not so much in carrying out supervision as in providing help on the spot
considering the data not transmitted by the automated equipment.

It is felt that the putting out of operational and tactical information
in the ASUV can change both the content and the methods of work of offi-
cials in the processes of giving missions, organizing cooperation. docu-
mentation. supervision and aid. On this level the basic advantage of the

ASUV is the possibility of increasing the initiative of subordinates with

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a simultaneous rise in the rigid centralization of control. This oppor-
tunity is provided by quickly transmitting commands (missions, signals and
so forth) through one or two levels of command in transit. In the opinion
of foreign specialists, along with a certain change in the work methods
of the commanders and staffs in organizing combat and in troop leadership,
in the course of combat within an automated control system a number of new

tasks will appear directly related to the functioning of the mechanization
and automation equipment.

First of all, the necessity arises of raising the level of the technical
training of all officers engaged in planning combat and providing troop
leadership. The staff officers should know the general procedure and par-
ticular features of solving individual machine programs (or their com-
plexes) on the computers and other computer equipment. A certain portion
of the officers should be able to make the corresponding corrections in
the elaborated procedures designed for a computer solution. The new duties
of a maJority of the staff officers include the preparation of initial data
and the filling out of the computer request blanks, analysis of the results
of their machine solution and the reporting of them to the corresponding
chiefs. The task also arises of monitoring the content of information cir-
culating in the telecode communications channels.

Abroad it is felt that the monitoring of the content of telecode informa-
tion is an important part in the work of the control bodies in all troop
elements. Its purpose is to exclude the possibility of the entry of in-

correct information into the computers and the feeding out of false in-
formation to the officials.

For monitoring purposes, all information received in the telecode channels
from the automated data primary sources and the data manual input devices

is ”printed out" by the automated relay devices or electronic digital com-
puters in those elements through which it passes in transit or is received
at them.

From the materials of the foreign press, the monitoring of the content of
information undergoing processing in a computer or stored in it is car-
ried out in several directions. This is done by the automatic checking of
data reliability in the course of its machine processing and by placing
canstraints on its feeding out to different officials in terms of its
purpose. as well as on the output of dubious and unlikely information from
the computer to other machines or various output and display devices.

An examination of the basic principles in the functioning of the foreign
ASUV makes it possible to disclose certain common trends in changing the
content of control activity as a whole. Along with the appearance of new
functional duties related to the servicing of ASUV as well as the prepara—
tion of data for feeding into the computers and obtaining the results of
collecting and processing the materials in the ASUV, the procedure is
being improved for the work and interaction of the officials of the con-
trol bodies.

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:"t. D 5::
III” I” u..-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The higher the percentage of the reduction of manual labor, the more time
is made available to the commander and staff officers for creative, mental
activities. and for using those possibilities of thinking which are in-
herent to man alone. The nature of this thinking. in keeping with the
increase in the technical equipping of the ASUV and the carrying out of
complex machine procedures on the computer (up to modeling inclusively),
becomes more and more analytical, and approaches the level of the activi-
ties of a scientist. For this reason, the fears on the question of the
routinization of staff officer work are at least groundless. All the
more so in that the technical work of preparing the data for putting into
the computer can be turned over to personnel of the control bodies which
is less prepared in operational. tactical and technical terms.

The forms of interactions of staff officers can be changed in two aspects.
In the first place. there is no necessity of an excessive spending of time
on various agreements. since all the officials will receive the same data

on the basis of unifons criteria established in working out the complexes

of computer-solved machine problems. Secondly, an opportunity can appear

for a closer coordination of fundamentally new. creative concepts arising

on the basis of analyzing information obtained in the ASUV.

The analysis made makes it possible to draw the following conclusions:

1. The style. methods and content of the work done by commanders and
staffs in the ASUV in one instance can be altered only partially. and in
another the changes can be sufficiently great and necessitate the acquir-
ing of new practical skills.

2. The acquisition of these practical skills should be organized on a
corresponding new base of scientific and technical knowledge.

3. Only a combination of a Leninist style of leadership with a firm
mastery of the modern technical devices in the processes of the collec-
tion. processing and putting out of information can lead to a proper rise
in the efficiency of troop control.

The degree of the interaction and reciprocal penetration of the above-
given ideas depends upon many factors, including: The goals (functions)
of the control system (body). the structure of the control system and the
control oodies (points) comprising it. the level of the training of the
personnel and the technical equipping of these bodies (points), the con-
trol cycles and processes occurring in the systems (bodies), and also upon
the conditions of the situation.

The possibility of reducing the personnel in the staffs depends upon the
designated factors. Here foreign experience has shown that the introduc-
tion of ASUV as a whole during the first stages increases the personnel of
the bodies operating the control points and only as the level of knowledge
of the staff officials constantly increases and as they acquire the skills
of using the ASUV equipment does a tendency arise for a gradual reduction
in the personnel of the control bodies.

201
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AP '
PROVED FOR RELEASE. Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R00010001000645
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A clear manifestation of the given trend depends upon the number of control
elements of the ASUV. In turn, the ASUV is more effective the greater the

number of control bodies it encompasses. in comprehensively solving the
complex questions of controlling modern combat and operations.

As a whole the ASUV should introduce a disciplining and systematized char-
acter into the work of control bodies. The work of the commanders and
staff officers becomes more systematic and approaches the optimum. One

of the main merits of the ASUV is the virtually complete exclusion of arbi-
trariness and a superficial analysis of the situation and the taking of
careless decisions. In this manner control is reliably protected against
voluntarism and firm scientific bases are provided for troop leadership.

3. Criteria and Methods for Evaluating the Efficiency of Automating Tioop
Control

The ultimate aim of automation, like control itself in combat and an opera-
tion, consists in ensuring the fullest use of the combat and maneuvering
capabilities of the troops, and the prompt execution of the set combat
missions by them with the least losses in personnel, weapons and military

equipment.

For solving practical problems related to the introduction of ASU into
the troops. the elaborating of a theory of troop control efficiency is of
very important significance. First of all it is important to correctly
disclose the content of this area of knowledge, to establish the general
principles for approaching an assessment of optimality in automating con-
trol, to determine the criteria and work out methods for evaluating the
efficiency of ASUV considering the particular features of their function-
ing in combat.

The necessity of working out these questions under the conditions of the
ever increasing introduction of automation is particularly felt since
before ordering the new control equipment one must be certain that the
expenditures on it will bring a definite gain and an improving of the
control system will ensure the optimum use of the forces, means and time.

The efficiency of troop combat (combat efficiency) depends upon many
factors. Among them one of the most important places is held by the
political-moral state and training of the troop personnel. V. I. Lenin

stressed that "an awareness of the aims and causes of a war by the masses
is of enormous significance and ensures victory."a Under the conditions

of nuclear war, if the imperialists start it. the significance of morale
and the training of the troops will rise even more.

Another equally important factor is the efficiency of weapons and military
equipment, the importance of which is difficult to overestimate. Certainly
the nature of the operations and the methods of cauwying them out depend
primarily upon the state of the weapons and equipment.

202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
:".’O

.. . . . . - -
U U. a i s a... s. . II" :-:I'- IO. Ittlt .I. U...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The quantity and quality of the personnel, the weapons and the military

“equipment. as well as the perfection of their organizational forms and the

procedures for carrying out combat hlVe an exceptionally great influence

on the outcome of armed combat. Howevs . the material base of armed combat
and tne organisatinal structure of the troops. while being essential. are
not sufficient conditions for ensuring maximum combat efficiency. The
actual efficiency of troop combat depends largely upon the able use of

the available forces and means of armed combat. that is. upon the effi-
ciency of control.

Consequently. combat efficiency (8“) can be viewed as n function of the
effectiveness of the forces and means of armed combat (Sp) considering their
quantity, quality. organizational structure and employed actions and effi-
ciency of control (Ea):

Em ' {(Er'Ee)-

At the same time. the necessity of a systems approach to evaluating control
efficiency in combat and an operation. and consequently. the efficiency of
automating troop control is determined by a definite control system which
ensures the taking of decisions and the directing of troop efforts at
carrying out combat missions. In evaluating the system as a whole. it is
essential to consider the efficiency of the components comprising it.

One of the most important elements in an automated control system is the
forces and means of control by which a response is provided to a change

in the combat and operational situation. Here of primary significance are
the high moral-volitional qualities, the profound knowledge and organizing
abilities of the «and personnel. since man plays the central role is
any system. regardless of the use of the most advanced automatic devices.
An important role is also played by the automation equipment and other
means of control. that is. that technical basis by which the officials
solve control problems. The quality of this base determines the efficiency
of the control system. If this base is insufficiently perfect. then with
the present scope and nature of troop combat it is difficult and in certain
instances impossible to take a rational let alone optimal decision and to
promptly assign missions to executors.

Another component of the automated control system by which control is
carried out is the structure of the control bodies and points. we have in
mind the organizational form in which the forces and means of control are
represented. By the organizational form we understand the aggregate of
such indicators which characterize the following:

a) The number of elements in the system;

b) The quality of each element trom the viewpoint of its capacity and
ability to carry out definite functions;

203
FOR DIVICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA—RDP82-00860R000100010006-3
ms "INCL“. mm ONLY

c) The organisational scpsrateness of the individual groups of elements.
and this can be viewed as the presence of definite subsystems which com-
prise the given system

d) The procedure of interaction between the elements and subsystems in
the course of their mnctioning;

e) The spatial interpositioning of the elements and subsystems of the
given system. including the possible connecting of one subsystem to
another.

A third comonent is the aggregate of relationships into which the control
bodies end points enter in the process of troop leadership in using the
means of full automation. The given aggregate of relations is manifested
through the work methods. the rights and functional duties of the officials‘

Each oi the listed components reciprocally determines the specific features
of the automated control system and its efficiency. A change in any one
of them leads to a warping of the system as a whole and to s reduction in
the efficiency of autuated control.

Herc it is essential to consider that the control system. as an aggregate
of the listed coqonents. is inseparably linked by a multiplicity of direct
informational ties and feedback with the troops as the object of control
or the controlled system. The given feature of a control system is as
determining as the feature of its integrity. Certainly only under this
condition is the very process of control ensured and the control system
has a practical sense.

Considering what has been said. the concept of the efficiency of an asuv
can be formulated in the following mamer. The efficiency of troop control
in using autoution is the compensated capacities of all the coqonents

of the automated control system to provide an optima execution of the
combat missions confronting the troops. Consequently, the efficiency of
an automated control system is the dcgree of its adapatability to solving
the problems confronting it.‘0

The correct definition of the concept of the efficiency of automated con-
troi is of fundamental significance. iiowever. the very evaluation of

efficiency depends largely upon those criteria and methods which are used
as the determinants. Their choice has direct bearing on the end results
of the efficiency of automation.

Considering the specific features of the troop control processes, the
basic demands nde on the criteria for the efficiency of automated control
systems come down to the following."

20':

'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
"'t. I 0"
. . e a. - ‘ " '
s. 0 II ‘,:I‘. ,Ill ltlll III III.

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Each criterion should:

a) Measure effectiveness of automation in strict accord with the tasks of
the ASUVL

b) Describe the quality of executing these tasks in using automation
equipnent and other new technical means cf control;

c) Permit an evaluation of the efficiency of solving the most important
task of conbat;

d) Be sensitive (critical) in relation to those parameters of the auto-
mated control system, the rational or optima significance of which must
be determined;

e) have a quantitative expression;

f) Possess small dispersion, that is. provide an opportunity to determine
it with sufficient accuracy without large losses and expenditures of tine;

g) Provide the nost accurate evaluation of the automated systca fro-
different sides as possible;

h) Be eilple and have a definite physical sense.

The total of the criteria should not conplicate the task of optimizing the
auto-ted control systes. At the some tine their nunber should be suffi-
cient for satisuing the most inportant destands made upon controlling

the nature of mdern cosbat.

The choosing of criteria by establishing a correlation between then and
the aisle of costbat (an operation) undoubtedly is the lost correct. How-
ever it is difficult to establish such a conforsity which would character-
ise all aspects of the auto-sted control systes, and would make it possible
to Judge in detail the quality of autonted troop control. For this reason.
along with the general criteria which reflect the degree of the confomity
of the auto-ated control processes to the sins of combat. as a rule.

a rather significant nusber of particular (local) criteria is used. They
reflect the very physical sense of control. that is, the indicators of its
conforlity to those tasks which directly confront it. In other words. a
definite syste- of efficiency criteria is used.”

Since the entire control process cones down to a response of san to a
change in the situation by the taking (“Just-cut) of decisions and their
carrying out. the criteria for the efficiency of automating control should
not only reflect the objective process of control, but also correspond to
the sins pursued by the principal in the given process.

205
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

in the process of troop control, as in any other, man endeavors to obtain
a satisfactory result. Ordinarily those results which correspond to the

set demands are considered satisfactory. For this reason. criteria are
selected with a zone of variable limits.

in evaluating the ASUV. it is essential to solve a number of questions

ahead of time. In structural terns. these can be represented in the follow-
ing sequence: is what degree the given system increases the efficiency of
using the forces and means of armed combat; how quickly the response cf
officials to a change in the situation occurs in it; how resistant is the
control system to enemy strikes (particularly in using weapons of mass de-
struction) and what are its capabilities in creating interference against
them; what is the adaptability of the systetnto conditions of abrupt changes
in the situation; by what material expenditures is the efficiency of auto-
mated control achieved; to what degree the control system reduces losses

of one's own troops with enemy surprise attacks; what is the economy from
automating control in the expenditure of materiel. and so forth. All the
listed and other characteristics of the system by which control is carried
out in combat and an operation in utilizing automation should be brought
together in three large groups:

1. Factors reflecting the tactical effect provided by the automated control
system.

2. Factors characterizing the technical indicators of the system.

3. Factors indicating the economic expenditures on the system and the
possibility of repaying (compensating) them.

in accord with this. it is advisable to examine the tactical. technical
and economic effectiveness of automating troop control in combat and an
operation.

By tactical effectiveness. one understands an aggregate of indicators
characterizing in quantitative terms the capacities of the automated con-
trol system to solve the problems confronting it promptly and effectively.
The determining of this helps to disclose the degree to which the auto-
mated control system conforms to the operational and tactical demands under
the real conditions of a combat situation with definite technical charac-
teristics of its basic devices and economic expenditures.

by technical efficiency. one understands the aggregate of indicators re-
flecting in quantitative terms the technical aspect of the automated sys-
tem by which troop control is carried out. In the given instance it is a
question of the technical possibilities of the automation equipment and
other control devices and the working convenience of officials using this
equipment under the various conditions of a combat situation. To deter-
mine the technical efficiency of automating control means to answer the
question of how advanced and rational are the technical means of automat-
ing control in the automated control system (with the determined economic
expenditures).
206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I 0:: i ' I e. l‘ i .l" ‘-II'2 ll3.l:l.I Ill ill.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By economic effectiveness, one understands the aggregate of indicators
characterizing in quantitative terms the material outlays on automating
control and the possibility of compensating (repaying) them. To determine
the economic efficiency of automating troop control in combat and an opera-
tion means to answer the question by what price that operational-tactical
and technical effect which is produced by the designated ASU is achieved.

Since the most important aim of control in combat and an operation is to
ensure the successful execution of combat missions by the troops. the op-
erational and tactical efficiency of a system is of primary significance in
evaluating the automated control system as a whole. The aggregate of cri-
teria determining the operational and tactical efficiency of automating

control is fundamental. It manifests the interrelated and reciprocally
determined possibilities of the components in the automatic control system.

Since the control system must provide the best conditions for carrying out
combat. the operational and technical efficiency of automating troop con-
trol must be assessed from the results of combat itself. Hith the given
forces and means by which combat is to be carried out, the indicators used
for evaluating its efficiency vill be sufficiently critical also for the
troop control system as a whole.

In conducting combat, it is essential ahead of time to assess the tactical
efficiency of automating control of the basic weapons.

As the basic criterion of practical efficiency it is possible to use such
an indicator which to a maximum degree reflects the influence of automating
control on the course of troop combat. As such e criterion usually they
use the caused (04) or prevented (Q'd) loss or their ratio:

Qd

E I
so Q'd

Frequently such a general criterion is used as the ratio of the damage
(caused or prevented) to the total outlays on automation (Ca):

Qd Q'd
Eac ' a; or Eac ' 75: '

Hith certain limitations the given criterion is sufficiently critical.
particularly when the compared automated systems differ insignificantly
in terms of cost. The area of applying this criterion is ordinarily re-
stricted to the inequality Qd> Qdmin. steaming from the condition of the
inadvisability of using an ineffective ASU.

It is essential to note that the constraints in any posing of the problems
of evaluating the efficiency of automating control are essential Just as
they are in evaluating the efficiency of the operations themselves. If

20?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001 0001000645
COR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

there is no constraint, the problem of evaluating the tacticalefficiency
of automated control systems looses its practical sense, since it can be
formally solved in any manner.

At the same time it is essential to consider that the practical applica-
tion of the given criterion entails difficulties in determining the degree
of the influence of the various forces and means on the success of armed
combat as a whole. At present it is not possible to find acceptable co-
efficients for correlating fundamentally different elements of the battle
formation and to consider all the diversity of factors in the combat and

operational situation. Although in methodological terms. the finding of
such coefficients is possible in principle.

Until the given problem is solved, as the general criterion for the tacti-
cal efficiency of automating troop control, it is advisable to use the
capacity of the automated control system to ensure the anticipation of
the enesv in using forces, that is, the probability PC of carrying out the
control problems over a certain time. This criterion makes it possible
to Judge to vhat degree the automated system ensures the solvirg of one
of the most imortant problems of armed combat in the course of action,
namely to anticipate the anew in deployment, in creating a superiority

in forces and means on the crucial sectors. the going over to decisive.
actions. and thereby thwart the enemy's plans, to force the enew to spend
time irrationally and fight under disadvantageous conditions. A quanti-
tative value of the given criterion is determined as a function of the

time spent on organizing combat by our troops (tc) and the time dictated
by the nature of combat (tn):

rc - P(tc an).

As the particular (local) criteria for characterizing the individual as-
pects of automating control, it is possible to isolate the criteria of
speed. scope. continuity, stability (survivability and reliability),
throughput capacity, mobility, secrecy. accuracy and flexibility in the
Nnctioning of the automated control systems.

The most important speed criterion of an automated system by which the
troops are controlled is the time of one complete control cycle, that is,
the duration of the response by the cosmanders and staffs to changes in
the combat and operational situation.

An evaluation (of the speed) of an automated control system can also be
made by particular indicators which influence the overall duration of a
full control cycle. As such data it is advisable to use the time for the
collecting, processing and putting out of information (in terms of the

importance categories) needed for troop control, and the time for taking
the decision and assigning and issuing the missions to executors.

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to information on the time of the complete control cycle, in
evaluating the speed of the functioning of an automated control system.
also of important significance is the consideration of data on the time
for carrying out the work related to drawing up the decision and working
out the documents on troop control. Considering the time expenditures on
these processes, in each control element and body it is advisable to de-
termine the overall duration of all work related to troop control. The
evaluation of the automated system using the given indicator will make it
possible to ascertain where the work of the control bodies is most regulat-
ing with the given control system. Finally. for ascertaining the import-
ance of one or another control element it is also advisable to determine
(in absolute amounts or in a percentage ratio) the time expenditures in
each element in evaluating the overall time of a full control cycle.

ﬂy the criteria for the scope of an automated control system one understands
those indicators which characterize its ability to meet the needs of con-
trol from the standpoint of the spatial extent of troop combat. An evalua-
tion of automated systems in terms of scope criteria is essential due to

the tendency for a continuous increase in the combat and maneuvering abili-
ties of the troops and the broadening of the spatial boundaries of the combat
of the field forces, formations and units. The most important indicators
for the scope of an automated control system in combat are the range of
transmission and the area for collecting tactical information.

Additional scope criteria can be the number of control points and the number
of correspondents served by the system in each control element, the number
of personnel and amount of equipment (particularly motor transport) avail-
able at each point, and the number of persons directly concerned with the
questions of control and also in the service sphere.

As criteria for the continuing functioning of automated control. it is
possible to use the mathematical expectations of the time of the maximum
interruption in control and the minimum duration of the continuous opera-
tion of the system between two interruptions. The quantitative values of
these amounts are best determined by the modeling method.

To evaluate the designated automated system for the stability criteria
means to determine the frequency of its failure and the duration it remains
in proper working order.

The stability of a control system is provided by its invulnerability and
reliability. By invulnerability one must understand the property of the

system to maintain its ability to operate under enemy action. that is. with
combat damage to the automation, communications and other technical control

devices as well as casualties among the personnel of the control bodies
and points.‘3 The reliability of the system is the aggregate of indicators
characterizing its capacity to operate under the conditions of normal op-
erations with the absence of combat losses.‘“

209

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the basic criterion for the stability of an automated control system,

one must use the stability factor as the probability of its proper work-
ing order at any arbitrarily selected moment of time.

In addition to this. in evaluating the stability of control. it is possible
to use such criteria as the probability of the prompt collection of informa-
tion needed for decision taking; the probability of the prompt transmission
of combat orders to the basic grouping of subordinate troops; the invulner-
ability of the control points.

By the criteria for the throughput capacity of an automated control system,
one understand the indicators reflecting its informat: n capacities. For
evaluating throughput capacity, the following can be used:

a) The coefficient for the information filling of the system as the ratio
of the mathematical expectation of information collectable over a unit of
time to the total quantity of data needed for troop control;

b) The data processing coefficient which characterizes that portion of
the total volume of incoming information which is processed over a given
segment of time;

c) The data consumption coefficient which indicates that portion of the
total quantity of processed information which is issued to officials and
used by them in control during combat or an operation;

d) A total indicator for throughput capacity as a function of the three
above-listed coefficients.

Each of them can be used for evaluating the throughput capacity of an
automated system in terms of transmission, processing and use not only
for the total volum- of information, but also for each type of operational
and tactical infroamtion individually.

For determining the quantitative values of the throughput capacity criteria
it is essential to determine the mum of information which is needed for
control in modern combat in each control element and bow.

By the mobility criteria of an automated system by which control is car-
ried out in combat. abroad they understand the indicators reflecting
its capacity for prompt movement.

In the opinion of bourgeois military specialists, mobility is one of the
most important conditions for ensuring the stability and continuity of
control. To evaluate a control system for mobility criteria means to
answer the question whether the methods and rates of its movement satisfy
the demands imposed by the nature of modern combat. The basic mobility
criteria must be considered the ability of control points to operate while
in motion and their transpvartability by air. Here particular attention

210
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
, - .. . .. i -
s . II ‘-.I . ll..l.lll “I III.-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

should be paid not only to the time of taking down, setting up and the
speed of moving control points, but also their cross-country capacity,
and the ability to mOVe through various obstacles and over water barriers.

Ahrond it in felt that the higher the control element. the more signifi-
cance should be given in evaluating the mobility of an automated system

to such a criterion as the presence of highly mobile and reliable air-
nround control pointu. Such points are particularly essential with the
massed use of nuclear weapons when large impassable areas are created and
it in essential to respond rapidly to changes in the combat and operational
situation.

in inferior levels. an automated control system should be based on mobile
control points which do not require any expenditures for taking down and
setting up. For operations in the battle formations of the troops it is
essential that the transport with the automated control bodies and equip-
ment located on them be up to the qualities of the combined-arms transport.

in the superior levels, as the basic criterion of mobility, it is possible
to use the ratio (in percentage terms) of the time expenditures for moving
control posts to the entire time of troop combat.

Abroad it is considered that for evaluating the mobility of automated
control systems. the following can be used: The share of time during which
control is carried out by the full strength of forces and means; the ratio
of control time from the basic command post to all control time; the ratio
of the time for setting up all control points to the time of conducting
combat, and other criteria.

According to the assertion of bourgeois military specialists, in evaluat-
ing the concealment of an automated control system. two problems are
examined:

a) Evaluating the concealment of the position, movement and functioning
of control points;

b) Evaluating the security of operational and tactical information used
for control. particularly information on the decisions of commanders and
the combat missions of our troops.

For solving the first problem. as the criteria it is possible to use such
indicators an the degree of radio emissivity at the control points in using
automation, the accepted operating conditions of radio electronic equip-
ment. the number of decoy control points, and so forth.

In solving the second problem. the most important criterion is the degree
of concealment of the transmitted information. the quanititative values
of which are determined for the control elements considering its value
and the obsolescence time.

211
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18, 2009: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOO‘I 00010006-3
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

The forces and means used by the enemy for reconnoitering the ASUV are
extremely diverse in terms of their physical essence. For this reason.
the concealment of the automated control system should be Judged according
to the types of reconnaissance. Of particular significance is an evalua-
tion of the concealment of the system from enemy radio and radar recon-
naissance.

Foreign specialists feel that an evaluation of the functional accuracy of
an automated control system includes the following Operations:

a) Ascertaining the degree of conformity of the operational-tactical in-
formation used in control to the actual conditions of the combat and opera-
tional situation;

b) Elucidating the accuracy of solving the computational problems;
c) Establishing the optimality of the decisions taken.

As the criteria for evaluating the degree to which the information con-
forms to the real conditions of the situation, it is asvisable to use the
indicators which reflect the accuracy of its acquisition. forming. collec-
tion, processing and putting out, as well as its age. For a generalized
evaluation of the accuracy of the information, it is possible to use its
total distortion factor which indicates the number of signs per error.

Here the basic criteria are: The age of the information as the difference
between the moment of its use and the period of a change in the situation;
the obsolescence time of the information, that is, the time the information
keeps its value.

The accuracy of solving computational problems can be Judged through the
mean square errors of those quantitative values which are produced as a
result of solving them. In addition it is possible to use indicators
characterizing the combat effect. These include the quantity and approxi-
mate cost of the equipment saved due to increasing the accuracy of the
calculations carried out using automation. From the methodological view-
point, an evaluation of the effectiveness of the decision is one of the
stages in its preparation. The optimality of the decisions must be viewed
depending upon the conditions for taking them. The criteria of the opti-
mality of a decision have determining significance in assessing the func-
tional accuracy of the automated control systems. Since a decision lies
at the basis of control. the evaluation of automated control as a whole
will depend largely upon the evaluation of its optimality. For this reason,
maximum attention should be paid to working out the criteria and methods
for evaluating the optimality of decisions.

By the criteria for the flexibility of the functioning of an automated

control system one understand the indicators characterizing its ability to
adapt its work in accord with changing conditions of control in maintaining

the required level of all the remaining efficiency indicators.

212
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. C. i i ' a a... s' 3 II" :-:D'; H; |:||I I” III.-

PON OFFICIAL USI’. ONLY

In assessing the flexibility of a system. it is essential to determine

its capacity to shift from certain methods of control to other ones; the
shifting of control from some control points to others; the linkage with
other automated systems. For example, in the NATO armies, great attention
is paid to the linking of control systems of the various states which are
members of this aggressive bloc.

In addition. it is advisable to consider the capacity for solving new.
additional control problems. for incorporating nev automated equipment and
other control devices in the system, and for using new methods for solving
problems.

As the basic criterion for flexibility. it is essential to use the time re-
quired for reorganizing the automated control system.

In evaluating nevly developed automated systems one must not be confined to
analyzing their operational and tactical efficiency in terms of the given
development level of operational art and tactics. It is essential to ex-
amine hov capable the system is of functioning normally with the appear-
ance of more promising types of weapons and military equipment and new
methods of armed combat.

These are the basic theoretical Judgments on the methods and criteria for
evaluating the operational and tactical efficiency of an automated control
system.

An evaluation of technical efficiency of an automated system consists in
analyzing its technical solutions. that is: determining the technical
capabilities and the modernity of the automated troop control equipment.

The rationality of the control equipment depends largely upon the efficiency
of the system as a whole. For this reason an evaluation of the technical
efficiency of automated control systems is inseparably linked with the
ascertaining of their operational and tactical efficiency. In assessing

the technical capacity of automated equipment. primary attention must be
given to the convenience of operating this equipment under the various
conditions of its combat use.

At the same time, the evaluation of technical efficiency in many instances
should be linked to an evaluation of economic efficiency. The advanced
nature and rationality of technical solutions for developing control
equipment in many instances must be Judged considering the economic out-
lays on realizing these plans.

In evaluating technical efficiency of an automated control system, one
must first of all analyze its design and technical indicators.

In the opinion of foreign specialists. among the most important of these
are: Productivity, operational reliability and mobility of the automated

213
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
FOR O'PICIAL USE ONLY

control equipment and the system as a whole. as well as the frequency.
Height. temperature and other specifications of its individual elements.
Moreover. the degree of standardization of the automated equipment and
other control equipment is a design and technical indicator. Here primary
attention is paid to the design and technical indicators of the electronic
computers. and particularly their extension devices.

Along with the design and technical indicators it is also advisable to
assess the technical operating indicators of an automated control system.
This includes: The amount of consumed energy. consumption of fuel and
lubricants. the number of operating personnel. weight. area and volume of

the automated equipment and other techical devices. the component parts
and elements of the system.

Finally. in evaluating the technical efficiency of automated control sys-
tems, particularly newly developed ones. it is essential to Judge their
future prospects and feasibility. here attention must be paid to the new-
ness of the proposed technical means of control. and to analyze to what
degree the most recent achievements of scientific and technical progress
have been used. particularly in the area of radio electronics and com-
puters.

It is equally important to pay attention to the Operational, and particu-
larly the electromagnetic, compatability of the various blocks and elements
of the system.

In addition, in evaluating the technical prospects and feasibility of newly
developed automated control systems. the possibilities of developing the
entire range of equipment should be correctly determined.

In addition to the criteria for tactical and technical efficiency. it is

advisable. in our opinion, to use the following criteria for the economic
efficiency of automated control systems.

1. The economic expenditures on the system. or the aggregate of outlays
related to its development, introduction and operation.

A distinction is made between two categories of expenditures: capital and
operating.

The former include all allocations on the system before it is received in
the troops. as well as for subsequent modernization up to the time the

system is taken out of operation. here also are included the expenditures
on scientific research and experimental designing. the preparation of the
problems. programs and other measures related to the software. the train-

ing of personnel. the purchasing of automation. communications and office
equipment and other means of control.

215
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
,u... . .. .
_ . . . . - ,
: _ Lo. 0. . 0‘" :-:I‘. '0. It'lO OH I...

FOR OFFHHM. USE ONLY

The latter include the expenditures on the entire service life of the sys-
tem starting from its operation. These include the expenditures on the
support of operating personnel, repair of equipment. the purchasing of
operating materials. and so forth.

Thus. the total expenditures (Cac) on an automated control system can be
determined from the fonmula:

Cac ' Cd*Ci+Ce*co.

where Cd--expenditures on the development of the system and the testing of
its experimental model;
C1--expenses on introducing the system;
ce--expsnditureo on operating the system in the troops;

Co--other expenditures.

2.The direct (real) economdc effect (Ore) is the savings directly in the
sphere of control activity achieved as a result of automating troop control:

Cre ' C1962+C3+Ch

vhere C1--reduction in expenditures for support of personnel of control
and communications bodies;

C2--reduction in expenses on collecting information On the situation,
combat documents. the solving of computational problems, and so
forth;

C3--reduction in expenditures on troop support;

C~--other types of savings.

3. The indirect (combat) economic effect (Cie) is the savings in the sphere
of armed combat itself as obtained from automating troop control. This is
expressed by the value of the increase in the possible damage caused to the
enemy, by the savings in the consumption of weapons, and a reduction in

the losses of one's troops. and is determined from the formula:

(:1: - Cd‘cc oct.

“where Cd--the value of the increase in the possible losses caused to the
enemy;
Cc--the total savings from reducing the losses of one's own troops;
Ct--total savings in the consumption of the forces and means of armed
combat;

h. The repayment time of expenditures for automating troop control com-
pensated for by the real (Tre) and indirect (Tie) economic effects:

CRC 68C
'r = —.— « 'r = —— .
’9 Cre ' 1" CAL-Wat
215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday, June 18, 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010008-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In examining the methods and criteria for evaluating the effectiveness
of automating troop control. it is not enough to have merely a sound evalu-
ation of its tactical, technical and economic efficiency. There must also
be a comprehensive evaluation of the system as a whole considering all

types of efficiency, that is, generalized indicators are needed on the
acceptability (or inacceptability) of the evaluated system.

As the most important of such indicators it is essential to use the ration-
ality of introducing the designated automated control system. A system is
rational if the increment given by it in the operational and tactical ef-
fect with a known commensurability factor is greater or equal to the incre—

ment in the expenditures on it considering the direct and indirect economic
effects.

The rationality of introducing a system is determined by the ratio:

- n - - -
330 82c Cac cgc Cre cie

 

 

- o------- .
o
Ego cac
where 32c--the effectiveness of new automated control system;
Egc-oeffectiveness of old control system;

o-commensurability factor of tactical effectiveness of system and
expenditures on it.

With the failure to observe this condition, economic expenditures on de-

veloping the automated system begin to exceed the increase in the required
level of the tactical efficiency of control. In this instance the system
is ill advised. Consequently, it is essential to seek out ways for reduc-

ing expenditures on the automating of troop control.

'0

The rationality of introducing newly developed automated control systems
can be Judged from the increment in the price of an effectively operating
unit of the forces and means of armed combat.

The price of the effectively operating unit of the forces and means (Per)
can be determined by the formula:

c
ac

Qrm°Eac

 

Pef '

The increment in price is determined by the ratio:

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a... . .a. .. c a c
‘ a . ' l a... a v a u a. . a-
. .' ‘ . .‘ .'.' "' '..
I

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c° c“

 

pof '

Qm-Egc an'Egc

where anthe number of effectively operating forces and seam: of armed
combat.

The system can be considered rational if 99,90.

In determining the rationality of introduction and the amount of the accep-
table level of the increase in the cost of the new ASU. its development is
ordinarily envisaged sequentially, stage by stage. Independently. they
examine both the individual stages of introducing a pronising control sys-
tem (for example. the experiaental model). as well as the system as a
whole.

In evaluating individual automated control systems. it is also possible

to use other criteria which reflect the specific functioning of the vari-
ous elements of the system. For example. in evaluating the automation of
control of radar reconnaissance equipment. one uses the expected quantity
of reconnoitered anew installations. the time for presenting data on
enesv scans of air attack and other installations. and the cost of the
effectively operating reconnaissance equipaent. The criteria for evaluat-
ing automated control of rear services can be: The probability of the
proapt support of troop combat. the quantity of carryover inventories at
the warehouses. the expenditures on transporting aateriel and equipment

in the delivery sphere, as well as the cost of keeping rear service docu-
ments, and so forth. The automated control systems for missile and artil-
lery weapons. aviation and so forth obviously have their specific efficiency
indicators. however. the general principles of the approach to evaluating
efficiency and many of the examined criteria are applicable for evaluating
each such system.

The probles of the efficiency of automting troop control both in theoreti-
cal and methodological term has not yet been conpletely solved. The
authors of this book have also not posed such an aim. The examined views
on the principles. criteria and methods for evaluating the efficiency of
auto-ated control system are aerely a first approach to solving this
important and coaplex problem.

rooesorss
1. K. Marx and r. Engels. "Soch.." Vol 20. p 116.

2. V. I. Lenin, "Poln. Sohr. Soch.," Vol 13, p 375.

21'!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010006-3
10.

11.

12.

13.

FOR OHICIAI. 088 00“.?

A. A. Onchko. "Na scrum Mira I Stroltel'ntm Renaming” [On Guard
for Peace and tho Construction or 0min]. p 58.

800 I. o. Zov'ynlov. ”Skorost'. Vrma 1 Prootronotvo v Bowman»
Voync" [9pm. The and Space in Modern Var]. Moscow. 1965, p 30.

Sec WM“ ZVBZDA, 21 801)“.er 1971.

800 MAYA ZVEZDA. 22 Melt 1972.

U. 8. M MD WELD am. 15 Dumber 1969. p 13.
V. U. Lenin. ”Poln. Solar. 80ch.." Vol 1:1. p 121.

Soc V. D. Shogun and K. 0. Dubravin, ”ﬂunk; Uprovleniya 1 Hot”
[Control Science and the Navy]. Moscow. 1972, p has.

8" Yo. 8. Vcnttul'. "Isoledounlye Operatoly v Voycnno- Dole” [Opera-
uono Reourch in Military Affairs]. Moscov. 1972. p 12.

See Yu. V. Chm». ”Inlodovuuye Opcrotuy v Voyennon Dole” [Opel-cum
Research in mum Affairs]. Moscov, 1910. p 813.

I. Anurcycv and A. Totarchcnko. "Princncntyc multichannel Hctodov
v Voycnno- Dale." 9 5111.

See "Stntcmc Iulcdomiya" [System Ramon]. Arman. Moscow.
1912. p 158.

See Yo. 8. Vcnctul'. op. cit., 9 11:8.

218
FOR OWEN]. US! ONLY
roe OHIOMI. USE OI‘LY

concwston

An anelysis‘o the nethodological problens of auto-sting troop control
ashes it possible to drev a nunber of conclusions.

The full auto-etion of troop control is an objective and natural process.
It arose not as a result of historical chance or a specific decision, but
rather is a mifestation of an objective necessity ate-ing, on the one
hand. fro. the logical development of a systen of the ”unuequipnent”
type. end on the other. fro. the develop-out of troop control systems which
are constantly being inproved in line with the coepliceting of conbet and
the necessity of ever none efficient and optisal troop control.

‘i‘roop control is being auto-ted on a broad scientific basis. A profound
and coqlete theoretical basis for autonetion has become possible as a
result of the rise of cybernetics. the strong development of nethenatics
end such areas of it as probability theory. gene theory and queuing
theory. ‘lhe methods of aodeling end foreslisetion have gained profound
develop-ent and broad use. '

Along with the natural end technical sciences. social sciences also con-
prise a theoretical base of autoIetion. end they examine changes in the
huen and social factors in control processes mder the conditions of auto-
nation. llerxisa-Leniniss is of enonom significance for a scientific
basis of auto-ting troop control, as this mes it possible to disclose
and correctly solve a nuber of Isost coqlex nethodological problems.
Consequently. full mtoeation of troop control is an unique function of
nodern science. its obJectification and'the materialization of scientific

knowledge.

The objective necessity of the rise of the automation of troop control
and the profound end coqlete scientific bases for its develop-cut create
fire and per-enent prospects for its further growth and improvement. The
strengthening of the defense capability of our utherland and the entire
socialist co-onvealth in the future vill largely be detensined by the
develop-eat level of the full automation of troop control.

219

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OWICML 081-: (MIN

Autonstion is not en end in itself. It is s neens noting it possible for
the cn-ender end his subordinete control bodies to flexibly end effi-
ciently control the troops under the conditions of nodern werfere, end to
optieise control ectivities. In end of itself eutoeetion is en extrenely
coqliceted process both on the theoreticel end precticel level. Its rise
end further developent hsve confronted Iilitery theory end prectice with
e whole series of involved problem the solution to which is becoeing e
vitslly ilportent need.

Militery theoreticel knowledge is confronted with the took of more pro-
foundly understending the processes of troop control. It is generelly
known thet nilitery science hes constently studied the objective processes
of control. In our tines this trend is becoeing en ineretive. At present
sore precise knowledge is required on the petterns of controlling eodern
ccebet. end their precise description using nethsneticel logicel nethods
end elgorithns for the co-ender's control ectivities. Only on such e
level of nilitery theoreticel knowledge is the eutoeetion of troop control
possible.

Militery prectice is confronted with the problem of skillfully utilizing
eutonetion. Obviously there lust be not only the corresponding chenges

in the thinking of the officers end generels who control the troops. but
elso en isprovenent in ell control ectivities end the bringing of thee: into
accord with the perticuler feetures of the operetion of the ABUV.

Ihe develop-ent of eutontion cen give rise to notions thet uen will be
elininsted fron the sphere of troop control. In this regerd bold pre-
dictions hove been node on the repid developeent of eutonetic systees
which will coqletely perforn huen functions in troop control. however.
the reel process of eutoestion shows the groundlessness of such predic-
tions. The greetest effect will be echieved only when the ASUV optinlly
ccebine the brood possibilities of eutcaetic devices with the truly in-
exheustible creetive possibilities of nsn.

The retio between een end eutoeetic cr‘rcrz :xisting in the ASUV will
not renin fixed. The correletion between the tori-sliced. moraine-like
end unfornelized. creative. truly hm work will elweys heve e concrete
historicel neture. The reel possibilities of eutonstion ere deter-lined
by the historicel limits for the development of science. technoloy, pro-
duction end nilitery effeirs. kit the potentiel possibilities for improv-
ing it ere unforeseeeble. Any fomlised end elgoritheized eree of hunen
lentel sctiwity cen be turned over to e nechine. Consequently the Isore
profoundly the processes of wer end erred coehet sre understood. the
greeter it will be possible to eutonste the ectivities of nen in the eres
of troop control in cabet. At the seas tine. et eny stage in the develop-
lsent of eutonetion. there will elweys exist e uhole series of problems
where the huaen brein can function significently lore successfully in
solving then then can e cybernetic nochine.

220

”I OFFICIAL US! ONLY
i I a:o: e: . II" 1-:0’8 II; ltlll I” III:-

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the troop control systems, man will always keep the decisive place.

for taking a decision for combat cannot be reduced solely to solving a
logical problem. This is a social, volitional and emotional act of
enormous importance. It can be carried out only by a person who has been
granted the corresponding rights as well as civil and party responsibility.

Automation, without reducing the importance of man, places increased de-
mands on him. All spheres of military activity should undergo definite
changes under the conditions of the full automation of control. This
applies also to the sphere of ideological conditioning, moral-political
and psychological training, the significance of which will increase. The
men must be aware of their responsibility to carry out military duty, to
turn a knowledge of Marxism-Leninism into communist convictions and mobil-
ize all the individual qualities of a Soviet soldier.

The automation of troop control requires a higher general educational level
01 the personnel. The criteria determining the professional level of the
military will change. The nature of military labor to an ever greater
degree will be determined by those functions which it performs in the ASUV.
The extrasystem, intrasystem and coamand (leadership) functions will to

an ever increasing degree differentiate military labor.

Full automation of troop control, in keeping with its development, will
haVe an effect on all spheres of military affairs. Under its influence
there will be a further development in the nature of combat in the direc-

tion of its greater dynamicneas. There will also be a more accurate
choice of the methods of conducting combat which to the greatest degree
conform to the existing balance of forces, to the terrain conditions,

the season of the year as well as the meteorological conditions; the
cooperation of the troops will be better organized. Under the conditions
of full automation, the content and style of the work of the commanders
and staffs will be significantly altered. This will be apparent in the
greater soundness of the decisions taken, in the accuracy and ierseness
of the orders given, and in the fundamental change in the staff documents
which to an ever greater degree will assume a form suitable for computer-
ized use.

Automating troop control is a modern means for increasing the efficiency
of troop operations. This places ever more rigid demands upon the effi-
ciency of the ASUV themselves, and necessitates a careful improvement in
the scientifically based system of criteria and methods for evaluating
such efficiency.

Full automation of troop control is one of the important aspects in the
life of the Soviet Armed Forces. Each officer to one degree or another

will participate in the process of introducing ever more advanced ASUV
into service. No servicemen can avoid the necessity of extending to one

degree or another his knowledge of the essence and content of automating
troop control. This is necessitated by the present-day level of the

221

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: Thursday. June 18. 2009: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000100064
I’M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

development of the Soviet Am end new. This eteme tron the demands of

the CPBU end the Soviet government to constantly inprove the coubet readi-
ness of the Armed Forces.

END
COPYRIOIIT: Voyenizdet. 197?
10272
cso: emu/21.59

222

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY