APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100: ClA-RDP02-00060R00010001001 1-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8204
5 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL Scxeuces
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE [NLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are ruppllcd by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
ur [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
Iation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar naaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

ev9VRIGHI IAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP 0F
XATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
"F 7:615 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
IIOUOOIA'NC OdIA

  
    
  
  

. upon No. )- Rerlplm‘s Artesslen No.
”as l./ 820‘
I C 0 - I
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY W
BlOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL scumces . (Pouo 1/79) -
_‘ ~='-‘°""‘ “‘“‘“"°'
. Man-Is. ousslssclsa ﬂeas sss Adam W
Joint Publications Research Service
[000 North Globe Road W

Arlington. Virginia 22201
1'
la. Spending OuaaIsstlss Naoe sad Address 0:. ems: Iepen O Psolad

  
   
     
   

  
  
 

     
 
     
     

As above

No ADNMIO

     

The report contains information on aerospace medicine. egrotechnology. bionicc
and hioacoustics. bioche-istry. biophysics. environ-ental and ecological
problems. food technology. microbiology. epideniology end ialunology.

sarine biology. military medicine, physiology. public health. toxicology.
radiobiology. veterinary nedicine, behavioral science. human engineering.

psychology. psychiatry and related fields. and scientists and scientific
organizations in bio-edicnl fields.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8204
5 January 1!

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY
Blonemcm. mo BEHAVIORAL Scxeuces
(moo 1/79)
Coursms PAGE

AEROSPACB mxcm

affect of Artilicm Gravity mun; Space nun: on Nutcr-
Solublc Protein Content of Nerve Tissue Strucmu

(A. V. Corinna". V. V. Pormulw; mum'
MPRDIBNTAL'MY IIOLWII I musm. no 10, 1978).. I

PHYS 101.0th

Bonner." Diocuuu Artificial Influencing of Ill-nu Mind
(I. P. hkhtorm; mama-rmmanmu
REVOLYUTSIYAICW, 1977)........................ 6

PUBLICATIOIIS -

Obtaining nutrient. has: Pro- Put
(rowamm mammal DWI!!! 12 mnn,19‘m ...... 16
FOR OFFICIAL USE OULY .

AEROSPACE MEDICIIB

UDC: 612.8.015.3‘8.0I‘.677

EFFECT OF ARTIFICIAL GRAVITY DURING SPACE FLIGllT ON HATER-SOLUBLE PROTEIN
comm OF NERVE TISSUE STRUCTURES

Hoecow IYULIJTEN' IKSPIRWTAL'IDY DIOWGII I HEDITSIIY in Mental
no 10. 1978 pp ‘21-‘23

[Article by A. V. Gorbunove end V. V. Portugelov (correeponding eeeber of
the USSR Acedeey of Hedicel Sciencee), lnetitute of Iioeedicel Probleee.
USSR Hinietry of ﬂeelth. Hoecow, euheitted 27 Her 78]

[Text] A etudy wee eede of weter-eoluhle protein levele in grey
end white letter of the epinel cord. intervertehrel genglie, ee
well ee eeneorieotor region of the ret cerebrel cortex efter en
ld.S-dey epece flight. There wee e reliehle decreeee in weter-
eoluhle proteine ‘.5-9.5 h efter the flight in the grey end

white netter of the epinel cord end intervertehrel genglie of
rete expoeed to weightleeeneee. Rete expoeed to ertificiel
grevity in flight preeented e decline of weter-eoluble protein
levele in the epinel cord white letter. In eninele previouely
expoeed to weightleeeneee. there wee reliehle elevetion of
weter-eoluhle protein level in the grey letter of the epinel

cord 25 deye efter the epece flight. No chengee were deeonetreble
(ee coepered to the viveriue control). either 6.5-9.5 h or 25 deye
efter the bioeetellite lended. in the grey netter of the eeneori-
eotor region of the cerebrel cortex of rete expoeed to weightleee-
neee end ertificiel grevity (BYULL. EKSPER. BIOL., No 10. 1970.

p #21). -

Key words: weter-eoluble proteins; ret cerehrel cortex; epinei cord;
intervertehrel genglie; epece flight; weightleeeneee.

Previouely ll]. it wee cetehliehed the: there ie e decreeee in weter-eoluble
proteine of ret epinnl cord grey end white netter efter e 19.5-dey epece
flight eboerd the Insane-782 hioeetellite. however. it reeeined uncleer
whether theee chengee were the direct effect of weightleeeneee.

It wee decned ieportent to enelyee neteriel (functionelly end hietologicelly
of verioue etructuree of the epinel cord et the level of the lueher
intueeecence-grey netter of enterior. poeterior end leterel cornue. where

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

there is predominant grouping of neurons. and white matter constituting the
ascending and descending conduction pathways. intarvertahral ganglia. as
well as sensorlaotor region of the rat cerebral cortex) taken after the
landing of Keenan-936 blosatellitc. aboard which the animals were sub-itted
to artificial gravity produced by rotation on a centrifuge. in addition to
space flight factors. A continuous acceleration of 1.0 G was produced on
the centrifuge (36 ca radius). The objective of this esperieent was to
differentiate between changes attributed to weightlessness and effects of
other flight factors.

Methods

He removed for exaaination the spinal cord at the level of the lumbar in-
tusescence. adjacent intervertebral ganglia and specimens of eray latter
tissue of the seosprisotor region of the cerebral cortex fron flight rats
exposed to weightlessness and artificial gravity. 5.5-9.5 h and 25 days
after an 18.5-day orbital space flight. The spinal cord was separated

at O-A'C into white and gray natter using an HIS-2 licroscope to aonitor
this procedure. ‘Batches of tissue were placed into special polyethylene
centrifuge tubes for hoeogenisation. Each batch of nerve tissue was
halogenited in a 10-fold volume of distilled water at 0-6'0. utter-soluble
proteins were extracted for 2 h at 4‘0. The extracts were centrifuged at
15.000 6 (60 sin. 0-4'0). Protein content of the supernatant was assayed
by the aethod of Lowry [3). The results were sublitted to statistical
processing according to the nooparanetric criterion of Van der Verden [2].
Rate kept in the vivariun and used in a ground-based aodel experiaent
served as a control. In addition. we included two groups of aniaals in
ground-based control experilents. One group was rotated throughout the
experiaental period on a centrifuge (36 c: radius) at an acceleration of
1.6 c, and the other group, on a centrifuge with the least possible radius
("radius-free centrifuge"), which enabled us to assess the significance of
the rotation factor (1.1 G acceleration).

Results

The results of our studies are listed in the Table. which shows that there
was a reliable decrease in water-soluble proteins (converted to 1 lg wet
tissue weight) b.5-9.S h after an 18.5-day space flight. as well as 9-11 h
after a 19.5-day space flight [l]. in the white and gray setter of the
spinal cord and intervertebral ganglia of rats exposed to weightlessness.
The levels of water-soluble proteins in the spinal cord gray setter and
intervertebral ganglia of rats exposed to artificial gravity during the
experieont did not differ free the control (control rats asintained under
vivariun conditions and in the ground-based aodel enperiment). whereas

the levels were reliably lower in white latter, as conpared to vivariua
rats. but did not differ from the concentration of water-soluble proteins
in the upinal cord white astter of rats involved in the ground-based
experiaent.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010011-7

2007/07J08:

a
.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

Quaiiv «93:3 2.» Iona nanouuuv 5.39:0.— 0: .33.».

13%.; 5.“: 3069—330 0.39303
Nn mo H055" Goa-03.33. an 5.7930270» .3515 haw-53 .3. sagas-o .7352, nag-Black
nasal—n0 3.27350»! 3 Inn-housing 395.30 5.32%» o» Gun-nouwuuliv 3.2.: Canada». noxJKSx
:ouauwuuaou count-36:: no noun-you Menu. 2?... mu 8
393608 zouauwuunou seams-5.2.3.. no 60.338 Am

“sauna gonna .aau nu Au

 

              

        

M 303.38 23.20.70 vein—:50»- uuuun a»: mu 3

_ up}: you: .. ocm 8

ﬂ “douucoov uncluuomXO cocoanvuaouu an

0 Conunoov 3.33:0 gun-33 Q :38

m 3

m

w .x
«gnawed

M «0 non-3.
bounce

awn. £038
3.3:: a:
Linn-33¢"
=qu- 3.3:
33 "scam
noun-l unu-
vuoo .35...."

. I 2;
a l

ﬁq 3 8.~ on; 3 3.4. on .84 and 3 84

a... an on... S... on SJ 8 86 a; 2 and

on.~ .3 no.” «3” .3 $4 and A a... 2 34 on.~ 3 3.6

. 84 a on... S.~ an 2.~ an on.~ :.~ ‘2 36

hug-ﬂu 3033.! 38.33.33:

non—503.3. 233a 0P3: on guano».— ounanouuuoun: 3:33 at... «IE3 :25.—

roa ovncm. use ouu'

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100010011-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Twenty-five days after the space flight. animals previously exposed to
weightlesaness presented a reliable increase in water-soluble proteins

of spinal cord gray matter. as compared to the control. In the white
matter of the spinal cord and intervertebral ganglia. the water-soluble
protein levels rose to the control Value. In rats exposed to artificial
gravity during the flight. there was n~ difference after 25 days in levels

of water-soluble proteins of gray and white matter of the spinal cord and
intervertsbral ganglia. as coapared to the control.

No changes (as compared to the Vivarium control) in levels of water-soluble
proteins. both 6.5-9.5 h and 23 days after the satellite landed. were
demonstrated in the gray matter of the sensorimotor cortex of rats exposed
to weightlessness and artificial gravity (see Table).

The findings demonstrated. once nora. that long-term space flights lead to
a decrease in water-soluble proteins of gray and white setter of the spinal
cord and intervertebral ganglia of rats. Since such changes were not
observed in animals exposed to artificial gravity. it can be concluded that
the observed decline of water-soluble protein levels in the structures
examined is apparently the result of the effects of weightlessness. One of
the factors involved in these changes. in the peripheral (afferent and
efferent) elements of the motor analyzer. is perhaps a decrease in
informative flow of interoproprioceptive impulses from skeletal muscles and
skeletal bones. which is due to a functional underload and relaxation of
antigravity muscles. These changes can be evaluated as an adaptation to
new living conditions in weightleasness. related to renoval of the

static load on the musculoskeletal system. The lack of changes in water-
soluble protein content of the gray matter of the aensorimotor cortex
warrants the belief that adaptation occurs primarily on the level of the
spinal reflex are. This hypothesis appears plausible. since it is known
that antigravity muscles are linked with spinal reflex mechanisms pri-
marily via the myotatic bineuronal reflex arc {6].

Readaptation to ground conditions in animals exposed to weightleaaneas was
manifested 25 days after the space flight by an increase in water-soluble
protein content of the spinal cord gray substance. The level of water-
soluble proteins in the spinal cord white substance and intervertebral
ganglia reached control values. Probably. this hypercoapensation vas
functionally necessary. since it was a response to the increase in the func-
tional load. related to the change from weightleasness to earth‘s gravity.
The presence of artificial gravity on the biosatellite most probably did not
require readaptation of animals to ground conditions. One would think

that this can explain the lack of changes in animals exposed to artificial
gravity during the flight. with regard to levels of water-soluble proteins
in the gray matter of the spinal cord and intervertebral ganglia. both in
the early postflight hours and after 25 days. Perhaps. in our experiments.
the effect of artificial gravity on the animals was not totally equivalent
to the effect of earth's gravity. since we observed a decrease in water-
soluble protein content of spinal cord white substance in animals exposed

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL-USE ONLY

to artificial gravity during the flight. It may be aeauaed that there is
a change in metabolite transport. slowing thereof. in the systee of neural
conductors of the spinal cord during the flight.

Thus. the results of our studies revealed that the decrease in levels of
water-soluble proteins in gray and white aubatance of the spinal cord and
intervertebral ganglia of rate that were weightlese during the space flight.
demonstrable a few hours after conclusion thereof. is apparently related to
relovel of the static load fro- the skeletonuacular systen.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gorbunova. A. V.. and Portugalov. V. V. BYULL. BKSPBR. BIOL. [Bulletin
of Bxperiaental Biology and Hedicine], No 8. 1977. p 168.

2. Van der Verden. B. 1.. "Hetheutical Statistics," Moscow. 1960. p 17.

3. bowry. 0. 11.; Rosebrough, V. J.: and Parr. A. J. J. 8101.. cam.
Vol 193. 1951. p 265.

b. Lloyd, D. P. J. NBUROPIIYSIOL.. Vol 6. 19103. p 317.

COPYRIGRT: "lyulleten' eksperinentel'noy hiologil i neditsiny". 1978

10.657
080: 1870

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

memos! -

WDIBGUSSB ARTIFICIAL 1mm 0! mm mm

Mow ”AUCWWOBKAYA arvomnsna I 0mm in Manna 1W?
eigned to preee 8 Aug 77 pp 162-171

Article by ILP. Bekhtereve froe the book "leuchno-tekhnioheeheye
evolyuteiye i Ghelovek' edited by V. G. Afenes'yev. Inetitute of
Sociological Reeeerch. IBSR Auden of Sciencee. Indetel'etvo “huh“:
”Possibilitiee m unite of [Miriam Influence on the m llind']

[Text] Scientific em technicel progreee ie one of thoee rclitiee which
hee ecquired e veet influence on the conditions of nn'e enietooe end
the fete of hunnity in our tine.

1he benefit'of progress in obvious. hovever hietory knowe um oeeee when
the direct coneequenoee of ecientific end technical edvenoee hed e direct
or imiirect unfevoreble effect on ten. 0f couree. not one of the

of the progreee of ecience ie conteined in the knowledge itself. or in

en inherent ettribute of thie progeee. The denser ie elweye the reeult
of unskillful or hcetile utilieeticn of knowledge ell! the potentinle
erected by ecience end technclog. The potentiel en! reelieed neeulte

of the scientific end technical revolution ehould elweye he mauled frce
theee positions. The result- end prcepecte of the etudy of un'e hrein
ehould else be enelyeed froe theee eeee poeitiom.

The prerequieitee for the new etege in underetendin; the nechenie- of
the hunt: hrein were the clinicel epplicetione of the increeeingla perfec-
ted Mcologicel neene end eepecielly the nethod of inplented electrcdee.

The nethod of ilplented electrodes entered clinicel practice et the en!
- of the 100': end deter-iced ite pleoe neon; therepeutic-diegncetic nethode
in the 60'e. The prehietcry of its clinicel uee wee elncet mo yeen of
use of ilplented electrode in experinente with male. This nthod in

being ueed now for diagnosis end treetnent of petiente with epilepey.
Perhineon'e dieeeee. certein nentel end other dieeeeee in different
countriee of the world. It in ueed in e nunber of ecientific inetitutione
in our country for treeteent of Perkineon'e dieeeee end epilepey.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Poll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Now data base been accuaulated of the type on which it is possible to
base a scientifically founded expansion of the treatsent of different
types of neurological diseases. and also eactionalpnental disturbances.
Very much in need of this are especially those patients for whoa phsrna-
cologioal treatssnt of their diseases is ineffective or proves to be
attainable with very large doses of the preparation. yielding often a
serious and difficult-to-resove side effect.

Long-tern studies of the structural-functional and neurophysiological
organisation of cerebral control of the emotions. perforned in the Institute
of Ettperiaental Isdicine of the USSR Acadesy of stical Sciences. have

Iuds it possible to plot charts of the cerebral organisation of the
enotions. They showed with what kind of physiological reorientations

in the brain the develop-ant of very varied eaotional reactions and states
is connected. 0n the basis of these data it is possible when necessary

to call forth different eaotional states and rsaotiotsor. on the contrary.
to suppress then.

The contssporary level of knowledge about cerebral organisation of the
esotions and utilization of the nethcd of isplanted electrodes hits it
possible very accurately to tum on certain enotiogenic cones in the brain.
to stisulate then. to coabine stitching off sons enotional sonss with
stisulation of others and with direction tors the developsent of the
desired sectional reorguusations. The possibility of direct observation
of different plvsiologioal indicators of the brain during the perforsanoe
by a patient of a current activity and one assigned by the physician .
under ordinary conditions and on the background of the use of purse-
cological preparations ashes it possible to specify the role of various
sections of the brain in the control of different functions. Specialists
working in this field can really talk about “love and hate“ as if

”fro. within“ the working brain. they can say how the nerve cells conduct

thenelves when an is solving a problen talking with the physician
is sad or happy. is sleeping or awake. ' '

Delving into the brain nechanisu of the sections has revealed that the
dsVsIOplsnt of a negative enotion is connected not only with the activity
of the zones of the brain directly connected with providing then. but also
with the inactivation of other sones Marking" during positive sections.
It is not Atcluded tint these processes reflect a unique I'conplsutity" of
the developasnt of negative esotions and. this. the protective role of

the cptiaua level of positive enctions. , 0n the other hand. studies of
indicators of the vital activity of the brain during the develop-est of
strong positive enoticns have shown tinthere too in individual cases

it is possible for there to develop in the brain a 'rssidualeffect" in

the fora of reorganisation of its physiologcal state. contributing to
the energence of a native esoticml state.

The data obtained using the -aethcd of ilplanted electrodes in a an lave
decoded literally in seconds wrat for a long tine renined not sore than
an interesting set of facts from an esperisent. and the experisent.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

having created the prerequisites for the clinical study. in tum itself
received new goals and stimuli.

of providing aental activity is connected first of all with the presence
in this systen of a very large number of links. and including ﬂexible
links. and with the fact that the olenents of the systen are not solitary
nerve cells. but a dynanic totality of mnctiomlly united groups of
nerve cells (neuron groups). and by a nuaber of other. less significant
factors. Serving for optimization of Dental activity is the brain
apparatus for detection of errors. unifying the structure of the brain.
”becosing silent" during the realisation of mental activity in aooonlanoe
with a plan and "working" when there is lack of agreement between the
activity and the plan. This appamttzs. apparently, possesses the ability
to nobiline the energy resources of the brain. which creates the bases
for correction of the current stage of activity and improve-mt of the

phenosena. Disclosure of this code can lake rental woe es

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm IWFICIM. "SI-I UNLY

of their activitynthoee connected and those not connected with acoustic
(sound) characteristics of the words.

The reorganisation: of the activity of nerve cells of the first type
disclosed a connection with tho Nnction of the current frequency and
rounding nnplitude of the word signals. These reorganisation are re-
garded by us as the primary (acoustic) code. detersining the possibility

of access to the basis of the long-tern senor-y accusulsted in the process
of individual experience after decoding (deciphering) the sense of the word.

The rearrange-eats of the activity of nerve cells of the second type.
apparently. also reflect the results of this decoding newly converted to
inpulec activity in the tors of a new ”sense” code. which further can
serve as the basis of a sore cosplex integrative activity of the brain.
The dovelcpacnt of research has uncorered that the coding of word signals
in the populations of nerve cells of Ian can be characterised as reor-
ganization of the frequency of electric charges of the cells. with the
appearance of discharges of a definite grouping. discharges of a definite
fore and with the change in the type of interaction of nearby nerve

it possible to single out a brain code of individual letters of a
pronounced word--phcneses. Thesc laterials in turn have been used for
control of the specificity of the code of words detected in the brain.

shown by an experiment with retraining-during ”Donation by s ptient
of the Issuing of unknown words the dynuics of the somatic ccde took

appearing changes in the activity of the nerve cells the appearance was
observed of new rearrangesents and the essrgence of a code linked by its
properties with the acoustic characteristics of the word--the amwer
pronounced by the patient. This code appeared before the patient’s
answer. which ads it possible to attribute it to the controlling
process responsible for the patient's spoken answer.

Utilisation of data about the code of different words ads it possible to
proceed fro- investigation of the coding of words in the brain to study
of the nechanisn of ascertainnent by the brain of their sililarity of
sewing. Using the Isthod of recognition of the code of different words.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOII OFFICIAL "SI-3 UNIX

it wee possible efter presenting to the petient the wﬁds ”chsir.” 'teble."
”oupboeni.” to detect in the brein the code of the we ”furniture" even
before it was uttered by the patient. erd so on.

The perforsed study of brsin nechsnisns of word coding nkes it possible

to propose for todey the following schese of processing this inforuticn.
The initisl coding of words is perform ecccrding to the lsws of coding
couple: sound (ecoustic) signels end is independent of the sense content
of these words. The energing acoustic code is eddressed then to the
long-tern nesory es ousuleted es s result of the person's individuel en-
perienoe. eotivetss it or builds up in the ebeence of e corresponding
besis. On the level of eooustic coding depending on s nusber of edditionsl
factors (the enoticnsl coloretion of the situetion. other stieuleting
notives end so on) it is possible to heve prelisinsry selection. 'filtretion"
of the inforsetion. Activetion of the long-tern senor-y leeds to forntion
in the brein of e new operetivs utib-the sense code. cepebls of serving
es the basis of other. considerebly sore couples: eentel processes. In
case of necessity of .word reelisstion of the ssntel process in the brein
a controlling code is foreed. In the ebsence of e corresponding besis in
the long-tern savory the function of the controlling code osn else be

ssoused by the prinsry sccustio code. which wss for-ed in the brein during
preoentetion of the unknown word.

Is it worth. however. striving for further decoding of the physiologic“
code of the sind? Will not the solution of this problen leed to such e
situation where the scientists will "let the genie out of the bottle.”
which it will then not be possible to ”put beck?“

There is no doubt thet it is worth trying. Just as it is worth striving
for progress in ell fields of knmledge. It is herd to cverestisste '
the significence of this tesk for brein physiology. Success in the stuiy
of the nerve code of nentel processes is uceptionslly isportent else for
philosophy es knowledge of the soot subtle ssteriel beses of concrete
dental phenonene. This is the sore inportent beceuse even now oertein

outstanding foreign physiologists consider the tee]: of, studying cerebrel
sechsnisn cf the mind to be unresolveble. Thus. in 1930-1937 Sherringtcn
wrote that we do not have the right to cosbins en experissnt of the mind
with e physiologicel one. end Ecoles in .1957 (2) one to the conclusion
thet "the brein with the aid of e speciel ebility enters into e relstion
with the spirit. possessing the property of e 'deteotcr."

However the significance of the question is not lieited by its theoretioel
espect. There is every reason to essuns tint nssely on the path of

study of the nerve code of nental phenonens it is possible to obtein very
inportent ester-isle for en understanding. end then even treetsent of the

sost serious eentsl diseescs connected. epperently. with disturbences in
the code of ssntel processes.

Progress in the study of the cerebrel orgeniseticn of esotioml-sentel
ectivity will wake it possible to return to the Joys of hunn life those

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

scntal patients whose lot now remins existence in psychiatric
hospitals.

Are there in the physiology of the brain probleas. questions and aspects
where pre-eainsnoe Mdanentally and for always will belong to the
experiment? There are. and this pertains first of all naaely to a nuaber
of aspects of studies of the neurophysiology of asn's higher nervous
activity and the physiolag of behavioral reactions.

It is scarcely peraissible according to very strict ethical oomiderations
to raise the problea of study of the intiute neurophysiologioal aechanisn
of the interaction of people in hunn society. By no aedical taslts. even
if you accuse as Justified the «passion of the sphere of application of
inplanted electrodes under clinical conditions. is it possible frcs ethical
positions to Justify the raising of such a task and the acre so its
realisation. But the “natural experiasnt"--the diseases of the brain
theuelvesudo not present the possibility of investigating this probles.
at least in an adequstely pure fore. In the solution of the broad circle
of questions of pmsicloy of the hunn brain the reasonably defined place
of up’l‘lloﬂu on anisals will never be occupied by the study of an his-

- self. But still. weighing both the linitations and the new possibilities
of acting on Ian's brain. the “fernsntation' of foreign public Opinion in
connection with these new possibilities. it is advisable to bring

lucidity at least to a nusber of aspects of the problea.

I an convinced: not such an isolated probles is the power of an over an
with the use of isplanted electrodes. I known all that we Inve succeeded
and are succeeding in doing in the field of the study of the Ischanis- of
Inn's brain will be utilised in our society only for hunne purposes.
This very society has fostered in us that very attitude turd the study
of the brain about which I as writing as the only one acceptable.

However. unfortunately. there is the problea of a social systes. full of
social contradictions. which encourages coercion. nkes it real and. if
this coercion is real. it is possible to me very different seal: for this.
And still even in this «tress case it is necessary to recognise tht the

sothcd of electrode isplsntaticn cannot be ”mo-elated“ for realisation
of this coercion.

Let us i-gine that. as in a frightening science-fiction novel. electrodes
are isplanted in people. they are given teleeetric sounds of “start“ and
"stop.“ they are plunged into dcpoodency or forced to uperience
non~existent Joys. they are “forbidden“ to think about soleting. they are
"forced" to think about sosething else... This. of course. is frightening.
But certainly sectional freedo- can be taken away by other lease. for
instance. by forcibly introducing 'tranquilisers“--epecial pharncological
agents or operating in still sore 'siapls' ways. Unfortunately. Insanity
for a long tine has not been sparing in the invention of ever new lease of
submission and destruction of those like itself.

' 11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70K ()h‘PICIM. "88 ONLY .

Ucing isplnntcd eloctrcdec not only is it hardly possible to oreete en
em of passive pseudorobotc. but it requires initielly en obedient
em of scientists resdy to be in the position of ewecutioners fulfilling
orders end trenssitting cosmnds. This is sisply shocking: he ere not
the only ones who think so. Outsteuiing scientists. specielieh in the
field of the brsin. regerd this question in precticelly the sees way.
”Scientists will not begin to febrioete robot-people. fully subordinete
to soeeone's will... Such en idee is sieply ebsuni.” writes the Spenish
scientist Delgado.

Ani nevertheless the denger oen not be excluded. It is ispoesible to
forget the shocking enti-husen etrocities of fesciss. First of ell hu-nity
should see to it that the utilisetion of pens of coercion will not be

the nors.of the behevior of society with respect to its sesbere. or of

one stete with respect to enother.

Along with this the chief teek is still sore specific. The scientist in
the sodern world hes eoquired reel influence on the fete of un. llsdisted
through the gcel of the society. this influence potentielly m be
demerous. it '-y leed to the creetion neeely of thet bosb which will

fell on his brothers in the species. Prospted by e personel excessive
“service to science.“ the scientist my potsntielly disregerd the interests
of the people entmting their fete to his in the news of “higher"
gcels-oof hypotheticsl benefit to hunnity...

Therefore in todey‘s world the soul seke-up of the scientist is very is-
portent. The even-increesing role of science mites the educetion of the
scientist e very ispertent not only stete tesk but else en internetionel
one. Not only does society detenine the utilisetion of the fruits of
the scientist's work. but it elso should not be e setter of indifference
to the scientist how the society _in which he is working utilises the
fruits of his lebors. The scientist. whose sissions ere purely hunn.
ssdico-biologicel problem. should elweys peeesber the biuiiu precept of
serving the high gcels of science only through the good of e specific
person. A petient. entmting the msicien with his heelth. end often
his life. should be ebsolutely sure thet ell the studies perforssd.
elthough et e11 debetebls reguding their possible influence. ere ads
only em ucluively in his own interests. end not for the good of “the
neat ptient.” The msicisn should elweys put in the plece of the
pstient not only hisself. but even the one who. perheps. is decrer to
his then hisself... Alli st the very sees ties nessly in the interests of

the given petient everything should slwsys be done for his thet is
possible for restoretion of heelth end presemtion of life.

rower over petients is ecquired only by en ective struggle with thee.
Such s set up of the question with wise orgenisetion cf the study will
in no wsy hold beck the progress of science. in illush-gtion of this ere

the hugu successes etteined in the pest two decedes in the science of the
sechenisse of nn's brein.

12

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’PIGIM. USE ONLY

Each following stage in the study of cerebral support of aental activity.
undoubtedly. is inportant in itself as a stage in the develop-ant of
natural sciences. as a stage in development of a large theory. Even a
very saall step forward in the science of man's brain is exceptionally
iaportant for clinical practice as a very necessary prerequisite for
inprcveaent of the treataent of neural and nental diseases. for expansion
of the spectrum of curable diseases.

But it should be considered also that each success in the given field of
science of the brain is exceptionally iaportant also for philosomvo and
for sociology. hcdern sociology is concerned about how the brain of our
planet is coping with the abundance of information. with the rising and
growing desands addressed to the brain. The prerequisites for the
scientific and technical revolution which were created by the brain of
geniuses and gifted- persons. and the scientific and technical revolution
itself, backed by the talent and labor of aillicns. live in turn pre-
sented huge demnds on the brain. Through the eyes and ears. Ian wants
this or does not want it. a huge voluae of infcmticn cones to the brain.
Hie brain. whether he wants this or not. reacts to this huge flow of

information. Is there really a threat that an my not cope with this
colaplexity?

Theorists in eotperiaental physiology have shown the hypothetical basic
principles according to which in interaction with the environsent. under
the influence of this environaent. the brain has developed. has adapted

to this environaent. Neurophysiologists should atteapt to amwer these
questions: in what way does it prove possible for there to be not only
colossal individual iaprovenent. exposure of the potentials of the brain.
but also an urgent transition to new stages of interaction with the environaent
by huge asses of people. how Ins the brain of an in less than two
generations proven capbls of adapting in a practically coapletely new
world? Mt will happen with the brain it in the fixture too with a

vast acceleration there is an incresse in the load on it? Alli W up

to our days has there been no ”catastrophe” (and we can say that no
catastrophes have occurred) on the level of the potentials of the brain?
Is there in the brain a nechanisa of self-preservation. of self-defense ?
"hat system of the brain are sore vulnerable-othe phylogenetic. the later.
or the earlier? "ill the enctional systea surrender and entail a “failure”
of the possibilities of the systea connected with it in the closest way.
the one providing intellectual activity. or. on the contrary. goiu out
of order teapcrarily. preserve the intellect? Is it necessary to

”render harsless" the eaotional systea and thereby open up space for the
intellect or is it necessary to preserve this “safety valve?"

There are Iany very isportant questions. Their address is the physiology

of man's brain. The answer to the anority of then requires investigations

and meditation. and to certain questions the answer is possible. apparently.
OVOI’I “We

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}! ONLY

It is known that in the brain there is a sschanisn providing surplus
possibilities upon nesting with each novelty. The one for when it has
been possible to "spy" on what occurs in the brain at the assent when
the situation proves to be a new one. when a transition is Id. unupec-
todly to an old situation. when there is even any basis at all to be
"surprised. " will be able to say that the brain in these cases as if
“plays through" the use of reedinessee for this new situation. Activated
at the ease tine is a huge nueber of nerve elesente. a use of comica-
tiono is switched on between the different sections and sleaents of the
brain. It is not exohwied that this sane eechanisa. even it partially.
was at the basis of preservation of the potentials of the brain. the po-
tentials of the species. It is very probable that this reaction to a
new thing is also eoeething in the way of natural training of the brain.
scaething like a sechanisa which insures surplus readiness for each
concrete. even ssall novelty of a given sinute. and for long centuries
has preserved endless1y the great potentials of the brain.

The greater the nuaber of new things. the greater the nueber of .tiaes
during short ssgaents of ties the brain is “surprised.” the sore infom-
tion that passes through the ears. eyes and other sensory inputs. the
more rapidly does the brain of a child develop all! thereby the sore full:
is the potential of the brain of the planet revealed. and the lore
opportunities appear for huunity. Perhaps. it will not be a great
exaggeration to say that the scientific and technical revolution is a
result of interaction according to the principle of positive feedback _
between the brain of humanity and the environsent. changed by this
brain. Scientific and technical progress. in this way. on the one hand
is the decisions of personality ads by humanity. an! on the other a use
upswing of the potentials of hueanity. a vase generation of ideas. a
clash of ideas. a autual snrichsent of ideas. Sowewhers. not having
noticed it ourselves. we passed the stage after which there began the
general activation of the Brain of huwanity. after which there occurred
an ”explosion" in the fore of the scientific and technical revolution.

But the scientific and technical revolutiono-this is also the huge increase
in the possibilities of study of the brain itself. of problsa solving-

is the ease as our bmin. And here again we cone up aginst the social
aspect of the problea. And this is why. The successes in the study of
physiological bases of aental activity can and should give the key to
control of the potentials of the brain.

It is not excluded that. having united the efforts of very different
approaches to the study of the brain. we will gain in the very near future
truly real power over the brain. This power should be med only for

the good of the healthy or the sick nan.

Us believe that the sore deeply we penetrate into the secrets of the
bmin. the smller will be the danger of using this knowledge aginst

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OVPICIM. USE ONLY

the brain. mint humanity. Knowlege oen never be denseroue 1v: iteelt.
Knowledge uill beoone or will not become denser” depending, on in whoee
hands it tells. Soiontiete of the uhole world. solving the problem of
mn'e brain. contributing their lebor end talent to these etuaiee. out
be :oneoioue of tho burden of reeponeibility to hunnity lying on then.
they met etrive in every way eo that whet their brein oreetee will be
utilised elwaye only for the noet hunne purpoeee.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'etvo "Ranks”. 19??

10908
(30: 1870

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'PICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

“'1'me mum YEAST PM“ PEN!

Ninth POW!!! ”DOWN! WM? 12 mm («ﬂitting muiont Yeast
Pro- Peet) 197‘! in Russian signed to press 13: Oct 7'! pp 2-26. 230-231

(Annotation. table or Contents. Introduction, and Chapter 1 free book

edited by Belorussian ssn Made-y of Sciences corresponding Mar V. Ye.
mvakiy. Irdatei‘stvo "uauka i tekhnika'. 1000 copies. 323 pages]

[Text] This book presents data on the availability and characteristics of
peat recomndad as a raw eateriai for hydrolytic processing. the indus-
trial procedures for hydrolysing peat vith concentrated sulfuric acid are
described. Data tro- research on the chenical cognition and biological
activity or the hydrolysis products of peat and on utilisation of the
coeponents of nutrient aedia prepared tron hydroiyeataa by protein. caro-
tene, and lipid-forming yeast. are generalised. Data are preaanted on the
use of peat hydrolysis residue to obtain fertilisers. substrates for
aicrobiai synthesis. and active charcoal.

The book is intended for scientists, engineers, and technicians in hydro-
iytic industry. and it say be usatul to scientists working on past chenistry.

Eighty-two tables, 38 figures, ‘23 bibliographic reterances.

Contents Page

lntroduction........................... 3

Chapter 1. Availability and Characteristics of Hydrolytic Peat

m htarial
(V. s. shiunskiy. A. V. Byetraya, L. P. Gusnchik. 2. V.
1‘starinskaya)............ 7
Chapter 11. Hydroiytic Processing-of Peat . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

methods For Hydrolyrinq Plant netarial Polysaccharidas (V. s.
Shinanskiy, R. P. Bratishko. R. V. Kosobokcva, II. R. my)».
‘lc. P. Into. ‘1‘. D. aelyavskaya, z. A. Ivanovich). . . . . . . . 27

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Investigation of lnursion o: aydrolysete Mess With the Goal of
Harlem Extraction of Reduced Pest Substances (V. 8. Shinenskiy.
a. P. Bratishko. L. P. Leto, R. V. Kosobokova, n. N. noyko. 'i‘. D.
m1y.v.u¥&) I O a O O O O O O O O O O 0 O O O O O C O O O I O 0

Chapter 111. Characteristics of Upland Peat Hydrolysetes . . . . . .

Destruction o! Organic Substances in Surface Post by Hydro-
lytic Processing (V. 8. Shiaanskiy. G. A. Yevdokisuove. O. I.
Reyteina, I. G. Pridlyend. 1.. lestyukcvich. V. V. Lyakh.

1:. . Voytovich. 1.. P. Galenchik. z. V. Tatarinskaya, a. A.
IVWV‘CI‘; v0 1. mu.) 5 0 O O O s O O o 0 I O O O O O O D I

Doteraination of hydrolysate inducing Agents and Nano-
seccheridee (o. x. Mytsine. G. A. Yeydoki-ove. I..c.
Pridlyand) O O O O C O O a o v I O O O O O O O O t O I O O 0 0

Hydrolysete Uronic Acids (G. l. Raytsina. G. A. Yevdo-
kiaove, I. O.‘Pridlyand. V. V. Lyakh) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Analysis of Puran Aldehydes (6. t. Reytsina, G. A. Vevdo-
km‘ll' I. C. Ptidlym, V.V. by“) seeseeeoeeeao

Properties of ﬂydrolysate lit-us Oomounds and heir Action on
Yeast (G. A. Yevdokisova. z. N. Voytovich. 6. I. Mytsina.
I..I.Kostykevich).......................

investigation of Pest Hydrolysate Organic Acids by the Gas-
Liquid Chroaetography Method (6. A. Yevdoki-ova. 1.. V.
mum.)Ose_saeeeseeeoeeeeee-aaeoes

Investigation of Instruction 0: Nitrogen-Containing Coupounds
in Upland Peat Subjected to Hydrolysis by Concentrat-d
Sulfuric Acid ( G. A. Yevdokinova. G. I. nytsina. a. ll.
Voytovich. I. G. Pridlyend, 1.. l. Kostyukevich, V. V. Lyakh) . .

Use of Pest hydrolysates to Cbtain Microbial Synthesis
Products (8. I. Peytsina. G. A. Yevdoki-ova) . . . . . . . . . .

Utilisation or Organic Ooqonents of Pest uydrolysates in
the Process of Yeast Cultivation (V. 8. Shinenskiy. G. A.
YGVGORMVI. Ge Is MYCOIM. Ia Ge "idly“. be Is ‘0...
wevich. V. V. Lyakh. 2. ll. betovich. z. A. lvenovich.
2h. u. Bogdanovskeya, N. V. wrestsova). . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter IV. characteristics of the Residue Proa Peat Hydrolysis.
andthewaysotltsUtilization . . . . . . . . .

cheaical Oosposition o! Residue tron Peat hydrolysed by
Concentrated Sulfuric Acid (N. P. Sorokine. Is. It.

Yanchevskaya)..........................

Physiological Activity of Residue Pro- Upland Peat hydrolysis
and or the Products of its Oxidative Destruction (6. A.

'17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

49
62

62

71

76

01

101

107

113

I20 -

137

137
rot omcm vs: ONLY

Yevdokinova. N. n.8anoylova. b. Imostydcevich, b. v.
“m'.) O Q 0 O O O 0 O O O O O . O O C l O O I 0 O O O O O b 1“

Utilisation of Residue Pros Peat Hydrolysed by Concentrated
"280“ 00 “at“ "3““.qu (O. “a Y.Vd°km.o ‘0' :0

m'tM.V‘°hs "e As ”10", In Va ”m". I. he
:vm'ich) . . O O . Q . . . . . . . . . ‘ O C . C O O . . . O 166

Biochseioel PUOCOIOHW of lbsidue Pro- Peat hydrolysis
(L.v.kosomgova.o.n.vevdokinova).,............ I73

Hydrocarbon adsorbents Pao- wlend Peat Hydrolysis Residues
(s.x.I.uk'yemve,o.I.ﬂssina)............... 192

mlu‘°n~...aasseeeseeesssseeaeasesss 21°

Bul‘WrMYeaaeeessseeseeeseeeesesaesee 212

”Mussseseesseesesseeeseesssseeees 229

Introduction

Creation of a highly productive livestock and poultry raising industry
would be possible only if sensible balanced nutrition is provided. The
cowosition of enieel and bird feed nust include sufficient quantities of
essential aeino acids, vita-ins. horeones, and eicroelensnts. nutrient
yeast, which contains up to 50 percent valuable protein. group s vita-ins
(81. 32. as. In). ergosterol (vita-inn), nicroelasnts. ensytas. and
other substances, is a source of these coepounds.

The dseand for nutrient yeast is being satisfied far fro. fully today. this
is why a significant increase in the output of microbiological industry has
been foreseen by directives of the 25th (260 Congress concerning the 10th

five-Year Plan. Projects having the purpose of seeking new raw eeteriel
sources are beco-ing 1-90th in this connection.

Our country possesses treasndous reserves of peat (el-ost half the world's
resources), including peat suitable for hydrolysis. which affords a possi-
bility for organizing production of protein end other products of nicrobial
synthesis (enino acids. vita-ins. end so on) in sufficient quantities for
a long period of tile.

Over a nmer of years the Belorussian 85R hcadeey of Sciencss'Peet Insti-
tute has been working jointly with the Latvian 888 heads-y of Sciences
Institute of ﬂood Gin-istry. the Planning-and-nssign office of the
Lithuanian $88 ministration of Pest Industry. the All-mica Scientific
Rsssarch Institute of Plant Material hydrolysis. the Irkutsk Scientific
Research and Planning Institute of Ch-icel llachine building. and the
lelorussien head-y of Sciences Institute of nicrobiology to acquire nutrient
yeast fro. upland peat that has undergone nild decoqzosition. In tens of

18

M ORIGIN, 0'83 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carbohydrate content this peat hardly differs at all fro. wood and other
raw plant materials used in hydrolth industry.

Peat hydrolysetes are a good sediun for cultivation of yeasts producing
aaino acids (lysine), carotene. and lipids. and they can be used to
synthesize organic coepounds.

Analysis of different nethnds and conditions for hydrolysis of peat by
mineral acids showed that one of the proaising and acceptable nethods is
hydrolysis with concentrated sulfuricecid. In this case not only the
readily hydrolyzable but also the poorly hydrolyrable peat polysaccharides
are broken domwith a sexist- yield of reducing agents and with satisfactory
separation of the nonhydrolysed residue from the hydrolysate. the residue
contains about 25 percent polysaccharides and 50, percent huus cowounds.

to include 30 percent hueic acids. and it is a valuable organic eaterial.
Different methods have been developed for its use in the national ecomsy"
preparation of granulated organoeineral fertilisers, activated charcoal.

and plastic'fillers. acquisition of total organic acids by means of oxidation
with atlaospheric oxygen in an alkaline enviroment. use as a binding agent
in pellets, and so on. The postferlentation lash contains nitrogen, pro-
tein coepounds, organic acids. reducing agents to include sole quantity of
sugars. and so on. After evaporative concentration, it can be used to
acquire feed concentrate. waste utilisation will increase the econosy of
obtaining yeast fro. peat.

The industrial procedures were tested out fully in the experi-ental shop of
the zrherelis Peat Bnterpriee (Lithuanian 3311), where erperieental lots of
nutrient yeast were obtained. Research conducted by the USSR Acadely of
hedical Sciences Institute of nutrition deaonstrated that yeast obtained
from peat is distinguished by high nutritional andstimletory properties,
and that it does not have carcinogenic activity.

A worn hydrolyzer sated with a peat-acid sister underwent tests and move-
ments at an experinental industrial facility for neutralysate-producing
hydrolytic peat processing. erected at the Iobruysk Bydrolytic Plant. The
planned productivity of the apparatus has been achieved. and the degree of
destruction of peat polysaccharides is good. A way of processing hydroly-
sate to acquire neutralysate has also been tested in experisental industrial
conditions, and the neutralysate has been tested as a yeast growing Iediu.

This nonograph suarises results obtained by the collective of the Delo-
russian sss heads-y of Sciences Peat :nstitute's hydrolytic Process Research
Laboratory. Research on yeast cultivation was conducted by colleagues of
the Belorussian hcadeay of Sciences Institute of hicrobiology (Doctor of
Biological Sciences h. v. Zalashko and candidates of biological sciences

Ye. s. airinovich. zh. ll. bgdanovskaya. 1. r. Ioroleva. and I. V. abrastsova).

This book provides a chesical assess-ent of upland peat used as hydrolytic
raw material. smstantietes the procedures for evaluating hydrolytic peat.

. 19

FOR OFFICIAL U53 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9
and cites data from scientific research perforled by the laboratory [with

the goal of creating the industrial hydrolytic procedures and increasing
the depth of destruction of polysaccharides.

There is little published infatuation on the ccaposition of hydrolysetes
and residues forced froa peat hydrolysis. Peat hydrolysatee obtained
free the action of concentrated sulfuric acid contain the destruction pro-
ducts of hms coapounds. nitrogen-containing ccepounds, organic acids.
and so on. Procedures have been developed for reeoving iepurities fro-
hydrolyeates by leans of ion-exchange resins. extraction with organic
solvents, and so on. Hodern analysis methods are used to establish the
cheaical characteristics of the components of peat, hydrolysates. and
residue from peat hydrolysis--paper and gas-liquid chroaatography. ultra-
violet spectroscopy, gel chroaatography, electrophoresis, and others.

Research on the influence the organic conponents of hydrolysates have on
yeast. perforaed jointly with the Belorussian 881! Academy of Sciences
Institute of Microbiology, revealed that peat hydrolysates are of high
quality, demonstrated that 40-70 percent of the organic acids contained in

media are consumed, and established the biological action of hydrolysate
huic acids on yeast.

This book presents data on the use of peat hydrolysates for aicrobial syn-
thesis. as well as the results of research on the possibility for utilising
peat hydrolysis residue to prepare fertilizers and activated charcoal. and
the process of oxidativedestruction of peat hydrolysis residue with the
goal of obtaining substruos for aicrobial synthesis is studied.

The obtained information will broaden our ideas about- peat hydrolysis and
about the products for-ed, and it will be a necessary link in develop-ent
of the ways of utilising these products.

The botanical descriptions of different types of peat were written by
colleagues of the laboratory of peat and sapropel deposits and the genesis

of peat and sapropel under the guidance of Doctor of Biological Sciences
A. p. Pidoplichko.

Chapter 1. Availability and Characteristics of Hydrolytic Peat Raw
Material

The significant increase in production of nutrient yeast in our country
foreseen by a 25th CPSU Congress decision requires that we find and
assimilate new types of nondietary hydrocarbon and plant raw laterials. At
present we acquire nutrient yeast with the use of the wastes of food and
cellulose-and-paper industry. mainly the products fro- hydrolysing wood and
agricultural plant remains. These raw asterials will not be able to
satisfy the planned yeast de-and within the very near future.

Mildly decomposed upland peat is a promising hydrolysis raw material in cer-
tain regions of the Soviet Union. Work done by the lbstorfrasvedka and

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Belgiprotorf Institutes with the participation of the Belorussian 888
Academy of Sciences Peat Institute to substantiate and select the priority
raw material bases for construction of hydrolytio plants has shown (1) that
the reserves of hydrolytic raw material in the European Raven total
1,021,000,000 tons (ll-40 percent), those of the Soviet Baltic total 453,000,000,
and those of the Belorussian 333 total 65,000,000 tons. This means that we
can build 95 plants with a total output capacity of 1,965,000 tons of
nutrient yeast per year, to include 62 (1,280,000 tons) in the BSPSR, 12
(205,000 tons) in the Latvian 88R, one (60,000 tons) in the Bstonian 888,
one (10,000 tons) in the Lithuanian 88R, and three plants (65,000 tons of
yeast) in the Belorussian SSR.

Priority status has been recouended for eight raw material bases in.the
BSPSR, one in the Estonian 8811, one in the Latvian $88, and three in the
Belorussian 88R. 1hese bases are, in the mrsn. Ulonskoye (Vologodskaya
0blast)--45,000 tons of yeast, Bol'shoye (Sverdlpvskaya Quest)" 15,000
tons, Lar'yanskoye (Leningrad (busty-45.000 tons, Bas'yanovshoye (Sverd-
lovskaya Oblast)--ls,000 tons, Bol'shaya Chist' (Vologodskaya oblast)--ls,000
tons, Orshanskiy Hokh (Kalininskaya Oblast)--ls,000 tons, mkhun (Novgorodskaya
Oblast)--ls,000 tons, and zayachiy Otrog (Pskovskaya oblast)--lso,000 tons
of yeast: in the Estonian 88R, Likhula-Lavasaare--60,000 tons of yeast: in
the Belorussian sss, 0bo1'--2,ooo-10,ooo tons of yeast, herurechenskoyen
15,000 tons, and Yel'nya--40,000 tons: in the Latvian ssn, Manny-45.000
tons.

The reserves of hydrolytic peat raw material in the European USSR and the
West Siberian reserves. which are two to three times as large as the forner,
can fully support production of nutrient yeast for anilal husbandry in the
required amounts, but for the present only, and not in the future (2).

The group cheaical composition of different types of peat has been studied
well. It has been established that various groups of che-ical conpounds
can be isolated froe the organic part of the peatnbitusn, readily and
poorly hydrolyzable substances, huic and fulvic acids, and 'lignin.‘ The
concentration of these compounds in different types of peat varies, de-
pending basically on the type of peat deposit, its botanical cot-position,
and the degree of its deooaposition.

Weakly decomposed peat is typified by a large quantity of different readily
and poorly hydrolyrable polysaccharides, which transform as a result of the
hydrolysis reaction into nonosaccharides that are readily assinilated by the
yeast cell. Research by the Belorussian SSB heads-y of Sciences Peat Insti-
tute and other scientific organization (2-3) has denonstrated that sous types
of sphagnuls and (sheykhtseriyevohsphagm- peat with a degree of deco-po-
sition (1?) less than 20 percent contain 63-78 percent (in relation to or-
ganic lass) hydrolyrable substances (Table l),' including fron 45 to 59.6
percent reducing agents (M), which are nutrient aaterial in relation to
sone species of aicroorganises producing nutrient yeast.

Polysaccharides fro. mildly deco-posed upland peat are subdividbd into
readily hydrolyzable (LII) and poorly hydrolyzable (Bl!) fractions. Readily

.21
FOR OFFICIAL “SE ONLY
, FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

9—“

0—“ w—&

   

0—“

éédé =3}
*1 Q? 1%
N .-
13 33 I? Z
”'2’ a’.’ é'i
Q1 99 99 h
8 “'8 #3
3.4 2,1, 4.3; i
”R $9 2'3

3.; ssggéa
a a“!
' ”5:2;
afhggféi

'{E 553

‘~

22

ran ontcm ‘u‘semv
‘\
F‘OR OWIBIM. "88 ONLY

hydrolyuhle 11A going into eolution upon hydrolyeie by diluted ecide ere

40-80 percent uonoeeooherideenqlucoee. qeleotoee, unnoee. erebinoee. xyloee.

end rheenoee. more then hell or ell Ionoeecoheridee ere hence” (Tobie I).

substances going into solution upon hydrolyeie with concentreted ecid (an
coneint ell-oat entirely of M. which in turn contein 03-100 percent nono-

uccheridee--ao-97.7 percent glucose end eeell quentitiee or eennoee end
xyloee. .

Table 2. Cerbohydrete composition or Polyuocheridee or wlend Peete
(R-s-zo percent). Percent oi motel augere

 

 

 

(l) ._.._.._‘.m'.‘_ﬂ)_
W ‘M- 0
anyone. neeyuee
e ‘ 0' '-
m Fm (61 35.3.3.1 01.1-11.1
(”Kt'nm" 2029-3525 Cm~ 1.1 (u)
Pen-m (10) 3.6-".5 -
(lime-mu 83.0-50.6 Cau- 1.1 lld)

rm 49.11.41,: a 3.100
(131cm. «9.32. 9‘ ct pa «1-» h—m

Key:

1. cenponent a. Arebinoee

2. Prection 9. Xyloee

3. needily hydrolyreble lo. Moe

d. Poorly hydrolyeeble ll. Pentoee

S. Gelactooe 12. Iienoee

6. Glucoee 13. total eugere, t of RA
1. Mennoee - 14. uecee

Other euthore (6.9-ll) heve ohteined einiler dete on the cerhohydrete
composition of polyuccheridee in nildly decomeed aplend peete. M tron
poorly hydrolyzeble polyuccheridee nelre up tro- 34 to 62 percent of the
totel quentity (eee ﬁnale 1). Theretore beeidee increeeing the yield of
M. utiliution of the poorly hydrolyuble pert of the polyeeccheridee in
there peete significently inrovee the quelitetive coepoeition of the
hydrolyeetee, ineeeuch ee glucose ie eeeieileted by yeeete better thet ell
other eugere (12).

The proportion of polyuccheridee in plent Ieteriele depend on Ioleculer
structure. the structurel order typicel of then, tightneee of coiling, end the

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL "SR ONLY '

lorcee of intermolecular interection. Il'heir inveetioetion by electron
eicroeoopy reveeied e ribriiier etructure in peet ceiiuioee. with elter-

netino ordered end poorly oriented eectione. without dre-etic pheeei
dietinctione (13).

The degree or poiyeeriretion or e-ceiluloee Iron peet plente end iron the
iibroue pert or peet ie three to (our tieee lower then the or woody cell-
uioee (14). pay diﬂ'r’dction eneiyeie reveeled etruoturel heterogeneity
in the force of o-celluioee etudied.

inromtion on the coepoeition or polyeeccherideeueeuuloee end heeiceiiu-
1oee-oend their etehiiity in en ecid nediue ie of epeciei intereet to the
nee or peet ee e hydroiytic rew eeteriel.

neeeerch hee been conducted on hydrolyeie of uplend peete by week ecide
(8.10.15). It hee been reveeied thet the extent to which peet polyeecche-
rider ere broken down depende on the conditione or the proceee (reection
tine. nmber of etepe of hydrolyeie. end the neture end concentretion oi

the cetelyet) (16). in order thet e sexier- quentity of peet polyeeccheridee
could be pieced into eoiution end eubjected to the in11eet hydrolyeie.
nieehin (16) emeete ueinq en 9-10 percent eolution of hydrochloric ecid
end e hydro1yeie tine of 60 linutee. D'yechhov (15) eetebiiehed thet hydro-
lyeie oi nu poiyeeccheridee fro- weekiy deco-poeed peet et 100°C end

are of a percent euifuric ecid requiree et leeet 10 houre.

(Media) end couple: upiend peet s end 15 percent deoomoeed reepectiveiy
(see Tebie 1 of the Appendix (or the botenicel conceition) were heeted
in e 4 percent euiruric ecid eoiution. end then« the m rrection wee eub-
)ected to invereion with a percent eulfuric ecid for 2 hoore (17-19) with
tho qoel of etudying the etebi1ity or poiyeeccheridee in ecid Iediu end
working out the conditione (or their mien- yield. 1hen we determined In

(by the ebollioetetic Iethod). the m eubetencee. end the nonhydroiyreble
rceidue.

The proceu or hydroiyring peet poiyeeccheridee ie rether comiex. end it
coneiete or eevere1 etegee. in the liret eteoe. celled hydroiytic dimin-
tion end proceeding in heterogenic conditione. the polyuccheride necro-
eoiecuiee mierqo depoiweriretion end the trepente tor-ed go into eoiution.
In the eecond eteqe the dieeOIVed oliqoeeccheridee ere hydroiired down to
Ionoeeccheridee. end in the third end rinel eteqe the Ionoeeccheridee toned
ere docoepoeed (16).

‘reblee 1 end d end l'ionree 1-4 preeent dete on chenoee in the cwonent
coepaition end yield or an end nonouccheridee depending on the tile of
hydrolysis with e percent eulfuric ecid. At riret hniceiiuloee ie dieeolved.
toning oiiqoeeccheridee. The concentretion of the letter in the hydrolyeetee
ie invereeiy dependent on hydro1yeie tine. no heeting tile in increeeed

the difference in the yield at both M end meccheridee before end erter
invereion decreeees. In thie one the eoet reedily hydrolyreble pert of

2‘

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tho heniovllulosedlemulvou and undergoes hydrolysis in the first 3 hours.
Attor further hosting the nora-roaiatant polysocchsridss begin to go into
solution so veil. as is indicated by e decline in the yiold of nono-
sacchsrides in the poorly hydrolysshlo fraction. coupled with a concurrent
lacrosse in the quantity or hono- end olioosooohoridos in tho m hydro-
lyute. Obviously groups or polysaccharidos with qlucoside bonds of
varying degrees oi otsbility ore present within the cooposition of the
carbohydrate port o! peat. As we can sso Bros figures 3 and s the totsl
oonosocchoride yisld dooe not ehano in tho tins intorvsi Iron 5 to 7 hours.
Appsrently on equilibrium occurs st this tins: The qusntity or decol-

posed sonosscchorides in equsl to the concontrstion of sonosscchsridos
just tor-ed by hydrolysis.

Table 3. Group Che-lcsl Cooposition oi (Mediulmsot (Res poroont)

Dopondino on rise of Hydrolysis with 4 Porcont Sulfuric Acid.
Percent of croonio Moss

 

 

     
   

. Im on no.5 7M w m
‘IH 38.? l3.0 to: 79.3 8.0 50.1
2 51.0 26.0 3|: ".3 50.2 80.4
3 60.0 20.6 32.0 NJ 9.3 0..
I 55.: 29.! 33.0 ”.7 53.0 8.7
s 50.: 30.0 m 31.: on. as.»
6 56.3 30.3 J! ”.3 65.0 ”J
3 55.7 JIJ 11 NJ “.0 57..
s 23-; 2;: 3 =3»: 2-: 3-:
no 5720 3229 a «Is 5221 sol:
Key:
1. hydrolysis tins. hours 6. honhydrolyublo rosiduo
2. an 7. motel hydrolysoblo substoncos
J. M in the toner O. 1otol M
o. as following inversion 9. Prior to invorsion
5. PM lo. After invorsion

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[0k (WPICIAI. 088 ONLY

Chenge in couponent convention or coupler ‘opiend Peet (8-13

. percent) Depending on ﬁne or nydroiyeie with 4 Percent "180...

Percent of net 0rqenic Heee

m1. e.

 

 

"300‘090‘.

eeeeeeeeee

«nunauuuuu

nl'd‘.“l¢”e0le

cl“ ’Ilaso ”

-O'Ie'IVJO’.

eeeeeeeeee

wﬂuﬂﬂﬂawﬂﬂ

9".“070‘3'

eeeeeeeeee

wmumunummv

. “lel‘-°99eus

eeeeeeeeee

”Nuuﬂﬂmﬂﬂn

8"-330306

eeeeeeeeee

Bﬂnﬂﬁmﬂﬂ

o.*.-aa7.’

0000000000

 

[80. Key. Tehie 3]

My:

IIIJ'ﬁl’O’m.

Imui quell.-

tity otter invereion: en‘mtei quentity before inveniom Jutn

the reedily hydroiyuhie lrection etter inveniom ("In the
reediiy hydrolyzeblc trecticn before invereiom Sun the poorly

Ounce in M Yield Depending on wine of iiydroiyeie or (Media)
hydroinehie frection

Peet (R-S percent) with e Percent Buiruric Acid:

time i.

26

M OFFICIAL I188 OIL!
m OFFICIAL 0.88 ONLY

  

IIIJVIOIIJWI

riquu 2. Change in M not. balancing on Tin. o! Ilydroiyoi: of Cowl“

091m Put (Ii-15 percent) With 4 Patent Sulfuric Acid. 8..
figure 1 (or explanation of synci-

! “'8

9
it’illldim.

TIE;

figure 3. Gang. in malaria. Yield Wine on ﬂu of am-
iylin 0! (Min) M: (8-5 potent) rich 4 Pom: Mimic
acid: lanai quantity; tuna: quantity an: invasion;

3am on nudity hydrolyubio gnctioo baton inversion: 4--
In tho poorly hydroiyublo (nation

27_

FOR ORIGIN. 08! MY
FOR (WI’IGIM. "8R ONLY

3N.

(I I
" a
II
I, 7
l!
I!
J

ll!!!’ll§!m.

ﬁgure e. Change ln meeccherlde Yield Dependlng on ﬁle or Mydrolyele
or couple: 0le Pent (Ii-ls percent) ﬁlth e Percent Bullnrlo
hold: Io-mul quentltyt turn the reedlly hydrolyreble
trectlom sum the reedlly hydrolyeehle treotlon etter lnver-
elom luln the poorly hydrolyrehle trectlon

concurrently wlth e decrease ln the quantity of w nonoeeccherldee during
8-10 houre of poet hydrolyele. thelr yleld ln unreedllyhydrolyeehle {rectlon
eleo decreeue. In theee condltlone Ionoeeccherlde breakdown dollnetee
over eyntheele. M e reeult the total quentlty o! nonoeeccherldee drope ee
the heetlnq the lncreeeee. 1n thle cue the curve or ohenge ln totel nono-
eeccherlde concentretlon dependlng on heetlnq the for (Death) poet
cherecterlced by 5 percent deooepoeltlon doee not heve e lent-I. vhlle

for cleex uplend peet (R-ls percent) e next-\- le noted etter 3 houre o!
heetlng.

Ooneequently polyuccherldee ln diffugn: types of pent heve afferent
quelltetlve coupoeltlone. end they cum ln reletlon to the ethhlllty of
the glycoelde bond ln en eold Iedlu. aura-email: enelyele o! peet
hydrolyeetee enorde e poeelhlllty for treolng the hehevlor of eech

hydrolyeete Ionoeecclurlde dependlnq on the the or hydrolyele o! peet vlth
a percent eulturlc eold.

we con eee fro- the dete ln Plgure 5 thet e polyeeccherlde product”
qelectoee upon hydrolyele le heterogeneoue. ooneletlhg o! eeverel frectlone

23
M OFFICIAL 088 MY
V00! iWI’IOlM. mm ONLY

that ds'ter in the strength of the elycoeide bond of the necro-oleeulee.
ee e re-ult of which there ere eeverel peehe on come 1 end 3. Hydro-

lysis of reedily hydrolyuble qelecten terninetee by the 3rd hour for
(India!) poet (RI-s percent) end by the 4th hour for couple: uplend peet
(Rois percent). Also present in eolution ere internediete hydrolytie
products. which elter edditionel invereion inoreeee the yield 0: eeleotoee.
Ariul o! peeks on curves 1 end 8 etter the 7th hour of hydrolyeie in-
dicetee thet poet elee conteine even more poorly hydrolyteble geleoten.

Nu

  

Illdf5lllﬂtoux.

Figure 5. Change in selectoee Yield in the bodily Hydrolynble traction
Depending on file of llydrolyeie of Couple: wlend Poet (3-15
percent, Garve- JA) end (ﬂediu) Poet (3-5 percent. Moe 1,8)
with d Pereent Samaria Acid: 1,3--oe!ore inversion: 8,4unlter
Inversion

29

'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0.

figure 6.

Pique 7.

M O'IICIAI. US! ONLY '

Us“

~C.‘

 

(meme in Xyloee Yield Depending on 11.. of Mrolyeie of

coupler 09m Feet (R-ls percent. mrvee 1,8,4) end (Media)

Feet (Ru-5 percent. MI 8.6) with e Percent Sulfuric Acid:

lulu the poorly hydrolyseble (notions Linn: tho reedily hydro-
lyuble {notion botore ism-ion: 8,6--ln the reedily hydro-
lyuble (notion etter invereioa

I
I
D

. ;\
W

'

Gauge in Gluooee Yield Depending on the of Win“ of
canal” wlend Peet (It-ls percent. curvu 1,8,5) end (II-dim)
Poet (R's percent. carve- 8.4.6) with e ﬁerce»: culturio kid:
1,8--ln the poorly hydrolyeeble (notion: 3.‘5nln the reedily
hydrolyoeble (notion elter invereiom {Jun the reedily
hydrolyeeble (notion before lover-ion

30
M OFFICIAL 088 MY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mi. dependence in eleo typioel of xyloee (figure 6). the only ditterenoe
being thet the produote o! inooeplete hydrolyeie--dieeooheridee end oligo-
eeooherideenere preeent in eonewhet lower quentitiee in eolution. he we
cen eee (roe figure 6, hydrolyeie o! the greeter pert o! the reedily
hydrolyrehle xylene ende by the 3rd hour (or (media) peet end by the 4th
hour for coupler uplend peet. A further inoreeee in heeting tine oeueee
e drop in the yield of xyloee in the reedily hydrolyeeble treotion. In
solution in theee conditione, however. we reveel oliooeeooheridee thet ere
(or-ed by dieeolution of poorly hydrolyeehle xylene. he e reeult the
quentity of xyloee in the poorly hydrolyeeble treotion deoreeeee.

He cen eee iron Figure 7, which ehowe the depeMence or the yield of glucose
in reedily end poorly hydrolylehle frectione on the tine o1 hydrolyeie of
poet with 4 percent sulfuric ecid, thet oluoen tBneiete o: eeverel (reo-
tione exhibiting dinerent degreee of hydrolyrehility. When (Iediu) peet
(RI-5 percent) in heeted, an gluoen ie hydrolysed eoeewhet eerlier then thet
in couples: uplend peet (13-15 percent). In eolution. beeidee qlucoee we
reveel products o! incoeplete hydrolyeie. Alter o houre the olucoee yield
is epprorinetely identicel betore end efter invereion, end etter 9-10 houre
of heating celluloee undergoee dieeolution. ee e reeult or which we and
oliqoeeccheridee in the eolution. ‘l‘he concentretion o! plucoee in the
poorly hydrolyuhle {rection herdly chengee prior to the 3rd hour. end no
the poet hydrolyeie tine ie increeeed eubeequently it deoreeeee oontinuouely.

As with the previoue polyeeccherldee, nnnen tron coqler uplend peet (R-ls
percent) coneiete of eeverel {rectione oherecterired hy ditterent etrengthe
of ncroeolecule bonde (Figure a). At flret, betore the dth hour. the
reto o! dieeolution of the polyeeooheridee ie greeter then the hydrolyeie
rote. owing to which oligoeeccheridee ere reveeled in eolution. 'l‘hen.

free the 5th to the 7th inure, the retee ot dieeolution end hydrolyeie
epproech eech other. Mter 8 houre o! heeting the poorly hydrolyuble
(notion of semen dieeolvee, end once egein only eeocheridee eppeer in
solution. undergoing hydrolyeie (otter 9-10 houre) down to me which
breeke down concurrently. In the poorly hydrolyuble (notion. the
quentity of Iennoee oonetently declinee ee heeting tine increeeee.

    

0111151!!!

Figure 9. Chenge in Hennoee Yield Depending on ﬁne of ﬂydrolyeie or
Coqlex 0le Feet (R-lS percent) With e Percent Sulfuric Acid:
ban the reedily hydrolyeehle :rection before inwereion: 8--ln

the reedily hydrolyeeble trection etttr invereion: 3min the
poorly hydrolyeeble (rection ' '

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

 

figure 9. Chenge in the Yield of hrebinoee in themeedilyuydrolyuble

faction Depending on fine of hydrolyeie of eagle: (3le
Dent um: percent) with 4 Percent Sulfuric hold: Inlefore
Invereion: 8--hfter Invereion

‘Nh‘u.

  

 

111395121:

figure 10. Chenge in the Yield of Moe in the lleedily nydrolyuble
frection Depending on fine of Hydrolyeie of Genie: Ilplend
Peet (R-ls percent. Curvee 3,4) end (uediu) Poet (Hi-S percent,
Curvee 1,3) with d Percent Sulfuric Acid: 8, J-olefore inversion:
1,4--After invereion

It would be interesting to trece the behevior of the polyucoheride thet
produce: erebinoee (figure 9). After 2-3 houre of hydrolyeie of cowlex
uplend peet uith d percent sulfuric held. only Iona-ere ere present in
eolution. end there ere no oligonere. Owing to this erebinoee dieeppeere
upon invereion of the hydrolyeetee. After 5 houre of heating the next
polyuccheride frection begine todieeolve. beco-ing fully hydrolyzed efter
8 houre of hydrolyeio. it ie believed thet the polyeeccheride producing
erebinoee ie uneteble, but preeence of erebinoee in the ecid eolution If“!
9-10 hours of heeting indicetee that it ie typified by eeverel frectione
with different degreee of hydrolyrebllity.

‘I'he polyucoheride producing Me upon hydrolyeie coneiete of eeverel
frectione (figure 10). ‘Ihe firet euge ie its dieeolution, ee ie indicated
by the increeee in rh-noee yield following invereion of the hydrolyeetee.

31

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

memes-producing polysaccharides from different types of peat differ free
one another in relation to the strength of the giycoside bond. Thus when
we hydrolyze (nediu) peat (3-5 percent) the sari-mu appear on the curve
of dissolution of different polysaccharide fractions after the 2nd and 7th
hours of heating. while for couple): upland peat (It-15 percent) the peaks
arise after the 3rd and 9th hours.

‘l‘hus peat heeicellulose contains groups of polysaccharides with glycoside
bonds exhibiting different degrees of resistance to hydrolysis. several
fractionsdiffcring in their capability for being- hydrolysed have been es-
tablished for every polysaccharide.

Comparing the data obtained for (Iediu) and couples: upland peat with 5 and
15 percent degrees of decoeposition respectively. we can conclude that the
quantitative coeposition of heeicelluloses in these types of peat differs
somewhat. but the basic laws governing the influence of the tine of hydro-
lysis with a percent sulfuric acid persist. Hydrolysis of the bulk of

the readily hydrolyrable polysaccharides ends by the 3rd-Sth hours. ‘lhe
total yield of nonosaccharides decreases after 3 hours of hydrolysis.
oligosaccharides are present in the hydrolysates: therefore the hydrolysates
must be subjected to additional inversion. In order to pereit technical
assessaent of peat (with R up to 15 percent) as a raw eaterial for acquiring
nutrient yeast in tens of its M content. it would be sufficient to sub-

ject m polysaccharides to 3 hours of hydrolysis followed by 2 hours of
hydrolysate inversion.

I
The reducing agents in hydrolysates froe the m fraction of nildly deco-
posed upland peat include uronic acids. which have ieportant significance
to describing peat as a hydrolytic raw. eaterial. According to data in
(16.11) their concentration drops as the degree of deco-position of the
peat increases, being free 5.0 to 17.4 percent in absolutely dry peat.
Other authors have established that the aerial quantity of uronic acids
(up to eo-so percent of the reducing agents) is contained in peat-forties
plants. and that it decreases as the degree of decoqosition of the peat
increases to 25 percent (22).

Uronic acids. which are present in hydrolysatee in significant quantity.

can significantly influence the yield of yeast bioease. It has been
deeonstrated that incultivation of Candida yeast. which is oseophilic in
relation to peat hydrolysates. uronic acids are 100 percent assililated (23).

But not all uronic acids go into solution during hydrolysis of huicelluloue.
Up to as percent of the acids are liberated subsequently in hydrolysis of
cellolignin with 00 percent sulfuric acid. and 21 percent rain in the
nonhydrolyrable residue (2‘). lbreover uronic acids entering into the
hydrolysate can exist in both free state and in the for: of the products

of incoeplete hydrolysis of polyuronides such as aldobiuronic and aldotri-
uronic acids (25).

In this connection further research is required on peat polyurthides so
that the option conditions could be found for their nest cleete

33
P0! OWICIAI. Uﬁﬁ ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hydrolysis. as a result of which a similar quantity 3f pentoses would
for: in addition to uronic acids.

Nitrogen-containing substances are an invariable coaponent of peat. they
are represented by the following classes of conpoundsnnitratas. anoniu
salts, anido and amino coapounds, and proteinaceous substances (26.27).
The nitrogen quantity fluctuates in lowland paets froa 2.0 to 4.0 percent.
and in upland pests free 0.7 to 1.5 percent (26,27). The bulk of it is
contained in humus compounds. When the huua substances of peat are
hydrolysed with 5 percent ﬂcl for 2.5 hours, so-eo percent of the nitrogen
contained in these substances goes into solution. with 64-75 percent of it
being in amino acids (28). The. authors hypothesise on the basis of the
obetined data that these comounds are either very readily hydrolysable
protein breakdown products or enino acids bound loosely with hms sma-
stances and retaining their individuality.

Detailed analysis of pests revealed 17 amino acids (29-33). Aaino acids
such as alanine. aspargic and gluta-ic acid, proline, tyrosine. and pheny-
lalanine are substances typified by high biological activity. and they
play a great role in accelerating the growth of aicroorganisn: and plants
(33.34). Almost all of then are present in past hydrolysates (28).

The concentration of anino acids in peat hydrolysates grows as the concen-
tration of the hydrolysing agent increases. and when the hydrolysis conditions
are severe (20 percent IICl or 30 percent H250“) the anino acid concentration
attains 10 percent of the organic substances in peat (28). ‘lhe strength of
the bonds between different seine acids and the organic part of the peat

differs. and in the opinion of the authors it increases as the degree of the
poet's decongesition rises.

The data presented here on nitrogen-containing cowounds of peat. especially
on amino acids, have i-portant practical significance to describing peat
as a raw eaterial for production of nutrient yeast. Mino acids obtained
under the appropriate hydrolysis conditions can provide w to 10 percent

more substances for the purposes of biceass accumulation and. noreover,
they can sti-ulate this process.

In addition to an and aim acids, organic acids serve as a source of carbon
for yeast: their concentration in hydrolysates froe coqalex wland peat
(8-5-15 percent) is free 0.5 to 15 percent (5). Present in hydrolysates in

significant quantities (36) . succinic acid is characterised by high bio-
logical activity (37).

In addition to low nolecular weight organic acids and anino acids. other
physiological substances such as. for ssamle, vita-ins are also present

in peat. Vita-ins 3,, 82, and on have been found in different quantities
in peats of different origin (38,39).

The rain source of vitamins in peat. soil, and sapropel is various nicro-
organisns (38). These aicroorganisns exist in these envirot-snts as comics

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.associations. and they are highly diverse depending on the ecological con-
ditions (40). This is the reason for the diversity of the vitamin ccaposition
of posts, which has been studied very little as yet. further biochenical

analysis of greater detail will have greet significance to assessing pest as a
hydrolytic raw material. '

Despite the greet differences in cheaical coaposition (ll). we can conclude
that in relation to the concentration of hydrolysable substances peat does
not differ free other ferns of plant raw material. In this case we should
note that the coeposition of polysaccharides in soee fem of agricultural
plant wastes includes lore pentose sugars. while peat henicellulose is

doeinated by henose uonosaccharidesua lore valuable source of yeast
nutrition.

Inasmuch as during for-etion of peat the most diverse species of bog plants
undergo change in heterogeneous conditions and. consequently. in different
directions in the presence of a broad spectrum of aicroorganisns. the
cheeical composition of peat is core coupler than that of wood. Nonreducing
coeponents contained within peat hydrolysates (organic acids. enino acids.
vitamins) can not only be successfully consued by living microorganisms
but also stieulate' their growth. increasing the yeast bio-ass yield to 65.5
percent of the RA (23).

While to evaluate peat as a raw eaterial with which to obtain nutrient yeast
we liait ourselves today to detersining the quantity of reducing agents. in
the very near future we will also have to consider the comesition of the
nonreducing part, especially the biologically active substances. which will
make it possible to use pest characterised by a high degree of decoeposition
as well as' other types of peat in yeast production.

There is another positive factor that should be noted in the use of eildly
decooposed pest to obtain nutrient yeast--concentration oi’ the peat in
large quantities over relatively slall territory, which precludes the need
for conveying it long distances.

All of these data attest to the fact that upland peat characterised by a
mild degree of decoqosition is a fully adequate raw ssterial for hydro-
lytic industry.

after analysing the results of nuerous studies. the Belorussian 883 Academy
of Sciences Peat Institute developed interin specifications on peat as a
raw material for hydrolysis with concentrated sulfuric acid, penitting
utilisation of total an of the readily and poorly hydrolysable parts.
According to these specifications ’peat lust be characterised by the follow-
ing indices: 1) Peat typeuupland: 2) peat specieso-sphagnu and (sheykh-
tseriyevo)-sphagmm 3) degree of deco-positionunot more than 20 percent:
4) yield of total Rannot less than 45 percent of organic ease in past:

5) ash content. no greater than 5 percent of absolutely dry past (we).

The only criterion for the usability of sphagmn and (sheykhtseriyevob
sphagnue peats with a degree of deco-position below l5 percent as a

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE OULY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

hydrolytic raw eaterial-is the species of peat, and for these sens species
of poet with a degree of decoeposition of 15-20 percent data euat be
available free an analysis of the M yield, obtained in accordance with
the specific eethod developed by the Peat Institute, presented below.

Selected peat eaqales are dried in air to an air-dry state, pulverised
until able to pass through a l-ua eesh sieve, and stored in herestically
sealed containers. The eoisture and ash content of the peat are detereined
prior to hydrolysis. 'I‘he'toncentratlon of organic latter in the sank
taken for analysis is coeputed with the foreula

suoo-m (loo-A)
s I
0’9 10,000 '

 

where S is the weight of the sasple‘s organic latter, 9, S is the weight

of the is of air-dry peat, ge, H is peat moisture content, percent, and
A is peat ash content, percent.

hydrolysis is perforeend in a 400-500 ml retort to which 2-3 p of the
eaterial being analyzed and 4 percent "250.. (liquor ratio 1:100) are added.
The retort, which is outfitted with a reflux condenser, is placed on an
electric hotplatc. Hydrolysis is perforeed for 3 hours, after which the
eixture is filtered through thick filter paper into a 500 el volumetric
flash: the residue on the filter is' rinsed with hot water until disappearance
of the 80,,” ion reaction, and the value of the solution in the flash is
increased with water to the eark. The residue is quantitatively washed
into a weighed beaker, in which the mixture is concentrated by evaporation
in a water bath until reaching an air-dry state. The eoisture and ash con-
tent are deterlined in the residue. The yield of organic residue (5' )

is computed sieilarly as S . Then the yield of readily hydrolyrabiy
substances is computed in 3:8 ollowing fashion:

3 - 31
pa- M 100"

sorg

where an is the concentration of readily hydrolysable substances, percent
of organic matter in the peat.

oligosaccharides in the filtrate are subjected to additional inversion, for
which purpose a 100 ml fraction is transferred with a pipette to the retort
outfitted with a reflux condenser. Then 3.5 el concentrated sulfuric acid
(specific weight 1.83) are added to the retort to achieve an a percent
solution, which is then boiled for 2 hours.

The RA yield is deter-med in the solution by the ebulliostatic method:

36

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

X ' 500 . (10093.5)
M-

 

100\.

Sam . me

where M is the concentration of M in readily hydrolyreblo substancee.
percent of organic latter in the initial peat aerplo. and X ie the

concentration of M in the couple being analyzed, obtained with a obullio-
utct, gn/el.

Approximately a i go senplo of the residue obtained after separating out the
wadily hydrolyrablo substances ie placed in e gleee weighing bottle. 80
percent sulfuric acid in added (l0 nl acid for every gree of ealple) . the
contents of um bottle ere nixed thoroughly but carefully. and than the
bottle is left for 2-2.5 hours at room teeporature, nixing periodically.
Next the contents of tho weighing bottle are washed into a hydrolytic
retort (lso ul) with dietilled water. tho reflux condonaar it fitted on.
and the couple is boiled for 5 hours, after which it is filtered through
filter paper into a 500 el volueetric flask; than the precipitate is
rinsed with water and the volune of tho eolution in the flock ie increased
to tho mark. The residue on tho filter ie waehed off quantitatively into

a weighed porcelain dish. subjected to evaporative concentration, dried to
constant weight, and incinerated.

The concentration of RA in the poorly hydrolyuble fraction io detoninod
with the filtrate:

x . son .95
3A,. —-——2—m- 100"
Sam some

where an, is the concentration of M in the poorly hydrolyreble fraction,
percent of organic latter in the mat, and X is the concentration of M in
the solution being analyzed. gal-1 (using the abullioatat). In order to
calculate the concentration of poorly hydrolyzeble aubetancoe we would have
to coepute:

l) The weight of organic matter in the name taken for determination of
poorly hydrolyuble eubetancee:

2 $1 (zoo-m (loo-A.)
s - .
”9 10,000

 

where s2 is the weight of organic matter in the sample. 9. 52 ie the
weight “ache seaplo taken for determination of poorly hydrolytablo

37

FOR OFFICIAL 033 ONLY

\
ION OFHCIM. 088 ONLY

O
eubeteneee. on. 91 ie the noieture content of the eeeple. percent. 'end A
ie the eeh content of the eupie. percent:

a) the concentretion of orgenic utter in the nonhydroiyubie reeiduec

”Rwanda-A, .

where Mike in the weight of onenic utter in the nonhydrolyuble reeiduo.

9n. MIR ”Ye the weight o! the eheoiuteiy dry nonhydroiyuhie reeidue. an.
end A; meeh weight otter inoineretion o! the nonhydrolyuble reeidue. on.
Then the concentration o! poorly hydroiycebie eubetenoee (HI. percent or
put orgenie letter) is counted with the fonuieu

(81 «HR )9!
pa. __°N_.22m._°££_ 100..
sora'som

The concentretion o! the nonhydroiyuble reeidue (MIR. percent of peat
orgenio letter) ie ccnputed with the (cronies

mm s1
(013- Azim— 10m.

somsm

Swing the M or the reedily hydroiycehie trection alter edditionei inver-
eion end the M of the poorly hydrolyuble trection. we get the totel
quentity of reducing coente.

COPYRIGI‘I‘: Imul'ltvo “Milk. 1 tdkhnlkl'. 1977

11004
C803 1870 m

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY