APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 3007/03/00: CIA-RDPOZ-00000R0001000.00.0-5
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040056-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE lNLY

JPFS L/S‘ZO
25 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 25/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040056-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
tranaaissions and broadcasts. materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlinee, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by ”Rs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is giVen, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

1he contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT HHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSHIP OF
MTZRIALS REPRODUCED RERBIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINM‘ION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/N
25 April

TRANSLAIIONS 0N HESTERN EUROPE
(two 25/79)

CONTENTS
mm NUCLEAR FORCES
ITALY
Italy Should "ave Hora Active Role in Hediterranean
(Patrizio Carte; comum DELLA 3m. 12 Mar 79) .......
‘ (”MY SECTION
FRAME

Hitter-rend Intervimd on Crieia, PSP'a Future
(Francoia Kitten-end Interview; PARIS run-ca. 16 la: 79).

Giacard-Chirac “conciliation Iiured
meh.1w; Pmsmm. 30 hr 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

Outline for a New National Boone-1c Policy
(Cluiarian Stone“ Interview; mums, Jan 79) .....

Barre Latter Screaaea Need for Pineal Bearrainr
("mm Am. 26 hr 79) COCO...OIOOCCOOOIOOOCOOOO

ITALY

Lagirinacy o! Navy'a Special Forcaa' Quearionad
(Varioua aourcaa, varioua dares) ...

PSI Accele‘a (to-aura, by Palco Acme
Co-andoaa Stationad in La Sparta, by Fabririo Carte
unitary Diacipline Law. by Guido Auoliui
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

commas (Continued)

8331)!!!

Nuclear Pin Hunt Find New Order: Soon To Survive
(ms mm. 1'“! 79) 000.000IOOOOOOOIOIOOOOOOOOOO

-b-

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER NUCLEAR FORCES ITALY

ITALY SHOULD HAVE mo: ACTIVE IDLE IN MEDITERRANEAN
Minn comm DEM 3m in Italian 12 Hot 79 p 5

[Atticlo hy robtinio Cotto: "A Moro Activo halo in tho-Koditottonoon for
tho Itolion Nov”)

[Toxt] In rocont nontho. togothor with tho dolicoto ovonto in tho hoot ond
Pot Boot. tho quontitotivo ond quoiitotivo Iovol of tho Soviot iioot in

tho hoditorronoon hoo progtoooivoly incrooood ond thio Notch hoo roochod on
oxcocdingly high ptoiilo. Iho proximity of tho 2 won now oitcroft con-into.
Hiook ond Kiow. of 3 powerinl guidod niooilo cmiooto. of lo gnidod niooilo
doottoyoro. o: 10 ouhnorinoo (2 of which oto niooiIo-lounching nucloot oubo).
and of o woty high and»: of logiotico ond oupply unito to tho ItoIion cooot
conotitutoo on unuouoI ovont which hoo ottroctod tho ottontion of RAID nood-
quottoro ond thot of tho Italian Novy. “to: hoving opototod in tho Iootorn
Hoditotronoon. tho novol forco novod to tho Ionion Son ond tho Stroito of
Sicily ond. divided into two groupo. now oppooro to bo otooning towotd tho
Iyrthonion Son ond wootword of Sordinio.

ﬂoor tho cooot. tho Inooiono' octivitioo hovo boon cloooly wotchod continu-
ouoly by novol unito ond holicoptoro of our novy.

It cortoinly in not o mo in which to ho olonod. Tho onbotontiol Sowiot
novol prooonco in tho Hoditotronoon hoo boon going on continuouoly for IS
yooro. In oddition to o oitoobio nuclouo of nodorn. wolI-otnod mfoco voo-
ooIo, nuuorouo ouhnorinoo. oono nucioc. onhibiono unito ond o lorgo nuubot
of ouniliory ohipo. which no oqnippod. onong othoro. for intonigonco goth-
oring ond o1octtonic worioto. opototo in tho noditotronoon. I'hoto io. oo

io won known. tho oimltonoouo ptooonco of tho v.3. Sixth Pioot.

In tho NATO ironwork. tho Anoricon novol ptooonco io cortuinly indio'ponoohlo
ond oignitioo o ptocioo co-itnont on tho port of tho ".8. for tho doionoo

of tho olliod countrioo. Ihoto in no doubt. howovor. thot both tho Inooiono
ond tho Anoricono. by ooono of thoir ilooto. purouo goolo o! notionol policy
which noko our ooo o conotont orono of conitontotion onhjoct to potiodic
non-«9o.

1
M OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In thie franework. what in the poeition and function of Italy which lives

on the eea and whoee econony ie fueled 90 percent via Iaritine routee? The
Italian Navy in undertaking operatione which require the uee of nodern equip-
eent end the eainteining of an efficient connd and control etructure. re-
quiring tinelineee end little publicity. 'l'he etetue of all naval forcee oper-
ating in the hediterrenean ie conetently obeerved end updated. but the fact
reneine that the Italian levy. deepite eone eodern aquipeent and an efficient
organiretion. doee not poeeeee the wherewithal neceeaitated by Itely'e po-
eition and naval obligatione.

The poeaibility of playing a role of active. and not eecondary, preeence (with
due reepect to the elliee). the poeeibility of undertaking a credible action
with the ail of etebiliration and collaboration within the confinee of the
Mediterranean Sea and, finally. the poeeibility of bringing about the etepe
toward eediation between Europe. between thoae countriee which geography hae
deened to he on eouthern ehoree. are all connected with end eubordinate to
the acquieition of lore "weight" with regard to naval power. which, ee the cue
hae it, ie not to be excluded when one coneidere the reeourcee the country
hea eet eeide for defenee.

France. in pureuing a policy of independence and active preeence. hae already
reinforced ite Mediterranean fleet a long tiee ago.

The inportance of naval powor ea an aid to the policiee of thoee natione
involved ha been evidenced in en irrefutable nenner by recent international
evente in which naval deploy-onto of the two euperpowere played a eignificant
role.

The gaining of popularity of world intereeta regarding the Hediterrenean area.
confined by the quantitative-qualitative balance of the two euperpowere'
fleete preeent in our baein. bringe forth. in an urgent and dranetic way.
queetione regarding the edaquecy of our political progran for the protection
of economic development. etability and notional eecurity.

In the paet, and unfortunately in eore recent tieee. eoeeone etated that Italy
wee an "unainkeble aircraft cerrier"; we would not want. for the lack of po-
litical foreeight, the cane judgeent to be held but with a alight eutetion
reeulting in a "landing wharf” open to traneit by anyone.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Bditoriale del "Corriere delle Sere" S.A.s.

9209
(:80: 3106

2
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W SUCTION _ rm

mmm :mmmo on CRISIS, PSF'S m
Doris PARIS mm in Road: 16 lo: 79 pp 50-53
[lutoxviow with fronooio littorrond by Miohol Gonod ond Louronco Hamil

[m] It woo whilo :otuxning tron 1mm. whozo ho wont
to oupport-ond choor up otool-Iill workoro. thot

tronooio Nittorrond loomod at tho Chino “cow" wimout
qroot ourpzioo. sinco tho day ottor tho potliooontory
oloctiono. ho had ootuolly ptodictod 'tho inovitoblo oun-
txontotion bobnon Giooord ond hio tor-or prino ninioton'
A month ogo. tho Socioliot Potty [P8] hod olroody so-
quootod tho convoootion o: o opociol ooooion 0! mo
loudly on tho lotto: o! o-ploynont, but to no ox oil.

In tho nindo of littorrond and hio tolloworo. thio ‘Jno
it woo thontoro opproprioto to: tho P8. in oxdo: to ouc-
cood, to join in Jooquoo Chiroo'o initiotiwo. which would
hovo boon inconooivoblo juot o tow wooko ogo. In on ox-
cluivo intotviow on tho following poqoo, Pmooio
nittorrond onowoto tho quootiono which ovoryono io ookinq
obout tho orioio, moqloylont. qovotnlont policy ond '
tho noont and outprioing 'ollionco' bouoon tho PB ond
tho I!!! {lolly to: m nopublic]. 3o oloo oxploino hin-
ool! 'ot lonqth oonoominq tho tutuzo ond hio porty‘o
diwioiono. which porticuloxly worry hi- on tho' ovo of

tho oooioliot oonqnoo of lot: (6 April), out! on an
Union of tho loft. in which ho otill boliovoo. It woo ot
hio he. in Porio on No do Diovro in his onioo, on
ottio tillod with tiloo ond book, that nonooio
Hittorxond dotinod hio pooition to: tho Pulls mm

inquiry.

.Pms Mica: You hovo joinod with tho m to obtain tho oonvocotion o! o
opociol ooooion of Pozlio-ont to oxuino «ploy-out promo-o. on tho
lioito of tho Iojouty. or at tho oppooition. in tho pnoooo o! ohonging?

3 .
POI! OﬂICIIJ. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

”mans ran-ammo: Our priority ie the fight egainet une-ploy-ent. Ne
oere little about parlienentery procedure and whoever tekee the initietive
if we can help to relly public opinion against the cisterd-Barre policy of
receeeion.

PARIS mm: Yet Ilr Berre eeid londey evening on televieion thet progreee
wee being node. inaemch at he hoe reeetebliehed the belence of France‘s
foreign trede. Ihet do you think of thet?

rumors mmmn: The foreign trede belence ie a very inortent fector
enong the nejor balencee neceeeery. eince it determiner the velue of our
currency and reduoee our indebtedneee. In thie respect, Berre has been a
better Ieneger then (mirac. nut thie reeult hae been obtained only by e
receeoion of our eoonony. with the rotor of doeeetic production running et
e elower rete due to lack of conuntion end with inorte considerably re-
duced an a reeult, the balance for which Mr Berre tekee credit is rue-bung
e etete of lethargy more end are. If I m eey eo, when nothing will be
loving eny longer, the balance will be perfect. Indmtriel production re-
neine at the 1974 level. Everything ie et e etandetill. The result: an
econonio end a eooiel crieie. And they will be enered when the nation be-
coueo annoyed. It nee-e to no that thet in elreew beginning.

Pm: mm: The prine ninieter eleo raid: “Since 1958. more he. been de-
coloniretion and the eeteblieklent of institutions. ‘nodey5it is a queetion
of edepting our econoqy to the world context.“ no you share thie enelyoie?

rumors mmmm: If Hr aerre ie telling the truth. whet e condemetion
of hie predecessor“ What an official etetenent of failure for

Valery Giecerd d'Beteing. in charge of rating eoonouic choicee for lo yeere.
whet! 1hey heve finelly noticed todey, and only todey, on failure of our
eoonoly to adept. end efter 20 yeare of th'. fifth Republic? I would like
to edd thet Hr Berre celle 'edeptetion' whet in not often only Prance'e
eubnieeion to the internationel divieion of labor end production deeired by
Iultinetionel oepitelien. Rightiet govern-onto heve elreedy loet the hettle
of the counter. of the egricultural-food rector, of ehipbuilding. They
ere in the proceee of losing the battle of the iron and eteel lndutry. It
in high tine thet they dieemeer.

PARIS mm: Dir Barre hae eleo eeidx "hence in now feced with the Iatter
of eurvivel.‘ re thie your opinion? '

'rmooxs ammo: hence will eurvive efter Hr aerre, let hi- reet ee-
eured. And after hr Giecard d'Beteing as well. I think that it will our
vive even better.

nus mm: Caught up in in own internel proble-e, in it pouible for
the P3 to adopt a eufficiently deteohed poeition to rake an overell or
global enelyeie of the political-econonic eituetion?

- 6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PRANGDIS MIMRRAND: I have constantly discussed national and world af-
fairs without limiting myself to may party's internal debates. I denounced
the Chinese attack on Vietnaa after the Vietnasese attack on CMa and
after denouncing the regise of the shah, I believed that the threat to
peace cane less from the Far East than free the events in Iran, where
(necessary) revolution is taking place in one of the mat sensitive spots
in the world, where there is cowetition for control of oil and access to
the Indian Ocean. I have vigorously alerted public opinion with regard to
nuclear proliferation. And all in the name oi my party. Just as I warned
a very fragile Cannon-Market Rurope against American economic inperialiss,
among nany other things. And I was not the only one. No, I do not believe
that the P8 deserves this reproach.

PARIS RAM: Isn't it surprising to sub-it a joint text with the PC and
RR?

FRANCOIS run-ammo: In our opinion, the fight for emloynent and for a
change of policy precedes parlimaentary rivalries.

PARIS m'rcm l-las Barre served his ties, as sole say? should he leave?

PRANCOIS ammo: Increase in prices: 10 percent per year. Before
Barre, with Barre. Unemployment: one million more meaployed since
Giscard d'astaing was elected president of the republic. Growth: less
than 3 percent per year when sore than 5 percent is required. Those are
Giscard's results. We night really ask: What good is Barre?

PARIS MAM: Are you worried about the coming year? Could the nongwy
situation be duplicated in other areas?

FRANCOIS MINIRRARD: I am concerned: mloynent can only rise. The
Giscard-Barre policy does not make it possible to reestablish growth at an
adequate level. This is tragic for production and for all the social and
hulan probless caused by this situation.

PARIS HA‘rcR: If you were in the position of Giscard-Barre. what would you
do'.‘

FRANCOIS mmmuo: This is a question which means nothing or everything.
The political context and all of the economic seasures which would determine
the social policy would be coqletely different. I do not have to put sy-
self in the context of the discard-Barre policy. If you read more closely

the proposals which I will make at the Congress of lists, you will find the
components of my answer.

PARIS "Am: But if the left had won in 1978, would there be the crisis of

the iron and steel industry, the strike of the SIP [expansion unknown] and
1.5 million unuployed?

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mucous ammo: The crisis of the iron end steel industry elreedy
existed. but it would heve been hendled differently. I edviee you to refer
to the Socieliet Percy's propoeels under the title of "An Awbition for the
Iron end Steel Industry." They were published recently. sieilerly. in

the nus of Iy petty I eubwitted e plea to fight for emloynent. which in-
volves e whole eeriee of econo-ic end sociel weeeures. Therefore, we wOuld
not be in the eene eituetion. Al for the strike of the SP9. it would have
no reeeon for being.

PARIS MATCH: Would there be eueterity juet the eene?

WIS hummus here would not be eny more oil in our ubsoil, I
grent you thet. But no netionel effort is poeeible without sociel justice.

PARIS mm: Do you think thet there night be e "nejority eccident“ which
would cut short the existence of the current Netionel nose-bly? Do you br-
lieve that there will be perlienentery elections before 1981? And if so,
why?

rmcots ammo: Imdietely following the election of 1981. I heVe no
dodat of it. No president of the repwlic will .‘;e eble to live with this
Aseeebly. But I do not rule out the cese thet perlienentery elections My
texe plece before. beceuse of the discard-Chino rivelry. The majority ec-
. .dent is likely end will be preceded by neny ekirnishes.

PARIS HAM: In the event of e serious crisis, would you be willing to
perticipete in e government of netionel unity?

rmoors zen-romp: A govern-eat of netionel unity generelly provides e
ceeouflege for e rightist govern-em: when too my failures force it to at?
cept such e eituetion. Only e world wer would justify such e possibility.
Portmetely, despite the rieke which I heve mentioned, we ere not in the:
situetionl

PARIS HAM: At the congress of Hetr. will the future of French socielisl
be et eteke?

PRANCOIS ammo: This congress is es ilportent es the Bpiney congress.
Since our perty wee founded. this is the first tine thet it is feced with
such e decisive choice thet the future will be different, depending on
whet tekee piece.

PARIS lam-ca: This will therefore be e fight of paramount imrma for
you end for your petty?

"ANOOIS mm: Por the Socielist Perty, yes. For myself. no. At
Bpiney. I hed no thought et ell of becoeinq first secretery of the Sociuilt
Petty. m unexpected eituetion which hes chenqed my life--deily absorbing
teeks, continuel trips in hence end ebroed end the necessity of devoting

6
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

my time to building e perty which hes becooo the first in Frenoe. I did so
wholeheertedly. but after 8 yeere I elso feel the need to trenster this re-
sponsibility to others. I would do so et Note it I were assured thet the
policy of Rpiney would not be threetened.

PARIS NA'ICN: Which doesn't lean thet you would leave the perty. thet you
would retire?

FRANOOIS mm: I would not cerry out the some role, that's ell.
PARIS mm: Are you enong those who ecouse moerd o! e 'rightist driit'?

FRANCOIS NI'M'BRPANDa I do not eccuse him of thet. A perty cennot he uni-
torl. The ter- ’rightist drift" is e polemicel tern. intended to be often-
siwe. I don't me it. but there is e logic in history. The principles
defined et Spiney end observed since then eerked the enohoring ot the So-
cielist Perty in the oleeees of which it is the neturel representetive.

As e result, it hes rediscovered its euthentioity. I! it integretee the
idees, events end hopes which eeoh dq brings. I will be delighted. I! it
ellows itself to be eweyed by teshion. I will be worried. boo): how the
right is reeoting. Everything which is oonservetive in Frenoe is wetohing
for the leest sign which could indicete weerinese or retreet on w pert.

I find thet very nor-ll. It is en honor (or no to be considered the nein
edversery by big oepitel end by the right.

PARIS MICK: Your ellience with CRIBS [Center for Socielist Studies. Re-
seerch end Sduoetion] is not very well understood.

qucoxs numb: 1 don't know mt you ere telking ebout.
PARIS mm: It is nevertheless your objective elly.

FRANCOIS NIMRRAND: I node on eppeel tor mity without exclusivity end thet
epplied to CBRSS so well es to others. But don't teke thet for e proposel
of e oertein situetion: thet eppeel detes beck to 8 July.

PARIS moon: And Pierre Neuroy? Do you still heve teith in him?

FRANCOIS IIIﬂ'SRRAND: It is one of w rules not to iwugn enyone working

at my side end disoherging elong with no the responsibility o! tho Socielist
Perty. Pierre Neuroy end Michel Rocerd ere todey et considerable verienoe
with no. But thet in no way detrects Iron their good guslities, which I
recognize.

PARIS mm: no you feel bitter. angry, I feeling o! ingretitude?

FRANCOIS NI‘I'I'RRRAND: Bitterness, enger. no. A reeling of ingretitude . . .
soaetiees. But I don't «hell on those things.

- 7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARIS MAM: It is said that an agreement has already been reached for
unity around you at the congress of nets. Your eoderation toward men who
have been critical of you for a year would tend to confine this.

PRANCOIS ammo: That's really rushing things! I want the nest gen-
eral kind of understanding. But in an atmosphere of lucidity. 'hvo politi-
cal policies cannot be proposed at the sane tine. The Socialist Party
would seriously hurt itself in the process. It is Q to the Iilitants to
make a decision. I have refused and will refuse to allow a small circle of
initiates to replace than.

PARIS mm: to be lore precise. according to this rough agree-ent, you
would continue as first secretary and nocard would have the green light to
be the P8 candidate in the presidential election of 1981. Is this a prob-
able scenario?

rumors mmamm 'rhat possibility in not out of the question. no lore
than others.

PARIS MATCH: You have never thought of resigning after March 1978?

rumors wzmmno: We have gone from one success to another. Why resign?
Between 1971 and 1978, the Socialist Party has not stopped growing. And
if, at the ties of the parlianentary elections, we reesined below our hopes
-and the polls. we were still the only party to gain in percentage, e per-
cent. 'l'hen there were the by-elections and we continued to advance.

I had no domt of it!

PARIS MAM: Do you believe it is still possible to speak of the Union of
the Left while your co-unist partners attack you every day?

tweets murmur Everything depends on the way in which the situation
5. viewed. As a political for-ula for close association of our two parties
around a joint prograe, the Union of the left has suffered a blow because
of the mine. It has lost a good deal of its credibility in pwlic
opinion. which inplies. and not without reason, that if there were a Iajor-
ity schisa in the next two years, it would be very difficult to establioh a
coalition of the loft sil'ilar to wet which we forud in 1972. But the
union of popular forces. translated politically into the Union of the Left,
stems free a very deep need. It is constantly debated on an electoral
level. lithin the socialist Party. we are all in favor of an agnesent
with our partners, an agreement which would leave no roa- for antiquity: we
desire a treaty of nonaggression in the esantile. It is up to the Pc to
reply. Nhat I ask of the Socialist Party is that it become, even more
than it is now, the stimlus of popular forces. If it does, it will win
its h'.storic battle. And all of French politics will be organized around
it. which is one more reason why it should continue its political strategy.

8
FOR OFPICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARIS HATCH: On what basis could a dialog with the coenunists be resueed?

PRANOOIS ammo: It is hard to say. since the Pc is unpredictable.
For us it is sisple: on the basis of realities. What is ieportant today
is unsuployeent, recession. the destruction of industrial potential and the
ruinatien of certain regions. Let us deb- re and therefore, let us nest.

PARIS MATCH: would you be surprised if Georges harchais telephoned you to-
norrow norning?

PPANOOIS urn-3mm I wouldn't be surprised at anything. But that isn't
likely. since the Pc's Iain concern is not to have a great Socialist Party
at its side. I have never concealed the contradiction of our strategy.

which we realised inediateiyt the left was able to win only through unity
and yet that victory was conceivable only if the mist-socialist ratio
of power. for-erly to the advantage of the cote-mists, were reversed. The

PC, I understand. was unwilling to accept it and finally broke became of
the obstacle.

PARIS "Aral: Do you still believe today that the P3 isn't able to win
alone?

rnmcors ammo: Not yet. we are totally independent. or autonomous,
depending on which expression you prefer. We are not asking anyone's per-
mission to act. But with 23 percent of the votes, as is the case at the
present tine. no doubt acre in June for the European election and even nore
for the presidential election of 1981. I hope about 30 percent. this is

not enough to govern alone inadasocratic country. A strong relative najor-
ity would nevertheless considerably change the realities of French politics.
We have not arrived at that situation. Our progress is linked to the loy-
alty of our choices.

PARIS HATCH: You believe that our foreign policy is ”stale." that Prancs

has eosething to say and is not saying it. Buctly what do you have in
nind? '

HANCOIS ammo: Regardless of how you look at it, it is still a half-
baked policy. we are not in favor of RAID. but we accept the assures which
reincorporate us into its framework, we are in favor of a new policy with the
Third world. but nothing useful in this respect is proposed: we are in favor
of disarlasent, but we participate in rearnanent: we are against an incrree
in area sales, but we propose a tax on arm purchases and not on sales--be-
cause we are a seller; we preach noninterference in the affairs of foreign
countries, but we take part in internal conflicts which give rise to then:
we invent a nuropean Ionetary system. but we neglect coapensatory amounts,
etc. Everything else is sinilar. The Yaounde debate held public opinion
for a half-day. while the Phnos-Psnh debate took years.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PARIS MAM: hpparontly you nioo Do Gaullo?
PRANCOIS WWI): That'o not what I loan.

PARIS HAM: Kurt Naldhoin. tho UN ooorotary gonoral. aayo that tho world
io going through tho moot ooriouo orioio oinco tho Cuban attair in 1962.
lo that your opinion aloo?

FRANCOIS ”IMRRANDI I think he in right.
PARIS HATCH: Ara you pooailiotio?

PRANCOIS III‘I'I'BRRAND: I on not a fortuno tailor. But wo nuot undorotand
that an atooio war io poooiblo and that if no groat idoao and no groat
program is imlonontod for tho poaootul organization of tho world. it io
doolod. Particularly an a rooult of tho proliiaration of atomic woapono.
Roithor Tong Hoiao-ping nor Brozhnoy nor Cartor Wants a world war. of Donna.
but tho atookpiling of am. irrational antagonioao and tho ohrinking oiro
of tho planot aro bringing us olooor to atomic war, unlooa . . . So do not
noto that tho groat poworo of thia world aro awaro of thio 'unlooa." Yot a
non liko Brorhnov lo a man of poaco, I boliovo. China in not an ottonoivo
powor. tartar io cortainly a good ran, with no thoughto of fighting it out.
But apparontly no ono toola that oouothing noro mot bo dono it war is to
bo avortad.

PARIS anal: What aro ooalo of thooo initiativoo that you want?

FRANCOIS HI‘I'I'BRRAND: A Loaguo of Nationo was organiud at ono til-o. but
that did not provont war. 'I'ho Unitod Nations noodo to undorgo a tranotor
nation. I do not aook a dirootorato of groat poworo. but thooo with oupo-
rior ar- ahould undorotand that thoy Imot prooood boldly with <11th
and that a policy of node nonproliferation nuot ulti-atoly ho imlanantod.
Arbitration luot booolo obligatory. 'l‘ho Court of rho uaguo io now 0! nor
ginal iqortanoo and yot it dotinatod tho thoughts or non of progrooo not
oo long ago. ‘l'ho groat idoao of arbitration and oolloctivo oocurity aro
growing dill oyon whilo tho urgoncy oxioto.

PARIS HATCH: You noon that thora aro no Ioro barrioro. no Ioro judgoo?

PRANCOIS Ina-roman: Thoro aro oo-o wioo Ion. Do thoy havo idoao?
Courago?

PARIS hA‘l‘Cl-l: Pro- tino to tino, do you fool liko retiring fro- political
lito?

PRAIICOIS ammo: that non of action dooon't think of that?

PARIS mm: It writo boob on oubjocto which intoroot you?

10
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rumors “11'!!th Sven-vetting than“: no. am: writing. 19:. ch. rout.
of 1c. 1.- . victory in nun.

PARIS mm: but than pounc- announce?

FRANCOIS maximum No dome I an nude (or politics nth" than for
writing.

0092mm: 1979 par Gogoaproun SA

11915
680: 3100

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COURTRY 830110“ FRANCE

OISCARD-CHIRAO RECONCILIATION HINTED
Paris PARIS HATCH in French 30 Mar 79 pp 46-47

éxrticle Michel Gonod: ”Peace Soon Between Chirac and
isoard?"

[Nexf7 Valery Giscard d‘Estaing and Jacques Chirac arc oing
to seet soon. All the conditions are fulfilled for the aullist
leader to go and snoke the pipe of peace in the big chief's
vigvaa. The latter wants to and Chirac expects to, The last
tine they met in Noveaher, they spoke for 45 ainutes about the
excavation of Les Halles and nothing else. Since then such
troubled water has run under the bridge of the sajority. Last
month Claude Labbe invite to the Elysee as chair-an of the
RPR lly for the ﬁepuhli parliamentary group,told Giscard:
”Hr resident, it is inperative that you neet Jacques Chirac."
claude Labbe did not best about the bush. Explaining to the

.president that one could not speak seriously of reconciliation
in the majority as long as Chirac would be deprived of the
respect due his present and past qualifications, he had af-
firned: "Without us, there is no parliamentary sajority conse-
quently without us there is no govern-eat. Therefore it is
unusual that the leader of our novenent is never consulted. In
addition, Claude Labbe had added,'ve are tired of hearing the
prime ainister speak scornfully of the political order, as if
he was not part of it. Hevertheless, it is the 3P3 which of-
fered his a district in Lyon vhere he could have been elected
easily.'"

It is quite probable that this speech did not please Oiscard,
but he did not indicate it at all. Bealisn in politics lust
dominate feelings. It uust be helioved that Labbe probably
has been heard, since today Oiscard declares that he is ready
"to console thoso vho think they are suffering.” The Elysee
declares that the president does not intend to "play on a split
in the 898' (and still, one confides has easy that vould be...)

12
’08 0!?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and that, at any rate, new elections will not do Franco an

good. In short, it is not the great love, but honest coha ita-
tion. The history of relations between Giscard and Chirac
remains to be written. Like in all passions, somber pages
would be more numerous than the rose-colored pages. Remember
March 1976 after the cantonal elections: the Left swept up

tho biggest stake. Giscard speaks to tho French. He is sad.

He announces that Chirac will be tho coordinator of the major-
ity from now on. That will then go from bad to worse, until

the spectacular resignation of Chirac 4 months later. Three
years have passed. ere we are again on the eve of the cantonal
elections. The political situation has chan ed. It has developed
in a other favorable direction for the UDP reneh Democratic
Unio . The results of the first round of the cantonal elec-
tions indicate it. Vith its thousand candidates, it obtains

21 percent of the votes, which would place it ahead of all the
parties, if we made a transposition on a national scale. In
fact, the P8 had the best score with 27 percent of the votes,

percent for 800 candidates. Under these conditions, Giscard
can take a step in the direction of the Gaullists without ap-
pearing to give in to the latter’s demands. For contrary to
a widely held opinion, the chief of state keeps himself very
well informed about politicians' maneuvers. le knows very well
what is happening in the group meetings and in the corridors
of the Palais Bourbon. He knows very well that the breaking
point had almost been reached on the second day of the special
session of Parliament when Chirac, attacked verbally by the
socialist.6eorges Pillioud, was not able to answer because the
President of the Assembly had not opened the microphone before
which he had gone with great pains to sit down. At that
minute, eve thing almost collapsed. Pierre Messmer admitted
it later: 5? was at the point of voting censure to protest
against the divisions of the majority and against the complai-
sance with which one allowed the RPR to be insulted by the
opposition."

The second round of this special session will take place in one
of the two investigative committees set up on the demand of the
Gaullists: the committee instructed ”to collect the facts re~
gardinn sources, organizations and means of diffusion of pub-
lic information.“ An extensive program: In the RPR, they
amused themselves by drawing up a list of government disorgani-
zation on the subject of information. The compensating amounts?

13
PORCWTICUH.USBCMLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The minister of agriculture says: “The problem is not solved.”
The chief of state declares a few days later: ”It is solved."
The iron and steel industry? Who can say today how many lay-
offs there will be after the many and contradictory official
statements. The liability tax on wealth? The UDP initiates

the bill with the support of the minister of economy, but the
prime minister opposes it. The price of gasoline? Monory an-
nounces last fall that it is going to dro and Barre says the
opposite. The SP? [:xpansion unknowﬂ7? he prime minister

says at the RTL [Expansion unknown7 microphone: ”I have seen
the file at close range and I declare that if it was opened com-
pletely there would be no lack of sensational subjects.” Then
nothing more. To those who want to know what there is in this
famous file, he answered solemnly: “Impossible, it is not in-
tended to be published." In fact, what is being concealed in
the name of no longer valid principles, is a generalized decep-
tion. There are 300 official vehicles for 3,000 employees;
there are extended estimates; thefts of equipment (cables, cam-
eras). 0ne mentions, among other things, the exorbitant cost

of an introduction for a broadcast of Antenna 2: the 8P? invoices
it at Pr 300,000 when a private company had offered to do it
for Pr 18,000. There are also an impressive number of temporary
workers who cost two and one-half times more than the enter-
prise's salaried personnel. There are finally the fees payed
regularly to people who do not have anything to do with tele-
vision. There are the sensational subjects which Raymond Barre
has kept for himself.

The investigative committee has plenty to do if it wants to try
to find out why the ?rench are underinformed, when they some-
times feel bludgeoned by the media. It is not enough to go
look under the stones, it will be necessary to say why and how
certain things were concealed there. "It will not be a revo-
lutionary court," Claude Labbe warns in the name of the
Gaullists. Besides, the approach to the problem is not the
same, according as one appeals to the RPR and UDP which share
the leadership of the committee. A Giscard leader pointed out
the other day to dampen the order of the Gaullists: 'Is it not
Jacques Chirac, who announced, on returning from his trips
abroad, some fabulous contracts we have not heard anything about
since? Is it not he and his circle who concealed from France
the gravity of the disease which was to cruelly carry Georges
Pompidou away?" The “PR, on its part, will not limit itself to
demonstrating that public information circulates poorly because
of incompetence or because of inconsistency. It also wants to

14
FOR OPPICUU.USB 0ND!
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY

demonstrate that nntiOnulliam preveila in some editorial stuffs,
especially television and radio. Jacques Chime is harsh on
this matter. "I an the victim of a now gang of four, he do-

clared the other day on o television stage. It in made up of
the Duhunel brothers, Mougootto and Elkebboohﬂ

COPYRIGHT: 1979 by Cogediprouo 8A

8490
080: 3100

15
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE-

OU‘I'IIN! NR A m mom. WC POLICY
Paris mums in hench Jan 79 pp 53-65

[Interview with Chriatian Stoffaes, adviser at the Minist of Industry, by
(My Poquetlz: "For a Liberal-Oriented Change in the Economy 3 place and date
not given

{Text} After the great electoral fright of lurch 1978
the French leaders decided to initiate a process for

the transfonlation of the hench economy. Indeed, they
acquired the conviction that France's econow must be

the subject of a far-reaching liberalo-oriented change
whose source of inspiration was to be sought in the (Screen
nodal, that is, limited intervention by the goverment,
increased coupetitiveness of fins on international nar-
hets, national consensus and little challenge of work
related values, but especially acceptance by euployers
and trade unions of a certain degree of concertation which
cannot occur without effective decentralization of decision-
making both within businesses and political institutions.

But in france is such an orientation comatible with the
nentalities, the structure of the econolic apparatus, the
customs acquired by the public administration and busi-
ness executives for decades“ Christian 8toffaes, adviser
of the Minister of Industry, author of "The Great Indus-
trial threat,” a work in which he analyzes the new diaen-
aicn of international ecamic relations and the strategies
that flow froa it, explains here the new lines of French
economic policy. He underscores in particular the consid-
erable efforts which French industry will have to deploy
to readJust itself to international realities and the at
tines socially painful neasures which those responsible
for ecumic policy will have to take in order to organize

'Christian an???” is head of the Studies and Planning Center at the Ministry
of Industry.

16
PO! ORIGIN. 08! our
M OFFICXAL 08! ONLY

the country's activities on the basis of the dictates
of the new Saint Simon-ist doctrine.

However, while a certain degree of consensus points to
the need for readjustaent of the French econoey, a lot
is needed for the approaches of v-rious economists to
converge. That is why, to throw light on the important
debate that has just opened, N'I'URIBIBS asked Jean
mtouk, professor of economics, for his thoughts on
this economic policy. for htouk the latter is danger-
ous because it leads to explosive growth which from an
economic and social viewpoint is untenable.

Question: ﬁance's means of adjustment to the new international economic
realities are now at the focus of a debate among economists. The dominant
spirit among economic policy-makers and which you defend is that of a return
to liberalism and a competitive econoew. Yet, voices continue to strive to
check the damage of an internationalism deemed to be both archaic and domi-
nated by the multinational corporations. Why do you reject such an analysis?

Anner: Even if it is arbitrary to place limits on progressive signs, the
internationalisation of the ecom is a relatively recent phenomenon which
has characterized the present era for several decades now. If we consider
the trends that have been in evidence for the past 30 years we find that we
have gone beyond a further stage since 1973 and that itself has changed the
nature of the problem. The emergence of the Third World as well as the domi-
nation of international trade by some countries and their multinational
corporations present particular challenges to the French econow whose period
of readjustment will certainly be long and painful.

In the face of such a situation the temptation is obviously great to brake
the painful adjustment process. But in that case would we not run the risk,
having 2 million unemployed in 3 to 5 years, witness runaway inflation, and
witnessing all the same in the last analysis the bankruptcy of important
economic sectors which lose their competitive position? It is however pee--
sible to discuss the option between free trade and protectionism. I would
rather characterise these as offensive and defensive policies, for they do
not boil down merely to a policy involving the opening up or closing of
borders. Rather, they concern a country's entire economic policy, that is,
measures of economic reactivation, the control of equilibrium at the macro-
economic level, as well as measures involving the structures of all sectors
of the economy.

The choice favoring an offensive stance can be defended as follows: First

of all this option has succeeded for some countries. Germany and Japan are

two such models. They have been able to take the-path of internationalisation
by specialising in innovative economic activities and those with a large degree
of value added, by reducing their investments in short order in declining
sectors, and by using a whole series of structural techniques. Such a strat-
egy is thus possible.

17
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

Then, France is extremely dependent on raw materials. It imports such
primary products to the tune of 100 billion French francs a year. since

the economic independence of the Third World entails a strong tendency for
price rises in this connection, the bill that France has to pay threatens

to become steadily higher. Yet, such a bill will indeed have to be paid

if we wish to bring about far-reaching changes in the daily lives of the
French people. We do not always gauge clearly what our civilization owes

to the abundant supply of energy. The payment of this bill can be effected
only through the export of our manufactured products. Indeed, despite the
effort in the direction of greater competition and higher productivity which
still reaains to be done, our agriculture will be unable to compete with the
extensive agricultural sectors of the new countries and we shall thus be
unable to export large amounts of agricultural products. The same is true
of services. We shall therefore have to place our bets unquestionably on
manufactured products and this option necessarily involves an opening up.

For the protectionist strategy would entail retaliation by our trading part-
ners. It is well-known that a cut in imports involves a reduction of exports
through chain reaction whose model was provided by the depression of the 1930's.

Finally, for many businesses the size of the French market continues to be too
small to be able to achieve specialization and efficient production costs.
There is of course the European alternative proposed by Jean-Marcel Jeanneney.
French industry being overly integrated into the European whet, no longer is
anyone really naive enough to believe that protectionist within the borders of
France is possible. What is suggested, then, is protectionism at the European
level. One should not forget, honour, that Europe, like France, is highly
dependent on raw materials and one again meets the problem mentioned earlier.
Furthermore, there are divergences of interest among the anropean partners:

To be persuaded of this one need only consider the negotiations in which
Germany, already highly integrated into international trade, is opposed to
the relative protectionist measures proposed by France.

Yet, valid auuents could be advanced in favor of a defensive strategy.

The first lies in the difficulty of the change to be brought about. The reces-
sion that we are experiencing is one of long duration which mandates unpopular
measures, the closing of any concerns with marginal efficiency, far-reaching
changes in the policy of territorial improvement in which some regions will
suffer particularly from this crisis of redeployment. It seems to me that it
is on this political and social obstacle that we run the risk of stmbling
most of all. Will the important changes prompted by the recession not frus~
trate the policy of adjustment? In other words, will the benefit match the
cost?

The second arguent involves risk. To follow a strategy of international
integration obviously signifies becoming dependent on the world. [hiring the
depression of the 1930's these countries which suffered most from the drop in
international trade were the ones which were the most highly integrated and
the most industrialised. France's relative stability at that time was probably

18
you ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

due to its protectionism whereas the eXcessivo integration of Germany (which
had a to percent unemployment rate in 1932) and the risks taken by that
country during the same period were partly responsible for the consequences
with which we are familiar. The question today is to know whether the risk
posed by integration into international trade is credible in the long term.
'lhc process of internationalising the sec: 31y and the emergence of the Third
World will certainly engender countervailing shocks. Some countries will be
unable to stand them and will choose to withdraw on themselves. Britain or
the United States, for example, thus threaten to adopt defensive strategies.
But there will certainly always be a core of countries that will play the
gene of international trade and those will increase their power and their
revenues: Germany, Japan, brasil, and China today fall in that category.
One should not conceal the fact that such a policy entails risks, but I
believe that they are fairly moderate on the whole.

finally, the third argunent for a defensive economic policy is tradition. The
era of the opening up of borders during these past 20 years is unique in our
history. Renee's protectionist traditions unquestionably go back to the
passage of the Civil code and the distribution of agricultural land among a
large nrmber of mall landowners. This agricultural protectionism, which was
very pronounced, by the same token engendered partially protectionist attitudes
in other sectors. low, despite the country's modernisation the problem con-
tinues. Few French people wish to expatriate themselves, so much so that
French firms are obliged to pay very high compensation, compared to Germany or
the United States, to those who agree to work abroad. 'lhis is a significant
fact which proves that we are not yet very wide open on the world.

These, among others, are the various sides of the debate. It is a full-fledged
one since what is involved is choosing between political power on one hand and
income or quality of life on the other without forgetting that the latter would
be effected at the expense of income and consumption but also of political
influence. Indeed, the country which withdraws on itself in the economic field
is no longer capable in any way of pursuing an effective foreign policy. Germany
and Japan begin to offer, by way of contrast, eloquent examples despite their
dcmilitarisation.

Question: This strategic option is obviously suggested to you by the diagnos-
tic that you sake of the recession. For you, in contrast to the 1930's, this
recession is not macroecononic. You have indeed asserted that what is involved
is a cybernetic recession of the decision-making processes in economies that
are open to the outside. Hhat does that mean?

Answer: The causes of the existing recession in some western countries are to
be sought in the war in which they make their decisions. The depression of
the 1930's challenged the traditional dogmas of classical economic theory which
postulated that equilibrium: are automatically restored following periods of
instability. It is John )hynard Keynes who demonstrated that equilibriun at
the run employment level does not flow necessarily from the free forces of
the aarhetplace. But his ideas took seVeral years to become accepted because

19
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a complete revolution of minds was necessary. Il‘he Keynesian ideas which we
have followed for the past 30 years and the liberalization of international
trade are at the origin of the increased mass consumption and exceptional
growth levels that we have experienced. Even though the present recession

is not of the same order of mgnitude as the depression of the 1930's, we are
nevertheless involved in a long-term recession from which countries are
emerging with are or less success. Before 1973 one could see a certain con-
vergent trend among Western countries: Europe was catching up with the United
States while Japan was catching up with both of the former. It was thought
that structures were gradually going to resemble each other more and more.
However, since 1973 the Western world seems to be on the way to becoming more
heterogeneous. here are now several types of Western countries and this idea
is beginning to be reflected in the collective terminology. There is talk of
the lead group, the bottom group, and naturally the middle group in which
France finds itself--at this time.

why these differences? The analysis of the economic organisations of the
various countries, of their success or failure, takes us beyond Keynes.
lhcroeconomic techniques and policies of economic reactivation are in fact
no longer sufficient to restore equilibrium. This is very evident in the
case of Britain which has suffered from an excess of Keynesianism in the
past 30 years and in the case of France where' policies of Keynesian economic
reactivation have sttmbled on the catch of foreign bargaining power and the
fatal ”stop and go" system. Il'hat is not surprising: Economic reactivation
and the policy of high employment check gains in productivity, make possible
the survival of inefficient production units, and undermine the competitive-
ness of an economy, thus making it unsuitable for international trade.

In contrast, the acceptance of a certain limitation of potential growth, that
is, a policy of controlled growth such as that which Germany has been pursuing
for the past 15 years, permanently forces the production apparatus to be com-
petitive, makes possible the automatic elimination of marginal firms, obliges
businesses to make investments to achieve greater productivity, and finally
provides long-term assurance of sounder growth. Desirable stabilization policy
is that which consists in pursuing economic growth following an upward slope
that is always slightly lower than maximum productive capacity.

Finding a way out of the recession thus implies an ideological revolution of
the same type as the Keynesian revolution, and it could be called a revolution
in industrial policy. Concepts are to be reviewed as is the operation of the
decision-making processes in industry. The long-term policy has to be pre-
ferred over the short-term one. A governsent which pursues a policy of con-
trolled growth is obliged to accept a level of unemployment slightly higher
than if it followed a hill-employment policy, and obviously what is involved
there is a difficult trade—off in a democratic political system. One may
wonder in this respect whether countries such as Britain or the United States
are not suffering from a democratic system incapable of highlighting the
benefits of long-tens policy: The Keynesian techniques of full-maployment
policy, used by American Democratic Party officials as well as those of the
British Labor Party to reactivate their economies, have all ended up in
failures.

20
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is also appropriate to review government-business relations. All govern—
ments intervene in the economy and all pursue an industrial policy, even if
the term has a bad press. But their economic nodels are very different.
These differences must be analysed and one should question what is done in
the realm of conversion, support to sectors in decline, and advanced tech-
nology policy. Hithin the seem the interrelations between distribution
structures and industrial production structures also deserve thought. Let
us take by way of example the role of multinational corporations: Germany
and Japan both possess powerful international networks of business firms
which permanently provide inputs to their industrial setups regarding demand
trends, relevant markets, promising sectors, new sources of competition, and
other data. It is in this connection that one can truly talk of cybernetics.
These multinationals are incidentally different in the two cases. In Japan
they are integrated into the major groups which use them as instruments for
controlling the econow over-all. In contrast, in Germany fairly independent
concerns may be involved which have contractual relations with small- and
medium-sized businesses. I believe that these multinational corporations
represent an essential means to bind the fabric of the small- and medium-sis
businesses to foreign markets. These smaller firms, lacking the financial
means or the critical volume to be able to afford commercial networks abroad,
should take advantage of collective structures of this type. Yet, there is a
total absence of such an arrangement in Frame. It is necessary to find anal-
ogous ones adapted to our industrial model.

Additionally, it is necessary to review the structure of our economy and the
respective roles played by the major groups and the small- and medium-sized
firms. The possibilities are several. For example, Japanese industry is
organized around four maJor conglomerates which, either thrOugh their direct
affiliates or through their subcontracting network, control the entire economy.
In contrast, in Germany there is a much more liberal structure in which the
major groups coexist with the independent small- and medium-sized businesses.
Financing structures and the role of banks also assume considerable importance.
In Japan banks are the industrial policy instruments of the large concerns
while in Germany the banks are much more decentralised. In trance this banking
structure, undoubtedly too highly centralised, makes the funding of small- and
medium-sized firms difficult. Finally, while in the 1960's we effected a cer-
tain amount of consolidation, this has often ended up establishing conglomerates
without true industrial rationale rather than with vertically well-integrated

channels .

Before 1930 it was the reign of the microeconomics of Adam Smith and of the
classical economists that held sway. Keynes then taught us the science of
macroeconomics and the techniques of aggregate intervention, but he did not
speak of industrial policy. To offset the recession, I believe that we should
now concentrate on an intermediary level, that of economic sectors, of the
linkages among economic units, on what we now begin to call mesoeconomics, use
the best that competition has to offer, the most efficient thing that govern-
ment intervention provides as a function of our traditions and national peculi-
arities. The market economy is a conceptual abstraction which does not have

21
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

the same meaning in Japan, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United States,
or the 'Ihird world. Let us know how to invent a French industrial model.

Question: in. great dependence of France on raw aaterials is aggravated
according to your analysis by the fact that French industry has not achieved
the critical volume to fight competition. Compared to the resources available
to hence, does this not constitute a handicap that is truly difficult to

overcome?

Answer: We are considerably behind, and catching up involves unemployment,
structural changes, geographic changes too, and thus time and suffering.

The Prench are surprised that after 30 years of very strong growth things
should deteriorate. But the growth levels of this period were possible only
by virtue of our enormous lags of productivity in agriculture before. An
entire bow of undereaployed laborers in that sector turned to industrial
work during these 30 years.

We have experienced soae industrial success and France is beginning to carve
a niche for itself in some international oligopolies. In the automobile
sector, for example, we occupy first place on the European market. We are
also very competitive in the aeronautical and professional electronic sectors
in the world market. Mover, we in fact lack critical volume in many sec-
tors and this is what determines the nature of the effort that we must under-
take.

It will be necessary that we concentrate more some of our production in saJor
French multinational corporations. To be sure, economic concentration is not
a panacea, and in those sectors which have a highly fraaented market--for
example, machine tools--this does not represent a sound solution. In such
sectors which are the most numerous, small- and medium-sized firms excel and,
while continuing to be small, can easily become competitive at the inter-
national level. In contrast, other sectors mandate larger sisensuch as in
the chemicals sector or in the agro-food sector. So far in France we have
strived especially to do business in ogre-foodstuffs through cooperatives
whereas this sector with advanced technologies, marketing and distribution
networks at the international scale.. .. It is truly scandalous that we used
to export unprocessed agricultural products abroad and then imported them in
processed form at three times the cost. That is why mture structural policies
must contribute both to reinforce the major groups in acne particular channels
and to improve the environment of the small- and median-sized firns to enable
them to better play their role in the redeployment process (financing, export,
ensconcement abroad, and so on).

Question: Is it then a matter of making businesses once more the principal
motive power of economic activity?

Answer: Precisely; responsibility for redeployment is to be placed on busi-
nesses. In part we must seek our inspiration in Germany which has a model
that corresponds fairly closely to our European temperament. This means that

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
mentality. Having experienced in
French still look dam

on- industry end view but:
Ante. It is neceeeery

to see that it is the
the sreeteet mount of difficul
re difficul 1‘

‘3!
t or them to lay oft wax-here, to
e their Impenet- labile, an
why one or the eeeentiel take

ee

d so 9 . met in
today is to seek methods of [worker] partici-
pation and lf-Iunageuent empathic with mobility and
hue or the marketplace were

1 their force while
toents that have to be ecce

pted in non cues,
the long tern cannot elven be
interest of the short te
FOR OPHCMI. ”8! ONLY

Answer: 'lhis policy, initiated in part 6 months ago, must first of all be

a policy of liberalisation and of making businesses more responsible. 'lhe
policy must also make it possible to reaedy the structural weaknesses of

the French econow. The government can play a role in the eliminati of
ntsnerous archaic features which subsist, but it is now appropriate to con-
sider that priority must devolve on industry. Indeed, some of the weaknesses
of the industrial sector are directly connected with the protectionism pur-

sued for 30 years now in other sectors.

Additionally, measures are certainly to be taken in the banking sector. The
banks still evidence too many conservative behavioral aspects, putting too
much stress on guaranties and dming back when it comes to assuming indus-
trial risks. This stems in part from imperfect competition among banks and
such deficiency is incidentally imputable to the government and its system
of regulating credit and the financial market. It is thus necessary to make
more flexible the rules of competition among banks by eliminating their
cartel-like aspect, that is, by insuring the maintenance of large national
banks capable of having networks abroad and by increasing the number of
regional and local banks which are not responsible to central organs and
which could assume risks more easily, even at the price of bankruptcies in
case of unwise decisions. He in France liVe with the memories of the tram
of the pre-ﬂorld "or 1! financial scandals and that is one of the reasons
which explains the straitJacket of regulations which limits recourse to the
savings of the public. If the price to be paid is the difficulty for small
and dynamic firms to secure credit, I believe that it is an excessive one:
The borderline between banking risk and industrial risk is badly positioned.

1 return to the liberalisation of firms in order to mention that this cannot
occur without a liberalisation of the conditions of dismissals. lb mitigate

the rules in this area means to improve unemployment compensation. mt while
the protection of the unemployed worker is a collective responsibility, it is
up to the cos-unity and not to businesses to assume it lest their competitive

position be undermined by forcing them to employ an excessive number of workers.

compensation. I believe, for exaaple, that it would be possible to increase
the number of French workers abroad. they young unemployed workers would not
refuse to go and work for 2 or 3 years in a French firm of the ‘lhird World if

Our industrial policy should also be premised on mobility to a greater degree.

This involves a significant revamping of our policy of territorial improvement.
An industrial nation is one where some regions have a fairly dense industrial
fabric. In this respect the Paris industrial center undoubtedly constitutes

2‘
[OR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an antimodcl because of its excessive concentration. In contrast, the
industrial entities of southern Germany are fairly good models: Goran cities
and villages are fairly close to each other and seweral industries are enscon-
ccd in the countryside. When a firm folds, it is easy for the workers to find
employment in another. But in such French regions as Brittany, southwestern
France, or the estuaries, highly scattered industries experience such diffi-
culty in rcdeploying. When a plant closes in a region where it is the only
one within a radius of 30 kilometers, it is a catastrophe without any solution.

The policy of territorial improvement must thus be revamped and premised on
the livable nature of population centers. Hhile for the past 20 years the
goverment has pursued a housing policy under the pressure of events and
scarcity and has built fairly haphazardly (low-cost housing, close suburbs,
and so on), it is now time to seek the means of a modern industrial model and
to put the stress on its qualitative aspect (individual homes, urban develop-
ment, and so on). It is necessary to resist the temptation to defend a rural
model which belongs to the past. A modern society llVeB in cities which offer
a certain number of amenities. And while the city rubs shoulder with the plant
in the hell of the collective subconscience of the French people, it is appro-
priate on that score, too, to proceed with the elimination of outdated ideas
and to look the future in the face.

France's industrial policy is also a policy in some weak sectors such as that
of mll- and scdium-sised businesses that we should better equip for the era
of internationalisation. I have already mentioned this. Industrial policy

is furthermore a policy of innovation and a fundamental point is involved here.
Innovation in the field of products is the fact of essential specialization
among developed countries. Rose who know how to plan new products, to deVelop
them on the whet, and then to export them will be those who will become more
affluent in the future. It is thus necessary to acquire in Very short order
new product sectors and to a! ndon no less rapidly sectors turning out products
which have become cosnonplace or outdated. This implies making a special
selection of means of industrial research, removing those processes which check
innovation, encouraging cadres and engineers to establish their own firms, and
setting up adequate mechanisms to this end. This is not one of the least
important aspects of an industrial policy.

Question: For you this industrial policy--you have mentioned it more or less
implicitly on several occasionsncannot occur without some policy of social
progress. lbwever, can the developments that you envision not be analysed as
a return to capitalism, if not pure capitalism at least a very tough, inexor-
able variety for all the marginal businesses?

Answer: Yes, definitely. But one should take care not to confuse things.
One could perceive in the model that I propose a socialism compatible with
freedom of trade and of the market place, one which is still the essential
source of not only our economic but also our political and social progress.
It entails effectively the elimination of deadwood. 'ihe government should
remse to smort businesses in trouble lest it stymie the process of adJust-
aent. By means of such support short-term gains are obviously achieved but a

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY

duper is put on the resllocetion of resources end in the lest enslysis one
because involved in short order in British "stop end go"-type vicious circles.
‘lhe sbendoment of sectors end businesses which ere no longer csspetitive is
the direct consequence of the increesed responsibility of fires. If you ere
responsible end free you ere slso responsible for peying for your feilures.

ibwever, I believe thet the introduction of s certsin degree of self-
eensgenent, thet is, the control by workers of decision asking cen help
reduce these risks. Indeed, numerous feilures heve bed Isnsgenent es their
sense. Now, if csdree or trsde unions hed their input in the sensgenent of
their fine, sons nessures would perhsps be sdopted lore eesily. In my
opinion socisl policy does not seen defending desdwood. Quite the contrery,
such protection constitutes e long-term sntisocisl policy. Hhet eust be
sociolized is the huen orgsnisetion known es the fire through reform of the
enterprise rether then the economy through the plenning of investnents. For
no plenning eeens stretegy but this does not signify thet the goverment mt
itself effect the redeploytsent.

Question: Do these prospects sets you optinistic without reservetions ebout
the future of the French economy?

Answer: A yesr ego the prospect of e victory of the Joint Program eede ee
pessimistic. Indeed, the left, es it wes constituted st the tile, would

heve pursued e typicelly defensive policy. It would heve stimneted con-
suption, increesed socisl trensfer peynents, end supported losing operstions.
Netionelisetions would heve obvieted the closing of sees pleats. which inci-
dentelly constituted the unspoken goel of sole of those fevering thet neesure.
Short-tern economic reectivstion would heve eede it possible to reduce unse-
ployeent souewhet, but the country would very soon heve witnessed e foreign
trede deficit end e recessionsry spirel with ell the politicel instsbility
thet thet implies. One could sey thet, considering the difficulties of the
French economy end the degree of dissetisfection, we eluded such e risk only
through s nirscle. But psrheps, too, there wee en merensss usong the public
of the true problus of reel strstegy thet heve to be fsced despite the hendi-
cep thet the neJority perty's 20 yeers in office constituted end despite the
new espect which the left hed then essused. People still one to see thet it
wes ncccsssry to choose between the perpetuetion of s "stop end go”-type
process end efforts st sdJusteent, hsrsh ones but which probsbly constitute
sound long-tern policy.

I so therefore e little lore optimistic todsy. While the ecoweic policy
pursued by the gowerrnent is sound policy, I would however reproech it with
not doing enough in the sociel reele, neuely, es fer es the decentrslisstion
of decision-asking is concerned. In contrest, it would be necessery to teckle
Bocisl Security with courege end en innoveting spirit. Mt esch thing con
cone in its tile. whet is involved here is not sosething thet csn eesily be
esteblished. Progress hes been reelised: m libersliution of businesses,
the refusal to support fires in trouble, opposition to stimleting the econow
[excessively], progresp in reducing spresds in incoee (low wsges), i-proved

26
FOR ORION 083 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

condition of manual laborers, policies that are less favorable to rare-era
and merchants than in the past, and other measures. Obviously, such remains
to be done: Tax reform, Social Security reform, tax on capital gains, and
especially the economic and political decentralization of decision-mung.
But perhaps all of this can be accomplishc only with the participation of
the Socialists in the soVermentna sacred unity for the sake of the economic
stmggle, as in 1911: with France's conversion to a war economy. um. I
believe that we have taken the correct path, I am not at all sure or being
optimistic in the long tern. Indeed, we are not done vith our difficulties,
notably regional economic difﬁculties, and vs shall olvays haVe elections
coming up. with a democratic system such as that of France, it must be some--
thing of a miracle to be able to pursue an unpopular policy in the long run.
But one must place one's hope in French democracy to find the scans of the
French industrial model adjusted to the realities of the your 2000.

COPYRIGHT: Association Internationals Futuribles 1979

2662
cso: 3100

27
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

COM! suction M03

mmsrmmmmnsmm

Paris VALBUIS ACTUBLLBS in Ranch 26 Her 79 pp 16-17

[Text] "Ravine the direction in which the atate ie going“: thie word of
order cane iron the preaidant o! the republic to the Council of hiniatere

on 28 l’ebruary. The teen day. Mr lay-cud barre wee addraaeing a pereonal
letter to each or the aaabere oi the goveruent. He publieh it in MI. we
have euphaeired ite eeverity.

"Subject: Preparation of the 1980 budget.

"the tiret budgetary labora for 1980 ehow that the projected financial law for
1980 will preeent very aerioua problele for the public finances. A einplc
reetateaent oi the 1979 credite. colbined with the rate of growth in volune
which it ie poeeible to anticipate today. ie iapoeeible becauee oi the large
deficit that it would cauae.

”That in why at thia meant when preparation of the budget in beginning, I
met peraonally cell your attention to the naceeeity of aeatering the diffi-
cultiea which etate iinancee are paaaing through.

"In apite of the etiorta made in 1977 and in 1978 to limit the budget deficit
to a eupportable amount for our econoly and coapatible with the deienae of
our currency. the elowdown in atomic expaneion ia emrely reducing receipts
while the expeneea oi ocean-ital and aocial intervention continue to in-
creaae rapidly.

”State borrowing will hencatorth be uaod to pay intereat on the etate debt.

"This aituation. which explain the difficult poaition that our country haa
bun living in aince 197‘ cannot be treated with indifference and mat be
progreaaively put right. he the overall fiecel preeeure hee today reached a
very high threahold. a rigoroua effort for elowing down public expaneea auet
be undertaken. thin objective ie eaaantial both on the political plane and
on the econoaic plane.

28
FOR OFFICIAL 088 MY
POI! OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

"The budget ninister will heve sent to you the necessary technical infor-
Iation for the preparation of the proposed finance law for 1980 in this
sense.

”Ac of now. I very especially call your attention to the inortance that I
attach to the following guidelines:

"1. I hope that a budgetary body will be constituted alongside you. This
budgetary body should associate. under your direct authority, high public
eeployees who will have responsibilities both to the central adninistration
and to the outside services of your depart-ant. I can see only advantages in
associating representatives of the budget hinistry in this body.

"This body will have as its niasion to present to you proposals for econoaies.
for aanegeaent changes and for redeployaent of your resources, by engaging the
edainistrntions thenselves in the effort of asking correctione.

"2. In administrations as a whole. the quest for greater productivity should
be systenstic; the econoIic context in which we have been placed ineratively
deosnds a change in our behavior. Respect for financial constraints lust as
of now take the first rank anong the concerns of the edainistrations placed
under your authority and it lust postulate a permanent revision of ends and
nuns. The redeploymt of credits is the only realistic technique for
revising the services voted on which often justly constitute one of the topics
of criticises asde of Parliaaent. In this spirit. I consider that the present
level of the effective public agents pernits the adainistration to ensure
their new nissions; furtherlore. suppression of jobs corresponding to the
reduction of certain tasks must take place.

"3. No doubt you will believe it to be necessary or opportune to tn'dertekc
new actions. I an not hostile. with a double condition: that they be along
the priorities already defined by the govern-ent and that you propose real
econonies in order to ensure their financing. These econoniee aunt be sig-
nificant both for their budgetary value and for their political inpect on

public opinion. I will refuse to ermine any request which doee not answer
those conditions.

"lo. I observe finally that Iany proposals for fiscal exonerstions or alle-
vietions are regularly subnitted to at. These are often translated into a
noticeable reduction of budgetary receipts. out of proportion to their
econonic and social interest. Such fiscal neasures do not constitute an
instruaent for intervention: on the one band they are difficult to aeasure
before they are put into operation and they rarely reach the beneficiary
who is initially anticipated. In an inverse senee. the habit has been
acquired of presenting new aeasures 'geuged' on new reeources: this lethod.
which would end up by disasntling the budget. cannot be accepted.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1 therefore hope thet you will be willing to neke theee guidelinee conpletely
reepected in the etricteet wey by the directore end eervice chiefe uho ere
pleced under your euthority.

"At thie noeent when the enterprieee. with the eid of the etete. ere cerrying
out e deep end difficult convoreion in their etructuree end in their ectivitiee.
public opinion would not underetend thet the government it devoted to revising
the wey in which the etete operetee.

”You Iuet pereonelly wetch over the definition of the renuncietione which
theee choicee ilply. An of now it ie neceeeery to ebendon ell Iinieteriel
perticulerien for the eeke of the netionel intereet.

"The etete budget in not continuously creeted throughout the yeer. lte
execution ehould be cerried out with reepect to the initiel epproprietione
voted by Perlielent. It ie not proper thet I ehould be conetently teken up
during the yeer by requeete tending to overflow the budget end thue to work
outeide the neceeeery ennuel dietribution in order to eeeter the evolution of
the public finencee. I believe thet it doee not belong to the eervicee of
the different linietriee nor to the eeebere of the ninieteriel cebinete to

engege or to contrect worke thet would leed to the uneveilebility of voted
credite.

"The budget of your depertnent in e pert of the budget of the notion. Govern-
eentel eoliderity ie therefore eeeentiel for the proper execution of the etete
budget.

"Reynond lerre"

COPYnlchz 1979 "Veleure Actuellee"

12.116
cso:

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY 830710? ITALY

1.861111%" 0! MW'S SPECIAL PMCBS' QUESTIG‘BD
981 Acceee'e Coeeenre
none AVA?!“ in Itelien 20 Feb 79 p 10

[Article by Pelco Accene. nenber o! perlieeent reeponeible for the Defenee
Section of the P81 leederehip: "Heny Queetione heurdine the Arned
Porcee‘ Speciel Unite")

[Text] Proe the ESPRESSO we heve leerned thet e epeciel unit. eede up of
hevy reidere, received ordere to etend by to eeeeult the hotel of pre-
eued red brisede eeebere et Selice “terse. Thie hee been confined by
the einietere of deienee end internel effeire in their reporte to the
joint co-ieeione held in the Cheeber of Deputiee leet Pebruery 9. Pro-
ll. comm DELLA 3m. deted Sudey the llth, we nou know thet nueeroue
epeciel unite of the ereed forcce epreed throughout the lend exiet. Proe
ll. 010m mo. deted the 16th. we heve leerned to the exietence of e
”chengin; guerd" eeon; the epeciel unite (but we do not know who the
nonco-ieeioned officer-in-cherge ie?) Perlieeent eleo hee leerned of
the exietence of theee epeciel unite iron the newe eedie. Sone cell it
routine edeinietretion. For ue. on the other hend, thie eignifiee greve
unknowne. an ordered the eekeup of the epeciel unite? mo provided the
funde for the new equipeent? In which budget do they eppeer? ﬂhet eort
of legel treining heve theee nen received? If they ere killed. whet bene-
fite ere provided? Are they volmteere or drefteee? le the uee of the
unite of the erned forcee celled for when replecin; the epeciel unite of
the Cerebinieri end the police even if the letter were to be eveileble?
Ileve the epeciel mite of the erned forcee been eet up beceuee thoee of
the Cerebinieri end the policy ere not euﬂ‘iciently rclieble? line one
bothered to find out it e perticuler ideology ie exhibited in con-on within
theee epeciel groupe? ‘l'he ninieter. in the Deienee Co-ieeion, in hie 9
Pebruery reply eteted. 'eccordin; to the co-ieeionere' bulletin, thet:
"The lew et preeent in force conteine nueroue none which cell for the
poeeibility of uee of the creed torcee with regerd to the eeintenence of
public order if the nor-l forcee of public eecurity in en energency ere
incepeble of cerryins out their reek. provided the court hee ieeued euch
e requeet." New. with reurd to the plenned reid et Selice Teree. it

31
m OFFICIAL 08! our
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cannot bo oaid that that woo a cooo in which tho "apocial unito" of tho
Carabiniori or tho polico could not ho callod on. Alao, it connot ho
otatad that tho uoo of tho unit wao ordorod by tho court. in viow of the
fact that it woo hoot totally in tho dark about tho whole opiaodo; thio
hao boon confirnod by tho niniotoro thonoolvoo. 'l‘horoforo. waa tho uoo of
tho bold raidoro at Salico Torno logitinoto? According to no it woo not.
and furthornoro. it roiooo vory gravo quoationo. along othora. ao to why
tho Carahiniori and tho polico woro totally loft out. Tho polico. through
thoir union roprooontotivoa. havo oxprooood doap concorn ovor what hoo ot-
currod. lut. oo wao otatod. abovo. tho probloa io ovon growor and doan
with tho critoria which aro to bo uood rogarding tho uoo of ailitary
forcoo. During tho diocuaoiono of Law 382. nouns ARI) PRINCIPLES OF
Hm'rm DISCIPLIRI. tho propooor of tho bill hiooolf. Sogni. forcofully
oado known hio worrioo rogording tho uoo of arnod forcoo not cloarly opollod
out in tho conotitution. A poooiblo indiroct participation of tho orood
forcoo. ao happonod whon tho attoapt againot ‘rogliatti tool: placo or on
tho occaoion of Horo'o aurdor, hoa boon juotitiod by tho govornnont with
tho clai- that in thooo circuaatoncoo all of tho polico in Italy woro
co-ittod and that a roquoot for tho arond torcoa to cooporato dtroctly
with tho public ordor forcoo woo aado. In tho caao or Salico Torao. thio
cortainly wao not tho caoo. Purthornora. tho conotruction opocifioo that
tho uoo of tho orood torcoo io oooontiolly ono diroctod abroad ond not
inoido tho country. with rogard to what tho ltolion conotitution roquiroo
of tho ornod torcoo, it io worthwhilo to rocall what conotitutionaliot
Giorgio Loabardi wroto on tho oubjoct in hio work, ”Contribution to tho
Study of Conotitutional Dutioo." oditod by Guiffr‘d, pogo “2: horo tho
author cloarly nontiono ”tho unconatitutionality of any logiolativc
noaoura whataoovor which. in accordanco with Atticlo 78. introducoo now
linito to objoctivo oituationo and nodifioo, coon toqororily, tho coo-
potonco of tho conotitutionol oyotoo oxcopting iotornal dofonoo cauooo."

Lonbardi gooo on to oay that thio would rotor to "a noro widooproad ond
ponotrating concopt of public ordor, in nouay rolatoblo to factual oituo-
tiono which owo thoir origin in ovonto of a foroign naturo linkod to tho
duty of dofonoo." According to tho GIORNALZ mo coluniot, tho ornod
forcoo ouot act unhindorod. bo it in poaco or in war, diroctod abroad or
to tho intorior. Ho ooy no to thio thooio. It oay bo truo that in oono
countrioo of Latin Aurica. Argontino for omla, tho arood forcoo

ore tho guarontoro of tho conotitution: but wo do not occopt tho
hrgontinian nodoll Nor do wo agroo with thooo who out an oyo at thio
oodol.

32
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Comandoea Stationed in La Specie
Milan CORRIBRB DBLM 9m in Italian ll Feb 79 p 2

[Article by Pabririo Certo: "Antiterrorint Coo-endoa Operate Throughout
ltely"]

[Text] Italian public opinion. becauae of the recent ovcnta of the Moro
cane. hee. with a great deal of curioaity, becoee intereated in a epecial
mit of the navy (with ite traditiona. ite 50-year experience. ite er-
ceptional preperetion acquired during yeera of hard work) which hee been
choeen for very riaky actiona and thua for operationa ageinat epecilic
ecte of terrorian.

He will not diacuee whether thie choice ia wiae or not. certain in our
conviction ea we are that the etete auet defend iteelf with the beet it
hee at ite diapoael egainat any ettack. be it iron within or iron outeide
the country.

The "bold raidera” of the navy are not a unit thrown together in a abort
period of tine: thie unit ia eade up of een who have placed their whole
at the diapoael of the etete. including their livea. And the etete hee
the duty, if it hee nothing better. to uee their hlep. be it in tiea oi
war. ea hee happened. or in tine oi peace.

Por thie reeaon we do not egree with a unber or parliaeant o! the Deienee
Co-iaaion. who hee aoea doubta regarding the opportunity oi uaing thie
unit due to the fact that there already exiat 160.000 nan betwen
Carebinieri and public aecurityﬂorcae.

The reeeon behind thie dieaent ia very ainle. The ceuae or the diecueaion
ia terroriae. in all ite form. including ite eoat aavage end aenaeleea.
Tarrorian ia fought by prevention, by continuoua and eilent work (above
all. without the deaire to be ieeoue end eake the headlinaa) which ie
being carried out by 81881 and by 8180! and finally by e capillery net of
nan end equipeent ee poaaeeaed by the Carabinieri end the police.

when eoeathing ia needed i-ediately. one. for any reaaone. euet not and
cannot ignore half a century of experiencee and dacadea of training or
aen and equipeent. One euet uaa that which ia the beat and neereat at
hand.

Obvioue aecurity reeaona do not per-it the revealing of aecreta of theee
unite; we can only eay thet they have no reeeon to be envioue o! the beet

in the world (auch at the SAS couandoa iron the United Iingdoe or the

ass 9 iron Heat Gerany. the feeoua leetherheada). Theee choeen een con-
tinue the tredition of thoee who were able to dieeble the world'a eightieat
and beat erned fleet. at Gibraltar. Alexandria, Sude. Helta, etc. with
claaaicel actione involving extre-ely bold reida. whoee aucceee necaeeitated

33
FOR OFFICIAL 08! our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the prior neutrelieetion of “the world'e eoet cepeble intelligence ere,
ee the Intelligence Service. All of thie cennot end nuet not be
forgotrtn.

Toduy the nen who neke up thie unit heve only one logieticel or edeinie-
tretive beee et Le Specie. but they ere ective throughout the whole
penineule. in the treining grounde which renge iron the Alpe to the oceen
floor. They ere ell young. enpert eountein clinbere, frognen, end pere-
troppere. Their mit ie of ebout bettelion eiee. end eoet of thee ere
reidere originelly iron the "Sen Herco.” They ere ecreened ee to phyeicel
etetue by Nevy doctore. given heelth teete every 90 deye end every 3
eonthe they underteke very etrenuoue teete euch ee eurvivel coureee.
elone, et eee or in the nounteine.

Their pey ie the use ee thoee of the eeee renk in the erly end treining
tekee plece in the noet diveree locelitiee. both in the North end the
South. They ere eble to go into ecticn inedietely, enywhere in ltely.
in e eetter of houre. All the rent ie ”top eecret."

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Bditoriele del "Corriere delle Sere" S.A.s.

liilitery Diecipline Lew
Roee ll. 610W NUOVO in ltelien 16 Feb 79 p 5
[Article by Guido Atrolini: ”The Beidere Ageinet the Red Brigedce”]

[Text] lane, 15 Feb—The eoet recent developeente of evente linked to the
. nurdcr of Aldo horo end hie bodyguerde hee eleo brought the nevy reidere
into the lieelight. lt ehould be reeeebered thet eccording to the

erticle in the weekly eelting reference to the preeuedly repentent led
brigede eedter, the nevy'e bold reidere ehould heve eurprieed end cep-
tured the heede of the led brigedee eeeting et e ville in Selice Teree.

Thie tect eppcered unueuel, end would heve been peeeed over ee en ieeginery
febircetion hed it not been coniireed by einietere Rognoni end luffini,
when leet Iridey they reeponded to e eeriee of perlieeentery queriee
heetedly preeented to th- on the occeeion of the joint eeeeion of the
lnternel Alfiere end Defenee co-ieeione. Actuelly, the epeciel unit

hed been pleced on elert; ite deploymt end uee would heve be“ perfectly
legitieete-_-it wee expleinedu-beceuee the uee of the erned forcee for the
neintenence of public order ie celled for by etete iew. upon requeet by
civilien euthoritiee with reeponeibility eeeu-ed by officere of the
Judiciel Police.

One doee not heve to go too fer beck to reeeﬂer thet on the very occeeion
of horo'e kidneping. eilitery pereonnel vere widely ueed under tbeee pro-
vieione end conducted eeerchee end eenned checkpointe without e dieeenting

3‘
M omcm. I183 ONLY
roe orrrcm. use om

voice being raised. The possibility that the navy raiders could be used
against the Red Brigades, however. jolted in particular socialist parlia-
mentary members Mancini and. as was to be expected. Accano. Accams,

among others. not satisfied with the answer he got on Friday, the other day
resubmitted a query in which. after indignantly calling into question the
presumed political preferences of the raiders. asked "how is the life“
the young career military men taken care of . men who certainly do not

want to see theasalves as Carabinieri or police substitutes who. by the
way, are given economic and legal guarantees in case of accident."

Also. not to mention the fact that the raidders, (they do not number over
100) have been used at length and at serious risk of their lives very re-
cently in the Punta Raisi body-recovery operation without Accsme's deigning
to showconcern over their health. To that should be added the fact that
that the socialist deputy is considered the major force behind the "horns
of Principle on Military Discipline" (Law No 382, dated ll July 1978) of
which Article 1 states that: "The task of the army. navy, and air force
is to assure, in cmliance with the oath taken and obeying given orders.
the defense of the country and take part in the safeguarding of those
free institutions and the co-on national well-being in case of public
disasters."

The ease concepts, more or less. are reiterated in Article 2 where the new
oath is spelled out, which binds military personnel to "carry out, with
discipline and honor" all the duties of one'w own state "for the defense
of the country and the safekeeping of free institutions." Now. that

the Red Brigades are a public calamity is affirmed by many; any also

hold that they are at war with the state. There is, however, no one who
denies that they want to subvert free institutions. If one cannot use

the military for doing what they solemly swore they would do, why should
one pretend that they pledge their oaths in the first place?

Not to raise polemics with the aforementioned deputy (who is very well
aware of these matters, having been a naval officer and former head of the
Defense Co-iseion). but rather by way of information to our readers:

the use of navy raiders in antisabotaga and antiterrorist operations and
against air piracy was forecast some time ago, more or less at the time

of the blitz of the "leatherheads" st Hogadiscio. The very Lufthansa
aircraft which was so brilliantly recaptured by the Gernan supercope in
Somalia had lauded for some hours at Piumicino airport.

He did nothing to try to detain it, despite a specific request from

Donn. Officially. it was said that there had been a misunderstanding. Ac-
cording to semiofficial sources the 06-9 was let go to avoid any diffi-
culties and also perhaps because of a sensing that the Germans were plan-
ning their coup de main.

The explanation provided by other qualified sources, however, is that
Italy did not posess men who could bring about a surprise attack on their
own, thus avoiding a loss of face by the government.

35
POI! ORIGIN. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We said that sen trained for that very special task were not available.
but that is not exact. The personnel was there, but it was not readily
at hand. Not only were there the navy raiders but at the state's service
were other shilar groups. cowoeed totally of volunteers, in the para-
troopers. the Lagunari, the San Harco Battalion, the Carabinieri and in
the Public Security forces.

Each of these groups, with its training and equip-ant could have been very
well used in special and exceptional operations. It was thus necessary to
coordinate their use because quantitatively the various units were at

that tine not nuaerous. The creation of other special, unique groups
cowosed only of supertrained Carabinieri and policemen would have led to
a proliferation of siailar units. nanely, to a useless and considerable
increase in expenditures, keeping in aind the very high cost of training
plus the difficulty in procuring very highly qualified personnel to be
used in that ltind of work. in and of itself exceptional (here used with
the naming of "unforueen" and "irregular").

Turning back to the navy raiders and thus Salice Tar-e. They really were
ready to take action: the alert system which had been set up to appoint
turns for the state's arsed forces indicated that they ”were up." (Na-
turelly how this peraanent revolving guard is regulated is not known.)
They would have carried out their mission, without the "ands" or "buts"
brought up by Accele. Article 52 of the constitution states that "the
defense of the comtry is holy duty of the citizen." In peace and in
war: it is not necessary to sake distinctions, especially in cases of
energency.

9209
050: 3106

36
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’IClM. 038 ONLY

COW“ 833110” MD!"

"1101.!“ PM MUST mm m ORDIRS 30“! 1'0 SURVIVB
Stockhol- WCWS APPARER in Swedieh 1 Her 79 p 18-19

[Text] Aeee'e [swedieh Generel Electric Corporetion] nucleer power progre-
ie ebout to end up in the one deedend ee Sub-Scenie'e Viggen. The donee-
tic nerltet ie elnoet eetureted. end exporte ere being confronted with polit-
icel end finenciel obeteclee. "But in the long run we ere on the right
couree. It ie e netter of hiberneting until thinge right theneelvee.“
'roreten Lindetron, the Ieneging director. eeye. ‘l'he queetion ie etill if
Aeee cen efford to hibernete. If not. whet ie the elternetiwe?

In two yeere Aeee'e profit hee decreeeed to only e third of whet it wee
during the l976 boon. Behind thie decline ie not only the bueineee cycle
but eleo the inpect of eignificently nore eerioue etructurel problem.
Developncnte in the energy field heve teken turne which no longer coincide
with the couree Asu elected. The etrenuoue efforte of the fir- during the
l960'e end l970'e in energy technology ie on the wey to becoIing e eort of
Viggen probleu for Men.

"Ihrketing conditions heve chenged in the leet yeere eo thet et preeont
we ere too heevily engeged in our power eide," Aeee'e neneging director.
'l'oreten Lindetron. eeye. "lie ere on the right couree for the long run.
It ie juet e letter of eurviving until thinge ere beck to nor-e1."

Both ‘l'oreten Lindetron end hie boerd cheir-en end predeceeeor ee neneging
director, Curt llicolin, ere convinced thet thie will occur. "the energy
eituetion in the world, together with the receeeion, hee reduced inweetnent
in energy equip-out. A higher rete of inveetnent. eepecielly in Sweden,
end e better coet picture will give better reeulte for ue, eince then we
will expend to our cepecity," eeye Curt hicolin.

For Aeee to be eble to reech ite cepecity in the energy field, not only
better bueineee conditione ere needed but eleo e eignificent incrceee in
inveeting in electricityobeeed energy equip-cut, e field in which there ie
todey globel over-production. ceueed not leeet by the claw-down which hee
occurred in the nucleer energy progreu of neny countriee. "Here en in-
provenent ie ineviteble when it ie reelieed thet the dependence upon oil
not be reduced-obenefiting electricel energy." 'l'oreten Lindetron eeye.

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1t ie likely thet Torrten Lindrtroe ie correct in hie judgenent, but doee
Aeee hewe the tine end reeourcee to eurviwe until thir "rerurgence" occure'l

1n the leet ten yeere the Aeee coupler bee concentreted etrongly on the
energy rector eo (er er reeeerch end dovelopnent end nenufecturing cepecity
ie concerned. The energy rector her repidly increeeed ite ehere of the
tirn'r eelee. In 1973 energy conetituted 23 percent. of which nucleer
power wee 10 percent. Aree-Aton. heir-owned by the etete, hee been the
rpeerheed. nee-Ato- eccepte nucleer power orderr end then rubcontrecte
the deliverier prinerily to fir-e tied to Aeee.

Up to now Aeee-Aton her been e poor burinerr. Up until 1977 rerultn before
profite heve been negetive, end through 1977 the ehereholdere have inverted
209 nillion 8w. kronor in edditionel cepitel over end ebowe the loo nillion
Kr. which were inverted in the initiel cepitel eherer. The future of A8“

lr not bright. There heve been no new nucleer power orderr eince 1976.
According to Aree-Aton'r neneging director, Lere llelle, en crder ir needed

every 2 or 3 yeere to neintein technicel tonpetence. end in principle one
order per yeer for e reeroneble profit.

One Yerr' e Orece

"We need e new order within 1 to 1 end 1/2 yeere in order to keep going,"
Lerr helle reyr. The conpeny it working herd to get en export order end
her good proepecte for one tron Turkey. In the neentine we ere eeeking to
reduce our dependence upon nucleer power deliverier by neking offere for
conventionel oil end coel fired power plentr.

Until the energy rector inprovee, Aree ie dependent upon develop-cote in
itr other two brenchee: the induetriel end trenrportetion eectore. There
together with the energy rector conrtitute the bechbone of Aeee‘r ectivlty.

The three lege ere. however. rupported by e etrong neintenence rector.
coneirting of three diwirionr: Stenderd Producte, Sui-Febricetion end
Other. The Stenderd Producte' Divirion neher comments for notorr, ceblee,
etc.. pertr which the three nein conponente ure in their production end
which therefore need not be purcheeed e1eewhere.

The Semi-febricetion Divieion prinerily ruppliee eteel to the firn'r nonu-
fecturing unite. while the diwirion Other involvee inrtelletion, wholerele
end rervice rctivitier.

The three-legged orgeniretion wee crerted in the beginning of the 1960'e

in conjunction with Curt Nicolin'r becoeing neneging director. During hie
tenure er neneging director Aeee inverted lerge rune in building up itr own
nucleer energy technology with the goel of Aeee'r Irrtering every rtep end
being rble to deliver conplete unite (including the trenrfer of the produced
energy to the ultinete toner-er).

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The concern'e research and developnent costs Junpod up to lo percent of
the firm's yearly turnover, several percentage points more than interna-

tional coepetitors. For nany yeers Asen has accounted for about 10 percent
of all research in Sweden.

herheting Neglected

.the strong effort in research has led to Asea's being one of the few fires
in the world which can deliver its own nuclear power plant and nesters the
allied technology. At the sane tine Asea neglected-oor was unable-~to
develop the sales organisation which could capitalise on the results of the
firn's extensive research. In 1968 foreign sales accounted for 65 percent
of the turnover. Today it is a few percentage points over 50. which, con-
pared with the international activity of other large Swedish tires. is low.
The share will, nevertheless, increase sore rapidly in the nest few years,
since orders are now 60-70 percent fron abroad.

"Our still low export share steals also fros- cosnercial restrictions on our
products," Curt licolin explains. "In any countries orders for energy
equip-cut are ends on the basis of national preference. Countries such as
England and l’rance are in practice closed narltets; and the United States.
which constitutes perhaps 100 percent of the narltet for energy equip-ant,

excluding the eastern countries, imports just as little as Sweden." 'l'orsten
Lindstron explains.

“Aaea's international efforts will be strengthened through a continued
develop-cot of the aarketing apparatus and by direct investnents in local
production as a aeans to break into otherwise closed countries." ‘l'orsten
Lindston says. Apparently Asaa's nanagenent has underestiaated the diffi-
culty of breaking into these new aarkets. The large industrial countries
have fevored do-estic Ianufacturers and at the best allow only a linited
purchase of parts abroad. The underdeveloped countries, on the other hand,

have preferred conpanies with experience in couplets plants, and up to now
Asea has been lagging internationally.

Rays of Light

what can now iaprove Asea's situation is an increase in orders in the indus-

trial and transportation sectors. here the situation seems to be signifi-
cantly brighter than only a year ago.

"the greatest change during the fall was that we achieved a better utilisa-
tion of our capacity. which was also increased by successive reductions in
personnel. He calculate that just during the first half year under-utilised
capacity cost us about 200 million Kan." Curt Nicolin says. the gross in-
coae for the first half of last year was only 27‘ million KL. but as a

consequence of better utilization during the second half year. it increased
to 460 million Kr. for the last six nonths of the year.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0! tho two diwioiona it io particularly tho induatrial aoctor on which Aoaa
io placing ita hopoa. ”It io hora wo aro going to naka our groatoot offort
in connaction with tho nachino induatry'a naod for ataoring. control and
induatrial oloctronico," Toroton bindatron oaya.

Thooo aro aroao in which Aooa aa a buoinoaa haa groat orporianco. Aaoa it-
oalf uooa ouch oyotooo to incroaoo tho profitability of ita own production.
Thio lod to ita otarting oovoral yoaro ago ita own production or robota and
otooring rolayo. "Our robot and rolay buainoao had had a fina incroaoo of
about 25 porcont yaarly and a good profitability. hora wa ooa a groat potan-
tial and hanco will concantrata on thaao aoctora in tho futuro," oayo Curt
Nicolin.

"onto To Soll atool

Ono ooctor wharo noithar Curt Nicolin or Toroton Lindotron ooo any poooi-
bllity for futura growth ia atool in tho Soul-Fabrication Diviaion. Tho
concorn'a two atool nillo aro Surahan-ar and Kohlowa. both aro doing badly.
In 1977 Suraha-nar loot 126 nillion Kr. and in 1978 it io about the noun.

"1 don’t ooo any futuro potontial for thoao two antitioa," aayo Curt Nicolin.
who would liko to ooa than incorporatad oonawhoro oloo in tho otool induotry.
"Our unita aro too onall to coapoto. Tho problan io alao that thoy ara ao
opocialitod in thoir tango that thoy do not fit diractly into any othar
otaol producar." Toroton Lindotron oaya. At tho nonant thoro aro no dia-
cuaoiono going on with anyono rogarding Surahannar and Kholowa.

Hhilo tho Sani-Pabrication Diwioion io tho firn'a only roal big looaar,

tho other two "oupport divioiono“ Standard and Othor, are the concorn‘a two
noat profitablo unita. Standard Producto in very profitablo in boon tinoa
becauoo toroign aaloo than incroaao groatly. Tho 0thor Diwiaion hao profit-
able onorgy oporation in tho Vbxnan Group.

A big probla- for tho firn'a nanaganant io inflation. Many of tho ordora.
particularly in tho onargy fiald but oloo in tranoportation, can only bo
dofinitely colculatod a coupla of yoaro aftor aigning the order. "Ho aro
not able to put indox clauaoa in our contracto but nuat in tho original
prico calculato for inflation. If wo figuro incorroctly, it affacta our
nargin. Loot yoor our coat calculation wao nora favorablo than anticipatod,
ond thio had a pooitivo affoct on tha roault. Thin yaar it will probably
bo the oppooito." aayo Curt Nicolin. It ia againat thio background that ho
boliovaa that tho i-prowanont in profito in 1979 will bo nodoot doopito
ordora and tho fact that tho utilization of copacity continuoa to ilprova.

Additional aalt in tho wound in tho fact that tho large order for trana-
fornero for Iron in 1977 will bo pootponod. A futuro which dooo not look
too bright for Aaaa if invoat-ant in energy dooa not pick up in Swodon and
abroad.

60
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

 

Key:

1. Aace‘e backlog of ordere 2. total 3. of which nucleer power

 

Key :

l. The laet three yeare of activity have been poor for Area economic-

ally. Profite have decreaood by two-thirde, end "eolvency”'
Ieoliditot] and eerninge on working capitol have eleo fallen.
"Veckane Afferer'e" for "eolvency" end returns ere lower than

thoec calculated by Aeee. This reeulte from using different

lKoy continued on following page]

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accounting prlnclplee. Thur. Aoee glvoo lte eolvoncy at cloeo to

30 percent end rotorne on "earning-de-endlng cepttal' et juet 10
percent for 1977.

Sales in Mllllone of Rt.
Bornlnse to Mllllone of Kr.
"Solvency" [eolldltot]. percent
Return on Total Cepltel. percent

COPYRIGHT: Ahlene 6 Akerlundo tryckerter, Stockholm 1979

6893
680:

3109

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY