APPROVID FOR NIL-ACI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00000R000100040008-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040063-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apas L/8427
30 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE
' (FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040063-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNINC C'dNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l
so April
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE
(pooo 3/79)
Courenrs
Reef Catescrtu Reviewed
3:. #5)”???1‘ff'fifz.T:.’.‘fff'.‘fffi.'."."f¥f‘.’?.“.f?'f’."ff‘:t.........

Deﬁning Pan-ate" for Silage Tranche. 1n leutock Couples”
(A. A. Artyuohtn, at .1.; MY VASIOiNIL, Jun 79) ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 636.2:637.5l7.2

BEEF CATEGORIES REVIEHED
Moscow DOKLADV VASKthL in Russian No I, Jan 79 pp 29-3l

[Article by D. L. Levantin. doctor of agricultural sciences; A. I.
Mgllnets, candidate of technical sciences (Presented by VASKhNIL academician
L. K. Ernst). Ali-Union Order of the Red banner Scientific and Research

institute of Livestock Farming: "The Quality of beef in Various Categories
of Cattle”)

[Text] The production of meat in our country increases from year to year.
The average weight of one head of cattle going to slaughter has been
increasing steadily and in l977 was 352 kilograms. Among the calves over

7 million were heavy, with an average weight of ~07 kilograms. Consequently,
with the growth of meat production there is an increase in its quality.

In addition to a solution to the problem of increasing beef production and
of raising its quality. a no less important problem is that of the more
efficient use of beef for human nutrition while taking into account its
quality. which is based on biological and physiological factors (age. sex,
breed. feedlng conditions and upkeep conditions). with sufficient and full-

value feeding a large role in meat productivity and quality is played by
the age and castration of the animal.

At the present time most of the beef weight (about 70 percent) is obtained
from the slaughter of calves at the age of from I to 2 years and from
discarded cows. There are a series of works on the study of meat

quality (l-S).

we performed comparative tests on meat quality of cows at the age of 6-l0
years and calves i5-25 months old. Muscle samples were taken for the study--
the long back muscle, the shoulder triceps. the semi-tendinous, the

biceps and hip muscles. In them scientists looked for the content of total
nitrogen and connective fiber protein (collagen and elastine), for the
breakdown of collagen during heat application. for the tenderness of the

raw and cooked meat in resistance to cutting and in an organoleptic
evaluation.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The content of connective tissue protein and the resistance to cutting

In three raw muscles (biceps. hip and long back)w.r. higher In the carcasses
of calves than of adult animals. For the semi-tendinous muscle the lndlces
are the same. The triceps of calves have more connective tissue protein
than adult animals (l.32 and 0.86 percent respectively), whereas the
resistance to cutting is higher in the carcasses of adult animals (3.5 and
“.3 kilograms). Almost double (#3 percent) the amount of collagen

breaks down in the meat of calves during frying than in the meat of adult
animals (22 percent).

The hydrothermal resistance of collagen in various muscles of adult animals
is also not uniform. The collagen of the long back muscles and the hip
muscles exhibited the greatest iablallty (the breakdown of collagen was
27.7 and 28.0 percent respectively). The smallest amount was exhibited by
the semi-tendlnous muscles (i3 percent). In contrast. in the meat of the
calves these differences were less obvious and the proportion of broken-
down collagen was significantly higher (35.2. h9.h and 39.0 percent
respectively).

The resistance to cutting in the meat of calves as a result of frying
decreases to the larger degree (by hh-SS percent) and more uniformly
than in the meat of adult animals (by 3-28 percent). In tenderness the
fried muscles of calves were practically uniform (h-h.6 points). whereas
in adult cattle there are significant differences (2.6-3.8 points).

To prepare the meat of adult cattle more heat and water are required, and for
this reason it is more expedient to use it in canning where stricter
regiments of heat processing are employed.

No essential differences among age groups were found in content of extract
substances. in the long back muscles of adult animals there is 0.h2 percent
nitrogen of extract substances; of calves--0.h0 percent. The total amount of
creatine and creatinine is #70 and MMB mg: respectively.

Our tests of meat productivity and quality in the calves of the Black
Spotted, Sinnuntal, Kelmytsk. Shvltsk. Ayrshire. Red Steppe. Yaroslav,
Kholmngor, Red Hunchback. Kostroma and Brown Latvian breeds and their
crosses with meat breeds (castrated and non-castrated bulls) showed that
there are prerequisites for improving the standardization of slaughter
conditions of calves that are to be used for beef production.

The optimal lndlces for meat productivity in animals and for meat quality
are presented in the table.

Animals in such condition pnoduce carcasses with a high yield of the most
valuable scraps (coxofemoral--3h-35 percent) and of large sections of
semi-prepared products (thick and thin edges--h-h.5 percent; inner portions
of back legs-~2.3-2.h percent; external portlons--6.2-6.5 percent; side--
h.0-h.3 percent and shoulder--2.5-3.0 percent). The optimal ratio of

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Optimal Indices of Heat Productivity and Quality In Calves

 
  

    
   
   
   

(5) n”?m‘(‘:’.::“ ‘I‘ Sue-‘3 63.0‘”
Nesta tyne m m—s: m—m
Cone-ens nape (Si:

I Gm." IS—IO IQ—N

' £11335“ "" 9.0—3. i.s—2.s
£10) Cease ole-1. ”- seen

‘I spun. at. M” lie-l. lO—ﬂ
(g; . 3:“ "a - it -I! "—11

-_—-———_—

K
i Index 6. Carcass weight (kg)

2. suilcelves 7. Fat content

3. Castrated 8. in average sample

A. Not castrated 9 In long back muscle

5 Precslaughter weight of animal (kg) i . Protein content (general)

 

meet to bones (h.6-S.2) and high biological (ratio of tryptophan to
hydroxyproiine of 5.1-5.7) and nutritional values of the meat are achieved.

A study of the biological values of the meat of castrated and non-castrated
bulls as concerns the content of full-value and non-full value proteins
using the test organism Tetrahynena pyriformis did not reveal any essential
differences between the aforementioned animal groups.

The greater reaction of the organism of non-castrated bulls to external
stimuli. their heightened exciteability, ore-slaughter stress result In a
greater breakdown of glycogen into carbon dioxide and water with the
release of a great quantity of energy. Because of .thls the meat'of such
animals (according to our data) has a pH of 6. 2- 6. 8, whereas the meat of
castrated animals has e ph value of 5.6-5. 8. Because of the low content of
glycogen in the muscle fiber of non-castrated buiicalves the anaerobic
breakdown of glycogen lnto lactic acid does not result in a significant
lowering of the pH to the required value. This affects moat qualit‘--the
color. water-binding capacity. structural-mechanical properties, orgeno-
leptic indices and resistance during storage in low relative temperatures.

with a high pH value most of the water is bound with the proteins(the meat
of non-castrated bullcaives contains 65 percent bound water, of castrated
builcalves Sb percent). For this reason the fibers become denser, creating
a barrier to atmospheric oxygen. this hinders the formation of the bright
red oximyoglobln and thus there is a reddish color to the meat from the
myoglobln.

3
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tests on the content of reduced sugars (glucoses) showed that their quantity
is closely related to pH. With a decrease In pH value the glucose content In
meat Increases--wlth a pH of 5.7 percent it Is #5 mg%; with a pH of 6.0--

25 mgt. With a ph of 6.8 glucose was absent. In the meat of cows with a

pH value of 5.5 the amount of glucose was 60 mgt.

Taking into account the possibility that during the process of heating
the giucoses can react with free amino acids with the formation of
melanoldines we can conclude that glucose Is very important for the
development of the taste properties of meat.

The studies made by us of the structural and mechanical properties of meat
from castrated and non-castrated bullcalves as well as from cows revealed
some notable differences. especially In toughness and viscosity, which have
a noticeable effect on the technological parameters of the final product.

Thus. the meat of various categories of cattle has different qualitative
properties. For this reason we should bring up the question of the
differential use of beef from different categories of cattle. It Is also
essential to reexamine the existing standards for cattle and meat. which are
based on a visual evaluation of the Quality of the animal and carcass.

The basic Index for an evaluation of calves should be the weight of the
animal on the hoof and the weight of the carcass because there Is a direct
relationship between the weight of the animal and the quality and quantity
of the final product. Such a principle will stimulate the introduction of
intensive methods for fattening animals to bring weight up to 380430
kilograms at the age of lh-IS months. Moreover. the requirements for

the weight of live animals and carcasses must be differentiated according
to sex and the efficient use of meat for consumption. Such a principle

of standardization will encourage an improvement in the quality of the
final product.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Levantin. D. L. "Theory and Practice of Raising Meat Productivity In
Livestock Farming." Moscow. Kolos. l966.

2. Hgiinets, A. I. in Journal on Materials for a Conference of Young VIZh
Scientists. i967.

3. Rostovtsev. N. F.. Cherkashchenko. I.I. "Industrial Crossing in Live-
stock Farming," Hoscow. Koios. I97I.

k. Rostovtsev, N. F., Cherkashchenko, I. i. TRUDY Vilh, 1970, vol 32.

S. Khrapkovskly, A. l.. Hgllnets, A. I. BYULLETIN NAUCNNYKH RABOT ViZh,
1977. issue 53.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Kolos". "Ooklady VASKhNIL", |979

8228
£50: l82b 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 63|.2‘03.2‘l

DEFINING PARMET£R$ FOR SILAGE TRENCNES Ill LlVESTOCl‘. COMPLEXES
Moscow DOKLAOY VASKhNIL in Russian No i, Jan 79 pp Iii-M3

[Article by A. A. Artyushln. A. ll. Pashltov. candidates of technical sciences;
V. A. Savin;(presented by VASKhNIL academiclan L. 0. Prlshchep). Central
Scientific and Research and Planning and Technological Institute of Live-
stock Farming of the Southern Zone of the USSR: "Defining the Parameters

of Silage Trenches for Livestock Complexes"]

[Text] The norms for the technological planning of silage and haylage
storage facilities have defined the nomenclature of silage trenches with a
minimum capacity of 325-3.900 tons. Typical designs of storehouses have
been developed. They are 6-i8 meters wide and the walls are 3-3.5 meters
high. Naturally, under conditions of concentration in livestock farming
the aforementioned areas are not the limit. Large livestock-farming
complexes and farms require the annual procurement of from 20,000 to i50.000
tens or more of silage. Thus. for a feedlot of 20,000 animals using the
silage-concentrate type of feeding, the annual silage requirement is about
l30.000 tons. To procure this amount it is necessary to have 33 trenches
with a capacity of 3,900 tons. \iithout doubt. on such conplexes it is more
efficient to use storehouses with larger capacities and with parameters
exceeding those of the recommended nomenclature.

We are presenting the methodological bases and results of studies to define
the efficient parameters 'd' silage trenches for large livestock farms and
complexes. For the studies the basic data included the type end size of the
livestock complex. the type of feeding method, the daily consumption and
annual need of silage in the complex, the daily duration of feeding, the
terrestrial type of silage trenches with wall construction of reinforced
concrete elements as well as the characteristics of machines and mechanisms
involved in the technological processes of procurement and unloading of feed.

The efficient parameters of silage trenches were defined according to the

criteria for the mlmimum total of proportional expenditures in accordance
with the integral function:

Zuilu+l...+l.)IV—~min (I)

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the limitations:

I. P < "“'W"7"' n, >-n:-s ‘Pe'h

~ .
a

'3. nos-ﬁn. ﬁa. - .._

where 2--totai proportional deduced expenditures (rubles/ton);
V--trench capacity (tons);

in n _
’u-IE‘U:10+8‘§'K‘a.e‘ "deduced expenditures for equipping (rubles);

I H
I._.- Eula-+82%. --deduced. expenditures for technological
"' ' "' processes (rubles);
l and junumbar of .constructive elements (wall supports, floor,
land work) end operations within the technological process
(loading and unloading of trenches. covering feed);

I ' - i u i
aglftm Iglu'm bag".

I
V I
151K" --total operational expenses end capital investments for

construction elements end technological operations;
Eunormatlve coefficient of the effectiveness of capital investments;
i..--expendltures from feed losses (rubles);
F--area of trench cross-sectionimz);
Flux-maximal allowable area of trench cross-section for given

complex (m3);
q--dally silage consumption at co-piex (tons);
p «density of silage in trench (tons per m3);
fl: "productivity of trench loading line (tons per day);
[1 "minimal required pace of daily loading of one trench (tons per day);
$--area of feed surface (m2);
h] and h2--minimal allowable level of daily loading and unloading of
feed (m);

n "productivity of unloading line (tons per hour);

Eudaiiy duration of feeding (hours);
dC-annual silage requirement in complex (tons);
T--agrotechnical schedule for the procure-ent of silage (days).

The equations

x..'- mm. . ‘ m
a - '
“am-J Eva-CHIH- (3)
. 0 (7|
Kaa-Faa'ca- _ “l
6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are used to calculate deduced expenditures for building capital investments
for land work “3.9). wall supports (Kc.o) and floor (Kn-l where

v3,p--volume of land work (n3);

cluproduction costs per i m3 of land work (rubies);

lip-expenditure of basic building materials (concrete, working and
construction fittings):

Clucost of a unit of measure for expenditures of basic building materials;
A.- "area of floor (m1);

c. -- cost of l m2 of floor (rubles).

The work volume and expenditure of materials for all construction elements
of the trenches were determined on the basis of existing norms for planning
similar structures and designs.

Expenditures for technological processes consist of expenditures for filling
trenches, unloading them and for covering feed. The following complex of
machinery is used to complete these operations: for cutting grasses-~the
KS-2.6 silage-harvesting combine in a unit with the 0T-7S tractor; for
transporting the mass from the field to the trench--the ZIL-HHZ-Ssb truck;
for renning the mass-4430 tractors.

The removal of silage from trenches end its loading onto KTll-lo feed
distributors and the transporting of silage from the storehouse to the
feed shop is done using PSK-S loaders if the walls of the trenches are

up to 10.2 meters high. he loaders'ere manufactured for walls over 10.2
meters high. in connection with this their possible costs in the
calculations are made in proportion to the height of the feed clamp in the
trench.

The daily productivity of the complex of machines for loading trenches

was calculated according to the second and fourth limitations of the

entire function and the larger of the two values was used in the calculations.
The productivity of the unloading line was calculated according to the

third limitation.

The nunber of machines for fulfilling technological operations was determined
on the basis of the productivity of technological lines and machines per
hour of shift time--the radius of silage shipments-while taking into

account the volume of feed procured on the farm. Expenditures from feed
losses were calculated according to the empirical fomla:

'I.--1§l-_.I.o1. . (5)

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Block~$cheme of Calculations of Efficient Parameters for
Silage trenches in Livestock Complexes with x.- as the
Parameters of the Trench (Height. Width. and Length)

Key to Sketch:

 

i. Recording of basic data l2.
2. Expenditures for wall supports
3. Expenditures for field complex i3.
‘0. Expenditures for resources for
stacking ill.
5. Expenditures for land work l5.
6. Expenditures for "00"
7. Expenditures for the means of i6.
shipment I7.
8. Deduced expenditures for unloading l8.
9. Expenditures due to feed losses i9.
l0. Deduced expenditures for equipping 20.
ll. Deduced expenditures for loading 2i.

 

Deduced expenditures for
herme'tization

Total proportional deduced
expenditures

No

Comparisonﬂf l is greater than
preceding 1

Yes
Store in computer
Sorting . . parameter values

Check end result of sorting
Print

Stop

where n-I7+1.slv - total losses of feed (percent);
(Zr-deduced expenditures per i ton of feed (rubles);
i.07--coefficient taking into account feed losses during storage.
An analysis of the entire function (I) is made with the tiir-i computer
using a complex mthod as seen in the block diagram. The aim of the
analysis is to determine the efficient parameters of silage trenches for

various livestock complexes.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Recomnded Parameters of Si iage Trenches and
their Economic Effectiveness

 
 
 

           
 
 

Cue-rule
saw" no
t neon-o e
g n

  
  

   
   

  
  

aspen
"0M

(7

 

 

 

. I.” a.» ".0 0.1 1"
a: '1: is w as: =2: a: i353
um ‘I 3 :15: it}: ”I: :1; sggg
me 'E g: 32;. sin at: lilo i‘m
:- 0
ml ::: l g; I |:::|:::|::::|.:;:| .:::.
\
mo m '0 Hi 3:9? 33:? it! ”iii
In iii :::| ‘::::|:::: ::;: ::;: :::.::.
Key:
i. Size of farm (herd) ii. Per year
2. Type of feeding 12. llidth
3. Silage consumption (tons) i3. Height
'4. Recommended trenches ”0. Capital Investments
5. Paramters (meters) is. Daduced
6. Capacity (tons) l6. Capital Investments
7. Expenditures (rubies/ton) i7. Deduced
8 Decrease In expenditures In I8. Dairy farms and complexes
comparison to mun-29 t.2 i9. Fattening complexes
9. Annual economic effect (rubles) 20. Feediots
I . Per day

The table presents the data for trench parameters that provide the fewest
expenditures for the procurement and storage of silage for each livestock
complex.

The studies show the expediency of using trenches that are I8-2h meters wide,
with walls 3.64.8 meters high and a capacity of 3.000-io.000 tons for dairy
complexes. For fattening complexes and feedlot: the respective figures
are 2‘: and 30 meters. “.8 meters and li,(i0’)--l6.000 tons. it would be
expedient to design a load-r of stemmed feeds able to collect feed from a

height of 7 meters in order to fulfill the technological process of unloading
trenches having walls '4.8 meters high. -

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "K0103". "Doklady VASKhiilL", l979

8228 Eli!)
CSO: Ink 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY