APPROVID FOR R-L-AOI: 20°7I°2I°.: CIA-RDPCZ-OOCCORWO"OWOOCZ-C
FOR OFFICIAL USE‘UNLY

JPRS L/8426
27 April 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPI’ENTS
FOUO No. 459

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT EARS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSRIP OP
MTERIALS REPRODUC- HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OP TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPEICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8426
27 April 19

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
rouo No. 459

Coureurs P.

Notion'a Electronuclenr Progrss's Progress Detailed
(REVUB GENERALB NUCLEAIRE, Dec 78) ...........................

French Electronuoloor Program

Status PHR Construction Progron

Fossenheiu Nuclenr Power Plant. by Andre Leblond. Guy Ferriole
Develop-en: Prospects. by Michel Durr

Creys-Hslvllle Power Plsnt
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NATION‘S ELECTRONUCLEAR PROGRAM'S PROGRESS DETAILED
French Blcctronuclear Program

Ports RHVUE CBNERALE NUCLEAIRB in French Dec 78 pp 1050475

[Eex57 The French electronuclear program which began in three
p ases -- 1970, 197%, and 1976 -- succeeding the "graphite—

gas generation," is proceeding in conditions that on he whole
appear to be satisfactory. Of course, there have been some
delays in the start of service of the first power plants
ordered, but it seems that such delays should gradually be
recovered during the next few years. This becomes a parent

in the articles that we are publishing here today. s first
two deg} with the 900 an level of the m @ressurized Water
Reacto process. Special attention is paid to Fessenheim,

the first power plant of this type to start operating in France.
The current status of the 1,300 MW PHR program is described

in the third article, and the last part of our re ort discus-
ses the development of Super-Phenix, the large 1, 00 MW breeder
plant now being built at Greys-Melville.

Status Full Construction Progra-

Paris REVUE GENERALE NUCLBAIRB in French Dec 78 pp M51-H59

[ﬁrticle by 3101 Chardonnet, head of the 900 MW level in
EDF's Equipment Division7

[Text7 The author gives the essential features of the 900 MW
level. He then discusses the current status of all the seg-
ments of this level, going into the issues of procedures,

studies, civil engineering, construction of equipment in
factories, assembly, tests, and the start of service.

Before presenting the current status in the various as sets
of construction of the 30 units or "segments" which e up

X
POR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Within EDP [French Electric Power Companz7 the policy of
developing levels of segments generating a ectric power pre-
ceded the present development of the nuclear program. But the
importance of this program begun in 1970, then greatly accele-
rated in 197k, and the ace e or the problems entailed in studies
and in industrial planning led EDP to make maximum use or this
policy in all the areas involved: standardisation of segments,
grouping contracts for specific equipment and awarding all

the work to the same builder, adaptation of the distribution or
work to this situation etc. The advantages of this standardi-
zation the problems it caused, the methods and resources used
were discussed by Mr Brignon in an article which agpeared in
REVUE GENERALE NUCLEAIRE, issue no 6 of 1977, to w ich the
reader may be interested in referring. Some additional infor-
mation on the definition of the 900 uw level, on its develop-
ment program, and on the distribution of Jobs within EDF's
Equipment Division are given hereafter.

Definition of the 900 NH Level

This level includes 30 units assembled two by two in 15 pairs
or segments, forming four successive series:

1. Fessenheim 1-2 (two segments)
2. Bugey 2-3 and “-5 (four segments)

3. CP 1 type: Tricastin 1-2 and 3-h, Gravelines 1-2 and 3-h,
Dampierre 1-2 and 3-h, Blayais 1-2 and 3-h (16 segments)

k. C? 2 type: Saint Laurent 1-2, Chinon 1-2, Cruas 1-2 and
3-“ (eight segments).

Each pair of segments includes a standard part covering the
essentials,of construction; this is identical for all the
pairs of the same series (with the exception of a few ada ta-
tions to meet local conditions). The actual parts specif c
to each pair concern essentially some or the annex buildings
and in part the cooling circuits whose plans are obviously
closely linked to the site conditions.

2
FOR OFF'ICIAI. USE ONLY
J. MD.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The plans for the Bugey segments are not much different from
the plans for the Fessenheim segments, from which the Bugey
plans are very directly derived. The experience acquired in
the study and construction of these first two power plants
was put to use in the definition of the CP 1 plans, which do
conserve the major lines of the architecture of the earlier
Fessenheim and Bugey power plants, with machine rooms placed
tangentially in relation to the cylindrical reactor building.
For the CP 2 type, the nuclear block part is an identical
reproduction of the preceding ones but the overall layout
of the construction was changed, giving a radial arrangement
to the machine room, which led to a complete individualization
of this part of the facility for each segment.

or the 30 segments, 16 are cooled with open circuits:
Fessenheim 1-2 on the Rhine, Bugey 2-38 Tricastin 1-2 and
3-h on the Rhone, Grawdines 1-2 and 3-: on the North Sea,
Blayais 1-2 and 3-k on the Gironde river.

The remaining 1% are cooled with closed circuits using cooling
towers: Bugey M-S on the Rhone, Dempierre 1-2 and 3-h, Saint
Laurent 1-2, Chinon 1-2 on the Loire, and Cruas 1-2 and 3-k

on the Rhone.

The Chinon and Cruas power plants each deserve mention of a
special feature: cooling with induced draft at Chinon where
powerful blowers (8 MW n all) take the place of a natural
draft; and a special foundation on neoprene studs for Cruas.
This made it possible to avoid special reinforcement of

the structures to adapt construction to local seismic condi-
tions.

Development Program

Fessenheim 1-2: begun in 1970, segments connected to the
network in 1977.

8 av 2-3 and k-S: be un in 1971 se ments 2-3 connected in
1378. Connections ofsh-S scheduled in 1979.

CP 1 type: first segment begun in 197%. Connections scheduled
in 1979 (for the first segment of Tricastin, Gravelines, and
Dampierre), 1980, 1981, and 1982 (the last two Blayais segments).

CP 2 type: first segment begun in early 1976. Connections
scheduled in 1980 (first segment of Saint Laurent), 1981, 1982,
1983, and 198% (the last two segments of Cruas).

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USI‘.| ONLY

Table I presents in detail the connection target dates now
scheduled. All the planning for the various jobs is based

on these dates. The delay in the nuclear rogram which has
actually occurred or which is made officia in the target date
is shown in this table, which for each segment shows the slip-
pages observed or expected. It is believed that these slip-
pages can gradually be reduced from nearly 2 years for the
first segments to zero for the last ones. The last segments

obviously benefit from the research and development done
throughout the entire program.

Oblecllls | oumm I
Trenches Inﬂhu: ; convenes I Glimmer“:
mung. [wasnmmi

Puma 1 Menu
U077
renown 2 Beam
7/10/70
2 Mall“

Bus-y ‘
Bum 3 Mallet
21/9/78
am 4 mm
m 5 01m
Mouth 1 W79
Gravellnu 1 07m
Dunoim I "/70
Trlcosﬂn 2 12m
Orwell!“ 2 01M
Oomph". 2 W
Tumult! 3 07M
Gamma 3 also
St-Lumu BI 10/!)
Tvlcum 4 HM
Oomph". 3 01m-
Bleyah 1 MI
Gnveﬂnee 4 Mt
8:4.qu 82 0001
Dannie". d MI
may» 2 MI
Chlvlon BI 10/”
Chlnon B2 was
Bleyele 3 W32
Blank A 11/62
Cum 1 was
Cnm a cam
Cum a cam
CM. 4 W04

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiﬁ

 

Table I: General Construction Program for the 900 "We PWR
Segments.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

1. Segments

2. Initial target dates for connection

a. Target dates for connection as of 15 Nov 1978
. Slippages '

5. Done

6. Months

Distribution of Jobs within EDF's Equipment Division

The Equipment Region to which the Division assigns the respon-
sibility for building a power plant (this is the "Operational
Region" for this plant) is responsible for carrying out or for
uiding the studies for the specific part of the project and

or managing contracts for this (the civil engineering contract
is the largest of these).

Studies for the standard part, its possible modifications, and
management of contracts (for construction done in factories)
related to this are the responsibility of the Pilot Region,
whose activities cover all the sites concerned.

The five regions of the Equipment Division are involved in
the 900 MW program:

a. The Clamart Region: Fessenheim power plant;

b. Alpes-Lyon Region: Bugay power plants (the Operational
Region and the Pilot Region functions are combined for
these two operations);

c. Alpes-Marseille Region: Operational for Tricastin and
Cruas. Pilot for part of the standard CP 1 (nuclear
block with the exception of the nuclear annex building
and miscellaneous facilities);

d. Paris Region: Operational for Gravelines and Blayais.
Pilot for the second part of the standard CP 1
(nuclear annex building and machine room, essentially);

e. Tours Region: Operational for Dampierre, Saint Laurent,
and Chinon. Pilot for the part of the project specific
to the CP 2 type (essentially the machine room).

)a

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The five regions work in close relation with the two staff

service ,_§EPTEN ermal and Nuclear Research and Plans
Service -and 80F anufacturing Control Servicg7.

The current status of the entire 900 MW level is briefly
presented below. All of the features which form part of this
record are organized under six headings: procedures studies,
civil engineering, construction of equipment in factories,

assembly and installation at the site, and testing and start
of service;

The Pessenheim power plant, the first one in the series, whose
two segments are now operating at 100 percent of their power,
has already supplied over 100 billion kWh. This plant, of
course, occupies a special position. A first operating record
covering a significant period is now possible. This is given
in an article in this issue by Messrs Leblond and Ferriole.

I Procedures

The public utility of all the Operations of the 900 MW level
(nine sites) has been recognized by successive decrees. Most
of the sites needed have been purchased on friendly terms

and now there are Just a few very limited problems remaining
concerning site availability.

At the end of the creation authorization procedure -- which
includes a detailed examination of the preliminary safety re-
port by the Standing Group on Reactor Safety, the creation
authorization decisions for Bugey, Tricastin, Gravelines,
Dampierre, Blayais 1-2 and Saint Laurent were made in succes-
sion by the prime minister. The preliminary safety reports

for Chinon, Blayais 3-H and Cruas are now being examined by the
standing group.

The ministerial authorization process for loading and func-
tioning tests -- including exami tion by the standing group
based on the report of the IPSN uclear Protection and Safety
Institutg7 of the lengthy provisional safety report, including
the provisional operating regulations -- has been completed

for Bugey 2-3 and has begun for Bu ey k-S Tricastin, Grave-
lines, Dampierre, and Blayais 1-2 ithe latest reports were
filed at the end of 1978).

The process opening a new ministerial authorization for the
definitive start of service, including the completion and exami-
nation of the definitive safety report completing the provision-
al report, has been begun for Fessenheim and for Bugey 2-3,

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

II Studies

At the point where things are now, dusign and piuunlng studios
and the essentials of the studies needed for execution have.
been completed both from the point of view of the prime contrac-

tor and research offices which are working together and from
the point of view of the builders.

Along with this, a major research followup program is accom-
pany ng the execution, thus making use of the experience ac-
quired during construction and during the first tests and
start of service; this has led to a significant amount of
modifications made in the plans and in the facilities. This

should significantly decrease after the start of service of the
first few segments.

Then we should mention the studies now in progress:

a. Work on the general functioning tests, with special
attention being given to loading tests (functioning
with control rods of a special type called "gray rods");

b. Studies related to manufacturing anomalies in equip-
ment and constructions' these studies are done to
determine the acceptability of developments which do

not strictly conform to the original instructions,
and include remedies to be used.

0. Special safety and radiation protection studies done
in relation with the standing group (these deal in
particular with the effects of earthquakes and
certain equipment failures);

d. Some research and development activities involving
fuel, etc.

III Civil Engineering Work

The civil engineering work for the nuclear segments, a complex
program considering the high concentration of the work, was
discussed in an article by Messrs Cousyn and Goubin which
appeared in a previous issue of REVUE GENERALE NUCLEAIRE

( ssue no 3 of 1977). The magnitude of the work to be done
can be seen from the following information for the Cruas

power plant the last in the series (four segments separated
by 6-month intervals).

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPI’ICIAI. USE ONLY

Concreto 550,000 m3
Steel 70,000 tans
Casings 1,000,000 m
General clearing and earth work 1.2 million m3
Removal of sand and gravel for

fill and concrete .2 million m3
Maximum workforce 1, 00 workers

These figures do ot include the four atmospheric cooling
towers (100,000 m of reinforced concrete, approximately .

The civil engineering work for the entire 900 MW level is very
well advanced now. It has been completed for the Bugey power
plant and the essential part of the heavy construction work is
about to be completed for the Tricastin, Gravelines, and
Dampierre power plants. At the Grass construction site, where
work started in October 1977, the first concrete was poured in
July 1978 and work on the leak roof wall which precedes the
excavation for segments 3 and the last pair of the 900 MW
level, will begin soon. The end of the heavy construction work
is scheduled for mid-1982 (h years of concrete work).

Considering the matter in greater detail, the situation at each
of the sites is as follows.

Tricastin

By the end 0 October 1978, hb3,000 m3 of concrete of a total
of M55,000 m had been poured. The prestressing of the reactor
buildings of segments 3 and h and the end of the concrete work
on the dome for the reactor building of segment k are being
done now. The metal framework and covers of the machine room
are about to be completed and all the major handling mechanisms
are operational. The secondary frames and the lar or wooden
constructions have been done at the rate of 100, 7 , 50, and

15 percent, respectively, for the four segments. The smaller
woodwork and painting are also proceeding well.

Gravelines

At this site, the situation is almost identical with the situa-
tion at Tricastin. By the end of October 1978, “51 000 m 3f
concrete had been poured of an estimated total of h35,000 m .

The prestressing of reactor building no 3 is being done the
concrete work on the dome for segment b has been started, and

the machine room should be completely enclosed during December.

10
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

n area that was formerly under
on (3 000 000 1113) was preceded by
the pouring of a £111 of 7,000,000 m3

 

11
F0}: OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. "SE ONLY

Saint LaurentIB

\
The earth work’(3.2 million m3) has been completed and the
concrete work iar this pair of segments is a groximagely 90
percent complete (180,000 m3 of a total or 2 ,000 m ). The
dome of the second segment was put in place it October.

I
Machine room 1, whose main frame is completed and whose
moving crane is o'qrational, was turned over to the builder
or the turboelter ator group on 15 September. The hoisting
or the deck for machine room 2 was done in October. The con-
struction of the two atmospheric cooling towers will be
finished soon.

Le Blayais

The nature of the foundation soil (mud unable to support such
structures) required a major excavation Job (2 million m3

of mud removed to a depth of 15 m) and the pouring or a sandy
till taken from the Gironde and bailt up on the stronger sub-
soil under the mud (5.2 million m ). The edges of the two
excavation pits were stabilized by building a large concrete
wall with braces, poured in the soil, then anchored in it after
dredging or the mud (2,000 m or wall, 30 m in height).

All this work is now finished for both airs, and the concrete
wgrk is 50 percent completed (2h0,000 m of a total of h80,000
m .

The dome of segment 1 was put in place in November 1978; the
dome of segment 2 is scheduled to be raised in April 1979. As
for the machine room for 1-2, work on the main frame for the
machine room began in Se tember 1978 and the moving cranes
were raised in ovcmber see Figure ), Work and Test Program).

Chinon

With the exception of the type of atmospheric cooling tower,
this plant with two segments of the CP 2 type is practically
an identical repetition of the Saint Laurent plant, with a

target date 1 year later. The target date is in fact less,
since for the main part of the construction, 138 000 m had

already been poured at the end of November 197 (68 percent).
The dome of segment 1 was to be put in place in January 1979

and the start of the frame of the machine room is to be done
in April 1979-

12
FOR CHICK“. USE ONLY
.IIIHHML -.
. 3:: 52;... v.7:
n I call:

5.3%

E.§§..s=; . . ._ -_

Es
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key for Figure 1:

Legend

Civil engineering

Assembly

Tests

Segments

Earthwork

Building

Bunker

Reactor

Raising or dome

Prestressin

Nuclea boi er

EPCO Open Tank Functional Tests?
gacgine room

on a ser
GTA [Eurbealternator group7

00.0.0-900‘000

o‘mmwaommamnmma

d-b-b-b—p—h—b

Cruse

The volume of work for this power lent, the last or the 900 MW
level, has already been given earl er. A year into the work
.the gener l clearing and earthwork are now being completed (1
million m at the end of November) the river borrow pi s

for alluvial materials are over 1/5 done (1.3 million m ), the
concrete work on the apron sup orting the neoprene studs for
the 1-2 pair and the peripher wall attached to it are largely
done and the concrete pouring or the nuclear block itself
should start in December.

IV Construction in Factories

Equipment for the 900 MW level is covered in contracts
betweeen EDP and the builders; most often these contracts are
for series of identical equipment for several segments (“level"
contracts), and it necessary, they also cover assembly at the
appropriate site. we should mention here that while the
Pessenheim and Bugey power plants had specific contracts for
each one, the equipment for the nuclear blocks for all of the
CP 1 and CP 2 segments (2% units) is handled in the same
series of contracts, each covering all the equipment to be
manufactured and assembled. The same is true of equipment
for the machine rooms or the C? 1 type (16 segments) and of
the OP 2 type (eight segments).

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After the inevitable problems, delays, and changes that are
always part of a Job of such a scale, manufacturing is now
proceeding in satisfactory conditions and at a suitable pace.
This situation does not in any way exclude the osaibility

of construction incidents of a random nature, w ich are called
"manufacturing anomalies." These demand constant vigilance

on the part of the builder and the contractor, naturally to
detect them, but also to evaluate carefully their real sig-
nificance and to determine the appropriate corrections.

Model of the Chinon Site with the Two PNR Segments.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this short article, there can be no possibility of giving
details on the status of the manufacturing of the many pieces
of equipment for the 900 MW level. There are hundreds of
contracts betweeen the various regions of the Equipment Divi-
sion and the builders. We will only give briefly the situation
for the nuclear boilers and turbo-alternator groups, which is
quite characteristic of the overall situation.

Nuclear Boilers -- Built by FRAﬁATOHB

The output rate of the tanks and steam generators, whose in-
stallment in the reactor buildings now controls the essentials
of the on-sito assembly in the nuclear blocks, in practice
governs the programming of all the assembly work of the boilers
and thus of the completion of the 900 MW level to a great ex-
tent. Seven CP 1 tanks will have been su plied by the end of
1978, after the six Fessenheim and Bugey anks. en tanks are
to be delivered in 1979, from Gravelines 3 to Chinon 81, three
in 1980, two in 1982, and two in 1983. Gradually the tanks
being built for export and for the 1300 MW level will re lace

the production of those for the French 900 NH level in e
builder's plants.

For the first eight CP 1 segments, the primary tubing and
steam generators have been elivered to the site and have
either been installed or are being installed now. The steam
generators, which so far have come from the factory in two
sections and then been assembled on the site -- for Pessenheim
and Bugey -- are now, at least in part, delivered in a single
unit; the design of the reactor building makes this possible
for the CP 1 and CP 2.

we should also mention at the nuclear fuel produced in the

FBPC [ex ansion unkno plants (a FRAMATOHB subcontractor)

at Desse and Romans is bein delivered in the required periods
of time (deliveries for the ugey S, Tricastin 1, and Gravelines
1 se ments during the first quarter of 1979' the fuel for

Damp erre 1 is a ready being sent to BDF‘s ntorregionsl

storage facility at Chinon).

Turbo-Alternator Groups of the CP 1 Type -- Built by Alsthom-
Atlantique

All the parts for the first four Tricastin 1, Gravelines 1,
Dampierre 1, and Tricastin 2 segments have been delivered and
inst lled or are in the process of ins allation now: the

NP [ﬁigh bressurg7 and B? [Low Pressur internal and external

16
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

casings, exhaust enclosures

HP and BP rotors HP and BP intake
units, HP and 8? guides alternator stator and

rotor, dryers,

superheaters, etc. Deliveries for the following segments are
well underway, and all the rest of the equipment for this im-
pressive series of 16 identical machines is at different stages
of develo ment: being manufactured in the foundry, forge,
mechanics welding, or milling sho s of the builder an of

the numerous French and foreign su contractors and suppliers.

Saint Laurent des Eaux: Construction of Two PwR Segments
(Hay 1978).

17
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

GP 2 Type Turbo-Alternators -- Built by Alsthom-Atlantique

These systems based on CEH [Electro-Mechanical Company7
technology differ from the preceding by the number of BP
turbine rotors they have, which have been reduced from three
to two. The preliminary tests are now being done by the
builder, and the first equipment should be sent soon to the
Saint Laurent site. For the later segments, production is
continuing without any major problems, often in advance of
the site schedules. Deliveries of the main parts for the
turbines (BP shafts and intake frames) and alternators

(body rotor) for the last segments of the 900 NW level (Cruse)
are already being made.

V Installation and Assembly work

The installation and assembly work for a nuclear power plant
has also been discussed in an article by Messrs Rouzaud
Baudriller and Lagarde, which appeared in nevus GENERALE
uucnsuas in I977 issue no 3).

The installation work is practically completed at the Bugey
site; its first two segments are now connected to the electric
ggwor network (on 10 May and 21 September 1978, respectively).

e third sagment should be connected in March 1979 and the
fourth in J y 1979. Aside from the work in progress on Bugey
u, the only remaining work consists of a few additions and
modifications which have been found to be of use. This work
will be done during the first shutdown for refueling.

Equipment installation is now well underway at Saint Laurent
and is beginning at Blayais where the air conditioning and
general electrical contrac ors are now working, installing
air conditionin ducts and electr c boxes and panels, MT
[Hedium Volta , B‘r [Iow Voltag -transformers in the electri-
cal building and the control room, and auxiliary tubing for
the nuclear oiler or for all of the nuclear annexes.

certain amount of heavy equi ment was placed in the buildings
before completion of the civ 1 engineering in order to sim-
plify handling procedures and limit or eliminate the need to
provide temporary access passages (bunkers, tanks, exchangers,
e c. .

This is the major part of the work now in progress at
Tricastin, Gravelines, and Dampierre, where nearly 2,000
workers are employed at each s to, and whose 12 segments are
to go on line in less than 2 years (from mid-1979 to mid-1981).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At both Tricastin and Gravelines, se ments no 2, whose work

is at identical stages, a little beh nd Bugey 5, the primary
circuit is now com letely installed and the prescribed com lete
hydraulic testing 225 bars) was done in early November 19 8.
By the end of November, the installation of the auxiliary
nuclear tubing of the boiler was almost completed and some
modifications decided on in the last few months were being
incorporated. There is some concern about the installation of
the secondary tubing for all the nuclear annexes, for there

is a great deal of work to be done on modifications, and this
may cause some delay in meeting the target date for connection
in July-August 1979.

The installation of the turbo-alternator groups is in advance
of the nuclear boiler work.

On the following segment, Dampierre 1, scheduled to go on

line in November 1979, the welding of the main rimary circuit
of the boiler has been completed and it is now eing connected
to the last secondary circuits which are attached to it. The
status of the assembly of the tubing of the auxiliary circuits
(of the boiler -- 80 percent by the end of November 1978; of
all the nuclear annexes -- 85 percent completed) and that of
the control-command electrical systems and the general elec-
trical system is close to the point requir d for the start of
operations to fill the tank and the BFCO Open Tank Functional

Test , which mark the start of the period of major systems
test ng.

The installation of the turbo-alternator group has reached a
phase where the first mechanical rotation tests can be done
in February 1979, and a first connection to test steam can be
made (the first of the CP 2 series as the Dampierre site

has a steam generating facility using oil) in Hay 1979.

At segments no 2 at both Tricastin and Gravelines, for which
the start of the EFCO are scheduled for approximately Harsh
1979 the tanks and steam generators are installed and the
welding of the main tubing connecting them is well advanced.
It is the installation of the auxiliary tubing and of the
electrical circuits which is now at a critics point, and
great efforts are being asked of the builders who are employ-

ing hundreds of tubing assemblers and electricians at each
s e.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the grou consisting of Dampierre 2, Tricastin 3, and
Gravelines 3, about 6 months behind the preceding group, the
welding of the primary circuit is now going on. At Gravelines
3 a new operations sequence had to be used because the tank
win not arrive at the site until January 1979. The instal-
lation of the auxiliary tubing and of the control-command
electrical circuits and of the general electrical system is
well underway at Dampierre and has been begun at Tricastin
and Gravelines.

Work is beginning on the following segments: Tricastin k,

Dampierre 3, Gravelines h, and Dampierre k; their tanks should
leave the factory between March and August 1979.

VI Testing and Start of Service

The first two Bugey segments (2 and 3) went on line on 10

May and 21 September 1978. At the end of November 1978, the
maximum power came to 87 percent of normal power for Bugey 2
and 75 percent for Bugey 3. During the increase in power, the
plant had several shutdowns for a variety of reasons, and so
this power increase took longer than expected. The following
problems were encountered:

a. Mechanical incidents: in particular, the alteration of
some of the condenser's tubes;

b. Modifications of some equipment, based on the experience
at Fessenheim (dryers and superheaters, etc.).

o. External events, primarily high levels of muddy water
in the Rhone;

d. Problems of a social nature -- strike of operating
personnel.

At segment h, whose connection is scheduled for March 1979,
all of the tests before fuel loading have been done. Fuel
loading should start in early January 1979. Connection of the
turbo-alternator group to test steam was done on 15 June

1978.

At Bugey 5, Tricastin 1, and Gravelines 1 the overall tests

of the boiler, which take approximately 16 months preceding

the first connection, were well underway at the end of November.
The filling of tanks and the EFCO which mark the start of these
tests, began at the end of the third quarter of 1978. The

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

cold tests and testing of the primary circuit under pressure
have now been completed at the three segments, and operations
will proceed slightly differently at each of them. The
schedule given below is for Tricastin 1:

a. Tests of the crane for handling fuel under waterj
b. Resumption-and end of BFCO;

c. Completion of initial checkout (in accordance with provi-
sions of decision of 26 February 197%);

d. Placing of internal parts with instrumentation in tank;
e. Test of seal of containment enclosure (k bars);
f. Hot tests of primary circuit;

g. Loading of fuel, previously placed in the pool of the
'fuel building;

h. Precritical tests both cold and hot;
1. Going critical and being put on line.

The successful completion of these test programs will give

EDP eight additional operational segments of the 900 MW system~
for the winter of 1979-1980.

A new and large group of six segments will be added to the
preceding for the winter of 1980-1981: Dnmpierrc 1 and 2,
ricastin 2 and 3, Gravelines 2 and 3. Of these segments,

phases 1 and 2 of the tests, which precede the phase of major
system testing, and whose contents, described very briefly

below are given in an article by Messrs Broch and Cayol .
(REVUé GENERALE NUCLBAIRE no 3 of 1977), are now more or less
in progress.

Phase 1

Last checkout of end of installation, preliminary tests and
tests of start of service of isolated components. For example:

hydraulic tests, checkout of relays while unconnected, tests
of pumps with zero flow, etc.

21
FOR. OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

a

Tricastin Power Plant and Eurodif Cooling Towers (June 1978).

Phase 2

Tests of integrated components or of functions which require
functioning configurations which can only be done during
partial system tests.

Each of the “elementary systems" of the plant has a series of
Specific tests which are carefully defined in the test pro-
cedures. These tests are designed to check that the system
can function correctly in all normal or accidental situations
either expected or imagined at the design phase.

All these operations take place as soon as the installation

and assembly status permits; each group of equipment or systems
moves in succession from the "assembly area" to the "test
area," in which any intervention requires the use or very
strict procedures, as the system is then connected to fluid

or electrical power sources.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Phase 3

Major system tests, whose nature and sequencing have already
been given.

Table II: Expenditures Listed as of 30 September 1978 for
Each Pair of 900 MW Segments. Given in Percentage
of Total Cost.

'IO 61 000! bill

'“mm 1-2
amuse
00w e-s
Trlmlln 1-!
Guyana: 1-2
Oomph". 1-2
tvlcauln 3-4
acme” 3-4
St-uuvem 1-2
Damolono 3-4
Le any»: t-2
Guinea M
Le slants 3-4
Cmas i-Z

 

Key:

1. Segments
2. Percentage of total cost

To conclude at the end of this short presentation of the
status of construction or the 900 MW PWR power plants (see
Table II, percentage of expenditures for each pair), perhaps
we should a sin mention the delay in the nuclear program and
discuss it n terms of its true significance. The few
elements presented in this article while they do of course
reveal the slippage between the original schedule (set to
accelerate the start and "running in" phase of industrial
systems) and the real situation at the end of 1978, will
enable the reader to measure the work done now and to
conclude, we think, that the nuclear program with its goal
of 1985, as defined by the government in 197%, is now well
under way towards completion.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The result of Joint action by hundreds of builders, research
offices, EDF's and government's contractor services this
program in the years to come will bring about a profound
change in saving our resources used for producing electrical
energy, and will thus make a big contribution to the develop-
ment of the diversification of the primary energy sources,
which is a vital necessity for our national economy.

Pcssenheim Nuclear Power Plant
Paris REVUE GENERALE NUCLEAIRE in French Dec 78 pp use-u7o

[Article by Andre Leblond, chief of the Pessenheim power plant,
and Guy Perriole, chief of the general research division of

the production-transport office, thermal production service
of £027

éText7 After presenting the essential features of the
essenhcim power plant and the phases of its construction and
start of service, the authors discuss the start of service
tests and the problems encountered. They analyze the main
results obtained and draw attention to the lesson that can

be learned from this experience.

The Fessenheim nuclear power plant will have supplied in
1978 ~- its first year of industrial operation -- over 11.5
billion kilowatt-hours to the French electrical power s stem.

This is over #0 percent of the electrical energy of nuc ear
origin produced n France during 1978.

This excellent result is even more significant and promising
as the two segments of this power plant are the first of a
series of facilities which{ in the years to come, are to

r r

provide the basis for elec icity production in ance: the
history and record of this first proving ground are thus
of great interest.

I General Panorama
The Fessenheim power plant, built on the left bank of the

grand canal of Alsace, has two segments each with a net
electric power of 890 MW.

Each segment has a nuclear boiler of the PWR type supplying
steam to a turbo-alternator group.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Those boilers consist of a 3,660 Nu (thermal) reactor which
transmits its thermal energy to three steam generators. This
is done by circulating water under pressure y three pumps
called "primary pumps."

The essential characteristics of the most important equipment
are given in an annex, along with a transversal view of the
power plant and a schematic of the circuitry.

The main phases of construction and of the start of operations
were the following:

a. Decision to build 1970
b. Installation of the reactor tank
Segment 1: October 197k
Segment 2: January 1975
c. Hydrostatic testing of primary circuit
Segment 1: narch 1976
Segment 2: October 1976
d. First loading of fuel
Segment 1: December 1976
Segment 2: ‘ Harch 197?
e. First connection of alternator
to network Segment 1: 6 April 1977
Segment 2: 7 October 1977
f. Full power Segment 1: October 197
Segment 2: February 197
g. Start of industrial service
Segment 1: December 197
Segment 2: March 197

The construction period was disrupted by a change of option
concerning the type of fuel (change from a 15 x 15 pencil
system to a 17 x 17 sggtem, in order to have the same flexi-
bility as the other 9 MW segments which will follow), by
manufacturing problems, by one act of sabotage, and also by
stiffened regulatory requirements.

Concerning the actual start of operations of the equipment
and circuits, this covered a period of nearly 3 years, from
the first testing of annex functions (production of water, of

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

compressed air, or auxiliary power supply) until the start of
industrial service of the largest contracted system, the
nuclear boiler.

 

Fessenheim Power Plant (August 1978).

Industrial operation began in January 1978 for segment 1 and in
April 1978 for segment 2; it is now continuing in very satis-
factory conditions. The first term of this 0 eration will

come with the shutdown of each segment in 197 for h months,

in order to replace a third of the fuel and to make many
required checkouts (associated with this first shutdown and
with the 10-year review); this shutdown will also be used to

make additions to the equipment, modifications, repairs,
preventive investigations, etc.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following remarks will concentrate most on the most recent
periods particularly the period starting with the first
connection of the segments to the networ ; then we will

exam no:

a. Start of service testing: its goal, contents, and how
it was conducted;

b. Problems encountered;

c. Main results obtained;

d. what was learned from this.

II Goals and Organization of Tests

The start of service tests were divided into three phases:

The first phase preceded the hydraulic testing of the primary
circuit of the boiler. In addition to the preliminary tests,
it included the gradual start of operation of equipment and
circuits; this phase ensured that the circuits and their
control and command equipment were capable of functioning,
without heat, according to the design specifications.

The second ase (5 to 9 months) tested the circuits in their
entirety, f rst cold and then hot in conditions as close as
possible to normal operating conditions. This period came to
an and with the first loading of fuel into the reactor.

The last phase (about 10 months) included:

a. Precritical testsi both cold and ha: and in particular
n

ingluding monitor g of the functioning of the control
re s;

b. Physical tests at low power designed to check the
neutron characteristics of the core;

c. The increase in power after electrical connection of the

alternator to the network. During this period characteris-
tics of the core at different power levels and the capa-
bility of the facilities to withstand power spikes,

either normal or incidental, were monitored. It had to
_be ascertained:

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OI-‘l'lCML 088 ONLY

1. That in case of a partial or complete loss of a function,
the facility was protected and if necessary could be
restored to a safe condition;

2. That the hypotheses used in calculating accidents and
limits of operation did include sufficient margins.

Ill Conducting the Tests

All these tests were c ducted under the authorization and
control of the SCSIN Central safety Service for Nuclear
Facilities? after consultation with experts from the Standing
Group on Reactors.

About to meetings of the standing group were held; these
meetings were preceded b about 0 preparatory sessions,
before obtaining the nut orization for loading fuel into the
first segment; this was then followed by authorization for
recritical hot tests, foregoing critical, and for tests at
B0 percent powen then at 1 percent of the nominal power.

At the time of the first connection of the turbo-alternator
group, the boiler had already operated at about 20 percent of
its nominal power, with the steam Broduced being vented
directly to the condenser by a tur ine bypass c rcuit.

At each level of power which followed (30, SO, 75 90, and
100 percent), the following major tests were carried out:

a. Survey of functioning conditions;

b. Charting of neutron flows in the core;
c. Tests of regulations;

d. Power variations.

The analysis of tests done at one power level determined the
possibility of increasing the power to the following level.

The diagram showing daily power (Figure l) illustrates the
chronology and duration of these tests, which were disrupted

by a certain number of incidents. Between the first connection
and functioning at nominal power, the duration of tests or

work was 2030 days for the first segment and "+2 days for the
second. An ideal duration is about 80 days.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CENTRAL: 0c FESSENNCIM

PUISSANCE MOYENNE JOURNALIERE (so-Ia) '97? £7 i978

 

FUR OFFlCIAL HRH nNL\

“a. _.« "-4—. ...- . “-4.. -04

  

II..- Qua!

i ! ‘ E \ ‘
'vsuunu‘;--HI '
I i | I

-«---«~a::-I--IIIIIIII

E i

’N tum.- "_.*‘IW*M I‘m a.“

"J v” Dove-In haun- nun-o

 
     
    

9m '0‘." ”lav

7*

    

‘q~uaoa»- .u..~~

O 4-."

  
  

0'“. a... a... ~o .Iul: u—,
o

   
  

o u . n . . . . .

Ja-

n-Mo»..‘n a...

  

....~.. on .au—q Do—n.
I

In.

 
 

._4 ..~.~. . . "a r-, .-. l

   
  
    

Ouvmamm3u¢m .“D "I_. .M

I ”an...“ ;
in! II... no. a... a... .. ...... ~..........

 

7-0.0“ I
Y-lh§nt 1

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key for Flnuru 1:

Segment I

Power in nu ofneleotricity

First connection (Nednesday, 6 April at 10MB)
Turbine incident (low ressure case 3)
Replacement of connect ens in reactor tank
Repair of adapters

Niscellaneous plumbing leaks

Work on low pressure water station

work on feed turbopunps and miscellaneous work
Start of industria service on 31 December 197?
Miscellaneous work

Work on secondary circuit

work on primary and secondary circuits

Work on dryers-superheaters

Checkout of dryers-superheaters

segment 2

First connection (Friday 7 October at 12k0)
Check of alternator bear ngs

Leak in secondary circuit and defect in cluster
command

Various checks of turbine and miscellaneous work
work on primary circuit (pressuriser spray valve)
Turbine plumbing and secondary circuit plumbing
work on connectors

Start or industrial service on 1 April 1978
Work on dryers-superheaters

Leak in pressurizer spray valve

Check of dryers-superheaters

OWOumfa—o¢mam+‘tam-o

‘d—b-o-b-o-“co

”NI“
9,..0

ION
.0

”MN
\10‘“

The following information can be drawn from this phase
u

preceding in

strial functioning and from the actual start

of service testing itself:

b.

Generally speaking, unlike the maiority or thermal
power plants for which full capacity is reached
quickly after the first connection, the rise in power

or a nuclear plant or the Pﬂh type necessarily takes
a long time.

Considering the site aspects, the experience with
starting the first segment greatly accelerates the
speed or starting service at the second.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0‘! OWICIM. USE ONLY

IV Problems Encountered

We should say first of all that the two segments are identical
and entirely independent except for the effluent treatment
facility which is shared, and also that they are the first of
a ser es.

0f the equipment for the nuclear boiler, the maJor equipment
was built under license. host of the rest of the equi ment

is being put to a new use in this type of facility. e major
pieces of equipment of the secondary part are prototypes and
the effluent treatment equipment is entirely new in its function-
ing conditions.

Among the problems since the first connection, we should
ment on those with a significant incidence on the duration of
tests or on plant opera ing time.

For segment 1, listed in chronological order, these were:

1. An incident affectin the turbine on 2 May 1977 while
the segment was at 3 percent of nominal power; serious
damage of a stationary guide of a low pressure casing,
probably caused by a manufacturing defect, required
changing all the clearances between wheels and guides,
checking all the low pressure casings and replacing
guides exceeding tolerances (10 weeks}.

2. A leak which appeared in mid-July between the reactor
tank and its cover this required the replacement of
two connections an the modification of the closing
bearing (20 days).

3. The discovery at the end of July 1977 of a weakness
in the seal of the welding on the control rods
command mechanism housing located on the reactor
cover; a complete checkout of the areas involved
uncovered several defects of the same type (20 days).

h. At the end of October 197? damage was found on one
of the two turbopunps feeding the water station
after contacts between the drum and the gland rings;
the damaged pump was replaced and the second pump

was modified during a 1-month shutdown in November-
Decenber scheduled for other reasons.

31
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5. During the November-December shutdown, six steam blowout
balloons surrounding the turbine and placed in the con-
denser were modified; these had ripped because of a
design defect.

In all, the incidents related to the prototype nature of the
secondary part of the facility and the work done on the tank
connections caused a 112-day delay in getting the se ment to
its operation at nominal power; if these roblems he not
occurred, this power would theoretically_ ave been reached 92
days after the first connection.

Furthermore, all throughout this period, the prescribed
requirements on methods of disposin of liquid effluents in
the environment have become more an more restrictive, and
théstEuoed some problems, even including interrupting the
sc e e.

The authorizations for waste disposal -- contrcled by the
SCPRI [Bentral Protection Service against Ionizing Radiation?
-- require that all effluents, whether slightly or highlyh
radioactive, be retained and monitored before removal. is
requirement has affected the continuing secondary draining

of the steam generators, done in order to obtain and maintain
very strict chemical characteristics of the water; this is
inportant to keep the equipment working for a long period

of time. At the time of design, it was felt that these ef-
fluents could be disposed of directly.

After the start of industrial service, the only incidents
affecting the satisfactory functioning of segment 1 were:

I. A leak in a valve of an auxiliary circuit of the boiler;
the motor of a primary pump had to be replaced (6 days).

2. The deterioration of internal parts of the four dryers-
superheaters associated with the turbo-alternator irou
(inspection doors on the separation plate between nta e
and outlet or heating steam on two of them, protective
bulbs for the tubular bundles on all four); the duration
of shutdown for this was 37 days (including 5 days for
checking repairs after 2 months of operation).

There have also been some shutdowns caused primarily by defects

in the tightness of some of the plumbing, although all the
shutdowns for other reasons were used for repairs. The inci-
dents first affected the primary and secondary circuits, then

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

mainly the secondary circuit (external leaks weak internal
seal rupture of rod, blockage). The total time lost, either
totally or partially, caused s ecifically by plumbing problems
amounts to the equivalent of 1? days of shutdown since the
first connection.

For segment 2, the experience acquired with segment 1 did make
it possible to do a certain amount of work before its first
connection (modification of low pressure cases of the turbine,
repair of the welding on the cluster command mechanism).
Causes of delay or time lost were roughly the same as in seg-
ment 1. The main occurrences to be mentioned are:

1. Total loss of function for 10 days because of heating
of a bearing of the alternator and a defect in a con-
trol cluster command device;

2. A 3-week shutdown in November 1977 to do some work
similar to the work done in segment 1 at the same
time, primarily on the secondary part of the facili-
ty (blowout balloons near the turbine, plumbing
work, checkout and repair of feed turbopumps);

3. An internal defect in the circuit breaker at the
outlet of the alternator (6 days);

h. Replacement of a prototype adjusting valve on the
turbine steam intake (6 days);

5. Work on dryers-superheaters after the incident in
segment 1 (25 days);

6. Several short duration shutdowns required by plumbing
failures (35 days).

V First Reports

Considering the "first of a series" and partially prototype

nature of the two segments, the first operating period has
been satisfactory.

Of all the technical problems encountered, none has invalidated

the fundamental Options selected for this plant and then used
for the remainder of the 900 MW program.

33
FOR OPTICMI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The actual nuclear part itself suffered only a few failures
of medium importance and the many changes that had to be made

in the conventional equipment or equipment based on conventional
designs were not of a radical nature.

Since the start of industrial operation the record of time
in operation of the two segments is good (78 and 82 percent),
a d higher than the value of 50 percent used in the PEON

dvisery Commission on the Production of Electricity of Nuclear
Origin? studies. By way of comparison, the average time in
actual operation of EDF's conventional thermal plants was 72
percent in 1977.

Figure 2 shows that the behavior of the two Fessenhsim units
since they supplied their first kWh to the network is fully
satisfactory compared with other similar production facilities,
such as the 0.8. Beaver Valley plant which was a point of
reference for the nuclear part, and the Tihange plant, with
similar secondary facilities to those at Fessenheim.

From the point of view of the performances expected, the
behavior of the facility in its transitional_phase seems we
satisfactory; the re ulatiens on "iletage" [meaning unkne

and load variations increase of percent of nominal power per
minute and spikes of 3 10 percent are being respected; follow-

up of load and adjustment by remote control are not authorized
at the present time.

For the time being the behavior of the fuel is satisfactory;
the total radioactivity of the water in the grimary circuit
(excluding tritium) is about 0.2 to 0.3 Ci/m .

The effects of the plant's operation on exposure of the
pgfsgnnel and the environment to radiation have been very
s g t.

The average annual dosages received by plant workers comes

to 11 millirems for 1977 and 100 millirems for 1978; these
figures may be compared with the value of 188 millirems for
all of EDF's power plants in 1977. we must, however, say that
these low values are not very significant, since they cover

a period during which no refueling was done.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Figure 2:
Key:
1.
2.
5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 

IIIIIIIII
I IIIIIII
I IIIIIII
IIIIIIIII
IIIIIII

    
     
   

Behavior of Fessenheim in relation to Beaver
Valley and Tihenge.

Start of Fessenheim and several 900 NM PWR
Restinghouse Units

Hours Equivalent to Full Power
100 Percent Operation
First On-Line

Age of segments (in months)

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite a larger production of effluents than expected, the
radioactivity caused by wastes released in the water and air
in 1978 reached the following levels in relation to the
authorized values:

a. About 10 percent for liquid effluents (excluding tritium);
b. Less than us percent for tritium;
c. Less than 5 percent for gaseous wastes.

Consequences for the population with the highest theoretical
exposure, based on very pessimistic assumptions, for 1977

gave an amount of irradiation equivalent to about 0.02 millirem
for the entire organism- this is nearly 10,000 times less than
the regulatory limit and than natural radioactivity.

VI What was Learned From the Start and First Year of
Industrial Operation

A. Conducting of the Starting Tests

There are obviously many reasons for the very satisfactory
start of the power plant; in addition to the use of an already
proven type of nuclear boiler, there are the good organization
of the tests and a special adaptation of the resources used.

The organization of the tests, implemented gradually and
becoming fully operational a year before the connection, was
maintained until the start of industrial service of the two
segments. The teams included personnel either from BDF's
Equipment and Thermal Production Region or from the contrac-
tors, with the overall coerdination in the hands of EDF. A
very close cooperation between all the parties involved, pri-
marily in matters affecting safety, greatly facilitated the
progress of the various phases.

During this entire period, tests were carried out according
to test procedures tabout a thousand) drawn up in advance;
their very extensive preparation (k5,000 pages of documenta-
tion per segment) represented a major amount of work. For”
the tests and their followup EDP sent a special team which
at peak came to nearly 30 people (engineers and technicians);
personnel sent by the builder of the nuclear boiler ambunted
to a maximum force of 2% people.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Other positive factors were:

a. - The rapid availability of the test results and their
critical examination;

b. The\very extensive followup of modifications made in
circuits and equipment during the starting procedure;

c. Highly effective communications between researchers
and people at the site.

However, some changes should be made as they caused too
burdensome a workload, or significant delays: the effluent
treatment system and the condition of the plumbing fall into
this category.

Since the start of the rise in power, the somewhat larger than
expected production of effluents and the high levels of radio-
activity in the primary circuit at shutdown have caused large
amounts of radioactivity in the liquid effluents, although

the levels are still acceptable. The higher than expected
production has still not been explained, for, on one hand
there are no means of identifying sources in the relatively
complex collection circuits, and also because problems have
arisen in reusing water from the primary circuit because of
the len th of time spent on improving the effluent treatment
system mainl evggorators and equipment for placing effluents
in containers . e radioactivity could not be quickly elimi-
nated as the flow passing over the demineralizers of the che-
mical and volume control circuit was generally too low. This »
radioactivity did cause some radiation protection problems.

Concerning the plumbing, the many (already listed) defects
which caused loss of operating time and doses of radiation

for the personnel during repairs should be reduced by decrea-
sing the number and types of equipment, a better adaptation

of the equipment to its function, precautions taken in instal-
lation elimination of all unnecessary clamps, an apprOpriate
selection of leakproof'aointings, checking of clamps and

the quality of connections. .

3 Organization of Operations

Since the start of testing the plant's operating personnel
have operated the equipment (from a centralized command room).
This gave them additional training and at the same time it
tested the operating instructions {there are about 200 in-
structions contained in 2,000 pages).

37 -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.. .‘g r xn.rh
1"2'r.?""'

'~":." r.-:«:f1r:!nr:r.’
induxtrla; upevntion

if)? ‘IP‘FUIIM. ".w!’ ”.‘u'lff
FOR OFFICIAL 083 cm

requires, throughout the entire duration or the plant's
operation, that:

a. Numerous periodic tests or equipment or circuits be
made while in use, in order to monitor and maintain
the facility's degree of safety;

b. All procedures done by an operator be defined and
controled in order to obtain the highest possible
qua y.

In this way the starting period was used to implement and
validate the procedures used in these periodic tests. There
are a great many procedures (about 500 for one segment, cover-
ing 5, 00 pages of documentation) and their execution entails
a great amount of work. Few problems have arisen with these
test procedures.

To respond to the demand for quality in all the operations
done, an ad hoc group was set up when the facility started
to operate. This system, which is part of the existing
hierarchical organization structure, has a double aspect:

a. A technical aspect related to the nature of the
activities (operation, maintenance, training), which
is described in written procedures (see above for
information on operating instructions or periodic
test procedures) listing for each of them the objec-
tives, the methods and resources to be used, and
the checkouts to be made.

b. A management aspect related to all of the steps
taken to guarantee that the technical activities
are carried out properly, using the structure and
regulations of a quality control organization. This
is based on a few simple principles: the definition
of activities and equ pment involved; these acti-
vities are to be entrusted only to skilled workers;
to think before acting; and to report (3 stematiza-
tion of written procedures -. nearly 2,0 main-
tenance procedures are described); to keep documents
up to date and conserve them, to systematically
verify the results of each activity (technical
quality control done by the plant's operational

services, and management control done by an
independent section).

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This organization was set up gradually over a period of about
1 year, and did cause some difficulties.

The start of operations also provided information on a
number of important factors in personnel management. These
concerned essentially:

a. Workers in each s ecialty, particularly operating
personnel, those andling control-command equipment,
and chcnonuclear controls. The experience gained
with the first refueling in 1979 is needed for
more information for ma ntenance personnel.

b. Methods and resources used for personnel training,
improvement, and replacement.

c. Steps to guarantee their protection from radiation
during interventions.

We should also mention the experience gained in relations with
outside organizations (government and public) in a relatively
new field such as nuclear PWE for most of the parties involved:

a. Safety (SCSIN, IPSN [Fuelear Protection and Safety
Institutg7, the Standing Croupg,

b. Monitoring of equipment under pressure (Division of

w Hines SIIM [Interdepartmental Services of Industry
ggdiMi e57, sccn [Nuclear Construction Control

c g .

c. SCPRI, which deals with protecting the population
from radiation;

d. Protection against sabotage (prefecture offices);
e. Information (Control Commission, press, public).

Haintainin these relations required a great deal of work
which she d yield good results with the future power plants.

This brief overview leads us to the conclusion that, despite
the few delays which occurred during the rise in power, the
first year of Fessenheim's on-line industrial operation has

been very satisfactory, promising, and full of a great amount
of information for the future.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OﬂLY

The great maJority of the incidents were related to the
prototype nature of some equipment, and none of these inci-
dents was of a nature to invalidate.the options of the progect
and of the future 900 NH plants. In particular, there were

no significant incidents affecting the nuclear part itself.

In the many areas of organization involved in the start and
operation of a plant -- tests, operation, maintenance,
personnel, relations with government agencies and the
public -- for which the Passenheim power plant was in many

respects the first proving ground, the work done has been con-
siderable and the experience gained will be very valuable for
the rest of the nuclear program.

We will of course have to wait for confirmation of the present
quality and performances: an incident causing a shutdown last-
ing several months is still possible in a "first of a series"
facility like Fessenheim. And the first shutdown for refueling
scheduled for 1979 will yield a wealth of information.

Still, Pessenhein now appears, after Tihange, to be an indus-
trial success auguring well for the future.

Annexes

Technical Characteristics of the Fessenheiu Power Plant
General specifications

Guaranteed nominal ratings

Thermal power of boiler 2,660 aw
Steam flow at turbine intake 5 155 t/h
Steam pressure at turbine intake 5i.1 bars abs.
Condenser pressure k8.5 mbers abs.
Gross electric power 920 MW
Nuclear boiler

Number of primary circuits 3

Steam generators model 51A

Primary pumps model 930

Fuel assembly type 1? x 17

Total thermal power 2,660 MW
Thermal power created in the core 2,652 SH

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nominal characteristics or feedwater
Absolute pressure
Temperature

Nominal characteristics of steam in insulation
valves or enclosure outlet

Total flow

Absolute pressure

56.6 bars
216. °C

géﬁs t/h

.57 bars

(CV carbonized tubes)

Tam eraturo
Hun dity

26 °C
0.3;;

Acce table load variations in normal operation between 155

and 002

of nominal power
Levels

105 or

nominal power

Continuing variations

SS of

nominal power/minute

Reactor and Fuel
1) Thermohydraulic characteristics

Nominal pressure of primary circuit
Flow per circuit loop
Actual mass flow of core
Average line power
Maximum line power in normal operation
Temperature of primary fluid at 100% or
nominal power tank intake
tank outlet

2) Mechanical characteristics

Type of fuel

Number of assemblies

Number of pencils per assembly
Spacing of pencils (cm)
Overall size (cm)

wei t of U0 (can)

Num er 0! gr ds per assembly
Pencil

Number

External diameter (cm)
Diameter clearance (cm) (regions 1, 2, 3)

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

155 bars abs.
20,100 m3/h
#3 610 t/h
176 W/cm

MSR W/cm

28H°C
322°C

:2; *7
26%
1.26

“05.80
g13.5

1 8

004-"
O O

,1».
950
017
Shield thickness (cm)
Shield material
Length (n)

Pellet

katerial

Density 3 or theretical density)
Diamter cm) (regions 1, 2, 3)
Width (cm)

Cluster of absorbent pencils

Absorbent mgterial, long pencils and short
penc s

Number or absorbent pencils per cluster

Number or long clusters

Number of short clusters

Intemal equipment

Core envelope

Internal/external diameter (cm)
Thermal shield
Internal/external diameter (cm)

Turbo-alternator group -- turbine

Thermal power MW (th)
Steam flow at turbine intake t/h
Steam ressure at turbine intake bars abs.
Steam umidity at turbine intake

Steam flow at intake of low pressure

case t/h
Pressure at intake of low pressure

case bars abs.
Exhaust steam flow t/h
Exhaust steam pressure bars abs.
Coupling power MW

Specific consumption at coupling kJ/th

Alternator

Apparent power (Pa) MwA
Active power MW
Total specific consumption kJ/RWh
Power factor

Voltage between terminals (Un) xv

Intensity kA
nausea bag and gum 0130.3 mo 3
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Tests
Spray pumps
Spray
Pressurizor
Steam generator
Loop 3
Discharge tank pressurizar
{gimary motor pump
0
Tank
Accumulator
Loop 2
Discharge
Charge
Exchanger regenerator
Surplus bleeding exchanger
Hot branches
Drain pits
Recirculation
Cold branches
Boric acid concentrate
Connection reed
Primary circuit (RCP)

Reactor cooling circuit at shutdown (RRA)

Safety injection circuit (R18)
Spray circuit (8A8)

Volume and chemical control circuit (RCV)

water and boron addition (REA)
Tank for Filling Reactor Pool
Demineralizers using mixed beds

Cation bed denineralizer
Non-regenerating exchanger
Exchanger for seal circuit
Volume control storage tank
Boric acid tank

Hater tanks

Injection and charge tanks (high pressure)

Mixer

Boric acid pumps

Hater pumps

Injection pumps (low pressure)
Direct spray

45
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:

hachine room

Main transformer

970 MW turbo-alternator group
Intercept valve
Dryer-superheater
Condenser

Feed turbopumps
Circulating water tunnels
Command room

Safety valves

11. Electric rooms

12. Energenc feed pumps

1 . Reactor uilding

1 . Internal pool

15. Transfer tube

16. Fuel buildin

1 . Pumping stat on

1 . Circulating water tunnels
19. Circulation motor pump
20. Filtration drum

Development Prospects
Paris REVUE GENERALE NUCLEAIRE in French Dec 78 pp k71-M73

[Rx-tine by Michel r, head of the 1300 my level in some
Equipment Divisio

O‘OWO‘m-‘wN—b

[1ex37 The author describes the present status of development
of the first 1300 NH level power plants. he then discusses

the work being done at Paluel, Plamanville, St Alban/St Maurice-
L'Bxil, and Cattenom.

I Paluel

The Paluel site on the English Channel near Saint Valery en
Caux is scheduled to have tour 1300 M" as ments with open
cooling using sea water. The public uti ity decree was issued
on 23 July 1 75 and the preparatory site work began in June

or that year.

Paluel 1

a. Begun in 1976

b. Order to start work on components of the nuclear boiler:
1 January 1976

47
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

c. Order to build boiler and start of first concrete work

at the site: 1 July 1977
d. Start of industrial service scheduled for February 1983.

Pnluol 2

a. Begun in 1977
b. Order to build boiler: 1 November 1977
c. Start of industrial service scheduled for May 1983.

Puluol 3

a. Begun in 1979
b. Order to build boiler: 1 August 1978
c. Start of industrial service scheduled for June 198%.

Paluel h

Segment planned, to begin in 1980, and be operating at the
end or 1995.

A. Present Status of Studies

Most of the studies have been done and we will mention only
the main points:

a. Control: studies concerning control are being done to
permit followup of load and adjustment by remote control.

b. Steam generator: the decision not to use the preheating
system and the steam generator with 11/16" tube caused
a 6-month slippage in the studies, which delayed the
start of industrial servtn of Paluel 1 which was
shifted from August 19 2 to Februar 1§83. To combat
the denting phenomenon that is, t e corrosion of
cross-plates of the bundle of tubes, which leads to
a reduction in size of the tubes and causes stress
on the plates, stainless steel plates with quadri-
roliate holes will be used.

c. Controbloc: EDP has decided to use, starting with
Paluel, the "Controbloc" system of control-command

 

1. See the article by Mr Coudray, "Recent Technological
Developments in Pressurized Water Reactors," REVUB
GENERALB NUCLEAIRE no b, 1977.

‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

featuring static relay devel ed by COBB [ﬁenoral
Electrical Equipment Compan chlsthom. This system was
tested at the Saint Ouen plant for command of 2+;
burners. A eport on it was made to the SFEN expan-
sion unkno on 2% November 1978.

d. Reactor control - SPIN. Frametome is studying a
microprocessor relay system for reactor control.
The decision to use or not to use this s stem
presented to the SPEN on 23 November 197 , will be
made in 1979. The method new in use in reactors
of the 900 NH program has a conventional electro-
magnetic relay.

Table l: 1300 Mw Segments -- Development Plans

Year Segment Order to Build Start of Indus-
Nuclear Boiler trial Service

1976 Paluel 1 1 Jan 76 * 1 Feb 83

1977 Paluel 2 1 Nov 77 t 1 May 83

1978 Paluel 3 1 Aug 78 r 1 Jun 89

Expected Saint Alban 1 1 May 79 1 Nov 8%

in 1979 Flamanville 1 1 Jul 79 1 Jan 85
Cattenem 1 1 Oct 79 1 Jul 85

Expected Paluel k 1 Mar 80 1 Sep 85

in 1980 Saint Alban 2 1 Apr 80 1 Oct 85
Flamanville 2 1 Jun 80 1 Dec 85
Cattenom 2 1 Dec 80 1 Jun 86

‘ Order actually given.
B Status of Work at the Beginning of November 1978
1. Earthwork at the site

Despite the disruptions caused by strikes in the spring, the
major part of the earthwork has been done (8 million cubic
meters, including k million cubic meters of chalk). There
were some problems caused by the depositing or this soil, for
compacting had to be done with a sufficiently dry material.
To obtain a suitable hygrometry reading, ashes from coal-
burning plants had to be added at times. This ensured the

69
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

later stability of the deposits. It was also almost
impossible to work with this soil during rainy periods be-
cause of the mud formed. There are still about 1 mill on
cubic meters to be moved in 1979 (secondary excavation for
segment k, platforms for no k, pumping station for 3 and h).

2. Protective dam and sea water feed channel

This work was made more difficult by the presence of a very
hard crystallized limestone bar which has changed the original
work schedule, and will require removal b the use of e lo-
sives. The total volume to be moved is a out 300,000 m .

3. Pumping station

Work on this station is done behind a sheet piling. The earth-
work is done for segments 1 and 2. The concrete for the cir-
culating pumps for pumping station no 1 is being poured. The
apron for the pumping station for no 2 has been poured.

h. Hain civil engineering work
a. Segment 1

The apron of the reactor building is done. The first raising
of the dual-structure containment enclosure is being done

now. The pillars of the machine rooms are done and the group
table is being built.

b. Segment 2
The apron of the reactor building is being built.
c. Segment 3

The iron work for the apron has begun. The main problems have
been caused by strikes which have paralyzed the site for a
total of 1% weeks since the work started.

II Flamanville

A public investigation of the Flamanville site on the west
coast of the Cotentin area between Carteret and La Hague,

began on 5 November 1976 and the decree of public utility was
issued on 22 December 1977. The site is partially embedded
in a granite cliff and partially (for the machine room) built

on fill soil. It is to have four 1300 MW segments using open
cooling by sea water.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
request for a bui‘”= ~

 

. F.
uﬁlvﬁ court to rP70

DC"

FUR Ul-‘FICML USE ONLY

 

_ :ding permit
proprzate report, E F
without waiting

Pluv.‘

...u permit.

' ..uor;:o . platform built over the sea was
.anunr: 19”?. Several suits were filed about Lhig
§dn:n.str :ivc scurL on 2? April 1978 issued ‘1
LISP «arm under the hulldinr ScrniL obtained at
a; tie Su‘ [P-slic Siilitv i0cree7. Owe of
gas the absence of an envirbnnontaf innaét stud"
113 was n 1 required at the :ime the bu]: J,
"0

cow letinf the

  

-.n.nr

:‘h was issue

’ l

J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OWICIM. USE ONLY

Removal of rocks from the cliff and construction of the
platform were disrupted by these legal problems. Work con-
sidered to be related to the building permit was blocked
tmtil 20 July. This affected mainly the crushing station.

More than a third of the originally scheduled earthwor has
already been done (of an original total of 5,000,000 m ).
however, the poor quality of the soil is going to increase
the volume to be moved (change in grade of the slopes). In

fact the granite is much more crumbly and broken than the
drillings had shown.

Civil engineering work on the first segment should be ready
to start in the summer of 1979.

III Saint Alban/Saint Haurice-l'Exil

The public investigation of the Saint An>an/Saint Maurice-l'Exil
site near Peage-de-Roussillon began on 2 May 19?? and the DUP
decree was obtained on 29 September 1978. Four 1300 NH

segments are planned at this site. The first two units will
have open cooling on the Rhone, and the second pair will use
atmospheric cooling.

The preliminary work of site clearing and fill of the platform
is being done now. Civil engineering work should start during
the first quarter of 1979.

IV Cattenom

The public investigation of the Cattenou site near Thionville
began on 9 Hay 1977 and the DUP was signed on 11 October 1978
for two 1300 MW segments using atmospheric cooling. A reser-
voir in the immediate vicinity of the site will keep too hot
water from being dumped in the Hoselle river in the summer.
Another reservoir in the Vosges will restore water evaporated
in the cooling facility to the Hoselle. The earthwork is
being done and the civil engineering work is scheduled to
begin in the autumn of 1979.

Editors' Note: In this article, the author discusses only
the 1300 MW plants which had obtained a public utility
decree as of 15 November 1978. But there are other 1300
MW power plants now in the planning stages.

52
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

Greys-Melville Power Plant
Paris REVUE GENERALE NUCLEAIRE in French Dec 78 pp h7b-h75

[fexg7 This report discusses the construction work which
began at the Creye-Halville site at the beginning of 1977,
after completion of the preparatory work. Some information
is given on the civil engineering work, the construction of
the nuclear boiler, and other electro-mechanical equipment.

For over 20 years France has been devoting sustained efforts
to the development of sodium-cooled breeder reactors.

After hapsodie (thermal pow r o: 28 then to NW), which was
put in service by the CEA Atomic Energy Commission7 in 1967,
then Phenix (250 HWe) put in service in 1973, the Greys-
Malville power plant (1200 Hue) is now being built on the
banks of the Rhone in the department of Isere, near the
department of Ain, 60 kilometers above Lyon.

 

The Super-Fhenix Power Plant at Greys-Melville: General View in
June 1978.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICML ”SB ONLY

e prime contractor for the preje t is the NEPSA firm
3%uropean Fast Neutron Power Plan of which EDP holds 51
percent of the stock ENEL [Fat onai Electric Power Agency7
33 percent, and SBK 16 percent.

The nuclear boiler which by itself accounts for 2/3 of the
total investment, is being developed by the No atoms-NIRA
L talinn Nuclear Company for Advanced Reactor group.

The civil engineering for the entire plant is being done by
the group consisting of Fougerolle, Condotte d'Acqua, and
Fred Holzmann.

The turbo-alternators are being supplied by the Italian firm
Ansaldo.

All the other work and equipment, including the ﬁovatome-
NIRA subcontracting, has been awarded to firms of the nation-
alities represented in NERSA.

Construction of the plant began at the site in early 1977,

- after completion of the preparatory work, which consisted
mainly of building a horizontal platform of approximately

15 hectares at the edge of the Rhone. This work was facili-
tated by the exceptional quality of the terrain found at all
depths at the Greys-Melville site.

Civil Engineering

First of all, the civil engineering includes the reactor
building whose external structure a concrete.cylinder 65
meters in diameter and 80 meters in height, has already

reached 50 meters in height. Then there are the steam
generator buildings, the machine room (the concrete for the
group tables has been poured), the miscellaneous auxiliary
buildings, and the hydraulic system for water intake and outlet.

All this work is well advanced and on the whole, nearly half

of the total amount of concrete planned had been poured at
the end of 1978.

 

1. ENEL is the Italian equivalent of EDP, and 88K is a

German firm established by RHE the largest electricit
producer in the Federal Republic of Germany, along with
Belgian and Dutch producers.

54
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"mu. gummy"

-'4u ‘10. .u.»

 

View of the Reactor ﬂuiifins at the end of Feptombur :9. .

a
4

,o:l-r

The Iuclcnr

t... 1‘.
n. . .l

.ories

O

Iclivnrins of all :hv ma‘rr “7231(30ﬁlﬁ are ”011 advanced and
the rachini nr i: done in ‘h0 facLo:T.. .ho:ef orc, iL woulﬁ
be a Aazz'c of zinc Lo list :29; a1 1 ar.d give Jloir state of
campioLion.

?or3379r, unlike
com.onc:.L:: are no:
Lheix 51x3, they
for that reason 23

po.-Ior plants. ‘.10 rencLor's main

9: c1 in ‘f.n .acLor) but, because of
;bled in a snop built at Lne site;
LLSCUSS the ac:i'1:ies of this shop.

 

$5
FOR OFFICIAL USE SLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Work done at the site

The first thing that attracts the attention of a visitor

to the Greys-Melville site is the immense shop (1 hectare on
the ground and 35 meters high) which was built by the
Novatome-NIRA group for assembling and machining reactor
parts which could not be transported by road, because of
their size. These are arts such as: tanks, closing slab
protective dome, etc. onditions here are quite similar to
those found in a factory. Novatome-NIRA': subcontractors
share the work areas where preformed sheets sent from the
factories are beginning to arrive.

Some large circular parts are machined in this shop on a
ipegial machine tool which has a circular disc 13 meters
n amo er.

Among the components for which parts are being made in the
shop at the site are:

a. The main tank and the safety tank;

b. The slab: assembly of parts of the external rim has
begun;

c. Raffles and various parts or the reactor.

Installation in the reactor building has obviously not begun
yet, but the piling that will be used for moving in large
reactor components, such as the tanks, is already in place.

Other Electra-Mechanical Equipment

The firms of various nationalities from which NERSA has ordered
the su ply and installation or components of the lant exclu-
ding t e oiler, have begun machining of this equ pmen in
their plants.

This equipment includes:

a. Turbo-alternator groups for which all the shafts are
now being made;

b. Condensers; drilling or their tubular plates has
started.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

At the end or 1978 there were about 1,000 workers at the
Creys-ﬂalville site, most of whom were employed by the group
of firms doing the civil engineering.

Personnel from the assembly and installation firms will now
start to increase rapidly and the maximum workforce at the
$323, about 1,500 people, should be reached at the end of

To improve housing and living conditions for the workers,
NERSA has developed or will evelop -- under the "major
construction site" regglations -- housing facilities for
single persons with 2 beds, and later 300, parking facili-
ties Ecr campers, a restaurant, and social services operated
Jointly by the various firms involved in this project.

7679
080: 3100

END

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY