PHVSICRL SCIENCES 8ND TECNNOLOGV
(FOUO L/79) 1 OF 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

apns L/BZOO
4 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 1/79)

‘c.

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publication~ contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [text]
nr [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no uay represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

. E" EIGHT HHS AND REGUIATIONS GC'JERNING WNERSHIP 0E
XA?ERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
‘ EulS Pl‘BLlCATION BE RESTRICTED MOEEICIM. USE ONLY.
I “P AVA " "rim" N'“ 3. RHINQM’I Arreseiun N».
3.11? "" ° W U 8200 __

.
. u r .ue \ II“ t era" It!

TRANSLATIONS 0N ussa semen mo TECHNOLOGY - ruvsxcm. 4 Jenna
scmwcss AND TECHNOLOGY. (P000 1/79)

  
    
   
  

   
 

 
  
     
    

    

6.

.- gulu-lng ﬁnalisation Rep.
0.

7. Ambush)

  
      
     
    
   
 

'- Nth-mu... lljemhllion Nae: .mJ Adm-u
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

W. l’volttI/Tashl'olh Unll No.

II Connect/Gun No.
l). Type of Report a Petlod
Coveted

I). Sim-mum: (nun-u... Nana ml Maven

As above

‘- M-su." l a

The report contains infornation on aeronautics; astronony and astrophysics;
ataospheric sciences; chcaistry; earth sciences and oceanography: electronics

and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; nathenatical

sciences; cybernetics. computers: lechanical. industrial. civil. and narina
engineering; nethods and equip-ant; nisaile technology; navigation.
communications. detection, and comterleaaures. nuclear science and technology: '
ordnance: physics: propulsion and fuels: space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

. h.) ‘IIJ‘ .mJ "Iran-at Ralph. .- Ill-eclipse"-

ussg Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and
Astronomy Energy Conversion Conunicatione
Astrophysics Haterials Detection and
Ataospheric Science! Hathaaatics Countermeasures
Chenistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Coaputers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Indmtriel Engineering Ordnance

Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics

Oceanography Methods Propulsion and Fuels

”‘- “a antler" “VIM-Odd Tush Equip-ant sue. Technology

in. c «Nun u-u/i-mp 01.03.00.07,08,09.10.11.12.13,16,16.17,18. ”30.21.22

II. Avasldnleiy realm-s m 2|. No. oi Pages
For Official Use Only. Linlted . “ - ' . . 52
lit-her of Copies Available Free JPRS ’ m

' °"" ""’” "'" ""’ ms toss an at neesooucen "“°"“°‘ "”’""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/ezoo
4 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(rouo 1/79)
Conn-ms PAes.

CYBERNB‘I‘ICS. commas AND MENTION mm

Develop-ant of the Main “non of as M
(N. H. Shawnanko; wcmsum'mm 1mm
smmtsncntsm SM. SBORNIK sum, Vol 2,

1977)aaeaeaoaaoao.aaoaooooetoooaoeooooo000.000.000.000... 1

Solving Probl-a of Coapatihility when veins Yes-A527. and
Yes-A528 Dink Checking Packets
(2h. Paakalav. I. Nanov: wmsnrm'mu mm
sorsmnuamsm mun. smut sum, Vol 2.

1977).lI....00...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOODOCOOOOOOO 7

A

Dink Suhayatal of 29 thtaa
(B. Druev. et al.; ncumum'mu mum
sorrsmtsncunsxm 8M. smut sum, Vol 2.

1977).00OO0000OIOo00oooooaoooooooooooooooooa0000000000000 1.)

intonation on Nov Hardware of the Yes m
(wenmm’mn 1mm so'rsmrsumsm SW.
SW“ mm. v01 2. 1977)...0......0:00.000000000000000 22

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL mmmmc

Calculating the Characteriatica of Antennae in the For. a:
Loaded Arraya Suapended' Low Above the Earth ﬂith Daaped
Periodicity
(0. no ruuhtn, .t .10; ”Immp N0 9’ 197a)aaoaaoc 3°

CMEYSICS, mm AND SPACE

Plane Internal Haven Ariains in a Stratifiall Plaid During
Plow Around a Marci-Discharge System
(V. t. Nikiahm. A. a. Stetaenko; cmmum.
m 36’ 1’77)I.00O000.00.....OOCOOOOCOOOOOO0.000UOOOOOOOOC. 36

-a- [III-ussn-nsa'rrouol
ma 091‘:an use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page

8013111813 AND SCIBN'HPIC ORGANIZATIWS

Nikolny Androycvtch deayevakty
(Yo. A. Kozlovokiy. at a1.; SOVE'I‘SKAYA GEOLOGIYA,
m 10. 1978)....0.0.000.005....0DOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOC. ‘3

Yevgenty Villa-ouch Kama
(Ye. A. Koxlovokty. at £11.; SOVBTSKAYA GEOLOGIYA.
m 10’ 1978)....OQOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOIOII ‘7

Sonny Globovtch Malian: (1920-1978)
(MUMO-TEKHNICHBSKAYA mom'rsna. SHIYA I -

ORGANIZATSIYA I IETODIKA INFORMATSIONMY mm,
“9’ 1978)....0...‘0.00.0000...OOCIOOOOOIOCOOOICOOIOQO ‘9

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBBRNETICS. COMPUTERS AND AUTGM‘PIO‘N WWW

DMWEN’F N THE MAIN MRY 0? YES EV“

Moscow WCHISLITBL'NAYA mmrn SOISIALIS‘HCHBSKIKH STEAM. 830”“ STATE?
in Russian Vol 2 1977 pp 5-10

[Article by Candidate or Technical Sciences N. H. Bharunenko, chief of
departmt of NI‘l‘sM (USSR), from the collection: 'Vychislitel'naya tekhnika
sotsialisticheskikh stran. Sbornik statey" edited by H. Ye. Rakovakiy]

[Text] The last decade has been characterized by significant changes in
mute: technology and progress is being observed in the field or software.
especially in development or operational systems of the cosponent base and
technology of oosputers, the structure and ntthods of constructing processors
and also all types of memory.

Along with introduction of mltiprogran operaticn and tine-sharing, the
"second generation” has experienced nicroprogran control and hierarchical
nenory of oosputers.

The hierarchical principle of constructing the internal storage, ﬁrst used
during the 1950's, is . beginning to be used efficiently only now with the
appearance of the sero-access large-capacity butter storage operating in
conputation tempo and with isprovenent of methods or intonation exchange
between the main and buffer storage.

An internal buffer storage (OP) should now have the intorntion capacity of
units-tens of bytes. we recall that the main internal storage had this
capacity in second-generation machines of Iediun productivity.

The speed of the buff“ storage should now oomrise tens of nanoseconds and
the overall diumions and consul-ed power should be mini-um, which would
permit location or the butter storage in the processor rack, occupying
several percent of its volune in this case.

Besides buffer (1’, the use of different low-capacity control internal storage

having the same high speed is also provided in the structure of a mdern
processor.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The microprogram principle of control and accordingly microprogram storage
have now begun to be used in all classes of machines, including highly pro-
ductive machines. As is known, this saves equipment, considerably increases
the structural flexibility of the machine, permits one to have a variable
instruction system and so on.

Hicroprogram storage. both as a constant and in some cases as with opera-
tional information exchange, may have flexibility up to 100 Kbytes and
should be located without fail in the processor rack. The requirement on
the speed of these devices is perhaps higher -- it should be within the
range of tens of nanoseconds for highly productive computers. The require-
ment on the packing density of the microprogram storage device components
is also high among processor storage devices (ZU) since otherwise delays

in connections and contacts will increase impermissibly, which leads to a
loss of speed of the working principle of the central processor control.

Thus, the most coaplex requirements are placed on the microprogram storage
among processor storage devices and the maximum attention should be devoted
to its optimum design.

The main internal storage is the most complex and expensive subassembly in
a hierarchical storage system and until now this type of storage determines
the level of development of storage technology as a whole.

The requirements on increasing the information capacity of the main storage
from hundreds of kilobytes to tens of megabytes are tow being increased.
The use of integrated circuits in the storage considerably increases the
information capacity of the buffer storage and the actual speed of the
storage system approaches the speed of the buffer.

The requirements on reducing the cost of the device increase with regard
to the significant increase of the main storage capacity. Fer example,
the storage of a large machine having capacity of 4 Hbytes will cost 2
million rubles, which is unacceptable for the machine as a whole. compared
to the traditional cost of the main internal storage (COP) equal to S

kopecks/bit for many serial computers.

Another important problem which should be resolved by developers of the
main storage with r ard to an increase of its capacity is to increase the
dependability of the device. This should be achieved first by an additional
increase of the efficiency range of modules from which the storage is cons
structed. Second, efficient correcting codes (of the Hanmdng coda typo)
must be used when storing information in the storage.

In this case expenditures for redundant equipment in the control device and
storage adapter and also an increase of its physical digit capacity are

justified. Byte organization of the computing process used in the Yes svu
helps to effectively solve this problem since the checking digits of bytes,
usually employed in the processor to check for evenness, may be used in the

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

main storage. It is not always necessary in this case to increase the physi-
cal digit capacity of the main storage.

we also note the problems of realizing the aain storage from standardised
nodules of the sane type, transfer of some logic operations. for example.
such as recording and reading control, and checking and correction of errors
to the "processor-storage" adapter, which minimizes the logic functions of

the storage nodules and contributes to their standardization within the
Unified Computer system.

Trends and methods of realizing new requirements on the storage device.
Regardless of the class of machine of the improved Unified System. the pro-
cessor storage should be related to zero-access storage devices. 'lhis cate-
gory includes large buffer storage. nicroprogram storage, superhigh-speed
processor registers (RON). small control storage. protective key storage.
auxiliary small buffer stores and so on.

an the enumerated storage devices are joined to the cosputer and central
control device into a single structural subassenbly to increase the speed
of information exchange and processing in the processor for the purpose of
minimizing commications delays.

The hierarchy of a comuter internal storage is constructed so that the
effective information volume of the main buffer storage is equal to the

OOP capacity and the effective speed of information exchange of the main
storage with the processor approaches the speed of the main buffer. This

is achieved by page organization of the information file stored in the memory
and by sequent or block exchange of information between the buffer and OOP.
no property of the cyclic nature of programs with multiple access to the
sane group of addresses, frequently inside a page. is realized in this case.
The greater the numer of page segments placed in the buffer fro- the 00?,
the closer its effective cycle is to the cosputer cycle.

The machine operates in the multiprogran mode. Page segsents from different
problem should be placed in the buffer to achieve maximum productivity and.
consequently, the buffer storage capacity should be sufficiently large.

There in a connection of the buffer capacity to the min storage capacity
which determines the effectiveness of nultiprogram operation of the coaputer.
However, the upper range of the main buffer capacity should be selected on
the basis of economic concepts in realization of satisfactory probable
"percent success" at the Ila-rents of access to the buffer for different pro-
gram situations.

Based on the need to fulfill these requirements, the buffer storage capacity
should be within the range of 8-32 Kbytes, depending on the class of machine
and the capacity and speed of the 00?.

The buffer storage cycle should not be less than 100 ns and should essen-
tially not depend on the class of machine of the Yes.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is no doubt of the use of bipolar integrated storage microcircuita as
cowonents of the buffer and other devices of the processor storage during
the next decade. This is achieved in the buffer device by using bipolar
nicrocircuits with integration of 128-256 bits in the housing and with
selection time of less than 45 ns. hn exanple of this microcircuit is the
ESL microcircuit 500110410 with integration of 256 bits. we design of the
buffer storage should be coapletely identical to that of the processor sub-
assemblios, in which the nodule is a typical replacement conponent (T82).
Solution of the problem of heat dissipation in processor storage devices
of all types requires a great deal of attention since this may affect the
design principle of the processor as a whole.

Bipolar nicrocircuite with integration of 64 bits in the housing may be
used for fast registers and small buffer and control storage. which should
have high- r speed compared to the main butter. The 583. microcircuit 500de
with access time of l5 ns may be presented as an example.

High requirements on microprogram storage. which was discussed in detail
above. limit the selection of integrated microcircuits. A microcircuit with
integration of a minimum of 1.024 bits in the housing is suitable to realize
a micmprogram storage with capacity up to 1.00 Kbytes built into the pro-
cessor. An electrically programmed microcircuit of a permanent storage of
type $001P49 with typical access time of 25 ns and integration of 1,024
bits may be considered as an exanple for constructing a permanent micro-
program storage. The ESL microcircuit 500120415 with integration of 1,024
bits, having access tin of 45 ns. may be considered for a microprogram
storage with operational information exchange.

This speed is inadequate for highly productive machines. Hicrocircuits
having access tire of not more than 20 us are required.

One my assune that a bipolar storage microcircuit with integration of

l Kbit or more per housing with access time of less than 15 ns will be used
in the future in all processor storage devices of highly productive con-
puters of the Unified System.

The main internal storage. Hicroierrites will as the main storage cospo-
nents in the mnory of large-series machines of the Yes in the near future.
The presently developed production capacities permit one to have lower cost
of ferrite stores conpared to the cost of other types of magnetic storage.

The use of a rapid-access buffer storage of increased capacity in modern
couputers temporarily reduced the requirement on the speed of the main
internal storage. which was discussed above. This in turn altered the ten-
dency in ferrite OP to constantly reduce the core diameter in new develop-
ments to achieve high speed of the storage device each time.

A cycle of 0.7-1 ms and access time of 0.3-0.5 as are easily realized on
cores with diaseter of 0.45-0.6 an. Therefore, the main problem of the
developers of a ferrite internal storage should include finding economical
design-production solutions for constructing stores using completely

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

integratmi. but inexpensive electronics. Expenditures for checking operations
and electronic framing subaseenblies: microcircuits, printed cards and atruco
turai components. rather than cores and wiring now cosprise the main fraction
of the cost of ferrite storage devices.

'lhe polemics of developers in selecting the system of organizing the ferrite
storage, which depends in each specific case on the purpose and capabilities.
has now lost its sharpness. The 30 system has become met widespread in
three-wire stores. Positive experience has been accumulated in realization
of the OP of the Yes BVH by a 2 1/20 system, which has increased speed and
therefore permits one to use cores of somewhat greater dimensions, which
facilitates wiring.

The appearance of microcircuits of medium degree of integration for con-
struction of completely integrated framing of OP permits one to realise two-
wir: stores by 2 1/20 and 20 systems, which finally eliminates the problem-
of wiring. However. main attention should be concentrated on inroving the
nodule designs of ferrite OP.

Thus, it was possible to achieve an information capacity of 2 Mbytes (the
minimum couplete set of 009) in two standard racks of the Yes-3206 together
with the electric power supply upon conversion to the modular principle of
constructing the main internal storage blocks of the Yes-1060 machine. The
microsecond cycle was realized in the Yes-3206 on cores 0.6 an in diameter
in modules with capacity of. 64 bytes with three-wire planar store con-
structed by the 2 1/20 system.

It should be noted for conparison that when making up a set of conplete
storage of the same capacity with Yes-3203 racks (from the Yes-1030 computer),
16 of them would be required.

The use of nodular designs of ferrite so in new models of the Yes M permits
a significant change of expenditures in large-series production, significantly
siqtlifies operation and increases the dependability of the main internal
storage. The ”facilitated" logic of the standardized module permits easy

use of it in various types of couputers of the mified System and rigid
standardization of the "storage-processor" interface for models of different
productivity is not required in this case.

The following step yields a significant technical-economic effect -& conver-
sion to totally planar design of the ferrite stores of Yes. The length and
nusber of connections can be reduced sharply and wire installation can be
coapletely eliminated by a certain increase in the dimensions of printed-
circuit cards, which couprise the basis of the design. and sore cowact in-
stallation of cores in the store. The potentials of the power supply sources
with an overall reduction of consumed power are decreased in this case.
conversion to n planar design permits configuration density up to 100-120
bits/cm3 in the internal storage module. This means that an 00? with elec-
tric power supply with capacity of 4-6 Hbytes may be located in the rack of

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the Unified System for a highly productive machine and that the main storage
can be placed in the processor rack in a machine of medium productivity.
The specific cost of these 20 should not be greater than 0.3-0.5 kopecks/bit.

Semiconductor Iain internal storage will cospete with the ferrite storage.
which was discussed above, as serial production is developed and the cost
or at)? microoircuite with integration of 4,096 bits in the housing is re-
duced. The density of packing the storage elements in the not of this
semiconductor storage may exceed loo bits/m3. The xsesmnn microcircuit
may be considered as an example for construction of this storage.

An internal storage with capacity of 8 bytes in the rack of the Yes. con-
structed on these circuits, has an access cycle of not more than 800 ns and
access time of not more than 600 us with consumed power or not more than

a nu.

It is natural that a modular design is also used in a semiconductor storage.
Therefore. an internal storage with capacity of 0.5-2 mytes in the term of
one-two panels of the Yes may be built into the processor cabinet in medium-
capacity Yes machines.

Oospletion of development and serial introduction of HOP microcircuits with
integration of 16 leits in the housing will make it possiblc to have the
internal storage of the Yes EVH built into the processor rack. We feel that
this coincides in tile with the active phase of completing conversion from
ferrite to semiconductor integrated 20.

Future 09. One should expect the appearance of a storage which we shall
call multilevel in the 1980's. 'lhis device will have a very large capacity
up to 1011-1012 bits) and hierarchical organization with unified design
tor-elation and speed equal to that of the buffer zu. The main store of the
multilevel OP may be either electrooptical with the holographic or hit prin-
ciple or information storage or cathode-ray with energy-independent storage
medium. The me of charge-coupled devices (P28) or a medium with controlled
cylindrical magnetic domains (Tenn) in the main store is not excluded. It
is also clear that rapid storage blocks of a multilevel OP will be made
exclusively on seniconductor nicrocircuits with high degree of integration.

The me of a lultilevel internal storage of this type requires review of

the structure and perhaps of the operatin' principle of computers. an.
appearance of OP using tunnel cryotrons may be predicted at the and of the

1980's. This OP will obviously have a degree of integration identical to
semiconductor storage, with higher speed and very low consumed power.
common-r: 'Irdatol'stvo "Statistika", 1977

6521
cso: sun/031.0

6 _

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYDBRNB‘NCS. COMPUTERS AND AUTONNPION TECHNOUOGY

SOLVING FIDDLEHS OP CWATIBILITY WHEN USING YES-A527 AND YES-A528 DISK
CHECKING PACKETS

Moscow WCRISLITBL'NhYA TEKHNIKA SUPSIALIS‘I‘ICHESKIKH STERN. SBORNIK STATE?
in Russian Vol 2 1977 pp 39-46

[Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences 2h. Paskalev, senior scientific
worker of WT (Bulgaria), and mechanical engineer 1. lvanov. office chief

of the storage device plant (Bulgaria). from the collection "Vychislitel'naya
tckhnika sotsialisticheskikh stran. Sbornik statey" edited by :4. Ya. '
Rakovskiy]

[Text] An increase in the capacity of interchangeable magnetic disk stores
is achieved by two methods: by increasing the longitudinal recording den-
sity and by increasing the number of tracks. Both methods lead to an in-
crease of requirements on the adjustment accuracy in providing coapatibility.

One of the most important problem in production and operation of devices
with interchangeable disk packets is cospatibility, i.e., the possibility

of correctly reading the information on a given store that is recorded on
another store and vice versa. Two types of adjustments of the floating mag-
netic heads of the stores: tangential -- with respect to the direction of
motion of the heads -- and radial -- with respect to the accuracy of posi-
tioning the head on a given track -- are made to provide coupatibility.

Tangential adjustment is carried out at the manufacturing plant. The plant
guarantees retention of tangential adjustment when a defective head is re-
placed. The tangential adjustment is checked by using a checking packet.
The problems related to radial adjustment of floating magnetic heads will
mainly be considered in this article.

The Yes-A527 six-dis): checking packet. The configuration of the gaps of
the magnetic heads and tracks for stores with six-disk interchangeable pac-
ket (of type Yes-5052) is given in the standard 150/018-2864. There are

10 each floating magnetic heads on each store which form two row of 5 each
or both sides of the plane passing through the spindle access. The access
mid-line is formed at the intersection of this plane with the disk surfaces.
The heads are moved parallel to this line during positioning.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I’ICML USK ONLY

 

Piguro 1. Arrangount of Gun of ﬂood on track: 1 -- tunnol
oroouro gap; 2 -- rocord-road gap: 3 -- accooo nio-
lino

KEY: l. Direction of rotation

uch hood has two working gaps (Figure 1'»: o rocord-road 2 and tunnol
orunro l. The tunnol oraouro gop consists of two porto. It in obvious
that tho vidth of tho track (tho rocording troco on tho dioh ourfaco) with
0.2 I imadiotoly otter tho rocord-rood gap is linitod by tho tunnol ora-
ouro gap to 0.13 ll. Arranging tho gopo of tho hood! to tho right (typo A)
and to tho loft (typo 3) iron tho accooo aid-lino 3 io ohovn in Figaro 2.
whoro Pa - 10.861 u, '8 - 11.999 an and 9 - 4’54'.

9 2 g I 4
“’4"? x. 3'! ’Y \\ ,
. r‘" '."~’.
. II 1 ‘Ir/ 1

’ \
'r" ’1
I I ,.....-- ‘ |
\ ‘ LfmgliiJI
’ m -_ 33...!
. 3 '

l'iguro 2. Diiforont Pooitions of hood Capo With Roopoct to Acton
Lino: o -- typo a hood; I: -- typo A hood: 1 -- tunnol
oraouro gap: 2 -- rocord-road gap: 3 -- accooo aid-lino:
I" - 10.861 II! P; - 11.999 In: 9 - “54'

I.

m: l. Dimtion of rotation

My of tho tracks on tho dial: packot is finally for-d aftor tho tunnol
oraonro. mntoro. tho loan voluo of tho onto: and innor rodii of tho
ring which in tho rooording track on the disk ouriaco io takon at tho track
radiuo. sinco tho aid-pointo o! tho tunnol aroouro gapo of tha loft one!
right hoods aro locatod ot ditforont diotanceo from tho accooo aid-lino.
tho track rodii will also bo difioront for typo A and typo a hoodo. Tho
only trod: for which tho rodii of tho loft and right hoado coincido in
track 073. (no soy ooncludo tron this that thoro io only ono roal cylindor
-- an .. on tho dial: pockot and all tho mining cylindoro aro arbitrary.

. ‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

 

rig-uto J. Positioning of ﬂoods on cylindor on. 1 - mid-point
of gop of orosing hood B; 2 -- mid-point of gap of
ornsing hoad A

Stop 9 to which tho hoods oro novod during pooitioning is constant and is
oquol to 0.2567 so. It is obvious tron Piguro 3, whoro tho positioning of
the hoods on cylinder 07: is shown. that :adius 9,, or longitudinal track n
is not a linoas function of spocing ond is oxptossod by tho formulas [2]:

R ".127...
u slu(ottl¢nf:)

's

3,, . -— 3‘ -.
Mn (otclg 7,—1.-
n

1'ho distances a,“ and Mn” no colculotod by tho formulas:

Il.‘ .- u,, + (73-—n) s,
”a. 5‘ ”a + (Ki-MS.

Tho volus of tho rodius of cylindor 073 in givon as P13 - 146.50? I! in tho
otondoxd ISO/01841864, fro- which it is oasy to colculato an, - 146.1039 .
ond 10733 I 1.5.9141 III (ton tho valuos of P3 and '3.

ma odjustnontol tho ugnotic hoods consisto in psociso setting of tho-
on ttoch on. which is dotoninod by tho playbook signol. Accordim to tho
concspts indicotod obovo. tho signal for rodiol adjust-mt is taken fro. tho
tunnol orasm winding by a special adaptor. which is connoctod bouoon tho

hood and tho nod prosoplifior. rothos than (to. tho rood winding.

A now uthod of signol xocording for rodiol adjuot-ont o! tho floating hub

is uood in tho chocking pockets pxoducod in Bulgaria, which consists in tho

following. A sosios of pulses and pouos (Piguro 4) aro rocotdod oltos'notoly
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

 

figure 4. Arrangement of series of Pulses and Pauees on Tracks:
1 and 2 -- auxiliary tracks: 3 -- head: 4 -- index
groove: 5 -- adjusting track

on two concentrically arranged auxiliary heads 1 and 2. equally separated
fro- pre-ealectad adjusting track 5. huntiliary heads 1 and 2 are located
at a distance fro- the aid-line of adjusting track 5 that the gap of the
head 3 encoupasses part of tracks 1 and 2 with approrieste adjuetunt of it.
than these puts are identical, head 3 is correctly adjusted. Engagement
of the parts of the outer and inner tracks are judged by signals induced in
the head winding. An image similar to that shown in Figure 5 is observed
on the cacillograph screen won synchronization due to index groove e and
with rough adjust-am of the head. this inge is obtained if the gap head
mocapasses the greater part of the inner auxiliary track 1 and the outer
auxiliary head 2 to a lesser extent [ll (see Figure 4).

magma; .Eaisia'

Pigure 5. Shape of Sicmals on Oscillograph Screen

            

   
   

     

‘l'he inaccuracy of head adjust-ant can be detersined by the tor-ula

‘7 micron.

l: wobble is essentially absent in the store spindle and if the head is
comctly adjusted. a rectangular iaags is observed on the oacillograph
screen (Home 6). Blight deviations from a rectangular inge due to acro-
uamnossea of the aagnetic coating of the disk usually occur, but they are
very ineignificant and do not enact adjmt-eat accuracy.

10

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

A very imortant advantage of the method. beaidce high eeneitivity and good
clarity, in the poeeibility of determining dynanic wobble or the epindle.

if there in wobble. an image einilar to that ehown in Figure 7 ie vieible

on the oecillograph ecreen. The location of eubaoeeebliee a and c ie re-
lated to the relative poeitione of the epindle and index groove eccentricity.
windle wobble (domle eccentricity) is determined by the formula

9' - 50-9;- micron.

 

rigure 6. Shape of signal on Oecillograph Screen With Proper
hdjuetoent

 

figure 7. Shape of signal on Oecillograph Screen in the Preeehce
of Wobble

The one when radial adjustment ie anode without an adapter (the eignal ie
obtained tron the winding of the recordoread head rather than fro. the

winding o.‘ the erasing head) ie of intereet. bet ue coneider how thie
adjustment affects positioning accuracy [d].

The radii of the circlee which are deeoribed by the nid-pointe of the re-
cord-read gape during rotation of the dirk packet, are denoted by inn and
H133, reepectively, in figure a. where the position or the heade on track
073 is ehown. in view of the fact that in the general case “A 9' "n“ (accor-

dingly. “‘3 f ”n3" one can etate that edjmteent or the heade without en
adapter introducee an incorroctable error into the accuracy of poeitioning
the heads with reepect to the geocetric rediue or the head.

it the origin of the coordinate eyeteu ie placed at the center of rotation
o! the dial: packet. one can write that the aid-point: Pu and Pa (and
accordingly P13 and P23) or the head gape will have the following coordinates:

1]

FOR OFFICIAL US): ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. U83 ONLY

 

Pigm 8. Position of and: on Track 073

KIA I J; y“ 2.: sz‘ ._ Fa;

I'M - F»: NM =- i'u -‘ l:
m - - F»; m - 1/RE,— Pi;
tn - -Fa: yu- m y.» +!.

Mii In“ an I“. m calm-tad by the tor-nu:

 

(an;

rigm 9. Bout-Lucien of Track with um m:

m. 1. Item 2. tracks
12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The error which in obtained during radial adjustment without an adapter in
equal to the dlfierence (HM - It“) (and accordingly "“8 - PM). If track

07.1 ie used as the ndjuoting track, the error will be 8.5 micrena. 'ihe error
also varies nonlineerly due to the nonlinear dependence of radius I!“ on

spacing s. reaching itn auxin-um value of 18 nicrone en the outer traoka 000
and 202 (Figure 9).

Pain: A (Figure 9) indicates the track where thie error in equal to zero:
RM unit“ (and accordingly. 158-. Thie in a case when the atraight
line connecting the mid-point: of thg gape of the record-read and eraeure
heads become a chord which eervee he the base of an equilateral triangle
with the apex at the center of the dick.

/:’--

(2)41an 4mm

 

__I.- ﬂy):

|< —- .—

rigure lo. Arrangement of nsm Magnetic Reade of Me A and
me a: l -- elite of record-read headay 2 -- band
of eraeing heads: 3 -- die):

 

m:

1.1ypeaheed 3.1ypeAhead
2. Spacing

The Yes-A528 ll-diek checking packet. The configuration of NS!!!) floating
Iagnetic hcade Yes-5061 with capacity of 29 bytes ie determined by atamiard
ISO/0164564. The arrangement of type A and a heade on the right and left
of the access mid-line is shown in Figure 10. Recording ia accoepliahed on
the tracke by the working elit of the record-read head i. but final formation
of the width and arrangement of the tracka is detenined by the hands of
erasing head 2. Similarity of tunnel erasure in use: res-5052 ie achieved.

The difference is that the signal read fro. the winding of the eraeing head
cannot he need here for radial adjuetnent [3].

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

A sore detailed drawing (Figure 11) with the dimensions of the head elements
shows that the poles of erasing head 2 are located very close to the slit
of the record-read head.

.__.._-;_'__'_' ‘1

[- l‘ J .3. 3|

-.~_ , k: “I

.-<-‘--'—3’----——-— l
my]; n.’.'._.i
L 331.!

Figure ll. Ital Dimensions of Head: 1 -- gap of record-read head:
2 -- strip of erasing head

Rec); 073 is also detereined as the adjusting track for Yes-5061 store.
Since the adjustment signal is taken from the record-read head. an incor-
reotable error is introduced into the radial adjustment. which reaches 3.5
uicrons for the outer tracks 000 and 202 due to the close proximity of the
record-read slit to the poles of the erasing head. ﬂow is the radius of
“bug”,- track 8,. actually determined? A model which reflects the
head configuration (Figure 12): point A is the mid-point of the slit of.
the record-read head; point H is the "mid-point" o: the erasing head (this
is an imaginary point which is introduced for better understanding of the
track geometry); HP is a straight line along which point M moves during
search and it is parallel to access mid-line H: point N determines the
radius of track 0.73; and r... is the distance from access aid-line to point
a, is coqilad to determine it.

The (allowing functions follow from Figure a:

”pal/R3113“ F?!" (1)
MPmNP+S(73--n). (2)
Ra, - V'Mrn + £3 , (3)

where s - 0.2567 an is the spacing of the gear rack to which the heads are
eechanicslly attached to the given track: n is the water of the track whose

radius is calculated (n - 0-202); and R573 - 148.05? a is the radius of
track 073.

let us stbstitute expression (1) into (2) . than
14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 12. Model Reflecting Bead Conﬁguration

 

MP VRan— + S (73-..). “’

not us now substitute expression (4) into (3):

 

m,- VlVR:,,—P.+sm—nw+n. (5)

Based on the values established in standard ISO/01545“ and after stall
amputations. we find In I 11.923 us.

The radius of the arbitrary track may now be calculated:

tip-147.3137 In:
.uP-Iu.srs7+om1 (re—n);

a“ - Mum 7"

The track radius for type a heads on the left of the access aid-line is
also deternined in eiailar fashion.

The method of recording the aignala for radial adjuetnnt of floating
magnetic heads used in the Bulgarian checking packets has the folloving
advantages cospared to the nethod used by Ian and 3A8? connotes:

higher sensitivity (the sane deviation of a given head tron precise adjut-
nant yields less variation of the insge on the oscillograph screen than when
using the m: packet):

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

4.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ivanov, 1. and 2h. Packaiov. “noted an upis nu niqnnli an radinlnn
nactroyka na plcwchchi glavi i kontrolon dick u ovnhchoatvyavnnoto
In,“ Author's certificate No. 22470/17 January 1973.

Pashiev. 2h. and I. Ivanov, ”Nyakoi v"proai no geomtriyacn nn
profscpico nu gloviee i pistito v"rkhu sheatdiakaviyu pant, nv“rzani

c on“uhchutvynvanoto na vacuums: mczhdu wan." 111124 National
Conference on Couputor Tochnology. Sofia. 14-15 October 1974. collection
of reports, Vol. 3.

Puknlev, an. and I. Ivanov. “Yes-A527 and Yes-3528 checking Dink Paekou,“
Doklnd na nillpoziumite po vxenua na izlozhbite nn b'igauka izohiniitolnc
tckhnixa v Hoakva i Vilnyus, 1976.

Pockalov. z. and I. Ivanov. "scrojenie pmnieniovo glowicy paliooi
dyekouych." TECHNIKA ZAGRANICZN . No. 10. Warsaw, 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdnccl'sevo "swastika", 1977

6521
(:80: 81441035 0

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNE‘I'ICS. COI‘PUI‘ERS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOIDGY

DISK SUBSYSTPH (P 29 “BY?“

Moscow WCIIISLITEL'NAYA TEKHNIKA SOPSIALIS‘HCNBSKIKN 8m. EDWIN swam
in Runaian Vol 2 1977 pp 72-77

[article by a. bunny. scientific worker grade 1, M (Bulgaria). 14.
Terpesheva, scientific worker grade 2, 1w (Bulgaria), 101. Rehev, scientific
worker grade 2, WT (Bulgaria) and s. Danchev. scientific worker grade 2,
M (Bulgaria) from the collection “vychislitel'naya tekhnika
eotaialisticheakikh atran. Sbornik statey" edited by )1. Ya. Rakovshiyl

[west] The 29-Mte dis): subsysten is designed to operate in nodels of
the Yes we and is an external magnetic disk storage with direct access and
high capacity. The subsystem configuration contains the Yes-5561 store
control device (on). Yes-$061 stores (nsm) and Yes-5261 magnetic disk
packets or ones equivalent to then.

Cowlex delivery of the 29-Mte system has significant advantages comered
to delivery of individual devices. The supplying plant of the subsystn
bears cowlete guarantee and service responsibility for the subsystem as a
whole. Delivery of the subsystem guarantees considerably higher quality and
dependability of the devices contained in it cospared to the variant or
delivery and joining of individual devices. The presence of operational
docuantation for the subsystem optinally ties in the cleete set or up
[spare parts). the service apparatus and cosplex of maintenance programs
(mo) and also routine Iaintenance. The presence of standards £or inter-
faces between devices penits expansion of each specific suleystee by con-
necting the stores or one or another type which seat the corresponding re-
quirennts.

The 29-May“ disk subsystem has the following main characteristics:
individual store capacity -- 29.2-106 bytes;
Ianilun capacity 0! the subsystem -- 233.6406 bytes:

speed of data exchange with the channel -- 312 mus/e:

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFHHAI. USE ONLY

three-phase power supply of the subsystem -- 380/220 V. 50 "a, and consumed
power of not more than 9 mm ( for maximum configuration).

The 29-Mbyte disk subsystem consists of a single control device with the
possibility of connecting from one to nine NSMD. A maximum of eight usm
is logically connected to the channel. One of the stores may be identified
as a reserve. It operates autonomously with the 00.

Each store has a single access mechanism carrying 20 magnetic record-playback
heads, by means of which access to data recorded on the replaceable disk
packet is achieved. The interchangeable magnetic disk store control device
(Yes-5561) logically connects the store addressed by the input-output in-
struction to the channel. performs a sequence of operations given by the
input-output instruction, exchanges data between the channel and the
selected store, checks the reliability of data during the exchange and
presents information about the state of the selected store to the channel.
The interchangeable mmmctic dink store (Yes-5061) sets the access mechanism:
selects the necessary record-playback head. records and plays back data and
accosplishes the possibility of the security of data located in the packet.
The Yes-S261 interchangeable mgnetic disk packet stores information re-
corded on the mgnetic surfaces. The data recorded on the packet may be
read in any store.

intonation is recorded and played back from the magnetic surfaces of the
interchangeable disk by mans of 20 record-read heads. The heads arranged
vertically are soved by the access mechanism. They float above the disk
surface in the working state.

The interchangeable packet contains 203 concentric information cylinders,
200 of which are working and 3 are reserve. Information is recorded or
played back from one cylinder without displacing the access unchanism.

The density of data recording on cylinder 000 is 60 bits/mm and that on
cylinder 202 is 90 bits/m. The average access time is 50 II. the saximm
is 80 ms and the minimum is 20 ms.

The 29-14mm disk subsystem uses a data format which cospletely corresponds
to ISO requirements. Organization of the track and recording on the track
are the same as in 7-myte disks.

The Yes-$261 interchangeable disk packet is cospletely interchangeable with
those of foreign cospanien such as IBM, sass. moss): and so on.

Exchange of data with the cosputer channel is byte-by-byte in parallel --
eight information bits and one checking bit. Exchange of data with the
stores is in series bit-by-bit. The checking bit is not recorded on the
disk surface. It is termed by the control device during readout.

The problem of parallel-series conversion of information is contained in
the 00 function of the subsystem.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The control device calculates two checking bytes. which are added at the end
of each recording. when recording data on the packet. 111a correctness of
information playback is checked by new calculation of the checking bytes and
by cenporinnn or them with the checking bytes recorded on the track. mesa
checking bytes. nre calculated an an inversion of the remainder of dividing
the information bytes in a given recording by the polynomial l + :15.

no control device adds an additional byte (byte EC) after the checking
bytes. It is calculated as inversion of the total nuber of bits (module
256) of the synchronous byte. the infer-nation bytes and the first checking
byte of the given recording. Byte ac is again calculated and compared to
the recorded byte when reading data.

1110 checking bytes and byte ac are not entered in the input-output channel.
'lhe 29-Mte disk subsystem performs the entire set of operations required
for operation of the 005 and 05 operational systems.

At the same time the subsystem has the following characteristic features:

it is possible to carry out multitrack instructions of the read and search
WP"

recording and processing of a transient recording are possible.

instructions of type "Continue scanning” are performed which are used to
process the transient recording on the defect or reserve track;

six bytes of the refined state. which retain information about the type of
malfunction, are formed in cases of malfunctions:

The possibility of moving these recordings along the track is provided
when defects are detected in the domains of the natural address and recording
N:

there is the possibility of reserving the stores for working only with a
single channel for the time while the channel making the reservation ro-

leases the stores when the subsystem is connected to two input-output
channels.

The 29-Mte subsystem is connected to the selector channel of the (mined
System cosputer through the standard input-output interface of the Yes m.
The channel capacity should not be less than 312 bytes/s.

since the control device is two-channel, there is the possibility of access
to the subsystem stores either from two channels of a single colputer or
from a single channel of each of two different cosputers. The stores are
reserved and released by the channel through the control device.

an. input-output chmnel selects the given store by means of its logic
address. The logic address of the store is given by the logic address box

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is located on the front panel of the store. The logic address is
changed by simle replacement of this box.

Moreover. each store is characterized by its own physical address. The
physical address determines the real store in the subsystem. The control
device transmits the physical address of the store to the channel in the
fourth byte of the refined state.

The sicroprogran principle of realizing the control device of the subsystem
per-its one to rapidly check in sufficient volume. without additional equip-
sent and test programs, the correct functioning of the subsystem.

There are three levels of microprogran diagnostics:

scanning the continuous recording device of the subsystem um
checking the executive logic of the subsystem control device:
checking the correct functioning of the stores together with the W.

Microinstructions are read sequentially in the scanning mode. In this case
a check is made for the oddness of the address and of the contents of the
nieroinstruction.

Hicrodiagnostic tests stored in the continuous recording device of the

W are used to check the efficiency of the executive logic. The following
us equipmnt can be checked by using these tests: the arithmetic-logic
device mm, the cannon register block, the nicroprogran conversion block
and the SN register block.

Operation with the stores is also checked by using built-in nicrodiagnostic
tests. These tests are designed to work with the reserve store to which
logic address '5" is assigned. It is isportant to note that they can be
carried out identically both in the autonomous node to check the efficiency
or to find malfunctions and in the systems node, without interfering in this
case with the joint operation of the subsystem and channel.

Performing the nicrodiagnostic tests in the systems node is possible only
when the subsystem is free of performing channel programs. The procedures
of loading and performing the tests are identical in both modes.

All three types of nicroprogras diagnostics are organized so that a luninous
display of the error code is shown on the engineer’s console of the control
device if errors are detected.

The 29-myte subsystem is delivered to the user together with test programs
for functional checking of the efficiency of devices in the conputer system.
The test program check the correctness of performing instructions by the
stores, joint operation of the NSD-UU-maputer and two-channel operation

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
of the subsystem (II. The test programs operate under the control of the
test monitor of the DEBS Unified System.

1110 software for the 29-May“ subsystem is contained in nos 2.0 and OS 4.0.
The 29-Mbyte subsystem is designed according to the requirements of the
Unified Cowuter System using type m integrated circuits. Development of
the 29-Hbyte disk subsystem is a further step in development of external
disk storage devices.

The most important advantages of the 29-mte disk subsystem coupared to
the 7-myte subsystem consist in the following:

the capacity of the subsystem has been increased fourfold with an equal
nus'ber of NSHD;

organisation of recording on the track is identical to 7 bytes, while the
track capacity is two times higher -- 7,294 bytes:

the number of cylinders is the same as in the 74am. system, but the
number of tracks within the framework of a single system is two times
greater, i.e., 20:

the speed of data exchange with the channel has been increased twofold --
up to 312 Kbytes/s:

the subsystem provides long time to the channel for cospleting the instruc-
tion chain:

the subsystem permits processing of the transient recording on the defect
or reserve track)

checking exchange of data is more efficient -- an additional checkihg byte
has been added at the end of each domain (byte BC);

changing the logic address of the store is very sinple:

transfer of the physical address of the store to the channel permits the
computing system to tabulate error statistics for each store:

the diagnostic equipment makes it possible to check and adjmt each store
during operation of the subsystem with the cosputer if logic address '8"
is assigned to it:

the control device has interface signals with parameters corresponding to
the requirements of the liwroved input-output interface so that a disk
subsystem of 29 Hbytes can be connected in the model of the inproved Yes EV!

The 29-Mbyte subsystem has been in serial production since 1976. It is
supplied in five standard configurations, including 2, 3, 4, 6 and 9 118111).
Functional testing on joining the subsystem to models of the Yes M were
successful and proved its operating efficiency within these models.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel'stvo "Statistika', 1977
6521 21

cso: 81“ FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GBSRNB‘I‘ICS. COM’UI'HRS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOIDGY

INFORMATION ON NEW RAMA“: OF THE YES EVM

Moscow WCNISLI’I‘BL'NMA TEKNNIKA MSIALISTICHESKIKN STRAN. SBORNIK swam
in Russian Vol 2 1977 pp 162468

[Article from the collection "Vychielitel'naye tekhnika sotsielisticheskikh
stran. sbornik stetey" edited by H. Ye. Rakovskiyl

{Text} The Yes-1060 Computer

The Yes-1060 eonputer is related to the class of high-speed comuters. is
progres-cospatible with couputere or the Unified System and is designed to
solve a wide range of scientific-technical, economic and special problems.
The speed of the Yes-1060 coeputer is 1.3 million operations/second. A
block diagram of the Yes-1060 is presented in Figure l.

01er the previous cosputers or the Unified System, additional hardware
which increases the efficiency of systems use of the cowuter have been
introduced into the res-1060 machine. These devices include a virtual
memory. instruction repetition devices in the processor, expended set of
instructions (up to 183). expanded interruption system. astronomic tine
clocks, recording of program events, increased accuracy of calculations
with fleeting decimal and a diagnostic systes which localizes malfunctions
with accuracy up to the group of interchangeable blocks.

The presence of a virtual mry permits the programr to use up to 16
bytes of addressable mmry in his program. Page organisation of the
memory by request provides additional conveniences to the user. The virtual
memory accelerates the process of program preparation and simlities the
structure or the programs theuelves.

The central device of the machine which provides organisation of the com-
puting processor is the Yes-2060 processor (figure 2).

The processor includes: central control blocks, an arithmetic block.
memory control block. checking and diagnostics block and control console.
The apperatus-microprogran principle of control is used in the processor.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     
   

  

a 11mm»! mu
(£40): -01 2)

nmmnnut r
mum-a! (3)

QEEQ‘

   
 

1
I
l
|
I;

BEBE

EE—

8

f'
t
I
I
I

figure 1. Block Diagram of Yes-1060 Oosputer

m:

l. Yes-2060 processor 4. interface
2. YeS-lOJS-OJ selector channel 5. up to
3. Yes-4012.01 multiplex channel

Pre-sachino instructions are processed during a single Inchine cycle. This

is achieved as a result of parallel operation of the three sain blocks:
central control. the arithsetic block and the sesory control block.

111s central control block is designed to select. unpack and buffer the
instructions. to control the operation of the erithnetic block and to
pertorsn system functions. The block has two-level nicroprogru control
and provides codaination of perforning instructions.

The eritluetic block performs arithnetic and logic operations. 'lhe accele-
rated Iultiplication block is connected to the arithnetic block as an

additional device. mltiplicetion is accosplishcd to 12 digits si-ulta-
neously and control of the block is tlovsheet.

'lhe senory control block provides interaction of the chamels and the cen-

tral control block with the internal storage, conversion of the virtual
address to the physical address, buffering of the sections of internal

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu m I‘II:I.\I. I'M: nNH‘

 

Figure 2. Processor of Yes-1060 Coeputer

storage sent frequently used for accent}, buffering of information for the
channels and correction of n sinqle error of information received fro: the
menory. The block contains: a buffer stomce. key protection storage and
channel buffer storage.

The checking and diagnostics blocks enters and checks the contents of the
nicroproqrans in the mnory, detects and localizes failures. repeats opera-
tions and records events in the system. The block converts the processor
to the diagnostics node.

The operator cosmmicetes with the corputer by means of the control console,
the presence of which permits one to carry out preventive maintenance work,
visual checking and control functions.

Hicroprograne are loaded into the mesory from the Yes-5009 ugnetic tape
console store.

Specifications of Yen-2060 Processor

matrol principle apparatus-nicroprogras
Digit capacity of arithmetic.
bytes 8
Method of representing meters with fixed and floating
decimal
Comtinq system binary, decilsl and 16-
digit

Tins required to fulfill main
instructions. nicroseconds:

21.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WFICIM. “SH ONLY

addition-oubtraction with fixod
daciml
addit ion-oubt tact ion with
floating alociaai
multiplication: with fixod dooinal
oultiplication with floating
dociml
division with fixed docinal
division with floating decimal
suitor otoragou
capacity. Khytoo
digit capacity. bytoa
oyclos. no
Hicroprogran atorago (Min):
capacity, mytoo
digit capacity, bytos
cyclo, no
Hicroprogran control otoragon
capacity. bytaa 1.536
digit capacity, bytoo 3
cyclo. as so

0
.

u
OJ

F”
o o
no
0!

‘0‘”
O.

‘40

09'".

80° .

852

Yon-$025 Magnetic 'l‘apo Storo

'i'ho Yes-5025 nagnotic tapo atoro (Piguro l) is dosignsd to oporato as an
oxtornol storago dovico in nodolo of tho Yos am.

who following aro uood in tho otoro dosign: morollor uthod of tapo food,
block principlo of construction, alactronics in coabination with diocroto
oloctronic radio cowononts and light-diodo dioploy.

nigh dosign-tochnological comatibility with tho bosolino “8-5017 m it
providod in tho Va: 5025 store and progrosaivo tochnioal solutiono includod
in tho res-son store are usod.

Tho «cord-playback channol, baood on digital couponsnts using intogratod
circuits. provides rocording and playback of data by two Iothodoa phasoo
codod with longitudinal rocording donsity of 63 hita/u and by tho m—l
oathod (without roturn to roro with invorsion by unity) with longitudinal
recording donsity of 32 bits/an.

Tho prosonco of two methods of rocording in tho storo par-its coqlato uao
of tho data archivo rocordod by tho m-l method and Iakos it posoiblo to

provido gradual rorooording of it on Iagnotic tapo uaing tho noro inrovod
phoso-oodod nathod of rocording.

Soai-auto-atic loading of tho ngnotic tapo is providod in tho storo. ‘i‘ho
nagnotic hood subaoscwly io me! during loading and rowinding of tho

topo. a built-in chocking apparatus for solf-contoinod chocking of tho atoro
olficioncy is built into tho was-5025 storo. 'i‘ha otoro oporatos with tho
Yos-SSZS control dovico and is connoctod to it through a standard intortoco.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main Set of Yes-1060 eeeputer

cipher or

   
  
  
  
  
  
 

  
   
  
   
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  

 
   

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Processor Yes-1060 1
Control console Yes-lSOl-Ol 1
Magnetic tape console etore Yes-5009 1
Internal storage (2 mytes) Yes-3206 2
Selector channel (2 channels) Yes-40354): l
Multiplex channel Yes-dol2-Ol l
”Channel-channel" adapter Yes-4060 l

Interchangeable magnetic disk store

    
  
  

      
  
  
  
   
  
 

  
  
  
 

   
  
  
  
 

   
  
  

(MD) Yes-5056 0
we control device Yes-5551 2
Magnetic tape etore (mt) Yes-5017 8
M. control device Yes-5517 1
Punch card input device Yes-60l9 2
Punch tape input device Yes-6022 2
Pmch card output device Yes-7010 2
Pmch tape output device Yes-7022 2
Printer 795-7032 2
Writer with control block Yes-7077 2

Group control device with four portable

   
 

   
     
 
 

   

   

consolee Yes-7906 l
Power supply devices Yes-0824 l
Yes-0825 l

Distributing head Yes-0853 1

Patch card data imprinting end decoding

   
 

  
  
  
 

   
    

   

device Yes-9011 4
Punch card information checking device res-9013 1
Punch tape data preparation device Yes-9024 1

Specifications

Average access tine 100 s
‘rape speed 2 We
Standard reel rewinding tine net tore than 2 minutes
"ﬁber of tracks 9
Distance between cones:

mini-um 12.7 II

nominal 15.2 In
Tape size:

earl-n- length 750 a

width 12.? .
aster dianeter of reel 267 as
Inner diameter of container 296 u
Power supply 380/220 v
Oensuned power 2 kv-n

Overall dimensions 26 190 x 150 x 1.600 -
l-‘llR lll-‘l-‘HTIM. IISH ONLY

 

Figure l. Yes-5025 Magnetic Tape Store
Yes-5525 Magnetic Tepe Store Control Device

The Yes-5525 control device is designed to control eight magnetic tape
ntores of type Yes-502$ and Yes-5017 connected in any combination.

The Yes-5525 device provides interaction of the channel circuits. which have
high speed, with low-speed circuits controlling the stores.

111s device receives end executes instructions from the channel, transmits
data between the store and channel, checks the reliability of data trans-
mitted to and from the store and processes information which describes in
detail the state of the device and the condition under which the last opera-

tion was completed .

The device permits operation with stores having the following recording
methods: without return to zero with inversion by unity (SW-l) and phase-

coded (PX) .

me Yes-5525 device can operate with two channels of a single or of different
cowutera and provides an increase of the reliability or read intonation

by automatic correction of single and group errors occurring on a single
track with the phese-coded method of recording and also by correction with
repeat reading by the aVN-l method.

1he Yes-5525 NHL control device has a branched system for checking processed
information and for checking the equipment. The electronic part of the device
is realized on integrated circuits.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICXAL USE ONLY

Specifications
Method of connection to channel standard interface
Cipher and nmber of connected
stores up to 9 stores of
type Yes-5025 and
Yes-5017
Maxim data transsission speed:
for the a: method of rocording 126 Rbytes/s
for the I‘m-l method of recording 64 bytes/s
Power supply 380/220 V
Conamsd power 1 ma
Overall dimensions 1.200 x 750 x 1,600 In

Yes-5066 Interchangeable Magnetic Dis): Store

The Yes-5066 interchangeable magnetic die): store (Figure l) with capacity
of 100 bytes is a high-speed storage device and is designed for use as an
external notary in models of the Yes m. the store is connected to the
counter through the Yes-5566 control device. up to eight stores of type
Yes-5066 can be connected to one control device.

Structurally the store is pads in the for: or a pedestal. The store has a
telescoping transparent cover for easy access to the dis): packet.

The drive and positioning bloc): which includes the carriage bloc): with nag-
netio heads, the dis): packet rotational drive, the carriage bloc): drive

with magnetic heads. the record-read bloc): and a brush mechanism for cleaning
the aurtaces of the dis): packet, is located in the upper part or the pedestal.
no power supply blocks, positioning drive control bloc): and the autonatice
and electromechanical system control bloc): are located in the lower part of
the pedestal.

 

Pique 1. Overall View of Yes-5066 Interchangeable Magnetic
Dis): Store

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he interchangeable disk packet consists of 12 disks and corresponds com-
pletely to the requirements of international standards. The disk surfaces
have a ferrolacquer coating.

111a floating elonent of the magnetic heads is made of hard ceramic alloy.
The carriage block with magnetic heads is driven by a linear sotor which
provides the required drive speed. It has a 1on9 sewice life, is resistant
to the effects of increased clisstic factors and is sisple to maintain.

an. electronic part of the store is based on integrated circuits and digital
cosponents.

Specifications
Capacity of a single interchangeable

disk packet 100 bytes
umber of working surfaces in a packet 19
"other of surfaces for servo drive

control 1
Nmber of tracks on each surface 411
Method of recording intonation three-freqmncy
Mar of heads 20
Time of finding the cylinder:

minimum 10 as

taxi-um 55 an

average 33 u
Average tine of access to information not more than 41 as
Disk rotational speed 3,600 rpa
Data distribution arbitrary
Data transmission speed 806 bytes/s
Time of changing packet 1.5 sin
Principle of checking information

recording time selection
Power supply 380/220 V, 50 n:

consued pwer
Overall dinens ions

not are than 2.5 “-1
1,131 x 671 x 1,135 1-

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo "Statistiks', 1977

6521
cso: em I360

29

FOR OVP'ICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mums AND ELECTRICAL MZNBBRINO

we 621.396.“

CWTIW m mmsucs or WAS IN 1112 FOR" 0? MD ”1'8
808393080 W ABOVE m BART" 811‘" M80 PERICDICI‘H

Unknown moxmnmxn in Runoion Vol 33 No 9 i978 oignod to prooo 7 Doc 71
pp 57-60

[Article by 0. N. Toroohin. A. N. mm and N. a. nomvik)

l‘l‘oxtl who oxtonoivo an of wiro ontonnoo (tho Bovorodgo ontonno, tho
rhoobic ontonno and to on. (11 woo dotorninod by thoir otmcturol oiwiioity
and low cost. who diudvantogoo of o rho-hie ontonno oro oignificont hoight
of ouoponoion ohovo tho oorth (h > All). which roquiroo rothor coupiox
ouppoxt otructuroo, and thoir low officioncy. who hoight of ouopondinq o
Bovotodqo ontom io inoigniticont (uououy hundzodtho o: o wovoionqth).
but tho omiiticotion factor io low in thio eooo. ﬂoutoxo, promo-o o:
contracting ontonnoo with low hoight of ouoponoion obovo tho outh ond
high onioioncy oro vory urgent. In uniting ontoonoo ouopondod low on
bond iinoo, thoy My ho mod-oxtonoivoly in tho our moo.

'rho probion of dovoloping o nothod of coicnloting ontonnoo in tho {on of
o oyoto- ot pound vino with noctivo ioodo poriodicoiiy connoctod to
tho- io ooivod boiow. An ontonna in tho {on o: o oyoton of oquidiotont
witoo 1 (Figaro 1) to which tho rooctivo loads 2 m oonnootod io tom oo
tho booio in tho onolyoio. Tho ontonno array is outpondod It a hoiqht of
h (( A ohovo on idooiiy conducting oath 3.

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-‘ICIM. “SM ONLY

lat ue coneider the nein relations which link the geonetry of the ayeten and
the value of the loada to the radiation field paranotera. let an aaaula in
analyzing thia relationahip that the field between the ayaten of vireo and
an ideally conducting earth (in tone 1:, 0 <2 4 h. Figure l) ia two-dinn-
aional in nature. 1.0., the condition 3/3): - 0 ie fulfilled for all dta
cowonante. let no arena that this am hypothaaia ia valid for the radia-
tion field in an external half-apece (tone I, t > h).

With regard to tho aaewtiona made. we vrite the radiation field in the
form

ﬂ" :9 Amen-5&0; (1)

c - (a)
E,.--“J:A,¢m ”cor.
anal-ﬁmwuw. ‘3’
where A; la the amiitude coefficient;
pn-ncosoulmsinh q- -lmcosO+nslM: (d)
a ia retardation; n - - kl’ 9 ia the angle betveen plane 30‘! and the

direction of the radiation wave propagation; £1 ia the dielectric per-ea-
bility of the cedin- 13 and k1 ia the propagation conatant in the "die- 1.

Being given the field in the for: of (1)-(3) penita one to obtain a high
directional action coefficient with low duping of the aurface wave [2].
thin is caused by the fact that the vave decreaaea weakly in a direction
perpendicular to the direction of ita propagation and provider a high co-
phaeal surface on the end of the antenna. Moreover. became of the nail-
neaa of dealing of the radiation wave, ita energy it totally anitted into
free apace. The validity of the indicated hypotheaia nae confirm by
theoretical and experiuntal checka in a nwber of inveatiqationa, for

euaple, [2. 3].

in zone It, let u be given the field in the for- of the an of two wavea:
the aurface wave:

fin-a Bch (pz)c": (S)
5,, - - aﬁBsh (p:)c": (6)
31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
FOR OWICIAI. US! ONLY

£..-1-3;8:h(pz)w m

(when E; la ch. «electric ”mulllty of tho lulu :1) M6 of the rogu-
lu wave of at. land llnoa

n,,-c.-um m
e..- ﬁcw-a. (9)

AM k: to tho pmgaelon mun: ln eh. lulu n.

w. u could" a 170:.- of My “mum for tho Idol m in
noun 1. m bounty «Mitten o! m follwlng {on ma b. tulﬂllod
on an “ally emanating ouch

5,-0 a 2-0. (to)

M «a be «on no. (5)49). m and la hilt-0pm I: “than N.
«mama.

In: an wrleo the bounty condlelm (or s o h. m following how can-
dlclou me In mama on a mu- ot vim vlth and» lab mud

to than he 1‘1 «X. I“ a ll 611/211: h‘r/ﬂr) “I:

5»-‘-= 0% "‘ "‘ (11)
Z n I- "' ~ ‘ 13
o r. mat—“7'4”; IO 0- o ( )

warm 1‘; means-loan“ atonement. 19mm: (2) and (6)
lneo mt, calcium (ll) um. the (on

A

B-éfa—u'w (1:)

ﬂy macaw» (I). (2). (S) and (O) lacs (12) VI!!! 209.26 to (13), V0 find

2 -m’.__'_c__;
.- ...1.',_%mm,_7;.-...,-., (w

32
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

no ﬁnd a Mob amplluoatlon factor of tho ontonna, 1t 1o noooooary that tho
loodo bo puroly roaotlvo. 1.o.. that tho followlno oondltton ho fulﬁlllod

|--tl||(yh)—x-."In'n - (13)

Subotltutlng (4) 1nto (m with toqard to (15) and oooulnq that

   

mood- K3: CIApM 4- l9: "‘0’. (16)
vo hovo
Z __L r ' n'cos'N mm
«.7: nalanM‘MnumO -nmuamn coup (17)
mm can-manna ) “M
unoro

  
    

,.
w:
....“

     

M
5).
o
4

 

4 u 4': a am
”9qu

slnco oonotmotlon o! o dlocharoo vavo ontonna clrcult aaou-oo puroly roac-
tlvo lood roalotancoo. tho oquotlon which llnko tho aotlvo povor tod to

bolt-moo l! to tho actlvo povo: «porting to halt-moo I ohoold bo volld,
1.o.,

I
o . .. ‘ .
RC 5kg“ + E“) (”u + Hymn“: a -R¢5 Eﬂﬁhdylcu. (1”

By oubotltutlnq (1). (2). (0o (5). (”'49) and (16) in” (18): '0 “M

33

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mcosO-i- "2W! oan—ancosQ—h amncos’0+%:aln20+

+' um aln’ o — g: sln 20) + x,lx’ (m cos’ 0 + m’ aln' 0)(a‘ + p) - (19)
' _n(n'¢oa'0:§-a‘ata'l)la(cumulu-i).

vhero I. ia the length of the antenna.

- W‘m'

:. ”ge‘

magi

. 9-“

   
  

 

  
 
   
 
     

  

riguro 3

The derived ayatan of formulae per-lite one to recon-and the tolloving order
of calculating the antenna:

l. the height or aupanoion h and the ratio botvoen tho unlitudea o: the
povor apply and radiation vavoa are detonined according to for-ulae (15).
(16) and (19) vith regard to the parameters of the given antenna radiation
pattern and length.

2. ‘lho required load diatribution function along the resin is calculated
by formula (17).

The array or vireo for paranetorax n - 1.13;; 0 - 25'; h- 0.02M 1. - 1x.
'1‘ - 0.1)“ and 1‘; - 0.025A (40 vireo) vaa calculated by the derived tornulao.
The lav of variation of tho valuoa of load naiatancoa ie ahovn in Pigure 2.

A room of the antenna in the torn at a ayaten or vireo vith reactive loads
connected to tho- (induotionloaa capacitora) vaa conatructed for an experi-
nontal check or the given aethod of calculation.

The roaulta o! the experimental chock are proaented in figures 3 and 4: the
pover radiation pattern in plane 3 on the calculated frequency in ahovn in
figure 3. at tho radiation pattern in plane 3 io ohovn in Piguro 3, In and

thodapmdonceoftheantennoinputiqedancoontroquencyiaohovninrigure
o.

36
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ﬁgure 4

Conclusions. The given method pemlte one to calculate the electrical and
geometric parameters of a system of vireo ouapended low above the earth vith
reactive loade connected to than by the given chancterietlca of the radia-
tion ﬁeld.

The experimental check continued the correctness of the hypotheoeo lode.

BIBLIOGAPHY

l. Ayunberg, G. 2.. "Komtkovolnovyye antenny" [Short-Rove Antennae].
Moocov, Svyaz', 1962.

2. ﬂushin, 0. N. and V. G. Gomn, MIMI“, V01. 2‘. No. 8, 1969.
3. Meehln. 0. N. and V. H. Sedov, mxmrn, Vol. 24, No. 9, 1969.
4. rereahln, o. N. and R. s. Mayan, mrmxn, Vol. 31, No. l, 1976.
COPYRlGlﬂ': mlotekhnika. 197a

6521
C80: 81“ I 3’08

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. 088 ONLY

OMINSICS. M AND SPACE

(DC 532.593

PM mm mm memo IN A smmm YILUXD waned wow mm A
sooner-013m SYSM

Kiev cxmnumn in Russian No 36 1977 signed to press 12 tel; 76 pp “~70

(Article by v. I. Nikishov and A. c. Steteenko. Institute of nydroeschanics
of the uhrainian sen Acadeny of Sciences]

(wort) The plane problen of wave eotione arising in an ideal stretitied
ﬂuid during uniron flow around a source and discherge of equal cepacity

is investigated in linear poetulation. It is aseuaed that the fluid is
bonded on the top and bottoe by solid walls and that the (loo rate 0 coin-
cides with the positive direction or exie On. Me 0y is directed verti-
cally upward vith the origin on the upper boundary. The source and discharge
are located at distance h fro- the taper boundary and the segIsnt annotating
than (with value 2a) is parallel to axis Ox: axis 0y passes throud: its

Diddle (Figure 1) .

 

Figure 1. location of Source and Discharge in now

It is shown in [4] that. elthou’: siailar problem are stationary, they nay
be solved ae nonstationery. Subsequent conversion to a stationary proble-
can be ads by using the minus conversion: at t 90°. The last state-ant.
as in (2), ie lode iron physical concepts. 'l‘hus, it is ensued in the in-
vestigation that the output of the source (disdarge) is dependent on tine
in the for: of a single neaviside mnction Mt).

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (WI-‘NHAI. IISR ONLY
but u eeeuno the undietutbed velue o: deneity ie in the torn
9.0!) -' Poor". (1)

where poo in the velue or denoity nee: the mpet bomdery.
The lineuieed equetione of notion have the torn t2. d)

«39-; -mu(l)6(y+h)l6(x“PW-“)1 m

%‘+U%+viﬁ”*°' m

M106";- + U 5}) + $5 .= o. (4)
«(M-3} + 0-3 4- § = ~01. (5’

where u end v ere the horizontel end vertioel velocity menu: P ie the
inetenteneoue difference between the totel deneity end ﬂow): 9 ie the
inetenteneoue ditterence between the totel end hydroetetio weeeurep a lo
the output at the some (diecherge): end 6 ie a Dim delte-tunotion.

w intmducing operator 0 5 Hat 4 "(a/ax) end the typicel eoelee of
length I. (the dietence between the bounderiee). velocity 0 end deneity Poo:
we find the equetion for the vetticel velocity comm: v in di-eneionleee
vetieblee:

#(g- +12%) +ug—ow-3-

(6)
- momma:+a)-—o(x-ama'w+h)-ow+hm.
when A-gwoi’mlq-mm.
Applying the uplece trenefon by t end the rout-let txeneton by x to (6)
710:. y.s) -Sc"'dl i (“comma (7)

we find the following equetion for (motion ‘30:. y. e) (we ehell eubeequently
olit the mi N)

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. 088 ONLY

$-o%-(ﬂ—lw)o- ¥ unmo'o,+a)—oo(y+h)). (a)

when A; - Akin. + m2.
I‘ho boutdoxy oondttlono oron

v=0ot y-Ouy-a—l. (9)

yo: oonvontonco lot no tntroduoo function a ouch thot
o-Q(§.~- )0. (10)
'l‘hon (to. (8). for tho voluo of 6. no ﬁnd tho oquotton
2-:é-oﬁ-3-(P-kom-7"umw+n) (11)

with bouuory oondtttono
0-0 at y-Ouy-—l. (12)

Solution of oquotion (n) with W oondtdono (12) hot tho (on

w
Gmﬂgslnn o “(M "farm" wow-”Int”; (13)

M=V~?+v— ..o.

lamina function 6. tro- (10) ono con and tho oxpmoton to: tho doviotion
of tho nopyonlc unoo from tho pooitton of «mumm- €0co Y: o). Ulla)!
1o dotontnod no. tho oquntlon

DE - v. (14)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

941+»
My. 9 W ism (Malguly 4-1.; mm «10“.»-

-MsluMll .H..;.)_..m3.tr_~2;;luﬂ. ,1..u.~_-~_:,u+_hn.],

In tho ooupiox domain In function £ hoo choroctoriotio tooturoo in tho for.
of poloo which on determined from tho oquotion

(15)

M m [M (16)

$449-1". L. —n‘a’. (1m

whore n - :1, 32, t3, ...

no: oonvonionco lot us introduoo an}; - - {3 - £3 - ﬂair: - 62/4, uhozo
x2 - M. and lot uo conoido: two coooo.

1. w: < o. In thio cooo on poloo no puroly inqinory and oxo roprooontod
in tho (on

3
h - am. — “-2,. m)
I

2. 0% )0. For onoll pooitivo voluoo of o. tho poloo on doooriboq by tho
oxproooion

a- :50, “"71: +099. (19)
I

By using tho invoroo Foutior tronoton ond tho limiting thoom to: tho
loploco tronolon, wo find

etx.y)= 1% \ e‘“ jgsinJNk. “9’

-.

mug>onn-umuﬁ<oun-u+1. mnwiutnenboupom
on tho m1 oxio and bypooo of tho: io ooioctod with noon! to oxproooion
(13) (Figuro 2). Making use of tho Cauchy thoom and tho Joxdon 1.»
0o find the following to: x > o:

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "BR ONLY

II
‘ Ilno o .y‘. thy-o
{(x, y) - ... 2'2ﬁn1‘3— sln..x+ S: A“. T. (20)

\

where

A. u. Qt-‘WR— lrlnmlnnnu +y—h)—nnsl¢n(y+h) x

Xﬂnml—ly~I-hl)+oslnnu’_L_r—|.L_J+ "M “.lan-h;!z+an .

(hide-pea wave notion, which ie determined by the zeal polee of the “hinte-
gtal function. doee not occur if 03 < 0 or

”>U‘-‘/lrl:'. (:1)

”+7

I! Unu_<u (on. where U.- -—°l+-;I' . moaned wave action ie toned
from N Havel.

Thie reeult ie found according to [3].

 

figure 2. Integzation Contour in eagles Plane K

‘Ihe pettern of notion deecribod above may be explained in the following
annex. The eyetel -- a etxatisied media located between eolid bomuiariee --

hae a set of natuxal oecillatione. When dietmbanoee with high velocity
(0)01) you through this media, the eyetee is unable to heooue excited:

it the velocity 0! action of the diaturbanceo is sufficiently snail (D ( 01).
the eyetelie excitedandveobtainmdamedvavenotionaeareenlt.

60 \~

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ﬁ$§~9s~ao

Figure 3. Dependence of Oecillation Aaplitude on x at fixed Die-
tance Between characteristics (at I 0.046455): 1 --
y - 43.6: 2 " y ' -0e‘, 3 -' y . '0.3

The eecond eua in (2) deeoribee the local effecte in the vicinity of the
characterietice which are determined by the imaginary polee and which are
repidly duped with an increase of x.

  

no!

ca’h‘e—C. ~V\.o

figure 4. Dependence of acillation haplitude on x at Different
Dietancee Between maracterietice: l - y II 0.4,
a - 0.01562; 2 -- y - -O.4, oi - 0.046455: 3 -- y -
. -o.4. a - 0.096651

It is brown that unlimited flow of e uniform fluid around a eource-diecharge
eyeteu ie equivalent to flow aromd an oval. net ue aeeune. as in [2). that
thie ie alao valid in the given caee.

Being given the half-width of body It, elongation d and incident flow velocity
0, the valuea of a and a can be found by the fomlee given in (1).

Concrete calculatione were carried out with the following valuee of the
paranotere: h - 0.1, y - -o.2, -0.4. -0.5 and -0.6y G - 0.0156. 0.0465
and 0.0966 (which correeponde to d - 2. 5 and 10); 0' o 0.25; and A o 196.
The derived functione of 5 I :(x) are preeented in riguree 3, 4 and 5.

It ie obvioue fro- the figuree that the wave pattern varies eeynetdcelly
along 0:. This ie lore clearly expreeeed in Figure 4. It ie obvioue 2m.

thie one figure that the value of 2, ea in [3], ie etrongly dependent on
the value of a: the oecillation aaplitude increaeee an elongation in-

CTIOI...

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

 

ﬁgure 5. Rundow- o! emulation unmade on x at y - -o.2
(1). y - -005 (2) w “- 0001562

A «man of «annexe» unend- at y - -0.5 (m Figure 5) to explain“
by the fact that an nod“ with «on valua- ot n disappear line. they .11
pan through zero If. y - -o.s.

1.

2.

3.

4.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

mm, N. Y... I. A. may and N. v. non. “Muetchuun
outwith-nth" (mum mam-actuated. Vol. 1. W.
magnum». 1940.

Benton. 1. v.. ”ﬂaw mum. Occurring in a smuma ﬂuid mug now
Around a Sub-org“ Body,” Pm, No. 6. 197a. '

!
Chanson 1.. V., “Penman. 1 vnutmniyo volny" [Surf-co and
mum}. Haws). nov, mm am, 1973.

W. 1., Yap-ran and c. c. H01, 'm-Dhmstml unity Raves tn d
Stuttﬂod Ocean,“ mazes 01’ P111108, W1. 10. lb. 3, 1967.

comm: :mul'am ”llama duh," 1977

6521
use: 8144/0336

62

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIH‘I‘IONS

UDO 55(092)
NIXDLAY ANDRB‘IWICII BBLYAYEVSKIY
Moscow SOmeAYA 6901.001“ in Russian No 10, 1978 pp 154-155

(Article by Ye. A. Kozlovekiy. a. u. Zubarev. V. I. Igrevekiy. A. A. Ryaanoy.
A. D. Shcheglov. Yu. 6. Brv‘ye. v. A. Yarnolyuk. N. A. udodov. N. 9,. Laverov.
v. Yu. Zeyohenko. A. l. Zhenoyde. Ye. A. Rorlov, 1.. I. xrasnyy and A. P.
narkovskiy on the death of Nikolay Andreyevich belyayevakiyl

(text) Soviet geological sciences has suffered a severe lose. Nikolay
Andreyevich aelyayevskiy -- well-known Soviet geologist, laboratory head

of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geophysical Methods of
Prospecting. meter of the cow, Doctor of Geological-Mineralogical Sciences.
Professor._ Karitorious Scientist and Technician of the 38283 and Iesber of
the Editorial Board of the Journal somsmm 6301.06!“ -- died unerpectedly
in hie 65th year.

N. A. Belyayevekiy (jointly with P. A. myushe) wrote his first official re-
port on the geological structure and ainerala of the Kungey-Alatau Ridge in
1934 -- the year he cospleted the Leningrad mining Institute, and his first
article on the alpine tectonics of the an'-l.m' use printed in less.

Since then N. A. aelyayevehiy has published acre than 200 scientific papers.
including a nuaber of aonographs devoted to problem of regional geology
and netsllogeny, geological cartography. stratigraphy and lithology. geo-
morphology and peleoclinatology. tectonics and geophysics. uikolay.
Andreyevich has made a weighty contribution to each of these branches of
geology. but his main interests, especially during the past 15 years. vars
related to tectonics in its broadest understanding.

During the 1930's and the first half of the 1940‘s. N. A. Belyaysvekiy
worked at ‘l'sNIGRI-VSEGEI [Central Scicntific Research Institutc for 6001091-
cal Bwloration -- All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Geology). as
was a unber of the expedition and investigated the weakly studied and diffi-
cultly accessible regions of the Southern and Baatern 1yan'-Sban'. the
maker‘s, law-Luv, the rarinsksya Basin and the edge of Tibet. Isis dec-
toral dissertation, which he brilliantly defended in 1952, was devoted to

the geological stmture and Iinerala of Central Asia.

‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

N. a. Belyeyevekiy conducted intensive investigations in the SiXhote-Alina
and in the Southern Primr’ye, heading a group of geological survey and ex-
ploratory parties. eince 1M6 for more than 10 yeare. Analysis of the
enornoue new materials permitted hin jointly with hie colleang to work
out an essentially new schom of etrstigraphy and to again illuminate the
history of the geological development of the region, which predetermined
the beeie of the gooetructural regionalization and aetallogenic specializa-
tion of the determined etructurel-faciee zonee (1953). Based On the data
obtained, a geological nap and a map of the minerals of the Primor'ye were
aleo ooapiled and a monograph was written (1955) which largely determined
the developnent of further geological end aetallogenio investigations in the
far Beet.

During the period 1950-1956 N. A. Belyeyevakiy heeded the Scientific Produc-
tion Depart-mt of vsacsr, working in the field of regional geology, minerals
and geological cartography.

In l956 R. A. Belyayewskiy was appointed Deputy Minieter of Geology and
Conservation of Reeonrcee of the USSR. After the ninietry was treneforued
to the State Geological Couittee of the USSR, he wee confirmed an a nesber
of the Collegian of the Co-tittee and chief of the department of geological
upping and later as chief of the deperteent of scientific research work.

In these responsible positions. N. A. aelyayevskiy skillfully directed the
activity of awardinate ecientific research institutes. fa-iliariud himself
in deteil with the achieveaente of foreign geological services and the status

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of mineral raw Mterial resources of different countries and participated
actively in the work of sessions of the International Geological Congress
and other international organizations. he published official reports on
the foreign tours of detached duty without delay: his positive experience
was introduced in the institutions of geological service of our country.

N. a. helyayevshiy together with l. l. Gorskiy was one of the organisers of
the international Union of Geological Sciences and he was first vice-president
(from the 033m of the Comission on the Geological lisp of the World. The
first draft of the legend to the geological map of the world belongs to his
(1958). N. a. uelyeyevskiy‘s extensive experience and vast knowledge in the
field of geological nurveying and cartography predetersined his indispen-
sable participation in cospilatien of nanuals and instructions and also in

the activity of the editorial boards of various geological naps of the soviet
Union.

Nikolay Andreyevich's investigations in the field of tectonics always had

a clear practical direction and were characterised by extensive and universal
generalizations. He always posed as the purpose of his investigations deter-
mination of the principles of the location of minerals as a function of tee-
tonic criteria.

Determining the relationship of the geological structure to the deep struc-
tures of the earth's crust was the next step of the scientist on the path to
developsent of couples geological-geophysical investigations. he early as
1961. he and V. v. redynshiy published an article entitled ”Study of the
earth's Deep Interior and the Problems of Smerdeep Drilling" in the journal
SOVII‘I‘SKAYA 6301061“. Therefore. it is no accident that N. A. Belyayevskiy
has headed investigations at Wllgeofizika [all-Union Scientific Msearch
institute of reopnysical Exploration Methods] since 1965 on the study of

the deep structure of the earth's crust and upper santle and on creation of
geological-geophysical naps of the USSR. The range of his interests in-
cluded seismic sounding. island arcs and rift zones. the earth's thernics.
applied geophysics. explosion seisslology and so on.

ma result of these nultifaceted investigations was the large monograph
“The earth's Crust Within the ussn" (1974). which is the reference book of
specialists engaged in problems of regional tectonics and geophysics. Pun-
danentel geophysical problem. primarily the essence of seislic bomdaries.
are considered in it from geological positions based on extensive factual
material.

N. a. aelyayevskiy was one of the innovators and managers of work to develop
"naps of the Faults of the USSR and adjacent Comtries.' his personal con-
tribution to his innovative work was especially great in solving coqlex
problens on reconstruction of faults and other structures of the platfor-
foundation and in sethodical develop-eats on the use of geological-geophysi-
cal data for these purposes.

FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY
NR OVHCIAI. ”9!! ONLY

me cemt helb but note the editoriei end eeientitio-orgenieetionei eotivity
or u. A. neiyeyevehiy. he vee e eeﬂaer of the editoriei boerde o! the (unde-
Iehtel pubiicetione 03mm!“ can end WWO“ “Ml" em end
the editor or eeny eepe end e umber or eohegrephe. including treneleted
eohogrephe. nee 1956 through 1969 u. A. Aeiyeyevekiy wee the editor-ih-ohier
of the journei soVImKAYA clown!” end wee en eetive eeeher o! the editoriei
boerd during the poet fey yeere. he wee eieo the deputy oheinm or the
Scientific cannon on denier nweetigetiooe of the Berth'e mt end Upper
Kentle oi the USSR Aoedeuy or soieheee. e newer of the Mreeo or the

min» on the internetionel aeodynenic Project end the Interegenoy Teotohio
conittee end e neeher or eeientiiio comoiie of Vangeoiieike end the nepert-
unt of aeoiogy o! meow atete Univereity.

Nikoiey Andreyevich devoted e greet deei or ettehtioh to treiaihg highly
quelitied oedree -- eeny o! hie etudente hecele oendidetee end doctere oi
eciencee. He heeded the expert conieeion o! VAR (high agree mnieeion]
for e nuber oi yeere.

N. A. neiyeyevekiy'e lehor Activity hee been noted by government overdo --
the Order of the Red sewer or uhor end nedeie.

All who knew Nikoley Andreyevioh end \oho worked with hie were inepired by
hie mnegging energy. deep erudition. enomue efficiency end purpoeefui-
neee.

1he bright inge o! N. A. neiyeyevekiy -- e highly cultured pereon. teiented
ecientiet-oo-miet. devoted without limit to hie ntherlend. etrict in hie
eneiyeee but e kind pereon - win elveye he reteined in our neory.
cormxm: Iedetel'etvo 'Nedre.‘ “Sovetekeye geologiye', 1970

6521
C80: 1070

‘6

M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

use 06l.7s
W" VILMWICH mus
noscov SOVETSKMA (:90anva in Russian No lo, 1978 p l09

[Article by Ye. A. Kozlo'vekiy. s. M. Zuherev. I. D. Vorona, V. l. lgrevskiy,
A. A. Ryesnoy, A. D. Shcheglov. Yu. 6. Brv'ye, V. A. Yamlyux, V. Yu.
uychenXo, N. P. Kerpov. N. P. Laverov, V. V. Sesenovioh, V. A. Pervsgo.

V. A. chernov, V. V. Nortikoyev, l.. H. zor'kin and L. a. Petroayan comm-
ratinq Ye. V. Ksrus's 60th birthday]

[Text] The director of the All-Union Scientific Institute of Nuclear
Geophysics and Geochesistry (VNIlYaOG), Doctor of Physicouthesatical

Sciences. Professor Yovegniy Villianovich xarus is celebrating his 60th
birthday.

 

Ye. V. items is a well-known scientist in the lield o! exploratory geo-
physics -- uisuology and qeoacoustics. The results of his scientific
activity are widely known both in the USSR and abroad. he began his

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OWICIAL 08! 03.1.?

ooiontiiic roooarch work in 1939 at tho matituta of 'rhocrotioai Goophyoioo
(now tho Inotituto cc Moioo of tho Earth i-oni c. m. mat). whoro ho
workod for ooro than 30 yoaro.

During tho poriod 1939-19“ to. V. Kano participatod in dovolcpnant of
tho correlation oathod o! rorraotod wavoo. tirot oroatod in tho ussn undar
tho awarvioicn or c. h. Oawurtoov and which hao now bocooa ono of tho
ooin oathodo of «ionic promoting. During world War 1: ho participatod
octivoiy in axploratory-proopooting work for oil and goo in tho rogicno c:
tho ratarokaya and Baohkirohaya asst.

wring tho poricd 1957-1964 Yo. V. Ram outta-via“ one diroctly participatod
in dovoico-ont of tho oothcd and intarprotaticn of ooianio proopocting ob-
oorvaticno owing otudy of tho undorioo roiio! and thiclosooa or tho Antarctic
ico covor. no io oditor of tour Iopo which havo hoccoo part of tho htioo

of tho Antarctic.

Yo. V. xaruo‘o invootigationo on tho mo of high-£roguonoy o1ootic vibrationo
to ooivo goo1ogica1 proopooting prohluo aro widaly brown. Devoiop-ont of.
anownathodot goophyoioai roooarchbaoodonthouooo! otoodyharnnic
vibration (BO-6.000 vibraticno por ooccod) woo bogun in 1974 undo: Yo. V.
Karuo'o ouparvioicn. thio oothod oponod now opportunitioo to otody tho
phyoicai propartioo of rock undor natura1 ocoditicno to who a nubor of
promo-o of tho propagation of olaotio vibraticno (dioporoicn and aboorp-
ticn o! o1ootic uovoo in rock).

Yo. V. Kano oanogod to donnotrata tho poooibilitioa ct‘ uoing tho nothod of
otaady hanonio vibraticno in lining goology. mic nothod hao now found
rathor wido practical application.

A oothcd of gooaccuotic invootigoticoo of doop boroholoo (ultraoonic 1cggiog
.. 02x) woo dovolcpod moor tho ouparvioicn and with tho diroot porticipa-
ticn of to. V. Iaruo and ho inrovod tho oothcd and tochniguo of cboorvaticno
and oothodo of intorproting tho data ohtainod. Yo. V. laroo'o dovolcp-ont
of tho automaton of tho thou-y of thin nothod soda it poooimo to dovolop
variono Ioditioationo of m.

Yo. V. Karol hao hoadod VNIIYoGG oinco 1969. no cowl“ of nucloophyoical
and gooocouatic nothodo of inmtigating borolnloo with roopoct to uplora-
tion and ca1ou1ation of oil and goo rooorvoo and am oo1id oinoraio io
boing dovolopod haro moor hio omnioicn.

Yo. V. Karua hoa carried on oxtanoivo podagogicai work ovor may yoaro in
odocating ociontitic oodroo o: highar qualification and tho ooiontitic school
of goophyoioioto wao tor-ad undo: hio ouporvioicn.

wordy congratulating hi- co thio annivoroary dato. wo wiah Yovgoniy
Viniamich good hoaith and now croativo ouccoaooo.
common: Mui'otvo 'llodro,‘ “Sontokaya goologiya', 1979

6521
com 1010 ‘3

POI ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

SERCEY GLEBOVICH HALININ (1920-1978)

Moscow NAUCHNO-TBKNNICNESKAYA INFORMATSIYA, SBRIYA 1 -- ORGANIZATSIYA I
HBTODIKA INPORHATSIONNOY RABOTY in Russian No 9, 1978. p 29

[Text] Sergey Glebovich Halinin, candidate of technical sciences, chairman
of the Scientific and Technical Council of the Automated International Sys-
tem of Scientific and Technical Information on Electronics of OSHA Memberi
Countries, assistant to the chief designer of information systems in the
country. deputy director of VNII lnformelektro [All-Union Scientific Re-
search Institute of the Center of Scientific and Technical Information on
Power Engineering and Electrification] died suddenly on 18 September 1978.

S. c. Nalinin'a life and activities are a striking illustration of the hisé
tory of the conception, interpretation, and realization of the information
industry in our country. Being one of the outstanding pioneers of informab
tion science, he greatly influenced information science in our country both
as an author of numerous original scientific works and as a director of one
of the country's best known teams of information workers.

His ideas in the area of integration of information and information control
systems gave rise to the following definition of the concept of control, a
concept deep in essence and brilliant in form:

"Control is: information and prediction,
information and planning,
information and solution,
information and control."

The principles developed by him in the area of designing sectoral and poly-
thematic information systems were responsible for the creation of informa-
tion systems in electrical engineering; brought into existence the inter-
national automated information system in electrical engineering; and will
influence for many years the development of inforsation theory ahd practice
in our country and abroad.

S. G. Halinin's work style was characterized by indissoluble unity of
theory and practice, academic and organizational boldness, atretegical
purposefulness, and tactical flexibility in achieving his goals. These

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

qualities in combination with brilliant scholarly intuition and organise-
tional talent made it possible for him to become an originator and active
participant of many important projects and studies connected with the im-
provemcat of the system of scientific and technical information in the
Gnu": IV a

S. G. Halinin deVelopcd the principle of combining the development of or-
ganizatlonal-fonetional structure of sectoral information system in elec-
trical engineering with simultaneous realization of automated information
processes within the framework of industrial technology.

The country's first industrial automated document retrieval system was
created under the direction of S. G. Halinin. It was also the world's
iirnt industrial-type system with automatic indexing of input documents.
The informeiektro institute. which for more than 20 years was headed by

s. c. Halinin. was a pioneer in the development of data retrieval systems.
This institute directed by s. G. Malinin developed and introduced micro-
cards with descriptions of inventions.

s. G. halinia attached great importance to the dissemination of information.
He was the initiator and the author of the first. and so far. the country‘s
only automated system of addressed dissemination of information materials.
it is difficult to enumerate all aspects of the organizational and scholar-
iy activity of s. c. Halinin--it is extremely broad and versatile. There
are more than 60 works in the area of information science to his credit.

8. c. Haiiain founded and was the first editor of the country's only theo-
retical Journal "Scientific and Technical Information" which became indis-
pcasible for tens of thousands of specialists in our country and abroad.

Having gone through 20 years of its development. the system of information
in electrical engineering directed by s. 6. Halinin is now competing suc-
cesstully with well-known world information systems. and the VNII Informe-
lektro created by him was called an information center of world significance
in 0N0 documents.

it is still too early to summarize the lifetime achievements of S. c.
Halinin--he left great problems and directions for their solution for us.

whoever met 5. d. Haliain will always remember his striking. complex and
unique image. he was a true communist. a tireless worker. and a man who
shared his knowledge generously with people.

"is human charm. simple manners. softness. and tolerance of human weak-
nesses in combination with the highest degree of exactingness with respect
to the most important won the love and respect of many thousands of people.

COPYRlcﬂT: Vsesoyuznyy lastitut Nauchnoy i Teckhnicheskoy lnformatsii. 1978

10.233 END
£50: 1870 50

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY