APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100010000-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010060-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8253

30 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (“LY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100010060-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-axe as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGH' MUS AND REGULATIONS WERNIM masmr OF
MATERIALS REPRODVCED H3331“ REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLIC-A110“ BB RESTRICTED MONICIAL 383 ORLY.
L II. the" Nu. ’. “n I u '~ A n \shuu ‘ 0.

I ' u - II-I \u an . - If“! an

30 Jenna 1979

‘0. I’vonulfeek'lwk lm: 3...

 

"tMNSIA‘HUNS 0N ussa l-zcommtc AFFAIRS , (5000 1/79)

 

. I‘nlmme. “lg-"IIIMIIHI fun: at! ANN“

 
  

     
 
 
 

 
 
   

Joint Publ icetione Reecerch Service
1000 North ciobe Reed
Arlington, Virginie 22201

    
   

 
 

e'weee No.

I). Ty el Re on e Perm]
Centre 9

e. Ahmeue

H. Come:

  
    
 

n. ﬁgment-n. munumm Nelle end Adam

M ebove

 
 

The report contains information on recent eduinietretive plane. chance. and
policy trends. iteue on the state of the nationel econooy, eisnificent end
representative comnte end statistics on principel industrial eectore.

. Key ‘neJl ml ornate: Aulyeie. e- Deu'i'eeu

USSR
Economics

In. Ll. nub. u ’05-»th Tune

11.. i "sen Hell/Glow Sc
u. Auelebeluy ﬂew-roe

For official Use Only. Limited
Number of Copies Aveileble From JPRS

I.“ 0e 'l.‘ ee ne‘v. h!" VUCMOC ‘5”."Vl

TI"! '0”. MAY BE IEPIOWCED
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Io/82!

30 Jenner:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(rouo 1/79) '
Couraurs

Problems of Disposition of Industry Anslyzed
(VOW m, NOV 78) 00.0.000.00000DOOOIOOOOOOOOOOO.

Distribution of the Productive Forces
Problems or labor Distribution end the Productive Forces

Problems and Prospects of Soviet-American Booncnic Relations
(Is. 8. Sbershnevz SSSR-CSM: muncussms mm,

1976) seeo00000000400000.0000...oeoeoeeeeeooossososeecooooe

Book Proposing Methods 01’ haunting Research Work Reviewed
(DO L'VW; Von“! mm, Nov 78) OOOOOIOOOOOOO'IOOOOIC
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PROBLBbB 0F msmsruon 0P llDUs‘l'llY ANALYZED
Distribution of the Productive Forces
Hoscou VOPRCSY BKONOHIKI in Russisn No ll Nov 78 pp 3-12

[Text] Problems of Deployment of the USSR Productive PorceoL-‘l'he economic
effectiveness of netionel production is to en ever greeter degree determined
by the systemetic territoriel orgenieetion of the economy. Pull economic
development of the Union republics end economic regions is directly tied in
with effective deployment of the productive forces through the territory of
the Soviet Union. Lenin's directives concerning e policy of complete in-
tegration end e conpreheneive epproech to the economic development of every
region. however smell, is enbodied in the precticel experience of the ne-
tionel economy.

The principle of completeness in development of the netionel economy use ep-
plied beck in the initiel stege of the orgenisetion of socielist planning--
in the period of the preperetion of the plen for the 601180 [Stete (lo-is-
sion for_the Electrification of Russie] end the first stete netionel economy
plen. ‘l'hst period sev the formuletion of the following teek: “l'he U888 one
only build end develop its netionel economy by giving full consideretion to

' ell the neturel end netionel cherecteristics of its vent society end by
specielising its individuel components. This is the only psth to tae ettsin-
ment of en optimum coefficient of effectiveness of netionel lebor.‘

‘l'his importent theoreticel proposition hes greet precricel significence for
the plenning end orgenisetion of the socielist economy end it serves es the
methodologicel besis for the deployment of the productive forces of the

Soviet Union.

The following are correletive to total integretion es the lending principle
of territoriel orgenisstion of the economy of the entire country end its
individuel regions: full exploitetion of the nsturel resources; proportion-
ete development of the industry sectors of the regions; orgenitetion of in-
dustriel end egroindustriel combines and complexes; development of e unified
system of regionel netionel economic end territoriel production complexes.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Maximum unity in distribution of even diverse production undertakings yields

great national economic effect. lassp sum capital investment costs are mini-
mized, operational outlays are reduced, and the entire system of production

organization and mnagement in improved.

The 25th CPSU Congress laid the foundation for a new stage in the develop-
ment and further improvement of the territorial organisation of the 088R
economy on the basis of efficient distribution of the productive forces and
fully realized structuring of the economy of the Union republics and econ-
omic regions. In the 10th Five-Year Plan the distribution (If the productive
forces and the forming of the economic system of the regions are marked by
qualitatively new tasks stemming from the increased scope of the USSR na-
tional economy, the fundamental changes in the territorial distribution of
labor, the increased degree of completeness in the structuring of the
economic system of the regions, and the growth of the economic effectiveness
of the economy of the regions as a result of scientific-technical and social
progress. L. I. Brezhnev observed at the lath Komsomol Congress: "Of a
certainty, effectiveness and quality are very broad concepts. They also an-
compass such fundamental elements as the most rational distribution of the
productive forces, improvement of the overall state planning, and a compre-
hsns ive approach to solution of the major economic problens."

Characterizing our time and the period lying ahead of us is scientific de-
velopment and practical solution of the vast sectorial and regional national
economic problems through extensive application of today's scientific-
technical achievements. ‘lhe gigantic construction projects now include not
only the Its-AZ [llama liotor Vehicle Plant], the 8ayano-8hushenskoye as, the
Tobol'sk Oil, Gas and Chemical Combine and others but also individual large
regions where new territorial production complexes are being built. Among
these are Western Siberia, the complexes of the laykal-Amr main line,
Krasnoyarslriy Kray and many others.

In the future the distribution of the productive forces will be coordinated
primarily with the solution of the major scientific-technical and social

problems. Included among these are the following: the fuel and energy prob-
lem, the task of territorial redistribution of the water resources, and in-

creased labor productivity resulting from a long-term policy of reduction of
the labor resources and efficient exploitation of the new (especially the
northern) regions with their high concentration of natural resources. The
solution of these problems will play a significant role in determining the
paths taken by further development of the country's economics. Ganges are
taking place not only in the scale of physical production but also in a funda-
snntal restructuring of the territorial economic proportions. Speedy dis-
tribution of physical production in the eastern regions, particularly in
Siberia and the Far East, has become essential for the economics of the en-
tire country.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Theoretical Problems of Regional Economics

The chief tank of regional economics is systematic study of the objective
economic and social laws operating in each economic region of the USSR and
in the entire system of the country's regions. Scientific research on re-
gional economics has enabled us to determine the basic theoretical and prac-
tical directions of the analysis and synthesis of today's complex regional
economic problems. An important achievement of regional economics is
scientific corroboration of the general patterns of distribution of the
productive forces of the USSR, the schemes pertaining to the physical pro-
duction sectors, the Union republics, and the economic regions as well as
corroboration of the regional comprehensive programs for the national
economic and territorial production complexes. Along with development of a
system of ideas on the social and economic development of each region,
scientific research in the realm of regional economic: enables us to also

map out a strategy of economic development, especially in respect to putting
new economic capacities into operation.

At the same time, there are still unresolved theoretical and methodological
problems, a situation which also affects the work of territorial economic
organisation. Us will dwell only on some of these problem.

I

National income should be regarded not only as the most important synthetic
indicator of national economy development but also as a general indicator of
the economic development of any region (Union republic, economic region,
oblast, kray, autonomous republic). an indicator which defines the degree of
the region's participation in the territorial division of labor, the ef-
fectiveness of the development of the productive forces of the region, and
its economic structure. The statistical reports and planning indicators are
prepared only for the Union republics and so one of the tasks of regional
economic research is a search for methods of calculating national (net) in-
come for the economic regions and for individual regions.

Along with study of the national income produced, income which is computed

for the various regions as the amount of net output of the physical production
sectors, a subject of special interest is analysis of the utilization of na-
tional income considered for the regions of the country on the basis of the

intersectorial and interregional production balances and output distribution.
Comparison of the national income produced (with due consideration for the

structure of the region's economy) with the national income in s particular
region furnishes important analytical material for an economic evaluation
of the status and development of the national economy of the Union republic,
autonomous republic and economic region. The Economics Institute of the All
[Academy of Sciences] of ‘radrhik 88R is now preparing a comparison of this
kind fora'l'adzhik 883.

Labor productivity varies considerably for the different regions. The bal-
ance of labor resources develops unevenly for the economic regions and for
many regions it is also extremely worrisome. The opening up of new regions,

3
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

especially in Siberia and the Far East, requires a constant influx of labor
resources from other areas (European USSR). Technical remodeling and modern-
ization of the enterprises are making it possible to increase the production
of output without increasing the number of workers. Complex technical,
economic and social problems pertaining to increase of labor productivity
are arising in the newly opened regions. Increased labor productivity, an
especially important feature for the new regions, entails such factors as
selection for operational purposes of effective mineral deposits and timber
tracts and use of technically efficient machines and equipment suitable for
the natural conditions under which they will be used. All these questions
require in-depth scientific research for the entire system of the country's
regions.

The task of regional economic research is scientific analysis of the entire
complex of problems relative to increasing labor productivity in every region
and determining the principles,urhods and requirements for highly effective
utilization of the labor resources existing in the macroragions of the
country. The aforementioned problems include the following: systematic
alinement of the population living standard for the country's regions,
cataloguing the characteristics of the population of the Union republics,
development of a planned system of distribution of the population through

the territory of the country, implementation of scientifically well-grounded
measures for protection of the natural resources and the environment, and
many other measures.

The solution of the major regional social problems requires the preparation
of scientifically validated recouendations for practical planning. He
therefore need normatives for the living standard of the population, methods
of development of a social infrastructure for the country's regions, and
evaluation of the effectiveness of the social measures in the context of a
regional breakdown.

The most important element in the economic structure of a region is fixed
capital. For the country as a whole the value of the fixed capital in 1975
was 1,250 billion rubles, including more than 800 billion rubles for produc-
tion fixed capital. In the 10th Five-Year Plan 622 billion rubles of capital
inveetpcnts are allocated for future expansion of the fixed capital. Satur-
ation 'of a region with fixed capital also determines the extent of its further
economic development. Regional economics goes into the matter of fixed
capital from two standpoints: increased effectiveness in the use of exist-
ing and newly introduced fixed capital and the establishment of new fixed
capital with maxisum effectiveness of the capital outlays.

The effectiveness of fixed capital is directly dependent on the study and
correct assessment of the economic, technical and social interrelationships
which evolve in the process of planning, preparation, development and putting
into operation of fixed capital. To a significant degree the regional
characteristics determine the output-capital ratio for both existing and

new fixed cepital. territorial concentration of capital, organisation of

2,
ran orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the work of enterprises enconpessing production sectors. the capacity of the
construction bases, the coefficient of cost of the operation of equip-ant"
all these are also at the same time factors of a regional character. The
existing methods of calculating the effectiveness of the distribution of
fixed capital and capital investments are far from ideal and they fail to
make full allowance for the territorial characteristics. To a considerable
extent they account for the discrepancies between the planned and actual
coat of construction.

we should emphasize the special importance of the factors which increase

the coat of construction and operation of fixed capital in the regions with
unfavorable natural and climtic conditions and in remote regions. The near
future will also see an increase in the capital and operational outlays for
implementation of measures for environmental protection (purification of
drainage waters, protection of the land and the water and air environment '
from pollution by industrial wastes).

Territorial differentiation of prices and rates has a great effect on the
choice of a region for distribution of production and on the shaping of the
structure of the economy in the regions. It has therefore become extremely
important to have a theoretical and practical study of the questions of
establishing prices embodying the principle of territorial differentiation.
The level of prices and rates directly affects the scientific planning cal-
culations and the organization of construction by the enterprises, making
it possible to arrive at variant evaluations of production distribution and
to determine the economic effectiveness of the operation of new enterprises
and their comrative profitability. The calculations of the technical and
economic indicators provide a basis for scientific research and planning
work in the realm of regional economics and distribution of production man-

power.

An extremely complex theoretical problem is entailed in evaluation of the
natural resources and-establishment of territorial price differentiation

for the various types of fuel and mineral raw materials. The sharp price
fluctuations ate-ing from the natural conditions entailed in the working

of the mineral deposits take a substantial impact on the effectiveness of
the national economy. For example, the price of energy coal calculated at
the rate per ton of conventional fuel fluctuates for the various basins at
the points of extraction from 2 to 28 rubles and the proportion of this
price for average transport expenses for the basins ranges from 15 to 60
percent. Great practical significance therefore attaches to the effort to'
obtain scientifically valid relationships among the regional prices for the
natural resources. And this gives rise to the question of the extent to uhich
the regional prices for the natural resources should reflect the territorial
differences in production costs, differences atoning from the natural and
other conditions; also, the differences in transport expenses. This is
especially important for solution of the major regional problems pertaining
to the task of accelerating the exploitation of the natural resources of the
USSR last and north.

5
roe orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“the mechanism for economic regulation of the location of physical production
must be interrelated with a scientifically valid policy of state motivation

for the development of the regions. This is particularly important for the
regions with unfavorable natural and climatic conditions. Acceleration of
the development of new regions is affected by lower rates for electric
power, reduction of the norms for withholdings from profit, increased ap-
propriations for the establishment of a production and social infrastructure.
and other forms of economic motivation. Definite motivational measures are

also necessary when enterprises are located in the small and medium-sized
cities.

At the same time, there is also need for methods of restricting the location
of enterprises with high material. energy and water index in regions where
fuel. energy and water are in short supply. Increased natural resource cost
valuations for such regions would indicate the undesirability of locating
energy and water-intensive enterprises in them. This restriction is also
important from the standpoint of establishing economic control over the ad-
herence to the territorial econmsic proportions. It is also necessary to
intensify the economic control over the placement of new enterprises in the
large cities. Economic regulation of physical production also has a bene-
ficial effect in protection of the natural environment.

Improvement of Territorial Planning

Science and the work of socialist planning have now developed a new approach
to improvement of territorial planning. This approach is characterised by
the following: preparation of general schemes for the disposition of the
USSR productive forces for the long-term period as preplan, scientifically
corroborated materials; preparation of special schemes for the disposition
of the national economy sectors and also for the all-round development and
disposition of the productive forces of the Union republics and the economic
regions; improvement of the methods of compiling schemes for regional plan-
ning projects on the basis of scientifically validated schemes; disposition
of the productive forces in the various Union republics and economic regions;
development of comprehensive programs for the economic regions and the re-
gional national economic and territorial production complexes; preparation
for the long-term period of scientific concepts defining the strategy of the
geographic distribution of the economic development of the country's macro-
regions and the essential tasks relating to the future distribution of the
productive forces throughout the regional system.

In accordance with the directives of the 23rd CPSU Congress, the USSR Gosplan
Council for the Study of Productive Resources (SOPS) worked out a general
plan for the disposition of the USSR productive forces in the 1971-1980
period. This scheme was used for the practical planning. In the last few
years the council has prepared a general scheme for the l976-l990 period;
this scheme reflected to an even greater degree the scientific concepts
which enable us to determine the optimum variants for improvement of the

6
For orrrcm. uss ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

territorial organization of the USSR economy as well as the basic directions

of the development of the country's national economy over the_long term. In
addition to the clarifications and supplements for the general scheme sub--

mitted, the 8098 is developing preliminary solutions for the most important
problems connected with disposition of the USSR productive forces in the
period up to the year 2000.

The scientifically validated general schemes for the disposition of the USSR
productive forces were firmly incorporated as preplan materials in the ter-
ritorial planning system. Their significance, however, is much broader than
this. The existence of developed end approved sectorial end territorial
schemes mskes it possible to improve the methods of work on regional
planning, the planning of project end research work, and industrial, agri~
cultural and transport planning. Aiding this planning is the established
procedure whereby beginning in 1971 decisions with respect to the planning
and construction of enterprises and installations had to be made on the
basis of the schemes for development and distribution of the national economic
and industrial sectors and the scheme for the development and deployment of
the productive forces in the economic regions and Union republics.

Many socialist countries are profiting free the USSR's experience in develop-
ing general schemes for disposition of the productive forces over the long
term. General schemes of a similar type are being prepared in Poland,
ﬂungery, Bulgaria, GDR and Czechoslovakia. The SOPS is currently collabor-
ating with the scientific planning organisations of Mongolia in the prepar-
ation of a long-term general scheme for the development and deployment of

the productive forces of MR [Mongolia].

leprovement of the territorial organization of the economic system generates
new forms of deployment of the productive forces. In the history of the
economic development of the USSR special importance attaches to the opening
up of new regions possessing a high concentration of valuable natural re-
sources. This national economy development, which is characteristic of
socialist construction, has made it possible to create the country's powe'r-
ful raw material and energy potential. Every five-year plan for the develop-
ment of the usse'. national economy maps out new paths for the economic ex-
ploitation of regions rich in natural resources. The scale and time periods ~
of this total economic exploitation are without precedent in world history.

“The long-range plans," said L. I. Brezhnev, "will lay the foundation for
the solution of many major problems of cormmnniet construction. This will
enable us to advance along the path to the establishment of a material and
technical base for coeeaunism and to raise the living standard of the people
to a qualitatively new level. It entails the all-round development of the
productive forces, the acceleration of scientific-technical progress, and
the consequent enhancement of the effectiveness of the entire economic sys-
tem. Work will be developed for the creation of new enormous national scon-
omic complexes.“

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The characteristic features of a regional national economic complex are: a
large newly exploited territory with a high concentration of valuable natural
resources, the exploitation of which resolves the major fundamental problems
oi the country's economic development in the near and distant future; the
need to establish not only specialized industrial centers but also a com-
plete production and social infrastructure.

The following are regional national economic complexes: the Rest Siberian
lowland complex (Tyumerskaya and 'l'omskaya oblasts and part of Novosibirskaya
Oblast), the system of the Angsra-Yeniscy complexes (Krasnoyarskiy Kray,
Irkustskaya Oblast and part of Kemerovskaya Obi-sot), the Timan-Pechora com-
plex (Komi ASSR and part of Arkhangel'skaya Oblast). A regional national
economic complex is rising in the vast territory of the Near North adja-

cent to the Baykal-Amur Trunk Line. Coming next will be the formtion of the
new interrepublic complex of the eastern Caspian.

The work of planning and territorial organization of the economy is to an
increasing extent embracing both the multisector and specialized territorial
production complexes [TPK]. Nearly all the regional national economic com-
plexes have ‘l‘PK system. In his report at the 25th CPSU Congress A. ll.
Kosygin emphasized this point: "The charter of the various regions of the
country will to an ever increasing degree be determined by the realization
of the large-scale national economic programs and the establishment of tar-
ritorial production complexes.”

The territorial production complex is a highly effective colbination of en-
terprises of one or several specialized industries deployed within a large
economic region, a Union or autonomous republic, an oblast or a kray and
making use of their production and social infrastructure. Typical of the
1930's was the organization of the Khibinskiy apatite-nephaline territorial
production complex. The 10th Five-Year Plan is continuing the development of
the territorial production complex based on the mineral resources of the Rural:
magnetic anomaly as well as the Pavlodar-Bkibastuaskiy, Karatau-thanbulslrty
and Hangyshlakskiy territorial production complexes in Kazakhstan. In ‘l‘adzhik
SSR they are forming the South 'i‘adshik Industrial Agricultural Complex. In
the system of the regional Heat Siberian National Economic Complex they are
mapping out the territorial production complexes of the middle Ob' and the
'l'yumen'-'robol'sk and Severnyy regions. In the Angers-Yenisey system of com-
plexes they have accelerated the pace of the development of the Sayansk com-
plex and the Central Kresnoyarsk organization based on the lanek-Achinsk

Fuel and Energy Complex; they are also forming the Boguchanskiy rm. hear-
ing completion is the Bratsk-Ust'-Ilimsk complex. In the zone of the SAM -
[Baykal-Amur Trunk Line] they are beginning construction of the South

Yakutsk territorial production complex, which is the first of those in the
system of MN complexes.

The schemes for the development of the national economic production com-
plexes have been incorporated in the scheme for the development and deploy-
ment of the productive forces of the Union republics and'aconomic regions.

8
For OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The scheme analyze the status of the economic development of the operational
complexma, elaborate on lllu concepts for the long term, and delineate the
interrelationships between the specialised industries and the production and
social infrastructure. and scope and priority of the construction of the

most important installations, the requisite labor, material and financial
costs. and their national economic effectiveness. The schemes for the com-
plexes constitute the basic scientifically validated document for the long-
range planning of the complexes in the state plans ("the unified construction

project"). Schemes like these with varying degrees of detail have been
worked out for all the complexes now being formed.

From 1969 to l970 the sovs worked out a special scheme similar to a compre-
hensive program for the development of the productive forces of Krasnoyarskiy
Krny in the 1971- [980 period. In his speech at the preelection meeting of
the voters of the Baumanskiy electoral district in June 1975 L. I. Brezhnev
called the decision for the development of the productive forces of
Krasnoyarskiy Kray a model comprehensive territorial program and he ob-
served that the other national economic complexes and regions of Siberia and
the Far East are also in need of such decisions tying together economic,
social, political, geographic and many other factors. for further develop-
ment of the productive forces of Krasnoyarskiy Kray there was now a need for
a perfected scheme for the new period (up to 1990).

The comprehensive program for the territorial production system differs from
the more concrete schemes in respect to the parties involved, the relation to
the balance sheet, the capital outlays and the results. The comprehensive
program is not a preplan but a concrete planning docuent with fixed stages
of implementation. Consequently. along with the scientific and planning or-
ganisetions, an active part in the preparation of the comprehensive programs
must also be taken by the state planning organs (Gosplan 11388, Gosplan of

the republic, and the kray (oblaat) planning cousission).

The theoretical basis of the modern system of territorial planning is the
regional economic system, which is required to make a study of the total com-
bination of facts and phenomena which bring about the planned development of
the productive forces in each of the country's regions. The deployment of
the productive forces, the scientific basis of which is the synthesis of
economic. social. natural and technical sciences, also determines the degree
of improvement of the economic structure of the regions.

The following mast now be the focus of attention in the matter of improve-
ment of territorial planning:

The methods of system analysis and a determination of the optimum territor-
ial economic proportions among the macrosones and within the cones. con-
stituting the basic scientific planning instrument are the general schemes
for the placement of the productive forces of the USSR and the schemes for
the republics. A careful analysis of the territorial proportions is espec-
ially urgent because of the accelerated development of the productive forces
of Siberia and the far Best.

9
FOR OFFICIA! USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The methodology and methods of forming large national ecmonic complexes and
their systems throughout the territory of the country. In this connection,
upeeinl importance is acquired by the preplan and scientifically corrobor-
ated schemes and programs for the development of the existing large complexes
and for the formation of new ones.

The methodology and methods pertaining to the social processes in the country's
regions. the processes which enable us to influence the demographic processes
in each region, and to provide for efficient utilization of the labor re-
sources and maintenance of an effective balance between the production pro-
gram and the labor resources, one which regulates the migration of tho popu-
lation. In this regard special importance attaches to the programs for social
development of the regions, programs worked out by the republic economic in-
atitutes.

The methodology and methods computations for environmental protection. , methods
which are acquiring ever greater economic and, particularly, social importance
and which have a substantial effect on the structure of the economy of the

regions. the volumes of capital investments and the concentration o‘.’ produc-
tion.

These utters require profound and comprehensive research performed directly
at the sites. This research must also find concrete realisation in the re-
gional planning projects and in the programs of capital investments and
scientific-technical progress in the republics and economic regions.

The Tasks and Organization of Regional Scientific Research

From an overall standpoint. the scientific research tasks in the field of
regional economics and deployment of the country's productive forces can be
divided into three groups: the strategic (conceptual) tasks. the concrete
(comprehensive regional programs), and the methods tasks. The strategic
tasks should include the scientific concepts for the long-range period (up
to the year 2000) and the specific directions of the economic development of
the entire regional system of the country and particularly of the large
regions which exert the greatest influence on the economic system as a whole.
it is along these lines that we are working out the construction principles
and stage-by-stage development of the economy of the regions on the basis of
further rationalization of the deployment of the 088R productive forces.

In the matter of concrete tasks we need a decisive change to a higher level--
a broad development of comprehensive regional program and a policy of loolt-
ing upon the schemes as the first stage in the solution of the complex of
regional problems. The first job is the preparation of a comprehensive
program for the Far East (with apportionment for Yakutsk ASSR) and the now
in preparation comprehensive program for Krasnoyarshiy Kray. Required in
the future will be the compilation of comprehensive regional programs for
all the national economic and territorial production complexes, both already
established and in the process of formation.

10
ron emcm use any
FOR Ol’PlCIAl. USE ONLY

In our opinion. there is need for the development of comprehensive regional
progreas for the sectors of the national economy and for all the Union re-

publics. Programs of this kind can only be worked out through the Joint ef-
forts of the scientific, project drafting. and planning organizations. The
coeprehensive regional pregrans should be regarded as planning documents and
with the various correctives they should be incorporated in the state five-
year and yearly plans for the development of the country's national economy.

The vast scope of the preplan and planned work for current and future dis-
position of the USSR productive forces and of the dynamic all-round fema-
tion of the scenery of the Union republics and econonic regions also makes
urgently necessary a new approach to the organisation of methodological work
along these lines.

There is need for a systen of general end special aethods for deploynent of
the productive forces and for the econonic developaent of the country's re-
gions on a new scientific basis. In the past the people concerned worked
out general methods and e progran of general schemes which were used in
conpiling the general scheme for the disposition of the productive forces in
the l97l:l980 and 1976-1990 periods. A great deal of experience wee ac-
quired in respect to the scientific preparation of scheaes of this type.
The need is to apply a creative approach to the generalizing of this exper-
ience and to perfect the overall methodology of the general schemes and the
nethods of preparing industry and regional schenss.

An acute need is also being felt for nethods to be used for the comprehen-
sive regional program which encompass not only the territorial production
complexes but also the disposition of the complexes of the industry sectors
(for example. the fuel nnd energy complex) and the long-term for-scion of
economic,conplexes for the Union republics and the econonic regions. Gir-
rently on hand is some reserve for the development of conprehensive program
netth for the regional coeplexes (the Krasnoyarsk program and others).
however. the work on these should include the republic econonic institutes
and e nunber of industry and planning institutes.

Along the regional methods of the functional type a special place is as-
signed to the general nthods pertaining to the economic effectiveness of
the disposition of the productive forces with an integrated and intertwined
systea of individual methods. These include nethods aimed at effectiveness
of the distribution of the various enterprises and production projects,
nethods aimed at effectiveness of the disposition of individual industries
and conplenes of the national econoay sectors, and aethods aimed at effective-
ness of the fornetion of territorial production coaplexes. This group may
also include the methodological uterinls pertaining to the calculation of
regional national income, to the effectiveness of the use of production
capital in the regions, and to the effectiveness of the nechanism for econ-
oeic regulation of the distribution of physical production. This is far
from a coaplete list of the scientific methods materials which must be
prepared in the next few years in the interests of inprovenent of

1.1
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

territorial planning and further development of scientific research. The
large scientific collectives can accomplish this on the basis of a vell-
coordinated plan of scientific research.

It is particularly important to dwell on the problems and the organisational
structure of the science of deployment of the productive forces.

He now have all the preconditions for the development of a veil-balanced
theory of deployment of the USSR productive forceo, one which is adequate

for the era of developed socialism. Such a theory, as one of the most im-
portant directions of modern science, Cull only be developed in an indissolubly
interacting complex of sciences, economic and social and natural and techni-
cal. it is necessary not only to study the objective economic lava and to

be able to quickly evaluate the changing social processes but also to attains
profound and modern scientific level in perceiving the objective laws of the
distribution of the natural resources (geological, soil, ecological and any
other factors) and the latest modern technology.

The work of development of Soviet economics requires a further differenti-
ation of the science branches and particularly of the economic sciences. A
recent development has been the formulation of the doctrine of the science
of demographics and of the economics of the social processes. Economic and
mathematical methods took shape as a branch of science. There also evolved
a new direction in economic science--regional economics. The scientific
discussions on the problem of regional economics in the republic economics
institutes and the broad coverage of these problems in the central and repub-
lic press accelerated the development of a regional economics which general-
izes the considerable experience of many years of regional economic research
in our country and abroad. As we know, the presidiua of the Academy of
Sciences USSR included in its basic fundamental research the comprehensive
problem "the Regional Economics and the Regional Social and Bconouic Devel-
opment of the USSR in the Future”; this subject is being researched in prac-
tically all the republic economic institutes. Regional ecmomics as a
branch of science is being successfully developed by the scientists of the
socialist countries. In the space of eight years each of the socialist
countries in turn has been conducting special conferences and symposia on
the problems of socialist regional economics. There have evolved in these
countries groups of highly skilled scientists who are versed in the theory
and methods of regional economics and are able to solve concrete regional
economic problems in their own countries. A large quantity of scientific
literature on regional economics is being published in the 088: and abroad.

with all this, regional economics is not a science of the disposition of the
productive forces in the strictly scientific interpretation of this problem.
The rational disposition of the productive forces is considered the basis
and the chief constituent element of regional economics. Regional economics
investigates only the objective economic laws and the economic substance of
the phenomena and processes pertaining to the disposition of the productive
forces.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’PICMl. USE ONLY

In my 1978 there was held an All-Union conference of the economic geography
departments of the country's universities. At this conference a Joint re-
port of three universities (Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev) defined the funda-
rental tenets in the further development of research in the field of economic
geography. A decision was taken to organize a combined coordinating
scientific center for regional economic problene.

FOOI'NUI'BS

i. This article served as the basis of the Hay 1978 Moscow-held Ali-Union
conference on methodological and methods problens relating to the deploy-
nent of the productive forces and regional economics. See pp 152-19. for
information on the conference.

2. "the Five-Year Plan of USSR National Economic Construction," Vol 3.
lrdetei'stve Planovoye Koeyeystvo, 1929 p 9.

3. The decree was published in full by Gosplen USSR in the journal PIANOVOYB
IOIOZYAYSTVO No 6, l977 pp 156-155.

lo. 1.. i. Brezhnev, "By the Leniniet Course. Speeches and Articles," Vol'S.
mmmr, 1976. p 68.

-Prebleee of Labor Distribution and the Productive Forces
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No ll. Nov 78 pp 152-151.

[Text] In the closing days of May 1978 Moscow was the scene of the first
scientific conference on methodological and methods problems connected with
deployment of the productive forces end regional ecmoeics; the conference
was organized by the USSR Gosplen council for study of the productive forces.
Taking pert in the work of the conference were lore than (000 scientists from
neny of the country's scientific organizations; they submitted 325 reports,
(in the fore of theses).

The plenary session heard a report from Academician N. Nekresov which re-
vealed the basic directions and nthodological tenets of the investigations
of the most inportant problems connected with distribution of national pro-
duction and its territorial organization in light of the decisions of the
25th CPS" Congress and the subsequent party and government decreesﬁ
Academician N. Nekraeovb report wu discussed in four sectione.

 

*‘lbe article Academician N. Nekrasov wrote on the basis of this report is
published in this issue of the journal.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first sectionuthe methodological problems of the economic and social
devalopment of the Union republics and the economic regions and the formation
and development of the regional production complexesureviewed the follwing:
the regional general and oVerall problems: the methodological and methods
questions entailed in the development of the economy of the Union republics;
problems entailed in the interregional placement of production and the for-
mation and development of national economic and territorial production com-
plexes and industrial centers; methodological problems connected with the
formation of a social infrastructure and a living standard; methodological
problems of resettlement and urbanization; methodogical problems connected
with safeguarding and improving the envuonment. It was noted in the
section that rational disposition of the productive forces and purposeful
social and economic development of the various territorial units mat be
carried out on the basis of the long-term goals for the development of the

country's economy. A positive solution for the problems of the development

of these units can be assured on the basis of interregional end intra-
regional national economy proportions based on the balance-sheet method of
calculations. At present the balance-sheet accounts in the Union republics
and regions are compiled on the basis of a limited group of indicators. No
intersectorial balance sheet of financial resources is compiled and the
figures for the balances oi social product, national income. and monetary
income and expenditures do not fully reflect the true picture of the region's

economy nor are they coordinated saith the planning calculation indicators
compiled for the sectors of the economy.

The section also discussed the new direction of regional economic research--
the effect of foreign economic relations on the fornmtion of national
economic systems in our country. From the methodological standpoint foreign
economic relations based on the participation of a particular region in the
international division of labor is considered one of the most important
factors in the disposition of production. The number of new problems should
also include the methodological approaches to evaluation of the development
of the scientific-technical potential (NIP) of a region. Improvement of the
disposition of NIP is not only a way to increase the effectiveness of
science but also an important instrumentality for planning the development
of the various territories and the disposition of the country's productive
forces. The large territorial production complexes cannot develop success-

fully in the context of the m [scientific-technical revolution] if they do
not possess the’ requisite level of MP.

A number of speeches tenched upon the development of methodological tenets
for economic evaluation of the environmental quality and protection in the
deployment of the productive forces and the formation of territorial produc-
tion complexes. The opinion was voiced that an inatrumentality for motivat-
ing environmental protection measures may be payment of a pollution penalty
which should be levied mainly against enterprises guilty of environmental
pollution. It should not be included in the production costs but should be
paid from the enterpriso'a fund. The pollution payments collected from the

enterprises go into a fund for the implementation of environmental protection
measures in the region.

it
roe onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the discussion of the methodological problems of regional formation of
the social infrastructure, the standard of living, and resettlement and ur-
banisation. attention was focused on the key problems of methods of evalu-
sting the regional differentiation in the levels of development of the
spheres of service; the infrastructural configuration of the territories;
assessments of the levels of regional development of the various sectors of
the service sphere; formation of a social infrastructure in relation to the
distribution of industry in a particular economic region; methods of geo-
graphic differentiation of the living standard of the 088R population and of
compiling the regional differentiated balance sheets of population income
and consumption; methods of planning regional differentiation of public con-
sumption funds; the methodology of establishing systems of populated places
in the USSR. etc.

The second section reviewed the problems of evaluation of the economic ef-
fectiveness of the disposition of the productive forces end their territor-
ial organisation: scientific methodological questions of regional effective-
ness of the disposition of the productive forces; methods of factor analysis
of the economic effectiveness of the distribution of physical production;
methods of determining and evaluating the effectiveness of the regional
utilisation of the most important types of production resources; methodolog-
ical questions relating to evaluation of the economic effectiveness of the
distribution of the industry sectors; methodological principles for deter-
mining the economic effectiveness of the formation of regional national econ-
omic complexes. We have not yet achieved a methodological unity in calcu-
lation of the economic effectiveness of the disposition of the productive
forces and all of national production. One of the important reasons for this
is to be found in the specific characteristics of the evaluation of the de-
ployment of the productive forces: ve need to take into account not only
the purely productim outlays but also the costs relating to the solution of
social problems in the regions of distribution; the regional characteristics
of the utilization of the most important types of material resources can only
be interpreted if they are evaluated in relation to the national economic
costs.

The third section discussed the methodological problems of the development
and distribution of the physical production sectors: methods of economic
evaluation of the utilization of the natural resources, which methods serve

as the most important prerequisites for the development of physical produc-
tion in the territory of any region. however, as a result of the lack of

unity in the concepts pertaining to the nature of the economic evaluation of
the natural resources there are today no generally recogniud methods of
evaluating even a single one of the types of natural resources. Inadequate
study has been devoted to the methods of mmprehensive evaluation of the ter-
ritorial combinations of natural resources. In its most general form the .
comprehensive evaluation of the territorial combination of natural resources
(1'8!!!) is obviously the sum of the component evaluations of natural resources
uhich make up the rsm being evaluated.

15
FOR onrcm. use on“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he «an noted in the auction the effectivenoea of the complete exploitation
of the raw material reeources ia determined via the relationship between the
outlays for proceaaing the raw material and the effect obtained an a reault.
The calculation of expenditurea done not preaent any epecial difficultiee
but the mthoda of determining the effect have not been adequately worked
out becauae the effect obtained from the full exploitation of raw material
in varieduit ehoua up in part beyond the enterpriaea of these induatry
aectore and in come cnaea a quantitative meaaure in hard to come by.

The aection carried out a detailed analvuia of the methodological problems
of regional development of the country'a fuel and energy complex, the com-
plex of the proceaaing induetries, and the conetruction complex and ite
umtorial and technical been. The ahift of the fuel extraction industry to
the east and the eatabliahment there of huge fuel and energy baaea of Union
aubordinat ion require increased ratea of growth of induetrial production in
the eaatern regione.

The diacuaaion oi the problema of formation of a water econqay included a
review of the methoda of water management dietricting and control of the
water roaourcee exercieed by a eingle water management eyetem for the
country; regional development of the water atonemy; economic evaluation of
the voter factor in the deployment of production; economic evaluation of
full use of the water reaourcea; compilation of water economy balance aheete
as baaee for evolution of the full utilization and protection of the water
resourcea; methodological and organizational probleme in predicting water
consumption in induetry and agriculture.

The membera of the fourth aection exchanged opinions on the uae of economic
and mathematical methods in deployment of the productive forcee: eimulation
of territorial national economy proportions; optimization of the dietribution
of the varioua eectors of the national economy, and of induetry and the non-
production rector; creating modela for the planning and forecaetieg of the
development and deployment of the productive forcee of the verioue regiona;
simulation of the formation of territorial production complenee and evalu-
ation of their economic effectiveneee; creation of modela for the ayatenm of
peraonnel relocation, etc. Recent yeare have seen a subetantial growth in
the volume of work on the creation of economic and mathematical modele for
deployment of the productive forcee. 'i'his haa enabled no to evitch from
individual aectoriel and regional modela and general theoretical projectiona
to practical development and monitoring of the syetema of modele for long-
range planning on the Union. republic and regional levele.

‘Ihe conference's concluding document noted that in recent yeara a number of
general and individual uthoda have been developed for the various problema
pertaining to rational dispoeition of the productive forces and enhancemnt
of the effectiveneae ,of the eocial and economic development of the regiona.
A great deal of practical experience haa been acquired for aolution of the

aectoriel and regional problema entailed in the development and deployment

16
FOR OFFICIAL use 0an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the productive torcee and work hee begun for the preperetion of e unified

eyeton of technicel end economic indicetore for the plecenent of the induetry
end netionel economy eectore.

The growing importence of methodologicel neteriel for eolution of the prec-
ticel problem: of deployment oi the productive iorcne Iekee urgently necee-

eery further development at the work elong the folloving linen: the eeteh-
liehment of e eyetem of interrelated methode for the preporetion of echenetice

for the dietrihution oi the productive iorcee end territoriel orgeniretion
end evolution of their effectiveneee; strengthening of the eyetem of con-
preheneive regionel reeeerch on the problem releting to the theory of de-
ployment of the productive forcee end territoriel orgenieetion of netionel
production; development of theoreticel end nethedologicel principlee for
recording the inpect of ocientific-tochnicel progreee on the diepoeition of
the productive forcee end on enhencement of the etfectiveneee of the ter-
ritoriel orgenieetion of production; improvement of the methode of enelyeie
end preperetion of territoriel belence ehoete for veried reeourceenfuel
end energy, minerel rev meteriel, voter. lend, timber and lebor; develop-
mnnt of method. of quentitetive enelyeie end economic eveluetion of the
effect of internetionel divieion of lebor on the fornetion of en effective
netionel economy etructure in the regione.

‘rhe conference'e concluding document noted thet for inteneificetien of re-
eeerch on the methodologicel end methode probleme perteining to the die-
poeition of the productive forcee end for employment of e unified epproech
to the eolution of there problem. it ie deeireble to net up e methodologi-
cel center uhich would euume the functions of orgenieing the phoning end
coordinetion of thin reeeerch.

V. Yevetigneyev end 1.. ‘reternikove
comma: Itdetel'etvo "Prevde". "Voproey Shanomiki", 1978

7962
080: 1820

17
won onlcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF SOVIBT-AHERICAN ECONOMIC RELATIONS

Hoecov sssn-csm Bkononichaakiya Otnoeheniya (USSR-USA: Economic Rela-
tiona) in Rneei‘an 1976 aimed to praaa 11 Aug 76 pp 3-6, 415-616

[Annotatiom table of contenta and attribution of chaptera fro- book edited
by Ye. s. Sherahnev. Nauha, 17.000 copiee. ‘16 pascal

[Annotation]

[Text] The book covers a broad range of topical problem in Soviet-Ameri-
can relationa on the baaia of an analyaie of eubetantial factual naterial.
ehova how political forcee in the United Statee are lined up on the ieaue
- of econonic cooperation between the USSR and the United Statea, and indi-
catee the roads and poeeibilitiea of ice develop-ant.

The authora of the varioua parte of the book are aa follow:

Ya. s. Sherehnav, doctor of econoeic aciancaa: Introduction.
Chaptera 2. 3. 5 and 6 (Sectione 1-4). and Conclueion;

V. s. Anichkina. candidate of hietorical aciancaa: Chapter 1 (Sec-
tion 1) and Chapter 8;

V. A. Padorovich. candidate of acononic aciancaa: Chapter 1 (Sec-
tiona 2 and 3) and Chapter 8; ‘

N. A. Dolgopolova. candidate of hiatorical aciencea: Chapter 6
(Section 1);

V. I. Zwlinakiy: Chapter b (Sectiona 2-6);
s. L. Kat-below Chapter 6 (Section 5);
P. ll. Halahhin: Chapter 6 (Section 6);

l. l. Sheydina. candidate of hiatorical aciancaa: Chapter 7
Editor in Chief Ye. s. Sherahnev.

doctor of econeeic aciancaa

18
ton onxcm. us: om
Foreword

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS

Introduction

Chapter 1.

1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
Chapter 2.
2.1.
2.2.

Chapter 3.
3.1.

3.2.
Chapter 6.
6.1.
b.2.

6.3.

t.‘.
Chapter 5.
Chapter 6.

601.

6.2.

6.3.

6“.

6.5.

6.6.

Peaceful Coexistence of States With Differing Social
Systems as the Porenost Principle of the Soviet
State's Foreign Policy

Lenin's Principle of Coexistence and its Dovelopeent
in the Present Stage-

Bconoaic Cooperation as the Material Basis of the
Peaceful Coexistence of States.

International Econonic Cooperation and Socialism

Soviet-Aaerican Econonic Cooperation in. the First
Stages of its Develop-eat

Develop-ant of Bconoeic Relations in the Years of the
First Five-Year Plane

Cooperation During the Years of Horld Rat II

The Period of the Cold Her-snd'lts Results

Goals of American Cold Her Strategy and "eye of
-1splesenting It

Consequence of the Policy of Trade Discriminations

Evolution of the Course of United States Trade Policy
in the Late 60's snd'Berly 70's

Changes in Approach to the Country's Foreign Policy
Priorities

United States Business Circles Reassess Their Views
Concerning the Problems of Bconoeic Relations With
the Socialist Countries

The Clinate in the United States Congress Changes and a
Reassessment of Certain Cold war Postulstes Begins
The Maneuvering of the white house in the Field of
Trade Policy

The historical Significance of the Soviet-Aeerican
Sun-it Meetings

Soviet-American Bconoaic Relations in the Present Stage

Assessment of the Prospects of Soviet Aeericsn Scone-1c
Relations

Expansion of Trade in the 1972-1975 Period
Use of the Most Sffective Pores of Iconoeic Cooperation
Pinencial Cooperation Between the Parties '

Inproveeent of the Mechanism of Business Contacts and
Relations

Urgent Prohlens in the Purther Develop-eat of Soviet-
Aeericsn leonoaic Relations

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Page

‘30!

16
16
38
b9
57

65
84

90
96
123
130
133

162
172
189

202
223
226
233
267
260
262

273
Chapter 7.

7.1.
7.2.

7.3.

Chapter 8.

Conclusion

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Scientific-Technical Cooperetion, the Roads and
Prospects of Ito Development

A New Field of Soviet-American Relations

Main Directions of Scientific-Technical Cooperstion
Between the USSR and the United States

Significance to the Economy of Soviet-American
Cooperation in the Fields of Science end Technology

Criticiea of the Conceptions of Opponents of Soviet-
Anerican Economic Cooperation

Brief Chronology of Soviet-Anericsn Bcononic Relations (1917-1976)

Subject Index

Biographical Index

COPYRIGﬂT:

7065

Izdetel'etvo "Nauka." 1976

C80: soaa/oszb

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

29‘
300

318
362

366
389
397
610
413
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOOK PROPOSING mops 0P EVALUATING RBSEARCR WORK REVIEW!)
Moscow VOPROSY momma in Russian No 11. Nov 78 pp 146-1“

[Review by D. L'vov of the book "Bhonolicheskiy Bffekt Nsuchnykh
lssledovaniy" (The Economic Inpsct of Scientific Research) by 1.. I.

Veger and Yu. D. Hatevosov. Irdstel'stvo AN Arlyanskoy 883. Yerevan.
1977, 165 pages]

[Text] This book is devoted to determining econonic impact in the
sphere of scientific-technical activity and analyzing the criteria

and indexes used to neasure it and the influence of specific aspects of
science on the sethodology of calculating inpacts.

In their review of the question of using the category of econonic in-
psct. the authors criticize the viewpoint that has becose widespread
lately and says that econonic ispsct is the primary or even the only
criterion for evaluating scientific activity. They also give a criti-
cal analysis of the thesis that the category of econosic inset is not
at all suited to scientific activity and thus should not be used. The
authors believe that it is entirely proper to use this category for

a definite sphere of science. and this is the result. for one. of the
target orientation of scientific research and develop-ant (sun) and.
for two, the possibility of calculating the ilpsct with the necessary
exactness. Thus, totsl SID where the econosic iapsct can and sust be
calculated is made up of SR!) projects whose primary objective is to
isprove the efficiency of public production and which have adequate in-
tonation (technical-aconosic parasaters of future Ischinery. sphere of
its use and value of use, and the like) asking it possible to detersine
the econosic ispact with sufficient reliability.

Beginning frost thispoint, the authors identify that part of applied
science where the econosic impact is the primary objective and should
be used as the target function and evaluation index. Using it as the
basis for the stisulation syste- and distribution of resources creates
one of the nest. iaportsnt prerequisites for optiaal use of resources
in the particular branch of science.

21
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This proposal to view this part of science as a distinct subsystem and
object of control is unquestionably interesting. however, such a dis-
tinction raises a number of new questions which are not treated in the
monograph. For example. how should we manage those scientific research
institutes. and they are a majority. which are conducting research
aimed at solving social problems in addition to development work to
solve the problems of raising production efficiency? how can ve evalu-
ate (stimlate. allocate resources) for research and development proj-
ects which are solving multifaceted socioeconomic problems? The sug-
gestion of the authors of the book that a separate and independent
system of management be established for all 8RD projects pursuing eco-
nomic goals merits more serious and thorough work.

As for the other branches of science. the authors believe that economic
calculations in them can serve nore limited purposes. For exanple.
given a number of conditions. they can be used in the pure sciences to
select the most economical alternatives for conducting scientific ex-
periments. In applied research aimed at achieving social results.

the economic impact should be used primarily to select alternatives
that guarantee achievement of the assigned goal with minimum expendi-
ture of resources.

At the same time. it should be observed that the authors' explanation
of differences in the use in the indexes of economic impact in different
branches of science (they identify three factors: the nature of the
goal. the extent of expenditures. and the correspondence between the
precision of the impact being calculated and the demands that are made)
is not exhaustive. This possibility of calculating economic impact

is a result of more complex circumstances and the effect of a large
amber of factors. That is why, for example, the book's explanation of
the reasons for the extremely limited use of the category of impact in
branches of science involved with improving public labor organization
(research and development in economics, planning, organization of man-
agenent, and the like) is not convincing. It is true that calculations
of economic impact are used much less often here than in the develop-
nent of new means of production. However. to explain this primarily
by the fact that expenditures for development are comparatively small
is. in our view, incorrect.

It appears that, in the given case. this factor is not fundamentally
important at all. The reason that a calculation of the efficiency

of such development work is not done is certainly not that it is use-
less; rather the reason is that methods of determining this efficiency
are not fully worked out. By the same token, the primary reason for
inadequate use of the category of impact applied to research and de-
velopment in the field of improving public production is a series of
unresolved methodological and technical questions. Taking into ac-
count the trend toward nore rapid development of these branches of
knowledge compared to the development of science as a whole. which

can be seen in recent years in both the USSR and the United States.

an increasing need will be felt each year to make economic calculations

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and substantiation for these projects. Therefore. analyzing the reasons
for inadequate use of the category of impact in research related to im-
proving management and also developing techniques of calculating this
impact should. in our view. be an important line of activity in raising
the quality of economic calculations.

The book devotes a good deal of space to what is called the problem of
"share participation" by several scientific organizations in the per-
formance of large programs. Under these conditions using the magnitude
of impact to evaluate the activity of specific organisations and compute
economic stimulation funds requires that it be broken down into parts
which could be considered the contribution of each of the co-psrforming
organisations. thus acting as evaluation indexes of their work. 1.. Veger
and Yu. listsvosov criticise those economists who suggest distributing
the total impact proportional to the expenditures of each organization
because this gives collectives an interest in increasing costs; rather.
they propose their own method. based on consideration of growth in the
magnitude of impact achieved after each stage of development.

The authors unquestionably make a contribution to study of this issue.
However. it seems to us that they still have not refuted the position
of those investigators who consider this problem an artificial one.
The authors substantiate the advisability of distributing the national
economic impact of new technology created through 3RD among science.
production. and consumption and the partial impact of science among
separate scientific organizations by reference to the possibility of
using partial impact to construct a system for stimulation and distri-
bution of resources. by the same token it is proposed that these in-
dexes should influence not just stimulation but also the rate of de-
velopment of these spheres. liowever. computing the part of impact at-
tributable to the production sphere does not at all mean that it
should automatically be allocated additional resources for development
because existing production capacities may be adequate to produce the
new technology. As a result. the use of partial impact does not in-
sure optimal distribution of resources among different spheres. as
the authors suppose Furthermore. the arguments given in favor of
using partial impacts to organise the system of stimulation and re-
sourcs distribution seem inadequate to us.

The book gives considerable attention to the factor of uncertainty

as a feature objectively inherent in science which has a notable ef-
fect on the technique of calculating economic impact in this sphere.
‘l'hey analyse the nature and sources of the uncertainty. review the
causes of the probabilistic nature of the impact-shaping factors of

SR!) (expected results. expenditures for 8RD. development time). and
describe the effects and influence of uncertainty on economic processes.

The authors propose. for consideration of the probabilistic nature of
the expected results when determining future economic impact. that
we begin from the idea that the economic impact calculated in the
course of development work should be figured as its mathematical

23
ms orrrcm. use our
FOR [WI-‘lClAl. USE ONLY

expectation. in other words. the product of the calculated impact and
the probability of achieving it.

The book takes up one of the most interesting issues connected to the
factor of uncertainty. This is evaluation of probleas (alternative
solutions) that differ by the spread of randon errors (v ' nn quadratic
deviation of possible values of the actual iapact and the expected is-
pact). The question is raised. for example. of the cooperative evalu-
ation of the efficiency of working out two problems (solution tech-
niques for one problem) which have the same astheastical expectation
of iapact (suppose. l aillion rubler) but differ by possible spreads
of ispact values. for exasple in the ranges :10 percent and £100 per-
cent. The authors answer this question as follows: "Pros a national
aconosic standpoint alternatives and problens vith identical inpact
but different confidence intervals are equal in value. If it is
necessary to select one out of two or several possible alternatives or
probless. additional infornation should be obtained (by conducting an-
parisents. testing working eleaents or ssseablies. or enlisting addi-
tionel caperts) to deternine the ssgnitude of the ispact more exactly
and distinguish along the alternatives" (p 133).

This statement by the authors could be considered correct if the eco-
nonic inpact were considered to be an abstract. calculated category.
llut if we take the ispact to be a quantity which is realised in the
concrete conditions of the planned economic nechanise. than we met
take account of the reaction of this lechaniso to randoa errors. Using
cosprehenaive planning that envisions advance preparation of produc-
tion and corresponding expenditures for the incorporation of new
technology neans that a certain part of these expenditures will be lost
when the actual technical para-stars of nev technology differ froa ex-
pected ones. And. obviously. these losses will be greater if the de-
viations are greater. These were precisely the considerations which
led us to argue that decision alternatives with sasller spreads of
possible inpact values where other conditions are equal are better for
the national econo-y.

The Ionograph gives a detailed presentation of questions of the tech-
nique of detersining the econoaic iapact of sun. In the appendix.
particularly. it has the authors' design of a technique which supple-
sents. for a nuober of special issues. the technique (basic principles)
of detenining the econoaic efficiency of using new technology. inven-
tions. and efficiency proposals in the national econon. The sub-
stantiation given for the unity and colon character of the nonstive
coefficient of efficiency for the spheres of physical production and
science particularly deserves attention.

however. along with the true and interesting oethodological points
one also encounters questionable ones. for exasple. the reco-enda-
tions concerning broad use of both absolute and cooperative inpact
see-s superfluous. The iapact of applied 8RD oriented to iuproving
economic indexes shovs up ultinstely in growth in the surplus product

2|;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON DFHCIM. USE ONLY

of society. Because the cooperative ispact. which shows the growth of
inpact created by the use of new technology. givea an adequately full
characterization of achieve-eat of this goal. introducing one aore in-
dex. the absolute inpact. is not justified. in our opinion.

The authors' proposals for isproving the organization and use of calcu-
lstions of econonic ispsct do hold practical value. The recon-ands-
tions on creating conditions that guarantee operational calculations
attract our attention here.

A shortcoaing of the book as a whole is the lack of even hypothetical
exseples to illustrate the primary points.

Overall. housvar. this is an interesting and useful work which contains
new. although eonetises also debatable. propositions with respect to
the prohleae of deternining aconosic impact in the sphere of science.

COPYRIGhTt lcdatel'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy ekonoeiki". 1978.

11.176
cso: 1820 m

25
FOR OFFICIAL use om