APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00080R000100030022-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8319

8 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreig.-lunguege
scurcea are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed oarentheses were not clear in the
original but have been a plied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parentnetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Honthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.8. Government Printing office. Washington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster. Ohio, 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North clebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
“Cl!" a

«as no 'oponau
rumnsm'mus on EASTERN EUROPE - acouomc AND INDUSTRIAL 8 March 1979
AFFAIRS, (Fouo 4/79)

 
   

7. Mutants) I. Pellet-h; ngaalsalloa keys.
9.

l0. Psolacl/Taak/Vodx Ulll No

II. Contact Gas: No. '
13. 1’1 oi Re a Petiod
can: we

 

'- Pruning Ouaaiaalloa Nan: sad Adana

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebs Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

H. Sponsoring Ougaaisuloa Name and Adda“

 
     
     
     
   
 
    
   
 
    
  

As above

IS. Supplementary Notes

6. lib-men

The serial report contains articles on economic- theory, organization, planning
and management; major agreements on and development of trade within cm and

outside the Bloc; articles on all aspects of the materials, services, machine,
electronics, and precision equipment industries; and concepts and attaimeats
in agriculture, forestry, and the food industry.

 
       
   
        
    
    

      

. eta-rat Aaalyau.

.- Dear-Mass

International Affairs Economics
Albania _ technological
Bulgaria

Czechoslovakia

East Gemny

Hungary

Poland

Romania

Yugoslavia

In. ldnﬁﬂvulOperEadad Tana

HIIIHII

  

"a. COSATIFiold/Gvoup 5C, IJI

thailatuluy SUICOOOIO 2|. 0. al Pages
For Official Use Only. .
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. " k

'0.“ N'IDII "0- ,0! VUCMOC COIlI-‘IO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/

8 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(P000 4/79)

CONTENTS

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

VRJ Organization. Manage-en: Development Described
(Antonin Stanek; PODNIKDVA ORGANIZACE. No 10. 1978).....

Khozraachet and Capital Investment Financing Policy
Discussed

(Michal Pancak; BKONOHICKY CASOPIS, No 1Q l978).........

-a- [III-EE-64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECNOSLOVAKIA

VNJ ORGANIZATION, MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT DESCRIBED
Prague PODNIKOVA ORGANIZACB in Czech No 10, 1978 pp 643-éb6

[Article by Engr Antonin Stanek: "Past Development of the VHJ Organiza-
tion and Comprehensive Hanagement"]

[Text] The process of production concentration is related to the develop-
ment of productive forces and to the corresponding level of division of
labor in society. The objective developmental tendency toward increasing
production concentration is reflected in the integration processes which
consist in grouping of enterprises into large economic complexes with
unified management. From the standpoint of the economy as a whole, the
purpose of grouping is to embrace individual productions and all related
and supporting technical-economic activities. Production controlled by

individual enterprises so far as put under unified management within the
economic production complex. ‘

In integrational grouping of enterprises into larger units. production
concentration is achieved essentially in two ways:

--through horizontal combination which is a supraenterprise integration
of enterprises engaged in identical or similar production based essen-
tially on the same technology;

--through vertical combination which is a supraenterprise integration of
enterprises engaged in dissimilar, but related production with regard to
final products. These enterprises are usually integrated from the stand-
point of and around production which represents the focal point of produc-
tion within the entire integration.

Horizontal concentration. on the one hand. economy by suppliers (favorable
conditions are created for effective production specialization), while, on
the other hand it frequently causes irrational coats for the customers
(violation of production and contractual discipline by the suppliers. trans-
portation costs and maintenance of inventories). The increase in horizontal
production concentration forces the integration in question to strengthen
and expand supplier-customer relations with the enterprises of other

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

integrations. For the sake of balancing demand with supply. these supplier-
cuatomer relations must essentially be centrally controlled.

Vertical concentration makes optimum use of the advantages of production
specialization through the division of production programs among all pro-
duction units so that the production process evolves smoothly along the
vertical axis within the entire integration. The increase in vertical
production concentration consolidates and increases division of labor
within integrated enterprises and reduces the number both of economic
links between enterprises of different integrated groupings and centrally
controlled balances.

The planned establishment of large economic production units (supraentcr-
prise organisms) in the socialist countries has been the fundamental fea-
ture of the organizational development of the production-technical base

in industry from the end of the 1950's. The planning of production con-
centration and integration processes is the manifestation of the objective
necessity of effective use of socialist social ownership of the means of
production.

Attention in all socialist countries roncentrated on forms of integration
which would create the best possible prerequisites for enactment of im-
portant measures within the economic reforms designed to strengthen cen-
tral planned management and to increase efficiency of industrial produc-
tion. At the present time, various forms of integration exist which are
due to the attained level of production concentration and general level
of management of respective sectors and branches, and specific conditions
prevailing in individual countries. The management apparatuses of inte-
grated groupings gradually assume increasing numbers of functions which
are necessary for really unified and effective management of integration
as a whole. This concentration of functions and the gradual improvement
of their execution represents in its sum the process of really increasing
the role of supraenterprise organises.

From the beginning of the 1970's, attention in the GDR focused on finding
those elements wrich would contribute to the solution of the fundamental
problem and requirement—-a gradual and consistent transformation of exist-
ing associations into khozraschet units properly equipped and staffed for
insuring an effective development of the entire production process includ-
ing the preproduction stages. A major step forward was vertical produc-
tion concentration by the combination of different productions through the
centrally planned establishment of industrial combines. Their establish-
ment was designed for instances when rationality required the organization
of manufacture of certain products. recognized by the center as key and
developmental products. in one uniformly managed economic organism.

The following four types of combines became eventually stabilized in the
GDR:

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-~combines with successive phases of processing of raw and industrial

materials (for example. metallurgy with production of pig iron. steel.
rolled material);

--combines including basic and auxiliary production (for example, produc-

tion of pig iron combined with production of building materials made from
the blast furnace slag);

--combines for comprehensive utilization of raw materials (for example,
petrochemical combines);

--combines specialized in production of aggregates, groups of products
and parts which are then delivered to the main (complementing) plant.
This is the most frequent type in the GDR.

The combines are either made part of the association or are managed di-
rectly by a ministry.

Generally speaking. the combines in the GDR have been favorably commented
upon and their basic advantages lie particularly in the possibility of
large series production. wide application of mechanization, automation,
concentration of means and qualified personnel in the manufacture of im-
portant types of products and in the reduction of existing cooperation
between individual sectors.

In the USSR, in accordance with the development of productive forces and
needs of the Soviet economy, planned production concentration was carried
out both horizontally and vertically in accordance with the specific con-
ditions. Production associations and vertically organized industrial com-
bines were therefore set up in individual sectors and branches. The 26th
CPSU Congress called for further production concentration according to the
plan. formation of additional combines and establishment of science-
production associations.

These tasks were gradually implemented in the USSR. More than 1,200 pro-
duction associations existing in 1966 were gradually integrated into more
than 600 large associations by 1972.

Science-production associations represent a new form of organization of
production-technical complexes essentially involving an organic and ef-
fective fusion of research with production in order to manufacture new
equipment as soon as possible. The production section of the association
is organized according to the needs and requirements of the association's
research base. The research section thus becomes the dominant unit of

the organization and it determines the nature and structure of production.
There are three types of science-production associations:

--associations specialized primarily in research and testing of new types
of products;

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--associatiens engaged in research and manufacture of mechanization and
automation devices:

--associatioas specializing in the introduction of new technological proc-
esses.

Taking into account the fundamental tasks and goals, there is a consid-
erable variety of types of these science-production associations. Ex-
perience with these associations has been very positive so far.

All-union and republic industrial associations have recently begun to be
set up. They are organized from the standpoint of one or several inter-
related branches as large. comprehensively equipped and unified economic
production units. They include primarily appropriate production associa-
tions. combines and organizations active in preproduction stages (scien-
tific research institutes. design and development organizations).

Supreenterprise Organisms in CSSR

One of the basic prerequisites for the application of principles of an
improved system of planned management in the CSSR was the reorganization
of the production basis through the establishment of comprehensively
equipped large economic production units. Individual enterprise integra-
tions have full responsibility for the satisfaction of the planned needs
of the national economy by their products, and authority derived from the
above responsibility and delegated by the control center to make decisions
on the fundamental problems arising out of their activities.

Economic production units (VHJ)--suprsenterprise or enterprise integra-
tions--set up in 1958 assumed one of the following three organizational
forms:

--associations of enterprises;

--main enterprise with its own plants and branches;

--individual independent enterprise-~uith plants--vhich is controlled di-
rectly by a ministry.

Some 383 VHJ were established (including the enterprise sphere of the then
existing Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) 67 of which were associa-
tions of enterprises.

Economic production units of 1965 (government decree No 132/1965 of SBIRKA)
were set up in two forms only:

--associations of enterprises (enterprise trust) and

-—sectora1 enterprises.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total number of VHJ was reduced to one-third and substantially
larger economic production units were formed at the time. The provious
254 VHJ in industry and building were integrated into 90 VHJ.

The clarification and setting of some additional tasks in connection with
the requirement of strengthening the VHJ's position were. together with
the proposals adopted for improvement of the system of planned management.
included in government resolution No 206/1971 as "The Principles of
Planned Management of National Economy" which became effective in 1972.
They provided. among other things. for the amendment. on the basis of past
experience, of government decree No 132/1965 which allowed further differ-
entiation of vuJ and enterprises including combines and concerns.

Government decree No 91/1976 on the organization of economic production
units and their statutes introduced. in addition to the two already exist-

ing types [trusts and combines] the third organisational form-~the concern—-
effective 1 January 1975.

The 15th CPCZ Congress paid great attention to management, planning and
organizational work. It set the task of improving the system of planned
management and planning. increasing efficiency of economic incentives.
improving the organization of the production-technical basis. raising the
standard of management and organization. and broadening the workers' par-
ticipation in management.

It lay special emphasis on the following important tasks of ministries in
charge of individual sectors and of the middle levels of management (VHJ):

--conceptual development of individual sectors and branches;

«formlation and implementation of uniform technical and investment
policy;

--satisfaction of the national economy's needs by their products;
--development of external economic relations;
--organization of the plan fulfillment.

In the report on the main directions of the economic and social development
of the CSSR during the 1976-1980 period which was read by Comrade L.
Strougal. the principal role of VHJ was formulated as follows:

“The increase in output and complexity of production, control over the
reproduction of basic assets and the solution of problems of technical
development and international cooperation and integration within CEHA
necessitate making the VHJ a comprehensive unit operating according to
the principles of khozraschet. and differentiated in accordance with the
conditions and nature of producti-n.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Best conforming to these requirements is the concern type of economic
production unit and sectoral enterprise, including the use of combina-
tion grouping whenever it is expedient. These organizational forms
make it possible to rationally control and economically organize the
management apparatus. After a careful organizational and political
preparation. we shall therefore, carry out these changes while keeping
in mind that higher economic efficiency of new production units remains
the ultimate goal."

In accordance with the tasks set by the 15th CPCZ Congress and efforts
to improve the system of planned management, a "Comprehensive Experi-
ment in Efficiency and Quality Control" has been designed which will be
verified by some VHJ during the 1978-1980 period.

Among the major features of general rules governing this experiment which
were approved by the resolution of the CSSR goVurnment presidium
No 279/1977 are the following ones:

--conditions are created for VHJ to become the basic unit of management
in the enterprise sphere;

-VNJ as a whole is the subject of the experiment. It acts as the basic
unit of management regardless of the organizational form;

--the five-year plan is the basic tool of management. The fulfillment of
basic tasks is evaluated for the entire five-year period, in individual
years cumulatively from the beginning of the five-year plan:

--enhancing the tasks of technical development in the system of VﬂJ man-
agement (creation of conditions for cooperation between individual depart-
ments of VHJ from research phase to finishing phase);

--introduction of obligatory planning indicators from the area of innova-
tions and higher technical and economic standards of products.

Improvement of Present Forms of VHJ

The main reasons for establishing large, economically strong, comprehen-
sively equipped production-economic units (VHJ) fully operating according
to the khozraschet principles can be summed up as follows:

—-objective tendencies toward production concentration and combination
which stem from technical and economic production expansion;

--increased importance of long-term planning and economic forecasting
which stems from the decisions on the technical and innovation develop-
ment. international socialist integration and structural changes;

6
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--increasing scope and complexity of certain activities (technical com-
plexity of production and supplier-customer relations resulting from it;
requirements for the concentration of research and development capacities
due to the constantly accelerating rate of scientific progress; implemen-

tation of research and development results requires the concentration of
investment funds for the priority projects);

--econony brought about by the concentration or joint pursuance of certain
activities in one place.

Generally speaking. the following fundamental features are typical of man-
agement on the VHJ level: a conceptual approach. long-term nature and
concentration on the fundamental comprehensive contexts. The essential
point is that the enterprises integrated into VRJ must be able to satisfy

society's needs and develop better than individual separate enterprises
are.

The role of VHJ as the middle unit of management resulting from the verti-
cal division of management of the economy can be described as follows:

--it elaborates on the decisions of the center and authorizes individual
enterprises to carry them out;

--it integrates management of individual enterprises and puts it on a uni-
form basis in order to achieve higher efficiency;

--it controls relatively independently the entire integrated unit.

The sectorisl or branch principle of production organization has been and
is the underlying and dominant principle in the organization of produc-
tion basis and VHJ position in Czechoslovak industry. The application of
the sectorial principle, which resulted in the establishment of predomi-'
nately horizontally organized VHJ. followed the fundamental purpose of
this principle. namely:

1. creation of favorable conditions for effective intensification of the
division of labor through production specialization;

2. direct management of industrial production by the central organs by
individual branches and sectors.

On the other hand, the scctorial principle:

1. promotes the intensification of production specialization within the
respective sector or branch only. If, however, individual sectors and
branches of the national economy do not develop in the desired propor-
tionality, from the standpoint of the societywide production process. pro-
duction specialization increases disproportionally;

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. within the trust, it gives rise to a serious problem-~how the inte-
gration as a whole could be actually and effectively managed. Management
lies in achieving harmony between the khozraschet (that is, economically
relatively independent) status of individual enterprises and the require-
ment that VHJ as a whole also must operate as a khozraschet unit.

When enterprises of the same sector or enterprises manufacturing products
of related sectors amalgamate into a VHJ, it is a combination of enter-
prises of different size, with different fund structure, different age of
basic assets. different level of intraenterprise management and hetero-
genous production programs (even if related production sectors are in-
volved)--in other words. enterprises with different production conditions.

This lays great demands on the trust management in relation to individual
enterprises.

One of the possibilities of improving the present organizational produc-
tion structure of VRJ in question is to improve the application of the
sectorial principle by restricting the negative consequences associated
with its application so far. A wider application, according to the plan.
of rational combination elements in all forms of VHJ appears to be expe-
dient.

In the present organizational structure of engineering VHJ, the elements
of vertical combined production organization are represented on two dif-
ferent planes:

1. there are isolated instances when a long historical development led to
a vertical combination of production organization ant this organization
was preserved when a VHJ was set up (for example, VHJ Skoda, VHJ CKD
[Ceskomoravska-Kolben-Danek]). For the manufacture of complex final
products (particularly piece production according to the customer's speci-
fications), the VHJ manufactures itself the key elements. subassemblies
and groups of products--from metallurgical products to conventional groups
of machinery to the complementary products which are not manufactured in
series by specialized producers (electric drives and accessory equipment,
hydraulic elements, gear boxes);

2. combination elements are used also in the enterprise trusts which are
regarded as typical representatives of horizontal production organization.
In this instance, either the respective VHJ has its own metallurgical base,
manufacture of complementary products for the main final production and
possibly also its own sales organization (for example, VHJ CA2 [Czechoslovak
Automobile works], VﬂJ TST [Plants for Engineering Machinery], VHJ ZTS
[Heavy Engineering Plants!) or individual enterprises of VHJ are producers
of part of capital goods or technologies which are subsequently put together
by VﬂJ into a complete unit (for example VHJ Chepos, VHJ IVTAS).

The enterprise trusts based on the sectorial principle are to strengthen
their relatively comprehensive nature, it appears expedient to apply in
their production process the following combination elements:

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--for complex final products or complete plant equipment and large techno-
logical units which reprusent the focal point of VhJ production, to use

products manufactured by individual enterprises as a share in the common
mission of VHJ;

--to promote and increase cooperation within the VﬂJ by setting up spe-
cialized departments for manufacture of parts and subassemblles \mich are
used in several production sectors of the VHJ or are technologically sim-

ilar (for example. parts of conveyors, frames. axles. cabins and chassis
of working machines);

--settlng up of specialized departments for manufacture of elements or
completion of groups of products and aggregates which are not generally
used and cannot be supplied by the specialized producers (such as hydraulic
face rams. electric distribution and control boxes):

--to create within the VHJ an organization for higher supplier activity;

--VNJ's can manufacture of machinery and equipment to be used in the VHJ's
own basic production (only certain atypical machines and equipment).

These combination elements must be applied in VHJ as a whole in order to

make the VHJ a comprehensive, integrated and self-contained economic pro-
duction unit.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bavlnka. Josef "Uloha a postaveni vyrobne hospodarskych jadnotek"
[Role and Status of Economic Production Units]. Academia Prague 1977.

2. Taksir. K. J. "Podstata a foray spojeni vedy a vyrobou za socialisnu”
[Essence and Forms of Fusing Science with Production under Socialism].
Czech Central Committee of Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship League.
1976.

3. "Sbornik hlavnich dokumentu XV. sjesdu KSC" [Collection of Principal
Documents of the 15th CPCZ Congress]. Svoboda. Prague 1976.

6. "OSPODARSKE NOVINY No 37 and No 50. 1977.

5. "ancova pravidla komplexniho experimentu riseni effektivnosti a
kvaiity“ [General Rules Governing the Comprehensive Experiment in
Efficiency and Quality Control) approved by the CSSR governaent reso-
lution No 279 of 8 December 1977 Supplement to HOSPOOARSKE NOVXNY
No 2, 1978.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL--Statni Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury. n. p. Prague
1978

10501
cso: 21.00 9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHN loOVA KIA

KIIOZMSCIIEI‘ MD CAPITAL INVBS'I‘BNI‘ FINANCING POLICY DISCUSSED
Prague EKONWICKY CASOPIS in Slovak No 10, 1978 pp 960-9109

[Article by Michal Pancak]

[Text] The Guidelines for the Economic and Social Development of the (SSR
during the period 1976-1980 and the March 1978 meetings of the Central Com-
mittees of the CPCZ and CPS! called upon investors to enhance the efficiency
of their capital spending activities by gaining better control over the en-
tire cycle encompassing the management, planning, and implementation of
capital projects. It is therefore essential that they should make pro-
visions for the tineiy completion of preliminary and final design plans and
for their compliance with high technical and economic standards, enhance the
cost-effectiveness of capital, architectural. and urban-planning designs.
and eliminate excessive amounts of in-process construction work both in
productive and non-productive industries. The realization of this goal
should be furthered by the more meticulous performance of consulting work

and by more responsible capital-investment decision making at all management
levels.

All capital construction plans and all design work nest comply with the high
standards that have been set in the area of efficiency. Allocations of fi-
nancial resources, as deter-ined by public agencies and within the links

necessary for the attainment of assigned targets, must be made available to
all participants in the capital construction process.

it will not be possible to insure an increase in the cost-effectiveness of
fixed assets and the sustained growth of efficiency unless nore effective
use is rude of cost accounting methods. Fanagers and decision makers in

the capital construction sphere. should weigh the benefits that are derived
from the expenditure of every single koruna, and it is in this light that
they should assure the effectiveness of their decisions.

For this reason, the concepts of Idioaraschet and financial nanagensnt oust
play a core active role and be eaployed on a wider scale as integral parts
of the capital invest-eat process. The khosraschet systea and the entire

IO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

credit and financial management system should employ their leverage mechan-
isms no as to play a more effective role in all areas where public funds are
being spent ineffectively. uneconomically, or in a manner that violates prin-
ciples of efficiency.

while underscoring the importance of hhozraschet and financial management it
should also be pointed out that in the realm of capital construction it is
just as necessary, if not more necessary to upgrade the quality of direct
management and planning work, since the plan is the only instrument that
can be used to strike a balance between the output of capital goods and the
output oi consumr goods (which are a point of departure for capital con-
struction not only when it comes to their production, but also to their
distribution).

In this article, however. we will be concerned solely with the problems of
khozraschet and financial mnegeaent in the realm of capital construction.
We will attempt to shed some light on certain aspects of these problem and
to indicate ways in which financial management in the area of capital con-
struction can be improved precisely from the standpoint of the more consis-
tent application of khosrsschet principles.

He will describe the essential characteristics of khosraschet as this con-
cept is now being interpreted during the present phase of our work on the
construction of an advanced socialist society.

Khosraschet is an economic concept and a method used for the planned man-
agement of socialist enterprises. The essential characteristics of this
economic concept and management method are defined by the economic relation-
ships that obtain within the context of discrete socialist capital replace-
ment (which are of course a function of collective socialist capital rs-
placemnt). According to this definition. then, khosraschet is a anni-
festation of the general laws and specific characteristics of discrete
socialist capital replacement, which in turn is the basis for the view
which holds that the individual enterprise may be regarded as the main
Vehicle of this process of discrete capital replacement, but this does not
a: all prevent us from regarding VllJ's or even entire branches as vehicles
of discrete capital replacement.

This gives rise to the following question: namely, what are the boundaries
of discrete socialist capital replacement or what are the boundaries of
khozraschet‘l To give the reader a general understanding of our approach to

 

l. "...diserete capital. replacement is not a function of khozraschet; on
the contrary. the objectives of khozraschet activity are a function of dis-
crete capital replacement...." Bunich. P. G. “Upravleniye, skonomlcheskiye
tychagi, khozraschet” [ﬂanges-eat, Economic Lovers. and IChozrsschet],
ﬂoscow, Nsuka. ”‘76. p l3.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

this problea sui f ice it to say that these boundaries are defined by the in-
terests of the national econoey or also by those organizational and econoaic
relationships which do the best job of insuring the greater efficiency or
discrete socialist capital replace-ant.

The essential characteristics of khoaraschet are a unifostation of its
underlying principles. Iszraschet. is an economic concept and at the sane

tine as a mthod for the planned management of socialist business enter-
prises, is based on the use of revenues to pay Operating costs and the at-

tain-ant of a specified level of profitability, on the relative economic

and operational autonoay of khoaraschet establishments. on the utilization
of causality-monetary relations, and on the mteriai self-interest of .
khoeraschet establishesnts. In effect khosraschet at the enterprise level’
is intended to endow business enterprises with a certain degree of econoaic

and operational autonowy. We know from experience that this is a very con-
plex task.

By employing the direct and indirect mnagenent levers at its disposal the
socialist state assigns tasks to the khozraschet sphere of the econo-y that
also take into account the utilisation of planned socialist comedity-
monetary relations, but in most cases it does so in a dunner that in indi-
cative of its desire to bring the interests oi society into haruony with the
interests of enterprises, work collectives, and individual workers.

The interests of society and the state and hence the interests of the public
at large as reflected by the plan are not always in complete accord with the
interests of enterprises and their work collectives. To be sure, steps mst

be taken to eventually harnonise these disparate interests (that is. their
non-antagonistic differences).

To some extent enterprise khozraschet, by virtue of its principles and their
inplenmtation in actual asnagenent of enterprise affairs, acts as a coor-
dinator of these two groups of interests. That is, it Ilﬂdltcl the “'18!"
meat of tasks and the spheres of interest pertaining to decision nking
processes related to the selection of production factors and their nest ef-
ficient combination. Under certain conditions enterprise khozraschet is
able to coordinate these two areas and thereby bring the interests of enter-

prises, work collectives. and individual workers into haraony with general
social interests.

The principles of khosraschet manage-sent define the relations that exist
between a given enterprise and (l) the state (also represented by the bank-

ing systea). (2) other socialist enterprises. and (3) a given enterprise's
own elployees. Of course, in actual practice the relationships that exist

 

2. Delineating the boundaries between the khorraschet spheres of enter-
prises, VIU's. and branches is another woblea which we will not deal with
in this article.

12
roe OPPICIM. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between a socialist business enterprise and the outside world are much more
complex and far-reaching. In addition to its relationship to the state
budget, a khozraschet enterprise also maintains relations with its organi-
zationaiiy superior organs, economic production units, and so on.

Labor relations are also not confirmed to the relationships that exist
between individual enterprise employees and the khozraschet enterprise
proper. Labor relations develop within enterprises between individual work
areas, which my be workshops, Operational divisions, plants. and so on, and
in this context such relations exist between work areas as collective an-
tities and between them and individual workers.

The points which we nude in our analysis of the essential characteristics
ant principles of khozraschet are obviously also applicable to capital con-
struction. but we should realize that under an economic system where the
means of production are socially owned the capital construction sphere must
be subject to the directive mandates of the plan to a much greater extent
than any other sphere of the capital replacement process.

We will now proceed to discuss certain problems that have a bearing on the
improvement of the capital construction process from the standpoint of
khozraachet and financial management. We have witnessed scam signs of im-
provement in the performance of management work in this area even during
the course of the Sixth Five-Year Plan and in particular in connection with
the coaprehensive experiment in efficiency and quality management, which to
a certain extent is also focused on the realm of capital construction. Some
of its basic ideas are very closely related.

In the first place, there is a clear emphasis on long-range forecasting as
the basic prerequisite for the attainment of higher efficiency ratings in
the performance of management work and especially in the performance of
planning work. Equal emphasis is being placed on the more effective utili-
zation of khoztaschet, including those of its aspects based on material self-
interest. For this reason, VlU's participating in the experiment will be
faced with major mandatory tasks under the terms of the fiva-year plan that
will have to do with the ratio of profitability to productive assets and the
system of norms for personal, collective, and enterprise incentive payments.
The greater emphasis on material incentives will also be accompanied by the
increased use of economic sanctions.

A capital development fund is being set up to serve as a mechanism for estab-
lishing a correlative relationship between capital spending and the formation
of earnings. This amounts to a major shift in capital spending policy, since
the former snail-scale enterprise capital investment fund, even though it
essentially reflected a similar line of thinking, was incapable of bringing
much iniiuence to bear on this area by virtue of the fact that it accounted
ior less than 10 percent of the tetal volume of enterprise capital spending.
0n the other hand. in most cases the capital development fund is supposed to
meet approximately 50 percent of overall enterprise capital spending needs or

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as such as 80 to 90 percent of these capital spending needs in acne
branches. The establishment of capital deVe lopnent funds on this scale is
already reminiscent of the decentralized capital construction policy that
prevailed in the 688R during the 1960's, a policy which, as is well-known,
was one of the reasons that led to the holding up of the economic reform
in the CSSR. Based on the lessons learned from Czechoslovakia's exper-
iences in the 1960's, it will be necessary to avoid the stumbling blocks
that stood in the way of this ecmonic reforsl.3

At the same tine, there has been an intensification of the trend whereby
enterprises are being consolidated into VllJ's. which in accordance with the
guidelines laid down by the 15th Congress of the cm are supposed to become
the linchpin of the management system at the business enterprise level.

In light of our preceding remrka concerning khozraschet it follows that the
nest important principle of hhozraschet. which is an expression of its es-
sential nature and purpose, is the fact that an enterprise's expenses are
to be paid for with revenues earned from the sale of its products and that
this forms the basis for the realization of its net income. According to
this principle. an enterprise,“ not only supposed to pay for all of its own
expenses, but is also supposed to sake a profit. This approach is based on
the relative autonomy of enterprises, which in turn stcns free: the relative
isolation of the basic coaponents of the national econosly, i.e., business
enterprises. comedity nanufacturers. He call the principle whereby an
enterprise draws on its own revenues to pay for its expenses self-financing.
The significance and purpose of this principle do not consist solely in the
fact that an enterprise is supposed to nest its current operating expenses
by drawing on its own earnings. The application of this principle is dedi-
cated to seeing to it, especially during the present era of the scientific
and technological revolution, that gross earnings are also used to sect ex-
penses associated with the expansion of an enterprise, capital expenditures,
and expenditures on scientific research work within an enterprise's particular
field of endeavor. This is at the same tine an expression of the anbitious

and increased direct responsibility of an enterprise for its nodernisation
and growth.

Credit funds also come into play in conjunction with the use of an enter-
priae‘e own funding sources. As far as the principles of Ithozraschet are
concerned, consideration my be and should be given to the utilisation of
funds obtained from the state budget only after these two categories of
funds have been exhausted.

 

3. by this we do not nean to con-pare the I978 experinent with the econonic
refor- of [960 not only because of the fact that the approach taken at that
tine was systematically and nethodologically different. but also because of
the fact that today's national acme-y differs free that of l960 in term
of its structure and rate of growth.

in
’ms orncuu. use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Profits should be the main source of khezraschst funds that is to he drawn
upon L0 meet the expanded capital replacement needs of enterprises. The
degree to which profits are utilized in this manner is a measure of the suc-
cessful application of the principles of khozraschet. According to the
ntatislics for the [976 state budget. profits covered barely 20.9 percent

of the total financial requirements (working capital and invastment capital)
of centrally administered enterprises, and, as a result of the large volume
of income redistribution achieved by means of the state budget, 60.9 percent
of these total financial requirenents was covered by subeidies from the state
budget. Miscellaneous needs were met by depreciation allowances at a rate
of 23.1 percent and by credits at a rate of only 10.3 percent.

There are two ways to put profits to work for the financing oi capital con-
struction.

The first technique can be used in conjunction with any scheme for the
centralization of capital construction policy along lines laid down by the
plan itself so that the categorization of capital projects under the terms

of the plan does not correspond to categories of funding sources; this means
that even centrally administered capital projects can be financed in a de-

centralized sanner by drawing on an enterprise's own sources of funds.

The decentralized financing of capital construction, i.e., khoaraschet fi-
nancing based on the use of intraorganizational funding sources, does not
conflict with the requirement calling for the centralized management of
capital construction, for which provisions must always be made in one form
or another in the nltionsl aconoaic plan.

From this standpoint, then, it is possible to broaden the scope of the de-
centralized financing of capital construction; indeed, this can be done

without in any way impinging upon the central obligations and rules of in-
dividual branches or enterprises.

The other way to make increased use of profits is be establishing a closer

relationship between categories of capital projects and the source of funds
that are tapped to finance these projects, as was done in 1976 with the

establish-cut of the snail-scale enterprise capital investment fund, the
thrust of which was greatly extended in 1978 in the form of the comprehen-
siVe experiment. In this case financing mechanisms became planning mechan-
isms as well. The second question has to do with the extent to which this
khozraschet financing arrangement was put into practice. This nay be a
question of scope. which in terns of the number of enterprises involved was
not vary noteworthy and hence not very effective, but it may also be a

question of the fact that this scheme violates the principles of centralized
management.

The CSSK has considerable experience in dealing with this problem. The
methodology of the 1959 plan crested separate areas of centralized and de-
centralized capital construction. Centralized capital construction was

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supposed to set the ruin proportions for the balanced growth of the national
econoey.

For example, within the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Construction in the
building industry branch certain kinds of machinery and equipment, which
were listed in an annex to the plan's methodological instructions, were the
subjects of centralized capital construction policy. At the same time,
these provisions were intended to serve strictly as general guidelines.
Other major building projects that have an important impact on the growth
of the national economy or for any other reason dictated by the public in-
terest could also be classified as falling within the jurisdiction of
centralized capital construction policy. Decisions to classify such build-
ing projects as targets of centralized capital construction policy were al-
ways made on a case-by-case basis, usually in response to recousendationa
made by appropriate central organs. All other building projects were covered
by decentralized capital construction policy.“

This kind of ratio between centralized and decentralized capitsl construc-
tion led to disproportions in the economy's growth.

After 1959 the norm governing enterprise material self-interest were sup-

posed to serve as the most iuportant mechanism of decentralized khozraschet
financing. in essence, these norms defined the limits of an enterprise's

financial base, since they constituted the source of funds to be used for
the financing of both working capital and fixed capital expenditures. lit
the same time they served as one of the principal economic incentives by
means of which enterprises were supposed to encourage to take a direct in-
terest in their own sustained growth, in the setting of high plan targets
and the oaxisml fulfillment of these targets, and in the increasingly better
satisfaction of social needs. Enterprise material self-interest norms were
also supposed to serve as a mechaniss for setting proper proportions in the
national economic development plan and for strengthening and enforcing these
proportions, especially in the area of capital construction. An interde-
pendent relationship was established between the payment of an enterprise's
operating expenses and its earnings performance. The application of these
norms presupposed a certain amount of functional and organizational stabil-
ity. To the extent that the national economy was affected by unexpected
influences (in the area of foreign trade for example) which disrupted this

stability. provisions were also made for the taking of emergency corrective
measures, including wssures of a directive nature.

However, in responding to the necdsof individual enterprises and branches
this principle was not put into practice in a manner that coincided with
the actual onset of fluctuations and problems or in the manner provided for
wrsuant to appropriate government resolutions.

 

 

1.. During the period [9594965 the share of centralized capital construc-
tion in the total volume of capital construction in the state sector of the
C558 fluctuated within a range of S9.9--70 percent.

16
1’03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Au sources of (inancing to pay [or rapital construction costs and the costs
of general overhaula first consideration was given to utilizing a portion
oi the nccured profits quota share, or dividends, and the depreciation quota
share. Other typical, supplementary sources of financing might take the
form oi capital construction credits, subsidies furnished by higher-ranking
organs or by the state budget, idle internal working capital. sales earn-
legs and returns from the retirement of unnecessary or idle fixed assets,
or unspent funds left over in capital investment accounts.

The lessons that were learned from the application of this methodology in
the area of decentralized capital construction up to the end of 1961 showed
that under these titer-stances it was notessary for organizationelly super-
ior organs to do a more thorough job of carrying out their performance re-
view duties in connection with capital construction planning in order to
enhance the efficiency of capital construction activities and, comequently,

in order to begin to eniorce compliance with khozraschet mnagement practices
on the [virt of economic organizations.

The problem of the proportions and ratios between centralized and decentral-
ized capital construction has not yet been resolved. in essence. the task

of insuring the proportional growth of the different branches of the na-
tional economy has been relegated to the realm of decentralized capital

construction policy. But this was not the right thing to do in view of the
provisions and nature of decentralized capital construction.

The thh Congress of the cm decided to place capital construction and the
planning and design of capital projects under strict central control.

in view of the circumstances that existed during this period this course of
action proved to be correct, since it cleared up the problems that resulted

iron the breakdown of central authority in the management oi capital con-
struction.

But the masures that were taken in accordance with this policy were to a
certain extent one-sided, since they failed to take into account the valid

aspects of khozrsschet management that are also applicable to capital con-
struction.

This is precisely why we believe that the lessons learned by the CSSR dur-
lay, the 1960's in the area of setting capital construction financing quotas
need to be studied with special care both because of the fact that the con-
cept of quotes has been rightly incorporated, among other places, into the
system for the financing of capital construction during the Sixth Five-Year
Plan and is no! being given broader substance within the context of the
comprehensive experiment and also because of the fact that we want to avoid
repeating the mistakes that were made during the 1960's.

in our view one of the principal flaws of the System oi Long-term mterial
IncentIVe Nuns oi the 1960's was the resulting distortion of the proper

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proportional relationship between decentralized and centralized capital con-
struction. a problem which also had an impact on the degree of thoroughness
that was achieved at that time in spelling out the system's conceptual frame-
work and on the feasibility of plan targets.5

The basic proportions governing allocations of capital-forming reswrces in
the national economy must be set by centrally determined capital construction
policy and not by decentralized capital construction policy over which the
center has little control. As we pointed out before, to be effective the
proportional relationships between decentralized and centralized capital
construction should be completely reversed.

After profits, depreciation allowances constitute the secmd source of
khozraschet financing.

Depreciation allowances are the financial manifestation of the process
through which fixed assets become used up and devalued. The degree to which
these assets are used up has an inpact on the total costs of goods produced

and also performs a capital accumulation function. Depreciation allowances
are therefore an important tool of khozraschet management, primarily in

term of costs and. hence, the estimation of costs, but also in term of the
replacemnt of fixed assets and the financing of this replacement process.

There are essentially two methods that are used to determine depreciation
allowance quotas. According to the first method. which is used in this
country, these quotes are set by central authorities according to categories
of fixed assets, whereas under the terms of the second method these quotas
are set by central authorities for entire branches.

Both the extent to which the system of depreciation allowance quotas corres-
ponds to optimal definitions of the physical depreciation of fixed assets
and the nature of the correlation between the depreciation of fixed assets
and plans for their replacement will have an important impact on khozraschet.

The advantages of the system of quotas set according to categories of fixed
assets as opposed to the system of industry-wide. aggregate quotas are most
evident in light of the fact that the former system makes it possible for

 

 

5. It should be realized that the application of hhozraschet management
principles has to be approached in a different way in an economy where de-
mud exceeds supply. In situations such as this it needs to be seen that
even where khozraschet is concerned the machinery of vertical relation-
ships can be used to some extent to help solve problems. Thus, we cannot
rely solely on the machinery of horizontal relationships, which would be
more in line with the requirements of Izhozraschet. Under present condi-
tions too it might be useful to bear in mind this correlation between

khozraschet and changing ccoaoeic conditions.

18
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

central authorities to set these quotes in a relatively accurate manner.
however, it is precisely in this context that this system also reveals its
disadvantages. Central authorities find this system rather unwieldy, since
it cannot take into account all changing conditions such as decreased or
increased demands (or general overhaul work, the need to speed up the re-
placement of some kinds of fixed assets as a result of technological
progress. requirements written into capital construction plans with respect
to simple capital replacement, and so on.

Capital construction planning experts do not always take into account the
fact that some enterprises make better use of their unchinery stock, and,
ignoring the faster rate of this mschinery's physical deterioration, they

do not nuke provisions that will enable these enterprises to purchase more
nuchinery. These complex issues may eventually be placed on our working
agenda and subjected to a thorough investigation.

The (35R has adopted a measure as a part of its depreciation allowance
policy whereby it is not permitted to claim deductions for fully depreci-
ated fixed assets (but in price schedules issued since 1977 assets have been
depreciated in excess of 100 percent).

We think that Czechoslovakia's depreciation allowance policy is theoreti-
cally sound, since it can hardly be argued that it is right to continue to
claim depreciation allowances for an asset which is already fully depreci-
ated and which no longer exists for accounting purposes. Indeed, it is
argued to the contrary that to do so would be tantamount to giving enter-
prises an incentive to nuintain obsolete fixed assets, since fully depre-
ciated and working f ixcd assets would not be encmsbered by the cost entry
represented by depreciation allowances. However, this may be the case only
in situations where the parameters of new fixed assets are no better than
the parameters of old fixed assets that have already been fully depreciated.
Regardless of this, however, the fact remains that we are faced with the
general problem of how to go about retiring old and obsolete fixed assets,
assets which at the same time are already fully depreciated. So, insofar
as it would no longer be permitted to claim depreciation allowances for
fixed assets in excess of 100 percent of their nominal value, which would be
the right thing to do in our view. we would then think that it would be
mssible (or central authorities (and this would also be consistent with the
principles of khozraschet management) to apply sanctions to discourage the
continued use of fully depreciated fixed assets in the fore of a penalty
tax, which would apply only to fully depreciated and, hence, obsolete fixed
assets. in contrast to depreciation allmsnces, this penalty tax should be
charged not to costs, but rather to gross earnings so that it would have on
impact on payments into material incentive funds.

This is related to another specific feature of Csechoslovakia's depreciation
allowance policy. Depreciation allowance quotas do not include the cost of
general overhauis. General overhauls are financed in the sense way as norml
maintenance by drawing on working capital funds. There are various opinions

19
FOR OFFlClM. USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

about this. There can be no doubt but that Czechos lovekia's present syste-
in this regard is a sinple one. however, we think that in the interests of
khozraschet, in the interests of intelligible costing, and, finally, in the
interests of efficiency, this system is not necessarily satisfactory in all
of its aspects. To be sure, nearly one-third of all functioning fixed as-

sets are fully depreciated, but at the same tine they are still in service
and they are still undergoing general overheuls.6

In our opinion the validity of this policy is questionable both from the
standpoint of costing and also from the standpoint of fimncial megement.
Therefore, it seems to us that it would be advisable to consider increas-
ing depreciation allowances by whatever anount is chargeable to general over-
hauls.

In connection with the increased emphasis on the tapping of internal fund-
ing sources for the financing of capital construction, as an important pre-
requisite for the application of khosraachet manage-ant principles, a prac-
tical problea arises having to do with the optimal structure of an enter-
prise's internal financial base, especially in terms of the normative
standards governing profits, depreciation allowances, and, something which
can also be considered in this context, invostannt credits.

This problem is a product of the natural imbalance between uterial and fi-
nancial resources in the realm of capital construction. For example, if

they are not the beneficiaries of capital development investments, new
enterprises cannot claim depreciation allowances chargeable to the period
in which they were under construction.

This is the first reason why it is objectively necessary to undertake a
general redistribution of these resources, which in the case of many enter-
prises will have an impact on both profits and depreciation allowances.

In our view the second reason which is making it increasingly necessary to
redistribute depreciation allowances, especially under present conditions,
is the economic nature of profits and depreciation allowances.

As a source of financing that is also used in the realm of capital construc-
tion, profits should be viewed as e stinulative mechanism, especially so at
the enterprise level. It is in this sense that the redistribution of pro-
fits, regardless of whether this is accomplished through the state budget
by means of progressive taxation or through the VHJ's by means of supple-
mentary levies, should be curtailed, and precisely because of their wide-
ranging stimulative potential profits should be allowed to play a larger
role in the financing of capital construction.

 

6. Novotny, Karel. "Pricing Fixed Assets Under the Terms of the Program
for Comprehensive Restructuring of Hholesale Prices," FINANCE A UVBR, No
12, 1977.

20

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Insofar as long-range rules are laid down to govern the structural utiliza-
tion of profits, depreciation allowances, and investment credits in the fi-
nancing of capital construction, it would then be possible to give enter-
prises partial or complete control over the disposition of depreciation
allowances, regardless of whether or not it is planned that these funds
will be spent in a given current year, and to regulate the spending of
these funds in accordance with the rules that apply to the use of these
funds in future years. This would take care of the third reason why de-
preciation allowances should account for a smaller share of funds used to
finance capital construction so that a larger role could be played by in-
vestment credits as a capital construction funding source in cases where
no excess profits are available for the financing of capital construction.
Accordingly, profits and investment credits may be regarded as the principal
funding sources for the financing of capital construction in economic or-

ganizations. Depreciation allowances may be drawn upon as a funding source
for the financing of capital construction only after all resources in the

form of profits and investment credits have been used up.

As a source of funds for the financing of capital construction the state
budget plays an indispensable role, and some priority capital projects are
paid for either entirely or at least partially with state budget funds. As
far as khorraschet relations are concerned, state budget funds are always
used whenever internal funds or credit are not available.

For various reasons, long-term investment credits supplied by banks are not
fully appreciated or utilized.

Under socialism credit is a function of the existence of planned connodity-
monetary relations. The need for credit arises due to the circulation of
capital anong khozraschet organizations and due to irregularities in this
circulation process. During the course of this circulation process the

capital of khozraschet organizations invariably is transformed into money.
homo/er, current accounts receivable and payable are not always paid up.

An enterprise draws on its revenues to gradually build up a depreciation
fund, but this fund is also subject to redistribution. To be sure, the cir-
culation of capital is not confined to the business enterprise sphere,
rather capital is circulated with a view to the redistribution of the na-
tional income (or social product) through the various channels of the finan-
cial systen. Funds which are temporarily not tied up in the circulation of
capital among socialist khorraschet enterprises (which are of course supple-
mented-by other kinds of funds, e.g., private funds, idle funds in the state
budget, and so on) are used to build up reserves in accordance with the
credit plan for the granting of all kinds of credits, also including invest-
ment credits.

Therefore, under a socialist systen credit is more than just an objective
necessity dictated by the actual circulation of capital in the national
economy. Credit per se is moreover a prerequisite for the proper organiza-
tion of this process of capital circulation.

21
-F0ll OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By its very nature the khozraschet status of socialist business enterprises
presupposes, in addition to a degree of relative autonomy, that the state
will have some say in the conduct of enterprise affairs. Investment credits
are also one of the tools used by the central government to exercise this
control and bring its influence to bear. Tho granting of investment credits
on a broader scale may be regarded as a direct concomitant of the expansion
of the khosraschet authority of business enterprises.

it was not until after 1967 that investment credits began to be used on a
larger scale in the state sector of'Czechoslovakia's economy. In 1967 the
total value of outstanding investment credits came to Kc: 13.61 billion.

whereas in 1970 this figure rose to Kcs 53.32 billion, and in 1975 it went
as high as Kcs 76.99 billion.

In addition to performing distributive and investment protection functions,
investment credits can also be used to perform a very wide range of control
functions. Indeed, we are of the opinion that investment credits are sup-
posed to complement the performance review powers exercised by enterprises
in the area of decentralized capital construction into line with the needs
of society as a whole. In this sense investment credits are one of the
tools used to promote general social interests.

Investment credits perform control functions in two ways. 0n the one hand,
this is done by making certain demands that make the granting of investment
credits contingent upon the likelihood of increased efficiency, and, on the
other hand, this is accomplished by virtue of the fact that an investment
credit may not be granted at all or only in a limited amount. The criteria
that govern the allocation of investment credits make it possible to exer-
cise control over the way in which funds are spent that are otherwise not
subject to central control even if these funds are dispersed in several
different directions. horeover. these criteria make it possible to exercise
control in the area of fixed assets utilization, especially in terms of the
manor in which these assets are utilized and the quality standards that
should be adhered to in deciding on the purchase of new fixed assets, as
well as to assess the recoverability of investunt credits. The control
functions of investment credits come into play not only in connection with
the granting of these credits, but also in connection with their repayment.
Thus, investment credits are not only exceptionally wide-ranging, but also
exceptionally effective control mechanism. The stronger emphasis that is
being placed on material incentives for enterprises, work collectives, and
individual workers is making it more necessary than ever before for enter-
prises to be mindful of all of these aspects of investment credit policy.

It is our opinion that as far as the impact of interest rates are concerned
the effectiveness of investment credits could be increased by taking a more
selective approach whereby interest rates will be raised under circum-
stances which are appraised in a critical light in terms of the public
interest and whereby interest rates will be lowered under circuutances
which are appraised in a positive light in term of the public interest.

22
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This kind of selective approach will have an impact on the incentive of
entorpriaee and individual workers, as we have seen as a result of the
limited application of this technique since 1916 in connection with the
fulfillment of the Sixth Five-Year Plan.

Fur example, such shortcomings as the substandard planning and execution of
capital construction projects, the squendering of resources, and the misuse
of fixed assets are grounds for economic emotions in the form of higher
interest rates.

In recent years the economic literature of the CM countries has been plac-
ing greater emphasis on the increased efficiency of credit financing.

0n the other hand, some theoreticians and practical experts as well express
doubts about the effectiveness of investment credits. since they clain that
they necessitate increased paperwork and, in comparison with budgetary fi-
nancing methods, do not produce better results. And even though they do

print out the positive aspects of investment credits, they still ignore the

overriding need to utilize investment credits as a source of funds for the
financing of capital construction.

We think that it needs to be stressed that investment credits are supposed
to work in tandem with the laws governing the planned and balanced growth
of the national economy. Under certain conditions investment credits might
even prove to be useful as technical planning instruments, and to some ex~
tent they could be need, for example, to take the place of the "automatiem"
of the current investment limits, most of which are scheduled and assigned
without any attached conditions whatever.

By granting investment credits and regulating the manner in which they are
spent or repeyed the banks have access to an ieportant instru-ent for eater-
cising social control, in the broadest sense of the torn, over the forsation
and disposition of social resources.

The principle calling for the planned development of the socialist national
economy in accordance with the dictates of social efficiency also presup-
poses that econoaic growth will take place in those areas where internal
resources are not available, where no arrangemnts can be made for the re~
distribution of resources, and where, based on the rules of banking policy,
invest-ant credits cannot be provided at all or to the full extent that is
required.

In these cases we deem it to be advisable that the state budget OhO‘Jd re-
sort to the granting of investaunt subsidies in order to contribute to the
financing of capital construction. lie refer to this principle which justi-
lies the role of the state budget in capital construction as the revenue-
based principle, and we consider it to be a useful supplement to khozraschet
financing. in certain respects the financing of capital construction by

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

drawing on the resources of the state budget in accordance with the revenue-
bascd principle is compatible with the principles of khosraschet management.

In addition to the revenue-based principle, there are certain other reasons,
equally proper and even desirable. which justify the financing of capital
construction with state budget funds. This is priurlly in ref‘ ence to
subsidies for capital projects spelled out in the budgetary plan. for civil
defense. and for military research and development rs provided for in the
appropriate special sections of the plan.

Disparities in the infrastructural distribution of plant and equipment among
khozraschet organizations constitute another one of the reasons why the state
budget must answer the call to provide funds (or the financing of capital
construction in these organizations. In a socialist society this reason
justifying the allocation of capital investment subsidies from the state

budget to khozraschet organizations is an integral element of the overall
thrust of the economic policies of the socialist state.

One of the important tasks endorsed by the 15th Congress of the cm calls
for an increase in the efficiency of fixed capital stock and. accordingly.
for the resolution of probless in the area of capital construction. The
fulfillment of this task means that we will have to address ourselves to
some very coaplex problems. In this article we hava indicated some of the
important ways and techniques by scans of which we can improve the capital

construction process with respect to the financial requirements of
kiiozrnschet organizations .

COPYRIGHT: VEDA, Vydavatelstvo Slovenskej academic vied, Bratislava 1978

[18 13
(:50: 21:00

26

. 70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY