APPROVID FOR NIL-ACI: SOOTIOZIOC: CIA-RDPCS-OOOGOROW‘UOOOJOOSO-I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030026-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8323

9 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 624

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030026-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agencv
transmissions and broadcasts. lmtcrials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedsssppropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
O? lﬁIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED EOROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. Ail-«(7).

 

9. IVES..." (huh-um. hm an-l Adan”
Joint. Publication. Reeeerch Service
[000 North Globe Rood
Arlington. Virginie 22201

[1. Span-um. Damn-non None end We"

M above

l3. Supple-runny Not"

 

O. Aha-cu

I. :nloulmg Open-nun: Kept—l
o

 

--e

no. Pumu'l um.“ up - \.‘_ I

ll. Connect/Gun: No.

-._.-....

I). Type ﬂown e POL“:
Covned

M.

 

The report contains intonation from Airicen and specialized Vest European

publications and radio on political. economic, and sociological developments.

l7. Key Ionic end Dermot Anny-in. Wo- Detainee”

Political. Science inter-African Aff.
Sociology _x_Angole
Econo-ice __Benin
Culture (Socul ___Boceuane
Sciences) __8urundi
Technological LCe-eroon
___Cnpc Verde
__Centrel African
Empire
__X_Ched
Leonora ‘ Islands
_COngo
___Dj ibooti
_Equnrorie1 Guinea
In. ldem-hne/Oan-Endrd Tet-i Tgsézpi.
__Gonbin

m. cosm hold/Glow 02,SD.SC,5K
II. A-eulanl-ty Salem“

Hm nI-‘HCIAI. USE ONLY. Limited Numbcr of
(topics; Available From .li‘ka

Iona «NI-n unv. 1-".

THE FORM MAY BE REPRODUCED

 

X_Ghene _Rvende g
_)_(_Guinee __Seo Tone and I
__Guinee-Bieuu Principe I
_tvory Coast _Senegal I
_Kenye __Seyche11 es |
__Lesotho __Sierrn Leone
Liberia _Sona1 in I
_Hade3eecar _SOuth Africa
__He1evi __Sweziland
X_Heli Tanzania
Heuriciue T1030
Inna-big“ IUgendo
_Nulibie __Upper Volta
_Niger __Zeire
_Niger ie __Zenbio
__Reunion
_llhodesie

. :«mly Clen l in
(you)
. \ . . 39
W“

05¢.“ DC III'I D”
FOR Of‘PICIAL USE (Illa!

JPRS we:
9 rulrcn1 2

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA

P000 No. 624

Conn-ms

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Africa in 1978 Reviewed
(Jean Gueneau; mums TROPICAUX B‘I‘ HEDITERMNBBNS.

19 Jan 79)eeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeee~eeeeeeeeee-eeeeeeeeeeee

Briefe

UDEAC Diepuee
DAD-Min Relatione
Qadbdhefi-Anin Split

ANGOLA

Briefa

Warning Iaeued to Portugal
Petroleum Agree-ant Hith France
Belgian Port Assistance. Raining
UNITA Bengaela Cleila Denied
Brazilian Heat Inporta

Refugee Problem Loo-e Big

CAMEROON

lav Regulating Petroleul Tana. Foreign Participation
Adopted

(INDUSTRIES 3T TRAVAUX n'omm. Jan 79)...............

Briefs
Sviee Aaaiatance Proepecte
Coffee satiatica
Cocoa Stetietica
French Equipment Donation
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued

CNAD

Results of National Reconciliation Policy Not Encouraging
(Joe-Blaine Aline; JEUNE APRIQUE. 26 Jen 79)...........

Briefs
Petroleum Reecurcee
Two Independent Arniee
COMORO ISLANDS

Dieenchentnent of New Leaders Reported
(Seikou cheikh; Arnrqua-Asrn. 5 Feb 79)................

GABON
Briefs
Coffee Stetietice
Onendo. Port-Gentil Port Inprovenente
GHANA
Briefs
Foreign Loon Inquiry Col-ittee
Railroad Subsidy Pollouing Strike
GUINEA
Briefs
Official'e Interim Appoint-ant
PRC-Guinea Trade Agree-ent

MADAGASCAR

Rateiraka worried by Threete to Netion'e Security
(3119 unto; APRIQUE-ASIE, 5 Feb 79)ooooooeoeoeeooeeeoo

MALI

Briefs
UDPH Congreee Announced
Nongovernmental Belgian Aeeietence

- b -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
UGANDA

Intermcloml Ruligmnt- Seen at Perilous for Antn
Real-o

(Hare Yul-ed; JEUNB AFRIQUB, 16 Feb 79)..........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AFRICA IN 1978 RBVIMD

Paris “ARCHES TROPICAUX 8T HEDI'I'ERRANEENS in French 19 Jan 79 pp 115-118

[Article by Jean Gueneau]

[Text] In spite of appearances. the year of 1978 will perhaps be recorded in
history as the year which saw the beginning of the consolidation and enforce-
nent of African cohesi n. its ability to settle its interior problems by it-
self and the beginning of an emergence to a return to civil government.

There is no doubt that Africa is still the scene of too many armed conflicts
or of conflicts which may generate into wars. Tension is still acute between
Ethiopia and Soaalie, which ascribe warlike intentions to each other. Chad
is still the theater of operations of a war. The northern part of its terri-
tory is still subject to clains by Libya. while the Western Sahara in still

a bone of contention between Morocco and Algeria. During the sane year, in
the final weeks. the armies of Tanzania and Uganda were facing each other in
the Kagera region.

However. it is necessary to observe that those conflicts. of which certain
ones had already begun before 1978, were limited and did not bring about
foreign intervention other than counaele of moderation, as was the case on the
part of the Carter adninistretion after the reconquest of Ogaden. The
Ethiopian army then stopped on the border and it is probable that. if its
territory had then been invaded, Soaalie would have found along the western
powers the military and diplomatic support which it did not have while in the
eyes of international observers and governments it appeared to be an aggressor
in violation of the principle of theinviolabilityrof borders, although, like
Eritrea, it was a victim of Ethiopian imperialism.

Localized Conflicts

In Chad. it is true that France is supplying troops at the request of General
Halloun, but it may be doubted that french policy is being used to give the

legitimate Chadian government the time and the means to resist the pressure
of nationalist forces supported and armed by a foreign power. in view of the

1
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

negotiated political settlement aiming at a national reconciliation where
the entry of Hissene habre into the national government was the first step.

After having thrown the weight of its "Jaguars" into the scales. trance came
back to a policy of complete neutrality in the Western Sahara conflict and
uses the influence that it has kept among all the interested parties to favor
contacts and to ease the search for a negotiated settlement which still demands
long and patient negotiations.

The intervention of foreign military forces on the African continent, the
French and Belgian paratroopers in Sheba, with American logistical support, was
a limited operation as far as its objectives were concerned and within the
time available. As soon as they were relieved by African contingents. the
European troops left Zaire. The pressure of the westerners contributed to
reconciliation and to the reestablishment of normal relations between Zaire and
Angola. permitting the return to Sheba of several tens of thousands of refugees.

In the same way the joint efforts of the CAD end the westerners succeeded in
limiting those conflicts and in avoiding the destablization of the continent.
At the same time the moderate stance of President Nyerere was able to limit
the consequences of the disagreenent which set his country against Marshall
Idi Anin Dada's Uganda.

Without a doubt Africa hopes that the DA" will turn out to be more effective.
This organization may become so as is witnessed by the success that it has

had with its new president. Gen Gsafar El Hineiry, as we see that his sole
competence was recogniLLi in the problem of the Hestern Sahara when he thus
avoided the internationalization of the conflict. however. the African
organization still does not have the moral autonomy which would allow it to
have greater weight on the African scene and internationally. It would be
necessary for it to be thoroughly reorganized in order to protect itself fros
reproaches like those just made by the president of Tanzania, who accused it
of behaving basically like a club of chiefs of state who only wish to keep
themselves in power and not to consider as aggression any action but those
which come from powers outside Africa. however imperfect it may be. the 0A“
in spite of everything is still the privileged forum for the peaceful arrange-
ment of inter-African differences. and its possibilities for action may become
stronger as a result of the greater and greater influence shown by states

like Nigeria. Sudan, Algeria. Senegal. Ivory Coast and others. both inside

and outside Africa. whether because of their economic influence or because of
the reputation growing out of the wisdom of their leaders.

Return to Civilian Regimes

0n the state level. Africa has given the proof that 20 years after independence.
most states have acquired sufficiently solid institutions so that the military
regimes which have resulted from coup; d'etat are returning power to civilians.
Others are bearing up under the shock of leaders as prestigious as Jone
Kenyatta and ﬂouari Busediene disappearing from the scene. Both in Kenya and

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in Nigeria the continuity of power has been assured without donestic trouble
and with due regard to constitutional rules. It may be thought that it will
be the same in the states directed by the "historical leaders" who achieved
power at the acne time their countries achieved independence.

Ghana. whose population, consulted in a referendum in 3978. adopted the project
of a union government. should get back a civilian government in July of 1979.
One month later. in Nigeria. a civil govern-ent will follow the military
governaent of General Obaaanjo as a result of elections in which the five
officially recognized political parties will have competed.

In Rwanda. Gen Juvenal Nabyarinana. elected president of the Republic. has had
a new constitution adopted to replace the one which he had suspended after
he took power, thereby returning the country to normal rule.

Mali should also get back a civilian regime in the niddle of 1979. The return
to civilian government is included in the constitution of 1971.. In Upper
Volta the last stage of the process of returning to democratic institutions
was achieved in 1978 with legislative and presidential electicns fairly won
by General Lamiuna, who triumphed over two opponents. and by his party which
had to wage a hard election campaign against the two opposition parties.

One indication of the consideration granted to the African continent by the
great powers has been given by the visits of their leaders. The year of 1978
saw for the first tine the president of the United States pay an official
visit to sub-Saharan Africa with the trip of President Carter to Nigeria
and Liberia. The vice president of China aade official journeys to Somalia,
Bgypt, Zaire. Nigeria and Chane. The president of the French Republic went
to Ivory Coast at the beginning of 1978, and recently to Guinea. At the

same tine French diplomacy is trying to extend its field of activity to the
English-speaking and Portuguese-speaking states of eastern and western Africa.

M conflicts were carried on in Africa in 1978. In these conflicts. although

they were of different kinds. the relationships between the forces. foreign
intervention and the interest in the outcomes are such that the OAU and the
African states cannot expect a peaceful resolution from them without the
collaboration of the international coIIIunity, particularly of the UN. These
are the Eritrean war and the decolonisation of southern Africa.

The enormity of the resources, both in men and in nterial. put by the Soviet
Union (whose generals are in count! of the operations) at the disposition of
Ethiopia in order to attempt to reduce the resistance of Eritrea, annexed by
Enperor Nails Selassie in spite of the resolutions of the UN and which has
been struggling for its liberty for 18 years, sufficiently indicate that this
undiainished war is now part of the such broader franeworlt of the confrontation
of the super-powers in the east. It is a question for the Soviet Union of
assuring itself bases for its fleet and its aviation in order to control
access to the Red Sea. The Eritrean war and the genocide of the Eritrean
people are part of a vast Ianoevre to encircle the principal sources of

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

petroleum for the Heat. Thus. to a great degree, they are more than an
Inter-African conflict.

Seven African Horries

However. it is in southern Africa that the stability of the African continent
is most threatened.

In Rhodesia. the agreement on an internal solution and the creation of the
interim government have not been enough to disarm the opposition of the
Patriotic Front. The perspectives of the Anglo-Saxon plan of solution are
becoming more and more distant every day, and 90 percent of the territory of
Rhodesia is today under martial law. The consequences of this situation are
fearful for the neighbours of Rhodesia. who on their own ground suffer from
the belligerent measures carried out by the Rhodesian Army, and who see their
economies severely tried. As a result the chances of a settlement negotiated
among all the parties appear to them completely compromised to the point where
the president of Tanzania has officially authorized the movement of troops by
Great Britain in order to take back its control of Rhodesia and impose the
application of its plan.

It is from the point of view of the support that wouldbe demanded of it by the
liberation movements or by one or the other of the "front-line" countries

that the Soviet Union could be tempted to play a role in southern Africa and
to consolidate its influence there. Another possibility might be opened to

it if the western powers do not succeed in getting South Africa's approval

of the UN plan for Ramibian independence. It is obvious in fact that Angola
will continue to feel threatened as long as its southern border is open to

the risk of intervention by the South African Any.

In such a hypothetical situation. as well as in the eyes of international law,
the Soviet Union (or Cuba) would be diplomatically justified in responding to
a request for assistance from a sovereign African state. The western powers
would see their credibility ruined for a long time and would see their
influence decline. Host of the African states are in fact convinced - and

it is their conviction which is important. even though it is unfounded -- that
the westerners, lead by the United States, are engaged in a worldwide nego-
t‘ation with the Soviet Union and are in a position to apply pressure. This
pressure would be enough to determine constraints on South Africa to force

it to respect the UN's decisions. In African eyes, only the solidarity among
white people and the defense of their economic interests in Rhodesia and in
the Republic of South Africa keep the western powers from adopting the
sanctions dennded in the UN by the African group.

The key to solving the situation in South Africa is Pretoria, whose economic
support is indispensable for the white regime in Salisbury if it is to remain
in power. Only South Africa's abandonment of its policy of apartheid and a

rise to power by the black majority in a multi-racisl state where the whites
and the mixed bloods would see their security and a fair place in the economy

I.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guaranteed, while ensuring a peaceful transition, would spare southern Africa
the trauma of a transfer of -power in Rhodesia and South Africa accompanied

by the horrors of civil war and the ruin of the already developed economies.
Zimbabwe and South Africa (or Azania) would then start their_independence with
a secure productive apparatus and they could continue to profit from the
competence of the white advisers and technicians who night stay there, instead

of condemning the-selves to a sassive exodus whose first symptoms are already
appearing in Rhodesia.

Although it is the opposite of the situation in Ethiopia, which seems to be
irreversible in the inediste future, there is still time for South Africa

and Rhodesia to change the course of events. However. ,it is at this moment
improbable that Pretoria and Salisbury will spontaneously accept a radical
modification of their present policy. The western powers should then continue
their efforts of persuasion with the Rhodesian and South African gotctnments
and facilitate the necessary negotiations and transitions. It is probably

by their actions in this realn that Africa will judge their sincerity, and the

relations of certain ones among them with Africa for the next 20 years may
depend on this judgment.

Peace Zones. Regional Cooperation

However, some zones of peace do exist on the continent. Specifically, this has
been the case in Rest Africa for more than eight years, in other words since
the Biafra war. The 16 states of the West Africa States Economic Conunity
[CBDRAO] are aware that it is up to them to hold off the ambitions or the
appetites of the great powers, and they have in mind signing a defense pact.
Senegal and Ivory Coast were the first to broach the idea, which was then
adopted by the member states of the "est African Economic Conunity [GRAD]

and today by Nigeria. If the project is brought to its conclusion, and if
MAO can find the mana to make the independence and the interior stability
of its members respected, then it will have achieved one of its objectives
with the departure of the French troops who are still stationed there.

France will not be opposed to their withdrawal. However, France will also be

in a condition to request the progressive departure of all the foreign troops
scattered over the rest of Africa.

It will not only have eliminated the tensions aroused by the drawing of borders
among its nembers, but it will little by little be able to constitute itself
into a political entity able to make itself respected as such in African and
international affairs. And above all it will offer. it already offers a

nodel to the rest of Africa. In fact. it is in the constitution of great
regional groups and subregional groups that Africa will find the best chances
for its developsent by transcending the problen of borders and by constructing
the great infrastructures that it needs, in particular dams on the great rivers

like the Niger and the Senegal. These dates will give it control over its
water and will assure it energy resources.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

From this point of view, West Africa must congratulate itself that the year
of 1978 saw the reconciliation of Guinea with Senegal, Ivory Coast and frunce.
The cohesion of CBl’EAO is made firmer as a result, as the cohesion of the
whole of the African continent is made easier by the daily functioning of
regional and subregional institutions like CEAO, the Mano River Organization,
the Council of Bntente, the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa.
OCAM, the Great Lakes Community and so many others.

without any doubt the world's attention is less aroused by the peaceful accom-
plishments that have been carried on with perseverance in the heart of these
inter—African organizations than by the sore spectacular armed conflicts.
However, the patient work which is accomplished there each day is a witness

to the strengthening of the solidarity of African states in the west and in
the center of the continent, between the white Africa on the Mediterranean
and the tortured south of Africa. Africa certainly hopes that the countries
which formerly constituted the Economic Community of East Africa will also
recover an understanding of their mutual destiny.

There is no doubt that Africa also experienced coups d'etat or palace revolu-
tions in 1978. In Mauritania, Col Mustapha Ould Mohamed Saleck, army chief
of staff, overthrew the civil regime of President Moktsr Ould Daddah. In
Ghana. General Akuffo replaced Gen Acheampong and in the Comoros Mohamed ben
Abdallah seized power from Ali Soilih. Paradoxicslly, it seems quite likely
that Gen Acheampong may have been the victim of his own twistings and turnings
in reestabliahing civil power. In Mauritania, the coup d'etst seems to have
been motivated by a wish to get out of a dead-end situation in the Western
Sahara business, by a certain discontent in the Mauritanian arly due to the
presence of the Moroccan army, considered to be too preponderant, and finally
by a very poor economic situation further aggravated by the drought.

In the Comoros the coup d'etat was followed by elections and the new government

is trying to reestablish the state structures which were completely dis-
organized by the previous regime.

Naturally the African states are not all undergoing reforms to the same extent
as Senegal, which has just authorized the creation of a fourth party, Upper
Volta or others in parliamentary democracy founded on party pluralism, a
system which moreover presupposes the existence of a certain number of
conditions which have not been satisfied everywhere. This system furthermore
is not the best adapted to African realities. However, it is significant

to observe in Africa, in 1978, the good record of the institutions in
the countries where the succession of chiefs of state of great prestige was
to be assured, and to witness a confirmation of the tendency to return to
regimes offering to the people the possibility of participating in public
affairs and of having a certain control over political life, which are
promises of stability for the future.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFiClAl. USP. ONLY

Economic Development. Political Optiona

The daily cooperation of the states in the framework of their great regional
and subreglonal organizations and the reinforcement of their internal co-
hesion should permit Africa to concentrate on its essential problem. that of
its ievelopment and its economic independence. As it comes of age. Africa
can free itself of overwhelming tutelage and choose its economic partners

as a function of its interests alone.

The contracts signed in 1978 by the Moroccan monarchy with the Soviet Union
and by socialistic Algeria with the great capitalistic American oil companies
show at the same time the possibility for states assured of their solidity

to plan long-term economic projects with partners which have radically opposed
political regimes. without for that reason renouncing their own political
options. and euphaaize the prudence with which it is necessary to consider the
rather simplistic classification of African states into capitalistic. social.
istic. conservative or progressive which is so often taken for granted in the
West. They also demonstrate that in the competition between East and Rest and

even inside each camp the economic criteria are those that will be decisive
in the future.

Angola's opening toward the Nest in 1978. for example. allows one to think
that the Soviet Union. hindered by its own development or by other reasons of
its own. in particular its technological backwardness in certain sectors. is
not in condition to give an effective response to all the requests of the
African states. It is quite possible that in the realm of cooperation Africa
feels resentment toward the nature of Soviet aid -- the most expensive in

the world according to Syaad Barre. the president of Somalia -- and certain
demands for the lion's share. It is certain that in 1978, as in earlier
years. it was in the countries of the Gen: (Cooperation and Economic Develop-
ment Organization). followed by the Arab oil-producing states. that Africa

as a whole has found their most important public aid as well as the capital

and the partners ready to associate with it in joint ventures. or to run the
risk of private investments.

North-South Dialogue Difficult

it is also certain that the public aid from the 000! countries. even taking
into account the increase in liberality and in debt forgiving by some
industrialized countries to the more poorly favored countries of Africa. was
still insufficient in 1978 and below the objectives accepted by the western
governments. It is still necessary to observe that among the African states,
certain ones have not yet reached a level of development which would permit
them to absorb larger amounts of aid. and that not all of them have been
able to use the aid that they have received in the most effective way. which
is to say as a function of clearly defined priorities aiming at real develop-
ment and the satisfaction of the real needs of their populations. It is also
necessary for the industrialized countries to accept the consideration that
if aid is and will remain for a long time yet indispensable to Africa, the

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

real foundation for the development of the whole of the Third World should
be sought also in constructing an international economic order on more
equitable foundations and in the completion of the negotiations of the
famous north-south dialogue. from that point of view the year of 1978 will
hch been a disappointment for Africa and for all deVeloping countries.

In Geneva the negotiations en the program concerning raw materials has hardly
advanced at all. They have come to a dead-end specifically on stabilization
funds for raw materials. In the same way the drawing up of a "code of
conduct" for transfers of technology under the aegis of UNCTAD has turned out
to be a delicate task and it has revealed deep opposition between industrial-
ized countries and developing countries. All hope of coming to a successful
conclusion in all of these problems has been sent to the Hanila conference
(Fifth UNCTAD) where the great confrontation in the north-south dialogue will
take place in forthcoming months (beginning at the end of February 1979).

The multilateral negotiations of the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade
[GATT] (Tokyo round) were suspended at the end of 1978 without the United
States and the European community having been able to come to an agreement
between them. On the other hand many bilateral agreements have been concluded
between the principal economic partners in the world. However. no developing
country has been included. The whole of the Third ﬂorid has been pushed to
one a like .

in feet. out of the great international negotiations, only the convention on
the European Economic Community and the ACP (Africa-Caribbean-Pacific) states.
to which the great majority of African states belong. seems to be on a good
track and offers good prospect of terminating in a new agreement in which
each one of the parties will have been obliged to accept compromises and

make concessions. but which should give an overall satisfaction to the whole
of the ACP states.

This slow progress in the north-south dialogue can be explained in part by the
differences in interest and by the differences in objectives within the group
of industrialized countries. 0n the whole it can be explained by the diffi-
culties deriving from the worldwide recession. This is even more agonizing
for the developing countries since they have reasons to suspect a degree of
neo-protectionism and suspect that the economic situation became worse for
most of them in 1978.

Indebtedness Serious Problem

Africa. which is not immune to the common fate in this domain, finished the
year of 1978 with an indebtedness which may possibly cause a slowing down

in investments. a greater difficulty in finding the capital which it needs.
and an evolution of the exchange rates which has been favorable to it. The
exchange rates slow down its capacity for freeing the resources which are
necessary both for the service of its debt and for financing its development.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The indebtedness of the developing countries was at the center of the labors
of UNCTAD in March of 1978. During recent years the official debt has
increased at the rate of 20 percent per year and UNCTAD's figures show that
for the countries that do not produce petroleum the service of their debts
took on the average 25 percent of their exports in 1978. Partly for this
reason the PVD [expansion unknown] have not been able to keep up their
imports at the level desired in order to meet the needs of their develop-
eent. and the rates of growth have fallen considerably below the objective
of six percent which was established for developeent in the second decade of
develop-ant. lt fell to an average of 3.b percent (or the least advanced

and most seriously affected countries, a category in which 22 African states
are unfortunately classified.

The international cos-unity has cone to the conclusion that the unusual

deficit in current accounts for most of the W!) is not due to bad management
of their donestic resources. nor to excessive expenses. It is rather induced
from abroad by the double effect of inflation and of the worldwide recession.

This judgment on the whole of the PVD is applicable and is quite obviously
valuable for Africa, whose overall indebtedness nay be evaluated at around
$100 billion. UNC‘l‘AD's secretariat adds that the increase, really even the
simple maintenance of the level of economic activity and of world trade.
demands that the PVD deficit not be reabsorbed by slowing down interior devel-
opnent. but rather financed by a contribution of long-term capital according
to appropriate conditions and modalities.

The financing that UNCTAD refers to can cone from the great multilateral
institutions like the 80?. the greater part of whose credits are reserved to
Africa, or the World Bank Group. It is necessary to observe however that
Africa's share in the loans and credits from the world Bank and from the
international Development Association (the International Finance Corporation
excluded) for the fiscal year that ended on 30 June 1978 ($1.63 billion) is
stationary in its absolute value and that it fell in relation to the 1976-
1977 fiscal year from 23.14 percent to 19.10 percent. Africa is also

profiting fron a large contribution of capital under the title of bilateral
aid, specifically from France.

Nevertheless it will still have to resort to financing fron private sources

at the rates of the financial market which are higher than the generally very
liberal conditions of public aid loans for develop-cot, and consequently this
will aggravate the service charges of the yearly pay-eats. The African states

are therefore constrained to adjust their borrowing to their capacity to
assune the servicing of their agree-eats.

"Exchange Rates” Deteriorating
Hlth few exceptions. lost African states derive the larger part of their

incoee from the export of basic products. Nhile the cost of goods for cons-
truction. of inter-ediate products and of consuner goods increased at least

9

FOR OFPILIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the rate of worldwide inflation, the general rate of increase of the
prices of 37 basic products exported by the producing countries. established

by the International Monetary Fund. at the end of 1978 had a real value
slightly above the 1975 level. which was the same as in 1972. The figure

of 100 corresponding to the period 1968-1970. the series of indicators is
the following:

1971: 89 1975: 94
1972: 9a 1976: 105
1973: 124 1977: 117
1974: 130 1978: 98

A much more detailed analysis of the evolution of raw nsterisl prices during
the year of 1978 will be published (as they have been every year), in our
forthcoming editions. as well as a rapid review of the econosic evaluation

of each of the African countries. In order to demonstrate the worsening of
the evolution of the exchange rate to the detriment of Africa it is sufficient
here to emphasise that the sale price indicator for copper (the most
important source of export income for Zambia and Zaire) was the same in 1978.
in real value. as in 1975 (the year which had recorded the lowest prices in
the last two decades), as the price of raw materials of agricultural origin.
At the end of 1978 these prices were at the level of the average for the period
1968-1970. still In real value. In the category of "beverages" the indicator,
after having reached a peak in 1977 (indicator 26b) because of the increase

in Cacao prices and tea prices went down again in 1978 to indicator 158. or

a dec1ine from one year to the next of 36 percent.

In 1978, therefore. Africa resisted the danger of destabilization relatively
well. Although it is still threatened by the two arsed conflicts that are
tearing it apart in its southern part and in the "Horn". it has been able

to strengthen its cohesion by an ever closer collaboration within its
regional and subregional organizations. At the same tine, interior stability
was strengthened in a good number of states and a tendency toward the

return to more denocratic systeas of government was observed....

0n the other hand. Africa suffered the consequences of a continuing decline
in exchange rates at the same tine that it continued to bear the weight of
food inports and had to face an increase in the domestic demand for goods
and services of all kinds. This made it extremely difficult or. in lost
cases inpossible to achieve a balanced budget even in the petroleum-
producing countries. Referring to the incresse in the foreign debt the
Executive Secretary of the Econosic Com-ission_for Africa [RCA] could
declare at Abbie Abbabs that 1978 had been the year of "insufficient devel-
opaent." In 1979. the non-oil-producing countries of Africa will have to
bear an increase of 16.5 percent in the price of crude oil decided on by
OPEC. It is still true that the producing countries. particularly the Arab
states, have announced that they would devote credits approximately equivalent
to the increase in the oil bill. based on the present value of the dollar,
to development projects in the Third world.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Africa will have a need for international solidarity in 1979 in order to
tone to the aid of the five million refugees victinized by its conflicts,
in order to keep interior differences frets degenerating to the point of be-
coning incontrolleble by Africa itself and in order to get for itself the

indispensable resources for its development. It should be able to find that

aid first in Europe. the continent which is closest to it both geographically
and historically.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena: et Cie.. Paris. 1979

12,116
050: “00

11

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICA]! AFFAIRS

Burrs

UDEAC DISPUTE-~The closed door sessions of the last UCEAD (Custoaa and
Economic Union of Central Africa) on 19 and 21 Deceaber at Yaounde were
at tines stormy. Emperor Bokaasa specifically accused Congo of trying to
strangle his country by aide-tracking the fuel that is shipped to it and
which goes through the port of Pointe-Noire. President Yhonbi Opanga

suggested that the dispute be settled by the two interested parties. [Text]
[Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 17 Jan 79 p 26] 12,116

OAU-MIN WTIONSnIdi Amin shuffled the cards when spoke to the 0M) one
aonth before sending his troops against Tanzania, as he announced an iminent
attack by Nyerere's army. Following his speech the 0M! did not react to
the Ugandan aggression. It was only at the moment of Tanzania's counter-

offensive that one of the deputy secretaries of the organization suggested
to Nyerere that he should officially alert the GA". without success.
[Text] [Paris JEUNB AFRIQUE in French 19 Jan 79 p 21.] 12.116

WWI-MIN SPLIT" Uganda accuses Libya of having supplied area to Tanzania.
However, Libya has been considered for a long tine as one of the principal
allies of idi Main and his number one area supplier. Uganda however has
tried during recent months to come closer to Cairo and to certain moderate
Arab capitals. And this is what has aroused the anger of Qndhdhafi. It was
the Algerians, traditional friends of the Tanzanians, who got a change of
attitude from Tripoli by asking for greater cohesion and a greater unity in

the Hard-Line Front. [Text] [Paris mm AFRIQUB in French 17 Jan 79 p 17]
12.116

C50: M000

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

WARNING ISSUED 1'0 PORTUGAL-411w Angolan minister of defense has just warned
Lisbon in e cousunique against "the attitude of certain citizens prominent

in Portuguese politics which seriously threatens the normalization desired by
the two peoples." The minister of defense referred in this connection to the
recent theft of a fishing vessel "by Portuguese individuals in the service

of imperialist plotters, an incident which is a part of the oft-denounced
plan for a widespread attack upon the People'a Republic of Angola." "The
cenpeign disparaging Angola. which is intensifying. is entirely hollow and
only reflects the difficulties of ite authors. 'lhet it finds support in
South Africa, Senegal end certain Portuguese circles is not surprising." the
minister of defense went on to say. "'lheir attitude. and that of other
foreign circles, particularly that nostalgic for the Portuguese Democratic
Social Party, only strengthens the determination of our people calmly to
pursue the path established by the KPH-Labor Party for the building of
socialism in Angola end the total liberation of the African continent." the
consmnique went on to say. [l‘ext] [Paris MARCH“ 'l'IOPICAUX E'l' EDITBRMNBBNS
in French 26 Jan 79 p 211] 5157

PETROLEUH warm HIT}! mum agreement was signed in Paris on 16
January by Total-CAP [African oil Company] and the WOL. the Angolan
Stnte Oil Company. represented by the Angolan oil minister, Hr Jorge

de Horeis, who was in the French capital from 15 to 17 January. Under the
terms of this agreement, Total-CAP, an affiliate of the french Oil Company.
is to invest 30 million dollars over five years in offshore oil prospecting.
The maritime zone allocated to it covers 4.000 aquere kilometers. It will
direct the work for the SONMGOL, within the framework of a production-sharing
agreement. This is the first agreement signed by Angola with a foreign oil
company in the prospecting sector. It should be noted that the agreement
implicitly recognizee the importance of the prospecting work already done in
the years 1960-1970 by the French Oil Company affiliate. representing invest-
ments which can be estimated at about 20 million dollars. It should also be
noted that Mr Jorge de Horeis met with e umber of French leaders. among
others Kr Albin chelendon, president of the ELF [Gasoline and Lubricants

Company of Francel-Aquitaine conpany. [Text] [Paris meats TROPICAUX ET
PEDITBRMNEEIIS in French 26 Jan 79 p 212] 5157

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BELGIAN PORT ASSISTANCE. TRAINlNc--Belgium has just signed two agreements
with Angola pertaining to the expansion of the port of Lobito and the
training of railroad personnel. The first of these agree-ants provides

that initially, the Angolans will entrust the study of tho conditions for
the eXpansion of the port of Lobito and its econonic impact on Angola to the
Belgians. Once this study is completed, Belgium is cousitted to financing
a part of the work to be done. In the railroad sector, the Belgian experts
will train middle-level cadres and specialized railroad workers on the spot.
and higher-level cadres in Belgium. These agreements are the first concrete
results of a recent visit paid to Angola by a Belgian mission, which in turn
was the result of a visit paid to Luanda last July by Belgian Minister of
Foreign Affairs Henri Simonet. [Text] [Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET
monsnmrsus in French 26 Jan 79 p 212] 5157

UNITA BENCUELA CLAIMS DENIED--The Benguela railroad linking Lobito to Zaire
and Zambia will not resume operations until there has been a settlement
among the various disputing Angolan factions, a representative of the UNITA.
"r Jeremias Chitunda. said in London. Hr Chitunda recalled that the railroad.
which formerly carried copper from Zambia and Zaire to Lobito, crosses an
area 1,000 kilometers long controlled by the UNITA. Four bridges. he added.
have not been repaired, and the UNITA opposes their repair so as to prevent
the sane fron being used to transport Cuban troops. The UNITA does not have
any plans to abandon this neans of exerting economic pressure on President
Agoatinho Neto's Angolan government, he said. It would however be ready to
talk with the Angolan chief of state and to allow the repair and resumption
of service on the line provided that all Cuban troops are withdrawn fro-
Angols, Hr Chitunda said in conclusion. A cal-unique published by the
Angolan minister of defense, on the other hand, said that the "minor
sabotage" the groups infiltrated along the Benguela railroad line have suc-
ceeded in carrying out can in no way paralyze its operation. "It is
operating, and with the technical aid to be received shortly, it will
function even better." If the railroad line has not resumed the transport
of products from Zaire and Zambia as yet. according to the minister, this

is due solely to the fact that the contracts have not yet been agreed upon
by the authorities of the three countries and the management of the company.
[Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANBENS in French 26 Jan 79

p 212] 5157

BRAZILIAN MEAT IMPORTS--Five hundred tons of dried neat have been loaded on
the Angolan cargo vessel N'cola in Sao Paulo, for shipment to Luanda. A
spokesman for the A. Sole company, which is effecting the operation, explained
that the 500 tons of dried meat are the first shipment of a 2,000-ton lot of
this product sold to Angola. Three trucks and 17 trailers of the Scanie

Vabia make were also loaded on the vessel. [Text] [Paris MARCHBS TROPICAUX
ET HEDITERRANEENS in French 26 Jan 79 p 212] 5157

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

REFUGEE PROBLEM LOOKS DIG-Jihe population of the People'e Republic of Angola
totals 6.790.000. Of this total. almost a Iillion peraons are either refugees
tron other countries, Angolans repatriated after having fled to other coun—
tries. or displaced persons forced to leave their houses and villegea.
According to the refugee aid department, there are still 550,000 refugees in
Zaire, 13,000 in Zambia, 7,000 in Portugal and 125 in Botswana. it is unknown
how many of these will return to the country. To date, more than 360.000
Angolans have returned fran Portugal. Congo-Brazzaville, Cape Verde, Zambia
and iaire. On the other hand, 250,000 citizens of Zaire and 30.000 Namibian:
have come an refugees to Angola. While the economy is not flourishing, the
authorities in Luanda are making an effort to feed. lodge, and clothe these
people and to integrate then in the atructurea of the young nation. [Excerpt]
[Peril means TROPICAUX ET )IBDII'ERMNEENS in French 2 Feb 79 p 273] 5157

CSO: 6000

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

LAH REGULATINC PETROLEUM TAXES. FOREIGN PARTICIPATION ADOPTED
Parie INDUSTRIES ET TRAVAUX D'OUTREMBR in French Jan 79 p 28

[Text] The draft law eatebliehing the new eyetem of tnxoe and royoltiee
on hydrocarbona end orea eubmitted to the legialetive cmmaiaaion by the

Cameroonian miniater of minee and power wee approved by the National Aeeembly
in ll December.

The reporter of the legialative commieeion had previously atreeeed the
"prudence" of the United Republic of Cameroon in connection with the "policy
puraued by the large oil producere," in view of the "negligible level" of
their production and the 'hwdeety of their reaervee," for which reaeon the
country "ie in no hurry to join the OPEC."

The new legislation, according to the reporter, "aaeerte etate ownerehip
of the natural reaourcee of the country." It epecifiee that the maximal
percentage from which exploitation companiea can benefit, taking the coete
they incur into account. "can in no caee exceed 60 percent."

The Cameroonian atate "further reeervee the right to at leaat 60 percent of
the production of each company." coneietent with the policy purauad by the
lending eountriee dominating the international crude oil market. In addition.
the etate requirea each conceeeion-holder to guarantee the rapid filling of
jobe on all levela with Cameroonian nationala. and aleo euperviaea produc-
tion, treneportation and the trenefer abroad of the product of ealee of
Cameroonian crude oil.

For the mining taxee and royaltiee ea a whole, the new meaeuree provide for
the concept in the future of "exploitation permito valid for four yeare,"
which can be granted in the event of the diaeovery of email depoeita con-
taining reaervea which do not juatify the granting of conceeeione for at
leaat 25 yeara, ae planned for more aizable depoeita.

For example, an oil conceeeion would pay overall a fixed duty of 250
million CPA france for 25 yeare (10 million per year), repreeenting the
equivalent in oil of 10,000 tone. on production likely to vary between
500,000 and eeveral million tone per year. In addition. production of a
million tone per year would bring in 20 billion CPA franca. The APP notes

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in pauing that the exploitation of Cameroonian oil began in 1977 and cone
to about 800,000 tone in 1978.

Finally, the text of the law mintaina the rate of 57.5 percent for the

tax on conpaniea, which rate ia already included in varioua agreements aigned
by the governuent with certain oil conpaniea allowed to function in the
United Republic of Cameroon. According to the miniater of uinea and power,
Cameroon has thus eelected the "ayaten of participation wherein the atata
joina with foreign companiea for the exploitation of ninins reaourcea," and
ia "oppoae-J to the principle of aterile nationalization."

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie. Peria. 1979

5157
050: 1.600

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

BRIEFS

SWISS ASSISTANCE PROSPECl‘S--‘l'he Swiss minister of foreign affairs. Hr
Pierre Aubert, paid an official visit to the United Republic of Cameroon
from 18 to 20 January. meeting with President Ahidjo. Noting that this is
the first time an official of the confederation has visited Africa while in
office, the Swiss minister said that he came to discuss details of a number
of cooperation projects in the realm of development and humanitarian aid.
He also announced that he will be talking with business circles interested
in investing in the United Republic of Cameroon as soon as he returns to
Switzerland. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX E'l' MEDITERRANEENS in French
26 Jan 79 p 200] 5157

COFFEE STATISTICS-int 31 December, domestic coffee purchases from the
1977-78 harvest total came-to 66,352 tone. as compared to 61.715 tone from
the 1976-77 harvest a year previously. i.e. a difference of more than 2,637
tons. Experts totaled 54.616 tone as of 31 December 1978, leaving a
theoretical stock of 9.938-tons. [Text] [Paris means TROPICAUX ET
EDITERRANEBNS in French 26 Jan 79 p 200] 5157

COCOA STATISTICS—In the course of a reception held in early January.

Minister of Agriculture Andre 'l'eoungui expressed hie satisfaction with the
results of the 1977-78 farm season. with a total yield of 115,000 tone

as compared to 86,500 in 1976-77, the cacao crop showed an increase of 25
percent. Also. according to the minister, the prospects for the present
season are promising. This increase in production is the result basically

of the expansion of planted areas. but also and above all efficient organi-
zation in cooperatives. [Excerpt] [Paris NAMES TROPICAUX 31' WIERMENS
in French 26 Jan 79 p 200] 5157

FRENCR EQUIPMENT DONATION-Within the framework of the French Aid and
Cooperation Fund (PAC) plan for 1978, which covers six rural development pro-
jects coming to a total of 22,500,000 CFA francs, a gift of various farm
implements (saws. wheelbarrow, building toole) has been made to the rural
cot-nunity of Bieeage, in the department of Upper Seneca. This contribution
should make it possible to build an ll-kilometer road. In addition, tw0
SO-horsepowr engines have also been delivered to the authorities, for use
on a ferry which in the future will make the crossing of the Seneca at this
point possible. [Text] [Paris MARCH” TROPICAUX 21' HZDIRWS in French
2 Feb 79 p 260] 5157
18

C80: “00

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3388108 0? “TIM mama! POLICY M mm
Perie mus ANGIE in Inch 24 J.) 19 pp 34-51
[Article by Joe-Blane Ali-u "nieeein Hebre'e Chellme']

[mt Preeident telix lullcun end hie prine nieieter
cen I one encther leee end leee.

Prim ei'ternocn 29 Decenher 191B eccredited Ienbere of the diplcnetic
corp. in Chnd left the preeident'e reeidence where they hnd teken pert in
the trediticnel cerencny o! orterihg their beet wiehee. heir ccnvereeticn
weenotdevotedtctherenerke Preeidutnnllcuhednndetcthen. mthe
ccntrery, the nene ct eonehcdy who wee not there wee on everyone'e lipe.
need of the neticnel unity moment {creed lut nan-t, limi- hbre,
thenuber-twceeninthegcvernnntecccrdiegtcthe 'beniccherter'

thet ie teepcrerily eerving ee e ccnetitnticn, did not feel it worthwhile
to teke hie place elcnpide the preeident for thie crricinl cerencq which,
however, x'eqniree hie preeeece. ht thet ie not ell. Over three-quertere
of the ninietere did not ettend. here were ninly tollcwere of linen
ﬂebre. niplc-te did not heve to think ebent it {or very long to reech
the ccnclneim thet the orieie thet eete the county's two chief leedere
epinetcne eutherendwhichmmmm thetirettcreveel}
ncnthe ego (m "8160! lo 932) in getting woree, hue enheeendcre who
etill heeitete to eend report- in to their mean-tn will eee their leet
dcnhte renewed ee of the m nfter tenor-row.

he Gep Ie widening

m the eitem of 50 Decenher, in tnct, the nenhere of the scum-It
were enmeed to go end otter their beet wiehee to the meeident. llcet of
the nihietere were preeent et the reeiduce. ht ace epsn, 31min lebre,
whownetotnlktnthenn-eofthewholelinieterinluelheheedn,mnot
there. here we. nothing lett for General lulla- to do but ndnit thnt

the up between hie prine ninieter end hinelt in widening. be ueeege
heeddreeeedtctheneticncntheccceeicncttheyeu—eedteetinlre

like n tieel wean; tc thie pert-er: "he nen reepcneible for mlﬁn;
theprcvieim ctthebeeicchnrter-et oenetntlybenrinnindthenotia

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of tho hidxor intoroot o! tho notion. In tho «out of Ioilun, no Chodion,
roardlooo of bio pooition in tho nohinory of morn-out, will ho pnrdmod.”

bolooot thotoonboooidio thotooonotonoohotwoonthotwomionoot
difficult. In o tow oontho tino, inoidonto hovo ultipliod ot onoh o roto
thot tho oporotion of inotitutiono tolpomily oot up io prootioolly poro-
W.

In Ion-ho: o pnrtioulorly otom Minot ooooin who hold which will ro-
nnintononointhoomloofthooonntry. Allthonorooooinooithopponod
inthoprooonoootoSodonooodoloption thothodoo-otroonaortonnto
ottor ito holp to tho protoconioto.

Unoonfortohlo Sitnotiono

rolix llollonn and moooin Bohro oonld not noon wt on tho prooodnro
to ho tollowod in trooinc priouoro. ‘lho tirot of tho two propoood thot
onooty ohonld firot ho amtod uly to thooo omotod under no.“ low
whilo tho oooond doundod tho {tool-3 or politiool prioonoro. Gomrol
IloJlonn, who woo to loan {or o trip to Pronoo thot ooho any ookod thot
tho prohlon ho pontponod until o cohinot looting oonld ho hold on No no-
tun. aioooin nnhro ”mood to oooopt thio oolntion, olo-od tho door of

thoGohinotoonroronooroooondrohoodtogotothooirporttoooycoodhyo
tothoprooidont.

Of conroo, 2 wooho lotor ho hoodod tho won-oat wolooli-g oo-ittoo for
tho prooidont'o rotnn to tho Minn oopitol, but no could ooo thot tho
twomhorolyohookhondowithontonyohowotonthoio-ondoxohouod
no wondo.

thorotoro, nioooinnohro io ohollnxine Polix Nollonnoo ithowontod to
pronotonly toko ovor or toho proooduoo our hio, but wo do not roolly
Inowwhotorwhohooxpoototoonpporthihindoineoo. Aoi’orProoidont
hollow, ho oon only with difficulty got rid of tho III who ropa'ooonto
rooonoiliotion with tho worthorn pminooo.

'lho two non oro not in confortohlo oitutimo. lhilo tho ohoioo of noooin
Enhro oo pri- niniotor on 29 mt hod oonowhnt onrpriood pooplo, it
novortholooo tollowo o oortoin kind of logic. Coot into tho linolldat by
tho vioiooitodoo of tho Clonotro unit, tho omont prioo liniotor Ill
ohlotooo—ndooortohondionooomcthopooplo otthonorth, whoroho
couo Iron. 0: cl). tho loodoro of tho miono rohol naval-to, it woo ho
who phhod tho poot ottorod by tho l'DJo-ono Govounoot ond Island to
nogotioto o noonoiliotion. Looo froo to pomo thoir initiativoo booonoo
of tho ntoriol old politiool onnort thoy honotit tro- i‘ro. thoi: roopoo-
tivo protootoro, Algorio ond Lihyo, Ahho Siddioh ond Mani moddoi could
not roolly nogotioto ond woro ohligod to withdrow into on intunoigonoo
thotrimlly—tonpororilﬂ—pnttholontoi’thornning. manly“-
wx'on‘ly, Iiooei'n Intro, todu ooonood of nciuolion, found hinool! ro-
tor-rod to oo o pogo, hord-ooro notionoliot. Uhilo ottorinc o goon-too of

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-T ONLY

oppooition to Wi'o oxponoioniot duo-o, thio no ohlo to ocutrihuto
towom oocolorotioo of tho prooooo of ooticnol rocoooiliotioh. rm Ichth-
lotor, tho holonoo ohoot io for iron boing «com.

lntronoigonoc

A tow oporodio Ioooioco of troopo woro, to ho onto, oi'i‘octod. ht ovon
though tho prino ointotor'o troopo and tho lot-thorn irood lomo (nu)
rocoptnrod tho town of irodo in tho protooturo ct hiltino in only Joann-y,
wo not odlit thot tho rooulto ohtoihod do not oorroopond to tho hopoo
around by hio choioo. mo intzuoim nkoo ccllohorotioo difficult
with otticiolo m- tho ocuth, lorcoly in tho nJoritq in tho country and
who con tio up tho odniniotrotivo Ichinory who» tho country ooodo it loot.

Under tho protoxt or ocrroctin‘ tho rogioml iohoJohoo inhoritod fro- colo-
nial tioootothoodvontoaoctthohcrth, hooudodophypmounatho-tc
trunthoirmocohiohocoooohohodoootod oo-o ofthooioooorocrlooo
dioguiood wow.

it tho proooot ti-o, on: rocoooiliotdoo with hio for-or com-ion, Goukcni,
coo-o to: off. tumor, woro tho lotto: to oppon- ch tho Chodioo politicol
ocono, thio would coco Iain riok upoottin‘ oll tho oudo on tho tohlo.

lock tonock

Mo otyliod oitootico dooo not holp Gooorol lbllcuo ow oithor. In Mot
tho Quinn prooidont hod to iqooo Eioooin nohro on tho honoh, who did
not wont hio, ho ooouroo no. lo odd- thot tho Mon Am itoolt who
hootilo to tho prooidont'o ohoico. 8o wo col hottor Mouton! hio dilom

”‘0‘.

If ho should wont to got rid of hio hurdohoou prino mini-tor, thooo who
oppoaod hio oppoihtlont would domd on mounting of his. hit on ho m
tho riot of lottine tho oituoticu so to tho dogs? In thio oomio, would
not Am howko, hoodod by polioo hooo, Hum-Mo, tor-or miniotor of
foroial offal-o, ho tolptod to intoﬂoho, thoo toning tho two In to lino
up hook to book? It io certainly not tho tow hound trocpo of tho no who
ccntinuo to olcno aux-ohm tho pri- oiniotor'o oototy or who could rooiot
tho rosolor Am fro- which, it io tno, thoy roooiwo no onion.

no on tho othor hood, tho poooihlo outing of Bioooin Hahn could hovo
ooricuo oonooqoonooo for tho country'o mtuxo. hon it tho motion or ro-
prooontotico I.) oooo dohotohlo, ot looot tho principlo or diotrihoticn of
poworhotwooathohorthoudthoooothionowopih. Sowohovotoﬂhd
on oltornotivo. Io thio poooihlo «odor tho prooont circa-moon

aud'o rool prohloo io tho ootohliohoont of o morn-oat otrco; my: to
rooiot tho jolto thot {or who ti- to cooo will so on outing tho country.

21
FOR OFFICMI. USE ONLY
Pet-hope the error liee in concerning cureelvee only with politiccl lattere
while forgetting thet adninietutive pmhleee ere at the eouce of the crieie
the country hee been expoeed to for 15 yeare?

(he of the son who in thie connection night he turned to ie Ahdotﬂnye
m, who holde uvenl trup cards. In ouch a divided country, he can
bout of having ulctivee in the north ae well co in the acwth. ihe fact
that he ie o hcelee could aleo he reaeewring to ﬁnale-e concerned at aeei ,
power taken over by airietinne fun the eouth. ﬂie touchy netioonliee ie
a gunnntee for thoee who fear o Libyan inmion.

Cox-rice e not of Height

linieter of pinning and eocooq for any yen-e, ihdouloye Iguana coohinee
the rigor of c good Ianager with the efficiency of n teolmooret. Ilie age

(45) pluee In- between two political generntiooen thnt of the indapadenoe
ere, firet of all, which he pcrticipeted in throwd: hie uau-ptiu of ninie-
terial reepcneihilitiee under the mum. Regine, and thet of today in
which the experience he hae ooqnind carriee a lot of weight. forthenora,
it he been whiepered ehcnt that Prince would not oppoee hie nppcintleat

to the poet of priae ninieter. not would ihdoulne Inn-e accept given the
current eocnooic eimticn? Me ie not quite oertcin. it the tine of

the dealinge thet preceded the for-tion of the preeent met-ant, he wee
oontected on eeveral ocoeeione. ht he olwaye tuned don the ninieteriel
portfolio offered hie.

Veiting

For the the being, he pnfere to go heck to the hoeieeee world. however,
ae a govemnent official, he he to firet get a releeee nhing hi.- availshle
for other occupation. an the government doee not eeen to he in any great
hurrytograntit. ﬂatwooooaei-e, hereontlynetwiththepriaeninie—
ter, who bee not given up getting his to go hook on hie decieico. In hie coo-
fortehle ville looeted in a popular eeotin of l'DJuenn, ibdooleye tonne
confided to ne that he hed really for the accent decided to pull out. It in
not thet he hae hecone indifferent to politice. mt he ante to weit for
the eetchliehnent cf deaconoy before throwing hie hot in the ring awn.
Perhaps he ie whiting for the right meant. but we know thet in politioe
one cannot clwnye ohccae it.

comm: Jeane Urique. GRUPJIA 1979

080: 4400

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAD

mom 388mm oil pnduotion will be opentionel by 1960. 01'
We, the Sedici depoeite, which ere to be exploited by OOIIOOO (Continentel
on m or and), m not very big. but they ere big enough to neet ell
doneetio neede. A urinary ie to be built et I'DJe-ene with the eid of the
worm m, the mm (m m for Boo-ado Develop-eat in mice) end

the Oentrel tend for Boononio coopentiu. Inveehente budgeted for ite
oonetnotin enount to eboot 4 billion on [Brian mm Oo-mity]
hence and it will heve en initiel production oepeoity of 2,000 benele e
dey. Given the dietmoe eeperetiu the Chedien oepitel hoe the Bedigi
depoeite, e 565-!- pipeline will be built. lte ooet ie eeti-ted et 5 bil-
lion cu tmoe. Aooondin to whet the emperte en, the Seoul reservee ere
eerely the tip ottheioeberg. Mantel-en toeeeerthetChedie eit-
tin‘moilreemethetwillpntitintheeeneoleeeeenweitl lore
ooneervetive eetieetee, however, p1eoe thee et 20 nillion tone e yeer within
e few yem tine. hie unexpected gift the hooves will “0 it poeeible

to niee per oepite inooee Ihioh ie et meat one or the loweet in “rice.
l(hie hleoh gold will eleo provide e nob-needed em to mwth. [tut]
[m-mmmmmuJuwpﬂ] 11466

mmmumu7smmmmum,

100 he north or Abeohe, do not tehe their ondere m. the tender Mien
Am. Meeppeeretobeetrenge, bottheoo-ederofthelorthenined
Poroee (Pil) tekee hie olden dix'eotly free Iieeein ﬁbre. be beeio oherter
providee for the pedal integetiu or til tnope into the Mien letionel
Am in eooordenoe with e eohedele ee yet to be eet up. For the meet,

it ie en atone-one tome thet ie evolving in ite own my without being
couoemed for the exieteeoe of Gen Felix lhllou'e troope. here ie no
oooniinetion betweq the two euiee. ﬁne wine einieter ie “ended by hie
own eoldiere, m unifonn e turben mpped ebout the heed end e bett1e
dnee reeinieoent or e mean... “iron, differ-e m. thet of the Amy.
‘lhe bulk of the troope ie etetioned et Abeohe, under nieeein Bebre'e outnol.
mt e few hundred eoldiere ere et I'Djenene where they Mde the prine
ninieter with protection. knee Iee needy to eooept e oertein amber of
then for e retaining prone. After eneein‘ to it, lieeein bbne revoked
hie deoieion. lie eon heve therefore not saved. nine and often the un-
pxeoedented epeoteole or e oountry with two mletely eutononone eniee.
[m1] [Perie mm mm: in m 24 Jen 79 p 27] 11466

080: 4400
23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPFICIM. USE ONLY

CWO XSLMDS

DISEMHMTKNT U" MU LENDERS REPORTED
Poris N’Rlﬂ-ASIE in French 5 Feb 79 p 19
[Article by Ssikou Cheikh: “Archipelago Adrift"]

[Text] The insurgents put in power by Bob Denard knew mat they no longer
wanted. But they no longer knm mat they want.

The new Cunoran leaders are beginning to be disenchanted. The country was
without reswrces and the fate of its inhabitmts hardly enviwle during
the time of Ali Soilih, the revolutionary leader who was overthrow and
then assassinated last May. But he at least had a goal, a program, an
attitude.

Eight months after the night landing of Bob Oenard's men, the money expec-
ted Tran France or from the Ialaaic countries is not forthccning.

To be sure, in order to meet the conditions dictated by Paris, formal
ballots had to be hastily organized with the task of 'iegitinizing' vested
poser: Armed nodsllah was elected with 99.95 percent of the vote where ~-
one year earlier -- All Soilih had obtained only 55 percent. The sane
triwnph took place for the not very laic constitution written in agreemnt
with religious leaders. The election: for “run-y aunts were a little more
contested. as is traditionally the case where a distribution of positions
is involved. And, in particular. the designation of governors. who are
the all-powerful rulers of each of the ialmds, gave rise to harsh
struggles.

This is that has led worthy men - whatever one may think of their attitude
with respect to Ali Soilih'a regiae - to enter into a veiled opposition.
Thus Houzaoir Abdallah, former minister of foreign affairs under Soilih,
has refused all ministerial posts offered, going as far as to attempt to
rally some of the young people. He has held illegal meetings. ad did not
fear having his have associated with the little denonatration held a few
weeks ago in the form of a prayer nesting at the gravesite of the slain
revolutionary.

26
P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fomr minister use even arrested for two days and then released.
apparently mder pressure from French diplomatic circles which are once
more markedly present on the islmds. and «rich see in him a possible
successor. Armed Pbdallah maintains that he is letting his act I'so as
not to give his too mach importance;" but pressures exerted by Paris in
connection with the security of Mouzsoir are sure indication that the old
Conoran chief no lmger enjoys the full confidence of France mich is
giving ouch thought to the poat-Ibdellah situation.

One fact is of concern to both the French diplosste no the leaders of the
Cosmo Ielmde: young people. In") uere the main supporters of Soilih, are
silent now. And for good reason: than their leaders on the People's
Notional Omittee were arrested, and power given back to the elders,
their voice use brutally stillsd. But their reﬁning is going to be
painful for the teen in office.

The Race for Dollars

Certain clues lead one to think that this youthful fire is Just unoldering.
ulitness the student strike uhich occurred last NovaIIber: troops had to be
called in. There use also the nilitmt prayer at the grave of Ali Soilih --
a "fatiha' - uhich resulted in 9 to 16 not-nth Jail sentences m fines for
those responsible, for having prayed at the grave of a loan considered as
"non-Moalen."

The retaliatory measure against followers of the faith engaged in the
peaceful invocation of Allah has shocked my s good Moalen in the Colours
Islands, as has the refusal of Judicial authorities to provide food for
the prisoners, even though the harm prescribes it.

It would soon that, according to an already typical pattern, the proli-
feration of goodwill gestures in favor of strict islanisn serves the stain
objective of extracting bundles of redeeming dollars fron Sandi Amie and
the conservative auiratee. And Alned Ibdsllah has Just started on a tour
of Gulf md Red Sea countries. where he can hold out his begging boul - an
enterprise uhich Soilih had aluays reJected. especially if it newt that
there would be accolnpmying preemree on the conduct of internal affairs.

It is true that pressure is the daily lot of the present lemera of the
Gamma Islands. Their arm, is in the hmds of French officers and non-
comissioned officers «no arrived beginning lsot October to take over fro-
Bob Denard's mercenaries. Cmrm officers are themselves mostly former
ranked officers of the French any. mm Ibdsllm brought back with his

in the aftermath of the coup. The sane goes for five recently anointed
ministers. said to have been practicing medicine for 10 years or lure...
but. in Frmcel

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Things Going well for Bob Dansrd

According to consistent testimony. 80b Densrd would appear to still he in
Frmce. where he divides his time bah-teen Paris - hssdqusrters of the

Convert: diplomatic representation - snd Bordeaux, were he has family and
friends. Christian Olsgsrsy, s French garage tuner who had prepared the
way For the mercenary. has Joined his in that city: he was arrested for
two days in early January, in Horoni, as a result of denunciations. He

was being suspected of wanting to 'liquidate' Aimed Nodallsh at the time.

Boo Densrd intervened. from France, demmding the release of his friend.
The notorious mercenary is now himself engaging in cmnerciol operations
oetueen France and the Sonora Islmds. sunetims acting in contradiction
with the Moroni govemnt... which is couplaining against him by now.
But. one makes friends where one finds them...

COPYRIGHT: 1979 African-Asia

11,023
050: «4.00

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GABON

BRIEFS

COFFEE STATISTICS-ﬁn the couree of a ueeting of the Coffee Price Stabilization
Fund held in Libreville on 16 Januery. it wee reported that Caboneee coffee
production totaled 600 tone of Coffee robueta in 1977-78, the greater pert

of which wae of poor quality. The fund had a turnover of 92 nillion CPA
france, with 200 tone of thie production being exported. The budget for the
fund for 1978-79. caring mainly fro. etate eubeidiea. ie balenced, for income
and expendituree, at 345 million CPA france. Thie will take it poeaiblc to
carry out a program of direct notion in favor of coffee production. Lot ue
recall that the purchaee price paid to the producer per kilogram of coffee
increeeed to 120 CFA france in 1977 and then 160 in 1978. after having etaycd

et 50 CM france for 10 yeere. [Text] [Parie mums TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERMNBENS in French 2 Feb 79 p 263] 5157

mm. PORT-CERTIL PORT IMPROVElms--A minieterial delegation headed by
hinieter of State for Treneporte Ceorgee Rawiri vieited the timber port of
Owendo and the port under conetruction at Port-Centil on 22 January. Their
purpoee wee to inepect the progreee on the work at the two porte which are
echeduled to be connieeioned thie year. The timber port of Owendo. which hee
two platform, wee planned to make poeeible the etorege of 1,250 tone of
floating timber. while the deep-water port in Port-Gentil will make it
poaeible for five or aix veeeele. depending on the tonnage, to be moored at
the docks. The coet of the work to be done at Mndo ia eetireeted at

12.75 billion CPA france, while the port et Port-Centil will coet 10.5 billion

CPA frence. [Text] [Parie HARCHBS TROPICAIJX ET animus in French
2 Feb 79 p 263] 5157

C80: 10600

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

FOREIGN LOAN INQUIRY comm-am Suprene Military Council has established
an investigation connission to note a detailed study of all the foreign
loans for which the Ministry of Finance contracted between June 1977 and
July 1978, i.e. the last year of financial activity for Lieutenant General
Achesnpong. In particular. the con-ission is to question and bring together
to confront each other the for-er and the new commissioners for finance,

H. A. K. Appish end Colonel B. T. Oklah. reepectively; the former and the
new couaiesioners for economic planning, Mr Robert Gardiner and Dr Joseph
Abbey, respectively; the for-er ccanissioner for justice, Mr Gustave
Korenteng-Addou; the ceanissioner for trade. Col K. A. Quarahie. and the
governor of the Bank of Ghana, M. A. E. R. Ashiagbor. [Text] [Paris MARCRBS
TROPIGAUX 3T MEDITERRANEBNS in French 2 Feb 79 p 257] 5157

RAILROAD SUBSIDY POLLOHING STRIKE-Ihe government of Ghana has approved a
monthly supplementary subsidy of l.l million cedis for the national railroad
conpeny. increasing the total of that subsidy to 3 nillion. This decision
was nade after the long 15-day railroad uorkers' strike uhich ended on

17 January. The strike. called by the railroad workers because of wage and
labor conditions demands. is believed to have cost the railroad conpany solae
80,000 cedis per day, nainly because of the spoilage of perishable goods.
[Text] [Paris MARGRZS TROPIGAUX ET animus in French 2 Feb 79 p 257]
5157

G80: 6500

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

OPPXCIAL'S mum ”Pom—Guinean Hiniater of Hinea and Geology
Ibrahim Kabaaaan Keita wee appointed interim ainieter of public uorke,
urbanian and habitat on 15 January. he ia replacing hr Hoheaed mine Toure.
who haa juet been elected eecretary-genaral of the International Bauxite
Annotation (1M). Alec. hr Diao, formerly director of intonation in
Conakry, haa been appointed Guinean anbaeaador to Libya. [Text] [Peria
mains TROFIGAUX ET momma: in French 2 Feb 79 p 253] 5157

vac-cum TRADE AGREEMENT-whim and Guinea aigned the protocol for a
trade agreenent for thie year on 11 January in Conakry. The term of thia
agreenent which pertaina to far- producta on the one hand. and food.
induatriel and cheeical producte on the other . were defined at the com-
pletion of the aix-day viait paid to Guinea by a Ghineee goverment and
trade delegation. The protocol vae aigned by Guinean Miniater of Exchanger
Domain El “adj Abdoulaye Toure and Ghineae Firat Viee-ﬂiniater of Foreign

Trade Che Hue-Iain. [Text] [Paria moms TROPICAUR 31' mun-amass in
French 26 Jan 79 p 193] 5157

650: M00

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WIGMAR

RATSIRAHA MIED 8V TFREATS TO NATION'S SECLRITY
Paris HIM-IBIS in French 5 Feb 79 p 23
[Article by Elie Renard: 'Ratsiraka'a Doubta'J

[Text] Facing the perils which loan on the horizon, Hadqascsr finds it-
self forced to strengthen its security.

In Malagasy govermental circles, domt persists concerning the sincerity
of western intentions with regard to current major problems. Recently,
while receiving diplasats in office md representatives of national

institutions in thsrivo, President Didier Ratsirska expressed to than
the following:

“Do they really desire peace,“ he wider-ed, W they are estmliahing
military hues dozens of thousands of siles away frag their national
territory (like Diego Garcia); men they express token condemation of Im
Smith while inviting him md arming him, the better to massacre mom's
black population; and than they refuse econanic sanctions against Pretoria
while providing it in musive shunts with the one union will enule the
white minority to further oppress the large black masses, to perpetrate
its prevaricstion in Nmibis, and to constmtly engage in aggression
against socialist Dngola md Mentions?"

the issue of human rights, mich is being so stirred up these days in
western capitals, also strikes Malagasy leaders as m muse of lmguage.
president Rstsirsks. who challenges “the bourgeois notion of ham rights
based on the cult of the individual.“ tendered how governments 'uhich bear
responsibility for using the stone bub against imocent civilims' and
mich "fairicated the Zionist state out of whole cloth mile holding in
contemt the Palestinim people's right to exist“ can now I'preame to in-
clude in international cmventions the notion of human rights which they
have lightheartedly sucked elsmre.‘

the bitterness which can be seen in the Malagasy ”revolutim'lesder's
statements cm be easily understood. For exsmle. it is becmse of the
West's occunodating attitude toward South Africa -- the latter posing a

30
FOR 0!?!an USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

permanent. threat to the security of Madagascar -- that the Malagasy govern-
ment has resolved in recent months to orgmlzs aerial defense: military
aviation. which until the end of 1970 had only a few old-fashioned transport
aircraft available, is now using a Mtg-17 squadron put at its disposal by
North Korea (‘). These fighters and their pilots are on low pending de-
livery of the Mig-21 planes on order from the Soviet Union. and the training
of Malagasy pilots now being conducted.

This was a reluctmtly made decision: Madagascar, grappling with a deep
transformation of its economy and social structure, would have liked to de-
vote all of its resources tc these projects, which are very taxing as it is
for a country so lacking in means. Thus, significant efforts are going to
be accepted this year to improve the situation in the vital sectors of trans-
portation and food supplies: the railroads. ports of shoes system date

back to the time of General Gsllieni, are going to be modernized; the suns
will hold true for coastal ports and ships.

with the sme concern for strengthening its con security. the Malagasy
government amid like the swiftest possible settlement for the throbbing
question of the islets scattered around the main island: Basses-de-Indis.
Juan de Nova. the Glorioso Islmds. or Europe, which lie at the limit of
Malagasy territorial waters, or are included within its zoo mile limit of
economic exclusivity, are presently occupied by French meteorologists or
parstroopers, md could be equipped with military means of surveillance or
offensive.

Antanarivo is insistently demanding the restitution of these islets which
were annexed by French sailors or traders beginning in the 17th century.
and later connected to the colony of Madagascar. But Paris, with support
from the lobby of colonization nostalgia new in retreat on Remion Island.
is offering some resistance.

The Democratic Reptbiic of Madagascar has therefore requested the estdalish-
ment of m OAU comittse of inquiry. as as to associate the Africm cm-
nity in the settlement of this problem of liberation of territories still
under colonial tutelage.

['5 Cooperation ostueen Madagascar and North Korea has developed steadily,
particularly since 1971.. It is primarily civilim: there has been tech-
nical assistance in operation of cooperatives md eatwlianent of a rural
bank; preparation of ricefislds aid tractor donations; construction of dose
and hydroelectric plants; installation of a prefwricated housing plat.
and so on. Last 3 Jmuary, in Tanstave. President Ratsiraka inaugurated a
"Palace for Pioneer Children," offered by North Korea, and mid-I cm
receive 20,000 children each year.

COPVRIGHT: 1979 Afriqua-Aaie

11,023
can: we
31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALI

BRIEFS

UDPM CONGRESS AMMOUMCED--Just prior to presiding at the ceremonies held on
20 January to celebrate the 18th anniversary of the founding of the Malian
army. the Malian chief of state. Gen Mousse Traore, announced the scheduling
of the study process and the constituent congress of the Democratic Union
of the Malian People (UDPM), the single and constitutional party of the
country. for 15-17 February and 28-31 March 1979, respectively. The draft
bylaws and internal regulations for this political body just being created
will be discussed and amended according to the "democratic process" by the
base cells, as provided by the 1976 constitution. General Traore answered
those wondering about a return not only to constitutional life but to a
eiVilian regime as well as follows: "since Mali won its independence in
1960, Malian soldiers have been in the same camp as the civilians . . . .
The Malian soldier has never doubted for a single moment that he is the
product of the people, and this explains the events of 1968," i.e. the
military coup d'etat which put the present regime in power. The establish-
ment of the UDPM represents a "crucial phase in the life of the country,"
in the words of the chief of state. It marks the imminent "return to a
normal constitutional life" which will occur this year. On the subject of
the "purge” of the army ranks. General Trsore gave assurance that the main
leaders of the 28 February 1978 plot, Minister of Defense Kissima Doukars.
former Minister of Transport and Public Works Karim Dembele. and former
Security Department Head Tiecoro lagayoko, will be brought before the courts
before the constituent congress of the future party. [Excerpt] [Paris
HARCMES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANEBNS in French 26 Jan 79 p 193] 5157

NOMGOVERMMEMTAL BELGIAN ASS!STAMC£-An agreement calling for a sum of 575
million Malian francs for the development of a gypsum quarry in Tessali

(in the Geo region in the northeastern part of Mali) wee signed on 18 January
in Bamako by the Malian government and a lelgian non-governmental body, Terre
ASBL [non-profit organisation]. The agreement, which comes within the frame-
work of the aid being offered by that organization to the countries in the
process of development. will make it possible to exploit the assets of gypsum
deposits in a neglected part of Mali. According to a plan which will cover
six years. the estimated production of the industrial unit will gradually be
increased from 300 tons in 1979 to 12,000 tons per year. according to Malian
Minister of Industrial Development and Tourism Lsmine Knits, who signed the

agreement on behalf of his country. [Text] [Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET
HEDITERRANEZMS in French 26 Jan 79 p 193] $157

cso: M00 32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIMIQU!

BRIEFS

031M PORT mmmﬁmetruction work on a new fiehing wharf in the port
of Beire will laet all thie year. ending next December. The coat ie eetinated
at 2ll,000 eontoe. The new wharf will be 634 hetero long. Veaeela with e
draft of 30 latere will be able to dock there. Plane call for the building
of a reap for ahip repairezand the inetallation of e five-ton crane. Beeide
the wharf there will be a water area aeeeurins 200 by 100 netere to allow
veuela to maneuver. and en eebanluent zone (acceu to the wharf). where
auxiliary inetallationa will be built (cold etorage facilitiea. ice plante,
cenneriea, filer proceuing induatriee. etc). Other projecta are planned for
the port of Beira. They include, anon: other thinge, the building very eoon
of a wherf with 300 netere of deck were and a terninel at wharf nuaber 10.
There are aleo etudiee underway, one on acceu routee to the port and the
othera. being suede by Korean experte, on the «lunatic railroad network.

[Tort] [Peril M80128 TROPICAUX 31' mums in French 26 Jan 79
p 212] 5157

050: M00

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

BRIEFS

cum omcauouum preeident of the resale-e Republic net with e Cuban
delegation heeded by H: Oecet Ore Mu Olive. chief of eteff at the (Mach
Ministry of Foreign Reletione. on 18 Jenuery. "we diecueeed the menu netting
the develop-ant of reletione between our two countriee poeeible with the
Tozoleee chief of etete." Mt Olive eeid. "He eleo diecueeed the unit

meeting of non-elixir“ countxiee which will be held in Hevene thie yeer.‘
{Text} [Perie mums 1'80?le tr mums in French 26 Jen 79
p 198 5157

680

é

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UGANDA

lNTERNATlONAL REALIGNMENTS SEEN AS PERILOUS FOR AMIN REGlME
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 14 Feb 79 p 22

[Article by Marc Yared: "ldi Alia: the Beginning of the End? "is Forner
Soviet and Libyan Allies Spurn "in. All Africa Disavows Hia"]

[Text] Dozens of people have been killed in the shooting that has been going
on in Kampala since 4 February. Squads of Ugandan oppositionist commandos.
partisans of forner Head of State Milton Oboto. who has been a refugee in
Tanzania since l97l, have destroyed an electric power plant and set fire to
an oil storage tank.

Meanwhile. Tanzanian forces are continuing to advance into Ugandan territory
with the avowed purpose of "causing the fall of dictator Anin." Since their
counteroffensive was launched at the end of January, Tanzanian troops have
destroyed or captured a dozen arnored vehicles, shot down 3 eneay planes

and besieged several towns: Mutukula. Minzino. Xakuntu and others.

The spectacular about-face of Libya and the Soviet Union in favor of Tanzanian
President Julius Nyerere has emphasized not only the deterioration of the aili-
tary situation in the last few weeks but also Uganda's economic and diplonatic
condition. Not only is Libya no longer supplying ldi Anin's regime with cash
and oil, it is also said to have delivered arns to Tanzania. As for the Kremlin,
which outfitted the entire Ugandan air force, it has a military mission in
Dar-es-Salaaa that is supposed to train Tanzanian flight crews in Mig's.

How can the Soviet and Libyan change of attitude toward Uganda be explained?
Colonel Qaddhafi. who was unstinting of his support for ldi Amin in the first
Uganda-Tanzania confrontation in 1972, is said to be furious at the Ugandan
head of state's visit to President Anwar Sadat at the end of October. After
this meeting, the master of Kampala becaae the advocate of the "spirit of Camp
David" and the policy of reconciliation between Egypt and lsrael.

Disagree-eat in Tripoli

There is another factor that Tripoli and Moscow have not been unaware of:
the support of President Nyerere by public opinion and most African govern-
ments. especially those of the "front-line" nations that are opposed to the
segregationist regimes of southern Africa. with a few exceptions. Africa
south of the Sahara makes no secret of disavowing the Ugandan president. who

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR lll-‘l-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

has infringed upon the territorial integrity of a neighboring country in
defiance of the charter of the OAU [Organization of African Unity].

These elements have no doubt played a part. along with Libya's and the Soviet

Union's sympathy for the Tanzanian socialist system, although the humanitarian
socialism advocated by Julius Nyerere is hard to reconcile with the communis-

of Mr Leonid Brezhnev or the islamic democracy of Colonel Qaddhafi.

But that is not the most important thing. Rather, the Soviet Union has always
courted Dar-es-Salaam because it was aware of Tanzania's importance and of
the influence of its diplomacy in the lndian ocean and southern Africa.

Moscow's intervention

NoweVer, Julius syerere, who is ideologically close to Maoist China and is
culturally linked to the English-speaking West, has been careful for a long
time to keep his distance from the Kremlin.

Here. as in the Horn of Africa, war has enabled the Soviet Union to make a
spectacular comeback. Tanzania today, as Ethiopia yesterday. has no other
resources than the military materiel offered by Moscow to confront its neighbor.
Libya. in agreement with the USSR, is snubbing islamlc solidarity, abandoning
ldi Ania (as it did Somali President Siad Barre) in order to convoy urns to
Tanzania and furnish it with subsidies necessary for the war effort.

COPYRIGHT: qunc Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

8782
C50: 4400 END

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY