APPROVED FOR RELEABE: ZOOTIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOO‘I000‘0033-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘RS L/8397

12 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 22/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TIIAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8397
12 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 22/79)

CONTENTS - Pas:

COUNTRY SECTION
FRANCE

Guenn—Chirsc Final Split Traced
(Ghislsine Ottenhsiner; I.‘ EXPRESS, 10 Na: 79)............ l

Briefs
Dissident PCP Intellectuale Predict
Future of car
Barre Insction Assailed
Giscerd Propossl Noted
Military Satellites Reconcnded
PCP's Jeuish Piles

MMO‘G‘O &~

SPAIN

Post-Election Results Published
(MIG 16, 18 mt 79)....0000-sssososooosoossvossoossssts 6

Article Looks Into Reasons for P805 bosses
(“IO 16. la “01' 79)....0oosooosssssoIosssesoooooss_oosos 21

SHEDEN

Before Chief Discusses Ans kport Trsde
(Goren Jonszon: VBCMNS APPARER, 22 Feb 79)............... 32

Jobless Rate Shove Pirst Signs of Drop
(”Ms mm. 22 Feb 79)...0.0000000000000000...too... 37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

GUENA-CHIRAC FINAL SPLIT TRACED
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 10 Mar 79 p 80

[Article by Ghislaine Ottenheimer: "Guena and Chirac, the Story
of their ‘Divorce'“]

[Text] "I'm leaving.” Monday 5 March, 1600 hours, this is the
announcement Yves Gucna, Jacques Chirac's political adviser, has
Just made to him. The president of the RPR [Rally for the Re-
public], tanned and in his shirt sleeves, stretched out on the
bed in his room at the Paris city Hall, loaps up: "Where are you
going?"

"I'm leaving the administration of the RPR. I am your political
adviser, but since I no longer have the means to exercise my
functions, I am giving them up." Yves Guena's announcement re-
calls nearly word for word the utterance of Chirac in August
1976, when he resigned his Job as prime minister. After a weigh-
ty silence, he continues: "I agree with the party line of the
RPR, but I can accept neither the present organization of the
movement nor its attitude toward the parliamentary group. I am
in favor of group unity at any cost. A year age you enjoyed a
remarkable image in the country. But since that time it has
deteriorated. What is more, I believe that you have been mis-

led and that you will end up as nothing. Guena gets up from his
armchair to give more weight to his words.

"Sit down," asks Chirac. "I can't talk to you when you are
standing. Listen, wait. I can ask that much of you. You can't
tell me at 1600 hours that you are leaving at 1700."

”No argument can deter me."

”Wait, you can't realize the blow you are striking at me. I
have plans for you."

“My decision is irrevocable!"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That same morning Guena has his desk at the Rue do Lille emp-
tied in order to get settled in his offices at the Lower House.
In order to avoid any discussion, he will not see any of his
colleagues nor put in an appearance the next day at the RPR cen-
tral committee offices. The news will be made public Tuesday
morning. No interview, no radio, no television. The gesture is
enough. Guena goes back home to the Derdogne.

At the beginning of February, he had conveyed his dissatisfaction:
"I am not even being consulted any longer." The mayor of Paris
had promised to arrange things, but nothing had changed. Before
leaving for the Antilles to attend the parliamentary sessions,
Guena had met with Chirac.

In Guadeloupe, the political adviser of the RPR felt more and
more relegated to the background. He was infonmed about the re-
quest for an extraordinary session at the last minute. After
all, communication between Paris and Pointe-a-Pitre is diffi-
cult. He was not even aware that on 28 February, Chirac had
given an interview to LE MONDE. ”Not true," claimed the members
of Chirac's entourage, "the text had been sent to him by tele-
type." And it actually had been sent, but only several hours
before its publication.

After the initial shock and feelings of sadness caused at the
Chirac headquarters by the departure of this most faithful of all
faithful companions, there followed a defense reflex. Guena was
the only public personality of the former ”gang of four.“ "The
only one acceptable,‘ said the wicked tongues. A follower of

de Gaulle as early as 19 June l9h0, a representative from Peri-
gueux for the past 17 years, a former minister of General de
Gaulle, and a dyed-in-the-woel anti-Giscardian, at the Rue de
Lille, at the headquarters of the RPR, he was the last of the
historical Gaullists; and along with Michel Debre the speaker
most applauded by the militants. A clever debater and a special-
ist in the creation of shock formulas, he was also a valuable
spokesman. With his departure, no one is left in Chirac's entou-
rage except second-generation Gaullists and the followers of Pom-
pidou and Chirac.

After Alain Peyrefitte, Alexandre Sanguinetti and Jerome Monod,
he is now the fourth former secretary general of the movement to
come out in opposition, not to Chirac himself, who remains the
undisputed and indisputable leader, but to Chirac's "secret en-
tourage."

The reaction was immediate. Tuesday afternoon, at the Intercon-
tincntal Hotel, at the meeting of the central con-uttee convened

to prepare for the national sessions on Europe, Chirac explained
that Guena had resigned "for personal reasons."

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"He occasionally had these moods. And in political actions
there is no room for self-doubt,” contidud Charles Pnsqua, the
man in charge. Less than 2“ hours after the announcement or
Guenu's departure, Chirac had found a replacement For him: the
president or the parliamentary group, Cloud Labbe.

Gucna had always been somewhat unbending and at times abrupt
with people. Labbe is conciliatory. He has been able to pre-
serve the unity of the group. “is nomination is a clever way

to recruit representatives on the eve of the European elections.

But here is a strange coincidence: at the moment when the RPR
is hardening its attitude vis-a-vis the Government, Chirac
chooses as political adviser the one RPR official who meets

regularly with the prime minister and the president of the re-
public.

Will he be able to make the voice or the majority heard at RPR
headquarters, in accordance with the promptings of Matisnon; or
will he be persuaded to align himself with the president of the
RPR on non-negotiable issues? when on 28 February at the Pointe-
a-Pitre Airport, Chirac let him know by telephone his decision

to request an extraordinary session of the Lower House, Labbe
replied: ”That is not Gaullist." Twenzy minutes later he came
around to the proposal of Chirac.

COPYRIGHT: 1979, S.A. Groupe Express

8117
050: 3100

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

BRIEFS

DISSIDENT PCP INTELLECTUALS PREDICT-Jrhe 23d [PCP] congress will result

in s return to the policy of dependence on Moscow; it will ssrk the end
of Burccomunise. i‘l‘ext] [Paris PARIS HATCH in French 6 Apr 79 p 67]

FUTURE OF CGT--Edsond Heire [secretary general or the CFDT]. comenting on
the renewed assumption of PC!" control over the CST: "The 23 Herch Perla

demonstration [marked by leftist violence] resembled Soviet tanks crushing
the with congress of the COT end its hopes for future respectability."
[Text] [Paris PARIS HATCR in French 6 Apr 79 p 67]

BARRE INAcrION ASSAILZDuRepresentetives of the sejority end sesbers of
the business conunity ere essailing [Prime Minister Raymond] Berre for
his feilure to buy beck L8 PROGRES, [daily newspaper] of Lyon. or et leest
to prevent its ecquisition by [inn] Ligael, e businesssen "who leens to
the left." They cennot understand how the prise sinister could "throw

away" a depertnent where he use elected and where he still hes ssbitions.
[Text] [Peris venues ACTUBLLBS in French 26 Har 79 p 15]

GISCARD PROPOSAL mm-Velery Giscsrd d'Estsing expects to propose en
sec-crux emit meeting to the Soviet leaders during his forthcosing
official visit to Hoscow. llis trip is being prepered by Edgar Peure,
president of the hence-Soviet Friendship Group in the National Assembly.
Feure seinteins good relations with one of the principal editors of PRAVM,
Yuri Zhukov, and with the vice-president of the presidiun of the Supresle

Soviet, Vessili Kusnetsov. [Text] [Peris VALEURS AC‘l‘UBLISS in French
26 list 79 p 15]

6

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
MILITARY SATELLITE RWDBm-Satellitcs for military applications,
launched by the Arisue rocket, are the latest proJect being recommended
by the general stai‘i‘. France would need two categories of satellites:
one for cmmications (over the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans) and one
for strategic reconnaissance which would increase the credibility of
the nuclear strike force). Texg [Faris VAISURB ALTUEIJBS in French

2Apr79p21

PCF'S JEWISH HLBS--Nunerous Parisian Jews were surprised to receive

a per-mm summon muses 301mm MCI!) de liaison du pun
comniste i‘rsncaie evec la population Juivg] when they had never had
the slightest contact with the PCP. Some received this bulletin st
addresses where they had Just moved in, which fact precluded misuse or
any list of Jewish coununity services wrongly furnished to a political
party. 0a the contrary, this lends credence to the idea that the POP
keeps an eye on this particular cup of citizens. [iris VAIEURS

AGNELIES in beach 2 Apr 79 p 21

080: 3100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION SPAIN

POST-ELECTION RESULTS PUBLISHED
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 18 Mar 79 pp 26-29

[Text] 0n 1 March. Spaniards proved that the long experience of 60 years of
dictatorship has not obliterated their political ideas. and that when they
go to the polls they know for whom they are voting and why.

This is one of the first conclusions that one reaches upon analyzing the re-
sults of the recent elections and comparing them with those of 15 June 1977.

In the two convocations to the polls, Spaniards have maintained virtually
the same voting tr- d, which goes to show that there was no provisional
quality in the 1977 elections, not any voting out of fear, as the Communist
Party claimed to explain its slight success in those elections.

The lack of practice in exercising suffrage caused many political observers
to think that the 1977 elections would show results that were not commen-
surate with those of elections called subsequently.

The Same Trend

The facts proved the contrary. The same voting trend that was noted in 1977
is what occurred 2 years later.

In those first elections, UCD [Democratic Center Union] obtained a total of
274 members of parliament (deputies plus senators); and, on 1 March. it won
287. The PSOE [Spanish Socialist workers Party], in turn, won 183 in 1977,
and the figure on 1 March rose to 189. The PCB [Spanish Communist Party]
vote rose from 21 to 23; and the Democratic Coalition [CD] which. 2 years
ago, appeared as Popular Alliance [AP], is the only one with a decline, from
18 to 11.

0n 1 March, nearly 18 million people voted, and this was the first time that
young adults 18 years of age were entitled to vote.

The inclusion of the latter voters caused the census of 23,935,100 persons
who could vote in 1977 to increase to 26,852,885 this year.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. whereas in 1977 only one out of every five persons abstained from
voting, that percentage has now risen to one out of every three. The 21.6
percent abstention of 2 years ago has increased to 33.6.

A certain amount of weariness caused by the fact that Spaniards have been
called upon to vote four times during the past 2 years. the disillusionsent
over past parliamentary perforaance and the persistence of the serious prob-
lens of unsuployment. terrorism and inflation have been cited as the most
direct causes of the abstention fron the polls.

Voting Discipline

Another feature has also made this year's elections different from those of
1977: the greater abundance at present of political options, particularly
in the leftist spectrum; because a total of 12 comnist parties, four so-
cialist parties and 18 parties of other leftist organizations appeared, as
did 16 right center. and six right and extreme right parties. and also any
other organizations of a local and regional nature.

And there was still another difference: Unlike the situation 2 years ago,

the senators appeared for the 1 March elections backed by the parties; and

the voting discipline operated to such an extent that the senator with the

most votes on 15 June 1977. the Catalonian benet, came out last in Barcelo-
na. and just barely. having been backed by only one party.

The different strategies of the parties did not make any substantial change
in the correlation of parliamentary forces. The 000's "continue governing."
or the 9802's "new alternative in government." or the CD's being "indispen-
sible in the government," and the comists' strategy of precluding the
9803 government only succeeded in outlining a political spectrus very simi-
lar to that of 2 years ago. '

However. some paradoxes resulted from the strategies. For example. the com-
munist vote declined in the two key regions of workers Comitteas [00]: the
Basque Country and Catalonia.

And the P303 lost status in regions with serious unemployment and terrorist
problems, such as Andalusia and the Basque Country, despite the fact that
the issues were major ones in its electoral campaign. and, in both regions.
the P808 was in the asjority in 1977, and the two autonomous entities were
headed by socialists.

But in the regions where unemployment and terrorisn are the major problems
being confronted. there was a spectacular gain for the nationalist parties:
the "abertzales" [patriots] in the Basque Country, and Rojas mrcos' Anda-
lusian Socialist Party [PSA] in Andalusia, where it managed to seat five of

its candidates in congress.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And the disappointment of the Spanish Socialist Hbrkers Party was not much
greater than that of the Communist Party which, although its leaders boasted
over the success accrued in the previous elections in Euskadi. for example,
did not win s single deputy. Nor did thecomnuniatsumnage to enter the
doors of the Senate, from which they are absent.

The election of 1 March likewise demonstrated that Francoism as an electoral
force has been reduced to a very slight factor, because the Democratic Coa-
lition lost nearly a third of the votes that it had won in 1977.

A large number of the votes lost by Popular Alliance appear to have gone to
the Democratic Center Union; which implies that there has been a shift to
the right on the part of the centrists insofar as the composition of their
electorate is concerned.

All the information and graphics were prepared by us. and were devised on
the basis of provisional data of 7 January.

Votes Hon By Parties and Coalitions (in thousands of votes)

1. UCD [Democratic Center Union]: 6,240

2. PSOE [Spanish Socialist workers Party]: 5.1.20

3. PCB [Spanish Communist Party]: 1,915

6. CD [Deaocratic Coalition]: 1.021

5. CU [Convergence and Unityl(catalonia): 670

6. UN [National Union]: 382

7. PSA [Socialist Party of Andalusia]: 330

B. PNV [Basque Nationalist Party]: 274

9. PTE [Spanish Labor Party]: 19a

10. H3 [Harri Batasuna] (Basque Country): 173

11. PSOE(h) [Spanish Socialist Workers Party (historica1)]: 136
12. ER [Republican Left] (Catalonia): 120

13. CRT [Uorkers Revolutionary Organization]: 118

1b. EB [Buskadi Left]: 90

15. Hc-OIC [Communist Movement—Communist Left Organization]: 87
16. UPC [Canary People's Union]: 60

17. IR [Republican Left]: 59

18. BEAM [National Liberation Left Bloc]: 56

19. PC [Carlist Party]: 56

20. PCT [Communist workers Party]: 52

21. LCR [Revolutionary Communist League]: 48

22. PAR [Aragonese Regionalist Party]: 38

23. UPV [Basque Statutory Union]: 35

26. PE-JONS(s) [Traditional Spanish Palange and Falange of the National
Trade Union Action Juntas (authentic)]: 32

25. UP“ [Navarre People's Union]: 29

26. OC/BR [Communist Organization of Spain-Red Flag]: 28
27. UCE [Coalnnist Union of Spain]: 24

28. PL [Liberal Party]: 17

29. PS [Sindicalist Party]: 10

Others: 88

Total valid votes cast: 17,600 8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chart 1.

A Total parlamcnurlos (Congress + Senado)
M. m

281 +1!
I” 4; 6(1)
13 +1

I: u. - 1

Imusa-ahblmmeSPyMWmU
WWI-Wmnhmmummsn 1911.3!
“umwalmummmm
mwmammmmemumm
unintenmauuuu-humuahuukm

 

Key:
A. Total members of Parliament (Congress + Senate)

1. The PSP nembers of Parliament and the Socialist senators are cowined,
although their candidacies had different names in 1977. If only the P503
members of Parliament in Socialist parliamentary groups were considered.
the Spanish Socialist Horkera Party HOuld have won a total of 23 additional
seats instead of the six indicated. in 1979.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

char 1 2 .

A Duptoporclén cnm pnmnnju
dc votos y cannon

Arms "N

“no huh. MD M huh. Mira
N) nn (9) I‘M I9! I“

.——-.-~

UCD ..... 34.7 41.! 4 I16 35.5 47.7 +0.1
P8080) .. 33.7 35.4 0 L? 30.3 34.6 + 3.0
PCB .u... 93 SJ - L5 l03 £3 ‘~ CJ
CD(Z) 8.! 4.6 - 3.1‘ 5.8 1.6 ~ 3.2

("Mon um. minnow“ ISM!" nun-m
y mu m‘l. Ar.

 

Key:
A. Dlsprnportton between percentage of votes and seats

I. The 799.376 votes of the I’SP-US and their six seats co-blned. in 1977

2. In I977. M’ [Popular Mllnnce]
'7. Votes
Ia. Seats

3. Dllleronco

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at: 3.

 

Deputies According to Regions and Rationnltttea

Congress

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(than: la.

Compoolcldn del Scnldo A

 

Key:
A. Composition of the Senate

1. (l) PSP added. (2) in 1977. AP [Popular Alliance]. (3) In 1977. DC [Cata-
lonian Democracy ?|

2 . chl Designation
1. Others

4. Total number of senators

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()l’l’lClM. USE ONLY

Lon die: mdom am voudo; 1 3

Inch .3"qu hum (In-acupu-
W— .
mmnustclo 666.421 P508 Madﬂd

JoupAndnu Audio 616.051 P508 condon-
Amado Benito . . 643.031 UCD Manda
636.736 P808 Imam

Mandi! Cltkl . . 631.351 P808 Damion
Manchu-m ... 629.463 P808 Malta

Juntmnellu ......... 603.597 PSOI! auction.
30““ch . ...... 561.960 lodcp. Barcelona
AIWCuco ... .. ”3.510 PSOE Valencia
Jul-nun ...... 366.7]9 0CD Valencia

 

10 senators winning the cost votes

of votes
.lcs

:rlct

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tom-167 m I
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

1 . Hon sea ta
2. Democratic Coalition

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mus . I‘IU'I :1
.2
I

 

'atioml and Regional Parties

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Kay:

1. Electoral participation
2. Abstention

3. Valid [votes]

6. Invalid [votes]

5. Blank [votes]
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

      

  

Graph 2.
WWMM 1
1 mam-.2133» imam-mam
2 iguana-mm Zmammmm
Key:

A. Political composition of the votes
1. No of voters

2. No of vote.

3. Right

6. Left

5. Center

6. Regional

7. Others

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Graph 30
WWII“ ﬁlm
i] luau 1
, Monro “mu-um. ”an0.: err-ton 601- mm
1. ownAmllﬂouPSOEva‘umewoupu.u-IM
Key: 222;

 

A. Political composition of the Congres-
1. Right

2. Right Center

3. Left

4. Tho independents were added to the UCD parliamentary group. Pour P8P
deputies were added to the 118 fro- the 9508.

19

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0

FOR OFFICIAL U83 ONLY

 

Graph la .
W cm W than"
than N No M
Ma ml
3-0-76 15-6-77 6-0-70 “3-79
Key:

A. Percentage of ebetentione

1. Political reform referendum. 15 Dec 76
2. General elections, 15 Jun 77

3. Conacitutional referendum 6 Dec 78

10. General elections, 1 Her 79

COPYRIGlT: INFORMCION Y PUBLICACIONES S.A., 1978

2909
680: 3110

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040033-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION SPAIN

mucus woxs mm seasons son Psos LOSSES
Madrid cnmxo 16 in Spanish 18 Mar 79 pp 18, 19, 21-23, 25

[Passages enclosed in slantlines printed in italics]

[tact] The P808 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party]
did not win the elections, either in seats-which
it did not count ono-nor in popular votes-which
it did expect to win. It has 4 years now to
correct its mistakes and hopes to win then.

They were all there. On the aorning of Friday, 2 March, the execu-
tive board of the P508 was seated at the table on the first floor of
its headquarters at 165 Calls Garcia Morato, beyond the posters, be-
yond the slogans, the withered roses, the uninhibited shouts of IN-
lipe for presidentI/ and the unopened bottles of chamegne.

milleno Galeote, secretary of propaganda and one of the people
directly responsible for the electoral camaign, opened the sheet of
results. The P508 coluan was not espty but there were large gaps
in Andalusia and Pais Vasco, few votes in Valencia and the three in-
sular provinces, the sane as before in Catalonia and, finally, more
votes in central and western Spain-mew and old Castile, Galicia and

Estrenadura.

Canon Garcia Bloise, secretary of adainistration and finance, has
the ability to not save a auscle, no utter what happens. she lis-
tened to the reading of the results with supreme coolness, her hands
folded. Jose Maria Benegas-ol‘btiki/usecrstary of youth relations,
did not believe it. Enrique Mugica, secretary of political rela-
tions, saw stars or red, white and green as if he had almost drowned
or been hit on the head. Alfonso Guerra, secretary of organization
and the an nest responsible for the electoral caspaign, threw his-
self back in his chair, stretched his legs and tried to relax. He
raised his right hand to his chino-an unconscious gesture, almst a

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tic--and his long forefinger rested on his lips. Ne have not won,
no./

Felipe Gonzalez, first secretary of the P503, was acclained, praised,
envied, coveted and lanented throughout 20 days of hard campaigning
free here to there, from meeting to meeting, favorite and spoiled son
of 100 years of honesty and firmness, the one in who- Pablo lglesias
would have placed all his hopes. Now he is not going to invoke the
Moncloa pact, is not going to tell oebreros /I an sorry, you will
have to deal with us/ because Cebreros will not need to deal with
then.

Fear of (mange

"None of us expected to win in the sense of obtaining the absolute
majority in Congress. We calculated that there were 300 seats to be
divided anong the use [Democratic Center Union], P808 and co [oeso-
cratic Convergence]. And there were. However, we gave on between

20 and 25 seats which would have left 150 for the mo and up to 145
seats as nxinun for us or 130 in the worst of cases. The mistake
was not to foresee the danage of the CD which enlarged Suares' group,"
Julio l-‘eo, sociologist and Felipe Gonzales' coordinator of public
appearances during the caapaign, told this magazine.

But the socialists do not feel that they have lost these elections.
"We have not won then--that is different--but we have not lost," Ja-
vier Solana, press secretary and nenber of the executive board of
the P508, said. The official explanation of the results, according
to Miguel Hole: and Pedro Parana who wrote this report, is sumrizod
in a few words: fear of change.

Julio Feo insisted that fear ceaented the right to the LCD.- "For
example, in warez' last speech on television, he acted deaagogic
and provoked a vote of fear. ‘me fear of change affected nany of
our 1977 votersnthe petite bourgeoisie with a high cultural level--
and they voted conservative this tine. In 1977 it was necessary to
bring about democracy; it was alnost necessary to vote Francoist or
anti-Francoist so they voted for the P508. This tine it was neces-
sary to choose between continuing with the known or voting for a
change. They did not want to know anything about that so the mo
sounded better to then."

General Dishonesty
In the interminable press conference-«lust 3 hours--that Felipe
Gonzalez held with reporters on Saturday, 3 March, the socialist

leader went further and spoke of the general dishonesty of the uco
antisocialist campaign. He cited era-ples like the arrest of the

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

candidate in Guipuzcoa, Herri Batasuna (Popular Unity). Telesforo
Monzon was used to strengthen the image of the {ED and its government
in the antiterrorist fight and the use of photographs and movies of
Suarez with the King were used as if the latter supported Suarez.

According to Felipe Gonzalez, the LCD was very irresponsible in these
cases in order to win the vote of fear and take votes away from the
P503. "We, on the other hand, made a civic presentation to solve the
serious problems of this country at their roots. In Pais Vasco, for
example, we tried to prevent radicalization. The uco insulted Bale-
gas because he spoke of dialoging with the ETA [Basque Fatherland and
Liberty Group] and now they have them in the Parliament. At meetings
I publicly asked for support for the forces of public order. This
was risky because, in some ways, it demanded a lot from our elector-
ate but, nevertheless. they applauded."

Go to the Opposition

"For those reasons. I have not congratulated Suarez. I am happy
about the success of the uco and I hope that it governs this country
as it should. We socialists promise that we will not force early
elections but will wait for 4 years of UCD government because we be-
lieve that the country deserves this period of stability. We go to
the opposition which does not hurt us. But I have not called nor am
I going to call Suarez to congratulate him because he acted dishon-
estly. He cannot state, as he has, that the um victory consolidates
a certain model of democracy because it does not have any model. It
would suffice for me to remind him, to show him, that barely 3 years
ago I was the secretary general of the P503 and he had the same posi-
tion in the National Moveaent. I am speaking of 3 years ago when the
old man was already dead and buried. Nevertheless, we did not bring

any of this out in the campaign."

"I prefer not to speak of the PCB [Spanish Con-unist Party]." The so-
cialists are "burned" by the communist campaign, by the injuries of
leftist comrades who added to the motto of lloo years of honesty and
firmness/ the marginal note of /and 40 years of vacation/.

"The old socialists who have fought for democracy, who have suffered
imprisonment and exile, do not deserve that." To Felipe Gonzalez,
the PCB campaign was shamefully dirty.

There Were Also Mistakes

Francisco Bustelo, new senator from Madrid and the person who won
the largest number of votes in all Spain, thinks that the "relative"
electoral loss of his party might have been due to an overly trium-
phal and superficial presentation. "The conviction that we were

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR IWFICIM. USP. UNIX

going to win the elections spread throughout the party and we pre-
sented ourselves as little more than a short-term alternative to
solve the pending problems. Since this presentation was not convin-
cing because there are no airaculous solutions to unusploynent, for
example, there were people who, reluctantly no doubt. chose the
known evil."

llustelo felt that there sight have been soae haste in the presenta-
tion of the socialist bid for government. "The benefits of the left
cone frets advocating ethical changes in the country, sedting in the
people the fiber of generosity and solidarity during a difficult po-
litical and economic situation. nut it became a tochnocratic

campaign. "

In the meeting or the executive board, the crestfallen socialist
leaders tried to outline some reasons to explain to thmselves why
they did not win. "Yes. where we had minute responsibility in the
preautonotnous regions. we lost positions. It is clear that in Paie
Vasco and Andalusia and partially in Valencia. the Inn government
did not want to give political content to centers of power that it
did not dominate. We have not been able to do anything concrete fac-
ing terrorism in Pais Vasco or uneaployaent in Andalusia; we have not
been able to do more than give statements. We have exhausted our-
selves with words."

Now it turns out that the stem of the rose did have thorns and that
the road was not strewn with rose petals. The leaders placed the
target very high and in the end did not even graze it. "We have
cheated the voters and we have cheated the nembers but the curious
part of the case is that everything second to indicate that we were
going to win."

When the campaign began, the P508 :ieply wanted to make a large bet
that they were heading for the governaent--unstoppable--with a seri-
ous party program and a different option of exercise of power.

“As the days passed, we ourselves warned up; we began to believe

that we could attain even more. mere are the polls that do not lie;
1 days before the elections they had us equal with the me. Now it
is very easy to say that our own enthusiasa scared the electorate,"
said a somber of the executive board.

Javier Selena was not conpletely in agreenent with that analysis.
"We never said that we were going to win more seats than the um. I
would like it remembered that the most we dared to say was that we
would win in popular votes. 1 deny that ours was a triumphal can-
paign: I deny that the executive board gave the feeling that we ce-
veted the ministries. we presented a bold but not foolhardy cats-
paign because we thought that the people were ready for change."

24
FUR dFFICIM. I'SII "SLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Open Breaches

This theory seens to be part of the official version but free Selena,
it is eoro oredible. "I believe that this was the tine to displace
the right. In fact, we did displace the right free its traditional
fiefs, not totally but we opened breaches in the two Castiles, in
Galicia and in Betrqaadura and that was very difficult. this was a
positive aspect of tho elections for us."

"We had to be bold if we wanted to take a giant leap,” St .na con-
tinued, "to elect 140 deputies. to keep the use free governing alone.
nut, of course, we should have protected our positions in other
areas.” That is where Selena introduced tho argueent of fear.

Canpa ion Approved

The truth is that perhaps the socialists are harder on the-solves
than the rest are. Pedro Seeperu. 36 years old. has spent 14 years
in public relations: he is a spezialist in seaeielogical studies and
creative director of an iaportant fire that does not do political
publicity because its statutes prevent it. He believes that "the
P808 caepeign was good. solid. consistent and unidirectional. It was
perhaps the best of all. 'lhus it is necessary to look for other
causes for the P508 loss--although I prefer to call it the Inonvic-
tery/o-than the caepaign.”

Miguel Martinez Cuadrade. professor of political law and electoral
sociology. also had a good opinion of the results obtained by the
P508. "mm has to be the priee concern to all parties is absten-
tion which was very high. But I would not call it a socialist loss.
It would certainly be a disappointaent because there were swollen ex-
pectations based on unreliable polls. Also the caepaign presentation
was hareful for the P508. ‘rhe socialists presented the-selves as an
alternative because the electoral systea invites the alternation of
two parties in power. But the 000 was not trying for that but for
hcgonony. aided by the PCB in its attacks on the P508. I conclude,
consequently, that the present electoral law oust be changed."

Identity Proble-

Professor Dieter Nohlen, assistant director of the Political Science
Institute of the University of Heidelberg (FRO), felt that the elec-
tions eeant "a consolidation of the forces of the left and, gener-
ally. of the structure of the abanish electorate. As to the P503.
it can still expand its positions.“

Josep Maria Valles. professor at the Antone-a of Barcelona and dir-
ector of the electoral sociology teas, felt that the P508 results of

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L?
mu tll-‘FICIM. "SE UNIX

the elections "are part of the general problem of the [European left
in finding its image during a total international econenic crisis;

it has an identity problen aggravated by the interclusist positions
that the right adopts in order to adapt itself to that same crisis."

Heads to Roll?

The professorial explanations sound like nonsense to the mubers.
"Too much theory," they told CAMBXO 16. "It is necessary to question
soae concrete actions like those of llnrique Mugica or Alfonse Guerra."

Javier Selena flatly denied that there had been any quarrel that Fri-
day at the aeetine of the full executive board. However, other sour-
ces stated that coarade Felipe had soae words with coarade mrique.
"me press conference which Mugica held with Martin villa on the sub-
ject of terrorism cost us at lenst one deputy in Guipuzcea."

The criticism also extended to Mugica's determination to head the
slate in Guipnscoa. the district of the radical Iabertzalesl. after
the public confrontations that the socialist leader had recently with
the nesque nationalist sectors.

"The Guipuscoa slate should have been headed by aenegas and even then
we might have been hurt.” socialist sources consented to CMBlO 16,
"because we have coeaitted mistakes here. he did not even elect

Eduardo Lopez Albizu. secretary of union relations for the party.
who is free Portunalete and was third in Viscaya."

In merid it was lamented that the socialist atteapt to serve as a
bridge between the native comnity and the emigrant group did not
work. "We lost votes on two sides» the nationalist and the unionist,"
members of the executive board recognized.

it is true that an important debate has Just begun in Basque social-
ism about which side it must lean toward because the role as bridge
that it wanted to assume served only to provoke accusations of
ambiguity.

It is better not to mention Andalusia. "This has been aentimed to
us a lot because the key positions of the erecutive board are detai-
nated by Andalusians: Felipe Gonzalez, Alfonso Guerra. Luis Yanez,

Guillermo Galeote. Rafael ltallesteros...."
Pay the Bill
Alejandro Rojas-Marcos. leader of the PSA {Socialist Party of Anda-

lusia] (which new prefers to call itself PSA-Andalusian Party) and
center of the greatest electoral surprise to everyone except himself ,

26

PM! -|Z-"r'l(‘lf\i. I'SI' ”NI."
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

found the results perfectly logical. "They believed that the Andalu-
sian option ended on 15 June 1977. ‘lhey caapaigned here not to save
Andalusia but to go to the governaent which was a mistake. On the
other hand, we have spent 15 years depending the identity of the An-
dalusian people and now the people recognize us as their specific de-
fenders," he told Santiago Trevor of CAMBIO lo in Seville.

"The Pact of the Betis"

The Madrid Socialist Federation was not especially satisfied either
with the interest that the head of the slate for Madrid, Felipe Gon-
zalez, took in its electoral district. "It was assumed that we had
to win totally and this was not true."

Many socialists coaplained that in mdrid the alliance with the ex-
tinct P5P [People's Socialist Party] was not noted at all. "These
votes went to the "CD and the PCB and very few reaained with Tierno."
This was note or less the saae thing that happened throughout Spain
but the Madrid P508 comlained about it.

If the Basque and the Andalusian results are compared-as soae people
have done--aore than one socialist nenber thinks that what actually
failed is what the incorrigible Pablo Castellano baptised /the pact
of the Betisl. the understanding between Basques Nicolas Redondo and
Enrique Mugica Mersog. It put on the scale the strength of the Gen-
eral Union of Workers and the understanding with the Cereans and Se-
villians Felipe Gonzalez and Alfonso Guerra who offered a new iaage
of the party and a demonstrated organizatiOnal ability to ieprove

the deteriorated situation in which the old aeabers had left the
Socialist Party in the interior.

"An overall analysis has to lead us to the conclusion that an entire
party policy has failed. Its errors were excessive centralisa, deci-
sion-making free above, lack of participation of the embers, eliai-
nation of the critical spirit, forgetting laborisn, etc. All these
aatters will have to be aired in the next congress."

Senator Francisco mstelo, considered a radical within the party and
a aeeber of the executive board who was fired-resigned along with

Pablo Castellane because of the Basque-Andalusian push, was not coe-
pletely in agreeaent with that analysis free other socialist sectors.
but he recognized that the party has to criticize itself and restudy

any questions.

austelo noted: ”We have to reflect seriously on the fact that the
right has not only won the elections but it has managed to capital-
ize on the end of the dictatorship. The left has been forced to
aoderate its deeands and to support the passage toward deaocracy.
precisely to avoid any risk of regression in this delicate process."

27
FOR OFFICIAL PSE ONLY
FUR (IFFICIAI. "33H UNIX

"If we had wen, we could have spoken or the brilliant foresight of
the left to have accepted a process of slow change and to have capi-
talized on it to accede finally to the govern-ent with guarantees of
remaining in it. However. the left lent its support of democracy to
the right without knowing how to explain to the people all the risks
and the sacrifice: that they have had to face and without having ex-
plained to them the advantages that they consciously gave to the
right. Thus the right exited unharmed, with its political and econo-
mic means almost intact, from 40 years of a dictatorship with which
it actively collaborated."

Excessive Utopianism

Bustelo combined this inability of the P508 to unmask the right with
the exeessive utopianism or the objectives or the electoral campaign
to explain the relative electoral loss. However, also, "those two
aspects combine with an evil that has afflicted us recently--
excessive homogenization of the party. It was not easy to 90 from a
party with a few hundred members to a party of the masses with 100,000
members and 2.000 local groups. That evil (austelo did not want to
speak of control) has hindered the strengthening of the organization
and maximum exploitation of the most valuable element of socialism:
its members and sympathizers."

Javier Selena. member of the executive board and included. therefore,
in the general criticism or austelo, was ready to admit that it has
operated perhaps in a "nonsocialist" style.

Soiana said: 'we trhxlthe frontal attack against the right with the
convictiOn that society wanted change which today only we, the so-
cialists, can offer. We did not achieve this but I believe that ours
was not a foelhardy proposal. There were sufficient reasons to de-
duce that society was inclined in that direction, that the Spanish
society as a whole is progressive."

Return to the Sources

'nul we have erified that it still fears change, it has been fright-
cued, and the right has exploited that fear," Selena meditated out
loud. "we have 4 years now. We will act with the method that the
Socialist Party has used historically: to change society, to inpreg-
nate it with socialism, to open more Houses of the People, to reach
all the corners of the country, to spread out the culture, to fight
against corruption and to make honesty a goal of all the people. If
we had wen, we would have done all this from the top. Now we will
do it from below.“

Alfonso Guerra's phrase that "the people have lost a historic oppor-
tunity," a disagreeable phrase to many socialists, remains behind.

an
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Rose Has Not Died

The general elections rennin behind. In the carpaign the P508 lead-
ers gave the sensation of being in a hurry to occupy ministries.

A year and a half of consensus rennin behind which the socialists
feel were harmful for then but they accepted it for the sake of the
approved constitution and they defended it as their style of politics.

Many nistakes in the treatuent of the autononous problems relain be-
hind which see-ed to belie the federalist vocation of the P508.

"We have 4 years of isprovenent left. We will win in 1983." Javier
Solana sailed openly.

Alfonso Guerra: "Spain Believed That We Were Going to win"

In a very snall office, 2 by 3 neters, Alfonso Guerra, secretary of
organisation of the P508 and the one responsible for its electoral
caspaign, eaerged froa behind the little table filled with books.

papers. reports and press clippings.

He bore it all, supervised it all, did it all. In addition, he hold
as neetings in his electoral districto-Seville-during the 20 days
of canpaign. took care of the national canpaign fron his office in
mdrid. prepared for the next party congress in May and read several
books, the last being "Variaciones psicoanaliticas sobre un tesa de
Mahler" by Theodor Reik, published by Taurus.

CAMBIO lo: In Seville, the 9503 lost a seat at the expense of the
PSA.

Alfonso Guerra: We won in Seville, in all the places where I held
aeetings. The PSA won more votes than anyone, even more than the
UCI) in ecija and El vise del Alcor where it had the first two candi-
dates. This helped it. I say that the P508 has not lost a seat but
the PSA won it with a denagogic and shaaeful canpaign but it won.

(‘AMBIO 16: In Pais Vasco, the P508 suffered a notable regression.

Guerra: Abstention hurt us, the fact that everyone went against us
hurt us. the irresponsibility of the UCD hurt us and having to pre-
side over a preautonoeous region in Andalusia which this govern-ant
torpedoed because we headed it hurt us....rhe comunications media--
the public ones. of course, but also private ones like CAMBIO 16--
hurt us.

I only hear questions about these cases but not about other regions.
Now we are further ahead than we were on ls June. We have achieved

29

FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the global implantation of the party in all Spain; we have opened
breaches in the right's tiers. That is good for us. One seat where
we did not have any is more valuable than an additional seat where
we had four.

CANDID 16: What has fail-d then?

Guerra: In every electoral process, the vote is decided based on
three things: identification with the party, the stimuli that are
received and reflection on the consequences or the vote. ‘nle degree
of voter identification with the 95013 is satisfactory; we have main-
tained our percentage of votes.

The stimulus during the canlpaign was strongly in favor of the P508.
The feeling of a winner was created between the party and the voters.
The possibility of winning in absolute terms was within reach and

that created a sudden change. Perhaps we should have slowed down
but it was impossible.

That change was unstoppable. Many were ﬁightened; they believed
that a socialist government was possible. Many people identified
that fear with what Suarez interred in his last speech on television.
Suarez did not provoke tear of the 9508 but he had it, showed it and
many people identified with him.

CAHBIO 16: Then the socialist campaign should have anticipated that
reaction. Man't it a foolhardy campaign?

Guerra: Poolhardy? The polls told us that we were winning seats,
that the electorate identified more and more with us. All Spain be-
lieved that we were going to win. It was not a belief or four crazy
men meeting in our offices. We connected with the people.

Thus I said that a historic opportunity has been lost because after
having fascinated society with the idea of change, part of that so-
ciety became frightened. of course, that first phrase was isolated
from the context in which I said it.

W810 16: And now what?

Guerra: Well, we go to the responsible opposition and we go on to
convince the country of the ethical revolution that has to occur. to
raise the moral awareness of the people. to make the worker aware
that he cannot collect unemployment insurance and have a job secretly.
We will have a party like the Austrian Socialist Party that moves 1
million citizens in the elections and campaigns door to door, family
by family.

30

FOR "HFICIAL "5F ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That takes tine; to inpregnete eocielisn and honesty in a society
that inherited the corruption of the dictatorship takes tine. How-
ever, I would agein do what we have done. me train or change
peered by end we hnd to do everything poesible to catch it.

COPYRIGer Infomeion y Publicaciones, s.A., 1978.

7717
C80: 3110

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION swam

BOWRS CHIEF DI acussas ARMS EXPORT TRADE
Stockholm VBCKANS M'FNU‘IR in Swedish 22 Feb 79 p 35-37
[Article by Goran Jonnzon: "Bofors Must Double Arms Export/'l

[Text] "Boi'ors must almost double its export of defense
equipment in the next few yearn in order to canpenaate
for shrinking Swedish defense orders ," said Before chief
Claea-Ulrik Winberg. ”The very life of the concern
depends on the production-~and exportnof arms."

Boi‘ors chief Claes-Ulrik Hinberg is widely known as a kind man, who is
objective about his Job. But that does not mean he is afraid to speak out
or stick out his chin when confronted with the new "popular tenets” in the
defense debate. for example.

"There is much talk about alternative production in the defense industry
today," he said. "As far as Boi‘ors is concerned, my only comment is--forget
it!"

According to Clara-U] rik Hinberg, butter cannot replace cannons in Karlskoga.

"That in an impossibility," he said. "Everything else is Just wishful think-
Ing, which serVes no practical purpose. Bofors now employs 8,500 in Karlskoga,
of which 5,000 are involved in the production of defense equipment, 1,500 in
the chemical sector and 2,000 in the steel sector. But there is a direct
connection between these areas of activity. Arms constitute the basic pro-
duction. which holds the company together. Chemicals and steel are functions
of the arms production, so to speak."

19y eliminating the arms sector, they remove the basis for both chemicals and
steel.

furthermore, they have problems with the steel sector and it will eventually
be phased out or restructured. Despite increased sales of roughly 20 to 600
million kronor last year, the result is negative. losses, which in 1977

amounted to 515 million kronor, will be about the same for 1978, according to

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VRKANS mmn'a estimates. The steel sector reduced its employees by
150 in 1978.

Developments in the chemical sector, on the other hand, were positive, both
with respect to sales and results. Sales which were developed in this area

a few years ago will continue, not least in the United States. Hostever, the
chemical sector is closely tied to arms production. And, in spite of the
improved sales in the chemical sector, it can hardly remain independent of
defense equipment productionu-at least not without considerable restructuring.

Hence, Bofors as a whole is dependent upon the production of defense equip-
ment. Bofors could be in a difficult position due to the greatly reduced
volume of domestic arms sales, but the company has been very successful in

the export market area and currently has orders extending over the next It
years, according to Claes-Ulrik Winberg.

"As we clearly see from incoming orders, there is a large global need for
our products," said Clacs-Ulrik Winberg. "Orders are also gradually increas-
ing in one sector as we lose them in another. Our investment program also
tells the message of our belief in the future. Having invested 129 million

kronor in new construction already, we decided to invest another 13': million
kronor last year.”

Bofors is doing well in spite of reduced defense spending in aleden, which
is one of the company's largest customers.

Due to the greatly reduced appropriations for defense materials in Sweden,
Bofor's domestic sales will decline from approximately 500 to 600 million
kronor per year over the last few years to 100 to 200 million hronor per
year over the next few years.

The company's total sales today (1978) are approximately 2.7 billion kronor
and, directly or indirectly, about 50 percent of these sales mt represent
defense equipment in order for Borers to survive.

In the last few years about 50 percent of the company's arms production has
been exported. In 1978 the sale of arms amounted to over 1.2 billion kronor.

Sweden bought arms from Bofors for over 600 million kronor and thus half of
the essential defense money came Rom the domestic market.

Export Should Be Increased by One Billion

With only 100 to 200 million kronor coming from the domestic market, Bofors'
export must account for about 800 to 900 million kronor. It should prefer-
ably exceed one billion kronor.

1111:: means that Bofors' annual export volume must equal Sweden's total arms
export today.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"or mun-no. we have long been aware of the expected cuts in Swedish defense
:zpmulim: and ham: netml aecnrdivmly," mud Clacn-Ulrik "lnberg. "Our aim
hax: [mum to ntay nomwhat ahead oi‘ the developments. Nobody knows how much
money will be appropriated for national defense in Sueden in the ﬁxture, but
the way it looks now, we must export 80 to 90 percent of our arms production
in order to maintain the present volume. 1 want to emphasize, however, that
we had planned to develop the export market anyway."

This aim toward the export market will hardly aid Claes-Ulrik Hinberg's
popularity as far as the defense debate is concerned. At least not along

those who demand that Sueden cut its already sharply reduced ams export
to an absolute minimum.

"There is unparalleled bigotry in this issue," said Claes-Ulrik Hinbcrg,
sticking out his chin a bit farther. "01' course, there has to be regulations
that coincide with the overall foreign policy and these regulations must also
be adhered to. But interpretations cannot be made in absurdum. lbst coun-
tries have a defense program, like Sweden. They should also have the oppor-
tunity to purchase the arms they deem necessary and be able to choose their
business partners. We must also keep in mind that if a country wants to

misuse its power and engage in war, it needs Just as many trucks and potatoes
as It does bullets and gunpowder."

In that connection Claes-Ulrik Hinberg points to what is generally known as
the Swedish inconsistency. "For example, we do not want to sell weapons to

Cuba," he said. "But Cuba gets mssive aid from Sweden and wages war on
another continent-~in Africa."

Growing lhrkets

Nevertheless, there is a growing "legal" market for Boi‘ors and the Swedish
defense industry. "Primarily in Europe," said Claes-Ulrik Hinberg. "But
an increasing number of foreign countries are also going demcratic, which
mean: that we could have more customers for our products. It is completely
realistic to believe that we can make up in exports what we lose in domestic
sales. however, this presupposes normalization of our export regulations."

The world's total export of defense materials (weapons systems only, not
com-nunications and the like) can be valued at 60 billion kronor today. There

are five main exporting countries and, together, they provide 83 percent of
the total export. This is the top list:

USA 23 billion kronor

Soviet Union 16 billion kronor
France 1% billion kronor

West Germany 3 billion kronor
England 3 billion kronor

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'me largest importer in Iran, which before the crisis bought arms worth

6.5 billion kronor, primarily true the United States. Other large importers
include Israel (h .2 billion), Iraq (3.“ billion) and Libya (3.3 billion).
All of the large buyers are located in the Middle East. Sueden, with experts
totaling one billion kronor (695 million kronor in 197'! and 502 million
kronor in 1976) and supplying a large number of countries throughout prac-
tically the entire world outside the Middle East, is not ever a dwarf among
the giants.

According to Claes-Ulrih Winberg, heirever, there is still room for the
Swedish defense industry on the export market because of its special compe-
tence and its weapons system, which perhaps more than those of any other
country bear the mark of "self defense." This will become an increasingly
important feature, especially for smaller nations, which want to avoid build-
ing defenses that could be characterized as aggressive.

“He knew we have attractive products that will sell if we can only get per-
mission to do so," said Glace-Ulrik Hinberg. ”We do not have to violate the
regulations concerning our special defensive weapons system either. An air-
dei‘ense cannon or missile is designed to stop attacking planes that fly across
one's territory. They are not offensive weapons."

As far as Bofors is concerned, however, the strategy must remain offensive,
according to Class-Ulrik Hinberg. He maintains it is best to avoid "sub-
sidization” or being supported by federal subsidies. He does not want to
think of Borers in those terms.

"Look at the shipyards today," he said. "They are not selling more ships
because they are government-owned. To sell below production costs with the
aid of government subsidies only leads to the preservation of weak companies.
Nobody benefits from that in the long run. Our planning must be offensive--
and foresighted."

New Trmp

In previous years Before manufactured a big seller on the world market. It
was the legendary ho millimeter air-defense cannon, which the company sold
(or licensed) to many countries throughout the world, including the great
powers. this cannon has now been improved, featuring advanced electronic

sighting equipment.

But the significant new trump is Robot 70. This is a simple missile system
(used in fighting low-flying airplanes), which can be carried by three sol-
diers and operated by one. 'Ihe missile "rides" to its target on a laser beam.

"'ihere is great interest in this weapons system, " said Class-Ulrik Hinberg.
"So far we have sold it to Sleden and N0). ay, but all indications are we will
get orders from other countries this year."

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Robot 'I() in now being tested by several NATO countries and this wenponn
ayntem could become standard NATO equipment. If that happens, Claus-Ulrik
Winherg definitely does not have to worry about the export volume for a
long time to come-«1 nomnl series costn 100 million kronor. Missiles and
mixnllc systems will become key words for Boi‘ors in the future.

"Together with Stub Scunia we have established It special corporation, Saab
Borers Missile Corporation AD, which will develop the missile system.
kaetwine, we will continue to he on the offensiVe with our missile system."

COPYRIGHT: Ahlens 8c Merlundt tryckerier, Stockholm 1979

{3952
CW: 3109

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION WEBB!

JOBLBSS RATE sums FIRST SIGNS OF DR)?
Stockholm vacuums AFFARER in Svedish 22 Feb 79 p 7

[Text] Some 1016,000 persons could not find regular work
or were unemployed in January. He have thus reached a
peak in the economic slump and a reversal is on the way.
Employment agencies listed twice as many Job openings at
the end of January this year as in January last year.

It it very possible that the unemployment figures for Jammry might be the
worst in this economic slump. January is always the worst month of the year
as far as employment is concerned and it is believed that industrial employ-

ment will pick up again sometime in 1979.

Unemployment figures changed very little in the last year. This was true of
official unemployment figures as well as the sum of all the categories listed
in the diagram, which do not have "normal" employment.

From January last year official unemployment figures went up by 7,000, to
117,000. me increase represented unemployment among youth--ages 16 to 210
being responsible for almost the entire increase.

But while official unemployment figures were held down by the 25-krona last
year, the emphasis will be on service work this year. And if we total all
those who are employed in service work, protected and half protected work
etc. and include the growth in the labor market, the increase was quite
moderate. The total figure rose from 290,000 to 296,000.

without all the government aid measures, youth unemployment, in particular,
would have been considerably higher. Between 1975 and 1979 the number of
youth (16 to 215 years old) involved in service work grew from 3,000 to
I01,000. There was not much change in the number of older persons involved
in service work-origures rose from 13,000 to 19,000.

37

FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' :3"qu I ne rem: inp.

r--. "v in still a downward trend In industrial employment, but this trend
-u.;uJ.d reVerm: llnelf in 19:"). 'lhe demand is already growing. asployment

agencies listed thCe ns many Jon openings in January this year as in the
name month but year.

'lhix: means we can expect a certain increase in industrial employment before
the end of this year. It will hardly be more than one to two percent, i.e.,
10.000 to 20,000 persons. Next year the increase could be much greater.

l-hny fear that indunLry'r. Increased demnd for workers will rapidly lead to
a labor shortage and an increase in wagen.

it is true that there are not that many workerr. available. Official unem-
Plﬁmcm- in January only represented 2." percent of the labor force--a very

low figure internationally. The nVerage unemployment for all of 1978 war.
only 2.3 percent.

However, a lame marina-r of persons who are now invoked in political service
Jobs will get into the regular labor market when the economic situation
imprch::. if we include these categories, we should have 7.1 percent
"mnemployment" (296,000 persons). or course, this figure cannot be compared
with official unemployment figures in other countries. But the figure does
show that there are almost 300,000 persons in the labor market who do not
have "regular" John. Even if we disregard the 118,000 persons involved in
protected or half protected work and several more in other Am activities,
there are still more than 300,000 persons who should be available for indus-
trial recruitment.

‘iherv, should to even more people available in the two top categories shown

in thr» diagram: among the latent Job seekers, who have not looked for a Job
but who are willing and able to work, and among the partially unesployed, who
work part time because they cannot get full-time employment.

it Mere Sitlegish Labor Market

: l the Later market is, indeed, more sluggish now than it was earlier. "my
40 not want industrial employment. Others do not want or cannot now to
another Job. But it is still hard to believe that industry's ra.her moderate
need for workers will not be satisfied in the next few years. There will be
cor-.Iinued minimal use of capacity.

COPYRIGHT: Malena 8: Akerlundt tryckerler, Stockholm 1979
R952
cm: 3109 EN!)

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY