APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDP02-00000R000100030016-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8312

6 March 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR. MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
FOUO No. 454

IL S.J(DHQT'PUBLKDAJTCH4$ RESEJNRCFISERVNCIL

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horda or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied.asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items‘are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100030015-1

alouooaamc can I. um“ No. ;
near .1988 Ll8312

uea “no

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS,
No. 454

1. Amber“)

9. ‘ Otaaalaaﬂea Rose a“ Mama

Joint Publicatlona Raaearcb Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

ll. Speech. Guahaeloe Naoe and Menu
Aa above

ll» Supple-tam, Nana

- A mm

The eerlll report contains intonation prtnarlly from French
and pertinent apeclallred journal. on French nuclear, nlull

reaearcb and develop-sent.

. ' y ' aaadDaeaneu Aaalnu. a. 00ch

France

weapon.
Aeronautic:
mullea

nuclear Technology

In. Mien/Opera“ Tune

in court rule/an 160, 18!, 19!. 223

Availabllm 5mm 0‘ any
For Offlclal Use Only. " '

Matted Number of Coplea Available From JPRS. 5' . W7 '

 

'0. I'D... 0."!

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030015-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/E
6 March

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS

Fn"9 No. 454

CONTENTS

Navel Crotsle Missile Deliveries for 1979 Noted
(Pierre Lengereux: AIR 6 COSMOS, 3 Feb 79) ..................

Arisne Erected at Guiana Space Center
(Pierre Lengereux; AIR 6 COSHOS. 3 Feb 79) ..................

SLBM Test in 1980 Plenned
(AIR 5 COSMOS, 3 Feb 79) ....................................

Arisne Preleunch Preparations Detailed
(Pierre Lsngereux; AIR & COSMOS, 13 Jan 79) .................

Arisne 1979-1980 Test Schedule Reviewed
(Pierre Lsngereux; AIR & COSMOS. 27 Jen 79) .................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NAVAL CROTALR MISSILE DELIVERIBS POR 1979 ROTBD
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 3 Feb 79 p 32

[Article by Pierre Iangereux: "Pour Naval Crotsle Weapon Systems To Be
Delivered in 1979"]

[Text] Pour Crotsle naval surface-to-eir weapon systems built by Thomson-CS?
will be delivered to the Prench Navy this year. The first system will equip
the frigate Duguay-Trouin (P67 class).

Late last year. see trials of the navel Crotsle entered the phase in which
the missiles are launched against targets under operational conditions. This
second test phase is to continue throughout the coming weeks with additional
firings. Upon completion of these test firings this summer. the naval
Crotsle system will be placed in operational service.

This new test series follows a series conducted with the first two Crotsle
systess installed on the French Navy's test ship Ile d'Oleron end the de-
stroyer Georges Leygues (070 class). These initial tests were designed to
check the Crotsle's fire control system, its missile shipboard storage and
loading system developed by the OTC" [Technical Directorate for Naval Archi-
tecture and Marine Engineering]. and fire dummy missiles to check operation
of the launchers. All these systems performed satisfactorily.

In one of these test firings conducted during December at the Mediterranean
Test Center. the Crotsle missile intercepted a CT-ZO target drone. For

this particular firing. the missile's warhead had been replaced L; a tele-
metry unit. The missile hit and destroyed the tsrget--simulsting an attack
on the test ship Ile d'01eron--at a range in excess of 6.000 meters. This
direct hit from a ship subjected to the platform movesents of s medium-state
sea. demonstreted the effectiveness of the servocontrols of the mount for the
radar that stabilizes the line of sight and guides the missile. These two
functions use the same programmable digital computer.

The navel version of the Crotsle missile is identical to the French Air
Force's Crotsle and uses the same subassemblies es missiles designed for the
new “IO-kilometer surface-to-eir systems." including the Shahine. developed

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF‘ICIAL USE ONLY

by Thomsson-CSF. The Crotale missile is normally equipped with an infrared
proximity fuse and armed with a lS—kilogram warhead producing a burst of
fragments localized in time and space. the fragments retaining the same
lethality within a radius of 8 meters. The naval Crotale’a specific char—
acteristics coupled with an efficient fire control system whose excellence
was recently demonstrated anew, make this weapon system unquestionably
effective out to long ranges.

 

Thomson-CS? Crotale naval surface-to-air weapon system mount with eight
ready-to-fire missiles (in sir-tight containers) on launchers. Missile is
radar-or TV camera-guided. as the case may be.

COPYRIGRT: AIR & COSMOS, Paris. 1979

8061
C50: 3100

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARIANE ERECTED AT GUIANA SPACE CENTER
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 3 Feb 79 p 33
[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Ariane in Guiana")

[Text] For the first time evar. an Ariane rocket now towers above its
launch pad in Kouru. French Guiana. This European launch vehicle is more
than 47 meters high and weighs 207 tons when fueled. It was erected inside
the launch tower in January. Newsmen and representatives from member coun-
tries of the European Space Agency will visit the installation in early
February. This version of the Ariane is the "fueling mockup" that will be
used to test automatic and manual fueling procedures until 15 March. then

to conduct vibration tests on the launch pad until late April, and finally,
to qualify the entire Ariana launch site-~launch pad. launch control center,
radars. etc--in Hay and June. These operations are part of the Guiana Space
Center's operational qualification. The center is preparing for the first
firing of the Ariane launcher now set for 3 November 1979. CNES [National
Center for Space Studies] is responsible for the Ariane program. Principal
French contractors include Aerospatiale, 55? [European Propulsion Company],
Matra. Air Liquide, etc.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030015-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Erection of Ariana first
stage in tower

 

Erection of Ariana

COPYRIGHT: AIR 5 COSMOS, Paris. 1979

80141
CSO: 3100 5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030015-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OELY

SLBH TEST IN 1980 PLANNED

Paris AIR 5 COShOS in French 3 feb 79 p 3“

"First F1

(Article:
on has announced--

raded 5585 S3 (Strategic

[Text] Aerospatiale's ballistic and space a.
in the company's magazine~-that testing of the ups

Surfsce-to—Surface Ballistic Missile) was completed in 1978 and that instal-
lation of these missiles on operational sites began that same year. It also

 

ile loaded in the tube 0

Test mockup of the M6 miss

at the CEH [Mediterranean nter} in Toulon

Test Ce

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m onrcm. US: ONLY

revealed that final adjustment and qualification of subsystems for the new
“838 Mb [SL382 Subnarine Launched Ballistic Missile] will be completed this
year in preparation for the first flight test scheduled for 1980. The H4 is
the first French strategic ballistic missile armed with multiple warheads.
It will have greater range and accuracy than the present SLBM's--h2 and
H20-as well as greater resistance to enemy defenses. The H4 will be put
into service in 1985 on-bosrd the new nuclear powered missile launching
submarine (SNLB) called L'Inilexible. The latter will be the French Navy's
sixth SNLE and the first to carry the M5 missile. L'Inflexible will be
able to launch its missiles from a much greater depth. It will also have a
new faster and more secure firing system. It will be recalled that in 1980
France will have five SNLE's in service. Standing operating procedure will
call for four of these to be manned at all times. This will enable a mini-
mum of two SNLE's to always best sea no matter what happens.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSMOS, Paris. 1979

8051
080: 3100

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ARIANE PRELAUNCB PREPARATIONS DETAILED
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 13 Jan 79 pp 34-36

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "'Arisne': The First Flight is Postponed
until October or November 1979 but the Operational Availability Remains Set
for Late 1980"]

[Text] The next meeting of the project "Ariana" Board of Directors will be
17 January 1979 at BSA (European Space Agency] headquarters, and will be an
important step for the Buropean launch vehicle.

BSA and CBES [National Center for Space Studies], the program managers, will
present to the Blard the results of the launch project review which had been
approved a few wonths ago ("AIR 6 COSMOS" No 740, page 39). The Board of
Directors is made up of representatives from the countries that are partici-
pating in the project, and will be the first to be informed of the complete
situation and of project details of at least a year after the first launch of
the new European rocket.

Also to be announced to the Board 17 January is the new schedule of "Arisne"
rocket test flights during 1979-1980, as well as the newly revised plan of
operational missions for the European launch vehicle during 1981-1985. This
will necessitate making several additional launchers beyond the first five
rockets of the series ordered by BSA. These series rockets. like the test
rockets, are produced under the auspices of CNBS using the industry of 10
European countries; the principal French contractors being Aerospatiale,

38? European Propellant Company. and Hatra 6 Air Liquide.

Three Crucial Probleas Resolved

The "Ariane" project review presented to the Board of Directors will stress
that three of the four identified problems have been. or are about to be
solved in a satisfactory fashion. The inertial reference of the "Ariane"
rocket guidance systen is now perfected, after adjustments that took much
longer than was expected. However, the French LRBA Ballistic and Aerodynamic
Research Laboratory has been charged with confirming by a new series of tests
this qualification of the Perranti inertial reference.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OWICIM. USE 0|!“

That will finish the qualification of the first stage of "Ariane". the quali-
fication for the second stage being already completed. The fourth test of

the first stage in flight configuration. made 5 December 1978 at Vernon
(Eure). verified the good working order of the propulsion assembly. which is
made of four "Viking" engines that develop s total thrust of 260 metric tons
during 162.9 seconds. corresponding to the duration of nominal flight (162.5
seconds). This test has especially demonstrated the good holding power. under
normal conditions. of the new substance SEPHEN 301. It is a phenol and
silicon resin which will be used on all the future nozzle collars of the
"Viking" engines of all the "Ariane" rockets (test rockets and series rock-
ets). A new test to confirm the earlier results on the first stage propulsion

assembly equipped with SEPHEN 310 nozzle collars was Previewed this week. it
will have s duration limited to about 50 seconds.

The adjustments to the "Ariane" launching assembly at Kourou (French Guiana)
are completed. The test program for the "fuels simulation" is in progress.
with a true "Ariane" rocket to verify the functioning of the fueling. drain-
age. and pressurization systems. It began at the Guianan Space Center with
the erection of the first stage on 6 December 1978. followed by the second
stage on 12 December. The test schedule. interrupted by the Christmas and New
Years holidays started aguin in January 1979 with the building of the third
stage. At the end of January the three stage launcher will be standing com-
plete on the Kourou launch pad. It will be the very first time a complete
"Ariane" rocket will be seen. set up as for launching. There will even be a
retraction of the launch tower. but not a firing. In addition the members of
the "Arlene" Board of Directors will go to the Kourou site in early February
to witness the event. The fuel supply tests for the stages (UDHM and N106 for
the first and second stages. liquid hydrogen and oxygen for the third stage)
will progress during the first quarter of this year. BSA predicts the fueling
simulation tests will be finished early April 1979.

Difficulties with the Third Stage

A single crucial problem remains: the perfection of the third stage with
cryogenic propulsion. However. it is a large problem. for some unforeseen dif-
ficulties (the explosion of an engine on the test pad) that recently arose are
going to delay coapletion of the rocket and increase costs.

During a test (8P2) of the third stage propulsion assembly. conducted on
28 November 1978 at Vernon. an abnormal accumulation of hydrogen gas in the
cryogenic engine's combustion chamber caused an explosion which damaged the

engine and its propulsion framework: the stage'e main tank and the test pad
(PF‘3) having been mirsculously preserved.

The incident has brought about a reorganization of the third stage test pad
schedule. The "battleship" tests (with heavy tanks) continue at the rate of
one per month on the other cryogenic test pad (PPbZ) at Vernon. But the EPZ
propulsion assembly tests are suspended for several months; long enough to
replace the damaged stage and modify some of the test pad safety precautions.

especially the burner for burning off any abnormal accumulation of hydrogen
so as to avoid all risk of explosion.

9
’0! OIFICIAL US! ONLY
1he “Ariana" Board of Directors will be told on 17 January of the consequences
of this incident. of the delays in the development schedule. and of the cost
of the development program. The modifications and repairs to the stage and
test ped--as well as the development delays--up to the first test flights-Mare
going to be reflected by some extra expenditures. whose exact ssount will not
be known until late February.

Cost of completion within the Allowed Limits

BSA will establish s new estimation of the "cost of completion" for the
launcher "Ariane". “this new cost will consume part of the Fr 612 million
(1973 price) which is a 20 percent financial margin for technical difficulties
calculated at the beginning of the project on the basic development cost with-
out difficulties. which was established at Fr 2.060 million (1973). in spite
of the new difficulties that were set on the third stage. CNBS estimates that
the new total completion cost of project "Ariana" will remain "sharply lower"
than the total authorized amount (120 percent). which still leaves an avail-
able financial margin in case of technical difficulties during the test

flights. Therefore. the cowletion of the new launcher development is not
threatened.

Let us remember that in mid-1978. well before the last incidents with the
third stage. the project "Ariane" completion cost was estimated at 106.7 per-
cent of the basic cost without problems (Pr 2.060 million). Let us also
remember that S Decoder the "Ariane" Board approved the 1979 project budgets
(in payment credits) which included 153.062 million credit units for launch
vehicle development and 37.869 million credit units for production of the
first rocket series.

Delay of the First Shots

A new schedule of test flights for the "Arlene" rocket will be announced
17 January to the Board of Directors. taking into account the favorable results
of the project review and the difficulties encountered on the third stage.

This new schedule is conceived to comnsate. before the end of the test
flights. for the bad effects of the last incidents so that the operational
date of the launcher won't be affected. Don't forget that is still the most
important part of the operation. me delays which are going to be announced
to the board on 17 January preserve the ultimate goal of the project without
risking coming to a dead end sooner or later over some crucial problem that
must be solved.

The new schedule has a rather long delay (about 3 months) of the first and
second flights. the third flight being hardly affected. and the fourth not at
all.

he date of the first test flight (bol) already slightly pushed back (from
mid-June to late July 1979) a few months ago. this time is going to be set for
late October or early Noveder 1979. but certainly before the end of this year.

10
'08 00101“. 082 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second test shot (L02) planned for early December 1979. will now be at the
beginning of 1980. The third shot (L03) scheduled for early May 1970 would be
put off no sore than a month. As for the fourth shot (L04). it would stay at
the date set initially, which is aid-October l9LO.

 

”L02" payload: “Firewheel” satel-
lite on top of "CAT" and "Oscar 9"
satellite on the side.

First Payloads Unchanged ‘

Th- first payloads placed on three of the four test flight rockets will under-
go no changes. The four rockets are all carrying the ”Ariane Capsule Tech-
nology" (CAT). which vill be in fact a sasll satellite (about 200 kg) placed
in a geouynchronous traczfer orbit after having aonitored the functioning of
the launch vehicle during the entire flight. The first rocket will carry no
other payload (except ballast). 0n the other hand. the three other rockets
will carry at least five satellites launched free of charge by special excep-
tion.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second rocket (L02) will launch two small German satcllites--tho amateur
radio satellite "Oscar 9" and the scientific satellite "Pirewheel"--which will
be placed in s geosynchronous transfer orbit at 200-3600kn inclined 17.5
degrees over the equator. The third rocket will also launch two satellites:
the European meteo satellite "Heteosat 2" and the Indian telecommunications
satellite "AP?LE”. This will be the first satellite placed in a geostationary
orbit by "Ariene". Finally. the fourth rocket (106) will place into geosta-
tionary orbit the European maritine telecommunications satellite "HARBCS A".
If it proves unnecessary to add a shock absorber for the Pogo effect (vibra-
tions of the liquid fuel pipes caused by propulsion. and also affecting it)
for the launch. the (Lot) rocket will serve to test in flight the functioning
of the "double launch system" (SYLDA) which will ultimately launch two
satellites simultaneously.

First Operational Shot in 1981

Given these conditions. end unless there is a new serious problem. the opera-
tional availability of the launch vehicle "Ariane"--forecast at the prerent
for the beginning of l981--perhaps even December l980--should not be affected
by the present technical difficulties.

The first five "Arlene" rockets in the series have been ordered by ass for
operational shots beginning in 1981 (L5 to L9). The first of these "prono-
tion series" rockets could be available by December 1980. The second should
be delivered 3 months later (March 1981) and the following at 3-sonth intervals
in 1931 (June. Septesber. December).

One of the rockets will rensin pernanently in reserve. The four other series
rockets are destined to put 5 satellites in geostationary orbit (with a double
launch). These are the European satellites "onsst". "HARZCS B". ”tcs 1". and
"Sirio 2". as well as the french satellite "SPOT“. The launch of the scien-
tific satellite ”Sunset" is scheduled for April l981. that of the ssritime
telecoe-unicetions satellite "HARECS 8" is scheduled for mid-1981. and the
telecommunications satellite "res 1" launch is set for late 1981. The
scientific satellite "Sirio 2” should be put in orbit (for free) in a double
launch (thanks to SYLDA) with "HARECS 8” or. in case of delay. with "ans 1".
Besides. it is possible that this will be the first use of "SYLDA" even

though BSA still plans a test flight of it previously on L06. As for the
fourth launcher of the promotion series. it will be used to put into geosta-
tionary orbit the first French teledetection satellite "SPOT". scheduled for
late 1983 or early 1986.

Additional Needs for Series Rockets

A certain nulber of additional rockets of the series (above L9) should.
moreover. be ordered during the cosing month to take care of the new missions
already approved or considered as probable. The manufacture of ”Ariane”
rockets to be used before the end of 1983 should in fact be approved early
this year. production beginning during the second half of 1919.

12
FOR OFIICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

ESA has established a new schedule of operational nissione with "Ariane" fron
1981 to 1985. It obviously includes the first four launches already nention-
ed. as well as a certain nunbor of new nissions.

The new nissions definitely forecast for 1981-1983 will need at least four
additional series rockets (L10-L13). They are all involving telecollunice-
tions satellites. This includes a rocket for the European satellite "nos 2"
(launch in the third quarter of 1983). two rockets for the new French satel-
lites "Telecon 1 and 2" (second half of 1982 and nid-1983) and a rocket for
the sixth lntelsat organisation satellite "Intelsat 5" (with option for a
second rocket). The launch of this "Intelsat 5" by "Arlene" is predicted for
July 1981. which leads to a conflict of dates with the other launches (of
European satellites) that are also set for 1981. Nevertheless. this conflict
can be easily resolved.

Along the possible prospects uniquely corresponding to European needd. at
least six other series rockets (le-Ll9) can be predicted over and above
these last nissions. This is counting a rocket for a neteo satellite "Meteo-
set 3" (in 1982. a rocket for a direct television satellite "H-sat" or its
replacement (in 1983 or 1981.). two rockets for naritine teleco-unications
satellites ”HARECS c and D" (in 1982). and two rockets for the telecon-unica-
tion satellites "ECS 3 end 6” (in 1985 and 1986) whose production has just
been approved ("AIR 8 COSMOS" No 765. page b0).

Twenty "Arlene" Rockets

This new nission progran represents a total production and launching of about

20 "Ariane" rockets. including the test flight rockets. This is for only the

nisaions involving placing satellites in geostationary orbit that are already

approved or fir-1y predicted through the siddle of the next decade. This does
not count the prospects for exporting than outside Europe.

New ESA certainly intends to offer "Ariane" abroad. especially for launches
(scheduled after 1982) of geostationary teleco-unications satellites on behalf
of various countries. These include the Arab States ("Arsbsst” satellite).
lndonesia (“Palaps 2"). and Colusbia ("Satcol").

"Ariane" will also be a candidate for launches of other national or regional
satellites in Europe. like the future Scandinavian direct TV satellites
”Nordsat" (toward 198‘). The European launch vehicle will obviously be used
to launch future scientific and utilitarian ESA satellites (teledetection.
etc).

Sonc of these satellites-~notab1y "Arabsst"--cou1d profit by a double launch
tron “Arlene“. thanks to ”SYLDA". The European rocket will then be conpeti-
tive with the NASA “Shuttle” for launching snall satellites ("Delta” class).
as it is already for launching large satellites ("Atlas-Centaur" class). This
has been desonstrared by its being the choice of lntelsat. ("All 8 CDSHDS"
No 7“. page bl).

13
’03 0!?ICIAL 058 Oil!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The prospect of an isportsnt iaproveaent in "Ariane" perfornence (payload in
geosynchronous transfer orbit 2300 kg instead of the present 1770 kg) is of a
nature to interest the potential users and increase the European launcher‘s
ability to coepete with its principal rival, the Aaericen "Space Shuttle."

A proposal for iaprovenent of this aspect of the launch vehicle (“AIR &
oosuos" no 736. page 35) was already presented last Decesber to the ass Board.
It has in turn asked the "Ariane" board of Directors to take a reco-endation
with the goal of starting the necessary work this suuer.

A Progran to Produce end Co-ercialise "Ariane"

France has now under study the possibility of creating a "progrss" intended to
ensure. in cooperation with its European partners. the production and col-
aercialiration of the launcher "Ariane". to be developed by BSA along with
sose already approved projects.

This program. which would be neared "Transpsce" (space transport) should pro-
tect the interests of the govern-ants and industries participating in the
production and sale of the launcher and at the ease tine be dynssic enough to

ensure the prosotion of "Ariana" against the foreign coepetition. especially
the Anerican "Shuttle."

The French Ministry of Industry and CUES. project "Ariane" overseer. are
looking for the for-ula sost suited to accoqlish these tasks. in consultation
with the other French Hinistries concerned. France may present the conclu-
sions of these studies to its European partners in ESA by late January.

COPYRIGHT: Air 8 Cos-0s. Paris. 1979

9376
650: 3100

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIA”; l979-l980 TST 3W“ ”VIEWS”
Porio All in coma in fronch 27 Jon 79 pp 39-40
[Atticio by Piorro Longoroux]

[Tort] ‘i'ho not dotoo for tho toot fiighto of tho Buropoon Ari-no rockot voro

nvooiod on 17 Jonuory. ot tho 23rd noting of tho boord of diroctoro of tho
Ariono pronrol.

Tho roorrmooont of tho ochoduio for tho Ariono toot fiighto io tho vomit of
tho incidont that occurrod on 28 hovoubor, during tho toot of tho oropuloion
unit of tho third (oryonnic) otouo of tho roctot. According to tho conciuoiono
of tho invootiuotion corriod out by Chi: [Notionoi Oontor for Spoco Studioo],
thlo incidont no duo to tho noifmction of o oofoty dovico on tho wound

(o torch-hoidor on tho toot bonch). and it dooo not bring into quootion tho
dooion of tho otogo itooif, tho Nropoon Spam “one, ototoo.

‘i‘ho M ochoduio inpiioo,“ I. bovo oinody vritton (All 6 cams No 7‘8), o
rothor forgo doioy (crowd I lantho) for tho firot too toot flight iounchoo,
o iittio iooo (i south) for tho third iounch, and nono ot oil for tho fourth
and loot toot flight.

Tho firot lunch (1.01) of tho Ariono rochot fro. Kourou io not oot for tho
boginnin. of honobor .. non oxoctiy, 3 Now-bor i979 (inotood of lid-Juno
l979). ‘l'ho oocond lunch (£02) io nov pionnod for tho bosiming of Horch i980
(inotood of tho boginning of Docubor I979). tho third iounch (L03) hoo boon
out but to Juno 1980 (inotood of tho bogiming of my 1980). ‘lbo fourth
lunch (1.01.) has not boon chongod: it io otili biomd for lid-Octobor i980.

'l'huo thio roorrongooont dooo not chongo tho doto pionnod for tho ond of tho
toot flighto, and it oiiovo tho doto for tho ooorotionoi ovoiiobiiity of tho
uroooon touch roctot to bo toot ot Doco-bor 1900, do originoiiy pimod.
Thio oohoo it ooooibio to hoop o urgin of 6 nontho vith roopoct to tho first

ooorotionoi iounch. thot of tho urooon ociontific ootoilito txooot, thich
io ochodulod to bo out into orbit in April 19”.

‘l'ho doloyo mducod by tho toclnicoi probiono oncomtorod in tho finoi tooto
of tho third otogo do not, thoroforo, mioo tho bogiminu of Ariono'o uoo.

15
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

O
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unloaa thora ia anothar aarioua incidant batwaan now and tho ond of tho toat
flighta, tho oporational launchoa will bo ablo to tailo placo on tho dataa

piannad by Ariana'a uaora. And, in particular,by tho firat foraion uaar ..

tho lntolaat organisation .. for putting ono or ooro intolaat S tolocoI-unica-
tiona aatoliitaa into gaoatatiom " orbit. 'i‘ho contract for tho firat launch

of an lntolaat S aatoliito by tho . riano rockot ia to bo aignac vary aoon by

EA [Europoan Spaco Agoncyi and lntalaat. Honovar, BSA la planning a looting

at tho and of Pobruary to proaont tho aituation of tho Ariana prograa to lntolaat.

Firat Stagoi Shortanoo Firing on ll January

An incioont that took placo during tho aocond toat-bonch firing of tho propul-
aion unit of tho firat "no on ll January I979 at Var-non cauaod tho toot to
bo ohm-toned. A cantral proaauro drop in tho colbuation chubor of ona of tho
four Viking anginoa of tho firat atago auto-atically cauaad tho toot to ha
and“ aftar only 8 aoconda of oporation (inataao of tho 80 aoconda piannod).
Tho cauaoa of tho incidont ara not yat known oxactly: tho angina ia boin;
taton apart. but CNI atatoo at tho outaot that tho incidant la not comactad
with tho bohavior of tho noulo throato in 3mm 301. it aaona that tho proa-
aura drop waa cauaod by a poor food of tho angino'a gaa somrator, duo to
cryotala that for-ad following tho dacontaaination of tho tanka. carriod out
i-adiataly aftar tho firot taat-banch firing of thia atago on S Docoobar 1978.
Tho filtoro of tho gaa gonorator aro baiiavod to havo boon foulod by tho
cryatala maulting froo tho cloaning of tho tonixa with pathanol.

‘l'ho docontaoination oporation ia uaod only for toat-banch triala. in ordor to
cloan tho rooaindor of tho hot praaauriution gaaaa out of tho tanha aftar a
long-duration firing, aapocially in viaw of tho long tioo that pay olapaa
batwoon two taatobonch firinga with tho capo propulaion unit. ‘l'hia procoduro
will not ba uaod during tho toot flighta and tho oparational launchaa at tho
Guyana Spaco Cantor, oharo tho oporationa taino placo Gifforantly. Tho Ariana
rocixot ia caaignad to rooain fualod on tho launch pad for up to a oonth, with
onol in tho tonic. in caao of an abortod launch, tho rockat maina on tho
rap and tho oporation of tho flratoatago notora atopa auto-atically aftor
3.5 aoconoa. than than in li'ttlo hot acid and praaaurication gaa: thua tharo

ia no noad to oopty tho tanixa or to cocontaoinata than bofora boin; ablo to
attoapt anothar firing in tho following 7 daya.

Nina Hontha fro. tho Pirot Launch

[979 will bo tho daciaivo yoar for Ariana. Plano for tho naxt 9 Iontha inciuda:
tho qualification firinra on tho toot bonch of tho firat two atagoa of tho
rockot (thoao for tho third atago will toilo placo lator); tho qualifying toata
of tho Ariana launching cooplax at Kourou with tho ”orgol nodal“: tho opora-
tionol qualification of all tho facilitiaa at tho Guyana Spaco Contor: and

tho firat qualifying flight launch of tho launch rockot. TM conatruction of
thia firat Ariana rockat (L0!) will basin in old-March in mraoux, at tho

Launcher romtruetion Slto (SIL) of Acrospatiaio, tho inauatrlal arehitact
of the launch rocket.

I6
FOIi OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'i'ho taata of tho ”orsol nodal.“ which boson in January i979, will bo cou-
platod at tho and of thia April, with tho otagoa of tho dynamical nodal of
Ariana alroady toatad at tho $11.. Tho Iain purpoaa of thoao toata ia to
vorify tho now ayoton that auto-atlcally fooda liquid orgol into tho rockot.
Honour. tho Duropoan proaa will bo invitad at tho boginning of Fobruary

to witnoaa tho procoduro in which an Ariana tockot will bo otoctad for tho
flrat “no on tho Kourou launch pad. aa if for a launch (but tho anginoa will
not bo firod). ‘l’ha noxt looting of tho board of diroctora of tho Ariana
progra- will alao bo hold at Kourou, fro- 6 to 8 Pohruary.

Tho procoduro for tho oporational qualification of tho Ariana launch co-plox
at Kourou will tako placo fm May to Juno, on part of tho oporational valida-
tion of m tho cac [Guyana 39m Contor] facilitiaa, including on. ”down-
atroaa“ facilitioa locatad in Brazil. Thia pmra- will includo, in par-
ticular, tho launch of aoworal aoundin; rockata (Eridan) fm tho 66 and

tho tracking of an Morican aatollito (6:03 3). in ordor to train tho ataff
and toot tho contor'o oquipoont bofono tho firot lunch.

Tho launch progral for tho firat Ariana rockat (L01) will basin at tho and
of Auquat I979, to proparo for tho launch on 3 how-bar.

A ”flightworthinoaa roviow“ will ba hold oarlior .. in Juno [979 .. by CNS
and tho principal induatrial orgmicationa involvod (Aoroapatialo, SE? I’Euro-
poan Propulaion Colpany], iiatra. Air Liquido, otc.. in Franco). Thia looting
will bo wary iaportant, bocauaa it will con" tho participonta to tho launch
program, and givo tho groan light to tho launch on 3 Nova-bar.

Flight Qualification of tho Third Stago

‘lho toot-baud: qualifying toota of tho throo atagoa of tho launch rocitot ahould
nor-ally toault in two aucooaoful firinga with two propulsion unita of aach
ataga, in ordor for that atago to bo daclarod “roady to fly.” it waa initially
plannod that tho qualification of tho throo atagoa would bo cowplatod boforw

tho firat launch (ml). ‘l'hia ia atill truo for tho firat two atagoo of tho
rockot.

Tho two qualification firinla of tho tirat atago will taka placo at tho ond
of April and in uld-Auguat [979, roapoctivaly, at Var-non. Each toot will in-
cluda, tirat, a ahort-duration firing (around 3 ooconda), followod by ohutdown
of tho onainaa to ai-ulatod an abortod launch on tho launch pad, and than a
lonxoduration taat raproaonting tho norlal oporation of tho otago. All thoaa
qualifying toata for tho firat ataao will 0! ccurao bo porfor-od with Viking
onainoa, whoao notala thmta will uoo tho now utarial SEPIIEN 301 (oilica and
phonolic roain) porfoctod by tho 52?. Up to now, thoro havo boon only two
firinqa of propulaion unita with throata aiado of SDiIEN 301, but tho raaulta
oro conaidarod wory aatiafactory, in apito of tho incidont that ahortonad tho
oacond firing (aoo oacond aoction, abowo). Thoao toata havo ahown tho good
bohavior of tho now Iatorial ovor a total taat duration groator than tho
noninal duration (ll-2.5 aaconda), and with two ouccaaaivo ignitiona of tho
four Viking onginoa of tho otaaa, which dovolop a thruat of 260 tona on
lift-off. "hon x-rayod aftor tho toata, tho noulo throata nado of SSPHIN 301

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were elnoet in their lnltiel etete, like new. Moreover, theee two flrlnge wlth
the one propuleion unit tool: plece with note then e nonth between then,

while tht nexi-m Celey between two eucceeelve ignitione plenned for Guyene
will be only 7 deye.

The eecond etege of Arlene hee elreedy eucceeefully undergone ite firet quel-
ificetion teet firing on the bench in October 1978. A eecond firlng ie plenned
for next February. If it ie eleo eucceeeful. the etege will be coneidered

flight quellfled; if not, there will be e third teet on the bench before the
end of the eu-er.

For the third etege. on the other hend, the quelificetion teete will be de-
leyed ee e reeult of deeign difficultiee. The teete on the Vernon P? 63 teet
bench (where the incident of 28 November occurred) will reeune in nid-Herch
1979. with the inetelletion of e new third-etege propulelon unit. The finel
teete of the etege will thue reeune towerde the end of Hey or the beginning
of June. Under theee conditione, the two ouelificetion firinge of the third
etege on the teet bench cen no longer teke plece before the f lret leunch of
Arlene. They will telle olece et the end of IO” end the beginning of 1980,
efter leunch L01: in orectico, the firet quelificetion of the etege will thue
be oerfoned in flight. however, CNS hee inpoeed the require-ent of wet-
ifying thet the finel teete of the etege heve been eetiefectorily coupleted end
thettbeetegeheebeen declered reedy for quelificetion, before cerrylng out
the firet leunch. Thue the finel teete perfor-ed by 5:? on the ground before
leunch will neke it poeeible to check ell the functione of the etege. Thie
procedure. which ie peculier to the third etege. thue introducee only e ellght
riel: for the eucceee of the teet flight. But CliB choee thle eolutlon in
order not to deley putting the rocket into uee. .

covmcnn Air 6 Coenoe, Perle, 1979

8629 .
am 3100

END

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY