APPROVED FOR RELEASE; 2007/02/00; CIA-RDPOZ-OOOGOROOO‘I000100‘6-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100010045-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8238

23 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010045-0
NOTE

JPRS publicatluns contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
soanes are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Precessing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerptl in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGl'l' MUS AND REWTIONS GWERNING WRERSlIIP OF
MATERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TIMI DISSBHIMTION
OP ‘I'ilIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOI-1" ICIAI. USE ONLY.
BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA L "'P'" ”0- 3. Inlpicni'a Autumn Lu.
m u 8238

. nu an. 3 nu r cpou alt

‘I‘MNSLATIONS ON NFJIR FAST AND NORTH AFRICA, (9000 1/79) 3 Janua 1979

9.

. I’rllouuoa Oopaoitauon None and Adamo I. Puma/Tanned Unu No.

Joint Publication. monarch Sci-vice
-

1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201
I). 2:535 Rope" a PmoJ

 

     
   
   
   

  

I). Spoaaotla‘ Oman-inn” Name and Marco

   

   
 
   
 
 

Ac above

IS- Suppleuomy Nata

. Abel-ecu

  
     

The serial report contains information on so'cio-economic, government, political,
end technical developments in the countries of the Near Beat and North Africa.

. ty Kala m Deco-at Analyser. a. Dumper.

Political Science _lntcr-Arab Affair: _Libya _Sultanatc
Sociology _x__North African _Hauritania of Onan
Economics Affaira _x_Horocco _Syrie
Culture (Social Sciencco) _A£ghanictan _Pcoplc'a Dono- _‘runisia
Ethnology thgcria cratic Republic _Unitcd Arab
Geography _Bahrain of Yuan Emirates
Technological __B;ypt __Percian Gulf _Hootern
Hilitary Sciences Linn Area Sahara

__lraq _Qatar __Ycun Arab

I" “mﬂdewEﬁN 7"” _x_larael ___Saudi Arabia Republic

_Jordan _Spaniah North

___Kuvait Africa

_chanon _Sudan

in. (WIII‘ku/Gwp so, so. 5K. 15 ._‘_

II. AvonIaan-uy Stucco-t ' II. a. 9! Part
For Official Use Only. _ , 25
Limited Nunber of Copies Available From JPRS. mm

roa- uno-o'c «luv. a-Iu votowot “Oil-"I

TIIB f0“ IMY DB IEPIOOUCED
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3985 3/8238
23 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(rouo 1/79)
CONTENTS PAGE

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Saharan Hiniater Deniee, Rejecte Contacte Hith Morocco
(AFRIQUE-ASIE, 11.2“ DOC 78) oeeeeoeeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeoaee 1

Briefe
Arab Loan 2

ALGERIA

Exiled Politician Diecuuee Preeidential Succeeeion Proepecte
(Ahmed Huhae Interview; PARIS HATCH, 8 Dec 78) ....... 3

Driefe

Canadian Financing 8
1979 Oil Production 8
Concortiun Bank Loan 9
Nel Ration Increaee 9
IRAN
Oil Crieie Analyzed, warning Sounded on Link to ‘Feudal' Reginee
(APRIWE'AS‘E, 11 D“ 78) lOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOODOOOOI.0.. lo
ISRAEL
Former Zioniet Leader Advocatee Peleatininn State
(Menu. 60an Interview PARIS mm, 29 Dec 78) .. . .. 13
WROCCO

Social Degradation, Official Corruption Dcectibed
(mmﬂd Selmt: JEUNE ”um, 13 D“ 78) eooeeooecee 19

Briefe
ADD Louis 23

PRO Cowany Agra-eat 23
- a - [III - NE 6 A - 121 P000]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"091'" AFRICAN AFFAIRS

SAHARA“ MINISTER DENIES. REJECTS CONTACTS um! moose
Paris AFRIQUE-ASIF. in French 11-24 Dec 78 p 39 w

[Unnttributed report under rubric "Bxclusive"]

[Text] Poliasrio Information Minister Ould Saleck has told ua officially
that "No official or unofficial contact has taken place between the Saharans
and the Horoccons. This" he said. "is a blatant Ianeuver by those who sis-
take their desires for reality." It is a maneuver which King llassan's
propagandiate in the ao-called "African" press, published in Paris and fi-
nanced by the Hobutus. Sneghora and Bongo: of this world, need to stifle
public opinion. "Re have not had and will not have any contact with those

who occupy our country." Ould Saleck added.

080: “00

1
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
I"I\ "OI Lyneu VUM ”He-o

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

ARAB LOANuA nroup of Arab and international banks. headed by the Kuwaiti Con-
pany for Investment and Foreign Trade and the Arab and International Invosteent
Bank. has granted a loan of 10 aillion Kuwaiti dollars (8&0 aillior.) to the
CHAN (National Algerian Shippim Company). According to the AUJBRIAN PRESS
SERVICE. the credit agree-em. which has Just been signed in Kuwait. stipulates
that this loan covers a duration period of 12 yeare. with 8 years grace period.
at an interest rate of 8.5 percent. This credit. the fourth obtained by the
CNAN on the Kuwaiti narket. ie intended to finance Almrian anuent invest-

nente. ﬁext? [Paris 1“me TROPICAUX ET NEDIMANEENS in French 8 Dec 78
p 336“? _ R ‘

050: “000

2
FOR 01??an use out!
EXILED POLITICIAN DISCUSSBS PRESIDENTIAL SUCCESSION PROSPECTS
Paris PARIS MATCH in french 8 Dec 78 pp 106-107

[Interview with Ahsed Hashas. former minister of agriculture. by Georges
Henant: "It is Not Bounediene Who Must Be Replaced but His Regine";
Paris. date not given]

[Text] The post-Bousediene era is under way. Uho will

he the new masters of Algeria? "hat changes will that
entail and what should be expected fros then? One man

is particularly qualified to answer these questions which
everybody is asking. A liberation fighter right from the
start. a political-military delegate from eastern Algeria.
a somber of the politburo of the National Liberation Front,
Aheed Hashes was Minister of Agriculture in independent
Algeria. first under Ahmed Ben Bella and than under nouari
Bousediono at whose side he sat for a year in the Revolu-
tionary Council. obliged to go into exile. Ahmed Hashes
leads in Paris today the "National Rally for Democracy and
Revolution," a sovesent which set as its essential task the
consolidation of the Algerian opposition. Georges Hanant
interviewed this nan of the inner circle.

Question: Today President Houari Bounediene is a dead man. at least
politically. Yet. that individual used to hold all powers. This now
confronts Algeria--and first its govern-ent, the Revolutionary Council--
with a fearful vacuum.

Answer: Fearful. indeed. as always with dictators.

Question: But if nounediene became that kind of dictator. is that not
the fault of the Revolutionary Council which allowed his free sway?

Answer: You know. housediene was not an authoritative. ilperious person-
at least in appearance. At the start it happened several times that the
Revolutionary Council placed him in a linority position.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

Question: And how dld lu- maul?

Answer: Very calmly. He was not the type of Individual to raise his
voice or bang the table with his flat. He preferred to act from a posi-
tion or ntrennth. seeking support outside. That is how he managed to
enjoy personal rule--hy dolnp. exactly what Ahmed lien llelln had been
reproached with doing.

Question: He also had in the Revolutionary Council his unconditional
supporters such as Abdelaziz Boutefliks whose name is often aentioned
today in connection with Boumediene's succession.

Answer: Indeed, there existed a faction which used to form s block
around Bouncdiene. Besides Bouteflika there was Cherif lekscen...

Question: ...who was since retired even though he was for a long time
considered as the spiritual son of the Master.

Answer: Ahmed Nedighri. . .

Question: ...who passed as Bousediene's aost intimate friend and who
was found drowned in his bathtub three years ago.

Answer: And Kaid Ahead. who died last year.

Question: There reaains. then, Abdelsziz Bouteflika. the last of the
faithful.

Answer: I would not call it faithful. What was involved was s aaall
group of men who had gathered around Bounsdiene to "stage a coup."
housediene did not delay detaching himself from then to play his own
game and nonopolize all power.

Question: Even that ofﬂouteflike?

Answer: Even that of Bouteflika. As Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Abdelaziz Boutefliks was in complete disagree-eat with the support given
by Boumcdiene to the Saharsns. This placed Algeria in a very embarrassing
position of diplomatic isolation, starting with himself.

Question: In your eyes, then, Abdelaaiz Bouteliha is not a credible
successor?

Answer: No. beginning with the fact that all the others hats his.
Question: "by?

Answer: Because he is given to intrigues and does not recoil before any-
thing to remain in office. Consider that this sen of Al has held his

I.
P03 OPIICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

portfolio for the past IS years. which makes of Boutoflika the dean of
all ninistcru or foreign affairs in the world when it comes to length of
tenure.

Question: Let us talk of the others. There is Mohamed Yehiaoui, the
present "boss" of the PLN. is there not?

Answer: Yahiaoui is one of the most honest men on the team and he enjoys
the halo conferred by the National Liberation Front.

Question: And especially, he has the benefit of the Fiﬁ apparatus.

Answer: True, but today's PLN. purged. tinkered with, perverted. is no
longer anything more than the skeleton of the great party that it used to
be. That is why I do not think that Mohamed Yahiaoui has much chance.

Question: How about Mohamed Ben Ahmed Abdelghani. the sinister of
interior?

Answer: Obviously, the latter has the public administration available to
him. But I can hardly see him in Boumediene's shoes. Personally, I would
be inclined to bet on a men like Chadli, commander of the Oran military
region. Boumcdiene wanted to remove Chadli from his command in order to
appoint him to higher positions but Chadli did not hesitate to refuse.

Question: Why?

Answer: Because he was afraid of being sidelined. Like Ahmed Draia, the
former director of State Security whom Boumediene. distrustful, had
"promoted" to the position of Minister of Transportation, or Ahmed Bencherif.
the foruer head of the gendarmerie who found himself Minister of Hydraulics.
Land Development and Environmental Protection.

Question: There is a lot of talk of Bencherif at this time in the papers
and on television.

Answer: Pehaps so. but it is still Chadli who seems to me the most likely
successor of all to the presidency because it is he who has the best
"strong man" profile.

Question: And if, failing to reach agreement on one of them, the members
of the Revolutionary Council were to choose contrariwise a "weak man," a
personality not in the front rank who would make a compromise possible?

Answer: That is indeed possible, at least for a while. But all of this
would not solve anything basic. For the present regime has involved the
country in such a grave situation that a change of individuals will not
provide a solution. not even a change of team. only a change of regime.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

Question: But how could the regime be changed?

Answer: By calling on men of the period prior to 1965, before the
Buumediene era, men who held high national positiona--a Ferhat Abbas.
for example.

Question: Abbas is 80 years old.

Answer: he could still serve in a transition government. he is a respected
man. an indisputable democrat. who has good relations with everybody. i

am also thinking of Benyusaef Ben Khedda. the former president of the war-
time GPRA [Provisional Government of the Algerian Republic], who lives

under house arrest in Algerias but who continues to be "on call by the
Republic." Ben Khedda is still young and he commands respect.

Question: And Ahmed Ben Bells?
Answer: Naturally, and everyone thinks of his first.
Question: But in fact is it known where he is?

Answer: Until lately he was at Cheragas near Algiers in an old farmhouse-
cnstle of the Sahel. He-has just been moved. undoubtedly because of the
rumors of a plot born as a result of the escape of Major Helleh. who was
compromised in the coup attempt by Colonel Zbiri. I do not know pre-
cisely the new site of his detention. But I have constantly been in

touch with Ben Bella. Some of those close to him are authorized to visit
him and naturally that makes it possible to exchange letters.

Question: Do the police close their eyes a little in this connection?

Answer: Naturally. It is such a scandal to keep a man like Ben Belle
under house arrest, with everything that he represents for the Algerian
people. And so many steps have been made in his favor, national and
international. that the government could not remain insensitive to them.

Question: Yet. it is still Ben Bella who inaugurated perumalrule in
Algeria. '

Answer: At any rate. I can tell you that he has changed his ideas a lot
since 1965.

Question: Thirteen years have elapsed since 1965. Do you think that the
name of Ahmed Ben Bella still means a lot in an Algeria half of whose
population is under 16 years of age?

Answer: Much more than is imagined abroad. precisely because of the
mystery which has continued to hover over his fate.

6
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

Question: In short. you could easily see Ben Bella taking the place of
President Bnlnudlune tomorrow?

Answer: A hen Bella government. yes. with a good pollticsl team around
him, it could work.

Question: At any rate, is a "de-Boumediene-ization" under way?

Answer: In politics, undoubtedly. Even ifthepresent team continues in
office. personal rule could no longer emerge. If an individual rises to
the top. even a "strong man." this will only be with the consent of the
others-~a "primus inter pares" [first among equals] and nothing more.

Question: And in the economic realm what changes do you foresee?

Answer: On that score things will be much more difficult. Agriculture,
completely dismantled by forced collectivizstion, sterilized by bureau-
cratism. needs to be rebuilt from scratch. And in the industrial sector
things are even worse. Instead of using the existing structure. the myriad
of small enterprises which we had inherited at the end of the colonial era,
and of promoting industrial development through successive stages. respect-
ing the needs. customs, and mentalities of the people. Boumediene sacri-
ficed everything for the establishment of a heavy industry because of his
megalomania, in order to pose as the economic leader of the Third World.
The result has been a monumental waste of investments, of gigantic plants
which produce at 30 to to percent capacity.

Question: Is it still possible to change that?

Answer: Basically. no. Such options are irreversible. Facilities cannot
be scraped. But on the other hand. it is possible to improve their manage-
ment and therefore their profitability considerably.

Question: how?

Answer: By decentralizing, by restoring the maximum degree of autonomy
at all levels, by restoring responsibility to people. Bad management is
the direct result of the concentration of power which transforms the en-
tire country lnto a system of superimposed umbrellas.

Question: To change that is then to change the regime. is it not?

Answer: Yes. And accumulated dissatisfactions are such that Algeria will
have to change its regime in short order. Accordingly. it would be
better to do it calmly than hot-headedly.

COPYRIGRT: 1978 par Cogedipresse S.A.

2662

CSO: 6600 7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AMER“

BRIEFS

CANADIAN FINANCING-on 12 Deceaber the Export Expansion Company (SE) of Canada
and the Toronto-Dosinion Bank put the finishing touches on arrangeaents made
with 39 other Canadian and foreign banks for the granting of a loan in the
asount of $667 sillion to Algeria. The SEE will supply 3&1? Iillion of this
loan. which is to extend over a period of 13 years. The financing agree-ant
applies to a contract granted to the firs. Bechtel Canada Ltd.. for setting up
a natural-gas plant in the Rhourde Nouss area southeast of Hassi Hessaoud.
This contract. ads by SONA’I‘RACH (National Con y for the Transport and har-
keting of Fuels) and announced on 16 Hay 1978 H'I'H of 19 Hay. page 1315). pro-
vides for the designing. engineering. equipping. project aanageaent. construc-
tion and coaplets start-up of a gas-collection network. a processing unit and
a systea for gas reinjection. The Rhourde Nouss installation will produce dry
natural gas for sale and rsinJection. liquid propane and butane and condensate
for the gasoline supply stock of the refinery. In announcing the signing of
the SONATRACH-Bechtel contract last May. we indicated that the recoverable re-
serves oi‘ the Rhourde Nouss deposits were estisated to be 200 aillion cubic
asters of natural gas and that the annual production should reach 12 sillion
cubic esters of dry gas. 2.6 aillion tons of condensate and 900.000 tons of

liquid propane (CPL). erg [Forts MARCHES mommux 31' nammmms in
French 22 Dec 78 1: $91 8568

1979 OIL PRODIJC'PION--”SONA’I'RACH has already sold its entire oil production for
1979.” Ahmed Ghouli. Algerian minister of enemy and petrocheaical industries.
stated. In an interview published on it Dace-bar in a report entitled. 'Hiddle
East Econosic Survey.” Hr Ghosali indicated that the overall oil production for
1978 will be about 57 sillion tons in coaparison with the 53.5 aillion tons of
1977. The 1979 production is expected to be about 5-3 or 59 million tons. “If
we deduct the 5 sillion or so tons needed for local consuaption. we find that
the export capability for 1979 will be between 53 and 5b aillion conpared with
the 52 aillion we had in 1978.“ he added. In regard to relations between OPEC
and consuaer countries. Hr Ghosali stated: ”we share Saudi Arabia's viewpoint
according to which we are an interral part of the overall world economic sys-
tes. Therefore. we should safeguard the econony of the industrialised world:
but we should likewise safeguard our own economy. which is also threatened.

'de should consider the well-being of industrialized countries. but we aust also
look after our own well-being." Hr Ghosali refused to sake any predictions in
regard to an increase in the price of oil. which sight be decided at the next

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OPEC neetinn, to be held in Abu Dhabi. Hoonur. he stressed the losses of the
oil countries indicatinrr that the prices of ieported products had increased
50 percent since the OPr-IC conference held in Doha 2 years ago. Lastly. the
Algerian sinister indicated that. in addition to the Alsatian-Italian pipeline
project. Algeria is presently studying the construction of another line toward
Europe via Spain, but that this project will not be carried out until 1986.
£2337 [Paris unease mncnux m mtmnnnms in French 8 Dec 78 p 33637

CONSORTIUM BANK LOAN-4 loan in the asount of $125 aillion has been granted to
.the National Bank of Algeria (DNA) by a oonsortiua of international banks con-
posed principally of lame French banks. in egresunt to this effect was
sinned on ‘30 Nova-bar by mpresentatives of the DNA and those of the consor-
tius. whose principal constituents are the National Bank of Paris and the Med-
itorranean Union of Banks. the latter. soreover. playing the role of agent in
this operation. The duration of the loan is 7 years with a grace period of

'1 years: interest is at the interbankine rate on the Eurodollar aarket (1.1808)
increased by 1 percent for the first 1 years and by 1.25 percent for the last
h years. This ‘oen is being ads to finance investaents necessary for the
devolopaent of the econoay. An Alzerian source emphasises that this operation
was carried out I'uncler conditions which were definitely sore favorable than
those obtained heretofore by Alnerian econoeic operators.” e157 aria
MARCHl-S TROPICAUX ET HEDITEJIRANFBRS in French 8 Dec 78 p '5 _ 85

FUEL MTION XNCRBASE--To forestall any possible coup d'etat. President
Bounediene allowed his aruored units to have only a linited asount of
fuel: just enough for 2 hours running tile. One of the first steps

taken by the interim sinister of defense. Colonel Chadli, who was
installed in office on 28 November, was to increase this amount. It is

now possible for the tanks to reach the capital-and exert pressure in
the event of a difficult [presidential] succession. [Text] [Paris VALEURS
ACTUELLES in French I. Dec 78 p 31]

C80: (0600

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

01L CRISIS ANALYZBO, HARNIHG SOUNDS!) 0N LINK TO 'FEUDAL' REGIHBS
Perle AFRIQUE—ASIB in French No 176. ll Dec 78 pp 65.65

[Article by "N.s.": "Coneequencee of the Criaie in Iran for the Oil
Situation")

[Text] whatever the turn of evente in Iran. it in beginning to econ that
neither Iranian oil policy nor the privileged poeition occupied by that
nation at the boron of OPEC can continue unchanged. The teat of atrangth
that hae begun between the ehah'a regime and hie oppoeition haa already had
two ieportant coneequencee. The firat and moat eerioue ia the drop of about
75 percent in oil production aince the end of October. an output of about
1.4 million barrela per day over the last two weeke ae againat an average
5.625.100 during the period of January to Auguet. 1978. The eecond. leee
epectacular although not negligible. ia the deciaion to freeze the overly
aabitioue lranian nuclear program. eaintaining it until further ordare at
the four power planta preeently under construction, which repreeent #200 H"

or 18.26 percent of the total of 23.000 anticipated for the beginning of
1990.

In the future. everything will depend on develop-ante in the political

criaie--how long the praeent political problena continue. whether there
will be a coaproaiae with the oppoaition or the ahah will be overthrown
and replaced by a eore netionaliatic and leee pro-American regime.

Doaeetically. firet of all. the cutbacke in the nuclear program ehould
automatically reeult in an acceleration of efforte directed toward develop-
ing the local coneulption of gee. All the more no aince the gee from the
well-head burned within the nation in 1977 repreeented not leee than b6.‘
percent of the total output. Even with natural gee. the low level of world
pricee has been inducing Iran aince 1977 to hold back on ita exportation
plane and encourage the replacement of other fuele by natural gee. eapecial-
ly in heating plante. Thea, today more than ever before. it ie well-heed
and natural gee and not nuclear power that ia turning out to be the main
energy nourcc that needa to be developed to counteract decreaeed oil re-
nervan and increaee national coneumption demende.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ("WWI/ll. "SH ONLY

Toward "lraniantion"

lhmnestically again. the Iranian opposition is vigorously advancing demands
that may weigh heavily on the future of the consortium of foreign firms
that has been ensuring almost 90 percent of the nation's oil production for
25 years. These demands are concerned in particular with tho "lranisation"
of the responsible positions in the all business and with the expulsion of
a large part or the foreign technicians. in other words. with the more
stringent application of the law concerning the nationalization of Iranian
petroleum enacted by Dr Mohammad Hossadegh in 1951.

The problem is even more delicate because negotiations begun more than a
year ago by the lranian government with the consortium to revise the 1973
agreement are already running into serious difficulties due in particular
to the low level of enthusiasm shown by the corporate members of the cartel
for increasing their investments in oil exploration and augmenting their
take of lranian crude oil. This means that a radical modification of its
relations with the consortium would make a basic. top to bottom. revision
of all of lran's petroleum policies and economic policies inevitable.

Internationally. the severe reduction in Iranian oil production would have
had no dramatic effect on world supplies unless it had lasted for two or
three months. and this would have been just as much the result of stock-
piling by the large industrial countries (generally three months' supply)
as of potentials for increased production in those OPEC countries that have
unutilized production capacities at their disposal. mainly Saudi Arabia.
Kuwait. lraq. and Abu Dhabi. At the moment it doesn't seem very probable
in any case that the drop in lranian production will last toc long in view
of the catastrophic effects such a situation would have on a ceuntry-no
matter what its political systemp-in which the approximately $23 billion
in oil receipts represent nearly 68 percent of its budgetary revenue and
90 percent of its foreign exchange.

In themes of pricing. finally. the lack of profits brought on by the drop
in oil production. perhaps nearly $350 million per week. puts the shah in
an extremely uncomfortable situation. he finds himself. really. torn
between two worrisome contradictions. wanting on the one hand to increase
both oil prices and output to compensate for the loss of profits and pay
back the foreign debts that already amount to between $10 and il billion.
and on the other. to recompense the Americans for their support of the
throne of the Pahlcvis by maintaining a “moderate" pricing policy.

The December 16 meeting

If the king is still on the throne. the next OPEC meeting. scheduled for
December 16. will show which contradiction he means to give priority.

Heanwhile. the experiences of the last few years have shown again and again
that the more the lranian sovereign feels the need for United States sup-
port. the more conciliatory he can be in the area of pricing.

1].
FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L?
FUN "I’VICIM. "8K (INLY

Furthermore.suullndvpendenl or the Iranian government's attitude. the price
adjustments that began In January I979 will depend to n great extent on the
eerket situation, which is characterized by increasing tensions following
the severe reduction in Iranian exports over the last two weeks.

Finally. on a more general level. one of the main conclusions to be drlbﬂl
free the lrenian crisis concerns the instability of the policy. followed
by certain industrial nations. which connects the insurance of their petroleu-

supply replacceent with the support of regimes that are politicslly un-
popular and characterized as "pro-Heetern" in the OPEC countries. it is

strange to notice in this respect that in none of the OPEC countries con-
sidered “radical" is there any question. either on the part of their govern-

eonts or their oppositions. of interrupting petroleum exports destined for
the Hestsrn nation or Japan.

Once again. events in Iran show that the best method of ensuring the security
of oil supplies is to reconcile the oil requirements of the consueing nations
with the national interests and actual develop-eat needs of the exporting
nstions end by no eeans with the interests of feudal and corrupt regiles.

COPYRIChT: 1978 Afrieue-Asie

9386
080: 6600

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFFICIAL "SR ONLY

ISIAH.

roam 210N181“ LEADER ADVOCATES PALESTIRIAN STATE
Poris PARIS M76“ in French 29 Dec 78 pp 72-73

[Interview with Dr Nam- Goldnsn. for-er president of the world Jewish
Congress. by lien Porat: “The United States Should Put Pressure on Begin";
Paris. date not given]

[Text] The attitude of intransigence of the Israeli
Governnent in the present peace negotiations with Bgypt
does not have the coaplete approval of the world Jewish
co-unity. Par tron it. as is evidenced by this inter-
view with Dr Nahu Goldaan by our colleague Den Porat.
Over 83 years of ago, Dr Nahus Gold-an. who lives in
Paris. is the lost prestigious leader of the Jewish
Diaspora in the world. Until 2 years ago (he has still
not been replaced) he was president of the Uorld Jew-
ish Congress. the organisation at the top of the hier-
archy of Jewish con-mities in the world. As the head
of the Zionist aovcnent which underlies the state of
Israel. Dr Gold-en had negotiated with Chancellor Kon-
rad Adonauer the reparations paid by Ger-any to the
Jews. Goldman was nentioned several tines in connection
with an important position in the Israeli Govern-ant.
today. his views are rarely appreciated by Jerusalem

Question: You have been steadily pessinistic since the start of the nego-
tiations. You even said: "take care, this cannot succeed." ﬂhy were you
pesainiatic when so any others were optimistic?

Answer: I have been claining for the past 10 years that without the large-
scale intervention of the United States in the Middle last through pressure.
peace will not cone about. In October 1978 I stated that the party really
responsible for the lack of peace in the Riddle East was not Israel or the
Arabs but rather the United States which. for reasons of douestic policy

and in order not to cooperate t-oo closely with the Soviet Union in the liiddle
East. has supported Israel's policy which consisted in the Isintenance of the
status quo as long as possible.

13

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i told President Anwar al-Sadat in Jerusales: ”You have done a very couru-

geous. thing but you will not achieve rapid success. You say need a lot of
tine. ‘

The great merit of Sadat is to have convinced nunerous Israelis that there

are Arabs who want peace. When I had said the ease thing I was treated as
naive and a sinpleton.

Question: Egypt is now posing the conditions that you know. especially a
schedule to set up Palestinian autonony and the cancellation of Article 6
[of the draft peace treaty] which gives absolute priority to this treaty

over all of Bgypt‘s other conitsents. especially those with the Arab states.
would you accept these terns?

Answer: Before answering. I wish to specify that I as speaking in any sane.

on an individual basis. and that I do not represent either Israel or the
Zionist novement in any way.

I believe that these discmsions about Article 6 and the linkage of the
treaty with the Palestinian probles are legal absurdities which are excuses
not to sign the peace treaty. What does the famous linkage signify? Is it

indispensable because the Americana stress the need for a solution for the
Palestinians?

I want to say that I adnire Prime Minister Menachen Begin a lot. lie is

the nest noderate of the lot. lie is sore soderate than the late Hrs Golda
Heir was and such sore soderate than Yitshak Rabin and Shison Peres. The
unfortunate thing is that a certain left wing in Israel is such more extrem-
ist than Begin and refuses to accept the need to return the occupied [Arab]
territories. But without a solution of the Palestinian problem there will

never be peace and a separate peace with Anwar al-Sadat would not last 3
sonths.

Question: Do you believe in the autonomy proposed by Begin to the Palestin-
inns?

Answer: I do not believe that the Palestinians would be content with autonosy

for long. Hithin 2 or 3 years a Palestinian state could be established.
linked perhaps with Jordan.

Question: “not would you do if you were the Israeli Prise Minister?

Answer: I have never had the ambition of bacosing prime sinister in the
past and I do not have the anbition of occupying that position at sy age.
But if I were in the Prime Hinister's place I would help establish a Pales-
tinian state federated with Jordan and Israel. This would be a kind of
European Canon iiarket in the Middle Bast.

II.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: Could you do that in a month as [former Prench Prine Minister]
Pierre Hondos-Prance had nods peace in Indochina?

Answer: I would need 2 or 3 aonthe.

Question: You talk of Merican pressure. How could it be applied?

Answer: In May 1978 the United States ambassador in Israel cans to see no
and told as: "My friend. I cone to see you with a note pad and you will
dictate to as your proposals as to how to pressure Israel." I replied:
"Hy dear ambassador. if I had to tell you how to put pressure in Israel
you would have to resign toaorrow iron your diplomatic post. no you lack
the nuns to influence Israel?" the whole of international politics con-
sists in pressure: Pressure on France, pressure of France on Oar-any,

of Germany on Britain. and so on. International politics is not a girls'
club.

Question: Specifically. what could the United States do to achieve peace?

Answer: I shall give you an ample. My friend Henry Kissinger. who is
again very popular in Israel. was at one ties heredity that entire country.
That was when the Israelis refused to lake concessions to iaplelaent Kissin-
ger's policy with Egypt and Syria. no then practiced what is called a "ties
of reflection” in his relations with Israel. he did not exert pressure but
said that he needed ans for Vietnam. that the bank did not sign the checks--
in short. he found all kinds of excuses, and 6 aonths later Israel accepted
90 percent of what it had refused earlier. Accordingly. I take good care not
to give advice to the Moricans. But it is obvious that they have the nesns
to cause peace to cone about in the Middle lost.

Question: In other words, you wish Israel to capitulate?

Answer: This is not capitulstion. If Israel won territories thanks to
wartiae action and is forced by international politics to return these terri-
tories. that is not capitulstion. history has 100 era-plea of this kind.

Question: Should pressure not be applied on Egypt. too? Sadat scans to be
right all down the line and Begin. wrong.

Answer: Yes, pressure should also be appled to Egypt. Regarding the
establish-ant of diplomatic relations uenachel legin is right.

Question: Should aabaassdors be sxchmged i-ediatcly between Jerusalem
and Cairo?

Answer: I-ediately. because to drag things out would soon that the latter
is not serious. Regarding tourien and trade, i-ediste action is needed
because that would set an example for the other Arabs.

15

’ roe omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

however. I on ooepletely in ngreeeent with Sodet thet he cennot eppeer to be
en individuel who plens e seperete pesos with Isreel beceuse thet would be
the end of his cereer.

Question: You ltnow Menschen Begin well. would you eey thet Begin is en
obetecle to peace?

Answer: No. on the contrsry. Begin is now e noderete leeder. Begin eur-
prieed so with hie "flexibility" end ebility to conproniee. he is resdy to
return the whole of the Sinei end he is reedy to liquidete the [Isreeli] set-
tlenente in the Sinei. ‘rhet is e greet eecriiice for hie for it constitutes
e rejection of his .50 yes're oi politicel endeevore.

Begin ie not the obstecle. Bother. the ohetscle is Isreeli policy which he-
gen with Devid Ben Gurion end wee reinforced by Golds heir who wee e greet
personality who I hevs elweye ednired but who wee so strong thet her nie-
tshes end errors were eleo very big. Everything thet she did wee grend—
her successes es well es her setheche.

I ednire Begin for heving bed the courege to make so my concessions. Thet

is why he conesup egsinst nejor opposition within hie psrtywto such e point
thet he risks losing hie nejority.

e

Question: Beceuse of hie perty‘l

Answer: No. beceme of the nubers of the Iereeli Lehor Perty who would
not epprove eutonony [for the Pelestiniens]. This is e norel scendel be-
ceuee even Ben Gurion would never has scted in this wey. ‘rodey there is
no one in Isreel who hes the prestige end euthority of Ben Curion to unite
the kind of concessions thet he would heve sgreed to Inks. Do you retell
the courege thet Ben Gurion needed to issue the order for Isrsel to with-
drew free the Sinei in 1957 efter the Suez wer?

Question: "he: is your opinion of the ettitude of the leedere of the Rest
Benk of the Jorden who refuse to negotietet

Answer: In Iy opinion. the Pelsetinien leedere of the Rest Bent would
col-lit e nsjor error if they refused to negotiate. They heve to negotiete.
If they don't they will pley into the heads of the Jewish extrenists.

Question: Do you believe thet Moshe Dsyen is nore noderete then Begin todey‘l
Answer: Yes. without question. Deyen eccepted things thet Begin refused.

But he does not heve greet influence beceuse he hes no perry hocking behind

hill. Deyen depends entirely on Begin end. et esch movement. Begin cen fire
hill. The nest noderete officiel is the Isreeli minister of defense. Beer
Heir-en.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

Question: There is talk in France of a reactivation of anti-Senitisn. Is
that correct? '

Answer: No. Since world Uer II and Auschwits. the non-Jews have treated
the Jews with hid gloves. without Auschwitz there would not have been a
Jewish state. If eve-thirds of the ushers of the United Nations voted for
the partition [of Palestine]. that was because of Auschwits. At that tine
[191.7] even the Russians and the deoncracies felt the need to coepenaate
the Jews. But that is beginning to change. During the last few years, in
any of any speeches. I have warned the Jews about the end of this favorable
attitude of non-Jewish public opinion and the surfacing of a certain degree
of nonalisetion. that is. new evidence of anti-Sanitisn.

If Israel continues to project the appearance of being the obstacle to peace
in the public opinion. I fear that a wave of anti-Sanitise will recur in a

few years. Not a new Auschwitz. to be sure. but an intellectual enti- sanitien
that is already being felt very strongly in the United States. Hy son, who

is a professor at Harvard University, tens ne about a "discretionary" anti-
Senitisn lurking in sons way in the background but which is not articulated.
Today, anti-Sanitise is still a shadow. but that is threatening to change.

Question: French television has just bought the series of fill sequences
on the Holocaust. Is that a good thing?

Answer: Yes. It is very good from the viewpoint of enlightening pwlic
opinion about Auschwitz. Free the intellectual viewpoint I wee told that

it was a disaster. a "kitsch," a lenon. Elie Uiesel. who is the greatest
writer on the holocaust. declared: "For the Jews this fill is an insult
against God." however, I think it is a good thing that ﬁre Sinne Veil
[French Minister of health and Panily] should have asked for its presentation
and that French television should have shown it.

0’
Question: Finally. as far as peace is concerned are you pessimistic or

optiuia tic?

Answer: Despite everything that I have said. for the first tile I an very
optiniatic about peace because the United States needs it. America fears
new problems—oil and others. Then. everybody is tired of the Israeli prob-
lee. of this snall state which for the past 30 years has occupied the atten-
tion of ptblic opinion every day, that is, note than China and the Soviet
Union combined. In the long run the non-Jews will no longer accept this
state of affairs. And since the United States is the decisive factor and
Israel cannot exist without Alerican support, I an sure that President
dis-y Carter will achieve peace. The genuine guarantee is its for-a1 under-
writing by the United States and the Soviet Union and the tenorery presence
of United States forces in the Middle East as in Genny. the Israeli
thesisaccording to which such a presence would be a violation of sovereignty
is absurd. The Census would be very concerned if the Americans were to plan
to withdraw one of their reginents. The Soviet Union is now prepared to

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pnrticipnto in providing such n gaunt“ vith tho Unitnd Staten. Io: m
thou rmono I an optiliotic lo: the first tin in 30 yarn about putt.
It in tho indilponnnblo condition for land'- bow-in; what it met In.
that in. tho opiritunl contor of tho mm poopio. I! it do“ not cruto
such a cantor the Jovian oxiotonco risk. being brought into qmtion can
note.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 par Cogodiprouo 8.A.

2662
080: 6006

18
you OﬂICIAl. U83 OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

SOCIAL DEGRADATION. OFFICIAL CORRUPTION DESCRIBED
Paris JEUNE APRIQUB in French 13 Dec 78 pp 79-80

[Article by Moha-ed Selhani: "The Other Face in Morocco--the One which Is
Not Hell Known and which People Do Not Talk About--the Face of the Little
Moroccan"]

[Text] Three years after the epic of the Green March. which made it possible
to recover the Saharan provinces. the faces always indicate the people's
satisfaction over being Moroccans. "Tomorrow we will be rich". the Moroccans
are fond of saying. for recent discoveries of petroleum (JEUNB AFRIQUB

No. 929) have nade them very optimistic. The country is in a state of
effervescence, end its emotional state is accentuated even more by a free
press intoxicated by this new acquisition.

Morocco has set out on the road to democracy. Nevertheless. it has three
years of austerity ahead of it. The transitional three-year plan will go
into effect beginning in December. From now on, there is to be no lore
waste and no more negligence. It will be necessary to face up to diffi-
culties, and difficulties certainly do exist. if one only were to consider
those which a number of Moroccans encounter in their everyday life.

A child loitering under the indifferent gaze of the proprietor of the fruit
and vegetable stall. an adolescent who sniles seductively at a Kuwaiti tour-
ist, a noisy native quarter exuding filthiness and a cafe tesning with sad-
looking unemployed nen--that Morocco is not to be found in a Mediterranean
Club hermetically sealed to the natives nor in.a ksid's tent surrounded by
"nokhaznis". and it is still less to be found around an organized meal of
whole lanb roasted on a spit. And yet nothing is more perceptible than the
poverty of the little people. It is in every street and every douar. It
is a poverty which is not entirely explained by the state of war in which
the country has been existing for four years. even though great efforts are
accepted on behalf of an army which fights beyond its borders--since some
of its elements traveled thousands of kilometers to go and "set things in
order” in Sheba. To be sure, the lives and the chances of survival of a
minority are not altered or threatened in the slightest. The middle class

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has never been as comfortable as it is now. four years after the fighting in
the Sahara began. There are always people whom a war makes rich. The king
himself recognized the truth of this statement when he told the members of
Parliament, on 13 October 1978, "I will not conceal from you the fact that.
if we continue on the path we are now following. we will end up by being a
society in which the poor are very poor and the rich excessively rich. The

gap will become a gulf which will soon be transformed inescapably into a
differentiation between classes."

The king used the future tense. perhaps out of discretion. for he knows
better than anyone else that those differences already exist. The policy
pursued in the past by the colonialists, giving the city privileges over

the country, has left perceptible traces. For example, the wild exodus con-
tinues. For another example, the Horoccans have recently been keeping track
of the case--one case among a number of others--of a village located in the
Good Hellah Valley. between Rabat and Casablanca. The inhabitants support
themselves by market gardening. One day, enormous conduits were installed
in the valley which were intended to supply the city of Casablanca with
drinking water. Since then, there has been no more potable water in the
village and the population has been loud in its criticism of the expenditure
of millions of dirhams (l dirham - 1.05 French francs) to produce such an
absurdity. This demonstrates the lack of foresight, the tendency to ex-
temporize and the indifference of certain people in responsible positions
with respect to the underprivileged population.

Is it necessary to recall the corruption, which has become chronic. and from
which only the humble suffer? The poor man has to struggle against an un-
scrupulous administration. Ita slowness and lack of a sense of responsibility
discourage the most optimistic. Go visit a town hall in any village at all.
There you will see a riotous assemblage of people who have been waiting for
hours, in the greatest disorder. to be received by an employee of the office.
Some of them have come seeking a simple official certificate. but they have

to wait for two days or three days. and sometimes even a whole week. unless
a hand that is "in the know" slips a bill into a pocket of the employee dia-

creetly. For such a traffic policeman, no infraction is serious if it is
"covered" by a few dirhams.

This attitude of the administration paralyzes the country's vital forces.
while we were there, we met a Moroccan executive who. up until a month ago,
was managing a small enterprise producing chemical products for use in agri-
culture. A.T. is a chemical engineer who was educated in Europe. At the
age of 32, he already has accumulated a history of solid experience in manage-
ment through occupying positions of responsibility in the administration and
in the private sector. Two years ago. A.T. established an enterprise pro-
ducing agricultural material in which he employed about a dozen people. His
officially declared turnover was 10,000 dirhams. but he already owns two
trucks. His knowledge of agricultural matters helped him to expand his en-
terprise. which became one of the largest in the region within a year.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then the engineer found himself obliged to borrow money, but no bank was
willing to come to his assistance. giving as their reason the absence of any
guarantee and his alleged lack of a reputation in the business world. As for
the local authorities. they added to A.T.'s troubles by the slowness with
which they delivered certain administrative papers. He got the impression
that he was the victim of a plot aimed at discouraging him, and they succeeded
in doing so since he ended up by ceding his business to a big coapany.

"One has no confidence in Moroccan managerial personnel," says this engineer.
"One considers them incapable of thinking and exercising leadership. It is
still the colonial complex which prevails. Believe it or not, private
businesses give preference to a European, even if he is inexperienced. and
even in the government a European is better received than a Moroccan. This
proves that the Moroccans are still far from considering the-selves indepen-
dent since their government functionaries remain mentally colonized." He
adds: "The liberal society is not favorable to a small business. which is
stifled by the big ones. and the state does not do anything about it. In our
country, people try to copy France too much, without taking the actual situa-
tion in this country into account. Quite simply, it is inpossible for
Moroccan executives to be creative, so they live at the expense of others."

A.T.'s story is just one example along many others. for one rarely finds a
small business in Morocco which succeeds in making its way if the person
responsible for its management does not bear a well-known name. That state
of affairs is aggravated on the level of the small fellah, who lived on his
small plot of ground not long ago but new is obliged to allow hisself to be
absorbed by his rich neighbor. In agricultural regions such as the Charb,
properties 6.000 and 8,000 hectares in size are not rare, and a single person
owns three or four farms simultaneously.

The inequalities which our engineer finds revolting do not cause the man in
the street to shudder. He is too used to then, and then there are the imme-
diate difficulties which have to be solved every hour of the day. That is
what Khadija T., 15 years of age, of Beni Mellal. thinks. She has never
been to school, and she has been traveling around the country by hitchhiking
for two years. Naturally. she pays for her journeys "in kind" and asks for
a small sun of money in addition. This sort of life was imposed on her by
her family in order to be able to bring up her six brothers and sisters. Al-
ready, Khadija has no illusions. "I have nothing against my parents. They
are so poor that there was no other solution for them than to send me out

to carry on this occupation. it will soon be six years since my father began
looking for a job--in vain. He is 70 years old." Khadija prefers to engage
in this "work" somewhere other than in Beni Mellal. "Perhaps sons day I will
need to find myself a husband."

hashish and the Policeman
Khadija's fate does not sitr up the people very much. The girls of her age

who haunt the working-class districts of the cities are numerous, just like
the young boys who spend their tins loafing all day long, taking hashiah and

21
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

doing a number of other thinga--including sliding a piece of bread into an
exhaust pipe to bring it out covered with residual gasoline. There are
numerous examples. and acne of them border on the absurd. In May. two in-
habitants of Sidi Allal Tnzi (Gharb) who had gotten into a quarrel went to
find a sergeant of the local police. he reconciled then by demanding 1.500
dirhnms from each of then. In that affair. although the police-en's attitude
is revolting. that of the plaintiffs is distressing. Are the Horoccsns so

accustomed to such behavior that they no longer even think of defending
themselves?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1978

9266
C80: 6400

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

BRIE-1‘8

ADD lows-minister of Finance Ahdslletif Ghioeassi presided on 29 Novoober in
Robot ever the coroseny of the signing of three loon ogroooonto with the "ri-
cen Developent Bonk (AD!) in the presence of H'henod Douiri. sinister of equip-
oent end notional proootion. and Abdelkeder ﬂensliaono. moident ond aenersl
oensger of the me (Nations) Econonic Dovelopoont Bonk). Kvaao Pordvar. pres-
ident end general Donner of the ADD. signed the ease-onto on hoholf of that
institution. Mounting to neorly 80 oillion dirheoe (l dirhao - 1.10 franc
opproxiaetely). the three loan agree-onto ore intended for use in {inencina the
projects of tho 31d Dries Dos {or irrigatinz the limo ores end winging drink-
ing voter to Horrokech tron the neighboring chonnel (loen mated to the 018?.
Notional Office for Drinking Voter . es well eo providing e line of credit to
the 8mm. During the corooony held for the signing of the Men oareeoente.
Abdellatit Ghissossi pointed out that AD) aeoietonco to horoceo not oosoo to

noncntricsn countries. The non-Afrioon etoten yorticipatiu in this looting
decided to nest ogein in Abidjon tron 9 to 12 Jenuary 1979 in order to parade
the study of the docuoento given then by the ADB mrsuent to their umiotlon
with thst institution. The 70 delegates umsonting 23 non-Afrieon countries
have accepted certain conditions proposed by the m for ooahorehi . on
[Paris MRCHES TROPIOAUX 3r maximums in French 15 Dee vs p 3:

Abderrai'ii Cusoooue. BRPh's ashore.) oonoger. end by Dr Ron end hr Keller. rep-
resentatives of the KlOcknor group. during a conoony presided over by houoea
Saadi. oinister of energy end nines. in the presence or Taiob Shani. secretory
zenersl oi‘ the hinistry of Energy snd Hines. Karbid hohaood. director of oinoo
in the sane ninistry. hoheoed Diouri. 3831's oocretoq «nerd. ond ooverel
other individuals. Accordint to tho terns of this mount. o considerable

23

FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (WIN

provides for en expeneion of the cooperetion between the am end the Julienne:
nroup. pertiouiu-ly in rum to the expiention end expioitetion of ureniue.
for which negotietione en underuey. In e speech siwn on thin r- union.
honoee Seedi etxeued the ieportence of the Aeegonr deposit. which an die-
cevend team! the beginning of the century end whoee neeervee m ebundent.
{my [Pu-u mom mommx s1 mum-us in Punch 22 Dec 78 p $937

0801 M00 £80

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY