APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00040042-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040042-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8406
18 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON JAPM
(FOUO 13/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM000400424)
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumurized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translit; ated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSBIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8406
18 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(F000 13/79)

Coursms PA

POLITICAL AND SOC IOLOGICAL

Obits-Nakaaone Meeting Draws Attention
(Tekehiko ‘I‘akahaahi; MINICHI DAILY NW5, 28 Mar 79) . l

'MAINICHI' on Piryubin Rejection of Japanese DIET Protest
(MINICHI snmun. 26 Mar 79) . 3

'ASAlil ' Coments on Sine-Japan working-Level Trade
(Editorial: ASAHI SHINBUN. 19 Mar 79) .................... S

'YNIURI' Helcouce Concessions at Geneva North-South Debate
(Nitorlal; ‘1'!!! DAILY YMIURI. 20 ﬂat 79) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

'ASARI' Rape Ohira'a 'Negative' Stance in Scandal Probe
(Editorial; ASARI EVENING mos, 23 liar 79) ............... lO

MILITARY

65!)? Chief Says Japanese Defense Buildup Inevitable
(THE JAPAN TIMES, 29 Pier 79) 12

Colmiat Calls (or indirectly Aiding PRC Military Buildup
(.‘tAINICHI DAILY REVS, 29 Her 79).... 13

FCONCIIIC

'AKAﬁA'l'A' Criticizes v.5. Pressure on Japan
(JPS, 26 liar 79) ............. ..... ....................... lb

'YOHIJIRI ' Views European Monetary System 'Hith Alam'
(Editorial: T85 DAILY YGﬂJIRI. 21 Hot 79) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 16

Top Economic Planner Hints at Policy Snitch
(Harman DAILY news. 26 Mar 79) 18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

con-rims (Continued) Page

Scholar Bxaninea Corruption in Japanese Induatrtal Society
(Tadanort Ntahiyala; ASA"! JANARU, 23 Feb 79) ........... 19

Rate of Increase in Foetal Savings Slackene
(NIHON KBIZAI sutunun, 13 ﬂat 79) ....................... 27

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I‘tl|.|'l'|tiltl. I\N|) SOCIOIJIHIUM.

lllllRA-NAKASONI'Z NI'Zl-Z‘I‘ING DRAWS ATTENTION

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00050R000100040042-0

'l-Ikvn NAINHIIII IMIIN NEWS tn English 23 Mar 79 p lo

l/H'l lrlr Iw ‘l'ukclltku Taknhnultl:

l'l't-xt. I

Prtme hllhlstet Nuayoeht
Ohlrn end Yuuhlm Nebulae
met tor a ale-how talk on
March 22 at amt. Bestdee
(mm and Nalmohe. the
taecttnn was attended by two
mutual trtehds. team with
(‘htet Cahlnet Secretary
ltolmmlte Tanaka and Prime
hlinleter OhIra's south-law end
seeretery Morita.

It I: mute that Prime
Mlhlstet Ohlnvastheoeeuho
lm'lled Nahuoue to this
meetlng. The penal! political
sltuahon does not seem to have
been taken up at this meeting
although Natmohe pulsed the
:mtruetlom that Ohtre m at
the uranhntlen ceremony at the
Ilrtem Academy.

chettheleu. the tact that
Ohtra and Nahum had a
lengthy tall: loathe: he: mat
nnlttleal signiﬁcance.

In the tut LOP pmldenttel
:lecllon. the one whom
«akuone erltlelud most
merely was Ohm. After the
:tlat't ol the OM“ Wh-
tlon. the Nahm (aetloh has
acted tn eooeett vtth the
Fukudataetlohasmaetwhh
inﬂuetm'.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02109:

There must have been a deep
leaeen why Nam. the hoes
at that Nahum (action. was
lnvtted by Prune httnlster
Ohm. lh thehaet. Immediately
utter the tomatloh ot the Sate
edmlntetnllon. Nahum we:
lhmmlmahutmmhuam

But shortly attervard.
Nam attend the eahtnet
as er at W and
later heeme dlreetoe metal
ot the Defense Agency. lt tseatd
that as the person mutate
toetheﬂnaheesottheﬂehsone
mumumw
remat- letevet to a antl-
matutreampoeltton.

When KM Tmha end
Takeohhodacemetedlotthe
presldeaey ol the Llheral-
Demeetatte Patty. Nelmooe
matted 1m. Although
tnmtheeameeonstttueheyu
Mode. Nnasohe My
mldnotactthahyothetny.

Latet'. Nehaaoee became the
hthlstetotletematloeal'n'ade
and Industry tn the Tenalta
CahloeLLDPsecremyuheral
cadet the httht Cahtuet. end
ehalrmah ot the LDP‘:
emeeutlt-c eomelt under the

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Nnnntat-ho llo Inga"!

wold nn tat
pteatdenttel
watched vlth
by when a
bean eetlettlt
setou 0&1
ohtehed In tl
leathanhedh

MB!”

pewtenhth
strategy I: at
ettecttve then
obtain the cot
Ohm tectlon
Tenn tattle
etnteomld
mullet: ot
Mild teettm

CIA-ROP02-00880R0001000‘0042-0
23§3=%§§§§E§§;
: ”E‘ziaagi 5:
“giggfgiiiégir
i?gé-§§§§‘§5§g
;zaEE§§;§E§§§é
aggsgigggégiig
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIOOICAL

'MAlNlCﬂl' 0N PXRYUIIN IEJBCTION OF JAPANESE DIET PROTEST
Tokyo HAINICHI sutNBUN in Japanese 26 Mar 79 norning edition p 3 0"

[Text] After it vas discovered that a Soviet nilitary buildup was under-
way on two of the four Soviet-held northern islands--Kusashiri and Btorofu--
the DIET adopted "resolutions concerning the promotion of the settlenent

of the northern territories issue" and wanted then delivered to the Soviet
authorities. However, the Soviet authorities refused to accept then on
grounds that the so-called northern territories issue was nonexistent. They
said that it was tantamount to a malicious act of interference in Soviet
domestic affairs for Japan to lake a fuss over this issue and that the
Soviet Union had no interest whatsoever in it. Details of how the Soviet
Union rejected the Japanese DIST resolutions were belatedly revealed on

25 March.

Earlier. on 5 February, the government had denanded, through Soviet Albassa-
dor to Japan Polyanskiy. that the‘Soviet Union stop deploying additional
troops and building ailitary establishments on the two islands. The Soviet
ambassador rejected the Japanese Government demand and called it an "act of
interference in donestic affairs."

The details of the Soviet authorities' reaction show that since the signing
of the Japan-China Treaty of Peace and Friendship last sun-er. the Soviet
Union has further strengthened its stand that "there exist no unresolved
postwar problems between Japan and the Soviet Union.”

The DIET resolutions were adopted on 20 and 21 February respectively by the
House of Representatives and the house of Councilors with the approval of
all parties except the Communist Party.

The lower house resolution said: "From the viewpoint of promoting peaceful
and friendly relations between Japan and the Soviet Union. it is regrettable
indeed that the northern islands of Hobo-s1. Shikotan, Kunashiri and
Etorofu--inherent Japanese territories--have not yet been returned and. to
make the natter worse, the Soviet Union has lately been building military

3
FOR OFFICth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

establishments on Kuneshiri and Btorofu." It then called on the govern-
ment to: 1) Demand the Soviet Union to immediately stop its military action
which goes against the spirit of peaceful settlement of the northern terri-
tories issue; and 2) Try to resolve the territories issue at an early date
and strive to establish durable relations of peace and friendship with the
Soviet Union by concluding a peace treaty.

The upper house resolution read about the same as the lower house resolution
with the exception that the upper house demanded the removal of not only
military but also other facilities (such as fishery plants) from the two
islands.

Acting upon these resolutions, the government on 26 February tried to deliver
them to the Soviet Foreign Ministry through Ambassador to Moscow Uomoto.
Uomoto met Vice Foreign Minister Firyubin and tried to deliver the resolu-
tions to him. However, Firyubin refused to talk with him. saying, "I have
learned from press reports that the Japanese DIET has adopted resolutions

but let us not waste our time with this issue."

Firyubin reportedly told Uomoto: l) The so-called northern territories issue
is nonexistent and he has no intention of talking about a nonexistent issue;
2) Japan is making a big fuss over this issue even though it runs against
statement by a Japanese leader that "we want to smoothly develop Japanese-
SOViet relations," and; 3) This fuss is not compatible with developing good-
neighborly and friendly relations between the two countries and constitutes

a malicious act of interference in domestic affairs.

When Uomoto asked Firyubin to accept the resolutions, saying, "they are
short and will not take long to read. so please let me carry out my home
government's instructions," the Soviet vice foreign minister said. "I have
no intention of accepting the resolutions." Firyubin reportedly told
Uomoto: The resolutions are addressed to the Japanese Government and we
have nothing to do with them. Japan may be interested in this issue but

the Soviet Union is not in the least interested. Firyubin is said to have
refused to even listen to the resolutions. This is the first time details
of how the Soviet Union rejected and "killed" the DIET resolutions have been
revealed.

COPYRIGHT: Mainichi Shinbunsha 1979

C50: 4105

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLCML USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASAHI' COHHENTS 0N SING-JAPAN HORKING-LBVBL ’RADE
Tokyo ASAHI SHINBUN in Japanese 19 Mar 79 morning edition p 5 0H
lﬁditurial: "A Restructuring of Japan-China Trade is Urgently Needed?"]

[Excerpts] Chinese vice minister of foreign trade Liu Xiwen has arrived
in Japan to discuss expansion of Japan-China trade with our government and
business officials. Trade negotiations this time will center on extending
and expanding the long-term trade agreement signed between the two coun-
tries last February and on financing problems. It is hoped that the con-
cerned authorities of the two countries will demonstrate a spirit of
reciprocity in settling problems and put Sino-Japanese trade on a path of
steady growth.

The volume of two-way Japan-China trade last year reached 5 billion dollars.
From late last year to January this year. various negotiations on exporting
plants to China. including one on equipment for the Shanghai naoshan Iron
and Steel Complex, were wound up, bringing the contract total to 3.7 bil-
lion dollars.

hut, in late February. Just before these contracts were to go into effect.
the Chinese National Machinery Import and Export Corporation. The Importer,
sent telegrams to Japanese firms saying. "the PRC Government has not yet
approved the contracts because the credit question remains unsettled between
nur two countries." This threw cold water on overenthusiastic Japanese
firms. As of 10 March. the total of contracts on which China had sent with-
holding notices reached 2.7 billion dollars.

Speculation is rife as to why China has caused this state of affairs. But.
judging from statements by high-ranking Chinese Government officials and
Japanese business officials, the direct cause can be traced to the gap
between trade negotiations and the payment issue. At the same time. it
cannot be overlooked that China's need to review its economic development
plan may be behind the complications. In China, priority was given to the
Iron and steel industry as a lay to industrial development. But, it has

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

been pointed out that shortcomings of this disproportionate and "isolated
prinritf'have begun to manifest themselves. One such example is Wuhan
Steel Mill. There a hot rolling plant and a silicon steel plate plant were
built with the help of Nippon Steel Corporation, but these plants are not
In full operation due to a power shortage, thus barring full returns from
the investments.

According to Vice Premier Li Xiannian, China has come to notice these
shortcomings and "is now reviewing major construction plans to make adjust-
ments.“ However, this does not mean a modification of the "four moderniza-
tions" line. It should rather be taken as a realinement of priorities to
achieve an overall balance with a view to making plans more effective. It
is naturally expected that as the overall economic plan is reviewed, plant
Imports from Japan will also be reviewed.

People in some quarters in our country have long sounded an alarm about
China's ability to pay. China has lost no time in noticing this problem
and beginning to take remedial steps. This awareness will assist the
Hound development of trade.

Needless to say, Japan's financial cooperation with china is the key to
solving payment problems. In this connection, Japan has come up with three
ways of financing. First, Japan proposed to finance plant exports by
deferred payment. last August and September Japan Export-Import Bank and
the People's Bank of China held talks to discuss this proposal, but the
talks fell through over the issue of whether payments should be made in yen
or in dollars. At the current talks, Japan will propose as a compromise
that payments be made half in yen, half in dollars.

The second method is dollar loans by Japanese rity banks. when Komoto, then
Hiti Minister, visited China, Chinese official: showed interest in this
method. The negotiations on this method of financing are now in the final
stage. According to the Japanese proposal, 22 Japanese banks will provide

2 billion dollars in loans. in addition. 6 billion dollars will be advanced
as stopgap loans. The interest on the loans will be based on the Eurodollar
interest rate (11 percent per annum). Althougl the interest rate is rather
high, this method, if agreed upon, will lead tt the activation of withheld
rnntracts .

The third method is the Export-import Bank's sr-called "No. 8 loans" avail-
able for specific purposes such as resources development and loans from the
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund. These loans will be made in yen, and
their interest rates will be relatively low. But they are available only
for llmlted purposes.

On the other hand, European countries are very positive in financing. in
the Brltish Government, there is an agency called the Export Credit
Insurance Bureau which insures the loan risks cf city banks and subsidizes
interest on loans. This enables British banks to make large loans to China.
lhur country should study this practice.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An a remlli of Slou-th. normalization. ".8. firms are expected to enter
(In! Chinese market. On the other hand. Secretary of Treasury Blumeuthal
lold Japanese Finance Minister Kaneko that "he is afraid that Japan any
provide excessively favorable treatment to China in terns of interest
raten." Such fears sten from misunderstanding. But we cannot overlook the
fact that such fears are prevalent in Europe and the United States. The
acnle of chlna's economic construction is so huge that even massive
financing cooperation provided by the United States, European countries and
Japan will not be sufficient. To diversify loan risks and to allay fears
in other countries. it nay be advisable for Japan to stand in the van of
international cooperation as suggested by the president of Pan American.

In some quarters in the United States. the concept of a china development
fund has been augmented. The United States has requested that the question
of Chlna trade be included on the agenda for the Tokyo sun-it talks. Japan
should not miss this opportunity to exchange frank opinions with the leaders
of other major industrial nations.

COPYRIGHT: Asahl Shinbun Tokyo "cache 1979

CS": 6105

7
FOK "FFHZIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'YOHIURI' HELCOHES CONCESSIONS AT GENEVA NORTH-SOUTH DEBATE
Tokyo Tilt: MILY YWIURI in English 20 Mar 79 p 2 0H
[Editor-ml: "Cons-on Fund closer"]

[Excerpts] The difficult probleun of establishing a cannon fund to stabil-
ize prices of primary products, which stirred heated debate in the past
between the North and the South, is heading toward solution in Geneva

negot ini ions .
We [come Concessions

We were very impressed by the concessions made by the South at Geneva this
time. The South showed realise and flexibility where once it voiced only
angry rhetoric and made proposals considered fantastic and unacceptable

by the North. however, the North also made several concessions. And this
is creating a pattern for useful dialog and negotiations between the richer

and poorer nations .

Although strongly opposing the Cannon fund three years ago, Japan later
switched to positive support when the South's position softened and this
country began to attach more importance to its relations with ASEAN [Asso-

ciation of Southeast Asian Nations).

The fact that Japan played a leading role in bringing about a compromise
is highly appreciated by ASHN member states, and this will be beneficial
in promot lug greater friendship between our country and ASEAN.

Trial-Error Approach

It is not yet clear how far the Canon Fund to be established on the basis
of this accord will go toward stabilizing prices of primary products in
the. South. He must be realistic and proceed on a trial and error basis.
After all, the problems between the North and South cannot be solved by
one action alone.

But with the Con-on Fund problem virtually out of the way, UNC‘IAD in Manila
can concentrate on a wide range of other problems. These include protection-
ist trade by advanced countries. protection of the interests of the South
FOli OFPlClAl. USE ONLY

ill rnkyu round m-rptlaiiunu. uxpnnaion of 0M (Official Development Aid)
and .n zurungt-r voice by the South on international currency problem.

we hope that lIM-m- and other problems can be overcome by tho South and
North booed on their experience in solving the Canon Fund problem For
instance, the South deaircn that the North promote international lpuclal-

ization with labor-intonach industries being tronsforrcd it- the South.
This makes good nonsc.

There how: boon suggestions that this specialization of inductries be
placed on the agenda of the Tokyo economic summit. Japan's attitude town:
this will be watched carefully by the South.

COPYRIGHT: The Daily Youiuri 1979

(:80: 1.120

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASMII' RAYS OIIIM'S 'NEOATIVB' STANCE IN SCANML PROBE
Tokyo ASAIll EVENING NEWS in English 23 liar 79 p 2 0d
[Editorlalz "Prenier's Responsibility")

i‘rext] Suspicious ovur the introduction of aircraft made by McDonnell-
Douglas Corp., Gruuaan Corp. and Boeing Co. keep on nounting. In the
resumning of witnesses by the Budget Couittee of the House of Councillors,
w.- iurther received the inpression of the possibility of politicians inter-
vening in the purchase of the aircraft. me clarification of facts by
govermaent itself is sought nore than ever before.

The teslhonlcs giVen by llachiro Knife. vice-president of Nissho-Iwai 00..
and Kunio Arlnori. for-er acting section chief of that fin's aircraft de-
part-eat, in the resumoning of witnesses served to deepen suspicions that

there night haVe been unsavory political aaneuverings and novenent of money
behind the sale of aircraft.

Frankly, we have to point out that the Diet's nethod of getting to the
facts lacks punch. This provides a sharp contrast with the enthusiasts the

Diet showed in cleansing politics and inquiring into the Lockheed incident
three years ago.

This may be due to the negative attitude of the ruling Liberal-Democratic
Party and the weakness of the opposition parties in clearing up the doubts.
That the opposition parties nalting the inquiry failed to liaise and lacked
naierial on the facts were vividly observed in the rest-toning of witnesses.
ll. cannot be said that such deficiencies respond to the expectations of

the people who seek to know where the political and noral responsibilities
llt'. ‘

we believe, howevur, that the Diet's handling of the case in a way is over-
shadowed by the political stance of Prime Hinister Nasayoshi Ohira. who
has supreme political responsibility. The results of a public opinion

poll conducted by the ASMiI snunwu indicate bluntly the people's view of
the prenier's posture on the suspicions surrounding the introduction of

the aircraft.

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPl’IClAl. USE ONLY

According to the surVey, 71 percent of those polled replied that they did
not believe the prime minister's stance toward clearing up the doubts was
"positive." This is much different to the evaluation the people gave of
for-er Prime Minister 'l'akeo Miki in the Lockheed case. lie want Prenier
Ohira to accept this stern reply and, as the supreme leader, renew his
determination to clarify the facts and establish political ethics.

That the prcmier's stance appears negatiVe to the public is probably due
to the strong ties he has with former Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka, the
principal in timocracy and money politics as well as the Lockheed scandal.

Also, it nay be that the premier, who assumed the post not long ago, is
cautious about Iaklng statenents on the case out of consideration of the
political situation, particularly the steering of his own party.

hoveVer, we want Prime Minister Ohira to consider the weight and influence
of the premiership. State-onto by the premier, endorsed by his awareness
and detersination as a political leader, have the power to change the polit-
ical situation. The possibility of goverment probing corruption in the

political and business circles in response to the expectations of the people,
who in turn depend on the leadership of a prime minister, is a lesson left

behind by the Lockheed case.

In the recent Diet resolution to clear up doubts and in the question in-
volving the ”meaning of witnesses, the premier has respected the "will
of the Diet." However, this is a "posture leaving everything up to the
Diet," averting political decisions that should be made by a prime mini.- -
ter. 1hc premier should not overlook the people's keen sense to fathom
his negative stance.

The results of the public opinion poll cite the cozy relations between polit-
ical and business circles as the first problem to be investigated. They not
only question the political and moral responsibilities of politicians who
are under suspicion, but also the political circles which are corrupt
structurally. To respond to those voices, various political forces, in-
cluding the prmier, should do their utmost in clearing up the doubts.

lie keenly feel the great distance lying between the government and the
people when we compare the premier's basic posture and the way various
parties are grappling with the use in response to the voices of the people.
It is the responsibility of the goverment first to bridge this gap. Espe-
cially, the responsibility of Prime Minister Ohira is extrnely, heavy.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening News 1979

C80: “20

ll

-.FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040042-0

MILITARY

FOR (ii-‘VICIM. "Si-1 ONLY

(:SIW liliiiii" SAYS .MI'ANKSH DEFENSE BUILDUI' [Hm/[TABLE

'i‘ukyn ‘I’iil-Z .lAi'AN TIMES In Familial! 29 Mar 79 p l

I‘l‘vxl |

(Iiil'VRIiZIIT:

‘32:":

ll L")

mmumma
«ammonium-mm
m «mom um In mm
WWymmmum-s
in the mm m
memmmwm
military MM and Sim-
Vieim m militia
m M ii W ior
nun in mite in m
mummhm
mm”.

The up osor amen.
”datum“
«muwumm
in: United Sides. m
mom militarily
with it» Middle nu. we
not Ju- io W in
m was in can-
ucmu «In tho «any at
"Mia.

“mutation“.
up «near oi Jam“: m

The Japan Tllvx l979

Ouliine. adopted by "m
In Odour ms.
mm.mummm
provisional coiling at "u-
oeume wily II les- uun one
pound oi tilt w national
«mm.

In his touch. Gm NW
mammal

.mmuwywum

hr Eli h laud um
mummy.

"When the uvmueui
Walkman-induce
mouiheIaMmm

lac! envisioned llai inc
mmmmm
Mam-lawman» ﬁx
M. it became mini)-
iliiiieuii to come: this Mai
("on line Soviet mlmaO‘
y) in Mania «In
ally the m «M oi the
osorwmrumn
ammonium.”
Me an Io «radically
min lilo mic-'1 Mm
me.mm
indimiioulrviidiycaiiiwl
maul mmumuﬂ
«manna—rum.“

12

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOOiOOMOMZ-O
HI l.l'l"tl€"

:tik til-‘l’ittliil. use: th|.\‘

titlIJIMNIS'l‘ CALLS l-‘tlll INDIRFCTIN MDINI. PRC MILITARY BUILDUI'

'rt-ltvu NAlNittili "MLY NHHS In lilmllsli 29 Mar )9 p :‘

[Erratum-upt- (Itelmttt: lay lit‘tllttllt‘icl’VL'I':
chxtI

Recently. thereha: been motmmlahitheaame
increasing public attention on range with that oi Sinaaoore
nationaldaienae.8oate trumpet (moo) or lion; lion: (9.6m
ahotdtiﬂhteettronttbeSoviet and tar below the m» tor
Union and the poor deiease ltaiyandSpata. ,
canabiiityoilaoan. Soothe a big portion oi that

Thewarntna ntaybeworth nonetoonrwdnationalltm
.tueninaio. A study into an lor Mae military spending:
economic angle comparing the must be llllltﬂ a bi: bite out oi
Soviet Union atth Japan and treSovietlantbeudneta.
otherlrceecnrmieLboaever. ltieooottiariyaaidhuﬁerope
aim the USSR to be rather thattheootentialetthetiaraav

matheratieastnotaebtgaeit

nationaltnconaeottheaorid'a
mmhytheUnioaBanhoi
Sutherland allow: the m7

Soviet mas national income at
876.200 million. abort oi
America'a SIM.“ million

The USSR. nith a population
oi 1Q million. may have the
advantage over the 0.8.. trlth a
W oi 215 million. in a
conventional land var.

lint the same mutilation that
mates a land var more ad-
vantage” lor thrSaviei Union
rule the oereaaita national
time In the Soviet Union to a
third oi that In America. The
Soviet aeranita aatlonai tn-

l'i'l‘Vl'liillt:

Pact organization to tight
conventional ware m
UntottheNATOeouiI-iee.

in iertna oi m national
Income.however.thecotnbined
total oi mot billion tor the
05.. Britain and Weat Ger-
many is well above the it
trillion tor the Soviet Union.
Poland. Eaat Germany and
othcritarsawl’aetcotnttriea.

it the two atihtary blocs are
to rootiitue thiamine the arms
race. the odds are clearly
enlist the Eastern bloceven it
the area oi competition is
ltlnltedtoEwooe.

When the area oi econo-
lnilnary rivalry is ealaraed to
include Asia. the Japanese
presence mahea it all the more
disadvantageoustoihel‘xtern
blot. At the present nehanee
rate. Japan's cross national

‘ltiui-lnl ii.ul\' lit-'42:, I97"

"Is the USSR a tilt: l'ou

income is t
uriiahovetl‘
It could
aotnewhat
apply the t
tradina m

economy as.
Is little doub
mnomy at I
with that ol t

In mean

military ex
olained tt
voiveniutti
hoping that
wilinotntal
setting the

odkv
FOR Ol’FlClM. USE ONLY

8(3ch

'AKAHATA‘ CRITICIZBS 11.5. PRESSURE 0N JAPAN
Tokyo .198 in Bnglish 091$ ONT 26 Her 79 09

[Text] Tokyo. 26 Her (JPS)--AKAHATA carried an editorial on 25 March.
entitled "0.8. Pressure on anan and the Ohirs Government." The gist
of the editorial follows:

"In preparation for the Economic Summit Conference in Tokyo scheduled for
late June (the sum-it conference of advanced countries), the 0.8. Govern-
ment is noticeably increasing its economic demands on Japan.

"we must not pass in silence the alarming contents of the 0.5. demand on
Japan now being reported... this clearly shows 0.8. interferences and
intervention into the Japanese economy. The u.s. demands on Japan do not
simply remain on the level of open market for individual goods. but include
a complete liberalization of the financial. industrial products. and agri-
cultural markets, and for increases in the shares of the military costs and
the overseas econoaic 'cooperation' costs.

"If the Japanese Government honors these demands. it will inevitably yield
serious and negative influences on Japan's economy and the people's living,"
uncompareble to the past blows dealt on the farmers and small and medium
sized producers by the liberalisation of markets for individual goods.

”Moreover. the 0.5. Government is strongly pressing the Japanese Government
to approve its unjustifiable demands. saying that the economic 'adjustment'
between Japan and the u.s. is the prerequisite for a 'auccess' of the Tokyo
su-it.

”Needless to say the serious crisis of world capitalism lies behind the
escalation of the 0.8. demands on Japan. But at present. the Ohira Govern-
ment gives weight to n 'success' in the Tokyo sumait. following the simul-
taneous local elections. in the political timetable, and dissolve the
lower house by autm to proclaim a general election on the strength of the
'auccess'. being placed in a predicament to yield substantially to the
unjustifiable 0.8. demands. [Oraf as received]

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Hhe Ohira Government iu actually showing a positive attitude toward the
recent proposal by 0.3. Ambassador to Japan Nike Mansfield for setting up
n 'Japan-U.s. Joint Research Group'. a per-anent institution [or inter-
terences in Japan. on institution for surveillance over Japan.

"Today...thc struggle for the establishment of the independent economic
diplomacy end econolic sovereignty. and for e conplete change in the
Japanese economy for the preferential service to the people has become more
important."

680: 4120

is
Fun urt‘lcm. use «mm
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

ECONGIIC

'YWUIRI'VIEWS EUROPEAN MONETARY SYSTDI WIT“ ALARM'
Tokyo 1113 DAILY 'YGCUIRI' in English 21 Her 79 p 2 0"
(Editorial: "EMS Cause for Alarm"]

[Text] we cannot help but view with alarm the asteblislaaent of the European
Monetary Syten (M) which seems to he a step toward forning a auch stronger
and probably more exclusive European Conunities (BC) economic bloc.

In March 1973, the EC created the so-called "snake," a joint monetary sys-
tem. Under this systen, the exchange rates among memher countries were
fixed while their rates were allowed to float against the-dollar. The Bc‘s
notive then was to maintain stability among its exchange rates.

however, Britain and Italy did not participate and hence departed from the
snake. It, therefore. evolved into what amounted to a West German mark bloc.

Given the differences in the rate of inflation among nations. it is extreme-
ly difficult to fix foreign exchange rates. his the BC most certainly knows
but nevertheless the ms. which binds the countries even more closely toge-
ther than under the snake. was inaugurated.

am of Paris. Bonn

Undeniably it was the political will of Rest Germany and France that
brought about the ms. They are believed to have lost all hope for the
dollar. which has been falling in value over the years, and wanted to cre-
ate a unified monetary systen for the EC.

However. the real intention of France and Heat Germany is not the formation
of a stable currency hloc but to strengthen the BC and an economic bloc.
And this seems to be in line with the strong body of opinion within the BC
to return to its original spirit and form a stronger trading bloc and a
bloc for long-term investment.

The he insists that the birth of the ms will not make it closed or exclu-
sive. however, we cannot believe that the BC. while taking measures to
bind its members lore closely together. will take itself more open to the

outside word.

16
run OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONtY

Japan an EC Target

During the Tokyo round. the ac strongly demanded the legalization of selec-
tive isport discrimination to protect any ac member from a sharp increase
in ieports [roe any country. The 80's Iain targets are Japan and the seni-
developed nations. Although the ac will probably not get its way because
of strong opposition. it says it sill interpret existing rules to enforce
selective import restrictions.

It should also be noted that French President Valery Giecard d'Estaing
proposed a conference of ac. the Arab Hbrld and Africa when the EMS was
approved. The other BC nations agreed. The ac already has concluded the
Lone Convention with 56 developing countries in Asia. the Caribbean and
the Pacific to strengthen economic tics.

It is apparent that the BC is bent on forming a large trading bloc with it-
self as the nucleus. Under the circumstances. it might be wise for Japan
to consider forming an economic bloc of its own.

COPYRIGRT: The Daily Yoniuri. Japan 1979

080: 6105

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BOONGtIC

TOP BCOWIC PM RIMS A'l‘ POLICY SHIN“
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY REVS in English 2‘ Hal: 79 p 5 OH

[Text] Japan's top national economic planner suggested on 23 March the
possibility of a switch in Japan's basic economic policy after September.
depending on international oil price developments.

Tokusaburo Kosaka. state minister and director-general of the Economic
Planning Agency. told an upper house budget co-aittee session that "if the
govertasent has to make some change in its basic economic policy lines, I
presume it vould be sometime during the second half of this year." lie
meant the October-Harch half of the coming fiscal year 1979.

He identified future international oil prices as the biggest factor that
might cause a policy switch.

Kosakn said the government wants to keep national economic growth steady
throughout the coming fiscal year, as it has been since the last quarter of
1978. But he admitted the need for an adaptable way of applying the na-
tional budget for fiscal 1979 according to economic conditions.

whether the goverment will concentrate most of its annual public works
spending on the first half of fiscal 1979 to keep stimulating business
“will be studied after the budget is cleared by the national Diet." he
added.

Kosnka said he did not oee any need for the moment to make any radical
change in the government's banking policy but that this depended on do-
nestic price developments.

OOPYRIGHT: Hainichi Daily News, Japan 1979

050: 6105

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOHIC

SCROLAR EXAMINBS CORRUPTION I“ JAPANESE INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
Tokyo ASARI JANARU in Japanese 23 Feb 79 pp 22-26

[Article by Tadanori Nishiyasa. professor of Economics, Musashine University:
"Lockheed and Grua-sn Incidents Expose Decay Pernesting Financial and
Industrial Establish-ants")

[Text] The Grun-an incident which followed on the heels of the Lockheed
scandal brought the rottenness of our financial institutions into close
focus. These cases involved both the 0.8. and Japan. but each was brought
to light by the Americans leading to the discovery of Japanese involve-ant.

The Lockheed matter was uncovered by the certified public accountant (CPA)
who was the company's comptroller and the Grunnan case by the Securities
and Exchange Con-isuion (SEC) of the 0.8. Although the Grunnsn case has
not advanced to the point of detailed clarification, in the Lockheed case,
at least. there is aaple evidence of the effectiveness of CPAs in the 0.8.

In contrast to that. in Japan the CPA who audited the books of Harubeni
and All Nippon Airways certified that the fires' books were in order.
Evidence of ineptness of audits in Japan vas pointed up in the Fuji Sash
Co case lest year. The CPAs who audited those books over nany years all
certified theextensively padded books as being ”in order." It was pointed
out that the CPAs involved uere in a vulnerable position since their
compensation for the work cans free the conpany. (Sanji Huto of the House
of Representatives nade reference to this in a stetenent to the Lower House
Appropriations Connittce hearing-~reported in the evening edition of

ASAHI SRINBUN on 1 February 1979.)

CPA who Points Out Irregularities Gets Fired

However. the situation should be no different than that in America. where.

if the CPA finds fraudulent irregularities in a conpany's books. the presi-
dent and other officers of the company get the ex. In a sinilar situation

in Japan. the CPA finds that he's the one out of a job. It nust be added.

however. that in the 30-sone years that Japan has had the CPA systen. there
hasn't been a single "fraudulent irregularity" decision handed down. It

is alleged that the reason for that is the CPA's fear of losing his job.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the cese of Fuji Sseh, the Public Prosecutor's Office, end the district
tsx office were responsible for finding the irregulsrities. In other

words. since the scsndel wee brought to light by others rether then the
CPAs, the CPAe bees-e the scepegoets. Reviewing such incidents, one wonders
why we heve s CPA system.

Though both the u.s. end Jepen sre cepitelistic countries and heve siniler
regulatory controls (Jepenese regulatory controls were nodeled efter those
of the 0.8.), why is it thet the controls seen to heve opposite effects?

He believe thet scholere in the fields of econonics. senegenent, eccounting.
cos-ores. end socisl studies hsve sn obligetion to supply en enswer. Some
people (psrticulsrly e-ong foreigners) ssy thet "the Jepsnese ere irreligiOue
end therefore heve lower norel etenderds." Others bless it on the eo-cslled
"Jspsn-type nsnsgenent." He csnnot conpletely deny these cherges.

But these ere insufficient explsnetions. The situation isn't merely s setter
of woods end impressions. Thst people are loved by densges snd benefits.
profits end losses is the same whether they ere Jspenese. Europesns or
Anericsns; we do not believe thet our norel or ethicsl stsndsrds ere beneeth
those of the others. Neither do we believe thet the degree of conscientious-
ness of the CPA in his work nor "Jepen-type nenegement: is the whole snswer
to the problem. We feel this wsy beceuse we must get answers to such ques-
tions es why conscientiousnese should be locking and why there should be
such e thing es "Jspen-type nenegenent."

It is ssid thet the boerd of directors does not control our country's stock
conpeniss. The systes itself is e pert of the con-erce revision reguletions
imported fro: the 0.8. efter the wer. In spite of the fsct thet the boerd
noninslly should heve the power to sppoint. discherge. end supervise the
president end others in the operetionel sector. in Jepsn's version. it is
subordinsted to the president of the cospsny. In Anerics the boerd. which
represents cepitel. cen discherge the chief executive officer; in Jepsn it
is the executive who cen fire boerd nenbere. why should it be this wsy?

The "tskeover bid" (103) is e nechsnisn which publicly ennounces thet e
conpeny's stock will be bought in en ettenpt to teke over that conpsny; it
is a procedure widely precticed in the 0.5. In Jspen, TOD is viewed as

e deepicsble ect bordering on the crininel. end is precticelly never
ettenpted. Tekeover nergers ere supposed to be the "epitone of cepitelisn."
but whst's heppened?

In Jepen, there ere professionel "stockholders' ennuel general meeting
ettenders" who neke e point of using the neetinge to disrupt the profit-
neking procedures of e conpsny. These norlel "enenies of Isnegenent" exist
in Anerice,too. But in Jepsn. we heve these strong-era see who work in
cehoots with lensgenent to intimidete the stockholders. or "ennuel meeting
sttenders who ere useful to nensgenent." They support Isnsgelent lessures
at the ennuel neetings end push then through st e fest clip by the use of
intimidstion. If the professionel gengsters were limited to the for-er
type-nenegenent disruptere-they could be quickly quelled; but to uproot

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE OULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the latter type--management collaboratorsuis not easy for the simple reason
that the cmany'e management supports them.

This type of management-racketeer collaboration is unique to Japan. that
gave them a foothold?

Criticising CPAs Renders No Solution

The academicians in social studies have a duty to respond. No doubt there
are many well-founded causes but at this time we wish to point out one-
society's Structural base."

In America, under the concept of separation of capital and management, capital
controls management (controls changes in management personnel). The fact

of the matter is that in Japan there is no capital entity; capital is not

a part of a company's structure. The giant enterprises operate on a
"management control" basis which. even though it was a concept founded in
America, has been made into a general practice in Japan. In this sense.
Japan is the world's forerunner in putting this concept into practice.

If the CPA should uncover irregularities in a company's books where a capital.
entity exists. as it does in America. the president and other management
figures would naturally get the ex (since management had misused monies
belonging to the capital entity). But where the capital entity is not part
of the company. as in Japan. there is no one to wield the an. Since
management alone has authority. it naturally follows that it is the CPA

who gets it in the neck. Since the Japanese CPA doesn't want to find himself
out of a job he finds no "irregularities"; it's just a matter of livelihood
to the CPA. We must. therefore. recognize the fact that the solution cannot
be found by considering the situation merely as a matter of CPA morality.

but rather as a "structural" problem.

The same pertains to the matter of directors' meetings. If. as in the 0.8.,
the board members or their proxies represent capital. the board meeting

will function and bear fruit. Regardless of how outward appearances resemble
those of the American counterparts. when the structure and the society in
which it exists differ. the same regulatory measures will not bring about

the same results. The stock company regulations now in effect are founded

on the premise that a capital entity exists. so when there is no such entity
the whole structure. including setting up regulations-«tack control
regulations. capitalization regulations. stockholders' meeting regulations.
directors' meeting regulations. accounting regulations, auditing regulations--
and all other matters pertaining to the functions of conducting business,
becomes ineffective.

The same holds for the problem of racketeering in the stockholders' general
meeting. If a capital entity exists. it would undoubtedly put a stop to
the tie-in between management and the racketeers aimed at personal gains.
so in that aspect, at least, the racketeers would be ousted. This is the

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

very reason there are so few of them in Europe and America. The reason

there are no rose in Japan is because management fears that through a

takeover a capital entity with "controlling stockholdings" will be thrust

on it. In a capitalistic society, a company should belong to the stockholders
and there should be freedom in stock transactions making it possible for
anyone to become a stockholder and to control a company. The stockholder
should be the reel owner of the company and management should be his
representative in the field of operations. Therefore, as the annual meeting

racketeer is an unwanted parasite to the capitalistic system, takeover
rights should be the star of capitalism. The fact that Japanese management.
aided by the meetings racketeer, shows its unabashed hatred for takeovers
and rose is living proof that it sees the company, which should not be its
possession, as its own personal property.

ﬁelding of Government and Industry Completes "Decay"

In the social structure in which the "capital entity" is absent (capitalists
do exist in medium and small enterprises but they do not affect the whole
society to the same extent as the giants) other symptoms of sickness are
becoming apparent.

If a bank in America should suffer a large loss through making a bad loan,
management would get the ax as a matter of course, but in Japan, there is
no capital entity to wield this power.

Poor company earnings is sufficient cause for replacement of management in
America, but in Japan it could, paradoxically, become a reason for keeping
the management on so that the traditional "retirement gala" can be prepared.
To explain way these as being mere "Japan-type management" is insufficient
because the basic impediment is the incompatibility of our system with

the basic philosophy of capitalism. It is a phenomenon which can be under-
stood only when one accepts the fact that there is no capital entity and
that management control holds the reins.

Admittedly. capitalist control does not prevent environmental pollution,
but it is considerably accelerated under management control. The fact that
Japan has become the world's leader in environmental pollution cannot be
divorced from its socir ‘industrial structure.

Zen Nikku [All Nippon Airways], Harubeni, Nissho-Iwai and others who are

the central figures in the Lockheed and Gnmman scandals are all examples

of no capital entity, pure management controlled giants. He must view them
as models of the Japanese "structures of decay." The government which has
control and regulatory agencies is the only entity which could check the
giants of industry in the management control system practiced in Japan. So
with the melding of government and industry, decay can thrive unchecked. The
Lockheed and Gru-aan incidents are the offspring of this uniquely Japanese
structure, and these scandals are only the tip of the iceberg.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’UR HFFICIM. USE ONLY

The giant industries of Japan are capitalized almost wholly by outsiders'
money. i.e.. borrowed money. There are many reasons for this. but the

main factor in that it is cheaper to pay the interest than to raise money
through sales of stock in its own company. The Japanese economy nehieVed
great growth by using other people's money. Basically. in a publicly owned
stock company. dividends should represent return on investment and treatment
of interest as cost is contrary to the capitalistic philosophy.

Adhering to the capitalistic philosophy. other countries do not conduct
their business with outsiders' money. It should be noted that in America
and West Germany capitalisation is handled through stock transacting credit
conpanies.

Host of the capital for the industrial giants of Japan is borrowed fros the
big banks. Since the big banks have little money of their own in their
inutltutions (capital raised through stock sales and accumulated profits
does not equal even 3 percent of their total capitalization). it is safe

to say that the general publie's depostis fonl the source of these funds.
In modern-day Japan. the suppliers of capital for our giant industries are
not capitalists as in America. but the general public.

Under such a structural concept. the "philosophy of capitalism" as practiced
by other capitalistic countries cannot apply to Japan. Industries. particu-
larly the giants. are in reality mammoth "profit cooperatives." ”living.
style cooperatives." and “fate cooperatives." all of which contain both
management and esployees alike. and as o result. the "philosophy of organiza-
tion" and "philosophy of control" have to be given precedence over the
philosophy of capitalism.

Japan's industries Spend More On Expense Accounts Than On Dividends

Hith the acceptance of this philosophy one can understand why stock dividends
are placed in the cost category. To the capital investor. dividends are a
distribution of profits. but to "aanagement which is in the worker category."
they are simply costs of operation and therefore should be kept to s ainiaum.
This is in direct contrast to American aanageaent. which tries to asxisise
them because if it doesn't. it incurs the displeasure of the capital inves-
tor. But. as pointed out earlier. the capital investor element is lissing

in Japan.

Some interesting figures come to mind: According to statistics compiled by
the National Tax Administration Agency. total dividends'dietributed by
Japanese companies in 1975 amounted to 1.520 trillion yen; during the same
period. expense account expenses for all the companies totsled 2.030
trillion yen. (Refer to NIKON KEIZAI SHINBUNSMA's l970 publication entitled
"Hanagement in the Industrial Conglomorate Era" by Hiroshi Okumura for
details.) This should be a mind-boggling situation; nothing even closely
resesbling it can be found in America or in other capitalistic countries.
There is. of course. the chance that tax laws peculiar to Japan play a role
in this. but when the Japanese industrial structure is viewed in the light

23
run nrrucua; ust«nn5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of its being a cooperatiVe pyramid of workers with management forming its
tip and which shares the wealth with all the workers under it. the situation
should not be overly surprising. and it is a natural developmental sequence.
In America. where industry is under the control of capital 1 estors.
dividends are seen as distribution of profits and expense account expenses
are justly listed as cost (that is capitalism). in Japan. where management
is in control. the situation is reversed: dividends distributed to stock-
holders are listed as cost and expense account monies which are put to
personal use are considered to be distribution of profits. This is what
could be classed as the "unusual nature of the structure" of Japanese
industry.

Rate of profit is the fundamental consideration in capitalism. so in America.
for example. management which is unable to increase the rate of profit (and
hence the dividend rate) will fall; in Japan. the figures showing total sales
are given precedence over the rate of profit. This order of priority

which is peculiar to Japan is a reflection of our unusual structure.

it has been pointed out that in comparison with European and American indus-
tries. the difference in the pay scales between blue and white collar workers
is considerably narrower in Japan; actually. the differences in the pay
scales among blue collar workers in large enterprises and medium to small
ones. and between organized and unorganized workers. are greater than that
between their average and the white collar workers.

Organized labor is apt to be more cooperative than antagonistic toward the
company. Frequently. the chairman of a labor union committee has an
authoritative voice in the company's personnel matters and it is not unusual
for a person to become a union officer as a stepping stone to joining

the management of that company. In other words. it can be used as a career
ladder to achieve management status. This phenomenon. which has no counterpart
in Europe or America, is an effect of the breaRUp of class structure" in

Japan.

The Kankoro [Rational Council of Government and Public Horkers' Unions] of
Japan. however. whether or not because it considers itself the "Boss of the
Rising Sun" is. unlike unions in the private industry sector. very active.
The Kokuro [National Railway Horkers' Unions and the Doro [National Railway
Locomotive Engineers' Union] have been very warlike in their disputes with
the National Railways. The riots at Aksbane station in Tokyo are an
example of this (on this point see DIAMONDSHA'a 1978 publication "European
Sick Call" by Paul Bonnet). The failure of the merger of Sumitomo Bank and
Kansai Sogo Bank last year was due to the opposition of the employees of
the Kansai Sogo Bank. This is uniquely Japanese and couldn't possibly
happen in America. It was a particularly strange development. since the
Sumitomo Bank. which is at the center of the Sumitomo group of interests.
owned almost 50 percent of the Kansai Sogo's stock and the latter was in
reality a subsidiary of Sumitomo. Nevertheless. the merger failed to
materialize because of employee opposition. This clashes with "the theory
of capitalise” and is an occurrence which Europeans and Americans must find
difficult to understand.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIJ’
FOR art-11:1,“. i'Sl’I ONLY

Control Principle Built 0n Crumbling "Logic of Capitalism"

Galbraith wrote on the destruction of "market logic." but in Japan the
"logic of capitalism" has eroded. It is questionable whether such a
society can be classed in the capitalism category.

if we are to assume that all societies which are not socialistic are
capitalistic. then Japan could be called capitalistic. but such negative
capitalism in a meaningless entity which has no substance to it. Not only
would the definition be useless in explaining social problems. but it could
not he used as a tool to solve them. We are of the opinion that we should
recognize the fact that capitalism has fallen in Japan and that we now have
a society which is neither capitalistic nor socialistic (I am provisionally
calling it u "controllism society." but i must stress that this is merely
temporary terminology).

Under that philosophy. "organisational logic" and "control logic“ replace
"market logic" and "capital logic" as the dominant factors. in a capital-
istic society. pursuit of profits is the driving force and control exists
merely in its behalf; in a controllism societ; such as exists in modern-

day Japan. the objectiVe of industry is the maintenance of organization. i.e..
control. and the pursuit of profit becomes the tool to achieve it. By

making "control a self-serving goal". that itself becomes a hindrance to
controllism and the source of various forms of decay. Capitalism and
controllism are both names for social sickness and Just as they go under
different names. they have different causes. Hhat would happen if a person
suffering from pneumonia was misdiagnosed as having liver trouble and was
treated for the latter it is a frightening thought. The Japanese structure
has advanced to a point where it can no longer be described as being
capitalistic in the old sense of the word.

An enterprise built on capital investment premised on the separation of
capital and management is now the exception in Japan. The coexistence of
the giants in which mananement is part of the working force and which uses
the general public's money for capital and the medium to small enterprises
which are controlled by capital investors is a phenomenon peculiar to Japan.
But the medium to small enterprises are in no position to compete with the
industrial giants.

if one states that there are no capital investor enterprises in Japan there
undoubtedly will be those who will refute it by naming Konosuke Hatsushita

as an example. The fact is. however. that Mr Hatsushita could be classed as
a capital investor only while Hatsushita Denki lHatsushits Electric industrial
Co] was in the medium to small enterprise category. Mr Natsushita's stock-
holdings were 60 percent of the total in 1963. 65 percent in 1969. and only 7
percent in l96l. In other words. his stockholdings have been In inverse
proportion to the rate of growth of the company.

The situation is often brought up as a living example of how ownership of 7
percent of the stock can control a company. The claim is misleading. The

25

FUR "'r’FliZIIJ. “all "2.13.
l-‘Oll ill-'l-‘lCIAI. I'M: ONLY

claln that it is holding 7 percent of the stock that enables Mr Matsushlta
to control the coapany is nonsensical; with a stochhoiding so saall that

it approaches zero. the chief executive officer of the na-oth Hitachi. Ltd.
has control of that conoany. The fact that has to he recognized is that

Hr Matsushits’s controlling authority does not use fro. his capital

holding of 7 percent. but frol being its sansgenent. Putting it another
way. the more success Hr hatsushita gained in aenagesent. his authority
derived fro: capital holdings had to dilinish. This fall of Konosuks hatsus-
hito. capitalist. is the portent of the fall of capitalioa in Japan.

COPYRIGHT: Mshi Shinbunsha 1979

8358
cs0: £105

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

ECONONIC

RATE OF INCREASN IN POSTAL SAVINGS SLACKENS
Tokyo NIHON KEIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese [3 Mar 79 p 6

[Text] A dark cloud has begun to hang over postal savings which have con~
tInucd a high level increase. According to the Ministry of Posts and Telc-
cos-unicntions' forecast. the postal savings balance for the end of this

I978 fiscal year (the end of March I979) will be a little under bé.5 tril-
lion yen; it will be Iinited to an increase of about 17 percent over last
year. That is the lowest increase in a sixteen year period iron l962. when we
Inoh at the accent of increase. it is certain that fiscal year I978 will be
lower than last year's sensor of increase for the first tine in twenty years.
The Finance Ministry sees the sluggishness oi postal savings to be the re-
sult of private banks, with city banks at the center. beginning to emphasise
the individual custoner and devising a "roll-back" policy toward postal sav-
ings. Likewise. scans for private financial institutions to raise funds
will be strengthened. beginning with certificates of deposit coning into
existence this spring. and with the strong probability that there will be
new kinda of personal banking accounts (compound interest tine deposit ac-
counts). On account of this. we will have a situation where accounts in
private banks will exceed the increase in postal savings within the year.

Anount of increase Less Than Last Year

According to the Hinistry of roots and Telecoanunications' conclusions. the
current postal savings balance at the end of February I979 was 66 trillion
276.5 billion yen. They are anticipating an additional increase of about

200 billion yen in March. But. with this. when you coapsre the postal sav-

Inas balance at the end of fiscal year I978 with the previous year. there

will he an increase of about 17 percent at best. (Hinistry of Posts and Telecon-
nunications) in until now. postal savings have continued to consistently

have n high actual rate of increase of 25 percent (based on balance). There

has not been a 17 percent increase since back in 1961 and 1962.

This scans the postal savings system has not increased such in fiscal I978:
and it is expected that the increase aoount will decline about 3 percent cun-
parcd to last year's increase. This is the first tine since 1958 that the amount

of increase In postal savings. which has kept up a "high rate of growth."
will be less than the previous year.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Meanwhile. as for the account balance for private financial institutions.
national banks. such as city banks and district banks. increased 12.6 percent
this year over last year. as of the end of January. Mutual banks increased
ib.5 percent; credit banks. 12.6 percent. All of then exceeded the previous
year's increase rate by two or three points. They have not caught up with
the postal savings balance rate of increase. but they are characterised by an

upward aoveaent in the rate of growth. in contrast to postal savings which
have slackcned.

On account or this. there is a strongly held view about the sluggishness of
postal savings. that custo-ers who used to turn to postal savings are gradu-

ally shifting to banks in proportion to the banks' emphasis on service to
the Individual. (Finance Ministry source)

In the last year or two. every bank has changed frou a position of placing
too ouch iaportance on business enterprises to a position of considering the
Individual iaportnnt. They have set out to introduce autosatic payroll de-
posits and to extend the hours of operation for automatic cash dispensers.
They are esphasizing loans to individuals who are backed up by bank accounts.
It In said that their efforts at exploiting the personal market are linked
to their "roll-back" policy toward postal savings.

Moreover. this year. certificates of deposit in order to bring in short ter-
runds froa businesses will appear as early as April. As a general rule. any
bank can issue then. and it is very profitable for city banks to bring in
corporate accounts. Also. concerning cospound interest tiae deposit accounts,
which reseable the post office's limited asount savings accounts. that are
said to be the trump card in the "postal savings' offensive." present negot-
iations have advanced to a point of introducing the. within this year.

Against this. postal savings are esphasising personal loans by expanding

the lending liaitation asount of the “yuyu” loan (an increase froa 500,000

yen to 700.000 yen per person beginning 1979). And meanwhile, they have
started rail-scale autosatic payroll deposits. and they are studying the
introduction of antoaatic cash dispensers in the near future. But this
system will not be ready immediately. So it scene that the banks' "roll-back"
policy toward postal savings is succeeding for the tine being. The situa-
tlon seems to be that the rate of increase of private banks and of postal
savings will be reversed. based on a coaparison of this year's balance sheets.

(mPYRiGﬂT: Nihon Keisai Shinbunsha i979

9600
(:so: 1.105 m

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY