APPROVED I'OR RELCABC: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100040004-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040064u6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8428

30 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00040064-8
JPRS puhlicatiJn- curtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and hooks, but also from news .|;;.-ne\
transmissions and broadcasts. ﬂaterials from forelun-lanxuane
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original plli':l<li‘.:‘_ and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are <uppllvd by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Lxcerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

i.\'-I":'!’.lGll' LAWS AND RECL'IATIOXS COL'ERSIXG WXERSIIIP 0F
MATERL\LS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMIXATIOK
C2" TIEIS P'.‘3LIC4\T IO}: 68 RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/l
30 April

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(P000 14/79)

Cosmo's
POLITICAL AND soc IOWICAL

'HAINICHI' Cements on Result of Japan Local Elections
(Editorial; MINICIII DAILY NEWS. l0 Apr 79)............

'AKAIIA'I'A' Bditorializss on Results of Local Elections
(JPS, 10 AP! 79)ssasseeaesaoessessaeasaessssasasassesss

'AKAIIA'I‘A' Decries Den Yingchao Relax-Its on Tokyo Elections
(JPS. 12 Apr 79)sesssssoesssasea-essesesssossssass-ass.

'Bureaucratiution' of Governorships Ahead
(Hitsuro Sukanoto; HAINICIII DAILY nuts. 7 Apr 79)......

Receiving. Giving Much Money Deco-es Hay to Power
(llideo Hatsuoka; NAINICIII DAILY ms. 10 Apr 79).......

Excise Tax Strategy Key to Diet Dissolution
(Takehiko Takahsshi; HAINICHI DAILY ms. ll Apr 79)...

Briefs
Japan Regarding NATO

MILITARY

Econsuic Expert Raps JDA for Manipulating its Information
(NIKKEI BUSINESS. 26 Feb 79).

BOONOHIC

Accounting Practices Facilitate Illegal Pay-eats
(HAINICIII DAILY. ms. 2 Mar 79)

Densan Barns Japan of EC Countsraction
(HAINICIII DAILY was. 29 Mar 79)

Recession-Plagued Industries' Status Re-Iieued
(HAINICIII mm nus. various dates)
WK OFFICIAL USI’. ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Japan-0.8.4116 Cooperation in Dealing With PRC Desired
(Isao Needs; SANKBI SHINDUN, 5 Apr 79) . . . . . . . . . . . .

Government To Assist in Mexican Industrial Project
(ASAHI SHINBUN, 7 Apr 79)

Oil Firms To Tenn Up To Buy Mexican Crude
(ASAHI EVENING NEWS. 9 Apr 79)

Briefs
Suutrn LNG Project

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

New Technology for Municipal Haste Recycling Developed
(me JAPAN TIMES. 18 Her 79)

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

'HAINICNI' COMMENTS ON RESULT OF JAPAN LOCAL ELECTIONS
Tokyo HAINICHI DAILY NEHS in English 10 Apr 79 p 2 0H
(Editorial: "Conservatives "in Game"]

[Text] Candidates running on conservative or middle-of—the-road tickets
swept to victories throughout the nation in the first round of the ninth
unified local elections held Sunday. It is believed almost certain now
that the local political maps will he redrawn in favor of conservatives,

or the Liberal-Democratic Party for that matter. while the progressives
are destined to face a long-drawn out fight over the next h years to regain
the lost ground.

The defeat of progressive candidates in Tokyo and Osaka was most indicative
of which way the political winds will blow in the future. The vict~ry

of Shunichi Suzuki in the race for Tokyo's governorship, running with the
combined support of the Liberal Democratic. Konei and Democratic Socialist
parties. puts an end to the lZ-yesr-long metropolitan administration under
progressive leadership.

The Liberal-Democratic Party is expected to take a strong posture in the
future. while groping to find common meeting ground with the centrist camps.
The Socialist Party. on the other hand. appeared greatly shocked at the
election turnout across the country. Observers believe the nation's

No l opposition party is in for more trouble, with intra-party factions

now rolling up their sleeves to hold the present leadership responsible

for the poor election strategy.

The conservative and centrist confederation that won sweeping victories in
the nation‘s two largest cities will take the lead in the local political
picture of :Le 1980's. As is often said. the era of I'local politics" is
to begin with the advent of the 1980's; and candidates. conservative and
progressive alike. have campaigned for the cause of decentralization and
autonomy. We have repeatedly emphasized that the advent of an era of
"local politics" should not end as a mere slogan of political parties,
designed to curry favor with voters.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The positive participation in local politics by residents is an important
factor in realizing the ideal of automony. In this regard. the poor turnout
in Sunday's election was most disappointing to us. The turnout for guber-
natorial elections was estimated at about 60 percent. or below the 68.7
percent in the previous elections in 1975. The voting rate was a record

low in postwar election history.

The inclement weather that hit the western half of the nation with downpours
in some regions. and the absence of real competition. can be taken to task
for the record low. The turnout alone may not be the yardstick of the
voters' political consciousness. but we cannot but take a serious view of
the figures when the nation is saddled with many knotty political problems.

From the 1960's to the 1970's. progressive governors and mayors emerged one
after another, heralding rise of the progressive camps in national politics.
The conservative camp. led by the Liberal-Democratic Party, remained idle
despite repeated warnings sounded in various quarters. The subsequent
local elections only helped the progressives and centrists increase their
strength. culminating in virtually equal strength between the two camps

in the national diet. The series of scandals. including the Lockheed

payoff scandal. and monetary politics all have soiled the image of the
conservative camp. A sense of crisis gripped the rank and file of the LDP.

The progressives, as represented by the Socialist Party. in the meantime
failed to capitalize on the favorable turn of events. The socialists
have engaged in petty intraparty struggles. at one time over the covered
[words as published] post of party leadership and mostly over their
ideological differences, while domestic politics, to say nothing of the
world situation. have been undergoing a change.

The defeat of progressive candidates in the gubernatorial elections spells
out the possible collapse of the much ballyhooed "confrontation between the
conservatives and progressives based on equal strength" in national politics.
The 1980's loomed large as a period of "reconstruction of the progressive
camps." Socialist leaders are, in this regard. urged to reflect on the
current failure of their political strategy.

The LDP leaders. too. should reappraise the outcome of the election instead
of rejoicing over a victory that could be only a "4-year" affair if they
fail to listen to the voice of the people.

COPYRIGHT: Hainichl Daily News. 1979

650: £120

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

'AKAHATA' EDITORIALIZES ON RESULTS OF LOCAL ELECTIONS

Tokyo JPS in English 0911 GMT 10 Apr 79 0"

[Text] Tokyo. 10 Apr (JPS)--AKAHATA on 10 April carried an editorial entitled
"Results of the First Half of the Simultaneous Local Elections and the Native
Power for Progress." The gist of the editorial follows:

1. A new political situation created in the election battle for heads of
local governments is that alliances of the Liberal-Democratic Party and anti-
communist "centrist" parties have been formed in many localities. These
alliances were successful in overthrowing progressive local governments or
maintaining conservative prefectural governments. But, this does by no means
prove "recovery of the LDP." 0n the contrary, this shows that the L0? is
maneuvering to put a brake on its historical decline and to prop up its
political rule. with the help of the anticommunist "centrist" forces.

2. It is clear that the LOP-"centrist" course cannot win support from the
people in the long run. These anticommunist "centrist" parties will be
subject of severe judgment of history. sooner or later. The fact that the
Komei Party has decreased its seats, and both the DSP and NLC are at a
standstill suggests this as early as this time.

3. As for such an inclination of arguing an "ebb of the progressive forces,"
analyses should be made from two angles. One is to recognize weakpoints
inside the progressive movement. The Socialist Party, which stood for the
progressive union in Tokyo, allied with the reactionary alliance centering
en the LDP in Osaka. This is a most symbolic fact. The JSP was forced

to suffer a setback. with many seats lost, in the prefectural assembly
elections. If the JSP continues to take such a contradictory attitude

toward the progressive united front. it will not only amount to suicide for
the JSP. but also create a very serious situation in the Japanese progressive
movement as a whole. The JCP earnestly hopes that the JSP will frankly
review that attitude. 1n the light of the result of the elections. and make
a stride forward toward new joint struggles of the progressive forces. As

to the Tokyo gubernatorial elections. it must be pointed out that

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Governor Ryehlrhl Hinobc reaffirmed his betrayal of the progressives at
the critical moment of the election, giving advantages to the LDP-Koeei-DSP
reactionary alliance. by declaring that he "strictly keeps neutrality."

a. The other angle of analysis of the argument of "an ebb of the progres-
sives" is to criticize the error in this argument which puts the communist
party in one some basket of “ebbing progressives." Because one of the
results. and one hopeful result. of these elections is the conspicuous big
advance made by the Japanese Con-unist Perty--the motive force for ever-
cening weakpoints in the progressive forces camp and reconstructing a
progressive united front. The hopeful answer was given by the Osaka
gubernatorial election contested between the six—party alliance and one
political party (JCP). Governor Ryoichi Kurode. supported by the Japanese
Communist Party, made an almost even confrontation. by increasing his votes
won in the previous election 6 years ago. The hopeful answer was given

by the leap forward made by the communist party, which overcame the two
straight defeats in the national elections and reached the highest asrk

in the prefectural asseubly elections in history since the inauguration

of the party. There is no room for doubt that this will encourage people
or various walks of life. who eagerly hope for the formation of a progres-
sive united front. including conscious people in the Japan Socialist Party.

and that this will be the first step for a new advance of the progressive
forces toward the 1980's.

CSO: 4120

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'AKAHATA' DBCRIES DBNG YINGCHAO REMARKS 0N TOKYO ELECTIONS
Tokyo JPS in English 0925 GMT 12 Apr 79 on

[Text] Tokyo. 12 Apr (JPS)—-The visiting Vice Chairwoman of the Standing
Committee of the National People's Congress of China. Deng Yingcheo (widow
of the late premier Zhou Enlai) was reported by ASAHI SHINBUN on 10 April

as saying in a conversation with Yoshikatsu Takeirri. chairman of the Koaei
Party, on 9 April on the results of the first half of the simultaneous
local elections. that she was "very glad to see that the Komei Party is well
backed by the citizens of Tokyo."

AKAHATA on 12 April took this up. saying that Deng Yingchao's remarks clearly
point at the election of Shunichi Suzuki as governor of metropolitan Tokyo
AKAHATA added. "Suzuki actively took part in the Japanese war of aggression
against China as a member of the Japanese army's special agency in Shanxi
Province. And even after the war, he still takes an ultrareactionary posi-
tion in such a case as drafting a bill to introduce the small constituency
system, which the Liberal-Democratic Party schemes to lay as the base for
advancing toward Japanese style fascism."

AKAHAIA went on to say. "Hhere on earth does proletarian internationalism
stand...to rejoice at the 'overturn of the progressive metropolitan

administration by the reactionary forces?‘ Deng Yingchao's remark amounts
to really an antiprogressive international act of betrayal."

CSO: 4|20

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'llURi-i/tllCRliTIZATION' 0|" GOVERNORSHII’S MFAD

’l‘ukyn HMNICtll DAILY Ni—lHS in English 7 Apr 79 p 1

[Article ivy Htrsuro Suknmoto. lininiciii. Shtmbun:

Ln (:th-rnorsiilns'q

l'i't-x t. l

‘Iill'YR MINT:

‘50:

One at the most notable
teaturaa oi the current
manhunt elections in is
pretactnreua is th:
predominance iormer o
ilclats ot the Home Malta
Ministry and its prewar
predecessor-the Interior
Ministry-among the leading
candidates. They number
eight: including tour in-
cumbents.andtvo challengers
tor novcrnorshlpsin‘i‘oayoand
Osaka.

Should all these ex-
hureauerats win in Suday‘s
balloting. the total ot melee.
tural warriors with similar
backgrotw'wldriseiozomr
more than to percent ot the
nationaltotalott'l.

Mostotthemhavenmiathetr
native ”lectures to devote
their later lives to those

WWI
quite meeting that More
andd'uigthalastrarmhen

otthe
Mlnisnymnoooiiud

norahloaasamrnmantap-
potntees

mathematicians“-
interment system tor local

35

-’n l 20

governments otter the end oi
thalaatwar.governorscameto
haetaetaebymuvote.

There are three major
masonsiorthe
in governors haling mm
ilomaAttairsiiinlst-y.

One islhecotlimm
it the Manners ot the two

themasttioaSocialiﬂPerttes.
Mamithashemeqoite
dittleutt in either oi them to
win gubernstwiai elections
without the help ot middleob
the-road tones. Under this
situation, nonpartisan: can-
didates pleasing to several
parttaaareotientotmdamong
acholarsorhureancrais.

Mainiciri Daily News, 1979

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"liureaucrats Drawn

Home Attalrs Ministry otticials

;Whea.udararaota-eoonomic
3M.

ateadyhcrease.

expertise are required to
manage local governments.
Since bureaucrats at the

as among the best
candidates tor pretecturai

-govemorships

Besides the increasing
manner otgovernors tormeriy
with the Home Altair: ministry.
thereareaisothoaewithother
bureaucratic backgrounds—
those who were with other
ministries ot the central
government or who were
bureaucrats in pretecturai

- pvernments.

Thlsmeansasteadydecrease
hpolltictsns-tumedgoverm-
Winthedawnhigotthemmh-
spoken-about “Age at

"coincideniihthe
“bureaucratiutlon” ot

governornhlps‘!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ICM. ANI) SUCIIIMNIICM.

VINC, GIVING MIICII MlNEY BECOMES HAY 'I’O POWER

MAINICIII DAILY NEHS In Engllsh IO Apr 79 p I.

Inn-In column by Illdco Hatsuoka:

'II
I mehlhdﬂhchlm
cun-

mhteomtora andmoaedtha
hill. "to was mad guilty to the
ﬁrst ltllll.‘ Illa polltlcal
phllnaophy o mum; Ilﬂ
am money we win:
mu] It lad to hla recent at M

mlllioulnthelackheedmoﬂ.

money.
They Involve laurolllhl.

MW
WWMVW

Javanaaus Attorney General
tor hta bmther Jack. a well-
ctreulated aplaode In the
mpolltlcalm made has It that
. mm
gantrmlﬁhenmmu atlc
. America
mmommum

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Money Nude and Broke Tannka.

Whatlslmvorlantlu‘hether
one cut MM: hlmaelt to
practice this worldly

M¥.WW

All thta (It: Into Hachlm
mm A lata alarm 0! mid-
dling aha. his Mann-at was
no match to utahtlahed hia-
tlme ttadlu houses In

«mum

tor Nlaho-lwat to attack
heathen at hllnd m This la
hat to say that eatahllahed bl:
oaevayortheotherhecameoi
Involvement oi the sense oi
shame. The aenso oi aharne

give money to politicians- In
power ior business iavors that
they ran arrange orthe dim.
Kaiiu ﬂed tor this Mines;
method.

y.
Both organized their own
motion Kaiiu was no business
genius. lien oi his hashes
caliber abound in trading
:ompanies. What rnade Kaiiu
urge ahead oi other equally
talented men was his allots
mentality oi not hesitatlag to
choose any meaaa to ac—

mullahthaand.

To think outﬁt. oiniiarlna
stiataelanotmlelyatuattaroi
morals. lt invelraa cthnhtai
cietnentaﬂhathaiaeatnhthe
tact that Yoahio Twit. ionner
chairman oi iii-Mini. after
being inionned oi an oiiothe-
book secret hank acootnt oi
”150.000 three- years am in
February iﬂd‘whtie he was
president oi

FUR -|'-i-'HCI.\I. "til-I lh‘iU‘

without gelling any convincing

explanation trorn him. he did
W” Wait, m:
's retpomih
dnhiotuiinanclalarranaemeot.
hit was aroma "fatigue;e that
t 1mm a can
my mm the
ve miteed
seriousness oi the situation-
mamasonooonthe-

mammmm
having hen draw out tor

dtthiotnpaylneuuuanianee.
tho aimtnality oi the whole
setup was beyond doubt.
Somethinghadtohedone and

Minththesitliailon'vere

Wieliwmwouldhlthe
companyvhereithnrtsﬂhlle
this much was clear. the
presidentdidnotdoanythin“
iuatcannothnaatneantanvitn

such a ﬂaunt. tacit oi

kMipﬁRh‘atdieheimoi
IN!

itmt‘i'miihelittled
thepoasibiutypiexponneoitlie
itnaaeiai ilnagllng. The
revelation cane turn the
Securities Exchaue Cont-
mission oi Innerlca. The
Douglas-Oman probe by
the SEC could have been a
mrprlse to Marin-int. Still.
Tsuji'a dare to leave the
warm situation hanging
Vithwt being properly tended

totem“ itoodd
he either‘TItit

thuainess headquarters
system in which each business

divm'on operates as a landsli-
independeni company w ill is
chiei wielding a broad power.
Themeroiailvisionchieits
deiined in company
regulations. his projects
usually require presidential or
boardapprovnl.

Keeping a secret hanh ae-
comtoiasmuchaonoso.wis
not Within Kathi“: allhority.
President‘t‘suiishouidhavepot
his dander up at Kaiiu and
Hiromitsu Shintada. the
managing director who
recentlycoinmittedauicideJor
acUng in violation oi the
company rules and Mm
the two accord-gt,
howevemotualiydidnoihinp,

hiayhe iihotunuhecouid
not touchnl't‘alhi who packed

cooperation -

.Kaihi. it was reported. told

clone irleod right heiore hie
aneetthathewoudhetuailxii
he was chased with “reign
exchange irregularities. But
chargesoirioiaihctheioreim
exchange regulations are
charges oi convenience. The
real purpose oi his prone isle:
charlie htn'etth «new 0
pduatedocuntentsqndm.
andaiaotolooithdohwtheoii-

the-hook bank account was
Spent.
Therehareheeanmreports
that the prosecutors have
already traced the “tons

payments trout the start to
where they ilnaily rested.
Whateverthetruthlisahattle
3.58 18..-

gzgatggs
gun. E. E... 1.: an...»
8.52.... 58 :8 32:2.
:28. t. a: 9. 83.28.
a... 9.8.3. 2. as 5.3:...
:3. 25.92.8356!
33339-38835:
gut-5.3.3383:
gin-38.59255
gagfgsog

m. 3.5.3133? ms
Xi: t :tI-t

I'AX S‘l'ith’l'l'iil' KIN 11D llIIZT DISSOLU'IIUN

nlu-n HAINICIH DAILY NI'MS III HthIHIt U Apr 79 it ‘4

N.m.sim'|m "Him;
«I "i'i‘tillul'illt «it limm

"It'xll

Oneoithereaanns whyPritne
Miniater liaaayosht OhIra
Willem
oi Mm and all tor
a penenl election in autumn
this year in the problem oi how
the excise tax ahodd

nearly ee-pareant
undeltthtnpseontlnneasw
are. the ataie nuances
neootne . niereiote.
how to provide tor aoand
tlnaneeatathehtnestprnhlem
that the government laces
today.

Dortna the period oi hllh
amthﬂtetneonteirnni taxes
increased even it the taxation

it untumtt by 'l':tkoltlltu Trlknltmiltt:
u «if lu-prmcntativcs"l

That is why the institution at
an “excise tax” was .
The Ministry oi Finance
helieVes that this will «still in
about 3 trillion yen in income.
That aware-3 trillion yen-
tneaon a tax harden oi about
moo yen per capita in he
shoulderedbythepeopie.

lnuseeueoithetnootne tax.
a larger amount is obtained
trotn thoae with a higher in
com. The mutton tax atao
applies is W main:

aptnilt.
‘l‘tttaiamtaovtihthoadae
Mnhldlbateﬂeviedatthe
nonmetal trans.

entail income and those with a
iarpeineomaiheexeiaetaxhas
heencrttieiredaaa ”W
alvetaxationayaietn."

Not only consumers but
practicaly alloitheopposition
partiasareoppoeediopnpoaed
noise tax. There is even on-
portion with in the therei-
oentoeretie Party. Oppoainp
theexcisetaxalaolstheJapan
Chamber oi Comm and
inihrairy tpresldenl: Shiaeo
Nam) which is molly
regarded as an inﬂuence

It)

tilt: Hit iniqz. t '4 il.‘.- ',

"'EXt‘telc ‘l'ux‘ llolds Key

mpporttnp the LDP.

WWt

Although the Ministry oi
Flnanee would like to see the
excise tax materialize an early
as possible. in order to
rehabilitate state itnanees.
Prltne Minister Ohlra la
remaintnttprndeni.

At not. during the con:-
pilation oi this year's budget.
enioreenieol oi the tax was
Miran “Jamaalﬂ'hni
the prime tnhlaler altered that
to “iron: the in itaoal year.“
targeting April t as the date oi
entoreetnenl.‘lhla washasedon
his owareneas oi the trend oi
ptlilie opinion In regard to the
exelsetax.

it the new tax were to he
enioreed irotn Jan. l. m0.
it «old he necemry tor
legislation to be approved in the
extraordinary Diet session to he
heldthlo autumn. litt ls tohe
irotn April 1. than the approval
could he pd oil to the ordinary
Diet salon to he nonvohed at
the, end oi December. The in-
tenenlntt petioll oi time could
hemedtnpoodadvm.

Because at his position.
Tnahioitotnoin.eheirn.anoithe
H'Yltlllll'l':

’e I 7"

Lot": Policy Mieireiteeeeteh
Council. to not em the
exeieetuiteeithutheheltevee
thet there ere e neither oi
mdltione exiettnc en the

pointed out by Chelrmen
lionioto will he diitiuuit to
reeltee. The elimination oi
rate in tteie wee
involves theJepeneeem Notional
Relive” end em on
the notionei heeith menu
eyetetn end the hone etnomt et
tilidl event by the government
tor rice. it will not he eeey to
eotveenyoitheeeolnieme.

zohioettvee

it to believed thet Choirinen
Koinoto' had two ehiectivee in
am whet he did. nemeiy.
"denying the introduction oi
the excise in" end "iornting
the conditions that would moire
theneteetaxmneoeeeery.“

in other write. even it the
iiooseoilteoreeeetetiveowere
to he diuotved thte outntitn
whtieieevin‘theorohletnoithe
exeieetexventniheltoileot
Councillors election to amine
oonextyeerJithereehouldhe

n‘l‘llliie'h‘ li.ullv "(‘03, I979

eheedonciuhtntheoiethe.
tween the government pert.)
end the oppoeltioo over the
inuitottonoitheueteetexmnl
itihieieiettewedhyiheiioute
oi Cot-tillers election. the
LDP. which to elneedy in e
oeiniiil position. will tee the
edditioit ot iurther titted-

venteneou addition.

Since Prime hiinieter Ohire
he; promised atonement oi
the excite to: "iron the im
iiecel year." this eennot he
abandoned easily. Ohm has
thereiore’oterled to think that
dissolving the Home oi
Representatives. heiore the
hendttnu ”oi the excise iex
also he edventeeeous ter the
mamasltothemieeuxie

. tie pruhieeuiicoi
whether Prime Minister Ohire.
with tall determioetion in the
ieee oi the contusion thet is
hound to he owned. ntii take in
the excise text "no theonly wey
to rehehiiitete ttete iineneesf'

But it he aheivee the excise
in "because oi the strong
opposition." compilation oi the
hudm tor the mo thee! yeer
will become diiieutt
end the Iiinietry oi Fiance to
hoondtoohieetwoogty.

Which oeth will Prltne
Minister Ohire cheoee? This
will heve e etoee heerhig on
whether the House oi
Representetivee will he
dissolved-endow.

fill: IIH'IILI..:. l"ol. ULL‘.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOCICAL

BRIEFS

JAPAN REGARDING NATOm-Tokyo. 12 Apr (JPS)--On the report that the Tokyo
sunsit to be held in June will take up aid to Turkey. AKMlATA carried a
concntnry on 12 April. saying that this "will drag Japan into the strategy
of NATO." The gist of the conentary follows. The conentary says that
"if the question of aid to Turkey is taken up in the Tokyo emit of the
developed countries...that will be a serious setter in the sense that
Japan will be bound to take part in the military alliance strategy of

the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. It adds that the discussion in
the Tokyo wait of the question of aid to Turkey "should be regarded as

a sove to strengthen the 0.5. silitery support to that area occasioned

by the signing of the Egypt-Israel treaty and the dispute in Yemen."

The cmentary also says. "It cannot be denied that the Japanese Goverment'e
aid to Turkey will he carried out in the dangerous frasework of strengthen-
ing NATO. a silitary alliance for aggression." [Text] [Tokyo JPS

in English 0921 GMT 12 Apr 79 ow)

C50: 6120

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pill! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iIILlTARY

ECON'NIC EXPERT MP5 JDA FOR HANIPULA'I‘ING ITS INFORMATION
Tokyo NIKKBI BUSINESS in Japzneae 26 Feb 79 p 26

[Text] The Defense Agency has announced that the Soviet Union has estab-
lished ful l-scale military bases on the islands of Etorofu and Kunashiri.
Newspapers are condemning the Soviet Union's lack of propriety and rainding
the Japanese people of the menace of Soviet military power. However. it
would be better to think this news through. In the first place. the problem
is the timing of the Defense Agency's announcement. The Defense Agency ex-
plains that it made its announcement before Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping's
visit to Japan so that the Soviet Union would not assume, incorrectly. that
Japan was put up to it by China. But this is totally unconvincing.

Among those associated with the Defense Agency. this story of the establish-
aent of military bases is already old news. You may remember last June when
news got out that lliroomi Kurisu, former head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
told of the movements of the Soviets and judged them to be "practice maneuvers."
thus creating a stir in the Diet. H'hen one inquires within the Defense Agency.
in the Joint Chiefs of Staff. in other words the uniformed services. one

finds that there had been word on this even froa the American forces. The
improper actions of the Soviets were known from the first. And while the
civilian Defense Agency bureaucracy. which has no connection with actual
fighting. did not know it. Kuriau swiftly let the news out. Thus. to save
face. the civilian part watched for a chance to make the announcement thun-
selves.

This does not guarantee that their face was securely saved. and even when

newspaper-en went out in planes and took clear photos of the bases. why the
announcement was delayed is difficult to understand. The main purpose of
the Defense Agency's special announcement regarding the establishment of
Soviet military bases was presumably to protest firmly to the Soviet Union
against setting up military bases in Etorofu and Kunashiri. which Japan
claims as its own territory. however, frm the Soviet point of view the

announcement to the Japanese people of the existence of the bases made no
difference since it was already a fait accompli.

[3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the last war. when defeat was approaching, giant 529's were attacking
at will. After they left we would send up wood and cloth biplanes. called
"red dragonflies." to give the appearance of pursuit. Strong protest to

the Soviet Union after military bases have been constructed is exactly the
same as those red dragonflies. Hhile the civilian bureaucrats of the Defense
Agency and the pusillaaisous Foreign Affairs bureaucracy were saking a de-
cision whether or not to protest to the "big hear of the north." the im-
portant fact is that they missed the noseat to do it. The Defense Agency
did not know what reaction there would be from the Soviet Union after the
vice premier of China. who talked up the strengthening of Japan's ornaments.
visited Japan. Therefore. they finally took the step and made the announce-

ment before he case.

If the Defense Agency denies this interpretation. they are after all in a
period of formulating budgetary estisates. It can be taken as nothing but

a way to relieve the pressure on the defense budget arising fru the trouble-
sane Grumman problem. To spread news about the military build-up of a
potential enouy nation and to make an exaggerated fuss is a set ploy of the
military-industrial couples. The mass media inediately implied that Ilokkaido
would be taken over by the Russians and they went as low as to scare the
people of Hokkaido. The announcement gave rise to rumors that are now fly-
ing around. such as the fishermen of Nesuro are Soviet spies in disguise.

that they are collaborating with the Soviets for an invasion. and that they
are plotting an insurrection. llowever. the Soviets. who invaded Czechoslovakia
with a force of 300.000 sen. have at nos: 5000 men on Etorofu and Kunoshiri.
This would indicate that something like an occupation of Hokkaido is quite
impossible. It is a strange canbination of manipulation and withdrawal of

information.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkei-McCrav “111. Inc. 1979

9391
C80: 10105

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-IlllNOMI (3

FOR OFFICIAL

llSI-Z ONLY

ACCUlIN‘l‘lM; PRACTICES FACILI'I‘ATE ILLEGAL PAYMENTS

Tokyo MAINICIII DAILY NHHS 1n Engllull 2 Mar 79 p 7

[From the i-Iconoacupo column by l-icunobscrvcr:

[Text]

Thewo InpotAmerica's
Securities «mom
mission are being outed by
Japaneseiegislatoruesnedaly
thosein theonposition.Anin~
ierpeiiator‘aiai areoentumr
House one get committee

mat-«o will
neveriormtheotiiosbioatrus
equivalentottheSBC.

their companies to iheae hired
manners. The owners iuily
recognize the managers'
capabilities but do not noon-
sarilyrespectihelrorohlty.

While anonese society.
bullies: or otherwise. is built
on motosl trust oi its mun-
bers. Americsn society is

built on mutual convention.
Corporate ovnersoiltroerica

5

naturally want to suite sun the
hired managers are not thin:
theirnodteiswithrooneythatis
dilemma.

The checking oi intricate
corporate tinuiee is not aioh
maimyhoitycanhanaesuhe
owners hire oertitieo nubile
acmtanis

Oosnmissioneohywnersvho
really «autumnal-yucca
in the acmtahility system oi
their canoaoies. the CPA:
mercile-iyripisiothedsrhest
Mien. both on and oil the
book. To mire CPA ta-
specllons. manners do
everything to rationalise snri
lusiliyiheaccoints.

‘ This is eh! American

businessmen ask tor receivl‘
«ammonium
illegainsymentsTheyneeilto

mamaersoeedeothemtonme
their tin-acts! nrohlly to the
m

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“No Slit: lmnglnnblc Herc“)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/07J09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100040064-6

(IDI’YK “MT:

(13302

6120

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

The SEC. In It: m et
queetlonehle payment: by
caper-that. can uh ed-

anememd
the ht; eorporettom ere
""mrtess. that tn. wtthout
mettle venom who tub-
etettttelly m then. The

E?
E

g:
E

‘E
:1
.5

E35 is
5-; z}
5.5 i
EEE8¥§
iiiéggg

hem the WW"
llstedonlheexchlﬂtw -

Oedturlly.,the president
belathechotceotCPAonm
teeter: a W MW.
and enmtden he a deb; a
temtetheCPAbymhtm.

1'heCPA.eohltut1.eetuIlly
telnet It a e tetra. The can!

Malntcltl Daily News, 1979

[6

such a mtetol. or
«recon-tulle. CPA!
In W the mom
mushotddthtbevers

Wth)

polltletm. Ind uevet d1
Mun-meiot-

sun. the smell
mm the whole u
that the bottom Iltte It
Thu 19 how W I
are audited tor mm
Jean A cheer study
regatta by I mutated
the Seamus Bum
mm wilt m
that even may I!
the heedlttte-nektn

plcklnp.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOOiOOMW-6
DENMN UARNS JAPAN 0F EC COUNTI‘ZMCTION

'l'okyn wumctu mum rims tn English 29 rm 79 p 8-5

[Text]

ltoy Denman. European
Cornrnonitlea _ Commiaaton'a
director general tor external
aiIaIrs. warned Wednesday that
the EC «waive mocli raay
dtccusa In June apecttie actions
against Japan unieaa Japan'a
trade aurpiaa m the EC is
manually M In the
monthaahead

Ite ntade the Minn as he
met wtth Shlm IIIyanroto.
dIreetorneneralotthelnIem~
ttanaihadePolIeyBueauthe
MInIatryot Trade
and Industry. edneaday
rnornIM

At the anew meeting.
Denmanpolntedtothreemaior
problem pendlna between
Japan and the BC - trade
Imbalance. that Japanese
market in attlt very much
closed. and that Japaneae ex~
portaareeonoeotratedonaorne
speettltarons.

Dennan told httyarnoto
Japan Is not lying to to the
spirit oi the UshIha-iiateriramp

jolnt atatenront bated about
oneyearapo.

lie said that there Is a

wing lIde otproteetlonirln In
tho malty and that he
hoped to rd‘algnltlegné
“In”... JW'
trade.
Unless Japan tairea Ilrrn
action to Improve the trade
relation. the Tokyo summit ot
mistrial palm ntll he a
"vayntetenei'hemouated
"WM

Also. Degoan aatd. the EC
aeeuNe council may dlacuaa
apeettlcaotionaatsnedatlapan
atitatneettnginlme.

Japan'a trade aurplua with
tIreECroaeupereenttnterlna
ot the yen and 29 percent to
term ot the dollar drain; the
tirattvotnonthaotthtayear.

Denman raid that Japan'a
Maltradeuupluatadecltntlg
hutnotwiththeEt‘.

In reply. Illyamoto aaId that
Japanhaaludeandla manna
um ettorta tor a hetter
halanoeoitradettththeec.

(zol'vtttmrr: ltnlnlclrt natty News, 1979

§§2§§§§§s§§éga i333:

§é§§§
you OFFICIAL nsa ONLY
muuhnuy

Tnkyo MAINICHI DAILY news in English 27, 28 Feb, 1, 2 Mar 79

RECESSION-PMGUl-Zl) INDUSTRIES' STATUS REVIEW!"

[27 Feb 79, p s]

ECUNOHIC
[‘I'oxt]

www.1muwmm 33mm mam”

mm”.

3.3 m E 3
333333333
$3.33 33333 3333 3: m.

[8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
§=“*§ézgﬁag§€

igsg §§iz 5: ?3s ai

u mmm “3m
“I mum an ’0 mm W5
quaun'mmuu
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/07J09: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100040064-6

#53.

FOR UFFICIAI. USE ONLY

"as the plywood Industry
WW!“
tn 2112mm

3

2%
-EE

5;:
E
g

33
3%;
E2:

32?

ltaeolleetlvacapactty).

la the mutt-to. the
cheulcal (sultan Matty
momenta-venom

1baddtotﬂs.:egm:‘l
Immunity"

ammuytavmwlal.
and this slashed the com-

petlt'lm ot the Japanese
«autumn;

[1 Mar 79, p 5]

[Text]

"The law“ was the my way
tonvethavlaummatetal
W. N they had no
alternate lobe to aumtt
themselvea and” mum

manager 0! Show nght
Melal'a Kltaltata plant. In
Kltaltata City. Putnahltna
Preteen“.

20

Then came China. M
unmet. China I: put
tonal-d |‘t’vﬂltlt ambttl
m punctual
luthehdmtrtalhatalaolu
agricultural aoctor. 1

323:3. ol the Japant
lemme: W17
Bmmuﬂm
meaty. “Nomlllookallke
can mm at law
mm! M . mu‘
Matthew

M an avenue aoeolo.
unable to I“!!! ﬁt mot
WWQW
atﬂllatetl comma. that

Egg;
5::
§‘§§

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOOiOOMW-6
3 iii??? 553?,
£3333;
:ggﬁe 52:5: E
§§§E§ Egizﬁ
68833903..

ggaﬁégf
alga-£9853
85881932395...»
Eggs-9928»
$.38388835
i223

n8§.q§_mnsa
xx 31883. SE. 3...
Finis—892:3.
Eggsgﬁ
gin—35.515288
ﬁggggaq»?
air-5.51.53. 28¢
.8538. 5:2: .538:
:3: .3533: a:
333:}; :3. 3....
803:8. 12: H a 333.
a... 3B 988: s so «3

3...
23353359.;

3 u 38.5 23% o. .38.

giEBlbip—i
IMWRNEIH':

(150:

FOR OFFICIAL 053 (MIN

ll will nlmhe very lamhelon‘
llle nlllp price. m. So let.
yum have been lnlllnc new
:1le were nl lhe new
level «new. Kepetl lllnnml.
thallium ol llle mm
uhlpynnl mmlllee at the
Japan swung lm
W. aﬂoamm:
alum. “no- Inn; \vlll In
weakened yards be able u
WM lo-hleed" They wlll
noon deplele their Inlemel
meme and Munch: will be
the preulnu problem tor
mean-clad yards ln the
muumnetudum."

Alma: M mm
ymln nnve been placed under
urlcl mm! at lllel: male-line
but: «mu m. nuance cl
WW. ~

mm Doe! Co. In one cl
web W. ll manly
escaped pronouncement nl
own when new end
Wamelnncnnmlneel
melllhlmr.

The company‘s «mun
dock vllh n NIH'IIII

“[20

Hainichl Daily News, 1979

21.

W Meme lac-been
memullmoly.m
mew-y lo um. and «-
clllme to well. am In:
loved-I meter- llle n
Jmlnmnmulpln
one.
ummmmn
eellollm.mmuelnelerul
the yard comm lncludlm
the dock. lo nlne m lot
comm: madman. Nov
ll pleas lomlveby cum
lbemhnlnenllneoluldlna
landed mum and «up
meundnln-eels.

Al one «no line m
employed wmmn.
Bul meal" humiliation:
mmntmmmm
lolJlllMen

An npenm of a mall
bulneu ln lletodele «no
planned. '11!qu
medlnhelheuldenllhepul
clly W. in! we an'l
nllntnlnwpelnudam
mentallmnu]ednn‘lwe
llnmmlnmem.
Jul don‘t are I In m
WM"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

I‘ICONIH lit

JAPAN-U.S.-FRG COOPERATION IN DEALING WITH PRC DESIRED

Tokyo SANKEI SHIUBUN in Japanese 5 Apr 79 Nursing Edition p l 0"

[Article by lsao Maeda]

[Text] According to a source associated with Japanese-Chinese economic
affairs. China has asked for Japan's cooperation in drafting and working out
plans in connection with a readjustment in its 10-year economic development
plan. and Japan has accepted the request. China is expected to begin
readjusting the 10-year plan shortly. Officials concerned with Japanese-
Chinese economic affairs stress the need to establish a system of cooperation
with China among Japan. the United States and Rest Ger-any because China is
asking for the cooperation of not only Japan but also the United States

and West Germany in funds. equipment and technology. For this reason.
Yoshihiro Innyama. president of the Japan-China Economic Association. will
meet Prime Hinister Ohira soon to ask for the government's cooperation.

This trilateral cooperation system is likely to take shape at the forth-
coming Tokyo summit (of advanced nations) scheduled for June.

According to the source, China is expected to readjust its 10-year economic
development plan. which covers the 1976-1985 period. at the National People's
Congress (NPC) which is scheduled to be called into season soon. "hen he

met with President Inayams during his recent visit to Japan. Vice Minister

of Foreign Trade Liu Xiwen asked for "Japan's cooperation" in drafting and
working out a new economic plan. In reply. Inayama indicated Japan's
readiness to render full cooperation in readjusting the economic plan into

a realistic one. lnaynma said: "It is impossible to fulfill by I985

the enormous plan which envisages some 120 projects including the doubling

of steel output and which requires a capital investment of some $300 billion."
Thus. Japan's private sector is to participate in the working out of Chinese
economic policies.

However. materially and financially Japan by itself finds it difficult to
meet the expectations of China. a country with 900 million people. in
addition. China wants to introduce equipment. technologies and integrated
plants also from the United States and West Germany. Hence. Japanese and
Chinese officials concerned agree that it will be better for Japan. the
United States and Rest Germany "to cooperate" than ”to compete" with one

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

another in dealing with China. This led to lnayama's decision to ask for the
novenmunu's help in establishing the proposed trilaterol cooperation system.

II In still unclear what this trllaterol cooperation plan entails. however.
it is likely to call for setting up a large framework of cooperation in
their respective fields of specialty-othe United States in developing
petroleum. mineral and other resources in addition to extending financial
aid: west Germany in supplying various plants; and Japan in providing iron
and steel. elertornics. automobile and other processing techniques. It may
also call for dividing a project among the three countries. This is aimed
at eliminating the possibility of a cutthroat competition among the three
nations in the Chinese market and also at containing China's negotiating
skill. The source associated with Japanese-Chinese economic affairs said
that. in holding business negotiations with China. "we have often been made
a fool by the Chinese. who take advantage of our weak points.”

Meanwhile. a government source has said that the trilateral system of economic
cooperation with China is a "Soviet shift" in the light of the international

political situation and will help stabilize international relations vis-a-vis
the Soviet Union.

The source assertated with Japanese-Chinese economic affairs said that this
plan will take concrete shape after the Tokyo summit. This remark is
believed to indicate the possibility of holding trilateral talks among
government leaders of the three states. including west Germany. who are
scheduled to participate in the Tokyo summit. after Japan and the United
States have coordinated between themselves at the forthcoming Japan-0.5.
sumait meeting. Thus. the proposed plan will likely be taken up for
discussion at the Ohira-Csrter meeting scheduled for May.

COPYRIGHT: Sangyo Keizsi Shinbun Tokyo ﬂonshs 1979

C50: GIOS

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR UFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

GOVERIHENT TO ASSIST IN MEXICAN INDUSTRIAL PROJECT
Tokyo ASANl SNINBUN in Japanese 7 Apr 79 Morning Edition p 9 0H

[Excerpts] A government source disclosed on 6 April that our government
would actively assist in the Lazaro Cardenas industrial zone construction
project jointly promoted by the Mexican Government and the Japan Federation
of Econoeic Organizations [Kaidenrenl on the west coast of Mexico.

Minister of International Trade and Industry Bsaki tentatively plans to
visit Mexico. The government is studying ways to support this project

through the overseas economic cooperation fund and the Japan Export-Import
Bank.

Under the Lazaro Cadenas coastal industrial zone construction project. the
small steel mill at (Las Tolucias) port will be expanded with Japanese
cooperation to increase its annual capacity to l nillion tons (in terms

of crude steel). with this steel mill as the center. the area around it
will be turned into a full-scale industrial zone sinilar to the Kaehina
coastal industral complex in Japan. when Mexican President Lopez visited
Japan last fall. the project was discussed. Later in March. Keidsnren and
Mexican officials held the first round of negotiations in Tokyo.

Between aid-April and late April. three Japanese survey teams will succes-
sively visit Mexico to discuss Japanese cooperation in the project. They
will be sent by: l) the Sumitome Metal Industries Group which will
cooperate in the steel pipe project; 2) Kobe Steel which will be in charge
of the forging and casting plants; and 3) Nippon Steel Corporation which
will be in charge of the expansion of the present steel mill. After the
return of these survey teams. the Japanese Government will decide whether
or not to dispatch a joint government-private survey team to Mexico.
depending on the reports of the three teams.

The Japanese Government plans to step up economic cooperation with Mexico
because that country is in the limelight as a treasurehouse of petroleum.

"hen the construction of a pipeline from the oilfield to Saline Cruz port on
the Pacific is completed. petroleum exports to Japan will become a possi-
bility. Mexico is reportedly planning to export oil beginning in 1980.

27
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mexlean crude oll~—u light crude 011--ylelds 25 percent gasoline. 19 percent
kerosene and [2 percent light 011. It ls very valuable to Japan. In the

wake of the lrnnlnn revolution. the Japanese Government is seeking nultiple
sources of petroleum ln an effort to avoid exclusive reliance on the Mlddlu

Enut for lts oll supply. That is why It is eylng the stable supply of
Nexlenn crude oll.

COPYRIGHT: Asnhl Shinbun Tokyo "onsha 1979

C50: 4105

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL 083 ONLY

ECONOMIC

OIL FIRMS To TEAM 0? TO BUY M£XICAN CRUDE
Tokyo ASARI dVENING REVS in English 9 Apr 79 p 3 0"

[Text] The five major oil cospenies of Japan, including Idesitsu Kosan Co.
Mitsubishi Oil Co and Dsikyo Oil Co, decided at a seeting of their presidents
Friday to fors a Japanese consortium to import crude oil fron Mexico.

The are doing this because international oil Iajors have cut oil supplies
to nonaffilisted firns since the Iranian shutdown. This alliance any result
in nergers among oil fir-s in the importing end transport fields.

It is reported that the nesting of presidents was held Friday at the cell
of Massni Ishids. chairnan of the Petroleum Association of Japan. Iahida
visited Mexico Iron 16 through 21 March and attended the ceremony narking
the 61st anniversary of the Mexican National Oil Company. Penex.

At that ties. Ishida took with him a seasage from Minister of International

Trade and Industry Esaki and said that the government was very interested
in importing Mexican crude oil.

In answer to Esaki's request, Mexican President Jose Lopez is said to have

indicated that he wanted to visit Japan in June and hold talks on the
matter.

But it is also reported that he completely rejected the barter systen pro-
posed hy Japan, according to which Mexico would export crude oil to Japan
in return for econooic cooperation fron Japan.

In Friday's neeting. Ishida explained these circumstances. and the five oil
fir-s agreed that in order to escape from the present overwhelming
dependence on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and to in-

crease the amount of crude purchased directly from oil producing countries.
the Japanese oil fir-s nust band together.

It wan decided that the five fir-s would study the question of negotiating
on crude oil inports and prices together.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Evening news 1979

cso: 1.120 2’
roe orucm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ECONGI IC

BRIEFS

SUMATRA LNG PROchtnThe Indonesian Government has asked Japan to take part
in a LNG (liquefied natural gas) development plan in Mun. Sunscre. which
Indonesia had been desiring to proaote with the cooperation of a 11.8. firm.
The Indonesian offer was disclosed by the Ministry of International Trade
and Industry [MITI] on 7 April. The plan in question is Indonesia's largest.
envisaging an annual LNG output of é.5 aillion tons. The MITI plans to
seriously study the Indonesian offer with e view to reducing Japan's
dependence on petroleu- and diffusing sources of energy supply. The
Indonesian offer was node by the visiting president of the Indonesian
Notional Petroleum Corporation (Pertuins). Haryono, to MITI Minister Esaki.
Indonesia reportedly made the offer because Indonesian negotiations with

a 0.5. fire on the Area LNG development plan fell through after experiencing
rough sailing. President Suharto himself is said to have instructed that
the plan he changed into an Indonesia-Japan joint venture. [Excerpt]

[Tokyo NIRON KEIZAI 8|!!le in Japanese 8 Apr 79 Morning Edition p l W]

(:50: #105

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
SC I IZleH AND 'l‘l-ZCIINOLOGY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIH 'I'HIZIINIIMKW I-'ll|l MINIIEII'M. HAS'I‘II RECYCLING DEVELOPED

'I'ukyu Tlll‘. .IM’AN ‘l‘llllzs In Himllnh Ill Mar 79 p 9

[Text]

Municipal mum ninth mm

lnrmerly ills-carom an "M10.“
unsu- can now be recycled by
nit-ans «I new lecnnoliw rc-
eenily dim-loved by line .lnpn-
neae Mcrnnm — noon nun
Ior "III mum noun

lry.

An enormous oniounl oi inn.
nlcipol m is hauled away
every week tron Ilie corners
ol slreeis and dooniepn oi
iiouarliolnn In this country.

Ill-uni oi lliis relau- is dis-
nosed oi In lnrlneroioin oi inu-
nlcipol [ornam- dispmal con-
m: and only a small poriion
olilismineolnrlonollll.

Sinllsilcn m incl on over-
une 17 million Ions oi woslc
are proliiiml annually innum-
oiil llie coililry - I daily over-
nuc ol Imam Ions oi munici-
pal rem. This means inc liv-
ernile person discord: one
kilogram oi wade o clay

in on ciiorl lo inaiu: boiler
im- oi "Ill unsie. Inc Aucncy
oi lndusirlal Science and rm:-
nnlnio ol llie liliniury ni lnier-
mlinnnl Trade and lnrimlry
has reeenliy «mph-in! devel~
«pineal oi new leennnm ior
municipal ins-Mic recycling

The "my eoinpieiul eon
elnn'llnn oi .1 hum nilnl plant
liils monln lor municipal
waxle lending :il ii reclaim-
«I-lonn area In Yokohama.
lions-gown l'reircliire. oi o In
iai msl ni ii :1 billion.

The ploril ll clubbed "slnr
Ousl 'an" In [M nope ilinl il
will no line ainr oi munlrlpill
mule recycling sislems by
line ism. according lo llie
agency.

ll look 6'.- )‘earn lo develop
lhis nyslcm and IN Iolal coal
0! Inc projccl omounled lo I‘
billion.

The idea or recycling munici-
pnlrenmlsbynorneanso
new one. Similar recycling
planio have been develooul he-
iore in vorlom oilirr counlrii-s.
including Inc I'nilnl Sink-s.
England. France. Weill Ger.
many. Holland and Snenen.

A unique uneci ol inc Jopn.
nest recycling ploni. Mom-r.
Is inc somlwl sclecliu- oolvn
rlzlnu classiﬁer union loeil-
llolrs Ilic Ioﬂlnu oiiI oi vorl-
nus kinds ol gamin- lrorn o
rnixlurc.

In IIII: new synlern. munici-
pal mule collected as a mix-
lure III Ilrnl led Inio Inc senil-

' wci Iclccilvc pulverlzlnl clas-

slller Inrouxn irlilcn Ii is
ended oul'inlo llim diiiereni
rnnli-rlol KW

(Imp l «art-N: oi gloss and
nllicr muse. Group ll I.\ mm
per. and Group lll mu: ol
pluslli'n. Mal: and lexilles

linen group oi ironies Is mm
('0va Inlo various rnulo
rlalx won as quallly coinnosl.
Mined pulp or Ierroos Mill!
llironﬂi lliree dilli'renl 5w
”Menu lnslallai oI Ine niorii.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2...... o. .3 33:33.. 9...
.3: a .o 35.3.1.1?
E. .o .83 o .31 :5. = 2...
......na. :3 .223. o- ......
.833 3333... 33... 3...
3.5658.

>32. .3 3.813! a 83.
v.13. .. t... 3 5 .o .391...
.... 2.5.3 3388.8: 5..
3.5.2.8. .2353: 13....

2. .2. .335 s 88.2. .8
:25. 82.8.8...

..8 3... 3.33.3...5 o.