APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R000100040002-4

, EL . .
mm 1979 (PM)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R0001000400024

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS Ila/8366
' 3 April 1979

SELECTED ARTICLES
. FROM THE JOURNAL 'OUANTUM ELECT RONICS'

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVIG

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400024
nor:

JPRS publication contain intonation priurily (to. foreign
navapapara. pariodicala and boob. but alao tron nava agency
trananiaaiona and broadcaata. Hatariala tro- foraign-languaga
aonrcaa ara tranalatod; thoaa fro- Bngliah-languago aonrcaa
ara tranacribad or raprintad. with tha original phrasing and
othar charactariatica ratainod.

llaadlinaa. aditorial raporta. and tutorial oncloaod in brac‘uta
[] ara anppliad by ms. Procauing indicatora auch aa [Text]
or [Bxcarpt] in tho tirat line of aach itan, or following the
lat lino of a briaf, indicate how tha original intonation vaa
procaanad. “hora no procaaaing indicator in givan, tba infor-
mation van man-ariud or extracted.

Untniiiar nalaa tandarad phonatically or tranalitaratad ara
ancloaad in paranthaaaa. Horda or nanaa ptacadad by a quan-
tion curl: and ancloaad in paranthaaaa vara not ciaar in tha
original but hava baan anypliad aa appropriata in contaxt.
Othar nnattribntad paranthatical notaa vithin tha body of an
ital originnta with tho aourca. riaaa within itaaam aa
givan by aoutoa.

131a contanta o! thia panioation in no way rapraaant tha poli-
ciaa, viava or attitndaa of tha v.8. Gourmant.

mm: um um REGULATIONS mum mm 0!
mama mnowcm mum noun: m1- DIIOWTION
01 um WEICATIOI I! mm montcm. US! ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPns L/8366
3 April 1919

SELECTED ARTICLES
FROM THE JOURNAL 'DUANTUM ELECTRONICS’

Moscow RVANTOVAYA ELBKTRONIKA in Russian Vol 5, No 12, 1978
pp 2550-2556, 2567-2576, 2611-2622, 2633-2640, 2656-2662

Coureurs PAG

High-Speed Wide-Band Electroopticei Lithium Niobate Blenenta
for Laser Beam Control System
(A. L. WIN, et a.) 0.00...000.000.00.000...00.00.40

Use of kcited Atoms in Ether-any Initiated Visible Che-ice].
were

(A. Se ”M13383 1]..) eeeeeeooeecaaeeeeaeeeeooeeacteeeaa 1

Chain-Reaction Visible Chemical. were
(A. s. Rankin, et a1.) 0.0.0...It.OOIOOOOIDOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 2

Feasibility of a Gas-Dynamic Inner Operating on Tramitione
Between Win 002 Mode level.

(v. x. Knnyukcv, v. u. thzulnyev) ....................... 3

Effect of the Degree or Polarization on the Gain in the Presence
of Stimulated Ramn Scattering

(A. Ze 0mm, 6% Bl.) econ.eeeoeeoeeaeeoeoeoaeecveeeeeeo u

Synchronization of Pinon-Mirror mectroionization 0% use"
(n. a. NJ”, at u.) ...CO....‘C......'.'........0....... u

Frequency Tuning in a Dye Iaeer With a Bragg Mirror Utilizing
n Cholesteri: Liquid Crystal

(I. p. Il'chiehin, et a1.) ............................... 5

Generation of High-Power Ultraahort Pulses by a Dw-Tenyenture
Ruby Inner um: Sun Volum or the Active Ibdiun
(A0 “0 mrun, cc ‘1.) 0.0.0.00I.OOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO. 5
POI! OFFICII'L US! ONLY

comm (Continued)

Study of e Pulsed k-l’a Chenicel beer at High Steeeuree of the
working Medina
(Yu. A. Kolchin' et a.) 00!0.00000000000000DIOOOOOOODOOOOO

Effect of Photoinituting luteriele on the Generatooo of a
Pulse to HP Chemical Ineev
(Yut I. “I”, .t u.) 000.0000.00IOOOOOO0.000000000000000

Nee-mum of the Amplification Coefficient in e Supereonic
Mixi Jet for 13-03-002
? .80 mm“, .t ‘1.) 60.00.000.000...OOOOOOOOOJOODOOOJOO

Study of the berg Pure-enters of on Electron-Been-Initieted
CIF- Chemical user
A. 8e mum, Gt “0) 0000.0DDOOOOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOQOOOO

Effect of Group Velocity Miemtch on the Reproduction of the
hoping Spectrum in the Cue of Stimulated Scattering
(Be 1‘. ul'mich, V0 Va 8m") eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeoeee

- b .
FOR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040002-4

M OFFICIAL USE ORLY

PUBLICATION DATA

English title : SELECTED ARTICLES
'Qm almost

Russian title

KVAM‘OVAIA W.“

Author (a) :
Editor (e) x 11.6. Beeov
Publishing llouse : Sovetskoye radio

Plece of PublicetiOn Moscow

ee

bets of Publicetion : 1978

Signed to prees 8

Copies :
' comm-«r : Itdetel'etvo ”Sove'
"Kventoveye elektn

- c -

M OFFICIAL WE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDPGZ-OOGSOROOO100040002-4
FOR OHICIM. 083 ONLY

(DC 5h5.2hl.l32537.228

RICK-SPEED WIDE-MID WMCAL m IIOMTB mm FOR M833 m
COMOL 8W

"one"! “MAYA mm in Russiln V01 5, lo 12, 1973 pp 2550-2557

[Article by A. L. Mikeelsen, II. It. Koblove. B. 8. Kiselev end 3. A. Zesovin;
submitted 9 Decenber 1977]

[most] A stm is nsde of the frequency end pulse chersc-
teristics of nodnlstors end polerisstion switches of digi-
tal deﬂectors nnde of 0°-cut lithium niobste crystals.
Methods ere proposed for incressin; the opereting reuse of
these devices by correcting the electric control signs.
A single-etc” switching tine on the order of 300 nanosec-
onds vss obtnined.

It is elso presented fron experimtel studies of the frequency end pulse
cherscteristics of electroopticu) devices rule of 0°-cut lithiu niobste
crystals. The possible Iethods xlergin; the pessbend end incl-using
the speed of these devices ere intestianted.

Let us consider the fectors deter-lining the neture of the frequncy-elpli-
tude chsrscteristic of en electroopticel crystel. As is known. the Jineer
clectroopticel effect is possible in ferroelectric crystels in which n pi-
ezoelectric effect is else obnerved. 0n epplicstion of s controlling elec-
tric field to this crystel. defomtions occur which lend to verietion of
the refrection coefficients. Thus. n "secondary” effect is inoced on the
"true" electroopticsl effect ceased by the inverse piezoelectric end opto-
elnstic effects.

The vsristion of the polsrisstion constents he” of the nondefcrnsd optical
index in s nechsnicelly free crystnl cen be described es follows for the ex-
istence of both effects [1]:

Ad"- Jf‘r’.£.n. (ql.+p"..d“.)£m (1)

where 1-ka sre the total effect coefficients; r! h ere the coefficients of
the true electroopticsl effect; p131. ere the op estic coefficients of

1
m omcm. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the crystal; 5‘ are the controlling field cosponents; du. are the piezo-
electric moduli.

In a mechanically squeezed crystal the electrooptical effect is determined
only by the coefficient r‘.

The conditions of mechanical squeezing in the exystal are also realized when
controlling a fast-alternating field as a result of the inertia of the pi-
ezoelectric effect inesnuch as the inertia of the "true" electrooptical ef-
fect is several orders smaller. Thus. the level of the frequency-amlitude
characteristic of the crystal is distinguished within low-frequency and high-
frequency bands of the controlled frecuencies. the effectiveness of the de-
vices Isde of the 0°-cut lithiu- niobate based on using the coefficient r22
at high frequencies diminishes by alnost two tines.

‘lhe ultrasonic waves propagated in the crystal experience reflection from
its boundaries. and on coincidence of an integral number of half-wavelengths
with the geouetric size of the sample in the direction of propagation. ae-
chanical resonance occurs. The resonance frequencies {pm of the rectangu-
lar resonator are defined by the expression

[MWVEH “mm: (2)

where n are the integral nushers defining the order of the overtone; d1 is
the size of the sample with respect to the direction of the wave propaga-
tion; v1 are the elastic wave velocities in the crystal. In addition. reso-
nance is also possible on combination frequencies of the basic tones and
harmnics.

In the resonance range, the contribution of the secondary electrooptical ef-
fect varies significantly. which defines the significant nonlinearity of the
frequency-alplitude characteristic of the elesent (the values of the total
electrooptical coefficients with respect to range can differ by several
tines). The Q-i‘sctor of the syntax: decreases with an increase in frequency;
the high-order overtones are weakly exhibited, and the total electrooptical
coefficient decreases to a value of r', which corresponds to the squeezed
crystal.

 

Figure 1. Diagram of the experimental setup for recording the modulation
coefficient and the half-wave voltage as a function of frequency:
l--laser; aupolarizer; 3-4/3 plate; huinvestigated seaple; 5-
analyzer; 6—photoreceiver; 7-m-27 frequency-saplitude charac-
teristic neter (oscillograph); 8—suhaodulator (SP-28 oscillstor).

2
NR OFPICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we have investigated the frequency characteristics of the electrooptical
elements aade of 0°-cut lithiua niobste with the application of a control-
ling field along the X-axis of the crystal by two methods.

the frequency-amplitude characteristics were recorded by the first method
for a snail controlling voltage with an alplitude of 0.1 U; 2 ("l/2 is the
half-wave voltage). The diagram of the device for taking e neasurenents
is presented in Figure l. he Inn-27 frequency characteristic meter and
wide-band amplifier (submodulator) were used in the setup. me accuracy of
this method is low. for the Joint frequency-uplitude characteristic of the
crystal and the photoreceiver is measured, but the method does permit sir
pls, fast detersination of the frequency-amplitude characteristics of the
elements in a wide frequency range. It is also necessary to note that the
controlling electrooptical element is a nonlinear device and, consequently.
the shape of the frequency-amplitude characteristic does not sufﬁciently
accurate]: characterise the sample even for an ideal receiver. for it de-
pends strongly on the amlitude of the controlling signal and the bias for
a nonlinear device.

The frequency-saplitude characteristics of elements Iade of lithium niobate
of various geometric sizes were recorded. Figure 2 shows one such charac-
teristic for a angle with diaensions of x I 10.3 I. y I 6.5 - and s I

16 m. It is obvious that the first resonance frequency is in the hOO-hilo-
hertz range. On application of the controlling field along the X-axis for
samples with dimensions along the I and 2 axes consensurate with the disten-
sion along the X-axis, the shape of the frequency-uplitude characteristic
of the elesent depends little on these dimensions, that is. the dimsion
along the direction of the applied field is defining.

The relation for the primary resonance bequency as a function of the disen-
cions along the X-axis is presented in Figure 3 in accordance with the ex-
perimental results. ’i’hese results agree well with the values of the reso-
nance frequencies that were calculated for the ultrasonic wave velocities in
lithium niobate and were presented in [2].

Thus, it is obvious that the modulating element made of 0°-cut lithiu nio-
bate can be used either in the low control frequency range (to frequencies
of several hundreds of kiloherts) or, the me of a carrier frequenq in the
high-frequency range (the lower bound of the range-tens of megahertz).

However, many electrooptical devices must have aodulation‘bands fro. zero to
tens of megahertz with low nonuniformity, or thq must have ‘a frequency-
amplitude characteristic of a form such as to permit correction as a rasult
or the control system (for the frequency-amplitude characteristic of the
free eagle depicted in Figure 2. this is impossible).

The known methods of broadening the hand consisting either in’decreasing the
size of the elements. that is. in carrying the resonance frequencies beyond
the operating range [3]. or consisting in sqmesing the crystal Us. 5]. are

3
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not always applicable. In the toner case. the crystal aperture is decreased
significantly (see Figure 3). In the latter case. the optical quality of the
crystal is foiled, and the orthogonal component of the light field (back-
ground) appears at the output or the device in the absence of a control
voltage. In addition. it has not been possible to danp the crystal fully
(see the bequency-enplitude characteristic 0! a sample with ussive elec-
trodes, Figure 2).

 

0 . 4! u z: t0 I. m;

Figure 2. Frequency-amplitude characteristics of a lithiln niobats samle:
solid curve-free sample; dashed cum-sample with massive sil-
ver electrodes; dash-dot curvec-senple with nonreflecting races.

{Mulls
U

1.0

a,
1 t s' 'g, In!

Figure 3. First resonance frequency as a Motion of the salple size d;.

I

He have proposed and used a method of elininating resonances as a result of
the tact that at the boundary of the electrooptical element conditions were
created under which reflection of the ultrasonic waves does not occur.

They are taken out at the crystal and are scattered outside it. he tre-
quency-snplituds characteristic of the controlling elelent with nonretlect-
ing faces is also presented in Figure 2. he optical quality of the salple
in this case is alnost no worse.

A sinner electrooptical element ads of lithiu niobate with dimensions or
x- l.5n.y-2uandsn ecu-was used inthe sodulatororadevice for
recording intonation by a laser been. The We values of the halt-wave
voltage were used as an exact characteristic of the frequency properties of

1;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the sample. As is known [6]. the noduletion cherecteristic of the syste-
nsde up of the electroopticel element end the enslysor with sinusoidel con-
trolling signel end using quarter-«eve bies hes the ton

l-I.sln'[-;-%$—(::+-:-], (3)

where I is the light intensity or the output; 10 is the ruin. light inten-
sity st the output; 00 is the amplitude of the controlling sipsl with s
frequency a.

The neesurenents of the magnitude or the helf-weve voltage were performed on
e device, the opticel pert or which is enelcgous to thst presented in Fig-

ure 1. The controlling voltege with uplitua‘e no use red iron the 03-28 os-
cilletor on fixed frequencies directly to the tested senile. Fran the photo-
receiver the siyiel went to the y-plstes ot the oscillogreph. end for scen-

ning the controlling signal 00 sin at wee used. The noduletion ehsreeterie-
tic defined by the expression (3) wes observed on the screen or the oscillo-
greph. 0n werying Uo end reaching the .nximn ot the signel I, it is possi-
ble to determine the belt-wen voltege a: the given frequency by the tormle

”3/2“” - 200. (h)

This method deter-ining the frequenq cherecteristic is lore erect by con-
perison with the first method. for the shepe or the frequency cherscteristic
is fixed. and the quncy-slplitude cherncteristic or the photoreceiver
does not influence the neesurenent error.

    

i‘ I I I 0 ﬁlm:

Figure lo. Belt-weve voltege es e {motion or frequency for e selple with
nonreflecting feces.

The values obtained for the heir-wove woltege ere presented in Figure h. It
is quite obvious thst the suppression of the neonences is effective, end on
high frequencies the contribution or the secondery electroopticel effect
dissppeers. es s result of which the heir-wen woltege increesos. The
transition tron the low-frequency to the high-Mguency region hes e nono-
tonic nature, end the steep drop of the frequency-uplitude cherecteristic
of the electroopticel elenent cen be conpenseted in the high-frequency renge
by correction of the controlling voltege with respect to the known low by

5
m onzcm. use ONLY
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

ordinary radio engineering methods. In the mentioned modulator this was
done by simple high-frequency correction of the frequncy-amplitude charac-
teristic of the suhmodulator. The modulator passband of 0-2.5 megahertz was
obtained with no percent nonuniformit . It is also possible to obtain sig-
nificantly luger modulation hands by complicating the correction of the
preliminary electronic amplifiers.

The contrast of the modulator exceeded 100, that is, the proposed method of
eliminating resonances in practice had no negative effect on the optical
quality of the crystal. Thus, this method combined with correction of the
controlling signal permits the creation of wide-hand (from zero to tens of
megahertz) electrooptical nodulators with good optical quality and hid: lin-
earity of the frequency-amplitude characteristic without reducing the trans-
verse cross section of the crystal. The analogous modulators can find ap-
plication in wide-band commication lines, high-speed shutters and other
such devices.

Along with the modulators, the most important class of electrooptical de-
vices includes the digital electrooptical deflectors [6], which are a series
of successively arranged binary cells (stages) made up of an electrooptical
polarization switch and a splitting element.

Let us consider what determines the speed of this type of deflector. 'lhe
modulation characteristic of one stage is given by the expression (3). and
the intensity of the output signal of the deflector with simltaneous commu-
tation of the II stages is proportional to sin” of the feed voltage.

This permits determination of the required voltage level 7' with respect to
the given level 1/10 at the output of the deflector on switching I stages:

7:: --?7 "ninety-7;. (5)

Thus, for example. for II I 12 and a light intensity level at the output of
0.9 of the static value. a voltage level on the stages of 0.915 of the half-
wave value (Y1: I 0.955) is required.

Here it is also necessary to consider the following facts: the frequency-
amplitude characteristic of the element has a steep drop in the mechanical
squeezing region (see Figure In), and the controlling element is essentially
nonlinear.

‘Ihc frequncy-amplitude characteristic of an electrooptical element (see Fig-
ure 3) can be represented by the expression

K(Ju) x K1 + Kz/(l 0‘ Jan). (6)

where ‘l’ is the time constant; K1. K2 are the coefficients taking into ac-
count the contribution of the primary and secondary electrooptical effects.

6
ran orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to- usec
to

 

—I———h—l—L—
0 41 4‘ 4’ ”Kusec

Figure 5. Calculated tine for buildup of the light intensity to the 0.9
level as a function of the controlling pulse front duration:
l—einglc stage; 2-l2-stage deflector; 3—single stage with cor-
rected controlling pulse. '11:. points near the curves are the ex-
perinental data.

i‘or the 0°-cut lithiun niobate on application of the controlling field along
the x-axis, x, : 0.6 and K, = 0.1:. ‘nae second ten of the expression (6)
takes into account the contribution of the secondary electrooptical effect
and is npproxinted w a function of the transmission coefficient of the
low-frequency filter.

0n feeding a controlling pulse of the single-step type with linearly in-
creasing front of duration '1' to the electroop'tical elenent characterized by
the transfer function (6). the lint eigml at the output can be determined,
using, for example, the operation Isthod [7] as follows. The inge of the
acting signal has the for:

UUu)-—1.u—.),—(l-e-IUT). (7)

Multiplying (7) by the transfer coefficient (6), we obtain the i-ge of the
reaction. On going to the original. we find the light signal in the fom

-’:,j—' -.;n’”§[+am--L;—Tou-n-K.-;-uI-e-mmo—
-(I—e-«~'m)a(t—rm.

where o(t) is a unique discontinuity.

(8)

Setting the relative voltage level equal to y”. fron (8) we obtain the
ligat pulse front duration at the output of the lz-stege deflector:

7
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

1. .-v|nQiLm:_£__J:-::“" . (9)
Figure '5 shows foe relations for the setup time of the light response with
respect to the 0.9 level for one stage and for a l2-stage deflector as a
function of the front duration of the controlling electric pulse calculated
according to (9) and also values obtained experimentally. It is obvious that
for the given crystal aperture. it is impossible to obtain a deflector speed
less than 0.8 microseconds by a simple shortening of the controlling pulse
front.

The tine constant 1’ determining the speed of the elesent can he decreased
by decreasing the dimensions of the crystal. but this leads to a decrease in
the aperture and. consequmtly. the masher of deflected positions.

Another means of increasing the speed reduces to varying the shape of the
controlling signal in order to emphasise the high frequencies in its spec-
trun so as to compensate for the steep drop of the frequency-uplitude char-
scterietic o.’ the element in the max-frequency range. This can he achieved
by creating a bl ip on the controlling signal front.

bet. for exasple. a pulse of the following type he superposed on the siual
with linearly increasing front '1'

um - n[o(t - 'r) -- o(t - r - 6)]. (10)

where o is the relative amplitude of the pulse; A is its duration. Using
the above-described procedure [7]. let us define the light signal at the
output of the controlling element with the transfer coefficient defined hy
the expression (5) for t z '1‘ + A:

[ml/.m -In"—; ll—(K.t‘n(e'I'—l)e-"' +K,¢le‘/'—llc-i""'l‘|. (n)
This exprescion is exactly equal to one under the condition

(«n-)(J/t - 1) .. «(eMt - ne‘P/t. (12)
permitting determination of the ratio between a and d for the given 1' and t.

This method of increasing the speed was checked experimentally. The con-
trolling pulse had s special form with a blip in the initial section. As a
result of this correction. the switching tine of one stage was reduced to
300 nanoseconds for snll distortions of the peak.

Figure 6 shows the oscillogrssc m‘ the controlling and the light pulses with

and without correction. It is obvious that the correct.on significantly
shortens the light pulse fronts.

8
'0! OFFICIAL "SI: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 6. Oscillogrsns of the controlling pulses (s. 1:) end the light
pulses (c. d). The oscillogrsn c corresponds to the controlling
pulse a. The oscillogrem d corresponds to the controlling pulse
1:. The scale is es follows: 100 nsnoseconds/division.

 

Figure 7. Oscillogrens of pulses obtsined vith undsnped (s, b) and duped
(c, 6) crystals. The upper hem ere the controlling electric
signals; the lover heels are the light response. Scale: 2 mi-
croseconds/divisiOn.

Ful Lher shortening of the fronts is possible by increasing the blip sapli-
tudc and giving it s defined shspe. The difficulties srising in this case

are connected with the selection of the shape of the blip which determines
the distortions of the fist peek of the light pulse. In order to obtsln

9
FOR OPPICIN. USE ONLY
FOR ONION]. 088 ONLY

nexinun speed end low distortions of the peek. the blip must be uy-etric
with snell buildup tine end coweretively gentle decreeee (shout 500 nono-
seconds for given cryetel site elong the X-exis).

'Ihe output light pulses of the electroopticel deflectors cen be significently
distorted elso es s result of the resonence properties or the electroopticel
element. ‘nze seperetion or the speetrel coQonente of the control signel
tekee plsce on conperison or their frequencies with the cherecteristic fre-
quencies or the crystel. end it is exhibited in the noduletion et the peek
of the pulse end in the pulse intervel. The edliesihle degree of distor-
tions cen be reelieed by limiting the spectral oi“ the controlling signel
which is equivelent to decreeeing the speed or by operetion of the deflectors
on fixed frequencies which norms the eree of their epplicetion.

The distortions of the light pulse peeks oen be dmreesed to ednissible vel-
ues by duping the crystels using the ebowe-eentioned nethod proposed by us.
In this cue the negnitude or the distortions in prectice does not depend on
the period end the duretion oi' the controlling pm... end it is determined

by the steepness of their fronts. Figure 7 shows the oscillogre-e or light

pulses in the ceee of undenped end duped crystals for verioue coobinetions

or periods end durations of the controlling pulses. The shepe of the light

eignel switched by the demed crystel in prectice does not depend on the op-
ersting conditions.

The results show thet e continetion oi‘ duping with correction of the shepe
oi‘ the controlling signel per-its et the present tine reeliution of e lb-
stege electroopticel deflector (11.096 positions) with less then 15-percent
distortion or the pulses under the worst conditions (simteneoue counte-

tion or ell stegee) for e switching tine on the order of 0.7-0.8 nicrosec-
onds.

In conclusion. the authors express their epprecietion to V. 8. Snorodinow
end I. V. Kerteehev for the developed end delivered control units permitting
the experinent to he pcri‘orned.
BIBLIOOMPKY
l. J. my, ”Pizicheskiye swovetve kristnllow i ikh opiseniye pri ponoshchi
teneorov i netrits" [Weieel Properties of Cryetele end Their Descrip-
tion Using Tensors end Metricee]. Moscow. Mir. 1967.

2. Vs. 2h. Spenser. P. V. unto end A. A. Sol-en. TIM. V01 55. lo 12.
1967s p 50

3. a. 9. Rinse And 14. a. sun, APPL. arms, so 8. 1969. p 1393.
la. r. Mitoki. mm: mm mm moment. so 3. 1912. p 165.

10
POI! ORIGIN. US! ONLY
7.

FOR OFFICIAL 083 OIILY

C. D. Butter, 9. C. Lee and J. D. look. ”Pace. of the included.
'nectroopticn System Conference. 1912.” I. Y.. 1972. p 111.

Ye. R. Mtol’ and V. II. Pu‘yghl. W Mat“! 1 omirovuuyc
"at.” [Minoan or Light Madman ma 80mins]. Noncov. m. 1970.

M. A. Iamnt'yov Ind 3. V. same. ”M Mr”. hm.” Mix.
”rump” [mm of the moor: or Manon- or a (:ch V‘s-ubloi.
”new. Hanks. 1973.

comma-r: Imul’uvo “Somme “no." “mew: gunman." 1918
1001.5

680:

81‘6/0821-22

1.1
M OFFICIAL I13! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

UDC 621.313.826.033.823
08! 0! ntcn'm am III M! nrrnm VISIBLE CHEMICAL MSW
Moecow ”ANA“ mum in mum Vol 5. lo 12. 1973 pp 2567-2576

[Article by A. 8. Baehhin. l. L. Knpriyanov and A. ll. Oreyewehiy. Phyeice
Inetitute ineni P. I. Lebedew of the USSR Acadew of Sciencee. Noecow; Inb-
aitted 20 June 197?. rewieed 22 Beptenber l9‘n]

[Text] in analyeie in mac or the poeeibility of obtain-
ing continuous (quaeicontinuone) generation in the ultra-
violet and wieible reaione with mine in a chemical re-
action with the participation of excited atone. The re-
aotion takee place during the mixing of fluxee of excited
ato- md the corresponding reagent. he excited ato-
(i‘iret excited state) ere toned on recodination of a
plane (hiring the fact cooling proceee in a eupereonic
nozzle. Specific reactione are propoeed. 'nte theoreti-
cal poeeibility of obtaining generation by thin eyeten on
Xe? and 11501 mleculee ie denonetrated.

1. Recently a great deal of attention hae been given to the creation of
wieible chemical laeere baeed on electron traneitione or Ioleculee turned in
chenical reactione. The reactions of the particlee in the ground electron
etate are eucceeemm need in intrared cheaical laeere (for ere-ple. on I?
and 00 nolecuiee) but for the electron traneitione the intent: eearchee for
generation in the reactions of thin type etill have not led to enoceee [1.
2 .

The etudiee of the dynaaice of binolecular exchange reactione indicate that
the reactione or the electron-excited particlee in the Mority or caeee
will pernit he to obtain electron-excited noleculee with high quantu- yielde.
For emple. the quantum yield in the reactions of the excited atom of noble
gaeee with a umber of fluorine-containing conpminde ie cloee to one [3].
Recently there have been reactione or tor-nation or electronnexoited nole-
culee m- excited as atone (h. 5]. co atone [h], and ato- of the amt
netale Rb. Ce [6]. The initiation of the reactione by an electron bean ado
it poeeible to obtain aenention on the electron traneitione of 1d, Kr? and
other eoleculee [1]. here the excited atone or the inert peee are tor-ed

12
M OIPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on peeeeae of feet electrone through e dense use. Although the electron-
excited nolecules ere formed in the chenicel reection here. the henic energy
in etill extrected from the mine nource.

Accordingly. it in unquestionehly of intereet to study the feeeihility of
ohteining continuous sensation in such reectione with the perticipetion of
excited etc-s for-ed by the thernnl nsthod (if the heetin; of the gen tekes
plnce en e result of the chuicel energy. thin lneer will be purely cheni-
eel). In the cue investiaeted by u. the reection tehcs piece with eixina
of the fluxes of the reegente (Just en in the treditionel cheniuel continu-
ous lesere [15]). one of which conteins excited etons. The thereel method
of the taxation of excited etc-s consists in using two different nechenisue:
plesne end etoeic recoehineticn. ‘lheee lecheniens correspond to two types
of internel eneru of the heeted one connected with the treneition cf the

perticlen to the continuous npectrel etetes. thet ie. ioninetion end dieeo-
cietion.

Pleene Nechenisn. In this cue the etcee in the excited etetce ere for-ed
as e result of electron-ion recolhinntion on cooling of n then-eel.” ionined
see in e supereonic nozzle. The Joint effect of the collieicn end redietion
relemtion lends to predoeinent populntion of the firet excited stete which
relenes the essentielly clover upper stete [7). If this etete is redietion-
connected to the ground stnte. then the cepture of the resonence redietion
cen eneure en increeee in the effective lifetinc. the difference in the
roposed eyeten fron the principlee of plum-Menu leeere developed in

7] coneiete in using the sucst populeted first excited level. Ite popule-
tion wee inventiuted previously en e henful procees of loss of excitetion.

The pnreneters of e then-ell: ionized gee. depending on the teqereture,
follow from the Bebe equetion

“e“i/nn ' Item I (em/e.)(2n.x'rln3)3/2 exp (-nm'r),

vhere k' is the Boltmnn conetent. The veluee of the equilibrium density
of the electrons ere presented in the tehle for toweretures of 10'" K end
5 . 103° K end see density of n. - 10'3 cu" for certnin etou. indicetini,
the poeeihilitiee of the then-eel lethod of creeting e pies-e. The plen-
vith per-eastern clone to the presented once cen he ohteined unins plenar-
trons. shock veves end hiah-tenereture fiance.

 

m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Atoaic Reooabination Hechanioa. This aechanisn consists in the foraation of
excited atom in the process of reconbination of atoaic particles with the

participation of three bodies. Ito general echeae can be represented as
follows:

R+Q+A¢RQ+A.,

where R and Q are the recoabinins atoms or radioalo; A“ ie the excited atoa.
The energy of excitation of the atoas A is theoretically linited to the en-
ergy of the M bond and it can reach a value of ~9 electron-volts for the

recombination reactions of 0+0. hen. A most cosplete study is aade of these
processes undor the conditions of excitation of additives of 'l'l. Pb. Cd and
Zn aetals to the different fleaes [8]. Another example is the reaction [10]

o+o+o~ouo(|s).

The advantage of this aechenisa ie the lower initial gas temerature. for as
a result of high statistical weight of the continuous states, the anority
of gases are sufficiently dissociated at tesperatures of ~3.000-b.000° K

As the calculations show. the internal energy of the as under such condi-

tions priaarily consists of the free recoabination energ. which proaotes
the achievement of high efficiency.

2. For analysis of the specific reactions and operating molecules it is
neceesery priaarily to obtain an expression for the aaplification coefficient
and the inversion condition in general fora. The possibility of this ap-
proach ariaee fro- the presence of general features both for the excited
aton reactions and for electron transitions of lasing aolecules.

he shall consider that the fluxes containing excited A‘ atom are aixed with
the acccapanying fluxes of the ac reagents. Then the cheaical reaction of
the formation of electron-excited AB“ molecules will take place in the nix-
in; zone:

A'ehc-on'oc. (1)

It is advantageous to place the axis of the resonator perpendicular to the
planes of the fluxee. This "transverse" systea is preferable in the case of
a high reaction rate. such so. for example. in the continuous ll? chemical
lasers [15].

low let us consider the ratio of the characteristic tines of different pro-
cesses in order to select an appropriate calculation technique. Let h' be
the rate constant of the reaction (1) with the foraation of the electron-
excited AB. Inlecule. let I: be the total rate constant of the reaction (1)
for all states of the products (as has alrew been noted we shall conoider
the reactions for which k'lh ~ 1). If the concentration fee] > [M], then
the characteristic tins of occurrence of the cheaical reaction is deter-ined
by the expression r,‘ '- “(36])“. no reactions of the excited atoas are

1'6
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

cherecterined by high rete conetente (weekly dependent on the teneretnre)

~lO‘” cn’leec. The niniu coneentretion of the reeaente ie deternined by
the condition of echievonent nf threehold invereion on the electron trenei-
tion in the mm. region end. prohehly. eennot be leu then 10” «Wm.
'l'hne. rx < 10'8 eec.

The decay of the excited An. nolecnlee ie poeeihle elona two chennele-ocol-
lieion end redietion:

ABM-M 1'. B+AM(M°). (2)
‘ nl
AB' 3:9 B+Mv. (a)

not us introduce the cherecterietic decny tine r, of the excited AD' Inle-
cnle by the expreneion 1/1’p - “$00)" + 1/1,“. For deterninecv we ehell
consider thet the electron treneition (3) ie reeolved eo thet 1" < 10" eec.
This condition correeponde to the IeJority of known eyetenn end in w ceee
doee not increeee the finnl reenlt.

In eddition. let us define the niacin; tine t. on 1. - e/n. where e in the
length of the eixins none of the flnxee; n in their velocity. Ergerience
in creetins continnone chenicel leeere penite no to net 1" 2 10' eec

(e > 1 cu. n ~ 10-5 cn/eec).

Thus. the imeticetcd nodel ie characterized hr the following expreeeion of
the cherecterietic proceee tinee:

1" > 3x ’ ‘p- (h)

The ennllneee of the decw tine of the excited etete by cowerieon with the
airing tine ad the reection tine Inhee it poeeihle to consider the concen-

tretion of excited nolecnlee queeietetionery end to celcnlete it h: the for-
rule

m-I - [I'llmlh'tr <5)

The conditione (lo) eleo indioete thet when celcnleting the qlificetion co-
efficient it ie neceeeery to coneider the finel tiring rete of the ree‘ente.
For thie pnrpoee we ehell nee the model of the flene front which in need
emceeefnlly to cedenlete ll? continnone chenicel leeere [10] end penite de-
termination of the concentretione of the reecente ewereced ecreee the flux
end the gee-dynnic pen-etc". lhe edventege of thie nodel in connected
with the feet thet in order to celcnlete leeer veto- the everece velnee of
the concentretione ere needed. for deter-inc let no not [no] > [M] (which
per-its m to neglect the ac flow rote). end let ne coneider the flow to he
ieothernel end to occur in e chennel of conetent croee eection. Then the

eqnetion for the concentreticn eveme to croee the flow cen he written in
the for.

15
roe omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

J-yJ—L‘ (6)
m"<m(x)lA'l> .mo.,.%L-L_c (x: A ,.

where yﬂx) is the width of the flees front es s function or the coordinate
elong the flux x; [”10 is the initiel eonczntrstion or M. end 1:: is the
chereoteristie lenfth corresponding to the tine ‘5‘ end defined by the ex-
pression l; I u/(k 80]). The verious eixing neehenises (leeiner. turbulent)
ere teken into eecount in the expression {or the function “(8). Here we
shell limit ourselves to the csse of turbulent mixing where [ll]

h is the width of the fluxes; la is the cherecteristic eixing length (19 -

th [11]). Then the solution to equetion (6) with zero initiel condition is
determined by the expression

whom» - hIA'lo(lx/lb)[1 - exp (Ix/1x” (7)

for x < in.

Postponing the investigetion or the inversion condition for the tiles being
end considering thet it is setisi‘ied, let us write the expression for upli-
i’icetion ecross q fluxes:

x I qo<[u'ly¢(x)>.

Here a is the induced redietion cross section of the investigeted electron
trensition free the lover wibretionel level of stste of AB. (test vibrs-
tionel relexetion or the stste is seemed). Let us convert this toreule
considering (5) end (7):

x - qor,|A']. %-—E-[ l mud-1:4”.

The nexieun elplii‘icstion is reeched for x I 19. end since the condition (It)
cen be rewritten in the fore in > 1;. the expression for x.“ is simplified:

“oss'W‘”. “Vie-“1' 1%. . (a)

It is necessery to note thet in the used nodel the sonnet of saplii‘icetion
does not depend on the pumping reection rete conetent or on the concentra-
tion or the second component which is connected with the tors of expression
(5) end the proposition of turbulent lining. he foreule obteined ashes it
possible to deter-nine the order of aptitude of cherecteristic concentretion
or the excited etoes required to set eeide the self-excitation condition.

net us illustrete this in the followi ere-pile: threshold elplificetion
equel to 0.1. u I 1|.0s cn/sec. o I 10’1 can: end t, I 10" sec (cherscteristic

16
M 07716th US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

veluee for the resolved electron trensitions) end e nmber of leysrs q - 100.
it is necessery to hsve [”10 I 10” ca".

3. Up to now we heve neglected the populeticn of the lover leser level.
However, the sccuuletion of solecules in the ground electron stste cen lesd
to fest disruption of the inversion end. consequently, to ineffective use of
the excited etc-s. ‘lhe problen of depomiletion of the lover lessr levels
must be solved considering the peculierities of the specific nolecules.
However. in the investigeted nodsl it is possible to teke out the consul

condition which the verious nechenisns of the rslmticn of the lower levels
must setisfy.

After the flene front the overell concentrstion of the resction products (1)
is equel to (”lo (mder the condition thet the thickness of the positive
nnplificetion leyer is much less then the aidth of the mixing sons. for

Ix << 11)). Then the light ehsorpticn on the Request» of the opereting
trensition hy the reection products in the airing sons will be

s(x) - «Nﬂxﬂn'b - olA'loyr(x)P(x).

where [AB'] is the concentreticn of the AB molecules on the lower loser
level. end ﬁx) is defined by the ewression P(x) - [AIM/(IA!) + [8]). end
it is e function of the distribution of the AB Iolecules in the ground elec-
tron stete considering their dissocietion. If the dissocietion of the AB
nolecules does not teke plece. then ﬁx) coincides with the vibreticnel-
rotetionel distribution function, for [B] - 0. This introduction of P(x)
permits us to consider the nolecules with low dissocistion energy (for ex-
enle, Xe?) at high tenperetures. low let us write out the condition thet

the elplificetion exceeds the sbsorption for totel use of the A. etms (con-
sidering (8)):

s/x I h?(ln)/(rpu) < l. (9)

This condition lust be satisfied for eny type of distribution function. If
the vibrstionel equilibriu cennot be esteblished. then P(x) depends on the
wibrstionel relenticn rete. however. in the ones of feet estehlishnent of
equilibriul with respect to vibrstionel levels of the gromd electron stete
end the dissocietion equilibriul (feet by caperiscn with the tine 1' deter-
lining the length of the reection sons). the distribution function P x) de-
pends only on the sggressive telpereture et the ﬂux point x. 'i'he investi-
getion of the equilibrius ones is else of interest fro. the point of view of
deter-lining the sterile-I ges tsepereture in the ective region for which the
positive slplificetions still exist.

The equilibriu constent of the reection AB 3 A + B cen be represented in
the tom 1: . so exp (-DM). where so u the rector which depends weekly on
the telpersture. end D is the dissocietion energy [18). hence. we obtein
the expression for P:

17
'03 ORIGIN. US! OIL!
NR OFFICIAL [183 ONLY

1“ _ ll - nu - e'lh'rn exp(— svn'nﬂ (10)
.u — l 1-

h”. v” ere the vihrstionel quentu mad the nunher of the lower electron
stete. respectively. The condition h!(lp)/(rpu) I 1 Joint]: with (10) one
he ccnsidered now es the equetion for deter-lining the lexical teqpereture
of existence of positive enplificstion in the eixing sons. The fornules oh-
teined neke it possible to estilsete the required flux perensters of the ex-
cited etou end the other 80 reegent in eech specific cese.

h. In this peper we shell linit ourselves to the enelysis of the flue
nechenien of fornetion of excited etc-s. Let us consider the peculieritiss
of the kinetics of the recoebining plesne detenining the populetion of the
first excited stste so thet the feesihility of this procedure will he dueli-
tetively expleined. we ere interested in the decey of the equilibrium
pleens with e telpereture of 'r 2 1.0“° K end en electron concentretion of
n. 2 l0” (es follows free expression (8) for concentretion of the excited
eton .

The populetion of the first excited stete A' tekee piece so e result of the
Joint occurrence of the reconhinetion processes end subsequent relexetion of
the highly excited levels. The letter process tehes piece quite repidly [1.
18]; therefore it is possible to use the epproech of the stetionery die-
cherge for the highly excited stetes. ‘i'hen the pmping of the stete A. is
defined by verietion of the degree of ioniution Ida/dtl. In contrest to
the highly excited levels. A' resets significently sore slowly. In the cue
of en opticelly dense plesne (or netestehle A.) its decey tehee plece during
collisions with the electrons end stem. The corresponding rete constents
k5 end to} heve cherscteristic welues of 10'” «ﬁle» end 10"" ce’leec, end
they depend weekly on the tenpersture [18]. Thus. with en increese in the
electron concentretion. both the naming intensity end the quenching rete
increeee. which leeds to the existence of optima. initiel pereletere of the
pleens for which the concentretion [M] otter cooling is axial.

Let us define these perensters. In order to evoid the nunsricel solution of
the prohlen of the flow of e relexing gee in e nozzle, let us use e model of
the inertiel eeperetion which is used successfully to explein the quelite-
tive peculierities [7]. Then the dependence of the tote]. perticle concentre-
tion on tires cen be written in the for: n I noun/t)”. here u is the diese-
sionelity of the prone. (for e wedge-type nossle u I l - 2); to I ﬁlm,
where n is the width of the criticel cross section; u is the flux velocity;
the tines is reckoned fro- the tine to.

not us write the equetion for the ”degree of excitetion" e I [A'lln tehing
into eccount the ehowe-enunereted processes:

1“,- -'%'-(KM+II2II)I. (n)

18
ron orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICXAI. US! ONLY

In order to find c it ie neceeeery to define the dependence of the degree of
ioninetion e on tine. At the tine to the equilibrium degree of ioniution e
in defined by the Sehe fornule. In the initiel etege of expeneion a con he
treced ener the tenpereture end e - opﬂ'). ‘nnen the teqereture deereeeee
eo nueh thet the icnizetion proceee in ”switched off." the rete of which ie
proportion]. to the eneu teeter exp (-M/h'i'). The verietion or the degree
of ionieetion ie new determined wholly by reccnhinetion; therefore the hi-
netic equetion for e can he vritten in the torn

do/dt I ~kpn3e3. . (12)

“373)» is the rete conetent of the three-perticle reconhinetibn (hp M
r 0

He ehell coneider thet the replecenent of the equilibrium ionieetion regine
by the kinetic one tekee glece inetenteneouely et the tile t; deter-lined
fro:- the equality k (t‘)n.(t,) ' (Wk/lino)" [18] (the cherecterietic
recoehinetion tine e equel to the title of verietion of the electron deneity
as e reeult or cooling). bet u eleo propeue thet the electron tmfetuse
in equal to the one tenpereture end eetiefiee the expreuion (17%) V“ I
n/no with y I 5/3 (the ediehetic expeneion). Thie ie valid {or e low degree
of ionizetion when it ie poeeihle to neglect the heet releeee on e result of
recentinetion. In eddition, the reelizeticn of the regine of interest to us
with eccumletion of the excited etc-e eleo decreeeee the heet releeee. For
eagle. for xe thie opprcech ie velid for e < to percent. Quitting the in-
ternediete celenletione. let an write the expreseion for e:

 

«uv{4:f+l(+.i"'"’-'il ,,,;.<.<...

wrb—r—F W ,0, :>:..

I .‘.
h” H- "

 

a"

For t > t1, the eolution to eqnetion (12) in written with the initiel condi-
tion e I n). The generel eoluticn of eoneticn (ll) hen the torn

e(l) .r “id? l-ffl'exp :(tha + ukﬂd!’]'exp{—£(ﬁ'm +1111) 41’] .

here we have neglected the initiel velue or ﬂu) by ceqerieon vith no.
I
The rector exp [-I(t)] (where ((l) -)'(k',na+nt€)dl') ie the frection of the

etone deceying in the cooling yroceu et the the t. The region or conver-
gence of the integrel 1(t) ie eeverel unite of to. Coneequently. for e de-
gree of cooling TIT. ~ 0.1 it ie poeeihle to nee the velne or I(-). It ie
obvious thet the eetietecticn of the inequnlity I(-) < l in curricient for

19
non omcuu. use my
FOR OFFICIAL 033 ONLY

quenching the first excited stete where e(-) e do. which nsene enellness or
the losses of the excited stone during quenching. Let us celculete this in-
te tel for the ehove-descrihed degree or ionisstion considering the equality
kp t1)n3(t}) ' “31/3130)“:

“Johnna—’{f-q l-exn[—§§f—m-c.)]}+

+ “"‘G‘QW 4-2ng

here we heve set 7 I 5/3. u I 1.5 for the equilibrium region end in - l for
the kinetic region (which hes s week influence on the result. but consider-
shly silplities the tor-ails). The ennlysis or thin expression indicetes thet
for setisrection or the condition I < 1 it is sufficient to require

Wenonah/31)”: < 1. mow. < 1.

It the opposite inequalities occur, then en exponentinl decresse in the yield
of excited stole e(-) occurs on e result of test relaxation. Consequently,
the optinel initisl pnreneters of the plssne aunt sstisry the expression

mo) - (31/2To)’/2/(k§to)- [whom/2. no - was”). (13)

It nust he noted that for n.(0) > 09“ the e cited sto- concentrstion otter
cooling will he no less then for n. 0) II n so thet the optinelness of the
initinl pereneters is connected with the e’ticiency of the conversion or the
reconhinntion energy into the energy or the excited stone. The concentra-
tion or the excited etons corresponding to conditions (13) st s towereture
‘1' ('1' << To) will he found by the town.

[m - n.(0)(1'/'r.)1°5.

Here we here considered thst “06)”... pot-Gr
0 O

The reletions ohtsined units it possible to eetinte the optinsl initiel pew-
reneters of the pleas end the excited stoln concentretion ester cooling for
w selected type of ston. The epproxi-te neture or the celculstion is
primarily connected with representetion of the inertial sepsrstion or the
pleas (u - const) end else with neglecting the hest releese es s result of
recolhinstion. The second epproxinstion. however, is better the closer e(-)
in to no. It is necessary to note the good egreenent of our estilntes with
the result of the detsiled nunericel celculetion of [17] per-toned tor the
recodining oi’ xenon plesu considering the equetions of as dynelics end
the best releese on e result or recoebinstion.

5. For enelyeis of the possibility of ohtsdning generstion in specific sys-
tem it is necessery to heve intonetion ehout the rstio VII, the Einstein

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coefficient of the electron transition, the spectral constants of the upper
and lower states. At the present tine the nost widely studied are the reac-
tions of the excited atom of inert gases with halogen-containing Iolecules.
Anon; the noble-asses xenon has the greatest ionisation potential. This fa-
vors the application of the thermal asth of initiation. It is also known
that the effectiveness of the formation of electron-excited aoleculee in the
Xe’ﬁ'z reaction is close to one. that is. k'lk I 1. Therefore let us con-
sider this system as an example of the above-developed concepts.

The lover electron state Xeﬂx’ﬂ) of the laser transition with A ~ 350 n:
is characterised by the following parameters: a" - 250 earl. n - 1.500 ca"
[13]. The bound-bound transition takes place to the upper oscillatory levb
els of this state. The probability of the VT relaxation for one collision
calculated by formlas of [15] for T I 500° K (considering the nonadiahatic
nature of the collisions) turns out to he on the order of one. Therefore
for the estimates we shall assure the existence of dissociated and oscillae
tory equilibriun of the Xe? molecules in the state 112*. Then the condition
(9) for tp I 10"7 see. u I 5 o 105 cn/sec, h I 1 ca, 3," I D assumes the
torn

(1 - 'IWHXe] < 5 - 1031.

It turns out that for the Xe? molecule in which the transition takes place
to the upper oscillatory levels (3,," - D). condition (9) is satisfied in a
wide range of telperatures and concentrations. 'ihe role of the tamerature
is very interesting here. An increase in it leads. on the one hand. to an
increase in the degree of population of the vibrational levels, and on the
other hand, to a decrease in the aolecule concentration in the pound elec-
tron state as a result of dissociation. Therefore the condition (9) depends
weekly on the temperature at T > e". In this case the temperature is lin-
ited by the dissociation process of the upper electron state. It is consid-
ered that the temperature of the aixture must not exceed l.000° K [16].

low let us estimate the possible uplification for the plasn nethod of ore-
ating Xe'. The initial data for calculating n , 'i' . [Xe'] are as follows:
1;; I 3 x 10“0 ena/sec [17]; In? I 10"13 cn’lsec; 81 I 12 avg 11 I 2 I; u I

5 . 105 cn/sec. Then tron (13. we obtain no - 5 - 10" ca' . To - a.ooo° x,
n.(0) I 3 ' lO1s ca‘3. For tenfold cooling (the gas telper'ature before mix-
in; is 800° n) we shall have [Ke'] a 1015 on". In order to calculate the
cross section of the induced transition we used "the rdinary expression of
[12] for the Doppler-broadened line: a I 10.'J"(B'M)l 2f(v')/(t v’T). Here
8' is the rotational constant of the r electron state (or g It is the
mass of the nolecule (atoszie lass wigs: f(v') is the distribution function
with respect to oscillatory levels of the upper electron state' v is the wave
amber (cf‘). For the radiation lifetime it was established [3. 13] that
"rad f 10'7 sec. Therefore for the investigated pressures tp I rm (the
decay of the upper state takes place by radiation). In this case the gain
does not depend on the quenching rate or on the Einstein coefficient, which
is an ilportant characteristic of the resolved transitions. Then for T I
l.000° K we obtain atp I 1.2 - 10‘22 enzlsec. hon foraula (8) it follows

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 031.?

thet the asin x I 6o - 10"; for the motor of lsyers q I 10. x e 6 percent.
This result unless it possible to hope to ohtein aeneretion in the investi-
ssted systen. A sinilsr enelysis denonstrstsd thst in the one of the Kr?
end Arr noleoules the nesnitude of the ssin will be less.

6. In conclusion. let us discuss the prospects for the crestion of chonicel
lssers bseed on the resctions of the excited stone (in sddition to the noble
stone). first of ell it is neoessery to note thnt the proposed nethod of
fornstion of the excited etons cen sisnificently expend the cless of rese-
tions by conperison with the pulsed initistion by the electh been. The
letter is limited to the necessity of the prelininery preperetion of the
resction mixture which excludes the use of the nonvolstile nsteriels.

As wss denonstreted shove. the use of stone with snll ionisetion potentiels
will poi-nit most conplete reelisstion of the possibilities of the thernel
nethod of initistion. This is connected with s decrense in the initiel tsp
persture of the see end. consequently. the degree of cooling which nsens en
incresse in density of the excited stem (see the totals). Therefore the
stone of the elksli netels Cs, Rh end In ere of the mntest interest. Un-
fortunstely. only the trinoleculer recosbinstion rescticns were studied with
the psrticipetion of these stone. for ennple, [6]

0s“ + Xe + Xe 9 CsXe' e Xe.

In order to ensure s sufficient resction rete, pressures of «.103 Is He ere
required which essentislly conplicstes the listing of the fluxes. Therefore
it eppeers urgent to find end study binoleculnr resctions with the pertici-
potion of the excited stone of the elheli netels. The infomtion shout the
neuitude of the qusntun yield of the excited nolecrles is of the greetest
interest.

Another close of resction systens is nnde up of the reections of the group
II stou Zn. Cd end He in the netestehle stetes 3P3. The nest inwestiasted
ere the photosensitized reections with the perticipetion of excited nercury
stone [8]. Let us note one type of resctionuthe fornstion of nercury helide
noleculesu-for sample, [5]

M6392) + c12 .. home’s) + c1.

The rete constnnt of this resction is close 10‘" cn’lsec. The resolved op-
erstine trensition B -e X (A ~ 500 ms) ends on the upper oscillntory levels
of the ground stnee (w" ~ 20), which promotes the crention of en inversion.
Thus. this resction corresponds to the senerel schene inwestigsted in the
given psper. The sbsence of dete on the nepitude of the quentt- yield in
this resction does not offer the possibility of cslculsting the enplifice-
tion coefficient. but if we consider thst 10/); ~ 1. then the «in turns out
to he on order lerger hy conpsrison with Xe? es s result of s decreese in
the ionisstion potentiel end en increese in the weveloncth. The isowelent
liar. CdCl. ZnCl end other nolecules elso hove en enelogous level structure.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

The motione of the tonetion or theee nleoulee fro- exoited etou un-
doubtedly require cereml etw.

The leteet publieetione inveetigeting chemiluminescence in the M30330 reno-
tione [19] indioete the defining role or the excited Ieteetehle lid 1’) etc.-
in the {emotion or the electron-excited no. noleeulee. Accordingly. the

ehove-dieeneeed lethod of tonetion or the excited etou ie eleo of greet
intereet.

In oonolueion. it ie egoin neeeeeery to eupheeiee the poeeihility of uein;
excited eeeily ionieed 0e. Rh etou fro. the point of viev of finding the
peth to the ereetion or the purely chained. vieihle leeer. The required
ionieetion teuperetnree of ~3.000° K eotneln ere obteined on combustion of
vet-ions fuele. for emple. II; + P; [15]. The preeented one-pl» indieete
the exietence or en entire clue of Intent euitehle for the creetion of
continuum ehenicd leeere with thensl initietion bend on nectione with
the pertioipetion or electron-excited atone. me preeence of «non fee-
turee both in theee reeetione end in the leeinc mleculee per-lite ue to ep-
ply the epproeoh developed in this peper to then.

BIBLIOOMPKY
1. mm FOCUS, lo 12, 1976. 9 1'0.

2. In: J.. 03-10. 1975. p 690; A. s. Beehkin. n. L. xupriyenov end A. u.
Omevekiy, KVAanArA mum. lo 1:. 1971. p 1063.

3. J. E. Veluco. J. ll. K01“ end D. W. Seteer. J. cm. PHYS” lo 65.
1976. p 31468.

1.. u. w. HcOeogh. o. a. Pumier end P. m. J. ms. 3. lo 9. 1916.
p 1.121.

5e “0 Po “r.u‘e “a 8e 0e Jouon, Me Me .‘m. ’0 31. 1975. p ”1e
6. a. Seyer and u. rum. J. vars. a. no 9. 1916. 9 L293.

7. In to Mien“, be A. “010)“! '3‘ Be In YlkovlcnkO. m! m. .0 83.
1975) p 100.

8. ”Vozhushdeme chutitev v hhi-icheehoy kinetike" [hcited Pertiolee in
Chemical Kinetice]. Moecov. Mir. l91h.

9. v. Pelder. J. cm. mm, lo 56. 1912. p 6028.
10. A. A. sewov and v. A. Shcheglov. am. No as. 1976. p 563.

ll. 0. l. Ahrenovich. "Prihledneye gnome dine-in” [Applied 0o wan-ice].
lieecov. leuke. 1916.

?3
Ion onxcm. use 081.!
12.
13.
13.

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.

FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

Do Button ‘0‘ a. 800M. Am. CHICO, '0 1... 19750 P 1&8.
3. me can 1.. Andmu. J. cm. me” lo 65. 1916. p hm.

Yo. Ya. mum. "roars” gnaw-010mm protlum v moth”
[Theory of Acute-“clean“ Precam- 1n can]. “occur. Wyn. 1970.

A. 3. Win. V. I. Iulhin. A. I. “kit!!! and A. I. Orwonuy,
"mum-km may" [Mon hurt]. Noam. W. 1975.

"nigh-Power Luau." J. "1103 and Sons. II. 2.. 1975.

Ya. In Stupttlm. 2111". lo 33. 1973. p 76?.

Yo. B. ul'dovich an! In. P. Mar. "nun alumna voln t wanto-
tupoutumkh sanctum-m yuloniy" [Mom of Shock "won
and lush-Mont”. We mom]. Iboeov. am. 1966.

n. J. new and w. 0. enter. J. cunt. 91:23.. lo 66. 1911. p 1011.

COPYRIGHT: Izutol'oevo "Bout-toy. tuna.” ”Kmtom. gunman." 1978

1085
C80: Oink/0821

?b
m ORIGIN. US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

UDC 621.378.33
cws-mcnon VISIBLE cannon “BIB
meow KVAII'NVAYA manna in Russien V01 5. lo 12. 1978 pp 2611-2619

[Article by A. 8. Beshhin. I. L. Kupriysnov end A. I. Oroevskiy. Mics
Institute ineni P. a. Iahedev of the 0888 Medea of Sciences. Moscow: sub-

mitted 19 Docs-her 1977]

[Text] A discussion is presented of the problem of crest-
in; s chain-reection visible. chuicnl loser. ﬂsdicels
(ective reection centers) ere propoeed es the losing spe-
cies. Depopuletion of the lover lsser level occurs es s
result of the chenicsl reection. Anelysis of the kinetics
of the n, 9 I? chein reection indicstes thst generstion
honed on the efectron trensitions of the II? Iolecule is
possible.

1. In the existing infrered cholicnl losers. the excited molecules fcrled
in the elmntery set of the reection ere st the seas tine the finel product
of the reection. For senerstion on the vibrationnl trsnsitions of these
molecules their eccmletion lends to disruption of the inversion which low-
ers the efficiency of the use of the chenicel energy. This deficiency is
Isnifested especinlly sharply in the one of chein reections.

Therefore it eppeers to he very enticing to use chein reections in which the
molecule formed in the excited stece is the inter-ediete prodmt (sctive
center). The ststionnry inversion of such nolecules csn he unlined if the
reectivity of the lover leser stste is higher then the upper. this situe-
tion is .0" prohshle for the electron-excited rsdicels. for the oecillstory
excitstion. es s rule. lends to so increeee in chenicsl sctiwity. Thus. re-
nlisstion of the proposed systeis is connected with the creetion of visible
electron trensition chenicel lssers. H'herees the reection of the excited
rsdicnl limits the rete of the cowlex process. the presence of the loser
field cen lesd to en increese in the rste of the chin reection. ‘Ihe pro-
cess of stilulsted emission is orannicelly included in the reection unche-
nisn.

25
ton orncuu. us: om . .
FOR ONICIAL 088 ONLY

1he theoreticel conditions or the reeslietion of such e eyeten oen he rom-
leted ee follow: 1) the pmence of e chein reeetion. in one or the ele-
neuter: ecte of vhich en electron-excited noleoule ie for-ed; 2) thie mole-
cule ie the intenediete product (eotive center) in the chein reectiong

3) the reactivity of the noleeule in the lover etete ie greeter then in the
upper etete.

The We“ of the experinentel end theoreticel dete porter-ed W us (1-9]
deeonetreted thet the it? end the 1m loleculee eetieiy the leet tvo require-
ments to e eimii‘icent decree. 'BIOIC redieele ere cheniceln eotive end ere
the inter-ediete product in new conlex proceeeee. The high reeetivity or
the I? end the ill! redicele in the around triplet etete ie ceued by the
preeence or two unpeired electrone [1. 3]. The ll? end the Ill reeotione ere
cherecterieed by the tollovina rete conetente (given in ca’leec; for brevity
the reection producte ere not indiceted):

NF(X)+NF(X). 1,-6- “WWW K) I2). (I)
NF(X)+NF.. Iq-Mo-n (450 K) la. 4!. (9)
H+NF(X). Kano-n (300 K) In). (3)
NH(X)+NH(X). 1.92.1040 (mo—2400 K) M. (4)
Nam-+0.. h- 10-“ (300 K) l2. 6). (5)
NH(X)+NH.. k.-2-Io-" (300 K) I5). (6)

 

0n the other head. in the excited etetee oi‘ ”(elm l.|o ev; 5%, 2.3 ev)
end Inﬂe‘d. 1.6 ev; but. 2.? ev) (see the figure) the electron ere peired.
which lend; to e eignificent reterdetion or the correepondiu reectione:

NF(a)+NF(a). au-lo-I' (800 K) [3. 7!. (In)
NF(a)+NP,. e..-2- 10-" (450 K) [3. 4). (24)
NF(b)+NF.. A..-ls-Io-'I «to K) [3. 4). (2b)
NF(e)+H. hn-IO'" (300 K) Isl. (an)
Nli(b)+o,, 1.4.4404 (300 K) m. ‘ (56)
NH(»+NH.. h.-4c10'” (300 K) la). (66)
NH(b)+At. h-S-IO'“ (300 K) In). (7)
26

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

mama-M ammo-v (300 K) lei. (a)
"PM-F“. 1,-10'“ (500 K) “71. (9)
wows. ham-lo.“ (000 K) ID). (no)

In oMition. tho ototoo o ond h hovo high rooiotonoo to oxtinsuiohing coni-
oion (procouoo (7)-(10)). In thio oonoo thoy oro analogous to the known
oingiot ototoo ngo‘hg. hate.

2. low iot no diocovor tho condition or oxiotonoo of tho ototionuv invoh
oion on tho oiootron tronoition during tho oouroo of tho ch-iooi roootion.
In tho invootiaotod noioouioo. tho tronoitiono o-x ond box of intoroot to no
toho piuo in oooordonco with tho hook-Conan mlo hotvoon tho loot popu-
iotoo hooio vihrotionol 1min. Tho only poooihio noohonion of oupportina
tho ototionuy invoroion oonoioto in prodoninont «motion of tho hooio
oioctron ototo of tho ooiocuioo. 'l'ho rotio of tho roootion rotoo for tho
ground ond oxcitod ototoo dotoninoo tho quontu yioid of tho olootron-
excitod holocuioo in tho pulping rooction muirod for (oration of tho in-
vonion. Doportins hon tho vihrotionoi-mtotionu otmcturo of tho tronoi-
tion (which hoo no ottoct on tho roouit). it io poooihio to ohtoin tho tol-
iovins condition of tho ototionoiv imroion:

§>£ l‘mm 4- 23mm»: om ’
O ‘0 ;."M"

 

who" R“. R0 on tho noction rotoo with tho ton-lotion oi‘ oxcitod nod mox-
citod noioculoo; 3', so on tho ototiotiod weighto of tho oioctroo ototoo;
ht, h on tho roto conntonto of tho cholicoi rooctiono of tho oxoitod ond
mono tod noloouloo vith o ooqonont of tho nixture n“ h“ in tho roto con-
otont or oxtinuiohin; tho oxcitod otote to tho ground ototo; v,“ io tho
pmhohility of opontoneouo rodiotion tronoition. For ll? out! In noiocuioo.
tho decoy of tho notutohio ototoo o ond h (vm s 102 ooc") io dotoninod
on]: by tho rooctiono. 'iho throohold officionoy of tho fox-ution of tho ox-
cited porticloo R'lho dopondo. conorony opening. on tho coupooition of tho
routing nixturo. I: o prodooimt procooo oxioto (for our/1o. tho rooc-
tiono (2). (an). (at) for I? or (6). (GB) for an), thon for o aunt‘- yield
of n - R'/(R' o 80). for vhich invoroion occuro. it io poooihio to ohtoin
tho following conditiono: for I? n(o‘o) > 0.03. n(b‘t) > 0.03; for In
n(h‘t) > 0.01. A. in known [9]. tho mam yield at m oloctron oxcitn-
tion in any onothonoi rooctiono roochoo o with“ or teno of porcontogoo.
vhich uoo indicotoo tho rooiity of tho nochonion of {oration of tho invoc-
oion inmtiaotod horo.

Tho oi-iiority of the rooction proportieo of tho ioooloctronic I}! out! ll?
micolo ponito propoool of tho prooonco of onologouo proportioo nioo for
tho PB. PP. All! ond to? rodicolo hurt-a3 oinuor otructuro of tho lover oioc-
tron ototoo (tho comopondin; tronoi'tiooo mo occur in tho vioihlo bond).

27
m omcm. us: om
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'hese nolecules have larger induced radiation cross sections than I!!! and III?
as a result of partial renewal of the ban on interconbination transitions in
heavier aoleculee. It is known that the enmrated radicals are short-lived
internediate products in many exothernal chain processes [1]. Thus. for ex-
amle. the transition ”Kb“: 9 X3?) was observed in flaacs of white phospho-
rus with hydrogen [lo]. and in the motions mama) with '2. glow of the
Pt and In? x-adisals was obsemd [11].

3. Now let us proceed to the investigation of the chain reaction in which
electron-excited molecules are formed. The best-studied motions are those
with the participation of If; therefore this radical will be med as an ex-
asple in further discussion.

It is known [3] that the yield of excited III-‘(a‘u molecules in the reaction
H+NF.- NF+HF. inc-3o 10'“ «Ne (300 K) [ca’lc I ca’lsec] (ll)

is close to 100 percent. Such high efficiency of obtaining the electron ex-
citation is connected with the specific aechanisa of the reaction occurring
through the singlet excited state of the m- nolecule (M; with subsequent
decay of it into m1.) and 11190:). The fonsetion of m: t) is fbrbidden
by the rule of conservation of spin. 0n the other hand. the inhibition of
explosion by negligible additions of hydrocarbons and the presence of two
coabustion liaits observed erperinentally [12, 13] indicate the chain aecha-
nisn of the couple: reaction H; + 32?... It is not Ila!“ that participates in
the eleaentary acts. but the III", radical. The latter fact is connected with
the low energy of the [Ga-lit: bond (~20 heal/sol). which leads to signifi-
cant dissociation of it already at low te-peratures (for ‘1' - 500° K and p I
20 Is Hg the degree of dissociation is close to 100 percent).

An analysis of the experiaental data of [la-lb] ashes it possible to isolate
two stages in the couple: reaction 32 9 ugh + In. He shall consider the
case of external initiation of the reaction under the conditions of suppres-
sion of the branching of the chain by the inhibitor additives. In the first
stage where the telperature of the mixture does not exceed l.000° K. a sin-
ple chain reaction takes place with radical links with the participation of
lﬂa. X). F. ii. nu (the corresponding eleaentary acts have an activation en-
ergy of :2 kcal/aol), which is accompanied by heating of the aixture and
dissociation of ”a". e 2372. lnasmch as the UP, radical is Inch sore ac-
tive than the 'an radical. the dissociation leads to acceleration of the
reaction.

The elenentary reaction with high energ of activation "are included" in the
second stage (for ‘1' z l.000° K): 32 0 RP: (36 heal/ml), III, «e I? + F (60
heal/sol). and so on. A thermal explosion actually takes place. his re-
giu is harmful for the laser, for at high temperature the rate constant k:
and :3 coapare. and the reaction (ll) ceases to doainate in the forntion of
the . Both of these factors on lead to interruption of inversion. There-
fore. considering the mixture a sufficiently dilute inert gas for shoes-heating

28
'0! OPPICIAI. US! ONLY
m OHIO!“ "8! ONLY

convoroion. lot no limit ouroolvoo to tho invootiaotion of tho Mien otogo
of tho complex rooction ll; 4' Ilrg.

Tho ole-outcry onto or romtion of tho choin do not ploy o rolo for tho ro-
oction initiotod by tho oido oouroo. Out of o louo motor or poooihlo clo-
nontuv octo in tho oonpiox noction [12-18] vo oolootod only tho tootoot

procooo or continuotion of tho choin. «fining tho hinotico of tho oyotol in
tho invootiutod rod-o:

P+H,- HIM-H. on-a. 10'ch (aoo K) m. as,”
awn.» mom-ms. hu-s-IO'WIc (coo no Isl. “a,
NF(¢)+NF(0)~ "rt-2F. kin-10"“ «Momma. 71. (m)
NF(X)+NF(X)-’ NrHP. Moo-5° 10"“(9000-3000 K) m (MX).

1ho voluo or I"; io oonotont in tho toqoroturo ronso of 2.300-3.000° K.

which indicotoo tho low onory ot ootivotion ond. conooquontiy. high rooo-
tion roto for T 5 1.000° It.

menus.» rum-r. I‘m-:- 10-“ ammo ms. 41'. (16-).
NF(X)+NF.- NJ’d-F. aux-MM um momma. an. (15")
me. XH-H.» "Him. (16)

in. on. m- [9] porlit on. tonovin‘ ootinto to ho cm: x", < 6 - 10'"
cu’looc (800° K). Bovovor. tho oppooronco of tho In Mice. in tho lixturo
MP. 0 I": + II; voo ohoorvod in [12] Motor: otter tho photon/tic moo
(doloy tioo 1m thon 10 nicrooocondo for [n21 - I: . 10" on". 'r - 500° 1:).
hence. it io poooihlo to ohtoin o moo of h“; > 2 . 10'u a’looo (500° K).
It is ilportont cm in tho roootioo (16). tho In wen a com to en.
octivo triplot ototo inn-lob oo tho onoru of tho motion io inoufficiont
for ottoctivo oxcitotion of IN“). Thio loodo to root continmtion of tho
choin through In in tho oixtunoo rich in Mon:

NIH-ma- N.+2H, o..-2- 10-“ délculooo—m K) [2). 17)
NH+NF,-o N.+l-IP+F. hu~10-“{oc’lc um. 13)

Undo:- the cooditiono or o rooction initiotod by on oxtorool oouroo (in tho
prooenco or high concentrotiono of tho rodicolo) tho hooic procooo of brook-
in; tho ohoin io tho binoloculor roootion

NF(o. n+u— mam. k...-l0"' cu'lc. 1...; 10-“ mile (all (19)

The orroot of rooctioo (19) on tho totol concontrotion of tho octivo oontoro
con ho noaootod it tho choin-hroohin‘ roto k1,;[lP(X)][n] 9' h [lﬂoHlll
to such looo thon tho roto or continuotion of tho choin Inﬁll“; ] ond
kmtmxnmzl. ‘l'hooo condition oro ootioi’iod 1: m neg-cc o mm.-
tion (tho rotio of tho totol concontrotion of tho rodicol. to [03]) dooo not
oxeood ~10 poroont.

29
M OFFICIAL US! MY
POR OHIO!“ "8! ONLY

'fhe processes of extinguishing the II? eolecule free the stete e14 to the
stete x31: slso eust be considered in the kinetics of the chein reection.

The besic decoy chennel Nﬂe) on collision with the molecules of the initiel
reegents H3. If; is the resctions (lSe) end (16e). 'l'he collisions with the
II? end the h, nolecules, on the contrery. leed only to extinguishing:

NEW-Hi?» Nrmwr. h..<l0‘”cnlc (coo K) lol. (20)
mums,- NF(X)+N.. h..<l0‘“ cu'lc (500 K) m. (21)

The enelysis of the elcnentery ects (12)-(2l) indicetes thet in the II, 0 IF,
mixture e chein reection tekes plece on initietion by en externel source.

In one of the sets of continuetion of the chein. the electron-excited Isle-
cules lIﬂe) ere for-ed. 'Ihe edventeges of chein reections in cheeiosl ls-
sers ere exhibited only when the ties of existence of the stetioner: inver-
sion is conpereble to the ties of the chsin chenicel process. In other
words. the leser length of the chein nust be close to cheeicel. Therefore
in order to estisste the prospectivsness of the given systen it is necessery
to discover the behevior end possible senses of the discontinuetion of in-
version during the course of the chein resction. For this pin-pose let us
write the belenco equetions for the concentrstions of the ective centers
considering the induced trsnsitions under the effect of e light field of in-
tensity I (Iil'lotons/cl2 -sec) for eiqlicity let us neglect the generetion
of H2 end ”2. the rete of verietion of the tenpereture end concentretion of
the products and elso the contribution of the reections (IQ-(18). The lest
epproxinstion is cleetcly Justified in the ebsence of e field in view of
the snellness of the constent k". . In the seturstion ends, consideretion
of the reections (10-418) does not leed to theoreticel verietions es will
be cleer from the further discussion. In eddition. in the initiel stsge of
the reection it is possible to neglect the bushing of the chein. The cor-
responding equetions ere written es follows:

ﬁl/dl-kmlNanﬂlNPJ-l-ku. INP(X)INP.I+2t..lNr(a)M
+21...mr(x)',\-k..trun.l. «anw—mnnml-rwua.
4‘ [NF (0))!“‘ - - 0’ IINFWI - ’MNHX)" 4' *Mﬂllm’sl '-

-mm»z.tum-I-A...INP(a)um-'.I-2t...INI=(aw.

«1 INHXMMI '01 IINFMI -‘lalNF(X)ll + INF“)! zﬁulMal '-

‘kssslNFsllNF (X)] 4' ”MINI-1,01%
[Fl + [HI 4- W? (“N + {NF (”I " A.

where o is the cross section of the induced redietion for the trensition

e-!; A is the concentration of the ective centers creeted by the externel
source et the initie. point in ties. In the queeistetionery eppnoxinetion
ll] ell of the derivetives ere equel to zero. es e result of which e systea
of elgebreic equstions is obtsined. Its solution (quite ewkwerd) sen be de-
scribed in explicit fore‘. but the physicel sensing of the females is cleerer

30
'0“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 Oil"

it ve onit the quedrotio tene with reepeot to [lF(n)l end “NIH. ‘lhe ee-
tinntee indionte the “mummy of thie epproxinetion m A/[Im < 10-1.
Int no ooneider the noet intereeting ooneequenoee tron the eolution. 'i'hue.
for emiei the tor-an for the doneity oi‘ the invereion h I [9(0) -

(2/3) uemee the torn
. Auuw.u--I.;I~omu
5" x .0 at v. u_ u n' (22)

' F b "‘ b
vhene 70""[mlﬂbguu 4"!" 4"} tehe into eooonnt the contribution of the
[725?)[11] to the tow oonoentrntion of the eotive oentere eo thet
Y: X

l ‘ unﬁt) ' A (for ['72] I [la]. n .- 1e 7; I 2)-
Pron (22) for

‘uxlNM 1. + 1: MIMI

I<——--5-:pr-5——. , .v I".

(1. ie the “cumin; inteneity) we hove the tor-m to: the meetmtei in-
venion deneitv under eteedy-etete oonditione:

A. A gamma-'1. 3AM."

awwnﬁwm

'lhis amnion nuke. it poeeihie to crew .eone incl-tent conoiueione.

Pint, the inter: option of invernion tehee piece when the Wtion rote
or the love:- ieeer level mama] heoo-ee 1\\ee then the tote). utinniehin‘
rote {tuna}. Inasmuch en en of the h“ m nth enun- then 318:. thie
i
in poeeihle on); for [Ira] « [la]. thet ie. for in pmtioe enhete bunny
or the roegente. During the come of the reeotion. the emu-nu equality
no - A ie eetietied which neene thet [lﬂnn eeeentien: enoeeb the concen-
tretion or the renninins redione. he «nee ie enenneee o: the mention
retee with the perticipotion of 0(3) end the extin‘uiehing weenie w
cowerieon with the other prooeeeee. m extinmiehin‘ end oh-ion «popu-
letion or the eteto e'n ere ometed for by the min. nation.

Secondly. the eheolute with“ of the invereion oen decree“ in the teno-
tion pnoceoe on e malt of hreehin. of the reeotion thin in (19). louver.

thie effect on plea e role only for n einitioent “pee or m of the
remote (eee ehove).

Token together. the enuereted conclusion men the following: it emioient
deneit.’ of the redicne for eetieteotion oi’ the condition of eat-mitotion

31
F0. OFFICIAL I)” OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

cen be creeted in the a, + If, wetee. the neneretion tine will he on the
order or the tine of occurrence of the chenioel ohein reeotion vhioh theo-
retioelly oen enenre hid: ohuioel efficiency of the eyeten.

In. It in intereeting to trece hov the rete or e denier reection R I
Idlﬂglldtl veriee ee e Motion of the um mm inteneity:

4 mm [at m... H...) + m 5;. mm + madam}
m+-I.mt+auxlmv.+u3mm: '

 

For I I 0. R I All? In“. thet ie, the reection rete ie lieited to the elov
elenent (15). In the eetnretion node for I » I. we here It - Magma/2.

Ineeluoh ee hum/Ins. I 20. the reection rete increeeee by epproxintely lo
tinee.

The tomlee obteined note it poeeible to find the quentun yield of the
etimleted eeieeion n in the cheeicel reection (o I P/R. vhere P ie the
power of the etimleted enieeion o of unit volune. end 1! ie the reeotion
rete coinciding with the pupina pover or the etete e‘d). Mer oueeiete-
tionery conditione the velne of P in determined by the expreeeion

P -oI amen-9.1m (xm "nexlNFJINHXN Hangman]?-
—lNF(a»2“.t..IMn

In the eetureted ceneretion or elpliricetion node the invereion deneity ie
neinteined on the level 01’ the threehold d.. For upliticetion d. I 0. end
in the ceneretor d. I (act )“ (‘3 ie the lifetine or e photon in e reconn-
tor). The threehold condition [l’(e)] - (2/3)[lP(X)] I A? together vith the
equelity ulmm * vellNeH I A pet-lite ue to find (I! 1)] end (”(01,
end then 1’ end II. The finel reeult for o hee the fore

mwnu-iw-(A.v:+'z.n¥n..lu.n (2 )
a - ital”: 13-733 1' Eula.“ “e1: 1- III“ ° 3

Iron (23) we here the following inportent corollery: for effective onery
output it ie neceeeery either to enmre enfticiently poverml initietion in
the leeer (A » 1.6.) or to operete in the enlitier node where d. I 0.

Before proceeding to the epecific initietion veto. of the leeer, it ie nec-
eeeery to detenine the uplitioetion index ee e function of the concentri-
tion of the electron-excited I? eolecnlee in order then to find the threeh-
old deneitv of the invereion. Ae ie mmue in [15]. the eqlificetion
index for the electron treneition of e dieto-ic nolecnle (A', 8’. v') 9 (A’,
3“. v") optimise with rcepect to the rotetionel quentu nubere cen be reme-
eented ee tollove in the oeee of Doppler broedenm:

32 u
M omcm. 083 OIL! "
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

wen-n- ——-.-r-‘-""'°;°,';""""' " [row—Wig.» me].

where A. 3 are the quantum nudere of the electron states; w is the amber
of the vibrational level; 3' ie the rotational constant or the upper state.
cm"; II is the mass of a molecule. snug u is the wave mater. cn' 3 '1‘ is the
progressive teaperature. K; r,” is the radiation lifetime. see; cw. y" in
the Frank-Condon factor; 1" . r are the distribution mnctione with respect
to vibrational level' 3'. II” are the populations of the upper and lower elec-
tron statee. For ”(a) lﬂ'(h) it has been established experimentally that
when r < 1.ooo° K. Moi » r°(v' 9| 0) and. in addition. go. o » no. W0
[17). Therefore. considering only the transition w' . 0 -> v" - o. for

m > N" we obtain

4.1.. X)-2.6« 10"INF(a)I. i-bu u;
“(5.. m-sa-no-anl. mm a-

for the following values or the parametere: ‘1' - 500° 1!. r,“ u 15 millisec-
ond! (b‘t) and 1 sec (a‘d) [7]; B'(a) I B'(b) - 1.22 cm“. Let us note that
the amplification index for the transition In: h + x 1. s . 10-“ [mum].

S. The base for practical use of the B + II? mixture is its above-noted
”metastability.”

The reaction of neration of the a, + If, «9 m, + a chain has an activa-
tion energy of heal/mol. Therefore there is a temperature range in which
the N2?“ molecules are dissociated. and there is no explosion (of course. it
the branching processes are coqensated for by the addition of an inhibitor).
This fact was most clearly emibited in the experiment described in [13].
where a mixture of 50 - llg of 82 t 20 - lg of 1|ng + 0.013 - 8g of 0.119
did not explode in 10 minutes on being heated to 110° 0. Under the condi-
tions of this experiment. the degree of dissociation of the I27. was 50 per-
cent. and the tine of establishment of the equilibrium with respect to dis-
sociation was 5 sec [17].

'ihe mixture prepared in this way can be initiated photolyticallv. he I?
photoabsorption cross section (with dissociation into I? + P) is 10'" cm
stand-unforl-ZéOnmuddl '20nm[12]. no fluxofloupho-
tons/cmz-sec into the absorption band or HP; (characteristic for chemical
lasers with ,3) permits us to create a concentration or active centers of

~2 . 10" cm‘ for (IP21 I 10" cm” in the time ~10 microseconds. As was
deaonetrated above. in this case the concentration of [W(a)] - 2 - 10" cm”
must be formed which corresponds to the amplification index of «le'z ca".

0! course, the eystem prop-coed here is not the only one. which only aloha-
sites the attractiveness of using the 32 0 It? reaction in chemical lasers.
For example. there is an interesting possibil ty of initiating the If. + 112
mixture by the radiation of a 001 laser (Ian and IF, absorb 10.6-micron
emission well). In [15] this procedure was used to obtain amplification on

33
roe onxcuu. us: our
POI OH’ICIAI. US! ONLY

the vibrational transitions of HF. Rovever, in order to create the 3! laser
a atateaent of the experiment different fron [lh] is required. 'lhe thernl
dissociation of II 9., e an; can be realised on irradiation with intensity
less than threshold [20]. 'lhen it is necessary to introduce a powerful
pulse of the co, laser into a mixture of If; + R; (with an intensity above
threshold) which also realizes initiation of an explosive chain reaction.

The Iixing of the fluxes of atomic fluorine with n, and hi“: [7] or fluxes of
H with IF, also is a possible neans of obtaining inversion. however. in
this case the snail ampliﬁcation cross section and the necessity to have
high concentrations of ”(a) and the radicals give rise to quite rigid re-
quirements on the sixing conditions of the fluxes.

when using the transition b + x in ”(A I- 520 III) as the laser transition,

a threshold concentration of the excited nolecules of an order less than in
the case of ”(a) is required. This fact forces us to find methods of ex-
citing IIHb). The chemical excitation of the stage b‘t was observed in
various reactions [3. 17]. but there is no intonation about the efficiency
of its fonaation. Obviously, the excitation of the ”(b) takes place from
the state a‘d as a result of energy transfer froa certain chenically excited
particles [3. 17]. It is possible to use this pulping procedure to create a
laser based on the b + x transition. The necessity for an additional purp-
ing process of a e b, of course, couplicates the systel by comparison with
the sisple chain reaction for ltﬂa).

As was reported in [16], the resonance process

NF(e‘A)+ copy.) .1!- til-10;!) +40%.)

has a gas-kinetic cross section. that is k. ~ lO'm-lO’u cnalsec. Mixing
the excited iodine flux [18] in the reacting mixture of Hz 9 HP; is one of
the nethods of creating excited ”(b) molecules.

Another interesting possibility is connected with the characteristic conver-
sion of the eaission of an iodine laser on a wavelength of x I 1.3 microns.
The presence of a small addition of atomic iodine in the reacting mixture of
a, + as; leads to the appearance of 1"(2P1/z) on irradiation of it by 1.3-
nicron emission and. consequently. it leads to puping of the l?(b) in ac-
cordance with the formula

INMJLL rem ”M NH»).

The proposed formula can serve as an effective "adder" of two quanta: 1.3
microns hen the iodine laser and 0.81 micron obtained as a result of the
cheaical chain reaction.

6. In conclusion. let us note the events of greatest interest in practical
respects. First of all, the class of diatomic radicals attracts attention

3‘:
non onxcm. uss om:
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

for which the chemical reaction rates for the basic triplet state are case“,
tially higher than for the excited singlets (10", III and other molecules).
Such radicals are intermediate products in new coupler erothersal reactions
frequently occurring by the chain nschsnisn. it. relatively lav energy of
the singlet excited states s‘A, b1}: gives rise to the possibility of their
excitation in the chemical reactions. and the increased reactivity of the
gromd state per-its us to hope for the formation or stationary inversion of

the singlet-triplet transition as a result of chemical depopulation or the
lower (ground) state.

the use of the a; + m. reaction with the operating I? molecule is the met
realistic way to realise this schematic. The attractiveness of this reac-
tion consists in the possibility of preparing a stable operating mixture and
a variety of initiation techniques (photolysis. mixing of the reagents. ini-
tiation by 002 laser emission). It is necessary to note that the mixture of
D: + 1121?“ + 102 was already used to obtain pulse generation on the vibra-
tional transitions of the DP nolecule. but the laser effect was caused by
the nonchein chemical reaction which it is possible to explain by the small-
ness of the partial concentration of NP; under the experimental conditions
[19]. Inasmch as the reaction or 112 4- IF, can be initiated by the atomic
ﬂuorine flux, there is a possibility for creating a wrely chemical laser
based on electron transitions. For this purpose it is necessary to use the
methods of obtaining 1’ developed for continmus-action chemical lasers caperb
sting in the innared range on the basis of the wdrogen fluoride reaction.

One or the interesting peculiarities of the given system is the dependence
:9 the coupler reaction rate on the Inuitude of the resonance light field,
which leads to the realisation 01‘ a characteristic variety of photostisluo
lated reactions. This effect can theoretically be detected with respect to
an increase in intensity of the cheniluninescence of the I? molecule by

A ~ 3 Iicrons for occurrence of the reaction in the resonator of an laser,
the operating wavelength of which is in resonance with the a-X transition in
the II? molecule.

smocm
l. V. N. Kondrat'yev and Ye. Ye. likitin. "Kinetika i mehhsnisn orat-
whh reaktsiy" [Kinetics and Mechanism of Gas-Phase Reactions . Moscow.
ﬂanks, 1975. '

2. V. l. Kondrat'yev, "Konstsnty shorosti gasoi‘aznyhh reaktsiy" [Rate Con-
stants or Gas-Phase Reactions]. Moscow, Bauha, 1970. .

3. J. u. Barbells. cm. ms. Lens, lo 2.2, 1976. p 367.
h. a. J. Collins and n. lusain, J. Psorocsmu lo 2, 1912. 1) I59.
5. c_. ZetzsgLand r. scum. J. cam. 91113., No 66, 1977. p 3107.

35
FOR OFFICIAL I183 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

60 Do "1 Cornell. Jo m. cm. 8°C.. lo 33. 1966. p ch“.

1. J. M. norboltn. D. J. Sponoop and It. A. M. J. Am. 9328.. no 118.
197?. p 3050-

8. a. Genome. J. cam. me" no 65. 1976. p I980.

9. "Electronic mama users." an Pro”, 1976.

10. s. a. mum. J. cam. 91113.. no 3. 1935. p 617.

11. o. 1.. Saba“. and a. 1:. mm“. m: J.. 08-11. 1915. p 690.

12. V. M. M11. candidnto'u “aeration. Moscow out. University.
1975.

13. 1.. Kuhn ma 0. wanna. m. can. lo 9. 1910. p 602.

13.. J. L. w and R. J. Jensen. J. me. c1131.. 30 1?. 1973. p 883.

15. n. 0. Button ma 8. u. enema. m1. omcs. lo 11.. 1975. p 1898.

16. u. 1:. m1. mm rows. no 12. 1916. p 18.

17. u. A. cm. and 1. 1. 1mm. cant. ms. um, lo 6, 1970. 9 I65.

18. p. cam cud J. roam. J. m. c1191.. lo 12, 1968. p 3715.

19. n. o. Buov. v. 1-. mm... 1.. 1:. mm. 1.. p. Din-kin. A. 1. nu-
mm m A. n. ommxu. nmm mm. edited by n. o.
Buov, lo 11, 1971. P 50.

20. l. 0. Nov, Ye. P. “arm. A. I. Orwcvnkly, A. V. Punkntov «1d A. I.
Skuhkqv, PIS'NA V 21m. lo 1'0. 1971. P 251.

COPYRIm: Izdstol'utvo "Sonata” rune." "Kmtw- olektrontu." 1978

1W5
(:80: 81M/ 0621-22

36
you onzcm. use can
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 539.196

momma or A GAB-DYNAMIC men 0mm on Mlﬂm 3mm run
co, non: isms

“Meow KVAMOVAYA HMO!!!“ in Russia: V01 5. lo 12. 1913 pp 2620-2622

[Article by V. It. Komhov end V. 1!. Pwsulnyev. musics Institute ineni
P. Mi behedev of the 0888 Auden of Sciences. beoow; snheitted 28 Deco-her
19??

[rm] Previous reports [1. 2] m. been published on u» fessihility of
emliiying redistion in the A I 19 uioron rsnce on the vihrstionsl-rots-
tionsl (calm-(loo) trsnsitions of the co, bend. an inverse populetion on
this transition occurs es s result of the Trinor molecule distribution with
respect to levels of the (:0: twin nodes which include the undo-l7 degener-
ete longitudinsl v1 end tending v; ey-etric vihrstions. In [2] the corte-
spondins estinstes were nsde of the pereneters of the ectivs India s'id the
electric pulping power for the direct-flow version of e co, ass discharge
loser in which the low tenpersture ('1' I 150° 1!) operetins conditions were
ensured by on srgon coolsnt. however. the elplificstion coefficient on the
(03‘0)-(1oo) trsnsitiou wss um es s result of the shsrp dilution of the
cerhon dioxide by the erson (com: II 1:50). Accordingly, it is of interest
to estinete the feesihility of using thernel pulping of the sctivc nediu in
the ens-Mo version of e co, laser on the tvin node levels.

As in known. for occurrence of inverse powletion with the ‘i‘rinor molecule

distribution with respect to levels siuificsnt vihrstionel nonequilihriun in
required under low as te-persture conditions. In the investiosted use the
nonequilihriun must be such that the following expression is sstisfied [1]

#>['_‘ee.d:8. I 1". (1)

where 1'12 is the effective twin node tespereture which in the hernonic ep-
proxinstion detenines the general quentu- reserve in of the sy-etric vi-
hrstions v.. v, of the 002 nolecule; ﬂu, is the qunntul energ of s bending
vihretion; 8,3 - 8.1%., is the energy of the a-cowonent of the Iultiplet

with the vihrstioo number v - 2“ 4 v2.

37
no: onxcm. use can
POI! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Thus, for exesple. for the (03‘0). (100) levels which belong to the multi-
plete with v I 3 end 2 end which ere shifted with respect to their centers

by the energy 'v‘vgo I 3.1%., - (2v:l + '2)“: ecuel respectively to -70 end

50 on". the iopulstion inversion according to (l) is possible et TulT 2 5.
In essence. (l) is the enelog of the condition of pertiel inversion on the
vibrstionel-rotetionel transitions of distoeic molecules. Hith the ges-
dyneeic eethod of thernel mining of the ective nsdiun. the setisfiebility
of this condition is ensured by the effect of freesing the sy-etric vibre-
tions which occurs in the process of ediebetic expension of the gee through
e supersonic nestle or slit. In order to echieve the required discontinuity
of the vibretionsl tenpereture Tn end the ges tapersture. it is expedient
to introduce e reletively snell esount of ergon ([Ar] ~ 50 percent) into the
ges nixture. which. without essentielly influencing the relenstion process
retes. offers the possibility of significently increesing the rete end depth
of cooling of the gen in the supersonic flow.

The results ere presented below free e mnericel solution of the kinetic
equstione describing the vibretionel releution of the nixture of 002M:- I
1:1 expending throng: e slit into s vecuun in the spproxinstion of the ther-
nodynenic sodsl of 002 [3]. The flow of gen mixture wes sssueed. Just es in
[h]. to be isentropic with en effective sdiebetic index 1 corresponding to
instenteneous freezing of ell of the 002 vibretions. nae dste presented in
[5] were used for the rete constents of the relention processes. The vi-

:etionel inverse populetion All I 30310 - II 00, end the enplificetion index
0 st the trensition (03‘0)-(100) were celc eted in the spproxieetion of
Trinor nolecule distribution with respect to levels (v‘vio) of the twin
nodeo of (:02:

A3. ,
Mm;0 ~N...exv [—m. + ,,,.§..:___;:A u.

where g1 I 1 if 1 I 0; g I 2 if 1 ll 0. The rotetionel distribution ten-
pereture wee sssuned to e equnl to the gen te-pereture. The dete on the
input broedening cross sections end the probebility of the redietion tren-
sition were teken from [2].

The etendsrd reletions ere presented in Figure l for the vibretionel inverse
populetion dl end the elplificetion index n for the P(15)-breneh of the
(o31o)-(1oo) bend es s function of distsnce to the slit 6 expressed in celi-
hers: E I x/h. where h I 0.03: on is the half-width of the slit. no behev-
ior of the gee tenpereture T end the vibretionel tenperetures of the sweet-
ric vibretions Tu end the entiey-etric vibretions T, elong the exis of the
Jet is also illustreted in Figure 1. Let us note thet the high ming
level of the metric vibretions end the low ges tenperetures cherecterie-
tic of the suspension of e cog-Ar gee nixture through e slit :sehe it possible
to reelise inversion in the Jet else st other trensitions. Thus. in pertic-
uler for T, [Ta 2 12 the elplificetion with c ~ 0.1 on" been-es possible or
the (02°0)-f0110) trensition in the l - 16 nicron region.

38
ran orncm. use om
FOR OPPICIM. 088 ONLY

Figure 2 ehowe the reletione for the vihretionel inweree popule'tion end the
enpliticetion index on the (03‘0)-(100) treneition u e function of the
breking telpereture m. The veluec or M end a in thie cue correspond to
the fixed see teupereture in the Jet '1‘ II 100° K. The tendency towerd e de-
creeee occurring for T1: ~ 1.600-2.000° x in cheruterietic for both rele-
tione. Thie tendency is connected with en increeee in the W-r’elmtion
rate or the energy or the ey-etric wihretione and the with the populetion

or him etimleted wihreticnel etetee progreeoing with en inoreue in the
hrekins teupereture.

 

Figure l. Dietributione or the relative tenercturee Tn/‘i‘n (1). ﬁlm (2).
171‘s (3). the inveree populetion dill. (h) and the elpliticetion
index «In. (5) none the exie of the Jet. the mixture of cozza -
1:1. the initial preeeure ya - lo etnoeoherees the braking tel-
pereture m - 1.3oo° x; a. - 0.68 . 10 ‘ cr , o.- 0.1 a-l.

 

mummmm

Figure 2. Al! (1) end a (2) en (traction: of the broking thereture Ta for e
mixture of C02:Ar I 1:1 for en initid denoity of the ﬁxture
pa - 0.72 . 10” cr’.

39
ton onxcm. use om:
I0! OPPICIAI. I188 ONLY

In conclusion lot no eotinoto the poooihlo efﬁciency of o goo-Mo 00,-
iooer n on tho tronoitiono hotvoon twin node lovolo. Considering thot tho
generation or the lnoer eniooion in choroctorioed in this coco by the qmntun

efficiency equol to l ond thot it io poooihle only under tho condition (1).
ve obtoin

n-ﬂoﬂlnlkpfd: Alli-‘IIq’IOrO

vhoro op io the opeciric hent copocity of the no nirture hoeted to tho to.-
peroturo Tu ot conotont preoouro; x io the proportion of tho cox-hon dioxide
noieculeo in the mixture. The nine of (1“). for (Tu). I 51' dotinoo the
now rote of the nonequilihriu quontul rooorve an of the Mr“ vihro-
tiono od-iooihle w the (mm-(loo) tronoition. m- m cm in Figure 2
it rollovo thot the officioncy of the goo-dynonic COz-loocr on thio tronoi-
tion can reoch volueo or n ~ 5 ond 12 porcont for broking tolporoturoo of
Ta ~ 800 ond 1.SOO° It, reopectiveh. Voluoo of n thot oro Juot Bl high (by
conporioon with the ordinary type co, coo-Mule looor oporotina on tho
(001)-(100) tronoition with l I 10.6 nicrono) ore conned by low encry of
the vihrotionol quontu (hug . 960° K) ond the high opocitic host copocity
oi‘ the onto-1c vihrctiono of 002. Pro- thio point of vicv tho use of the
aeo-dynonic thornnl mine oppooro to be highly proopective tor genorotion

of looer oniooion on the 002 twin node lovolo.
mm

1. A. A. Lign'tor, EMA mum I MICEMKAIA ram. 30 3.
1975. p .

2. A. A. um'tor. KVAI'NVAYA mom. lo 2. 1975. P 2399.

3. A. 8. Biryukov and B. F. We“. WYA mom I MICHE-
KAYA PIZIKA, lo 6. 1972, p 29.

8"
o

‘ Ye. u. Kudryovtoov ond v. u. anal-um. mmu mum I m
aroma nun. lo 6. 1913. p 25.

S. B. P. cordiyeto. A. I. Ooipov. Ye. V. Stupoohenko ond L. A. Bholopin.
um. No 108. 1912, p 655.

common Indetel'otvo ”somome radio.” "Kmtovovo elektroniko.” 1918

10865
080: 8153/ 0821-22

to
'03 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

one 535. 375

WOFMDMREOP POW?!” 03mm: "MWOPW
mm m 80AM!“

Moecov “MAYA mourn in Rueeien Vol 5. lo 12. 1978 pp 2633-2635

[Article by A. 2. Oreeyuk. V. 1!. Orehemuh. V. ?. Yeti-kw. V. II. legorodin.
8. 3. Ker-er end K. 8. Yuehho; enheitted 9 June 1918]

[Text] The heeic tectore defining the aein pereeeter in the pretence of
etienleted lie-en ecetterins ee e function of the polerieetion etete or the
etimletins redietion ere the dependence or the eponteneoue lie-n ecettering
crone eection on the polerieetion or the incident light. the degree or de-
polerieetion ot the etinuleted ecetterins end the dependence of the equere
of the electric field intensity or the incident light evereced over the oe-
cilletion period on the poleritetion etete.

It in knevn thet the Renee ecettering croee eection ie deter-lined W the de-
rivetivee with respect to the coordinete of the ieotrepic end We
perte or the polerieehility teneor (1]. The inteneitiee of the ecettered
light ere pmented in reletive unite in 'i‘ehle [2) for certein cahinetione
of directione of the vectore B. h end k' (2 ie the electric field inteneity
or the etinuletins ligat, k end h' ere the wave vectors of the incident end
ecettered redietion). It in obvious thet the ecettering croee eection doee
not)depend on the polerieetion etete wept when kl Ik' (longitudinel pup-
ine .

In the preeence of etinuleted Renen ecettering the depolerieetion lend: to
the interection or the pulping end the ecettered redietior. with the ntuelly
perpendiculer directions of the vectore 3 end 3' (8' ie the electric field
inteneity of the ecettered light). It ie poeeihle to ehov thet for the ex-
ponentiel node of the cein of the Staten couponent of the etieuleted Benn
ecetterins. the degree at ite depoleriution in defined by the expreeeion

5'» up l-(I-n mu.
vhere n in the degree or depolerizetion of the eponteneoue ecetterins; 3 ie

the gein in the preeence o! etimleted Relen ecettering; In in the inteneity
of the pumping redietion; l in the length of the nonlineer nediul. It 9 ie

1&1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

slall. then the polarization of the incident and scattered light in prac-
tice coincide. Usually this case is realised [3].

 

Since the nonpolarised um [h] can he represented in the for- of the sun
or tvo independent waves with autumn perpendicular directions or polarisa-
tion and with an intensity equal to half the intensity of the initial light.
for the longitudinal pimping and '2 O the threshold intensity for the non-
polarised J[.i )t nust be twice as large as for the linearly polarised light
see also 5

5"“ (1)

was (1)

0.2.:e:‘
'.‘(ﬁ 0

Puping radiation power Pa and generation power Pl- as functions of tile for
linearly polarized (a) and nonpolarised (h) light.

Key: 1. Relative units 2. Hicroeeconde

In this paper the results are presented for measuring the threshold intensi-
ties of linearly polarized and nonpolarized pumping radiation for a liquid

ougen conbination leser similar to the one described in [6. 7]. For it
9-0.1; [Blundtorzai-ao 101m/cs.9-o.02.

he
FOR onlcm. ”SB ONLY
POI! OWICIAL 088 ONLY

A photodiesoeietion leser (wswelencth 1.315 microns (9-111) we used es the
source. the eliesion of which wen directed by e lens into the native nediun
pleced in n resonetor with plene-perellel nirrore. In order to decresse the
effect of the senerstion developnent ties on the deter-instion of the thresh-
old intensity. experinents with polerised end nonpolerised pulping were per-
forned for the shortest possible length of the resonetor.

no degree of pelerieetion wee deternined W neesurin; the energy of the
light heels rei'lected free the pletes errensed in two nutuelly perpendiculer
directione st the Brewster eagle. For polerised uission it wes 20.96. end
for nonpolerised enission. «0. hr the threshold inteneity of the win; we
neen the velue of I n Pals (P11 is the threshold power; 8 is the eres of the
treneverse cross section of the in; been merged over the length of the
ectiwe nediu). The power Pg I 1/2)”. 0 P3) (1’, end P; ere the weluee of
the power at the tine of occurrence end ceeeetion of ceneretion) wee tehen
es the threshold power. Reletione ere presented in the figure for the pup-

in; power end the first stokes ooqonent ee e function of tile for lineerlv
polerised end nonpoleriud enission.

The neeeured velues of the threshold inteneitiee ere 2331.3 end 5.82.6
Mil/cs2 for lineerly polerited end nonpolerised light. This corresponds to
e sein of (6.3234) . 10-3 end (3.31.6) - 10-3 calm. end it egrces mu
the neeeurenente tehen in (8] (coneiderin; the verietion of the wevelencth).
In the first ceee the velues of the threshold intensity ere 1330.2 tines
sneller then in the eecond cese.

”31.1008”!!!
1. I. Brendseaeller end 0. ﬂour. "Vvedeniye v spehtmkovm nonhinetsion-
nogo reeseureniys svete" [Introduction to the Spectroscopy of Ban
Scattering of Light]. Moecow, Mir. 196k

2. L. D. and.“ Mid Ye. N. Lifthltl. ”nmmn 091M 0M"
[nectrodynenice of Continuous Nedis]. Ioscow. lsuhe. 1963.

3. p. n. lhher end a. u. ‘i'erhune. ms. m.. so 131. 1965. p A401.

1:. u. Born end B. Vol'f, ”Osnovy optihi" [Mdnnentels of Optics]. Moscow.
km. 1970.

s. I. u. nei'wn end Ye. M. unhov. memvm mum. lo 3.
1m. 9 mk-

6. A. 2. Crew. V. P. Yeti-av. I. 0. Zuherev. V. I. Nishin-end V. G.
Seth-now. PIS'HA V m. '0 8. 1968. p £730.

1. V. M. Izgorodin. 8. B. Ker-er end K. B. Yushho. "fesisy doll. no I

Vsesoyuz. honf. 'Optike luerov'” [‘lopics of Reports et the First All-
Union Conference on Loser Optice]. Ianlncred. 1977.

ha .
m omcm. use out!
POI ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

8. J. 3. am. A. K. Nominal And 3. P. amount. me. am. lo 180.
19699 P ‘10

9. V. V. KID”! “a 00 8. P‘mm. m. me- 1m. no 59 1””. p 2310
100 ‘0 J. DO ”1. “a C. J. 01‘... APP!» me. In. '0 9. 19“. p 61-
110 0. ‘0 “Pin”. 8. Bo “wt. 0. 0. mhuov. a. H. Milo". V0 “0

W. V. to. ”tony”. a. A. 8W und V. D. Urun. “MAYA
mm. 30 2. 1975. D 6“.

COPYRIGHT: Isutol'ntvo ”Sanctum radio.“ ”New. “cumin." 1978

was
cso: Bush/08a.»

Mt
m omcm. as: on!
MR OUICIAI. US! ONLY

UDO 621.318.3 3
BYIICWIZATIW OP rum-mm mozoszwxon 003 M3518

noscov KVAM‘OVAYA macaw in Russien Vol 5. lo 12. 1978 pp 2635-2637

[Article by I. 0. Buov. V. A. Who, V. A. Denilychev. V. D. 2voryhin.
A. l. Inhenov. I. V. lmolin end A. Yu. Chmmv. Physics Institute ineni
P. :i uhedsv or the 0388 Acedeq of Sciences. ﬂoscov; suheitted 21 June
191

[Text] In [1] e nev epproech vee proposed to the creetion of leeer devices
for sphericelly sy-etric ccqressicn oi‘ thereonucleer tenets. The essence
of this epproech consists in using e plane tor-ed under the effect of leser
enission on the eurtsce or the tercet es the come Iirror of poverful elec-
troionisetion co, lesers erren‘ed unii‘only over the sphere. nae edvcnteces
of the proposed systen over the trsditionel leser syste- usin‘ the princi-
ple of series-perellel enliticstion of e veek sinel met include the eh-
sence of e neeter oscilletor end the prelininen elplificetion ste¢ss with
optical decoupling for conversion of the self-etinuletion oi the device.
The self-consistent operetin; ends of e pus-mirror lneer nekes it possi-
hle to ensure high spetiel uniformity of irredistion of the tel-get end it

lovere the requirenents on the precision of sdJuetnsnt oi' the optics). ele-
nuts.

The celculstions of the leser initietion of e thernonucleer resction in non-
uniform sphericel tenets [2] indicetes thet for en energ of the leeer
eniseion oi" ~l "Joule. tenet sites of ~l on end leser pulee tine perennters
cherecteristic or the plane-mirror electroionisetion 003 leser (~1oo neno-
seconds) [3]. it is possible to ohtein e Quin with respect to energy of «.103.
“the see» celculetions denonstreted the lov sensitivity of the cein to the
vevelength of the hestins redietion end the shnpe of the lnser pulse. now
ever. very high requirenents ere inosed on the Ma of the irrsdietion

oi’ the tenet.

ihis peper is on the problem of echievins the tine synchmniution of the
operstion of severe). leeers required for sy-etry of irredietion. let us
note thet the enct eynchronisetion of the lesers cennot he med by step
hiliution of only the electricel peruetsrs or the device. teen in the
cese of strictly ei-ulteneoue inclusion of the leeer min; the m

35
roe onxcm. use ONLY
POI ONION]. US! ONLY

seen nuctuetions of the min; level. the coqosition or the operetina
eixture. optioel Q-fector oi‘ the resonetors. end so on iced to sinii‘icent
dispersion in tine of the develop-sot of the generetion pulses. In this ps-
per ecthods ere proposed for precise synchroniietion besed on the introduc-
tion of en optieel coupling between the lessr resonetors.

Synchronieetion of m Losers by e Co-on ‘i'eraet. A diesree oi‘ the experi-
nentei setup is presented in Figure lie. The leser resonetors were {creed hy
p1ene eirrors 1. 2. spherioel lirrors h. 5 end e co-on tenet 6 looeted in
e mut- cheeber. 'l'he ectiwe eleeent or the two iesers wee the io-liter
electroionitetion leeer couwetts 3 described in deteil in [k] with en sper-
ture of 10 n 10 on. The dieneter or eech user besl wes detereined by the
dienster or the holes in the diephreue 7. end it mounted to 2.5 cu. The
dietenoe between the opticel ens of the resonetors wes 1 on. Pert or the
Inner eeission wee picked up free the resonetore by light-semen“ pistes
or Incl 8. 9 for the power detectors 10. 11. The sinus i‘roe the detectors
were elpiii'ied by two identicel elplitiers. end they were fed through oebles
of equei length to one or the twin-been tubes or the 6101M! osoinogreph.
The tine pereneters of the recording chenneie esde it possible to leesure
the difference in tiles of the develop-eat of aeneretion n: with e precision
of :5 nenoseconds.

 

Pigure 1. Optics: system of the expel-insists in leeer synchronisetion.

when using one teraet es e co-son eirror for two users pert oi’ the redis-
tion or eech leeer wee reﬂected on the eperture of the focusing lirror or
the other 1eser es s result of the dittme [5] neture or the reﬂection of e
«400 nenoeecond pulse fro- the plane toned by the redietion on the surtecs
or the terget. This provided en opticei coupling between the monetors.

R6
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The dependence of M et the 0.1 level of inteneity of the leeer eianele on
the dietence 1 between the centere of the epote where the redietion wee fo-
cueed on the target wee neeeured in the emerinent. ‘lhe reeulte of the
noeeurcnente for epot dienetere of ~2 lee ere preeented in Figure 2. For

I > h In the optlcei coupling of the reeonetore wee eenll. end the differ-
once In tieee of developeent of generetion reeched it ~ 300 nenoeeconde. A
deereere in 1 led to en increeee in the optieel coupling end correepondins
eherp decreeee in M’. In the cue of pertiel or couplete owerlep of the fo-
cueins epote (l < 2 II) within the linite of eccurecy of the neeeurenente.
coeplete eynchronieetion of the operetion of the leeere wee oheemd.

Synchronieetion Ueina e Light-Bepereting Plete. The diearen of the experi-
nentel eetup ie preeented in Figure lb. without the liaht-eeperetins plete
12 the leeer reeonetore were not opticellv coupled to eech other (the redde-
tion of the leeere wee focueed on the teraet in euch e wear thet the focueins
epote do not owerlep). In thie ceee. ee e reeult of incomplete identicel-
neee of the leeer reeonetore, the difference in tinee of development of gen--
eretion executed to A! ~ 200-300 nenoeeconde (eee Figure 3e).

With the linht-eepereting plene-perellel sex-unin- plete inetelled. the re-
flection end the treneeieeion coefficiente of which were cloee to 50 percent.
the redietion of eech leeer pmmeted from the terget wee eepereted by the
plete into two beene end we nixed with two beene of the other leeer. is e

reeult of thin "hiring” couplete eynchronieetion of the leeer eipele wee
achieved (Figure 3b)-

“. nenoeeconde

 
          

I J 0

km

Figure 2. Difference in generetion development tinee of two leeere M’ on e
mnction of the dietence 1 between the centere of the epote where
the redietion ie focueed on the tel-get.

'Ihe propoud procedure cen he epplied for enchronieetion of four leeere ue-
in; four lidit-eepereting pletee. For eynchronieetion of lore then four le-
core, the eyeten for eixing the leeer bee-e beconee extrenely ewtwerd for
precticel ilplenentetion. end the lethode of eolvina the problen ohviouely
mt be found in e codinetion of the ebowe-inveetigeted eynchronieetion
techniquee.

Control of Flee-viiimr were. The inclueion of the generetion in e eye-
ten of eynchronieed leeere et e given point in tile cen be chewed by exter-
nel control of the coefficient of reflection of the enieeion fro. the tel-get.

h?
roe orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A sisple experinent denonstretes one of the nethods of noduleting the re-
flection coefficient using the redietion pulse or en edditionsl controlling
leser fox-sing e plesne on the surtece of the terget.

    

h—n—l

Pigure 3. Oscillogren of nonsynchronised (as) end synchronised (b) genere-
tion pulses of two lesers.

the diegren of the experinsntel setup is presented in Figure 1c. The reso-
nence of the lower leser in the diegrn wes for-ed by e plene ndrror 2 end
the terget 6 et the tocel point of the nirror 5. The dienster of the leser
bee-wee Son. lhe upper controllingleseronthe diegrenwithbeendiene-
ter of 2 on opereted with s cm senitrensperent nirror 13.

Vhen using on orgenic gless tel-get with e diffusely reflecting surrece to
the fornetion of s plesns in the eperture of the focusing nirror 5 no more
then 0.1 percent of the incident redietion wee scettered. end the loser res-
onetor wes cherecterized by e very high threshold of occtn-rence of genero-
tion. 'lhe ptlping level for e closed been of the controlling loser wes es-
teblished sonswhet below this threshold.

For on open generetion been of the controlling lescr it led to the occurrence
of e plesn on the surfece or the terget end to en increese in the reflection
coei‘fioient by eppronnstely 10 tines. The increese in positive teedhech in
the resonetor of the plesns-nirror loser. in turn, ceused generetion of it.
The tine dslev of the generetion pulse with reepect to the controlling laser
pulse wes ~150 nenoeeconds. The new of inclusion of the plesnvnirror
leser wes no worse then :25 nanoseconds.

BIBLIOGBAPHY

l. l. G. Besow, I. A. Berezhnov. V. A. Boyko, V. A. Denilychew, V. D.
ZVorykin. V. V. Ignet'ycv, I. V. Kholin end A. Yu. Gaugunow, PIB'NA V
Zh'l'P. lo 1. 1975. p 1105.

2. in. V. Afenes'yew. I. G. Besov. P. P. Volosevich, Ye. O. Oeneliq, 0. I.
Krokhin. 8. P. Mun", Ye. I. lavenov, V. B. Rozenov, A. A. Belushi:
end A. ll. 'l‘ikhonow, PIS'NA V mm. lo 21. 1975. p 150.

1.8
ms omcw. ass on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. N. 0. Bow. V. A. Doyko. V. A. Donilychev. V. D. Zvorykin. A. II. 1.0-
banov. A. P. Suchkov. I. V. 1010111) and A. Yu. Chosunov, KVAI'NVAYA
mom. '0 h. 1977' P 1761.

h. I. A. Boronhnoy. V. A. Doyle. V. A. when", V. D. hernia. V. V.
Imc'yov. I. V. Rhona and A. Yu. Chmmov. PIE, lo 5, 197?. p 112.

5. I. 0. MY. V. A. ”to. V. A. Mlychcv. V. D. Zvory‘ldn. I. V. Kho-
11n and A. Yu. Chumov. KVAI'I'OVAYA maxim, lo II. 1977. P 2268.

Ct‘PYRIOM': Imul'uvo ”Smtlkoye radio." "Kmtonya elektronikn." 1978

1081.5
cso: emu/0821.22

1.9
m orncm. us: my
'0! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

unc 621. 378.3:621.375.82

WYWOIIADYBWWAMWORWIUZHOAMWC
LIQIID CRYSTAL

Moscow madman menu in Russisn Vol 5. no 12. 1918 pp 2637-2650

[Article by I. P. Il’ohishin. l'e. A. Tikhonov. V. 0. 'i‘ishchenko snd Ii. '1’.
8hpsk. Physics Institute of the Uhrsinisn 88R Acedew of Sciences. Kiev;
sub-itted 27 June 1978]

[Text] 1. The interest in studies of liquid orystsls in qusntus electron-
ics snd nonlinesr optics crises. in psrticulsr. m- the possibility of con-
tinuous control of the opticsl chsrsoteristics by the superposition of week
external effects. The cspscity of liquid crystsls to chsnge their texture
essily per-its sssll fill-type ole-c its which control end convert loser
enission on the bssis of then. Thus. thin lam-s of liquid crystsls of the
cholesteric type (we) were used for senerstion of the third hex-Ionic [1. 2].
The introduction of concreting orgsnic dyes into oriented lsyer: of neutic
liquid crystsls hes ssde it possible to build losers which chsnse intensity.
cenerstion threshold. rsdistion psttern of the emission snd polsrisstion on
reorientstion of the liquid crystsl layer [3. h].

In this psper s report is presented on obtsinins s frequency controllsble
dye loser. one of the resonstor nix-rots of which is en oriented we lever.
A study wss nsds of the vsristion of the gensrstion freqmncy during thernsl
vsristion of the pitch of the we helix.

2. An oriented thin we lever with the helix sxis nor-s1 to the bounding
substrstes is s nsdiun. the dielectric constsnt of which is nodulsted with s
period of P/2 I s/qo, where P is the pitch of the cholesteric helix. 90 is
the angle of twist of the structure per unit length. A psrsllel been of
non-anachronistic light incident st the angle 0 on this structure will un-
dergo coherent reflection on the A which sstisfies the Bros; condition

P cos 0 I Mo. ne" ho is the wevelencth in the sedit- equnl to A/n. n I
(no 0 n.)/2 is the neon index of nefrsction of the wc.

The selectively reflected light hes circulsr polsrizstion. the for- of which
is given by the direction of twist of the cholesteric helix in en oriented
flst texture. for norssl incidence snd sufficiently lsrse number of helix

so
to: omcm. use out!
FOR OHIOIAL "8! ONLY

windings in the we lever. the incident redietion of circuler polerisetion

in coepletela reflected in the firet order [5]. end the Bregg condition hee
fore Pn - A.

It in ohvioue thet the wevelength of the eeleotiwly reflected light in de-
tenined by the pitch of the choleeteric helix which depends on the composi-

tion of the we. the teepereture. the electric end negnetic fields end other
dieturbeneee [6-8].

3. In the experieent teepereture edJuetnent of the pitch of the helix wee
need for nor-cl orientetion of the we lever with reepect to the reeonetor
exie. A tricoeponent Iixture of choleeterol chloride + choleeterol oleete +
cholesterol nonenoete wee used no the we in e grewinetric retio of l:l.33:l
et e telpereture of 22° c epproxiletely in the center of the tenoereture
renge of exietence of the liquid cryetel etete. For thin mixture the pitch
of the helix increeeee nonotonicelly with tenpereture (dP/d‘r > 0). The no
wee pieced in e cell for-ed by two gleee pletee. The thickncee of the mo
lever wee given by tenon ineerte. 'l'he ineide wells of the cell were cov-
ered by e treneperent layer of Soil: end they were poliehed by the Chetelein
method [9]. In order to ohtein e uniforl flet texture. the Lee lever wee
heeted ebove the pheee treneition point to the isotropic etete; then it wee
cooled elowly. At the pheee treneition t reture the pletee were ehifted
in opposite directione by the nethod of [10 with subsequent elow cooling to
noon telpereture.

3%

§

    

m m ‘1an

Figure l. Selective trenenieeion of en ncc Iver (d - 15 mien-one) for left-

hend (1) end righthend circulerly polerieed light (2) end eleo
for lineer polerisetion (3).

the eelectiwe trenenieeion chencterietice of the tint texture for different
polerizetione of the incident redietion ere preeented in Figure l. the ori-

ented we lever 15 nicrone thick reflecte the lefthend circulerlv polericed
redietion in the hut-width bend of M I 1.1 u with en efficiency of R I 52

percent. The te-pereture dependence of A.“ of the selective reflection for

51
M OWICIAL 08! OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

this too mixture is presented in Figure 2. The selective reflection ware-
length varies linearly with veriation of the tespereture with a rate of 3.1
nun/deg. hear the phase transition tespereture (39° C) the linear growth of
km with telperature ceeses as s result of couplets untwisting of the cho-
lesteric helix. The weriation of the reflection efﬁciency in the investi-
gated temperature range es a result of dispersion of the plate used to ob-
tain the circular polarization All did not exceed 5 percent.

1.3-. III

 

r,.

Figure 2. Temperature dependence of the selective reflection for the indi-
cated DOC nixture (d I 15 microns).

The pumping source of the dye laser was the second harmonic radiation of the
no” 31m laser. A solution of rhodaline 60 in dinethylsulfoxide with an
optical density or D I 1 at l I 530 ns wee used in the dye laser. The exit
nirror of the resonator was a mirror with dielectric coating end reflection
intheeine560-620nnrengeofR-30percent. ‘lhe anglebetweenthewlp-
ing radiation end the generation radiation of the dye laser was 7°. A
couwette with the «Lye lo I: thick was placed at the Brewster angle to the
exit: of the resonator. The cell with the ace was placed in a themstated
holder, the thermal stebilitation of which was no worse than 0.l° C. In or-
der to inprove the efficiency of the reflection, a phase plate was intro-
duced into the resonator with a phase shift of s/2 for the tuning range. In
this case lineerly polarised generation emission was propagated in the reso-
nator which was converted to lefthand circularly polarised i-ediately before
the 1.00. The pulping been aperture was linited by a diaphragp l I in diale-
ter.

15. The experimental results are presented in Figure 3. Figure 3a shows the
generation spectre of the dye laser in the telperature range of 22-28° c.
The radistion was edJusted true 561 to 585 on. The total width of the tun-
ehle frequency band reeched 3.5 m for pimping epproxinstely 30 tines the
threshold welue.

M intense bands were observed in the generation spectra against the back-
ground of the wide tunable band. The spscing between the two intense bands
was 2 up. With a decreese in the resonator base fro. 300 to 150 I (Figure
3b) end the ease esount over the threshold. the generation took place in two
narrow bands, the spacing between which wes 2 nu. he bend widths were 0.5

52
ton omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

and 0.7 nm. respectively. The presence of a continuous nontunable genera-
tion spectrum in Figure 3a is caused by reflection from a plane-parallel
cell with 1.00 and the All; plate.

 

Figure 3. Generation frequency control of the dye on variation of the tem-
perature from 22 to 28° C (from bottom to top. resonator base
300 n, s) and dye generation spectrum at a temperature of 23° c
(resonator base 150 as. b).

The frequency tuning rate of the laser obtained with a precision of 0.1 In
corresponds to the tuning rate observed for the telperature variation Am
of selective reflection, and it is determined by the thermal stabilisation
error. The presence of two intense bands in a wide generation spectrun and
also the splitting of the wide band into two lines can be caused primarily
by nonunifornity of orientation of the sec filn both respect to area and
with respect to thickness. 'lhe proposed physical causes of this phenolsenon
for the me with strong dependence of P on '1' were discussed in [10] where
the splitting of the selective reflection band was also obtained.

5. The perfon investigation demonstrates the possibility of the applica-
tion of the oriented DCC layers for the selection and tuning of the fre-
quency of dye lasers. They can be used in lasers with suffici‘ntly high
power for pulse durations where disordering of the structure 0 the MC has
still not taken place. he rupture threshold of the LCC film by nanosecond
pulses is comparable with the rupture threshold of the transparent orienting
substrates. The use of we nixtures with a pitch which depend! on the elec-
tric field [11] is prospective for the practical realization of the genera-
tion frequency tuning.

msuoamm
1. J. u. Shelton and r. s. Shen. ms. MN. m, No 26, 19h. p 538.

2. S. A. Akopyan, s. H. Arakelyan. R. V. Kochikyan, 8. To. Nersisyan and
Yu. S. Chilingsryan, KVAN'NVAYA menu. lo 3. 1977. P lhhl.

53
ran orncnu. use can
FOR OHIO!“ 088 ONLY

3. I. P. Il’ohinhin. Yo. A. Mkhonov. H. '1'. 811ka And A. A. Domhkin.
913% v am. no 2h. 1976. p 336.

lo. :. nxnonov. n. nor-colon: and 1'. Bowen. on. ma. no n. 1976.
p 35?.

5. ll. be V14”. mm WW” ’0 3o. 1951. p 219.
6. R. Do mm.t. 10L. CRY”. HQ. “Mo. “ 13. 1971. P 337'
7. P. J. Kuhn. ma. RSV. mm, lo 25. 1970. p 209.

8. 1.. II. 311m. 8. V. new Ind V. A. K1101. ““8168 MB, lo 655.
1978. p 33.

9. p. chacuun. nun. soc. ms. mm. no 66. 19lo3. p 105.

10. V. A. Kisol’ and 8. I. Kuduhov. W. lo 72. .1977. p 2180.

11. 3. Spitz Ind 1). Dumb. M8. PA?” 30 2. 1973. pp 137. 166.
COPYRIM: Izutel'atvo ”Benetton radio," "Inntom 010W.” 1978

1W5
080: emu/0621-22

5'0
you onmm. us: my
NR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

one 621.378.325

much 0! HOB-m WM P011818 31 A now-mm RUDY LASER
mmvomormmmm

Moscow KVAI'NVAYA mom in Russisn Vol 5. lo 12. 1978 pp 2650-2632

[Article by A. I. Kirkin, A. ll. leontovich end A. N. Motherovehiy. Physics
Institute ineni P. I. Inhedew of the 0383 Acsdsw of sciences. Moscow; suh-
nitted 1 Merch 1918. revised 1 July 1978]

[i‘ext] A self-eode-locked low-tequreture ruhy leser csn generets e short
trsin of 1-3 pulses [1]. This is csused by the feet thst st low tqereture
e ruby hes s lerge opereting trensition cross section. end the enlificetion
coefficient of the sctive nedius cen reech e velue on the order of 1 cl" st
the tine of illuinetion of the setm'ehle filter when using filters with
initiel trsnsnission of ehout 1 percent. he energy stored in the nsdim is
relessed in this ceee in e seen nuher of pesses of the light in the reco-
netor.

In [2] e study wee nsde of the tine cherscteristics of the ruty leser enis-
sion using en inge converter with tine scenning. The aiesion wee in the
forn of e short trein of puleeo with en energy of 0.02 Joules end s duretion
of 3S picoseconds. This duretion is less then the trsnsveree relention
tine of the ruby et the telpersture of nitrogen (on the order of 100 pico-
seconds [3]). end the interection of the rsdietion with the Interiel csn oc-
cur coherently in this one (It. 5]. Por coherent interection of the light
pulse with the uplifying eediu. its "eree"

o - «1/15 .1. sum

(3 in the light field elplitude. d is the netrix dipole want of the tren-
eition) wproeches e eteW-etete velue of 1 es it is pmpegsted the lexi-
“ esplitude increeees. end the shspe end durstion chsnge. In ‘6. 7] n
study no nsde of self-induced treneperencv end coherent wlificetion in s
ruby et the tapereture of liquid nitrogen. It wes denonstreted thst gener-
etion of e “pulse cen teke piece in s ruby leser. In the cue of coherent
elplificetion. the pulse duretion is shortened by up to two tines (free 35
to 18 picoseconds).

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this psper the oherscteristics of the ruby st low tenpersture (the possi-
bility of generetion of s short trsin under self-ssde-loehing conditions end
shortening of the pulse with coherent slplifiestion) hewe been used in prec-
tice to obtein high-power (durstion lo pieoseoonds. enery l Joule) ultrs-
short pulses with sssll volume of the sotive sedius. A study wee Insde of
the roletion between the pulse durstion end the rsdistion line width in the

enplificetion process. A high-speed opticel shutter wss proposed end used
to nessure the pulse durstion.

  
  

saws

- -
19"! "1’10!

   

Figure l. Disgren oi' the sxperisentsl setup: lwruby crystels; 2—nirror
(R I 100 percent) with couvette; 3—wedge substrste (R I h per-
cent); h—telescope; S—diephrsa 6 II in disaster; 6--echelstts
(retina: 7—couvette with setureble filter; Msphrsa l - in
disaster st the focel point of the lens 9; lO-odelsy line; 11-
Psbry-Psrot interferonster; l€-disphrsanz l3c-scetterer;
lit—lens; lS—obJective; macs-ere; l?-long focel length lens;
18--senitrensperent sirror; l9udecoupling; 20—111: 15 photoele-
Isnt; aura-1 oscillogreph; 22—nsutrel light filter; 23-41131:-
spsed opticel shutter.

‘Ihs disgrsn of the experisentel setup is presented in Figure 1. Ruby rods
9 12 x 120 - with Cr ion concentretion of 0.05 percent were used in the
generstor end snlifier. They were cooled by nitrogen wepor to 100° it. he
ends of the rods were cut et en sngle of 6°. 'lhs resonetor wee foned by e
loo-percent sirror in contsct with the setureble filter end wedge substrete
(R - ’4 percent). A telescope with 1.8:: negnificetion sdJustsble to s nece-
tiwe region wes plsced between the setursble filter end the end of the illu-
sinetor. This crested en unsteble resonetor configuretion. end it ends it
possible to increese the generetion energy with steble sods synchroniution
es s result of incrsesing the been disaster to 6 n. The generstion enery
exceeded by en order the enery ohtsined in [2], end it resched 0.2 Joule
for en energy flux of 1-2 Joules/cs“. The divergence of the redietion wss
corrected by e long-focus lens pleced et the output of the sqlifier. he
rsdietion energy wee sessured by en IZhK-l celorineter. A solution of cryp-
tocysnin in nitrobensene with initiel trensnission of 1-2 percent (couvette
thickness of 2 I) wee used es the setureble filter. The self-lode locking
wss observed in e wide rsnge of telescope sdJustnents.

56
roe orucm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The radiation enery reached 0.5 Joule after amplification. The pulse dura-
tion at the output of the amplifier was measured by a high-speed optical
shutter with saturable filter [7. 9]. Uith this measurement technique the
pulse track obtained using a scatterer is photographed through a shutter.

the opening time of which is less than or comparable to the pulse duration.
In order to increase the shutter speed by comparison with [7. 9]. an eche~
lette (150 lines/ms) was used as the scatterer on which the beam was directed
at the glancing angle. The fifth diffraction procedure was used for the ex-
periment. The total length of the echelette corresponded to a duration of
hs nanoseconds. The high speed of the shutter made it possible to use a
saturablc filter with small initial transmission (10") and to decrease the
"closing time" of the shutter by cosparison with the dye relaxation time. A
solution of cryptocyanin in ethanol (couvette thickness 1 ms) was used as
the saturable filter. As a result of the low initial transmission of the
saturable filter, the recorded track corresponded to the pulse of the train
with maximum amplitude; the closure time of the shutter was less than 1 picc-
second by the estimates. The transmission of the eaturahle filter in the
illuminated state was 10". Considering the properties of the photographic
film (type 15) the track contrast could reach 20. The finite opening time
of the shutter could not lead to a difference of the recorded track length
of more than two times from the actual length. The pulse duration at the
output of the amplifier was estimated by the track length and it was 10-20
picoseconds at half the altitude. An example track is presented in Figure 2.
An oscillogram is also presented there for the radiation at the amlifier
output. The signal was recorded by the TEX-15 coaxial photoeluent and the
12-7 oscillograph.

 

\

Figure 2. Oscillogram of radiation (a) and pulse track (b) at the output of
the amplifier.

The spectral width of the radiation at the output of the amplifier was meas-
ured by a Pabry-Perot interferometer. and it was equal to 1.0-1.5 cln‘1 at
half the heiylt. The interaction of the radiation with the material in the
amplifier took place coherently. The effect of the self-induced transparency
observed on transmission of the radiation of the amplifier through the un-
pumped ruby rod (analogous to the one used in the generator and the ampli-
fier) is confirmation of this. The transmission of the sample for the 2!-

pulse obtained by compression of the amplifier beam by two times was 0.1.
and it coincided with the results of [6]. Here the radiation spectrum was
not broadened. This indicates absence of significant nonlinear distortions
of the pulse. The radiation spectrum of the generator and the amplifier was

57
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

photographed sinultaneously on one frame. The edge of tho diaphragn 12 used

in thehinteri'eroaeter exposure system was placed at the focal point of the
lens 1 .

 

Pigure 3. Radiation spectrum of the generator (right) and anplitier (left);
region of dispersion oi‘ the Psbry-Perot interteroeeter 2.5 cm".

The systesatic broadening of the spectrum was recorded for alplitication to
1.6 times (see Figure 3). It was caused by a reduction in the pulse dura-
tion during coherent amplification. The product Au . At 01‘ the width of the
uplii‘ier spectrum tine: the pulse duration (taken at halt-height) was 0.2-
0.8. It must be considered that this value can be souewhat less than the
corresponding value for a single pulse. This is caused by the fact that {or
coherent amplification in the case of absence of nonlinear distortions the
minus: pulse out of the pulse train can have Iainilun duration. Therefore
the spectral width of the entire train can be less than the spectral width
of its maxim pulse.

With mrther anplii‘ication of the radiation by two such anplifiers. the en-
ergy increased to 1.0-1.2 Joules. and the pulse duration was reduced to 5-10
picoseconds. Here the radiation spectrul was broadened to 2.0—2.5 en".

The divergence of the radiation was measured using a mirror wedge [10]. and
it was 2 - 10'3 (with respect to the halt-energy level). During prolonged
operation, the negative lens of the telescope in the resonator was danged;
the probability of node synchronisation was decreased in this case. In or-
der to improve the stability or the operating conditions. the telescope in
the resonator was replaced by a scattering lens with a focal length of 2-3 In.
The results did not change simiricantly in this case. There were no volu-
netric disturbances in the ruby.

The authors express their appreciation to H. D. Galanin for his interest and
attention to this work.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. A. M. Leontovich. Ye. D. Bayeva and A. M. Mozharovskiy. KVAM‘OVAYA
anxxrnosxxn. edited by s. o. Basov, so u (16). 1973. p 106.

58
non OFFICIAL use ONLY
2.

3.

6.

7.

FOR OPPKOIAI. US! ONLY

A. M. Iaontovich. A. M. ﬂozhmvokxy. Ya. I. Sordyuohenko an! N. h.
Dhchelov. KVAIITOVAYA mourn. llo 1. 19710. p 691.

A. elm/10v. 1n the book ”mew” [Intern]. Moscow. 11.. 1963.
a. 1.. mom and a. 1.. Hahn. me. man. lo 183. 1969. 1: ~57.
s. L. mom. an: a. 1.. m. me. an. A. no 2. 1910. p 861.

A. LA. Inontovtch and A. N. ﬂown-ovum. PIB'IIA 1! sum. Do 19. 19710.
p 3 7.

L62... Inontovich And A. N. Moshmwkiy. PIB'NA V m. lo 20. 197k.
p .

A. No “Grill!!!“ V. A! “mono. Po 0. W'. Y“. A. htm“..
3. x. Chokdln and 0. 3. suctbomhvln. ”MAYA m. lo 1.
197 9 P 377-

0. ﬂomu. B. Drouln And I. Downy-Reborn. Am. PHYS. 13178. lo 20.
1972. P 553.

v. v. many and r. s. rqsmov. am I WWI“. lo 27.
1969 p 101.

COPYRIGHT: Isutel'otvo ”Bantam. rune.” "batman antennas.“ 1978

MHz/082142

59
ton 07mm. 03: on!
POI OHIO!“ US! ONLY

006 521376.33

8M! 0? A m 32-h mm mm AT [1103 man 0? me warm
HDIUII

14°th KVAN'MVAYA moan in Rueeien V01 5. No 12. 1973 pp 2652-2655

[Article by Yu. A. Kolchin. V. B. Kolovekiy. 8. Ya. Paheehetexiy end I. P.
(mobotarev; eubeitted 10 October 197?. revieed 3 W 1978]

[Text] At this tine the prim-y errorte oi‘ the reeearchere dealing with
chenicel leeer eyetele have been ained at netting the H24, or Dz-Pz-OO le-
eere having high epecitic perenetere (energy output of about 150 Joulee li-
ter ll. 2]. Recently a eipifioent nunber of experilentel end theoreticel
papere have been publiehed where Ila-P: ohericel laeere have been enelned

(eee, for emle. (3-71).

It ie known that in order to obtain sexin- ei'i‘ioiency, e puerml ehort
initiation of the reaction ie required. end in order to obtain high epecitic
power it in neceeeery to use optieel preeeure or the mixture which. gener-
ell: epeekinc. cen be higher then etnoepheric.

Accordingly. the problen of etudyinc. 32-12 laeere at increaeed preeeure of
the cognate end with powerml initiation hae becone an urgent one.

The Ila-1’2 laser with a reaeure or the coQonente to l atnoephere wee etud-
ied in the pepere [5. 1 in which a lineer increase in the output eneru of
the leeer wee observed with en increase in preaeure. A preeeure above 1 et-
Ioephere wee ueed in [3] where a pere-etric enelyaie wee nede of auch e le-
eer. end the output enem wee neuured en a function or the preeeure of the
mixture within the linite or 0-3 etneupherea. The maxim energy output wee
obtained for e preeeure of about 1 atmophere. The theoreticel celculetione
of the laser in a wide power reuse end wide range of initiation tinee. pree-
eurea of the mixture and ite cowoaition [6] denonetreted thet depending on
these quentitiee. the optinl preeeure can eignii’icently exceed etnoepheric.
The absence of a eutficient quentity or experimental dete coqlieatee con-
periaon of the theoretical celculatione with the experimentel date.

The purpoee of thia paper we to trace the lawn end the trende in the behav-
ior of the output enery of e fluorine-hydrogen leeer in the preaeure renge

60
ton omcut use om!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

01' the comonents of 0-5 atsoapheres with light initiation of different du-
ration and poser.

Bxporisental Procedure

An ordinary laser device with initiation of two times was used for the seas-
ureaents: l) the m—sooo xenon tube placed alonnge a laser couvette and
fed fro: a capacitor bank with a capacitance of 2.0 Iicrofarads across an
air gap; 2) a specially Innufactured coaxial tube constituting a unit with
the capacitor. the discharger and the laser couvette. The laser couvette
with an active volune of 2.5 ca’ was located inside the discharge gap. The
discharger. the tube and the capacitor of this structural design are de-
scribed in detail in [8].. 'ihe low inductance of the discharge circuit sade
it possible to obtain a pulse duration of 0.7 aicrosecond with a front of
250 nanoseconds. In the usual version of illmination. the pulse duration
was 7 nicroseconds; the active volume was llo ca’. In both cases the resonan-
tor was formed by a blind nirror R - 3 II and an A1203 plate. The coaponents
were nixed in the dynamic node, and the exchange of the mixture in the laser
couvette took place in less than 1 second.

The fonula for the initiation pulses obtained using the rat-224w and
the 88-11 and the 1-2-7 oscillograph is illustrated in Figure 1.

Figure l. shape of the lidit initiation pulses in the first (a) and in the
second (b) version (the sorts are made every 50 nanoseconds).

The inuensity of the light flux was neasured in this experinent using the
indicated initiation procedures. In connection with the difficulty of de-
tenining the P atoa concentration during photolysis the following procedure

was developed which is based on deter-lining the snount of 61!; for-ed during
photolysis of 01?.

It is known that the absorption peaks of cm and r: aJnost coincide (21b and
28'; na. respectively) [9. 10]. The optical absorption curves in this region
have the sane shape according to our measurements. The F1 absorption cross
section is approxiutely twice as large as the Cl! absorption cross section.
In this case. by determining the number of Cl? nolecules dissociating during
photolysis. it is possible to calculate the nulber of deco-posed P2 Inle-
cules.

In [9] it was deaonstrated that the following processes take place during
photolysis of the (:1? molecules:

cirono-acior; (l)

61
Iron ontcuu. us; OIL!
POI! OWICIAL USE ONLY

01 + Cl? 4 01: + P; (a)
r + cu + c115; (3)
r + cu:2 » cm. (*0)

It follows from this that the quantum yield of 0173 during photolysis of Cl!
is equal to 1. Thus, measuring the amount of cu,. it is possible to obtain
a nuber of absorbed quanta. The amount of 011’ was determined on the
Specord device by variation of the optical density and the axis. absorp-
tion region of 01?, (208 nm). Instead of the operating mixture, for a pres-
sure corresponding to the optically thin layer. 61? was let into the laser
couvette. After several flashes of the light. the contents of the couvette
were refrozen in a quarts optical couvette. The amount of formed ClPa' and.
therefore. the number of absorbed quanta were determined by the variation of
the optical density on a wavelength of 208 nm.

The quantum flow in the c1? and the 1’; absorption region ave over the
wavelength amounted to 1.15 . 10" cm‘zin a pulse or 1.5 - 102 cm‘2 sec"
for a coaxial tube. and for an ordinary tube the first version of initia—
tion). OJ: 0 10” csr2 in a pulse or 0.5 . lo 3 car2 sec“. The degree of
dissociation of the 01? was equal to 0.0!: percent for the first tube and
0.13 percent for the second tube in a pulse. For fluorine, these values are
two times larger. The accuracy of deteraining the indicated values was
30-50 percent. The characteristic generation time in the case of the appli-
cation of a coaxial tube was ~l demand for a pressure of 1 atmosphere
of a mixture of szzzozme . l:0.33:0.2h:8. The generation time was ap-
proximately inversely proportional to the pressure of the aixtm-e. The
fluorine dissociation takes place in this case during the entire time of the
existence of generation. In the first version the generation time was sig-
nificanm less than the initiation time and, correspondingly. the propor-
tion of the dissociated fluorine in the generation time was less. This
means that the initiation with respect to atomic fluorine in these two cases
differs by more than an order of magnitude.

Results and Discussion

As is known [11], with an increase in pressure of the mixture, several com-
peting processes take place. The growth of the rate of formation of are is
prevented by the reactions of breaking the chain as a result of recombina-
tion of the 1' and 1! atoms in ternary collisions and the reaction ll e 02 +

N -o 1102 + II, and the break in generation is promoted by the VT-relaxation
processes. At the same time. the increase in pressure as a result of intro—-
duction of inert additives into the mixture, equalisi the rotational tem-
perature, can lead to an increase in the efficiency [h . The optimal pres-
sure of the aixture will be determined by the expression for the rates of
the counting processes and it will depend on the composition of the mixture
and the initiation power. The experimental results are presented in Fig-
ure 2 where the relations are shown for the specific energy as a function of

62 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the pressure of the Iixture. the degree of dilution of the nixture by heliun
end the initiation power.

‘Nl (1)

   

 

 

wad—a.
M 43 1' u 1.0 1.0
ﬁrm [mm

Figure 2. Specific output energy as a mnction of the pressure oi“ the mix-
ture (a, h) and as a mnction of the partiul pressure P: (c. d)
for the following values of the parameters: coqos'ition of the
Iixture: 92:3: :He:SFIl:.:030.::260(l-3,7,9).
1:.:.:.030203:o(. 8).10305030(5).1030503033
(6); type I initiation (1. 2. h. 7. a). type II (3. 5. 6. 9, 10),

- 15 (1. a. 7. 8).19 (3. 5.6 .9. 10). 20 kw (2)

Key: 1. Joules/liter 2. Atmospheres

Figure 2a shows the specific energy c of the laser as a hmction oi‘ the
pressure of the mixture P2: 32:0 :Be - 1:0. 3: 0. 2:6 for different voltsge on
the reed capacitors in two wers one or the initiation.

Figure 2b shows the dependence or c on the pressure- oi‘ the mixture in prac-
tice not diluted by helium (lie/P2 - 0.3). Figure 2a, b shows the effect or
the initiation power on the dependence of c on pressure. It is obvious no]:
this that with an increase in the initiation power (that is. the degree of
dissociation of P2 in the generation time) with a silultaneous decrease in
the pulse front not only c increases, but the minus: oi’ the specific energy
as a mnction or pressure is shifted in the direction of higher pressures
(from 1.5 to 3 atmspheres for mixtures diluted with helium and from 0.8 to
1.5 atmospheres for undiluted ones), whereas with an increase in the pulse
energy without significant variation of its shnpe this is not observed
(curves 1 and 2).

63
701! orncuu. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2c. d shove the effect of the dilution of the mixture by helium on
the dependence of c on the fluorine pressure, that is. on the chemical effi-
ciency. Curve 7 van obtained for Hell-‘2 II 6. curve 8 for lie/P2 I 0.3. In
Figure 2c it is obvious that dilution of the mixture by helium leads to an
increase in the chemical efficiency although the specific output enery does
not increase here. This is obviously explained by the negative effect of
the V'r-relaxation processes and recoﬁinstion of the active centers in the
ternary collisions.

Figure 2b (curve 6) shove the effect of 8?; (31'5”: I 1/3) on the specific
energy output. some increase in the energy output was observed in the pres-
sure range to l ataosphere. Vith pressure the energy output decreased by
comparison with the same mixture without 8!".

The data obtained indicate a more complex effect of the initiation. the to-
tal pressure and the composition of the mixture on the output parameters of
the fluorine-hydrogen laser with a pressure of the components above atmo-
spheric and for lover pressures of the components. Increasing the intensity
of the light initiation by more than an order leads to doubling of the spe-
cii‘ic energy of the emission. w comparison of the optimal pressures of the
mixture obtained experimentally with those calculated [6] demonstrate.‘ good
correspondence of them.

BIBLIWRAPHY

1. II. 6. Basov, A. 8. Bashkin. P. 6. arigor'yev. A. I. Orayevskiy and
o. Ye. Porodinkov, Kvnmvnm mourns. [lo 3. 1976, p 2061.

2. A. 8. Bashkin, P. P. Origor'yev, V. I. Igoahin. V. Yu. likitin and
A. I. Orayevskiy, KVANTOVAYA mom. no lo. 197?. P 100’s.

3. V. Ya. Agroakin, G. K. Vasil'yev, V. I. Kir'yanov and V. 1.. Tal'nrte.
rumours menu, Ho 3. 1976. p 1932.

’1. G. K. Vasil'yev, V. I. Gur'ye'r and V. L. Tal’roze, ZhETF, lo 72, 1917,
p 9’53.

5. lino-Lin Chen, R. L. Taylor, J. Wilson. P. Levis and H. l’yfe. J. cm.
PHYS., no 61, 19114. p 306.

6. V. I. Igoshin, V. Yu. hikitin and A. ll. Orayavskiy, KVAll'i‘OVAYA 81.3K-
mum, No It. 1977, p 1282.

1. D. B. Nichols, R. B. hall and J. Doyle McClure. J. APPL. HHS” lo M,
1976, p .0026.

8. Yu. A. Yanayt, Yu. M. Anisimov and V. I. Pchelkin, PTE, Vol 6. no 2.
19739 P 18]..

6h
son orncru. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. E. A. Bun Row and B. J. machor, 2. ms. cam. 30., lo 71. 1970.
P 153.

10. R. K. Btounenberg and R. c. Vogel. J. m. cm. 800., lo 78. 1961.
p 901.

11. A. 8. Rankin. V. I. Igoshin at 0.1.. "IOIMcnukiye Mary. 11:03!
nauki 1 tokhnikt. Sor. Motekhniko" [cheucn Losers. Science and
Engineering Results. Radio Engineering Series]. Vol 8. Moscow. VIII'I‘I
A1! 8881!. 1975.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo ”Sovotokoye radio.” "Kvmtomo elektroniko," 1978

10816
cso: Buds/0621-22

65
POR ontcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

m 01’ molsmmm “TRIALS OBI Th3 GENERATION 01’ A WEB! '10 Ii?
CHEMICAL LASER

Moscow KVANNVAYA MRI“ in Russian Vol 5. Ho 12. 1918 pp ﬁns-2658

[Article by Yu. I. Koslov, ll. 10:. Petrov. 8. Ya. Psheshetsxiy and h. F.
Chebotarev; subnitted 3 New 1978]

[Text] One of the methods of increasing the efficiency of chemical lasers
is the introduction of mterials having a larger absorption cross section in
the spectral region of light puping than the initia‘. 1’; molecules [1. 2]
into the basic laser mixture. Multiatoaic metal. fluorides. inert gases or
halides. for example, Mel’s, W5. JF7, 011’s and so on can serve as these
photoinitiating conponents. However, up to the present tine the character-
istics of laser systens containing photoinitiating conponents. in particu-
lar, the possible negative effect of the photoinitiating components on the
generation para-stars, have not been defined.

In this paper a study is made of the effect of some such photoinitiating na-
terials on the output enery of laser generation in mixtures of P3 and Cl?
with H, having the greatest output parameters and efficiency [3].

Experimental Procedure

The experinent was performed on a device analogous to that described in (It,
5]. A quarts laser tube was used with an inside diameter of l? I and a
length of the active section of 70 cm. The ends of the tube were covered
by windows of ca, installed at the Brewster angle. The photolysis of the
mixture was realised by a flash tube with xenon filling (p 0 30 u it). The
electric energ storage elencnt was a capacitor bank. the structural design
of which made it possible to vary the capacitance in the range of 0-7.5 mi-
crofarade. The voltage on the bank had to be raised to 20 kv. The count-
ing element in the discharge circuit was an air discharger which responds on
the approach of two copper balls 20 I in diameter.

The expcrinents were performed for two different initiation powers: c I 1.5
nicrofarads, U I 13.5 hv, t I S aicroseconds (l) and C I T microfarads. U I
20 iv, 1 I 12 nicroseconds (2) (C is the capacitance of the bank of feed

66
ron omcm use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cepeoitors. U is the opereting feed woltege. 1’ is the duretion of the initi-
eting light pulse nessured on the l ’2 nexim level). For eech of the vex5
sione, the intensity of the light flux wee nsesured in the Cl? end F; eb-
sorption region. m procedure developed by the euthors for ensuring the
light flux wee besed on determining the smount of 0133 formed during the
photolysis of the 011'. end it wes described in deteil in [6]. he neesure-
ment showed thet cese (1) corresponds to the incident light flux .13 I 1015
on"2 for the pulse. end cese (2) corresponds to .13 I h . 1017 en" for the
pulse. The eccurecv of determining the indicated velues is :50 percent.

The energy of the leeer eeiseion wee eeesured by the KIN-l. 110-2 end INT-1N
celorineters. For promotion of the working mixtures. teehnicel ludrogen
end high-frequency helim were used. the hydrogen end helium were cerefully
dried by SA seolite; the Cl? wee synthesized on 300° c free en equieoler
eixture of 0ng end 012. Further movel of the F2 wss accomplished by
ewecuntion et the teqereture of liquid mgen end remowel of Ola. c133.
0195. HP by redistilletion in e mum st t I -120° 0. The degree of puri-
fication was determined by the ebsorption spectre.

The admission end mixing of the asses were reelised by e systee of steinless
steel needles. The sddition of the geses to the leser tube wen eocosoliehed
in the dvnemic node. Mixtures of nonreecting components st werious pres-
sures were nede in 3-liter steinless steel mixing vessels. Then the vessels
were connected to eech other. end the mixtures were edmitted to the operet-
ing volume through e colleen valve. eixing in the streem.

Results end Dincussion

In [h] it wee shown thet the lergest nueber of fluorine etou during photoly- .
sis of the inweetigsted fluorides by the pulse xenon tubes ere formed iro-
W5. end the leest umber, from us". Beginning with this, e stw wes' mode
of the effect of the W5 edditiwes on the output enery of e leser besed on
9,412 end ClP-ﬂz systeee. Figure 1 shows the output energy of e loser besed
on e nixture of Cl? + 1!; es e function of the VP; ooncentretion fer initie-
tion powers corresponding to the ceees (1) end (2). It is obvious thet the
effect of VP; essentially depends on the initietion power. In the cue of
"week" initietion (1) 10 percent V75 (with respect to 01?) will leed to en
increese in the output energy (consequently, to growth of the chenicel end
totel efficiency) by 10-20 times depending on the fresher renge end the tun-
ing of the resonetor (the output eirror for the neesm‘eeents wee en A120,
piste). In the ones of ,"strong" initiation (2), the increeee in output en-
ergy is observed only for pressures to 20 II Hg. it higher pressure the ed-
dition of “'5 leeds to s decreeue in the output enery.

The effect of the W5 edditiwes (8.8 percent) on the ng-Pg end elf-32 sys-
tens is illustreted in Figure 2. It is obvious thet without the W5. the
generetion energy in the 22-82 systen under week initietion conditions is
6-10 tines higher then the energy on the 0117-82 system on introduction of
VPs, both systeee heve equel output energies. The generetion deley is neu-
ured under these conditions with respect to the beginning of initietion end

67
roll onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

also the generation duration were identical for both systems. hence. it is
possible to conclude that on introduction of the photoinitiating components
and for low initiation pulse pover. that is. when the initiation of the re-
action is basically determined by the photodissociation of the photoinitiat-
ing component. the ClP-ﬂg and the hat; systems have close parameters. It
must be noted that the W‘s-ll: laser system has low efficiency and. conse-
quently. the basic contribution to the laser emission is made by the I"; + H2
and the Cl? + H2 reactions. The relations for the output enery as a func-
tion of the total pressure of the mixture based on the "5-H: system for the
initiations (1) and (2) are illustrated in Figure 3.

(”11(1) . a

    

5 a so no
mum-m (2)

Figure 1. Output energ of a laser based on a mixture of Clrzn2:ne:V?5 I
1:0.3:(l.7 - 10:: as a function of the Cl? pressure for different
initiation powers and V175 concentrations. The numbers on the
circles indicate the percentage of V? with respect to 01?; the
light dots correspond to initiation l), and the dark dots, initi-
ation 2 .

Key: 1. Bout, Joules 2. as;

In order to explain the different effect of the W5 (and. obviously. other
photoinitiating components) for different intensity of the initiation. let
us consider the output energy as a function of the initiation energy in the
mixtures with V35 and without it in the cur-u; system (see Figure I»). It is
obvious that under the conditions of the specific experiment for pumping en-
ery of l.’5 kiloJoules. the addition of 10 percent "5 does not make any
contribution to the generation energy, and with further growth of the pup-
ing energ. the mixture with VPs additive gives less output energy than the
"pure" mixture. The intersection of curves 1 and 2 in Figure It indicates the
existence of a critical mine power for which the output energies of the
lasers based on the ”pure" mixture and on the mixture with photoinitiating
components are compared. On initiation less powerful than critical. the ap-
plication of the photoinitiating component leads to a gain in output enery.
For more powerful initiation the addition of the photoinitisting component
leads to a reduction it. the output energy.

68
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
ron OFFICIAL USS ONLY

0

0"“ (1)

E'

    

I

  
  

deaeiﬁﬁ

~ ' guns... (2)

Figure 2. Output energy of a laser based on nixturss of cur-a, and Pz-Hz
as a Motion of the 011' and 1“; pressure with initiation (1):
lunixture, cmazmozvrs I l:0.3:7.6:0.088; 2-Iixture.
rzmzmuozms - 1:0.3:7.5:0.1:0.088; 3. 5- nixtures l. 2. re-
spectively. without the W5 additives.

Key: 1. Bouhluoules 2. III;
Emma (1)

Figure 3. Output energy or a lsser based on 0 mixture of “75:82:!“ I
l:0.5:2.|o as a Motion of the total pressure of the nixture tor
the initiations (1) end (2): (l) riat scale; (2) left.

Key: 1. BougJUoules 2. lens

The negative role or the photoinitiating coIponent in the Pz-liz laser is
nnnireoted for weaker initiation than in the Cl? 4' a, laser. This is il-
iustrntod by the data in Figure 5 from which it follows that on initiation
ulth u pulping energy or l.h hilojoules. the generation energy of the HP
laser based on a mixture of 1’2-32 with the addition or 1101'; decreues by 50
percent.

The decrease in output power of the laser on addition of the photoinitiatins
component under power-ml initiation conditions'can be connected both with
the relaxation on the nolecules of the photoiniatine couponent and the prod-
ucts or their photolysis, and with the participation of these particles in

69
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL 083 ONLY

the separation reactions of the laser circuit, for exuple. in the ternary
collisions. here are no data on the relaxation constsnts or sinilar reac-
tions in the literature. In the case of week initiation there is optimal
concentration of the photodissociating conponent leading to the maxi-us out-
put power (see Figure 1). This optimum with respect to the concentration of
the photodissociating component is probably caused by competition of the in-
crease in the proportion oi‘ usefully absorbed light with an increase in pres-
sure oi‘ the photodissociating component and an increase in its ”extinguish-
ing” effect. However. for the performed neasurmnts it does not appear
possible to {ind the "light" efﬁciency. in particular. as a result or s
significant difference in the generation and initistion pulses with respect
to duration and shape.

‘W" (1)
M ,
a.)

0,2

e:

“an“.
o u to mu- (2)

Figure 10. Output energy or the lasers based on mixtures or to on + 12 II: +
66Be (1) mduocu+1232+6aae+hw5 (2) asatunctionof
the initiation energ.

Key: 1. sout~ Joules 2. KiloJoules

fut-’4' (1)

, .V 2

45 ,

o
a!
an
0!
4 J 0 30 m
pvmlsumu)

Figure 5. Output energy or the lasers based on mixtures of quizdlorszhe I
1:0.3:o.1:16.6 (a. 3) and i:0.3:16.1 (1. h) as a function of the
P2 pressure for the initiations l (3. h) and 2 (l, 2).

Key: 1. Bo“. Joules 2. 1.83

70
1'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition to the “0P; end the W5. e study vee ude of the effect of the
cm. “1'5. J77 on the mention in Iixturee of cur-n, end 92-112. The love .

of the effect of on of the photoinitieting couponente ere heeicen: identi-
eel.

Thun. the effect of the verioue photoinitieting menu on the output
pover of the investigated chenice‘i leeere indicetee thet for e couperetively
lav-potter light initiation. end for 10v preuuree of the reective coqonente
(to 50 no lie) the efficiency of the lenere cen he einificently increeeed by
introducing up to 10 percent of the photoinitieting couponent. At high
pressure of the ieeer nix end for powerful initietion. the addition of the

photoinitietins conponent cen lead to improvement of the output pereletere
of the leeere.

3mm
1. L. D. Hen, J. APPL. ma, lo 33, 1972. p 1157.

2. l. 0. Beam, 8. I. Zevorotm. Ye. P. Mei-kin, A. I. ﬂititin, A. II.

Orwevehiy, B. L. Borovich. P. G. Grigor'yev end V. 3. 2w", KVAM'OVAXA
Wm. lo 1, 197).. p 560.

3. D. B. “chain at 0.1.. J. APPL. PHYS.. lo 307, 1976, p 5026.

h. II. 101'. Petrov, I. l". Chehoterev end 8. Ye. Peheshetekiy, KVAII'IOVAYA
WNW, lo ’5, 1971, p a“.

5. A. ll. Chester end L. D. neee. m J.. 03-8. 1972. p 1.

6. Yu. A. Kolchin, V. B. Kolovekiy, 8. Ye. Pehezhetehiy end I. P. Chehote-
rev. KVWAYA WU. lo 5, 1W8, p 2652.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "Bovctekoye redio." "Meme eiektronihe," .1978

1081‘s
cso: mun/0821.22

7.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 621.313.826.038.823

mm or m mmxcuuon comrczm n A wmaonc mm m roe
n-o,-co,

Moscow KVMITOVAYA WEI“ in Russian Vol 5. lo 12, 1978 pp 2655-2657

[Article by A. 8. Beshkin. A. 0. Velikenov. l. H. Oorshunov. Yu. A. Kunin,
Yu. P. leshchinenko, A. ll. Oreyevshiy end I. l. Yuryshev, Physics Institute
ieeni P. l. lashedev of the USSR Acedew of Sciences, Hosea; sublittcd

6 Jul: 1978]

[Text] In [I] e report ves node on obteinine generation in e nixture of
n-oa-coz in the continuous (nore precisely. quesicontinuous) resins. The
experimntsl device used there was described in [2]. The output generation
power ohteined enounted to e total of 1.5 vetts. However. the redietion
power insufﬁciently coqietely cherecteriees the possibilities of the sys-
ten, for it depends on the length of the elpiificetion region end the quel-
ity of the resonetor (the transition end reflection coefficients of the nir-
rare, the quelity of the sdJustnent, end so on).

A more ohJective index is the elplificetion coefficient of the redietion de-
ter-lined by the witude of the population inversion end cherecterizins the
oecmetory energy reserve in the system. In eddition. knowledge of the en-
plificetion coefficient per-its couperison of the feesibility of verioue
types of co; iesers. Therefore vs neesured the uplificetion coefficient of
s week signel in s supersonic eixins Jet of stonic deuterium, osone end cexs
hon dioxide. In viev of the short length of the ective nediun. e three-w
neesurins circuit was used. The source of the sounding rudietion was en
18-23 laser. Bpeciel neesures were edopted to inprove the stehiiity of its _
output power. The IRS-21 spectrosreph ves used to nonitor the redietion
vevelength. The Oe—Au photomsistences were used es the redistion receivers.

First of en the elplificetion coefficient vee eeesured under the conditions
under which mention ves ohteined in [1]. An oscinocren of the unfi-
cetion pulse is presented in Figure 1. It is obvious thet the signed hes
the seas shepe es the seneretion in [1]. he enlificetion coefficient un-
der these conditions was 0.2 n".

72
you omcm. use om
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Amplification pulse oscillogram.

In order to improve the efficienq of mixing and improve the parameters of
the laser a new ejector was used which is analogous to that used in [3]. It
had the following distinguishing features by comparison with the old ejector:
the ratio of the ejected flow cross section to the ejecting gas cross section
was increased; the characteristic diffusion thickness was decreased; the in-
jection point of the gas was brought closer to the critical cross section of
the nozzle, as a result» of which the relative flow velocity diminished; the
single ejector was replaced by an ejector array. All of this led to an in-
crease in the mixing rate and an increase in the uniformity of the flow.

 

Figure 2. Amplification pulse oscillogram obtained with a new ejector.

More than 50 experiments were performed with the new ejectox . The amplifi-
cation coefficient measured under various conditions is within the range of
0.9-2.1 111']. An oscillogram of the amplification pulse from the experiment
is presented in Figure 2. Amplification of 2.1 m‘ was recorded in this ex-
periment. In this case the operating conditions were as follows: initial
pressure of the mixture Dz:Ar = 1:15 in the low-pressure channel of the
shock tube 0.095 atmosphere, speed of the incident shock wave l.h3 has-sec".
initial pressure of the mixture Oazcozme =- l:3:30 in the valve 3.25 atmo-
spheres.

A measurement was made of the generation power with a new ejector. A reso-
nator was used formed by a blind spherical mirror with a radius of curvature

of 3 m and gold coating and a plane output dielectric mirror with transmis-
sion coefficient of 6 percent.

73
you onxcm. US: ONLY
FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

The nsxim recorded power vss 36 watts. Optisisstion or the resonstor was
not csrried out.

The portal-led studies hﬂdiOGtQ the pmspectivsness or using the sanction of
atomic deuterium with ozone so s sourco of chain]. pupins of the 003 loser

operetins in the continuous node. Therefore the studies of the 0-03-00;
systen will be continued.

BIBLIUOMPH!
1. A. 8. neehkin. II. M. Oorshunov. Yu. A. Kunin, Yu. P. llsshchinsnko. A. ll.
Orwzvskiy end I. II. Yul-yen". KVABTOVAYA mum. llo 3. 1976.
p 11 2.

2. A. 8. Boshkin. l. M. Gorshunov. Yu. A. Kunin et e1... KVAl'l'OVAYA m-
‘I'ROIIKA. lo 3. 1976. p 3:62.

3. A. v. Krsukns, v. u. Kroshko, a. I. Soloukhin and s. A. Folin. rnm
comm I mam, No 5. 1976. p 792.

comma: Izdstel'stvo "Bovetokoye radio." "Kventovsys elsktroniks,” 1978

10835
cs0: emu/0891.2?

7h
sou ontcm. use om:
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

one 621375.826

STUDY 0? m WY PM“ 01’ Al amen-mmmnm 011-32 CHIN!-
CAL LASER

Moscow KVAII'NVAYA mum in Russian V01 5. lo 12, 1978 pp 2651-2559

[Article by A. B. Beshhin. A. P. Konoshenko. A. ll. Oreyevskiy. 8. Ye.
Pshethetskiy. V. I. Rasher, II. F. Chehoterev end I. I. Yuryshev; submit-
ted 6 July 1978]

[Text] At the present time the cheeicea. leser hesed on the chein reection
of hydrogen with fluorine hes the best energ cherecteristics.‘ however. the
mixture of 32-15 hes e number of deficiencies, the nein ones of which ere
its instehility end the presence of e thernel reection leedins to en in-
creese in the initiel concentretion of the H noiecules strongly deectivet-
in; the loser levels. In order to find cheeicel systems free of the indi-
ceted deficiencies, e study wee suede of the energy pereneters of en elec-
tron-been-initieted ClP-hz chelicel leser. he eixture of Cir-n2 is dis-
tinguished by much sreeter stehility then 82-h. In eddition, the simul-
teneous seneretion on HP soleculee (is I 2.7-3.5 microns) end ml (is I 3.6-
!: microns) is en interesting characteristic feeture of the Cir-ll: leser.

‘l'he enission of the ac; nolecules is ehsorhed much lore weekly in the etio-
sphere then the enission of the HP noiecules.

Generetion on e nixture of ClP-nz wes observed for the first tine in [l].
Leter, deeper studies were nede of the operetion of this leser to discover
the nechenisn of the fornstion of en inversion end deter-inetion of the rote
constents of the hesic processes [2]. A study wee nde of the energy chm
ecteristics of the cur-u, leser with photoinitietion.

Under the conditions of experinentetion with photoinitietion the efficiency
with respect to the pumping energy ehsorhed in en ective medium wes 200 per-
cent es opposed to 500 percent for the Ila-1'2 leser under enelogous condi-
tions. ‘1'he solitude of the specific energy output of the Cir-n: leser is
2.5 tines less then the specific energy output of the Ila-P2 leser with en
identicel seatitude of the new energy shsorbed in the mixture.

The light efﬁciency of en 112-? leser ohteined in experiments with photo-
initietion is quite lea-3e, but it is essentielly inferior to the efficiency

75
you orncm. use out!
FOR OPTIC!“ USE ONLY

echiewed during electroinitietion which is distinguished by much higher
power. Thus, in our experieents veluse of the efficiency greeter then 900
percent hewe been echieved. It is necessery to consider thet the ectuel
difference in efficiency is much greeter ineemuch es the energy expenditures
on obteining s fluorine etoe during electroinitietion (12 ev [3]) is six
times greeter then during photoinitietion, thet is. the length of the opti-
cel circuit in the Ila-Pg leeer with electroinitietion is ~ll times greeter
then during photoinitietion. In this peper e study wee ude of mixtures of
ClP-Bz using electroinitietion. end e conperison wes msde between the gener-
etion properties of mixtures of Ila-Pg end CIT-Hz for electroinitietion.

The disgrem of the experiment wee enelogous to the diegrem presented in [It].
The electron been st the input to the couvette hed en energy of «6.6 Joules
for e current of WOO emps end en electron energ of «200 hew. The pulse
duretion of the electron current is We nenoseconds. The energy of the
electron beem ebsorbed in the working mediun of the leeer wee determined by
s'eeeuring the energy loss of the electron been on peessge through e gee ne-
dium. These meeeurements were reelised using n porteble cerbon celorimeter
pieced in the leeer couvette. ' In connection with the high eggreseiweness of
I": end 611', the working medium of the leeer wee simuleted by sulfur hexe-
fluoride end owgen. The density of the simuletors wee selected equel to
the density of the working medium. The energy of tie leeer emission wee
neeeured by the TPI-SA celorineter. end the duretion end shepe of the pulse
by the PEG-22 photodiode.

The optimal retio (Hz/0117):, wee meesured initielly. The meeeurements were
performed for e Cl? press of 75 - Hg. The welue of the retio (ea/cup,”
turned out to be 0.5. which differs from the value of (Ea/CHM", I 0.2 ob-
teinsd during photoinitietion of e mixture conteining the seme emount of CIT.
In further experiments. mixtures were used with the optimal retio (Hz/CUR”.

The neeeured duretion of the generetion on the mixture of Cll'dizzlie I
2.5:l:2.5 for e pressure of «225 - Hg wee 1.5 microseconds under these con-
ditions (see Figure l), which is essentially shorter then for photoinitie-
tion, for which for en enelogoue mixture the cherecteristic welues were tens
of microseconds. Il'his difference is obviously connected with the difference
in initietion power.

A comperison of the energy cherscteristics of the CIR-Hz end the 32-32 1&-
sers wee msde for mixtures of optinl composition mmzzﬂe I 2.5:l:2.5 end
1’ :0 :ﬂzzﬂe I l:0.08:0.35:5 [lo]. Figure 2 shows the output power of the
Cir-12‘: leeer es s function of the pressure of the mixture. Just es in the
ceee of photoinitistion. the magnitude of the output power of the ClF-liz le-
ser increeses lineerly with the pressure of the mixture. For e Cl! pressure
of 100 In ﬁg, the density of the mixture of this composition coincides with
the density of the mdius of the P241: leeer containing 100 - Hg of Pg. In
the cese of identicel densities of the conpered mixtures. the electron-been
energy ebsorbed in them is elso identicel end equel to ~l Joule. A comperi-
son of this velue with the output energies of the 32": end the 32-01? Jssers

76
ms orucm. use 0qu. .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

given efficiencies of 670 and 170 percent, respectiveu, with respect to the
inputed energy. The indicated value of the efficiency of the ClF-Hz laser
remained constant in the pressure range of Cl? of 50-150 mm Hg. The beam

energy absorbed in the mixture varied from 0.1: to 1.5 Joules, and the energy
output varied from 6 to 22 Joules/liter.

 

Figure 1. Generation pulse oscillogram.

am (1)
J

l—__L_l—L__
0 ﬂ Mgr-ulna (2)

Figure 2. Output power of the laser as a function of the pressure of a mix-
ture of ClI-‘sz:He = 2.5:1:2.5.

Key: 1. Joules 2. mile

As is known. the mechanism of the formation of atomic fluorine in a mixture
of Fz-Hz includes the following processes [3]:

+
Fate ¢F2+e’+e

r r‘

P2+eB+P+r3
F;+F'+3F,

where e , e‘a are the fast and secondary electrons. Consequently, one act of
ionization of an 1’2 molecule by fast electron leads to the fomtion of four
P atoms (without consideration of losses). The beam enery expended on the

77
FOR OFFICIAL us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formation of one P atom is in this case ~12 av [31. Obviously for the
Cir-Hz system it is possible to propose an analogous mechanism:

ClP+ef+01r+ef+esg
cir+e3+cr+n
c1'+c1r*»2c1+r.

The Cl atoms formed as a result of the ion reactions also can yield 1’ atoms
in are reaction of c1 + crr + or, + r (K . 0.5!: - 10-12 ova/sec). The time
constant of this process under the experimental conditions is «600 nanosec-
onds, which is essentially shorter than the generation duration. Taking
this process into account. the expenditures on the formation of one r atom
will be. Just as in the Hg-Pg laser. equal to ~12 av. Therefore it is pos-
sible to draw the conclusion that: under the conditions of the performed
experiments the proportion of the laser energy for one 1" atom in the Ila-P2
system is four times greater than in the err-n, system. The energ con-
tained in the emission of the liCl molecules was measured. For this purpOse
the integral emission of the laser was separated by a prism. and a diaphragm
which cut off the emission of the HP molecules was placed at the focal plane
of the collecting spherical mirror located outside the prism. It turned out
that the generation energy on 801 is 210 percent of the total output energy
of the laser. Thus, the efficiency of the ClP-Hz BC]. laser is «130 percent
with respect to the energ absorbed by the mixture.

As is obvious from Figure 2, the magnitude of the laximrm laser energy ob-
tained on a mixture or ClP-ﬂz is 2.6 Joules. The proportion of the scr gen-
eration is 0.62 Joule which corresponds to an average generation power of
OJ: megawatts for an energy output of S Joules/liter. The presented values
are obviously record values for Bel lasers. Therefore the ClP-Bz RCl laser
can be highly prospective under conditions where it is necessary to obtain
coherent radiation with a frequency corresponding to the transitions of the
RC]. molecule. for example, for purposes of laser cheaistry.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. 0. D. Krodl and G. O. Pimentel, J. CHDi. me, lo 55, 1972. p 969.

2. N. F. Chebotarev. candidate's dissertation. RIKhPI, Moscow, 1978.

3. J. Hilson, R. L. Chen, H. nye, R. L. Taylor, R. Little and R. Lovell.
J. APPL. PHYS., No No, 1973. P 55107.

Is. A. S. Bashkin. A. P. Konoshenko, A. N. Orayevskiy, V. R. Tomashov and
N. l. Yuryshev, KVAM’OVAYA WNIKA, lo 5. 1978, p 1608.

OOPYRIORT: Indetel'stvo ”Sovstshoye radio." "Kvantovava elektronika." 1918

108145
cso. mun/0821-22 78

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 535.375.5z62l.373.326

mm OF GROUP VELOCITY MIME}! O! m ‘MODUO‘I‘IOU 0? mm mm SPEO-
M'M II m CASE OF STDIJLM'ED scan-mm

Moscow KVAII'IOVAYA m0!!!“ in Russian V01 5, lo 12, 1918 pp 2659-2662

[Article by B. Ye. Zel'dovich and V. V. 8hkunov. Physics Institute ineni
P. :i Lebedmr of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Iioacow; submitted 5 July
197

hurt] The problem cf the reproduction of the spatial [1. 2] end tine [3,
h] structures of the pulping field by the scattered wave field in the case
of stimulated scattering of light has been discussed with great interest in
recent tines. The nechanisn of the reproduction of a spatial

structure consists in a prim (two tines larger) alplification coefficient
of the scattered wave conﬁguration for which the interference peaks coin-
cide with the pumping peaks in the entire interaction volune in spite of
diffraction. Let us esphasise that aultiple aJternation of the peaks and
the ninina as a result of diffraction "is tied onto" the reproducing struc-
ture. For forward scattering we have the ratio 33(r)~ﬁ 3dr). and for back-
scattering 33“) M Bﬁr). A qualitatively different physical cause provides
the basis for reproduction of the ties structure [it]. In the case of a non-

achieve hishm effective (resonance) buildup of the molecular vibrations if
the scattered wave 39(t) has the form S.(0-mhe“‘a‘“s"£;(o (let us cepha-
size that in the time problem of forward scattering and backseatterins we are
talking about reproduction without complex conjugation). Indeed, in this
case the force F(nvn“'s""s"|£.,(or building up the disturbances of the sodium
contains a monochromatic component proportional to the man I81,(t)l2 with re-
spect to tine. and the scattering of the laser field in“) on the monochro-
natic disturbances of the nedium gives the reproduction of the tile struco
ture EMM,,(0¢“'L"%V .

In spite of the difference in physical. nechanisas of reproduction of the
space and time structures, their mathematical description in terms of the
angular and frequency spectra, respectively, under the defined conditions
(see [3]) leads to similar equations. This paper is devoted to considera-
tion of the effect of the nisnatchina of the group velocities of the pupins
and the scattered wave on the reproduction of the time structure in the case

79
ron ontcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of stimulated scattering. The mathematical methods developed earlier [2]
for the problem of reproduction of the spatial structure in the presence of
utimulntcd Raman scattering are used in the investigation.

The equations of the theory of the nonstationary stimulated scattering of
plane waves [3-5] will be written in the form

I 05,, as; l as,_ as; (1)

do i e
terror-m “are: +3. “6"“ T+’t‘°"-3t‘”

where the "+" and ”-" signs in the first equation describe the stimulated
forward scattering and backseattering. respectively; a is the slow amplitude
of the vibrations of the medium.

The solution of the equation for the pumping field will be represented in
the form of an expansion with respect to spectral cowonents with frequen-
cies a reckoned from some central frequency on

£:,(:.l)-£¢(l:-;i-)-§C(Q)exp[—10 :gﬁ». (2)

Inasmuch as we are interested in the problem of the reproduction of the time
structure, we shall find the solution for the scattered wave in the form of
an expansion with respect to the same spectral components:

£g(:,l)—};‘8(0.s)exp[-iD(l$-:T)}. (3)

Let us emphasize that in contrast to [3], the structure matched in the plane
(2, t) with the pumping field structure is tied onto the scattered wave field
in spite of the difference in group velocities. For a sufficiently great
distance between the spectral components In, - 81+“? 2 l. we obtain the
equation

0862.1)_‘u_‘:as(°',)__;_cc(g)2c0(o)sa. n, (h)
o

where a :- (uL I us)/us (a I v/uL in the notation from [3]); 0 I 213101 is
the characteristic of the stew-state amplification coefficient of the me-
dium; glen“) - GIBLIZ.

System (1:) permits the search for the solution in the for- 8(0, 2) I
exp(uz}S(n). ‘men this solution has the following form:

a -1
$(Q)u'/.GD[|i--‘¢TL'] CM: D—gcqmsm). (S)

The equation for the eigenvalues of the amplitude increment has the fon

80
ton onrcm. use 0va
FOR OPPICIAL [188 ONLY

I.~-3'-o_\élcm)|-[u—Ia 7H J. (6)

As in known [2, 3]. for small effect of the nisnatch there is a reproducing
uolution of the system of the type of (5). (6) of the fern 8(a) '

const . C(n) with the increment u - 0.5 or, where I - ::|c(a)|2 is the mean
pulping intensity with respect to time. In addition. for systen (5). (6)
there are a number of nonreproducing solutions which have a sero increment
in the investigated approxiution. (Let us note that the difference in

ptwsitinl mechanisms of reproduction of the time and space structures is felt
hexe.

Considering the mismatch of the group velocities. the reproducing solution
assumes the tom (5) with the value of u equal to

”n+m+‘—ﬁ.(o)_%;. 93:92... (7)

'2

here we arrive at the expression for u with accuracy to the term ~(u60)2.
inclusively; the angular brackets indicate averaging with respect to the

frequency puping spectrun. The time behavior of this solution corresponds
to reproduction with smoothing:

+.
£.(:.!)- fathom-nan (3.)

where H1) is the Fourier transform of the spectral function of the transfer
from (5):

Hr) — mus (1) "pl—1:41} . “3b;

For a -o 0 the reproduction becomes exact. The inaccuracy of reproduction
for u i 0 leads to a decrease in the increment by the amount

IAsIH-zkebuuw ﬁgs-W. . (9)

where go - 01 is the amplification coefficient for exact reproduction (coin-
ciding with the steady-state value). Let us note that expression (9) does
not depend on the selection of the central frequency from which the spectral
tuning out n is reckoned.

The nonreproducing modes approximately correspond to the excitation of indi-
vidual spectral conenents of C(n) in the scattered wave and the correspond-
ing eigenvalue of u turns out to be almost pureJy imaginary: Ila - ins/u;
and it describes the propagation of the scattered wave with its own velocity
us.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "88 OM?

It is clear that the group nisnatch leads to disruption or the reproduction
or the tile structure for IAgI/g . l. For-nuns (8). (9) of this paper per-
ait formulation of the reproductfon criterion (with respect to the group sis-
Initial: «'l‘l'c‘ctn) qmmtltntlvvly. expressing it in terns or the paranetern <n>
tun-.I u <u’>-<u>’ is the noun value and the dispersion or the frequency in
the pulping spectrum

let us consider the extraordinary properties of the reproducing node in the
case or the greatest niautch oi' the group velocities: in the ease of back-
scattering (s : 2). For Ag/go s l the wave node Bah. t) has the torn

Bait. 00".‘1'Hh' ~5‘ (, +_:: fuel-H... . (10)

In other words, the envelope for this node goes ntched with the pumping in
the direction of --s with a velocity u I 11;, although the phase velocity and
the enery nu: are in the #5 direction. The fact that the group wave ve-
locity can vary by any tires in ned‘ a with significantly nonstationary gain
has already been noted (see, for exasple. [6]). Let us illustrate this
within the trancvork oi‘ the system of equations (1). Us shall consider the
pumping monochromatic and constant in the entire voluae. and we shall con-
sider the anplification or the input Stokes pulse. Assuming the value of ‘l’
to 'ue a stall pare-eter. the lest oi' the equations (1) for B}, II const can be
solved by the iteration aethod:

a PE;

0 . BE
0 " 7651,83 - 7.45., 'ﬂl 4- 7,9511,— 4. . . . (11)

Substitution of this solution in the second of the equations (1) gives

%+‘%ﬁ(—:‘:+f-)-+m+v-’a‘i‘-+~~ ‘12)

Thus, the part of the stokes wave which is alplified with the gain g [cn'll
(with respect to intensity) will receive a positive addition of the gt/2 to
the asgnitude of the inverse group velocity u“. For gr » u§1 this indi-
cates a decrease in the group velocity by new tiles. The time for passage
through a cediul of length L with this (decreased) group velocity t z (gL/2)!
coincides [6] with the tine of establishment of the stimulated scattering
node with a stationary gain g.

In these tense for the nonstationary pumping EL(t + s/uL) part of the scat-
tered field (reproducing node) can have a group velocity differing iron the
initial one even 'in the sale sign.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

a!

3.

6.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

B. Ylu ul'douchg v. I. muchov. V. V. m..kw “a PI 8. twin.
10v. PIS'NA V m, lo 15. 1972. p 160; 3. Ya. Zel'dovtch, l. A. Hal'-
nikov. If. P. Pinpettkiy and V. V. Ram‘sm, PIB'IM V m. 30 25.
1977. P 1-

B. Yu. Zel'dovich and V. V. Shkunov. KVAI'NVAYA mm. llo h, 1977.
P 1090.

G. P. 01.1.01;an, Yu. Yo. D'yukov, I. 0. Zubuov. A. B. Miran“ and B. I.
Hummer, Kmmuu mourn, no i. 1977. p 131?; V. c. sum-ouch.
KVAII'HWAYA mum, lo 5, 1978, p 1356.

c. 8. Hang, Pm. REV., lo 182. 1969, p h81; Yu. Ye. D'ynkbv. PIS'HA
v zhm. no 9, 1969. p 1.81. -

I. u. nordmun, Ye. u. Zeukov and v. I. Chernen'kiy. maximum m-
Tnounu. lo 5. 1918. p 133:9.

8. Ya. Zel'dovich, PIS'NA V m, llo 15. 1912. p 225.

COPYRIOKI': Izantel'atvo "Soveukoye radio,” ”1(th elektronika," 1918

10816
080: BIN/0822 am

83
ma ontcw. use on!