APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP82-00050R000200040032-0
Near East/ North Africa Report

No. 2066

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornation priurily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sOurces are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPIS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. were no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sunrized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

”MW 01' PUBLICATION

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it isirecousnded that the JPRS mnber, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Goverment hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U. 8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Piloting Office, Washington, 0.6.
20602.

indexes to this report (by keyword, author,_personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell a Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, (bio M691.

correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It Atoll-cl mm" 100 new»

Thin aerial report contains infatuation on aocioecononic. government, political.
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

II lame-1W0 I mum -
‘ l' -lltlcul Science x Inter-Arab Affairs Libya Sultanate

 

 

 

suciology :North African _x_ﬂauritania of Oman
Econonlca Affaira ___Horocco _Syria
Culture (Social _Afghaniatan _;_Peop1e'a Deno- ___1‘uniaia
Sciences) _Algeria cratic Republic _X_United Arab
Ethnology Lbahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _I'.sypt __Peraian Gulf _x_Heatern Sahara
Techological JLIran Area _Yeuen Arab
Military Sciences Liraq ___Qatar Republic
_Iarael _x_Saudi Arabia LIalamic Affairs
_Jordan _Spaniah north
_z__l(uvait Africa

_Lebanon _Sudan

   

e Manon/00.01““ lav-m

  
   
  
 

c count-omen» SD. 5C. 5K, 15

   

in In M cam air-Q»

UNCLASSIFIED

"n m to: fvailability

Sold by NTIS m an. )
Springfield, Virginia 22161 ‘UNCLA‘EEEFIEM

IMMI. ~Mﬂm mmlillh,"
um nus-m

“IRMA-i ll PM.
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2066

Conn-:urs F
INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

'Arafat: 'Our Battle Is a Battle of Civilization'
(Yasser 'Arai’et Interview; unmnon, 23-29 Nov 79)

Current. 0.8. Attitudes Toward Middle East Ccntemplated
(Editorial, Naair-al-Din el-Nasheahabi; AL-
MUSTAQB‘L, 8 he 79) O.QC.000......OOOOUOOCQOOOOOOOOOIOO
ISLAMIC AFFAIRS

Religious Wars in Third World Seen as Spreading
(Editorial, Selim el-Firzli; AL-mumm, 9 Nov 79)

Text of Prophet's Pledge of Safety Revealed
(Antoine Shukrallah Haydar; AL-HAHADITH, 9 Nov 79)

Koranic Concept of Security Discussed
(Huhmed 'm Hesen; AL-HUDA AL-ISLAHI, Oct 79)

Islamic Unity Expounded, Defended
(Huhmad Ahmad Selih al-Hasin; AL-HUDA AL-ISIAHI,

wt 79) I0000.00.00cocoon-0000000000....oiuoceoOoooooooe

BAHRAIN

Foreign Banking Concessions Closed
(AL-SIYASAH, 17 NOV 79) 090000-00oooooeoeooeeooeo-eooooo

Bahrain Seen Unique But Inseperable Part of Gulf
(Riyad Najib al-Rauyis; MSTAQBAL, 1 Dec 79)

Briefs
Petroleum Industry Startup

-a- [III-NEGA-IZI
CONTENTS (Continued)

IRAN

IRAQ

KWAI T

Those “10 Vote and Those “10 Don't
(NAME-YB RUZ, 3 M 79) eooeoeonooooo'ooeo-oeooooooooeoe

Ghotbzadeh Appointment Seen Indicating Tougher Policies
(“Am-m Roz, ”Nov 79) 0......OOOOOOOOIIOIOOOOOIOOU.0

Khalkhali Wants Carter Condemned, Not iostages
("Wm Ruz, 22M79) .00....OOIOOIOOIIIOOCIICOOCIOI

Students Allege 0.3. Bnbassy Documents Reveal Another Agent
(BMDAD, 11 M 79) 0.9.0.000...COCOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO

Sistan, Baluchistan ‘l‘o Enforce Revolutionary Order
(BM, 12 mo 79) 00.0.0000...OOOOQCOOOOOODOOIOOOOOOO

Ayatollah Lahuti Explains Split From Guardians
(W, 11 he 79) 00......I....CUIO.....CUOOOOO00....

Hoseyn Khomeyni Speaks that on Arab, Religious Issues
(AIPHAWADITH, 16 Nov 79) 0.....-0......OOOOOCOOOOIOO.I.

Paris Court Rejects Fund Restitution Demand
(Tm Tm, 13 mo 79) OIOCOOCOIOIOOOOIOOIO000......

Iran To Petition 11.3., Foreign Courts for Shah Asset Freeze
(mm Tm, 13 Ike 79) 0.00.00.00.000DICOIOOICOOOOI.

Exports of Pistachios, Rugs to United States Halted
(W Tm, 12 me 79) CDIOOOOOOOOOIOIOIOIIOOOOOOOOO

Modern Methods of rJrop Protection Being Implemented
('Abdallah Kati'; AIP'IRAQ, 15 NOV 79) oooooeoooeooo- to

Arab Summit Tied to Iranian Crisis
(Editorial; AIPRA'Y “1"”, 10 NOV 79) oeuaeoeeoeooooo

American Blacks' Role in Middle East Discussed
(Editorial, Najib 'Abd-al-Hadi; AL-HATAN, 15 Oct 79) ..

Deceptive Propaganda Against Arab Nation Deplored
(Editorial, Armed al-Jaralleh; AL-SIYASAH, 19 Nov 79) .
CWTENTS (Continued)

Paper Decries Ineffectual Actions Against United States
(Editorial, Ahmad Jarallah; AL-SIYASAH, 9 Dec 79)

Crown Prince Speaks on National Bcononw
(“Pme’ 15 mt 7o) IOOIOIOIOCOIOOOUOOI.0.0.0.0000...

U.S. Economic Measures Against Iran Opposed
(Editorial, Ahmad al-Jarallah; AL-SHASAH, 17 Nov 79) .

Evaluation of Investment Policies Urged
(MI-Y‘s“, 17 NOV 79) 0.000000DOIIIOOIOOCOOIIOIOOIOOO

Preparations Made for Seashore Development Project
(AL-sum, 6 M 79) OOOOOIIOIOOOICOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOIOO

MAURITANIA

Briefs
Rural Exodus

PEOPLE'S DEAOCRATIC REPUBLIC 0? mm

'Ali Nasir Seen Gaining in Power Struggle
(AL-“ISM, 29 0017-15 NOV 79) neeeeeeooeeeooeeoooeoe-eee

Health Service Progress in Developent Plan Reviewed
('Ali 11m Talib;1h OCTOBER, 1h Oct 79)

SAUDI ARABIA

Regionalism, Fundamentalism mreaten Regime
(Harald Vocke; mm ALIBMDIE, 5 Dec 79) ......

Conscription Order Expected Soon
(ARAB m, 13.11‘ M 79) OOOOOOOOOIICO....OOOIOOOOC...

New Industrial City Of Yanbu' Detailed
(SAUDI WSW, 30 NOV 79) oneness-ensue.cones-000000.

Dedication Ceremonies, by Jim Lenders
Industrialization Is ijective

NGL Fractionation Plant

NGI. Pipeline

Crude Oil Pipeline

Petrochemical Complex

Petrondn's Dunestic Refinery

Export Refinery

Page

63

6S

71

72

73

78

82

8h
CONTENTS (Continued)

Petrochemical Agreement Signed With Japan
(ARAB “M, 25 NOV 79) OCOOOOOIOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOODOOOOO

Plant at Jubail, by John Rossant
Capacity of 600,000 Tons

Saudi Arabia's Port System Surveyed
(SAUDI BUSINESS, 7 mo 79) IOOIIOOOIIOOOOOIOOOIOOIOOO0

Computerized Effort, by Mary Jo McConahay
Aim for Stability
Damnam Port

Six Joint Gulf Ventures Under Study
(ARAB m, 26 NOV 79) III.OOOOOOOOOIOOIIIIOOOOOIOI...

HeJaz Railway Feasibility Study V5.11 Be Examined
(ARAB NEWS, 3 M 79) oooooooooooocoeooo0-00.00...a...

Dannan Sulfuric Acid Plant on Stream Soon
(ARAB m, 17 me 79) OOOOOOOOIOOIOOOI.OIOOOOIIOIOOOO

Hasa Project Has Cost 811550!
(m3 m, 21‘ Nov 79) .CIO'OOI...I..I.OO.......C.....

UNITED ARAB muss
New Legislation Clariﬁes Federal, Local Jurisdiction
Over Gulf CompMes
(Mum, 21 "av 79) OOIOIOCQOIIOOOOQ.OOUIDIOOOCOCC

'AL-HAHDAH' Compares al-Sadat to Shah of Iran
(Editorial; mm, 12 Nov 79) oooeeooooeoooonoooeo

WESTERN SAHARA

Possible Effects of U.S. Military Aid to Morocco Explored
(Mireille mteil; MAIN L'AHIIQUE, 5 Nov 79) ........
'ARAFAT: 'OUR BATTLE IS A BA‘ITLE OP CIVILIZATION'
Casablanca LIBERA‘I‘ION in French 23-29 Nov 79 p 13

[Interview with Yasser ‘Arafat, head of the PLO Executive Comittee,
by Bahij Bachir]

[Text] The 10th Sunlnit of the Arab League was held at a crucial time. In
fact. it took place 2 years after Sadst's visit to occupied Al Qods, thus
beginning the process of his capitulation and initiatives which renoved
Egypt from the confrontation front with the Zionist enemy.

The Camp David accords are confining the fears of the Arab peoples as they
are applied. The Sadat administration, still lulled by illusion. is stub-
bornly proceeding toward establishment of diplomatic and economic ties with
Tel Aviv. The Zionist enemy continues to defy the Arab world and interna-
tional opinion by expanding its operations of annexation and aggression and
by refusing to recognize the national rights of the Palestinian people.

In occupied Arab territories, it continues its policy of colonization, judai-
zation and repression. In Southern Lebanon. the Israeli-isolationist camp
is preventing the Lebanese state from exercising its authority over its
territory, is increasing aggressions to bring about partition of Lebanon and
is engaging in genocide against civilian populations.

All of these aspects of the problem dominated the work of the Arab nut-nit in
Tunis and were reflected in the decisions made. In fact, the conference con-
demned American policy in the Middle East. It invited the U.S. Goverment
to reappraise its policy which might have a bad effect on the relations of
the Arab countries with the United States. The conference also reaffirmed
the decisions of the Baghdad Sun-i: which condemned the Camp David accords.

what is more. the conference confirmed the total sovereignty of Lebanon over
all its territory, the safeguard of its independence and its national unity.
It also affirmed the need for executing the Riyadh. Cairo and Beit El-Dine
decisions and for taking all the neasures required to this end.

The conference approved the efforts of the Lebanese Government and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) designed to establish coordination
and collaboration to settle all problems.
Finally, the conference resolved to support the efforts of the Lebanese
people by giving particularly importance to the situation in Southern Lebanon.
It decided to supply $400 million worth of aid to Lebanon.

The PLO did a lot of work in the preparation of this sumit. Toward this
end, Yasser 'Arafat, head of the PLO Executive Conittee, took a trip to a
nuaber of Arab countries. Our correspondent in Baghdad met with him and in-
terviewed him on the eve of the Tunis smit.

[Question] Mr Chairman, there is increasing talk of a common Lebanese-
Palestinian work program which will be submitted to the Arab conference at
the Tunis sumit. Can you give us the broad outlines of this program?

[Answer] To tell the truth. it is not a question of a Lebanese-Palestinian
work program. In this regard. it is very important that there be a Lebanese-
Palestinian accord before going to the Tunis conference. But I can tell you,
as I have told the heads of Arab states with whom I have met and will meet,
that the relations between the PLO and Lebanese authorities are friendly re-
latiOns, relations of understanding. The Pm is concerned with preserving
the integrity of Lebanon, its unity, its independence. And it is absolutely
necessary that the lawful officials extend their authority over all Lebanese
territory. By that I also mean the border region which the Zionist state is
attempting to occupy through the intermediary of the puppet Saad Haddad.

For Saad Haddad is nothing more than Israel's shadow.

in this spirit. we can give Lebanon all the aid it needs to exercise its
authority.

[Question] 0n the eve of the Arab Summit, what is your assessment of the
Camp David accords?

[Answer] You wish to talk about Camp David as a repetition of Sykes-Picot.
After World Us: I, the Sykes-Picot treaty divided our Arab fatherland; and
the entire Arab nation rose up against it. Now, I can tell you that Camp
David is trying to again divide our Arab nation and to involve it in the me-
chanism of military pacts. Do not forget Begin's words. After having signed
the Camp David accords, he said: "llaifa and Alexandria are two bases which
the Sixth African Fleet can use'.' What does tiat mean?

The means the division of the Arab nation favors U.S. interests in our region
and in Africa. Sadat, for example, is in the process of defending such
interests in Africa. The contender in chief of the Egyptian army has said:
"Re have military missions in 10 African countries." Thus we can understand
SaJat's role. Moreover, he has stated frankly: "I need arms to fulfill my
role which is to help the Americans in Africa."
[Question] 1n the meantime. what is Israel doing?

[Answer] In the meantime, Israel is receiving sophisticated arms to play its
role on the eastern front and to strike at the Palestinian revolution and

at the same time to strike at Jordan, Syria and Iraq. Its goal is to get
hold of the oil resources. As for the importance of the Baghdad conference,
it was a historical moment. Sadat had defied us, being of the opinion that
we could not meet without him. He can meet without Sadat, but not without

the Egyptian people.

incidentally, the Egyptian people were present in Baghdad but not the Sadat
government. The Baghdad conference was a blow against Sadat and against the
American and Zionist imperialists in our Arab region. But our region can
face up to such plots.

After Baghdad, American imperialism and the Zionist state launched an offensive.
Events in South Lebanon are proof of this. American arms were used against

the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. American imperialism wanted to include
Jordan in Camp David.

However, we must point out in this regard that Jordan has always respected
the resolutions of the Baghdad suit.

The Palestinians in occupied territories were savagely attacked: that was
the autonoay plot; no Palestinian agreed to cooperate with the so-called lo-

cal administration .

But at the heart of the matter. what is this imaginary autonomy when everyone
knows that the mayors have greater responsibilities than those proposed to us?
Autonomy to reduce us to the state of slavery. No, our people are ready to
fight until a victory is won over such slavery.

[Question] The Tunis summit is at hand, and the Lebanese question will be
on the agenda.

[Answer] It is a very important smit; but there are those who wish to
forget the Baghdad victory. and want to make the Lebanese question the only

question.

We are ready to talk about South Lebanon, but within the framework of the
overall situation of the Arab nation.

we have to consider external threats, those concerning oil which justify the
American presence in the Arab gulf.
()II is a hothersone question. And it is the duty of our nation to use all
the weapons, including economic weapons. to win its rights. Anericn has used
the eu-unnmic wupon against China.

it is using the economic weapon against Cuba. Why should we deprive our—
selves o[ it? We are at a historical watershed; our battle is not an ordinary
battle, it is a battle of civilization. Our existence is at stake. But

we are certain that future generations will write history in letters of gold
and will win a sure victory with the help of God.

8143
CSO: 4800
CURRENT U.S. ATTITUDES TOWARD HIDDLE EAST CONTEMPUED
Paris AL-HUSTAQBAL in Arabic 8 Dec 79 pp 8 5 9
[Editorial by Nasir-al-Din al-Nashashabi]

[Text] My information tells me that all of the generals of the Israeli
army paid brief successive surprise visits to a number of important u.s.
army bases in the 0.5. during the past month.

My information also tells me (and I returned this week from a visit to
some of the countries of the Gulf, near the powder keg) that U.S. Secre-
tary of State Hillian Hiller expressed to his closest friends and advisers
his consternation, dismay, and anger at the expressions he had heard from
the senior officials in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE of their oppo-
sition and caution against any military action to which the 0.5. might
take recourse against Iran in the future. This secretary returned, and,
during his short stop at the airport in london on his way back to the
0.8., said, "I had understood from the Arabs that they stood in a position
of neutrality with regard to Iran, but their position of preventing us
from using force against it is a surprise to not"

My information also tells me that, in spite of the broadcasting by the
Pentagon officials to the effect that they would adhere to the policy of
restraint with regard to the Iranian situation, their thinking after
reaching the point of no return has been by no means confined to the
release of the hostages or diplomatic relations with Iran. but has reached
the point where the situation has begun to depend on all of the effects
attendant on any coming solution uhich depends on the reputation of the
11.3. in the world, its influence in the Middle East, its petroleum, and

its strategy and policy toward the peoples of the area. And all that
depends on crushing the Khomeini revolution and putting an end to it:

Finally. my information tells me that the 0.8. military accounts, in the
event of 11.5. dependence on the strength of Israel during the coming 0.8.
military operations in the area, have entered the stage of actual execu-
tion, for negotiations between Washington on one hand and Tel Aviv and
Cairo on the other hand for the U.S. to lease the Eitam and Etzion air
and military bases in the Sinai desert and use then as a principal base
for the large 3-52 aircraft instead of moving those two bases or doing
This week, for the first time, I listened to the voice of U.S. Vice-Presi-
dent Halter .Vondale as he spoke before a huge U.S. Jewish assembly which
let in Washington in honor of the Jewish leader Sam Rothberg, general
chairman of Israeli Bonds. He said, "The secret of U.S. support for Israel
depends on the strategic and military advantages which the U.S. receives,
and is not limited merely to definite political comitments to Israel."

Thus, we entered once more this week into the atmosphere of 1956, with
all of the secret meetings. all of the night encounters, and all of the
mad military planning that preceded the tripartite aggression on Egypt.

’Abd-al-Nasir nationalized the Canal in defiance of the U.S., not out of
love of the Canal, and Khomeini imprisoned the hostages in defiance of the
U.S., not out of love of the sport of hostage-taking:

There is rancor and bitterness on all sides today, just as there was in

1956, and likewise the exhaustion, the fanaticism. and the feelings of
need for vengeance:

Carter called on world public opinion, and succeeded, regrettably, in
rallying most of world public opinion against Khomeini in preparation for
the beginning of the aggression, just as Anthony Eden did in 1956 in New
Zealand, Australia, the nations of the Commonwealth, and all of the
beneficiaries of the Suez Canal and tried to win them over against Egypt
and Jamal ‘Abd-al-Nasir, but Carter has failed because of the difference
between Khomeini's position today and that of 'Abd-al-Nasir yesterday.

Carter dreams today that internal Iranian resistance will materialize to
assure the elimination of Khomeini and rescue him from the future gamble,
just as Eden dreamed that Egyptian resistance -- the Moslem Brotherhood
or the kafd Party, or an Egyptian military movement -- would materialize
to save Britain from the gamble of 1956:

Furthermore, Carter still dreams that some of Iran's neighbors (and there

is no need to mention names) have a large role to play in rescuing the
situation: -

Carter is driven by the relentless challenge of his rivals in the coming
electiols, just as Anthony Eden was driven by the relentless challenge of
his opposition in the Labour Party in 1956.

Israel stands behind Carter today as it stood behind Eden in 1956. Yes-
terday it was David Ben-Gurion, and today it is Menachim Begin, and the
goal in both instances is the closing of the old and the new accounts.
Yesterday, Zionism was making war on Arab nationalism, and today the Jew-
ish fanaticism is making war on Islam. And in all instances, the picture
of Jerusalem, its future, and its cause is prominent:

The big question remains: In 1956, the U.S. was led by Dwight Eisenhower,
and it may be true that it alone deserves the credit for compelling Anthony
Eden, Mallet, and Ben-Gurion to withdraw from Egypt. Then to whom do you
suppose the credit will be due this time for compelling Jimmy Carter to
withdraw from Iran?

I was told on the coast of the Gulf this week, "The purpose of the U.S.
plan of occupying parts of Iran with the object of fragmenting it. break-
ing it up, and dividing it in agreement with the Soviets like a new Yalta
is to internationalize the issue of energy in the world and seize it from
the hands of some of the "kids", as the U.S. calls them. And then the
U.S. ecanomy, the dollar, and the shipments of petroleum would be exposed
to deadly blows, and in the long run they would be exposed to a situation
no less dangerous than their situation in Iran. And western Europe would
never be rescued from the results of such a gamble as this disaster, and
neither would Iran. I heard this and more during my last visit to the
area of al-Barud on the Arabian Gulf.

Someone else said to me, "We are approaching a catastrophe in which there
will not he a single winner: The U.S. will lose in Iran if it gambles,
and will lose if it keeps silent. Likewise, in spite of the feelings of
the revolutionists that their gamble has brought them to the point of no
return. and in spite of the belief of their leaders that they have an ap-
pointment with heaven, nevertheless the unity of the land of Iran and the
safety of its resources have fallen into danger!”

I said. "And what does that mean to us Arabs?"

They said, "The U.S. is eager to win the Arabs to its side in the current
crisis, and in the results of it also. That is no secret. He have heard

plainly and clearly from the lips of the U.S. secretary of the treasury
yesterdayi"

0n the Kuwaiti aircraft flying back to tendon, I said to myself, "If the
reason for all that has happened were the person of the deposed shah, then
the matter would be of small consequence, and if the reason were the
release of the hostages who were captured. then the solution would be easy.
But the reason is the absence of full confidence between the U.S. on one
hand and every one of the Arab and Islamic peoples on the other hand. The
U.S. has succeeded in earning the enmity of every child, every woman, every
old man, every individual among the Hosiems of Iran and the Arab Moslems
in the Middle East, if not in the whole world. If it is hard for the U.S.
to exercise restraint in the issue of the 50 American prisoners in Iran,
then it is harder for the Hoslems and Arabs to do so in the issue of their
Grand Mosque in Jerusalem, which is held captive in the hands of Israel.

If Khomeini is responsible for the seizure of the hastages, and we oppose
him in this matter, then the U.S. and its leaders. Johnson, Nixon, Ford,
and Carter are responsible likewise for letting alqusa Mosque, as well

as the rest of the Christian and Islamic holy places, remain captive in
the hands of Israel:

The U.S. is the supplier of arms to Israel, the supplier of wealth, the
support, the armor, the shipherd, the protector, the America of Anwar
al-Sadat and his deviation and capitulation, America the accomplice and
confederate, the America of Camp David, the America which is Jewish in

policy, in positions, and in hostility and enmity toward all that is Arab
and all that is hoslem from 1940 till the writing of these lines.

The 0.5. moved its ally, the deposed shah, to a 0.5. base in Texas to be
near his son, who is studying there, and so that he might spend there what
the 0.5. spokesman calls his convalescence.

Do you suppose that the 0.5. has decided to make this period of convales-
cence a prelude from which the 0.5. forces may cross to Iran to reach the

petroleum Yalta of 1979, as it did with the political and military Yalta
Yalta with Stalin in 1946?

What shall I say?

Just yesterday, I saw a picture of Frank Church, the filthy 0.5. senator
who reviled me in the newspaper and cursed Islam in a speech, assailed
Saudi Arabia in a book, and praised Israel in his waking and sleeping
hours, sitting beside the 0.5. delegate to the Security Council to submit
the Iran issue against Ayatollah Khomeini. and so, for my own part. I did
not hesitate to applaud the life of Ayatollah Khomeini:

If not for love of 'Ali, at least out of defiance of a bitch:

To be explicit, out of defiance of Carter, Frank Church, Israel, and
Anwar al-Sadat too.

0803 6802
RELIGIOUS HARS IN THIRD WORLD SEER AS SPREADINC
London AL-HAUADITH in Arabic 9 Nov 79 p 14
[Editorial by Salim al-Firzli: "Religious Wars in the Third Horid"]

[Text] It seems that religious wars in the Third Horld will become the
distinguishing features of the struggles in this period. This is be-
cause such were conceal all kinds of strife that do not reach the status
of warfare. If religious wars were possible and expected in certain
locations where no historical reasons for friction and repression do
exist, the outbreak of such wars in locations where they were not expected
signifies that there is an international disposition towards that trend.

Religious strife is comnplace in the Near East and on the lndian Con-
tinent. but it is new to the Far East, at least as far as murder and
bloodshed for religious considerations are concerned. Malaysia and Thai-
land have recently experienced broad acts of violence between the follow-
ers of predominant religions there and those who belong to some religious
ainorities. This week in Thailand scores of people were killed by bombs
in the temples.

But in Africa the problem has been getting worse since the Biafra Har in
Nigeria. The religious strife which tore up Chad in recent years has
loved to the Cameroon where no less than 1,000 Koslems were killed in
operations to avenge the death of 15 influential Christians in Yaounde.

The majority of the population in Cameroon is Christian. Christians con—
trol the south even though the chief of state. President Ahmadou Ahidjo,

is a Hoslea: from the north. Northern Hoslems accuse southern Christians

of controlling the reins of power. of influence and of the econoty. 'l'hey
accuse them especially of controlling the army. the police and the vital
economic facilities. They accuse them of nonopolizing jobs and benefits

so that their, areas became advanced and prosperous. whereas Islamic regions
in the north were left in a state of neglect and poverty.

Thus, there were class and political reasons behind the acts of violence
and murder which began on last 20 October. News about an attempt to
assassinate President Ahmadou Ahidjo became widespread. At the same time
Christian civil servants in the north were accused of wasting funds that
had been earmarked for opening schools and building roads in the Islamic
regions in order to keep those Islamic regions backward.

There are, of course, outside reasons [for this unrest]. The government
of the Cameroon is stating that some of the "salon elders who were financed
by Libya had crossed the borders from Chad and had begun inciting the peo-

ple to mutiny and rebellion. It is being said that a similar situation has
begun to develop in Mali.

But the brutality with which the Cameroon army crushed the recent rebellion
in the north of the country in response to the murder of 15 policemen, as
some said who witnessed this massacre, left a feeling of bitterness and
rancor so that many did not believe their eyes. Government circles, how-
ever are saying that the army dealt such a brutal blow deliberately and
intentionally to announce to all that it will not permit the Chad situa-
tion to move into the Cameroon. Observers, however, are saying that the
army's action accomplished the opposite.

"hen the European countries ruled Africa and the East directly, such a

struggle used to assume a patriotic and a national feature since it was
directed against foreign, colonialist forces. The Algerian Har was the
example and the model [in that regard]. It is now being said that the

situation is still the same, although indirectly, considering the fact

that Christian affiliations there are imported and are remnants of the

old conditions.

But this leaves no room for anything but civil wars. because even though
affiliations are imported, those who are affiliated are citizens of the
country.

8592
CSO: 6802

10
TEXT OF PROPHET'S PLEDGE OF SAFETY REVEALED
London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 9 Nov 79 pp 77

[Article by Antoine Shukral lah Haydar: "The Pledge of Safety from the
Prophet to the Monks"]

[Text] Among the holdings of St Catherine's Monastery is a holograph copy
of the Safety Pledge that God's Prophet, Mohammad, may God bless him and
grant him salvation, granted the monks of the monastery for the protection
of their lives and their property under the Islamic religion. The monks
of the monastery have revealed this valuable, ancient copy for the first
time. It's been said that the Ottoman Sultan Selin the First took pos-
session of the authentic copy when he conquered Egypt in 1517, and after
having the copy translated into the Turkish language, he gave it as a gift
to the monks. The text of [the doctment] follows:

"In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate whose assistance we
seek. This is a scroll copy of the pledge written by Mohamed, the son

of 'Abdsllah, the messenger of God, may God bless him and grant him salva-
tion, to all Christians.

"This document was written by Hahn-lad ibn 'Abdallah to proclaim, to
admonish and to entrust all the people to contend God's creatures to His
protection so that people would have no excuse after the messengers. God
was nighty and wise. Hohammed wrote this docuaent to the people of his
religious couunity and to all those who subscribe to the Christian faith
in the eastern and western corners of the Earth, those who are near and far,
those who are fluent in the language and those who are not, those who are
known and those who are unknown. Mohammad wrote this document as a pledge
mthem. He who breaks the pledge, goes against it or goes beyond what God
ordered, whether he be a sultan or another one of the Muslim believers,
would be breaking and contradicting God's pledge and covenant. ridiculing
His religion and asking for the curse of God.

"If a monk or a traveler were to seek refuge in a mountain, a valley, a
cave, a populated place, a plain, a desert, a meadow or a church, I myself
and my assistants, my kin and my followers will be behind them, protecting
them from all preparations [made against them] because they are my sub-
jects. and they are free non-Noslen subjects. I will protect their
supplies from damages. and all those who have been granted the pledge
will not have to pay any land tax, except that which they voluntarily
pay. They will not be forced or compelled to pay. No archbishop is to
change his bishopry; no monk is to change his monastery; no hermit is to
change his hermitage; and no traveler is to change his travels. None of
their houses of worship or their churches is to be torn down, and none
of the materials that are used in the construction of their churches is
to be used in the construction of a mosque or in the construction of the
homes of Moslems. Anyone who does any of these things would have broken
the pledge of God and will have disobeyed his messenger. The monks and
the archbishops are not to be converted, nor are they to be subjected

to payment of a head tax or a fine. They are under my protection wherever
they may be: on land. on sea, in the east, in the west, the north or the
south. They are under my protection. guarded from all evil by my covenant
and my pledge. Likewise, those who worship by themselves in the mountains
and in the holy places are not to be compelled to share what they culti-
vate, to pay a land tax or to pay a tithe for what they consume. They
are to be relieved of having to supplement their crops by taking off one
keddah [of grain] as a consumption fee from every ardeb. They are not to
be forced to go to wars or to pay a tithe of more than 12 dirhams in kind
every year--not even those who pay a land tax, who have funds, real prop-
erty and commercial houses of business. None of them is to be charged
excessively, and discussions with them should be amicable. They are to
be treated with mercy, and they are to be shielded from the harm of
adversity wherever they may be and wherever they settle. If a Christian
community were to come to a Moslem community, Moslems are to sanction it
and to enable Christians to pray in their churches. Hoslems are not to
come between Christians and their faith. Anyone who disobeys the pledge
of God and adopts its opposite would be disobeying His covenant and His
messenger. Christians are to be assisted in protecting the sanctity of
their churches and their hermitages, and this should help them in their
religion and in their interaction with the pledge. None of them is to be
forced to carry arms. Moslems should rather defend Christians. Moslems
should never disobey this pledge until the end of time.

"This pledge, which was written by Mohammad ibn 'Abdallah, the messenger
of God. may God bless him and grant him salvation. was granted to all
Christians who are to comply with everything stipulated therein and was
sworn to by the undersigned witness."

8592
C50: 4802

12
KORANIC CONCEPT 0? SECURITY DISCUSSED
Tripoli AL-HUDA AL-ISLAHI in Arabic Oct 79 pp 21-23, 30

[Article by Dr Muhammad 'Ali Hasan: "Security as Indicated by the Texts
or the Koran; One Hoslen Seeking Refuge with Another"]

[Text] The fact of the matter is that this is a recent opinion, and it

is based on the notion that the multiplicity of Hoslem states is permissable.
Anyone who endorsed this principle has acknowledged this security, and anyone
who refused to acknowledge it, has repudiated it. I will cite state-ents by
those who would allow multiplicity so that we can examine them closely. I
will then respond with what I think is truthful and correct.

Professor Dr Hahbah al-Zahili says, "The purpose of establishing a government
of the land of Islam is to protect the principles of the law of Islam, of
truth and of justice. The purpose is not :0 form an international govern-
ment and to let an Islamic group control the entire world. The aim of the
matter is to have an Islamic ruler manage the affairs of the country in
accordance with Islamic law.“

Then he says, "The principle upon which there has been agreement is that
only one sovereign is recognized in the land of Islam: it is the sovereignty
of the law over all those in the land of Islam. This sovereignty is
indivisible regardless of the multiplicity of actual sovereigns. The truth
about sovereignty in the land of Islam is that it be comparable to the
sovereignty of non-Moslems in their different countries, other than the land
of Islam. There are no objections to having a large number of governments
in Islamic countries as long as the constitution of each government is not
at variance with the stipulations of the Holy Koran and the precedents
established by the prophet, is based on consultation and does not contradict
the general rules of Islamic legislation. This is because the aim of the
unity of the Islamic Government is in fact the unity of political, defense,
cultural and economic goals and objectives. The Islamic nation can achieve
this by treaties, by regional or international organizations or by political
alliances that have different objectives. Theologians have decided that a
large number of imamatea is permissible when distances are great and regions
are distant. [Such an arrangement] would give the imamate the ability to
manage the affairs of every region and to understand its needs from a close
vantage point."

13
Then he corroborates his statements and says, “Moalems put this concept into
practice a long time ago in Andalusia, Morocco, Egypt and Baghdad when the
lslamic Government was broken up into small states.“

Accordingly, Dr al-Zahili asks, "Does the necessity of preserving peace and
public order require that a Hoslem or a free non-Hoslem subject in a Hoslem
country other than his own be considered trustworthy on some occasions?
would he then be subject to the restrictions imposed on foreigners? would
he carry a passport and pay customs fees? Can his residence be confined to
certain locations? And can he be prevented from entering another country or
be banished from it?

The fact of the matter is that Hoslem rulers can do that because necessity
warrants forbidden actions, but the necessity must be determined proportionately.

Dr al-Zahili then says, "The need to preserve security may require that a
person's residence be confined to certain locations, that he be placed under
observation, that he be banished or prevented from entering the country."

These statements are false and bear within them the seeds of their own
extinction. The texts of the Koran, the precedents established by the
prophet, the collective opinion of the Prophet Muhammad's disciples and
analogy disagree wholeheartedly with these statements.

1. He began his Statements by saying, "The agreed upon principle is that

only one sovereign is recognized in the land of Islam. This is the sovereignty
of the law over all in the Islamic nation. The sovereign states. As long

as there is agreement on this matter, no Hoslem can make a conflicting state-
ment. In fact, there can be no contradictory agreement to nullify the first
agreement. This is legally impossible. Likewise, if consensus about a

matter does exist, that matter is firmly and irrevocably established because
[such] a consensus is irrevocable and cannot revoke another. This is because
it is only the Koran, the legal precedents established by the prophet or
another consensus that can supplant [a religious law].

"The texts of the Koran and the legal precedents established by the prophet
do not supplant a unanimous opinion. In fact, one cannot conceive of a
unanimous opinion existing along with the texts of the Koran and the legal
precedents of the prophet. The rules to be followed then are those of the
texts and not those unanimously agreed upon by the disciples.

"Regarding the notion that a unanimous opinion does not supplant another,
scholars have agreed that a unanimous opinion does not revoke another and
that it is itself irrevocable.

"Accordingly, the legal opinion remains unchanged, and statements [that
claim] otherwise are unfounded."

2. Then he says, "The truth about sovereignty in the land of Islam is

that it be comparable to sovereignty for non-Moslems in their different
countries, other than the land of Islam."

1h
He may be comparing one matter to another. The analogues are the countries
of the infidels and the numbers of those countries, and the standard is the
land of Islam. I do not know where the occasion might be that would bring
together the analogue and the standard. This is a false statement that is
based on a false foundation. The fact that the countries of infidels are
numerous stems from the fact that godlessness has numerous systems and numerous
forms and colors. It stems from the fact that the ways of the devil are
numerous. But the state of Islam is the state of one nation, the state of
clinging to faith in one God. It is a monotheistic state, a state that
believes in the unity of God. The relevant statement is that which contrasts
and does not counter; it lies in contradiction and not in conformity. "This
path of mine is straight. F0 low it and do not follow other paths, for they
will lead you away from Him." 'Whis nation of yours is one nation, and I

am your lord, worship He."

3. Then he says, "There is no objection to having numerous governments in
the countries of Islam as long as the constitution of each state does not

violate the stipulations of the Holy Koran and the precedents established

by the prophet."

He tell him, "Hoslems have one law, and one group of Hoslems may not deviate
one iota from the community of Hoslems."

The law emanates from the Koran and the precedents established by the prophet.
Statements in the Koran and precedents established by the prophet differ

from what Dr al-Zahili says. God Almighty said. "If two parties of believers
take up arms the one against the other, make peace between them. If either
of them commits aggression against the other, fight against the aggressors
till they submit to Allah's judgment. when they submit make peace between
them in equity and justice; Allah loves those who act in justice."

In this verse God encouraged believers to prevent any split from taking
place between two groups within one country. How then would it be were
there two states and two caliphs? According to the prophetic tradition,
"If allegaince is pledged to two caliphs, kill the other one of them."

Dr Ibrahim 'Abd-al—Hamid says, "Breaking up the unity of Moslems to get the
upperhand is a precipitous decline into political extinction. Leaders and
commanders are impelled by their inflamed spirits and covetous appetites to
seek mastery for expanding their regional or moral influence. This may be
accompanied by a general weakness that affects the majority and tempts
foreigners to gain control over Islamic countries, as is the current painful
reality. Until recently this situation existed in a worse fashion. About
this, God, may His name be glorified, gays, 'Cling one and all to the faith
of Allah and let nothing divide you.‘ '...do not dis ute with one another,
lest you should lose courage and your resolve weaken.‘ The prophet, may
God bless him and grant him salvation, says, 'Hhen someone comes to you and
commands all of you to break your sticks or to disperse your group, then
fight him.’ This was narrated by Ahmad and by Husallam. The import is even
clearer in Husallam. It is being said that the prophet, may God bless him and

grant him salvation, said, 'If allegiance is pledged to two caliphs, kill one
of them.'"

15
4. it is being said that what is in fact intended by the unity of the Islamic
unvernment is the unity of political. defense and cultural goals and objectives.
The Islamic nation can achieve this unity by defense treaties, by regional

or international organizations or by political alliances that have different
objectives. Such statements have no legitimate or rational basis because

the real unity of the objective lies in the unity of the Islamic nation. The
unity of the goal lies in fighting all those who deviate or stray from the
community. The prophet of God, may God bless him and grant him salvation,
said, "The blood of a Hoslem cannot be rightfully shed except for one of
three reasons: submission to adultery, ta ing one life for another, and
abandoning the religion of the community." A Noslem's blood is shed if he
were to abandon the community. It is not right for Moalems to think of
themselves as scattered in small states that are tied together by frail
treaties or organizations.

The unity of the goal lies in the unity of the ranks to face every greedy enemy
and to spread Islam.

 

FOOTNOTES
1. "The Ravages of War," page 181.
2. Ibid.. pages 283-284
3. Ibid., page 286
4. Cattle: 153
5 . The Chambers: 9.
6. Al-Imrans: 103.
7. The Spoils: b6.
8. "International Relations in Islam," by Dr Ibrahim 'Abd-al-ﬂamid, page 3.
9. The statement occurs in a conversation with Ibn Has'ud and is narrated

by al-Bukhara and by Husallam. It was mentioned by al-Nawavi in
al-‘Arba'in [the Parties] the fourteenth discussion.
ISLAMIC UNITY EXPOUNDED, DEPENDED
Tripoli AL-HUDA AL-ISLAHI in Arabic Oct 79 pp 15-17
[Article by Dr Muhammad Ahmad Salih al-Hasin: "Islamic Unity"]

[Text] Islamic unity is a fact established by virtue of the Koranic texts
and the prophetic tradition. Islam does not recognize separation: it does
not distinguish between white, black or red. God Almighty said, "The
believers are a band of brothers" [The Chambers: 10]. and He said, "The
noblest of you in Allah's sight is he who fears Him most" [The Chambers: 13].
The prophet. may God bless him and grant him salvation. said, "An Arab is
not better than a non-Arab unless he is more pious."

He are satisfied with a minimum of unity. We build upon it in stages until
Hoslems reach the highest levels of this unity in a matter they agree upon
under any form.

We have divided this investigation into four parts.

First. there is a foreword to explain the intentions of Islam from human
unit. [This part] explains that Muhammad, may God bless him and grant him
salvation, was sent for all people.

The second party deals with the composition of Islamic unity during the age
of the prophet, may God bless him and grant him salvation, and the establish-

ment of Islamic unity during the age of the orthodox calipha instead of the
caliphate in Islam.

The third part deals with the reasons for disunity after reunion. we show

the reasons for this disunity and what the objectives of the separatists
were.

The fourth part explains the unity that is possible now.
Foreword
1. Islam looks upon humanity as a unit, making no distinctions among races,

colors or regions. If land separated the sons of Adam, [their] humanity
united them. All people are the children of Adam and Eve. They were created

17
from the same spirit and free the same clay. God Almighty conferred this
truth upon people and said, "Men, have fear of your Lord, who created you
from a single soul. From that soul He created its mate, and through them
He bestrewed the earth with countless men and women. Fear Allah, in whose
name you plead with one another, and honour the mothers who bore you. Allah
is ever watching over you" Women: 1].

This holy Koranic text directs those who read and listen to it to the fact
that kinship does exist among the sons of man:, those who live in the east
and those who live in the west; the white, the black and the yellow; those
who dwell in the desert and those who dwell in urban areas; those who are
ignorant and those who are learned; those who are whole and those who are
lacking.

The difference in colors and languages [among people] is one of the miracles
of God Almighty in the universe. The difference was established—praise be
to Cod--by Him who created the heavens and the earth and all the universe.

His creations are disparate, such as shade and hot winds; quiet, fertile land;
harsh, rugged land. Therefore, God Almighty said, "Among His other signs

are the creation of heaven and earth and the diversity of your tongues and
colors. Surely there are signs in this for all mankind" [The Greeks: 22].

Although the earth was divided among the sons of Adam its climates and

conditions kept them apart. Although people's languages and their life styles
varied, their brotherhood was established by virtue of Islam, and by what

was stated in the Koran. Becoming mutually acquainted was a duty. If land
separated people, human ideas brought them closer together and united then.

God Almighty, may He be praised, said about this matter, "Hen, He have

created you from a male and a female and divided you into nations and tribes

that you might get to know one another. The noblest of you in Allah's

sight is he who fears Him most. Allah is wise and all-knowing" [The Clumbers: 13].

Getting to know one another strengthens universal unity and fosters harmony
among people. Getting to know one another undoutedly requires equality

and human dignity which God Almighty gave to man by virtue of the fact that
he is numan, as God Almightysaid, "He have bestowed blessings on Adam's
children and guided them by land and see. He have provided them with good
things and exalted them abovenany of Our creatures" [The Night Journey: 70].

In order for people to become acquainted with each other, the residents of
every region must spread their surplus wealth among the residents of the
region whose land is dwindling and did not produce wealth similar to that
of the region that had a surplus.

A region that has a grain surplus must not throw this grain in the sea and
raise prices, but it oust rather give this grain to those who do not have any.
He who has clothing materials is to give them to those who do not have them.
If fortunes in the land of GodAl'mighty are disparate, the fruits of those
fortunes are to be brought together and gathered for the residents of each
region by virtue of the fact that humanity is united. Disparity would then

18
be good so that everyone would have plenty. It is for this reason that
some of the verses that have been attributed to the prophet, may God bless
him and grant him salvation, state, "People are blessed when they differ;
they perish if they compatible."

Becoming acquainted with each other requires that people cooperate in
upholding virtue and diminishing evil. It requires that virtue and just
equality prevail among the sons of man and that injustice be driven away
from all the sons of man. It requires that the residents of every region
stand in support of the weak in any one of God's countries so that injustice
does not corrupt the people of the Earth. God Almighty, may He be praised,
said in this regard, ”Had Allah not defeated some by the might of others,
the earth would have been utterly corrupted. But Allah is bountiful to

His creatures" [The Cow: 251].

2. while the Koran stipulates the unity of humanity in spite of differences
among regions and races, it does stipulate the unity of human nature. The
people of one region do not have a natural manner that is different from

that of the peOple of another region. Rather, the origin of psychological
behavior is one; the reasons for righteousness and deviousness are one; and
the reasons for differences and disparities are one. Disagreement does not
stem from different natures, but rather from the same nature. It is thus
not said that the nature of a negro differs from that of a white man. [Human]
natures rather have the same origin. The difference [between one person and
another] stems from guidance and direction and not from the origin of [human]
nature. Human nature is one. It is for this reason that God Almighty said,
"Mankind were once one nation. Then Allah sent forth prophets to give them
good news and to warn then, and with these He sent down the Book with the
truth, that it might judge the disputes of men. (None disputed it save

those to whom it was given, and that was through envy of one another, after
veritable signs had been vouchsafed them.) So Allah guided by His will those
who believed in the truth which had been disputed. Allah guides whom He will
to the right path" [The Cow: 213].

This noble text indicates that humanity is united in its instincts, in its
behavior, in the origin of instinct and in the dispute between capricious
whims and compelling appetites. This unity inevitably leads to disparity

and conflict because if reason alone were the judge, people would not have
disagreed. But the control that whims and appetites have over some souls make
a conflict inevitable between virtue, which reasons advocates, and evil, which
passion and lust induce. It was because of these disputes within people's
souls and among people that the prophets were sent. Another verse [of the
Koran] states that the original composition of spiritual unity does inevitably
entail difference. God Almighty said, "There was a time when men followed but
one religion. Then they disagreed among; themselves: and had Allah not deferred
their punishment, their differences would have long been settled" [Jonah: 19].

This indicates to us that the text points out that unity is derived from

difference. If all souls were united in the existence of conflict and if they
were prepared for good and for evil, disagreement, conflict and even slaughter

l9
may be the Inevitable result. Disagreement stems from spiritual unity.

God Almighty said. "by the soul and Him that moulded it and inspired it
with knowledge of sin and piety" [The Sun: 7]. God Almighty said. "Have

We not shown him the two paths?" [The City: 7]. Thus does the Koran declare
the unity of the human spirit in its attitudes and inclinations. It is
education, social environment and directions that create differences among
romlnunities. One does not say that this is the spirit of a free man, and
this is the spirit of a slave. One does not say that this is the spirit of
a negro. and this is the spirit of a white man. One does not say that this
is the spirit of a Bedouin and this is the spirit of a city dweller. Spirits
are one; they differ because of environments and societies.

Anyone who attributes one spirit to one group and another spirit to another
is unfair to facts and to humanity.

3. Islam does not consider one nation's generation a unit, but it rather
considers all generations one comunity that is united in its opposition to
and compliance with the prophets. This is because the human spirit has
been one in the past and in the present, and man is the son of man, just as

some of our illustrious professors have determined. Hay Cod Allighty bless
them.

The Koran mentioned this spiritual unity in all generations. God Almighty
Aid in the chapter, "The Believers," "Apostles! Bat of that which is
wholesome and do good works: I have knowledge of all your actions. Your
religion is but one religion. and I am your only Lord: therefore fear Me"
[51]. And God Almighty said in the chapter of "The Prophets." "And of
the woman who kept her chastity. We breathed into her of Our spirit, and
made her and her son a sign to all men. Your religion is but one religion,
and I am Your only Lord. Therefore serve lie" [91-92].

This holy text, just like the text we cited earlier, is evidence of the unity
of nations in their defense of truth if evidence to support this truth exists.
The text indicates the fact that many believe in it. Its authority, like

a [radiant] light, has emerged, and people stepped knowingly into its light.

8592
CS(): 4802
FOREIGN ammo CONCESSIONS CLOSED
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 17 Nov 79 p 7

(Article: "Did Bahrain Offshore Banks Perform Their Boles? Bahrain
Suspended Licenses of Foreign Banks, Thereby Terminating Special Stage
in History of Gulf Banking"]

[Text] The recent decision that was issued by Bahrain to stop granting
any new bank licenses narks the end of one of the stages in the develop-
ment of the Bahrain aoney market. This develop-ant stage had lasted lo
years. Bahrain, like its neighboring countries. depends on oil returns
since 011 is the backbone of the econoay.

But Bahrain differs from the countries of the Gulf in that it has con-
tinued to enjoy its oil and the benefits therefrom for sore than 60 years.
This initiative [it demonstrated] in benefiting fron oil was not futile,
according to MIDDLE EAST DIGEST Hagasine.

In 1975 when the oil producing countries were beginning their search for
ways to deal with the increasing nonetary surplus that was the result of
the rise of oil prices in 1973, the Bahrain Currency Agency. which had
been recently created, was putting the final touches to a bill that led
to the introduction into the Gulf area of more than 50 of the world's
largest banks.

In October 1975 City Bank and the Allgenein Bank received the first
licenses for an offshore banking unit. These licenses allowed thee sens
exemptions froa banking restrictions inside the country, but restricted
[their] business activity outside Bahrain.

By November. 15 international banks had applied for such per-its, and the
applications were considered by the Bahrain Currency Agency. The first

bank that was granted [a license] after the two aforeaentioned banks was

the Anerican Express Bank. The spring of 1976 is considered the date when

a large nudaer of international banks began doing business in Bahrain.

But these banks faced problems at that early date. There was a shortage

in the ,nunber of workers, and the banking labor force that was nade available
was expensive.

21
The situation was not exemplary. After banks were invited to open offices
in Bahrain, it became evident that the office space [that was available]
was insufficient and that the facilities for housing the employees and

the workers of the banks [were inadequate].

This was a temporary setback even though this new direction had relied on
a well-considered plan that had been approved by all international
financial organizations.

Allan Moore, adviser to the Bahrain Currency Agency and the author of this
plan for granting licenses to offshore banks, says that he was expecting

the complete success of the plan because it had succeeded in Singapore.

It was the success of the plan in Singapore that had encouraged him to bring
up the subject with the Bahrain government. Bahrain has all the components
for the success of this plan. It is located in a time zone that would
enable it to fill the vacuum between the markets of the East and the Heat.
Its location would allow commercial activity to be conducted around the
clock. Bahrain also has a good communications system and an exemplary
geographical location in the midst of the richest area in the world.

The timing was decisive. This offshore banking project was announced during
the period when the Gulf states were accumulating huge oil returns, and
there was nothing to do with those funds but use them in trade in markets
outside the area. There was no Arab financial center, and the civil war

in the former commercial market-Beirut-was still raging and had not been
settled. Bahrain suddenly emerged.

In 1976 reports issued by the Bahrain Currency Agency indicated that the
total assets of 27 offshore banks in Bahrain amounted to 6.2 billion dollars.

Before the end of 1977 the total assets of offshore banks had risen to
15.7 billion dollars. Then this total figure rose to 23.4 billion dollars
in 1978, and the number of offshore banks came to £2. The Bahrain Monetary

Agency was preoccupied with preserving the excellent quality of the offshore
banking units.

The agency assures itself that the banks are international banks. This is
the reason why it rejected the applications of small banks or of banks
with meager capitals.

Although Bahrain has succeeded in attracting prominent international banks,
it has so far failed to attract Japanese and west German banks.

It is true that the Bank of Tokyo, the Nipon Credit Bank and the Sumitomo
Bank have branches on the island similar to those of the two German banks,
the Dresden Bank and the Commerce Bank, not one of these five banks has
acquired an offshore banking unit license, even though one of the Japanese
institutions is still awaiting a response on that matter.
Mr Moore thinks that the restrictive governmental legislation pertaining

to the activities of Japanese banks oversees constitute the principal
reason why these banks [stay away from Bahrain]. The Germans. however. are
satisfied with the current level of their banking performance.

Mr Moore calls attention to some of the other problems and says, "If one

of the financial markets reaches a certain degree of development, the bank
will not find it necessary to be in the market to benefit from it. Although
this market has grown in Bahrain, it has not received sufficient support
from neighboring Gulf states."

Offshore banking units in Bahrain have received some of the blame for this
because they are considered the reason behind the 1977 dirham crisis.

This is because they speculated against the currency of the emirates.
However. there is no truth to this charge.

These banking units in Bahrain were criticized also because they were able
to borrow money from Kuwait with little interest, and then they lent those
funds at competitive rates.

All this led the Central Bank of Kuwait to announce in March that financial
deposits in Bahrain must not be counted as part of the bank's liquid funds.

The offshore banking units in Bahrain responded to all these charges by
saying that the fact that they had attracted business that could have gone
to other Gulf states was due to the fact that they were more efficient and
more competitive. The critical remarks were undoubtedly inevitable. More
than 30 percent of the business of these banking units is conducted_in
local currency whose worth amounts to 8 billion dollars. Saudi riyals are
at the forefront [of this business], and the opening of the Saudi National
Cosmwrcial Bank early this year has strengthened the position of the market
and increased its activity.

The opening of the Saudi National Commercial Bank was welcomed enthusiasti-
cally, especially since it has 65 branches in the kingdom. This bank
opened the riyals market to the offshore banking units in Bahrain. The
fact that the other Gulf states have not supported this offshore market

in Bahrain has not diminished its success inside the country. The Bahrain
government collects 1 million dollars annually in the form of licensing
fees from the offshore banking units where approximately 1,000 persons are
employed. Half of those are Bahrain citizens. The collective expanses

of these banks for telecommunications services, for telex services. for
office equipment and rent represent 50 million dollars that are added to
the sums which the Bahrain government obtains from these banks.

Mr Moore says that these banks have other positive effects. Many visitors
come to the country and carry out other businesses that meet the needs of
the offshore banking group.
For any assets worth 500 nillion dollars a single bank can collect paynents

in annual interest that aaount to l nillion dollars, after subtracting
expenses.

ﬁr Moore affirms that the new banking units will be able to make up the

expenses [they incurred] in opening the units and will realize satisfactory
profits. But towards the and of 1978 it was noticed that grovth rates
were slowing down and that the average interest had dropped fron 0.7

percent to 0.64 percent. This reflects a general decline in interest [rates]
in international noney narkets.

8592
080: 4802
BAHRAIN sssu UIIIQUE our INSSPARABiB mm or cum?
mm AL-msnow. in Arabic 1 Dec 79 pp 26.27
[Article by Riyad man» al-Rayyisn "Bahraini Concerns"]

[Text] Bahrain: there is no narrower island. and none with wider horizons
or nore hispitable people. when this snll island was 'Dilaun" in ancient
tines. it coapeted with Phonecia for the coasts of the Gulf. Even today it
is a political and co-eercial listening post for the entire Arabian Peninsu-
la. .Uhen you an in Bahrain you are at a loss who. to talk to, where to be-
gin. 'and what to ask. You get even sore confused over whether you want to
obsorve the Arabs of the peninsula and the Gulf. or Iran and its revolution.
or the northern Arabs and their Middle East. All questions are peraitted.
and everyone is overflowing with soeething to say.

There is a sincere friendly relationship between ”self and Bahrain. dating

back acre then 15 years full of the joy of looking for news. during which I

was able to get to know lost of its leading sen before it beoaae an indepen-
dent state and they becaee ainisters. directors and rich sen. The Journal-

ist ceasing to Bahrain after a long absence amt begin by talking with one

of the four authorities who determine the characteristics of the winds which
blow through the region and who give it its proper orientation, its extreme

speed. its real axis and its fir- starting point.

lnforeation Minister Tariq al-Mu'ayyid is one of these authorities. Discus-
sion begins with his and it frequently ends with bill. This young Ian. who
left a Job with one of the oldest con-ercial houses in Balmain, was able to
build up within a few short years infer-nation agencies which today are among
the most advanced in the Gulf, with eodest budgets and even l0!" aodest re-
venues. He was able to aaintain Bahrain's position as an infatuation center
for the entire Gulf, into which the news pours and out of which flows analy-
ses. Bahrain is still the best listening post. Pros Tariq al-Hu'ayyid's
office. one lust cross the corridor to see Deputy Inforution hinister Shaykh
'Isa ibn Reshid A1 Khalifa, so that he can discuss the diaensions of Bahrain's
strength of character. He will analyze Bahrain’s unique role in the Gulf.
which derives froa the Bahninis' having nursed the silk of politics ani
trade from ancient tines until today. He will mks a connection between re-
gional events and their reverberations in the Gulf and their effects on

25
Bahrain. He is acquainted with everyone. can classify their orientations,
and can define their roles for you.

Free int'omtion to politics. Here we lust get the keys to the heart of
Bahraini diplcaacy. which Foreign hinieter Shaykh hubs-and ibn Mubarak A1
Khalifa has nde into a model of what the diploaacy of seall nations without
money or weapons. in the aidst of big. rich nations. ought to be. If only
Shaykh Huhaaaad ibn Mubarak could have been the foreign sinister of a larger.

ople like Minister of Develcpaent and Industry Yusuf alaShirawi. another old-
titer in the Bahraini government. Hithout a doubt Yusuf al-Shirawi has one
or the most fertile political and practical ainds in the entire Gulf. His
mind is like an "same-ant park” became of the claaor and dream going
around in it. when you listen to hie. you are convinced that Bahrain is the
San Francisco. New York or even the Gernany of the Gulf. His thoughts love
tron tepic to topic so rapidly that hou almost cannot follow them. Yusuf
al-Shirawi is one of the few people still faithful to the American Universi-
ty of Beirut. and is one of its first Bahraini graduates. He has suffered
the loss of Faysal's Restaurant and the old Uncle San. and misses the old-
tiners of Ra's Beirut. Ymuf al-Shirawi's drew are the times of all as~
piring Bahrainis who look beyond the shores of their shallow island.

Fro- persons to ideas, to the reality being experienced by Bahrain day after
day in the shadow of the difficult political conditions surrounding it on
all sides. and the changes taking place so rapidly. The chaotic political

Arabisn. in the name of defending the rights of Shi'isa or in the nus of
the history of the Farsi eapire hundreds of years age. Ayatollah Sedegh
auhani's threat to re-incorpmte Bahrain into Iran, or Ayatollah Hmayn

'Ali Huntasari's appeal to the mlers of Bahrain and Kuwait to ”follow the
path of Islaa" out of fear od‘ a ”fate worse than the Shah's" have had no
result other than ensuring that this utter has been historically. political-
ly and psychologically decided with respect to Batu-sin. There is no space
here to go into this topic. '

Bahrain my be the only country whose nationalism was decided with inter-
national supervision when its national loyalty was put to the test. The
people of Bahrain decided this utter in 1970. Even those of Iranian origin
whose faailies have been in Bahrain tor humreds of years told the UN dele-
gation at that tine. ”I an not an Arab. but I an a Bahraini, and Bahrain is
an Arab island."
If y0u asked in Bahrain about Iran's stand towards the Arab Gulf states. the
answer would be, "But first, what is Iran's stand on Iran?" If you also ask-
ed about the uneasiness caused in the Gulf region by current Iranian circus-
stances. you would get the answer. ”Us in the region are uneasy about Iran.
but Iran is not the source of our anxiety. The Arabs of the Gulf are the
ones who are taking on the Iranian concerns. and not the other way around."
In Bahrain you hear the historic question, "Are they our friends or our
eneaies?" The Soviet Union alone knows its friends and stands by then.
exaaples being Afghanistan, South Yeaen and Ethiopia. The Arabs always want
to know who is the enemy and who is the friend. The United States has div-
ided its loyalty between the Arabs and their enemies. The traces of the An-
erican Eabassy hostage incident in Teheran will renin in the ainds of the
people of the Arabian Peninsula for a long tine. There is a sort of convic-
tion that Aaerica does not distinguish its friends fro. its foes, and doesn‘t
even know its own interests. France alone of all the western states has de-
fined its friendship with the Arabs. and with its interests has stood along-
side then. The Arabs of the Gulf don't like divided loyalty. If you stand
in Salmon Port you can hear the novel-ants of the Anerican aircraft carrier
Hidway and the Anerican, British and Amtralian navy ships which arrived

in the Arabian Sea last week to conduct military answers at the entrance
to the Gulf. You can also hear the scomful talk about the giant with feet
of clay. what waneuvers? No one believes that Anerica will stick by its
friends, if it has any. Hith its interests? Maybe. but protecting its in-
terests does not begin on the deck of an aircraft carrier standing tinidly
at the Straits of Horus.

Yot hear much talk in Bahrain. but the most iaportant talk which you hear
clearly and perhaps for the first tine is about a distinct Gulf personality.
They feel that the Gulf states have sinilar political and economic systels
just as they have similar geographic and social conditions. Therefore,
there must be periodic, organized coordination anong then. But they are not
a bloc within the Arab whole: the last al-Ta'if conference demtrated that
to a certain extent. iraq? ﬁaturally a Gulf state participates in all the
Gulf-related regional and international conferences. but Iraq was not invit-
ed to the al-Ta'if conference because it was a special conference for Arab-
ian Peninsula states having "siailar regiaes." A veiled stateaent. perhaps?
But Gulf-Iraqi relations are definitely at their best now.

Cuff security--what do you hear about it in Bahrain? world security issues
have becoae so intricate that no country in the world can defend itself by
itself. The Arab states, including the Gulf states, have tried to establish
a unified Arab defense for themselves. But the Arab plan has not been acconp-
llshed, and today the defense plans are either part of a regional or an inter»
national strategy. Regional defense is always linked to a big nation or a
bloc. Today no country can defend itself apart from its neighbors. Arab
interests require security cooperation anmg thenselves. Gulf security nust
be part of this cosperatien. which must not be pernitted to renain a word
devoid of action.

what about the American role in the Gulf? Nothing new. outside of the desire
that the Arab Gulf states renain outside the stnggle anong the superpowers.
or the desire that firm relations be established on the basis of the inter-
ests of the participating parties. But no one has any confidence in the An-
ericen role. and no one really kneels where the American interests are and
with when they lie.

If you ask in Bahrain about the services island, you get the reply that Bah-
rain is not trying to take Beimt's place. and that if it tried it would fail.
Even Bahrain doesn't want to be the Gulf Singapore. why? Because it knows
that its size and its resources do not per-it that. arri became it doesn't
want to becone like Beirut is for the Arab world--the extraordimry rarity.
It doesn't want to become like Singapore is for Southeast Asiauthe diffi—
culty which daily challenges everything around it. Bahrain. even with its
distinct personality and its unique nature. wants to rennin an inseparable
part of the Gulf. no nore advanced than sons and no acre bselocards than
others. If it can do things that others cannot. that is because others do
not appreciate or want those things. and because Bahrain can absorb then nore
than its neighbors can. Bahrain's concern today is to deny itself any su—
nremcy wherever it exists. The bridge which is beim built to connect Bah-
rain and Saudi Arabia is sonething forthe future. the next '6 years. If one
supposes that the Saudis will go to Bahrain on the weekends. then the reverse
supposition also holds. Bahrain is a cranped island whose population has
filled up its stall borders: the Bahrainis will want to escape to the eXpanse
of the deserts. And. because the Behrainis have lower incones. they will
find in the Eastern Province the opportunity for change they are looking for.

The Saudis, now that the world has become shall, will find in Bahrain a near-
by recreation spot if they don't want to fly to Europe or Asia.

The Bahrainis are worried about the immigration of foreign unpower fron
.-;or¢a. the Philippines. India and Pakistan to the various Gulf countries,

and they fear that the Gulf is facing a problem sinilar to that of the Asians
in East Africa some years ago. Therefore Bahrain has shown great interest

in the conference of Gulf ministers of industry and development which con-
vened last My in Riyadh to stuiy this very problem. far fro- the clamor of
the press and the spotlights of publicity. There are nore than 100,000 hor-
ean workers in Saudi Arabia. and a sinilar number of Philippines in the king-
don and the Gulf. in addition to Indian, Pakistani and Iranian laborers and
the like. The foreigr labor problem is one which nust be treated on a pan-
peninsular level through a clear-cut, positive policy which will plan for the
final quarter of this century. It is true that in Bahrain there is a reser-
voir of Bahraini mnpower, but it is only in the services, literary and
civil service sector. not on the manual labor level. Bahrain hopes that the
skills of its yOung people will fill positions on this level in the Gulf

countries if the opportunities in Bahrain itself become liaited. But for

28
the next few years Bahrain will be capable of aocooodating its gndmtes.
technicians and laborers.

Rahrain's worries are not few. but this snll. poor island lying on the
eastern shores of the Arab Gulf. not possessing any of the Golf‘s tradition—
a] resources, has one of the greatest mmnrcesupeople. It the oyster sane
day no longer bears pearls. and if the oil wells dry up, Bahrain will still
be a source of sen. her since the beginning of Bahrain'e history the word
has been "nan." In Bahnin‘s sen is its resource. the truly significant re-
source. l‘ay God protect Bahrain.

8559
(SC: USQ

29
BRIEFS

PETROLEUM INDUSTRY STARTUPw-Bshrain announced yesterday that it will
complete measures to take possession of its oil industry by the end of
this month. This announcement was made by Minister of Development and
Industry Yuauf al-Shirswi in an interview published by the Bahraini news-
paper AL-AWA'. Hr el-Shirawi said that the Bahraini Government recently
approved the financial arrangements necessary to implement such measures.
He added that the Bahrain field, the oil, gas and production and its
marketing facilities will pass completely into the ownership of the state.
and the Bahrain Petroleum Conpany Limited (W60) will retain possession
of the oil refinery and foreign Isrketing operations only. Be said that
the company will supervise production operations in the field in return
for specified fees. This will be on a temporary basis until the National
Petroleum Company of Bahrain becomes qualified to take over all these
operations. He added that his country can reconsider the arrangements
pertaining to mow; ownership of the refinery at any time and under any
circumstances since these arrangements are not tied to a specified time
period. [Text] [Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 16 Oct 79 p 7] 8591

C80: (0802
THOSE WHO VOTE AND THOSE WHO DON'T
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 3 Dec 79 p 1
[Article]

[Text] Yesterday and today a referendu- is being held in Iran for the
approval of the new constitutional laws of the Islamic Republic. In spite
of Kholaeyni's last nessage all political parties and groups have boycotted
the referendu- except the Islamic Republic Party, under the leadership of
Beheshti, the JAHA Party (Isladc left), the Iranian Freedo- group (Mahdi
Bazargan) and the 'mdeh Party. Along those who have boycotted the refer-
endun are the National Front, the National Deeocratic Front, the Radical
Party, the Pan-Innis: Party, the Iran Party, the Meals: People's Party,
the Fedayane Khalq and the )bjahedine Khalq. me Kurds, the Turkomns,
the Baluchis and the Aaaris have either boycotted the referendu- or have
not participated in it and the cruelties that took place yesterday in
Azerbaijan, Baluchestan and Kurdestan indicate the seriousness of this
matter. The progressive [leftists] groups believe that the biggest weakness
of this constitution is its chapter 5 "religious jurists” which gives
Kho-eyni certain powers which have no precedent in the political history
of the world and thus for the first tine "a dictatorship" receives lawful
recognition.

According to Article 110, Khoneyni and his successors, as co-anders-in-
chief, have the power to appoint and dis-iss the military co-andera, to
appoint judges, declare wars, sign peace treaties, elect candidates for
the presidency, disniss the president, and to close the National Assenbly
and the Suprene Court of Justice. They can reduce sentences passed by the
courts or annul decisions nade by then. men are rights that no owner

can enjoy even in his own land and no dictatorship has ever enjoyed these
rights--st least officially.

In this constitution there is no reference to the basic rules of democracy,
such as the right to strike, the formation of unions, the equality of wouen
and freedon of beliefs. In a country like Iran, where unity along its

tribes contributes to its power, there is no word mentioned concerning the

31
rights of these tribes. He saw how Reza Khan and Mohamed Reza Khan abused
the old constitution, in which the power of the people was recognized. This
new constitution has given the ruling power to the religious con-unity and

we shall see how the rest of our country-en will becone second class citizens.

The new constitutional laws are being placed in referendum at a tine when the
people of Iran are struggling for the return of [40th [less Pahlavi and

his partners. Many of the Iranian people, such as the Kurds, the Baluchis,
the Turkonans, some of the Arabs, the Azaris and all the progressive groups
and a large part of the liddle class will vote. Among those who will vote,
some are going to give a yes answer to the constitution. However, their
positive vote will be one for in unity in the present struggle of the Iranian
people for establishing justice and resisting probable attacks fron foreign
governments. In the light of these facts can one believe that the new
constitutional laws have been approved by the mjority of the people? Would
it not have been better to have delayed the referendu- to a later date in
order to prove total support for it?
GHUI'BZADBH APPOIWNT SEEN INDICATIBG 'lOUGHBR POLICIES

Paris MHz-YE RUZ in Persian 30 Nov 79 p 1

[Text] The replacesent of Bani-Sadr with Ghotbzadeh as the ninister of

foreign affairs is considered as a new step towards toughening Iranian
foreign policy tomrds the United States.

This change, which took place three days prior to the Bani-Sadr departure
for New York and his participation in the United Nations Security Council
meeting, indicates that it is becoming more difficult to find a solution

to existing problems. While Bani-Sadr did not strongly defend the takeover
of the American Embassy and the capture of the hostages, Chotbzadeh supported
this action, and from the beginning used national television and radio,
which came under his supervision, to broadcast in detail the events taking
place around the Messy. Ghotbzadeh is the fourth foreign minister in the
nine months following the revolution, after Dr. Sanjabi, Ibrahin Yardi and
Abol-Hasan Bani-Sadr. With each change of the minister there has been a
change in policy. Foreign policy during Dr. Sanjabi's tenure was based on
quiet diplomacy, Yazdi changed that to a diplomacy of alliance, Bani-Sadr
supported a revolutionary foreign policy and now Ghotbzadeh is following a
very harsh revolutionary policy. The appointment of the first foreign
minister, who had a brilliant record in the struggle against the old regime
was made outside of a religious framework and this indicated the unity of
the different political groups mich Hanged to make the revolution s suc-
cessful one. However, the appointment of the last foreign minister, whose
struggle in these past years has always been within the framework of the
Islamic revolution, indicates that new power is in the hands of the religious
leaders. Bani-Sadr differs from Ghotbzadeh in that he has a political and
economic philosophy of his own whereas chotbzadeh leans on Khomeyni's beliefs
and is the only member of the Revolutionary Council who has been able to
maintain his position as the head of national television and radio since the
beginning of the revolution. Therefore, it can be expected that from now on

one can hear some of Khmeyni'a opinions through the statements made by
chotbzadeh.

33
While chotbzsdeh, due to his acquaintance with Kholneyni is able to have a
better understanding of his beliefs, and through his nearness to the
students in the E-basay can convince than of some probable agreement with
the United States, he also can through this relationship impede the start
of talks between the two countries. And it mst be renewbered that no
problem can be solved unless there is a dialogue.

After the revolution, Bazargan, Yazdi, Bani-Sadr and chotbzadeh were the
advisers around Khoneyni. Today only the fourth person is in power and the
first three have stepped aside. Hill the future president be one of those
who ha\]Ie been put aside or will it be he who is closer to Khoseyni [Ghat-
bzadeh ?
KHALKHALI WANTS CARTER CONDEHNBD, NOT IDSTAGBS
Paris NAME-YE RUZ in Persian 22 Dec 79 p 2

[Excerpts] The Revolutionary Council, at its neeti of Thursday night,
has adopted a final decision in connection with the 0.8.] hostages. The
contents of the resolution have not been revealed, but it was said to have
been adopted after a 10-hour discussion held at Kho-eyni's residence.

This information was released by the PARS News Agency on Friday (yesterday),
which quoted also Ayatollah Beheshti as saying that the nesting was a
“very useful" session.

0n the other hand, following the resolution of the Revolutionary Council,
sheykh Sadeq Khelkhali, in an interview with the London TIMES, stated that
the hostages should be released, because they are "innocent." He also
added that "In my opinion, these people are innocent, and they are our
guests. I want them freed and returned to the United States. Even if
they are spies, this is not an adequate reason to have then held here.
Every embassy has its spies. He cannot, according to Islamic laws, execute
a spy. He cannot condemn them if even we were to try then. We want to
have Carter and the 0.8. govern-eat conde-ied."

080: 10906
SWDBN’I‘S ALLBCE U.S. EMBASSY NCUHENTS REVEAL ANOTHER AGENT

Tehran BAHDAD in Persian ll Dec 79 pp 1, 3

(Article: Bythe student followers of the Imam: "Documents are Published
Revealing Collaboration Hith the U.S. by Hushang Rte-"l

[Excerpts] By publishing a document on cordial relations (that existed)
between former Bank (bran president Hushang Ram and former United States
ambassador in Tehran the student followers of the Imam have unveiled his
activities during the last days of the shah, aimed at strengthening the
deposed Shah's position. The text of the document is as follows:

"From lI.S. anbassy in Tehran to the State Department. Confidential,
Tehran 12163, Dec. 13, 78 - 27th Mar 1357.
Subject: Meeting with Hushang Ram on Bank Duran.

1. Bank Omran president and the Shah’s confidant, Hushang Ram, visited me
on Dec 13. He wanted to inform me that he had organised a group of young

intellectuals to stimulate political discussions among middle class Iranians.
He wanted to know if this could be of any use to us.

2. I told him that we would like to be in touch with such groups hoping
they could have a calming effect in the current political arena.

3. I pointed out that in my opinion people had no time for political
analysis (discussions) at a time when the nation's economy was near collapse.
Ram agreed and gave detail description of problems his bank had with the
Central Bank and the Helli Bank.

4. I told him that his statements confirmed ny views and urged him to
organize a group in his bank and approach Central Bank directly. I also
suggested that they (members of the group) should go to various sections

of the bank and quietly identify the young people who interfere with regular
banking transactions. Bankers could then find replacements (for the trouble-
makers). I said bankers (banking officials) must now be weary of such
conditions and it was time to act correct the situation. Ashura (mourning)
is now over and it is the time for the country to return to normal.
5. He said the Shah was opposed to strong assures. I ssid that the Shah
considers the shooting at people as s strong measure and said that I believed
that some strong actions in various government depsrtnsnts short of shooting
could be fruitful. He (Rea) agreed to discuss my suggestions with his
colleagues at the but and departed rsther determined.

Sullivsn.

11.8. Anbstsssdor to Irsn

C80: 6906

37
SISTAN, BALUCHISTAN T0 ENFORCE REVOLUTIMY ORDER
Tehran BAHIMD in Persian 12 Dec 79 p 23

(Article: "People of Sistan and Baluchistan, Guided by Humanitarian and
Islamic Principles, Are the Enforcers of Revolutionary 0rders"]

[Text] Zahedan--Pars News Agency-Following a BBC broadcast regarding
demands nade by the Islamic Union of the province of Sistan and Baluchisten,
the Sistanis' co-Iunity in Zahedan yesterday issued the following statement:

"By the name of God the merciful. In connection with the report broadcast
by BBC on 16/9/58 (Dec 7, 79) the Sistanis' calamity registers its strong
protests to the points raised (in the broadcast) as follows:

1. The connunity views with respect all noslens and responsible Iranians,
local or others, who have rendered valuable services to the oppressed people
of the province. Leaving the affairs of the province in the hands of incon-
petent people, who are mostly the sons of chiefs and feudals and who pass
themselves as local people, will not help the needy people and will only
prepare the way for the blood-thirsty feudals and the sons of the chiefs

in the area to once again assume power.

2. In its prosecution, Revolutionary Courts met disregard personal consid-
erations and act according to the Islamic laws and punish all criminals
regardless of the group they belong to.

3. Revolutionary guards who have, since their arrival in the province,
established relative security, are approved by the co-unity and are
supported in their efforts to achieve their humanitarian and Islanic goals.

lo. In one part of the BBC report it was noted that there had been some
thirty thousand Baluchis in Sistan. hhile deploring such reports, which
only help create division among noslems, we deny it vehnently. we warn
people who try to exploit such issues. The Moslem people of the province
are the enforcers of the orders issued by the revolutionary leader Imam
Khoneyni.

38
5. Finally, we declare that any grow; threatening arnad struggle (will be
faced with) the Sietania' co-mity, which will put to nae all ita night
and ita arsed cepabilitiaa that are in ready atage to put an end to such
a deplorable action, the true perpetratora of mid: are international

ineria lien and Zionist.

(:80: 4906
AYATOLIAII LAHUTI BXPIAINS SPLIT PKG! GUARDIANS
Tehran KBYHAN in Persian 11 Dec 79 p 3
[Article: "Ayatollah Lahuti: my I Resigned Directorship of the Guardians")

[Test] In an exclusive interview with the Keyhan newspaper, former director
of the Guardians, Ayatollah Lshuti, gave the reasons for his resignation.

In the interview he, who had (previously) given heart trouble as reason for
his resignation, at the beginning reviewed factors that had necessitated the
setting up of the Guardians Corps, its operation and its present status and
the dangers threatening the Corps at the present tins.

Q. what was the reason for your resignation?

A. In order to make it clear to all and leave nothing in the dark there are
certain issues that need to be aired and I have prepared notes that I would
like to refer to them rather briefly.

1. The necessity to withstand torture and inprisonnent and to prepare plans
for the struggle (revolution). ’

2. Speaking frankly and openly under difficult conditions and presentation
of Islamic ideology for the young generation at a tine that it was feared
it was losing faith and leaning toward materialistic school of thoughts (sic).

3. [men's leadership at a grave periotl of tine in these past twenty years
and the showing of a my leading to final victory--that of an Islanic rule
in which an Islamic Republic is crystalized.

4. Transfer and deportation of the Inn: from Iraq to France and the giving
of a new shape to the revolution.

5. The flight of the shah from Iran and the return of the Imam and the

subsequent fall of the Balthtiar goverment which was no less important than
the Shah's flight.

ho
6. Ninety percent popular vote in the referendum for the Islamic Republic
and the 60 percent vote for the Assembly of Experts and the 10 to 8 percent
for the city, county and provincial councils and far less votes than the
first referendum (Islamic Republic) for the confirmation of what the Assedly
had approved in connection with the constitution. It is noteworthy that

the Imam's call to the people to go to the polls for the constitution had
been answered and obeyed by the majority of the clergy.

7. The necessity of setting up the Guardians Corps which was conceived by
the lamm himself.

8. Formation of the Corps under the Deputy Prime Minister for Revolutionary
Affairs and a representative of the Imam to assist and coordinate its affairs.

9. Changing of the directorship of the

Revolutionary Council and the various interpretations and analysis, its
becoming the arms of the revolution, a single party corps and the appointment
of member of the Revolutionary Council to coordinate the various groups that
were involved in military operations which in the long run was catastrophic.
Unfortunately, appointment for a six-nonth period of individuals in the
Mud Council from one party (faction) further ooqlicated the matter even
though procedure demanded that the Conand Council was to be elected
(appointed) after a period of six months.

10. Reappointment of the same people after a six-month period and the
dictatorial behaviour of the (Jo-and Council ecupled with the lack of
qualification of the Council to run the Corps and the already existing
problems and lack of cooperation and efforts to influence the reappointment
of the Co-and Council (meders) along with incompetence of those in charge
and their acceptance of too many comitments and their inability to carry
them out all resulted in the resigning of the director of the Guardians.

The director was one of the oldest meters of the Corps and familiar with
its problems more than anyone else. For many reasons the appointed (members)
Cor-land Council refused to withdraw (resign). He met recognise and learn
what the Imam'a line is to realize to what extent the Corps has now deviated
from that line. I believe that we must once again try to define the lmsm's
line. For one, it is the anti-imerialism of the struggle (revolution) and
that the Imam is its leader. Second, it is Islamic. Thirdly, it supports
the disadvantaged and the poor which overshadows his program. Sixth (sic),
is the non-compromising nature of the movement. A man should not give in
to compromise and the Imam himself is an exaqla. Seventh, daily problem
should be faced determinedly of which, once again, the Imam is an example.

Q. Hhat were your objectives when you were the Corps director?
A. Allow me to first go into a little more detail of some of what I just
said. As I an the subject (of the discussions) and as to why I resigned,

and as one of the newspapers had suggested that I should break silence and
that if I kept quiet it would be catastrophic, 1 had already declared that

hl
I will spell out the reasons for my resignation. I believe that I even
annOunced my intention to radio and television stations which I am not sure
if it was agreed upon (to hold). Anyway, once again 1 ask them to allow me
to tell peOple as to why I quit. I also like to tell people more about the
Corps. At the start I said that there are a number of issues I would like
to raise in connection with my resignation. I have already spoken about the
withstanding of torture, imprisonment and formalization of the struggle
(revolutionary movement). This subject (of being in prison) is a bit smelly.
I spent some time in jail and so did my son. Well, that is it if one wants
to achieve a goal. There are people who suddenly appear after victory is
achieved and the goals reached and want to lay claim to its fruits. Society
identifies these as opportunists. There are numerous individuals who were
not in the movement when it began. There was a period when the oven was
burning hot and the end result was burned hands and feet and possible death
by torture. There were many who, at this time, had accepted (joined) the
struggle in order to bring about changes in the government (system) and were
prepared to accept the consequences. I said that there was a tine when the
oven was burning hot and healthy people were taken inside a room and his dead
body came out through another door. There were people who joined the struggle
at such a stage and there are many such people in the country now. The
number of people who emerged from prisons in the last few days (of the past
regime) was about 5,000 though some reports have put the number at 20,000 to
50,000. I believe they are all out (not in power) and those who were not
there (not taking part in the struggle against the former regime) are now

in (power). This is an issue that nukes people wonder where were these
people when the struggle needed coeaaitted individuals. There were many
people who did not want to forget their normal business and waste their

time in taking part in the struggle against the former regime and were busy
taking advantage to the conditions acquiring land and more fortune. They
did not care what the conditions were in the country and what a moslem
should do or how dangerous the government (former regime) was for Islam and
what the exiled Imam was demanding from people. For a group of people coming
to power now or later (who did not participate in the struggle) is an issue
for those who took active part in the struggle who, at the same time. ask
themselves where have all these people been?

(:80: 14906
HOSEYN KHWEYNI SPEAKS OUT ON ARAB, RELIGIOUS ISSUES
London AL-HAHADITH in Arabic 16 Nov 79 pp 68-69

[Text] It is being said of Hojjat ol-Islam Hoseyn Khomeyni“ that he is
the "influential nan" in Iran. He is the oldest grandson of Ayatollah
Ruhollah al-Husavi Khomeyni (this is the full nane) and the son of
Khoeeyni's son. Hustafa who was killed by SAVAK in al-Hajaf in Iraq. He
visited Lebanon twice and met with senior officials, with officials of the
state and with leaders of the resistance. He also toured south Lebanon
and debated Farid al-Khatib on the cultural dimensions of the Islanic
Revolution in Iran, the problem of scuth Lebanon, relations between the
Iranian Government and the PLO, the oil weapon, the situation in the Gulf,
women, music, alcohol and executions. Before leaving Lebanon, Khoeeyni's

*Hojjat ol-Islam Hoseyn Hustafa Khoneyni was born in 001: in 1958. He
grew up in Qon, and he saw the events of 1962 during which Ina- Khomeyni
was arrested. After the Imam's return from Turkey to Iraq, Hoseyn and
his sister lived alone with the Ima- ln aI-Najef. The other members of
the Khomeyni family lived in Iran. A strong relationship developed
between Hoseyn and his grandfather. Hoseyn studied philosophy, religious
subjects, philology and Arabic literature in al—Hajaf. Despite his
youth, he participated in political events when the struggle of the
Iranian people abroad was one of the principal dimensions of their
struggle inside the country. He was asking preparations for the Islamic
Revolution. He went with the Team to Paris, and he stayed there with
him, but he went to Tehran 1 week before the Imam. Hoseyn Khomeyni con-
siders his father, Hustafa to be the principal figure of the Islamic Revo-
lution in Iran. Soon after Hoseyn'a father died in action, the groups of
mourners turned into demonstrations, and there was a general shutdown

(of all services and activities]. in that year Iranian newspapers also
launched a campaign against Imam Khoeeyni on the 40th day of his son's
death. The death of his father made Hoseyn continue his struggle,
withstand more and become more hostile to the Shahinshahi regiee.

113
grandson left an article at the Beirut office of ALPHAHADITH. he included
in his article his point of view on all these matters. Hhen he delivered
the article, he explained that he had written it as a revolutionary and
not as a member of government. He said he represented a sector of young
people. university graduates and intellectuals in Iran. The text of what
he wrote follows; it is closer to being a review of ideas than to an
essay dealing with a specific idea.

Islam gives Moslems freedoms that are broader than those given by liberal-
ism in the West on the basis of "enjoining justice and forbidding evil."
Islam gives the ordinary citizen the right to criticize the president of
the republic. the chief of the government or the commander of the army if
[any one of them] committed some error. Although the West states that such
criticism is permissible, Islam says that it is one's duty. This is based
on [the dictum] that "You are all to watch over each other, and you are
responsible for your charge."

Just as in Iran, social freedoms [everywhere] are created by circumstances.
These freedoms can be found in Iran on a broad scale. Every group can say
what it wants. There is no doubt that social freedoms must be available
so that there would be no pressure on citizens. from the high-handedness
of persons or individuals, to take positions other than those they prefer
to take.

An Islamic government has the right to disseminate its doctrine. Although
it recognizes the doctrines of minorities. it does not allow their promo-
tion. This was what happened during the days of the prophet in Mecca when
the Jews were free within their domestic framework and their social affairs
but were not free to disseminate their doctrine and promote it among people.
In the future, after the constitution is put into practice. the new reality
will not permit the dissemination of doctrine and religion for the purpose
of getting people tv adjure Islam. We will be ready for a candid debate
on television and htthe cthz'media. Under better circumstances other doc-
trines may be disseminated in a broader fashion.

The rebels want to rule; they want to rule so they can enforce values.
Every revolution that grew out of hucanitarian and ethical values wants

to put those values into practice and wants power to be its way to putting
those values into practice. But if the revolution has to choose between
its humanitarian and ethical values and power, it should leave power and
adhere to the values. We will isolate ourselves from every regime without
values that may be established in Iran. He will consider it to be similar
to the regime of Reza Phalavi. and we will fight it.

The foreigner has not and will not succeed in changing the situation in
[ran into a civil war, but he did succeed in stirring up an ideological

and a political war. Leftists and rightists are struggling with each other
just as the reactionary religious movement is struggling with the progres-
sive religious movement. Nevertheless. those who subscribe to those
beliefs, or met of them, believe in the leadership. Therefore, the
leadership is a principal factor at the present time for achieving
national unity. But if the leadership were to go, the situation could,
God forbid. deteriorate and turn into a civil war.

The situation in Iran is considerably different from the situation in
Lebanon. The sects that are found in Lebanon can be found in Iran. But
the ideological unity that exists on a broad scale among the people in
Iran is unmatched anywhere in the world. and the single leadership which
the people in Iran recognise has no parallel in Lebanon. These matters
would not allow the situation in Iran to be altered and turned into one
resembling the situation in Lebanon.

Executions do take place after every revolution, and there are executions
that are inevitable. But I do believe that some embers of SAVAK who had
been executed should have been pardoned. In fact, all nenbers of SAVAK
who were paid small salaries should have been pardoned. SAVAK took all the
files of the Eighth District. and those included the files of the real
spies in the area who used to strike at the foundation of the revolution.
The files of a few thousand persons of the Third District were left behind.
Only those persons were considered to be SAVAK members. The revolutionary
courts became preoccupied with those powerless members of SAVAK although
they should have been in pursuit of the real members of SAVAK who could
still be in goverment positions.

0n the other hand executions that were carried out on the basis of atroci-
ties that had been committed were grievous errors. We recognize "Islamic
punishments" that are carried out in an Islamic but not in a barbaric
manner. This requires the presence of "four honest witnesses" who had
witnessed a certain action openly. If the Judges, the revolutionary courts
or the government suspect a person of adultery, they have no right to in-
vestigate the charge. Instead, the witnesses should have been present
where the act took place, and four of them should come forward to testify.
If three witnesses and not four enter their testimony. the accused is
punished by a whipping. This is the Islamic premise.

we are now living in a Shahinshahi society. that is, in an ignorant society
and not in an advanced society. The executions and the "punishments" must
be put into practice in the real society and in the actual culture. As
long as there is poverty in society, the hand of a thief must not be cut
off. As long as there is poverty, an adulterer must not be whipped. I

an opposed to executions. Executions eust be carried out in an Islamic
society, but before the executions [are carried out]. the problem must be
dealt with, and I do not think that execution is a realistic remedy for

the problem.

Imam Khomeynl did not ban msic. However, music has been banned from
television and radio. Television does, nevertheless, show a small number

1:5
of films, and these include music. Besides. music is sold on tapes and
records in the streets. It is likely that educational and cultural pro—
grams. which Iran has a great need for at the present time. will replace
music on television and radio.

It would have been better to sell the alcohol that had been in storage in
the country for sums of money instead of destroying it. Islamic law,
however, does not consider alcohol property or capable of becoming
property.

As a revolution--and not as a government-we want realistic equality for
all. We want to advocate and call for equality among all those who worship
God outside Iran and among all the people in the world so that the revolu-
tion would not be confined to Iran.

Religious scholars and politicians took two positions on the probl- of
"autonomy" which was brought out by our Kurdish brothers. The first posi-
tion agreed to granting the Kurds autonomy, and the second position advo-
cated that we explain the purpose of the revolution to the Kurds. The
revolution is different from the government. The Kurds should be per-
suaded that the revolution is better for them than autonomy. The question
that Yasir 'Arafat asked imam Khomeyni about the destiny of the Kurds dur-
ing his visit to Iran after the victory of the revolution may have been an
invitation to us to explain the revolution to the Kurds [and to tell them]
that the revolution exists and that its purpose is to establish justice
and equality. If justice and equality were not made available, we would
not be revolutionaries, and there would be no revolution.

1 know that Zionist and foreign functionaries can be found in Kurdistan
and that they are inflaming the Kurdish problem there. We do not vindi-
cate ourselves or officials of the Iranian Government from some suspicions
concerning this question.

The solution in Kurdistan must be a political solution. It is to be based
on negotiations and on clarifying matters for people. At the present time
we must not strike the armed Kurds. This would cause the traitor not to
appear, and in fact. people may rally around him. On the contrary we
have to reveal the identity of the traitor to the people. Herein lies the
real solution. We must also impl-ent broad construction projects in
Kurdistan.

We are not against the army, but we must raise a question around it. We
are still calling for a further purge of the army. It was for this reason
that the "revolution's protective" army was established. As long as it
exists and as long as people maintain their frame of mind, a military

coup cannot be achieved.

The problem of south Lebanon is neither a south Lebanese or a Lebanese
problem. It is a Middle Eastern problem in south Lebanon, and it is a
world problea in south Lebanon.
we are involved in south Lebanon, and we are responsible for it!

A decision on south Lebanon and on the Palestinian Revolution in south
Lebanon is not made in Beirut; it is rather made in Tel Aviv, in Hashing-
ton and in Moscow. The problem of south Lebanon is being dealt with from
outside Lebanon. The oil exporting countries in the Gulf, therefore,
must exert greater pressure on imperialism and Zionism and must carry out
an oil threat against them until they abandon south Lebanon. Iran should
play the same role because it exports oil. It is to fly the banner of
the revolution and to control the Straits of Hormuz. If this does not
happen, south Lebanon and Lebanon will in future years turn into a state
where Israelis would be found in an official way. Their presence would
constitute a threat to the nation. At the present time the nation is re-
sponsible for removing this threat.

The people of south Lebanon have great faith in the Palestinian question.
This is evident in the fact that they have been hosts to their Palestinian
brothers during the last several years. They offered sacrifices for the
Palestinian Revolution. and they sent their young men to struggle from
within the PLO.

But there is in fact a matter that must be dealt with. It is the fact
that the resident of south Lebanon wants the Palestinian Revolution to be
victorious, and he wants to be victorious with it. He does not want to
perish on the road. The continued Israeli shelling and the fact that the
method of the Palestinian Revolution's military struggle has been main-
tained on the same degree and mode for 10 years in south Lebanon-~along
with political victories in Europe and the United States-~raise a question
in the mind of the resident of south Lebanon: "How long will this go on.
and how long will the camels remain on the mountain?"

Residents of south Lebanon can undoubtedly hold out in their positions with
the Palestinians if a change in the Palestinian Revolution's style were to
take place. Residents of south Lebanon can also work on the Gulf front.
011 exporting countries—-and Iran is among them--can also issue an appeal
on behalf of the Palestinian Revolution and the question of south Lebanon.
Several shelters can also be built in south Lebanon. and requirements for
resistance. including funds, can be provided. In addition, an "order

for unity" can be issued by Imam Khomeyni.

‘The legal situation in Iran is that of the revolution. and the legality of
the government is [to come about] by change, that is, by legalizing the
revolution in particular. The revolution, which did authorize the govern-
ment to rule, has the right to exert pressure on the government to make it
adopt the revolution's positions. we will. God willing, exert pressure on
the government from our revolutionary premises so as to make it assume
responsibility postures vis-a-vis south Lebanon and the Gulf.

We consider the PLO "the legitimate and the sole representative of the
Palestinian people." We believe in the Palestinian question which has a

h?
t.u.tuuu «nu. (. LAVJJLLCU ulutdctet Lnat UUU-chgns 1E5 Military Character
and operations. [The PLO acts] not only to liberate Palestine, but rather,
like the Iranian Revolution also. to achieve a cultural change for the
Arab and lslanic nation. Therefore, our coordination with the Palestinian
question and ui:h the PLO emanates from the identity of the Islamic Revolu—
tion everywhere.

Iran must support the Palestinian and the Arab question with its policy.
its oil, its weapons. its people and all means and methods [it has]. That
is what the revolution is teaching us. But there are problems in Iran

from which the revolution is suffering. So far, these prohlens have not
permitted this support to be accomplished. There are also reservations
[regarding this support]. We are prepared to reduce oil production and to
cut off oi; [shipments] to support the positions of the Palestinian Revolu-
tion.

we consider the Islam which finds justifications for the positions of
tyrants and for the treacherous positions that despots take towards their
people a non—Mohammedan lslan. This
is because Mohammedan Islam came into
existence to s:rike at despots and to
combat injustice. If we abandon
[this principle:, we are not real

N sit-ins. The position that the
$1":ka of ai -Az'.:ar took in the legal
opinion he issued on the Camp David
accords emanates from a non—Zinhamnc—
dam islum.

[imperialists] are looking for someone
to succeed the shah after his depar-
ture from the Gulf. They want this
successor to be President Anuar al—
Sadat. Therefore, propaganda is

being spread that Iran wants to

occupy or carry out a strike against
the Gulf. This is colonislist propa-
ganda whose purpose is to get the
elders and the rulers oi the Gulf to
tell iii—Sadat. "Be so kind as to come
to the Gulf," to justify Egyptian
intervention and also to get Egypt out
of the isolation in which it is living.
This is the plan [that has been drawn
up‘J so Egypt can achieve a major success.
mus COlJllT REJECTS mun mnmnon pm
Tehran mum Tmss in English 13 Dec 79 p 1

[Text] The Paris court ruled yesterday Iran has no right to demand the
immediate restitution of a $50 million deposit, blocked in the vaults of
Citibank Paris.

The decision meant the Bank Harkazi Iran had lost the first round of its
battle to win prompt restitution of its funds held in the French branch of
Citicorp and foreshadowed a protracted court battle. legal sources said.

Mrs. Simone Rozes, the court chairman. decided the $50 million was not a
deposit that could be withdrawn on sight but a time deposit to be kept in
the bank for a certain period of time.

The judge thus ruled in favor of Citibank which had argued that on Dec 1. the
Iranian Central Bank agreed in telex exchanges to keep the funds in the
Citibank for two more weeks--until Dec 19, at 13-3/4 interests.

The judge. flanked by two assistants. ruled that under paragraph 1186 of
the French Civil Code a party that had agreed to a time deposit, cannot
claie funds back before the final dateline had run out.

Judge Roses said, however. that on Dec 19, the Iranian State Bank nay
file a new court case if Citibank refuses then to return the funds.

P. Rancois Cheron, attorney of the Iranian State Bank said he will appeal
the court decision.

Monday, when the case was argued before the Judge, Cheron asserted the
Iranian Bank agreed to keep the funds in Citibank vaults for two weeks
because it had no choice, after being told by Citibank officials they were
abiding by President Carter's executive order freezing all Iranian funds
in 11.5. banks and their oversees branches pending the liberation of Ameri-
can hostages in Tehran.

1:9
Diplomats said the French court's move may set a precedent for other

litigations launched by Iran's Islamic Regime against foreign banks to
recover its deposits abroad.

Diplomats also said the French court's action may sour relations between

France and Iran. The Iranian Embassy already Tuesday complained in a note
to the French Foreign Ministry that Iranian refugees such as ex-preuier

Shapour Bakhtiar are allegedly enjoying too much political freedom.

C80: 4920
IRAN T0 PETITION U.S., FOREIGN COURTS FOR SKAH ASSET FREEZE
Tehran TEHRAN TIMES in English 13 Dec 79 p 2

[Text] Iran will petition U.S. and European courts within days to freeze

personal bank accounts and properties of the deposed shah and his family
worth $100 nil1ion, officials announced TUesday.

Central Bank Governor Ali Reza Novbari declared the bank had documentary

proof that the ousted royal family amassed the assets, including properties
in Switzerland, Spain, France and the United States with embezzled state
funds.

The suits. Novbari told a news conference, were the Revolutionary Council's
first step to recover the fortunes of the Pahlavi family. He estimated the
fortune totals $10 billion.

Since the seizure of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran on Nov 4. Novhari has sought
to accumulate proof of mass corruption both to get back the assets and to
bolster Iran's demand for the return of the shah to face trial.

The Central Bank filed a 277 page petition with the Iranian prosecutor
general Tuesday for forwarding to European and U.S. courts.

he said foreign courts will be given documents which show how the royal
family misappropriated state funds and accepted bribes, and deposited the
funds in personal accounts.

"My strategy will be to show how money was taken from government accounts
to buy houses, not from the shah's personal account. and how the shah's
personal account filled with government money or with bribery money,"
Novbari said.

Novbari's move came as U.S. Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance began Tues-

day a swing through Europe seeking joint economic retaliation if Iran con-
tinues to hold the 50 hostages.

51
Novbari, 32, said he would leave Wednesday on a trip to sympathetic Algeria,
before going to Europe to try to counter Vance.

"He want to explain our position to the European people, and hopefully in
the near future to the American people, so the! will not be deceived by
American propaganda." he said.

Novbari has filed a series of suits against U.S. banks in Europe. He
maintains the banks should not have frozen Iranian funds on deposit. in
compliance with U.S. President Jimmy Carter's order to American banks.
Novbari says the bank branches should obey the rules of the nations in
which they do business.

Novbari reported Tuesday the Central Bank has suits pending against five
American banks in Britain and three in France. with suits planned against
v.5. banks in Gernany and Switzerland.

Meanwhile, the government of Iran has filed suit against the Swiss canton
(state) of Grisons, seeking to force it to disclose detailed information
on the St. Moritz villa of the former shah, it was learned Tuesday.

Erich Diefenbacher, one of the Swiss lawyers of the Iranian government,
said he has filed an administrative complaint with the Swiss supreme court
after the Grisons authorities refused to reveal the requested information
last month.

Iran's request that the ex—shah's Swiss assets be blocked was rejected

by the Swiss government last February. Now Tehran's lawyers are trying to
discover the origin of the funds used for his real estate purchases in
Switzerland.

Diefenbacher said the authorities of the canton of Geneva supplied similar
information.

The shah's "Villa Suvretta" lies just outside St. Moritz. the famed ski
resort in the eastern Swiss Alps. and was reportedly purchased in 1968 for
four million franca--$930.000 at the time.

Diefenbacher said Grisons authorities had rejected his request on the
grounds the shah had never abdicated and therefore the new Iranian authori-
ties were not entitled to the information.

080: 4920

52
EXPORTS 0F PISTHCHIOS, RUGS 10 UNITED STATES HALTED
Tehran TEHRAN TIMES in English 12 Dec 79 P 3

[Text] Iranian exporters of Traditional goods have refused to export Such
goods as rugs and pistachios to the United States during the last 65 days,
to show their solidarity with the Iranian anti-ilperialist struggles.

The director of a pistachio exporting colpany told the TERRAN TIMES yester-
day, "Even though Aaericn is one of the most important markets for Iranian
pistachios, importing more than eight thousand tons of the nuts yearly,

the Iranian exporters have refused to send their goods to that country to
show their unity and solidarity with the Iranian people."

In the current year, said the official. Iran has exported 35,000 tons of
pistachios to France, West Germany. England, Belgium, Sweden, Switzerland
and Arab countries.

Mehdi Kazemi. director of another pistachio exporting coupany said that

the harvest of Iran's pistachio crops was greatly reduced as a result of
cold weather, adding, last year's production was about 50,000 tons, lost of
which was exported to foreign countries due to the Iranian Revolution,

He said that as a result of the reduction in the Iranian pistachio harvest
the price of the nuts has gone up. He said the present reserves of Iran's
pistachios are about 18.000 to 19,000 tons.

The increase in price of Iranian pistachios. said Kare-i, has presented the
exporters with difficulties in a sense that the prices are not acceptable
to ieporters. The price of every ton of pistachio nuts is about $8,000

to $9,000. according to quality.
MODERN METHODS OF CROP PROTECTION BEING IMPLEMENTED
Baghdad AL-‘lRAQ in Arabic 15 Nov 79 p 7

[Article by 'Abdallah Kati': "To Protect the Crops: The Latest Technological
Methods and Modern Aircraft Are Being Used"]

[Text] There is great activity in the agricultural sector both in devising
and implementating the agricultural plan in which a large mass of farmers,
civil servants, specialists and officials in the Ministry of Agriculture
and Agricultural Reform InJ the other ministeries are participating through
the annual agricultural conferences. which have won the attention and
guidance of President Sadam Husayn.

The agricultural sector agencies and the responsible agencies in the chief
circles are accustomed to the vital revolutionary interaction between the
leaders and the principles in planning and implementation, and in investing
all the capabilities and effort available to improve the agricultural sector.

It is clear that the sharp increase in agricultural production is being
achieved through the use of advanced methods of production which depend on
scientific progress in this direction. There are numerous factors which
influence the achievement of this sharp increase, among them concern with
protecting the crops from damage by various agricultural disasters such as
insects, plant diseases, overgrowth and various harmful animals.

Providing Protection

Therefore the agriculturalproiection services provide agriculture with the
protection that is necessary against the spread of plant diseases and the
attack of agricultural disasters which when they rage sometimes cause the
loss of approximately a third of the country's annual agricultural production.

Increased Efforts in the Struggle

The technical apparatus in the State Organization for Farm Protection has
shown particular interest in expanding the struggle against agricultural
disasters, and has redoubled its efforts in keeping with the other concerns
about specific kinds of agricultural production.

5h
A source in the above organization said that there are many ways currently
in use to combat agricultural disasters, such as sprays of various kinds:
surface-land carried on automobiles, applied by means of applicators. and
others available in Ihrge quantities distributed through all the country's
governorates in accordance with the efforts there.

Agricultural Aircraft in the Battle

In addition, according to the source, the State Organization for Farm
Protection is provided with agricultural aircraft, both fixed wing aircraft
and helicopters, in sufficient numbers to cover all the requirements of

the battle in the country's regions. Furthermore, these aircraft with all
their crews offer their services to neighboring countries, especially the
sister countries of the Arab Gulf.

The Areas Committed to the Battle

The area committed to combat this year--still according to the source from
the State Organization for Farm Protection--in light of the agricultural
plan amounted to 9,089,017 dunams, among which is an area of 6,277,313
dunams in which a campaign is currently underway to disinfect wheat seeds
with chemical pesticides to protect them from wheat "blackening" disease
and to obtain a crop of good variety and quantity for this basic food crop
for our citizens.

The remaining area is represented in the battle against the remaining
agricultural disasters which afflict gardens and other agricultural land.

Pioneering Agriculture's Battle Against Overgrowth

There is an important aspect to the farm protection services; the battle
against overgrowth in the pioneering agriculture in the country's regions.
[Pioneer agriculture] provides good economic returns for our important food
crops such as wheat, rice and cotton. Furthermore, the Farm Protection
services provide protection for grain stored in siloes and other grain
storage places from damage caused by the disasters which afflict stored grain.
[This is accomplished] by treating it with chemical pesticides appropriate
for preserving it. The State Organization for Far Protection is committed

to treating large quantities of stored grain in the country's regions.

The Use of Applied Field Research

Due to the increased use of modern technological methods such as portable
spraying equipment and modern aircraft, services pertaining to farm pro-
tection have expanded and improved. There are agencies which specialize in
scientific research in the fields of plant diseases, entomology, overgrowth
and chemical pesticides. and which are carrying out scientific research,
studying the problems of plant disasters and discovering safe ways to combat
them, reduce their harmful effects and provide effective methods for the
farmers.

55
The State Organization for Farm Protection is committed to carrying out the
following experiments and applied scientific research:

In the area of research to combat insects the organization is committed to
carrying out 124 applied field experiments.

It is committed to carry out 72 applied field experiments in the area of
research to combat plant diseases.

In the area of research to combat overgrowth the State Organization for Farm
Protection is committed to carrying out 43 applied field experiments and
35 educational field demonstrations for the farmers in combatting overgrowth.

Improving the Technical Cadres

The State Organization for Farm Protection is endeavoring to improve its
technical cadres working in the services to combat plant disasters in all

the governorates by organizing classes within the country and training

abroad under the auspices of agreements for technical and economic cooperation
with the sister and friendly nations.

The Spread of Plant Disasters Prom Abroad

The work of the State Organization for Farm Protection is not limited to
combatting plant disasters alone. Its work and activities include concern
with reducingopportunities for the spread of plant disasters from abroad
technologically through the development of agricultural prohibition agencies.
Technical cadres are being trained to work in this special area as well as
the agricultural prohibition agencies in the various border locations and
the country's other gateways, such as the various airports. in accordance
with the great expansion in the volume of imports and exports of plant
products.

Preventive Measures

The Organization is committed to taking preventive measures on the following
types of plant shipments:

Inspection and fumigation of 5.8 million tons of plant import shipments.
Inspection and fumigation of 200,000 tons of plant shipments for export.
Inspection and fumigation of 50,000 tons of plant shipments in transit.
Expanding Beekeeping

Because there is great benefit in honeybees from their [ability to] increase
fruit and seed production in general while at the same time providing good

income from the honey, a great effort has been made to create trained technical

cadres capable of improving the methods of raising honeybees and establishing

l
l

56
centers in most 0! the country's regions to create a nucleus for beekeeping
and centers to train the farmers and beekeepers in technical methods and to

supply them with the requirements for modern beekeeping. The State Organiza-
tion for Farm Protection is committed to the following in this connection:

Production of 2,320 swarms of bees to expand these services in every party
of the country.

Production of 929 swarms of bees to be sold to the private sector.

The production of 1,675 young queen bees to replace the old queen bees to

preserve the vigor of the hives or the producing swarms to improve their
productivity.

Production of 45,000 kg of honey as an "incidental" product.
ARAB SW11 TIE!) T0 IRANIAN CRISIS
Kuwait AL-RA'Y AL-‘ANH in Arabic 10 Nov 79 pp 1, 23
[Editorial: "The American Embassy and the Arab Smit")

[Text] The picture looks like this at present: No one knows the answer
to the question of how and when the hand-biting action taking place
between Tehran and Hashington will and.

That is to say. the question itself is unexpected, and thus it is
inevitable that there is a total lack of answers.

The United States knows that very few mediators exist. But at the ease
tine. it knows that its probless with these "sediators" are more complicated
than its present probles with Tehran. Possibly. Tehran has turned its

back on the possibilities of such Iediation efforts in order to achieve

the goals for which it is striving.

There were those who "wished" that the shah would take the initiative to
leave the United States so that this probles could be solved.

But the shah case to New York 111, and in all probability he will be unable
to bring his illness to an end—even if he gets well—lest it be reported

that he is not, in fact, 111. Moreover, the shahninwardly at least—wants
fighting to break out and a state of "war" to be reached between Hashington
and Tehran so that he can get revenge on both at once--Tehran which revolted

against his and toppled his regise, and Hashington which renounced and
abandoned his during difficult tines. But what is the solution?

The Egyptian ruler inediately volunteered his services to host his friend
the ahsh and his doctors. But this is not the solution. Nor will the
solution be provided by internationalization, i.e., subnitting the issue
to the Security Council as the United States has done.

Therefore. how will the problem be solved? It appears that the dile-s
has arrived, but is this the dile-sa which was sought?

58
Snow experts on the Arrricnn disposition any that some time ago Hashington
began to feel uneasy abOut these snail oil states which possess some sort

of control over the fate of the "eat. It was uncertain about which method
it should use to put these states "in their true place," as U.S. Senator
Hoynihan said. Perhaps the United States has found in this affair an avenue
to implement its plan for the next phase.

ﬂow? The coming hours will bring many indications of this plan as it
concerns the Gulf and the size and kind of role the United States wants to
play here.

Some observers feel that Hashington will pay the price to create a new
situation in which oil will move away from its essential-and disconcerting

--role in the Arab front of steadfastness and confrontation.

These observers also feel that in the earlier stages of this game Washington
was able to involve the PLO in a swift appearance in the guise of mediator
for the release of the American hostages, despite repeated denials by the
PLO, and in this context the United States scored a winning point.

In addition to--or perhaps prior to--this. Haehington has. by using the
action against the American embassy in Tehran. spread a dense fog before

the Arabs who will be going to the summit conference in Tunis in a few days.
where since a solution to the problem of Lebanon, and south Lebanon in
particular, is supposed to be produced in the midst of the complex web of
inter-connections between the Lebanese problem and the Palestinian presence-
in other words Syria and ultimately the eastern-northern front.

It would be unwise to forget what the American embassy incident in Iran
could mean in terms of excess attention to the choice of Arab positions--
and their repercussions on Arab relations, in particular--on the eve of the
preparation for this summit. This action will be used to increase suspicions
and kindle conflicts between one Arab state or organization and another.

All of this would tend to destroy the potentialities of the unified Arab
decision. if not the way to the summit, completely.

The odd thing is that we are always victims, even when the problem begins
completely outside of the Arab sphere. H- are always easily trapped.

And this is not entirely an imperialist plot!

8591
CSO: 6802

59
AMERICAN BLACKS' ROLE IN MIDDLE EAST DISCUSSED
Mait AL-VATAN in Arabic 15 Oct 79 p 10
[Editorial by Najib 'Abd-al-Badi: "Black American Tactics"]

[Text] No sooner had the international political and ssdia uproar raised
by Andrew Young's meeting with Zahdi al—Tarsi quieted down when another
"stern" arose. The hero this time was the black sinister, Jesse Jackson.
who toured the area and met with a under of its leaders in a trip
described as a facts-finding and fanilarization tour.

In Cairo, Reverend Jackson met with President Anwar Sadat. who was able to
brainwash the black leader to hire hin as a "mailman". to carry his messages
to Abu 'Amer and Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad.

As a result of his visit to Cairo, Jackson's statements began to differ
from the statements he made during his visit to Beirut, South Lebanon and
the Heat Bank. The black ninister forgot the huge crowds which carried
his on their shoulders in the city of Neblus as if he were the rescuing
hero and the awaited Mahdi!

Yesterday, another hero appeared on the black American stage whose name has
been added to the list of black champions. His is Bayard Netin, the head
of the A. Philip Randolph Institute in the United States. In an open and
shameless attenpt at one-upnanship, this hero said: ”The United States

must give Israel everything necessary to maintain its existence and
continuation."

At another point he said:

"My visit to Israel will serve to confirn the standing of black Americans
in the United States and prevent a break in our relations with American Jews!"

In short, we can say that the Arab media made a big mistake by believing
that black power in America is capable of changing the course of political
matters in the Arab region. Moreover, it made an even bigger mistake by
imagining that this force is capable of exerting real and effective pressure
on the U.S. administration in order to gain recognition of the PLO.

In all probability, the sole Arab group which has not made a mistake and
has not fallen into the trap set for it is the PLO, represented by Yasir
'Arafnt, who realizes better than anyone else the significance and
dimensions of the tactics now being carried out through the American blacks.

We realize that the uproar concerning Young, Jackson and, lost recently,
Rustin is nothing more than a cleverly prepared action, and the only
concern of these individuals is to serve their own interests and those of
their country. Thus, there is no need to go overboard in issuing judgeIents
or to persist in giving advice and offering admonitions. For the resistance
knows when to act, when to rennin silent, and when to win. More important
than these, however, is that it realize just what standing and importance
American blacks have in America.

8591
CSO: 4802

61
DECEPTIVE PROPAGANDA AGAINST ARAB NATION DEPIDRED
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 19 Nov 79 p 1

[Editorial by Ahmad al-Jarallah: "Harping on Ineginary Tunes"]

[Text] Part of the tragedy is that some Arab leaders still believe that
trifling with their people is acceptable behavior even if the jest were
beyond possibility and defied reason. There is a well-known traditional
Palestinian saying: "If what you want is not to hit acetone, take a
larger stone." This means that the large size and the heavy weight of

the stone will be one's convincing excuse to stay out of a fight. We are
reminded of this proverb in the course of what we heard that the Palestinian
Revolution was prepared to support the Iranian Revolution with weapons and
with men if the United States were to intervene. Is there a stone bigger
than this one that would cause us to doubt that the whole process is a
joke played on our people? If the Palestinian Revolution does have this
capability, it is South Lebanon that needs it and not the Iranian Revolul-
tion which has more useful means it can use in its clash with the United
States.

It is certain that the Arab nations feel huniliated when they hear stars-
nents that imply a degree of [proficiency in] the art of the absurd. They
feel humiliated because there are those who are insulting their intelligence
by ascribing unrealistic proportions to facts whose proportions and real
strength are known to these nations. The late Prime Minister of Britain
Hinston Churchill told the British people when he was facing war, "I can
offer you nothing but patience and blood." Churchill did not tell then
that his [forces] were victorious and overpowering, nor did he tell then
that he would confront Hitler. assist France and defend the Netherlands.
In his appeal to the British people he carried a reasonable stone with
which he could seek refuge.

The Arab nation has gone through a period of media deception. Any exag-
geration of this kind or any harping on imaginary tunes is ultimately

an exercise in futility. Victory in the end belongs to the leader whose
promises are limited to his capabilities. A nation would thus not think
that it has storehouses of imaginary power that it would know nothing
about except from the thoughtless state-ants that defy logic.

8592
cso: 1.802 62
I'AI'EK DECRIES INEFFECTUAI. ACTIONS AGAINST UNITED STATES
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 9 Dec 79 p l
Ll-Zditorial by Ahmad Jarallah]

[Text] [L has been observed that the victories of some of the Arab and
Middle Eastern armies have been limited because they have been either
internal victories or victories in maneuvers in which it was known in
advance that nobody would die. Because the Palestine revolution knows in
advance that war between the U.S. and Iran will not happen, it sees no
harm in proclaiming its readiness to stand beside the Iranian ievolution
in its war with the 0.3. and in sending Palestinian armies to lehran.
\Inc:- the action is a maneuver in which nobody is to be killed. there is
no impediment to a hullabaloo of propaganda.

It is not the Palestine revolution alone that proclaims that. There are
nations which are content to adopt this attitude in the knowledge that.
if the situation were earnest and serious, they would have to cut off
their petroleum from the 0.5. in solidarity with Iran, and would likewise
have to cut off their diplomatic relations with the U.S., the stronghold
of colonialism and aompoly, down to the last of those designations which

we face uith starched collars and deference which sometimes reaches the
point of servility.

The L'.S. is a powerful nation, and we do not deny that we envy its might
and wish it to be weak, feeble, and in decline. Nevertheless. its weak-
ness. its feebleness, and its decline will not come about through raising
fists and shouting. "Down with President Carterz" It will come about
through the preparation of our people and the raising of their nroductiv-
ity. it will come about when our peoples are independent and able to work
in their own countries and develop them instead of fleeing from them and
instead of having the victories of our armies turn into justifications for
asking for more obedience or for the destruction of countries and villages

whose whole offense was a situation of unrest growing out of poxitical
maladministration.

Since the departure of the shah, Iran has lived in an atmosphere of suc-
cessive daily demonstrations and rallies, to the point where they have
hindd'rt'tl tho vountry's productivity, as if dcmnstrations and rallies were
all that is required of the shah's departure. When he left. it was as-

sumed that there would be a new political activity thm that would bring
about a change from the bad economic and political situation. Instead of
that. there has been lore misery. However. God is nagnaninous.

C30: (4802

61:
CROHN PRINCE SPEAKS ON NATIONAL ECONOMY
Kuwait AL-HATAN in Arabic 15 Oct 70 p 7
[Article: "Amir Receives Gulf Chamber of Commerce Delegations Today")

[Text] His Highness the Amir and Prime Minister Crown Prince Sa'd a1-'
Abdallah al-Sabah will meet today the heads and members of the delegations
participating in the second meeting of the chambers of commerce. industry
and agriculture of the Gulf states. These states include Saudi Arabia.

the UAE, Bahrain, Qatar, the Sultanate of Onan and Kuwait. The Iraqi
delegation did not attend yesterday.

The conference opened yesterday with a short speech by the president of
the Federation of Chambers of Commerce of Saudi Arabia, Shaykh Isma'il
Abu Daud, in his capacity as chairman of the first conference which was
held in Jiddah in October 1976. Abu Daud expressed his hope that this

meeting will give a boost to strengthening economic ties among the Gulf
states.

'Abd-al-‘Aziz al-Saqr, president of the chamber of Commerce and Industry
of Kuwait, also gave a speech following his election as chairman of the
current conference. He said: "This meeting opens to announce the formation

of the General Federation of Chambers of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture
of the Gulf states.“

He described the federation as the basic framework for cooperation and
coordination of efforts among the Gulf states. so that it can completely
fulfill its role in economic cooperation plans representing the private
sector.

He said: "The announcement of this federation is based on three main
considerations:

"The first is that this effort by the chambers of commerce is in harmony
with, integral to. and interconnected with the efforts which all their

governments are making in support of economic cooperation and integration
among all the states in the area.

65
"The second is that the realization of economic integration among our
countries is not dictated only by fraternal attachments, nationalist
feelings, historical and geographical ties, and a common purpose and
destiny. Rather, the achievement of this integration is above all an
inevitable economic necessity imposed by world economic trends, objective
scientific theories and the urgent need to preserve and protect the area's
resources. This integration is in the interests of all of us without
exception, and is our sole means to industrial and economic advancement
without any alternative. Moreover, it is our way to take advantage of the
historic opportunity given to us today to build a decent future for our
children tomorrow.

"The third consideration on which our efforts are based is our belief that
any effort to achieve regional economic cooperation among the Arab and

Gulf states must be seen and planned for as a part of a more general and
comprehensive concept and a stage in the attainment of a more far-reaching
and more complete goal, namely, economic cooperation on the level of the
greater Arab homeland. Without this view, or outside of this strategic
framework, Gulf cooperation will be unable to achieve its desired results."

Confrontation Uith Lloyd's

Mr al-Saqr praised the role of the chambers of commerce in confronting the
decision of the Lloyd's Group to consider the Persian Gulf and adjacent
waters--including the Gulf of 0man--a war zone, and the consequent increase
in war insurance rates for ships passing through this area. Lloyd's

also decided to impose an additional premium to cover risks of detention,
eabargo or seizure as of 14 August 1979. The Chamber of Commerce and
Industry of Kuwait inmsdiately opposed this decision and did its duty in
seeking to confront the move and to explain the ”suspicious background
circumstances" behind it and the serious economic and other effects which
could result. The Kuwait chamber sought assistance in these efforts from
all its fellow Gulf Arab chaaber of commerce organizations so that this
decision could be confronted firmly and with studied scientific and technical
measures and in complete coordination by the area as a whole. Indeed, the
agreement of your chambers of commerce was swift, admirable and unanimous,
due to the fact that all of you expressed total support for the Kuwaiti
Chamber of Connercs and Industry's viewpoint on the interpretation of the
"secrets" and "background circumstances" behind the decision, as well as
on the seriousness of the decision's effects and the need to contain this
action in a firm and coordinated manner. All of you made commendable
efforts in supporting the national insurance companies in their meetings
and negotiations with the Lloyd's Group. Our great pride in the admirable
results of these efforts was crowned by tho Lloyd's Group's withdrawl of
its decision. He must not forget two facts:

The first is that this test is a guiding example of what can be achieved

through action based on cooperation, coordination and the objective
presentatiOn of our common problems.
The second fact is that the federation of Gulf Arab chad>ers of cameras
can justly constitute a stable organizational framework to insure that
coordinated activity such as this will have a firm foundation and ample
scope for preliminary research and swift and flexible action.

For-ation of Joint Company

Mr al—Saqr also said:

"Because the formation of this federation achieves one of two resolutions
adopted by the Gulf Arab chanbers of commerce in their first meeting in
Jiddah. it gives ne great pleasure to mention now the second resolution
calling for the establishment of a joint investment company aimed at setting
up [word illegible] projects in various fields of economic activity. This
resolution was broadened and developed in a more general manner so that it
would include all the Arab states and would be edaraced by the General
Federation of Chanbers of Com-arcs, Industry and Agriculture of the Arab
Countries. This is what has occurred, and a charter has been issued for

the company in Dubai, UAE, with a capitalization of 700 million dirhams.

Shares will be offered in most of the Arab states before the end of this
year. God willing.

8591
C50: 1.802
U.S. ECONOMIC MEASURES AGAINST IRAN OPPOSEI

Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 17 Nov 79 p 1

[Editorial by Ahead al-Jarallah: "Equally Strong Opposition to 0.5.
Heasure"]

[Text] The 0.8. president's decision to freeze Iranian funds has undoubtedly
cracked the principles of 0.8. financial policy. It is basically incon-
ceivable for a country like the United States to tie political action and
economic action. In spite of 0.8. assurances made in letters which President
Carter sent to a number of financial and oil leaders in the world, the
certain fact remains that President Carter's decision did draw attention

to the possibility of utilizing or universalizing the use of such a prin-
ciple with any country that is engaged in a struggle with the United States.

We are not talking here about the Arab oil countries who have no more than
80 billion dollars in funds invested in the United States, but we are
talking about the dollar coverage for Japanese currency which is invested
in the United States; we are also talking about the funds of Ger-an banks
which are in excess of 200 billion dollars. The u.s. president's
decision has created an atmosphere of sharp apprehension in international
circles. It is true that oil countries or other countries nay not take
action to withdraw their funds at the present tine, but they, undoubtedly,
cannot ignore some of the warnings that have now been generated. These
state that it would be unwarranted to invest these funds in the future in

any fixed investaents such as real estate or anything that would be difficult
to dispose of quickly.

We have been opposed to what has happened in Iran, and He still are opposed
to it, but we now declare our opposition to the 0.5. decision regardless

of its interpretations and justifications. The question is one of prin-
ciple, and the u.s. president's decision is tantamount to the action of
occupying the 0.8. embassy in Iran. There is nothing equal to the action
of holding a human being hostage than that of withholding his funds. We
all realize that had not the internal situation in Iran been what it is.
Iranian leaders would not have supported what has happened. Their lack of
support or their opposition to the students have been futile since the

absence of law in Iran is asking every individual think of himself as a
national ruler.

The v.5. president's decision has created a major fracture even if it

were demonstrated on the surface that the international annoy markets
have assisailated and overcone it.

8592
080: h802 68
EVALUATION OF INVES'DIENT POLICIES URGED

Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 17 Nov 79 p 5

[Article by Economics Editor: "Reactions in Market to Decision 'I'o Freeze
Iranian Funds: (1) Expanding Considered Internal Investments "here
Political, Financial Returns Are High and Guaranteed; (2) Expediting
Reduction of Oil Production To Avoid Accumulating Surplus That Would Be
Subject to International Economic and Political Ups and Downs"]

[Text] "Once again all circumstances indicate that local and regional
investments, that is, investments within the Kuwaiti and the Gulf markets,
continue to be more advantageous and more secure than investments in
international markets." This is what AL-SIYASAH heard late last week from
numerous sources in the financial and real estate markets and in the stock
exchange. This follwed the decision of U.S. President Ji—y Carter to
freeze Iranian funds in 0.8. banks. Although the U.S. administration gave
assurances to Arab capital, these assurances did not prevent a climate of
apprehension from spreading. [It was feared that] over the long range
such capital may be subject to a similar step from the United States or
from Europe. A market source counted on the incident by saying:

"The occupation of the U.S. embassy in Tehran—according to the current
story and theory-was an accidental action by the students. It did draw
the Iranian and the US. adninistration into a confrontation that neither
had counted on. Every country in the world is theoretically subject to
emergency or surprise actions that may not have been considered or intended.
Hhat guarantee do we have that the United States or Europe will not repeat
the action of freezing the Arab countries' funds?"

Regardless of the political implications of this decision, the spontaneous
reaction that came out from the market was a conviction that investing
national capital in the local market and in joint Gulf ventures continued
to be the major security for these funds.

The capital returns in the local market and in the Gulf are high. The

high return rates are concrete and politically guaranteed. In addition,

such investments yield returns that subsidize the national economy and the
Gulf economy and constitute security returns that are ultimately advantageous
to the area.

69
The second reaction in the market supported the official cell to reduce
oil production, that is, to keep the oil in the ground es en invest-eat

so that there would not be any finencisl surpluses that vould be subject

to the econoeic and political fluctuations of the International nerket.

The freezing of Iranien funds in the United Stetee will lost certainly
expedite official progrsns locally end in the Gulf aree to resulete
production and to be satisfied, as much no possible, with [a level of] pro-
duction thet would neet the needs of national develop-eat.

8592
C80: 4802

70
PREPARATIONS MADE FOR SEASHORE DEVEIDPMENT PROJECT

Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 6 Dec 79 p 3

[Excerpts] Engr Fahmi al-Zamami. director of the adninistrations of buil-
ding and constructions in the municipality [of Kuwait]. said recently that
planning has been done for the Kuwait seashore project, which extends for
about 21 kilometers between the coast and the Gulf road and from the port
of al-Shuwaykh to Ra‘s al-Ard in al-Saliniyah. The project comprises
several recreational and tourism projects.

The seashore project is included in the coast and geodetic survey which
is in progress. It will be offered at international auction, and it is

hoped that work on it will begin in the middle of 1980. The cost of it
will be about 62.5 million dinars.

The project consists of 6 stages: (I) al-Jazirah al-Khadra' and the resort
complex in Dawhat al-Sha'b; (2) the area surrounding Abraj al-Kuuait
(Dasman and nunayd al-Qar); (3) the old ships museum (eastern tone): (a)
the al-Sharqiyah children's areas in al-Shuwaykh, al-Natyah, and al-Qiblah;
(5) the waterfront museum in al-Saliniyah (al-Salimiyah--Ra's al-Ard): and'
(6) the coast of Sayf al-‘Ann and the anchorage.

C30: 4802

71
BRIEFS

RURAL EXODUS--A rural exodus of extraordinary scope has mtied the Mauritanian
countrysides and has caused poorly controlled growth of the cities. of the
1,490,000 persons in the country. the number of nonada in 1976 fell to 1.106.000,
representing 36 percent of the population compared to 65 percent 11 years
earlier. During the sane period, the nunber of sedentary persons increased

to 906.000. while the last census revealed that 67.000 Hauritanians spend

part of the year abroad. Consequences: Nouakchott has 135,000 inhabitants
compared to 12,300 in 1964; and its population, over the last 15 years.

has grown at the rate of 22 percent per year. The average annual growth

rate of the urban centers is 10.2 percent. Similarly. the structure of
employment has changed profoundly: the traditional sector offered 279,000
jobs in 1965 but only 224,000 for approxinately the past 3 years. since the
last census; the modern sector, during the sane period. has had a population
increase fron 32,600 to 68,700. [Text] [Paris nmm L'AFRIQUE in French

19 Nov 79 p 6d] 8163

680: (0400

72
'ALI NASIR SEEN GAINING IN MEI! STRUGGLE
London AL-DUSTUR in Arabic 29 Oct-lo Nov 79 pp 16-17

(Article: "A New Shift in the Power Struggle in Aden: A Temporary Recon-
ciliation Among the Party, the Security Machinery and the Army")

[Text] The relations among the various cmponents of the ruling group in

the PDRY do not seem to be going well. On 18 September, the Beirut daily
AL-NAHAR reported the emergence of a new, though unstable, balance of power
in Aden. On 3 September, the Cairo weekly ROSE AL-YUSUF had reported the
arrest of "Huhsin," chief of the revolution's security nachinery. Earlier.
on 13 August, the Kuwaiti AL-SIYASAH carried a report-which later turned out
to be incorrect-to the effect that Hahamd Sa'id al-huhi, a member of the pre-
sidential council, has replaced 'Ali Nasir Muhammad as the head of government,
in a new chapter of the power struggle in Aden. All those reports, regardless
of how true they are, direct attention to events going on in the PDRY.

The outbreak of a political crisis in the PDRY unfolds the file of political
infighting in that small country-a file which often lends credence to the
political "aaxim" that revolution, like a cat. devours its own offspring.

Some people date the crisis back to a time preceding the "Nationalist Front's"
assumption of power, specifically to 1963 and 1961. when the front's leadership,
which was made up of members of "The Arab Nationalists Movement," began to
liquidate tribal leaders with the purpose of converting the front into a mo-
dern political organization. During that period, Salih Ibn "Awwas al-llaw-
shsbi, 'Abdullah al-Haj'ali and others were dismissed from the front. A

long procession then began during which liquidations continued while the front's
popular base continued to shrink and become confined to certain educated
groups. In the meantime, the settlement of political disagreements began

to take on a style akin to isolated terrorist action. The latest victim of
such action was former President Salim Rubayyi' 'Ali, or "Salimin" as he was
more comonly known.

The some observers say that the proclamation later of a "Marxism-Leniniam"
which is extremely radical in its language and quite alien to Yemen was the
clearest expression of the growing isolation which drove out Qahtan al-Sha'bi.
Faysal 'Abd al-Latif, Muhamd 'Ali al-llaytham and Salim Rubayyi' 'A11 for
much the same reasons in the end.

73
Analysis pauses at an important station, namely, the fifth congress of the
Nationalist Front which was held at Hndinnt nl-Sha'b [the people's vityl

in March 1973. The congress convened k years after the toppling of Quhtan al-
Sha'bi and his cousin Paysal 'Abd al-Latif al-Sha'bi. It appeared at the

rise that certain political factors have emerged internally and on the pan-
Arnb level which were in favor of the stability of the regime. The divisions
within the front seemed to have disappeared, relations with the north took a
positive direction and the campaign against the "petit bourgoisie" within

the Arab regimes turned into an inconsequential and pointless one.

In the atmosphere of that temporary lull, the fifth congress voted to halt
the process of building the "mass organizations" which the opposition had
demanded to Qahtan al-Sha'bi. Hith respect to the arny, which is the most
important element. the legitimate status of the armed forces was firmly
established and the demand for the dissolution of the armed forces, which

was one of the major causes of contention between Qahtan al-Sha'bi and the
leftist opposition, was finally dropped. The congress considered that the
military situation was stabilized through purging the army of the officers
and soldiers who supported the enemies of the regime and through pro-sting

an ideological indoctrination of the any by means of a progras of education
and guidance. That and the recurrence of border wars between Aden. on the one
hand. and Riyadh or San'a, on the other, created a new map of the relationships
among the various powers and forces and placed the army in the heart of poli-
tical activities.

It should be noted that 'Ali 'Antar, couander of the armed forces, was able
through his tribal ties to establish an accord between the tribal setup and
the any. The accord brought about great gains for Aden in its wars with
neighbors, especially in terms of having the tribes. or sons of then, join
the conflicts on the side of the “Haunt" govern-ant.

0n the other hand, the party appsratua--the Nationalist Front-was growing
under the leadership of 'Abd al-Fattsh Isma'il and was developing a radical
socialist language which placed it in conflict with the security machinery.
The conflict is one which distinguishes most "building-of-socialisn" ex-
periences in the non-European world. Hhile the public role of 'Abd al-l-‘attah
lsna'il as party theoretician and leader was growing, another role was growing
silently, secretly and alarningly, namely, that of Ina'il's ally, Kuhn-sad
Sa'id 'Abdullah, the former minister of state security better ltnwon as
"Huhsin."

It scene that this is the crux of the struggle: the party and the security
machinery, on one hand, and the army. on the other. The struggle assumes se-
veral nanifestations. If it is true that the prime ninister, 'Aii Nasir,

is allied with the defense minister. 'Ali 'Antar. against 'Abd al-Pattah
Isma'il who tends to be autocratic after having gotten rid of "Salimin,"

then we can assume that a bloc with strong tribal roots and fir- ties with the
array establishment is pitted against a bloc which had grown with the growth

7h
of the bureaucracy of the modern state but which has no true roots in the
society. Although he is an Arab, 'Abd al-Pattah Isma'il comes from a northern
family which lives along the borders between the two Yemens. He began his
political life in the trade union movement when the "working class" was in-
debted to 'Abdullsh al-Asnaj and supported him politically. Al-Asnaj later
became a leader of the "Liberation Front" which became a rival of the Nationa-
list Pronr. 'Abd al-Fattah Isma'il has not played any significant military
role, and has spent the greater part of the struggle against Qahtan el-Sha‘bi
receiving treatment in Bulgaria.

The two men who really toppled Al-Sha'bi were Salim Rubayyi' 'Ali who led the
famous uprising in his district of (lbbin). known as the Hay uprising,

and Muhammad 'Ali al-Haytham who controlled the junior officers hailing from
his region of Duthaynah. Disagreement over the army between him and Qahtan
al-Sha'bi was one of the most important factors which exploded the struggle.
The two men who are said by some to have been the victims of 'Abd al-f‘attah
lsma'il (i.e. 'Ali and al-iiaytham) share with the present prime minister, 'Ali
Nasir Muhammad, and his defense minister, 'Ali 'Antar, similar backgrounds
and experiences with the power structure. 'Ali 'Antar is the former leader
of the military operations against the British. One of his many achievements
in .xhe struggle against than is his liberation of the Dali' region. Since
'lcr aber 1969. he has been the comander of the PDRY armed forces. He shares
this important position with premier ‘Ali h'asir who is known to have strong
support within the army and who was defense minister until August 1971 when
lu: :cpluced Muhammad 'Ali al-Haytham as prime minister.

it seems that the present problem started when Huhsin, the former minister

of state, tried as security chief to extend his influence into the army.

In doing so. he clashed with 'Ali 'Antar who wants to keep a firm and absolute
grip on tne army. 'Antar's resentment found response from prime minister
Nusir and two other prominent ministers, Foreign Minister Muhammad Salih
Mutayya' and Planning Minister 'Abd al-'Aziz 'Abd al-ilali. All three share

a resentment against the excesses of Iana'il and Huhsin which have been
growing at the expense of the powers of the government and the cabinet
ministers.

According to very reliable information, the Soviet Union and several coununist
parties and elements in the Arab east offered to mediate between the two
sides. but the offers were turned down on the grounds that the crisis was

an "internal" matter.

On 8 August the Central Connittee of the Socialist party in the P011! held
an extraordinary meeting in an attempt to deal with the internal disputes
within the framework of a general reassessment of the PDRY's internal and
foreign policies since the overthrow of Salimin in June 1978. It is said
that 'Abd-al-Fattah Isms'il and Huhsin came under severe personal attack at
the meeting--the former for his excessive inclination to disrupt the other
[extra-party] political organization and concentrate power in his own hands
and his radical bureaucratic practices which alienate the people, the latter
for the atmosphere of intelligence surveillance which he has spread all over
the country. The opponents of Isma'il and Muhsin stressed that exaggeration
in attacking the late president Salimin and persistence in emphasizing the
leadership role of the party conceal certain implications and rebound one
way or the other to the benefit of the Isma'il-Muhsin axis. They also
attacked the practice of accusing all those who do not profess absolute alle-
giance to isma'il and Muhsin of treason on the grounds that they are sup-
porters of Salimin and opponents of the leadership role of the party.

The Outcome of the meeting, which was considered to be an unstable compromise
between 'Abd al-Fattah Isma'il and 'Ali Nasir, can be sensed up as follows:

'Ali Nasir was able to accomplish the following:

l--Removsl of Muhsir. from the post of minister of state security and the
formation of a collective committee to oversee security affairs.

Z--Consolidation of 'Ali 'Antsr's position as minister of defense.

3--vromotion of former minister Muhamd Salih Mutayya' to a party position
which makes him directly responsible for the PDRY's diplomacy and the chief
of the new foreign ministry and the promotion of former planning minister
'Abd al-‘Aziz 'Abd al-wali to a position which makes him the direct chief

of all planning and development operations and the ministries related to them.

'Abd al-Fattah lsma'il, in turn, was able to accomplish the following:

l--.\ declaration by the extraordinary session affirming "the strengthening
of the party's leadership role."

2--.\ppointment of Lt Col Ahmad Salim 'Ubayd, member of the Yemeni Socialist
oarty's central comittee, as director of the defense ministry's political
department.

3--chovnl of interior Minister Salih lluslih who is known to be Salimin's
last supporters in the government.

At any rate. the compromise favors Salih 'Ali Nasir. All the gains he made
were at the expense of 'Abd al-Fattah lsma'il, whereas Isma'il's "gains"
came within the framework of reorganization. The reaffirmation of the
party's leadership role is ultimately a formal matter, while the removal of
Salih Huslih under the guise of promotion within the party ranks is simply
a question of settling old scores which are not part of the present power
struggle. The only serious gain scored by 'Abd al-Fattah Isna'il is the
appointment of Ahmad Salim 'Ubsyd as director of the defense ministry's
political damn-mot. It is said that 'Ali 'Antar agreed to this decision
reluctantly. The appointment may prove to be the catalyst of a future ex—
plosion in the series of the power struggle. It would not be easy for some-
one iike 'Ali 'Antar. with his long record of struggle, his important tribal
status and his membership of the political burlau of the ruling Yemeni So-
cialist Party, to accept. finally and decisively. ideological control of the
army by a member of the central committee.

A final problem remains. namely. the problem of unity between the two Yemens
which may overlap with the current struggle in Aden. About 3 months ago, an
"ideological symposium" was held in Aden to discuss some problems of the
Yemeni revolution. The seminar was attended by representatives from Arab
communist parties and organizations as well as members of the Yemeni So—
cialist Party. The discussions which took place at the symposium showed
that there were two conflicting opinions. One opinion contended that the
question of Yemeni unity should precede the task of “building socialism"

in the PDRY, the other argued the reverse case.

if we recall that the elimination of Salim Rubayyi' 'Ali in the south and the
assassination of Ai-chashmi in the north set off a bloody conflict between
the north and the south. then it is noteworthy that the present conpromise
[in the PDRY] was accompanied by another development--the 3-day visit by

'Ali Nnair Muhammad to San'a after which a joint statement was issued by

'Ali Abdullah Salih, the president of the Yemen Arab Republic, and 'Ali

Nasir Muhammad affirming that unity between the two parts of Yemen is essential
and should be achieved by peaceful and democratic means. The two leaders
also pledged to exert further efforts to achieve unity. Hhile it is diffi-
cult to be certain about the existence of a connection between the power
struggle in the south and the situation in the north, it is clear that 'Ali
Nasir seeks to push the bilateral relations forward in the hope that he may
at the right moment seek the help of the strong neighbor 'Ali Abdullah

Saiih against the weak Comrade 'Abd al-Fattah lsma'il.

9234
USO: 4802

77
HEALTH SERVICE PROGRESS IN DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEHED
Aden 14 OCTOBER in Arabic 14 Oct 79 pp 5. 6

[Article by 'Ali Ibn Talib: "The Medical and Health Services Achieve
Significant Progress"]

[EXCERPTS] When one takes a searching look at any country to gauge its pro-
gress and the correctness of its course, the first thing he would investigate
would be the state of the social services which are provided by the state

to the people. He would try to determine the ratio of doctors. nurses and
hospital beds to the population, the ratio of school seats and teachers to
the population and so forth. In other words, the enquirer would try to probe
what the party has planned and what the state is providing for the citizens
in the way of social services which necessarily reflect the interest being
shown in developing and improving the life of the people.

Since we are celebrating today the 16th anniversary of the revolution, how
can we monitor the development and expansion of the health services in our
country? He will not go back too far, but it is necessary to point out that
with the issuance of the Popular Clinics Law in 1973. private clinics came
to an end and medical and health services became free to all in the PDRY.

In recent years. public health was not strictly associated with conventional
medicine. but we began to see the emergence of various health institutions
dealing with health care in the schools, health care in the professions.
maternity and child care and other such areas. This in itself means greater
expansion and specialization in medical and health services.

Looking at the country's health map during the 1970's, we detect visible
changes in its features. Eleven new hospitals have been opened in various
provinces of the republic. of these, three are specialized hospitals--the
first time any such hospitals have been established--for maternity, chest
diseases and children. Moreover, a large number of health units and centers
were also established in the rural and remote areas of the country.

78
Several hospitals and health centers will soon be completed. They include

a hospital in Al-Mukalla with a capacity of 200 beds. a hospital in “-3
with a capacity of 120 beds. a new childrens hospital with a capacity of 300
beds and a hospital for mental and psychological diseases with a capacity

of 300 beds, in addition to two health centers in the Yafi' area.

Free Treatment for Hospital Inmates and Outpatients

During the past 2 years. health services were extended for the first time to
many remote and rural areas. bringing to 252 the number of health units in
the villages. in addition to five mobile health units, using vehicles and
camels to reach remote areas.

In the field of mother and child care. there are 29 care centers in various
provinces. while 26 popular clinics offer medical and health services in the
highly populated areas twice a day--in the morning and the evening. in addi-
tion to the existence of 49 dispensaries and seven popular dental clinics.
The health ministry also operates an old people's home with a capacity of

26 beds. But this home still requires greater attention and care to enable
it to provide more services to its inmates.

Free medical care has become a reality, and the state's expenditure on health
services has increased in recent years. Suffice it to know that in 1978
the state spent 718.000 dinars to buy medical and preventive materials. In

1 year. this figure jumped to more than 1 million dinars--an increase of
as percent.

Providing care for citizers is no longer confined to the services offered by
the medical and health institutions in the country. A citizen suffering

from a disease which cannot be treated locally is entitled to go abroad for
treatment at government expense. In 1 year, the state expenditure on treat-

ment outside the country increased by 33 percent. It reached 200.000 dinars
this year.

Future of health Services

Certainly. the health and medical services have not yet reached a fully
satisfactory level. in terms of the number and kind of services offered to
the citizens. But there is no doubt that those services are expanding and
improving continuously.

To explore the future of health services in this country. one has to look
beyond statistics and into the minds of leaders in the health ministry as
well as into the files which contain the future plans of the ministry.
In an interview, brother Dr 'Awad Salim Ba-Mutarraf, the deputy minister of
health, gave us a view of the ministry's plan from a new perspective.
"Previously," he said, "the ministry concentrated on the treatment aspect.
But after the health seminar which was held recently and after the health
conference, greater attention began to be paid to the preventive aspect which
has become a direct target. This attention to preventing the occurrence

of diseases has become a practical reality."

Dr Ba-Mutarraf explains that preventive medicine is directed at diseases
connected with the environment of the country. Statistics collected by the
ministry show that those diseases, such as Malaria, bilharziasis, child
diseases and diseases caused by parasites and contagion, are the major di-
seases in the countryside. Those environmental diseases are being focused
upon because of their direct connection with the public health and because
they affect a part of the work force, as the malaria does, for example.

Other Concerns of the Ministry

He will here let Dr Ba-Mutarraf tell us about the ministry's other interests
and concerns: "In the international year of the child, we wish to emphasize
the attention paid by the revolutionary government and the Ministry of Health
to the health of children and their mothers. The Childrens Hospital provides
medical services and treatment to the country's children, while the various
maternity and child centers provide the necessary care and services to ex-
pecting mothers and children, including such services as comprehensive immuni-
zation of children against contagious diseases and providing medicines, tonics,
vitamins and any other material related to the state of malnutrition which

has plagued our children for many years in the past.

As a result of the industrial and productive expansion in many projects, the
number of workers has risen significantly. The ministry has therefore opened
a special center for medical care for professionals and equipped it with mo-
dern equipment to serve as a center for supervising the health of workers.
protecting them in their places of work and treating them from occupational
diseases and accidents. In this regard, the ministry coordinates its efforts
with those of the Ministry of Industry and the General Federation of Workers.
It is also cooperating with them in drawing up plans for setting up clinics
in work centers to provide help for workers on duty. Following the return

of scholarship grantees from abroad where they acquired their specialization.
the center will witness further improvement and development.

In cooperation with the Ministry of Education, we also show concern for health
in the schools and seek to improve the health of students in the schools and
provide them with treatment and protection against contagious diseases.
We sh0uld not forget the tuberculosis plan which is considered one of the pro-
minent health improvements in the country. Re have been able to achieve
major progress in treating this disease scientifically. The results thus far
achieved by the project are impressive. Several branches of the project have
been established in the provinces.

The plan places a special emphasis on health conditions in the island of
Suqqatra where health services used to be below zero. as witnessed by the
high mortality rate among children. We will try to make up for the island's
previous lack of medical services by providing even better services than those
being offered now.

The files of the Ministry of Health include a project which represents an
important qualitative leap by the sector of medical services in the country.
and (or which funds have been allocated in the second five—year plan. I

asked Dr Ba-Hutarraf to give us an idea about this project and its future po-
tential. He said that the project is huge and involves first aid and first
rate medical care. In addition to the state's interest in the project, the
project has also attracted the interest of the Horid Health Organization and
other international agencies, especially after the international Alma-Ate
conference in the Soviet Union which had emphasized this aspect. The project
will be implemented in coordination with the Ministry of Planning and coopera-
tiou with international organizations. Those will be invited to a health care
conference which will be organized by the ministry in November 1979. The
project aims at providing full health care to the citizens by consolidating
protective and treatment medicine and making it available in all parts of

the republic by means of first rate health care units. Because of the vastness
of this project, health units will be able to operate in every village with

a complete team including a medical aide, a health inspector, a midwife and

a nurse. Naturally, the project will not be implemented in its entirety.

but will begin in the remote and backward areas and continue to spread until
it covers the entire republic.

925-“
C30: 4802

81
RECIONALISM. FUNDAMENTALISH THREATBN REGIME
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEHBINB in German 5 Dec 79 p 1
[Article by Harald Vocke: "Saudi Arabia Is Sick "]

[Text] "A lion who commands an army of a hundred foxes wins every battle.
A fox who commands an army of a hundred lions loses every battle." By
such a vivid metaphor, they summarize in Arabia what they think of leader-
ship qualities in army commanders and statesmen. Abdul Aziz Ibn Saud. the
founder of Saudi Arabia, was a lion who conquered a kingdom with a handful
of Bedouins. Since President Carter last winter dropped the Shah, an old
ally of the Heat. without much ado, the Arabs see the head of state of the
Western leadership-power as a fox who does not have the lion's courage for
victory. After the Shah's departure from Tehran, the House of Saud also
began to he uneasy. In Arabia. they have virtually lost all faith in the
United States. Would, in an hour of need. America stand by the Arabian
kingdom, as Carter's predecessors had promised again and again during the
past few decades?

Because of its oil riches, Ibn Saud's formerly poor empire has developed
into the Near East's economic superpower. Only if the West has at its
disposal Saudi Arabia's oil fields, which are richer and can be exploited
more rapidly then the Orient's other oil deposits, can the industrial
nations cover their energy needs in the 1980's. Should Saudi Arabia drop
out as oil supplier for only a few months, the consequences for the West's
economy would be more decisive than the earlier oil boycott. in the winter
after the 1973 Arab-Israeli October War. had been for the United States.
The revolutions in Libya and Persia taught the industrial nations what
unreliable oil suppliers revolutionary governments are. An overthrow in
Saudi Arabia would probably mean that in the kingdom welded together by
ibn Saud. several power centers, hostile to one another, would emerge.

The Nest Arabian Hijaz territory which, apart from the harbor town of
Jiddah also encompasses the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. has little in
common with the East Arabian oil territories on the Persian Gulf. 1n the
Hijaz' towns live austute, cooly calculating merchants whose enthusiasm
for the puritan piety of their Bast-Arabian comrade-in-arms, Ibn Ssud,

had never been very great.

82
The East Arabinn tribes who are loyal to the crown, on the other hand.
lunk d-un with displeasure on the activity of the people of Hllnz and of
the armies of temporary foreign workers who do the major work in the oil
fields. Perhaps one-fourth of Saudi Arabia's inhabitants are temporary
foreign workers. The industrious itinerant workers from Yemen's mountains
have traditionally been on the side of Saudi Arabia's royal house. But
the Palestinians and Syrians under surveillance by the government have
also achieved influence on Saudi Arabia's economy.

Saudi Arabia is sick. Its main illness is the loss of faith in the United
States. Hardly less serious are the rivalries within the royal family.
The tensions in the royal family were strong already under King Feisal.
Feisal was murdered in 1975 by one of his nephews who had been trained in
close combat by Lebanon's Palestinian partisans. After the regicide, the
rumor was spread that the United States was behind the act. As nonsensi-
cal as this assertion was, it found an ear with many Saudi Arabians. King
Chalid, who took over the crown from the murdered Peisal, felt too weak

to risk an open power struggle with the terrorist commandos of the Pales-
tinian partisan movement. Even after the regicide, Saudi Arabia continued
its high aid payments to the Palestinian Arabs.

Sinve Feisal's death, the present crown prince Fahd has been the most im-
portant man in the ruling family. But in the past 6 years. America and
the Nest European countries have in their Arab policies been betting
primarily on the young minister of foreign affairs Saud ben Feisal. This
son of king Feisal studied in the United States and he is negotiating in
English. However. Saud ben Feisal is no friend of western democracies,
but flirts instead with the radical arab countries. After the November
occupation of the great mosque in Mecca by a few hundred rebels, Minister
of Foreign Affairs Saud first offered several explanations, but then he
became silent.

Saudi Arabia is an important ally of the Western World. America has
delivered highly sophisticated weapons to the Saudi Arabians. But the
confidence-based relationship between the oil kingdom's leading politic-
ians and the western industrial nations has been shaken since Feisal's
death. The Nest is lacking experts on Arabia who would be capable of
strengthening once more the Saudi Arabians' confidence in the west, which
has been diminished by the Persian crisis. But Saudi Arabia's ruling
house can overcome the kingdom's internal crisis by itself. “by does it
not elevate Crown Prince Fahd, the royal family's strongest and most
experienced man, to be the sole responsible head of government? Without
Fahd. the sickly King Chalid will hardly be able to save the throne for
his family.
éga'ggggéiiﬁgéggs

éggagggﬁggas
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200040032-0

C50:

center had been established in the
Kingdom. and everything is got;
according to schedule. he said.

The «Inference 0/ Arab Minty
ters of the Interior. to he held in
Saudi Arabia shortly. will concen-
mte on plowing cooperation
among Arab countries in security
and lighting crime. Preparations
for the conterenoe here progra-
sit'. on the itlatl'tlctions 01 Prime
Nail. Await slresaed.

With the present ecommic situ-
at'nn and the development in the
county many people were coming
With the intuition 0/ remaining
here illegzlly. hc said.

The government has taken the
same step\ I! are applied in all
other Ctltl'ltnc: to light the Illegal
presence.At the same time it gives
all the help it can to time perform-
in. their religious data. In
some people take edvuttage d
that help to 1?] 1.; work here.
Campaigns or WW
residents. were no more th-
natural and legal treatment. It was
'h’: teqtonsihility 0! all citinnt to

Ip the government in Ipplying
the law. but some people hide
people without residence penis
or try to detend their rightwmy
in the Kingdom. Awaji aid.

Asked about the eﬂeaiveneu
ot campaigns. and whethet lb
government had other ways 0!
deal whh the mam; Await

aredthat thepolicy deport.
in; ileulﬂreeidents was a ﬁg:
Mie' ' the government.
there were various methods.

4820

85

WWI;

helptomrestrlct:
to

$1“ pennht

thoddeuayeat

an oravisilloll
Moat crimes are
theae people.who
areottchotni
Thenevspapero
taxi drivers disr-
prioes. the Tram
doesnotate and
giventp.Whatwu
wondered?
Awajirepliedth
iatak'mgthemattet
ueoltattirneters
Mandhypt
transport which
W1 and r
wlheloroedtoh
Yetthatdoesno
polioelromtheirdl

and pushing one:
ted.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200040032-0
Hisham Naaer walked out into the
clear morning settling over the Yanhu
Industrial City and looked at the ﬂutter-
ing green flags of Saudi Arabia. the new
houses. new streets. the mosaic of plan-
ning being titted together on an enorm-
ous scale.

" My feelings '.' “ he said. replying to a
question.“ Right now. they are the feel-
ings of a builder. a builder who is seeing
his building going up. "

Last week. when King Khaled led the
dedication ceremonies for the new
Yanbu, the Ministerol Planning‘s senti-
ments were appropri-te to thousands of
men who have worked lot the past ﬁve
years to build an industrial colossus on

the Red Sea.
They were particularly apt for the
young engineers of the Royal Commisv

sion for Juhail and Yanbu. and the
Yanhu team led by director general

Sammy Mosly. Crown Prince Fahd. the'

chairman ol the Royal Commission.
hailed the complex as " proo! that our

skilled hlshly educated youth can per-
form great adtievemenu. "

What has been ' d- at
Yanhulnthespaoeolﬁveyearsolplao—
nih; and two years ol‘eonstrtadion is
remarkable. King Khaled Saturday
dedicated '1 counties that is np'dly rising
above its .-lahorate inlrastructurc.

The builders began with a vast. empty
tract that boasted good soil conditions
and the makings ot a deep-water port.
but virtually nothing else. A series at
toughengineeringchallenges wen: sethy
the planners for tramlorming the land-
seepe into an integrated. petroleum-

Those challenges are being met.

The makings of two pipelines — one
for crude oil. one for natural gas liquids
(NGL)— now reach across the Ki
from the Ahqaiq and Ghawaroil lildsol
the Arabian Gull coastal plain to the
coal shoresol the Red Sea. Eleven stor-
age tanks. each capable otholding a mil-
lion barrels of crude oil. are nearing
completion at the Yanbu terminus of the
oil pipeline. The big steel cylinders used
in the complex business of lractionat'utg " The!

gas liquids into consumer luels now phrlosopl:
march to the edge at the sea. leading to a Naur 5
cause way that stretches almost a theme economic
ter out from shore. The cracking towem plea. Sec
beams and pipes of an oil refinery are aspect of
gathering just across the mouth of awadi the Red 1
{tom the Ntil. plant. momenl‘
Hundreds of new houses. clustered ”I“ '
together like subdivisions of a new town. Gilli
radiate lront the Yanhu headquarters of Vi! ["1
the Royal Commission. Aﬂmh“
Nine months ago. hardly any of these main:
facilities were noticeable. Little was said I' uefted
- in the Kingdom about Yanbu by anyone [Ema oi
apart lrom the planners. 1he Royal the same
Commission itself remained largely sil- With s“
ent ahottl developments. 20 r
I Two days before the dedication took 9° -
place. Mosly lound time at the end 0! a cairnmunl '
long day to explain why. ‘0‘, . a
" I'm a person who never used the hardly be
words 'will' or 'shall.‘ " he said. " Now The E
I‘m saying something in the past tense. l Pipeline
huilt. lacmtnpli-hed. Not'l will.‘ Andl toline (a
want Hts Magesty King Khaled. the m‘ the
Crown t’nnte and the Vice chairman oi minerals
the Commission (Nazer) to have conﬁa delivering
dence that we will never say ‘will.’ We per d”.
will instead accomplish. " 198|_ so.
Saturday.November l7 wasacelebra- that sup;
tion to herald the transtormation of one exports u
0! Saudi Arabia‘s most fundamental SUP“
concepts into reality. It will be another ""008" l
six years before all the components of EWJ
theYanbu Industrial Citycome together irtg the 0'
to form the functioning colossm. but the since prit
integration processisnowclcarly visible. romin ref
In [985. 75.000 people will live and my,
work in the new city. Their homeswill be These
arranged to maximize amenities ranging following
from highway access to breezes from the that the l
- sea. More than 8.000 people are already though th
tltere. calls lora
They will worlt at two oil reﬁneries 1 I982. Tl
petrochemical complex. a crude o" boosted e'
export terminal. an NGL fractionation million by:
plant :at schools. hospitals. mosques. an “ looping
airport and three ports : at a variety_ol director 3
private factories producing everything Forthe
from concrete walls to windows. Several the (m.
factories are already open. A 60-bed Almost a
hospital now under construetion will that oil ar
start operations less than 30 weeks after world. u
its ground breaking. Saudia ﬂights are gained ts
scheduled to start in Julv. through
processes

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200040032-0
construction ot Yanbu‘s NGL
lractionation plant. Redec and
its subsidiaries built and man-
_age Yanbu‘s first modern
hotel. the Yanbu Hyatt. Redcc
manages the cement storage
system at the Yanhu commer-
cial port. which is now handl-
ing more than 1.2 million tons
a year. Redec hopes to get
involved in lood supplies for
Yanbu through a Kindomu tile
cold storage network that
Pharaon vows will drop food
prices in Saudi Arabia by 40
per cent in less than a year's
time.

“We're here becausewebelievein
the Kingdom's industrialization."
Rharaonsaid.“ Herewe havetwo plen-
tiful and cheap commodities — energy
and money. Youeangodownstream bet-
ter here because you're attachedto the
wellhead.

“ Today we might not have our oil
production after 50 or 60 years." he
said. “ But. i! we can reduce production
and stretch out the life of our oil by pro-
cessing it. we may get another 200 years
out of our oil. "

All of this. oi course. is costing Saudi
Arabia huge sums of money. Infrastruc-

ture work performed by the Royal
Commission at Yanbu alone will prob-
ably wind up costing S 6 billion during
the ﬁrst. eight-year phase. Petroline
expects to spend 8 1.64 billion on the
crude oil line. storage tanks and export
terminal. Petromin‘s domestic reﬁnery is
now tagged at S L6 billion. The
Petromin’Mobil export reﬁnery will
probably weigh in at between: 1.5 bil-
lion aods 2 billion. The Royal Commis-
sion is placingS 35 billion worth of insur-
anoe [or the intrastmcture alone at
Yanbu and its larger sister industrial city
Jubail on the Gulf.

Large as these amounts are. the ulti-
mate success at Yanbu and Juhail over
the next 25 years will make it well worth
the investment.

Unlike other government agencies.
the Royal Commission's budget ‘s not
fun-ﬂ“ I:- uuc-Iuﬂ can-UH -:‘=‘c1ﬂ-
coca—22.33 no...» 3. is”. 23:
9.81:8 an: n «3.03 .. 5 Go 9.8 on
<25...

2—3:. run 332:. .0953 u. u: on :3
5.683; 52353 8 2:0: :5
352%: 0.. $35.5 5 (page. v8.3.
83 2a 53.8 E in: E» :8 .2 as?
38:. 38 «3&3! 30.9 53 guano?
Em. 2259.6 23 33353.8... m<2.<
was: 62.23.. so .5“. mo 3=omo 2.2.25
.3 Bra: 0... 3. 5n 003356: 3 2:?
.303 :32. a ton—”.mcnw .2833
33:2. 8 «.5 :8 £5.33 9.38..
3.53.3 374.33.

: w»: 0.. 2:. Ran—:33. .55 w 8
in: =5 3.9%.; 3325 <55: 5:. £8
8 «o 8 :6 35.28.. 239 a 3217.

gal-7...; .. {h’iﬂnﬂr— .. 2.. IL: Ira—E
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP.2-00060R000200040032-0
On the eve of King Khuled's arrival in Yanbu last week.
Crown Prince Fahd toured the new Industrial City with
officials from the Royal Commission and several ministers.

The Crown Prince. who is chairman of the Royal Com-
mission forlubail and Yunbu. spoke afterwardsto a gather-
ing of about 300 ollicials and businessmen about the
importance of Yanbu to Saudi Arabia‘s economic
development and how it represents “an example for all
Saudis“ of achievement.

"What i have seen today has impressed me greatly."
Prince Fahd said. “This is a start toward industrialization.
which is our objective. and we are striving with all of our
charts and strengths to attain this goal.“

The tour included visits to several of the live permanent
construction camps being built around the Royal Commis-
sion‘s headquarters at the Industrial City. an area desig-
' nated by its distance from the old town of Yanbu as Kilo 19.

The camps were built by Saudi companies — Al Rashid
Trading and Constniction. Ditco Engineering and Con-
struction. SaudiIMod-L Construction. Arabian Polylabl
Al-Hamidi and SAPRECO.

The Crown Prince praised both the young engineerswitlt
the Royal Commission and the Saudi contractors for their
worlt in building the permanent construction camps. which
wilt be home for the next decade to most of the' thousands
of workers who will build Yan-iu.

Minister of Finance and National Economy SheiIrlt
Muhammad Aba AI-Khail agreed that the camps con-
tained " really beautilul houses." adding that they were
“executed at a logical cost which was not exorbitant."

Aba Al-Khail questioned. though. whether the houses
were too luxurious for the young men who would be living
in them.

Prince Fahd responded by saying that Planning Minister
Sheikh Hisham Naaer had informed him that the attrac-
tiveness of the Yanbu housing was acting as an incentive in
the Royal Commission's recruitment campaign among
Saudi graduates.

The Crown Prince's speech locused on these young edu-
cated Saudis.

“ What we see here today from the young Saudis working
for the Royal Commission is an example {or all Saudis." he
said. “Several years ago. when lwas the Minister of Educa-
tion. Saudi Arabia had few ~‘ nook. and at that time the
number of students was only 30.000 to 35.000. Now we
have six universities comprising 50.000 students and these
universities are graduating every year thousands of gradu-
ates in every field.
"Here is proof that our skilled. highly educated youth
can perform great achieVements." he said.

Prince Fahd noted how there are now more than 800
industrial plants in Saudi Arabia. both large and small. and
that they represent "a good sign for a good beginning.

“I believe that we all have a task towards fulﬁlling the
objective of industrialization." he said. “We have all to
work diligently hand in hand to fulfill this goal. 1 know that
many Saudis do not know this reality and I want them to
ltnow what we are doing and what we have to do. This is
why I told the Minister of information (Dr. Muhammad
Abdo Yamani) to produce programs and shows on televi-
sion to focus on this so that the people will know what has
been done. to know what has been accomplished and to
know that we are doing something. that we are working
hard.

“The people should also know that they have a task. a

‘ duty toward their country, to put all their strength toward

the construction of the country."

Prince Fahd signalled out Naaer for praise. thanking him
for providing the opportunity oi his speech and applauding
Saudi Arabia's planning approach to development.

"If we are successful. this is only because we follow the
true path of Islam and that we are strong believers in our
attachment to our religion.

“Saudi Arabia's stable plan and stable policy has also
brought her respect from the world and our friends. Our
relationshi with the United States is based on this

sub]; po icy and plan as well."

The Crown Prince encouraged the Royal Commission
and businessmen to continue their elforts at Yanbu. and
added that King Khaled had asked to be informed daily 0!

advancements and progress oonceming the economic
development drive.

NGL Fractionation Plant

Jtddah snum ausmss in English 30 Nov 79 pp 28-29

[Text]

The NGL Fractionation Plant ill
Yanhu represents one of the next-lo-lnst
steps in the Kingdom’s extensive gas-
gathering system Ming built by Aramco
[or Pelromin. TthZO billion gas gather-
ing project aims at utilizing all the
natural gas produced daily with the
Kingdom‘s oil and converting it into
feedstock (or petrochemical production.

power for machinery. and as natural gas
products for export.

91

At the western end of the NGL
pipeline being built as putt of the gas
gathering project. the fractionation plant
at Yanbu provides the vital task of
seperating the natural gas liquids into its
component gases. Fractionating. which
involves controlled vaporization and
recondensatinn ol the materials. is essen- _
tinl in order to get usable raw materials
[mm the associated gas.
‘ I :1 11¢..(..la.<: 1.]:- ‘E a h 25.8:

:28.» o a»? a... z :3 can: 132.... m:
28—. a Si :5. 82.0.4 2:. an .3328:
3. 8 tan 3:. = :5 532... can?

>u £5 :8 8.: on :5 «on «222.3
2335. :8 20—. 12: 5 <39. W
woman 9.... £32 :8 363.. «£82.20:
0- >338. 33.. >32». £5 =8 .8...
2: 8333 5 :8 C18.”— 2989. W8...
«.333 3332. > was. 3:83
53.3.5 Om. 5.3:...» 2 :8 tag

923 2:. 08.5.3 .83» w 836 3
3:: 83399.. .

N81. Pipeline

Jiddah SAUDI BUSINESS in English 30 Nov 79 p 30

[Text]

The NGL Pipeline l'arlting the oil fields
oi ‘the Eastem Province with the Yanbu
lndustrial'City is an integral part of Saudi
Arabia‘s decision to use associated gases
in its move downstream into the pet-
rochemical industry. The I .I60-
kilometer pipeline will connect the NGL
lraetionation plant at Yanbu with the
gas-oil separator plants at Shedgum and
Uthmuniyah in the middle of the Eastern
Province fields.

“I: pipeline. scheduled to be com-
pleted by the middle of l981. will be able
to move 270.000 barrelsa day of natural
gas liquids across the peninsula along its
route. The 26-to 30-inch diameter line.
which will run parallel to a crude oil
transport pipeline also under construc-
tion. will be computer controlled. and
will incorporate a number of new and
sophisticated safety features.

' what will ultimately

Ltke the rest of the gas gathering prog-
ram. it is being built by Aramcn as part of
be a $20 billion

program to keep the country's gas wealth
from being wasted at flaring stations.
The high-pressure pipeline will in a sense
operate itself. since power to move the

gas through thuIine will he provided by
burning NGL for fuel at various power
stations being constructed along its
length. incorporated throughout its
length are sensors and a series of valves
which will allow a control center in
Dhahrun to close off any portion of it in
an emergency. Pipe wall thickness in
Shedgum. Yanbu and at a future inter-
mediate pump station will. be increased
to provide additional salety in those
areas.

Main contractor for construction of
the line is Saudi Arabia Techint. with the
parent company based in Argentina.

Crude Oil Pipeline

Jiddah SAUDI BUSMSS in English 30 “av 79 p 31

[Text]

At a cost oi $1.64 billion. the 1,207-
kilometer oil pipeline — called the East
West Crude Oil Pipelite -— will give
Saudi Arabia an outlet for Eastern Pro-
vince oil on the Red Sea without the
necessity ior costly shipping through the
Straits of Hormuz and around the Ara-
bian Peninsula. it will termirtate in a l.8$
million barrels a day terminal at the
Yanhu Industrial Complex from which
the oil can be loaded directly on tankers
or sent to the twin oil refineries under
construction as pan of the Yanbu indus
trial program.

Construction of the pipeline. being
managed by Petroline (a subsidiary of
the government's Petromin organiza-
tion). is due to be completed in mid-
l98| . The pipeline. which is“ inches in
diameter. isone of the two biggest in the

9h

world - the other is the Alaskan
pipeline — and later can be expanded to
handle a total of 2.35 million barrels of
crude a day. Planning Minister Sheikh
Hitham Naaer said at the Yanbu dedica-
tion ceremonies that the line will carry 3
million barrels a day. an upgrading of
capacity that isapparently linked tocon-
cern over the security of the Straits of
Hormuz. _

The line's ll pumping stations. two
pressure reduction stations and twocool-
lng stations will string out along the
rough country seperating Yanbu from
the Eastern Province terminus at the
Gharwar and Abqiaq oilfields.

Petroline. headed by Director Gen-
eral Hussein Linjawi. is responsible [or
construction and operation of the
pipeline. Design and engineering was
Petrochemical Complex

Jiddah SAUDI BUSINESS in English 30 Rev 79 p 33

[Text]

Planners at SABIC and Mobil. joint
venture partners in the Petrochemical
Complex at Yanhu. hope to see the giant
plant begin to come on stream early in
l984. after a constniction period of
about three years. The plant will be fed
by the NGL fractionation plant at
Yanhu. which in turn is fed by the trans-
peninsular NUL pipeline from the East-
ern Province to the Red Sea.

Ethane. the product resulting from the
first stage of the fractionation project.
will he the prime feedstock for the plant.
and in turn will he converted into one
billion pounds a year of ethylene. the
first stage in the process which leads to
the development of plastics.

The plant will be divided into four sec-
tions. each with its labs. machine shops
and other support facilities. The first of
these will he the ethylene cracking plant.
with an annual capacity of 450,000 tons
per year. Some of that will he exported.
The rest will flow into the three other
sections of the plant for conversion into

95

other products. They include ethylene
glycol. which will he produced at a rate 0‘
200.000 tons per year: low-density
polyethylene. to he produced at a rate of
200,000 tons per year; and high-density
polyethylene, which will he produced at
a rate of 90,000 tons per year. These
materials will be sold individually hy the
two partners. first in the Kingdom and
then in the United States and Europe.
where planners believe annual demand
for them will increase at a rate of about
seven per cent a year.

Low-density polyethylene is the
largest. volume plastic presently pro-
duced. and it is valued for its toughness.
light weight and ﬂexibility. High-density
polyethylenes are finding a growing use
in the manufacture of plastic bottles and
containers. since it is more rigid than its
low-density cousin. Ethylene glycol is
used primarily as the chemical compo-
nent m the manufacture of polyester
synthetic fibres. and also is used «men-
sively in automobile anti‘frecu.
Petronin' a Domestic Refinery

Jiddalt SAUDI. BUSINESS in English 30 NOV 79 p 34

[Text]

Petromin's SL6 billion domestic
reﬁnery at Ynnbu is designed to help
make Saudi Arabia's Western Province
self-sufficient in petroleum products and
fuel. United to Pctroline's crude oil
pipeline it is planned that the refinery
will begin producing ”0.000 barrels a
day of various fuels by late l98l. soon
after the completion of the pipeline.

The reﬁnery will he the major point
for producting the gasoline. aViution
fuel. marine fuel. deiscl fuel and other
products used in the Western Province.
The refinery is being built and will be
operated by Petromin. It is also desig-
nated as a training camp for Saudis who
will then be able to stay and run it. or
on to key jobs in other sectors of t

Kingdom‘s oil business.

_The current needs of the Western Pro-
vrnce have been served by tankers which

have to haul crude from the east around
the whole peninsular and to Jeddah for
refining before it can It distributed. But
the leddah reﬁnery is rapidly running

out of capacity. and soon will be unable
to supply the needs of leddah. Medina.
Mecca. .liutn. Yanhu and other expand-
ing cities in the area.

Eventually. the Yanbu rcﬁnery's vol-
ume will be increased by 250.000 barrels
a day. though the mix of products for the
overall amount of 420.000 barrels of ml
per day has not yet been decided.

to the ﬁrst phase. it is expected to sup-
ply the West with 66.000 barrels of fuel
oil per day. 30.000 barrels of motor
diesel fuel. 24.500 barrels of premium
gasoline. 8.150 barrels of regular
gasoline. I2.000 barrels of jet fuel and
2.100 barrels of liquificd petroleum gas.
About 20 per cent of that will he used
locally. and the rest will be moved from
the refinery site in the Yaobu industrial
complex to distributors by pipeline. tank
truck and tanker. Plans are on the board
to build a 200 kilometer pipeline con-
necting the refinery to Medina.

Main contractor for the project is
Chiyoda of Japan. which started work in
Yanbu during the summer.

Export Refinery

Jiddah SAUDI BUSINESS in English 30 Nov 79 p 35

[Text]

Yunbu‘s Wobil-Petromin Export
refinery represents one important phase
in Saudi Arabia's decision to integrate its
oil industry. It will manufacture end sell
the oil products —- aviation fuel.
gasoline. fuel oil and so on -— which in
the past have been the exclusive prop-
erty of the major oil companies.

The $2 billion project. in which Pct-
rornin and Mobil each have u 50 per cent
interest. isto be completed in early I985.
after ground is broken for its construc-
tion late in NM. Initially it will have the
capacity of producing 250.000 barrels a
day of petroleum products. and if it

proves to be successful that capacity can
be expanded to 500.000 barrels a day.

Crude oil for its operations will arrive
in Yanbu through the Petrolinc pipeline
now under construction. Fuel for its
operations will be provided by the paral-
lel NGL pipeline. which also will link
Yanhu to the oill'relds of the Eastern
Province.

Petrornin and Mobil say the daily mix
of fuels produced by the refinery will
meet the needs of the international mur-
,ltets of the late 19805 and 1990.» Of the
initial 250.000 barrels duily capacity.
current plans are for production of
68,000 barrels of gasoline. [8.000 hur-
rels of naphtha. 35,000 barrels of jet
fuel. 75.000 barrels of heating oil and
deisel fuel and 54.000 barrels of marine
and other heavy fuel oils.

Builders of the refinery say it will he
among the most sophisticated in the
Middle East. with the ability to change
the amount of each fuel produced
according to changing world demand for
its products. Petromin and Mobil will
each market its 50 per cent share of the
reﬁnery products separately. The refin-
ery will include storage facilities and a
terminal at which the fuel products can
be loaded on to tankers for shipment to
Europe and the United States. which are

seen as the prime markets for its pro-
ducts.

The Foster-Wheeler company of the

United States is performing an engineer-
ing study of the project.

97
gain; 3‘ no.5 .8332

”22.2... 29.. 5|? «IE-082:2:
3. a 98.8: 8.. u «a: 30:83. 15. a.
Econ. - ”arts-.88 3.2 3.5.3. 18

i r. B an: 83 u. 5.
3172333032 :8 . IQ?
2S urn—W3 5 E39.

d! m» 89 .2an In: 3838 Eu :3
032.2 Elem-.233 33.2 3.3903.“—
3383 8 3.9 - 3E. 125.8 .9832...

:8 8328.: to. ”C32. 8 0—. GE
23.32.33... 0. Fa moi: can :59?
53 09.338: 2.... 2.122 c« .135
5.. E3595. 2x. .5 25.39 Manes-.3
58 13-82: 0. $5.23! 08 08.18..
2... v3.82: 2 :3 .5338 mus...
3233. 093.83. :8 53.88 832..
:63.

4.? 8301...... SR. 3 $858!. $29
t5o§8=ﬁ$n289323n 1.2.9.8.
.3580 :3: 53:3 .3 9.18.3
Org—.8... x33 08. Sin—.95. I:
n._89.8n~.o~tr§$-r-<o-=¢av283

33 «Sun. .38 58:8» "32:33. is
.8: :8 83:33 6 =2 8:. 53:3 E

ﬁﬁﬁaigéizﬂﬁﬁgéﬁif 5
_enxn_

03...... n. =8 «2.... up..." 5.5.18
9603...... .58 ... u 33 8.. 58..
.8. £8... 0.. 93...»... :8 5.. £3?
32.. 2. a 30828. 12.. ... .59.. £8
.30.. 3. «>20 2... . 5.2.08 3..
3903.2. 8:85....

.38 mm, 3.. 3....3 1...... £39 3....
.53 .. 3.2. 830.... o. 398.. 8... .
«233.83.85.99 32.56. (.8: ..
8...». 03.32.. ... .2. .8»: w <2...
.933... 8 ...n 33:89 3.3.6.. .. w
o. 3.5.5.... 5.... :8 8533.. .o 8:...
0. =8 2.8.. was... 3.89035. .36.
.00.». .. w :8 a... 53.6.3... 3
5.2.8.. :38 ... 32.8.8. Hogan...
2..qu on .38...

.. w are .3335... 3.. Mac... >3...-
canock .. w :8 :3. on .3 8.6.. 33....
3.82535: 93.8.. 8 8.3.5.. 88..
.. 3...... 3.832... 23.95.. 9...... 2...
.5838 can...» <38 95 .2526 :8
28¢ 85303.... :8 .8232. ...o 26
92.0.... 325.... 2... 8332.8 .38
955.....6 o... :8 3.3.3.3 3.333...

832......
1.... Go a.
ME... >3
3.2.3 ..
3...... .8.
.939...
0.5.2.0 .u
:5 ....o n
a... ...n a...
32.3..
D... Q
.353. n
m>.=n. .
382.3...
.8 8.3....
Own—n D36 .
.90 a.
0.5.2. I.
96. «no...
3.... 8....
128.2...
1......» v...
u:.oo¢.=
.0 mo 9....
.1!!! 4.1‘l... El. I.-GJII. 1:)...clg

on :8 in...» 23.2.0 23...... 8 9o
:28» 2» Zn?

Us >633... SE :8. map. 5.8.
538 no. m>w=u v3.2.3 .22.... .8
.58.. :32 :8 .8... 5.8 2 .2:
33.3.: .3... 38 3. 82.. 8 .8
0.33 02.128. 2... a: .512... 8 a...
98 won: «.33 6.3.. 3 :8 32.8.8.
833.2... .

2.0 can...“ .3 :0! 8.5.6 as -
.2.ch 35.3 3.. =5: .3... 3.5.3
.13 9788.2... 4.0.... mean. 0.. u
88.... .8... 32.8.6. 22.. a... .
898° 8.. a .3... 2.6.... 3:». £8...
32.. 0.. =8 w>w=voo£ 23.2.0
788 3322 w :8 98 a: 2. .3an

33...! a «at 33.7.»... gala 8
“>C—n Qatar—n. DD! 750 nigh-5L7.
u-I‘ iii-lg!!! zinc-II‘ In! Ell-I?

5n :8. an: tau .3 288232.... .8
88. ea .22. :5. :o :83...“ 2 :8
52.8. 3.... 89: as: .8938 2:
«33 o. 3:; 93983: t... 9.53 .8
22.... 92.53.33 12. 82...;322.
.83." .3. ._.w 333:... :3 3E... 5a
:8 c.9235: .a :8 $3.. :— =8 5%
moans? w 9033.:5 3.8.. :83 83.
En act...

.38 aria. £8 2:382. 538.30
n25 =8. mace >32- 3»... .x .3 8—0
ca .3 25.0 cm 8 =3. 3 .3 8.3283?
now. 93.8 83mm: 852:8; 393
5.25.3 3 05. 9...: Eon-2..
:zocau =r3 :8: 32.58 8 .3 2?
53.3.3 852. 3 .5: 3.103
2.88.. 2123.5 3 cam—En 52... .33
SAUDI ARABIA'S PORT SYSTBi SURVEYS!)

Colputerized Effort

Jiddah SAUDI BUSINESS in English 7 Dec 79 pp 19-21

[Article by Hairy Jo licConahay]

[Text]

Ur. Faye: Badr. 43. loolts forward to
theday whenhecansit atamasterter-
Initial In the landlocked desert capital of
Riyadh and direct port operations in
coastalcities like Dammam. .lubail. led
hh. Jinn and Yanbu.‘ For the sake of
eﬁciency. Badr would like to see all of
Saudi Arabia's ports. even those planned
aad operated now by other agencies.
under the aegis of his own single ofﬁce.
all computerized and all plugged in to the
big board in Riyadh.

Yet installing twenty-ﬁrst century
apparent: in a uniﬁed port system is
apparently not enough: according to
Badr. even the quantum leap in port
capacity which has talten place since he
came into office in I976 will not be sufﬁ-
cient for needswitltin five years. Because
of the long lead time required for their
siee'mlized construction. he says. work
on new facilities must start soon.

President and Chairman of the Board
of the Saudi Ports Authority. Badr is
known as the man who broke the trans-
port bottleneck in Saudi Arabia's
development boom by clearing its
dramatically choked ports within months
of his appointment. The computeriza-
tion scheme. which' ts already underway.
it perhaps the ultimate step in his design
to use the latest technology to streamline
operations while saving manpower. most
of which ts imported

The system '
lion to set I.
expomd to cr
year. At that
and King Abd
will be comp
smaler ports
system to facili
easy as it may!
for instance If.
teaches the
expetts can pr

A contract
project has be:

y of \'
non or the su
all tic ports in
expected to be

Once in pl:
computer syst
SR6 million pr
to increase ef
administration
nance. Just as
manpower: 8

force at the
am. Pt

An element
dons at the pr
savings in time
sive mechaniu
‘ 1 1171:: 1: SI. in: an. .85

PS 5.38.03 3:: 922.9... m: on?
Elna 5w 8.3.. 283. can (can... .3.
:8 .663 823 8 .— «Eat-u 8 22...-
2... 32:58 2 «05.. .3 2323 832.
2.. v3.5? 8.. =8 aoa§.§ on a
“.392. .3 can: 92.6.. 9:: 3 33%..

wifartrorrwknscobosnﬁq
3:. noon 2:. 83.2.8: 56qu
«003.8. 3.. =8 39.: «a: u. .23....
265.6 is: .339 <32? .8: t3
£003.; 52.353. >5 «xv-3.2.
Edna-a 282. Sea: :83 02:: u. a
23. on m». .N 9.52. .o .53 :8 we: .6
8 n «as; 53.53....— 9685 0. Pa
32:0: 83 a 28:. :48 869..an
332. $8 a 3332 Saw... use 83...
:oxvoanﬁ: 2:. 23 £3 :2 3:2. 3

5:5 <32. .862. 8 8.3 :8 3.23
D: ail-Fr 33.. LEFL 1| I .
1.10115... .5 «ENG. = -

can... a. 3.89.... 25:6 1% i 28.?
0...... 963. not nan =5... 65 =. _ as... 2
~98? .5 .50 £8: .0: Bo _ .35
.388 8235....

.35 2.30 w 58 .a 33.. wk: «a?
Sin: .8 $313—$592. a 2:8...
85.5 .a 2.... 862:8 8332.:Kv. =5
:8 .33. 98:32 a? .

:38 3602-3 3.8352318350
:63 5.32.325. 33:03.. _ «on a
no: mo. 8.3.32. _ .8. n «3.8 an 8?
.56.. m5: = (a .85 28% 832.3 m.
w 3.8—. 3:2. :8: .536 :8 08:23.
23.5.09:

.38 03:8. 3-80 2 883m 8!.an
a: 8:8 :63 man—7&5? 5 :8 an...
2:. 59821 .253.“ we»... on :8
8998820 E03; .353 2:. 85.6
:5 5:20.: on a 38.0. 53 3Q .83
8:8 .523823. 2.5.39 on 55.2..

DHLD:I .
9:. :8. 3:95 233 :2? 923a mung:
tact—n ca 338$? >. a: 03.535.
39.3.3: 99 Eva .. 00:62 in. 8 ca

2.2"...» .3. 9-: 3.: =6 «3.6 12.5
3.9 .

3.5.3.

3 2. 8-8

8:8 £38. .3? «as: .6 $8. 935:.
9: 2 .23... .5133st P» a: 8:.
95.3.3 25...; .03.

.158 :5“. ﬂirt:— miaacxaaa. .3 .r
an}: 5.. 2 82.05.59 :8 58.
~35. «$8.... $8 3.338.. .a .93 8
33.8.. :8 38:. on 5.3 .2203...
.353 o. (2.33 .3. ...o .2822.
”2.03. 0. 95.32.. 3... 2:33.32.
9.53.... >rz—c—Eaan. :8 @8262. 8
:9 9.9553... r. .28»... 88:28 8
Zak—:3. =8 «.5». 8.. :63 S. 8
$8.. 8... 2... n. .2... .bco .0... a .5
:6... .3 a...“ 9.... run. 233...: .7.
E: 83.3.... .12. 12.5.8...- 0.
:8 3.53.? 18 3.8.3...

.38 19.8 5 .5: .83.... 878g
«0.: 5 832238.. 2... w. 283.83.
E Han—En. .2 9.2.6.». .39.. .3:
man.» a 9.93.99. .2. 8 .3 «3.308..
a... 9-88 .3330: can m3 u. 3 .3
$13.... - .m ‘28... 3....» .3223 8
aunt—83 .5 :6 225. = t... a... a was:
.at £39 2:. ca 3333.? i... 5.2.
3:25. 8&2...

:« £8 :2 “can? ace... :8 88.
a... $.33 ca .53..» a 2.... 598..
8313.5 :5. :6 2.99.5.» Susan
3...!» an: 8 83.. a: 83533.38“
52.3 3 80:. .2 260: on or. 8:.
“unﬁt: 3:632... no. 3833? 0.. :0.

_< «25.6 5.0: .353.

waging-Mo...“ again—8 an 8
v2 8:. on :5 >c=§=<£ £24.10 5%.
8.2. :5. 8233 £9 0:: $2. in..-
owns“:— moloa. a and”: 8:833?
.2. 28335 02:32:. 28 £9 03%
38.9.50 5 .259: SE 8295.

p.905: 9:: an 32.8: 33an
0:2 Iva—no.3»?
(8 u. .8. 8....
>. :5 was... 9.... 03...... 02.503:
83.5.... 8:8... w 2.28:2. 9.32;
‘3... a $3. «8.. 96 2.... 8:8...
.355. >36..8...§..83220~1u8.
:8 8:8... w :8 282... .838. >
. 38.8.. 3035.883 539888..
:8 553.5. 3 o 852.. .888
.33.: 92.. 98.6.. a 3...; .0 .or. -
«3.1.6 1.9 :88 3.3 $3.... 8......
a... 53.32. :8... =5 9... 753.0
98.. 8.8 o .5. 883.... .o NEE...
0...: “8.....8 $0....” .0... 8:852.
83......“ 2x. 580 .338 1.... 201.5
8.88... 3...... no. 59...... <28?
22.9.... N52. 8... 8...... ”9.3.
3.8.. .89 o: 8 .83... .83....

- D». .53....- .Dh in»? ..I.))LbL l
C80:

Around40percentofthe porfscargo
is now containerbed. Zaheri says. The
termhtals can handle around 9,000 con-
tainers a month. One is leased {zomthe
port by an Alireaa company and largely
used by Sealand. The other three are
leased and run by the Hansa line and
used by other shippers.

Dammam port is entirely built on
reclaimed land. It began 30 years ago
with a framed-steel jetty built by
Aramco for its imports. Unloading was
onto barges which would transport the
cargo to the jetty: the use of barges has
now virtually ended. although it was
common up to the ﬁnal expansion in the
last few years.

Aramco now uses the leased port of
Juaymah five kilometers away. It lelt
Dammam to help ease congestion. but
Zaherisnysitishetngencourapdtoma
Jubail.

Dammatn port is connected to dry
land with a long causeway in pan lined
with warehouses. A small ﬁshing port is
tucked away behind the port complex.
protected from the waters of the 6qu by
the southern breakwater.

Fast turnover. sometimes clearing
ships in under a day. has been ensured by
a streamlined, centrally-organized ﬂow
of cargo. The Saudi Ports Authority has
long put order into the uncoordinated
anarchy which used to exist betwc'en
shippers. agents, contracted unloaders.
the authorities, and private warehouses
before a cargo reached its ﬁnally consig-
nee.

4820

109

Under a subsiu
responsible for
from three corn
8C0. now wo
receivitg SR33
whereas consign
mine ho

w le pm
plete control.” :
managers from l
Sew-m, which r
tract.
Last month, I
cars and vehicle:

t in near
and 28,000 tons
well as 51,000 t:
responsible (or I
the Kingdom's i

Plans exist it
Commerce Oual
port. Managers
ing proposals (c
operations sync
and speed the at
particularity u:
advance bootinr
tions {or the ani

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02I08: ClA-RDPO2-00850R000200040032-0
s1x J0m- cuur vmnnrs mm sum
Jiddah ARAB vows in English 26 Nov 79 p 2

[Text] The Gulf Organization for Industrial Consultancy in Doha is con-
sidering setting up six ventures by the entire Gulf. Minister of Industry
and Electricity. Dr Ghazi Algoseibi said Sunday.

He said that coordination among Gulf countries in all fields had become a
tangible reality and was getting deeper and deeper every day. he told the
Qatari news agency that there were several bilateral, trilateral and
quadrilateral joint industrial ventures now under discussion by the coun-
tries of the area, an example of close industrial cooperation among Gulf
states.

He went on to say that the Kingdom was carefully following up industrial
activities in the Gulf and coordinating with Gulf officials to avoid any
duplication or needless competition.

He said that the difference in the industrial sphexe between the Second
Five-year Plan and the Third was that the necessary infrastructure for
industry will have been completed and that the present industrial zones will
have been developed with improved services, for the establishment of new
factories and plants with integrated services.

He added that industrial zones in Jubail and Yenbu will also have been
completed, ready for private industry. He said that Saudi Arabian indus-
try will improve in both quantity and quality and that the number of plants
will increase from 1,000 now to 1,500 by 1985.

CSO: 4820

110
JEDDA H. Dec. 2— Acommit- wasdest

tee is to meet in Riyadh Monday wih IE”:
toexamineconsuttants‘reportson Rm," M
the feasibility oi rebuilding the now 6mm,
Heinz Railway. touthem
SPA reported Sunday that a Am... wit
technical committee will then from Ma'antc
wbmitthe studiestothe‘i‘ripartite reoommissior
Committee for the Reconstrttc- Medita we"
tion oi the Hejaa Railway. made from the '95.
non! the ministersoi communica- shelved them
tions oi Saudi Arabia. Jordan and
Syria. They will consider reports Kayyalhaa
on tile economic. technical and project. “I
ﬁnancial mas rtrebttildingthe "WM 1
line. tradt. may t
Dr. Mohieddin Kayyal. deputy Improving
minister of communications for Ammanseeti
transport. said that the technical 150 million.
committee will meet ior three The ,0“,
days it will also set a date tor the mm Al
ministen to meet. Kayyal will sit in an attend
on the technical committee. aswlll eariier this ye
Jordan'nn Deputy Miiister oi the comrltar
Communications Hisham Taher. . date (or co
Syrian Deputy Mhtister of Com- Will he [93‘
munications Amm Bampl. and rel-id in at
Dr. Nasser S tlloum. Saudi rather than
Anhia‘adepttty minister for roads 8W-
in the Ministry of Communion- Suhaiman
lions. - . ..
The Hejat railway once thud F“ '3'. If?
Medina with a: Ottoman Tun:- from a“ '
httsyttemendthenoetoedmpe. “PM“;
Opened by the Sublime Pane in relieve
I908. it cost 3 million at mid. momma
Trains only ran until |9l4 carry- h. am he
in; pilgrims. though. as the line ”"3,me
CSO: 10820

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000200040032-0
._“.‘I

«ﬁx»:
' 0|

1m canon: pmooo 9K
paodmd ”qua

15mm ’0 'm

1an tum qmonu mm

Jomn'mnm
mammal-I'M

tuguqs-mond-puc-um mo!

volumes
as

I'll OOJVS ‘ml mun
um in mm mum mm m
mad no uanmadn an :-

mw W! In.
{Esau-M'mm

P". l
'mtmpmd-noougumnou

smszsmgzmummm
:mﬂmammm

ow! mm on ooavs

mom
C50:

The cost 0! mini. which he
hematostimdlteloealptod
Mmybepmliibitiveﬂxht§_

olthepuvcnityothmn

modstobebo'ltdnmgthemt
FiverPlnoltedonewitha
wM-uphutmixtun. the King-

dotnmigytuvenmuchusm
milioo.“

Although the queition of

wptwotnnd we: like
said-Miscompotblewiththe
mimic an he used it sulfat-
uphdtisodopoedin modem-
auction

Reeeu'di into such useeot sul-
hubbwncondtntedinanodo.

10820

113

$2?

Eiiisiiiéiéyi

§?§$§

§§

Eiiaiiiiii

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000200040032-0
HASA PROJECT HAS COST SRSSOH
Jiddah ARAB NEWS in English 26 Nov 79 p 2

[Text] The Kass irrigation and drainage project has so far cost SRSSO
million, Muhammad Abdullah Abu Batin. director general of the project.
says.

The project serves 52,000 farms with a total area of 11,000 hectares. It
uses water from 32 springs. including those of haql Umm Al-Sabe, Khudoud,
Hera, Jobrat, szahariyya and Fawarah.

The farm land is watered by 1,525 kilometers of concrete canals which were
designed in a terraced fora to facilitate the flow of water. Dates, vegeta-
bles, animal feed, citrus fruits and the Haas rice strain are produced.

Abu Batin said the drainage system ensures that subterranean water does not
rise high enough to cause swamps and prevent the cultivation of fruits and
vegetables. With this in mind three main drainage plants were built to get
rid of surplus water by evaporation. They are connected to saaller drainage
canals with a total length of 1,500 kilometers.

Engineers are carrying out studies for recycling waste water in irrigation.
Results have so far been encouraging.

The government has allocated $335 million for clearing 3,000 kilometers of
private drainage canals of weed for the farmers. in addition to clearing
1.500 kilometers of canals belonging to the authority.

Abu Batin said that soon 16,000 square meters of swzmps will be reclaimed
and 275,000 square meters of roads will be levelled and compacted. During

the same period, estimated at a month. 90.000 kilometers of private drainage
canals will be cleared.

The Bass Irrigation and Drainage Authority is also carrying out experiments
with the cooperation of Nationalist Chinese experts on developing new and

improved strains of rice in 100 experisentel farms. Farmers are given
advice free.

The Ministry of Communications this year agreed to asphalt 248 kilometers
in the agricultural project.

cso: 1.820 111;
RE“ IEGISUTIOII' CIARIFIES MEML. WA]. JURISDICTION OVER GULF COMPANIES
Kuwait AL-SIYASAH in Arabic 21 NOV 79 P 1

[Article: "UAE Federal Justice Ministry Issues an official Decree About
Gulf Conpanies"]

[Text] The UAE Ministry of Justice, Islaaic Affairs and Religious Trusts in
Abu Dhabi has issued a legislative decree defining the federal and enirste
position with respect to the constitutional, legislative and eXecutive pow-
ers and Jurisdictions in the ntter of Gulf coapnies. here is the full
text of the official federal decree signed by the deputy Justice sinister
and dated 13 Noveaber 1979.

We hope that it‘is fully known that Chapter 7 of the UAR provisional con-
stitution is devoted to elucidating the distribution of legislative, execu-
tive and international Jurisdictions between the federation and the eairates.
Article 120 of the constitution specifies those utters which are the sole
Jurisdiction of the federation to legislate and execute, while Article 121
of the constitution clarifies those utters which are the sole jurisdiction
of the federation to legislate only. Among those setters included in the
latter article is legislation pertaining to conasrcial dealings and coapan-
10‘s

"the aforegoirg asans that with respect to coapanies, the federation has
the right to legislate only. not execute. which is left to the eairates con-
cerned. However. since to date there has been no federal legislation per-
taining to conaercial dealings and conpanies. and since Article 109 of the
constitution provides that except for the rulings of Article 121 the air-
ates are permitted to pass legislation needed to regulate the setters ex-
plained in the above-aentioned article without violating the rulings of
Article 151 of the constitution. then the eairate concerned-~11; the absence
of federal legislation-may issue local legislation regulating the general
guidelines pertaining to corporate letters. At the ease tine. it can estab-
lish Joint stock companies according to local law. incluiing all the guide-
lines and rulings pertaining to this company.

115
”As for the authority to oversee and supervise the Joint stock coapaniee,

as long as the cospeny is established within the territorial boundaries of
an eairate, then the local eairate authorities shall be the ones to have

jurisdiction in supervising and overseeing the company which was establish-
ed. doing so according to local laws in effect in this natter.

”It should be noted that there is nothing legally prohibiting the establish-
ment of Joint stock companies subordinate to the federation. In this case
the federal authorities sill have Jurisdiction: in everything pertainim to

the establishaent, overseeing and supervision of these coapanies. and they
shall be founied by federal law at that tin."

8559
050: “8‘2

116
Abu Dhabi AL-HAHDAH in Arabic 12 Nov 79 p h
[Editorial]

[Text] The deposed shah's present situation could be a aodel for another
shah who is still ruling with the ease night and violence with which the de-
posed shah ruled. and who has the sane fortune that the shah accusulated,
estisated at note than $7 billion.

The exasple of the sick or nlingering shah is not strange or unique; perhaps
al-Ssdat has any aspects sinilar to the deposed shah.

He is an Asericsn policeman in the region. Just like the shah. and he is a
tool of doaestic oppression Jmt as his fwitive friend was.

Al-Sedat is robbing the Egyptian people. Just as the shah did. and he is sav-
ing up for his black day. The head of the Egyptian governsent reasins in
power thrash Aserica’s patronage and protection. Jmt like the sick shah.

The correspondence between the two “friends." the ruling shah in rapt and
the aalingering shah in Aserica, leaves no roo- ror doubt that the ruling
shah will west the sale fate as his fugitive friend.

Aserican power was umble to prevent the flight of the shah. and his stolen
wealth was unable to protect hill on his black day. The despotic measures
which he had practiced against his people are still an affliction following
his from one country to another.

There are sany siailarities between the ruling shah of Egypt and the deposed
shah of Iran. and the end result will be the ease.

3559
630: h8m

117
POSSIBLE EFFECTS 0P 0.8. MILITARY AID 1'0 ”OCCO EXPLORE

Paris 0mm L'AFRIQUE in French 5 Nov 79 pp 32-33

[Article by Mireille Duteil: "Point of No Return: Hashington Is Running
the Risk of Starting the Pire"]

[Text] The long line of Land Rovers of the Saharan guerrillas vanishes into
the inense wilderness of the Saharan desert. It leaves behind it Mahbes,
garrison town of the Western Sahara located 110 Km from ‘l‘indouf which, up
to that tine. had never been attacked by the combatants of the POLISARIO
Front. Today, Hahbes is nothing more that a ghost town littered with the
bodies of Moroccan soldiers withering away in the sun. The POLISARIO Front,
as usual, has carried away its dead and wounded.

For several days, beginning on 17 October, thousands of Saharans faced up to
the Morocco: five infantry companies and the squadron of armored vehicles
which were defending the former Spanish fort. In short order, the Moroccan
air force «we to their assistance. That was not enough. Hahbes fell, after
fierce fig' ting, the victim of its isolation—the reinforce-eats requested
by the Moroccan garrison had not reached their destination—the greater fire—

power of the Saharan guerrillas and their mobility.

After the two battles of Bir anaraa (in the Sahara) and Lebouirate (in
Morocco), last August. the attack on Smara, the Saharan holy city, on 6
October. then the attack on Mahbes a week later demonstrate that the guerrilla
warfare of the desert sands has really changed in nature. The POLISARIO
Front has now been able to establish "sanctuaries" inside the very borders

of the Sahara. Both the human and nilitary resources used and the convoys

of 100 Land Rovers cutting furrows through the desert with complete inpunity
are proof thereof. Another kind of war has begun which still has not been

named .

Another important stage was reached on 21 October. It will perhaps change
the face of the Sahara conflict. On that day, after a weekend of reflection,

the 11.8. president, Jimy Carter, decided to sell military materials to
Morocco. particularly the airplanes which Rabat had been requesting for nearly

118
2 years. for the antiguerrilla fight. Although the U.S. Congress is not op-
posed to this-~and there does not seem to be any uneasiness on this score in
Haahington-—in about 50 days. the 0.8. administration could take action to
begin sending across the Atlantic to Morocco the 20 OVlO observation planes
and the dozen combat helicopters, accompanied by the required specialist.
These antitank, armored helicopters of the Cobra type, some of which are
equipped with tow guided missiles, could prove to be of redoubtable effective-
ness in the Sahara.

The American decision had the effect of a bomb and was not made until after
discussions in the White House. "The maintenance of the status quo and the po-
licy of neutrality followed previously was de facto anti-Moroccan. in light

of the situation in the field." it was explained in Washington.

In fact, even though this American decision marks a new step by the United
States in their commitment to the Sherifian monarchy, even in their Saharan
policy, such comitment goes back more than 6 months. Officially, the turning
point was reached following the attack against Tan-Tan last January by the
Saharan guerrillas. At the time, Hashington stated that attacks by the
POLISARIO Front within the internationally recognized borders of Morocco
changed the main elements of the problem. And the U.S. administration closed
its eyes to the use of U.S. military materials in the Sahara, including F 5
tighter planes. The United States also gave the green light to the Italian
company, Augusta Bell, so that it could sell Morocco helicopters manufactured
under an American license which would be used in the Sahara.

Of course. the Hhite House is now linking the sale of airplanes to an agree-
ment by King Hassan II to a reopening of negotiations on the future of the
Sahara. But the American administration took great care not to mention by
name representatives of the POLISARIO Front as being partners with whom the
pnurparlers should be opened. Therefore, one does not have to be a genius
to guess that these reconmendationa will remain a dead letter. As for the
second argument advanced by Washington to permit King Hasaan II to negotiate
from a position of strength. it is absolutely not convincing. "The key
question is to know whether one can encourage an ally to negotiate by making
him stronger or by allowing him to remain weak," The New York TIMES asked

recently.

Above and beyond these arguments, other reasons weighed very heavily in the
decision made by Washington. They are of three kinds.

Because of its moderation, particularly in the Middle East affair where it
has often played the role of intermediary between Egyptians and Israelis,
Morocco continues to be a traditional ally of the United States on this
question.

119
Military support at the decisive moment, after Egyptian President Anwar Sadat
had decided at the beginning of September to send his arms. could only incite
Hassan II to reexamine an attitude which, last spring, caused him to condemn
the Camp David accords.

What is more, the conflict between the Sahara and Morocco involves a region
which is strategically important for the Vest, between the Atlantic and the
Mediterranean. As important as the shah's Iran was in the Persian Gulf.
Washington is also concerned over the consequences a war of attrition might
have for the Alaouite throne. Some officers are inclined to believe that

the king's moderation is holding back a military victory in the Sahara and
could because of this be harboring the thought of taking action, according to
information from American services reaching Hashington. Consequently, there
can be no question of the United States' abandoning its only ally in the re-
gion. All the more so because for some in the American administration aban-
doning Morocco after having abandoned the shah would be an additional con-
fession of U.S. weakness and the small credence one can accord to Hashington's
friendship.

It is this risk of "destabilization" of the Sherifian monarchy, which the
POLISARIO Front predicts will be inevitable if the war continues, that forced
the United States to support Morrocco and to cause it to regain its vigor

in the field. however. by the same token, Hashington is playing with fire.
"Open" U.8. support for Rabat threatens to incite Libya and, behind it, the
Soviet Union to raise the ante in the arms sector. "This more direct commit-
ment of arms suppliers on all sides could increase the risk of internationali-
zation of the conflict," a Western diplomat said. On 25 October, at the
United Nations. in New York. Ibrahim Hakim, minister of foreign affairs of
the POLISARIO Pront. reported this risk. while in Algeria, on the same day.

a statement by the Politburo of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FL!)
offered the opinion that "the initiative of the U.S. administration can only
tend to prolong and intensify a war of oppression and territorial conquest,
to compromise the possibility of seeking a peaceful solution and to aggravate
the threats weighing upon the peace and security of the region."

In fact, it seems that for Washington the possibility of a future escalation
represents a rather minimal risk. Similarly, the Americans do not think their
attitude could deeply affect their relations with Algeria, which have continued
to improve since 1975 both in the commercial and political sectors. "Why

has France, which is selling Morocco the arms used in the Sahara. succeeded

in improving its relations with Algeria?" is the ingenuous question being
asked on the American side.

It is true that in this problem of the Sahara commercial interests. diploma-
tic positions taken and sales of military materials up until that time had
been placed at quite different levels. Moscow, like Hashington, is linked
to Rabat end Algiers by important commercial ties. Algerian natural gas and

120
Moroccan phosphates are routed respectively to the United States and the
Soviet Union. In the diplomatic sector, the two superpowers are officially
maintaining a position of neutrality. A neutrality which, like that displayed
by France, has never fooled anyone. France, like the United States. recently
stated that it had gone back to the decisions of the last OAU summit in
Monrovia which came out in favor of self-determination of the Saharan peoples.
However, in the field these past 6 months, deliveries of French and military
materials are giving another image to neutrality. Thus, before summer, a
dozen French Mirage F-l‘s, out of a firm order of 25 airplanes, arrived in

Morocco. At the beginning of September, at the time of the battle of Smars,
F-l's were used in the Sahara for the first time.

Parallely, on the basis of military cooperation agreements now 20 years old,
Nashington and Paris are engaged in the undertaking of reorganizing the Moroccan
army and have furnished it with advisers. In this regard, Paris is stressing
the fact that although the Ministry of Defense is sending a good 100 advisers
to Rabat, 30 French military personnel are also serving as advisers in the
Algerian army. But above and beyond this cooperation, are such advisers
present in the Sahara? No, is the answer from Paris and Hashington. How-
ever. according to Mohamed Ali Ould Sidi el-Bachir, deputy from Smara in

the Rabat parliament who has just rejoined the ranks of the POLISARIO Front,
Unezican and French missions reportedly have spent several days on many
occasions in El—Asiun. the capital of Western Sahara since the beginning of
1979.

In fact, although deliveries of American or French military materials cannot
change the situation in the field, they can be a serious handicap for the
columns of the POLISARIO Front, like the intervention of French Jaguars in
Mauritania at the beginning of 1978. Such deliveries also bring the Moroccan
sovereign the fresh breath of air which will permit him to calm his army.

At least momentarily. But. at the same time, the dispatch of a French airborne
company--that is 150 men--to Mouadhibou, second largest Mauritanian city loca-
ted on the Tiris-Bl-Gharbia border now annexed to Morocco, marks the strict
limits which France serving notice on Morocco not to exceed.

He can hope that one day this French and American support for Rabat. this
official "neutrality," will be used to push Morocco toward the negotiations
table with the POLISARIO Front, otherwise the war in the Sahara could degenerate
into a Maghrebian conflict.

8143
C50: 4400 END

121