APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100020020-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020020-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8275

13 February 19 79

MEIEOROLOGY AND HYDROLOGY
No. 12, DECEMBER 1978

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020020-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news 1gency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or follouing the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was suuariaed or extracted.

Unfamiliar nanes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source. -

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Govern-mt.

COPYRIGH MUS AND RIGIMTIONS manna; mass» 0?
MATERIALS nanome- HBRZIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? 1318 PUILICA‘HON 32 ”STRICT” ”0??!an US! ONLY.
IIILIOGIAPMIC DATA L “cm-n N... 3. Honour-1‘1 Arron-on .\u.
sum JPRS 1A2 75

usnoaowcv AND moaowcv, No. 12, December 1978

7. Auhmlal

l I'nlmlun‘ mun-lam"- Nan-e and “Jun

Joint Publicationa Reaearch Servica

1000 North Globe Road ll. Contact/Cunt No.
Arlington. Virginia 22201
l2. ﬁns-mu (ha-ligation Nut and Mm"
Coward
A: above

I). \quIc-mrnluy Nuara

Translations from HETEOROWIYA l GIDROIDGIYA, publiahad Ionthly by tha Soviet

llvdronctcoroloical Service.
II. AM-u- u

 

. The report contains articles on nicrocli-atc. agricultural meteorology, vcathar
[orc-rnstlnk and cliuate control, hydrological fomaating. the activities and
: personnel of the Soviet llydrmteorological Service, and new publications.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/827s
13 February

HETEORDLOGY AND HYDROLOGY

No. 12, Decanter 1978

Selected articles from the Russian-language journal
METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, Moscow.

Coureurs

Natural Components of Small Samples With a large Number of
Parameters
(N. A. Bagrov) .............................................

Some Characteristics or Have Orographic Cloud Cover Over the
Middle and northern Urals
(r. u. Bihikova) ...........................................

Statistical Indiccs of Spatial Distribution of Precipitation in
the hperimental Meteorological Polygon
(v. H. Muchnik) ............................................

Increase in the Visibility Range of laser Beacons in a Fog
(o. A. Volkovitskiy, v. P. Snykov) .........................

Spring Restructuring of the Temperature and Pressure Field in
the Southern hemisphere

(L. A. Uranova) ............................................

Relationship Between Atmospheric Pressure and the Level of the
Northwestern Part or the Pacific Ocean
(8. S. Iappo, et a1.) ......................................

Equilibrium Model of Langmir Circulation in the Ocean
(A. A. Zelen'ko) ...........................................

Improved Models of Water Discharge and Evaluations of Accuracy
of Its knsurement by the “Velocity-Area" Method
(I. F. hnsev) COO...IIIOOOIOOCOIDOIOCOOOOOOOOIOIIOOOOOOIOI
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Determination of the hunters of Ground Permeability Prom
Unstable Infiltration Curves
(V. M. Denisov) ..........................................

Evaluation of Soil-Cliutic Conaitions Applicable to the
Cultivation of Winter “heat
(I. v. Svisyuk) ..........................................

Forming of Archives of Observational Datc. for the First Global
mtperiment GAR?
(o. A. Aldukhov) .........................................

Automation of Collection, Processing and Analysis of Oceanographic
Information on the Basis of Small Electronic Conputers
(v. A. Volkov, et 31.) ...................................

Methods of Image Recognition Theory in Problems Involving
Analysis and Prediction of mteorological Fields
(Yu. V. sﬁmnovek1y) Dessesooossosselooeaecaotoox00.00000.

Twenty-Firth Anniversary of the Transcaucssian Scientific
Research iivdrometeorological Institute
(6. c. Svsnidze, z. I. Tskvitinidze) .....................

Work of A. A. I-‘ridmn in the Field of marology
(Xe. s. Seleznevs) .......................................

Review of Book by V. V. Kuwiyanov: "bdrological Aspects of
Urbanization" (Gidrologicheskiye Aspekty Urbanizatsii)
Lenin ad, Gidromteoizdat, 1977
A. v. Karaushev, s. a. Skakal'skiy) .....................

Seventieth Birthday of Nikolsy Aleksandrovich Bagrov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sixtieth Birthday of Vssiliy Ivanovich Sapozhnikov . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

At Institutes of the State Comission on iiydromteorology
(N. u. Podgayskiy, o. v. Gruza) ..........................

Conferences, Meetings and Seminars
(n. P. Smirnov, s. I. Sarukhanyan) .......................

Notes From Abroad
(s. I. Silkin) ...........................................

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020020-6

English title

Russian title

Author (s)

Editor (s)

Publishing Rouse

Place of Publication

Date of Publication

Signed to press

Copies

' COPYRIGKT

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION DATA

.0

so

.9.

Meteorology and
Dec 78

monoan I

N. A. Bagrov, 'I

Ye. I. Tolstoko

GURWBOIZM

Moscow

1978

28 Nov 1978

l‘030

"Msteorologiys :
1978

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100020020-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.314
NATURAL COMPONENTS OF SMALL SAMPLES HIT“ A LARGE NUMBER OF PARAMETERS

Hoscou HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 5-14

[Article by Professor N. A. Bagrov, USSR Hydrometeorological Scientific Re-
search Institute, submitted for publication 16 July 1978]

Abstract: A new method is proposed for comput-

ing the natural orthogonal components in a

case Hhen the volume of the sample is less than
the number of introduced random variables. This
procedure makes possible a considerable reduc-
tion in computation work and in some cases one can
solve the full problem for a synmetric matrix,
earlier beyond the capabilities of modern elec-
tronic computers with average capacity. Some
historical comments are made in passing.

[Text] The expansion of meteorological fields or in general a random vector
in natural orthogonal functions has found extensive application since the
publication of [3]. This method is presently given different names by dif-
ferent authors: the main components method, expansion in empirical or
statistical orthogonal functions [1, 7, 8, 12], or the Carunen-Loeve expan-
sion [5]. All these names have some basis. However. with respect to the
latter. it should be noted that one of the first studies in this direction
was made by Hotelling and dates back as far as 1933 [ll], vhereas the studies

by Cnrunennnd l»eve.judging from the citations in [6]. date back to 1967
and 1955-1966 respectively.

Now we will briefly examine the entire problem using matrix calculus. assume
there is a random vector P of the dimensionality n, that is, having n com-

ponents. in general correlated with one another. Its covariation matrix is
written in the following way:

ﬁuﬁe-~-F_IF.

[Ma-W: m'ﬁz...F,-F‘ - (l)

oeeeeee

immum

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here the asterisk is the transposition sign, whereas the line at the top
is the mathematical expectation symbol (empirically - the averaging sym-
“01).

mwrww.lnlmHnlmmndlmHademelmﬂleﬂvallinvmmlmwmdy
umnre ronvouient to deal with a vector with uncorrelated components. Some-
times, however, instead of the F vector, especially if it has a very great
dimensionality, it is desirable to examlne some approximation of it. In
both these problems the result is achieved by a linear transformation of
the F vector

F-UA. a)

where U is the transformation matrix-operator (in general, inverse), and
A is the new vector. The transformation (2) will retain the general dis-
persion of the F vector if U is an orthogonal matrix, so that UU - U U
- I. In actuality, under this condition we will have

F°F=A'U'UA-A‘}l. (3)

if the U matrix columns are selected in a definite way, for example, in
the form of a set of values of some orthogonal functions in a grid of
equally spaced points, it is possible to obtain an expansion of the F
vector using these functions. This assertion follows from the sieple
fact that the transformation (2) can be written in a more expanded form

F-U°|A|+UMA3+ ---+U°IAII (b)

where Au is a component of the A vector and Uou (k - l, 2,...,n) is a col-
uan of the U matrix.

For example, if as the U matrix we take the matrix

then after normalization of its columns we obtain an expansion of the F
vector in trigonometric functions. The first column of this matrix repre-
sents the cosine of zero, repeated four times; the succeeding columns are:
I'os 2n t, sin 2n t, cos bat for t - 0, 1/1., 2/1. and 3/4. If the last
column of this matrix is replaced by zeroes, we obtain an approximate

(broken) expansion. Sisilarly it is possible to obtain an expansion of
the random vector in Chebyshev polynomials.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY "“

Ihnucver, in a general case the components of the A vector here will '

not be mutually orthogonal. On the other hand. obtaining mutually orthOc
gonal Lampononts of the A vector can be one of the purposes of the trans-
formation (2). In particular, it was pointed out in [6] how, knowing the
covariatlon matrix of the F vector,lt is possible to form the triangular
matrix U, by means of which it is possible to obtain a vector with un-
corrclated components. By means of a special normalization of the U mat-
rix it is even possible to achieve an equality of the general dispersion
of both vectors, that is, retain equations (3).

Among all the transformations of this type the most modern, and probably
the most natural will be a transformation following from a representation
of the covariation matrix of the F vector through the covariation matrix of
the A vector

M = FF- : UH'U'.

if it is now necessary to have a diagonality of the covariation matrix of
the A vector

we will have, nssuming the U matrix to be orthogonal,

I" ll FF. '3 UAU-I.

This formula shows that the 11, 7‘2...” An values must be the eigen-
values of the covariation matrix N (we will always arrange them in de-
creasing order), whereas the columns of the U matrix give the corres-
ponding eigenvectors. The transformation (2) of the F vector from such

n matrix has another extremal property that it gives the most rapid con-
vergence of series (6) in the sense of an approximation to the general
dispersion of the F vector.

Thus. the expansion (0) with satisfaction of equation (5) is obtained in
a "natural" way from the properties of the P vector itself.

However. historically the situation had developed in such a way that de-
spite the fact that the fundamental principles of the main components or
natural components methods have been known since 1933 they evidentally did
not initially come into broad application. Accordingly, in the 1950's,
when the possibilities of electronic computers became well known, meteor-
nlogists had to discover this method anew. This is indicated by the first

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"meteorological“ publications of Lorenz H2]. liagrnv [3| '1‘", Obukhov [71'

in practice we will almost always be dealing with the sample values of

the vector, and accordingly. we can obtain only an evaluation of the covar-
lation matrix. A sample of the F vector values (we will call it a sample
matrix) consists of a set of its realizations

F” Fl}...F‘-
F: F" F... . .F,,

(6)
Flea1-°-F

here a is the dimensionality of the P vector (the number of its components)
and m is the volume of the sample - the number of individual observed
realizations of the 1’ vector. An evaluation of the covariatioa matrix is
obtained in the form of the averaged product of the matrix (6) and its
transposed form I

Ill-:7 FF’.

It is assumed that the mean value of each component is already excluded.
Re can add that by virtue of the symmetry of subsequent formulas we will
postulate that all elements of the matrix (6) have been divided by J3. In
this way we avoid division by m in the formula for the covariatiun matrix.

in hydrometeoroingical practice it often happens that a>m, that is, the
dimensionality of the 1" vector is greater than the sample volume. And
such a relationship between a and m is undesirable (by means of a decrease
In dimensionality of the F vector) or is impossible (by means of increas-
lng the sample) to change. Such circumstances are rather frequently ob-
served in prognostic practice in meteorology. It makes sense to call
:sawies whose volume is less than the number of introduced variables
(m<n) "small samples." For a small sample it is possible to simplify con-
siderably the computation of the eigenvectors and the eigenvalues of the
ruvariation matrix.

In this case the covariation matrix FF" will have a very great dimensional-
ity (n x a), but its rank will not be greater than m, that is, not less
than (n - m) of its eigenvalues will be equal to zero. In this case in
place of the matrix FF it is necessary to examine the matrix P'F, whose
dimensionality will be m x m. lleaceforth we will assume that all the eigen-
values of this latter matrix will not be equal to zero.

As Is known, the eigenvalues of these two matrices [8] coincide; in his
study [9] V. L. Sklyareako used a simple relationship between their eigen-
vectars. Both these postulates are demonstrated very simply. First of all,
for the second (small) matrix we will write a formula for reduction to a
diagonal form F'F-VAV'.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fl)“ (IFVHIIM. "33E UNIS

r*r .. WW“. (7)

He will multiply this equation (it makes no difference whether from the
right or left) by itself. As a result, by virtue of the property W’ - I

F'(FF°)F-VA’V‘:

or after the obvious transformations

(V‘F') (FF')FV-A’. (8)

But this is the formula for reduction of the covariation matrix FP" to
diagonal form. Expression (7) makes it possible to conclude that the col.-
umns of the W matrix are orthogonal. The colum of, this matrix can be
urthnnormalized by multiplying on the right by A‘u 2and then it will be-
name an ortho onal matrix of the eigenvectors of the 1’?" matrix; the diag-
unnl matrix becomes the matrix of eigenvalues. Thus,

U: FVA"'I'-'. (9)

This is the basis of the relationship between the eigenvectors of the PF"
and F F matrices. Incidentally we obtained proof of the equality of the
first :- eigenvalues of these matrices. here it must also be noted that
formula (9) determines only the first In eigenvectors of the 1’? matrix.

Formula (9) gives a significant representation of the initial matrix
F- UAW V. (10)

This known formula [1] is extremely rarely cited in the academic litera—
ture.

By a simnle multiplication this formula leads back to formlas (5) and (7).
We note that the U matrix in formula (10) must, in accordance with the
rules for multiplication of matrices, have n rectangular dimensionality

(n x m). that is, contain eigenveccors corresponding only to the nmbers
)1, not equal to zero.

Now we will turn again to formula (2). If the P vector is represented by
the sample matrix (6), then the vector A must be represented by a matrix;
in the case n>m the matrix of eigenvectors U will be incomplete since the
eigenvectors for filling up this matrix will not play a role in any case.
nut it follows from this that the A matrix must be square: m x m.

an an- - -“I-

A: a,.a,,...a,., . (11)
a_.a_,. . .0.-
5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

An elem-mt of the P matrix, according to (2), is expressed by the formula

[ﬂu-=0.” nlI+Ul3 an"? - - - +Ua- 9-»

which makes it possible to write a column of the P matrix in the form:

F” :1 z Una“.
a (12)

where the "0 a symbol designates the s-th column of the matrix of eigenvec-
tors U.

Expression (12) is precisely an expansion of the 1" vector (its realization)
in natural orthogonal functions (in eigenvectors of the covariation matrix).
111a coefficients of this expansion on constitute the matrix (11), deter-
mined by a formula which is the inverse of (2).

A-U‘F. (13’
It is easy to see that
AA‘-A
or otherwise
0,, -a;,-uf,+a§.+ . . .+nl,=).,. (14)

Thus, the spur (FF') - spur (M').

According to (ll), the A matrix contains only m2 elements. whereas the 1“
matrix contains :1 x 11: independent elements. In order to express the lacking
an - m2 - m(n - m) elements we use variable U. The latter in incomlete
form contains a x m elements, of which only the m2 elements determined

from the V matrix are independent. The remaining m(n - m) elements were
also expressed precisely using the U utrix in accordance with (10).

However. this indicates that the evaluation of the covariation matrix PF.
by means of the matrix P(n x m) is rather fair.

Similarly, it is possible to express the I” matrix through the matrix of
vigenvectors of the F“? matrix. We will have

F‘-VB. (15)

The Ii matrix in this formula has the dimensionality (m x n). Using the ele-
ments of this matrix it is possible to derive a formula similar to (12)
for the rows of the F matrix (or the columns of the F' matrix).

r,,=o.,v,.+b,.v.,.- . . . +a_.v... (1")

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Similarly to formula (14). we can obtain

blObau-‘bzl‘l'bi':" ‘ ' ' +bg~=lr

There is a simple correlation between the matrices A and ll. following from
(2) and (J5); equating: the right-hand sides of these formulas (with trans-
vositioning), we obtain

A-(VBU)‘.
We write. in accordance with (9),
F-UA-FVA'U’A.

"e multiply this equation on the left by ‘1'?1' and on the right by V; we ob-
lain
.‘ = a‘a\‘ln A V

or
A:.\"’ V'. (17)

This formula can also be derived directly by a comparison of formula (10)
.und .1 matrix analogue of formula (2).

The principal merit of formula (17) is that in order to obtain the A mtrix
it is not at all necessary to return to the matrix of initial data F.

Assume now that it is necessary to find the regression of some variable Z
to the variables F1, F2....,l’n -- the components of the l' vector. a sample
of which was given by the matrix (6). The sample of the variable 2 will
evidently be represented by a row of the volume a (of In terms). we will
seek a rexresaion not directly to the variables 71. F2...., Fn, but to the
.-;riablcs of the A matrix. in this cane the regression equation can be
written in the following form:

2—1.0" PC’a-n‘ a o a +'.a‘.. (18)

when- 0|, 52..." 5.. are coefficients which for the time being are un-
lnown, whereas the values 310. 020"...“ o are rows of the A matrix. As

.. result of orthogonality of the matrix rows (ll) and using expression
(Ila), we can write that

' o _, I C
‘.=T‘-(z¢..)--x‘-(¢coz )- “9)

Unit»: formula (17), we can write an expression for the vector-row £1, 52,
.... I)" in the following form:

I = ZVA'm. (20)

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is understandable that it we expressed the vector-row €-- ( £1, 62,
.... Ln) through the U matrix, we would have the expression

enZA'A‘b

For the derived regression equation (18) it is easy to compute the correla-
tion coefficient. In actuality. since the variables of the equation (18)
are mutually orthogonal, the squa.e of the composite correlation coeffic-
ient R2 will be equal to the sun

R31Ii+rg1r . . . +"’.o

in which Pﬂlh term is the square of the correlation coefficient between 2
.Ind 3i 0- 0n the other hand. on the basis of th. elementary principles of

correlation theory it is possl.ble to write -r s
:- a .T'
l

where 0; and 03 are the standard deviations of the variables Z and a; 0.

Hence we easily 0 tain
(z‘,°)‘

 

”=7: (21)

1he composite or general correlation coefficient is determined using the
formal n

' I”-.. | ‘ .J...
""7: "' ""' 17 ‘2‘“) Va‘.‘ (22)

In this formula the variable 2, as before, is the vector-row of sample
values of the 2 variable.

using the multiple correlation coefficient it is easy to coapute the repro-
ducible dispersion of the variable:

A (23)
s:=o-R'.

0

Thus. the problem of correlation of z for the F vector is completely solved.

Now we will proceed to the problem of predicting the 2 value from the
«ample F value. Its prediction in pure form exceeds the limits of this
sample because here it is necesaary. using the new, (m+l)-th sample value
of the F vector. to determine the corresponding sample (m+l)-th 2 value.
in this case the sequence of operations is alnost obvious.

First. we will assume that the regression equation (20) can be applied be-
yond the limits of the sample from which it was derived. Then, using a

single new realiration of the vector F ”I we find the values of the para-
meters a], a2.....a.. in accordance with the formula

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“1::UfnféﬂJ-II (1:: I'll Fl”... a 0‘ (2a)

where “0 1 are eigenvectors of the FF: matrix. which were determined earlier
using formula (9). whereas F,” is a new realization of the 1" vector. The

determined values a1. a2.....a. are introduced into equation (23) and the
2M1 value is computed.

As we have already noted. the evaluation of the covariation matrix FF‘ of
the dimensionality (n x n) using a sample of the volume m< n is quite noon
has a weak stability. In actuality. it is sufficient to increase the volume
of the sample by unity and a new eigenvalue appears which in general is not
equal to zero: there is also a change in the other eigenvalues and the
small numbers change relatively more. The eigenvectoru corresponding to the
small numbers are also less stable than the first eigenvectors correspond-
ing to the large numbers.

It therefore follows that in general in the regression equation (20) it
makes no sense to retain all the terms; the last terms. as the least

stable. containing much "noise." must be omitted. But how many terms must be
kept in equation (20) is a special problem. There can be no general solu-
tion here; eVerything is dependent on the nature of the problem.

when using a regression equation for forecasting purposes it must be taken
Into account that_from the very beginning we divided all the elements of
the sample F by m (m is the volume of the sample). For this reason. if we
uish to use formlas (lib-(26) without any changes we must also divide
the new (MD-ch sample value of the P vector by fl: in particular. this
applies directly to formulas (25).

:.'e will not discuss some other details of practical cowutations here. It
Is obvious that small samples (in the sense that the number of random var-
lahleu is greater than the volume of the semis) are encountered rather
frequently in studies on the analysis and prediction of atmospheric pro-
cesses. The problem of small samples will also remain pertinent in the
future. since each 10-15 years new series of observations of new elements
appear in meteorology. The work approach outlined here, with such samples,
In definite cases is capable by many times of reducing the purely computa-
tional side of the work, and in some cases will make it possible to solve
problems which cannot be handled directly even by electronic computers
with a rather considerable capacity.

r‘lnally. we will make one more content. It is possible that some of the
aunthematlcsl transformations cited in this article may prove to be ex-
tremely aonrigoroua and even arbitrary. This applies primarily to matrix
transformations with, a U matrix - the matrix of eigenvectors of the co-
variation matrix PP“. The 0 matrix is determined only for the vectors corres-
ponding to the first to numbers. not equal to zero. But we have already men-
tioned that the U matrix can also be supplemented for the remaining (n - a)

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inuﬂiers. identically equal to zero. Such a supplementation can he carried
out by an extremely great many methods, with adherence to only one condi-
tion: orthogonality of the full U matrix. After such supplementation of
the U matrix (in actuality. of course. it is not necessary to do this) all
the computations become completely determined.

Another possibility of justifying all the computations which have been made
is use of methods for pseudoinversion of matrices. These methods have been
set forth quite completely in the already cited book by Albert ll].

Thus. mathematically it is entirely possible to obtain some number of first
natural components for a very large number (several hundreds) of points
with use of an electronic computer of average capacity. It can be assumed
that these natural components. about half the volume of the sample. will
the sufficient stability. Their use. with definite reservations. is admis-
sible on a practical basis and is entirely feasible.

Assume. for example. that it is necessary to represent the natural compon-
ents of geopotential of the SOO-mb isobaric surface in the northern hemi-
sphere with monthly averaging. At present we have observational data for ap-
nroximateiy )0 years. This means that the volume of the sample for each cal-
endar month is about 30. it is assumed that the numb:r of points necessary
for describing the "500 field for the hemisphere can attain ‘00-500 or even
nore. We note that the number of so-called "independent" points for a hemi-
sphere. according to different estimates. varies from 60 to 60. Under such
circumstances 20-60 points in a hemisphere will scarcely give any good idea
concerning the first natural components for a hemisphere. in any case. for
the first l0 components it is better to take about 100 points and use the
techniques developed in this article. It seems that such reconendations
agree entirely with the requirements of climatology. in which it is assumed
that a period of 30-60 years is entirely adequate for obtaining virtually
stable means. Taking into account some weak nonstationary character of at-
mospheric circulation processes, it can be said that a lengthening of these
times is scarcely desirable.

with respect to the regression equation and its use in predictions. here. as
usual. ewerything is dependent on the volume of the sample and the number of
predictors. Although the system of natural components. determined on the
hasis of sample data for a new (not entering into the original sample) real-
ﬁxation, will not be complete. this should not have any significant effect
on the regression results. since we cannot take all the components into ac-
count. In other words. here there is an ordinary transfer of the statistical
ornperties of the sample to the new realization. it can he noted that some
researchers. such as H. l. Yudin [10]. consciously very greatly limit the
volume of the sample used in the forecast. assuming that large samples are
useless as a result of nonstatienary processes. in this article we do not
give any statistical evaluations of the results obtained. it appears that

on classical methods for making such evaluations are applicable here. in
many such methods we encounter the mandatory condition a) a. that is. the

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

volume of the sample must be greater than the dimensionality of the consid-
ered vector.

Thus. for judgments concerning the applicability of these operations. for
the time being we can judge their statistical significance only on the ba-
sis of general intuitive considerations. Some modeling procedures or empir-
ical computations are also possible.

.\n empirical checking of the legitimacy and admissibility of use of small
samples is possible in two directions: either from a good large sample
(m>n) form several (2-3 or more) small samples, such that in each (m1<n).
and compare the results. that is. compare the eigenvalues and eigenVectors;
or vice verse. from one small sample (m< n). but where n is sufficiently
Brent. by means of a decrease in dimensionality. form one or two normal

samples (in the sense m>n1), by means of a regular thinning of criteria
(for example, a decrease in the number of points on the map).

The coordinate system. reducing the covariation matrix of the random vector
to a diagonal form. has the optimum property that the entropy of disper-
sions in this case becomes minimal. This property can be expressed by the
formula

0 s
-ZMu In Mu; -£ ‘1 Ink. (25)

“I III

where M“ are diagonal elements of the covariation matrix.

As is well known. for thermodynamic system the change to more probable
states is accompanied by an increase in entropy. In our case an increase

in entropy in accordance with equation (3) means a change to those coordin-
ates in which the dispersion is distributed more uniformly with respect to
different components of the F vector.

it makes sense to trace how this occurs. On the basis of the rules of matrix
multiplication. for an element of the ll matrix. using equation (5), it is
possible to write the expression

‘A‘U===}: the lot/:11: I: (A s ‘6‘ 1.-

ssi as!
For diagonal elements of the li matrix this formula gives
I
Muzzulik- (26)

1110 0(2) matrix, whose elements are equal to the squares of the elements
of the orthogonal matrix of the eigenvectors U. evidently will be doubly
stochastic. that is. the sums of the elements of each row and each column
or such a matrix are --|ual to unity. It therefore follows that the N“
values are found by some averaging of the values 31, 22..." A... In

partlcular. this means that ii“ {A1, and Han a A". and, as it is easy
to see.

ll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ZMnc=Zk-

The inequality (25) was already mentioned by Shannon. the founder of the
theory of information. An application to matrix theory was evidently given
for the first time in (SI. Published in 1967.

)0

6.

7.

|).

lo.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Albert. IL, REGRESSIYA. PSEVDOINVERSIYA I REKURRENTNOYE OTSENIVANIYE

(Regression. Pseudoinversion and Recurrent Evaluation), Moscow. "Nauka,"
1977, 224 pages.

Anderson. T., WEDBNIYE V HNOCOHHRNYY STATISTICIIESKIY ANALIZ (Introduc-
tion to Multidimensional Statistical Analysis). Moscow. GosudarstVennoye
lzdatel'stvo Fiz.-Mat. Literatury. 1963. 500 pages.

ﬂagrov, N. A., "Analytical Representation of a Series of Meteorological
Fields by Use of Natural Orthogonal Components," TRUDY TslP (Transac-
lions of the Central Institute of Forecasts), No 74, pp 3-20. 1959.

Bagrov. N. A.. ”Orthogonalization of Random Values," METEOROLOGIYA l
ClDROLOGlYA (Meteorology and hydrology). No 6. pp 3-12. 1976.

Vatanabe. 5.. "Carunen-lm'Vt-Expansion and Factor Analysis." AV‘l‘OllATlCM-
ESKiY ANAle SLOZHNYKM IZOBRAZHEMIY (Automatic Analysis of Couplex lu-
ages). Moscow, "Mir," pp 256-275, 1969.

LueVe, M..TEORIYA VEROYATNOSTEY (Theory of Probabilities), Moscow. IL.
1962, 720 pages.

Obukhov, A. M., "Statistical Orthogonal Expansions of Empirical Functions.“
IZVESTIYA AN SSSR, SERIYA GWFIZIKI (News of the USSR Academy of Sci-
ences. Geophysical Series), No 3. 1960.

R30. 5. R.. IJNEYNYYS STATISTICHESKIYE mom I “(H PRINENENIYE (Linear
Statistical Methods and Their Application). Moscow. "Nsuka." 1968. 585
pages.

Sklyarenko. V. L., "On the Problem of Classification of Natural Objects

in the Coordinates of the Main Components. Biology of Internal Haters."
mmmnrstoxm svuttam' (Intonation nullctin). No 31, pp 62-66, 1976.

Yudin. M. l.. FIZlKO—STATISTICHESKIYB METODY DOLGOSROCIMKM PROGNOZOV
P060"? (Physical-Statistical Methods for Long-Range Weather Forecasts),
Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdst. 1968. 28 pages.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll. "ﬂatullluy, or (lumplcex SIM Lul'lcsll Vnrlnhtm lntn l’rlnulpnl Conpnm-nm,“
.l. HXI’. I’SYCII.. Val 21:. pp 017-698, 19'”.

12. lprcnz. 3-2.. "Empirical Orthogonal Functions and Statistical Heather
Prediction." Hassnchuuecce Institute of Technology Scientific Report.
No 1, December 1956. 68 pages.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 551.576.ll(670.5)

SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF HAVE OROCRAPNIC CLOUD COVER OVER THE MIDDLE
AND NORTHERN URALS

lhscow HETEOROLOGIYA I CIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp lS-Zh

[Article by T. N. Bibikova, Moscow State University. submitted for public-
ation 16 March 1978]

Abstract: A study was made of the principal
characteristics of wave orographic clouds
forming on the leeward slope of the Northern

Urals.

[Text] Already for a period of 20 years the Department of Atmospheric Phys-
ics of the Physics Faculty Moscow State University has been engaged in a
study of air currents in mountaina and an investigation of the conditions
for formation of orographic cloud cover in different regions of the Soviet
Union. As a result. much factual material has been accumulated on the phys-
ical properties of altocumulus lenticular clouds of the Ac lent type in

the Crimes. in the Caucasus. in the Carpathians and in Central Asia [1. 3,

1.].

The studies which are being carried out in the Department of Atmospheric
Physics have made it possible to compare the observed wave clouds with
theoretical data [2]. in particular. it follows from the theoretical stud-
les of A. F. Dyubyuk and V. N. Koahevnikov that the profile and configura-
tion of an obstacle exert a considerable influence on the redistribution

of meteorological elements on the leeward side [5. 7]. Accordingly. at all
times we have striVen to find those mountain ranges which could be theoret-
icnlly investigated within the framework of two-dimensional models and the
results (streamlines) are compared with really existing cloud systems [8].

The Urals long ago attracted our attention. A. F. Dyubyuk has repeatedly

mentioned the necessity and good prospects for studying the propertits
of the air flow in the Northern and Niddle Urals. In actuality, the Urals

Range is oriented alsost meridionally, especially in its northern part.
is quite elongated. and the westerly flows. perpendicular to the range.
as we will see below, are typical.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFICIM. "SF. UNLY

All this indicates that it must exert a considerable influence on renal
flows and on the leeward side create a stable wave pattern close to the
two-dimensional theoretical models [8], which in the first place must be
manifested in the field of orographic cloud cover.

Despite the fact that the Urais is of considerable interest for investiga-
tors of mesometeorologicai processes, it has been very poorly'studied. For
example. in the studies of A. Rh. Khrginn and V. D. Sovetova an investiga-
tion was made of the influence of the southern and middle parts of the
Ural Range on cloud cover and precipitation [10, ill The region to the
north of Nizhniy Tagll has remained virtually unstudied.

in the summer of 1972 we made a first attempt at clarifying the conditions
and nature of wave formation on the eastern slope of the Northern Urals.

The expedition was based on the aerological station at Ivdel', which is
located 60 km to the east of the main line of the range and 500 km to the
north of Sverdlovsk. Our investigations revealed a good possibility

for study of wave novanents in this region. In the summer of 1973 we or-
nanized a second expedition to the regions of Severourai'sk and Vsevolodovo-
ulagodatskiy village. The observation points in this case were situated
rlnser to the main line of the range (at a distance of 20 km). which made
possible a more detailed study of the properties of orographic clouds.

Ibr an observer situated on the ground the only evidences of wave movements
in the atmosphere are orographic clouds. Therefore. our efforts were di—
rected to a study of cloud systems consisting of Ac lent clouds. we employ-
ed an earlier developed stereophotogranmetric method with s simultaneous
survey of the entire heavens on the same frame [3]. In addition to instru-
mental measurements of cloud cover, in order to obtain the mean statistical
characteristics of wave cloud cover, extensive use was made of data from
the network of meteorological stations.

Frequency of appearance of clouds of the Ac lent type in the Middle and
Northern Urals. An investigation of the spatial distribution of the fre-
quency of Ac lent is interesting from two points of View: 1) Due to the
fact that the Urals Range is quite extended in a meridional direction,

its uniformity from north to south is different. And this means that its
Individual parts must exert a different influence on perpendicular air
flows. 2) Knowing the frequency of appearance of wave clouds over meteor-
ological stations situated at the same latitude but at different distances
from the axis of the range. it is possible to estimate indirectly how far
the wave pattern is propagated downstream.

In a meridional direction we examined a region with an extent of about 600
km from hurmantov to Sverdlovsk. An analysis of cloud cover was made using
Jata from eight meteorological stations situated on the eastern slope of
the Urals (Burmantovo, Ivdel', Severoural'sk, Karpinsk. Serov. Verkhotur'-
ye, Nishniy Tagil, Sverdlovsk). From the meteorological records we selected
the days when there were clouds of the Ac lent type.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1

Frequency of Appearance of Wave Geographic Clouds of the Ac lent "ype ln

Key:

the Northern and Mlddle Urnla Regardless of Season

 

 
 
    

Hucao “emu

l'nnonune ‘lnmo 3113- mm: c non-nun

“pm

at man. .uunpyenux 064mm n malo-
"thaw" u .1le tuna tune
I 2 3 Ac lenl. A: Inn. 1’ 5

           

 

Bypualnolo 60 19635-55972 .90 25
xuxwm
7 "was 50 {7 1903—1912
I uxnwy 2553 78] 22
(qun- 35 taco-nun
3 ypanuu I my ”735;”? m 27
Knpmmtx 50 INS—I972
9 x uxtexy ”H2 339 I2
CtPOI 70 1965-I912
10 at may 2822 . 422 I6
Brpxotypu 80 ISM—Nd?
11 x lottoxy 2457 :46 6
"human 60 l965—I972
[2 Tuna x uuwmw 2mm an ID
Cucpznoecu I60 1963-l972
I3 ‘ 5 ”any 3553 250 7
manual. I70 IBM-INS
1" x "Kinny I120 70 4
15 Hemunb I20 1961-4965 225 I3
x JaHIJy
16 Fab-Neptu- 300 18 l96l—I9GG
n innajs |726 33 2

————_

Observation point

Dlstance from range, kn

Number of analyzed days

Number of days ulth Ac lent type
Frequency of appearance of Ac lent clouds, Z
Burnantove

lvdel'

Severoural'sk

Knrpinsk

Sernv

Verkotur'ye

lehniy Tegll

Sverdlovsk

Shantal'

Chetdyn'

Ust'-chernnya

to the east

to the west

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Without regard to season, these data were averaged and we calculated the
frequency of recurrence of days with lenticular clouds. Table 1 gives_'
data on the spatial distribution of the frequency of occurrence of wave
orographic clouds. It can be seen that in the northern part of the region
from nuranntovu tocheroural'sk the frequency of occurrence of wave clouds
is maximum (an average of 251). The range in this region is characterized

by a maximum uniformity (mean width of range - 100 km, elevation 1,100-
l,300 m).

To the south of Severoural'sk the main Ural Range deviates somewhat from

a meridional direction and is incised by latitudinal valleys. Individual
mountain complexes rise here: Ol'vinakiy Kamcn' (1.519 m), Konzhakovskiy
Kamen' (1.569 m), Kos'vinskiy Kamen' (1,519 m). As a result. the influ-
ence of the range in general attenuates and this creates a complex picture
of flow around individual peaks which impairs the ordered wave system char-
acteristic for a uniform elongated range. In the cloud cover field this

is manifested in a decrease in the frequency of appearance of clouds of

the Ac lent type. on the average by 121.

From Nizhniy Tagil to Sverdlovsk the main range drops down considerably
(to 500 m). broadens out (average width of range 200 km) and still more
loses its uniformity. The leeward slope of this sector is characterized

by a minimum frequency of appearance of clouds of the Ac lent type (on
the average 82).

Thus. most frequently ordered wave movements of air and the lenticular
clouds associated with them are formed on the leeward slope (for westerly
air flows) of the highest northern part of the Urals Range, from Severoural'-
sktu hurnantuvo. Cloud photographs taken from meteorological satellites

show that wave clouds are also frequently observed beyond the Polar Urals,
but we do not have a sufficient series of observations for carrying out a
statistical analysis.

In order to ascertain the rate of attenuation of the wave flow downstream
we analyzed data from meteorological stations situated at the latitude of
lvdel': Ust'~Chernaya, Cherdyn', Ivdel' and Shantal'. Ust'-Chernaya and
Cherdyn' are located on the western slope of the Urals Range, 300 and 120
km respectively from the main line of the range, whereas Ivdel' and Shan—
tal' stations are located 60 and 170 km respectively from the main line
of the range on the eastern slope. Table 1 shows that at Ivdel' clouds of
the Ac lent type are observed rather frequently (222). With increasing
distance from the range the frequency of appearance of wave clouds de-
creases and for the meteorological station Shantal', situated 170 km to
the east of the range line is 61 of all the investigated days. The same
Picture is observed when there are easterly winds on the western slope

0f the range. Whereas for Cherdyn' station the frequency of occurrence of

clouds of the Ac lent type is 131, the Ust'-Chernaya meteorological sta-
tion observes these clouds very rarely (2:).

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

S m a
I0
0 -—4—-—-i-——__A_...__J
J) b
a. winter
I
0
b. spring
c. manner
d. wlntcr

 

Fig. l. Diurnal variation of wave orographic clouds of the Ac lent type
for different scasnns (according to data from Severoural'sk aviation

neteorological station).

40

O
”IFWMIN

Pig. 2. Seasonal variation of wave orographic clouds of the Ac lent type
(according to data from Severoural'sk aeroueteorological station) (1)
and westerly flows (according to radiosonde data for Perm') (2).

As a result of an analysis of the spatial distribution of the frequency
uf appearance of clouds of the Ac lent type along latitude it is possible
In draw the indirect conclusion that the influence of the Ural Range on
the field of orographic cloud cover is reflected downstream to a distance
"f 200 k.-

nlurnnl variation of wave orographic clouds. A joint analysis of radiosonde
data and a slow motion picture survey of clouds made earlier in the Crimes
made it possible to establish that one of the reasons for the destruction
of wave clouds is a change in the intensity of convective air movements

as a result of heating of the underlying surface [6]. Accordingly, the

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

diurnal variation of wnve clouds must essentially be dependent on the
uenmm oi: the year. 11w observational data on At lent nnke it possible
to clarify this problem to some degree. He took data for the aviation
meteorological station at Severournl‘sk during the period from 1967 to
1973 and analyzed the frequency of appearance of clouds of the Ac lent
type during the course of the year. December-February are assigned to the
winter season, March—May are assigned to spring. June—August are assigned
to sun-er and September-November to outrun. Figure 1 presents the results
of determinations of the frequency of appearance of clouds of the type
Ac lent during the day for different seasons.

Table 2

Cloud Cover Accolpnnied by Clouds of the Ac lent Type (According to Data
from ﬂeteornlogicnl Stations in the Northern Urnls)

 

 

 

1 2 3
:5
Q 3 .3.
opus eons-moan E g
s e E
5 gif-
.\r lent. Sc lent. Ci. Cs. Ct 6251' 47
.\c lent. Se lent. Ch 57 4
.-\c lent. Sc lent. Cu tong. I2 I
At lent. Sc lent. Cu mod. I
Cu hum. 43 4
.\c lcnt. Sc lrnl.. At. As 7 6
.-\c lent. Sc lent. Sc l ‘ l3
SC lﬂll. CH 5
.\c lent 18
At lent. Sc lent. Clu. Cu.
Ci. Cs. At. St 2
I. "tore . . . .l309 100

I
———~

Key:
1. Form of cloud cover
2. Number of days
3. Frequency of recurrence. Z
a. Total

The diurnal variation of wave clouds is clearly traced during the spring-
gunner seasons with nsxina during the morning, evening and nighttime hours.

.\t near-midday hours there is an almost complete absence of wave clouds
for the spring-smer seasons. In eutuln a diurnal variation of clouds

of the type Ac lent is virtually not expressed. In the winter time, on
the other hand. during the daytime there is a uniform increase in the

19

FOR OFFICIAL USS. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frequency of occurrence of wave clouds from morning to eveningwith a max-
imua at about 1600 hours.

Thus, In the warm half-year the daytime local circulations developing over
the mountains and valleys are propagated to an altitude adequate for de-
stroying the distribution of streamlines behind the range, and this favors
the appearance of atmospheric wave movements.

Seasonal variation of wave orographic clouds. The problem of the seasonal
variation of wave orographic clouds of the he lent type has not yet been
completely solved. For example, it was pointed out in [12] that over regions
of the Sierra Nevada (United States) and the British Isles wave situations
are encountered most frequently during the winter half of the year. The
observations of Larrson in Sweden [13] revealed a substantially different
peculiarity, to wit: the influence of mountain barriers on air currents

is especially great during the transitional periods of spring and autumn.
We feel that in order to clarify the seasonal variation of wave clouds

it is necessary to know, in particular, the conditions surrounding their
formation. if, as mentioned in [2], the perpendicularity of an air flow

to an obstacle is one of the decisive factors for the excitation of wave
movements on the leeward side of a range, it was especially necessary to
clarify the wind regime of the Northern and Middle Urals.

We examined radiosonde data for Perm' for the period from 1968 through 1973.
Taking into account that clouds of the Ac lent type, according to our
stereophotogrammetric measurements, are observed most frequently at alti-
tudes from 3 to 7 km, we limited ourselves to an analysis of data for the
tropospheric layer from 1.5 to 8 km. First of all we determined the type

of air flow for eight directions of the compass for each day. westerly

winds, perpendicular to the range, were predominant for all seasons; there

is a seasonal variation of westerly flows with a minimum in summer and maxima
in autumn and spring. True, deviations from the mean are small -- abOut #122
(see Fig. 2).

Next, using data from the meteorological stations Severoural'sk, Ivdel'
and Burmantovn we constructed curves of the seasonal variation of the fre-
quency of appearance of clouds of the Ac lent type, which are shown in
Fig. 2. It can be seen that there is a definite correlation between the
frequency of appearance of wave clouds and westerly flows.

Easterly winds, also perpendicular to the range, are observed quite rarely.
Nevertheless, it can be suggested that in summer their number is somewhat
nreater than in spring and autumn. When there are easterly winds wave
clouds should be excited on the westerly slope of the Urals (see data for
the Cherdyn' meteorological station in Table 1).

Cloud cover accompanying wave orographic clouds. Convective air movements
destroy ienticular clouds, but these same flows are responsible for the
formation of cumulus clouds. The intensity of cumulus clouds will be essen-
tially dependent on atmospheric stability, that is, the temperature

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fill! ill-'PICIM. lllll'. "NIX

'Il railflrmluh of the illl‘ l'lnw. ﬂu-ru-[uru-, nu llw lmnlu ut the typo M
cloud form accompanying vnve urournnhlr clomln we cam draw the com-lu-
uien that there in n utrntll’lcniion of the Atmosphere. 0n the hnnin of
data for the meteorological atntions ﬂurnantoVn. lvdel' and Severournl'ak

we selected l.109 days with he lent or Sc lent clouds.

Table 3

Altltudlnnl Dlntribntiun of Layer» with Ac lent Clouds in August 1973

 

KNIm- Dmnm women-l ne‘.....,l.l..,“ ' Bonn-new" Illa-panama:

 

 

2 «so c noun“ llllll Ioiunotls Mm-o- “W"c’" Fm“ """mmo
; yposseﬂ Ac h nl. an an mots, u “"":‘l""’:"“"' (3'33:-
2 1 2 3 a ' ' s ' 6 '
5 5 3.01 4.. LG! 0.2.10 3 7
{.33 4.7 0.“ 0.69
5.07—0.43 LOI L337
750—8.?” 0.5. 0.70
9.|--9.‘
3 ‘ 5.77-1.19? 0J5 0.56 J 7
7.48 - - 7.74 0.2"! 01-1
8," 8.87 0.20 0.”
[UT-9.22 0-1:
J t lJluiiﬂ 0J5 1J3 3 7
5.5" "6.25 03‘ 0'“
6.80—7.05 o." 1'. I6
9214.44 0.23 I
I9 . 23-16 0.20 ".30 3C) 8
2.7-2.9 0.20 0.3"]
1'9—336 0." 3.3%
6.7-7.1 0.4
l? 2 3.3—3.6 0..” L92 3C3
5.51—5.70 0.30 a
9 I 23-2.“ 0.33 3 9

Key:
l. Nuuber
2. Number of levels
3. Altitudea of levels with clouds of the Ac lent type. kl

4. Vertical thickness of cloud layers. ha

5. Vertical thickness of cloudleus intervals. ha

0. Direction of air flow in layer 1-8 km

7. West '

8. “NH

9. F.
The observed cloud cover was transcribed from the neteorologicnl record
books for each specific day. An a result it was possible to discriuinate
eight groups: vhen simultaneously with Ac lent or Sc lent. Cc lent there
was observation only of cirrus cloud or cu-ulus- or stratus-type forms. or
only middle-level clouds; when only lenticulnr clouds were observed. and.

11

FOR OFFlCllll. "5?. ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ilNl.Y

llnall). when all rloud forms were observed slmltanennuly.

1he analytical results are presented in Table 2. from which it follows that
ilnunl half of all the days are cases of simultaneous existence of wave
and cirrua cloud forms (57%). One of the reasons for this can be that the
train form not only clouds of the no lent type. but his cirrus clouds.
in [in] Ludlam already pointed out that upper-level clouds can be for-ed
heyoud the mountains. Our stereophotogrannetric seasurelents of cloud
cover registered Cc lent situated at altitudes of 9.3 km. Unfortunately.
we had no cloud data for these sane days for the oncoming flow. that is.
in front of the Urals Range. in the future it would he of interest to
retry out a simultaneous comparison of cloud forms in the windward and
leeward flows. .

In :32 of the cases there were only wave orographic clouds. Table 2 shows
that clouds of the he lent type. in combination with cumulus clouds. are
encountered quite rarely (91 of all cases). This agrees with the fact.

as shown by an analysis of radiosonde data. that in the case of wave
clouds of the Ac lent type. the atmosphere is stably stratified and at
altitudes 2-6 ha there are isothernic layers which inhibit the develop-
ment of convective clouds.

Lifetime of ane urographic clouds. Almost all theoretical studies relate

to stationary sndels. in order to clarify the legitilacy of their applica-
tion to really existing wave cloud systems it is necessary to know the
lifetime of these systems. it follows from our direct obserVations of clouds
of the he lent type that the lifetloe of a systen consisting of wave oro-
araphic rlnnds varies from 2 hours )0 minutes to 10 hours. The individual
lentirular clouds entering into the system continuously change fora and
wire. The velocities of horizontal change in individual clouds of the Ac
lent type vary from i to i n/sec and their lifetime is 12-50 oinutes.

The processing of the stereophotogrslsetric photographs indicated that in-
dividual Ac lent pulsated. that is. the lenticular clouds developed in a
definite region and at sane moment in tine attained their saxiuus size.
fhen the clouds began to decrease in volume until they had couplctely dit-
appeated or until they had attained a mini-u- sise. After this, after a
definite time interval a cloud similar in site and fora again developed

at this very some place. The period of the pulsations was 15-35 minutes.
lhe wave cloud system in general in such cases resained quasistationary,
that is. the center of gravity of individual cloud bands was almost not
displaced relative to the local relief.

Spatial characteristics of wave orographic clouds. During the period of
vspodltionnry work we repeatedly observed cloud systems consisting of
clouds of the Ac lent type.

Since aterenphotograrnwtrlc measurements of cloud cover were made in the

Sorthern hrals region for the first tine. we will now discuss sane of the
result».

:2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VCR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Altitudes of appearance. As a result of processing of the stereo photo-
graphs it was possible to detect a characteristic peculiarity: as a rule.
clouds of the Au lent type existed simultaneously at several levels. be-
tween which there were cloudless intervals. For example. on 5 August 1973
there were five levels with clouds of the Ac lent type. on 2 August 1973
-- four levels. on 6 August (morning and evening) and on 19 August 1973
-- three levels. on l2 August 1973 -- 2 levels. Table 3 giVes some idea
concerning the thicknesses of cloud and cloudless layers, their lower and
upper levels. Table 3 shows that the levels of cloudy and cloudless layers
vary from day to day.

The enumerated situations were observed when there were westerly or nearly
westerly winds. when the wave pattern developed on the eastern. leeward
slope of the main Urals ﬂange (average elevation l.000-l.200 n). When
there was an easterly air flow, as was the case on 9 August 1973. the re-
gion of observations was on the windward side of the main Urals Range. but
an the leeward side of the eastern Urals ridges. which are 70 ks from the
Urals Range and 20 km from the observation site (to the east). The region
of the ridges consists of three principal chains: the foothills of the
Ursls Range with the highest rise being Petrepavlovskaya Peak (624 m) and
the two chains of the Eastern Urals Ridges.

0n 9 August wave orographic clouds of the Ac lent type. which we observed
at Lake Svetloye (6 km from Vsevolodov-Blagodatskiy) were formed on the
leeward slope of the Urals Ridges. In this case the wave cloud pattern was
completely different than in the case of westerly flows. First, there was
only one layer with clouds of the Ac lent type. The lower base of the lent-
icular clouds was situated at altitudes from 2.3 to 2.6 km and the tops at-
tained 3 km. The vertical thickness of individual clouds was 360 m. The
cloud system itself was not represented by long bands parallel to the
range. as we always observed in the case of westerly flows. but by indi-
vidual "lenses," whose long axes were parallel to the ridges. The hori-
zontal dimensions (perpendicular to the flow) of individual clouds varied
[roi- 205 to 8 kill.

All this indicates that beyond less high obstacles wave movements are ex-
ritcd at lesser altitudes and their attenuation with altitude occurs con-
siderably more rapidly.

Vertical thickness. in most cases for wave clouds of the Ac lent type it
is possible to measure both the lower and upper bases. 0n stereopairs ob-
tained on different days we measured the vertical thicknesses of individ-
ual lenticular clouds entering into the wave systems. As a result. we as-
rertalned the frequency distribution of the vertical thickness of clouds
of the Ac lent type. The histogram shown in fig. 3a shows that most fre-
quently there are clouds having a vertical thickness from 300 to 600 m.
The scatter of values varies in the range from 100 to 1.200 m.

untent of clouds of Ac lent type perpendicular to flow. A distinguishing
characteristic of the Northern Urals is that when there are westerly air

flows a whole system of wave orugraphic clouds of the Ac lent type is
23

secs. sees-on... u-- .0...
FilIi ill-‘i‘liilM. "SI-2 ONLY

lurmvd. The individual clouds entering into the nystem constitute long
tlhhnﬂu parallel in Hue another and the range. The use in the analysis
at rlnnd photographs taken from meteorologirai satellites has made it
euuaihie to clarify that the wave pattern is extended 400-500 kn along
ihe meridian. Our survey apparatus did not sake it possible to take in
the entire cloud systen. Therefore. when we speak of the extent of vaVe
cloud". we have in mind the individual clouds registered on the stereo
photographs. Figure 3b, which shows a histogram constructed on the basin
of measurements of horizontal dinennions of individual clouds perpendic-
ular to the flow for all days of observations shows that the extent of
the clouds varies from i to 22 ha. At the sane time. it oust be taken

into account that we did not discriminate any definite stage in the de-
velopment of wave clouds.

” l) . 5) b 5)

\~

xm.‘lu?’9 9”?“ n
is

‘e‘.

l'
4' ~15 a! 0 l is 0 O O M

Fig. 3. Frequency distribution of parameters of clouds of he lent type. a)
vertical thickness. h) length perpendicular to flow. c) width

Thus. the distinct organization of clouds of the At lent type into elongat-

rd hands gives us a basis for asserting that the flow around the Northern
Irais in two-dimensional.

width at clouds. The width of individual cloud bands varies in a consider-
ably lesser range than their length. Figure 3c shows that it varies free

i in 5 kn. Most frequently there are wave clouds with dimensions from 2 to
i he perpendicular to the flow.

Inunstrean propagation of wave pattern. As a rule. cloud systesa consisting
nr wave clouds of the he lent type constituted parallel ridges with a total
nuaaher iron b to lo. As indicated earlier, a stereophotogranletric survey

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

made it possible to detect n multilevul nature of wave orographic clouds.
1he greatest number of bands with the greatest distance from the range
downstream was registered for the lower (3-0.5 km) level. He will cite
several of the clearest examples.

 

Fig. 6. wave orographic clouds of the Ac lent type which were observed on
2A July 1972 at 0825 hours (at lvdel').

0n 5 August l9?) there were nine cloud bands sinultaneously; in the layer
1.2-6 kn these were propagated downstream for a distance up to 100 km.

In the above-lying layer, from 5 to 6 kn, there were only four bands with
a naxisum distance from the range up to 30 km. At the very upper level.
at an altitude of 9.) kn, there was only one band which was situated vir-
tually over the main Urals Range [9].

Iin 21 July 1972 wave orographic clouds were observed from the earliest sorn-
ing to lJOD hours in the form of long bands parallel to the range. the to-
tal number being more than nine. According to seasureoents. the lower layer
with clouds of the Ac lent type was situated at the level 6.3 km. The ver-
tical thickness was 550 a. The average wave length was 9.5 kn. By conpar-
ing the data from the stereophotogranmetric neasuresents with data obtain-

ed using a wide—angle camera it could be established that the entire cloud
system was propagated downstream for a distance of more than 150 km (the
cloud hands moved out of the field of view of the survey camera).

According to radiosonde data (at lvdel'), the wind had a stable westerly

direction in the entire thickness of the troposphere. The wind velocity
Increased with altitude. The wind shear in the layer from 500 s to 2 km
was particularly conspicuous. For example. at an altitude of 500 s

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ilFFICMI. "53E ONLY

the wind Velocity was 7 n/uec, and at an altitude of 2 kn -- 20 n/sec.
Aloft the velocity changed little with altitude. on the ayerage remaining
23 lP/Hm'.

The oncoming flow, according to radiosonde data for Pern', was character-
iyed he an increased ﬁtnhlllty. in the layer 1.5—5 km the vertical tem-

perature gradient was )’ P 3.6’C/i00 n.

u :5 July I972 vnve orographlc clouds ol the Ac lent type developed at 0500
huuru and lasted until 0950 hours. As in the preceding examples. the clouds
were stretched out in long bands parallel to the range. Figure h is n pho-
ingraph of cloud bands at 0825 hours. it is easy to see at least eight
handy. He succeeded in enlabllshing that the influence of the Brain Range
was reflected in the cloud cover field a distance of sore than ihO kn.

According to radiosonde data for Pern'. the oncoming flow had a stable vest-
erly direction perpendicular to the range. At an altitude of 3 kn the wind
velocity was 5 n/sec. and at an altitude of 5.5 km - 25 n/sec. Hith alti»
tude a wind shear occurred with a gradient of 8 m/sec per kilometer.

An in the preceding case. in the oncoming flow there was a considerable
layer with a small vertical temperature gradient. At altitudes from 1.5
to 3 kn the vertical teaperatute gradient 7" 0.a°cll00 n.

Thus. not only indirectly. but also instrumentally. it was possible to es-
tablish that the influence of th‘ Urals Range is manifested in the field
of orographie c‘end cover [or a diotnnce of more than iSO kn.

we note in conclusion that the Northern Urals is exceptionally favorable
for leeward vave formation. when there are westerly air flows the cloud
systens consisting of clouds of the Ac lent type correspond to a two-disen-

sienal pattern of flow.
iiiiiLiocmiiY

i. ulhikova, T. 5.. Dyubyuk. A. f., Trubnikov. 8. N.. "Conditions for the
Formation of Ac lent in the Crimean Region." TRUDY TsAO (Transactions of
the Central Aerologlcal observatory), No 67. pp 85-91. 1963.

2. uihikova. T. N.. Dyuhyuk. A. P.. Kozhevnikov, V. N.. "Soce Results of
a Comparison of Theory and Observations of Wave Clouds." TRUDY VIII
VSESOYUZNOY KONFERENTSII P0 FIZIKE OBLAKOV I AKTIVNYH VOZDEYSTVIYAH
(Transactions of the Eighth All-Union Conference on the Physics of
Clouds and Artificial Modification), Leningrad, pp ﬁlo-obi, 1970.

l. Dynhyuk. A. F., Bibikova, T. N.. Iruhnikov. B. 3., "Influence of Houn-
tain Topography and the Sea on Formation of Summer Cloud Cover Over
the Southern Criaea." TRUDY UkercHl (Transactions of the Ukrainian

Scientific Research hydroaeteorological institute). No 26, pp 74-85.
i96l.
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(n.

:9.

"I

10.

I1.

12.

I).

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oyuhyuk. A. P.. Blhlkova. T. N.. "Conditlono for Formation of Cloud
Cover in Dependence on Orography.“ TRUDY 660 (Transactions of the
Main Geophysical Observatory). No 171. pp 130-163. 1965.

Dyuhyuk. A. F.. "0n the Theory of Lee liountaln waves for n Rise with
an Arbitrary Profile," IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. PIZIKA MHOSFERY I OKEANA
(News of the USSR Academy of Sciences. Physicu of the Atnoaphere and
Ocean). Vol IX. No 3. pp 235-2106. 1973.

Dyubyuk, A. F.. Blblkova. T. N.. Trubnlkov. B. N.. "Some Physical Prop-
erties of Ac lent." HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA (Meteorology and Hydro-
logy). No 6. pp 3-9. 1963.

Knuhevniknv. V. N.. Kozuderov, V. V.. “Theoretical Picture of Flow
Around the Crimean Range in the Yalta Region." IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. FIZ-
IKA AWSFBRY 1 MEAN/l. V01 V1. No 10. pp 979-988. 1970.

anhevnlkov. V. N.. "Orosrnphlc Disturbances in a Two-Dimensional Sta-
tlonnry Problem.“ IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKEANA. Vol 1".
No 1. pp 33-52. 1968.

Kozhevnikov. V. N.. Bibikova, T. N.. Zhurbs. Ye. V.. “Drogrsphlc Atmo-
spheric Disturbances Over the Northern Urals." IZVESTIYA AN SSSR. FIZ-
IKA AMERY l OKEANA. Vol X111. No 5. pp 651-560, 1977.

Sovetova. V. 0.. "Influence of the Urals Range on the Evolution of
Frontal Cloud Cover." TRUDY TsIP (Transactions of the Central Institute
of Forecasts). Na 79, 1959.

Khrglan. A. Kh.. "Influence of the Urala Range on Cloud Cover and Pre-
clpltatlon." WROIDCIYA I GIDMIDGIYA. No 3. pp 11-17. 1961.

Alaka. H., "Aviation Aspects of Mountains." WHO TECﬂN. NOTE. No 34.
1960.

Larreon. L.. "Observation of lee Have Clouds in the Jeutlsnd Hountalns.
Sweden." TELLUS. V01 6. No 2. pp 124-138. 19510.

Ludlaw. F. 11.. "Orographlc Cirrus Clouds." QUART. J. ROY. HBTEOROL.
5°C.. V01 78. 1952.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.616

STATISTICAL INDICES OF SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF PRECIPITATION IN THE
EXFERIHENTAL METEOROLOGICAL POLYGON

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No l2. Dec 1978 pp 25-30

lArticle by Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences V. H. Huchnik.

Ukrainian Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute. submitted for
publication 28 March 1978]

Abstract: A study was made of the character-
istics of the precipitation field in the Ex-
perimental Polygon of the Ukrainian Scientific
Research hydrometcorological Institute. The
presence of stable local nonuniformities over
the territory of the Experimental Meteorolog-
ical Polygon (EMT) is demonstrated.

[Text] The organization of the Experimental Meteorological Polygon (BHP)
with a dense rain-gage network made it possible to solve many problems
relating to artificial cloud modification [6. 8]. In selecting the territory
of the EM? particular attention was given to the absence of significant dif-
ferences in elevation, major rivers and water bodies as factors exerting an
influence on the formation of precipitation [8]. But disturbances of the
precipitation field must neverthelesa exist, since in the territory of the
EM? itself and in the nearby areas there are major industrial cities (Krivoy
Run. Dueprudzcrzhinsk, Zaporozh'ye. Nikopol') and large water bodies (Kakh-
uvskoye and Dneprodzerzhinskoye Reservoirs). As is well known, large indus-
trial cities exert an appreciable influence on precipitation in the adjacent
territory ll. 3, 10]. Accordingly. in the EM? it is possible to expect the
existence of a singular areal distribution of precipitation.

L. F. Bogatyr' and A. I. Ronov [2]. making a study of shower precipitation
(intensity maximum greater than 6 mm/hour and duration less than three

hours) during June-August 1960-1962. discovered "permanent" maxims in the

uesternnud castenaparts of the EM? which were separated by a zone of min-
lmua precipitation.

The existence of local maxima and minima of precipitation over the terri-
tory of the EM? is of considerable interest in relation to the problems
involved in evaluating the effectiveness of modification [5, 6, 8]. For

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

example. those cases of modification which relate to a territory with a
Inca] anximum on the average give exaggerated values In comparison with
modifications carried out for a territory with n local minimum.

The presence of local maxima and mininn of precipitation at distances of
lO-ZO km from one another is a factor which must be taken into account in
solving a number of pressing problems: long-range forecasting of the quan-
tity of-precipitation, planning of sown areas, prediction of the probabil-

ity of obtaining a harvest of a stipulated level. organization of irriga-
tion systems. etc.

The problem of the existence of local maxima and miniaa during the modific-
ation period (May-August) in convective clouds was examined using precipita-
tion data collected at posts in the EM? during 1966-1970. As demonstrated
in [a]. the result of modification of well-developed cumulus clouds during
this time period was less than 12 of the mean quantity of precipitation and
c0uld not exert an influence on its distribution. Therefore. artificial pre-
cipitation was not taken into account. The author also did not take into
account the possible influence of microclimate on the conditions for mess-
uring precipitation. since during the setting out of precipitation gages
particular attention was given to the absence of such influences. "hen pro-
cessing the data use was made only of those posts whose observation series
had no interruption during the course of this time. As a Seoult. the mean
density of posts was about 1 precipitation gage per 18 km . These data were
used in constructing maps of the monthly and seasonal (Hay-August) precip-
itation suns for the period 1966-1970. The maps were used in determining
the positions of the centers of the precipitation maxima and ainima as the
geometric centers of closed isohyets. in cases when the isohyets were not
closed at the edges of the map. the position of the centers was determined
approximately. The accuracy in determining the position of the centers of
the maxima for the most part was 1-2 km and was greater than the accuracy
for the minima, which was 2-6 km.

Table 1

Dimensions of Areas of Regions "+" and "-" According to Fig. 1

Oceans
It I "4, I "1+ I IV, 5+ II l_ I IL I "L I .‘.‘_
SuﬁI 196' 2NI ls-II 78 I m u 66 I 250 I 972 1288

As can be seen from the seasonal precipitation map for 1966-1970 (Fig. l),
in the 8H? territory there are clearly definable regions of maxima and min-
ima. The isohyet 180 mm can be considered the boundary between zones of in-
creased and decreased quantities of precipitation and the isohyets 160 and
200 mm can be regarded as determining the principal regions of reduced and

29

 

     

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLCIAL USE ONLY

increased quantities of precipitation respectively. [Henceforth the re-
gions of increased and decreased quantities of precipitation will be des-
lgnated an regions "+" and "-" respectively.l As a result. it was possible
In define the following regions of increased quantity of precipitation
(Table l): l+ - in the northwest. [1+ -- in the southwest, Ill+ -- in the
north, IV+ - not closed in the southern part of the EHP. and with a re-
duced quantity of precipitation: I- -- not closed in the northwest. II-
-- in the south. III- - large, taking in almost all the eastern part of
the EMP. within which there is a rather large intermediate region with an
increased quantity of precipitation.

 

Fig. 1. Seasonal (May-August) precipitation map of the Experilental Meteor-
ological Polygon during perind 1966-1970. Regions of quantity of precipita-
tion: increased (> 200 an) -- 1..., 11+, 111..., “1+ and decreased ((160 III)
-- 1-, iI-, 111-.

Table 2

Frequency of Recurrence of Centers of Precipitation by Months and Parameter
p for 1966-1970

“all limo. "on An”!

 

Key:

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VCR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tab 1e 3

Frequency of Recurrence of Centers "+“ and "-" of Monthly Suaa of
Precipitation by Regions of Precipitation "+" and "-" in 1966-1970

 

Key:
1. Month
2. May
3. June
6. July
5. August

Table 5

Values of p Para-eter and Ira Confidence Limits 01 and oz for the Regions
"+" and "-" for 1966-1970

1.——_—————

O

a

z n m a P:
8

Pl

 

 

 

 

 

05am

 

u I: I6 om 0.11 1.00
II+ 16 13 0.5: 0.5: 0.94
m+ 1:. lo 0.07 0.30 0.88
1:, at 42 0.52 0.53 0.02
- :7 2 0.12 0.02 0.37
m_ 00 IS 0.2:. 0.15 0.00
:_ a: I? 0.2: 0.12 0.32

 

 

Key:
1. Precipitation region

local nonuniforaitieu of the precipitation field in the EM? territory are
extremely significant. For example. the difference in the lean extremal
quantity of precipitation in the northern parts of regions 111+ and III-

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vxrvwdx 90 as. that is. is comparable to the minimum value in region (II.
(128 mm) and constitutes about half the maximum value in the region lll+
(2l9 mm). With a distance between these points of 16.h km the gradient of
the mean quantity of precipitation is 5.5 nn/km, that is. is extremely great.
He will also compare the mean values of the quantity of precipitation by
areas in region ill+ and the northern sector of region tll-. determined as
the means of the values for individual posts. This gives values of 205 and
165 mm respectively. Since the axes of region 111+ and the northern part

of region llL.ara ‘ieated parallel to one another. the distance between
them can be determined approximately. It was found that the mean values of
the quantity of precipitation in these two areas of about 200 kmz, whose
axes are approximately 18 km apart. differ by 60 mm. Still greater differ-
ences are obtained when comparing data for regions 1+ and 11+ with data for
regions It- and III-. the distance between which does not exceed 60 km.

Now we will attempt to answer the main question as to whether these regions
are a result of a random distribution of precipitation over the territory
of the EM? or some constantly prevailing factors. For this purpose we will
determine the frequency of recurrence of centers of increased ("+") and de-
creased ("-") quantities of precipitation from the monthly maps for each
year.

According to Table 2. the number of centers in June and July somewhat ex-
ceeds their number in May and August. Such a variation in the frequency

of occurrence is possibly attributable to the fact that in June and July
separation between periods of precipitation is greater than in May and Aug-
“at.

Since only the appearance of centers of precipitation of two signs is pos-
sible. their distribution is binomial. Accordingly, for solving the prob-
lem of the existence of local disturbances in the distribution of the cen-
ters of precipitation it is necessary to check the hypothesis of an invari-
ability of the distribution parameters over the territory of the EHP. For
this purpose we will use the parameter p . mln, where m is the number of
"+" centers and n is the total number of “+" and “-" centers. For final
samples the p parameter can be varied in some linits p1 and p2, stipulated
by the selected confidence level. If the local disturbances of the precip-
itation field in the EM? are great and the regions of increased and de-
creased quantities of precipitation are attributable to them, it must be
expected that for the "+" regions the p1 and p2 values will differ consid-
erably from their values for the "-" regions. in particular, there can be
cases when the entire interval of p1 and p2 values for the "+" regions
will fall outside the interval of their values for the "-" regions.

In order to determine the confidence limits p1 and p2 we will select the

sufficiently high 992 confidence level. These li-its will be obtained from
the p and n values using the nouogram cited in [9].

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2 shows that the p value for the entire territory of the m, de-
termined on the basis of all data (a - 265). is equal to 0.101 with the
confidence limits p1 - 0.35 and p2 - 0.lo7. From month to month the p
parameter and its confidence intervals experience small changes. This
supports the hypothesis that the conditions for the formation of preclp-
lintion in the EMT vary little during the period of time Hay-August.

Now we will proceed to an examination of the frequency of recurrence of
centers of precipitation by oblasts.

Despite the fact that there were 51 centers for all months in all regions
with a quantity of precipitation greater than 200 an and 81 centers with
less than 160 In, their number for individual months is inadequate for
obtaining convincing values of the p parameter for individual regions.
Therefore. we will use data only from the last line in Table 3 for deter-
mining p for individual regions (except for regions 1V... and I-) for all
months. and also for 2+ and Z- for individual months.

It follows from Table lo that the frequency of recurrence of the "+“ for
regions of precipitation "+" differs sharply from their frequency of re-
currence for "-" regions. Thus. the minimum p value for "+" regions is
equal to 0.67 (region 1114,), whereas its maximum value for "-" regions

is 0.25 (region 111-). In addition, it is found that both for the total
region 2+ and for the remaining "+" regions. cited in Table lo. there is
no superposing of the p1-p2 intervals with their values for the 2 _ re-
:gion and the remaining "-" regions. These data make it possible to assert
that the conditions for the formation of precipitation over the territory
of the "4-" regions differ greatly from the conditions over the "-" re-
gions. In actuality, if it is assumed that the observed distribution of
centers of precipitation is random, and not due to any local effects, then
the p value for the entire territory of the Eli? is equal to 0.61 and falls
In the confidence limits p1 I- 0.35 and p2 - 0.67 (Table 2). Carpeting
these values with the values in Table lo for individual regions, we see that
in this case as well the confidence limits p1 and p2 for all the "+" re-
gions fall for the most part above their values for the entire area of

the EMP. but for "-" regions -- lower.

Now we will discuss the problem of the stability of the influence of local
factors on the formation of precipitation over the territory of the m
with time. For this purpose we determine the values of the p parameter
and its confidence limits for the total regions of precipitation by months
on the basis of the data in Table 3.

According to Table 5, the value of the p parameter experiences relatively
small changes with time both for the Z 4- regions (from 0.75 to 0.92) and
for the .8. regions (from 0.05 to 0.33). At the same time, the intervals

l'l-Pz for the regions 2., and 2. do not overlap one another for the per-
iod June-August. Therefore. it can be assisted that for these months there

ls a well-expressed and constant influence of local factors on the condi-
tions for the formation of precipitation in the territory of the m. A

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nomauhnt more uncertain problem is that of the existence of such an influ-
Face in May. since the pI-pz intervals for the 2+ and 2.. regions overlap.
It Is possible that the reanon for this uncertainty is the extremely small
number of observations of centers of precipitation for the 15+ region,
which is caused, as mentioned above. by the relatively small "breakdown"
of the precipitation field in May. Thus. the data in Table 5 make it pos-
sible to assume that the local factors exert a constant effect on the con-
ditions for formation of precipitation in the territory of the EMP during
the entire period of modification of convective clouds (Hay-August).

Table 5

Values of p Parameter and its Confidence Intervals p1 and p2 by Months for
Total Precipitation Regions for 1966-1970

 

Key:
l. Month
2. May
3. June
a. July
5. August

Now we will make an attempt at a qualitative examination of where the sources
of modification for the formation of precipitation should be situated in
the territory of the EMP.

The regions 1+ and II+ are adjacent to the territory of Krivoy Rog and it
is natural to assume that specifically the peculiarities of a large indus-
trial city exert an influence on the formation of precipitation. The influ-
ence of such cities on clouds involves, primarily, first -- the initiating
effect of the heat island over them with ascending currents in the limits
[0-60 cm/sec, and second -- the effect of an increased content of condensa-
tion nuclei in the air [7, 11]. Therefore, it can be assumed that the rea-
son for the formation of precipitation regions 1+, II+ and 111+ is the in-
fluence of Krivoy Rog.

The existence of extremely large gradients of the quantity of precipitation
for a month and for a season and the small values of the mean monthly same

(about 30 mm) in the regions of an increased quantity of precipitation is
the basis for raising the question: is there a redistribution of precipita-
tion over the territory of the EHP during the warm season of the year?

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE IININ

is the Increase in precipitation near large cities not accompanied by a
decrease in precipitation at some distance from these cities? if there
are rvmums for the nor-- frequent and sore intensive resolution of ctssnlo-
nimbus clouds near cities, this is responsible for a decrease in the num-
ber of cases of their resolution at sane distance from the cities. if this
hypothesis is true. than prior to artificial modification during the warm

season of the year the following problem arises: accomplish Iodification
in such a way to eliminate. insofar as possible. the unfavorable influ-
ence of a city on the distribution of precipitation near it.

in conclusion, i wish to express appreciation to H. V. linyitav, Ii. V. Levin
and B. Ye. Pishsan for useful discussion of the work.

5.

(I.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

npsalyamva, 7.. 6.. Zvorykina. 0. ii., Sokulovn. N. 6.. ”Some Peculiar-
ities of the Spatial-Temporal Distribution of Considerable Precipita-
tion Over the Territory of licmcov and Hoskovskayn ()blast." TRUDY TsVGHO
(Trmwartions of the Central Volga iiydroneteorological (hservatory).

No 2, pp 83-96, 1973.

nogatyr'. L. F., Romy. A. 1.. "The influence of Hesoscale Temperature
inhomogeneity of the Underlying Surface on Sumner Convective Precipit-
ation," TRUDY UltrNIGHl (Transactions of the Ukrainian Scientific Re-
search llydrocseteorological Institute), No 6i. pp 106-“). 1966.

KLIHAT HUSKVY (Climate of Moscow). edited by Ii. Ii. Nitriyev and N. P.
itessonov, Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat. 1968, 323 pages.

Korniyenko, Ye. Ye.. "Evaluation of the Possible Quantity of Additional
Precipitation Under the influence of Solid Carbon Dioxide on Cumulus
Clouds." TRUDY Uker’GHl (Transactions of the Ukrainian Scientific Re-
search iiydroseteorological institute), No 92, pp 72-96. 1970.

Korniyenlto, Ye. Ye.. "Artificial Regulation of Precipitation." TRUDY
okrmom. No 137. pp 3-24, 1975.

Leonov. ii. 9., Perelet. G. 1.. AKTIVNYYE VOZIEYSTVIYA NA OBiJiKA V XHOLOD-
NOYH POLUGODIYE (Artificial Hodification on Clouds 'in the Cold Half-Year).
Leningrad, Cidroneteoizdat. 1967, 152 pages.

NEPREDNWRFJNYYE VOZDEYSTVIYA NA KLIHAT (inadvertent Effect on Cli-
mte), Leningrad. Gidronoteoizdat, 1976, 260 pages.

i’rikht'ko. C. P.. iSKUSSTVEﬂNYYE OSADKI I7. KONVEKTIVNYKH OBLAKOV (Arti-
ficial Precipitation from Convective clouds), Leningrad. Gidroueteoiz-
dnt. I968. 173 pages.

)5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

9. Khan. 6., Shapiro. 5.. STATISTICIIESKIYE MDHLI V INZIIENERNYKII ZMMCII-

Mtll (Scott-411ml Hodcln In ﬁnglttcerlng Problems). Moucou. "Mr." 1969.
195 pages.

I0. Ilul‘f. F. .\.. Clmnunon. S. In, "Climatological Mucnumnt of Urban Bf—

foelu on l'n-rIpItntIon M: St. bouts.” J. APP!» HETEOROI... Vol II. N"
a, pp 323 Hz, 1972.

ll. Lamlahum. 1.. "Inndwrtcnt Mnosphcrlc Modification Through Urbaniz-
nllon," HEATHER AND CLIMATE mnmcxnou, New York. pp 726-763. I974.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.509.6l5:535.36i.i
INCREASE 1N THE ViSIniLiTY RANGE OF LASER BEACONS [N A FOG
Hoscov HBTEOROLOGIYA l CIDROLDGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 31-62

[Article by Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences 0. A. Volko-

vitskiy and V. P. Snykov. institute of Experimental Meteorology. submitted
for publication 20 March 1978]

Abstract: This paper gives the results of an inves-
tigation of the intensity of scattered radiation of

a HeNe laser propagating in a droplet fog with its
evaporation by the coaxial beam of a 002 laser. Dur-
ing observation toward t5: ray it is noted that the
evaporation of droplets in the affected zone leads

to movement of the son: of maximum intensity of scat-
tered visible radiation in the direction of the ob-
serVer. The results of the experiments and computa-
tions were in good agreement. Expressions are deriv-
ed which make it possible to establish the correla-
tion between the intensity of a C02 laser and the
range of move-eat of the zone of maximum intensity

of scattered radiation of a ﬂeNe laser. it is shown
that for a substantial (by several times) increase in
the range of detection of a laser beacon under the
conditions prevailing in a real fog it is necessary

that the radiation power of the 002 laser be several
tens of kilowatts.

[Text] At the present time there has been extensive development of optical
systems for signaling. transmission of information and navigation based on
use of laser radiation. A serious limitation for the use of optical systems
operating through the atmosphere is the presence of fog and clouds. The de-
tection of signal lights and orientation by ray in fogs and clouds are made
quite difficult or become impossible since over a quite extended path the

radiation energy can be virtually completely scattered by cloud elements.

In order to increase the range of detection of a light ray in fogs and

clouds the authors of [2] proposed a method based on the fact that beams of
visible and infrared radiations (such as that of HeNe and 602 lasers) are

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

umxlally «llrecled (award the nlmerver. As a result of the effect or ill
mull.“ loo a light my In slight ly «em tervd in a "cleared" zone and he-

--nnes visible as a result or aernuol scattering at a distance where the
evaporation of cloud elenents decreaoes.

He will examine the lawn of change in the intensity of sounding radiation
scattered in the zone of effect of a bean of on; laser and we will evaluate
the possibility of a substantial increase in the visibility range for laser
beacons in a fog on the basis of scattered light.

Formulas for CoIput ing Sounding Radiation Scattered in Affected Zone

The intensity of the radiation of a “she laser scattered by an elenentary
volume A V of a houngeneoua cloud medium with an attenuation coefficient
“*0 at the angle 0' to the direction of propagation of radiation. regis-
Iered by a receiver situated at the distance I, from the boundary of the
medium (Fig. l). in the single scattering approxilation can be evaluated
union the data in studies [6, 8, 12].

We expression for the intensity of scattered radiation la (9'). normaliz-
ed to log, taking into account attenuation along the ray path to the scat-
tering volume A V and from A V to the observation point can be written in

 

the form ( r ) A V
5“" 1m -' “—E“ 5w ’_"' "
= a d . c '9 Sin ' n (I 4. )
1.. . 1—" 7. 4,. (1)

where [(9 ')I6.n in the normalized scattering function for radiation in a
homogeneous cloud Iediun: m
Ciel
n -( )

R
is the angle of divergence of the ray of a lleNc laser.

 

 

Fig. l. Schematic representation of arrangement of sounding ray and radiation
detector.

In the affected zone the nicrostructure of the cloud nediuo is inhooogen-
eous. In order to determine the field of scattered radiation in the neigh-
borhood of the bean of a 002 laser it is necessary to take into account the
laws of change of oierostructure caused by the exposure.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An approximate expression for detersining the radiation intensity of a lit-Ne
laser. "scattered in the "( learing" zone formed in a lmmgeneous droplet

i loud medium hy the continuous radiation of a (:02 laser in,“ (0' ) can be
written using an analytical description of the laser action process exam 'ned
in [3] with the following assumptions. lie will assume that the ratio of the
transverse disensions of the clearing zone do and the diameter of the sound-
ing ray d x 0 is such that the microstructure of the medium within the Units
of the transverse section of the sounding ray is uniform and we will assume
that the optical scattering section under the influence of the co; laser
radiation changes due to a decrease in the size of the droplets although
their concentration remains the sane. Then the expression for I, v1,(9')/
1‘0 will have the following fora:

l

 

~Jc, (3'. ll u' _. s.
Ini'l _ la (0') '0 unFsltN‘
“’ﬂ -’ ”A .3)+‘¢ e ‘rx
5 ‘t (2)
X a V
'+ '1‘ .
[II - via] 0,.

and HMO 'Mn is the normalized scattering function of radiation in the
affected zone: 1 is a coordinate determining the position of the sounding

ray in the beam of a 002 laser (with coincidence of the axes of the beans
7. I 0).

0n the basis of (l) and (2) it is possible to write an expression for the
ratio of intensities of the radist ion scattered by this elementary volume
after and before the action of radiation by a 002 laser.

Inii’l a Ix. ll him M. m

1g a, = '3 i", C ' (3)
m. (z) = - n m - at: - j -. (r. 2) «'-

 

0
where

The values “10:. z). t,(z). 49‘“) entering into (2) and (3) can i"! 49“"
nined using formulas [3. ’0]

0(1) ‘1'»
l (cT- i)¢- 5

2
“(8):? Tia +

—tl r, H

[a‘ cat‘)_” .

+ V5[srtig———V————-—_,a -stctg —-‘—“-,-]:
Hand“) "‘1 l+2lT
5k. 2): ‘-

l + it .ill_ l)e~.‘s"‘ III
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where the thermal effect function in

.. CPA ' l _
0 (3) -— mll + U! (Zn. (6)
_ .4: a. q. . a) _
m " VihTfup +7)" U)
liere -3 AJJ'.
C - "GT"

[1‘ - heat; p - seat] I. is the heat of evaporation: P0 is the intensity of
the co; inner; r0 is the radius of the beam of the (:0; laser at the inten-
sity level I - lo-e'I: A? - 2°103 cn‘l; v in wind velocity: ﬂ 1t’ ﬂu“
are coefficients taking nto account the energy losses of the 86'; lnser

in heating of the surrounding medium and scattering of radiation by a drop-
let medium: R02 is the mean square radius: Pb in the parameter of germ dis-
iributien of droplets by sizes. For To - 293 K. I - 100 wlcuz. R02 - 5010'“
”It 5 heat ~ 0.75. Bacat $8 0060

11m noraalized scattering functions f(0°)/Mr and fwr(0°)llm for the in-
itial Iicrostructure of the droplet nediun and the droplet mediu- in the
affected zone can be found from tables or graphs with known droplet dia-
trihution parameters R2 and y. . 'ihe R; values in the affected zone can be

computed using the formula R

R, (a. :) = -———-—-_——m.
[I 4- (run— I) a '0.“ (8)

derived free (5) with the aasunptions made concerning the optical section
on the basis of obvious considerations.

Table l
0‘ | A annu
______'_.l‘_".‘
2.0 64 2.0
2.5 do LG
3.0 2'.) IA
0.0 l7 L2
3.0 I2 L!

In carrying out the coaputations it is not entirely convenient to use a
nrnphie or tabular representation of f(0')/6vr as a function of micro-
atructure. in this connection it is desirable to find an approximation of
the dependence of f( 9'1/61 on 82. A satisfactory approximation of this
dependence for null observation angles with R2< 7“. is the function

R

Liv-:0”! =A(£1)'e-t. (9)

60

FOR OFFICII‘L USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in which the constants A and R. can be selected in dependence on the ob-
servation angle and the parameter p . For [A - 6 the A and R. values are
:tiVen in Table l.

The error in computing the function using formula (9) in comparison with
the precise value in the range of change of radii l.S< R2< 1 m does not
exceed 10-151.

Results of Experimental Study of the Scattering of Visible Radiation in
the Neighborhood of a C02 Laser Beam

Since the formulas for evaluating scattering in the neighborhood of the
zone affected by radiation were derived with important assumptions, an

experimental study was made of their applicability.

The experimental apparatus was assembled in an aerosol chamber [1] in ac-
rordance with the scheme presented in Fig. 1. As the source of effective
radiation we used a C02 laser with a power Po.3500 H with a beam diameter
do‘*l.5 cm and as the source of sounding radiation we employed a heNe
laser, type ill-38, with a beam diameter d so m 3 m. The axes of the

beams were matched: the length of the path was 1 - 13.6 m. At the end of
the path (point c) there was a detector of sounding radiation registering
the result of this radiation. A detector of scattered radiation was mounted
on a moving platform moving perpendicularly to the x-axis (point B) at the
angle 9‘ - 5' to the axis. By means of a change in the distance :1 it was
possible to achieve a movement of the scattering volume AV along the x-
axis. As the detector of scattered radiation an rev-69 apparatus was em-
ployed. The direct radiation was registered using a PD-ZAK photodiode
(point C). The photocurrent from the radiation detectors. after amplifo
ication by logarithmic amplifiers, was registered by a multichannel auto-
matic recorder. The angular aperture of the detectors did not exceed 6';
this made it possible to measure the coefficient of radiation attenuation
with a sufficient accuracy [7]. The total error in determining “‘20 did not
exceed 92 when “Ego - 0.l and 12 when “‘10 - 0.8 m‘l. Measurements of scat-
tered radiation were made in a broad range of change in the attenuation co-
efficient, whose value attained “so - 0.7-0.8 m‘l. As demonstrated by
investigations of scattering of radiation in an optically dense medium [9.
[0], with values cu > 0.6 In‘1 the contribution of multiple scattering to
the total radiation glux could become substantial. In addition. an inter-
ference in the registry of low levels of scattered radiation was the back-
ground caused by "outside" illumination of components of different measur-
ing apparatus. The contribution of multiply scattered radiation to the
total flux of registered radiation, generally speaking, can be computed.
hut. as experience has shown. one variant of computations of the field

of multiply scattered light by the Monte Carlo method takes about 100 hours

on an "-220 electronic computer [ll]. This makes such computations undesir-
able in routine work.

in our experiments allowance for the influence of multiply scattered light
and the background from sources of extraneous irradiation was made by di-
rect measurements of the scattered irradiation by the receiving system.

61

Moe Anne-on... u.- -u...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on which the flux of singly scattered laser light was not incident. in the
computations we assisted a ratio of the light fluxes

“97‘ - ‘7.— “ 17- no)

lliJH - mens; Q - back(ground)l where P’ne ﬂ(6 ‘) is the radiation flux
registered by the detector at the point 8: *back is the flux of the
background of multiply scattered light and "outside" irradiation; Pa

in the light flux of a lieNe laser. used in the experiment (P20 2 501 ‘2
u).

The contribution of the l’ “back/9‘0 value to the ratio of the fluxes
I'.\ was“) ')/i' "0 began to he manifested significantly when Peback" A O
<10" (withlvaiues 0;o >0.6 n‘l). The background value was P7‘back .
(2.2-3)'10' H.

For comparing the experimentally measured fluxes of scattered radiation
with the computed intensity values it is possible to use the expression [6]

 

t r.
P. (0') ~ I‘ (m, 8.. (I + W) slu'P 1
‘ ~ --’:— '9'. 3. ' ( 1)

. 3,,(1 + —-l.s'—M’ )

where

1

?m - (2.15)". .-_- 7".

is the field-of-viev angle for the receiving objectiVe; lie,“ is the solid
angle of the field of view receiving objective: f is its focal length;

d1 is the diameter of the field diaphragm:
g x
d..-d.,(1 + ,‘a i

" l

 

la the diameter of the sounding ray at the distance x with a divergence

angle (‘ a u:

S

"'5:
SH =_'4_

is the cruss-sectional area of the sounding ray at the distance x: 8;, is
the area of the projection (at the angle y“) of the field diaphragm onto
the ray.

The scattering volume AV. entering into (i) and (2), formed by intersection
of the two cones. has a complex configuration. However, under the condition
that the effective diameter of the receiving objective dnzl exceeds the ray

’02

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dlnm‘ter din and on the assumption that d "x and d“ I vary little within
the AV limit". the m-ntlorlm'. volume mm Im manna-(1 npprnxlnntuly Inning

llw I‘m-uni“
(12)

"‘3: I

ll
”~‘1- ark-

uhere d.“ = to 1- .0“. ll.- );

<1n ia the diameter of the receiving objective.

\ie note that the AV value. computed using fomuia (12) with 9‘ I 90' in
the neat unfavorable cane. when d», - d011, will exceed the A V value
found using the more precise formula AV - 2/3 d3A x by less than 182. When

 

Fig. 2. Dependence of flux of radiation scattered at an angle 9' - S'oon
attenuation coefficient 0‘30. i. 2) results of neaaurenenta of P; (9 )/
Mia and ”mm )IPAo respectively; 3, lo) coaputationa under conditions
I and 2 respectively; n) x I 12.0 I: h) x - 7.5 a.

The Ienaureaenta of scattered radiation in the neighborhood of the affect-
ed zone were trade for several positions of the scattering voluae under the

Influence of a 002 laser been on a "fixed" cloud medium in which a station-
ary state of clearing was established as a result of the convective current

1.3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which .Irlm-u. The experimentally determined dependenceu

I’. W) I',.W) Putt“!

_- ’l—o-—-. -7;|‘.—~0 7“??-

[h - vial were compared with those computed using the fomulas cited above.
Since the velocity of the convective flow was not measured in the experi-
ments and since for computations of the thermal effect function 9(:) it
is necessary to know the velocity of movoment of the medium. the v value
was determined from a comparison of the experimentally determined dependence
of the degree. of clearing AC; on (do and the computed value. A good agree-
Heat of the results of change in ‘10 from 1 to 10 was obtained with a
value v - 9 era/sec. This v value was used in computations of the radiation
scattered from the affected zone.

3 1. 2, 3) experimental data with

' x - 12.0, 7.h and 5.0 m respect-
ively; 4, 5. 0) results of comput-
ations for conditions i. 2 and 3
respectively.

 

0 QV ‘3)”

Fig. 3,. Dependence of ratio of scattered radiation fluxes Pav13(9°)l
I', (9 ) an attenuation coefficient “)0 for 9' - 5’.

Figure 2 shows the results of measurements of fluxes of scattered radiation
"A ( 0')/P.\o in the scattering volume AV without an effect with a correc-
tion for background irradiation and also the results of measurement of

I',\ vis(0.)/P7‘0 as a function of AV with an effect in dependence on the
attenuation coefficient “no for two values at - 12.0 and 7.b m. As a com-
parison we will cite the results of computations of these same dependences

using the cited formulas. It can be assumed that a good agreement is obtain-
ed between the experimental and computed data.

4/.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 2 show that as a result of the effect from the radiation of a 002
laser on a droplet medium there is a considerable change in the dependence
of the flux of scattered radiation PAva) ')/P 10 on the attenuation coef-
ficient “20. whereas in a cloud Isediu withnut such an effect the flux of
scattered radiation with an increase in “to is attenuated in accordance
with Bouguer's law. in the affected zone to some “20 values there is a de-
crease in the flux of scattered radiation caused by a decrease in the op-
tical section under the influence of the radiation of a (”2 laser. and

then with an increase in °‘;\0 there is a greater, in comparison without
such an effect, flux of scattered radiation.

The dependence of the ratio of fluxes PA“ (0')”; (0‘) on the attenua-
tion coefficient “30 for three positions of the scattering volume on the
bean axis (x - [2.0. 7.6 and 5 II) is shown in Fig. 3. The figure shows

that the flux of scattered radiation from the affected zone increases by

2 or 3 orders of magnitude with the “to values. power of the 002 laser and
neoaetry of the ueasuring systel used in the experiaents. It follows from
the cited data that by means of the effect of the radiation of the 002
laser on the cloud medium there can be a substantial inproveeent in the

visibility of signal lights in a fog at considerable distances from the
radiation source.

Estileting Radiation Power of 002 Lasers for Improving Visibility of Laser
Beacons

An analysis of equation (2) shows that the intensity of sounding radiation
scattered in the affected zone at the angle 9‘ attains a maxi-us value at
some distance x”; fron the beginning of the path. The interrelationship
between the distance x." and the power of the affecting radiation can be
established from an expression derived after the differentiation of (2),
equating it to zero. This expression will have the form

0(1) -¢.n'nl‘nn
-.(x)[-§- W -"'a mm "]+ (13)

I; (r. x...)

+ MRI...) ‘0'

Using an approximation of the scattering function in the form (9). (13) can
be transformed to the form

a ”+0.?“ _ n. I a (11.)
"T—vror— ‘WmW” °'

where

(15)

45

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By means or replacing (l + Q!) - y3 (lb) is reduced to a fourth-degree
equation

 

 

 

 

.__ «a. _ .1__ , a.
" 17‘7”] Tu. ’ ""“‘4I$;:-.0. (lb)
Table 2
1:...va , I0.-'."-| mo.
3 L735 {.689 I515
5 hm 3.2M. LI!"
7 [Am 3J3! LI“

 

 

 

 

An analyais of this equation shows that it has two fictitious and two real
roots. only one of which satisfies the condition of the problem. The values
of this rent with 9' - 2' are given in Table 2.

Finding the roots of equation (16), from (15) we obtain a simple express lon
relating x.“ and the thermal effect function 9(a)

_ s. I (Mn—I (11)
.X.,.—11: “T.

where SM is the neteorological range of visibility (sue 6/“) 0), correct
for 0(z)> 0.7.

in .1 case when 9(2) 9 1. it is possible to write
x... =—':- [0 (z)— In Q”, (18)

Graphs of the dependence of 9(2) on x.“ are given in Pig. 6. The distance
at which there will be registry of the radiation scattered in the affected
zone. if I1V13(9') exceeds sole threshold intensity In", exceeds the

an“ value. This distance 1:ch can be evaluated using the formula (if :1 .

n)
xregm xmax "’ xthro (19)

where
3., n I, (no. 0')

x - ._._.
”If 4'. i -—-7..'—
is found fro- the consideration that at the distance Ithr from the source

the intensity of the radiation scattered in the fog without an effect is
attenuated to In“. As an illustration we have given the results of con-

putntinns of several specific exasples of a change in scattered visible

rndintinn propagating in the fog along an extended path in the zone of
action of the 002 laser.

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR omcm. USE ONLY

0(2)
J z
to
I
10
0 7,0 x... m

Pig. ’0. Dependence of thermal effect function on at.“ for different fog
nierostruetures for s" - 200 I. l, 2. 3) R02 - 3. S and 791: respectively

(p. - 6).
Table 3

 

3 32.5 l3 to“ 2.5 24:.
¢ 65 ll: no“ 5 490

a) W
b) rad
c) I‘ll/cl;
d) Ill/cm

Now we will emaine the change in the patterns of scattered radiation
from the beam of a ﬂeNe laser caused by the effect of 002 laser radia-
tion on a fog, whose optical density is characterized by a meteorological
range of visibility 5H - 200 n (“20 - 0.02 u'l) on a path with the

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

length l - 2 km with n wind velocity 1 m/sec at a temperature 1" - 20°C.
He will assume that the mlcrostructure of the fog is characterized by a
gnu-m distribution of droplet sizes with the parameters R02 - Spun, p4 -
6. '11".I computations are made for a case when the observer moves parallel
to the my at the distance :1 (see Fig. 1) and registers the intensity of
ncnttercd radiation at the angle 9° at the distance x + ll/tx 9°. We
select the angle of my observation quite small, such as 9 ° - 2°, since
in the case of small observation angles the increase in the intensity of
scattered radiation as a result of an increase in the function f(0')/Iur
exceeds the attenuation of scattered radiation at the distance AB - 21/
sin 0" from the scattering volume to the observer. The specific Po and do
values for the nondiverging (‘f' 0) and diverging beams (the divergence is
assumed to be close to the diffraction value). used in the computations,
are cited in Table 3.

The parameters of the sounding beam are selected in such a way that the
diameter dao is much less than d , divergence does not exceed the dif-
fraction level and the intensity 1 is equal to l H/cmz. Under these
conditions in the first example P; - 0.1 H and dao - 0.36 cm: in the re-
maining cases P, - l H and d-‘O - 1.13 cm.

A laser ray can be detected from sirgly scattered radiation if its inten-
sity at the observation point exceeds the background level caused by out-
side irradiation and multiply scattered radiation, and also exceeds some
threshold illumination which can already be discovered visimlly or using
an instrument. In computations of the intensity of scattered light, in

(1) and (2) we assume ‘Pn - 6', which corresponds to the mean angular
resolution of the eye. He will not take into account the background irra-
diation, which in principle can be eliminated using interference (constant
background) and polarization (multiple scattering background) filters. and
we note that the threshold illumination for a red color, clearly distinguish-
able to the eye. applicable to the conditions for nighttime signaling in
aviation and navigation, is It!) - 6010-14 w/cmz, and the absolute light
threshold is Ithr - 3-10'16H/cm5 l5].

:‘iow we will examine the conditions under which the ray of a HeNe laser will
he observed in the neighborhood of the affected zone. He will scene that

the observer is situated at the distance :1 - 10 m from the laser ray. The
results of computations of the ratios of intensities of the scattered radi-

ution
Ilver(9 ”/11“ ' 0.9.), I)“. 9 ')/I A0: I 0. 9')

[B - vie] (left scale) and the intensities of scattered radiation 17w“
(2,9°) and I)( [,0 ') (right scale) are presented in Fig. 5. It can be
neon from the graphs that with the selected geometry at a distance 1:: 600
n from the radiation source the observer ceases to distinguish the ray of
:I "die laser with the intensity I; - l "/Cﬂz in a fog with a stipulated
attenuation coefficient (“*0 - 0.0? m'l). The effect exerted on a fog

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fig. 5. Dependence of functions I g (3,9 ’)I
1:0: - 0. 9 '). Ilverob 0°)II A (x - 0. 0')
(left scale) and intensity of scattered radia-
tion I, (l. 0'). “WA 1. 0') for :1 -10
n (right scale) on x. 1 respectively. l-la) sale
as in Table 3; 5) Po - 0. I) threshold intensity
for red light applicable to nighttime signaling

conditions in aviation and navigation; II) abso-
lute light threshold.
FOR OFFICIAL 1151i "NI”

when the wind velocity is 1 m/sc-c In the vnm- of the beam of a on; laser
with n power of 32.5 KW. d" - I) cm, '4’ - lO‘I‘ rad makes it possible In move
this level of the intensity of scattered radiation to the distance i V 1.100
n (Pig.'1). A better effect is attained using the been of a 602 laser with

a power of 65 k" with the same divergence or using a nondivergent beam with
a power of 25 k" (i - 1.500 and 1.900 a respectively). The computations

:dunv that at the distance where scattered radiation begins to be discrimin-

ated the intensity of the direct effect of sounding radiation is reduced
to safe limits.

The time in which a stationary state of fog clearing is established. lead-
ing to an improvement in the visibility of laser beacons. can be estimated
using the expression t - dolv. in our examples it will not exceed 0.13. it
therefore follows that a considerable (by approximately an order of magni-
tude) decrease in the mean intensity of the effective radiation can be

attained by the use of pulsed sources with a pulse length t¢I0.l5 sec and
with a pulse duty factor of about 1.5 sec.

Changes in the distance :1 from the laser ray. observation angle and geo-
Iaetriral parameters of the receiving system. attenuation coefficient ““0
and other parameters lead to different quantitativa estimates. It sust be
noted that a decrease in the temperature of the medium and an increase

In wind velocity. all other conditions being equal. cause a decrease in
the effect from the radiation. An increase in the intensity of the radia-
tion necessary for compensating the influence of these factors is easily
estimated from an analysis of the expression for the thermal effect func-

lion. from which it follows that with 9(2) - coast the effect will be
identical.

The results of cosputations of the intensity of scattered radiation in the
neighborhood of the zone affected by the beam of a 602 laser, cited here,
indicated the fundamental possibility of increasing the range of detection
of laser beacons in a fog on the basis of scattered radiation by the method
proposed in [2]. The formulas derived in this study make it possible to
make the necessary evaluations of the intensity of scattered radiation

for other meteorological situations and for the parameters of beams of C02

lasers. which can be used for increasing the effectiveness of specific laser
navigation systems.

The authors express deep appreciation to A. F. Nerushev for useful discus-
sions and A. c. Petrushin for computations of the scattering function.

BIBLIOGRAPNY

l. Borovskiy. N. V.. Voikovitskiy. 0. A., "Large Aerosol Chamber." TRUDY

ch (Transactions of the institute of Applied Geophysics). No 7, pp
5-12, 1967.

49

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.,

h.

7.

'0.

'1.

l2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vulkuvitskiy, 0. A., Hamonov, V. K., Sedunov, Yu. 5., Semenov, L. P.,
Skrlpkin, A. M., "Method for Optical Signaling in a Fog," AUTHOR'S
CERTIFICATE USSR No 527729, dated 21 February I975.

Volknvltskly, 0. A., "Approximate Analytical Description of the Effect
of a C02 laser on a Droplet cloud Medium," TRUDY [EH (Transactions of
the Institute of Experimental Meteorology), No 18(71), pp 23-33, 1978.

Volknvitskiy, 0. A., "Change in Transparency of an Aqueous Aerosol

at the Wavelength of Snnmding Radiation in the Zone of its Clearing
hy:nlwam of a C02 Laser," RADIOTEKHNIKA 1 ELEKTRONIKA (Radio Engineer-
ing and Electronic»), Vol 22, No 7, pp 1379-1383, 1977.

Cavrilnv, V. A.. VIDIMOST' V ATMOSl-‘ERi-I (Atmospheric Visibility). Len-
ingrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1968, 324 pages.

(:erslnm, A. A., "Photometry of Turbid Media," IZBMNNYYE TRUDY I’O l‘O'i’O-
METRII I SVETOTHKHNIKE (Selected Studies in the Field of Photometry and
Light Engineering), Moscow, izd-vo Piz.-Mat. Literatury, pp 85-113,
1958.

Znyev, V. Ye., I’ROZRACHNOST' AWSFERY DLYA VIDIHYKH I INFRAKRASNYKII
LUCHEY (Atmospheric Transparency for Visible and IR Rays), Moscow,
"Sovetnkoye Radio," 1966, 317 pages.

lvanov, A. 9., OPTIKA RASSBIVAYUSHCHIKH SRED (Optics of Scattering Hed-
ia), Minsk, "Nauka i Tekhnika," 196% 542 pages.

lvanov, A. P., "Blurring of a Narrow Light Beam in a Scattering Medium,"
VZAIHODEYSTVIYF. NERAVNOVESNOGO IZLUCHBNIYA S VESHCHESTVW (Interaction
Between Nonequilibrium Radiation with Hatter), Minsk, pp 86-96, 1965.

Kabanov, M. V., "Optical Transfer Function for Scattering Media," 12-
VESTIYA AN SSSR, FIZIKA ATHOSFERY I OKPANA (News of the USSR Academy
of Sciences, Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean), V01 A, No 8, pp
835-853, 1968.

02erenskiy, A. P., Romsnova, L. M., Snykov, V. P., "Light Field in an
Aqueous Fog Outside the Geometric Zone of Propagation of a Coilimated
Laser Ray," TRUDY IEH. No 13(58), pp 167-161, 1976.

PROZHEKTORNYY LUCH V ATHOSFERE (Searchlight Beam in the Atmosphere),
Hnscow, Izd-vo AN SSSR, 1960, 264 pages.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

UDC SSI.(513.2:510.535)(215-13)

SPRING RESTRUCTURING OF THE TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE FIELD IN THE
SOUTHERN “EMISPHERE

Moscow HMTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 63-69

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences L. A. Uranova. USSR Hydro-

neteornlogical Scientific Research Center, submitted for publication 17
ihrch 1978]

Abstract: A study was made of restructuring
of winter cyclonic circulation to summer
anticyclonic circulation in the southern
hemisphere stratosphere. 0n the basis of an
analysis of pressure pattern charts for the
30. 30. 20 and l0 mb surfaces and spatial-
temporsl sections constructed using data
from aerological and rocket soundings it
was possible to determine the date of the
restructuring. The results of the analysis
indicated that for the most part the restruc-
turing of the temperature and pressure field
in the southern hemisphere stratosphere oc-
curs the same as in the northern hemisphere.

[Textl During the last decade a rather great number of studies have been

devoted to an investigation of the processes of restructuring of circula-
tion in the northern hemisphere stratosphere [1-11]. In these studies the
authors for the most part proposed qualitative characteristics for deter-
mining the dates of restructurings of the temperature and pressure field

in the stratosphere. As the date of the restructuring it is customary to

use the day when the spring stratospheric anticyclone was to the north of
the cyclone and vice versa, when the anticyclone was to the south of the

cyclone in autumn. In addition. the author determined the dependence of

the seasonal restructurings of the stratospheric te-perature and pressure
field on different factors.

In [8] the author found the dependence between restructuring of the tem-
perature and pressure field in the atmosphere and restructuring of the
field of total ozone content. The gradient J24o.p, obtained by D. A.

f

)1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rcd' [A]. was used as a characteristic of the restructuring. Under the
influence of an intensive influx of solar radiation. after the winter
solstice there Is a restructuring of the field of the total ozone con-

lent. and then the stratospheric temperature and pressure field begins
to be restructured.

As is well known. after the winter solstice an intensive flux of UV radi-
ation is incident on the upper boundary of the stratosphere in the south-
ern part of the temperate latitudes (JO-40'"); under its influence. as a
result of photochemical reactions. a marked increase in the quantity of
ozone begins. First the ozone increases in the stratopauae region. and
then lower. Naturally. this leads to a temperature increase in the strat-
osphere. This, in turn. changes the geopotential field and first causes a

weakening of the westerly winds prevailing before this and then their re-
placement by easterly winds.

An analysis of charts of stratospheric levels (SO-10 mb) for a 20-year per-
ied indicated that usually the spring restructuring begins with the ap-
pearance of a small heat region at JO-éO'N along the shores of North Amer-
ica in the Atlantic Ocean or along the shores of Japan in the Pacific
Ocean or at the center of Eurasia at the isobaric surface 10 mb. Then

this focus begins to be displaced almost strictly to the north and after
several days enters the polar basin. This is followed by pressure field
transformation. Incidentally. the relationship between the movement of
heat foci and foci of growth of the total ozone content was already noted
in an analysis of stratospheric winter warnings in [7]. It was noted

there that first a region of increase in the total ozone content is formed
and then a region of a temperature increase.

Unfortunately, for altitudes greater than 30 km there are still no suffic-
iently good temperature data for the hemisphere that would make it possible
to trace the movement of heat foci.

lhcre are very few studies devoted to an investigation of the seasonal re-
structuriags of the stratospheric field in the southern hemisphere. 3. Far-
kas [10]. in an analysis of variation in the total ozone content in the
course of the year at different latitudes,relatcs these data to the similar
temperature variation at the isobaric surfaces 100 and 50 mb. These data
were used in computing the 5240-85 values for 03 for each month over a
period of 10 years and were used in this study for determining the mean
times of restructuring the field of the total ozone content. The mean
unonthly 5140- values for the isobaric surface 10 mb in the southern hemi-
sphere were taken from charts constructed by L. A. Zhdanov for a four-year
period.

A Joint analysis of the monthly distribution of J240.p values for ozone and
geopotential H10 for the southern hemisphere with the 32 40- values for
the northern hemisphere (Fig. l). plotted on the graph from $11]. indicat-
ed that restructuring of the field of total ozone content in the southern

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hunlupheru. the same as in the northern hemisphere. occurs sooner than
Ihe restructuring of the gcnpntentini fleld nt the Isohnrlr surfnce IO
mh. The same on in the northern hemisphere. the change in circulation at
the "l0 surface heglns when the restructuring of the ozone field has al-

ready occurred. that i3. ““9" 53 40-p03 ' G'

.2

 

Fig. 1. Mean long-term 5140. values and geopotential “10 for the south-
ern hemisphere (l). southern hemisphere (2), total ozone content in the

northern (3) and southern (A) hemispheres.

it must be noted that the time interval between restructurings of the ozone

field and geopotential 810 (At) in the southern hemisphere (Table l) in
both spring and in autumn is greater than in the northern hemisphere. The
spring restructuring of the geopotential field occurs more rapidly (22

days) than the autumn restructuring (56 days). whereas in the northern hemi-
sphere. on the other hand. the spring restructuring is considerably longer

(66 days) than the autumn restructuring (18 days). It is also interesting
to note that the spring restructuring in the northern hemisphere (Table l)
and the autumn restructuring in the southern hemisphere occur almost at

the some time (February-March).

The autumn restructuring in the northern hemisphere occurs two months earl-
ier than in the southern hemisphere. The fact that the spring restructuring
of the temperature and pressure field in the southern hemisphere stratosphere

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

ucvurs an the average twice nu fast as in the northern hemisphere can evi-
dently be attributed only to the influence of the underlying surface. This
is indicated by the data in Table 2. which shows the duration (in months)
of cyclonic (5240. 3-0) and anticyclonir circulation (5240.“ < 0) in the
ntratonphere of horh hemispheres. The duration of cyclonic circulation in
the southern hemisphere is not much greater than in the northern hemi-
sphere. whereas the differences in the lifetime of the field of the total
content of ozone of the same sign are Very great. For example. vhereas the
minimum in the northern hemisphere polar basin (5240_p>v0) persists for

6.5 months. in the southern hemisphere it is observed over a period of 9
months. As is well known. the amplitude of the variations between the maxi-
nnm and the minimum in the total ozone content in the annual course is less

than in the northern hemisphere.
Table i

"can Times of Onset of Seasonal Restructurings

1 Cesepnoc nonyuupue IOaunoe noazuupnc

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

= I
= 3
Jo) 3"" :3 .10, nu" : 3
a n
:1. 0 p133" law a; law 24 XII 22
.1. I5 vm 21x Is :3" ”VI to
D ut '

Note: nap, and D“ ' are the dates of the spring and autumn restructurings.
D03 is the date a? restructuring of the ozone field, ”"10 is the date of
restructuring or the geopotential field at the isobaric surface 10 mb,

43‘ is the tine interval between restructurings of the ozone and geopoten-
tial fields. 1) Northern hemisphere; 2) Southern hemisphere; 3) days

All this taken together is evidently the reason for the rapid spring and
delayed autumn restructurings of the geopotentisl field in the southern
hemisphere.

ﬂaw having an idea concerning the mean times of seasonal restructurings
«r the temperature and pressure field in the stratosphere in both hemi-
spheres. we will proceed to an analysis of the spring restructuring in
the southern hemisphere in 1977. For this purpose, during the period of
the i9th voyage of the “Akademik Shirshov" scientific research vessel we
ronstructed pressure pattern charts for the 50-, 30-. 20- and lO-mb sur-
faces for the southern hemisphere for November and in part for December.
charts of the trajectories of movement of the centers of cyclones and
anticyclones at these levels and the spatial-temporal sections for both
temperatures and winds from 5'" to 50’5 along 95'E and from 20 to 50's

along 65.5.

The spatial-temporal section along 95°E from 30 to 50's for the period ll-
19 November 1977 indicated that in the entire thickness of the strato-
sphere, from 22 to 65 km. where the stratopauae was situated at this time,

54

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

there were easterly winds. This indicates that the restructuring of the
utratospherlc temperature and pressure field at these latitudes over the
Indian Ocean has already occurred. Above the stratnpauue. in the mcs01I.
sphere. at an altltude of 50-56 km at ao's westerly winds with a velocity
of 20 m/see were already observed on 13 November. On 16 November westerly
and southwesterly winds with velocities up to 15 m/sec were observed at
«5'5 already at an altitude from 56 to 59 km, whereas at 50‘s westerly
winds occurred only above 65 km. Thus, the boundary of the westerly winds
rose at the rate of 2 km/day. It can also be seen in this section that at
an altitude of 30 km at ao's from the beginning of November there was a
temperature -40 - -65’c, whereas during winter the temperature at this ai-
titude here drops to -60°C. The spatial-temporal section along 6S°E from
)0 to 50's and back from 25 November through 3 December also indicated
that In the entire stratosphere and mesosphere there were easterly winds
in this region and accordingly a spring restructuring had already occurred.

Table 2

Duration (in Months) of Positive and Negative

‘O'P Values of Field of Total 03 Content and
Geopotential Field "10

 

Ccupuoc Dance 2
noayuapuc nonnaapne

 

 

0’0 0 O
A V

A
1' 7 3 r
a” c? on a?

 

m. 1.5 4.5 a C
o. 0.5 5.5 o a

 

 

 

 

 

Key:
l. Northern hemisphere
2. Southern hemisphere
3. Surf

Unfortunately, a small delay in departure on the voyage did not make it pos-
sible to trace the entire restructuring process because it began at the very
beginning of November, as is indicated by the pressure pattern charts 50-10
nb for the southern hemisphere, constructed and analyzed during the 19th
voyage of the "Akademik Shirshov" scientific research vessel.

As in the northern hemisphere, the spring restructuring in the southern hem-
isphere began with the formation of heat foci in the subtropical zone (Table

1). The data in the table do not give a complete picture of movement of heat
foci toward the pole, but on the basis of these data it is possible to ob-
tain a general idea concerning this. For example, during the period 6-9

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nuvvmher fuel with a temperature ~60 - -hb°C appeared in different regions
or the nubtropicn (21-25'8) at the isobaric surface 10 mb, and already on

II November a focus with a tesperuture ~li'c was observed along the shores
of Antarctica. On 27 November. at the altitude of the isohnrir surface

20 ab, n heat focus with a temperature ~20°c was traced at Amundsen-Scott

station. that is. at the south pole.

Table 3

Maximum Temperatures at Stratospheric Levels in the Southern Hemisphere in
November 1977

   
 
 

 
  
   
 

 

lineapn- ML: "3068p".

tonnes Imus-man "9““
qupou. Inoarma, "”11“”
UN", 3| .‘pad 4 sum. 16

Koopmmaiu o
«mush norm-man "Cl"

I
“WM-I. neuron, non-m. I'C'
m0 moi. Horn. 3 6

Trunepa- Trumps.

'im In —-

    
  

Key:
1. Number
2. Coordinates
1. South latitude. degrees
5. East longitude. degrees
3. isobaric surface, mb
6. Temperature, 'C

Aftvr movement of heat foci to the south. stratospheric anticyclones began
to move in this same direction from the subtropical latitudes: one from
the indian Ocean sector. had the other from the Pacific Ocean sector lying
in the southern hemisphere. By 17 November, as shown on the map of trajec-
tories of movement of cyclones and anticyclones, at the lO-mb isobaric sur-
face (Fig. 2) the anticyclone of the Pacific Ocean sector approached the
shores of Antarctica (66’s, 170’s). At the same time. the center of the

circumpoiar cyclone. rapidly filling, began to move northward and on 17
November was already at 65's. iS'E. Thus. using the definition given in
[1). it is possible to regard 17 November as the day of spring restructuring
of circulation in the southern hemisphere stratosphere in this year. The

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

position of the centers of cyclone» and nnticycloncs (Fig. 2) (or 9. l8 and
28 November 1977 revanln three stages in the process of spring restructur-
lnn hr the strntnnpherir temperature and presnnre fleld. 0n 9 November the
center of the rireumpolnr cyclone (3020 dam) was situated at 85's. 20°E.

nu IR NOchher the renter of the circumpolsr cyclone (1100 dam) was already
at 65's. 15's. and on 28 NOVemher it was filled.

 

Fig. 2. Charts of trajectories of movement of cyclones (l) and anticyclones

(2) at lsnhnric surfaces 50, 30, 20 and 10 mb in November 1977. Southern
hemisphere.

in order to determine how the process of restructuring of the stratospheric
temperature and pressure field occurred at the isobaric surfaces 50, 30, 20
and 10 mb. for each day. from 9 through 28 November 1977 we computed the
values of the smart-ht 5240-9 by the n. A. Ped' method [4]. A graph of the
distribution of 5250-9 values during the indicated period (Fig. 3) indi-
cated that the restructuring began simultaneously at all four isobaric
surfaces. from 50 to 10 mb, and it occurred first and most rapidly at the
isobaric surface 20 mb. As in well known, the maximum of the ozone content

in its vertical distribution is situated. on the average, at the 20-mh level.

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uul hvgluuiug on ll November the restruclurlug process occurred cuuulder~
ahly n-re rapidly at the lunhnrlc surface 10 mh. whereas at all the re-
maiulug surfaces it was considerably delayed. Thus, on l7 November the
restructuring occurred at the isobaric surface 10 oh and on 18 November
at tho isobaric surface 20 ab. At the isobaric surfaces 30 and 50 oh the
restructuring occurred on 27 and 28 November respectively. that is. when
at the isobaric surface l0 ah the anticyclonc was already over the pole
and had many closed isohypsqs. it must be noted that at the isobaric sur—
face 20 mb. although the restructuring was noted on 18 Novenber. up to the
27th the S} 40. values at all times varied around zero, and only after
27 November did lr finally occur.

 

Fig. 3. 5240.9 values at isobaric surfaces 50 (l). 30 (2). 20 (3) and 10
(4) ah in November 1977. Southern hemisphere.

hiring this period the distribution of the total ozone content is unknown.
hut on the basis of indirect data it can be assumed that the restructuring
of the ozone field occurred at the end of October.

As a result of generalization of all the analyzed material it can be con-
cluded that in the southern hemisphere. as in the northern hemisphere. a
restructuring of the temperature and pressure field in the stratosphere
transpires after the restructuring of the field of the total ozone content.

The heating of the stratosphere caused by an intensive increase in ozone
leads to a change in the direction of the temperature gradient and then
a restructuring of the geopotential field. The spring restructuring of the

$8

FOR OFFICIkL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stratospheric temperature and pressure field begins in the layer of the
ozone maximu- (20.30 km) almost simultaneously. but ends sooner at the

isobaric surface 10 mb than in the lower-lying layers.

in addition. the spring restructuring of the geopotentlal field at the iso-
haric surface 10 mb occurs in the southern hemisphere twice as rapidly as
In the northern hemisphere. whereas the autumn restructuring in the south-
ern hemisphere transpires (according to mean values) three times more slos-
ly than in the northern hemisphere. This is evidently attributable to.the
influence of the underlying surface, that is, the difference in the dis-
tribution of land and ocean.

in the spring of 1977 the restructuring of the temperature and pressure
field in the stratosphere transpired more rapidly than according to the
uean times and at the isobaric surface 10 mb had already occurred on 17
November; at the remaining lower-lying stratospheric levels it was 10 days
later.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Gromova. G. 6., Knyazeva, V. 1., "Tho-Year Cyclicity in the Times of
Formation of the Stratospheric Anticyclone." METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
LOGIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), No 6, pp 35-36, 1964.

2. Rats. A. L., Bugayev, V. A., "Quasi-TVo-Year Cyclicity and Evolution
of Circulation and Weather in the Atlantic-Eurasian Sector of the
Hemisphere in 1968-1970," KVAZIDVUKHLETNYAYA TSIKLICHNOST' I TSIRKUL-
YATSIYA V ATMOSFERE I OKEANE (Quasi-TUo-Year Cyclicity and Circula-
tion in the Atmosphere and Ocean), Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat. pp
25-40. 1971.

3. Kats, A. L.. KVAZIDVUKHLETNYAYA TSIKLICHNOST' I TSIRKULYATSIYA V AT-
HOSPERE I OKEANE (Quasi-TVo-Year Cyclicity and circulation in the At-
mosphere and Ocean). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat. 1971. 192 pages.

k. Ped', D. A., "Determination of the Change in Types of Circulation of
the Circumpelar Vortex in the Stratosphere," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA
SSSR (Transactions of the USSR Hydrometeorological Center), No 115,
pp 8-24, 1973.

5. Pogosyan, Kh. P., Pavlovskaye, A. A.. Shabel'nikova, H. V., TSIKLICH-
NOST' VETRA V BKVATORIAL'NOY STRATOSFERE V SVYAZI S GLOBAL'ROY TSIR-
KULYATSIYEY ATHOSFERY (Hind Cyclicity in the Equatorial Stratosphere
in Relation to Global Atmospheric Circulation), Leningrad, Gidro-
meteoizdat. 1976. 96 pages.

0. Ugryumov. A. 1., "Quasi~TVo-Yesr Cyclicity of Spring-Summer Atmospheric
Circulation," TRUDY CIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR, No 77. 1971. 80 pages.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7.

N.

9.

10.

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Uranova, L. A., "Distribution of the Total Ozone content and its

Change During Stratospheric Winter Warnings." HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO-
mom, No 11, pp 63-50. 1971.

Urnnovn. L. A.. "Spring Restructuring of the Temperature-Pressure
Field In the Stratosphere in 1971 and 1972," TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA
SSSR, No 171, pp 20-27, 1977.

u1uchkslov, h. 8.. "Peculiaritiea in Develop-eat of the Quasi-Two-Yesr
Cycle in Relation to Air Transport in the Equatorial Stratosphere,"
TRUDY CIDRDMETTSENTRA SSSR, No 107, 1972, 317 pages.

Frakus, 8., "Variations of Total Ozone and Stratospheric Temperatures
Over high Latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere." J. 0? SCI., Vol 13,
No 3. New Zeaiand, 1970.

Ped', D. A., Uranova, L. A., "Features of the Total Ozone Distribution
and its Role in the Change of Stratospheric Circulations Over the

Northern hemisphere." PROCEEDINGS OF THE JOINT SYMPOSIUM ON AIHOSPHERIC
OZONE, August 1976, Vol II, Berlin. pp 149-165, 1977.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.065.75(265.5)

RELATIONSHIP BETHBEN AJHOSPHERIC PRESSURE AND THE LEVEL OF THE NORTHWESTERN
PART OF THE PACIFIC OCEAﬂ

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GlDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 50-55

[Article by Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences S. S. Lappo,
A. V. Skripnik and A. B. Rabinovich, Sakhalin Hultidiscipline Scientific
Research Institute Far Eastern Scientific Center USSR Academy of Sciences,
submitted for publication 22 March 1978]

Abstract: The authors have made a joint anal-
ysis of two-month series of levels and atmo-
spheric pressure at five points on the Pacific
Ocean side of the Kuriles Ridge. The general
energy naxims at frequencies of 0.08, 0.3 and
0.65 cycles per day were discriminated. It is
shown that the "reverse barometer“ law is set-
isfied well for all stations, except one, where
the amplitude characteristic is considerably
greater than unity. A joint analysis of level
and atmospheric pressure indicated that low-fre-
quency disturbances are propagated along the
Kuriles Ridge to the northeast with a charac-
teristic velocity 50 km/hour. The phase shifts
in the reduced levels were used in cosputing
the wave numbers, which coincide well with the
first mode of continental shelf waves.

[Text] It has been traditionally assused that ocean level and atmospheric
pressure are related by the “reverse barometer" law. Numerous investiga-
tions carried out during recent years have shown that this law is well
satisfied for isolated island systems [12. 17], but at stations situated
at the continental boundaries there are strong deviations from it [13, 14,
15]. It is assumed by most researchers that the observed anomalies are re-

lated to the presence of continental shelf waves and other shelf effects

(effect of the wind on level in shallow waters, shelf resonance, etc.) [7,
3, 15, 16]. The actual phase shift between the reduced levels at different
stations confirms the presence of shelf waves. It is unquestionable that

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

they haVe a definite relationship to atmospheric processes. although the
nerhatinm of this rulailnnﬂhlp remains dehatnhle. A study of reaction of
thr :tvel tn changes In atmospheric pressure is of great interest from
the pulni of view of prediction of storm surges and spectral methods were
very vffvrtivc here [2. 3. 10]. A spectral analysis makes it possible to
clarify the interrelated elements. which in the future will be Important

in formulating physical models [12].

 

Fig. 1. Map of distribution of observations.

in this paper we make a joint analysis of two-month series of levels and
atmospheric pressure at five points situated on the Pacific Ocean side of
the Kurilea (Fig. 1) during August-September 1975. This region is conven-
lvnl for such an analysis for the following reasons: a) the Kurile Islands
are located in a zone of intensive atmospheric disturbances: cyclones pen-
etrate from the west and typhoons, which are most frequent in August-Sep-
tenher, penetrate from the south: b) an elongated linear slope, makiab it
pnnhlhlc to check the hypothesis of the existence of shelf waves associated
with atmospheric processes; c) a great depth in the neighborhood of the
ridge makes it possible in the first stage in the analysis to neglect the
influence of the wind; d) the poor study of this region.

in addition to the problem of the relationship between the observed and hy-

drostatlr levels, the purpose of the study was a clarification of the prin-
cipal energy-carrying frequencies in the level and atmospheric pressure
spectra and an examination of the spatial variability of different character-

istlcs.

Method. in the analysis we used series with a discreteness of 3 hours. We
elialnnted from the level series the 20 principal tidal waves (diurnal and
wenidiurnal), computed first by the least squares method [5]. In this pro-
«can we achieved a quite high quality of filtering of tides and at the same

()2

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

time there was no distortion of the nontidal frequencies. Subsequent spec-
tral nualynin of the residual fluctuations demonstrated that in actuality

at the frequencies of the semidiurnal tides (2 cycles/day) there are nol'X-
plicit energy maxim" exceeding the general noise level. At the same tinw.
there are appreciable extrema at frequencies of about I cycle/day (Fig. 2A).
it is doubtful that their presence is associated only with tidal waves or
radiation effects which have not been taken into account. One of the possible
hypotheses explaining the existence of these extrema will be set forth below.

A spectral analysis of the observations was made using the procedure of a
"fast Haurier transform." A study was made of the relationship between the
leVei and pressure at a single point and between levels. pressures and re-
nlured levels at different points.

Proceeding on the basis of the difference in the spectra. the analyzed points
ran be divided into two groups. For the southern group (points [-3) there is
a characteristic coincidence in the level and atmospheric pressure spectra
for all frequencies below 0.7 cycles/day. General maxina are discriminated at
the frequencies 0.08, 0.5 and 0.65 cycles/day (Pig. ZAb). For the northern
nroup (6-5) the variation of the level spectra duplicates the corresponding
variation in the spectra of atmospheric pressure at the low frequencies. The
main naxima fall at the frequencies 0.08, 0.33 cycles/day (Fin. 2Aa).

In the frequency range 0-0.7 cycle/day for all stations. and also in the
ranges l.|-l.8 cyclen/day for 6 and l.l-i.4 cycles/day for 5. (ht coherenCe
between level series and atmospheric pressure falls above the 901 level of
significant coherence, which is evaluated using the formula llZl
l
F(R’<.r’)= 1 —(I —x=)"".
(1)

where R2 is the square of coherence: n - 10 is the number of degrees of free-
dom of the equivalent distribution )LZ, used for computing the coherence
uoufidence interval. i - F Is the probability that the square of coherence

nl uncorrelated events exceeds :2. For F I 0.9 x2 - 0.66.

it can be assumed that the level variations at these frequencies are deter-
mined by the variation in atmospheric pressure (Fig. 23).

we will represent the level ”(t) in the high coherence region to atmospheric
pressure as a function at the output of a linear system to whose input is fed
atmospheric pressure Pa at the time t - t

win-sip. (t—e) I: (r) dz +u m. (2)
6

where nit) is the noise component at the output. uncorrelated with Pn(t).
h(t ) is the "impulse" transfer function.

03
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL URI-Z ONLY

A
The frequency characteristic "(0’) of the system can be evaluated using the
expression

A
‘ a" (.)
I, (U) —: o
6n ('0 (J)

 

where c, (d ) in the evaluation of the cross-spectrum of the processes ’?(t)
and Pn(i ; Gxx(ul) is the evaluation of the spectrum of the process Pn(t):
ad is frequency.

It is more correct to consider the level to be the signal at the output of

a llnenr systcm at whose input, in addition to Pn(t), the velocity compon-
ents or wind friction are fed [17]. but also in the case of several inputs
(2) It is possible to obtain the unbiased characteristic of the system under
the condition that the inputs cannot be correlated [1. 6].

We will represent the frequency characteristic in the form
A
Hi--)'--|”('")|¢'”" ’. (a)

where l"(aJ) I is the amplitude characteristic of the system and 43&P(ad)
is the phase characteristic. that is, the phase shift of the process rlit)
relative to P.(t) at the frequency a}.

Assuming that III(“’) 1 I l. and A? (a) I n , in the entire range of fre-
quencies where the level variation is caused by the variation in atmospheric
pressure, we determine the limits within which the mentioned characteristics

must fall, without refuting this assumption. The formulas determining the
error in measuring the amplitude and phase characteristics have the form [1]

F: l-‘|||H(u-)i~-l|<sinx: [Asian-4| <|I= l '-
l—R-(--) 1

— I-nlhnuh-I -'

(5)

where F is the probability of finding the characteristics in the indicated
intervals. n I 10. For F I 902

amt-02$ c~l§.

in all the indicated frequency range the difference in the phase character-
istic from II was less than 5 (Fig. 23). For values of the amplitude char-
acteristic exceeding the limits determined by formula (5) the confidence
evaluations were computed taking into account the true coherence values

(Fig. 2B).

These computations show that for all the points. except point 6, the "re-
verse barometer" law is satisfied quite well. The high coherence between
the level and pressure at point 6 makes it possible to construct the

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mnpllhulr rlmrm-Iu-rlnl lu- Iml mlly in “w nmym 0-0.] ryrlvlduy. as Mr (lu-
rvmululng points. but also la the range I.|-|.8 cyrlvs/dny. unwerr, prr-
rluuly for this point the "reverse barometer" law Is not satisfied -- the
amplitude characteristic in the indicated ranges considerably exceeds unity
(Fig. 23). The reasons for this are not clear. Possibly a decisive role is
played by its geographic position - it is situated in the region of a deep-
water strait.

A
obtaining an inverse discrete Fourier transform of the function “(‘9) "0
obtain the uelghting function h(€) (response function), that is, the re-
gression dependence of sea level at a particular moment on pressure at the
given and preceding moments in time. With a zero lag the barometric factor
(or all the points. other than A, has a value close to -l. For‘f> 0 it tends
to zero. At the point h h(0) - -1.4.

5!. rni-cyn 1 1

 

a" VL'.‘ ‘J/Gl 7 osv~uv~~"lvr\ ’J~~.‘\’ \

e
[L r~?:1£L\7F/1n.:’,L/3
a "U‘F ”3
a"‘d~a‘ d
I '5“ ' \~"~v"‘_
1,1 1,5 own/q. 0 II
_1....).._J 2 ., v. _

Fig. 2. A -- spectra of level (I) and atmospheric pressure (2) at points
h(a) and 2(b), 8 -- amplitude characteristics at points 4(1), 3(2) and 5(3).
C -- coherence and phase shift between atmospheric pressure and level at
points 1(a), 2(b), 3(c), 4(d) and 5(e).

05

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 I

a nun/(ya 2
o I.”

”flea/an w 40!: a0
3

 

M 1" as a urn/cyst 2

— ’ -—2 noose:

Fig. 3. A -- coherence and phase shift at level (1), atmospheric pressure
(2) and reduced level (3) between points 2-3 (s) and 3-5 (h), B - disper-
nion curves of first and second modes of continental shelf waves, computed
for shelf -- continental slope of Kuriles Ridge.

Key:
1. rnd
2. cycles/day
3. rad/km

For a study of the nature of propagation of lowarequency processes we carr-
ied out a joint analysis of atmospheric pressure, level and reduced level

P.U)\

vim—urn 2;;

between different points.

At near-lying points there is a high coherence of atmospheric processes up
to a frequency of 1.2 cycle/day. and the level to a frequency of 0.7 cycle/
day and in the range 0.9-1.1 cycle/day (Fig. JAa). For remote points the

coherence between the levels. as between atmospheric pressures, is highest

at those frequencies at which there were maxima in the autospectra (0.08,
0.3. 0.65 cycle/day) (Fig. 3Ab). The higher coherence at frequencies 0-0.7
”VCIC/dny between pressures shows that the correlation radius in the atmo-
sphere is greater than in the ocean.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the haul" of the phase shifts at frequencies 0-0.J cycle/day it was due
ieruindd that atmospheric disturbances during the period of the observa-
tions wire propagated along the Kuriles Ridge to the northeast at a rate

of abodt‘SO km/hour.

The coherence between the reduced levels for the most part falls below the
90% confidence level, but there are definite extrema coinciding with the
atmospheric pressure extrema (for example 0.7 cycle/day -- Fig. 3Ab).'
Such a picture was also noted in a study by Hysak and Ramon [15], in which
it was postulated that these extrema are attributable to tl' presence of
continental shelf waves generated by atmospheric processes. In order'to
Investigate this hypothesis, from [a] we took the dispersion curves of

the first and second modes of shelf waves, constructed for the real Kurile
shelf. and on these we plotted the wave numbers for those frequencies at
which the coherence between the reduced levels was sufficiently great (Fig.
JR). The wave numbers k1 were determined using the formula

- 5 i
k.-',—;"’. (6)
where Ax is the distance between stations. Coincidence with the first
nude was found to be quite good.

The author of [II] has postulated. later experimentally confirmed in [9].
that the maximum in the energy of shelf waves must be expected at fre-
quencies where their group velocity becomes equal to zero. In our case

for the first mode this corresponds to a frequency close to l cycle/day;
accordingly. the extremum in the level spectra observed at this frequency
and the high coherence between the reduced levels (Fig. 3A) can be attrib-
uted not only to the presence of tidal residues, but also to the presence
of shelf waves at these frequencies. In this case the waves should have a
length of about 100 km and the distance between stations is too great for
an unambiguous determination of the wave number. In Fig. 33 we have plott-
ed the possible wave numbers, determined from the phase shifts at near-ly-
ing points (1-2, 1-3, 4-5).

1hus. a joint analysis of atmospheric pressure and level indicated their
intercausality up to a frequency of 0.7 cycle/day, and at point i, also

in the range 1.1-1.8 cycle/day. The “reverse barometer“ law is well set-
isfied for all points, except for point 4, where the amplitude character-
istic is appreciably greater than unity. In the level and atmospheric pres-
sure spectra there are general maxima at frequencies 0.08, 0.3 and 0.65
cycle/day.

A spatial analysis of the observations between different points demonStrat-
ed that low-frequency disturbances of level and atmospheric pressure are
propagated aIOug the Kuriles Ridge with a characteristic velocity 50 km/hour.
The zones of increased coherence in the reduced levels are possibly asso-
ciated with continental shelf waves propagating in the opposite direction.

it is not impossible that the manila in the level energy spectra at fre-
quencies of about I cycle/day are also associated with shelf waves.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

8.

9.

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bendut. J.. Pieraol, A., IZMERBNIYE I ANALIZ SLUCNAYNYKH PROTSESSOV

(Measureaent and Analysis of Random Processes). Moscow, "Mir." pp
228-315.

Ger-an. V. Kh.. "Investigation of the Correlation Between Sea Level
Fluctuations and the field of Atmospheric Pressure as a Linear Dynamic
System with Constant Parameters," TRUDY COIN (Transactions of the
State Oceanographic Institute), No 121, pp 13-20, 1976.

German. V. Kh., "Spectral Method for Writing Regression Equations for
Computing Aperiodic Sea Level Fluctuations," MBTBOROLOCIYA I GIDRO-
IOCIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology). pp 65-71, 1976.

Yefimov, V. V.. Kulikov, Ye. A.. "Application of the Method for Adap-
tive Evaluation of Space-and-Time Spectra to an Analysis of Trapped
Haves on the Shelf," IZVBSTIYA AN SSSR, FIZIKA ATMOSFERY I OKBANA (News
of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Physics of the Atmosphere and Ocean),
Vol [6, No 7, pp 7&8-756, 1978.

Kullkov, Ye. A., Rnbinovich. A. 3.. Kharvi. R., "Deep-water Investiga-
tions of Tides in the Northwestern Part of the Pacific Ocean," TRUDY
SathNIl DVNTs AN SSSR. GIDROPIZICNESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA OKBANA (Trans-
actions of the Sakhalin Multidiscipliar Scientific Research Institute
USSR Academy of Sciences. Hydrophysical Investigations of the Ocean),
No 54, pp 59-75. 1977.

levlkov, S. P., Prival'skiy. V. Ye., ”Spectrum of Irregular Sea Level
Fluctuations and its Dependence on the Spectra of Atmospheric Pressure
and Wind Shearing Stress," IZVESTIYA AN SSSR, FIZIKA ATMOSFBRY I OKEANA,
Vol 8, No 1. pp 80-85, 1972.

Buchwald, V. T., Adams, J. K., "The Propagation of Continental Shelf
Haves," PROC. ROY. SOC. LOND., A305, pp 235-250, 1968.

Buchwald, V. T.. de Szoeke, R. A., "The Response of a Continental Shelf

to a Travelling Pressure Disturbance." AUST. J. MAR. FRESH. RES.. Vol
24, No 2, pp 143-158. 1973.

Caldwell, D. R., Cutchin, D. L., Longuet-Higgias, M. 5., "Some Model

Experiments on Continental Shelf Haves," J. MAR. RES., Vbl 30, pp 39—
55, 1972.

Cartwright, D. 5., "A Unified Analysis of Tides and Surges Round North

and East Britain," PHIL. TRANS. ROY. SOC. LOND., A263, No 1136, pp 1-55.
I968.

Cartwright, D. 8., "Extraordinary Tidal Currents Near St. Kilda,"
NATURE, Vol 223. pp 928-932. 1969.

()8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l2.

[3.

M.

IS.

16.

I7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Groves. G. H., Hanna". 8. J., "Time Series Regression of Sen Lchi on
Weather," REV. GEOPHYS., Vol 6. No 2, pp [29-174, 1968.

"anon, B. V.. "The Spectra of Mean Sea Love] at Sydney, Coff's Harbor
and Lord Howe Island," JGR, Vb! 67, No 13, pp 5147-5155, 1962. Correc-
tion: Vol 68, No 15. p 4635, 1963.

Manon. B. V.. "Continental Shelf Haves and the Effects of Atmospheric
Pressure and Hind Stress on Sea Level," JGR, Vol 71, No 12, pp 2883-
2897. 1966.

Hyauk, L. A.. Hanan. B. V.. "Low-Frequency Sen Level Behavior and Con-
tinental Shelf Haves Off North Carolina," JGR, Vol 74. No 6, pp 1397-
1602. 1969.

Robinson. A. R., "Continental Shelf Haven and the Response of Sea Level
to n Heather System." JGR. Vol 69, pp 367-368, 1966.

Huuxch. c.. "nermudn Sea Level in Relation to Tides, weather and Euro-
clinic Fluctuations," REV. GEOPHYS., Vol 10, No 1, pp 1-69, 1972.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.665.15
EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF LANGHUIR CIRCULATION IN THE OCEAN

Moscow HBTHOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 56-6ﬁ

[Article by A. A. Zelen'ko, USSR Nydrometeorological Scientific Research
Center, submitted for publication 29 March 1978]

Abstract: The paper gives the principal re-
sults of actual observations of Langmuir
circulation. The author examines an equil-
ibrium model of Iangmuir circulation based

on an approach developed for describing fin-
al disturbances in the case of hydrodynamic
instability of flow. Within the framework

of this method the form of the disturbance

is determined from the linear theory and

the amplitude is found from the energy equa-
tion for final disturbances of an already
known form, which are written for an equil-
ibrium (in the sense of energy transfer by the
the final disturbances) state. The model re-
produces the principal characteristics of Lang-
muir circulation, agreeing in order of magni-
tude with the experimental data.

[Text] The increasing number of observations made in the ocean is leading
to the conclusion that Langmuir circulation occurs widely, refuting the
long-held opinion that it is sporadic. The presence of powerful vertical
currents, created by this circulation, is an important factor for a whole
series of problems in ocean dynamics, and in particular, for understanding
the mechanisms of mixing and formation of the upper quasihomogeneous layer
In the ocean. Recent investigations indicate a correlation between Lang-
muir circulation and the wind waves and drift currents processes. An im-
portant concept [10] is that langmuir circulation is a connecting link

In energy transfer from wind waves (receiving the greater part of the wind
energy) to small-scale turbulence. The conclusion that Langmuir circulation
is not sporadic requires caution in determining the representstiveness of
measurements of the characteristics of small-scale interaction between the
atmosphere and the ocean, since the circulation evidently leads to an im-

pairment in the horizontal uniformity of these characteristics, usually
a priori postulated.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rsually langmuir circulation is visually determined from the zones of con-
vergence of surface currents in which there is an accumulation of aigae.
foam or floating matter cast onto the sea surface and which. the same as
regular bands of samoth water, characterized by an absence of ripples.
sometimes are called wind hands. Observations at sea have established the
principal characteristics of a langmuir circulation. which here we will
simplyxennmerate, without citing the corresponding sources, which are men-
tioned. for example. in the reviews [10. 18, 19] and in studies [2, 7. 16):

l. in the upper layer of the ocean, as a result of the wind action (with
velocities greater than 3 m/sec), ordered eddy movements are formed which
are elongated in the direction of the wind, with an opposite direction

of rotation of the particles in adjacent circulation cells.

J. The spatial scales of eddies are characterized by a considerable varia-
bility (from several to hundreds of meters) and intermittence: eddies of
different scales can exist simultaneously.

3. The Velocity of descending flows in the region of the wind bands has a
characteristic value of about 5 cmlsec and as a rule increases with an
increase in wind velocity. The transverse velocities of the currents at the
surface have the same order of magnitude.

6. The longitudinal (relative to the wind) velocity at the sea surface in
the region of the wind bands (wiadrows) (zones of surface convergence)
is greater than between them. that is, zones of intensive descending move-

ments are situated under zones of maximum longitudinal current velocity
at the surface.

5. The time required for restructuring of the wind bands (windrows) at the
sea surface with a marked change in wind direction is 20—30 minutes.

0. The distance between the bands is approximately equal to the depth of
the upper quasihomogeneous layer.

7. In the northern hemisphere the axes of the eddies are deflected by some

angle to the right of the wind direction. According to experimental data
this angle is about I1°.

In addition to these properties, established in a number of experimental
studies, it is possible to note the following properties which are indi-

rated only by individual observations or which are established on the
basis of indirect criteria:

8. The velocity of the descending flows exceeds by several centimeters a
second the velocity of the ascending flows.

9. The circulation cells are characterized by asymmetry: the centers of
the eddies are displaced toward the surface and toward the wind bands
(windrows).

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1”. There in lateral shiftinf of ihe system of lunnitudinal eddies at
Velocities up to lb cm/sec l 1

Any thenretiraIIMidel making a pretense at describing a langmuir circula-
tlou must reproduce at least the most important of the motioned «'liai‘m‘h-i‘lu
ties of circulation. we note that as test characteristics of this kind for

a model of Langmuir circulation the authors of [7] mention properties 1,

a, 8: in place of 3 it is necessary to compare the comparability of the
velocities of descending currents and drift currents.

in order to explain the Langmuir circulation a number of mechanisms have
been proposed (a review of the most important of these is given, for ex-
ample. in [10, 18, 19]. Despite their diversity, recently on the basis of
experimental and theoretical results it has been possible to define a rel-
atively narrow direction within whose framework it has been possible to
formulate models taking into account the interaction of the surface waves
and drift currents processes. The basis for the priority in this direction
has been given, in particular, in [7, 10. 18]. In our opinion, the most
realistic description of the participation of these processes in the for-
nation of the langmuir circulation is attained in models examining the
hydrodynamic instability of the friction layer in the ocean, in support

of which there are also additional proofs: first, the laboratory invest-
igations of Falter [8] and other authors indicate that the instability of
the laminar Bkman layer is manifested in the appearance of longitudinal
eddy movements close in structure to a Langmuir circulation; second, ob-
servations at sea reveal the specific properties of a Langmuir circula-
tion (deviation of the eddy axis from the wind direction and lateral dis-
placement of the system of eddies), which are explicable from the point of
view of the mechanism of hydrodynamic instability of the friction layer;
third, new measurements of the parameters of longitudinal eddies in the
atmospheric boundary layer reveal an agreement with a model of an unstable
Hkman layer [5, 6, 12, 13. 17].

An important difference between the friction layer in the ocean and the at-
mospheric layer is the presence of wave movements. Allowance for surface
waves leads to the conclusion that Stokes drift plays an important role

in the generation of a Langmuir circulation [7, 16-16]; therefore, in the
proposed model the effects of a Stokes drift are taken into account in the
hydrodynamic instability of the friction layer. The model is a development
of [2] and to some degree is intermediate between the Craik—Leibovich model
[7. 1a. 15] and a model of an unstable Ekman layer [6, 17].

in order to take into account nonlinear effects in an examination of in-
stability of the friction layer it is possible to use two approaches to
description of the final disturbances. The first involves a numerical
solution of the equations of motion with a retention of the nonlinear
terms Ill]. An alternative approach, based on the ideas of Landau [3], was
developed for a description of instability of some types of currents in
the studies of Stuart (for example [20]), and applicable to the boundary

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
L- son orncm. use ONLY

layer of the utmsphure -- in a study by llrown [6]. Within the framework
of this method the form of the flunl disturbance is determined from [incur
theory, when-nu the umlitude is found from the energy equation for final
disturbances of an already known fora. Adhering to this approach. in the
further exposition of the model we will first examine the procedure of lin-
earization of the equations, making it possible to compute the form of the
secondary mvements in the friction layer; then we obtain the energy e'qun-
tion for an equilibrium state detensining the amplitude of the secondary
movements.

The equations of motion for the upper layer of the ocean are written in
the following form, henceforth using a right-hand coordinate system with
an x-oxis directed along the wind and a basis directed downward from the
the origin of coordinates at the free surface:

:—:+29Xv—--:—VP+v-Av+glt; (1")

vv=0. (1")

where 1’ is the coefficient of turbulent viscosity; the remaining notations
are those generally employed.

The main flow in the friction layer of the ocean will be represented in
the form of the sum

[OCH - main; 8 - wave] of the velocity of the drift flow (v3), stipulated
by the Simon model. and the wave part of the velocity field (Vwave). which
is assumed to be stipulated in the potential theory approximation. He will
cite explicit expressions for (2) for a situation when two identical waves
are propagated at angles which are equal in magnitude but opposite in sign
to the wind direction (the two-dimensional wave spectrum is usually describ-
ed by a function which is symetric relative to the wind direction). In

this case. with displacements of the surface 4'1 I a caucus-ﬂy -d t).
caused by these waves. for the components (2) we’aave the known expressions

'I:= IUI. Va. ol-(CsG-lm) [C03 (% + V—TZ). . .-

sin(—:-+ V: r), 0];

_ 2 .. -s
v,_ ll!» 9» 9.! = (+ e 'M—acospy cosZ. psinpy slnz.

(3:)

tea: I- ;
Bysnz] (m

s“
l

V,=\‘V.J v.dt= la,. 0. 0] = (2 share-“0x

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x{(,+%wsgpy),0.0}- (36)

where k = A22 + )5 2 is the wave umber; 2a, 6-1 is wave height and frequency;
x-ux—«ol:

2.. is the Coriolis parameter; Co is the surface velocity of the drift cur-
rent.

Equation (Jo) represents the components of the Lagrangian velocity (Stokes
drift) of the order of 82, where a is wave steepness [lo], which with av-
eraging can be exasined in Euler variables.

Since anve - av] [4], where v1 - [a], v1, w!) and 8 - ak is a small par-
ameter, examining perturbed notion in the friction layer of the ocesn. the
velocity field can be represented in the fore of a series

‘
Vm-V: +GV|+C’V1+..-. ( )

[ll03M '- pcrl

Second-order notion (v2) will be represented in the form of a superposition-
ing of second-order uean motion and the second harmonic [2]; in addition,
:since in (2) it is understood that Vwave is described by potential theory,
then the second-order effect, Stokes drift, known from this some theory,
will follow. Thus,

'2‘ v (y. 2. lH-V,(y. 2. !)+Vn(x. y. z. I). (5)

Here v - in. v, w] is mean second-order notion (secondary motion), v22

is a component containing the second harmonic, whose influence, like that
of higher-order terns, henceforth will also be neglected. 0n the basis of
(1), (la), (5), we obtain a system of equations describing secondary notion
in the friction layer of the ocean [2], which with use of the stress func-

tion (I!) has the following for:- (subsequent conputations are cited for
dimensionless variables):

 

a o (Ivy. 2:_ _; _ A 3 —
(17+V217)(u+“.)+ u: ., 'Re £24” 1") (620
d a ﬁll; 04 _ 00 do,
(7+VLW)°?-T§'W "“ '___(“‘"—277—27‘_)+
74

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

0 I w 09 a 0' 3;. .
+7.1“ 7' + “’- 71")“ WP“ 7;” ”' 7.?)- (6")
__ 3i 0+ _ an t... 7
v- 8. w ,, - Re——-‘ — yﬁt D=V7 (6c)

The author of [2] examined a mechanism of generation of secondary move-
ments in the friction layer by means of the action of Reynolds stresses
caused by the interaction of the velocity wave field with the shift of
drift currents and which is described by the terms on the right-hand sides
(6a.b) with averaging (line at the top). In the ease of potential waves
these terms are identically equal to zero, but the Stokes drift effects
remain as a possible mechanism of generation of longitudinal vorticity.

Since the Reynolds number is of the order of 102, it is natural to discard
the terms describing the viscous effects. However, system (6) becomes sin-
gular and a simplification of its solution is not attained. Therefore, it is
customary to retain higher-order terms. In Our case it is desirable to re-
tain the terms emphasized in (6a,b) describing diffusion (in order to elim-
inate the singularity) and the influence of Coriolis force (since the equa-
tions of the system are related through them).

For a more general situation than in 3b,c), u8 - ua 1(z)-exp[i‘Y(y-ct)] and
equations (6) have solutions in the form

a! = f(1) t'l (iv-m; u = I“ (2) en (1-H), (7)

where 7’ I 23 and c - cr + ic1 can be interpreted as the complex velocity
of the perturbation, its real part characterizes the displacement. and the
fictitious part characterizes the increase in the amplitude of the perturb-
ation. For determining the amplitude functions we obtain a system of ordin-
ary differential equations

p"— l1’+':Rec,+i7Rc (VE— ,)| "+2 I"—
—l7ReUl',_f—1Rcc,u,.+I1Re(V,_—c,) n,,:

f"'-l213+7Rec.+I1Re(Vr—c,nf'+|7'+:’Rec.+ (8b)
+11a Re(l’c-c,l+i~;Re Vi]f—2p’=0:

with the boundary conditions [7]:

(86)

when 2 - 0 f-p’-f"-0; (8c)

when z—on =:"'fl'=o‘ (8d)

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'lu- dum-rilvml model In current in the mute of small perturlmtionn and here
H In um-tl for tleiermlnlng only the form of the periurlmi Inn. For rumpulllw.
lln- mnpllt’lule of the perturbation. an already noted. we one the energy equa-
linn for -|ll equilibrium ntnte. from whleh I» found the nornnlizotlnn I'aelnr
Ior IM'I , ('l'llllll'I| ln-nu-elurtb by A. The final perturbation" by nun-Inn oi lley-
noliln ulreuueu da-I'orm the initial profile of the current and therefore the
velocity field in the friction layer mnnt he represented on follown

V...“ -: V.. (2) i-V. (x. y. z. n - My. 2. I) -i-v. (y. :. I). (9)

[mm H . per; ll - wave] where vo(z) in the horizontally uniform nean current
(not now dem:rib.uhle by an Eknan spiral) and v in a periodic secondary cur-
rent of the form (7), already .1 finite value.

:BulmtituiJIm (9) into (i) and carrying out horizontal averaging. we obtain
unmitionn dwliti‘illlily, the mean current V” - [l], V. 0]:

ll"—2Vu Rel iu-i-u,)w]’; (10o)

V"-|-2U.-=Rc('el3')'. um.)

Ihe energy equation Inr uerondary motion i-Z - (iIZWZ-U2)/2 is obtained in the
mono! way from the equation» of mmion and in a nonviucouu approxination has
the iorm

05 -05 'M- :. 2'1-__.:_'. .
.__.' ‘37.].(V-.()u-T’;—+ 2" ti ‘ Nihi-

m 0! (
_ an . av . 0:- 3L _ 11)
i I110}?- 1-9'0-5'4'1 11"...” d: -.0.

lion: p is .1 prenaure component corresponding to the secondary motion [2].

Integrating (ll) for the layer occupied by secondary motion and averaging
nlonu the direction of the y-axie, with one of the expression u + us I
Ill'/(V-«-] ‘1' (following from (On) in a nonviscoun approximation with the
replaeement of v“ by V“), we obtain the expression

__ II I! _. .—
15..., ..;-V’ w ' ' .1". 2'. ~ (12)
m J o d: JV (0, d: _) d"

In an equilibrium ntate alt/a t - 0 and the energy equation is interpreted
in the following way. The aecondary motion of finite amplitude, receiving
rnerny from the mean r low. by means of Reynolds stresses redistributes it.
which leadu to a change in the initial current profile. The modified profile
ran bernlne more. :ltahle, and in this case .1 stationary store is attained.
provided that the energy transfer from mean motion is balanced by dissipa-
lion. or. with neglecting oi' the latter (the term describing dissipation
vontahm the factor Re'l). is equal to zero.

-..'e will divide the mean flow by the airman part and some increment describ-
ing modification of the mean flow by the final perturbations: v0 . VP; 4»
v". From (l0), taking into account the mentioned expression for u, we

’6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oii OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtain equations describing Vm - {um, VI. 0] :
“I. - 2 0.. '-- 0. v; -i- 2 u. = Re —(w)’ (l 3)
with the boundary conditions

a}. (0) =0; (0) = u. (II) :: u,(11).. 0. (15)

in (l2). (l3) discriminating explicitly the sought-for normalization factor
A. we obtain an equation for its determination

“an y I

Ni V. 7?.- 1%%)dz-z-A'§o —"— f—Ld—tymo. <15)

The model was realized numerically; the computations were made using the
following model. from the linearized system of equations (8) we determined
the components of secondary motion u, v, w.y/. The necessary parameters
for waves and drift current were computed the same as in [2]. System (8)
was solved by the matrix adjustment method using a uniform grid and employ-
ing a difference scheme with a second order of accuracy. For reducing the
system of difference equations to a "three-point" form we introduced the
additional unknown function F(z) - i". Using (13). (lb) we found a modif-
ication of the Ekman profile Um. vm. Formula (15) was used to determine
lhe amplitude factor A; in this case the integrals were computed using
the Simpson formula. We computed the value of the fields (V', u, v, w,

on, Va). corresponding to an equilibrium state.

Figure 1 gives an example of computation of the stream function for sec-
ondary motion, which also shows isolines of the vertical velocity and
second-order longitudinal velocity (u + us). The structure of secondary
motion does not essentially differ from the structure of the Langmuir cir-
culation. It should be noted that the region of maximum descending sove-
menta is situated beneath the zone of the maximum longitudinal velocity

at the surface.

Junerlral experiments demonstrated a weak influence on the secondary cur-
rent by the parameter c[. which can be regarded as an index of growth of
wavos during a developing wave situation. As a characteristic of the de-
nree of instability of the friction layer we employed |f(z)| max: charac-
terizlng the quantity of water entrained in the secondary motion. The vel-
ancity of uspvemcnt of the system of eddies along the Y-axis exerts a more
ngnlficant influence. it appears that the friction layer is most unstable
when the velocity of movement of the perturbations (cr) is close to the
transverse velocity V5 at the point of inflection of its profile (Vé), as
takes place in the case of a classical Ekman layer [17]. This result can
be related to the phenomenon. noted under actual conditions. of lateral
displacement of the wind bands (windrows) at the sea surface caused by the
Ulngmuir circulation [l].

77

FOR OFFICth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 
 
  
 

(‘In/ set
”an; {Ii/I'll

  

in 6, "Iran “I,“

Fig. l. Stream function for second- Fig. 2. Dependence of maximum rate
:nry motion (a). iaolines of vertical of water subsidence (um) on wind
velocity V (b) and total longitudinal velocity (C6) with 4" c1 - 0, c, .
velocity u + us (c) in dimensionleas Vé. (Curves l, 2, 3, 4 corresponds
form, computed for c6 ' 8 m/sec. - to Y - 0.2; 0.3; 0.4; 0.5).

Cr - c1 . 0.

we also modeled situations with an orientation of the perturbations at the
angle 9’ to the wind direction. with small Y the maximum instability is

displaced in the direction of the negative angles (‘Pu- 10°); with a de-
rreaSe in wavelength (2:: /7’) a greater instability is noted with deflec-

tion to the right from the wind direction by approximately the same value
(velo‘).

Figure 2 shows the dependence of the maximum velocity of descending move-
ments on wind velocity at a height of 6 m (C6) with different 7’ values.
The computed values agree with numerous measurements of the rate of water
-unbsidence in wind bands and indicate a direct dependence on wind velocity.

As might be expected, secondary motion is an effective mechanism for the

redistribution of momentum. Figur: 3 shows examples of a modification of
the Hkman spiral for several situations.

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  

qt

Fig. 3. Modification of the Ekman spiral

(0) by secondary movements of finite am-

plitude (in dimensionless form).

1) C6 I 8 m/sec, 9’- 10°, c1 - 0.012,
7" 0.5

3) C6 I 10 m/sec. 9‘- C1 - 0, Y- 0.5

3) C6 ' 10 m/sec. 9 - c1 I 0, 7" 0.1

in all cases er - Vé.

.ay
Now we will formulate the principal conclusions.
I. An examination of the process of interaction between the drift current
and surface waves. stipulated by the Ekman spiral and potential theory re-
spectively, demonstrated that as a result of hydrodynamic instability a
secondary motion arises which is similar to a Langmuir circulation. The
"forcing force," determining the form of the perturbation, is Stokes drift
In the case of three-dimensional waves modeled in the simplest case by the
intersection of two ordinary plane waves.

1. a model considering secondary motion as an equilibrium motion explains

a number of properties of Langmuir circulation (1-4. 7. 10) known from ob-
nervatlons.

3. Secondary motion causes a substantial transfer of momentum. commensur-
able with transfer as a result of small-scale turbulence. A modification
of the Ekman spiral by secondary motion leads, in particular, to a de-
crease in the angle between surface flow and wind shearing stress, and also

causes a narrowing of the velocity hodograph in the upper layer, and this
means a greater uniformity of the flow with depth.

5. The reproduction in the model of the principal peculiarities of a Lang-
muir circulation, established experimentally, makes it possible to hope
for success in the approaches used in solving the problem. At this stage
it is most important to develop a model of Langmuir circulation for taking
into account stratification for the purpose of determining the role of cir-

uulation in processes of formation of the upper quasihomogeneous layer in
the ocean.

In conclusion the author expresses appreciation to P. S. Lineykin for atten-
tion to the work and useful comments.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.

6.

10.

12.

13.

14.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Imutrlyeva. A. A., Ryazhin, S. V., "Uydrometeorological Conditions for
the Appearance of Langmuir Eddies," VESTNIK LCU (herald of Leningrad
Stale University). No 3, No 18, pp llO-ll7, 1976.

Zelen'ko. A. A., Radikevich, V. M., "hydrodynamic Instability of the
Friction layer and Langmuir circulation in the Ocean," MBTEOROLOCIYA I
CIDROLOCIYA (Meteorology and Hydrology), Mo 4, pp 66-75, 1977.

landau. L. D., "On the Turbulence Problem," DOKLADY AN SSSR (Reports
of the USSR Academy of Sciences), Vol 6‘, No 8, pp 339-362, 1944.

Phillips, 0. M., DINAMIKA VERKHMEGO SlDYA OKEANA (Dynamics of the Upper
layer of the Ocean), Moscow, "Mir." 1969, 267 pages.

Angel], T. K.. Pack, D. M., Dickson, C. R., "A Lagrangian Study of Reli-
icnl Circulations in the Planetary Boundary Layer," J. ATMOS. 801.,
Vol 25, No 5, pp 1210-1225. 1968.

Brown, R. A., "A Secondary Flaw Model for the Planetary Boundary Layer,"
J. macs. sc1., Vol 27, No 5, pp 742-757. 1970.

Craik, A. D. D., leibovich, S., "A Rational Model for Langmuir Circula-
tions," J. FLUID MECR., Vol 73, Part 3, pp 601-626. 1976.

Puller, A. J., "Experimental Study of the Instability of the Laminar
Ekman Boundary layer," J. FLUID MECH., Part 15. pp 560-576, 1963.

Faller, A. J., "The Angle of Uindrows in the Ocean," TELLUS, Vbl 16, No
3, pp 363-370, 196‘.

Faller. A. J., "Oceanic Turbulence and the Langmuir Circulations," ANN.
REV. OF ECOLOGY AND SYSTEMATICS, Vol 2, pp 201-236, 1971.

Fuller, A. J., Kaylor, R. E., "A Numerical Study of the Instability of
the Laminar Ekmnn Boundary Layer," J. ATMOS. 561., Vol 23, pp 466-480.
1966.

Frisch, A. 5., Miller, L. J., Stauch, R. 6., "Secondary Flow Fields in
the Planetary Boundary Layer Estimated from Duel-Doppler Radar Measure-
ments During Snow Conditions," JCR, Vol 80, No 36, pp 5051-5060, 1975.

Le Mone, A. M., "The Structure and Dynamics of Horizontal Roll Vortiees

on the Planetary Boundary Layer," J. ATMOS. SCI., Vol 30. No 6, pp 1077-
l09l, I973.

Leibovich, 8., "0n the Evolution of the System of Hind Drift Currents
and Langmuir Circulationa in the Ocean, Part 1," J. FLUID. MECM., Vol
79, Part 6, pp 715-763, 1977.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15‘

Ill.

17.

[8.

I9.

30.

FOR lll-‘FICIAI. llSl-I ONLY

Leibovich, 8., Rndhakl‘islman. K., "On the Evolution of the Systemof
wind Drift Currents and Langmuir Clrculatious in the Ocean. Part 2,"
J. FLUID "86".. Vol 80, Part 3, pp ‘81-507, 1977.

Leibovlch, 8.. Ulrich, 0., "A Note on the Growth of Small-Scale Lang-
muir Circulations," JGR, Vol 77, pp 1683-1688, 1972.

Lilly, D. K., "On the Stability of Ekmnn Boundary Flow," J. ATHOS. 561.,
Vol 23, pp 119-696, 1966.

Pollard, R. T., "Observations and Theories of Langmuir Circulations and
Their Role in Near-Surface Mixing," DEEP-SEA RES., Sir George Deacon An-
niversary Suppl., 1976.

Scott, J. T., Myer, G. 8., Stewart, R., Walther, E. 6., "0n the Mechan-
ism or Langmuir Circulations and Their Role in Epllinnion Mixing,"
LIHNOL. AND OCEANOGR., Vol lb, pp 693-503, 1969.

Stuart, J. T., "On the Non-Linear Mechanics of Wave Disturbances in
Stable and Unstable Parallel Flows," J. FLUID HEC"., Vol 9, Part 3,
pp 352-370, 1960.

Bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.(535.3+072)

IMPROVED MODELS OF HATER DISCHARGE AND BVALUATIONS 0F ACCURACY OF ITS
HBASUREHENT BY THE "VELOCITY-AREA" METHOD

bbscov METEOROLOCIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 65-73

[Article by Doctor of Technical Sciences I. F. Karasev, State Hydrological
institute, submitted for publication 28 March 1978]

Abstract: The article gives analytical depend-
cnccs for new models of water discharge and
their measurement errors. obtained on a cor-

relation-hydraulic basis.

[Abstract] "Velocity-area“ methods constitute the principal astrological
basis for fluvial hydrosetry. A determination of discharge on the basis

of the results of registry of its elements - a modification of indirect
measurements. having a definite analytical basis -- is a water discharge
model. Although the concept of a discharge model developed considerably

earlier than many other hydrological models, until recently it remained

extremely imperfect. This made it necessary to carry out the investiga-

tions whose results are presented in this article.

In general form water discharge in an open channel is modeled as some fluid
body formed by the elementary volumes dw - vdaJ. where v is the current velo-
rity at the center of gravity of the area dad normal to it.

The entire diversity of existing models and methods for computing water
discharge on the basis of measurement data was governed primarily by the
difference in the methods for spatial-temporal averaging of current velo-
cities and computation of the "discharge body" H.

The analytical and graphic methods used at the present time are based on an
interpolation of the measured mean velocities on the verticals v1, V} (Fig.
l) as precise values, without taking into account the error in their deter-
mination and variation in the width of the section. In the case of linear

interpolation the averaged velocity in the section is determined as the
half-sum of the mean velocities on the verticals

v. = 0.5 (v. + 0,). (1)

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

which leads to a computation formula for a standard analytical method
for computing the water discharge (we will call it a linear-determined
model):

1-. .\'-l

Q-a. 0.... +c” ”Na” 4- 2 0,5 (0, + I") “’3- (2)
II?

where 0‘1 and °°N are the "edge" coefficients for computing velocity
in shore sections, N and “L are the number and area of the sections
between the velocity verticals.

In the United States use is made of a determined model of a different type

[12]. The model combines measurement and velocity verticals and the deter-
mined elementary discharges are applied to their neighborhood or are lin-

early interpolated in the interval between them b3.

    

-r-9mmm5 ﬁﬂﬂ‘

 

Fig. 1. Distribution of mean flow velocities on verticals in width of sec-
tion. 1) actual distribution of velocities, 2) hydraulic components, 3)
linear interpolation-hydraulic model, h) linear-determined model; devia-
tions of velocities from actual values: 5) curve (3), 6) straight line

(6)-

1here are more perfect discharge models which take into account the nonlin-
ear nature of change in velocity in the width of the section. In the graph-
ic processing of water discharge the velocity curve is reproduced in the
form of a smooth curve. In the analytical variant the change in velocities
ls represented using a parabolic interpolation model or in dependence on
the local depths in the section (A. P. Braslavskiy).

83

FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in all the cited cases the discharge model remains determined. In actual-
lty, however, the measured mean velocities on the verticals can be broken
down lulu at least three components.

ll‘ ' Ill ”Ivy-+8144...

where Vh is a determined value, hydraulically governed by local depth, the
slope of the free surface and channel roughness; w is the structural de-
viation of velocity caused by the action of different disturbing factors
and large-scale turbulent formations; fv is a value reflecting the influ-
ence of the local turbulent fluctuation of velocities and the errors in
determining mean velocity of different origin, including instrumental and
methodological. dependent on the number of points for measuring velocity.

Each component, naturally, must have different methods for its spatial in-
terpolation in the width of the flow.

The determined value vh follows the change in depths on the verticals in
accordance with the Chery-Manning formula

_ u: u: '
Vr=-—h "I =allm. (3)
[I'- h)
The parameter
I]! o
"- T_;.:" (6)

[cp - mean] (where «J and hmean are, respectively, the area and mean depth
of the cross section) serves as one of the hydraulic characteristics of
the flow, used by H. A. Velikanov [l] in computing the plan of currents.

For computing vh with the use of expression (3) it is necessary to know
the distribution of depths in the width of the channel. An analytical ap-
proximation of the outlines of the river channel transverse profile in
each specific case is quite complex. However, in order to obtain the mean

velocity th in the section ‘13 it is not mandatory to reproduce the true
configuration of the channel under the condition that the used approxima-

tion gives an equally "guaranteed" distribution of depths. The analytical
expression for such approximations was proposed by V. N. Concharov [3]:

II = II." (%)', (5)

where u and “max are the width and maximum depth of the channel respective-
ly; y is the distance from one of the water edges; for the exponent we have

”an 8

z: -I=<;—l.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Here ’P' is the characteristic of completeness of the section; its value
varies from 2 to l for triangular and rectangular profiles respectively.
For natural river channels of complex configurations ‘P .9 l.

The hydraulic dependence for the determined component (lo) and the approx-
lmntlon (5) is also applied to the sections between the velocity verticals.

Therefore, the vb, value can be represented as follows:

= - m
lr- h] "' "*""‘w.-

(6)
where as is determined from the values of the partial discharge qa. area
a!” and mean depth in the sections between the velocity verticals:
It 0 211
I v I!“ I s __ v \’I3‘.-" damn“.
lcp ' moan] 9. “Tim" “Y =3; wild-1f; ”7'?!“ (7)

J .
I)

With respect to the velocity components -- structural w and random Ev --
together they are determined as deviations of the measured mean velocities
on the verticals from their hydraulic components:

A

:.'1c“n+f :1. "

”Mn "uh " ‘I’ — ‘

“(II-

The Avk values on the intermediate verticals are a random function of the
transverse coordinate y. They can be obtained by means of interpolation of
the deviations Av: and AVJ in the interval between the velocity verticals.

The Ava value. averaged in the width of the section, in general form is
represented in the following way:

Av, = P, (M, 4- A0,). (8)

In the simplest case of linear interpolation Ps - 0.5. However, for the
best approximation to the real value it is necessary to take into account
the correlation of An and AVJ. For this purpose it is possible to use
the optimum interpolation method [2], interpreted by as applicable to hy-
drometric problems [6].

Using a separate representation of the components of mean velocity in the
section vb, using (7) and Avg using (8), we will synthesize the interpola-
tion-hydraulic model of water discharge:

"I

) ‘iv daily; .9)
‘~ = Tr- + P- (v. - II.“ + «0— mm] '5- ‘
I-‘or I"s we obtained the approximate expression

P, = "

.. s
nig+2q+2

 

 

(10)

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where [k "It/b3 in determined on the basis of the autocorrelation func-
tion or the structural deviations w [61;n is the measure of errors in
measurement of velocity on the vertical:

 

a’ o7
I I

7.: _ = $1 ‘.
*1 H0.) --:.

[ N - mean] (The line at the top denotes statistical averaging for the set
of varying parameters.)

lhe basis for model (9) is the hydraulic nucleus of the flow (the first

term under the sum sign). But, in contrast to the linear-determined model
(2). model (9) contains a varying part (second term). Depending on the in-
terpolation method. the varying part of the discharge interpolation-hydraul-
h:lmudels ls subdivided into two modifications:

- a linear interpolation-hydraulic model, which corresponds to the con-
stant value P. I 0.5;

-- an optimum interpolation-hydraulic model in which the weighting factors
l'x are determined on a correlation-statistical basis using expression (10).

1he modifications of the models are successively interrelated. For example,
if the structural deviations of velocity have a random character, P. as-
aumes a zero value and the water discharge is expressed only by the sum
ttfthe hydraulic components of the discharges in the sections ‘43. With ap-
proach to a determined distribution of velocities P3-0.5. The water dis-
charge model in this case is reduced to a linear interpolation-hydraulic
model. And finally, if in supplementation to these conditions we use as a
point of departure a linear bottom profile between the velocity verticals,
a linear-determined model is precise (2).

interpolation-hydraulic models do not require the introduction of the edge
coefficients 0‘1 and 0‘N, since formula (9) ensures the necessary averag-
ing of velocity in the first and last sections with the values v1 - 0, h1
- 0 and v3 - 0, hj I 0 respectively.

The values entering into formula (9) represent the directly measured water
discharge elements or are computed using measurement data (9, as). The as
c; ffieient is determined using formula (7), in which as a first approxim-
ation the partial discharges q; are computed by a standard analytical method
on the basis of model (2). Thus, the new model (9) is successively related

to the presently used model (2) and gives a second approximation for water
discharge.

The relative mean square error in measuring water discharge 5 is charac-
terized by a set of special errors in determining its elements. 0n the as-

sumption of a mutual independence of the latter, on the basis of expression
(2) and the obvious expressions

1' 0': “:

$9-1; ﬂ=2i
l

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we w i l l have

'1 . '3 (H)
Al Al
where 0.)” and 0‘s are the relative measurement errors for the areas of
the sections between the velocity verticals and the mean flow velocities
In these sections respectively; I3 is a metroiogical parameter dependent
on the hydraulic structure of the flow and the degree of discretizatioa of
the measurements.

N
NXvE
I

lie-T-

with a uniform distribution of velocity verticals in the width of the flow
in a rectangular channel 3 - l, in a river without floodplains, P - 1.2-1.8,
in the presence of floodplains l.8<3< 3.0. In general, the smaller the
value. the more rational is the measurement process. In a channel with a
complex configuration the velocity verticals must be placed in such a way
that approximately equal fractions of the water discharge pass between

them; this ensures a maximum effect of the spatial smoothing of the special
errors in measuring discharges in the sections between the velocity ver-
ticals. This principle. adopted in the United States as an empricai rule,
follows directly from the formulas cited below (12)-(14).

The mean square error in determining the area of the sections is dependent
on the instrumental errors of the instruments employed in making measure-
ments (markers. sounding leads, echo sounders) and the reliability of the
geodetic base of the hydrometric work. The errors in determining distances
from a constant beginning and the width of the sections usually mutually
compensate one another in sign and value and therefore do not exert an in-
fluence on the accuracy in determining ‘Js. Deviations of the measuring ship
from the hydrological line introduce a definite error into the measurement
of éJs; these constitute a source of so-calied morphometric errors [5].
However, the principal factor determining the accuracy in measuring the
area of the channel is the number of measuring verticals. Althoudl the
error in representing the continuous profile by a series of discrete meas-
urements of depth can be evaluated theoretically, it is better to use more
reliable empirical data directly. For example, with 20 or more measuree-
neat verticals the mean square error in measuring the cross—sectional area
(according to data from O. N. Borsuk) assumes the almost constant value 22.

A decisive influence on the accuracy in measuring water discharge is exerted
by the errors in measuring mean velocities on the verticals aVver and their
averaging in the section 0's. The error 0' r is dependent on the accuracy
of the measuring instruments, the dorationvzf their exposure at the measuring
points where Velocity is determined and the number of these points in the
depth of the flow. The duration of instrument exposure determines the

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pulsation error in measuring velocity and the number of points determines
the error in discretization of the curve of distribution of velocities on
the vertical. Estimates of the error chver and its components can he found
in numerous sources. including publications of the hydrometry section of
the State Hydrological institute [5. 7]. In combination with adherence to
the standard method for hydrometric work, the accuracy in measuring the
mean velocity is: the detailed (five-point) method - 2-31, the main method
(two-point) -- 4-52.

uith respect to the error in averaging velocities in the section (TVS,

it is represented as the average error in interpolating the measured val-
ues v1 and v1 in the interval between the velocity verticals. since in
computing v,‘use is made of only one (averaged) value of the weighting co-
efficient P3. In general form the evaluation of the mean errors in linear
and optimum interpolation is given in [6]. Using approximate estimates of
lhe error 038, we obtain the following expressions for the relative mean
square errors in measuring water discharge in the variants:

linear interpolation-hydraulic model

0

~ 9 ~ '~ -|.4tI "’ II!
.o=[-w—(.3’+_—je;e '°*+0.5o:_)] : (12)
optimum interpolation-hydraulic model

~ —Ln515

"" 3 "' ~ I)?
’o = [7"; + 2:: + 0.5 61, )1 : (13)

standard analytical method (linearly determined model)

- ’ ~ 5 I? -1451” :3 . :3 r]:
'0: wi°l.+'a' a +05 a.) <14)

[3 - verl [M - morphometric] The error in determining the water discharge
on the basis of a standard linearly determined model includes the entire
set of errors in the linear interpolation-hydraulic model and also the
Inorphometric error in determining mean velocity in the section Cry“. equal
to the difference in the mean values of the hydraulically governed velocit-
ies in accordance with formula (7) and the half-sums of the values computed
for the verticals limiting the section. In a special case for a rectangular
or nearly rectangular channel, when ‘f-o 1, his: hjvhnax, we have 6v" 3 0.
and for an estimate of the error in determining water discharge, processed
on the basis of an interpolation-determined model, the formula (12) becomes
applicable. If. in addition, there is such a close correlation between the
measured mean velocities on the verticals that the correlation radius is
substantially greater than the distances between them (C k3’b3), the error

akzis evaluated by means of a simple dependence, cited in our earlier stud-
ies, such as in [5]:

_. 3 a u:
°0 _ [W it." + 0.5.1:. )1 ,

l3 - ver]

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table l

lirror in Hater Discharge Models According to Computed Dependences 06

and Actual Data 50(2)

Mona. pacxoaa now 2

 

 

 

   
  

 

    

Kean-wet

.0 cwpo- anucﬂnommpummpo- anaemia-"Impuom- onmuaatunu IIIII’L‘MIOI'I-
a...“ nunu muouuwupnun-mcxan uuouuomlapaIau-Iccxau 5

I091 uxo- —'—'——L| _.___ __

6 Bum—mun" Tmaya. 1900—1961 rr.
;.-ll.8!'.: ﬁ—uh-ss

 

a . 2.9 - . 2.9 — 2.1 ..
3. 5.5 3.0—6.0 | 5.6 u.o—4.o 4.6 1.0-1.0
2 _ 1.1 1.0—6.0 7.1 1.0—7.3 5.7 1.0—4.6

! - 7 Cuuapu—xumua Kmunxuumau. IWG 1'.
3940.09,; '5. tam—m

 

 

 
  
 

n - . 2.1 -. 25 — 2.6 —
o. 3.0 0.0—5.2 2.9 1.0—5.0 I 2.7 I 0.9-2.9
a, _ 3.0 33—22.; as 3.7—1” 34 l 1.0-4.8

3 Bum—1.5ypnm. |968 r. '
3.,-2I.6s; E.-un-a.o

— 3.9 ' - 3.4 -.
| 10—120 I ”.2 | 1.0—no.o 8.8 054.6
HUI—32.0 «7.3 4.0—2” ms 10—21:)

            

Key:
1. Number of velocity profiles
2. Water discharge model
1. Linearly determined
A. Linear-interpolation-hydraulic
5. Optimum interpolation-hydraulic
6. Vnkhsh—Tutknul village
7. Syrdnr'yn-nylkishlak village
a. Volkhov-Burlgl village

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100020020-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In roulrnnl lo the fornmlnn eited hv other authors, such as [6]. including
I-rrleo author” lh-lll. the dependencen (l2)-(lh) eonlain parameters re-
Ilurtinu the degrte oI discretization of measurements and rorrelation of
Ihe errors In delirmluing current Velocity. it in inadmissible to evaluate
the aeeuraey in arauuriue the water discharge by simple summation of the
special errors. and In determining the weighting coefficients for each of
[hen there should he no change in the duntee of discretization of the dis-
charge-laidel. The nonndherence to this latter condition distorts the rela-
tionship of the errors determining the accuracy in measuring the water dis-
charge. A similar inconsistency was allowed by 6. V. Zheieznyakov and B. B.
nanilevleh [AI. in their formula. as indicated by the computations of N.

K. Siblryakova [8]. the weight of the errors in measuring velocity exceeded
by 4-6 orders of magnitude the values of the remaining coefficients. In
other words, the accuracy in measuring water discharge was not dependent

on the error in determining the cross-sectional area. Failure to take into
account the correlation of the special errors leads to an understatement

of the combined error in measuring water discharge.

The correlation-hydraulic characteristics of the water discharge models

and the errors in measurinn its elements were also studied on the basis

or materials from methodological investigations on the rivers and canals

of (entral Asia. thy Northeln Caucasus, the Northwest and Belorussia.

Table l niVes the CV“ and "k values for three characteristic rivers: moun-
tainous (Vakhsh). semimeuntalnous (Syrdar'ya) and lowland (Volkhov). in

the absence of flow disturbances in a prismatic channel, such as the Vakhsh
River. both characteristics assume a minimum value: cry in this case dif-
rets little from the errors in measuring velocity, not having correlation.
”a the other hand. if the distribution of veloeities \mder the influence

of above-lying disturbing factors is not entirely hydraulically governed,
(inadequately corresponds to depths). there is an increase in E?" and 5 hi
this peculiarity is characteristic of the Voikhov and Syrdar'ya stations.

the correlation-hydraulic characteristics of the flow velocity structure
must be determined for each specific station on the basis of the results
of preceding observations. With respect to the data in Table 1, they can
he used as a preliminary basis for use of interpolation-hydraulic models
and evaluating the accuracy in measuring water discharges in rivers with
similar hydrological regimes.

As Is well known. fluvial hydrometry does not have absolute standards for
water discharge measured by the "velocity-area" method. Under these con-
ditions the effectivoaess of its different models can be evaluated only
on the basis of measurements with increased discreteneas, in our case -
deviation 6 Q or the discharge values in the case of a reduced number of
velocity verticals from the more precise values obtained without such a
reduction. Table i giVes the relative mean square errors Sq. computed
using formulas (12)-(14) respectively and compared with the ‘50 deviation.
The latter were obtained using data from hydrometric expeditions ef the
State Hydrological institute. To be sure, it is impossible to expect a

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

complete eolneidenee of the theoretleal and empirical evaluations ur the
error. Neverthelesa. the eloueueuu or the eampared values was acceptable
and in any ease there were not those considerable discrepancies which were
registered in an analysis of existing formulas for evaluating the accuraey
In measuring water discharge [8].

1hr effectiveness of interpolation-hydraulic models in most cases is the
nreater the lesser the number of velocity verticals. This means that in
many hydrological sections it is possible to decrease the number of velo-
eity verticals and accelerate the measurement of discharge without de-
creasing its accuracy.

'nwre are also other nudifications of the "velocity-area" method eusurlnq
acceleration of measurements. in particular, we will mention integration
methods for measuring flow velocity both using hydrometric current meters
and employing ultrasound. The investigations carried out at the State Hy-
drological institute indicate that these methods are quite promising. al-
though they require the development of special equipment for hydrometric
sections. (Such a characterization of integration methods exceeds the
framework of this article.)

The use of new models wit- a restricted number of velocity verticals dif-
Iers fundamentally from the use of the correlations between water discharge
and its so-cnlled representative elements. for example. the maximum depth
and velocity values in the cross section [7]. The accuracy of these models
is considerably lower and is 15-202 due to the instability of the coef-
ficients for conversion from representative elements to water discharge.

Summary

1. New (interpolation-hydraulic) water discharge models make possible a
considerable acceleration of its measurement by "velocity-area" methods
without a decrease in accuracy in comparison with the employed standard
methods.

2. The determined dependences for evaluating the error in measurement of
discharge follow directly from the analytical basis of its models. in
contrast to those proposed earlier, these dependence: take into account
the correlation and weighting coefficients of the special errors as char-
acteristics of the veioeity structure of the flow. The metrological para-
meter ﬂ contained in them reflects the degree of diseretizatioa of the
velocity field. It can serve as one of the criteria tor optimizing meas-

urements on the basis of the maximum effect of spatial smoothing of the
special errors.

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

(i.

7.

10.

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vellknnov. M. A.. DINAMlKA MUSLOVYKM I'OTOKOV (Dynamics of Channel Flown).
Vol 2. Moscow. lad. Tcklmiko-‘l‘ooretlcheskoy Literatury, 1955. 125 pages.

Gandin, L. 5.. Kngau. R. L., STATISTICHESKIYE MBTODY INTERPRETATSII

METHOROIDGLCHESKIKH DANNYKH (Statistical Methods for the Interpreta-
tlun of Meteorological Data). leningrad. Gldroneteoizdnt. 1976, 357

pages.

Gnncharov. V. N.. DINAMIKA RUSLOVYKH POTOKOV (Dynamics of Channel
Flows). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, l962. 374 pages.

Zhelezuyakuv, G. V.. Danilevich, B. 3.. "0n Computation of the Accuracy
in Determining Mater Discharges in Open Channels." METEOROLOGIYA I
GIDROIDOIYA (Meteorology and liydroloiiY). No 9, pp 88-90. 1971.

Karascv. I. 9., "Accuracy in hydronetric Data and Improvement of Methods
for Determinlnn the Runoff of Rivers with an Unstable Channel (in the
Example of the Anudar'ya River)." TRUDY GO! (Transactions of the State
Hydrological Institute), No 185. pp 3-39. [971.

Knrasev. I. P.. "Methods and Evaluation of Accuracy of Mydronetric De-
termlnation oi‘ Runoff." TRUDY GGI, Mo 2310, pp 52-72. 1976.

Sergutin. V. Yc., "hydraulic-Hydrometric Method for Determining Water
Discharge in Open Flows." tmrroammm I cmnomctvn, No 6, pp 72-76,

1976.

Slbirynkova. N. K.. "Methods for Evaluating the Accuracy of Measured
Water Discharges," TRUDY 60!, No 202. pp 75-82. 1973.

Baton, H.. Struyk, A. 1.. "Errors in Measurement of Flow by Velocity
Area Methods. llydrmnetry," PROCEEDINGS OF THE KOBLENZ SYMPOSIUM. Sep-
tcnher I970. UNESCO-WINE, Vol 2, pp 771-786, 1973.

Carter, P. H.. "Accuracy of Current Meter Measurements. Hydrometry,“
PROCEEDINGS OF THE KOBLENZ SYMPOSIUM. September 1970, UNESCO-HMO-IAHS.
Vol 2, pp 86-109, 1973.

Herschy, R. H., "The Magnitude of Errors at Flow Measurement Stations.
Ilydrumctry," PROCEEDINGS OF TIIE NOBLENZ SYMPOSIUM, September 1970.
umzsco-uno-tms. Vol 2, pp 103-131. 1973.

Snvini, J.. Badnaine. c. L.. "Analysis of Current Meter Data at Colum-

hln River Gazing Stations," WASHINGTON AND OREGON 680106. SURVEY h'ATER
SUPPLY, p 1869, Nashington, 1971, 59 pages.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.332.6

DETERMINATION OF TUE PARAMETERS 0F GROUND PBRHEABILITY FROM UNSTABLE
INPILTRATION CURVES

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 74-82

[Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences V. H. Deniaov. submitted for
publication 22 March 1978]

Abstract: The article examines the laws of
water movement in the aeration zone and gives
the derivation of the equations for the re-
duced rate of vertical filtration and a new
method is proposed for determining the para-
meters of permeability of virtually homogen-

eous ground.

[Text] As is well known. hydrological computations of rain-induced runoff
are closely associated with determination of possible water losses due to

its infiltration into the ground.

Upon entering into the soil, the water can completely fill its pores in
some volume or layer. or only a part of them. In the first case there is
a two-phase soil~water system, and the medium (ground) is water-saturated.
with partial filling of the pores the medium is not water saturated and
thus is already a three-phase soil-water-air system.

Under real conditions. even within the limits of a single profile, it is
possible to encounter different degrees of ground water saturation. The law
of water movement in saturated soil media is described quite well by the

well-known Darcy equation

u-IQL
[43- fill (1)

where Kfil is the filtration coefficient: v is the reduced filtration rate; 1
is the hydraulic slope.

In the case of vertical filtration in water-saturated ground (downward fil-
tration) the hydraulic slope is formed only due to the distribution of hy-
drostatic head

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

‘ 1' (n

where h in the water layer on the soil surface; I is the length of the fil-
lrution path.

In the case of water filtration in unsaturated ground the picture is great-
ly complicated. The interaction of uncompensated forces [2| is complex in na-
ture. These are caused by the potential of the moisture content gradient

Pg. the osmotic potential Po arising as a result of the presence of water-
soiuble salts, capillary-film potential Pc, potential of the soil moisture
ronfiguration caused by the energy of the water-air phase discontinuity P, .
the potential of entrapped air Pe and other possible potentials.

It must be noted that all these forces. other than the osmotic potential, are
formed at the uater—soil-nir discontinuity in the unsaturated zone where

there is a moisture content gradient.

The vertical filtration of water in unsaturated ground is a complex process
when there is a change in moisture content both along the profile and with
llme at each point on this profile. Usually the upper zone of this profile
rapidly comes into a state of complete water saturation and a region of un-
uaturated ground arises on the filtration front. Hith the downward advance
of the filtration front the layer of water-saturated ground also increases
and the region which is not saturated drops downward. It should be noted
that water filtration occurs progressively from the surface region through
the water saturated ground layer into its unsaturated part. There is a
simultaneous and progressive filtration through the water saturated and
unsaturated ground. Thus. a decrease in the water in the surface layer cor-
responds to an increase in the volume of water-saturated ground and the
volume and moisture content of its unsaturated part.

1'aking into account the sequence and interdependence of the filtering of
water through the saturated and unsaturated ground zones. in our opinion

it is necessary to regard this process as a single process and express it by
some one generalizing equation.

For this purpose we will express the total effect of all the uncompensated
forces on the filtering water. arising in the region of the unsaturated
part of the ground. the so-called equivalent potential

R=K+A+A+a+ﬁ+ m

In - osmotic; K - capillary-fill] where P. is the equivalent or total poten-
tial, having the dimensionality of length (in millimeters of a water column).

We will find the hydraulic gradient and the reduced rate of vertical filter-
lag of water into the ground, having a different degree of water saturation.

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN (WI-'ICIM. "RH UNLY

A» is well known. under conditions of lauinar filtration there is an equal-
lty of the forces caused by a drop in the hydrostatic head and the effect
of the total potential of the part of the ground not saturated with water,
on the one hand, and the resistance force (friction), proportional to the
first power of the filtration rate, acting on the filtration path, on the
other.

For one—dimensional filtration we have

v(za-zn)+vP. -tlu. (b)
where 1’ is the volumetric weight of the water; :1 is the reading for the
filtration front; :2 is the reading for the 1evol of the water present at
the soil surface.
For the vertical filtering of water into the ground we have

22—2. -h+l. (5)

Substitution of the value :2 - :1 free (5) into (4) gives

y(ll+l+P,) =clv. (6)

hence

 

(7)

For reducing formula (7) to the known Darcy equation the proportionality
factor c must be

‘ "' 77‘ (a)

[ Q - fill The replacement of the c parameter in equation (7) by its val-
ue from (8) leads to a final expression for the reduced rate of vertical
filtering of water into the ground

U=K.,l-K,(l+ hjp‘}. (9)

 

[ 5 - fill It must be noted that the equivalent or total potential P,, as
demonstrated in numerous experiments, can have not only a positive, but also
a negative (repulsing) value. Thus, using equation (9) it is possible to
describe the process of water infiltration into the ground in the aeration
zone.

Under field conditions the infiltration process is most frequently simulat-
ed by means of n Nesterov infiltroueter, in which, due to the presence of

two concentrically arranged cylinders, some buffer zone is created which
reduces the outflow of water from the inner cylinder. However, it must never-
theless be noted that when using this instruuent some methodological "non-
closures" arise. The results frequently lead to exaggerated percolation

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vhurarierlutles as a result of the weak restriction of lateral outflow.
Evidently. the extensive use of these instruments is related to the de-
sire to obtain the filtration characteristics of the unimpaired ground

under natural conditions.

These characteristics can be determined more precisely when using ground
monoliths selected under natural conditions without disruption of their
structure and mechanical properties. however, this cannot always he done
on a practical hasis (especially for weakly bound ground) and therefore,
knowingly expecting some loss in the accuracy of the results, use is none-
theless made of the Nesterov infiltrometers, regarding infiltration from
the inner cylinder of this instrument to be approximately one-dimensional.

At the present time we know of several methods for the field determination
of permeability of ground. which can be divided into two principal groups:
1) methods based on the theory of steady water movement,

2) methods using the theory of unsteady movement.

1he first group includes methods developed by N. s. Nestarov, A. K. Boldyrev
and N. K. Girinskiy [3], but these methods have a number of shortcomings:

-- only the filtering coefficients are determined;

-- attainment of a steady water discharge is dependent on a great time ex-
penditure on carrying out an experiment and a great volume of water, which
sometimes is in short supply;

-- in the process of prolonged wetting of the ground there can be a change
in its mechanical structure as a result of swelling of the particles and
also calmatatiou of the upper layer at the water-soil discontinuity.

The second group includes the methods of N. N. Bindeman. N. N. Verigin [3]
and V. V. Bsdov [1]. These methods considerably reduce the time spent on
the experiments. but for determining capillary pressure forces (more cor-
rectly, evidently. total potential P8) and inadequacy of saturation it is
necessary to expose the ground to the depth of its moistening.

Also of definite interest is the somewhat original method of instantaneous
water applications developed by V. V. Badov in which a study is made of

the filtration process with a free decrease in the water level (surface
head) after an instantaneous application of water. However, the determin-
ation of the reduced rate of filtration or the intensity of decrease in

the level of the free surface (v - -dh/dt) by means of the tangent con-
tracted by eye to some point on the decrease curve (h ' f(!)) can introduce
a substantial error into the computations. V. V. Badov recommends that the
shortage in saturation also be determined by means of exposure of the ground

to the depth of its moistening or use of a constant equal to 0.2 (in fractions
of unity).

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Waking luto account what has been said above. we developed a new. rather
simple and not time-consuming method for determining the permeability of
virtually homogeneous ground using unsteady infiltration curves. The propos-
ed method is based on use of unsteady water infiltration when there is a
variable surface head (free infiltration). The experience with determin-
ing the hydrophysical parameters of the ground involves observations of
change in level (surface head) of the filtering water to its total infil-
tration. It can be used under both laboratory (with monoliths) and under
field conditions. The most precise results are usually obtained in an in-
vestigatlon of monoliths in the laboratory. There conditions are created
which impede the outflow of water through the lateral surface of the mono-
lith (application of paraffin or smearing of the lateral surface with
plusticine). This favors the creation of a rigorous one-dimensional fil-
tration flow. Hhen carrying out laboratory investigations the volume of
the water passed through the monolith must be approximately 8-10 times
less than the volume of the sample.

Under field conditions the Nesterov infiltrometer usually used for these pur-
poses can be employed.

nelow we present the theoretical basis of the proposed method and an example
of computations of the parameters of ground permeability.

He will express the temporal change (decrease) in some initial volume of
water filtering into the ground by the known equation
qu__
"'1?" ' (10)

where W is the volume of the filtering water; t is time; Q is the water dis-
charge through the filtration surface.

Dividing the left and right sides of equation (10) by the area A} through
which filtration oceurs. we obtain

an _ o _
—T_-._u. (11)

For determining the filtration rate we will use formula (9). in which the
length of the filtration path is expressed through the relationship of the
percolating water layer ho-h to the value of the free or active ground por-

osity y : l
l==--(h -h.
u . ) (12)
where ho is the initial layer (initial surface head) of filtering water.

Substituting the 1 value from equation (12) into (9), we find that

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll‘h .‘I'I‘l

”"K‘l' i 77"- (Ira)

with repeated application of some volume of water its filtration conditions

will differ somewhat fro: the filtration conditions for the first volume.
This difference is associattl with the forming filtration column for the
first volume to which water was applied.

“nus. the filtration rate u for the second volume to which water was applied.
In a case when it is equal to the first, In

P 14
u..- .K¢[l+-——h+P' ]--Ko['+ 1M1:_“] ( )

._.+.___.

u n

[vii-ml

He will find the time for the filtering of water through the first volume
with a change in surface head from the initial value to some adopted value.

u (hi-P)
”=—_=K°['+-T.TFL'- (15)
M»- tlli
hence
h I
a .
‘ ( ——pu+m "‘0! d" (16)
1‘. l*‘rr
Integration gives
(=m[(l- "ll-(v - l) Ill—[5:51]. (17)

where n; - ht/ho is the relative surface head (in fractions of the initial
value), corresponding to the time t.

 

, P
_l+.‘T:- (18)
v.—— 1"? .

Similarly we find the water filtration time with repeated application of water

=ﬁ;[u “u,)—('o'--2) 'n H]. (19)
2+;L%— (20)
I: 2?,
99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The water filtration time with a change in surface head in the interval
from ho to h for both water applications can also be determined from an
experiment with observation of the change in the level of the filtering
water in the inner cylinder of the instrument. For this purpose, using
data from the experimental applications of water. curves were constructed
showing the change in the surface head of water with time (h; - f(t)) for
the first and second water applications.

The equations (17) and (19) include three unknowns: filtering coefficient
Kfll. active (free) porosity ’1 and total potential P3. For finding these
unknowns we will write three equations, stipulating specific intervals in
tne change in surface head.

For the first vnlume of filtering water we noted two intervals of change in
surface head, from which their filtration time is determined. The first
interval is determined by a change in surface head from ho to 0.5ho. or

 

II, = “'5 It. = 0.5.

 

II.-
The second interval is from ho to 0.05ho. or
Ii, ‘: 0'3: I" :: 0,05.

For the second application of water the interval of change in surface head
is adopted in the range from ho to 0.05 ho, or

um I... _ 0'05.

:1,:: It ..

 

Thus, using the selected intervals of change in surface head and formulas
(l7) and (19). we write a systen of three equations

 

_ h. —0.6 '
t.———k—u_,,, . [0.5—(v.—1)In "V. H

.a v —0.0~')
‘2-m[°'95“"“’ '""~.——r . ‘2“

_ he ' «mg-0.05
‘a-m[°'95“'=‘9"“ .,_. ]

 

where t1, t2 and t3 is the time of change in surface head in the selected
intervals.

For determining the 1/1 value we will solve the first two equations in
system (21): . .

w.-—0.J

v.—l

.. —u.es' (22)

slul

 

0.5—(v.-|) Ia

 

1L
" _o.s‘»—(».— n In

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

r.
The V1 parameter is found from the graph of equation (22), since in explic-
it form it is not solved relative to this parameter.

'lhe V2 parameter is determined by solving the second and third equations

in system (21). ‘

0.95—1w—I) “1%“:-

t. _
" 0.93—hg—2Hn 359—. :75

(23)

Due to the fact that equation (23) is not solved in explicit form relative
to the Vz value, it is found using s nomogrnn of this equation (Fig. 1).

For determining the active (free) porosity we will solve the system of
equations (18) and (20), excluding? from it the value

 

 

P— :0:
l 4- p— P_'.
v.= l__:"
(24)
244 2,—3-
v,- .. __ P "
The solution of the system gives
l
l.=1— ~.—~.' (25)
Similarly, from these same equations we find the total potential:
é —»..
P1=hsu+-'~|_T. (26)

For determining the filtration coefficient for ground we substitute ex-
pression l -y\ from formula (25) into the third equation of system (21).

'Ihe formulation gives

 

K.— “~",‘j " [0.95 —t-o.—2) la ‘55-;- (27)

For the purpose of facilitating computations, Pig. 1 gives a graph of
equation (22) and nomogrsms of equations (23) and (27).

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

a 10!. 60 so two M‘Itmu
min

 

Fig. 2.

As already mentioned above, the proposed speedy method for determining
the parameters of ground permeability is applicable for the seat part
unly for a virtually homogeneous soil profile for the entire filtration
depth ( L ' 2ho/rbL

The presence of a sharply expressed layer-by-layer ground inhomogeneity
at this depth can lead to substantial errors in the experimental results.

With respect to the evaluation of the accuracy in determinations by the
proposed method it should be noted that the author did not carry out
special investigations of this problem.

Evidently, the mean error in laboratory determinations can be: for the fil-
tration coefficient t(3—52), and for active porosity and total potential
3(5-10)2.

During field determinations with use of the Nesterov infiltrometer there
can be a systematic error as a result of the presence of lateral outflow
on the average by 5-102.

Now we will examine the sequence of formulation of the experiment and an
example of determination of ground permeability by the proposed speedy
method.

The experiment was carried out under field conditions with use of a Nesterov
lnfiltrometer. The instrument was set up on an even and virtually horizon-

tal soil area (sandy loam). For the purpose of elimination of water flow from

the inner cylinder clay was smeared between the instrument rings and the
soil surface.

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in order to obtain an initial head equal to 100 mm with an area of filtra-
tion from the inner cylinder of (.00 cm2 a total of 6.000 cm3 (1. liters) of
water is poured into it. For the purpose of limiting the lateral outflow
water was also poured into the outer ring; its level was equal to the
water level in the inner cylinder (the water volume is dependent on the-
dinmcter of the outer cylinder of the instrument).

Figure 2 shows graphs of the experimental water applications in the Nesterov

infiltrometer. 1he decrease in water levels during the time of the experi-
ment, with its filtration from the inner cylinder, is characterized by the

following data:

Surface head

Apia. . . too 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 IO 5
n, ..... |.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.! 0.05

Filtration time t, ninutes

Hater application I .0 3 7 12,5 |9 as 37.5 as 39 so -15
Water application II .o 8.5 It 3. 39 51,5 64 77 so [06 I12

Now we will determine the time of decrease of surface head in the selected
intervals for the first and second water applications and we will cite com-
putations of the filtration parameters using the graphs of water applica-
tions in Fig. 2 and the nomograms in Fig. 1.

As a result of the computations we have:

t1 - 28.0 min; t2 . 75.0 min; t3 . 112 min
—f;—-o.313; -,'-:--_0.70: 4/1 - 1.45; V2 - 2.70
“-0.20; P,-'80 Mu: Kfu - 0.75 mlain

Thus. using the proposed nethod it is possible relatively rapidly and
simply to determine the principal parameters of ground permeability.

Experience in application of this method demonstrates the high stability
in deteraining all the water absorption parameters.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. lindov, V. V.. "Determination of Permeability of Rock Haterial by In-
stantaneous Hater Applications in Test lioles," RAZVEDKA I OKHRANA

NBDR (Mineral Exploration and Conservation of Mineral Resources),
No 9, pp 1.8-50, 1971.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gluhml, A. H., EKSI’I‘IRIHENTAL'NAYA GIDROFIZIKA POCIIV (Experimental lly-
drupl‘yalcs of Solla), Leningrad, Gldrmnuteoizdnt. 196‘). 355 page».

SI’MVOCIINIK GIDROGl-IOLOGA (llydmgouloglut'n llnndnouk). general odltur
M. Ye. Al'tovskly. Moscow. Goagcoltckhlzdnt. 1962, 616 pages.

10’.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

UDC 551.584.43:633.ll(470.61)

EVALUATION OF SOIL-CLIMATIC CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE CULTIVATION
0? WINTER "NEAT

Moscow HETHOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 83-87

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences 1. V. Svisyuk. Weather Bur-
eau, Rostov-on-Don. submitted for publication 30 Hay 1978]

Abstract: The author proposes a method for
evaluating the agrometeorological conditions
for the cultivation of winter whent in the
administrative regions of Rostovskaya Oblnst.
ﬂue evaluation takes into account both soil and
agroneteorological conditions and can be used
in evaluating the standards for the cultiva-
tion of winter wheat in a rayon and oblnst.

[Text] During recent years an evaluation of agricultural standards has as-
nuned great importance. However. for the time being agricultural workers
are forced to do this on the basis of fragmentary data. In this study we
havu attempted to develop a method for a complex evaluation applicable

to winter wheat. bringing together the principal factors exerting an in-
fluence on the formation of its yield. Such factors are soil fertility

and the agrometeorological conditions of growth. Both soil fertility and
the anrometeorological conditions in the different administrative regions
of any oblast differ considerably. Taking this into account. we carried

out a mean long-term soil-climatic evaluation for each administrative re-
gion in Rostovskaya Oblast.

lbr our computations we used two independent complex evaluations: firs; -
soil honitet, which takes in an evaluation characterizing the thickness

of the horizon n + B. an evaluation of the humus supply in the soil and
an evaluation dependent on the mean long-term yield;

second -- evaluation of the climatic peculiarities of the region, which
lakes in the following indices most important for the cultivation of win-
ier wheat: dtptn of wetting of the soil at the onset of renewal of the
growing season of winter crops in spring; the severity of conditions for

'52 wintering of winter crops (sum of negative mean daily temperatures in

105

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OhPICIAL USE ONLY

winter); an overall evaluation of the state of winter crops at the beginn-
lag of the spring growing season: the sums of active temperatures during
the period from the renewal of the growing season to enring and separate-
ly from caring tn golden ripeness. and finally, the precipitation stmm
during these same periods. 1he average of these two complex evaluations.
that is. the evaluations of soil bonitet and the climatic characteristics
of the reglon. also given an evaluation which we called the soil-climatic
evaluation of the conditions for the cultivation of winter wheat in the re-
gion .

Computations of the mean long-term soil-climatic evaluation were carried
out in the following way. On the computation sheet (Table l) we first en-
ter the computed (for each administrative region) mean weighted region
soil honitet. and for each ohlsst -- the mean oblast soil bonitet.

As a convenience in computations the mean oblast boaitet (962) was assign-
ed the value 100: and then the soil boaitet for each region is calculated
relative to the ohlust bonitet. These values are also used as an evalua-
tion of the region soil quality. In deriving evaluations of the climatic
condltluns we enter the mean long-term values for the depths of soil wett-
lng in spring (08") for each region and as an average for the oblsst and
then the overall evaluation of the state of winter crops in spring (on

the basis of data from a spring investigation), and the sum of negative
mean daily temperatures for winter for each region. Then we enter the sums
of actiVe temperatures and precipitation sums for the two mean long-term
periods: from renewal of the growing season to the curing of winter wheat
(first period) and from caring to golden ripeness (second period). For
each of the considered elements we find the mean oblast values, which are
assigned the value 1002, and these are used in computing the percentage
(evaluation) of each element for a specific administrative region.

The evaluations for the depth of soil wetting, the overall evaluation of
the state of winter crops in spriLg and the precipitation sum for the two
periods are assigned a "+" sign. because these elements, with their in-
crease, improve the conditions for growth and development of winter wheat
.uul Increase the formed wheat yield. The evaluations obtained from the
sum of negative mean daily temperatures during winter and the sum of ac-
tive temperatures for the periods from the renewal of the growing season
in raring and also from caring to golden ripeness are assigned a "-"

sign because with an increase in their absolute values they worsen winter-
ing conditions and the spring-summer development of winter wheat and in
the last analysis reduce crop yield.

After carrying out the computations the evaluations of all the elements

by administrative regions are algebraically summed and we obtain the sums
of the evaluations for all the agrometeorological (climatic) elements.
Having such sums of evaluations for all regions. we compute the mean long-
term sum of climatic evaluations for the oblast. It is assigned the value
1002 and it is used in computing the percentage (evaluation) for the sum of
climatic elements for each region. This is the mean climatic evaluation.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR HFPICIAL "SH oNLY

 

Fig. I. Soil-clinatic evaluation of conditions applicable to cultivation
of winter wheat in Roatovaknyo oblast.

The two evaluations -- the neon evaluation Fer soil bonitet and the mean
long-tern climatic evaluation -- are used in computing the mean long-tern
soll-cllnatic evaluation. lts distribution by the rayons in Rostovskaya

«min»: ls shown on the map (Fig. 1). It increases froa 60-601 in the
east to 90-1002 in the northwest and to 150-1602 in regions of the south-

(‘l’ll zone.

In our opinion. this method can be used in evaluating the conditions for
the cultivation of winter wheat in each nd-inistrative region of the ob-
last. it can also he used in evaluating the standards for agriculture for
the cultivation of winter wheat. For this purpose. using the mean long-tern
agroneteorological indices, employing our methods [1, 2]. for each region

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fl)" OFFICIAL USE ONLY

   
     
       

     

  

 
    

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

           

     

  

   

  

          

 

2. 8. 8 9 «.8 .l 2... 3. 8... :. . 8. . $33.1...an a
3 «a 3 3 So .I «No S. 3 8 S on . . «3.32.33»: h
R S 3 9 «3 I So 8 8n 3 B «a . . 222.25.: mm
3. 8. 3 9. as .I - s... 8. 3... z. 8. 8 . . 5.88:3...»
S 8 8 5 8 .SI «.5 I .5 .I 9» 8 8n 8 8 8 8 . ass-2.35552
2.. 9 8 9 . an .I an. :_I an El 8... 8 =8 3 2 S 8 . . «38....3
a... K. .2. 5 S 8 I 8... I .2 RI «.3 3 ea 8 2 z 3 . 36......55. Na
1.. S 8 3 S 8 I as 8 I .2 .I So a... 8n 3 8 2 8 . 338.83,. mm
E 8 3 3 3 2 .c.l ma 3 I .P. _:I So 8 .8 2 3 2 8 . . 3.625.:
a... R 3 u 8. 3 SI .3 .I 3“ :I E. 8. 5“ 8 3 8 8 26.....53223
.5 8. 8 8 8. on I 8.» 8 I R .2I 9n .2 2... 9.. 3 8 «a ca..u.......8=.§z
3, 3 8 a... .3 ﬂ - as . I an :l on. .2 an a 3 8 R . «5.2522
3. P. an 3 .2 a .I 8» 9| nu 3| 9o 8. 8». 8 9.. 3 «a . 53.525. on
P. a... on 3 .2 a .I .2 .I a» ........ as 3. En 3 8 8 3 . . 2.2.3.2 an
..... 9... o: 3 2. 8 El So . .I 93 5| «3 8 .3 u... 3. 8 8 «388......3‘ «a
a... a.» 8 2 8 3 .. 8.. a I nu RI 6: 3 8... 8 S 2 z . . 5.285.... mm
8 S 8. 3 2. 8 I .8 ET 8» 3| :2 8 .8 8. 8. 3 8 _ 23.2.“...
k G 3 no .2 z .I so 6 I Soﬁa... i 8 Sn 3 8 8 3 8383.35 mu
.5 P. 9.. S. 3. 3 3.I Sm I 8.. .EI 3“ 9.. :8 8 8 a... 3 _ . 2.5.3:: 3
II: I. I»
runny a.» .o. a... w as .w ﬁmmw m... can in: w... %
nwm 3.“. m... rm. w, mm. W... MI W; m m. -mm m. .5 u. m w” .m
In“ Inc ma_mmm ma um um w I: an“ I» an. -a c mm a an a
.113“ -m .uum m mum -.. mm "m “mm um mm um ma .. . U». u
mm“ m“ m" .u. m. :w u a” a .1.“ ma n.“ m mm m. up n
r. u I w N U W“ ' l I. 9 ' . I C
II.“ nm em ﬁve—m amenw .. “w Bow 3 «33“ um" aw : 3.. .n 3....
m w M m o I n o I .
m . w I I»::« an :32...» v
mun ”ﬁrm a 53.382. n :35..- ou a?!“ 505......» w«5.2.5.: nus-93; n
.2330 2:30 .02“! :33qu- nl’hu '233323 2.3.8 pa.— 3.5.0.5.
_ .3 0:33 no.1??? 3.5-0
_ CIISJ ailzhﬂila 2808 —

 

:38 33:23:08
mo 30an 03:33:33. an :25 ~35: new coda—Sugm uquwaquua

4 «Hana

Com Banana.— 562 we 5332—08
ONLY

 

FOR OFFICIAL US!-

  

waw}

 

 

 

 
 

"me

on uam'od: a t;

nutmn

oﬁ'purad: x t;

Illuamomw
...OV mmcnau
INN-“M01090! on 10

H
0

'Illlllo IIL‘VJJI-ﬂ l

-Imu~4-onuunon nunudg

O
0

H

-.__..—-——_

 
 

:13“qu lynno'cmu
ol’ Iunamol‘o'c m
mama» uououou
or quamoum m

     

     
  

  

_._.—-_.—.._ ———-_

(a) nun-muss mummnmwu

h 33.2.90... 2.. a»...
...—yuan... nag-.3... «...-s» 3.33.55...
.3 can:

...—396» uxnluoltlﬁoxsﬁx «3.8.0

rand—an:
o: noun-8 «...-nu

g on ammo undcm..\'3

0‘
d

 

 

 

at. “5—:
“w”. :- I
....v A. II
:3 F...

b...“ ...i. .-
13.36 I
~37. ..z

N“. .... I
...wh R

1a“ ....a.
. a
A“
. l...-
2..
.w
.n
....—

I.
[-
Illll:

9'
n
-

 

   

lull-"3|

   

 

 

 

mum: (3

«mm: and:

H

mm mu...
..m mm.
mm; am
.3 mm
«m o.
I.“

ﬂl

m lucdsuno;

053.... 0..

5.33832.

3.
a...

r.”

a...

......
.3
Z:
..5-
r...
....
.8

n:

3.
2:
2:
3.

I 3

'jh_—_—-

 

m6... 3. ho a... 3

an“ 0.. ... w... a...
. . 23.3.2: .3... a...
in R ...h :0. 3 . . c.2335”

in. u .... I a... ‘H . .....3.3..:......=:n

lgodo c:

c5335....”

.3... an .. .7. 8 . . «Eu-:55.
9A.. \. 2.. .3 .n €213.95...— _
:3 .4: .... ...); a: e.........o..o=n..v...=
2.. . =- . ... ...... .... . . .5326...
...u... n... . .... .. c.2255:
... u a: .. .2 .... 3 _ 34.15:}: _
.5.” u... . ......— ...c. n. _ ...}... ...... .....n. ....

_ 2.. _
u

.5” .ﬂ. =— ﬂ.“ 3.—
_

. . . 0:41.03.
33.. .... .... .... a... cane—.203. a... .3... on
an 3. 2: .... a: .
Sn 3. .2 ....— ...:
9.... n: a: .5. «N.—
..«o a: ...: an. r...
0:. . Z .2 a: N:
2... a... ...: a... ......

.N- n... on.

czauooESchx
2.3.33»? 633.34
. 2.88131»:

. «53.9.33...
23.3.3510

. . c3333.

. . assoc-8n

l g

    

 

  

  
    

   
 

   

 

         

nun ""0 $ 0' ‘
m mm m m m
m.» mm um um ...
m. m a mm, m
3“ .mw «W 2 S» m
«all-.3 d lnl
2:553 cc.— cnaoaua .—
3588 £5.85:
3.52.1.6 23.8.0

  

 

QM!” mvwwws

109

mceeeeee-v
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COHNMMB
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Table l

l. Region

2. Evaluation of climatic conditions

3. Evaluation of soil conditions

6. Depth of soil vetting

5. Overall evaluation of state of winter crops
h. Sun of negative temperntures during winter
7. Sum of active temperatures by periods

8. Sum of precipitation by periods

9. Soil bonitet

10. 2 of menu for ohlast
ii. nepth of soil wetting, cm

12. 2 of mean for oblast
13. Evaluation according to spring investigation
16. Z of mean for oblast

15. Sum of mean daily temperatures

l6. From renewal of growing season to caring

17. From earing to golden ripeness

18. Overall evaluation based on climatic conditions
I9. Hean soil-climatic evaluation

20. Veshenskiy 67. Azovskiy

2!. Verkhnedonskiy 48. Zernogrsdskiy
12. Chertkovskiy b9. Yegorlykskiy
23. Bokovskiy 50. Tselinskiy

2b. Hillerovskiy 51. Ssl'skiy

25. Kasharskiy 52. Peschsnokopskiy
26. anasovskiy 53. Proletarakiy
27. Knmenskiy 54. Orlovskiy

28. Krasnosulinskiy 55. Zimovnikovskiy
29. Belokalitvinskiy 56. Dubovskiy

30. Tutsinskiy S7. Renontnenskiy
31. Horozovskiy 58. Zavetinskiy
32. Mllyutinskiy 39. For oblsst

33. oblivskiy

34. Konstantinovskiy

35. Ust'-Donetskiy

36. Tsimlyanskiy

l7. Martynovskiy

38. Semikarakorskiy

l9. Bagayevskiy

60. Aksayskiy

Al. Oktynbr'akiy

62. Hyasnikovskiy

43. Nekllnovakiy

66. Hntveyevo-Kurganskly
b5. Kuybyshevskiy

46. Rodinn.-Nesvetayskiy

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
30R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we compute the mean yield of winter wheat. If the latter is higher than
the average computed value for the oblaat, these cultivation "standards"
for winter wheat in the regionrlre higher than the mean ohlast level. How-
evcr, il‘ the actual y1¢1d is lower than the computed value. these "stan-
dards" for the cultivation of winter wheat in the region are lower than
the average for the oblast.

The soichlimatic evaluation can be used in evaluating the cultivation
"standards" for winter wheat in a specific year.

Having the values of the parameters entering into the agrometeorologica!
evaluation, it is possible to evaluate the cultivation "standards" for
winter wheat in any rayon in the oblast under the conditions prevailing
In a specific year. For this purpose the computations of the rayon yields
are made using data for a specific year and are compared with the actual
yield for this same year. in the evaluation of agricultural "standards"
the mean long-term periods from the renewal of the growing season to

earing and from earlng to golden ripeness always remain constant - mean
long-term values for each administrative region.

The proposed method makes it possible to evaluate eomplexly the conditions
for the cultivation of winter wheat in each administrative region of the
oblast both for the long-term period and for a specific year and to determine

the level of agricultural "standards" relative to the mean oblast agricul-
tural "standards."

BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. Svisyuk, I. V., METODICHESKOYE UKAZANIYE P0 SOSTAVLENIYU DOLGOSROCHNYKH
PNIZVODSTVENNO-AGROI‘ETEOROLOCICHESKIKI! PROGNOZOV SREDNEY RAYONNOY
UROZHAYNOSTI OZIMOY PSBNITSY NA SEVERNOM KAVKAZE, NIZHNEM DONU, NIZHNEM
POVOLZH'YE (Methodological Instructions on Preparation of Long-Range
Production-Agrometeorological Forecasts of the Mean Rayon Yield of
winter Hheat in the Northern Caucasus, Lower Don, Lower Volga and Ros-
tov-on-Don Regions), Rostitdat. 1973, 42 pages.

3. Svisyuk. I. V., "Method for Predicting the Mean Rayon Yield of "inter
Wheat,“ SBORMIK TEZISOV DOKLADOV: SOVERSHENSTVOVANIYE METODOV PROGNOZOV
UROZHAYA ZERMOVYKM KUL'TUR (Collection of Summaries of Reports: Im-

provement of Methods for Predicting the Yield of Grain Crops), Moscow,
VDNKh, pp 48-50. 1977.

III

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.506.5

FORMING 0F ARCHIVES 0F OBSERVATIONAL DATA FOR THE FIRST GLOBAL
EXPERIMENT CARP

Hoscnu HETEOROLOGIYA t GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 88-94

[Article by 0. A. Aldukhov, All-Union Scientific Research Institute of ﬂy-
drometeorological Information-ﬂorid Data Center, submitted for publication
I? March 1978]

Abstract: The problem of the forming of
archives at the Ii-b level for the First
Global Experiment CARP, obtained from dif-
ferent territorial and specialized subcen-
ters. is described in terms of the theory
of sets. The article presents a method for
realizing the program of combining FGGE
archives in assembler language with applic-
ation of structural programming principles.

[Text] During 1978-1979 plans call for carrying out the First Global Bx-
periment (F668) under the CARP program. One of the objectives of the ex-
periment is the creation of the most complete archives of data from ordin-
ury and special observation systems. which can serve as a basis for the
testing of presently available and yet-to-be-developed numerical forecast-
lng models [7].

In accordance with the international plan for FGGE data control [1], the
Soviet Union in this experiment is to carry out the function of a number
of centers for the collection of data at the so-calleu II-b level, includ-
lng both data received at a real time scale and delayed data, including
the function of a data center for the collection and integration of synop-
tic and aernlogical data for the entire earth, received from the six ter-

ritorial and special subcenters (United States, Great Britain, Japan. Best
IIermany. USSR).

In order to carry out these functions it is necessary to create a set of

programs for integrating the archives obtained from the different subcen-

ters, their checking and reforming in accordance with the requirements of
the general FGGB format [7].

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The exchange of runs data among centers will he accomplished using 10-day
accumulations of data. He will denote by A5 (1 - 1.....6) the accumula-
tion of dntn [or the pnrrlculnr IOLdny period. obtained from the j-th ﬂuhr
center. For i’.] - l.....6 the elements of the AJ data accumulation are
the sets Pi (i - i,.... m 4600), each of which is entered on the magnetic
tape in the form of an in ividual tile. and

"I
A1 = 2 F{. (1)

III

For v.1. i the net F1, in turn. represents an ac umulation of data whose
elements are communications on the observations Rik (k - 1.....n11)

I"
Fl=fl+ 2 R1» (2)

1he set E.1 is the heading of the file P1. The file heading indicates:
a) ti is the date and the main synoptic observation time (0000, 0600. 1200,
1800 GMT), entered in the particular file;
h) dj is the number of the model, using which data are entered in the file
(at the present time eight models have been developed, one each for aero-
iogical, aircraft. meteorological and oceanographic observations, three
models for satellite observations and one model for observations of drift-
ing buoys:
c2 the vector§i - (Si 1,...,S'l ) (2‘7 and Si,r<51. “.1 for V r I l...
- l), which ndicates the types of data present in this file. All the
types of data planned for exchange during the F063 period are given in
Table i. As a rule. one type of data is entered into one file, but in a
number of cases data of similar types. such as oceanographic, can be com-
bined in one file.

For \Ij - l....,6 the sets (files) F1 (1 - 1.....mj) are orderly arranged
on a magnetic tape at three levels:

I) with respect to increase in t ;
2) with respect to increase in d
3) with respect to increase in S

for equal t 8
for equal t and equal di.

Une mass of A] data can be entered into several volumes of magnetic tape if
one volume is inadequate for its entry. In this case each volume of mag-
netic tapes is formed in such a way as if that part of the data accumula-
tion which is entered in it does in fact constitute the entire data accum-
ulation from the particular subcenter. The only requirement is that files
nf data having an identical date and main synoptic observation time not be
entered into different volumes of magnetic tapes.

For VJ, i, k the connunication Rik consists of the headin of the comma-

ication rihuand the meaningful part of the communication H k' The heading
Of the co nication contains the following characteristics: 81k is the

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5, 75, 76. 77

Radiosonde, rauin, pilot balloon

"ind, from ships outfitted with radars (THC
Hind, from ships outfitted with NAVAID syst
Prom instruments dropped from aircraft
From constant-level balloons

Aircraft (ASDAR. AIREP, CODAR, AIDS)

Visual and automatic from ground stations (
Sea meteorological from fixed and commercia
Sea meteorological from outfitted buoys
Satellite sounding

Satellite observations of cloudless sky
Satellite Hind observations

Satellite observations of cloud cover
Satellite measurements of sea surface tempe
Oceanographic

Drifting buoys
FOR ilFI-‘liillil. IISK "NLY

tyln- or data In the unmmnnivnlinn, N-[k In the latitude, ”{k is the (ringi-

lude of the place of observation. h-lk is the precine time of observation,
"ii: is the number of entries in the comunication.

The main part contains the values of the meteorological elements; the values
for pressure. temperature, humidity, wind direction and velocity must be
accompanied by quality control criteria.

The sequence of placement of comunieations Rik in each file Pi is determin-
ed:

1) by the increase in 10‘ latitude intervals from -90 to +90';

2) by the increase in 10' longitude intervals from 0 to 360° for equal lati-
tude intervals;

3) by the increase in bik - the observation time for equal 10' latitude in-
tervals and equal longitude intervals;

6) by the increase in the type of data for equal preceding criteria.

With a coincidence of the headings

(’i.‘ a. 2 ’ka

two communications are considered duplicates
(R11 1:. = Rib).

The presence of duplicated communications in the masses of data arriving

from the F662 territorial subcentera is determined by the very plan for the
control of FCGE data. since by agreement, each of the subcenters must col-
iect shipboard meteorological, aerological and aircraft observations arriv-
ing through the GS? channels from the entire earth. Due to the different
reliability of reception, different for different centers, and also due to
the different procedures for quality control in the territorial subcenters.
the meaningful parts of the communication can differ, despite the coincidence
of headings.

Ho um denote Um Ff: nF{f=0.

if for Vl-l.-ou I'l'v m-IIH-v 13!:

there is satisfaction of the condition. '
. ,:,+ng,,.
Otherwise Nani-2: q. 0.

Similarly Al'nAl’=0. if for \l p-l.'“' "'j. V 0‘-~-.mi:

there is satisfaction of the condition Fﬁ-nr{:=o.

Otherwise Al'- 0 A” 4. u.

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the F663 conditions, for t/ j - l....,6 the accumulation of data A3
cannot contain duplicated communications. that is, for V'il. iz - 1,...,
ml ([1 - [2) there must he satisfaction of the condition

FﬁnFZ-O.
liut. possibly, as was mentioned above, :3 11' 32 n 1,..., 6 (jl 1h 32) such
that
AllﬂAhql-o.

The task of the Data Center for Ground Systems is the creation of a full
mass of data for each 10-day period in the experiment on the basis of six
masses of data sent by the subcenters without duplicated communications.

We will denote by A the mass of all data for a given 10-day period, which
mutually unambiguously correspond to the observations carried out. Then

a . “- .
_ I: '_ n L
A_’l'J.A 2.4 {(4 0A! (3)
J” ..'<! .

Due to the considerable complication of the problem with an increase in
the number of data masses to be combined, it was decided to combine the
data accumulations in pairs. Despite_the almost double increase in the
need for computer time with such a sequence of work, the paired combina-
tion method has the following indisputable advantages:

- the program for combining the two data masses is considerably simpler than
the program for simultaneous combining of the six masses of data, it is more
flexible and it is possible to introduce local changes;

- it is known that the time of receipt of data masses from "subordinate"
subcentera will not be identical and the program for paired combining will
take it possible to begin this "combining" process prior to the receipt of
all data masses; -
-- the paired combining program requires the availability of three input-out-
put devices, whereas the program for combining six data masses would require
seven such devices.

Thus, we will examine the problem of combining two masses A1 and A2. In ac-
cordance with (3) we have

.4=Al+AI—A'nA==2F;+Ze—Zz‘wmet
p 0 pt (4)
Since the combined data mass must satisfy the P663 format, the sequence of

arrangement of files in the output volume of magnetic tapes must also sat-
isfy the above-mentioned "orderliness" levels.

The FCCE format for data registry is described in greater detail and more
formally in [1, 7].

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task of combining F663 data masses was carried out using a Yes-1022
electronic computer. The program was prepared in assembler language. In
developing-the program use war:- made of the principles of structural pro-
nraasnlngnin combination with the method of "top-down" programing [la-6, 9].

Structural programing is s programing method when the program is prepared
from structural elements of only the three following types (base structures):
-- sequential structure or enumeration; --

-- distribution structure or choice:

-- repetitive structure or repetition.

The most important and distinguishing peculiarity of the enumerated struc-
tures is the presence of a single control input and output point in them.
This rule must be satisfied for any combination of structures, that is, for
the entire program as a whole. In the structured program the relationships
between parts of the program are localized and ordered; this assumes pri-
mary importance when debugging the program and introducing changes [2, 3].

The essence of the ”top-down" programing method can be briefly suamarized
as follows. The first step is preparing the programing segment (the basis
of the future program) from symbolic names and propositions in the selected
programing language with a length of not more than 40-50 lines. This is
achieved by discriminating the most important (from the functional point

of view) sectors of the future program and substituting into the text of
the first interval the symbolic names of these sectors. In the second step
the first step aethod is applied to each of the defined functionally import-
ant sectors, that is, some plan of a sector of symbolic names and cot-ands,
etc. is applied to each of the defined functionally important sectors.

As a result, we obtain a hierarchical system of quite short segrents and
the upper-level segments are referenced to the lower-level segments. The

segments of the lowest level are already prepared completely in program-
ing language.

'lhe combining of the "top-down" programing method with structural programm-
ing means that each of the formed segments must satisfy the requirements of
structural programing, that is, the satisfaction of each segment begins
from the top (from the first operator of the cement) and ends at the bot-
tom (with the last operator) and there is no mans for entering it or
emerging from it by any other method.

The assembler language selected for developing the program for combining
the F668 data masses has a well-developed macrolanguage which is most suit-

able for realizing the hierarchical structure of the programs with the "top-
down" programing method.

however, it must be noted that the development of special macrodeterminstions
ls necessary for realizing basic structures in assembler language.

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Such a ancrodetermination was presented in [8]. but it is inapplicable In the
processing system of the Yes electronic computer, and the deVelopment of
similar nacrodeterninationa by oneself is quite tine-consuming. Therefore.
the basic structures were realized with use of co—ands of conditional and
unconditional control transmissions. Although this is a violation of struc-
loral programing in its pure form. the very fact of construction of the
program from three bauiv structures in very useful. since it leads to a
ronsiderahle ordering of the logic of the prograu and facilitates under-
:ztandlng of the program.

The result of the first step in the program for coshining two data masses is
recorded on magnetic tape in the F663 format with the exclusion of duplic-
ated cox-unicstiuns and registry of the combined mass into sagnetic tape
values In the F663 format. that is, the actual program itself has the fol-
lowing form:

I) SECOND BEGIN

 

 

'2) CLEARANG

ll) I)0\\'IIILE EQU ‘
4) FOREOV
5) ANALISIS SIGN
6) IF SIGN-(I) TIIEN MERGE
7) II: SIGN- I TIIEN FILE ONE
8) II' SIGN- 2 THEN FILE TWO
9) ENDWI-IILE DOWI-IILE

10) _ ENDWORK SECOND

II) EOVOUT UNLOAD OUT

I2) SETNEW OUT

I3) SETINPUT

I4) I3 DOWHILE

Propositions 1-10 correspond to segponto which deter-inc:
I) standard heading ("cap") of any program in assembler language;
2) Initial forming of the volumes of sagnetic tapes. printing of the
heading of the process ng fore and obtaining the first record-headings f
and ff of the files I“ l and t? (11 - 12 - i):
I) colicncesent of cycle of containing of data masses;
I.) storage of the numbers of the input and output files from which the new
nix-hour data blocks begin;

output of the processing forss nag analysis of the headings (£1 a

12

'I
r%2 of the two input files F11 and t‘ . me parameters t].1 and t 2. d“

and (If . S} and *8; are compared; a coincidence of all three parameters
means ghat flue two Input files must be cosbined into one file;

i») the combining (in the case of coincidence of the parameters t, d and §)
of the two files F11 and Ffz into a single file with the exclusion of

ulupl leated COIIIIIII icat ions;

7)-8) registry of the file Fh or t‘fz on the output tape;

1
11

II8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Piili inI‘IGIM. "SI-Z "NLY

'))-10) analysis at the end of the cycle of combining of the data mass and

termination of processing -- final forming of the magnetic tape output-"vol-
Ill'll'o

Propositions 11-13 are for processing e situation when for registry of a
combined data mass it is not sufficient to have one magnetic tape volume

alone and it is necessary to esploy an additional voluse for the output
data mass.

All the segments whose names were used in the main segment of the program.
cited aboVe. other than the segment designated MERGE. have 1-2 more levels
in depth and are quite simple. The MERGE segment, which is for the combin-
ing of the two data files into one, is more complex and its depth is mens-
ureul with six levels. we will cite an example of the MERGE segment:

i) MACRO

2) MERGE

3) ill-ZADER

4) DOWIIILER IEQU‘

5) SOLUTION PRIS

6) [F PRlS-® THEN QUALICON
7) [F PRiS-l THEN REPORT ONE
8) IF PRlS-2 TIIEN REPORT TWO
9) FINISH DOWiilLER

IO) OFORMIT

ll) NEXTFILE

l2) MEND

Ilcro proposition 1 is the heading of the nacrodeteroinstion; proposition 2
-- a prototype of a macrocomand -- determines the symbolic none of the par-
ticular segment.

Proposition 3 corresponds to a segment which creates the heading of the file
obtained with the combining of two input files and introduces the headings

r k and r of the first (It - k . l) comuunieations R k and
i I k 1 2 1
'a 2 kg- Proposition 6 serves an the connencement of the cycle of combin-

ing or two files into one. After one passage of the part of the program cor-

responding to this cycle (propositions 6-9) there is a changeover to the
next communication in one of the combined files or in both.

Proposition 5 corresponds to the so at for carrying out a cosparstive an-
.Ilysis of the headings r} In and r12 kg of the comunications R 1 1:1 and
Rf: k3. An analysis is Isa e of the parameters ah. «1", ”iv 1) 10 present
in the hearing of each cousunlcation. Depending on which of the two conun-
ications R 1 ii; and sz k2 is preferable to be registered first, the Pius

criterion is assigned the value 1 or 2. If the sbove-oeationed criteria are
inadequate for a solution (this means that the communications are duplicat-
ed). the rats criterion is assigned the value ,0 .

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL "SH ONLY
Table 2

"rights for Rollnhlllty Criteria

Value or reliability Description Weight
criterion
0 No checking 3
1 Correct value 5
2 Questionable value 2
3 Brroneous value 0
6 Value changed in
checking process 1

 

Proposition 6 corresponds to the segment which with a value of the rats cri-
terion equal to 90 a comparatch analysis is made of the communications

R k and a} k . The analysis is made on the basis of the quality con-
trdl driteriazior the principal elements in the crunrrnication supplied

hy the territorial suhccntcrs. Each quality control criterion is assigned
some weight (Tahle 2).

"sin" a recoding comaand (TR) each control criterion encountered in a par-

ticular communication is converted into the co responding weight and the
total weight of the particular communication Pik is determined (segment
QUALICON). in this same segment there is a cosparison of the total weights
"i1 k1 and Pi: k; of the communications all R1 and R;2 k2.

if Pil “l < P? k2. then the Pats c iterion is assigned the value 2 and
there is a reading of the heading r; k of the next (k1 . k1 + 1) com-
munication R} k1 (that is, the worsi oi the duplicated communications is
omitted). "solver. if P} k > Pi: kzv the PRIS criterion is assigned the
value and we read the heading r22 R2 of the next (R: I R; + l) cos-unico-
tion “#2 st

Proposition 7 corresponds to a segment which (if the value of the R15 cri-
terion is equal to l) accomplishes registry of the cornunication R R1
into the combined file and then the input of the heading ril kl of ihe

nest (kl - *1 + l)-th communication 311 kl.

Proposition 8 corresponds to a segment which (if the PRIS criterion value
is equal to 2) performs the same operations as the segment in proposition
7, but with respect to the com-unication 322 R2-

Propositions 9-ll correspond to the segments which perform an analysis at
the end of the cycle of combining of files. finalize the combined file

in accordance with the requirements of the F668 forest. and accomplish
ihe input or the headings of the next files in both input data sssses.
Proposition 12 is the end of the macrodeternination. determining the seg-
ment.

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l1um. although the une ol' anaembler language in thin ptogram did not make
It poaalhlo to create a fully utructured program. the application or the
:ctrueturod programing principle in organizing the program was extrelely-
nuel‘ul In the debugging ntage In the program and the introduction of
changes (canned primarily by chaugen in the mar: format) and made it poe-
:Iibie to reduce the time required for debugging of the program and making
preparations for the PGGF. test period.

The program wan used for combining the masses of test data receiVed from
the United States. Sweden, Great Britain and Japan and prepared in Soviet
l-‘GGE centers.

The time for operation of the program with the merging of two magnetic tapes
with 10-day data masses in about 30 minutes.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Aksarin. N. N.. Mynch. L. 'i‘.. "Data Collection in the First Global Ex-

periment CARP." HHTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and hydrology).
No I, pp 9lo-l03. I978.

'.'. llilknn, s. N., Haulyuk. G. r.. "Structural Programing." PROGRMNIRO-
VANIYH (Programing). No 6. pp 123-131. 1976.

l. (:eraslmenko, V. A.. "Basic Principles of Structural Programing."

ZARUIIBZIINAYA RADIOEl.i-:KTRONIKA (Foreign Radioeiectronica). No 11. pp
3-10. 1976.

4. Dahl. U” Dykstrn, 8., ﬂoor. 6.. STRUKTURNOYE PROGRNMIROVANIYE (Struc-
tural Programing), Roscow, "Mir." 1975, 21.5 pages.

5. llills, ll. 0.. "Top-Down Programing of Large Systems." SRi-ZDSTVA O‘I'LAD-
Kl BOL'SIIIKII SIS‘i'l'IH (Means for Debugging Large Systems), edited by
Rastin. Moscow. Statistika, 1977. 135 pages.

6. lloltoa. Y.. Rryan, 8.. "Structured Too-hm" Flow Charting." DATMATION.
No 5, pp 80-84. 1975.

7. INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL DATA PROCESSING srsm PLAN 1'0 SUPPORT 1118 F665,
WHO. No 669. 1977, 73 pages.

ll. Ricks. 6.. "Structured Programing in Mae-bier Language," DATANATION.
No 7. pp 79-82. 1976.

9. Yourdan. 8.. "linking the Move to Structured Programming." DATAHATION.
No 6, pp 52-56, I975.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.463681.03.06

AUTOMATION OP COLLECTION. PROCESSING AND ANALYSIS OF OCBANOGRAPNIC

INFORMATION ON THE BASIS OF SMALL ELECTRONIC COHPHTERS

Moscow HETROROLOGIYA i GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 95-98

[Article by V. A. Volkov. Yu. A. Grodetukiy and V. V. Lukin. Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research institute, submitted for publication 6 Jan-
uary [978]

Abstract: The authors examine the basic prin-
ciples for the routine processing. systematic-
ing and analysis of information on the basis

of small electronic cosputers under expedition-
ary conditions corresponding to the present-day
nature of oceanographic research and the sodern
rcquirenantts on data processing. The article
gives the procedures for use of small prograslr
able electronic keyboard computers (FEKC) as
the basis for computation centers for exped-
itions not having large electronic computers.
There is emphasis on the desirability of using
PEKc for automating the collection and primary
processing of data on scientific research ves-
sels outfitted with large computers. The at-
ticle also gives an analysis of experience in
operation of a computer complex on the basis of
the "Iskra-lZS" PEKC on the high-latitude air
expeditions ”Sever" of the Arctic and Antarctic
Scientific Research institute of the Main Adsin-
istration of the Hydrometeorologicsl Service.

ITextl Oceanographic investigations long ago ceased to have a purely geo-
graphical, descriptive character. Nov purposeful investigations are being
Inade of the lava of physical processes transpiring in the voters of the
world ocean. Recently the investigations assumed exceptionally greater
scales, which is attributable to the ever-increasing importance of the

ocean and its resources for man's economic activity.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFlClAL USE ONLY *

Oceanographic expeditions are very diversified in their objectives. the
personnel employed and the equipment used. in addition to purely scien-
tific objectives. problems of a practical nature are being formulated

and solved. such as the collection of hydrometeorologicai information

for prognostic purposes. planning and research work and the quest for fish.
Major experiments at sea have now become commonplace; they cover relative-
iy large but localized ocean areas (these expeditions: Atlantic Hydrophys-
lcal Polygon-70. TROPEKS-76. POLBKS-Sever-76. POLIHODB and others). Such
investigations are no longer being carried out by individual scientific
research ships. but by detachments of ships. frequently belonging to dif-
ferent departments or even different countries.

Oceanologists are turning more and more to investigations of fine hydro-
logical structures. small-scale interaction between the ocean and the at-
mosphere. which requires the development and use of self-contained low-in-
ertia measuring apparatus giving a considerably greater flow of informa-
tion than ordinary instruments.

Thus. the volume of information obtained on a modern oceanographic expedi-
lioo is undeviatlngly increasing and researchers are being faced with the
problem of its processing. the solution of which is impossible without the
use of computers. The processing of observational data must be carried out
routinely. which is dictated, first of all. by the necessity of transmis-
sion of data for the forecasting services: second. by the necessity in a
number of cases to introduce corrections into the research program as re-
sults are obtained, that is. carry out so-called "controllable experi-
nests.“ which corresponds to a purposeful nature of present-day research
in the ocean. At the same time. routine processing makes possible a con-
stant monitoring of the quality of observational data.

The processing of the information collected on an expedition can be divid—
ed into three types: primary processing. systemstisation of observational
data. analysis.

The primary processing of observational data can be reduced essentially to
computations and introduction into the instrument readings of all possible
corrections -- with the use of traditional (nonsutomatic) measurement in-
lruments and methods which at the output yield an electric signal -- and
also a conversion of coded data into the generally employed form. In the
second case the problem also arises of compression of information at a
real time scale.

Until now the systematizing of data has involved the compilation of differ-
ent specialized and composite tables. Now. when virtually all types of
oceanographic information are being subjected to analysis on electronic
computers. the collected information must be incorporated on a computer
carrier (punched tape. magnetic tape) and it would be natural, parallel
with forming these tables. to create archives of bydrometeorologicsl data
on a carrier suitable for input into an electronic computer. The systemat-

lzatioa also includes the process of sorting of data and preparation of all
possible intermediate and sample files.

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U58 ONLY

1hc final form of data processing in analysis. The specific forms of an-
nlysla are determined by the researcher himself in accordance with the
purposes of the experiment. This class of problems is the most diversif-
led.

1hus, the systematizlng of material in the logical ending of primary
processing and is the basis for analytical computations. it is necessary
to he guided by this thesis in formulating principles for the mathemat-
ical support or systems for the automated processing of observational
data using electron computers.

The hydrometeorological Service system has already acquired definite ex-
perience in the use of electronic computers under expeditionary condi-
tions on large scientific research vessels on which intermediate-class
electronic computers of the "Ninak-JZ," Yes-1022 and other types have
been installed. The application of this experience to oceanographic ex-
peditious based on small and intermediate ships (and they are the great
majority -- several hundreds), drifting stations. etc. is not feasible
and frequently it is simply impossible due to unwieldiness. expense and
complexity in operation of the mentioned machines.

As is well known, there are also electronic computers of a smaller site.
?he first computers. later given the name "minicomputers." were the POP-S
and POP-8 computers produced by the American 086 company. appearing in

I963 and 1965 respectively. The idea of a minicomputer is very simple:

in these instruments there is a programmed performance of all elementary
transformations of data in an arithmetical-logic device, in the last anal-
ysis performing some operation. Such an approach made possible a marked
reduction in the site and cost of the electronic computers (although at

the expense of some qualities - speed. volume of the directly addressable
memory). In a whole series of cases it has proven justifiable to place such
an electronic computer at the disposal of an individual laboratory or
scientist. Hinicomputers have come into extensive use in scientific experi-
ments and in the control of production. The best known modern computers of
this class in the USSR are the ﬂ-6000 and H.500, and abroad -- the DEC
family of computers POP-ll.

Further improvement in the technology of components and new ideas in the
architectural designing of electronic computers have led to the appear-
ance of minicomputers. with respect to their size being virtually personal
table-top machines for the researcher and having considerable functional
rapahl l lty.

Among these computers we can mention those which can arbitrarily be called
program-controllable electronic keyboard computers (PEKC). Their character-
istlc peculiarities are the form of storage of the programs in the opera-
tional memory unit (0N0).-

As is well known. the usual sequence for carrying out a program involves

lts introduction into an electronic computer in some initial high-level
language. such as FORTRAN. its translation into an objective code --

124

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE nNLY

the program in a computer code and work with the resulting program. Such
a method makes it possible to obtain an effective program. but requires
the availability of a large-volume memory unit for holding the program- .
translator. Additional mathematical support is required for debugging the
program in computer codes.

A different principle is used in PEKC. In the PBKC OHU the program is stor-
ed in the initial language and the program is carried out by means of suc-
resalVe interpretation of the operators. The program for the interpreter

is stored together with the other controlling programs in the permanent
memory unit (PHU).

As a result. the PEKC is very simple and convenient to use. It is ready for
operation immediately upon being turned on and does not require initial
warmup. The programming for it is not complex since its input language is

a high-level language. The debugging of the programs is very simple because
the PEKC is provided with a display on which it is possible to indicate the
program. places where there are malfunctions or stoppages. and the editing
is accomplished directly from the computer keyboard by checking the text of
the program on the display screen. With a PEKC provision is usually made
for the attachment of a large array of external devices. In addition, the
PHKC can perform the function of automated collection of information by con-
necting measuring instruments to it. Such an approach reflects the modern
lrends in the construction of measurement complexes as programming-instru-
ment complexes.

Among the foreign PEKC it is possible to mention. for example. the Hang-2200
and the very high-capacity leoSlOO. In the Soviet Union the "Iskra-lZS"
PEKC is being produced, the "lskra-1256" is being made ready for produc-
tion and the four-program "lskra-126" has been developed.

it is easy to see that this modification of the minicomputer is the most
successful and universal means for automating the processing of observation-
al data under erpeditionary conditions. Precisely PEKC, having a consider-
able computer capacity and making it possible to create complexes with a
«rent number of external devices, have, despite a small size. a quite high
degree of operability and a maximum simplicity in servicing; the progralmh
lag system is simple and graphic.

us the basis of the analysis which has been made of the problems facing
nceanographlc detachments and the experience now available in the opera-
tion of PEKC, it is possible to determine precisely the complex of appar-
atus for an expeditionary computation center and the characteristics of in-
dividual apparatuses.

In addition to the PEKC. the complex must include:
-- an alphabetical-digital input-output printer with a wide carriage;
-- 1-2 memory devices with direct access - storage on magnetic disks;

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IIH-‘ICMI. llSli (WIN

-- 2-3 memory devices with consecutive access ~- cassette storage units on
nmgnetic tape (KNHL);

-- curve plotter;

-- punch tape equipment - punchet and photoinpnt;

-- matching devices with research instrumentation.

The printout unlt ls intended hath For dialogue control and monitoring of
problems and also for the input-output of the computation results. The
length of a line for the printout unit must not be less than 65-70 symbols
in order that there be a possibility of printout of standard oceanographic
documents. such as the TON-3H table (by parts), Rah-6 and other tables. At
the present time the most reliable device of such a type, despite the fact
that it is outmoded. is the teletype.

The presence in the apparatus of storage units with direct access is neces-

sary for the storage of programs and reference data, such as instrument cer-
tlfirates. The use or such storage units removes the restrictions imposed

by the small volume of the PEKC OMU. The most suitable with respect to size,
vest and speed of exchange of information are elements of the type of stor-

nge units on flexible magnetic tapes.

Hagnetic tape storage elements are intended for the organization and stor-
age of data archives. Among the tape elements. cassette storage elements

are the most compact and reliable and the most suitable for expeditionary
conditions. The mentioned number of units (2-3) is necessary for the sorting
of information, the preparation of intermediate and sample files.

The purpose of the curve plotter is obvious - representation of the results
of individual observations or computations in graphic form.

Punch tape devices must be reserve equipment for the input and output of in-
formation and also are used for the input of data prepared. for example, in
such a widely used apparatus as the teletype.

In order to control the mentioned complex of apparatuses effectively and
carry out computations. the PBKC must have an OHU volume of about 2-8 kb
and a speed of about 103 operations per second. It is desirable that there
he an "interruption" system and a channel for direct access to the memory
for speeding up its loading. The operation of the PBKC with its external
devices must be supplied with input language microprogramming operators.

At the present time Soviet-produced PBKC do not meet all the mentioned re-
quirements simultaneously, but the "Iskra-1256" PEKC. whose production is
beginning in 1978, already makes it possible to create an expeditionary
computer complex in full volume. The brief specifications of this computer
are as follows: volume of 0H0 - 6 hb; input language -- BEYSIK (Basic);
interruption -- present; display - television (8 lines with 32 symbols

each); built-in KNHL -- present; direct access channel - present; dimen-
sions - 680 x 520 x 400 am: mass - 39 kg.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'“7 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he effectiveness or the computation systems is determined not only by
im-leﬂuﬂvalupmﬂrhmlhmurﬁ Hm nmuwuhm.lml:ﬂsoiw Uu'HNHWMWP
inn 'mmmrl .

1he architecture of programming support, that is. the logical tie-in,
Interaction and some standardized formulation of programs. must reflect
its end purpose. Among the architectural peculiarities of the set of
oceanographic programs we must include: "

-- tie-in of the programs to the archives.

-- nondependence of the programs for the processing of primary information
on the form of its input and the type of the carrier.

-- noodependence of the data processing programs on the output programs.
-- monitoring of the implementation of tasks in a dialogue regime through
the dispatcher's panel.

The first point is the most important because the purpose of all oceano-
graphic expeditions in the collection of information on some region and

an archives of the results of observations stored on any technical carrier
is the object and essence of virtually all programs. The presence of
specialized detachments on any expedition and the singularity of determin-
ation methods results in a nonuniformity of the receipt of the results

for individual elements at the computation center and therefore the op-
timization or organization of archives for facilitating access to individ-
ual elements of the formed files and the availability of sorting programs
are a mandatory condition for the effectiveness of all programming support.

The requirement [or a nondependence of the processing programs on input-
nutput programs is making it possible to limit the number of modifications
of one and the some programs and is increasing their quality at the struc-
turai level.

The use of a dialogue regime for monitoring and controlling tasks will make
it possible to avoid excess manipulations with the PEKC keyboards and makes
the control process simple and graphic. This is very important because un-
der expeditionary conditions at times it is necessary to use specialists
who do not have special training as operators.

At the present time, specialists at the Arctic and Antarctic Institute have
already accumulated definite positive experience in the automation of ex-
peditionary Oceanographic uork using PEKC. Such work has been carried out
at the institute since 1975. when a computation center for the processing
of observational data on the basis of two "Blektronika-SSO" minicomputers
functioned on the high-latitude aerial expedition "Sever-27." During sub-
sequent years work on automation received further development. Computation

complexes were created on the basis of the more powerful and modern model
of the "iskra-l25" PEKC.

The inclusion in the standard outfit of the "lskra-lZSl" of an additional
"magazine-type" unit for storage on magnetic tape, a teletype. a two-coor-
dinate curve plotter (LKD-é) and also FS-lSOl, PL-80 punched-tape input

127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and output devices. although it was necessary to develop devices for a
link-up with the PEKC itself. to a considerable degree there was a broad-
vnlng or the capabilities or the coaputer complex.

For this complex the specialists at the computation center and in the ocean-
uiogy division of the Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute
have created a set of purposeful and systems programs. The purposeful
programs cover the primary processing of all standard types of deep-water
hydrological and hydrachemical observations with the simultaneous plotting
of information on a technical carrier (magnetic tape. punched tape) and

with a printout, by means of teletype, on specially developed report forms
close to those generally adopted (ROM-6, Kan-9, etc.); systematisation, out-
put of systematised material in the form t? "hard copies" to the teletype
(TOM-3M table) and also some forms of analysis: T-S classification of

water masses. computations of their heat content. calculation of circula-
tion of waters by the dynamic method. calculation of vertical stability

of waters and elements of autumn-winter convection, calculations of the
speed of sound, etc.

The availability of means for clearing the 0H" of the PBKC and the possib-
ility of segment-by-segment loading of the programs from the external stor-
age units (KNHL [storage on magnetic tape]. photoinput) made it possible

to formulate programs considerably exceeding the volume of the PEKC 0H0.
Thus, the program for cosputations and printout of the TOM-3N table has

a length of 7,000 elements with the GNU volume in the PBKc having only 876
elements.

The need for systemic programs arose due to the use of nonstandard exter-
nal devices not ensured with microprogramming input language operators,
and also for convenience in checking and sorting the information recorded
on the magnetic tape.

The monitoring of the programs is accomplished in a dialogue regime by
means of teletype. Provision is made for checking the correctness of data
input. Operation of the computer complex demonstrated its high effective-
ness and reliability. The work productivity in processing of observational
data increased by three or four times.

The specifics of operation of the high-latitude aerial expedition "Sever,"
carrying out an oceanographic survey of the Arctic Ocean, was such that
the site of basing of the expeditionary computation center (sec) frequent-
ly changes. This results in a repeated repacking of equipment and prolonged
aerial transport. For example. during two months of work in the spring of
I977 the sec operated at five different Arctic points. including the drift-

ing station "Severnyy Polyus-ZZ," covering a path in the air of about 20,000
km.

rho positlvv results of operation of the Ecc on the "Sever" expeditions
were obtained under conditions which evidently are the most severe of all

those which can be encountered on any oceanographic expeditions. This also

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY 9'

vonflrmu the point expressed in this article that it is necessary to
vonﬁtIUCt expeditionary computation centers on the basis of PEKC and on
the effectiveness of the proposed architecture of the complex and its
programmed support.

in conclusion it should be noted that the described computer complexes
should be used for monitoring the collection, primary processing and sys-
tesntizing of observational data and also on scientific research vessels out-
fitted with large computers. in each of the detachments, assigning to the
large electronic computer the function of analysis and the higher system-
atization stages. This makes the entire system for collection. processing,

systematixation and analysis more reliable, flexible and universal and
simplifies its operational system.

129

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.509.3110

METHODS OF IMAGE RECOGNITION THEORY IN FROBLBNS INVOLVING ANALYSIS AND
PREDICTION OF WTEOROLOGICAL FIELDS

Moscow MBTBORDLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 99-105

[Article by Candidate of Physical and Hathamatical Sciences Yu. V. Semen-

ovskiy. Central Aerological Observatory. submitted for publication 31
May 1978]

Abstract: The article describes a method for
the analysis and prediction of meteorological
fields based on the ideas of the theory of
image recognition. A new version of the rec-
ognition method is given. The axiomatica of

a universal classifier is given and a numer-
ical algorithm of the classification has been
developed.

[Text] Introduction. The image recognition theory methods intensively
developing during the last decade are now also beginning to penetrate
into meteorology. It is sufficient to mention the work cycles carried

out at the Central Asian Regional Scientific Research Hydrometeorological
Institute under the direction of G. V. Grace and at the Hydrometeorolog—
ical Center under the direction of N. A. Bagrov. The attractiveness of
these methods is attributable to the fact that they are a natural general-
lzation of statistical methods in the problem of extracting the maximum
information from meteorological archives and therefore they are a conven-
ient and at the same time an exceptionally effective method for the anal-
ysis and prediction of meteorological fields. It is no secret that the
actually used long-range forecasting methods are in essence synoptic-
statistical methods. Therefore. the possibility of increasing the effect-
lveness of synoptic-statistical forecasting methods is the chief premise
for employing image recognition methods.

Another peculiarity of image recognition theory methods is that they con-

stitute a mathematical approach for the formalization of synoptic methods.
for objective search for and analysis of the natural states of the atmo-

sphere. It therefore seems that recognition methods will help in closing

the gap between synoptic-statistical methods, on the one hand, and numer-
ical hydrodynamic modeling, on the other.

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6|"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The problem of the maximum use of already available meteorological inform-
ation for analysis and prediction has two sides. The first side is tech-
nical. This is the creation of a general meteorological archives on com-
puter carriers, special meteorological archives, the theory of represent-
ation of meteorological fields. systemic complexes of programs for h-Ih
exploitation and retrieval. The second side of the problem is in the es;

aence of the methods used in data processing and their effectiveness inw
computations.

In thls study we give the general outlines of a method based on the ideas
of image recognition theory, making it possible. in the author's opinion.
to make appreciable advances in the effective use of the meteorological
prehistory for the purposes of analysis and prediction of meteorological
fields. In addition to the term "recognition." we will use the narrower
terms "grouping" or "classification."

'nte principal premises of the method are as follows:

1. Existing statistical methods for the analysis and prediction of meteor-
ological fields contain very strong assumptions concerning the statistical
nature of the processes. Therefore, the optimum method must not encumber

the statistical structure with data, but must reveal this internal struc-
rare.

2. The method must be based on a clear general mathematical axiomatics, be
quite flexible and allow variations. The number of axioms and undetermined
parameters must be minimum.

3. The method must allot a tie-in to hydrodynamic models.
6. The method must have a high computation effectiveness.

These diverse requirements also led to the well-developed approach of image

recognition theo'y or (more narrowly) a machine classification. Otherwise
this nwthod is known as learning without a teacher, grouping, etc. The de-

vice (computation program) for effectuating these methods is called the
classifier of the objects. In application to weather forecasting, the general
formulation of the problem is beyond the limits of machine classification

and constitutes the following chain of problems.

Representation-Classification-Prediction

The first stage involves an effective description of the specific states of
the atmosphere in the form of criterial vectors. In the second stage. class-
ification, on which the emphasis is placed in this study, there is a break-
down of the sample of the criterial vectors into classes, the internal
structure of the sample is thereby determined, and the data are analyzed.

The third stage, prediction, operates with the statistics of causal-tempor-
al transitions between classes.

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principal physical idea of the method can be summarised as follows:

”The representative sample of states of the atmosphere is a set of inhomo-
goncouu point sets. which. differing in internal structure. form noninter-
secting classes."

This assertion is in essence the hypothesis of the existence of stable
meteorological states (classes) in the atmosphere. The available series of
evidences in support of this hypothesis (for example. see [6. 7]) is still
not decisive. The final objective answer can be obtained only on the basis
of a machine classification of a representative sample of meteorological
states of the atmosphere.

Now we will proceed to a detailed exposition of the principal stages in the
proposed method.

Representation

This stage in the method is essentially clear. The procedures for recon-
structing the fields of meteorological elements on the basis of data from
point measurements (objective analysis) have been well developed. These are
the methods of generalized Fourier series. in accordance with the continuous
fields giving the vector of the Pourier coefficients: sometimes expansions
in natural orthogonal functions. etc. are used. This means that the repre-
sentation problem is solved if the representation axiom (RA) is stipulated.

RA: There is a rule R establishing a correspondence between the continuous
(field) description of the state of the atmosphere at a specific moment (or
in a specific period) in time and the discrete criterial vector 5 - [xx] .
Thereby the inverse rule R'1 has been determined and exists: this makes it
possible. using the 1 vector, to reconstruct the initial state of the atmo-
sphere.

But in the practical application of representation methods, especially for
the representation of three-dimensional global fields of meteorological ele-
Iaents, the effectiveness of representation, that is, the information content
of components of the 7 vector, begins to play a highly important role. The
well-known "curse of large dimensionalities” has the result that many well-
developed methods are forced to yield before the access ty for operating
with objects whose dimensionality is of the order of 10 . In light of what
has been said it is clear that pure computer technology, based on specific
algorithms. has unquestionable advantages. As an example, we point out [6]
that programs classifying objects with a dimensionality of about a hundred
or more are already successfully functioning.

in order to increase the effectiveness of representation. that is, for re-
ducing the dimensionality of 31there are special methods. such as, for ex-

ample. the correlation-regression method. image recognition theory methods.
and others [1].

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proveduruu Much as the use or meteorological standards as been functions
can he proposed (or testing; these are specific for meteorology. Meteor-
ological standards can be obtained formally on the basis of image recog-
nition theory, but it is simpler to use a small number of stylieetions of
typical synoptic processes already firmly established in meteorological
practice (for example. ”cyclone." "center of action." "planetary wave,"
ctCs)o

it can also be useful to apply the physically clear parameterisation_pro-
cedure similar to the way in which it is used in numerical hydrodynamic
forecasting models. The higher Fourier harmonics of the field expansions
are averaged either over the entire wave spectrum or in its parts and this
(one or more) averaged parameter is included in the vector of criteria
characterizing field mesostructure.

Here it is fitting to mention still another characteristic feature of rep-
resentation for the purposes of long-range forecasting. The rule R must
evidently describe only the ”principal," “planetary" characteristics of
meteorological fields. and the small-scale processes must be parameteriz-
ed. in addition. it is useful to include additional components in the vec-
tor of criteria which a priori can represent some prognostic value. These
almost undoubtedly should be nonediabatic factors; they can be the para-
meters of solar activity, the characteristics of the world ocean. etc.
Therefore. the representation of R, on the one hand. is somewhat less in-
formative thsn the initial fields due to the “coarsening" of the descrip-
tion of mesoscale phenomena. but, on the other hand, it contains additional
information.

In summarizing what has been said. it must be concluded that there are no
general "formulas" for selecting an effective representation. The specific
form of the initial data, together with the specific formulation of the
long-range forecasting problem. should themselves determine the optimum
combination of the approaches enumerated above. It remains only to assert.
proceeding on the basis of the simplest evaluations. that the dimensional-
ity of the vector of criteria. with different degrees of effectiveness of
representation of three-dimensional meteorological fields. falls in the
range from fifty to several hundreds. which makes the meaningful problem of
long-range forecasting entirely realizable for computer analysis methods.

Classification

The idea of using classification for the purposes of analysis and predic-
tion of meteorological fields is not new. Approaches which are extremely
close in essence are the prediction methods based on analogues, investiga-
tions operating with such concepts as rhythm. natural synoptic season. etc.
These studies are associated with the names N. A. Aristov. N. A. Bsgrov.

U. V. crusa, N. I. Zverev. A. L. Rats. S. T. Psgsva. D. A. Ped' and many
other well-known meteorologists. As a result. that which is presented be-
low must be regarded simply as a mathematical realization in most part of

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

already known ideas. as an effective computation tool making it possible to
realise these ideas for a meaningful planetary prognostic problem on the
basis of representative meteorological archives. It can be hoped. to be
sure. that the use of this new computation technique will also lend to
qualitatively new results. but this is a matter of the future.

:bw we will proceed to classification. we will assume that the represent-
ation problem is soIVed. He have a set of vectors of state (criterial vec-
tors) -- a sample. Each vector ﬂk, in accordance with the R representation.
corresponds to the state of the atmosphere at a definite moment (in a def-
lnltc period) in time. The volume of the sample is H. the dimensionality
of the vectors is h. The components xIn of the vector 3; are identically
informative up to the classification procedure. For this the criteria xn
of the vector i are normalized and centered. so that the dispersion of all
the criteria in the sample is equal to l and the mathematical expectation
is equal to 0. This procedure is not mandatory. but is convenient, if a
universal classification is proposed.

Definition 1. The classifier is said to be universal if its axiomatics does
not contain assertions concerning the nature. structure or peculiarities
of the teaching sample of data.

The sample in represents points in sample space D with the dimensionality N.
The first axiomatic classification. naturally. is the axiom of the metrics
A-I.

A-[. A rule is established which in accordance with the indicated pertinent
vectors R.. ‘5 determines the nonnegstive value [0 (x1, i3) -- the distance

between the points satisfying the triangle inequality.

There is a great diversity of the metrics used in the classification [2, 9).
It is reasonable for a universal classification to use very simple quadratic
Euclidean metrics. since the more complex metrics already themselves contain
implicitly some classification principles. Thus, Euclidean metrics makes it

possible, at least, not to increase the number of axioms.

Naturally. the most meaningful are the axioms of the classification prin-
ciples. The fact is that the classification problem is in essence the prob-
lem of formation of concepts [8]. The necessity of recognizing the class
property for some group of points in sample space is equivalent to the for-
mation of a new concept. Accordingly. the universality of the classifier is
to a certain degree conditional. like the universality of the axiomatics.
cut the practical difference in the known classification principles was
small. This was convincingly demonstrated in [6]. Evidently, today the
bottleneck in image recognition theory is not the classification principles.
but the effectiveness of the numerical algorithms for their realization.

Among the best known image recognition methods we should mention the follow-
lng:

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SR "NI-Y

I. 1hr method of linear decision functions. historically related in the
studies of Flsher.

2. The BraVermsn potential functions method.

1. The Bayes method.

A. The method of extreme of a sample distribution density. frequently at-
tributed to Parson.

Definition 2. The problem of classification of an "unmarked" sample with an

unknown number of classes is called taxonomy. grouping. learning without a
teacher.

Below. among the enumerated recognition methods, for the considered taxonomy
problem we selected a method based on an analysis of sample density. This
choice was dictated by two factors. First. the classification axioms for
this method are more general. more formal; these correspond better to the
spirit of universal classification. Second, precisely for this method it

was possible to construct an extremely economical numerical algorithm.

which is important in problems with a great dimensionality.

The method was subjected to considerable editing. The principal change re-

lates to determination of sample density and is reflected in the density
axiom A-ll.

A-ll. There is. determined in the sample 1;, a positive function fr(§), known
as the sample density in the averaging radius r. monotonically dependent on
the number of sample points falling in a hyporsphere G with the radius r

and with a center in I and it can he dependent on the local structure of a
point set belonging to the mentioned hypersphere.

A peculiarity of this definition is that the sample density is calculated
for a particular element of the sample with the use of only those elements
of the sample which are distant by not more than r from the initial element
(moving averaging). The next factor which must be taken into account with

a sample f,(x) is the very low density of the point set in the sample space
of a great dimensionality. Therefore, in order to still further increase

the smoothness of frCE) in the sample it is desirable to draw on informa-
tion on the microstructuro of the point set within the hypersphere G.

The following variants of the choice fr(;3 illustrate this problem:

 

-' - (1)
A" (x) - S. m.
(2)
11” (7n » 8.6)» G). (3)
1:" Gr - E I» i}. 5).
3. to. 2.4-?
135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POM "PFICIAL USE ONLY

here 3r(x) is the number of points x1. such that x1€ih P is the mean dis-
tance of the points x15 6 to the point x.

Formulas (2) and (3). in addition to the local numerical density, take into
account in some way the connectivity of the points xi € 6 with the center
of the hypersphere. This. generally speaking. is not introduced into the
classification. since the idea of connectivity is already contained in the
definition of classes as nonintersecting sets. There are. to be sure. other
hussibilities for taking the microtopology of the sample into account. in
other uords. all the arbitrariness in the classification in the considered
method is concentrated in the averaging parameter r and in the choice of
the form of sample density fg(x). which is more attractive than the use of
s Parzen sample density [10]. The Parsen density is computed in the entire
”ample using correlation matrices. the form of its problems: the single par-

ameter h does not have such a clear interpretation as the averaging radius
r.

The last axiom of the universal classification is the classification prin-
riple axiom.

A-lll. The maximn in the sample density fr(;3 in the sample are the centers
of the classes. the "passes" and "valleys" in the surface fr(§5 -- the lim-
its of the classes.

The axiomatics of the universal classification is completed. it can be shown
that the objective has not been attained: indeed. the number of clases has
not been determined. The function C(r). where c is the number of classes.
was obtained. but the optimum r (that is, c) was not selected. A natural
axiom. formally closing the classifier. is the "object" axiom (quality of
the classifier). The point of view of the author of this study is that the
"object" axiom must fall outside the universal classification and determine
the so-called optimum classifier.

Definitlon 3. The classifier is said to be optimum if its axiomatics in-
eludes the "object" axiom (quality function, grouping criterion. "object"
function, etc.).

The reasons for such a discrimination of the "object" axiom are clear. The
universal classifier operates only with an abstract structure of the data.
At its output it gives only possible variants of the breakdown of data into
rlasses (c - C(r)). It does not use information on the physical nature of
the object and the objects of recognition are unknown to it. The researcher
must stipulate all this by means of the "object” axiom. For the weather

forecasting problem the minimizing of the forecasting error can be such an
axiom.

Classification Algorithm. Description of classes

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The computation aspects of the classification problem are frequently over-
shadowed by the circumstance that the first practical results were obtain-
ed for r‘lntlvely small dimensionalities of sample space. This matter has
been glv a due attention only now. when the need has arisen for manipulat-
lug objects described by several hundreds of parameters. A» clearly indi—
cated in the monograph [J]. from the computation point of view the most
effective classification algorithms are the methods using the ideas of

the theory of graphs. in these methods only the distances between pairs

of points are computed, that is. the number of computation operations of
the order N. the dimensionality of sample space. These considerations served
as a basis for the classification algorithm presented below for the sample
density extrema method.

The essence of the algorithm is as follows. we find the element 31 of the
sample Q in which f¢(§) attains a maximum value. This element is a first-
class center. The sample vectors. belonging to the first class, are de-
termined as follows. we term a sequence of chains (similar to the minimum
covering graph). each of which satisfies the following rules.

_ Q

The Chill“ . I. (:0: 1"“..- _ _ , ”in.
l. The element 3i+l is the closest to ii; for the sample °\l;v- ~"‘ﬂ-|L

2. ,0 (3:+|)<’r (1:)-

3. The element 3&6 [161) is a set of first-class boundary points.

The transition from k to k + 1 involves a truncation of the sample Q -
(Q‘\lk)U :1. Transition to the second class is accomplished by truncation
of the sample

0» ow. (7a).. . .. m2." etc.

A result of operation of this procedure is a breakdown of the sample into
classes with a stipulated averaging radius r. The following information

is known about each class: list of elements, number of the central element.
set F of boundary points.

Since the initial sample is considered as a teaching sample, for the new
elements. if their number is small and there is no need to "reteach" the
classifier, it is necessary to formulate an identification procedure. This
is usually achieved by computation of the separating functions. In the con-
sidered case the problem to a certain degree is simplified by the presence
of information on the boundary points of each class; therefore it is pos-
sible to use. in accordance with [5). the very simple algorithm of divid-
lng standards. If a hypersphere is used as a standard, the procedure of

description of class will seem quite simple. The first hypersphere is con-
structed from the center of a class with a radius equal to the distance
to the nearest boundary point. The class elements entering into it are ex-
cluded from the class list. then the next element. giving the maximum of

137

FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the function fr(:). is found. It is used as the center of the second
hypersphere. lts radius is equal to the distance to the nearest remain-
lng boundary points. etc. Thus. the description of the class consists of

a series of hypersphere parameters. Such parameters are the renters or the
hyperspheres. radii. number of sample points entering into the hypersphere
(weight of the standard).

This method for describing a class is interesting in that it makes it pos-
sible to obtain the accompanying statistical information. indeed. the
curve connecting the centers of the description hyperspheres (standards)
in essence determines a nonlinear intraclsss regression. A comparison of
these curves for different classes can to a certain degree characterize
the quality of the classification and thereby be a quantitatiVe argument
in the key problem of the existence of stable states (classes) in the at-
mosphere.

Prediction

Since the elements in the sample are the meteorological states of the atmo-
sphere. they are interrelated to one another by causal-temporal relation-
ships. The use of classes instead of sample elements makes it possible

to study the statistics and structure of the temporal transitions between
rlnsses. This, indeed. is the principal difference between recognition
unthods and prediction using analogues. A classifier. similar to a weath-
erman. finds the common characteristics in many meteorological records

and combines them into groups. The only difference is in the computation
capabilities of an electronic computer and the objective nature of the
classification.

Thus. in the prediction stage the object of the investigation becomes the
oriented forecasting graph. the “peaks" of which are classes. whereas the
sides are the temporal transitions between classes. Generally speaking,
recognition methods here also suggest a formal procedure for selecting the
final number of classes. This is the so-called decomposition problem. in-
volving a breakdown of the graph into parts most strongly related to one
another.

However. it seems that the "object" axiom must not be formal. in the pre-
diction. as already mentioned. it is natural to require a minimum of the
forecasting error. A requirement which is close in sense is the optimiza-
tion of the forecast with respect to information content simultaneously

with the statistical significance of the transitions between classes.

There can be other variants of the classification criterion. It is only
clear that the case of one class c - l is not of interest. whereas the

vase c - M, where H is the sample volume, leads to a prediction by the
analogues method. Accordingly. there is an optimum (in some sense) number

of classes cop - C(rop). we will satisfy ourselves only with a statement
138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

ul' lhln ultuutlon, carrying out more speclflc inwatigationu in connection
with the formulation of the corresponding optimization problems. Then we
will assume that the number of classes C is known and we will define a
possible forecasting scheme.

we will arrange the sample undergoing the classification stage in a chron-
ological series. Assume that A1.....Ac are the classes of states, is c-(u,
1hen Af denotes that at the moment in time t the atmosphere was situated
in a state of the class AL. The chronology of the meteorological states

in the language of classes has the form

(n ‘M-t ‘3 - '| (U
A’""A’..-|.O. s . “A" Al.-

Assume that t - to is the moment in time at which the forecast is issued.
Using the prehistory (4) we will compute the matrix of conditional proba-
bilities in the following form:

Pidn. Pi‘d ... .. Pidcl
IMAM“). PUMA) . . . . . ”(Ac/41')

(5)
u... ma._A,_, ‘6" mom“. AL). . . .. 9.14914“. 4“)

..............................

-
.............................

here, for example. P(Ak/A£1. A12) is the probability of the appearance of
the class Ak in series (A) after the two classes A12, All. approximately
equated to the value V(A12, A11. Ak)lv (A1 , A1 ). where V(...) are the
frequencies of appearance of the corresponding classes in the chronolog-
ical series of the prehistory (4). Tb be sure. only those elements of the
matrix (5) for which the corresponding frequencies V >l.make sense.

A prediction using a matrix of conditional probabilities a can be given in

categorical form. selecting the maximum matrix element, or in stochastic
form.

1he cited prediction model is unquestionably extremely simplified, but
no slnnlfirant efforts have been made to apply it to more complex cases.
for example. to a variable time interval of the prehistory (4). etc.

Relationship to hydrodynamics

The simplest conjugation with hydrodynamic models appears in a case "he"
the representation is based on generalized Fourier series. in this case
the "field" part of the criteria! vector is the Fourier coefficients of
expansion of meteorological fields, and this suggests a variant of s
hydrodynamic model. specifically a spectral prediction model; it is con-
venient to select the latter in a variation interpretation. More specif-
ically this is expressed in computation of the integral square nonclosure

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the hydrodynamic system of equations with substitution of a finite
Fourier series into it. Thus, in the sample space we determine a hydro-
dynamic functional in the form

IiS)- {l1 l§;+;|1dxdyl:. (6)
i o)
a 9

here NV+ 17- 0 is the matrix form of the eqmtions of hydrodynamics.

2 1.3.. (0 v. (1M. (1M, m:
a. j. 3

u is the re ion of the solution. 3 is some curve in sample space between
the points x1 and :2. It is easy to see that if the base system of func-
tions is complete, and the series is infinite, then m‘n 1(8) - 0 and repre-
uents a precise solution of hydrodynamic equations.

The minimizing of the hydrodynamic functional (ﬂ?) is the same as the Rite
method. If for a simplification it is assumed that s is a straight line.
then the HP will be dependent only on the position of the initial point

X; and the final point *2, that is. 1(8) - 1(x1. :2).

Assume then that {i and x2 are the centers of the classes 81 and Bﬁ then
1(xl . x2) is the hydrodynamic weight of the transition between these class-
es. 1An interesting situation is observed. The chronological series (6)
determines the statistical weights of the transitions between classes; the
weights of some transitions are equal to 0. that is. transitions are phys-
ically forbidden. At the same time. for all transitions the hydrodynamic
weights are determined. A problem of unquestionable interest is the corres-
pondence between hydrodynamics and statistics in the mentioned interpreta-
tion. It can be hoped that its solution will prove to be extremely useful
for the problem of long-range hydrodynamic forecasting.

In conclusion. we should mention that the form of the HP (6) is not the
only unc but in the simplest in a case when there is no information on such
properties of the operaterR as linearity. self-conjugability and positive
determinancy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Bckker, A. V.. Koiokolov, A. A.. "Analysis of Criteria from Their Cor-
relation Hntrix and Choice of Important Criteria for Economic-Statis-
tical Modeling." RASPOZNAVANIYE OBRAZOV I REGRBSSIONNYY ANALIZ V 3K0”-
OHICRZSKIKH ISSLBDOVANIYAKR (Image Recognition and Regression Analysis
in Economic Research). Novosibirsk. 1972.

2. Gladkikh. B. A.. "Some Problems in classification." RASPOZNAVANIYE OBRAZ-
0V V EKOROHIKO-STATISTICHESKOH MODELIRDVANII (Image Recognition in Econ-
omical-Statistical Modeling). Novosibirsk. pp 5-30. 1976.

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

7.

1’.

[0.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dunn, R.. Hart. P., RASPOZNAVANIYB OBRAZOV I ANALIZ STSEN (Image
Rééognition and Analysis of Scenes). Moscow. 1976. 511 pages.

Zhurnvei'. N. N.. lonina, N. 9., "0n the Problem of Anaiyoin of Clau-
sificatinnn Obtained by the Image Recognition Methods," RASPOZNAVAN-
[YE ODRAZOV V EKONOHIKO-STATISTICRESKOH MODELIROVANII (Image Recog-
nition in Economic-Statistical Nodeiins). Novosibirsk. pp 31-37, 1975.

anoruyko. N. 6.. HETODY RASPOZNAVANIYA I txu PRIHENBNIYE (Recognition
Methods and Their Application). Moscow, 1972.

Paxavn, S. 1.. Ariatov. N. A.. Biyunina. L. 1., Turketti. Z. L.. 05-
NOVY SINOPTICHESKOGO HBTODA SEZONNYKH PROGNOZOV POGODY (Principles

of the Synoptic Method for Seasonal weather Forecasts). Leningrad,
Gidrometeoizdat. 1966.

Pronekiaa, G. M.. Ugryunov. A. 1., "Classification of Synoptic Procean-
ea in the Northern Port of the Atlantic Ocean Using the Criterion of
Geographical Localization of Long Haves," TRUDY GIDROMBTTSENTRA SSSR

(Transactions of the USSR ﬂydronetcoroiogicol Center), No 161, pp 22-
35. 1975.

Rastrlgin, L. A., "Introduction." RASPOZNAVANIYB OBRAZOV (Ilage Recou-
aitioa). No I. Riga. pp 3-7, 1976.

Tuypkln. Ya. 2., OSNOVY TEORII OBUCNAYUSNCNIKNSYA SISTEH (Principien
of the-1heory of Teaching Systems), Moscow, 1970.

Parzen, 6., "0n Estimation of the Probability Density Function and
Mode." ANN. HAT". STAT.. Vol 33, pp 1065-1076. 1962.

[hi

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 551.5:9‘7.086(679.2)(047)

1H8NTY-?IFTN ANNIVERSARY 0? TBS TRANSCAUCASIAN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
NYDROHETEOROLOGICAL INSTITUTE

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 106-109

[Article by Professor 6. G. Svanidrs and Candidate of Physical and Hatha-
aatical Sciences 2. I. Tskvitinidxe. Transceucaaian Scientific Research
Hydroeeteorolosical Institute. subaitted for publication 30 Hay l978)

Abstract: The article presents concise histor-
ical information on the work of the Tbilisi
Geophysical Observatory. on the basis of
uhich the Trenecaucesian Scientific Research
Hydroeeteorologicel Institute was organised

in 1953. The authors tell about the principal
tasks facing the institute, the successes at-
tained and the prospects for the developaent
of scientific research.

[Text] The year 1978 aarked the 25th anniversary of organization of the
Trsnacaucasisn Scientific Research Hydroeeteorological Institute. This
sane year is the 135th anniversary of founding of one of the oldest sci-
entific institutes in the Caucasus - the Tbilisi Geophysical Observatory,

on the basis of vhich the Transcaucesian Scientific Research hydroneteor-
ologicai Institute was organised in 1953.

The history of the Tbilisi Geophysical (for-er Tiflis Physical) observatory
to a considerable degree is the history of development of Russian science
in the Tranecaucesien republics, and especially, the natural sciences. free
the day of founding the observatory becaae the principal aeteorological
Institute in the Caucasus. together with observational activity carrying out
a major couple: of scientific research work.

The observatory's observational data were used in the writing of a nuaber of
ieportant scientific studies, covering the climatic characteristics of the

Caucasus: the aonographs of well-known scientists: A. I. beeykov, I. V.
Figurovskiy, K. S. Vesclovokiy. and others.

142

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hell-known scientists have worked at different times within the observe
ntnry walls: Academicians USSR Academy of Sciences N. I. Nuskhelishvili and
I. N. Vekua; Acndemicinns Georgian Academy of Sciences A. I. Didebulidze.
A. N. Dzhavakhishvlli. Ye. K. Khnrndze. P. F. Dnvitnya and B. K. Bnlnvndrc;
Professors A. H. Benashvili. R. V. Khutsiahvill, H. z. Nodiya. S. T. Vag-
uva, K. L. Sulakvelidze. S. U. Guniyn. K. I. Papinnshvlli. D. Dolidze.

I. G. Kurdiani and many others. I. V. Stalin worked here in 1898~190l as
an observer and computer. The first director, V. P. Inminadze, made a
special contribution to organization of the Transcauensian Scientific Re-
search Nydrometeorological Institute and the development of scientific re-
search there.

Continuing the glorious traditions of the observatory, the Transcaucasian
Scientific Research Nydrometeorological Institute during the 25 years of
Its existence has traveled a long path of development and has been trans-
formed into a major scientific research and scientific methodological cen-
ter of Transcaucasia. The institute is outfitted with modern technical
equipment and is staffed by a large body of professional hydrometeorol-
ugists capable of implementing the tasks assigned to the institute and
vapahle of solving a number of problems in mountain hydrometeorology not
only at the scale of the Trnnscaucasian region, but at the scale of the
USSR Nydrometeorological Service in general.

The Transcaucasinn Scientific Research hydrometeorological Institute does
the following work:

-- deVelopment and improvement of methods for meteorological, agrometeoro-
logical. glaciological and hydrological forecasts and methods for artificial
modification of harmful hydrometeorological phenomena (avalanches, hail,
CtCs);

-- search for effective means for regulating precipitation (inducing and
redistributing precipitation) applicable to the mountainous conditions in
Transcaucasia;

-- study of hydroseteorological. climatic and agrometeorological conditions
and resources, development of recommendations on their use;

-- study of the peculiarities and development of methods for predicting at-
mospheric contamination over industrial centers of Transcaucasia, rivers

and reservoirs. and also soils from industrial effluent and poisonous chem-
icnls;

-- introduction and determination of effectiveness of use of the results of
the carried-out Investigations in the national economy and the subdivisions
of the Nydrometeorological Service in Transcaucaaia.

The institute. including the Baku Division and the Yerevan Section, has 22
scientific sections and laboratories with about 600 specialists. including
60 Doctors and Candidates of Science.

I63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The results of scientific research are presented in 20 monographs prepared
by Institute specialists and in 70 collections of articles TRUDY ZakNIGHI
(Transactions of the Transcaucasian Scientific Research Hydrometeorological
Institute).

A considerable contribution to study of regional peculiarities of synoptic
processes in Tranacaucasia has been made by specialists of the Section on
Investigation of Atmospheric Processes and Weather Forecasts. The method
for weather forecasting for a month in advance for Tranacaucasia was award-
ed the hultanovskiy Prise. 0n the basis of these studies it was possible

to create methods for predicting such phenomena as hail, thunderstorms,
severe cold, frosts, shower precipitation, strong winds, etc. During re-
cent years physical-statistical and hydrodynamic methods for investigating
atmospheric processes and predicting meteorological elements have been
especially developed.

in the operational subdivisions of the Administrations of the hydrometeor-
ologicai Service of the Transcaucasian republics extensive use is made of
the methods for predicting weather phenomena developed at the Transcaucaaian
Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute. In particular, among the
scientific developments of recent years which have found practical appli-
cation we should mention the method for hydrodynamic short-range forecast-
ing of vertical movements in Caucasus regions within the framework of an
adiabatic approximation, a method for predicting the development of squalls
on the Black Sea shores of the Caucasus, a method for predicting vertical
nir movements for the Caucasus, with relief taken into account, a computa-
tion model for the short-range forecasting of thunderstorms during the cold
season of the year for the territory of the Caucasus, etc.

Further investigations were directed to a deeper study of atmospheric pro-
cesses over Transcaucasia under the influence of mountainous relief, the
Black and Caspian Seas against a background of large-scale atmospheric
processes in the northern hemisphere.

The Section on Meteorological and Climatological Research, in collabora-
tion with the Aerological Research and Atmospheric Electricity Laboratory,
carries out work on the study of natural and anthropogenic climatic varia-
tions, heliopouer resources, scientific-climatic studies of new industrial
regions, city construction, development of curortology and tourism in the
Trunscaucasian republics; it carries out investigations for determining
processes and phenomena in the upper layers of the atmosphere, taking into
account the peculiarities of local circulation,and carries out investiga-
tions of atmospheric electricity phenomena in the surface layer and in the
free atmosphere. The results of scientific research in these directions
are being used effectively in the national economy, in particular, by
planning and design organizations, subdivisions of the Administrations of
the Hydrometeorological Services of the Transcaucasian republics, etc.

Investigations for the development and improvement of methods for agro-

meteorological forecasts for the principal agricultural crops grown in
Transcaucasia are carried out by specialists in the Section on Agricultural

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ibtearology and Agrometeorological Forecasts and the Agrometeorology Sec-
tion of the Yerevan Section of the Transcaucasian Scientific Research lw-
drometchfdlogical Institute. Particular mention should be made of the suc-
cesses achieved in creating forecasting methods for the principal phases
of growth and development. moisture supply, average republic yields of
grapes, citrus and fruit crops, tea, tung, tobacco, winter wheat. corn and
other crbps.

During the last seven years alone the subdivisions of the Administrations
of the Hydrometeorological Services of the Transcaucasian republics have
adopted more than 10 different methods for agrometeorological forecasting
which are used in routine practice.

At the institute studies are made of the agroclimatic resources of Trans-
caucasin for the principal branches of the national economy for the pur-
pose of rational distribution of the leading agricultural crops over the
region. Agroclimatic regionalization diagrams and maps are successfully
used at national economic organisations. They are used extensively in
studying the agroclimatic resources and agrometeorological conditions in
mountainous and high-mountain regions of Georgia. The Paravanskaya Agro-
meteorological Expedition organised for this purpose carries out a major
complex of studies in the high-mountain Sansarskiy Meteorological Polygon
(2,200 m above sea level). The results of investigations of the growth
and development of annual and perennial agricultural crops from the work
done in this polygon served as a basis for extremely valuable recounnnd-
utions on the introduction into agricultural production of root crops for
animal and human consumption, vegetable and berry crops. These recommend-
ations have now been introduced in the agriculture of a number of high-
mountain regions in Georgia and give a considerable economic effect.

Scientific research in the field of cloud physics and artificial modifica-
tion has been developed considerably at the institute. A method for con-
tending uith hail by the procedures developed at the Transcaucasian Scien-
tific Research Hydrometcorological Institute has been deemed an invention
and is used for the protection of valuable agricultural crops in Eastern
Georgia (protected area 350,000 hectares). From this work alone the deter-
mined economic effect is more than 3 million rubles per year. Great atten-
tion is being devoted to work on the problem of an artificial increase in
precipitation in the mountainous conditions of Transcaucasia. This has
great importance for the national economy because the objective is an ar-
tificial increase in the available water resources used for the irrigation
of lands, for irrigation purposes, for hydroelectric power purposes. and
for the water supply of major industrial centers.

Being the scientific hydrometeorological center of Transcaucasia, the
Transcnucasian Scientific Research Nydrometeorological Institute has as
one of its principal goals a study of the water regime and water resources
.-r the rivers and water bodies in this region. In hydrological investiga-
tions the hydrologists have established the hydrological and glaciological

145

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processes and their patterns in different physiographic regions of Trans-
cnucasla and have formulated recommendations on preventing and predicting
the onset of situations dangerous for the national economy. These recom-

mendations and methods are used extensively in the practical routine work
at the administrations of the Hydrometeorological Service of the Trans-

caucnsian republics for satisfying the needs of hydroelectric power. water
management and construction organisations and the Transcsucasian railroad.

During the last seven years alone. 15 different kinds of hydrological and
glaciulugicnl forecasts have been introduced in the prognostic subdivisions
of the Administrations of the hydrometeorological Services of the Trans-
caucasian republics and these forecasts have had a high level of reliabil-
ity.

Jointly with the USSR hydrometeorologicnl Center and the Administration of
the Nydrometeorologicai Service Georgian SSR, specialists developed an
automated scheme for the prediction of rain-induced high Haters on the

Riunl River. based on a mathematical model. The following methods develop-

ed at the institute and used in routine practice are of great importance:
conditions of formation and prediction of the descent of different types

of avalanches in the mountains of Transcaucasia; prediction of the monthly.
quarterly and seasonal runoff of rivers in individual parts of the consider-
ed region; prediction of the times of passage of maximum discharges of spring
high water: territorial prediction of the spring runoff of rivers, etc.

It is particularly necessary to note the results of investigations for study
of the nature of mudflous. the conditions for their formation and propaga-
tion. In the studies of the leading specialists of the Section on Hudflous
and Channel Processes there has been a generalization of the results of
many years of multisided investigations in developing forecasting methods
and methods for computing the principal hydrological. rheological. kine-
matic and dynamic characteristics of mudflovs. channel deformations, ele-
ments of rupturing of natural dams, etc. Engineering computations were made
for anti-mudflav construction and rational and effective nnti-mudflov con-
structions of an industrial type have been created. This work was noted

by a special prize of the Council of Ministers Georgian 53R and is being
introduced both at the scale of the Soviet Union (in Georgia. Armenia and
Kazakhstan) and abroad (in Yugoslavia).

One of the principal tasks of the institute is a study of the hydrometeorolog-
icnl aspects of environmental contamination. In the investigations in this
direction there has been reflection of the results attained in developing
methods for predicting contamination of the environment -- the air basin

and soil and ground in individual regions of Transcaucssia.

The Section on Investigation of Atmospheric Contamination is carrying out

work for the most part in two directions: monitoring and investigating radio-
active contamination of the environment in the territories of the Adminis-
trations of the hydrometeorological Services of the Azerbaydshan. Armenian.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY -..

(hernias. Moldavian and Ukrainian SSRs and the Northern Caucasus Adminis-
tration of the Hydrometeerologicai Service and invostigntion of industrial
contamination of atmospheric air in large cities and industrial centers

in Transcaucasia. Among the broad complex of investigations made we should
mention development of the method for predicting dangerous air contamina-
tion for the cities of Tbilisi and Rustavi. This method has been handed
over to the Administration of the hydrometeorological Service Georgian SSR
for practical use.

Professional contacts with different institutes of the USSR are expanding
for the purpose of a multisided study of the state of the air medium. In
collaboration with the Department of Physics of the Atmosphere at Lenin-
grad State University, the Main Geophysical Observatory and the Administra-
tion of the Hydrometcorological Service of the Georgian SSR. the complex
energy experiment "KENBKs-72" was carried out in the industrial complex

of cities Tbilisi-Rustavi-Gardabani fer a thorough study of the peculiar-
ities of composition of the atmosphere caused by gas and aerosol effluent
from industrial enterprises.

Jointly with the Institute of Astrophysics and Atmospheric Physics Georgian
Academy of Sciences. the "Astro" subsatellite experiment was carried out

in the Samaarakiy Meteorological Polygon for the purpose of comparing data
from complex measurements of the aerosol component of the atmosphere from
the earth and from space.

In 1966 a Section on Meliorative Hydrology was established in the Trans-
caucasian Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute. and in 1972

a Laboratory of Hydrochemical Research was organized in this section. Due
to the activity of these subdivisions there has been intensive development
of the theoretical and experimental investigations of elements of the water
balance, heat and salt balances, moisture exchange of surface and ground
water. the process of evaporation of moisture from the surface of the land
and movements of water-soluble salts in the aeration zone in the territor-
[es of Transcaucasia which can be improved (drained and irrigated). Recom-
nendations are being developed on improving the state of meliorsted lands
and methods for water management computations are being improved with re-
spect to providing a hydrometeorological basis for the planning of irri-
gated and drained systems. in investigations of transformations of indi-
vidual chemical compounds in water and in the soil-water and soil-plant sys-
tems model laboratory experiments and complex experimental studies are
carried out on a broad scale for determining the chemical composition and
quality of surface, ground and waste collection basin-drainage waters over
the territory of Transcaucasis. Recommendations are being developed for
evaluating the aggressiveness of natural waters during hydraulic construc-
tion and their use in coamunal and technical water supply. for the pur-

poses of irrigation and the flashing of saline soils. repeated use of waste
water, etc.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The principal hydrometeorological investigations for the Armenian ssn
have been concentrated in the Yerevan Section of the Tranacaucasian Sci-
entific Research ﬂydromoteorological Institute. The leading specialists
in this section make a substantial contribution to the detection of re-
nionnl peculiarities of meteorological. hydrological and agrnmeteorolog-
ical phenomena over the territory of Armenia.

Among the most important results of scientific investigations in the sec-
tion we should mention the determination of the variation of meteorolog-
ical elements in the boundary layer under mountainous conditions in depen-
dence on the synoptic situation and relief forms; formation of the water
and heat regimes of the soil in the aeration zone and determination of the
patterns of expenditure of ground water on evaporation; the water and heat
balances of the territory of Armenia and sound meteorological setting of

the norms and the regime of irrigated agricultural fields under mountain-
ous conditions, etc.

The Baku Divition of the Transcaucasian Scientific Research Hydrometeor-
ologicnl Institute, in close contact with the main body of institute per-
uonnel. carries out a complex study of the hydrometeorological regime of
the territory of the Azerbaydzhan 88R. Dagestan ASSR and the water a:ea
of the Caspian See. "are specialists generalize the results of investi-
natinns for study of the hydrometeorological regime of the Caspian Sea
and the mouth regions of the rivers flowing into it.

The greatest attention is devoted to investigations of the principal hydro-
neteorologicai elements acting on petroleum industry hydraulic structures
-- wind, waves, currents. The results of long-term investigations found
their reflection in the ATLAS VOLNENIYA l VETRA (Atlas of Waves and Hind),
which is a regime-reference prognostic and navigational aid. Together with
this atlas, successful use is made of a method for predicting wind waves

in the Middle and Southern Caspian, developed by section specialists. A
method for predicting the summer low waters on rivers in the republic was
developed and adopted at the Baku Weather Bureau.

luring recent years the institute has been intensively supplied with mod-
crn equipment and computers. The Computation Center functions on the basis
of the Section on Mathematical Support and Programming Methods. with this
center institute scientists are able to carry out work for numerical solution
of the complex equations of atmospheric hydrothermodynsmics. to establish

the patterns in the investigated regions, and also to put their developments
and findings in the hands of others for routine use by the prognostic agen-
cies of the Administration of the Hydrometeorologicel Service Georgian SSR

where each day there is routine calculation of prognostic charts for the
Thiiisi Heather Bureau.

The Trnnscnucasian Scientific Research Mydrometeorological Institute is
maintaining close contact with the institutes of the Mydrometeorological
Service. the scientific institutes of the Academies of Sciences and other

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

departments. In the task of forming and training young scientific special-
ists the institute is rendered great assistance by Tbilisi State University.
USSR hydroneteorolopical Center. Main Geophysical Observatory. Central Aero-
logical Observatory. State hydrological Institute and many key institutes

uf the USSR Academy of Sciences. The Scientific Council of the Transcauc-
nsian Scientxfic Research hydroneteorolosical Institute includes leading
specialists of the Administrations of the ﬂydroaeteorologicnl Services of

the Transcsucasian republics and also well-known scientists working in
fields closely related to hydro-cteorology.

For the successes achieved the personnel of the Transcsucssian Scientific Re-
search hydroneteorologieal Institute have been awarded the Diploma of honor
of the Central Committee Cbsnunist Party of Georgia, the Presidium of the

Supreme Soviet Georgian 83R. the Council of Ministers Georgian SSR and the
Georgian Republic Council of Trade Unions. and repeated coanendations have

been received from the Main Aduinistration of the hydroneteorological Ser-
vice of the USSR Council of Ministers.

The 25th anniversary of the date of organization of the Transcnucasian Sci-
entific Research hydroseteorological Institute and the 135th anniversary

of the Tbilisi Geophysical Observatory are being greeted by institute per-

sonnel with new successes in scientific research and a major rise in creativ-
ity.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HORK OF A. A. PRIDHAN IN THE FIELD OF HYDROLOGY

Moscow HBTBOROLOOIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp l09-llZ
[Article by Professor Ye. 8. Selesneva]

Abstract: This article gives information on
the first period (1913-1916) in the work of
the outstanding scientist A. A. Pridman in
the field of geophysics, poorly reflected
in biographies. During this five-year per-
iod he devoted great energy to the then-new
probless of serology and aerial navigation
and did much in the organizing of observa-
tions and the servicing of aviation.

[Text] The year 1978 marked the 90th anniversary of the birth of the out-
standing scientist Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Pridman. the founder of Soviet
dynamic meteorology and the author of exceptionally important theoretical
studies in the field of cossogony. The studies of A. A. Pridmsn have re-
ceived broad recognition in these fields. The high evaluation of their
importance by leading scientists is given in a series of articles published
in an appendix to the selected works of this scientist [1]. in one of the
issues of USPEKHI FIZICHBSKIKH NAUK (Advances in the Physical Sciences) [7],
and in other publications.

In biographical articles and recollections there is usually only a fleeting
mention of the work of A. A. Fridman at the Aerological Observatory and in
aviation units during the war of 1914-1918. This is briefly told in the
main, most coaplete biography, written by the closest associate of Pridmsn,
P. Ya. Kochina [1. 3]. However. his work in the field of serology and ser-
lal navigation has not passed without a trace either for him or for serol-
ogy. This energetic, high-initiative young scientist did not follow well-
irod paths: there were no such paths in serology at that time -- it was in
its initial stage of develop-eat. Precisely during this first period (1913-
l918) of practical and experimental work A. A. Pridnan exhibited his great
organizational capabilities, and at the same time he further developed his
interest in the study of atmospheric processes. in various observations of

weather phenoaena. This interest also persisted later, despite his pro-
found dedication to theoretical problems.

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it In pngalhle to obtain some idea concerning the activity of A. A. Prid-
mnn during the "aerological five-year period" in particular from his
blugrnpﬂy'lll, which in chronological sequence lists the principal stages
and lnleidual ewenta of this time. Evidently, this record lists precisely
the-: events which the author regarded as particularly important and there-
fore they can be used as a basis in reconstructing the most important as-
pects of the scientist's activity. The brief autobiographical information
can be supplemented using the reports of the Main Physical Observatory and
its affiliate -- the Aerological Observatory. and also using the articles
of scientists with whom he chanced to work during this period. These were
u. l. Isvekov [2], A. F. Gavrilov [1, 7] and H. M. Rykachev [6]. Finally,
the scientific articles of A. A. Fridman published during these years re-
flect his practical work and scientific interests.

A. A. Pridman went to work at the Main Physical observatory in the spring
of 1913 [ll and was sent by the director, 8. s. Golitsyn, to the Aerolog-
ical Observatory, which was located at Pavlovsk (a suburb of Petrogred -
leningrad). This observatory was just formed on the basis of an aerological
division and a balloon station which until then had been part of the Mag-
netic-Meteorological Observatory (Pavlovsk Subdivision of the Main Phys-
ical Observatory). V. V. Kuznetsov headed the Aerological Observatory, and
earlier a division. he was already a well-known scientist who did much in
organising aerological observations and constructing the necessary instru-
ments. In aerological work use had long been made of the extremely conven-
ient Kusnetsov theodolite for observations of pilot balloons and meteoro-
graphs for sounding the atmosphere with kites and pilot balloons. Aarolog-
ical observations multiplied and they began to be carried out at affiliat-
ed observatories (Yckaterinburgakaya, Tiflisskays) and other places. The
need arose for standardizing the processing of their data.

The first study which was assigned to the new specialist of the Aerological
ubservstory was the preparation of instructions on the processing of meteor-
egrams. For its preparation the author had to familiarize himself with meth-
ods for sounding of the atmosphere and evidently mastered them, since his
instructions, according to the cos-eats of B. I. Izvekov [2] ”introduce
considerable simplifications into the practice of aerological observations,
and saves time.“ Later, Fridman, together with another specialist, P. A.
Nadeyev, prepared instructions on the processing of pilot balloon observa-

tions and they gave a simplified method for computing the coordinates of
pilot balloons [6].

in this same year, 1913, A. A. Pridman was engaged in investigations of
the temperature distribution in the atmosphere, to which, it must be as-
sumed, he was attracted by his familiarity with data from aerological
soundings. At this time aerologists were concerned with the problem of the
reality of the recently discovered "upper temperature inversion," as the
stratosphere was then called. Everyone was interested in an explanation
of this unexpected temperature inversion. A. A. Fridman wrote a long ar-
ticle on the temperature distribution with altitude, which was immediate-
ly included in the GEOFIZICHBSKIY SBORNIK [16]. He again returned to this

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

matter in 1920 and examined it from a theoretical point of view [lb].

It is interesting to note that at this same time A. A. Pridman did not
abandon his mathematical interests and in the autumn of 1913 he took
his master's examinations at the university.

A. A. Fridsan mentioned two events in his activity during the first half
of 1915 in his autobiography: in the spring of 1916 he was sent to Leipzig
to work with Professor V. Bjerknes. There he became familiar with new syn-
optic methods and the compilation of streamline laps. He carried out
processing of data from one of the international serological days and
constructed charts of the distribution of meteorological elements. These
results were published in SYNOPTISCBB DARSTBLLUNGEN, but without the
author being mentioned [2]. After this period of service and training with
"jerknes Pridman drew practical conclusions and already late in 191é pub-
lished an article entitled "Importance of Streamlines for Aerial Naviga-
tion” [9]. The article gave a number of practical indications on the con-
struction of streamlines and their use in aviation.

The second event noted by Fridman was not seen through to the end. but it

undoubtedly interested him. For example. he writes: "In the summer of 1916
I participated in the preparation and development of measures for serolog-
ical observations which were to be made during the total solar eclipse of

August 1916; for this purpose a number of flights were made in dirigibles"
Ill. The intended observation plan was not carried out due to the beginn-

ing of the war.

At the beginning of the war A. A. Pridman and other specialists at the Aero-
logical Observatory (H. H. Rykachev, N. N. Andreyev, V. S. Abramov) went to
the front as volunteers. They were all enlisted in aviation and balloon
units and had to supply them with serological data. Pridman very actively
participated in this work. his activity at the front was rather diversif-
ied. He organized serological stations. taught soldiers how to make ob-
servations and processed the results. He did much for reconnaissance and

for observations of atmospheric phenomena. Concerning his work in the first
war years Fridman wrote in [1]: "I worked in the aviation detachment first
an the northern front (at Osovets and Lykov) and then on other fronts in
organizing serological observations and in general an aerial navigation
service." And then: "In the spring of 1915 I organized the central serolog-
ical station of the sixth aviation company and also a number of serolog-
ical stations in different aviation detachments." Here it was pointed out
that ”during the time of the flights a series of observations was made

of the nature of atmospheric eddies." Later in his scientific articles A. A.
Fridmnn made reference to his own observations from an aircraft.

Fridman participated in flights for the purpose of military reconnaissance
as well. In many cases these were dangerous situations and he wrote 3. B.
thlitsyn concerning this [IL

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in his autobiography A. A. Fridman particularly mentions flights over

the German-un-uplvd fortress l’eremyshl' for precise bombing for the pur-
pose of clarifying the aeroballistic properties of aviation bombs. Taking
into account his own experience in bombing Pridman made ballistic comput-
ations and then jointly with A. P. Gavrilov [1. 7] organised computations
of ballistic tables. Later (1920-1923) he returned to this work in the
mathematics bureau at the HFO. P. Ya. Polubarinova-Kochina, working in
this bureau, recalls: "Everyone participated in the computations of the
ballistic tables. to which Pridmsn returned in order to make different
refinements in them" [3].

in 1916 A. A. Pridman worked in aviation organizations in Kiev. There he
presented lectures on aerial navigation in the school of aerial observ:
are. later. for his successful results attained in aerial reconnaissance.
Fridman was awarded the title of aerial observer. he reported this with
some pride to a. s. Golitsyn [1].

Then. in 1916. in the Kiev region. Fridman carried out several flights with
a thermometer and meteorograph for measuring temperature from aboard an
aircraft. In essence, these were the first aircraft soundings of the atmo-
sphere. Only five-six years later this experience was repeated near Moscow
(at Klin). however. the aircraft method for investigating the atmosphere.
which Pridman recommended. was developed only after construction of a
special meteorograph, that is, toward the and of the 1920's.

In the 1950's the pilot with whom A. A. Fridman flew near Kiev unexpected-
ly announced himself. he wrote to B. L. Dzerziyevskiy, in a letter from
Tallin requesting confirmation of the scientific value of these flights.
information which he needed in connection with pension matters. Boris
L'vovich and I then certified in writing the great importance of these,
what might be called, historic flights. But now. unfortunately, there is
no possibility of naming this pilot (an Estonian); his last name and ad-
dress have been lost.

During 1916-1917 the activity of A. A. Fridman in aviation became still
more diversified. In addition to the enumerated flight and instruction
work at the central aeronavigation station he organized workshops for the
repair of instruments and raised the question of creating a special plant
for the fabricating of aeronavigation and aerological instruments. Then
he headed up the working out of a plan for the factory and participated
In its creation in Moscow. In the summer of 1917 the plant began to oper-
ate. In this plant Pridman headed the design-computation section and

temporarily performed the tasks of director. A. F. Cavrilov ll. 7], who
was a participant in this work, told about the practical activity of A. A.
Fridman.

The plant did not exist for a long time. During the first post-revolution-
ary years there was no possibility of keeping this enterprise and it was
shut down in 1918. A. A. Pridmsn proceeded to Perm', where he had been
called for presenting lectures at the university.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY

The successful work of Fridman during the wartime period was susmmrired
ln [6):

"The network of military aerological stations in light aircraft became par-
ticularly well developed. The organization and direction of this network

was in the hands of a specialist at the Aerological Observatory. A. A. Prid-
man. The service which he created. in addition to an enormous number of
aerological observations. loft behind a number of publications in the form
of instructions. manuals, etc. In addition, steps were taken for finding
new research methods. In 1916. at Kiev. rather successful attempts were
made at suspending a meteorograph on an aircraft. etc."

we note in passing that at that time the aerological service for air ships
was organized by H. H. Rykachsv. whereas the aerial navigation service in
the hydroplane service of the Baltic Sea was organized by the youngest of
the aerologists -- P. A. Holchanov [4. 6]. These aerologists also did much
which was useful and new in the development of aerological methods.

Despite his great workload with organizational matters, in these same war
years A. A. Pridman wrote several scientific articles which are also of
interest for the modern aerologist. These studies were based on pilot-
halloon data and the author drew important conclusions concerning the ap-
pearance of eddies in the atmosphere and on the relationship between them
and the formation of cumulus clouds; also given here are formulas for de-
termining the velocity of vertical movements. Also of interest are ar-
ticles on determining the velocity of vertical currents by means of ob-
servetions of pilot balloons [12. 13].

In 1920 A. A. Pridman returned from Perm' to Petrograd and again began to
work at the upo. He created what is now the mathematical bureau, soon to
become the the section on theoretical meteorology and in accordance with
the principal direction of his interests was intensively engaged in the
fields of mathematics and dynamic meteorology [1, 3]. however, even dur-
ing these last years of his activity Pridman did not break his bonds with
nerology. Thus, according to the recollections of P. Ya. Kochins [3), in
the swmser of 1922 he worked in the Aerological Observatory at Pavlovsk.
In the TRUDY ABROLOGICHBsKOY OBSERVATORII (Transactions of the Aerolog-
ical Observatory), published in this year, Fridman published an article
entitled "Atmospheric Eddies and Hind Gustiness" [8]. Pridman had the best
relationship with the director of the Aerological Observatory in those
years - P. A. Holchanov. With respect to personal matters, Fridman has
written with high praise about Holchanov's activity.

It is impossible to overlook still another study directed to the servicing
of aviation and aerial navigation in which A. A. Pridmen actively partic-
ipated, being one ur its inltlntors.During 1915-1916 B. B. Golitsyn establid
ed an editorial commuttee and a team of authors for preparation of the acad-
emic manual OSNOVNYYB SVBDENIYA P0 ABEDLOGII I SINOPTICHBSKOY HBTEOROLOGII

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DLYA LBTCHIKOV l VOZDUKHOPLAVATELEY (Basic Information on Aerology and
Synoptic Meteorology for Airmen and Aerial Navigators). The manual was
written dad published by the MPO by the lithographic method in 1917 al-
ready alter the death of Golitsyn. The book consists of 12 chapters.
written by different authors. for the most part N. N. Kalitin. V. I. Pop-
ov, P. A. Holchanov and D. P. Nerdyurov. Chapter 9, untitled "Heather sci-
once," was written by A. I. Asknasiy, B. P. Hultanovakiy and H. F. Petelin.
A. A. Pridaan wrote the Introduction. which defines the subject of aerial
navigation and the objectives of the course. In addition, in connection
with the death of 3. B. Golitsyn, he served as general editor of the
course. In the foreword it is noted: "The objective of publication of this
hook is filling the gap in Russian meteorological literature with respect
to aerological subject matter3'Five of the 12 chapters are purely aerolog-
lcal; they were written by P. A. Molchanov.

In July 1925. two months before his death, A. A. Pridman and the aviator.
later stratonaut, P. P. Pedoseyenko, made a flight in a balloon to an alti-
tude of 7,600 n. This bold act of the theoretical scientist cannot be un-
derstood without taking into account his preceding aerological activity.
enthusiastic aspiration to learn about the real atmosphere and visually
observe meteorological phenomena. This side of the scientist's activity

is also reflected in one necrology. entitled "He-orial to a Professor.
Flier-Observer."

The premature death of the enthusiastic scientist A. A. Fridman, occurring
on 16 September 1925. was a great loss for Soviet science.

tit

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

Se

6.

7.

FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

IZBRANNYYE TRUDY A. A. PRIDMANA I HATBRIALY I MM"! 0 ZRIZNI I IVOR-
GIBSTVB (Selected Works of A. A. Pridsan and Materials and Articles
on "is Life and Creativity). Moscow. "Nauka." 1966.

Izbckov. B. 1.. "Studies of A. A. Pridnan in the Field of Geophysics."
GBOPIZIKA I HBTEOROLOGIYA (Geophysics and Meteorology). Vol III. Nos
1-2. pp 5-18. 1926.

Kochine. P. Ya.. VOSPOHINANIYA (Recollections). Moscow. "Nauks." 1975.

- "Review of Activity of the Main Physical Observatory and Other Geophys-

ical Institutes of Russia in the Field of Meteorology." No IV. ISSLED—
OVANIYA SVODODmY ATHOSPBRY (Investigations of the Free Atmosphere).
Petrograd. GPO. 1923.

"Memorial to the Flier-Observer Professor A. A. Pridnan." VESTNIK V02-
DUSHNOGO FLOTA (Herald of the Air Fleet). Vol VIII. No 10. pp 36-37.
1925.

Rykachev. H. H.. "Review of Soviet Literature on the Distribution of

Wind Direction in Different Layers of the Atnoaphere." YBSI‘BSTVMYYE
PROIZVODITEL'NWB SILY ROSSII (natural Productive Forces of Russia).

Vol I. Part 1. 1919.

USPEIGII PIZICHBSKIKH NAUK (Advances in the Physical Sciences). Vol xxx.
No 3. 1963.

Aerological Articles by A. A. Pridnan

3.

i) .

10.

ll.

12.

"Atmospheric Eddies and Hind Gustiness." TRUDY AEROLOGICHESKOY OBSERV-
ATORII V PAVUWSKB (Transactions of the Aerological Observatory at Pav-
lovsk). No 1. pp 8-12. 1922.

"Importance of Streamlines of Air Currents for Aerial Navigation."
TBKHNIKA VOZDUKNOPLAVANIYA (Techniques of Aerial Navigation). No 6-8.
pp 266-258. 1916.

"On Atmospheric Eddies," GEOPIZICRESKIY SBDRNIK (Geophysical Collection
of Articles). Vol 3. pp 90-130. 1916.

"At-nepheric'tddies with Vertical and Horizontal Axes.” IZVBSTIYA 6P0
(Neva of the Main Physical Observatory). No 3. pp 3-1.. 1921.

"Vertical Currents in the Atmosphere." ZHURNAL PERMSKOGO UNIVERSITB‘IA
(Journal of Perl University), No II. pp 97-106. 1919.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

14.

15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Determination of Vertical Air Currents Using Observations of Pilot
Balloons Made from a Single Station" (jointly with S. N. Putyataya),
GEOPIZICIIESKIY snomx. Vol 3. No 2. pp 75-83. 1917.

"Distribution of Tcnperaturo with Altitude in Presence of Radiant Heat

Exchange Botveen the Earth and the Sun." IZVESTIYA 6P0. No 2, pp az-aa
1920.

"Die vertikalen Strdnungen in dor Atmosphere," BBITR. z. PHYS. FREIEN
Amspne. x. 11. Pp 12‘16. 1922.

"Sur la diotribution de la temperature aux diveraaa hauteure," GEOPIZ-
ICHBSKIY SBORNIK, Vol I. No 1, pp 35-55, 19110.

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REVIEW 0? BOOK BY V. V. KUPRIYANOV: "RYDROLOGICAL ASPECTS OF URBANIZATION"
(GIDROIDGICHBSKIYB ASPEKTY URBANIZATSII). Leningrad. Gidrometeoisdat, 1977,
186 pages

Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 113-115
[Book review by A. V. Karauahev and B. G. Shakal'skiy]

[Text] A book by V. V. Kupriyanov has now been published. Entitled "Hydro-
logical Aspects of Urbanization" (GIDROIDGICHESKIYB ASPEK‘l'l' URBANIZATSII),
for the first time it gives a systematic exposition of the principal prob-
lems in the hydrology of urbanized areas. The formlating of a new inde-
pendent branch of hydrology of the land has taken place. Vhereas in for-
eign studies urbanization hydrology is understood vary narrowly and in-
cludes the problems involved in only calculations of rain-induced runoff
from urbanized areas. calculations of sewers and determination of the qual-
ity of waste water, the reviewed book gives an extremely broad treataent

of this branch of hydrology. V. V. Kupriyanov, in developing this new
branch of hydrological science. includes an examination of research meth-
ods and methods for solving problems relating to the two following direc-
tions: hydrology of urbanized areas proper (hydrology of cities) and hydrol-
ogy of the territories surrounding cities which exert an influence on the
water resources. regime and quality of the waters in these territories.

From an integrated point of view the book examines a wide range of prob-
lems: transformation of the landscape of urbanized areas: global process-
cs caused by urbanisation; water consumption; transformation of the water
regime; annual, minimum and maximum runoff; water and water management bal-
ancea of urbanized areas; sources of contamination and water quality; bal-
ance of chemical substances; problem in eutrophicetion. thermal contamin-
ation and self-purification of surface waters; erosion. runoff of alluvium
and channel processes within the limits of urbanized areas.

The book covers extremely diversified interests and reveals the author's
nrent erudition. A major merit of the presentation is the wealth of il-

lustrative material taken from the author's own work and from an im-
pressive number of Soviet and foreign articles and books. The bibliography
contains 11!. item in the Russian language and 83 in foreign languages.

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1ho degree and nature of the influence of urbanization on hydrological
processes are different. and as indicated by the author, must be regarded
specially in the following three stages of urbanization: 1) the period of
building up end exploitation of a territory, 2) the period of stabiliza-
tion upon completion of construction, 3) the period of a stable regime

in theJnormal rhythm of urban life. In particular, it is emphasized that
the problems of the quantity and quality of water must be examined insep-
arably.'

Dwelling on the problems involved in the effect of cities on the hydrolog-
ical cycle, the author devotes attention also to the climatic factors and
the influence of cities on global moisture cycle processes.

in a special section of the book there is a discussion of the problem of
transformation of the landscape during the urbanization process. In touch-
ing in general on the problem of the anthropogenic influence on landscapes,
the author correctly not-“ that the greatest changes are introduced spe-
cifically by urbanization, leading to significant changes in the heat and
moisture balances in the territory. The book enumerates the principal hy-
drological characteristics of an urbanized area.

It is characteristic that despite the relatively small areas of urbanized
territory (on the earth about 2%). the latter even now are exerting an in-
fluence on the hydrological cycles uver greo' areas, and in the future
this influence will considerably increase.

The author points out that in general for the earth the gross water con-
sumption for the urban population is about 58 km3 annually and for the
rural population is approximately 60 km3 annually. It is noted tnat the
increasing water consumption (for household-living needs and for indus-
trial production) is creating strained conditions for the water balance of
individual areas, but does not constitute a threat of exhaustion of world
resources of fresh water. A highly important problem is the preservation
of natural waters against contamination, as the author writes, "from
qualitative exhaustion" (p 33).

1he prospects for water resources in our country are evaluated rather op-
timistically, but at the same time the need for a territorial redistribu-
tion of runoff is correctly raised.

This is followed by a rather complete description of changes in the moisture
cycle and climate as a result of urbanization. It is noted that the influ-
ence of urbanization on global moisture cycle processes is determined by

two factors: 1) change in the temperature regime and the annual composition
of the atmosphere and 2) regulation and redistribution of runoff. Also
mentioned, with citation to a study by M. I. Budyko, is possible global
changes in climate as a result of the anthropogenic factor. The author

gives a detailed examination of the problem of the climatic characteristics

159

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

of cities and urbanized areas. The monograph contains very interesting
nraphs of the increment of maximum temperature due to urbanization, repre-
sented as a function of the number of urban inhabitants.

The fourth chapter of the book is devoted to erosion, the runoff of alluv-
ium and channel processes in an urbanized territory. The author defines
two stages in the effect of urbanization on erosion and the runoff of al-
luvium: the construction period, when erosion and the runoff of alluvium
increase greatly (sometimes by many times),and the period after completion
of construction, when the erosional process dies down and then as a result
of the laying down of asphalt pavement and presence of buildings the ero-
ulnn becomes less pronounced.

The construction period merits special attention. Hhile comparing the ap-
proaches to quantitative and qualitative evaluation of water erosion de-
veloped in the USSR and in the United States, and while accentuating the
work done at the State hydrological Institute, the author, unfortunately,
does not express his attitude toward these approaches. however, it is evi~
dent that the approach of the State hydrological Institute, based on a gen-
etic analysis of the erosional process, taking into account the discrete-
uess of slope runoff, occurring through a network of microehannels forming
in the erosional process, is more promising than the purely empirical method
for solving this problem used in the United States.

The mention of the dangerous effects of an "impairment of the natural sat-
uration of watercourses with sediments" is very correct. It is known that
this leads to an imbalance of the natural process of interexchange of sedi-
meats between the flow and the channel and an impairment in the equilibrium
state of the channel, that is. to its erosion or silting. In his subsequent
presentation in this book the author reveals a profound understanding of
this process. however, in proceeding on to an examination of the problem
of channel deformations, the author seemingly forgets about this key "in-
teraction" principle and about balance methods for analysis of the direc-
tion followed in the channel process. he limits himseli to an examina-

tion solely of the morphological theory of channel processes, which is giv-
en in an extremely schematic form. It remains unclear how it is possible to

apply this theory. proceeding on the basis of the principles presented by
the author above.

In the two chapters devoted to the annual, minimum and maximum runoff and
Its intraannual distribution the author examines the conditions for forma-
tion of runoff and the peculiarities of the water regime of urban territor-

ies. The book covers the most important parameters figuring in the computa-
tion formulas and the computation parameters are presented.

The method for determining the areas of the zones of influence of cities on
snow melting developed by the author is very rational, and therefore. it is
important in studying spring runoff. The method is based on an analysis

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of space photographs, on which it is possible to trace the' 'aureoles
of the influence of cities" (p 85). It is to be hoped that the author.
will successfully carry to an end the work which he has begun.

It is pointed out in the book that applicable to urbanized territories
the most suitable method for computing the runoff hydrograph is the iso-
chrnnes method. Also considered are methods for calculating rain-induced
high waters from urbanized areas used in the United States. The author
writes that his task included emphasizing the inevitability of change in
the hydrological cycle as a result of urbanization and pointing out the
possible dangerous consequences of such changes. As an example the author
considers the inundations caused by urbanization.

in the book much attention is devoted to the water and water management
balances in urbanized areas (Chapter 7). The author gives a detailed an~
nlysis of the water balance structure for such a territory and studies
the changes in the role of individual balance components as a result of
man's economic activity. Also considered is a general formulation of the
problem and numerous specific examples are cited.

Evidently, it would not be erroneous to regard Chapter 7 as central in the
reviewed book because it virtually ties together most of the principal
hydrological aspects of urbanization considered in other chapters of the
hook. Indeed. it would be desirable to place this chapter at the beginning
of the book, for example. after Chapter 3. Incidentally, it should be noted
that the chapter devoted to erosion and sediments (chapter a) was not in
its proper place. The exposition would be more rigorous if it was placed
after Chapter 6 or at the end of the book.

The monograph includes the long Chapter 8. devoted to the anthropogenic in-
fluence (especially, urbanization) on water quality. Noting the great influ-
ence of the anthropogenic factor on the quality of natural waters, the auth—
or mentions the waste waters from industrial production and household-living
waste waters. We should also mention agricultural contamination, whose role
is constantly increasing and with which it is particularly difficult to
contend.

Clear examples are cited of the contamination of large water bodies in the
countries of Western Europe. United States and Japan.

in analyzing the totality of factors determining the effect of an urbanized
territory on water bodies, the author notes the possibility of discriminat-
ing those of them which can be subject to spatial generalization in their
hydrological-geographical aspect. Such an approach is extremely valuable be-
vnuac it can lead to an improvement in prediction of the influence of cities
on water resources in different natural zones. In this connection the char-
acteristics of household waste water and the surface runoff forming in ur-
han areas acquire considerable importance.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Considerable attention is being devoted to the anthropogenic eutrophication
of water bodies due to the excessive entry of biogenous substances into
then. ‘ﬂlllc correctly noting the major role of urbanization in the develop-
ment of this negative influence, the author at the some time passes over

In silence the process of agricultural contamination. which here frequent-
ly plays the primary role.

in touching on thermal contamination, the author cites extremely interest-
ing figures on the consumption and discharge of water by thermal and atom-
ic electric power stations. For example, by 1980 electric power stations
in the United States will use for the cooling of the plants about 1/5. and
by 2000 -~ about 1/3 of the annual runoff of the rivers in this country.

In the section devoted to self-purification and dilution of waste waters

in rivers, lakes and reservoirs, the dilution process is correctly regarded
as a component part of self-purification. The book gives a simplified meth-
od for computing dilution. by no means being universal and inapplicable to
lakes and reservoirs. It is to be regretted that the more modern and quite
universal method for computing dilution developed at the State hydrological
Institute has not been covered in the book under review, although it is
well known that this method is extremely widely used in practical work.

Among the shortcomings we must note a definite noncorrespondence between
the title of section 8.6 and the material presented therein. It gives only
methods for computing the mean concentration of contaminating substances
in river flows. whereas methods for evaluating the quality of river water
are not really touched upon.

In summarizing the results of this analysis of the monograph by V. V. Ku-
priyanov, we note, in particular, that this book must be regarded as the
first, but nevertheless a successful generalizing work on the hydrology
of urbanized areas. including all its principal aspects. Each of the as-
pects is exasined in a separate chapter giving the characteristics of the
process and an evaluation of the changes introduced by urbanization into
any element of the hydrological cycle and also in most cases including
recommendations on the computation method.

The Hydrometeorological Publishing House has produced a very useful and
very presentable book. It is intended for a wide range of specialists en-
gaged in a study of anthropogenic changes and preservation of the environ-
ment. for hydrologists, geographers and workers in the fields of communal
and water management.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SEVENTIETH BITRDAY OF NIKOLAY ALEKSANDROVICH BACROV
Moscow HETEOROLOCIYA I CIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 p 116

[Unsigned article]

 

[Text] Professor Nikolay Aleksandrovich Bagrov, Doctor of Physical and Math-
cmntical Sciences, Deputy Chief Editor of the journal METEOROLOGIYA I GIDRO—
LOCIYA, a leading professional meteorologist, creator of a new direction in
the field of weather forecasting on the basis of a physical-statistical de-
scription of atmospheric processes, marked his 70th birthday on 10 December.

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIXTIETH BIRTHDAY OF VASILIY IVANOVICR SAPOZNNIKOV
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 p 117

[Article by a group of fellow workers at the Hydrometeorological Center]

 

[Text] Doctor of Geographical Sciences Vasiliy Ivanovich Sapozhnikov, senior
scientific specialist at the USSR Hydrometeorologicsl Center, marked his
60th birthday on 21 December.

v. I. Sapozhnikov is a leading scientist in the field of hydrological fore—
casts.

Graduating from the Higher Military Hydrometeorological Institute in Decem—
ber 19b1, he took part in the Great Fatherland "at. For his successful exe-
cution of tasksnt the front he was awarded the orders Fatherland Har (Second
Degree), Red Star and many medals.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Proceeding in l9b6 to the post of engineer in the Division of Short-Range
Forecasts at the Central Institute of Forecasts. V. I. Sapozhnikov has
continuously worked at that institute (transformed in 1966 into the USSR
hydronetaorological Center), combining scientific and routine work in
servicing different branches of the national economy with hydrological
forecasts. Over a long period he headed first a section and then the
water forecasts laboratory for lowland rivers of the USSR.

he has written about 70 scientific studies, including the monographs OSNOVY
PhDGNOZA STOKA P0 ZAPASAH VODY V RECHNOY SET! (Principles of Forecasting
of Runoff from the Water Supplies in the River Network) (1956) and PROGNOZ
STOKA 33K V BASSEYNB VDLOI P0 RUSLOVYH ZAPASAH V00? I PRITOKU VODY V RECH-
hUYU SET' (Prediction of Runoff of Rivers in the Volga Basin from the Chan-
nel Supplies of hater and Water Inflow into the River Network) (1960).

in his scientific work he exhibits the greatest interest in problems relat-
ing to short- and long-range forecasting of high waters on rivers on the
basis of a determination of the intensity of spring melting of the snow. the
distribution of runoff and the travel-time of water in the river network.
heading investigations in this field in the Service, he gives much method-
ological assistance to specialists at other scientific institutes and local
administrations and directs graduate students and workers gaining addition-
al experience.

V. I. Sspozhnikov participated in the work of the Third and Fourth All-union
Hydrological Congresses. a number of union and international conferences
and seminars on hydrology, presenting scientific reports at them.

Over a number of years he was a member of the Scientific Council USSR Hydro-
meteorological Center; at the present time he is a mesber of the hydrology
Section of the Cbuncil. he is a member of the CPSU. he has been elected
Secretary of the Party organisation of the hydrometeorological Center.
Chairman of the Professional Committee of hydrological Sections, and has
taken an active part in many public measures.

Vnsiliy Ivanovich is full of strength and energy. We wish him further pro-
ductive scientific activity for the welfare of Soviet science.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AT INSTITUTES OP Th3 STATE COMMISSION ON HYDROHBTBOROLOGY
lioscow HE‘I‘BORDUJGIYA I GIDRDLOGIYA in Russian No 12, Dec 1978 pp 117-119
[Article by N. N. Podgayskiy and G. V. Cruse]

[Text] A session of the Technical Council of the Ural Administration of the
State Cbsmiesion on Hydrometeorology was held on 29 June. There was a dis-

cussion of the problem of the accuracy of chemical measurements in a study

of contamination of the environment - atmospheric air, water and soil.

In opening the session, the chief of the administration V. N. Bobchenko not-
ed that the discussed problem is of great scientific and practical import-
nnce. especially in connection with the fact that the study of the qualit-
ative state of the environment is the concern not only of the Hydrometeor-
ological Service, but also many Ural organizations of the Ministries of
Water Management, Health, Ferrous Metallurgy, Gosstroy, etc. However, these
studies are being carried out in different organizations by different meth-
ods, and in particular, in the taking. transport and analysis of samples
and their computation. This is reflected extremely clearly in the reliabil-
ity of the results of the qualitative state of atmospheric air, water and
soil and leads to contradictory conclusions.

The Technical Council, in whose work representatives of different organize-
tlons participated (Ural Scientific Research Institute of Hater Management,
"blast Sanitary-Epidemiological Station, Ural Division of the Institute
"Tcploelehtroproyekt," Sverdlovsk Division of the Institute "Soyusvodo-
knnalproyekt" and others), deemed it necessary to standardize methods for
carrying out chemical measurements in all media.

The Sverdlovsk hydrometeorological Observatory was assigned the responsibil-
ity of formulating recommendations for increasing the quality of chemical
measurements. taking into account the peculiarities of the water, soil and
climate regimes of the territory of the Urals.

N. N. Pogayskiy

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
t.- ' run orncw. use ONLY

1|.

An American scientist. Doctor A. Murphy, a specialist from NOAA (Boulder,
United States). was in the Soviet Union during the period 17 June-16 July.
he is the director of a team for investigating the interaction between na-
ture and society and visited the State Commission on Uydrometeorology for
studying the problems relating to the statistical analysis of meteorolog-

lcal information and the exchange of scientific research data between the
USSR and the United States.

Murphy is actively working in the field of evaluation of the quality of sto-
chastic weather forecasts, methods for preparing subjective stochastic fore-
casts, and is also engaged in a determination of the value or economic cf-
fectiveness of such forecasts..he has published several tens of articles in
the leading journals of the American Meteorological Society.

The guest visited the Central Asian Regional Scientific Research hydrometeor-
ologlcal Institute (Tashkent). where he familiarized himself with the pro-
redures for preparing stochastic short-range weather forecasts, the USSR
Hydrometeoroiogical Center (Moscow), the All-Union Scientific Research In—
stitute of Mydrometeornlogical Information-World Data Center (Obninsk) and
the Main Geophysical Observatory (Leningrad).

During his visit Doctor Murphy presented several lectures and carried out a
great number of conversations with Soviet scientists. It follows from the
collected information that in the United States. since 1965, specialists

in the National Weather Service have everywhere initiated the preparation
of stochastic forecasts, or, as we sometimes say, forecasts in a stachastic
form, but for all practical purposes meaning a forecast of the probabilities
of the fact of falling of precipitation. These forecasts are prepared by
wenthermen by the method of subjective evaluation of the probability of the
fact of falling of precipitation. Use is made of all data at the disposal
of the weatherman (analyses, numerical forecasts, satellite data, etc.)
1hese forecasts in stochastic form are transmitted to the population. At
first there was inadequate understanding and resistance to the introduction

of these forecasts, but now they are in universal use and have won the wid-
est recognition.

ln addition to these subjective stochastic precipitation forecasts, NOAA
also prepares stochastic forecasts by objective methods. Objective fore-
casts are prepared in the so-called "MOS" system (Model Output Statistic)
on the basis of a statistical analysis of the results of numerical fore-
casts using hydrodynamic models. In this system a stochastic forecast of
different weather phenomena is given: the fact of the falling of precipit-
ation, altitude of the lower cloud boundary, visibility, etc. This inform-
ation is basic auxiliary information for weathermen at 120-130 large cit-
les in the United States. This information is used both in the preparation
of subjective stochastic precipitation forecasts and in remaining synoptic
forecasts as an auxiliary method. The works of Doctor Murphy give a pro-
found and thorough analysis of the quality of these subjective stochastic
forecasts and their high reliability is demonstrated (reality, that is,

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

correspondence of the predicted probabilities to the actually observed fre-
quencies) and also the fair accuracy (nreier evaluation).

Another direction in the studies of Doctor Murphy is an evaluation of the
economic effectiveness or value of meteorological and climatic information.
Numerous interesting results were also obtained in this field and the ba-
sic conclusion is drawn that forecasts in stochastic form are the most val-
uable and their value surpasses both the categoric forecasts (adopted in
the USSR) and the value of the climatic information. It seems that the
conclusion about the value of stochastic forecasts must be attentively
studied and used in forecasting practice in the Soviet Union.

An interesting theme was touched upon as a result of analysis of change in
the quality of weather forecasts during recent decades. A study was made
of many different data on the temporal change in the quality of hydrody-
nasic forecasts and weather forecasts by different weather bureaus and
prognostic institutes. It was found that during recent years there has

been a considerable decrease in the increase in the quality of the fore-
casts, and in many cases on the curve there is a "plateau" or even some de-
terioration in the quality of the forecasts. In the United States some
experiments have been carried out for clarifying the reasons for this sit-
uation. Murphy himself is a supporter of the point of view that the cessa-
tion of an increase in the quality of forecasts is associated with some
negative effect exerted on the weatherman by the availability of computer
objective forecasts. Since computer methods are used in the United States
for obtaining weather forecasts, and not only for forecasts of the general
situation. weathermen have begun to think less and make more use directly
of forecasts obtained using computers. In America this phenomenon is called
"meteorological cancer." Thus, the interaction between man and machine in
practical forecasting is the object of serious investigation.

Below we give the basic conclusions from the reports of Doctor Murphy in
his own formulation.

1. Objective and subjective stochastic weather forecasts are issued in the
United States on a routine basis. Objective stochastic forecasts are pro-
duced in the "HOS" system for a number of weather elements (statistics of
the results of numerical models) and are transmitted to forecasters at
local prognostic agencies as basic auxiliary information. Subjective sto-
chastic forecasts are formulated by forecasters only for precipitation and
are transmitted to the population.

2. Experienced forecasters can give a reliable and correct subjective quan-
titetive evaluation of the uncertainty inherent in weather forecasts, both
with the assistance of objective stochastic forecasts and without them.

3. The rates of improvement in the quality of forecasts of meteorological
fields and weather forecasts have slowed down during recent years. More-
over. the curve of increase in the quality of weather forecasts in 1970

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evidently attained a "plateau," which means either an absence of improve-
ment or even an insignificant deterioration in the forecasts.

4. Objective weather forecasts, used as basic information, can exert an
unfavorable effect on forecasters (psychological, etc.), in the last ans
alysis on the quality of subjective weather forecasts formulated by man.
The problea of interaction between can and machine in routine weather Tore-
casting requires serious investigations (at least in the United States).

5. Entirely reliable stochastic forecasts (that is, those in which the pre-
dicted probability corresponds to the observed frequency of the phenomenon)
are more valuable for the user than categoric and climatological. This con-

clusion was also correct for forecasts with different degrees of "reli-
ability."

6. In definite situations and under soee conditions there are sequential or
even functional relationships between the measures of accuracy and the sub-
sequent evaluation of the value of the stochastic forecasts. Therefore, in
some cases such relationships can give additional information on the value
of the forecasts. However, in situations with more than two states (or
events) there can be cases when more precise forecasts are less valuable
(with a subsequent evaluation).

7. Investigations of the value of weather forecasts almost always show that
the gain associated with the proper use of these forecasts exceeds (fre-
quently significantly!) the expenditures on obtaining them. These are
pleasant results, but they must be viewed with caution, especially since
the investigations are usually Iade on the basis of many assumptions and
also because these investigations are made by the forecasters themselves.

6. V. Gruza

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm (WPICIM. "SH "NI.

CONFERENCES. MEETINGS AND SEMINARS
Moscow MBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOOIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 119-121
[Article by N. P. Smirnov and B. I. Sarukhanyan]

[Text] The second Soviet-American Conference on the Program "ROLEX-South-
lntcrnational Program for Investigation of the Antarctic Ocean" was held dur-
lng the period 13-15 June at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in the halls of the
Massachusetts Instltute of Technology. It met for a discussion of the re-
sults of joint studies in the Antarctic Ocean in the course of 1977-1978

and the prospects for further investigations.

The Soviet delegation, including seven specialists, was headed by Corres-
ponding Member USSR Academy of Sciences A. P. Treshnikov. The United States
delegation. which organized the conference. was headed by Professor 6. Baker.
co-chairmaa of the executive committee of the International Program for In-
vestigation (f the Antarctic Ocean. In addition to Professor Baker. a num-
ber of leading specialists in the field of study of the Antarctic Ocean
participated in the conference on the American side.

The Soviet and American specialists presented 14 reports containing the prin—
cipal results of recent investigations in the Antarctic Ocean. A number of
reports also contained proposals for specific experiments which will be carr-
led out in the summer of 1978/1979 in the'region between Africa and Antarc-
tica. in Drake Strait and to the southeast of New Zealand. The second half
of the conference was devoted to a discussion of the direction for further
cooperation between the USSR and the United States in investigation of the
Antarctic Ocean.

without dwelling in detail on the reports presented by the participants, we
will note the principal scientific results discussed at the conference.

1he principal results of the three years of joint cooperation in the field
of investigations of the Antarctic Ocean were presented in a report by Cor-
responding Member USSR Academy of Sciences A. P. Treshnikov, who, while
giving a positive evaluation of the results of the cooperation, proposed a
number of major directions in which Soviet-American cooperation should de-
velop during the coming years. In other reports by Soviet participants

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the most detailed exposition was for the results of investigations carried
out in the Scotia Sea during the summer of 1977/1978. Also presented were
the results of instrumental measurements of velocities of the Antarctic
Circumpnlar Current. its structure and dynamics in the region of passage
across the South Antilles sill (report by A. F. Treshnikov, E. I. Saru-
khanyan, N. P. Smirnov). The unique data collected by Soviet researchers
are indicative of the unidirectionality of water flow in the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current in this particular region and the presence of high
bottom velocities (60-70 cm/aec). The report of N. P. Smirnov gave the
results of geostrophic computations of water circulation in the Scotia Sea
and an estimate of the water balance in the sea.

American researchers presented the results of a study of level fluctua-
tions using underwater mareographs in the neighborhood of Drake Strait (re-
port by D. Baker). Three annual series of level observations demonstrated
the presence of well-expressed fluctuations with 15-day and semi-annual
periods and also the existence of a trend. American researchers attribute
the first of these fluctuations to long-period semi-onthly tides. They re-
gard the semiannual fluctuation to be a result of the total effect exerted
on the ocean level by tidal disturbances with a semiannual period and semi-
annual variations of atmospheric processes.

The results of a study of the structure and dynamics of the zone of the
Antarctic polar front were examined in a report by B. V. Afanas'yev and

N. P. Smirnov. A report by W. Emery discussed the results of long-term
American observations of the Antarctic polar front in the neighborhood of
Drake Strait. The conclusions drawn by American researchers coincide with
the results of Soviet investigations in the Scotia Sea, in particular: the
relative stability of the mean position of the frontal zone and the varia-
bility scales, associated with formation of meanders and eddies.

A report presented by A. Gordon proposed a hypothesis concerning the form-
ation of a quasistationary polynia in the Weddell Sea and also the role
which the presence of such a polynia can play in the formation of Antarc-
tic bottom waters. As a result of the discussion, the hypothesis of a de-
cisive role of the upwelling of deep waters in the formation and mainten-
ance of the poiynia in the Heddell Sea was subjected to criticism. However,

the opinion was expressed that bottom waters can be formed in the polynia
region.

In the reports of American researchers great attention was devoted to an
analysis of the horizontal and vertical correlation of the variability of
currents in Drake Strait on the basis of instrumental observations (report
by F. Skiremammano). The principal objective of these investigations was
obtaining scientifically sound criteria for the planning of a new major ex—

periment for study of the structure and dynamics of the Antarctic Circum-
polnr Current in Drake Strait in 1979-1980.

At the conference there was also a discussion of the results of modeling
of water circulation in the Antarctic Ocean. For example, in a report by
V. V. Guretskiy. V. 0. Ivcheako and E. I. Ssrukhsnyan the authors presented

171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on original diagnostic nodal of circulation in the Antarctic Ocean and
proposed methods for the parameterization of mesoscale eddies in problems
involving description of global circulation.

K. Pendri gave an estimate of bsrotropic water transfer through Drake Strait.

In the field of study of energy exchange between the ocean and the atmosphere

and the energetics of the atmosphere, as before, the principal studies were
carried out by Soviet researchers.

A review of the results of instrumental observations of currents in Drake
Strait under a three-year program and a description of the structure of

the new "Drake-79" oceanic experiment were presented in a report by J. Mor-
rison. The experiment will be carried out in January 1979 and will involve
the placement of about 20 buoy stations with submerged buoys with current
meters and temperature meters over the entire area of Drake Strait for the
purpose of a quantitative description of the spatial-temporal variability
of the field of currents in this region at different scales.

A report by N. A. Kornilov and B. I. Sarukhsnyan was devoted to an exposition
«bf the results of long-term investigations on a section along 20°B and a
draft of a program for the oceanic experiment "POLEKS-Yug-79." The exper-
iment will be carried out in the region between Africa and Antarctica dur-
ing the first special observation period of the F063 and will include the
carrying out of a complex of aerometeorological observations on ships, place-
ment of FCC: drifting buoys, setting out of buoy stations with susergible

buoys, a hydrological survey of the water area and work in the polar frontal
zone.

Thus, in the course of the conference there was a presentation of the prin-
cipal results of Soviet and American investigations in the region of brake
Strait and the Scotia Sea, carried out during recent years. The investiga-
tions carried out within the framework of cooperation and represented in
the conference reports made it possible to advance considerably in an under-
standing of hydrophysical processes in the Antarctic Ocean, to determine

In considerable detail the structure of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
and the Antarctic polar front in the investigated regions, to obtain an
evaluation of water transport, and to evaluate the degree of influence of
the hydrological front on atmospheric processes. Thus, due to the joint
investigations there has been a marked increase in the effectiveness of
scientific research work.

This feeling is shared by both Soviet and American specialists, who in the
course of the discussion expressed complete satisfaction with the results
of the joint three-vear cooperation in the Antarctic Ocean and expressed
the opinion that it must be continued and intensified for the longest pos-
sible period. In the opinion of both sides, the main efforts must be di-
rected to solution of the problems in large-scale energy interaction be-
tween the atmosphere and ocean, the structures and dynamics of the

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Antarctic Circumpolar Current and the Antarctic polar front. as well as
the formation of Antarctic bottom waters.

The Soviet and American specialists agreed on specific measures for the
exchange of upccislists on ships and observational data. The opinion was
also expressed that it is desirable to exchange specialists in the field
of numerical modeling of circulation in the Antarctic Ocean between the
scientific rI-search institutes of the USSR and the United States. The pro-
posal of American researchers that there should be organization of a joint
oceanic experiment in the neighborhood of the Heddell Sea polynin was also
met with understanding.

Thus. this conference once again confirled the effectiveness of Soviet-

American cooperation in the field of investigations of the Antarctic Ocean
and the desirability of its development in the future.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD
Moscow ﬁETBORbLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 p 121
[Article by B. l. Silkinl

[Textl Smog arises primarily from interaction between automobile exhaust

and atmospheric oxygen in the presence of solar radiation forming an ade-
quate quantity of ozone for this purpose. however, the processes of inter-
action between ozone and the remaining atmospheric components. leading to
the appearance of such a phenomenon, have still been studied inadequately.

A recent discovery, node by the physicists R. Suenram and F. Lovas (US Bur-
eau of Standards), casts definite light on such processes. They established
the existence of a new class of organic substances -- dioxyrans, represent-
ed by a simple three-ring molecule consisting of carbon, hydrogen and oxy-
gen atoms and aerving as an "intermediary" in the smog formation process.

This discovery has led to a reexamination of the formulated models of smog
uhich laid resionsibility for this on the free radicals (unstable chemical
substances) forming during the interaction of automobile exhaust with ozone.
The investigations show that the reason lies in the appearance of less ac-
tive molecular compounds. such as dioxyran, created in the reaction between
ozone and ethylene. ejected by internal combustion engines.

The existence of dioxyran was postulated for the first time by the American
chemists H. R. Hodt and H. A. Doddard in 1975, but such a molecule could
not he discovered due to the fact that at the ordinary temperatures at
which the reaction transpires the lifetime of dioxyran is extremely short.
Suearam and Loves succeeded in doing this due to the use of low-temperature
microwave spectrography which stabilized matter for a time adequate for its
observation.

Then they studied the reaction between ozone and other final olefins (the
family of hydrocarbons to which, in particular, ethylene belongs). The next
stage In the investigation will be to determine specifically what dioxyran
romponent plays what particular role in smog furmation. This will probably
help In contending with smog. causing great damage to the health of the pop-
ulation in large cities.

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The eddylike currents recently discOVered in the world ocean are now being
investigated from space. For example. from aboard the American artificial
earth satellite "landnnt." situated at an altitude of 915 km above the
planetary surface, it was possible to take a space photograph on which _
at least eight individual formations of this type could be distinguished.

1he processing of the photograph, carried out at the US Geological Service.
Restan, Virginia, under the direction of R. 5. Williams. made it possible
to detect the existence of three well-developed double annular eddies at-
taining a length of 70 km. Some of these "rings" have a diameter of not
less than 30 km.

A study of the newly discovered phenomenon plays a major role in meteorol-
ogy and oceanolngy, including in the investigation of interaction between

the ocean and the atmosphere. in the tracing of the processes of contamin-
ation of the water medium. in measuring plankton productivity. etc.

tit

According to the concepts new prevailing among specialists, the movements
of water masses. especially those associated with action of the atmosphere,
are small at great depths in the ocean and cannot exert an influence on
bottom relief. however, recent investigations carried out in the Atlantic
Ocean. in the region of the Gillis underwater volcano (to the notheast of
Bermuda) have demonstrated that very significant movements of sedimentary
rocks are occurring on its slopes which it is difficult to explain on the
basis of such concepts.

Around the Giliis submarine mountain. whose peak is situated at an eleva-
tion of approximately 3 km above the ocean floor surrounding it, special-
ists placed a network of automatic current recorders on its slopes and at
depths attaining 5,000 m. The data registered by these instruments indicat-
ed that directly after the passage of hurricanes. which attain a great in—
tensity in the Bermuda region, new currents appear in the bottom layer,
even at a depth of 5 km. in three cases there was found to be a rather
considerable rate of movement of the water masses, attaining 30 cm/sec;
this happened each time after a hurricane.

Such sporadically arising and disappearing currents can fully explain the
redistribution of sedimentary materials on the slopes of Gillie volcano
and the significant change in local relief which is observed there.

COPYRIGHT: "Meteorologiyn i gidrologiya," 1978

5303 42""-
(280: IBM.

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY