APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R0001000400204

P1 -0 '. .0
noon «on (mun 3/79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8384

9 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
PoLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL; AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT MLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Haterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea, or following the
last line ot a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nstion was suuarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion ark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
ites: originate with the source. “lines within itens are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Govern-ent.

COPYRIGlT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSNIP OF
MRRIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINM‘ION
OP nus PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED MUFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS l
9 Apr:

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL; AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(pouo 3/79)

Coureurs

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

PRC Official Reviews work of FRO-60R Border Colliasion
(Klaus Otto Nana; EUROPA-ARCHIV, 10 Jan 79) ......

POLAND

Briefa
Military Salarica

ROMANIA

Romanian Independence Prom USSR Examined by French Source
(Jean Grand-ougin; VALEURS ACTUELLES. 22 Jan 79)..
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

no OFFICIAL REVIBHS woax 0P FRO-COR manta comssxou
boon EUROPA-MCI!“ in Ger-an 10 Jan 79 pp 19-28

[Article by Dr. jur. Klaus Otto Nsas. until 1976 department chair-an at

the European Comission in Brussels. now state secretary in the Ministry
for Scone-ice of Lower Saxony and for a period of alnoet 2 years. l976-l978.
Lower Saxony’s senber of the Border Co-ission]

[Text] The Protoccol Over the lnner-Gernan Border

For a period of aleost 6 years. fron 31 January l973-until 28 Novenber
1978. the Co-iasion. consisting of delegates free the govern-ants of the
no and the can (Border Co-ission). net at irregular but never too distant
intervals. alternating between towns of both Conan states. usually close
to the border. before the leaders of both delegations. each for his own
governlaent. on 29 Noveﬁer 1978 signed a docunent in Bonn which is identi-
fied as a "Protocol" between the two govern-cute.

A contract regarding the foundations of the relationship between the no
and the CDR (Basic Treaty) of 21 Deceeber 1972 had created this nixed
cnuission. It had given it a dual task: first. to control the border
nerkings between the two states end. if necessary. to renew or supplenent
then. as well as to compile the necessary docunentation regarding the
course of the border; secondly, the Border 00-ission was "likewise" to
contribute to the "settlement of other border-related problems. s.g..
water rights. supply of energy end pest control."1

With this Protocol. which consists of five articles and a footnote regarding
the Elbe River. the governeents sanction the results of all past work by
the Border emission. The Border Couission had aubnitted a report about
its past work. which is attached to the Protocol as Appendix 1.2 Further
attached to the Protocol are: Parts of the border documentation. as well
as a total of 20 agreements regarding other border-related problems. 12

of which had already gone into effect before the signing of the Protocol
and another 7 of which became effective at the tine of signing but which
had been (with one exception) in tentative use "beforehand." A few of
these agree-rents have only local significance for a certain area near the
border. but others would merit thorough consideration. which lust he omitted
here because of limited space.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

e

Prominent among these important texts is the regulation regarding pest
control at the border and principles regarding upkeep and extension of
water'reaources at the border. as well as their water supply installations;
iurther agreements about fishing in Lubeck Bay. soft coal mining in the
Barbke-helmstedt area. which covers land on both sides of the border. as
well as border crossings by recreational boats and other amphibious
vehicles on the Harra and Saale rivers. As far as the marking tasks of
the border Couission are concerned. it is evident from forber documents
and the report of the Border Commission that 1,296.7 km of border have
been surveyed geodetically. Not yet surveyed are border sectors 7-9
(Blbe River) (approximately 95 km) end a part of border section 26
(harms Bode) (approximately 1.2 km).3

Peculiaritiea of Inner-German Border Determination

The past work of the border Commission shows peculiarities in at least
three different respects:

First. according to Article 2 of the treaty regarding relations between
the PRC and the Three Powers (German Treaty) of 26 Hay 1952, the Three
Powers (Prance. Great britain. United States) retained those rights and
responsibilities regarding berlin and Germany as a whole and after the
transition of sovereignty to the PRC which they had held and exercised up
until then within the framework of the Four Power agreements. Therefore,
the government of the Federal Republic was not empowered to agree to any
deviation from the demarcation line of the inner-German border. which had
been drawn by the occupational powers.

The con acknowledged this limited sovereignty in Article 9 of the Basic
Treaty. which provides ”that through this treaty no earlier treaties by
them [the PR6 and the coal. or international treaties between two or
more parties concerning them. shall be affected."

This determination was related expressly to the agreements among the

Allies in correspondence between Federal Minister Egon Bahr and Secretary
of State Michael Kohl. In accordance with this general limitation. both
parties to the treaty stated concretely in the basic Treaty: ”The course

of the border...is established according to the determinations in the London
Protocol of 12 September 196‘. wherever the border deviates locally from
these doterninations on the basis of later agreements of the occupational
powers. its exact line is determined and marked by the Commission at the
site in question taking into consideration all relevant facts."6

The practical consequence of this legal position was sometimes costly
research into the intentions of the occupational powers as expressed either
in writing. orally or by inference. Thereby the "customarily used

border" visible in the terrain. which had not been changed after control
passed into German hands. served as an essential guideline.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly: In spite of this unaabiguous binding of the work of the Border
Con-ission to the allied agreenents regarding the borderline. different
interpretations regarding border rights exist on both sides. This dis-
crapancy is openly stated in the Basic Treaty. the introduction to which
expressly sentions the "differing opinions" of both states "on basic ques-
tions. anong then on the national question." To the GDR it is s national
border which is subject only to international law.5 The FRO. on the other
hand. goes by the ruling of its Suprese Court, which describes the border
"as a border between two states under constitutional law." with the
”peculiarity that it exists on the foundation of the still existing state
of ‘cernany as a whole.‘ so that it is therefore a state border sisiler
to those between the states of the Federal Republic."6

This difference of opinion regarding the legality was in itself without
significance as far as deterninstion of the intra-Gernan borderline is
concerned. However. it gained in significance through the initial ettenpt
of the con to formulate the documentation which concludes the past work
of the Border Connission. This atteapt failed. as will be shown below.

The "border policies"7 of the 60% are the third notable element, although
it is not the task of the border Consission to treat thee as such. lnci~
dents along the border adversely affected current talks sore than once.
The FRO delegation tried to contribute to clearing up and avoiding such
incidents. It was beyond the powers of the Rest Gernan delegation to pre-
vent the GDR fron systenaticslly building up its fortified installations.
even during the last 6 years. The Border Con-lesion has. nevetheless.
contributed to a decrease of tensions at the intro-German border to an
extent which is not yet fully neasurable.

About the Problesatic Fature of a Coaprehensive nocunent

Deternination of the border is at any rate one prerequisite along others
for the prevention of border conflicts. why did the PRC agree to this
Protocol which. although it clarifies the borderline, does not noticeably
lessen the inhunanity of the GDR "border policies"? This question
ultinstely contains a criticisn of the Basic Treaty. which established the
Border Conaission and charged it with the deter-ination of the borderline
and the handling of other borderline-related probleus. The Basic Treaty
is, however. in the interpretation given by the Suprene Court. the legal
authority; pacts sunt servanda.

but isn't there a danger that the GDR will atteapt to attribute to this
Protocol the character of a treaty. of an international border treaty?
Surely the 608 would like to see the Border Connission as a con-ission
exclusively under international law. In the opinion of the Tao. however.
what is special about the Basic Treaty (and. therefore. the border
Connission as well) is "that. although it is a bilateral treaty between
two states which is subject to international law and which has the sane
validity as any other international treaty. it is between two states which
nre parts of a still existing. if inoperative. enconpassing state of a

3
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
P08 OFPICIAL USE OﬂlY

totel Germsny with e homogeneous populetion..."8 No one can expect thet
the 608 will enbrece this view. Anyone not wenting to supply the GDR
with the pretext for describing e docueent es s purely international
tresty would heve to sinply reject eny negotietions end egreeuents with
the con.

At eny rete. it wee edventegeoue to recepitulete the extensive results

of yeers of work of the Border Commission. If one wishes to eppreciete

the chosen for- of e government protocol. it must be seen sgsinet the heck-
ground of the interests of both negotieting pertners. Hhile possibly e
report of the Border Comeission could. in soon respects. hsve been setis-
rectory to the Pederel Republic. two demands of the GDR reeeiu unfulfilled.
nemely. the conclusion of e formel tresty end its fornsl rstificetion.

In other respects. certein eepects of the discussion (which ensued during
the provisionel signing of the document in the PRC) over the treaty neture
of the Protocol in the sense of Article 102 of the UN Chsrter9 did not
eddreee the ectusl problen. The document is. in view of the speciel neture
of intre-cermsn relations. not en "internetionel" egreement; in perticuler.
neither the lesic Treety nor its subsequent egreenents ere filed with the
United Netione. But even if the document could be registered with the UN
Secreteriet. the exclusively decleretory cherecter of the border determine-
tion in the border docueentntion could in no wey be disputed. The decisive
criterie for judging the governeent Protocol is this question: does the
docu-ent contein e constitutionel border deterninetion. or does it merely
give the eppeerence of en eutonomous sgreenent between the two Gernen states
regerding the course of the border sepereting thee.

lot e Conetitutionel Border Deter-instion

The enswer ie unembiguous: No. The more intensively one exeeinee the
wording of the Protocol. the more it becomes clear thet it does not pernit
eny other interpretation. Even its Preeeble makes clear thet the entire
doculent rests ”on the beeie of the tresty of 21 Decesber 1972." which hed
instituted the Border Con-lesion. Taken into consideretion ere Article 9
regerding rights reserved to the Allies. es well as the Protocol definition
regsrding the tesks of the Border Coneiseion. with its express reference

to the London Protocol end leter egreenents there between the occupational
powers. In eddition. the eddendun which outlines the tasks of the Border
Com-iseion end the Protocol definition lentioned sbove ere cited five
sdditionel times (Art 1. per 3: Art 6. per 1; Protocol footnote Elbe No 1:
Protocol footnote Elbe No 2; neport of the Border Comrfseion No 1). One

cen hardly imsgine e closer interpretation of the Issic ..-sty clause. in
which the 603 slso expressly ecknowledged the principle of s nonconstitutionel
border drewn by the occupetionel powers. To the contrery. 34 yeers efter the
conclusion of the London Protocol e coenon text of both Germsn etetes

refers to this Allied legel foundation.

b
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nor can this interpretation of the text be weakencd by referring to the

(act that the Preamble contains clauses which in part appear to be de-

rived from the Final Act of the 6868 [Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe] (e.g.. "refraining tron threats of force or use of force."
”inviobility“ of the border. “unliaited respect for territorial integrity“).
or those which belong to the universally recognized rules of international
law. All elesents within the Preamble are (also) contained in the Basic
Treaty (Preamble and Article 3. which is the basis of the Border Commission).
and any enumeration in the Preamble of the document is subordinated to the
reference to the Basic Treaty by the preceding word "accordingly" ("on

the basis of the treaty...accordingly in the effort..."). Thus it is clear:
The Basic Treaty is the sole basis for the Protocol. and neither formulas

of the C508 Final Act nor general rules of international law, but only

parts of the Basic Treaty. are repeated in the Preamble of the Protocol.

This interpretation of the document as a text which merely notes but does
not change the borderline is confirmed in many instances; such as when the
"existing" border is mentioned (heading. Article 1. etc.). such as when
Article 2 speaks expressly of the "determined course of the border existing
between the PBS and the 608.“ and simply by the fact that both governments
have evidently not reached agreement on the Preamble. as in the basic Treaty.
but rather merely say that they "agree.”

Pinally. the governaent Protocol itself does not mention border markings.
but rather confirms that the work of the Border Commission agrees with the
basic Treaty. This border documentation has been available for years at
the bureau of Survey for the respective border segments. Both sides in
the Border Commission had agreed on the points in time on which they based
their practical measures from the verified. marked and surveyed borderline.

It is unambiguous that the test has neither drawn new borders nor claims
to autonomously redraw the borders drawn according to occupational law.
And in addition: the document. in contrast to the Basic Treaty. changes
nothing as for as the legal nature of the border is concerned. nor does’it
change the legal character of the relations between the two German states.
After the signing of the document. as well as before. these relations
have the same character as that outlined by the Federal Supreme Court
decision of 31 Ju'y 1973. ,
Prom that it can also be concluded that the PRC cannot be accused of not
having improved its legal position as compared with the Basic Treaty. Such
a basic inprovement was not the goal of the negotiations. and could not

be the goal of the'negotiations. if the corresponding intentions of the one
were to be met with as much success as was actually achieved (e.g.. the

CDR intention to conclude a treaty with constitutional clauses). considering
the initial regulations binding both sides.

There might also be criticism of the fact that the Preamble of this Protocol
did not--as. for example. the Preamble of the Pour Power Pact of 3 September

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYPICIAL USE ONLY

1971 on Berlin--contsin a passage like "without damaging their legal
position." Even such criticism would misunderstand the character of this
Protocol. which is dependent on the Basic Treaty (especially regarding the
national question and citizenship problems). On the contrary. an un-
specific. general. legsl reservation on both sides which deviated free

the Basic Treaty would have given to the GDR a pretext for claiming that the
Protocol had departed from the understanding achieved in the Basic Treaty
binding the obligations of the occupational powers. A reservation was
indeed included where it was meaningful. namely. regarding the unsolved
Elbe River question.

The Omission of the Blbe River

In four border segments (Elbe and part of the Harebach Harme Bode) there
was a failure to achieve an understanding on the borderline determined by
_the occupational powers. The problems relating to the course of the Elbe
borderlo cannot be dealt with in this report. it may suffice to mention
that the Second Criminal Panel of the Supreme Court in justifying a de-
cision, stated on 2 February 1977: "At Blbekilometer $40.5. according to
historic development. the border between the PRC and the GDR runs along the
east bank of the Elbe River"; the con. on the other hand. according to a
decision by the chairman of its highest court on 9 November 1977, assumes

a lovable border on the river. namely. the lowest point of the valley. that
is. the channel.

As far as the Blbe River is concerned. the work of the Border Commission is
not yet concluded but continues. Both parties are in agreement on this in
the document (Protocol Art 1; Protocol footnote Elbe No l and 2). Therefore,
it was not a case of the application of Protocol definition No 3 of the tasks
of the border Commission. which states: "If the Commission cannot reach
agreement on a problem at hand. this problem will be submitted by both

sides to their governments. which will settle it by way of negotiations."

By this formal statement, which essentially agrees not to agree. government
negotiations on the Elbe border could be avoided. The GDR, on the other
hand. had a fundamental interest in continuing work on this problem, es-
pecially since the unresolved Elbe border could be considered a symbol of
the unresolved German question. In spite of this symbolic content. the PRC
could, even had to. consent to the CDR wish not to change the legal position
outlined in the Basic Treaty through this Pratocol, especially in compliance
with the above-mentioned principle. For that reason it was able to confirm
that the mission of the Border Commission. which has no time limit. remains
in existence.

Thus, whl is in effect is the expressly stated willingness to continue

the work n :nly of ascertaining the course of the border but also of
other related problems. for example. the exercise of fishing rights on the
entire river and in the sloughs of its eastern bank. The PRC'a interest

in solving such questions was quite intense but nevertheless did not lead it
to question basic principles for the sake of practical solutions.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Avoidable Border Incidents

Even in the future the lack of ambiguity which could be achieved at other
border segments through border documentation will. therefore. not be achieved
at the Elbe River. which. incidentally. is a Federal waterway according to
the addendua to the Federal Haterways Law of 2 April 1968. But. now as
before. the river is navigated by ships of the PRC and the 60R. In the
Protocol footnote mentioned above. both sides start iron the premise that
the traffic treaty of 26 Hay 1972 continues to apply to this area. This
treaty. however. does not regulate in detail the coexistence of ships from
both states on the Elbe River (compare. especially. the Protocol footnote
to Article 23 of the traffic tresty).11 In view of the bilaterally unregu-
lated responsibilities and the unresolved borderline. the potential for
conflict on this river can flare up at any tine. The previously mentioned
principles for pest control at the border which were worked out by the
border Cosmission on 20 Septeaber actually also apply to the border seg-
ments in the Elbe region; but. (or example. the bilateral obligation it
contains. "to take all possible measures...to prevent the occurrence of
daaages to the area of the other state" (Article 6). presumes an sgreeaent
as to where the area of the other state begins and one'a own area ends.

For that reason. there is special significance in that part of the Protocol
footnote referring to Elbe—related problems which says: "Until an agreement
is reached, bath sides will continue to take into consideration the cir-
cumstance that the work regarding border segments 7-9 has not been concluded."
In clauses. both governments thus declare their willingness to avoid con—
flicts which could arise through the unresclved border question in the Elbe
area. This sentence does not contain a bias favoring a certain course

of the border. not even in the reference to the past ("will continue to"):
it particularly does not provide any binding arrangement which goes beyond
the traffic treaty regarding existing practice on the Elbe River. ”With

all aessures"-those are measures in "border segments 7 to 9." Where the
border runs. whether on the river itself or along the east bank sloughs.
reaains open. Additionally. the following sentence contains a reservation
regarding the "interpretation of the legal position."

The value of such clauses is. however. questionable. as long as the views
about a "provocation" at the border are as far apart as they are between

the con and the PRC. When the GDR party secretary. Erich Honecker. declares.
”In 1976 alone more than 1.000 provocations and attempts against our border
troops were made by the PRC." then he has-~assuaing the nusber is correct--
counted every furrow that a West German farmer has illegally. but not
necessarily intentionally. plowed on GDR soil. Such border violations by
the GDR are not even possible. because the land at the border is not used
agriculturally; rather. there is a continuous belt of fortifications and
barrier installations between the border and the population which is aeant
to prevent not only accidental. but especially intentional. border crossings
from east to west.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation is ainilar in the border region of the Elbe River: while
anyone nay row on or swis in the river fron the west bank of the river.
river access fro. the GDR side is prohibited to private individuals. A

Best Ger-an pleasure boat which gets into the eastern alougha is considered
a border provocateur. However, not every West Gernnn pleasure boater

acts as the sonewhet dangerous situation densnds. If the 601! should desire
a conflict on the Elbe River. it could always create or find a pretext.
whether all is "caln" on the Elbe River does not depend on what is happening
on the river as Iuch as on the total nature of the relations between the two
neighbors. Clauses like the one cited above are proof of the good will--

at least at present--of the signatories. As for the rest. the border prac-
ticea of the GDR. as long as they are not fundaeentally changed undeniably
rennin "a special hindrance to the nornslization of relations."i2

Nture “tasks of the border Co-ission

Can the Border Co-isaion help prevent border incidents in the future? _
According to the Protocol. the Border Co-ission continues in existence.
when the Border Cos-ission began its activities. both delegations had
stated in Protocol footnotes that the agreeeents on pest control and

border waters were to go "into effect together with the docunents concluding
the work of the border Conission." Its task. however, has no tine linit.
according to the Basic Treaty. The future tasks of the Border Couission
will be (besides continued adv. ce on Elbe-related problens) the checking
and. if necessary. replacing of narkers, participation in the carrying

out of agreenents concluded or prepared by it, as well as "discussion of
further problems related to the course of the border."13 The responsibility
of the Border Co-ission to contribute to the settlement of border incidents,
which is thus implied. does not linit the jurisdiction of the permanent
representatives in Bonn and East Berlin; neither are parallel actions on
both avenues excluded. but routine nethods on the bureaucratic level in

a regularly convening emission are eoeetines better suited for easing the
situation than proceedings of e lore political nature.

The Protocol now concluded refers expressly to the legal principles which
have applied until now for the work of the Border Co-iseion (Art 0. par

1; Art 4.. par 2; as well as "principles according to Article lo" attached

as Appendix IV). with that it is nade clear that this is the sane Border
Couission that the Basic Treaty institut‘ed and not a new conisaion based
on this Protocol. To be sure. sons policies which until now have been
unofficially in use are not specified in writing; but as before. Article

3. Addendu- to the Protocol. and the Protocol definitions of the Basic
Treaty rennin in effect. Further evidence of this is the fact that. al-
though work on border segeents 7 to 9 is to be "continued," the decisive
detersinations of the Basic Treaty (as. for exanple, the passage stating that
"the necessary docunentation regarding the borderline" lust be compiled are

not repeated.

The Border Co-iseion will therefore continue to deal with all problems
relating to narkings and the borderline. As before there is no possibility

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of direct negotiations between. for example. a West German Kreis adainistra-
tion or state administration with the corresponding local officials of the
GDR. That does not rule out the possibility that local experts (e.g.. a
geodeticist) can be consulted or given special assignments by the Border
Commission. Two reasons are decisive for this concentration of tasks: First-
the centrally organised 60R is totally unwilling to delegate power; and
second. the special nature of inner-Geraan relations includes a central
jurisdiction of the PRC in relation to the GDR which night even exceed the
general rights of the Federation to foreign representation as laid down in
Article 32 of the Constitution. It even governs matters within the PRC
which are subject to exclusive international jurisdiction; this has been
confirmed indirectly by the Federal Supreae Court in that it declared the
Basic Treaty valid. not subject to modification by state legislatures,

even in those cases in which it regulates international matters (e.g..
Article 7 regarding cooperation in the cultural field, as well as point

No 10 of the Addendua to Article 7 of the Protocol regarding radio and
television).

As the above arguments have shown. the significance of the Protocol lies,
on the one hand, in the confirmation that the border between the two states
(except for Elbe and Horne Bode) was unambiguously aarked and documented
by the Border Commission. and. on the other hand, in the settlement of
numerous. mostly local problems.

The border policies of the GDR are, however. not relaxed by this Protocol;
they continue to harden the relations between the PRC and the GDR. But
the Border Commission has. in the past. contributed to the avoidance, or
rather, settlement of border incidents. It is hoped that it will succeed
in that in the future as well.

The policy of keeping the German question open will be successful only if
both states continue to talk and if misunderstandings and prejudices are
reduced. 0n the other side, the GDR leadership. for reasons of self-
identity, continues to need a policy of demarcation toward the PRC. which
limits the possibilities of talks. Seen in this light. the border Commission
does not contribute to the German partition but. on the contrary, by con-
tinuous dialog. to increased bilateral understanding.

FOOTNOTES

1. Article 3. Basic Treaty of 21 Deceaber 1972; Addendum to Protocol to
Article 3. Basic Treaty, as well as Protocol definition of the tasks of
the Border Connission by both leaders of the delegation. also of 21
Deceaber 1972. Quoted in 3031 11. 1973/1, p #21 ff; EA 1/1973. p
D13 ff.

2. Compare Protocol wording and certain attachments on p 03 ff.

3. Compare in detail: "The border Commission--A Documentation of Principles
and Activities." published by the Federal Ministry for Inner-German
Relations, Bonn. November 1978.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.
5.

6.

-I.

a.
9.
10.

11.
12.

11‘

FOR OPPICIAL USE OQLY

Protocol Dcfinition (footnote 1).

Coopera, for axonple. Erich lloneclter, interview by SMRBRUBCKBR ZBITUNG.
19. 20 and 21 Furuary 1978; excerpts in BA 20/1978, p 51.9 ff (550).

Constitutional Law of 31 July 1973. Constitutional Lave Vol 36. p 26.
For an apparently differing opinion. nee Karl Rainer and Peter Rouen.
“The Beetern Policiea of the PRC in the (rework of Western Politics
of Detente." in "Die international. Politik 1970-72.” Huenchen-Hien
1978. p 179.

Conpare "anrterhuch au- Soeialintiechen Staat." Dian-Varies. Berlin
197‘. 9 3‘3.

Constitutional Lava. Vol 36. p 23.
Compare WM?“ ALLOWINB zen-vac. 27 October 1978.

Coepare Dietrich Rauachnina. "Peatehrift fuer Eberhard Henrel. Berlin
1975 p. 492 fi.

Quoted in: BA 13/l972. p 0320 ff (Protocol footnote p 0327).

Federal ainiater for inner-Conan relations, "Report and Docunentation
of the Development of Relation. Betveen the PRC and the 6011 1969-1976."
9 l7.

Ooepare No 21. paragraph 3 of the ”Principlea of Art. In" of the
Protocol. 9 D5.

comma-r: 1979 Verlag fuer Internationale Politik Mh. Bonn

9328

850:

3103

10
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POW!)

BRIEFS

mum SALARIES-Joana Poles, obliged to nerve for two or three years
with a salary ranging from 170 zloty: for a private to 250 zlotye for e
corporal, nevertheleu are proud to Join an army which is not only a tech-
nical school but eleo a school or social ettitudee, combat hardening

and discipline. And above ell, be is really considered "3 m" when he
returns n-on military service. [Em-p37 [Pu-1a m D'Awm'm
no 37. Jen-Feb 19 pp 116-15]

680: 3100

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE OIILY

mane 1W3 m USSR mm B! FRENCH SOURCE
Perie VALEURS ecrutuzs in French 22 Jen 79 pp 36-37
[Article by Jeen Orenthougin]

[Text] Ceehodie, the Hereew Pect: Ronenie eccentuetee ite diplonetic
independence free the USSR. 'l'he threet of erned nornelitetion tekee ehepe.

Nicolee Ceeuceecu'e regine continuee ite internel rigidity end fleunte e
diplolecy which differe with the Rte-lie. A phenomenon due to the country'e
”letinity?" In eny ceee, three deye before leet week'e reception of
Giecerd d'Seteing. who to eone extent ie a epokeenen for the ﬂeet. luchereet
knocked up egeinet Hoecow over Ceebodie.

In effect. the Ronenien Co-uniet Perty ceneured the inveeion of the country
by Vietneneee troope. "There ie no juetificetion. in eny fen. thet wer-
rente one country interfering in the effeire of enother," it wee eteted.

‘l'hie wee not e triel flight for Ceeuceecu. During leet Noveder'e lbecow
neeting of the coneulting co-eittee for the Vereew Pect. the Ronenien chief
of etete hed refuted to eccede to two Rueeien duende:

Though Ronnie contributee e here 3 percent of the Pect'e nilitery budget.
it would not egree to en increeee. The reeeon: "lnteneificetion of ene-
nente will neke inprovenente in the people'e etenderd of living inpouible."
"Denegogic reeeoning," Brezhnev proteeted. whet ie heppening. he eeid.

ie "unileterel dieerne-ent ."

Oeeuceecu would not agree to greeter integretion of Pect forcee. lie
effirned: "He will never ellow eny Ronenien unit or eny Ronenien eoldier
to receive ordere frcn e foreign eource. we seen to run oureelvee."

Under cover of reforming the Pect, the Rueeiene intend drewing their Euro-
peen elliee into their querrel with Chine. Juet ee Vietnel'e entry into
can reeulted in Reetern Burope teking on e pert of the burden of econonic
eid to Vietnen. eo it wee enticipeted thet Vietnn'e entry into the Uereev
Pect during Prine Minieter Phele Ven Dong'e vieit to lioecow in eerly Revu-
her would enteil nilitery eid.

12
roe OHICIAI. US! ONLY
POI! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Thie would lead the 0833'. European partnere to aide with it in the con-
ilict with China. even to military operatione in Aeia or elaewhere, not
covered by the ﬂareaw Pact. 'lhe Pact envieagee only "looting imperialist
aggreeaion againet eocialiet countriea in Europe." Ceauceecu ruinded then.
Though for tr. llueeiane the chineee have becone the toole of M10 in Aaia.
for the Ruaniana the chineee are to be conaidered ae frienda.

beat «nor. to the Krenlin'e diepleaaure. the unineee preeident, llua
Quoteng [liua Kuo-feng], vieited buchareet. And it licolae Ceauceecu talke
of Harlow Pact reiorn. it ie to advocate that etaff leaderahip be taken in
turn by a repreaentative of each umber nation-~a roforn the 0881! la not
able to accept.

Laet hove-bar Soviet troop novuente near the Bonanian frontier having
been reported. Carter had diepatched to luchareet hie eecretary of the
neaeury. Hr Bit-enthal, charging hi- to deliver to Ceauceecu during their
901inute talk a neaeage congratulating hin on hie "cooetructive role.”

With 160,000 an and 300 Hic'a over a LNG-kilometer border. both land

and aea, the ”Ionian Any would hardly preeent exceeeive reeietance to a
Soviet incureion. but Ceauceecu aaee hinaelt aa without fault. Par iron
preaching the Inneniet look for eocialiu. In Ronnie, he naintaine the
loot Staliniet regine of all the Beat European countriee except for Albania.
Ccauceecu hee lore power than Irerhnev. Like Stalin. he hae kept any poe-
eible aucceeoore at a dietance. by none of "executive rotation" every

two or three yeara. Reunion leadera change aeeigt-ent. traneterred by the
party in the adninietration. they nova iron one region to another without
being given tine to eatabliah a baae.

Only the chief of atate'a (-ily eacapee the naeletron: Slena Ceauceecu,
who haa juet received on her birthday the nodal of the Star of the Social-
iet Republic of mania. iirat clue; and Caauceacu'e eon-in-law, plated
at the head of etudent organisatione. ea well ae eone coueino.

General Pacepa‘e detection to the "eat, the head of Security. gave
Ceauceacu an opportunity oi getting rid of anyone euepect for "lack of
vigilance." or otherwioe eaid, oi fidelity to his pereonally.

but the Ito-anion econouy will not obey theae rulee: it deterioratca and
diecontent ie growing. In 1977. 30,000 ninere in the cm valley went on
etrilta anducuriouelyubd houra after a vieit fro- the chief of etate
the Piteeti refinery wae accidentally deetroyed.

Ceauceecu knowe very well he nuet have a loophole for eacape ehould there

be a cleen oweep node "otter Brezhnev." Thie ie why he ie raking in pledgee.
thinking there will be no need to redeen thu. sip of independence: he
haen't given up on conetructing a Reunion airplane to market it not to
China at leaet to the ‘l'bird world. ‘Ihe Roleniane have inveeted 350 nillion
dollare in an aeeenbly line eat up for a highly eophiaticated plane. poe-
eibly of demo origin.

13
ton OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

Ae for the Rueeiene, they ero etill working to encircle Roeenie. ‘lhe
Roueniene heving elweye refueed to open e corridor through their terriv
tory for Soviet or other troope to one through to bulgerie, the Soviets
heve recently put four ferry hoete into deily eervice on the Black See
between Ilychev, eouth of Odeeee, end Verne. Pour fifthe of the treffic
between USSR and lulgerie ie by cergo boot. The Inc fifth treneite
through Ronnie by reil. But the width of the trecke being different in
Rueeie fru the reet of Europe, the Rueeiene coeploin thet eerchendiec
ehipente teko up to four weeke to get ecroee Ronnie. henceforth this
treffic will he eeeurod by the ferrice.

Prelude to e blockede? Beth ferry cen teke on hoerd 100 reilroed cere or
130 Soviet 1'62 tenke. Soviet tenke lending in lulgerie will find theneelvee
480 kilo-etere from Yugoelevie, 1.00 fru Greece end 280 free Turkey. The
Yugoeleve ere pricking up their eere. They know thet to etteck then the
leetern forcee uuet go through Hungery end Bulgerie. So it ie leid out in
the Polerke plen reveeled by Generel Pecepe.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "Veleure ectuellee"

8860
080: 3100 END

16
[OR OHICMI. US! MY