APPROVID FOR R-L-A-I: ZOOTIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOIOROOO‘UOOOOOOIZ-O
FOR OrFlL'IAL USE WLY

JPRS L/8416
24 April 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPf'ENTS
FOU0 No. 1458

U. S. JOINT PUBLICAT!ONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriste in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFPICIAL USE ONLY.
l-‘OR OF‘l-‘ICTM. “SI-2 ONLY

JPRS L/84
24 April

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE. AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
rouo No. 458

CONTENTS

Results, Weaknesses of Nation' 3 Nuclear Program Viewed
(MChel "Crblay; L'EXPANSION, Feb 79) eeeooeoeeeooeeeoeeoeeee

French-Invented Steam Generator Seen Too Late for M's
(hue? "eager; LB MON“, 8 "a? 79) ooeeeeeeooeeeeee.oeuoeeoe
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KPSULTS, HBAKNBSSES OF NATION'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM VIEUED
Paris L'BXPANSION in French Feb 79 pp 106-107. 109, 111
[Article by Michel Herblay: "The Everyday Atom"]

[Text] Reader, my friend, you who are going through this issue of L'EXPANSION,
you get your lighting 1 Jay out of 6 from electricity of nuclear origin. If
you were a citizen of Federal Germany. it would be one day out of nine, if
Brltish. one day out of eight, and. if Belgian, one day out of four. Nuclear
energy has invaded our daily life softly. in spite of the protests and the

hue and cry of the "opposition.” Simply at the present, still modest, rate.
the ates represents for Prance a saving of 8.5 million tons of oil per year.
That is not much? It is close to 1 billion dollars.

0n the world scale, about 600 Terawatt-hours (billions of Kilowatt hours)

of nuclear electricity were produced in 1978: without them. it would have
been necessary to extract 132 additional million tons of oil-half the Iran-
ian production or 200 sillion tons of coal. Last sulmer 228 reactors were
humming throughout the world. or rather in the 22 countries sufficiently in-
dustrialized to have them. Hith incidents, but no accidents. As many build-
ing yards were open, heavy machinery whose completion takes 6 to 8 years.
each requiring half a billion to 1 billion dollars investments. "Nuclear"
energy is no longer a working hypothesis, a dream of the technicians, approved
or opposed. but an industrial data already of long standing. That is what
caused the sociologist Alain Touraine to say, at the recent 'National As-
sizes against Nuclear Bncrgy.’ that the opposition movement incurred the

risk of “weakening with the launching of the first PHI [pressurised-water
reactor] power stations (the French line being implemented). of becoming ex-
hausted towards 1981. and disappearing."

Is it too early to attempt a first technical. industrial, economic and human
evaluation? The Professionals. who are always prudent. until cruising con-
ditlons are reached. would no doubt prefer to seat after 10 years, when the
stages of prototypes, the units preceding mass production and the first of the
Ins” produced units are only subjects of history. ”It took a long ties to
accomplish”, said Remy Carle. 30? head of thermal (hence. increasingly nuclear)

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

production. "But this very slowness. both intentional and inflicted. was

beneficial: in this age, we have no right to permit a failure in a decisive
technological notation." -

"it works"

To fail in a mutation...The first cargo boat carrying liquid methane exploded
in an American port. causing hundreds of victims. and for 20 years. no one
dared to return to planning such a "floating bomb" project. Today. oil
tankers operate without any incident. but up to today. the project of setting
up a nuclear unit in the Pen area has been blocked by this argunent: and
what if a tanker. calling at the Foo terminal. were to explode. how would

the power station resist? The latter cannot explode physically. but no one

is unaware of the fact that the nuclear reation is not a harmless phenomenon.
Hiroshina will be an eternal reminder.

It took a long tine. but "it works.“ Almost better than the first 250 megawatt
coal and fuel units. at the beginning of the 60's. Rely Carle who is oper-
ating this equipment. designed and nsnufactured by others. plots "availability
curvas” which. it see-s. are envied by the Americans. In cruising conditions.
a standardized and "adult” (more than three years old) piece of equipment
would be able to operate at 85 percent full power. the remaining 15 being
devoted to the need of refueling and current maintenance. Before this fourth
year. the power station is supposed to have paid the price for the running in
and the "childhood diseases." a price which is higher in the case of pre-
series or the first unit of the standard production. The P30" [Production

of Energy of Nuclear Origin] Co-isaion first assumed a 36 percent availability
during the first year of operation of a unit at the 900-megawatt level. a

rate it then increased to 50 percent. i.e., 6.260 hours.

Now. it was observed that:

--The Hestinghouse reference unit (Beaver Valley). from which Pranatome de-
rives its licence. had not reached 3,000 hours;

--Pessenheim i crossed correctly the 50 percent level;

--Tihanne (Franco-Belgian) and Pessenheim il crossed it with three months to
spare;

--None of the first classical thermal units of the 250 and 600-negawatt level

had attained a 50 percent availability; only the first 700-megswatt fuel unit.
at Cordemals. had been able to compete with Pessenheim I. but is nonetheless
beaten by Tihange and Fessenheim II.

From the technical point of view. the French have been successful. and this
is readily agreed to in the international seminars. is that an accident?
If not. how could it be explained?

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂiree nuclear units do not represent reliable statistical data, and bath at
EDP [French Electric (Power) Company] and Prematome. they ”are touching wood."
The role played by chance will only be confirmed by 1981. when the four Tri-
castin units are operating (they represent the real standard industrial aer-
ies). ”He profited by a privilege of which we are fully aware." the people

at Pranutome admit. "The Americans are the ones who bore the brunt."

This tribute. materialized into a fee paid to Heatinghouae ("not much for

the service rendered." Pramatome specified: 5 percent of the cost of the
reactor. less than 2 percent of the cost of the power station) is one willingly
paid by 80?. General Electric and Westinghouse have paid for their appren-
ticeship hy tremendous losses. exceeding 1 billion dollars. The great Ger-

man company A36 [Allgemeine Blektrizitaets Gesellschaft] was almost destroyed
and had finally to give up nuclear energy. This is therefore the first-
considerable-advantage. and one which was not contradicted by the experience
previously acquired in France with the graphite-gas line: the practical and
economical aspects of a prototype and a standard equipment cannot be compared.

The second chance factor. not observed anywhere else. is the EDP strategy
for standardizing the orders. This is an old story. relating to the un-
pleasant aemory of the implementation of the 250-megawatt coal and fuel
level. The first 8 units of this series. coupled from 1961 to 1965, had an
availability of only 22 percent during the first year of operation. They
were ordered, one unit at a time, often from different sources. often from
rival suppliers. In short. they were never identical, and their operation
meant coping with eight types of running in and childhood diseases. There
was a slight improvement for the next 20 units. with an availability of 37
percent during the period 1966-1970. Thereafter, the principle of ordering
series of identical equipment. from the boilers to the chimneys, gave a
spectacular result for the last eight units of this group: the average rate
of availability reached 90 percent.

Rapid implementation

Units of 250 aegawatts are no longer being manufactured. but the industrial
policy was retained. and the 2,000 companies manufacturing nuclear equipment.
the thousands of persons "converted" or trained for their operation and
maintenance know that they will not have to learn their job again at each EDP
order. The advantage of repetition is symbolized by the discount offered by
Ua-supplier by adhering to the program, and by the penalty incurred by the
client if he is forced to modify the volume or the schedule of the line or-
dered; it consists in a quality of the equipment which is easier to repro-
duce since it is standardized, and especially a faster implementation. Now,
a week, a month. a year saved in the slow process of sta'.ardi:ing the nu-
clear tool. represent billions of kilowatt hours which the country will not
he lacking. billions of francs which will not be unproductive. "hat in more
foolish than having a non-available power station?

3
ton orncuu. use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principle of the identical units for a given power level (which was al-
ways championed stubbornly by Michel hug. Equipment Director at EDP) had
nevertheless certain complex effects. which occasionally aroused criticisms.

In view of the dimensions of the french energy market. standardizing led to
the designation of a single supplier applying a single technique. These sup-
pliers included Prematome for the reactors. Altshom-Atlantique for turbo-
nlternators. the Hestinghouse licence for the PHR model. After many discus-
sions and hesitations. the idea of resorting to other techniques and other
constructors was given up. Remy Carle. who had worked for a long time at the
Atomic Energy Commission before becoming Michel hug‘s colleague. admits that
he Is one of the persons who regret the absence of a second supplier. He
specifies that this regret is 'purely sentimental'. for he is not unaware of
the fact that neither of them would have reached the threshold of equilibrium.
and that the operator--he. Remy Carle-would have to overcome not one but two
worlds of difficulties.

lechnoingical Rigidity

Framatome rejoices that it was chosen, but is not yet triumphant. This branch
of Creusot-Loire inherited the nuclear personnel formerly employed by its
rivals: 62 engineers and technicians come from lsbcock. 200 from 663 [expansion
unknownl. a valuable contribution in an area in which the quality of the teams
is of primordial importance. The regularity of the BDP orders makes it save
time and win over people. but this EDP series (5000 to 6000 megawatts per
year) is not sufficient to keep its production means employed on a full time
basis. Every year a. 000 to 3, 000 megawatts more are needed. The coherent

EDP program represents a basis, a reference; the identical units furnish the
guarantee for an easier maintenance. but Jean-Claude leny. Director of Prams-
tome, is surveying the world rather than the French. nuclear provinces. If

he is unable to install under foreign skies two Fessenheim units every year,
the industrial line will not fulfill its premises. for want of the right
amnrtisement of the production means set up to satisfy the 80? needs.

The criticism most often levied against identical units is the technological
rigidity it induces. in this area of activity which is still young. advances
are achieved every year In the research centers. in the architecture of the
power stations, in the organization of the construction yards. in the design
of the equipment. and the Administrator (with a capital A which annoys the
technician) is opposed to their adoption. The second in line could be better
than the first. the third. better than the second. But since the line has
purposely been fixed. this will never be. Is that a scandal?

it is obviously one in the eyes of the technicians. who love a "beautiful
machine." As for Michel hug and Remy Carlo whose eyes are directed at the
availability curve of their fleet of power stations. this rigidity represents
an insurance against hazards. They accept only two types of modification
for the line: those imposed on them by the safety regulations, and those
resulting from the experience acquired on the prototypes. and the units of

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prewtnndardization or the first units in the line. As regards the rest, the
"improvements“ will wait for the next line, or the next level, to be applied
all together.

A nuclear power station is a system, matarializing in the shape of components.
There was no precedent for the nuclear system: it required a mass of new data,
in rapid evolution. and as they say at Framatome "one had to be able to as-
similate." Although France had not the means available in America, it was
not without means, as would later be the case for the young countries which
would seek to equip themselves with electronuelear equipment: a long re-
search tradition symbolized by the Curie family, the creation of the Atomic
Energy Commission and its development under the pressure of military ambition
in the fifties, the experience acquired with the graphite-gas reactors. the
sounding of other lines (heavy water at Brennilia, light water at Chooz) had
made the men familiar with the needs of the nuclear system, of the nuclear
quality. They could not however assimilate straight off the system with
light water and enriched uranium—-60 percent of the world's systems--which
the Americana were championing. Hence the recourse to the foreign licence
and helping hand. which by a mischievous paradox, became relatively more
efficient in France than in the United States.

As a matter of fact. the requirements of the system-component pair, come up,
on the other side of the Atlantic. against specialization of the enterprises.
Westinghouse is specialized in electricity, not in boiler making; for Babcock,
it is Just the opposite. Hestinghouse has always ordered its reactor tanks
from abroad (including from Framstome, even before the ED? had adopted the
FUR. in a Westinghouse power station, the weak point is often the steam
generator. or the tape, for which the American company ended up by building a
factory itself, failing to find satisfaction with the subcontractors.

It was then that the defects of the modest dimensions of the French industry
proved to be useful. In the case of an activity in which the cohesion of

the system and its components is decisive, the very French fact that the men
"know each other“ in spite of their belonging to different organisations is
emphasized by everybody as a great asset. AEC [Atomic Energy Commission]. 80?,
Le Creusot, Pramstome, Jeumont-Schneider, Alsthom-CEH constitute a small world
coming from the same schools,'launched into the same technical adventure and
accustomed to making do with the available means. A French nuclear workshop
In like the cross-roads where one meets everybody. "There is a phenomenon

of congregation," says a Frametome official. Intolerable in other areas in
which specialization represents a pledge of productivity and the "company
spirit” is a competitive virtue, this collusion permits French industry to
build a nuclear unit in 6 yesrs, whereas Hestinghouse takes 8, and to have
greater success with Pessenheim than its licenser had with Beaver Valley.

ﬂu' Franco-Belgian Chooz prototype, a forebesr on a reduced scale of the pre-
sent BDF program. had had. when it first started, the worst troubles (stop-
ping from 1968 to 1970) because the assembly screws of the collars of the
internal structures did not hold firmly. The obsession for nuclear quality.

5
roe orrtcuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which is very special, should imbue all those participating in the collective
work. The Soviets. who are building an industrial town to locate all the
means of manufacturing the components of a power station are coming round to
thls opinion.

Therefore, although as a whole the first really industrial steps of the
electronuclear system in France appear to be fairly firm, indeed more assured
than those of the large classical equipment 25 years ago there remain shadowy
areas to be explored, shortages to be eliminated and failures to be corrected.
All these may be measured in terms of non availability of the power station.

The most absurd. least nuclear. and even least electric incident was the 1976
drought which paralyzed many European units cooled by rivers whose flow had
dropped. The most sophisticated mastery of nature. subjected to climatic
whims, how absurd! Hhether or not it was liked (because the coat of the ad-
ditional investment is high). the open cycle fresh water cooling is banned in
favor of serocoolants and sites on the sea coast.

The problem which was most poorly solved concerns once again water, but this
tinm, that used by the steam generators. It is impossible to produce a really
pure industrial water, or one which stays pure: "It is difficult because it
involves researchers in all the areas, chemists. physicists. mechanics, ther-
mal specialists." An untimely breakdown is due to the water, to the incrusted
deposits of metal oxides. to breaks in the seal of the secondary circuit
(l.e., outside the nuclear core), the crushing of the pipes. Even then. the
French assert that they suffer less from the effects of that wretched water
than their American and Japanese colleagues. perhaps because the Westinghouse
steam generators are particularly sensitive. whereas the old tradition of

the Creusot boilermakera benefits the Framatome equipment.

Then all the troubles inherent in all rotating machines are encountered:
turbine blades being deformed. elements heating up. Or all the equipment
containing fluids: leaking taps. pumps wearing out. It is nothing, a mere
triviallty. but the operator protests. Stopping for one sonth (November
1977) the 900 megawatts of Pesaenheim l to replace a pump of the water sys-
tem is more provoking than the stopping of a 125- or ZSO-megawatt unit.

0n the whole so much care was lavished on the nuclear unit. that the latter
now causes less anxiety than the classical machinery manufactured for a long
time. but which has to be enlarged to the dimensions and the economic
stresses of the nuclear system. Just as in the United States. the acute pro-
hlem of the taps will be solved sooner or later by the creation of a special
factory where nuclear cocks and fittings will no longer be considered as
"ducks in a chicken coop." but as the basic product, to which all efforts are
devoted.

In the hierarchy of difficulties, the hardest problem to solve is not mater-
ial. It is the matter of the "programmed stops." which the operator laments
beforehand. Fessenheim i will stop for 6 months this spring. and Fessenheim
II for b‘months starting in June: complete control. as per regulations. of

6

FOR 0F?ICIAL "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the primary circuit (in the reactor), and normal discharge of one-third of
the fuel. Then every year, each French program unit will shut down for 2
months to renew the fuo-l.

Remy Carlo does not understand. lie will not accept that repetitive oeprstions,
lasting 3-6 weeks in the United States or Germany. should extend to 8 weeks
in France. By the end of its existence, the French power station incurs the

risk of having worked 2 years less than its counterpart in the other indus-
trialised countries.

The problem is not specific to the "Technical Production Departsent" of the
30?, nor to the after sales service of Framstome or Alsthom. It is an over-
all one. A national one. The French industrial fabric permitted a fairly
brillinnt entrance into the narrow circle of electronuclear powers, with the
bonus of a complete mastery of the fuel cycle (enrichment at 'i'ricaetin, re-
processing at La Hague. vitrification of the wastes at Harcoule): it is not
dense enough to supply permanently the forces which would assure the maximum
“availability" of the system, which, at the beginning of 1986, will include
90 900-magawatt units and 11 of the MOO-megawatt level.

"we need men," they say at EDP rather anxiously, ”Many more than we can re-
cruit and train."

Franatome odds: "He spend our time pinching welders from each other."

And what is going to happen when the same French industrial fabric has to
help for the operation and maintenance of the two plants which have to be
exported ewery year? The case of the welders has become legendary. There
is no lack of training schools and technical high schools in France, but
nuclear qualifications have not yet become part of the public education
system. The nuclear enterprises have set up their own schools; but as soon
as they are trained, those with “nuclear qualifications" become the object
of bitter disputes between the chemical and oil industries who also complain
of a shortage of highly qualified welders.

Although welding is always the case cited, the personnel problem is a gen-
eral one. The first Frnmatome deliveries had to be delayed for want of suit-
able personnel, and strikes have just come up in the first EDP 900-magawatt
power stations, because the operating teams were not large enough. If the
French company is incapable of producing in sufficient number persons with
nurlear "mentality" and "skill," will it have to undergo the mortification
of calling upon German. American, Japanese technicians to oerate the power
stations it is exporting, or to reduce by half the period of recharging of
the stations set up on its own territory? "The operators of nuclear power
stations are already meeting in international clubs, where they exchange
their experiences," Remy Carle remarked. Should one go further still, and
conteminte internationni service companies equipped to intervene, on a full
time basis on the shut-down reactors?

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

KVerythiug Is Too New

There now remains for us to assess the-enormous-odds of the financial bet.
The analysts seeking to know whether the nuclear energy "is profitable" for
the enterprises which invested in it only receive evasive replies. Every-
thing ls too new. too young. Too many construction yards are still being

set up. too few completed power stations have aduitted their operating bal-
ances. Furthermore, the economic budget of the prototypes and prestandardized
units mean nothing to the builders or the operators. a company truth of which

the nuclear system does not hold any monopoly. Hith much simplification. it
may he stated that:

1. Everybody has lost money up to now. knowing that that was the price that
had to he paid to enter into this new industry. The first industrialists to
receive a profitable price were the producers of uranium oxide in 1975-1976;
this causes dramas. by the way, for the builders of power stations. who had

engaged to furnish to their customers fuel at a fixed price and on a long
term bnsls.

2. The operating results are and will be very different according to the
level of development of the countries in which nuclear units are set up. To
predict that the nuclear kilowatt hours will remain less costly than the
kilowatt hours from coal or oil is only valid in the countries already highly
industrialized, and who have decided to go in for nuclear equipment in
"series." Although the fuel cost is international. the investsent cost is

double in under-industrialized countries. and the operating costs much
greater.

3. The rapid evolution of the technology and safety regulations have.1ong
prevented the precise calculation of the costs of the installed kilowatt
hours and the kilowatt hours generated. The financial managers were working
on forecast calculations revised every year, and always on the rise. This
whirlwind has been subaiding since 1977. The Paasenheia invoice, for example.
passing (in steady France) from 1,155 francs per installed kilowatt hours in
1972 to 2,650 francs in 1977. leads to an estimate of 2.8é0 francs in 1978.
In the present conditions the cost of the nuclear kilowatt hours produced by
the plants of the 900-magawatt level. is estimated as 10.4 centimes against
12.6 for the kilowatt hours fron coal and 16.1 centimes for the kilowatt
hours from 011. On the eve of the oil crisis, we had 6.2 centiues for coal
and oil. whereas the cost of the nuclear kilowatt hours was announced as
3.83 ceutlmcs.

'Mb withstood the emergency." they say at Pramatome. "but we were frightened."
when proposing to EDP the Hestinghouse Beaver Valley model. first of the
American standard 900-megawatt pressurized water reactor units. the French
builder engaged to take the price of the standard unit, and not the real cost
of ore-standard production for Fessenheim. This policy. which appeared
sucidnl, since the State had not yet authorized 80? to program standardized

8
FOR OFFICIAL use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nuclear equipment, had discouraged the competitor Ambroiae Roux, who in

the name of COB. was offering the General Electric Boiling Hater unit. Ac-
tually, ut the rate of one or two units per year at the "American " prices.
Pramatoae was overextcnding, and ruining itself. The Yom Kippur War and its
energy consequences represented the stroke of luck which by forcing BDF to
triple its order of nuclear equipment, turned into coherent management pnlciy
the initial Freestone bet.

Siunle States of ﬂind

however for the moment there is still a financial unknown. The 1978 Frann-
tonm hudget will he the first to indicate the accounting results of the Fes-
sheim power station, a result which is bound to be negative. The next budget
will perhaps indicate how matters stand with the A Bugey units (first units
of the standard production), balanced to the best possible level, probably
still deficit. Starting frna 1980-1981, with the accounts from Tricastin
and Craveiines, the builders will begin to know whether in terms of MBA
[expansion unknown], cash flow or net profit, the stakes were worth the
trouble they took.

As far as EDP is concerned, where the barometer for the forecast cost of the
kilowatt hour remains within the margin of relatively fair weather. the states
of mind are much simpler. Since there will soon be not enough oil in the
world to satisfy all the needs, since there will never be enough liners to
extract to the maximum the coal reserves. since France will never have

enough dollars to raid the world resources of fossile fuels, why ask the
stupid question: "if i had to do it all over again. would I do it?"

 

Power stations and sites

The nuclear sites must satisfy very stringent safety requirements. and if
pessihie be located near the see or a waterway. Hence they are relatively
rare

1. gas-graphite line 2. breeder reactors

3. pressurized water rcacor line (FUR)

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

LEMYNSd
LEMVMJ
mu
MI!

LEMVMI
WW”
I
m.
LEMVAQ!
MW”
mm.
m:
“M33
mm:
m:
(MM!
m2
m1

WM!
W!

uxxvs
unlvn
uxmvs
uxnvz
filltlnnll
remnant-n
a«xu°

gill"! lﬂilllﬂﬂﬂlu mums:

WINNWWMJI
KO!S§RO!(A~:u-du3udr
man-n?

mm mm)‘
oottuto-rm») l ,
nu2u0£u(ndru~) 0?’ . -

mun-tuna! 13 mo M an m: um ms um m: 'm mm In In: In 'Il mu 'm

 

stilatr:_

 

Framtow Order Schedule

This table of the orders received by Framtone Illustrates the EDF pollcy:
contracts for standardized units. grouped into technical levels. with de-

livery dates programd from quarter to quarter. Frautooe is also equipped
to propose two units per year for export.
[Key on next page]

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to table on previoue paged

1. Put Into service 2. Put into service in 1967 3. Third contract EDP
program 8 unite ‘. To be defined 5. clone 6. Second contract 80?
progrnn. 10 unite 7. Considered 8. First contract EDP progrn. 16 units
9. Ordere recicved between 1961 end 1973 10. Export 11. South APrlco
12. Belgium 13. Total number of units 14. Fro-atone, supplier of the
nuclear core. to c neuter of the coneorttuu supplying the comleto power
station

9018
CSO: 3100

11

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
e . e no .u- can vnut

“Shell-INN“ STEM GENERATOR SEEN 1'00 LATE FOR M's
l'urie be MONO! in French 8 Her 70 p 61

[Article by Xevier Booger: ”No French Steen Generatore for the ED? Nucleer
Reoctore"!

[Text] Do we Reelly Rent to Get Along Without Heetinghouee?

The Frenetonc Conpeny builde French nuclear reectore under
licence tron Heetinghouee. on Anericen group. The egree-
went between the two conpeniee will expire in 1982. In
officiel circlee. it ie underetood thet thie egreeeent will
probebly not be renewed. enpheeiring thet Freeetone.

aided by the can [Atonic Energy Coulieeion] end EDP [French
Electric Co]. in non neetering nucleer technology. In
short. the Anericen proceee will be Frencized.

However. the recent eed edventure of Georgee Trepeud.

o enell French induetrieliet, leede one to wonder. he
hee perfected en originel, working eteen generetor. Use
of the proceee would per-it e epecteculer Prencizetion of
one of the eeeentiel conponente of nucleer reectore. It
is fcered. however. thet thie generetor will never be
need in French power plente. due to e lete decieion to
undertehe releted reeeerch.

Stcon goneretore ere very inportant elenente in nuclear reectore. Stending
20 notere high end veighing 300 to 600 netric tone. theee huge boilervorke
ensure the crenefer of heet fro. the prinery circuit to the eecondery cir-
cuit. The outer of the eecondery circuit in veporized. end thie vapor

then turns the turboelternetore, producing electric current.

In the poet. the eteen generetore in the French FUR'e [Preeeurized-vuter
reectorl have poeed none problene. They ere eubjected to high tenpereture
grodicnte. end the hundrede of tuboe through vhich (love the preeeurixed
eater of the prinery circuit have often been victine of extrenely eevere
corrosion phenoeene. On top of thin. the Heetinghouee'U-tube generetore
heve the dieedventege of producing e slightly vet vepor.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Too Late?

Thus. several asnufacturers have done research in this field. Bsbcock 6
Hilcox perfected s straight-tube generator. In 1972. Georges Trepsud.
whose conpsny already builds nuch boiler equipment for nuclear power plants.
envisioned a wavy-tube exchanger. The 03A technicians took an interest

in this project which. froa the very beginning. gave indications of very
interesting theraal perforaances (notably. an efficiency one percent
greater than other areas generators). and s reduced-scale prototype. built
and tested at the Nuclear Studies Center at Cadarache. gave remarkable
results.

Hill this stean generator one day equip French nuclear power plants? Nothing
is less certain. EDF. whose research direction sustained the project.
inforacd Trepaud in February that they were giving up building a full-size
nodei of the exchanger. indispensable for precise study of the technical
production of such devices. The ides was to demonstrate that this exchanger
wns ccononically valid. soon enough so that the Trepaud steam generator
could be integrated into the design for the second series of 1300 NH
reactors. which will be constructed beginning in the next decade. Introduc-
tion of these new stean generators (high perforaance since two generators
would suffice to drain off the reactor's power. as conparcd to four U-tube
stean generators) would entail Iodificetion of the prinary circuit. and
therefore a whole new study of the reactor.

Why this change of plans. Because of the liaited industrial capabilities

of Trepsud's conpany. in 1975 EFF had proposed that the nodsl be constructed
by Freestone or one of its partners. since the public establishment was
ready to finance the operation. It is ruaored at as! that Freestone dragged
out the negotiations so long that the engineering manage-eat of the public
corporation was finally led to say it was "too late."

Freestone states that "there is no conflict" with the 03A or 50F. and that
the decision was Iade by all three partners.

In any case. this "innovation" risks being left in the box. Soae see proof
in this affair of the lack of enthusissn nanifested by Freestone for
Frnnclzstion of the Hestinghouse process. Could they be correct?

9171
C50: 3100 END

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY