APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO‘I00020010-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020010-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1 ms L/8265

5 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020010-7
.H’RS puhlicatinn-: curtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, perledieah and hooks, but also from news .meucv
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phraeinr, and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] iu the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRlGiT MUS AND REGUIATIOXS COVERXING OUXERSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIX REQUIRE THAT DISSEMIXATION
OF lNlS PUBLICATION 5E RESTRICTEDFOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
l. lepon No.

)- Recipioni'u Acct-ulna No.
M— _
I. Paton-6o. Gguiwion Root.

No.
l0. Ploicu/Tul/‘mi Uoit No.

II. Contact/Gm: No.
”- Typc oi low a Peciod
Covmd

NILIOGIA'NIC OA'I'A

    
  
 

      
  

 

   

- Potion-tog 01.0-6le No.2 cod Minn

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clcbc Rood
Arlington, Virginia 22201

  

‘2. Snack; Gauizuin N-C nod Mdmo

As above

I}. Sunk-noun Mom

. Ahma-

Thc report contains press and radio coverage on political, economic, Iilitary.
sociological. scientific and technological developments.

«can Anhoio. c. mung... -

JAPAN

Political and Sociological

Military
Economic
Science and Technology

In. banana/“crud 1’".-

 

lh. CWTIFku/Gvup 5C, SD, SK, 150, 160, 181, 19?, 223

For Official Use Only. t. . .
Limited Number of Copies Available From ms. mm

omuvnounonn meow-o: qu-"I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/826!
5 February

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(F000 4/79)
CONTENTS

POLITICAL MID SOCIOLMICAL

'ABMII Wniacussee mtlook {or Ohire Government
(m Jmu, 15 Dec 78)

Initial Asaessunt or Ohirn

Ohim's Character and Philosophy
Realism in Ohirn Government

BCOﬂMC

Trade Policy Chief Sees Turnaround in Current Account
(Shigenori Oknznki; “mama: mm ms, 3 Jan 79)

'mnucm: MILY' Interviews chonic Ministers
(Mullen: mm unis, various dates)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

'ASMII JANARU' DiSCL-SSES OUTLOOK FOR CHIRA GOVERNMENT
Initial Assessment of Ohira
Tokyo ASA!" JANARU in Japanese 15 Dec 78 p 3

(Article: "Do Not Let it ﬁnd as Mere 'Saying'"]

[Text] An assessment of the nature of the newly formed Ohira Cabinet
must wait until later. but the core of the new structure is said to be
composed of three factions. Ohira. Fukuda and Hiki. The Tanaka faction.
in this case. maintains. as a presidential faction. a double-dealing
relation with the Ohira faction. The Ohira Cabinet, probably would not
have escaped the strong criticisms as "Kakuei's Lockheed Cover" had the
new Cabinet's Justice and Transport ministerial posts been filled by mem-
bers of the Ohira-Tanaka presidential factions.

The prevailing feeling in the Liberal Damecratic Party [LDP] is that the
Lockheed scandal is a passing issue, fading from public memory. But

Ohira's political philosophy should recognize that public sentiment is not
and should not be that mild.

Though a conservative. Ohira is far more liberal than ext-Prime Minister
Fukudn. he may be called an enlightened conservative. This is clear from
looking at the filo-page "Policy Guidelines of Hasayoshi Ohira." released
inediately after Ohira was elected as the new party president. The key
portion on the administration of government deals with the differences
between his and Fukuda‘s methods. using such expressions as "the goal is
to seek .1 flexible yet strong government, "the government should promptly
and cf f ectively cope with the rapidly changing era." and "we will govern

lolntly with the people by explaining the facts about difficulties without
simply relying on authority."

With regard to "political and administrative management. it calls for "the
establishment of an effective and inexpensively-run government by modifying
the superior stature of the administrative arm and promoting the authority
of the legislative arm." it also stresses that "measures will be taken to

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

allow local autonomaus bodies to exercise independent. aobile administra-
tive power" by "eliminating inefficiency due to bloated adainistration
and vertical relationship."

The issue. however. is in iaploeentation. Does Ohira's strength actually
lie in dealing promptly and effectively? would he be able to overcoae
bureaucratic resistance to ndainist:alive reforms that are lost disliked
by bureaucrats--"the reform of the inefficient vertical relationship" and
"strengthening of the decentralization of power?"

Ohira. it seems, has available to hie a number of study sessions with
govern-eat officials. scholars. financial leaders and policy "brains" as
participants. and he does not hesitate to listen to the people's voices.
Fuhuda. in the true sense of the word. see-s to have lacked policy “brains.“
Tanaka gathered other government officials around him to hear their poli-
cies and took than into his confidence. Niki had scholars as his brains

but was isolated free adninistrative agencies. That probably was the reason
why from bureaucratic resistance. Hiki's "life cycle" concept. though out-
standing, was shelved. Ohira seams to be blessed with brains in the two
areas of ideology and practical business.

But can his "party platform" be really realized? Or will it end up as a
nere "saying"? In the midst of concern over recession. unenploynent and
Japan-0.8. nilitary unification. there is a trend of greater voices for

stronger leadership and a powerful govern-eat. Hill Ohira'a philosophy
be carried out?

Ohira's Character and Philosophy
Tokyo ASAHI JANA!” in Japanese 15 Dec 78 pp lO-lb

[Text] Hayato lkeda. the tutor of Hasayeshi Ohira, frequently created
incidents by his slip of the tongue. Sons of his famed, wild reaarks are:
"The poor should eat barley." and "It doesn't eatter if two or three
medium and snail businesses go bankrupt."

Ikeda's tutor. Shigeru Yoshida. uttered the word. "fool." in the Diet. and

as a result a non-confidence vote was passed and his Cabinet forced into
dissolution.

At that tine. he was bitterly assailed. but as tine passed he came to be
known as an honest politician who always told the truth. That is why there
probably was little resistance when Ikeda. who later bees-e priae sinister.
said. "I do not tell lies." and "Leave econoeic affairs up to as." The
bond that links the people with politics is the individuality of the prime
sinister. That the personality of candidates rather than policy has becoee
the ”issue" in the recent party presidential elections is of acne signifi-
cance. Both Yoshids and lkeda were highly popular politicians who repre-
sented the postwar. conservative party history.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tukuo Fukuda is noted for his catch phrases. some of his “classic" phrases
are "Shown Genroku." "crazy commodity prices." "era of limited resource."

and finally. “the world's Fukudn." The "Fukuda goroku [saying]" will most
likely live on.

On the other hand. Ohira is a tnciturn politician who is extremely careful
what he says. In his 26-year career as a Diet member. one cannot recall
even a single case of a slip of the tongue. Listening to a press confer-
ence by the new party president at installation. the "vox populi [tensei
jingol." was dumbfounded--"ﬂe throws such a slow ball. But just about the
time when batters and spectators have become sickened by the boredom.
impatience. restlessness. redundancy and disinterest. the ball would land
in the mitt" [ASAHl SHlNBUN of 2 December 1978].

That probably is due to his temperament as a "dull cow." which he acquired
as a long-time aide to Ikeda as an assistant or right-hand man. He admits

to being taciturn. but deep inside. he seems to even take pride in it. He
once stated:

”when l resigned as foreign minister. Mr Etsusaburo Shiina became my
successor. At that time I gave a farewell press conference at the Foreign
Ministry. A mischievous reporter asked. 'Hr Ohira, do you think your
successor. Hr shiina. can curry out his responsibilities as foreign
minister?‘ when i asked. 'Hhat do you mean by that?’ he replied. 'Doesn't
he have difficulty with foreign languages?‘ Then I responded. 'No,

Mr Shiina probably will make a great Foreign Minister. He is not fluent
in foreign languages. but neither is he fluent in Japanese. This. indeed.
is the qualification for becoming a great Foreign Minister."

“One must ponder deeply before answering yes or no. and assume responsi-
bility for one's statements. I feel it would be better to be like Mr Shiina

who is very tight-mouthed“ [Addressed at Kamamoto Postal Savings Kaika:
"all. 16 October 1971].

indeed. this is an "argument" defending his use of ah's and oh's. This may
be the reason for his being called the "four and a half-mat politician."
he does appeal to the professionals but to the masses. it is uncertain.

lack of Intensity Is His Character

After the overwhelm'ng victory in the latest party presidential elections.
there was an appraisal of Ohira that he is dovish and he makes vague state-
ments. But during the elections. it seems that there were even stronger
voices asking: "Are there any differences between Pukuda and Ohira? Both
are Finance hinistry bureaucrats. who served in the cabinet and in the
party. Moreover. they both belong to the conservative mainstream. There
is no improvement from the change." Obviously. Fukude's supporters know-
ingly disseminated such views. but it also was due to the lack of intensity

on the part of Mr Ohira. Such lack of intensity can be viewed as Ohira's
character.

3
roe orncm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ohira supporters sold this character during the elections. It was
"simple honesty" and "restrained action." Ohira himself appealed for
"perspiratory politics." Ohira. who had coined the term "magnanimity

and porsoverence" for the [keda Cabinet. is good at taking such a politi-
cal stance. At the 1 November campaign rally. Ohira summarized his views
under the three slogans: “Don‘t become arrogant with power." "Don't sow
sweet illusions on the people." and "Don't become a major military power."
In other words. they were the "politics of peace."

Those election slogans cannot be attacked, but the question is whether
they are what Ohira truly believes in.

The post of prime minister is said to be a solitary one. After occupying
the seat for a long time. he begins to hear only pleasant things and unin-
tentionally he betrays his true character. Eisaku Sets. who is also a
reticent politician, let off steam on the day of retirement by yelling at
reporters to "get out" during a press conference and vented his anger he
had been suppressing. Announcing his candidacy for party president at a
press conference. Fukuda boasted. "Throughout the land. there are rising
voices seeking my reelection." But in those instances. the low posture
seen at the time he assumed the post of prime minister was not evident.

in Ohirn. who is ever cautious, there is very little episodes to reflect
a political image like those Yoshida and Ikeda. Hence. there is no choice
but to rely on his "saying" to draw an image of his premiership.

l have here a memo pad containing notes on Ohira's statements made 7 years
ago on 11 November 1971. I do not remember whether the notes were taken
during an interview with Ohira at his home or when I was riding with him
in his car. I was then a political reporter.

As for the political climate at the time. it was the eve of the so-celled
“Tana.a-Fukuda war." Political interest was on whether Prime Minister Sato
would pave the way for a Fukuds government through a "Tsnaka and Fukuda
reconciliation" or whether Tsnaka would confront Pukuda with the backing

of the Ohira faction. It appeared that the "Tansks-Pukuda reconciliation
concept" had a slight edge. In the Diet. the LDP maintained an overwhelming
superiority with 300 seats against the Socialist Party's 90.

The contents of the memo pad. though somewhat lengthy. are as below:

The eras of lkeda and Sara. including Yoshide and Kishi, were pleasant
and roeantic. Bluntly speaking. they were eras when even a fool could
conduct politics. That was because the world of the dollar was stable.
Politics can be said to have been non-existent. Prom three and one half
years ago. the dollar became shaky and that world collapsed. The period
that followed was the season of politics.

h
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl’. ONLY

it is necessary to realize that stability achieved during the postwar

quarter century in highly abnormal and an unstable world will be common
hereafter.

It is important to grasp the flow of history. in the coming era, God will
bless the poor. It will be an era of undeveloped nations and small na-
tions. rather than that of advanced nations and major powers. and even
domestically. it will be the era for the poor. The L0? is on the road of
decline and will probably be unable to recover. It was defeated in local
elections. and on a national level it was defeated in the Upper house.

and now the Lower House. The selfish idea that only the LDP can assume
the rein of government must be changed.

it would be distressing for the opposition parties to wind up as a cat
unable to catch a mouse. The mortal shortcoming of the opposition parties
is their over emphasis on confrontations with the LDP. Their objective
should not be the LDP but the masses.

Required in the hearts of politicians are "trembling fear“ and "humbleness."
There is a limit to what can be achieved through politics. Humans are
neither fundamentally good nor bad. They must not be made weary. Complex
nultl-equations should be explained. It is no longer an era of giving
commands.

Assuming the rein of government is the procedure. It is not enough to
just come to power at any cost but not have any definitive idea of what is
to be achieved. It is an era requiring the unity of all to overcome the
difficulties.

The prolonged life of the Sato government was due to the cooperative ef-
forts of Tanaka and the former Ikeda faction. Sato may not like Hssayoshi
Ohira. but politics is like a chorus. Perhaps. I also must have been an
accomplice in prolonging the life of the Ssto government. Tanaka is neither
inferior to Sato nor to lkeds with respect to background. political sense
and capability. It can simply be stated that his attitude is not impres-
sive, simply because he is a career government official.

Can differences be noted in Ohira's above statements of 7 years ago with
his recent political views and posture? If a marked difference does

exist. it would be dangerous to draw a new image of the prime minister from
the "Ohirn'o saying" of the pre and post election period. But a comparison
would probably furnish material with which to examine the truths of the
expressions. “stupidly honest“ and "politics of peace."

Let us see how Ohirn thinks today by focusing our study on the speech and
his responses he gave on 28 October 1978 at Nippon Kishs Club [Japan Press
Club] immediately prior to the elections:

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR ()l'l-‘ICIM. USP. ONLY

"For 10 years, the LDP has been suffering from a steady erosion of power.
The Socialist Party is in a similar position. The political world has
faced an era of multi-parties. with new political forces such as Kameito
appearing like a comet. This period has been a violent one for Japan's
economy and politics. Economic growth rate reached a peak, became over-
heated and pus oozed out. It was a serious problem for the LDP which has
its roots in agricultural villages. People left their farms for big cities
and became a non-partisan class. Statistics bear out that the LDP lost
support by 16 percent in this period. We are not so self-conceited to
believe it marked the beginning of a return to conservatism. That is the
reason for advancement of party reform. He must not slacken our efforts.
It can hardly be said that the tide is in favor of the LDP. The LDP
achieved a slight increase. while the opposition forces suffered a slight
setback. but that is not the point. We must realize that non-partisan
(actions are trailing behind the L0? and are increasing their strength.
This class is politically clever; it keeps vigil and deals a scathing blow.
we ourselves must examine the political sense of these people." (From

28 October 1978 speech given at Nippon Kisha Club)

Hhile chief secretary of the LDP. Ohira achieved a "partial coalition"

at a time when the strength of the conservatives and reformists was evenly
matched. His method was to conduct talks with the opposition forces and
effect an affiliation whenever problems surfaced. In regard to this par-
tial coalition, Ohira stated. "That's what's been done so far in steering
Diet activities. but it does not extend to policies and decisions. There
is no other way to obtain some agreement so that the Diet can reach some
conclusion. Under the present situation where a reversal committee exists,
that method is needed, even when we have an overwhelming superiority. It
is required even more when strength is being evenly matched between the
ruling and opposition parties” [consent by the new prime minister at a

1 December 1978 press conference]. Thus, Ohira's posture on political
activities and Diet measures can be viewed as being rather consistent ever
since the expression. "magnanimity and perseverance" first appeared.

Dis Consistent 'Stupidly honest' Posture

“Power is appealing. but it should be employed as a last resort. This is
my creed. As to the method, I wish to conduct a ‘politics of peace.‘ which
calls for hard work. sincere talks and which seeks understanding through
persuasion. Conflicts and disputes must be avoided as much as possible"
[Statement before the Nippon Kiaha Club on 28 October 1978]. Here. Ohira
emphasized "the politics of peace" and the "stupidly honest" way of living.
On these same points, he made the following remarks in a speech in ﬂakone
on 1 September 1971: "Even when politicians occasionally break promises
and lightly undertake tasks that are impossible to fulfill, they incur the
distrust of the people and cause unnecessary anxiety or hopeless expectations.
Such misdeeds must be corrected at all cost. He must clearly differentiate
what can and cannot be accomplished and must not defer until tomorrow what

6
ran onrcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

has to be done today. We must act a deadline to solve problems that are
particularly Important and must devote our full efforts to them. If

unachievable, we must be willing to assume the responsibility.“ in this
respect. during the past 7 years there has been no significant change in

his line of thinking. Perhaps the same can be said about the expression.
"stupidly honest."

Let us examine Ohira's views with respect to financial and administrative

reforms. These are the most serious domestic problem confronting the
Ohira Cabinet.

"Japan's financial conditions are indeed serious. Even the control of

expenditures and increase of revenues are difficult. Fundamentally, the
government should refrain from excessive meddling in private affairs, and
the public should not expect too much from the government. We must start

from that point. These are not symptoms that can be cured through finan-
cini techniques. It is not that simple.

"With this kind of expectation. we must look at the administrative system.

No government in the past has ever succeeded. An inexpensively-run govern-
ment is soon forgotten. it must be an even more inexpensively-managed
government. Tampering with the structure, however, does not create an
inexpensive government. Government officials become frantic over administra-
tive reforms, but they mean little to the people. It has been said that
'retrieving a merit is not an elimination of a demerit,‘ but I feel that

eagerness to do one good deed will lead to a failure" [remarks before
Nippon Kisha Club on 28 October 1978].

in short. it means that an inexpensively-run government must be established,
but a reorganization. such as the strongly resisted merger of government
agencies. is to be avoided. This is an unfair expression when we consider
how Fukuda backed away after hoisting the banner of-administrative reform.
Perhaps. it is on this point that some LOP members. with respect to Ohira's
cautiousness. attacked him as a "cunning bureaucratic politician." But

this may be Ohira'a own view. In an essay entitled. "The Minister and
Government official" written by him in 1956 when he first became a member'of the
Lower house. However. he said. "My advice to the minister is this. It
would be safe not to place great hopes on reforms of the public service
personnel system and the administrative structure. In many cases. it may
prove harmful to national interests. if not of value. Long ago, a noted
Mongolian minister spoke the immortal words, 'retriaving a merit is not an
elimination of a demerit.’ People prefer a minister who will work for the
elimination of one demerit rather than a minister who diligently works for
100 good deeds." Ohira may be "stupidly honest" all right. but is probably
closer to being unyielding.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sign of Zealous Cleanup of Government Absent

Some view the birth of the Ohira government as an emergence of a straight
rather than twisted administration, thus reflecting the concern over the
strong influence of ex-Prime Minister Knkuei Tanaka, a defendant in the
Lockheed Scandal. Public Interest is focused on this point. This is
Ohira's greatest weakness.

The ties between Ohirn and Tanaka run deep and go back many years. When
Tanaka emerged as a cabinet minister for the first time at the general
elections. he was the first to stump for ohirs in the lntter's constituency.
And when Ohira was chief cabinet secretary, he visited Tanaks's constituency
to embark on a series of campaign tours. During the "Tanaka-Fukuds war" of
1972. the "Ohira-Tanaka coalition" was formed, and at the initiation Ohira
remarked. “Without Ohira there is no Tanaka. and without Tanaka there is no
Ohira." The pair have maintained a close friendship spanning the three
administrations--lkeds, Sato and Tanska-—and the latest being the fourth.

Even the midst of the Lockheed Scandal and the storms cver financial
influences and cleanup of the government Ohira continued to assume the
posture that "there was no change in his personal friendship with Tameka."
During the 1976 moves to bring about Hiki's downfall, Ohira. together with
Fukuda, formed Kyotokyo [The Committee Organized to Bring Miki's Downfall].
This caused Takeo Miki to harbor negative feelings until the latest elec-
tions, "Ohira. to protect Tsnaka, yielded the post of party president to
Fukuda; he cannot be forgiven." Perhaps, the groundwork is being laid for
future government takeover by the "Ohira-Tenaka coalition," but the rela-
tionship between the two may run even deeper.

At a press conference on 1 December 1978, Ohira made the following comment:
"IL is a hard fact that some party members are close friends of Tanaka.
Based on my 2 years' work in the party, I believe that these people are
aware of their own position and are prudent in their behavior. There was
never any unjust pressure applied to party conduct. I feel that the members
of the Tanaka faction have made a splendid contribution to party affairs
and in formulation and implemtnation of policies. I am sure that my friends
in the Tanaka faction will act prudently as a respectable force. I expect
this and am convinced of it. There is no change in my personal friendship
with Mr Tanaka. However, he and I realize that as public servants. our

ties must be moderate." .
however one looks at it. his remarks show no indication of taking a posi-
llve stance toward cleaning up the political world. Concerning the Lock-
heed Scandal. he remarked, "As a political party, the LDP must continue to
he on guard not only with respect to the Lockheed Scandal but also to the
establishment of political morals to deal with the problems of public and
private lives. They will be dealt as problems of political ethics and
morals." Nevertheless. one gets an impression that Ohirs is trying to

evade the issue with the moral argument. With regard to emergency legis-
lation. inure showed a dovish attitude, while on Diet activities. he

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IL. 1': ONLY

iavnrrd ennuultatlonn, nnininn the goodwill of even the opposition camp.
hot when it rude to the inane on cleaning up the government, he would
suddenly speak haltinnlv and become unsure. This is the sad part of the
"hira noVeruwwni.

Conaidnrinu lﬂurn's "slmple honesty." it is highly unlikely that his
friendship with Tanakn will be weakened just because ohira has become
prime minister. And Indulnn from events leading to the birth of the Jhira
uuverumuut. the authority behind the Tanaka faction may grow stronger but
never weaker. lately. In the Tanaka faction. there are even talks of
"reinstatement of the ntayish. high official." if so. how is this to be
handled? This point casts the biggest shadow on the Ohira government.

The dlauolullon oi factions raised by past prime ministers is not expected
to be readily reaolved by Ohira who seized political power on the strength
ol the "uhira-Tanaka coalition." Even at the 1 December 1978 press
conference. he upoke in a delicate. rorndabout manner: "The issue of fac-
tlons is a difficult one. In this election. the four candidates are to be
nvutemntized among [.5 million party members and party friends. Should
this he interpreted an factionalizinp the LDP or considered that elections
are supposed to he like that! i would like you to understand that sys-
tematlzinn is an election. An election for party president is not possible
if it is noinn to be interpreted as iurtherinn factionsliam. It must be
tuulerutood that elections were held out of necessity. i do not recall
saying that factions served a purpose; l merely said that factional forces
do presently exist. I said they were difficult to eliminate but I did not
say that they should be encouraged. it would be well if factional energy
can he applied in the direction of policy studies and expansion of party
strength. hot as i have repeatedly said. violation of party autonomy or
its authority, or creation of disorder must not be permitted."

Judninn from the present circumstances of the LDP. this is probably true.
Ihwever. one does not get a feeling that there is any seal for party reform
that the Luv is confronted with. He do not say that ohira. should reverse
himself and push for "dissolution of factions" or consider factions as an
enemy so soon after becoming prime minister. but in any event. dreams are
lilt'kll": in the "tihira's sayinn." One may say that Ohira, who holds to the
view that "two factionn will he formed when three men get together."
pruhahlv made a "stupidly honest" reply on the issue of factions.

however. noticeahly open activities of factions in the latest primary
vlvrilnns is beginning to cast dark clouds on the future of the LDP. even
reminding: us of a return to the days prior to the Lockheed Scandal. Ulth
the approach of party presidential elections 2 years from now. fsctional
acilvltlvs are expected to he stepped up. At that time also. one may find

a shadow of the Ohira government that will come to power through official
elect ion.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ill-'FICIM. USE ONLY

Ablllty to 'l'm'klt‘ Illllli'llli l'l'ulnlt'm 'l'u lit! Tested

in the recent party presidential elections. Ohira presented one strategy
and two programs. The strategy concerns general security. Here one finds
criticisms directed against the moves of intro-party forces to bolster
military strength. The difference of opinions is also apparent in the
emergency legislation issue. it is the opposition parties. rather than
the Fukuda government, that has a favorable impression on this point.

The two programs involve the completion of the garden city project and

the improvement of family life project. The garden city project was
formulated in 1972 when ohira ran in the party presidential election. but
this time it is seasoned with a concept of decentralization. Previously.
policywise it overlapped with Taaaka's concept on improvement of the
Japanese islands. and this time again it has a nuance of policy collabora-
tion with the Tanaha faction. The program on improvement of family life
is new. but essentially it is linked to the life cycle plan devised by

the Niki Cabinet. which fizzled out somewhere along the way. The determina-
tion to seize the rein of government can also be observed in the policy
titled "a government of composite power" which concealed contrivsnces
against the Tanaka and Hiki factions in preparation for the main election.
Politicians ought not forget about policies once they assume power. And

this is the point where Ohirn should demonstrate his "stupidly honest"
character.

Hhat impressed us in the recent party presidential elections was that in
his speeches. Ohira told the people "not to expect too much from the govern-
ment." He probably tried to make his "stupidly honest" political posture
appealing in order to directly deal with even unpopular matters.

"i believe that government should respond to the people truthfully and
seriously while considering its own capability without giving sweet illu-
sions. i feel. therefore. that undue political intervention in private
matters should be restrained. I also wish to ask the people not to expect
too much from the government. Otherwise. it would be difficult to expect
economic and financial recovery and stable livelihood." [comments at
ohira faction rally. 1 November 1978].

in an election campaign where optimistic note is eossson. Ohira's statements

is unusual. It may be that he is aware of the seriousness of the current
situation.

Facing the ohira government are complex issues. enough to cause the down-
fall of a few cabinets. They involve correction of unfair tax structure
in favor of physicians. reviews of welfare. medical and annuity and finan-
cial programs. and on future tax hike.

when the lkeda Cabinet was born. ohira reportedly told Prime Hinister lheda.
"i wish to ask you not to mention a word about a long-term government since

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOIi OFFICIAL USE ONLY

our position is that we would not have any regrets if u cabinet formed in
the morning falls in the evening. And as we must share both happiness and
grief with the people hereafter. please refrain from attending geisha
parties or playing golf."

Times have changed. but we hope Ohira will not forget this spirit. And
when a cloud appears in making decisions while occupying the solitary post
of prime minister. he must be ready to call on someone who can provide
adviCe readily. it is only normal to do so; the post really belongs to
the people. not to Ohira alone or to his faction.

Horde are good. but what counts is action. An assessment of the Ohira
government will depend on how seriously it deals with "unpopular policies."
"is "stupidly honest" character will be truly tested from here on.

Realism in Ohira Government
Tokyo ASAHI JANARU in Japanese 15 Dec 78 pp 15-18
[Text] Changes and Limitations of 'Dovish' Methods

Hasayoshi Ohira was elected as the 9th president of the LDP. and on
6 December 1978 the new Ohira government will come into being upon Diet
designation of Ohira as the prime sinister.

Former Prime Minister Fukuda. who received comments that he stepped down
graciously. personally checked the uncompromising views of younger members
in his faction and promised the new president a "full cooperation“ at the

1 December 1978 party convention. For this reason outright factional
struggles among party leaders and cabinet ministers under the Ohira struc-
ture may be prevented. Outwardly. the concentration of new political forces
built on what Ohira calls ”total party posture" will probably start.

As for reaction of the opposition parties. both Socialist and Communist
partic: have begun to assume a confrontation posture. contending. "The
Ohira government is essentially no different from the Fukuda government."
The middle-of-the-road parties have placed great hopes on the Ohira govern-

ment's "flexible structure." although the Democratic-Socialist Party remains
somewhat cool.

For example. Xomeito Chief Secretary Yano has termed Ohira's call for par-
tial coalition with the opposition forces as "the dawn of the coalition
era." Representative Den of the United Socialist Democratic Party has
categorized the forces within the L0? as those defending democracy and
those against. with Ohira belonging to the former.

Compared to the Fukuda government established 2 years ago during a crisis
of defeat in the general elections. Ohira took over during a mood of
revival of conservatism. Also. while both Niki and Fukuda governments

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were "emergency. refuge-like" cabinets born without having to go through
election procedures in the party convention because of intro-party strife.
the new Ohira government possesses strength in having undergone a "baptism"
of presidential elections involving 1.5 million party members and friends.

Apart from the effect of power struggles in primary elections and diffi-
cult policy issues confronting the new Cabinet. at least outwardly the
Ohira government may be said to be blessed with a smoother departure than
the Fukuda government.

The rain of government was seized amid criticisms of national propagation
of factions. of financial influences and on resort to material resources
in elections. Therefore. unless the Ohira government institutes some

changes in the makeup of conservatism. the energy expended for the elec-
tions is a complete waste.

Hill the emergence of the new Ohira structure result in a change in con-
servative politics. and if so. what are its substance and limitations?

A careful study of these points will hold the key to the future of the
Ohira government.

The notable differences in the political posture of Ohira and Fukuda iso
the former's political philosophy of "60-point principles." which attempt
to solve problems realistically by attaching importance to the process

rather than results without becoming stirred up. with the senses of normalcy
and naturalness as the principle.

Although the fukuda government had embarked with the catchphrase of
"cooperation and solidarity." recently it has tilted toward the leadership
style of "leave it up to Pukuda." Especially apparent in the party presi-

dential elections. was his noble posture reflected in the quotes such as
"the world is seeking Fukuda."

in contrast to this. Ohira has particularly stressed "politics of peace--
avoiding a show of power. unproductive confrontations and disputes." He
also cleverly conducted public relations to emphasize his down-to-earth
character. stating in "The Candidate's Views" which was passed out to all
party members that "his nickname has been daddy since his days in the
finance Hinistry." or that he was proud of being told by an old woman when
first elected to the Lower house that "although you're poor at speech-making.
i will vote for you as you have a nice smile."

The result was that over confidence was counterproductive and caused the
defeat of Fukuda. and floating votes went to Ohira who stood on the prin-
ciple of "honestly admitting when things cannot be accomplished."

Certainly the Ohira camp had the support of factions backed up by material
resources and knowledge of grass-root elections. thanks to total support
from the "Tanaka Corps." The Fukuda camp. on the other hand. was off guard.

12
FOR OFFICIkL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

relying on the achievements of the prime minister. Looking at it calmly.
it was impossible to expect an "overwhelmingly favorable" situation for
the Fukuda camp. fighting with its single corps against the two allied
corps of Ohira and Tnnaka. It would be wrong. however. to merely conclude
that the outcome of the primary election was linked to factional pressure
or to brand it as "an election of financial influences and material
resources."

It oust not be overlooked that even though Fukuda did not believe as
strongly as Nakanone. Fukuda's concept of "Japan the Great Nation." which
presented an isage of "keeping to the right." net disapproval by some
voters in favor of flexibility, which was closer to new conservatism.
Roughly speaking. keeping within the franework of the LDP's status quo.
the voters chose to correct the policy line slightly toward the left to
niddle-of-the-road.

Ever since the LDP joined with conservatives. the change of the LDP
government has generally been described by the pendulum theory of right

and left. with some exceptions. in that sense. i also agree with the

views of lchitaro lde that "in conservative Japanese politics. the action

to reverse the swing of the pendulum as willed by the people has been
achieved." The lkeda government of "nagnaninity and perseverance" succeeded
the Kishi government in the days of the 1960 Security Treaty. It may not
have been just a coincidence that by a curious coincidence the rein of
government was transferred from Fukuda. a direct descendent of Kishi to
Ohira. who was the pupil of Ikeda.

Hith respect to the conflict within the LDP over the two policy lines. it
may be said that the power transfer fro- the dovish Niki government to
the hawkishi Fukuda government was once again reverted to a dovish line
with the energence of the Ohira government.

It must also be stressed that this kind of pendulum theory. under present
circumstances. was dined at making a slight adjustment in order to prolong
the LDP dominance and nothing else.

In reference to the struggles of four candidates in the recent elections.

Hr Ohirn himself reiterated that the struggles were over "political method."
and that since LPD's basic line and policies were predetermined. a decision
has to be made as to "who would inplement them and in what manner." To
illustrate his point. he stated that ingredients in sukiyeki may be identi-
cal. but how it is seasoned is what counts.

it would be only natural. therefore. for the Socialist and Connunist parties.
having different ingredients and tastes. not to recc,nire the transfer of
government from Fukuda to Ohira as being "essentially different.”

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ohira Government is New Realist Faction of Conservatism

On his "views“ on candidacy. Ohira stated: "Nearly everyone accepts the
basic order in today's society. founded on parliamentary democracy. the
free economic market and the Security Treaty structures. Any kind of
policy should be aimed at protecting. strengthening and developing them."
he made a similar statement at a press conference after becoming the new
party president. however. the contention that nearly everyone accepts the
free economic market and the existing Security Treaty structures is clearly
an intentional "exaggeration.“ for while some within the middle-of-the-road
factions may agree. the reformist. leftist forces centered on the Socialist
”arty do not take that view.

In addition. Ohira takes a stand that the "structure" of 'amae' [availing
oneself of another's kindness|--peoplc placing excessive hopes on the
government--was permitted because "events occurred in the era of high
economic growth." and he strongly contends that it was in response to the
people themselves assuming responsibility to cut back on entrepreneural
management to combat a recession. of course. Ohira has not forgotten that
employment instability caused by changes in the industrial structure is

a "contradiction“ and is the greatest current problem. However. the con-
cept of applying a scalpel to the "excesses of reduced management” cannot
be drawn from the traditional. conservative theory holding that the basics
of economic management is "a vigorous development of private economy."
without any excessive government intervention in the economy. On this
point. a clear conflict exists with the Japan Socialist Party Chairman
Asukata‘a reformist theory of giving priority consideration to those vic-
tims of the change of industrial structure, rather than basing the policy
on "mercenary. competitive society." From the standpoint of such economic
rationalism. a common ground cannot easily be found even in the arguments
of combined factions for a "law restricting dismissal“ against excessive
personnel reduction using recession as an excuse. In this area. the Ohira
government. which has made ”trust and agreement" as its catchphrase. faces
a clearcut limitation as a conservative.

it probably would be inaccurate to describe Ohira. who has unzil now
represented an element of the conservative mainstream flowing from the
Yoshida government. with the term conservative leftist faction. Calling
for a "flexible and tenacious government." he clearly differs from the
intra-party right faction. but he is not a conservative leftist. He may
be termed as belonging to the conservative, new realist faction which is
able to cope with any situation.

Of course. even if the difference is in the "method of politics." it may
not be a minor one.

This is because. for example. the partial coalition with the opposition
forces as mentioned by Ohira can become. depending on how future issues
are handled. crucially inconsistent with the Fukuda government's dream of
restoring "an absolute LOP majority."

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With respect to partial coalition with the aim of obtaining some coopera-
tion from the opposition parties an Individual matters and accommodating
requests for revisions. Ohira. upon Installation as the new party presi-
dent. said. "That. of course. is necessary under the present situation of
equal strength between the government and opposition parties. but is neces-
sary even where the LDP has overwhelming superiority." At the same time.
he placed a limit on relations with the opposition parties by saying. "it
does not extend to policy decisions and coalition."

With regard to the future of a single, conservative government. Ohira. on
a separate occasion. said. "The world is moving in the direction of divi-
sion rather than a single government or integration" (Interview. "The

ﬁre of the Coalition Government"). "It is too early to tell whether the
LDP alone can lead the single. conservative government in the future or
whether the middle-of-the-road forces or other forces will be participating
in it. But in any event. the LDP must fulfill its responsibilities as the
"backbone" of government. From these remarks. it seems that Ohira is eager
to effect a partial coalition with the opposition forces. especially the
middle-of-the-road parties. as he does not dismiss the possibility of
demise of a single conservative government in the future. Party president
Ohira again denied any intentions to dissolve the Lower House prior to next
apring's unified local elections. The thinking behind this is that he
realizes that a hurriedly-held general election would not insure a stable
majority. even if the government party gained a few additional seats. and
that the idea of "control of the Diet by numerical strength" is no longer
cherished by the people.

Regarding the views that the 1980 structures of both the LDP and Socialist
Party are on the course of disintegration. Ohira's opinion is closer to
the middle-of-the-road parties than Fukuds's.

Ohira states that the conceptual. ideological scheme of the old conservatist-
reformist conflict is. "immature, outdated. barren and unproductive" in the
eyes of a majority of the people who are beginning to acquire a superb sense
of balance and mature consciousness. ("The Outline of Policy"). it gives
an illusion as if one were reading from Kameito and 08? documents.

nonetheless. the middle-of-the-road opposition parties should not entertain
excessive "illusions" on this point. Although the concept of partial
coalition can be attributed to Ohira's flexible political methods. it was
an unavoidable measure in order to survive the era of equal strength between
the majority and minority parties.

Should the partial coalition progress and lead to future policy agreements
and a coalition government. the LDP's right-wing elements are certain to
resist. it cannot be denied that the moves for partial coalition may ulti-
mately obscure the issues of the majority and minority parties and cause

the Ohira government to nibble on the middle-of-the~road line. let in such
a situation. the partial coalition strategy may be up against a wall because

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (IFFNIIAI. "til-2 ONLY

of the negative reaction of the middle-of—the-road opposition parties.

If so. the time will come when its very nature will he questioned: whether
the partial coalition concept is to remain a Diet strategy as is now the
case or whether it is intended to prepare for a coalition government in

the eighties.

The issue of emergency legislation concerning the Self Defense Forces,
which forged into an important policy dispute between Fukuda and Nekasone
during the party presidential elections. clearly supports Ohira's dovish
posture.

Fukuda. who ordered the Defense Agency to study the issue of emergency
legislation. including measures to deal with surprise attacks. said. ”It
would be utterly irresponsible not to establish a system enabling the

Self Defense Forces to go into action in the event of an emergency."

Ohira. however. countered with the statement that the existing Self Defense
Forces Law itself was an emergency legislation. saying. "An emergency situ-
ation can be dealt [with the present strength] with full training and an
alert intelligence collection capability. There is no need to stir up the
public at this stage with technical arguments." Ohira does not rule out
the idea that the "Defense Agency should pursue its studies quietly and
seek s Diet decision as necessary." Judging from the view of Ohire on
security. his intentions seem to be to slowly reduce the emergency legis-
lation issue.

Dovish Posture Amounts to 'Difference of Methods'

Ohirs's views on security are covered in the section on "The General
Security Strategy for Peace" in the "Outline of Policies." Though all
four candidates spoke on the need to expand the security policy to embrace
not only defense issues but security as well. the dovish end hawkish fac-
tions differed on where to lay the emphasis. la the case of Ohira. the
notable feature is his view on comprehensive national security and his
stress on striking a balance, saying that s preponderance of military
power and neglect would be wrong. Also. to ensure security. other than
through military power. he has mentioned a "collective power including
politics. economy. diplomacy. culture and science."

Ohlra's thinking that the peace strategy is basic to a comprehensive
security structure is shared in part by middle-of-the-rosd opposition
parties. If efforts were made for a broad review of the security issue
along such basic line on the governmental and Diet levels. it would be
adding to the new qualities of the Ohira government. However. it must be
noted that the comprehensive security structure envisaged by Ohirs calls
for continuation of the existing collective security structure--s combina-
tion of the Japan-0.8. Security Treaty and a moderate. high quality
defensive power--plus non-military measures such as diplomacy. In this
sense. broadly speaking. it represents a difference in "political methods."

16
FOP 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not a deviation from LDP's basic policy. Under the present situation.
there is estrangement between parties such as the Socialist rnrty which
oppones the Japan-0.8. Security structure and the Self Defense Forces.

in the area of foreign policy. there are no marked differences with the
Fukudo government. "hat concrete differences are there between the think-
ing. "the earth is a single community. and we will cooperate with all
nations of the earth with Japan-v.8. friendship as an axis." and Fukuda'a
"peaceful diplomacy in all directions?" As Ohira's new idea. worthy of
note In his advocacy for a "formation of a Pacific Ocean community ring“
and his intention to open the first "Foreign Ministerial Conference of
Malor Pan Pacific Nations" prior to the Tokyo Summit (summit conference
ol advanced nations) In late June. Japan would aim for a "moderate soli-
darltv" with Pacific area nations to develop a cooperative policy. just
an the United States and the European Community are giving special con-
Mldvrntlnn to Central and South America and African nations respectively.

At a time when there are criticisms from certain developing Asian nations
that Japan'n diplomatic posture centers around industrialized countries.
the expansion of an Asian-Pacific diplomacy through the new concept of
regional solidarity in a worthy idea.

There are criticisms. that Ohirn's views on economic and financial policies
can only be examined through his past remarks and that they are vague and
difficult to understand.

An example of this is the following statement made before a joint press
conference during his candidacy for president:

"Japanese economy is not in a situation where high growth can be sustained.
but we should not abandon the high growth. He must look to a high a growth
as possible. But. hearing in mind that a desirable growth is unattainable.

we must go ahead with financial operations. entrepreneurel management and
household management."

From this statement. one can detect a facet of the "philosophy" of "coping
with all things in a natural form". but the outline of the emphasis on
economic management. such as compilation of the next fiscal budget. remains
unclear. From his fragmentary remarks and peripheral observations. it is
clear. however. that Ohira advocates a stabilized growth rather than high
growth as In the days of the lkeda Cabinet.

During the elections. Ohira criticized Pukoda. who out of international
commitment, emphasized the goal of achieving 7 percent growth. saying. "An
economic management with undue emphasis on the rate of growth is undesir-
able." This reflects his view that "this is an era in which qualitative
fulfillment rather than quantitative expansion is required." however.
Ohira's views on the formulation of the fiscal 1979 budget is:

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Although the goal of high growth will be avoided in anti-recession
policies and employment stabilization. an appropriate economic growth

is needed. and financial management will have to assume the lead in the
coming fiscal year." The expressions used by both Ohira and Fukuda may
differ depending on the occasion. and the two have something in common

as a veteran financial bureaucrat. Thus. the Judgment of the head of the
Economic Planning Agency and others prevails: "A change of government
does not mean any significant changes in economic policies. as the sphere
of choice under current economic conditions is narrow." However. the
problem is that the pressure exerted by intro-party activists opposing

the economic management proposals of Ohira. who is prudent and attaches
importance on his sense of balance. cannot be avoided. Ezaki of the Tanaka
faction advocates "formulation of a large size budget with a target growth
of 6-7 or 8 percent." while Komoto of the Hiki faction supports a "high
growth" for stabilizing employment.

if Ohira hopes to accommodate such a positive financial concept within

the party and shelve the proposed general consumption tax in fiscal 1979
[January 1980]. there will be no alternative but to increase the issuance
of national bonds. Just how Ohiru plans to effect a compromise on this
dilemma poses the first test of the executive ability of the Ohira govern-
ment in dealing with compilation of the fiscal 1979 budget.

firm Decision and Power of Action Required for Inexpensive Government

Our hope is that the new government will courageously work for the fulfill-
ment of Ohira's commitment to "realize an effective and inexpensive govern-
meat."

1 am in favor of "banning the stern posture of an administrative government
rooted in authority and eliminating undue government intervention."

Ohira'a motto is "it is better to eliminate one demerit rather than

retrieve one merit." However. for the postwar government. it is simple to
"retrieve the merit." but extremely difficult to "eliminate the demerit."
This is why administrative expansion occurs. To achieve an "effective and
inexpensive government." it will not suffice to be “indifferent and unenthu-
siastic." A firm decision and action are required. If even a single commit-
ment were to be realized. the society will most likely highly evaluate the
Ohira government.

“hen viewed in this light. the direction of Ohira's dovish line embraces
several notable ideas. although it represents only a slight adjustment in
the conservative government. The people's interest is in to what extent
"effective and inexpensive government" will be realised. and whether "they
are all rhetoric and no action." Even if minor changes are to be made,
there will be many causes for applying a brake. The most serious problem
is the revival and growth of L0? factions which come about during the
course of party presidential elections.

18
roe orncm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL IL‘SI-Z "NLY

Prnhahly the new ohirn ulruvlurv. will somehow start out under the guise
oiawmﬂnuunher2unwuum

However, that is only on the surface. Beneath it is opposition between
the mainstream and non-mainstream factions which is expected to continue.

The real axis of the new Ohlra structure is the Ohira-Thnaka factions
which loined forces in the party's presidential elections. Our opinion
is that the general trend is for the Niki faction centered on hr Komoto
to nave closer to them. and for the Hihi faction to be gradually trans-
formed into the "Komoto faction" hacking ohira. But the Pukudo faction.
despite all external indications to the contrary. will probably continue
to maintain some distance from the Ohira structure.

However. a premonition of uncertainty over the Ohira government develops
not so much from such united factions as from a greater manifestation of
the LDP, as a result of the "upheaval.“ as a factionally united party due
to national advancements of a vertical relationship among factions. not
only at tlw central level but also among local party members at the bottom
of the scale. The recent presidential elections demonstrated the signifi-
canre of participation of party members in primary elections and showed
that a large number of voters were divided owing to factional influence.
with independent. floating ballots not being so numerous as had been ex-
pected. The Nakanone faction and other factions bent on capturing the
presidency at the next opportunity will probably wove to strengthen the
organization of party members. in light of such intro-party activities.
Ohlra will probably have to devote considerable efforts to mount a "re-
election device." 2 years from now. Rather than the elimination of fat-
tions. an intra-party multipolarization is inevitable. A great danger is
that it may lead to weak leadership and. ultimately. disintegration of
governabillty. when Ohira decided to run for party presidency. he remarked.
"i wish to become a conductor rather than a leader." This statement is
also applicable to intro-party management. Bluntly speaking. we feel that
the prime minister/LOP president is now merely a “custodian-type leader
under a 2 year contract with provisions for termination along the way."

if this is true. Ohira should not dream of a long-term government. He
hope that he will deal with government activities with a "stupidly honest"
posture. aiming at even one or two achievements. which the people will
praise and say. "The conservative govern-eat has changed."

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbunsha 1978

9097
630: 6105

\9
son OFFICIAL use new
Ramon [ (3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TRADE POLICY CHIEF SEES TURNAROUND IN CURRENT ACCOUNI‘

Tokyo HMNICIII DAILY NEHS in English 3 Jan 79 p 6

[Article by Sltigcnort Okazakil

[Text]

The Year ot the Sheep
dawned wtth the reverberation
etteets at last year‘a trade
connlclahottreenJapanaMthe
United States. Last year. It
appeared. Japan was the target
ol all sons 0‘ crlttclsm tor
havlou aemmlated a huge
cumotareouuwnﬂm

YetJaoaotookmanyalepato
opeoltsaumtmvldelyto
the outstde world. It teduud
tadthoomaudacmudpoda
wellhetoretheaaclmlnaolthe
Tattyoltotaadmltllateraltrada
mum (mm. neat a
mmmumus..m
WWWmny
agricultural commodltlea-
treahmngesandheet.

Mamdtnolldturaarotmd
la already evldeut lo
the growth; trad ol the
nation's current Icon-ll aw
alts. says Stun Illyanoto.
dlnctor general ot the In.
tamatlonal Trade Policy

Bureau. the lhtatry at I»
tematlonalﬁadeandlodmtry
tltl‘l‘ll.

Mlyamoto also an that
Japan was uttering a basic
malt detlctt m April.
NovenherotlaatyearJodlhat
thetreodwtllcuttooetuaome
tlmlatheme.

0n tlu.I other hand.
Mlyamoto polata oul
eel-lawless ol the

dollarlshetnatel
thutm

American
what Mlyamoto desc
"perceptlon gap"
Japanandtheus.

Mlyamoto met the
Dally New! at the e
yearloranexdualve
Excerpts:

MDN: One at 1

events In

the vtalt .
member Amerlcal
mutated mksloolo
Wﬂoyouthlol
Nam tho I
lackadalatcal In exp
Japanese unmet. l
aha-M

Ntyamoto: The
symbolized twt
MNUWUSJ
a has: am am
and a altld h the v1
Mack. M
udmhatloaotam
champ ta the US
andvorldecomkt

We all have lha
problem are m
threat to the atalatllt)

ml: order. But
voa OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

yet convinced that the
Americana on hilly awate ol
thie.leceheieapecception¢ap
beiweenJmandthetls.

ill)": llow do you tale the
(‘erter admleiaitatlon'e
pachap to deiend the [teen-
bach'

'Iilyanoto: ithlnh it wee a

dtauic eiep. in tact. it has
mmmvumamahw
to a restate extent on lovely:
exchange marten. lit the
government level. I think the
aeriouenaeoliheaieldoilarle
underuoedhutlltbenwlcan
people. lonenerai. believe it'e
Japan that tatobielnelotthe
hapettadeltnbatancmtnuld
bemtberpeoblenn.

MDN: us. Conmman
JameeRJoneenrnedIhiieln
Tokyo laet tell that ihete will be
aetronulideolproteciionietnin
the US. Connme which to
openlnuJan. is.Deyoueeethe
U3. cm really min;
protectionist‘

itiyaaioto: ihadnebenceto
IneetwithliirJoeeeandothet
Concreeetnen title In Tokyo.
They eharpty atticieed Japan
lectbetradehnbalaneeJ'bel:
Wim.mbebotied
dovnlothreepeinteziapante
“autumn-then
comet the hnbailice: then
hubﬂlliiblielwttnmtn
theeltevedpettemeitndeztbe
Japanese inﬂict te clued to
tiieouteldewotid.

Butateilatieeahowthetlheu
hae alteady been a male:
change In the and. Take die
"ﬂight lhetbﬂouatteeoi
laatyearJoe heteneeJapan‘e
domestic denmd rose 1.1
peeeenLen ammo!”
pend.

Dal them who.

uternai indelee declined on
peecent due uaylnl to e
eiowdon I: expect ’3”!
declined Mpattiy telirl'l'a
adnltntetretive alliance and
partiytotheabacpappteeiatlon
oltbeJepaoeeeyenaaainetthe
US.doilar.

2.1

On the oihec hand. lmpone
Watered sizable increases.
led by mamlactuted mode.
notably lrom European
melee end the US. The
tmie ewpiue. u e mill. is
dendtiydecllnhg.

And on the basic econ-It.
which aleo covete capital
outflow. Japan eullered e
deficit Wins the tint emit
monihe oi that me (Aptit-
Novembec. imH'hieteendJ
believe. will continue let one
ttnieintbeltitm.

In": Wot“ you comment
onibepolntelhatlapaateeot
taking enough action and the
Jepaneeolnarhetlecleeed?

Ely-intozveheventheced

import dutlee on eone
manulactured goods even

belone the conclusion oi the
Myoilomdwediepateheda
buying intseion iothetls. to

restrictions on agricu
commodities cider political
eonsideeatlon And thie hind ot

E

duly appreciated by the
Ameticam.

Aeleaidbeiel'e.deepitetbie
propose. a peeeeption gap
reenahe.Andvevliihaveto
mmmtonmw
thieuathvon'tdoeltbeeoi
lie-Japan 0: the U.S.—any
andtheutooanetienal.

eppreclated by the
Amman...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ﬁg sew;
grégggg.
zzééd
*iiéiig

1m omq

”MUWuIman
um OI MN IM WV
an 'nm‘mm mam
"IMMlmm
one com I banana mm

mm mm:
EUWMI (I

FUR tWFIiIIM. HRH ()Nl.l'

'MMNICIII DAILY' Interviews Economic Hinietern

Tokyo HAiNiCﬂt DA'IX nuns in English 28, 29. 30, 31 Dec 73

[Series of interviews with new cabinet ninintera by shimnchi Nuunorni,
managing editor economic new department, and Tndno Koike, political

news editor]

|28 Dec 78 p 51

[Interview with 'l‘okusabnnt KOSﬂkﬂ, director general (Economic l‘lanning

Agency]
[ Tex t I

Iatntchi: Mr. Director
General. i heard that you have
been mania; top oiiiciala
oi the Economic Planing
Agency (EPA) to "hecorne
active economists." What
m do you have to mind
to take in trnlaie your ex-
nerience aa a hush-email Into
theathiinlitralionhciiviiy“

Roam: ldoo't think there
isrnechdtticrencehtnynayot
thinking alter lolnlnx the
www.mmeeconotnyta
a living creature anti the
hnreancratic )oh oiorte cannot
rotve ninhlenn. I think. it
seem to he important.
thereiore. tor the adtntntatra-
tion to lend its ear to chat the
Whiheorlraleaeciorare

muthrooahciooecontacts
riththern

i hope that bureaucratic
mute will examine how
thettmtheyhavecalmiated
arcinncilonlngintherealttyot
actual economy and try to
renlnlhapeopie'atnnihthe
(tune the W has
cemented

,-

Theilnooriantlhinntaionin
theneonte'otrnoi.linlaothere
iatnninoﬁioumhemtn
actual economic operation.
Wanna-chute
cod: no anon atone. mil
hone. Wrote will
taeiorieaanoprnmoio
local areaohoniuio
teeltng ot a living oociet
ihetnoetvea.

Inuit b tend lop
ieadenoethlo'ﬁclety.
myaettviitpoomoo.

ttiouha hatia tron Nauno
Preltctoremherehena horn
andmvwhadtatingntahed
tontilyJietaayounaerhnoths

ii

”‘8.
3.

53

renorter. he unneeded hta
tether. rhotwnoed Shin-Btu
Chemical Co.. I! W“:
"it may. 1W
experience he to continent in
actinlcconotnlchmlctiau
M: Canyoaaay that
you are an active «new
general at the Economic

HuuheAnowf

“J
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.... 23 u #3:... a
Swingsnguag.
Quiz-$8.382?
IE. 2.23.3.3
1.953.883.8858
Sign-35.38::
again-32...

Itib-..-II—I;I~
FOR OFFICIAL “SIT ONLV

taelna the oment Japanese
my. and the meaatty lot
It to change tta tndmtetal
atmctuteandtodmtattnettto

mumumwky.
he a nemdotthtee rem

ttteteundeeatandtu.
lt aeenta to he more

tallenhethnlrolwtdllleto
Italy was to aha. to the
newleaaemcnteawcohand

haata M. toe Instance.
ettheetntheanlcﬂtuatm
oethemuutaetmm
Italnlehl: The exchange
tateottheJaoaneaeyenaeenn
tohetnalntt. llardoywm
the hm trend at Janam
external mte relattm.
lnetvdtne the tteld ot tn.
Wm‘mnttt
he the stance at the Jeanne

25

government on the Tonya
summtt scheduled to he held tn
Juneneat yeat‘

Roam: It the yen'a ex.
change ratetothedottantmte
anound the level at In yen In
dustttea ndtng on tan.
matertela at?“ dealt a heavy
blow. and It la deattahle la: the
yen to aettle amend the ﬂ.
level.

But )udetnu teeth the
attuatloa ot lnternattenal
mummy It aeemstohehardto
any that the yen mud come
back to that lewl. In the 03
andﬁumneanmntmtheveh
a mating wake demandtng
that Japan reduce lta emu.
and the 0.5. t‘anmu ta alao
tall 0! the seatttnent ol
pnteettnntam.

Tome wlth thls attuatton the
Javaneae Md he wilted. at
the level at Dlel. hotneaanwld
and m ulna. to neonate
telendly nelatlana theouah
duet untaeb Itth the US.

Thh I! ID! ”I!“ II. In
ammutmmmume

Atthemlnﬁolyamtntt
theteatematoheaweathtttty
otthecnnﬂtctoteach natton‘a
mMmeleady
thaneverlhemlnueaentlt
henyeaevhenenchtmeaaa
tnletnatlonat meney and
ttade wtlt Ml! m as a
uaveattuatton.

um: h‘hatetaeatewl
wanted about In the m
year?

Koala: lhaveamherot
thtnp to my M. Par-
tlmlarty. I am atrald that
"aonethtnanlmthmallot
aaadden.”‘l'ocanevlhueha
use-encedlaaetwamtem
wmmmlyu
lttaantletnateanynuathtltuu
at emergency. and always
did I. ‘I'hbtstmenatonly
wtthhathellaldatmy.”
also In the Wary and tn
ternattanalpollttealttelda.

Melon. lt bdattahletae
themetuenltalntentlonally
aetwamteuteethetanme
alum.

70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘mt tlH-‘ltIIM. Itzti: ONLY

‘2') Doc II! p 5]

[Interview with lppoi Kanctw, minister of finance]

[Text]

labial: Mlhiatet Kahelto.
alum ammptlonotoluee aa
llaahce atlatater you have no
llatalaloaahatmwattlngoa
the comptlatloa at a tit-alt
Met lot the m tlaeal
year mm in twill. ‘l'he
polntmhavetomateeteatla
deem the acne and the
charactattaticaotthehodneil.‘
your m We the
wt: north tale In the
yearmtevlet..

Kaaelo: Reunite: the
mute north rate toe the
comma ﬁscal year. I am now
thltttllu. lt ahould be meted
out by government olllces
mm. particularly the
m2: Planing Am. as
the walla la Minded Nth
the medium-range mic
plaatatthe t. Butt
amell have alteady Enameled
olllctala oi my mlhlatn to get
thetlpuelotme

Iatalchl: I head that
umutmmma
and lath-try tlu’aatlnll Salt
and Dlteetor General
(Ml Keaata oi the
Sum Plaanla; Agency
aeellt lobed the who that
thetamtolmlcm-lh
Mkaetaahlnaapaaalhta
la tlntt ol the aeeeaalty
tor the W to tattle

mumuuenptayneat

Mm. Whali- mountain
oathu‘

leaa‘tthtahthete
meldedllterenceaoteolalea
wtthla the ”treatment. It
seemtotnethemtaty
mkmthhrealtem
tll tmulated tntaan meal

rate) Ia an aw“ aetceat.
andltlaamtateJMta
heathenneleveletwthtn
theaeatlladyear.

.Lb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ﬂahldtl: note ts no doubt
that the W wtll have
Nathanael“
month target. ll this la so. (It
you want 10 keep the meth
ate at a cutalu level) Isn‘t
there a heceaalty lot the
government to team the at
llclal Mint ate at to m-
ptle a aecaati mun
Meet-«Mathematical
year as a them to allevlale
thehatloa'ammy'

M: Regarding the at
tlctaldlamuraleJheBantot
Japan la la charge at that In
my opinlon. the intend rate
has been towed to such at.
extent that several cases
caneerathg haalaeaa
management have been
wummmww
0! m N '5 ll W
«mammalian!

Montana-rum
mm W L I

mm m mm mm
mmrumau.

"manhunt-I
mmlmmmm

WWW

pqmnwWM

[mm

W!

mutant "new"
1‘??? 11" mm: «In W !

.-..... h... ._ _
lﬁ i all Chili. 2:953.

852.. a... 5.3 a... 3.35.
n 28.3. 8 8 1392. 1. 8.
= .- 9835 8 3:: =3
8.3. 88- .8.! 5 =3
.533.

>333. - .358 a 9»
5:... 33:8 .33.. :8:
£5 a 3:3 2 23%. on.
.888. t... 8 a 938...?
.8 5o 5.39.28: 1 :8 on.
28 8.. «3.3.. 25 _ n... 8
35382852382...

togutgswszssw
: Bg=8° 3 :39

Eigisgigé Egg?!
Eggéiaw§=§=
8§§i§%‘z'iﬁ§§;
‘gaéﬁﬁﬁ‘g'lgi
§§§§§§§§§§§Eii
r95; 8.. 13.3.5.2. 2
22.55;... a 3.12.3.3
=2............ 5 37......5 .2.
..&.....=....:.... i .3. 5:. =8
12:..." $5.259... a .3 3......
9...... E... .3 33.... =3 3... o.
a.......u.... .... 5.. _....n.... .
=55"... . 24...;

.c. .21.. . ....$...................
.8... ... «22.... .525... E.
9.11... 132...... .e 8.... 55.
52.2.1.3. 7.5.9... 9.3...» E
.2.» 35:3. Eu £3 E ”2 .5

.Fb has. 1...!) 3. III 3"! I!
Ftllt tWFltIlM. USE ONLY

So luntl on .inpnn insists on
tree irntic. ll t'nnnnt take the
policy oi restricting the crports
oi nellhherinp newly-
industrialized countries to
Japan.

ﬂainichi: A meeting oi the
United Notions Contereoce on
Trade and Development
(UNCI'ADi is scheduled to he
heldlohiaolonestiieyaodthe
Tokyo summit is due in Jute.
What it your tirelecy In
authioloettteecteomoetlwf

ﬂeshi: tile havotoeoriroui
o etrste‘y oi economic
diplomacy by conihlnina the
UNCTAO meeting and the
Tohyo eummit irom the
viewpoint that they are linhcd
winnsinuieline

Jepen was detected by
Baneiederh In the election to e
W seat ot the tut.
Security Council It is a pond
omega” tor JAeopan to male
use UNCI‘ meetingto
elimineie utioer‘
distrust oi Jepen For this
purpose Japan shotld matte
cited: to obtain their un-
der-stunting oi its policy by

implementing its internationel
commitment to deuhie its ot-

ilcial developmentembtsoce

in Dec 78 p 5]

iDIMI inn Ihrmymr period

:\I the Tokyo summit. Japan
must also convince other
countries the! it stands iirm to
promote tree trade and to
contribute to "It global
economy through the heioneed
methoteoridtradc.

With tin-so tor-tors in mind.
the government cannot till
eeay iron: a policy oi setting e
high economic growth target in
the eomloc year even it it intuit
ho suiicrluirnm dtiilculliee
with the tinenciul ultuntlon to
someerteni.

lwould like tosttemot to tote
mp. to lower the oiilciel
discount reio through «I!
sultotions with government
oillccs In charge oi iinancisl
antlmoneteryaiielrs.

tin the Ohira cabinet ehoee
oiiiciai stance is to sect: "en
appropriate mirth." Eula ls
mlotieinthorheisanedvoceie
oi hlrm econonnc growth. tie is
likely to drive the "riow ox" to
molester.

iii the moment. Balti‘s
strength etill remains es e
"tropical toe pressure" but
there ueeme to he a pond
poeslbtlity oi it owing lilo an
"Bsehityphoaif‘i

[Interview with Suneo Sonodo, minister of foreign nffairel

l'l'cxt]

leieichi: The blunt

diplomatic tonne m J“
et present ls matting

preparations tor the mmit
conicrenceecheduledtohehelii

Mm JmeVIhatls
musiceteoce onthlc
letter?

“Moe nicotiect the
mpthedexatdatsctrrencylt
“which: meet
thettheU moroio
stahittoetheudothrmthere etitbe
nomlotion
no

mm
MMMMU

31

their on role in extending
cooperation end sharing
respouihtllty (“tumour-no.2:
problem iroro
thedoiiariea
prenuuiriie tor heath; the
world's economy and
recession
1heeeoootttseeeis isthe tt-orth
Southprohleni‘l'hisouertioois
nottolimitod toieeconom eldto
Misha timuet
ea In tar u to etimioste the
ninth wide diiicienoe h
memo-«Mme.
‘l‘heuphilvhutndanbeoo

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
M
emu

9°”le
an no

" ill'ﬂ WW

II!- "nu-
W ‘U

“I ‘93!” 0m
1.009 0.1.. um
INN )0 Kama

«um-Immune»
‘0 mm in 0.]. 2m

(dN9) l3“

pm

mlommq

mu mm
:0 'am Inn

30‘“

3'0

mv
1m
mm
[W

I) "ll
Mm

E5§§i§§§§2§F§ s

‘
Eisgigei‘éiiﬁz
aaégi‘ﬁﬁéém
I‘M: Finally. I we
llkebm mmmm
Peninsul- wanna. Do you no

anymmydduncthm?

8M: lace no (actor that
I’ﬂlbﬂﬂMlblngMJ
say this Meme the mat
cm; [hem Union-um

Unﬂcd SIM in W
m

PothJu-nlsudm
hulloexenemtutomuun
ulna-am M Mlle-Ibis
Noah Id M to hold I
WM.