APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100010020-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010028-9

FOR OH'lLlAL USE UNLY

JPRS L/8221
15 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010028-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other character ist ies retained .

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government ﬁgbligstiog! issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, n.c.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Nowell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio, #4691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
1. Ir N.

. in. .m. \uanu rpm ale

rwswxous on ussa - 90mm“. AND socmumcm. amms 15 Janna 1979

(POUO 1/79)

- IN III-teller use-tantrum Mn and Adan-n
Joint Publications Research Service
ll Contact/Grant No.
II. Type oi Room a Pet-oi
Covered

1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

     
      

       
     

    
  
    

  
  

  
     
 

ll. Wuilug (Nldmlﬂllﬂ Nane and Mama

  

As above

    
     

 
  
 

IS. ‘urrlrm nury Note:

  

The report contains inforlation on government and party structure. policy and

problems. law and social regulation. education. and cultural and social aspects
of Soviet life, trade union and Konsoeol activities.

     
   

  

II. X: 1 “wk sod lure-rat Analysis.

USSR

Politicnl Science
Sociology

Govern-out

Con-unis-

an (Jurisprudence)
Education

Culture (Social Sciences)

0- "compote

  
         
         
   
   

IUD. ll- unlu u 0pm I MAI To...

   
      
 

 

SD, 5?. SK

"e. ( IBAII I w III/(unq-

   
  
  
 

      

     
   
  

IU. Junta-alley Van-hf.

Pnr nrrirlnl Use Only. Limited
Nu-ber of Copies Available From JPRS

a noun «HQ-u Ian I hill

. Scrum, (.lani hi-

I. -\o. ol Peers
lepoul . ' 3‘]

run so»: an n: nuvnonucsn WM“ "’“"”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/82

15 Janus:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(rouo 1/79)

Coureurs

Kudtysvtsev Discusses Legislation 0nd“ New Constitution
’.V.N. Kudrysvtssv; SOVBTSKOYE GOSUMRSTVO l PRAVO. Ssp 78)...

Repatriation of Ethnic Gomns Pro. USSR Declines
(PMNXFURTBR nwmama. 16 Doc 78).

Book Discusses Soviet Thought on Eastern world
(LB. Mlsn'kiy. Ink. Volonsksys; sovnmm NATSIONALISM
I OBSRCHBSTVWB RAZVITIYB ZARUBBZRNOGO VOSTOKA. l978).....

Gvishiani Reviews Work of International Institute of Applied
System

(Ye. B. Btlngof: BUDUSHCRBYB NAUKI, 1978) ...................
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

KUDRYAVTSSV DISCUSSBS 1.3618“le INDEX N39 CONSTITUTION
Moscow SOVBTEKKOYB OOSUDAIS‘WO I PRAVO in Russian No 9, Sep 78 pp 133-139

[Article by v. N. Mryevteev, Director of the Institute of Stete and ten
of the Acedesy of Sciences USSR. corresponding nesher of the Acedeny of

Sciences USSR: "leportent Problene of Scientific Reeeerch in the Light of
the New Constitution of the USSIl"]

[Text] The yeer which hes pessed since the edoption of the new Constitution
of the USSR hes very cleerly deaonstreted the greet historicel i-portence
of this docunent. In our country the constitutions of the union end euton-
onous republics were edopted on its besie. and e vest enotmt of work hes
developed to prepere new legislative ects end improve the existing legis-
letion end to bring ebout the precticel inplenentetion of the idees and
theses of the country's Beeic Lew. The commie: end workere' perties of
foreign countries end progressive-eluded people on all continents heve
perceived end token the neeeure of the new Soviet Constitution es s vivid
emple of e genuinely denocretic Besic Lew which hes solidified the greet
ecconpliehnents of socielien end upped out the weye toverd e greduel trens-
ition to e co-unist society. The Constitution of the USSR hes eppeered
before the entire world so e nodel of creetive Herxisn end so enbodilent

of genuine populer power end eocielist denocrecy.

It is inpoesible to overestiute the importance of the 1977 Constitution

of the USSR for the developnent of Soviet legel science end prectice. Its
role is nenifold: the constitution defines the veye of improving the Soviet
politicel systen, consolidetes end develops the besic idees end principles
of the lost inportent hrenches of the lew. end leys the foundetion for the
developnent of the theory of the Soviet stete end lew elong e under of new
scientific directions. Pinelly, it conteins concrete solutions of e nunber
of inportent legel problens which in the pest heve been debetsble. Let

us consider certein directions of scientific reeeerch which in the light

of the new constitutionel legisletion ere very topicel.

The develop-eat of e generel theory of stete end lew. One of the soot in-
portent politicel end legel idees of the Constitution is the idee of the

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constant growth of the role of law and legality in the society of developed
socialism. Socialist lounllty is prnclnimed in the Constitution of the USSR
as the principle of the functioning of the Soviet state and all of its
agencies, and also of public organisations (Article Four); and a strengthen-
ing of the legal basis or state and puhllc life in cited as one of the chief
directions of the development of the Soviet political system (Article Nine).
This attention to the issues of law and legality is not accidental. The
1977 Constitution of the USSR uas reflected a general historical regularity
which is characteristic of socialist society: a consistent strengthening

of the role of law. legal regulation. and legality as the method of the
state administration of society. and an increase in their social value.

This regularity reflects the profound political, economic, social. psycho-
logical, and other changes which have been and are occurring in our society
during the process of the construction of mature socialism and communism.
They are also conditioned by the scientific and technological revolution.

The increased complexity of economic processes and social interrelations,
their increased dy:amicnass, and the need for a clearer regulation which
follows from this not only of production work but also of other spheres of
social life; the widening of communications between people; and an essential
increase in the social activcaess of the workers and of the degree of their
participation in discussing and deciding state and public affairs - all of
this naturally leads to a growth in the organizing role of social norms,
including the norms of socialist law. New fields of legal regulation
(environmental protection. space, social planning, demographic processes)
arise, as do new overall problems on the edge of various fields of law;

a differentiation of legal norms and, then, their integration on different
bases occur; there are changes in the relationships between the methods of
persuasion and coercion, the limits of the permitted and the prohibited,
and punishment and preventive means; the forms and means of the legal
regulation of social relations are improved and in a number of cases they
are replaced by the influence of the norms of morality and socialist
traditions; and wider and wider use is made of information and computer
equipment in the sphere of the application of the law. All of this raises
a number of new problems for science, above all, in the field of the
general theory of state and law. At the same time, certain traditional
problems are moved onto a different plane and receive a new solution.

One of the central problems which is of fundamental scientific importance
is a definition of the developmental prospects of the entire socialist
legal superstructure. In and of itself this problem is not new. Soviet
legal scholars and practitioners are constantly working on an improvement
of the legislation and the practice of its application. on increasing the
effectiveness of the work of legal institutions, and on developing the
legal consciousness of the population. In the light of the Constitution

of the USSR, this task now appears as an overall, many-sided, and internal-
ly interconnected one which has a long range perspective. Three of its
aspects merit attention. One of them consists of a necessity for a

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hnrnonious and interconnected development of all of the elements of the
legal superstructure of contemporary socialist society: of the law.
practice of its application by state agencies, and the legal consciousness
end legal culture of officials and citizens.

With the adoption of the 1977 USSR Constitution the process of legal
creation has become seriously activated. it is now at the center of the
attention of legal scholars and practitioners. At the same time. it is
important on the basis of the renewal of the legislation which is now being
carried out and which will continue to be in the next few years and. along
side it. to devote especial attention to improving the practice of the
application of the law which to a certain extent is lagging behind the
demands which are being made by the new laws. We still have a few scien-
tific recommendations on the issues of the optimal organization and func-
tioning of the agencies which apply the law. There is a need for a
scientific development of the ways and means of further raising the legal
consciousness and legal culture of the officials who apply the law and of
bringing then close to the high level of legal ideology which is reflected
in the new Constitution of the USSR and in the legislation being created

on its basis. The ideas concerning the criteria, conditions, and indicators
of the effectiveness of the operation of the individual institutions and
norms of socialist law which have been formulated in Soviet legal science
have been insufficiently developed and realized. Good laws have to be
correctly applied. and this requires the development and improvement of all
of the elements of the legal structure in their totality and interconnec-
tions.

The sharply felt need fer a systematic understanding of the mechanism of
the legal regulation of social relations is being reflected indie discus-
sions of the concept of law. The previously formed concept of Soviet
law as a system of norms which are established or sanctioned by the state
does not. in the opinion of certain writers. fully cover the other parts
and elements of the legal superstructure: it does not reflect the place
and functions of legal relations, legal consciousness, legal ideology,
and the practice of the application of law. Meanwhile, the latter is
increasingly attracting the attention of both scholars and practitioners
who are directing their efforts toward achieving a "final product" for
the action of law - the optimal regulation of social relations. Nor
does this definition satisfy those who are striving to discover the
objective basis of the formation of legal norms on the basis of socio-
econonic and other social laws and to overcome voluntaristic errors in
the creation of norms.

The development of the concept of law and successfully bringing it into
correspondence with the modern understanding of the processes of the
creation and application of law - is a difficult task whose accomplish-
ment. in our view, cannot be reached through a rejection of the chief
element of the legal superstructure -- the norms (rules) of human behavior

3
' son orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICKAL ”8? ONLY

which are sanctioned by the state. A mechanical expansion of this defin-
itlon by scans of adding to it oth:r elements of the legal superstructure
would be hardly productive. Law is undoubtedly a normative system. and
it is inseparably bound up with the state. However. this connection is
complex and multi-faccted. and the very normative nature of law springs
from no less complex social and psychological regularities. Therefore.
Soviet legal science is faced with the responsible task of working out a
developed conceptual apparatus which would be capable of characterizing
both norms and relationships. both the souls-economic preconditions of the
creation of norms and its ideological and psychological aspects. and both
state sanctions and the role of the rules of socialist communal living

in the actual implementation of legal prescriptions.

The problems of the structure and the concept of law are closely connec-
tod with the problem of its systea. This is the second aspect of the
above-named overall task. The prnc:ical divergence between systems of law
and legislation became especially clear in the preparation of the design
of the Code of Lens USSR at whose basis there was put a grouping of
Juridico] norms and institutions which far from correspond to the tradition-
al division of law into fields. It is clear that it is not possible to
artificially make the systems approximate each other. Nor is a "compromise"
solution -- a special mixing of these systems -- acceptable. The chief
problem con;ists in seeking those scientifically substantiated criteria
which have to be put at the basis of one or another system and la a clear
demarkation of the criteria of the two systems. Can these criteria with
regard to the system of legislation, to the spheres of social relations.
and to the system of law be reduced to methods of legal regulation? "but
are the tendencies in the development of both systems? None of these
questions have as yet found a satisfactory answer in science. Yet, they
are not only of theoretical importance. but also have great practical
applications. As is known, a great deal of work is now being done on
preparing a Code of Laws of the USSR and republic Codes of Laws. a number
of present legislative acts will have to be renewed and new ones created,
and a long-term program of legislative work is being worked out for the
1990's and the decade beyond. All of these documents have to contain
solutions. first of all, of the problems of system.

The scientific problems connected with the long-term forecasting and plan-
ning of future legislative work should be classified as the third aspect of
the overall task of improving the political and legal superstructure of the
society of developed socialism. Their solution presupposes a preliminary
study of certain complex problems: for example. the marking off of the
range of political relations which by the years 1990 and 2000 will be in
need of legal regulation; the forecasting of the changes in the forms and
methods of legal regulation and in the structure and activities of state
agencies; a definition of the concrete problems which are subject to a
state-legal solution and the development of the institutions capable of

A
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ensuring this solution; and the establishnent of the limits of the legal
sphere which separate it from the sphere of the notes of a moral, social.
and technical character. It is not difficult to see that this vast range
of scientific problems (they could be called problems of legal policy) is
such that to study it will necessitate the closest cooperation between
legal experts and sociologists. economists, psychologists. and specialists
fron other sciences.

The above-named problems are chiefly related to the future. But a nunber
of scientific problens are already arising today which are de-anding a
immediate and intensive develop-ant. They include. above all, the problems
of current nors creation.

The role of science in the improvement of legislation. The 1977 USSR
Constitution is based on the renewal of legislation which has been performed
in recent decades and is, as it were, the crowning point of what has been
eccoepliahed in this respect. At the same time, it serves as a basis for

a further large amount of legislative work. During the next several years
it will be necessary to realize the extensive legislative progran which was
adopted on 12 December 1917 by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet USSR.
This program is designed for a consistent renewal of legislation in con-
nection with the new Constitution of the USSR and on its basis. The
participation of Soviet legal scholars in this work must not have only

an applied and practical scientific significance. It is important for
there to be a timely and profound study of the fundasental probless which
are essential for the creation of the new laws and a developeent of the
legal conceptions which have to lay at their basis. It is precisely in this
way that Soviet legal science is able to provide the most effective assis-
tance to practice.

The new legislation which is being prepared on the basis of the 1977
Constitution of the USSR concerns all of the basic spheres of the activity
of Soviet society - the political system, the economic systes, the field
of social policy. the relationships between the state and the individual.
and so forth. The main direction in the development of the legislation is
in the political sphere - a further improvement of socialist democracy.
This is emphasized in the documents of the 25th Congress of the CPSU and in
the 1977 Constitution of the USSR (Article Nine) as one of the laws of our
entire state and social development. We are speaking about an increased
role for the Soviets, and expansion of the rights and freedoms of citizens,
and increased activity by them in the socio-political sphere. "Our party."
L. l. Brezhnev emphasized, "has shown and will continue to show constant
concern for the fact that the workers not simply possess the ssibilities
of participating in .the nanagensnt of society which are Fovi ed Ihenby the
constitution. but take actual and real part in it."

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the aspects of the development of Soviet democracy is the in-
creased role of workers' collectives. The Constitution of the USSR grants
collectives extensive rights in the management of production and in
deciding state and public affairs. The task now is to consolidate the
"mechanism" for the realization of the authority of workers' collective

in all of the spheres of the economy. culture, and social life. Certain
authorities of the workers' tellecrives which are stipulated by the
Constitution of the USSR n) beyond the framework of their immediate produc-
tion interests. The form- of their realization have not yet found a legis-
lative solution and haV- been insufficiently worked out in the theory of
state. management, and law. Participation in the preparation of a draft
of a legislative act on the laws of workers' collectives is an important
task for Soviet legal thprflﬁ. economists. sociologists, and psychologists.
At the July 1978 Session of the Supreme Soviet USSR two new legislative
acts were adopted which relate to the political system -- the Law on the
Council of Ministers USSR and the Law on the Elections to the Supreme
Soviet USSR. Their adoption was a new stage in Soviet state construction
and a step forward toward strengthening the Soviet representational system
and the apparatus of state administration. But this is not all there is
to the development of the legal acts which regulate the activities of the
various elements of the Soviet political system. On the agenda is the
preparation of laws on the kray, oblast, and okrug Soviets of People's
Deputies, on the procedure for considering and carrying out the orders of
voters. and others.

Delivering the concluding speech at the Extraordinary Seventh Session of

the Supreme Soviet USSR (Ninth Convocation) L. I. Brezhnev said: "A great
deal of work will have to be done in the field of developing legislation

on the agencies of administration." An important direction of scientific
investigation is the development of an optimal system of agencies of state
administration and of their interrelations in connection with an overall
solution of interbranch and territorial problems. of the tasks and functions
of the agencies of people's control, and also of the forms through which
the state apparatus takes account of public opinion which is mentionned in
article nine of the Constitution of the USSR.

0f great importance is an improvement of legislation in the socio-economic
sphere for which the new Constitution of the USSR is a legislative base.
"Thought has to be given as a whole as to how best to reflect in legislation
the measures mapped out by the 25th Congress of our Part! to improve the
'methods of economic manegement...." said L. I. Brezhnev. A most important
scientific task is an improvement of the legal forms of managing industry
and agriculture, of planning. capital construction, the distribution of
resources, and also of the forms of individual labor activity and of control
over its actualization. '

6
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is stated in the preamble to the Constitution of the USSR that in

a developed socialist society the workers make ever wider use of the fruits
of great revolutionary gains. This proposition characterizes not only

that which has been achieved by Soviet society today: it is also

designed for the future. From this point of view it is necessary to
analyse the tasks which face Soviet legal science in the field of the
regulation of socio—economic development. The 1977 USSR Constitution
outlined and consolidated in law a vast program of social development. It
is emphasized in it that "the state promotes a strengthening of the social
homogeneity of society - the eradication of class differences, of essen-
tial differences between town and country and between intellectual and
physical labor. and the comprehensive development and drawing together of
all of the nations and nationalities of the USSR." (Article Nineteen)

The above task will undoubtedly be accomplished both by political, economic.
and legal methods. In this connection the need exists to develop a future
oriented conception as to which legal means and legal forms will promote its
optimal solution.

It has to be recognized that when legal science analyzes social problems it
mostly has the urban inhabitant in mind. At the same time. rural areas have
their own specific legal problems. and the constitution devotes a number of
norms to them. The special characteristics of the legal status of the rural
citizen have to be thoroughly analyzed, above all. in the direction of grad-
ually bringing it closer to the status of the urban inhabitant. Of great
importance in this connection are Articles Twenty-One. TwantyJIwo, and
Twentydrhree of the Constitution of the USSR which formulate a program

for improving working conditions, increasing the real income of the workers,
and transforming agricultural labor into a variety of industrial labor, and
also the materials of the July (1978) Plenum of the CC CPSU.

The plan for legislative work which was approved by the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet USSR on 12 December 1977 provides for the preparation of
normative acts on the use and protection of the housing fund. the protection
of the atmosphere, of the animal world, and so forth in whose creation a
large role has to be played by civil law experts, labor experts, and special-
ists on legal environmental protection. The series of these acts of a socio-
economic character should have added to them norms which regulate the status
of scientific institutions, their relations with industry, the forms of
introducing scientific recommendations, and others. The legal regulation of
the questions which have to do with science as a definite sphere of social
life follows directly from the Constitution of the USSR.

The 1977 Constitution of the USSR and the Constitution of the union and
autonomous republics materially expand and strengthen the legal position of
the individual. Many propositions of the Basic Law which have to do with
the legal status of the citizen require a further detailization in current

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

legislation. it will be necessary to make changes in the legislation on
labor, on marriage and the family. on health care. on public education, on
pensions, and so forth. 0% great importance is the preparation of acts
concerning the procedure for Judicial complaints against the illegal
actions of officials and compensation for the damage caused to the citizen
by those actions. of no less importance is a scientific development of the
ways of improving the legal "mechanism" of the realization of the rights
and legitimate interests of citizens and of the juridical guarantees for
their legitimate actions. Connected with this is the scientific problem
of protecting the individuality of the citizen and his interests against
illegal encroachments. and also the problem of the responsibility of the
individual to society.

Despite the substantial development in recent years of Soviet criminology.
many of the problems facing it are still unsolved. Let us recall. for
example. the development of a typology of the personality of the law
violator, of effec.ive measures of fighting against individual types of
crime (theft, bribery, recidivist criminality. and Others), and of methods
of forecasting and preventing crime. A more general problem is an analysis
of the reasons for and of the ways of preventing certain violations of law --
civil and administrative delicts, and also drunkenness and other deviations
from the norms of socialist communal living. The bases for the development
of these problems have already been created: studies of the sociology and
social psychology of individual and group behavior, and the psychology of
the personality of the law violator. which has been especially developed
with regard to the behavior of minors.

in the field of the general theory of law there is a marked lagging in the
development of the problems of the "mechanism" of the influence of lav on
human behavior: the conditions for the optimal assimilation by citizens of
the demands of the law; the role of the special characteristics of the in-
dividusl in legal and illegal behavior; and the effectiveness. depending
upon the type of individual, of various methods of influence which prevent
or stimulate one or another kind of behavior. in the society of developed
socialism and of communism which is under construction the role of the
individual consistently grows, and legal science has the task of developing
"in an outstripping manner" the corresponding scientific problems here.

Legal science and the ideological struggle. The fact that legal science
today has found itself in the front line of the ideological struggle has
objective historical and sociological preconditions. The problems of the
rights of man which is at the center of this struggle reflects above all
the increased role of the popular masses in the modern world and their
striving toward a just and democratic solution of acute social problems,
and. On the other hand, the attempts of bourgeois ideologists to defend
the main principle of capitalism -- private property and the ideology of
individualism. nationalism, class and social inequality which is connected

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OVPICIAL US“ ONLY

with it.

Soviet juridical science which is based on Harxist-Leninist ideology
occupies solid and immoveable positions in this struggle. Our political-
legel conception of the rights of man recognises and affirms all of the
democratic positions which have been won during the course of the hirtorical
development of human society. At the sane time. it takes an essential

step forward, emphasizing the importance of the liberation of man from
exploitation and of ensuring genuine popular power as indispensable con-
ditions for the freedoa of the individual. And these conditions have
really been achieved under socialism. Our country possesses the most
progressive legislation which consolidates and guarantees the extensive
aocio-ecenomic. political. and personal rights of Soviet citisene. lt
corresponds in full measure to the international documents which have been
adopted in the field of the rights of man. "He have no reason to avoid

a serious conversation on the rights of man,” L. l. Brezhnev noted at the
World Congress of Peace fighters. "Our revolution and the victory of
socialism in our country have not only procleiﬁed but have actually ensured
the rights of the working man of any nationality and the rights of the
millions of workers in a way that capitalism has not been able to do in a
single country of the world."

In the sphere of the ideological struggle. in addition to spreading the
truth among the workers of foreign countries about the Soviet legal system.
science. and ideology. substantial work of a scientific research character
will have to be done. It would be useful to follow the modifications of
bourgeois propaganda with regard to the issue of the rights of man, and to
reveal and unmask the methods used by it into order to falsify Soviet law
and the practice of its application - and this must he done with regard
to the psychology and ideology of the foreign reader. radio listener. and
television viewer. An analysis and unmasking of the methods of Haoist
propaganda in the sphere of the ideological struggle with regard to the

issues of democracy, state construction, and law is of specific scientific
interest.

The dissemination of genuine, truthful information about the Soviet state
and law and about our legal science plays and will play an enormous positive
role in ensuring international cooperation between states which belong to
different social systems. It would be useful in this connection to develop
comparative legal studies through which scholars of different countries and
broad circles of readers will find out about the legal systems of the pres-
ent day and the theory and practice of the agencies of justice. All of this
will promote greater trust among peoples and a strengthening of internation-
al law and order which. in its turn, fosters peaceful coexistence between
states, a relaxation of internetional tensions. and the maintenance and
preservation of peace on our planet.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

The first unniVeraoty of the adoption of the 1977 Constitution of the
USSR 1» a giodbuednte for the entire Soviet people. it obliges Jessi
ocholnra and practitioners to perform creative work in order to achieve
the fuilent and most cnnprchenFIVv inpieuentniiun of the Constitution's
propositions and to put them into the practice of communist construction.

FOOTNOTES

1. vromosrt vmnuvncoc seven sssa, No 51, 1977, p 166.

2. L. I. Brezhnev, "0n the USSR Constitution." 2nd Bd.. Moscow. 1977, p 57.

3. Ib‘dl. P 58.

COPYRIGHT:

Izdetei'etvo "Neuke", "Sovetukoye sonndnretvo i prevo", 1978
2959

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REPM'RIATION OP ETHNIC GEMS l’ROH USSR OECLINES
Frankfurt/Main MWRTER ALLOWINB in German 1‘ Dec 78 p 3
[Article signed Lgn.]

[Text] Rureeberg. l: occult scene as though the federal govern-ant has had
to take some setbacks in its efforts toward the resettlement of Soviet citi-
zens of Gernan descent to the Federal Republic. hopes generally linked to
the Bonn visit by Soviet head of state and party chairaan Brezhnev in early
Hay this year obviously have not cone true. Hhile the resettler figures
during the first 4 aonths of this year still allowed to assume a tendency

of increasenin harch. for exanple, 929 Russians of German origin were
registered in the Friedland border-transit canpnthey decreased to 657 in May
and to 600 in June. The result inproved once more in July when 825 resettlers
case. but when 503 Russians of German origin arrived in the Federal Republic
in August. the nunber of resettlements reached the tentatively lowest level
of the year. In Septenber. the border transit camp at Priedland had accom-
dated $30 resettlers froe Russia and in October 573. with 533 reuttlenents
in Novel-bar finally. the quota dropped by nearly half in comparison with
Noveaber 1977 (1.103).

The situation is terned particularly difficult in the ‘l'edzhik and Kirgis
Soviet republics. This paper has learned from reliable sources that in
these republics exit permits for which people of German descent often had
been waiting for many years. in nany cases have been annulled again since
about early July. Utterances by the intelligence service as well as by the
authorities coapetent for the resettlement indicate the reasons for the
repressive actions. It is obviously difficult to (ill with new personnel
the gaps caused to eany production enterprises by resettlements to the
Federal Republic. ‘l‘hus. reportedly, plant managers have been told that a
labor shortage. for instance in the harvest assign-ant. may not be justified
or excused with the absence of personnel of Gar-an descent having left the
sovi.‘ Union.

"hat caused concern strong the people of German origin was the announcement
that the fasuily reunion in the present form sight be concluded by the Soviet
Union in early 1981. These rumors spread by the intelligence service

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
F0»! OFFICIAL 11512 ONLY

reportedly are based on considerations to conclude with the Federal Republic
an agree-cut on the future family reunion. The repatriation agreement of
1958 is considered obsolete. Circles of the Soviet intelligence service
further ere aaid to have reported that the Soviet Union is also interested in
an expanded ﬁnally reunion in the eVunt of a contractual agreement with the
Federal Republic. so for only the CIOSvQE rvl1tiven. an a rule married
couples. parents. children. and brothers and sisters have been ollovod to
leave the country.

in this connection there is talk of financial payments expected tron Bonn.
in this even the Federal nepublic would he fecing demands in the anount of
billions. which the federal government--ii oaked--tertuinly would deny. if
only because it doaa not want to be disturbed in preliminary talks on auch
a tickliah iaeua.

An extended family reunion would even increase the number of applicanta.
According to the findings of the atuttgart "lend group of the Gar-ans from
Ruaaia". core than 10.000 separated families had applied for family reunion
in 197$. Reportedly tne German Rad Green has now racelfad about 65,000
applications.

COPYRIGHT: P.A.Z. Cebu. Frankfurt an Main 1978

cso: 3103

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

300! DISOUSB“ SOVIET mum on EASTERN HORLD

Moscow 80W NATSIWALISH I onsacxmsrvmuorr MZVII‘IYB mnmooo
VOSTOKA (WOW! NAIIONALISH AND m SOCIAL DBVBLOPM O! m

FOREIGN M81) in Russian 1978 signed to press 3 Her 78 pp 2. 3. l. 328.
6-6. 301-315

(Annotation. Table of Contents and excerpts iron book edited by A. B.
lelen'kiy and 1.. R. Polonskaya. blanks. 2,600 copies. 328 pages]

[Excerpts] the collective nonograph is an attespt to subject to theoreti-
cel enalyeis the contesporary evolution of nationalien in the countries
of the foreign Bast. as well as various sides end aspects of nationaliss

in their association with the basic problens oi the social developeent of
these countries.

Table of Contents Page

’°:mtdeeeoeeeeseesseseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesssseesseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeoeo 5

Part I. Nationalisn and Ideological Denarcation
in the Developing Countries

Chapter I . Ithe Characteristic testores of the Evolution of

N.t1°n.11.- 1.“ ch. “mtd.. of ‘h. But.OIOOOOOIOOIOOOOOOCOOO. 7
Chapter II. Contasporary Revolutionary-Descent“ Theories

of Socialiss and Their Role in the Social Progress of

th. Mlophs ".‘1OMIOOOOO.IO...0.0.0000COCOIOOOOCOOOOOIOOOCO 61
Chapter III. Nationalism in Official Ideologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Chapter IV. Nationaliss and the Ideology of Maoists. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Chapter V. Vestern Bourgeois Sociology and RetionaIisn in

th‘ unntd.‘ of th. mt.DD0000...0..'00....OOIODOOOOIOOOOOOOI 1“

Part II. Nationalistic Ideology end the Problem
of Overconing leolwardness

Chapter VI. Nationaliss and the Overconing of Backvardness. . . . . . . . . I76
azapter VII. Nationalism and Probleae of Scientific-
T.CM1“1Pmﬂu.eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeesseeeeoeeeeeeeoeseeeeseees 19$

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter VIII. Netionelietic Ideology and the Problem of
Tr.ditt°na€00lIOOOIIIOIOOOCCOO-OOCOOO|OOIOCOOQOOIIOOIOOOIOIIOOO 219
Chapter 1x. Religion in Nationalietic Concepts of Social
“valopmntbotIIOOOOIOOICOOII0000000....ICO‘O'OOOOCIOOOOOQOOOCO 2‘0
Chapter x. Language Policy and Nationalism in the Liberated
countrioatioitctDCOOIOOIIOI0000...!00.00.IIOIOIIOOOOIOOOO.OIOCO 283
Conclusion. Correlation of the Social and the National in
Contemporary Ideologies of Countries of the Bast............... 300
L1‘cr‘turOOOOQ00OODOOOQ'ODOOOOOOQOOQOOOOCI'OOQ"OOCOOOGOOOOOOIOCIOUQ 316

Foreword

The characteristic feature of the modern epoch is the growing role of the
ideological struggle in the world arena. As General Secretary of the cc
CPSU L. I. Brezhnev remarked in the report to the 25th party congress.
"The positive changes in world politics. and detenre, create favorable
opportunities for broadly spreading the ideas of socialism. But. on the
other hand, the ideological confrontation of the two systems is becoming
more active, and i perialiet propaganda more keen."1

The ideological struggle in the countries of the foreign list is an important
part of the universal ideological struggle. In this connection, the emotions
of the contemporary role and the evolution of the ideology of nationalism in
the liberated countries of Asia and Africa have taken on special significance.
Today, when the overwhelming majority of the former colonies have won their
political independence, when the problem of the choice of the path for further
socioeconomic development arose for their people, and the class struggle has
noticeably intensified, the role of the progressive elmnts in bourgeois
nationalism of the oppressed nations and the developing nations becomes
narrower, while the role of the reactionary elements is growing. 1n. exploit-
ing classes are striving to utilise nationalism to put down the class struggle
with the help of the advocates of "national unity“; whereas in a number of
countries of the East they are able to hold back a rather broad section of the
working people under the influence of these slogans.

Under these conditions, Marxist-Leninists supporting the popular-democratic
anti-imperialist tendency of nationalism in the countries of the test are at
the same time taking into consideration the fact that the ideology of the
reactionary exploiting sections of society, which are connected with imperial-
ism, can be expressed in nationalism also. Nationalist slogans can change
their pirposei‘ulnels, and can be transformed from weapons of the struggle for
national liberation, into a means for dividing the anti-imperialist forces.
At the same time it would not be correct to underestimate the anti-imperialist
potential which nationalism still retains in e auster- of developing nations.
Thus, contemporary nationalism in the new nations is a phenomenon both complex
and contradictory.

IMaterials of the 25th CPSU Congress, Moscow, 1976, p 76.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The authors of the current collective monograph have undertaken to put to
theoretical analysis both the contemporary evolution of nationalism in the
countries of the foreign Best and the various aspects and features or nation-
alien in their connection with the basic problems of the social development
or these countries as well.

The sonograph represents the first in the seriea, "Paths of Development of
the Liberated Countries of the Best," which includes works on the contemp-
orary problems of the developing nations end works in preparation by the
Department of General Probleas of the Contemporary Development of the Coun-
tries of Asia and North Africa, of the Institute for Oriental Studies of
the A)! 085%. It consists of two parts. in the first part, the position of
nationalism in the contemporary ideological demarcation and in the ideolog-
ical struggle in the Best, is examined. Special attention is given in the
monograph to the ideology of the revolutionary democrats; which, while it is
not nationalism itself, bears the stamp or the influence of nationalistic
slogans and concepts. The second part is dedicated to the approach or nation-
alisn to the problems of overcoming economic and scientific-technical back-
uardneae in the countries of the neat, its relationship to the traditional

ideas and norms, and to the positionoi‘ religion in the nationalistic concep-
tion or social developent.

0..

Chapter I was written by a. D. Lita-an; Chapter II by A. S. Kaufman; Chapter
III by l. a. Polonekayag Chapter IV by L. P. Delyusin and L. S. Kyusadahyan)
Chapter V by A. O. Bel'skiy; Chapter V! by N. A. Simoniya; Qmpter VII by
As no N. w 'e ‘0 W} mp“? VIII by ‘s In. v.3. m In Re
Polanskays; asaptor IX by A. I. Icnova, V. 1. homes and L. R. felons”)
and Chapter I by 1.. B. Ililscl'skiy. The conclusion was written by Associate

hectare of the AN USSR 0. F. Kim and Ink. Polonakeye.
V. I. Kornev and ﬂ. 0. Prussakova assisud in preparation of the mamscript.

CORRELA‘IIM 0? m SOCIAL AND res "HIM DI CONTEMPORARY 1080106138 0?
WWI“ 0P 1'!!! EAST

[Conclusion by G. 1'. Kim and L. R. Polonekaya, Institute for Oriental
Studies. USSR Academy of Sciences]

The problem of defining the current stage of national liberation revolu-
tions and the prospects for future development of the countries of the

East which have passed through the epoch of colonial slavery is of para-
mount inortanca to the world Wt movement. and has riveted the atten-
tion of Harder scholars to its study. In this connection. special sig-
nificance accrues to the study of the basic ideological currents of the
countries of Asia and Africa. which reflect the ideas of the various social
and political forces in these countries on methods of overcoeing bacherdness
and actual inequality, the struggle for economic independence, and the

15
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strengthening of the national state. Although these iducIOgicsl currents
bear a primarily nationalistic character, they bear witness to the serious
changes with respect to the foreign (international) and domestic (national)
factors of the social and national aspects of the revolution.

The international aspect of the concept of metal development is defined in
the close union of the international workers' and Ccauunist movements with the
anti-imperialist forces of the developing countries of the east. But the
relationship to the nationalittic ideological tendencies at the level of an
individual country depends upon their social purpose; upon what is forecoat,

a truly national relationship, or nationalistic narrow-minded self-realisation.

The new alignment of the national and the social in contemporary socio-politieal
ideas in the developing nations is manifested first of all in the fact that
bourgeois nationalism is not so widespread as nationalistic ideological tenden-
ciea which express the refraction of national self-consciousness through the

prism of the interests of the potty bourgeoisie and other non-proletarian
social groups.

Theories of social developnent differ, according to their form—religious

or secular, and according to their social purposes—which are socially homo-
geneous, and represent the interests either of separate bourgeois or petty
bourgeois groups of the population, or the non-proletarian working sections
of society; also represented are complex atrivings which cabins bourgeois
and petty bourgeois features, or which reflect both the natural strivings of
the non-proletarian working groups and the influence of proletarien ideology.
With respect to content, in all concepts of social development, it is colored
by nationalistic feelings. The difference lies in the fact that the duality
of the nationalism of the oppressed nations and its popular-democratic anti-
imperialist currents (insofar as actual inequality and economic dependency
are not overcome), and its class narrow-mindedness is far from equally re-
tained and manifested.

The ever-growing spread of the principles of socialist internationalism fur-
nishes new content to the correlation of national and international factors
in the ideology of the national liberation movement. In witness to this,

an ever-greater number of the foremost people in the liberated countries
understand that expanding cooperation with the socialist countries is not
determined by considerations of market prices, but by the commonality of the
basic long-term interests and aspirations of world socialism and the national
liberation move-ant. "The principles of internationalism require us to
support nationalism in its struggle against colonialism, but at the same time
to speak out against nationalism if it is directed against the 1159!... The
problems of the revolutionary struggle are so closely inter-won, that not a
single important question concerning any country at all can be solved on a
narrow, parochial, national basis. Life itself forces the working masses to
pass through the school of proletarian internationalissa,a stressed General
Secretary of the S ian Ccsmnist Party Khaled Bagdash in his articles and
speeches [7, 8h .

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

More favorable objective and subjective prerequisities for inculoating social
thought in the developing nations with the principles of socialist internation-
alisn are being created in proportion to the growth of the national liberation
aovenent into a struggle against all types of exploitation and oppression.
Scientific sooialisa is becoaina the most important international factor in
the process of fox-nation of revolutionary social thought.

The new correlation between the operation of internal and external factors,
the national and the socialist elenents, inevitably leads to the fornation
of principally new traits in the national liberation movement. Contemporary
revolutions of national liberation, being a manifestation of a new historic
epoch-the epoch of the transition of mankind froa capitalian to socialise,
by its scale, its active forces, and its political and social ails differs
in principle from the hourgeoie-deaocratic revolutions of the past, and
rewesents a revolution of a new type.

The mw stage of national liberation rot-elutions, which is connected with
intensification of the social aspects and choice of the paths of developeent,
introduces changes in the arrangement of social and class forces. Whereas
the interests of the various classes and social strata coincided in the
anti-imperialist unity in the period of comon national struggle for state
sovereignty, today one can speak of the increasing acuity of class contra-
dictions, which leads to demarcation of social forces and their further pol-
arisation. Although ccnnon national motives are still preserved to a certain
extent, at least in some countries, and are intertwined with social and class
aspirations, the latter are acre and nore coming to the foreground, which finds
direct expression in the ideologies of social developent.

At the present tins, the class struggle is deployed between: monopolistic and
other reacticmry groups of the bourgeoisie, and landowners, either the tra-
ditional feudalictic end the feudal-patriarch forces (which are to one degree
or another associated with inpsrialisn) on the one hand; and the proletarians,
seni-proleterians, middle and other petty bourgeois strata of society, and also
those groups of national bourgeois which still retain their progressive poten-
tial, on the other.

The basic directions of the ideological-political struggle in the 1960's and
70's bear witness to the fact that under the new conditions, in a umber of
cases, the national and social aspects of the revolution are opposed to one
another, which is manifested in various ways in the different ideological
currents. Strengthening the social aspect of the bourgeois ideological cur-
rents, in the final analysis, means that an ever greater nunber of questions
are treated therein frcn narrow class positions, free the point of view of

the egotistical interests of separate groups of the bourgeoisie, and conse-
quently, nationalistic narrow-Iindedness grows and the features of nationalien
in the oppressed nations are lost. Although correct on the whole, posing the
question thus is not sufficient for defining the essense of bourgeois nation-
elisn and its position in the theories of social developnent, insofar as the
correlation of the national, the social and the international are not the cane

17
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in different bourgeois currents. cue nuzxt not fail to take into consideration
the fact, that a nusbcr of bourgeois concepts of soclal development which ref-
lect primarily the interests of the middle and lowest business undertakings
retain the popular-democratic approach to the solution of national problems.

With the influence of tne ideas of socialist. int-al‘mtionalism, similar concep-
tions consider cooperation of the developing countries with the countries of
the socialist camp, and :mity in tho anti-imperialist struggle, to be object-
ive necessiﬁss. in the 1970's, both western scholars and ideologues of the
liberated countries themselves are paying more and more attention to these
anti-inperialistic aspects of the theories of the social development of the
nationalists of the developing countries. ‘ rtain so-callcd liberal bour-
geois official ideologies demonstrate a striving for overcoming nationalistic
narrow-nindedness while sacking solutions to problems of the anti-inparialistic
struggle, economic growth and the struggle with poverty, declaring the exped-
ience of taking the experience of the socialist countries into consideration.

And although in these cases the widest, naturally, is not the changes in

the relationship of .he separate groups of the bourgeoisie to the philosophy
of scientific social..sn, but their interest in the end result of socialist
construction in the matter of overcoming economic backurdness, the very fact
of appealing to the experience of the socialist countries bears witness to the
changes in the correlations between the national and the international factors
in working out models for social development.

Nationalistic narrow-mindedness is displayed to a significantly greater degree
in the bourgeois~conservative ideological currents, which are trying to contains
an exaggeration of national specific character with an appeal to the bourgeois
models of the West. And what is more, attenpts are being made to represent this
appeal to the models of the West as genuine internationalisa, which is opposed
to socialist internationalisn.

is far as the petty bourgeois currents are concerned, the strengthening of
their social aspects signifies in some cases growth of nationalistic narrow-
nindedness and the overcoming of the reactionary petty bourgeois approach to
the problems of social development (right wing petty bourgeois ideological
currents); in other cases, it signifies strengthening of the elements of
revolutionary populism and the overcoming of the popular-denocretic approach
to the solution of national problems of social developsent. The change in

the correlations between national and social consciousness, between the national
and international factors in the petty bourgeois ideological currents is mani-
fested upon treating the problems of overcoming economic backwardneas, the
creation of a new type of statehood, and the struggle with poverty. At the
same time, the severity and complexity of social conflicts is determined not
only by the fact that the activity of the working masses pew significantly
under the conditions of political independence, but also by the fact that the
formation of new classes and social groups is taking place.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The growth or class conecicuenesa of the working people directly affects the
correlation of national end international factors in the social thought or the
developing nations. As is well tom, the creation and development or national
industry, which is taking place in the majority or the countries of Asia and
Africe, end the influence or the scientific-technical revolution, are conducive

The processes of class fox-nation taking place in the countryside have s direct
influence on the correlation of the national and sociel factors in the social

influence or traditional religious conceptions and institutions: nevertheless,
the dirterencee in the positions of the peasant-workers ondthe semi-prole-
terians on the one hand, end the smell rural businessman on the other are
manifested more end more mildly. Witness to this feet is the appearance or
political and ideological currents which reflect the interests or the working
peasantry first or all, as e counter-balance to the interests or the petty
bourgoisie. The worldng etc-ate or the peasants, Just as the non-proletariat:
working strata of the city are, after the proleteriat, the moat receptive to
the ideas of socialist internationalien end the nest hostile to the bourgeoie
influence of the ﬂeet. The practice or the 1960's and 70's showed that the

The formation or the ideologicel conceptions of the different social strata
does not coincide with the formation or close-consciousness. These ideolog-
ical concepts either reflect the interests of the different groups of an

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ll'ﬂ-I ONLY

it is from among the intelligentsia that the authors of these theories cons.
Without a doubt, in the developing countries as everywhere, the intelligentsia,
in the words of main, "in all says more consciously, more decisively, and
more accurately reflects the dot-element of the class interests and the polit-
ical groupings in the entire society“ 45, 3112]. Its ideologues appear as
representatives of the. bourgeoi sic on the cm; band, and of the seminprolotarian
working strata on the other. however, as has been noted repeawdly in a
nusber of works, during the last decades the role of the intelligentsia as a
special social stratum or the developing notion has grown signiﬁcsntly. In
this connection, the instruction: of Lenin concerning the intellientsiya

takes on a special significance, as concerns a "new middle class," which finds
it harder and harder to live in a capitalist society (I, 213 and which,
"under the conditions of rapprochement with the people," , 199 can become

a prominent force in the struggle against not only feudal ut s 0 against
bourgeois reaction. It is Just in no different petty-bourgeois ideological
currents that the mood of the intelligentsia itself receives the most complete
expression, as the "unconscious blending of democratic and primitive socialist
ideas" 2, 31.27. Pnreover, the nature or the influence of socialist inter-
nations ism on the intelligentsia has profoundly changed. The bourgeois
values of the West are gradually losing their former significance in the eyes
of nsnv or its representatives, but the attractive force of socialist ideals--
is growing..

it the very same time, in order to understand the theory and practice of the
contemporary national-liberation revolutions it is necessary to consider,

that the intelligentsia in its essence is nationalistically-minded, whereas
the traditional impressions engendered by their pro-colonial, pro-bourgeois
and colonial past continues to play an enormous role in its social psychology,
Just as in the social psychology or the petty bourgeoisie and the non-proletar-
ian working strata. In these conditions the very searches for alternatives

to the bourgeois course for social development and attempts to adapt socialist
ideals to a national specific character frequently do not go beyond the limits
of a "third course" for development, and become “locked up' in national tra-
ditions.

The emphasis on the national-specific character is typical for many petty-
bourgeois nationalists and ideologues or non-proletarian working strata of
society, and it has not been completely eliminated in certain revolutionary-
democratic theories either. Highly indicative in this respect are stataaents
such as, "National independence is not only an act of political and economic
liberation, but also a rebirth of national identity; the very national identity
gives to independence its substance and inparts action to it" (-8].

Salt-assertion by way or the past, end searches for one's own national indiv-
iduality in the socioeconomic institutions and customs of one's country are ,
in "national character," and above all in historic traditions, the character-
istic features of the overdhelming majority of the contemporary concepts of
social developaent. This is ad-itted by the ideologues or the developing
countries themselves, and by many foreign scholars ct their social thought
5, pp 1.5-1.6, 55, 137 and renewing. As the events or the 1960's and 70's

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corn for the traditional, including the religious and social institutions and
ideas. And in those cases when adherence to traditions, which comprises an
integral part of the social psychology of the peasantry and other non-prolet-
arian sections of society, and the national specific character, are not con-
sidered to a sufficient degree, the political teachings and programs, including
those which include objectively progressive requirements, might not win popular
support, or night unexpectedly, at first glance, lose it (a vivid example of
this was the events in Pakistan and the results of the latest elections in
India). As one of the Indian H'aracist scholars correctly pointed out in the
pages of a collection of works dedicated to the nemory of H. K. Gandhi,
"National nihilism of itself only phys into the hands of the cheauvanists

and reactionaries. The latter can be isolated, and they might be dealt a

blow only when the Left and the Gunsmist movement are firmly united at the
roots with the very heart of the life of India" 50, 7g].

No less dangerous, however, is the idealization of tradition. Whereas at
earlier stages of development such idealiaation was related primarily to the
feudal and semi-feudal so-called traditional ideological currents, bourgeois
nationalism was distinguished by a differentiated relationship to traditions
and it became firmly established upon the destruction of the old traditional
ideas (tribal, patriarchal, commial, and purely feudal) 3 under the new con-
ditions bourgeois nationalism is in many respects losing these, its traditional
functions. Although capitalism, in the developing countries of the East, has
not yet fulfilled its role in the matter of the destruction of pro-feudal and
feudal production relationahips, of social institutions and etereotypic think-
ing, with the appearance of socialist prospects for development this role is
changing profoundly, insofar as, in the final analysis the line of development
is determined by the fundamental contradiction between socialism and capitalists.
Trying to establish the possibility of a ”third path" in social relationships
and social consciousness which differs both from capitalism and from eccialism,
the bourgeois and patty-bourgeois ideologues are advancing "national specific
character" to first place, and this, in turn leads inevitably to denial of the
differentiated relationship toward traditions and their idealization.

me problea of a creative relationship to Ono's national tradition and a dif-
ferentiated relationship to tradition in general takes on paramount significance
for working out the theory and practice of social development. Insofar as, in
bourgeois and petty-bourgeois theories the national specific character isﬂned
in the primry position, this or that form of idelization of tradition is inev-
itable. Laggcration and absolutizing of the national specific character lead
to the gmth of nationalistic narrow-mindednesa in the theory and practice of
the development of society, and nuke it more difficult for the spread of the
ideas of scientific socialism. Mlic figures in the comamnist movement in the
developing countries themselves repeatedly devoted their attention to these
conditions. For example, General Secretary of the Syrian Communist Party
Khaled Bagdaeh has often emphasized that, "The negative aspects of nationalism
mifest themselves after liberation of the count from imperialist dominion,
in a more powerful form than before liberation" , 827.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIM. USE ONLY

One cannot help but cmsider also the conscious striving oi‘ Reaction to utilize
various conservative, and above all religious, traditions for distracting the
poath and petty-bourgeois urban strata of society from the class struggle and
directing their activities against democratic actions, not only of the revolu-
tionary-democratic but also of the nationa‘bbaurgeois uoverments (of which the
events or the 1970's in Pakist" and Bangladesh bear witness). Furthermore,
the brcss oi‘ nationalistic reaction are actively striving to impede the influ-
ence of pmlotarian internationalisn, replacing its slogans with slogans of
"religious unity," traditional oommnality of the "colored peoples" and such
similar psuedo-internationanctic ideas.

In the 1960's and 70's, this situation and the pecualiarities of internal dov-
elopnont as well, led to the idea that an allegedly new method of treating
internationalisn was needed; this idea became widespread in the various right-
reformist and loft-extremist theories for nocinl development. arguments in
favor of this were based on Maoist conviction: on the idea that the .ﬁmdsmental
contradiction of the epoch is not the contradiction between the forces of imper-
ialism and motion sad the forces of socialism and progress, but between the
developed and devehraing countries without regard to their social orientation,
as a result of which the previous basis for unity of socialism and the workers'
or columnist movement with the national-liberation movement allegedly does

not exist. Thus, in this case also, one is counting on that very nationalistic
mrrow-nindedness of the social consciousness of the developing countries. And
this in turn inevitably leads to the situation in which the positionld‘ inpsr-
ialism and that of the right and left-extremist elements in the countries of
Asia and Africa are becoming ever closer on this guestion.

The change in the correlation of the social and the national in the various
nationalistic theories for social development brings about the necessity for

a net: criterion for bourgeois and petty-bourgeois nationalism and the national-
liberstion revolution as a whole. Whereas in the preceding stages this criter-
ion depended upon the participation of popular forces in the struggle for pol-
itical independence and on the determining of paths and nethods in this struggle,
new it depends the orientation toward the capitalist or socialist path for social
development, and on the relationship to the capitalist and socialist systems as
a whole. Revolutions in the period of struggle for political independence were
primarily bourgeois-democratic, anti-imperialistic, national-liberation revolu-
tions. Additionally, nationalism, which comprises the substance of all bour-
geois revolutionary teachings, became a popular ideology, which has stirred up
wide sections of the woridng people to the revolutionary struggle for creating
independent national states.

In modern conditions the anti-imperialistic national-democratic peoples‘ revol-
utions are becoming the nain type from the point of view of the prospects for
social development. Modern revolutionary theories for social development
retain their nationalistic slant, but this is primarily petty-bourgeois nation-
alisn (although this by no means signifies that bourgeois nationalism has al-
ready depsrted the scene).

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’ICMI. USE ONLY

Theories for social development of this type have grout popular-revolutionary
possibilities which have not yet been used up, and reflect the national popular-
denocratio end social interests of the broad popular coalitions—frost laboring
sections of society to separate groups of the middle and lower national entrep-

cneurs—while experiencing the ever-growing influence of socialist internation-
alien.

In today's conditions a neticnal-desocratic revolution can appear as one of the
toms of development of a revolution of national liberation into a socialist
revolution. In pc-actioal terns, this is manifested in the non-capitalist path

the sons tine the national-denccratic rewolution, the chief attribute of which
consists of solving the problems which creato conditions for the change to soc-
ialism which follows, does not yet cease to be a national-liberation revolution,
being its highest stage. Considering the general socioecononic backwardness,
and the weakness of the proletariat and his political organisetions in tho '
naJcrity of the afro-asian countries, one can eeeunc that a national-democratic
revolution can occupy a historically large interval of tine.

ideological-political end socioeconomic ideological purposes are worked out.
The fundesental economic indications of the deepening of the socioecononio

cherscter of s national-liberation revolution, in our opinion, are: elinina-
tion or drasticdly weakening the positions of foreien capital in all spheres

The foreign political orientation has a special position anon; the signs of a
national-denocratic revolution. oily a course for union with world eocialisn
can ensure the successful development of a national-denocratic revolution.
Violation of this condition inevitably leads to loss of revolutionary positions.

iuporialict notional-denocratic revolutions, expansion of the class struggle
end change of the coorelaticnships between petty-bourgeois nationalists and
prolemrian intcc-nationalisn, it is necessary to recall the instructions of
Lenin, who in the debate with those who considered the demand for independence
of the peoples in the colonies “practicable, wrote that it is “inpracticel

without a series of revolutions ," and 'unsound without sooialisn" (enphasis
ours—the authors).

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL INF. ONLY

Determining the class-basic of political ,‘umr in countries with a socialist
orientation presents a special difficulty. In order to do this , a thorough
analysis or the social nature of the awhile-3 in quoction, and particularly
of the heaurooracies, is necessary. The important role or the party-political
and the adainistrativc hcauroeracica in certain countries with a socialict
orientation and their relative rut-umduncc [12:11:39.5 the ruling circles ol such
countries to earry out a more or less flexible policy of social maneuvering.
howeVer, this complex phenomenon need not lead to a dead end. buch a type of
power by no means bears a characteristic transcending classes, tor it reflects
tirat of all the interests o'.‘ the non-proletariat werkinc strata of society
and the petty bourgeoisie.

a national democratic revolution can provide differing variations oi‘ develop-
ment. If its leadership falls into the hands at the succeeding revolutionary
deaccratc, the variation of non~capltalist dewlomcnt is at hand; if the
revolutionary leadership renalnc in the hands or the national revolutionaries,
in which environment either demarcation to petty-bourgeoise nationalists and
genuine revolutionary demcrats occura, or a stable enuillibriua is maintained
between those and . .ncrc, than :1 kind of intermediate variation arises, uhich
leads to emphasis on thl‘ popularmational tasks or economic and cultural work
(and in accordance with this or subordination to ”national discipline“ of any
class interests) in domestic policy, to sharply expressed Jesonctrative neut-
rality in foreign policy (the so-called theory or "ecual distance from super-

pouers").

National-desecratic revolutions are least of all distinguished for irrevers-
ebility, stability, and (in character. The quality of transition itseli‘ is
related to revolutions, And their ability to evolve to the left and to the
right predetexstincs the dynanic of their 'nutation," and the significant
amplitude of fluctuation in social orientation, and their special sensitivity
to the anallast changes in the correlation of class powers and to the nest
insignificant shirt in the character at the leadership. Pathetic emplas on
this plane are the countries in which the national-daaocratic revolutions
suffered defeat.

The course 01‘ developent or national-democratic revolutions itself is a con-
plex process of outerotving the trusses-k or popular-democratic tasks. This
process takes place unequally and irregularly. Lenin, citing Emels' general-
ization of the experience 01‘ the revolutions of the 17th and 18th centuries ,
wrote in his tires that, "There is evidently a law which requires a revolution?
to advance farther than it can manage, in order to make secure the less signif-
icant transrornationar 1?, 20,7.

ittrectod by the general enthusiasm oi‘ the revolutionary struggle of the masses,
and infected by the successrul emplee ol‘ the neighboring atro-asim peoples,
certain revolutionary-democratic leaders would at tines bring out extreme left-
ist and radical (from the point of view of the concrete historic conditions of
their countries) slogans and programs, trying by administrative means to force
the realisation of the latter. Such an approach inevitably leads to the nest

2L
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radical contradiction of the objective requirements for securing the basic
political achievenentcs stabilisation of the internal situation and systematic
construction ained at reestablishing the national economy, and achieving econ-
oaio self-sufficiency; intensification of the social content of the process

of revolutionary reorganisation, codinensicnal with the real capabilities; etc.
Scorn for the stated probleas and abuse, by cathode of unedorned orders and
decrees, led to growth of a profound econoaic and, in turn, political crisis.

Lenin repeatedly stressed, that in the ranks of revolutionary denocracy the
estrangeunt of the proletarian and seai-proleterian from the petty bourgeoisie
is inevitable, but it is possible that, "Cohesion of the proprietary elements
of the revolutionary bloc will lead to the point where it will overcome the
organisation of the nassee around the proletarian slogans” (E, 21.9. This
important instruction should guide mnrxist-leniniets toward extra-sly flexible
tactics. 0n the one hand, it is impossible to artificially force this process.
On the other, the forms and methods of consolidating all the progressive forces
within the framework of national-democratic fronts, the basis of which consists

if cooperation of Columnists and revolutionary denocrats, take on great signif-
canoe.

Such progressive fronts are still in the process of creation; therefore, in
the theoretical-political scheme any of their aspects are not yet clear, have
not met the test of time and, evidently, vill be suggest by the practical
revolutionary work itself. Candidate msber of the Central Connittee of the
Iraqi Cosmunist Party Abdul Khaba gives the following description of the

national-democratic front of Iraq as an maples "ihe truly distinguishing
feature of the present front, as conpared to the preceding ones, is the fact
that it unites the national efforts with the social reforms. The social
forces on which the present Rent is based are: the working class; the peas-
antry; the petty urban bourgeoisie, and the progressive stratum of the riddle
bourgeoisie; that is, the.claeees and strata of society whose interests are
connected with the development of Iraq along a non-capitalistic path." Noting
the hopeful prospects of this front, Abdul lihaba stresses, that for realising
these prospects, expansion of the still-insufficient popular base of the front
is necessary, “especially saong the workers, peasants, students, and vases”

O

The nature of the evolution of revolutionary-democratic regimes depends to a
great extent upon their ideological platfora. The various theories of "nation-
sl socialise" which became the nest widespread as new national ideologies in
Asia and Africa in the 1960's, reflect not only petty-bourgeois nationalist
ideas, but also the interests of the broad working stratum of the population.
“any of these doctrines bear witness still of the inability (cheotivc and
smaective) of their authors to accept the ideology of scientific socialism
fully at the present stage, and above all its main idea of the leading role

of the working class. it the some time, in the theories of the "national soc-
ialisste," one finds also reflection .‘3 really progressive ideas. Revolutionary
democrats are enlisting the services of many socialist principles, the realis-
stion of which they see as the nest effective asans for econo-ic progress.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WNCIAI. USE 031.?

This creates a favorable ideological climate for the development of pro-
sreuive eociel thought in the dimctlon of scientific oocielieo, end the
poooihiiity for the gredunl overcoming of nationalistic nerrov-nindednou
and the hobituel entiuomniote. Cooperation of revolutionary denooreto
with the intornetionel Comniot ooveoent is destined to play on important
role in the overcoming of eclectic scheme and [emotion of scientific
ooeieilet views in lhu ideology or uettonuhduooctatio revolutions.

COPYRIGHT: Gievneye reduktoiya voatochnoy iiterntury irdetei'otvo "Neuko"
1978

9006
680: 1800

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

grim?!“ REVIEVS max 0? IMHNMOI‘AL INSTI'NTB OF APPLIED SYB'I‘BIS
A Y8 8

Moscow NWBHCHEYS MUKI [THE W3 01‘ 801M631 in Russian 1978 signed to
press 2 liar 18 pp 266-275

[Excerpt tro- the book "Budusheheye nauki” edited by Ye. s. Etingot]

[Excerpt] In the course of the scientific-technical revolution conteaporary
society is encountering problems which are fundamentally new, conplex by
their very nature and global in character. The profound and radical changes
in science, technology and productioni the tremendously larger scale or so-
cial production; the constantly growing inpact of man on the environ-ant he
inhabits; the unprecedented opportunities for improving huaan welfare cre-
ated by the growth of the productive forces, and so ohm-all of this is ac-
coapanied by a whole series or consequences both good and bad.

ﬂaw of the acute problem affecting dosens of countries and nations can be
solved only by neans or a fruitful combination or their good will. scien-
tific-technical potential and sizable naterial and human resources. "Even
nor.” 1.. I. Brezhnev, general secretary or the cc CPSU, said at the 25th
party congress, “such global problems as the rav materials or energy prob-
leu, the liquidation of the lost dangerous and videspread diseases and pro-
tection of the environment. the conquest of space and use or the resources
or the oceans are rather important and relevant problem. In future they
will have an increasingly noticeable impact on the life of every nation and
on the entire syste- ot international relations. Our country, like the

3 Dchenan Kihhsylorich Ovishiani. doctor of philosophical sciences, pro-
fessor. corresponding sue-her oi' the USSR Academy of Sciences, deputy chair-
nan of the State Conittu or the 0858 Council of Ministers for Science and
Technoloy, director of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute for Sys-
teas Research or the State Conittee for Science and ‘l‘echnology and the USSR
Acadew of Sciences. chairman of the council of the International Institute
of Applied Systsas Analysis honorary doctor or econoaic sciences or the
Prague School of Bcononica {senior poetsecondary], and a aeaber or the Seed-
ish Royal Acadew of Engineering Sciences.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFNCIM. "8|; ONLY

other socialist countries, cannot stand aloof from the solution of these
problems. which touch upon the interests of all hunmnity."n

The socioeconomic and scientific-technical prerequisites for s. Joining of

the efforts of different countries in solvinc these problems can be embodied
in real proJects and programs only in the context of a relaxation of inter-
national tension and establishment of the principles of peaceful coexistence
among states with different social systems. Favorable changes have occurred
in the world political climate thanks to thc direct impact of the Peace Pro-

goals desired) have been transfomed into elements of a unified system. As
they merge in a unified and interrelated complex, science, technoloy, pro-
duction end management are giving birth to instruments of tremendous capa-
bility for transforming the world and for solving Immanity's most urgent

The emergence of an absolutely new class of problems whose solution requires
comprehensive analysis, long-range forecasting, quantitative evaluations of
goals and of the means of achieving them, coordination of the efforts of
specialists in different disciplines, and so on, has put on the agenda the
question of a madamentslly new approach in solving them. This approach is
systems analysis, otherwise termed systems methodology, which has absorbed
the most recent achievements of scientific fields that have come into being
in recent decades: operations research, information theory, cybernetics,
decision theory, organization theory, automatic control theory, etc. Sys-
tems methodology, which combines not only quantitative, but also qualita-
tive methods, facilitates the rational formulation, structuring and solving
of a problem using the available resources. Systems analysis can be re-
garded as the most universal method of solving global problems character-
ized by their complexity and indefiniteness.

The International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis [18A] was set up in
1972 at the initiative of the USSR and the United States in order to solve
such problems; at the invitation of the Austrian government it was located
15 km south of Vienna in Inxemburg Castle. The period when it came into

' l'Materialy XXV s"yesda KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress], 12 56.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

being coincided in time vith the preparatory stage of the Conference on So-
curity and Cooperation in inn-ope. The institute is a brilliant example of
implementation of the principles of relations among states which were later
set forth in the conference's final commique. host of the member-organi-
sations of ISA are representatives of the states which participated in the
conference. A sisable portion of the research conducted by the institute
coincides with the directions outlined in the final communique as specific
fields of cooperation in the domain of science and technology. These are
the problems of fuel and enery. optimum use of resources. medicine. health
care. environmental protection. eth effectiveness in solving them depends.
of course. on success in the continuing struggle for peace and international
cooperation. for controllingthe am race, and for strengthening the polit-
ical detente and for giving it material substance.

18A represents a nev type of scientific organisation both with respect to
the problem area it works in and also from the organizational standpoint.
In accordance with its bylaws, the institute is a nongovernmental Imaltilat-
eral and autonomous scientific organisation.

The term "applied" in the institute's name reflects its express orientation
toward the practical solution of urgent problems confronting humanity. The
list of IBA's research topics is clearly oriented toward the future. It is
the institute ' a responsibility:

1. to conduct and to support Joint and individual research pertaining to
the problems of the present arising as a result of scientific-technical de-
velopment; to this end the institute is conducting its own methodological
and applied projects in the interrelated fields of systems analysis. cyber-
netics, operations research and management techniques;

ii. to stimulate and support national and international efforts in correo
sponding fields of study; to promote the growth of interest in research of
that kind on the part of scientists of all countries and to attempt to im—
prove their mutual understanding by creating uniform standards and terminol-
oy; the institute's vorh is open to all specialists in accordance with the
customary practice of international scientific cooperation; it is endeavor-
ing to attain the highest standards of science;

iii. to serve the aims of peace exclusively.

In mid-1977 national organizations of 17 countries were members of ISA: the
0888, the United States. Austria, England. Bulgaria. Hungary. 00R, Italy,

Canada. Poland. France. Heat Ger-aw, Czechoslovakia. Japan, Sweden. Fin-
land and Rolland.

The institute's international character makes it possible to pool the scien-
tific achievements of many countries, to use them in making multilateral
comparisons and assessments of results, to systematics the existing knowl-
edge and on that basis to conduct methodological and applied research on

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIN. USE ONLY

problems which have international significance. The institute engages lead-
ing specialists of different countries to work together on a long-range ba-
sis. enjoys the support of numerous international and national organiza-
tions, and in turn extends aid to them. The creation of the institute has
led to the emergence of an entire network of scientific organizations work-

ing on the problems of systems analysis and using systems methods of solving
national problems.

The institute was created. but there was no experience in designing the op-
eration of organizations of this kind. In drafting its first scientific
program, therefore. the organizers strove to encompass a sufficiently broad
range of problems so as to provide the basin for attracting to the institute
scientists and specialists in different fields who would subsequently Join
efforts in interdisciplinary research.

A large number of specific scientific research topics were discovered thanks
to numerous conferences among experts, and following their discussion and
selection, they became part of ISA's first scientific research program.
which consisted of nine lines of research (projects): 1) the methodology of
systems analysis; 2) the design of large systems and their management;

3) ecological systems; 1‘) cncrgy systems; 5) city and regional management
systems; 6) water resources; 7) computer technology; 8) biological and medi-
cal systems; 9) integrated production management systems.

The results of the first 3 years of work were taken up by the ISA council in
a session held in November 1975.

It was noted in the session that thanks to cooperation in ISA among scien-
tists of many countries mathematical models were built and the corresponding
programs compiled for forecasting development of the fuel and power indus-
try, combined use of water resources, and management of municipal systems.

Reconnendations concerning the new matrix structure for organizing the list
of scientific topics, which was adopted in place of the previous system of
independent proJects, were first taken up by the council in that session.
'lhe matrix structure of IBA's scientific topic plan provides for related
projects to be combined into consolidated fields of research. The following
four basic research fields have been distinguished; they encompass most of
the previous proJects: l) resumes and the environment; 2) urban settle-
ments and services; 3) management and technology; 10) the methodoloy of sys-
tem analysis. These fields of research remaining after consolidation are
integrated through diverse research programs. Two kinds of programs were
proposed as the basis for integration of the topic list: universal pro-
gramsufor solving problems urgent for every country, and global problems-
for solving problems couson to all humanity.

A very important event in the institute's life—the first conference in its
history--took place in May 1916. The 18A bylaws define the institute's con-
ference as its basic forum for promoting fulfillment of the institute's pro-
grams, for linking those programs with the research of other national and

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

international organisations. and also for providing the council and direc-
torate broad scientific consultation. Distinguished representatives of
world science, directors of major scientific institutions, officials of gov-
ernment agencies concerned with the affairs of science and technology. the
environment" and so on. the heads of the scientific research sectors of ms-

Jor firms and other competent individuals tooh part in the proceedings of
the conference.

In the first 3-year stage of the institute's activity scientific research
was done separately along each of the nine directions listed. A sizable
portion of the results obtained in that stage went to make up the scientific
spadeworh that served as the basis for subsequent integration of the scien-
tific topic plan. II'he energy project. which subsequently grew into a global
program encompassing several fields of research has advanced furthest in
that regard. The energ program which arose out of the enery proJect is
the leading program within the inetitute's scientific topic plan with re-
spect to the number of staff members working on it (about one-third of all
ISA‘s staff scientists), with respect to the amount of research being done,
and with respect to the results obtained. The topic list inherited from
the energ project contains the following lines of research: energy re-
sources; the enery requirement; possible new energy technology; constraints
on development of energy systems; strategies for development of the fuel and
power industry; and certain problems in carrying out long—range strategies.

National scientific organisations of most of the institute's member-coun-
tries hsve Joined in work within the problem area of energ. They are using
the ISA's work to frame their long-range policy for optimum utilisation of
domestic enery resources. and in addition they are collaborating on the
problems of the future development of the fuel and power industry on a world
scale. Unique results are expected from the method being developed in 18A
for defining and comparing with respect to many criteria a strategy for de-
velopment of the fuel and power industry of individual countries and re-
gions.

The conception of "resilience”--the elasticity of biological comnities-
is now being developed in work on the dynamics of development of natural
comities-oecological systems. The goal here is to determine the permis-
sible levels of human impact on natural commities in the environment and
to work out optimum variants of ecological policy. This is an international
project being financed by UIIBP (United nations Environment Program). One
other proJect in the ecological field—the use of mathematical models in
planning forest conservation measures-owns completed in 1976.

Development of the institute's coaputer network has taken on a significance
of its own. This project, which mostly involves scientists and design orga-
ninetions of the socialist countries, pursues two purposes: first. creation
of a network of computers belonging to the computer centers of participating
countries for their direct use in the process of systems research under the
topic plan of the ISA whether being done within 18A itself or within na-
tional organisations; second, developscnt of a forward-looking architecture

31
FOR OFFICIAL US! 031.!
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

of the network's software making it possible for it to be linked with com-
puter networks operating in the participating countries.

Summarization of the know-how. structure and principles of managing large
organisational systems relative to the example of two large regional proj-
ects in the USSR and the United States culminated in two representative con-
ferences which were held to study the experience of comprehensive develop-
ment of the Tennessee River Valley in the United States and creation of the
Bratsk-Ilimsk regional industrial complex in the USSR. The material result-
ing from the conferences. which has arrived in the USSR and other partici-
pating countries, has been sent to many USSR ministries and departments.
where it has been applied. specifically in development of the program for
development of the Heat Siberian petroleum region and the Beykal-Amur Trunk
Rail Line. The line of scientific research entitled ”Urban Settlements and
Services" encompasses research on the earth's human resources. It includes
examination of problems of demography, an well as the problems of organising
health care, education, transportation. coununications and other services
designed to meet human needs. Among these projects the greatest interest is
in the topic "Comparative Study of Urban mergency Medical Services and Com-
putzr-Controllod Municipal Transportation System," which was completed in
197 .

The biomedical group, which has been headed by Soviet specialists since the
institute'a founding. is conducting a project on the topic "Simulation of
Optimum Health Care Systems." Results which have won international recogni-
tion have been achieved in this work.

The scientific field referred to as "Methodoloy of Systems Analysis," un-
like other fields. is not oriented toward the objects of study. but toward
development of a mathematical apparatus and computer programs for studying
large systems and for forecasting the possible consequences of decisions
taken in the process of managing such systems. The most interesting re-
search within the methodology project is being done in the field of dynamic
linear programing and is aimed at creating software for optimization of the
management of complex systems.

Research being done in the institute itself is performed by staff scientists
sent by their national organisations on a permanent or temporary basis. sv-
ery national organization which is a member is entitled to send at least one
scientist to work in the ISA regardless of the size of its membership con-
tributions. The director selects the candidates and hires staff scientists
for work in the institute. The national institutions can recon-end candi-
dates or grant consent to enrollment of scientists from their countries in
the ISA. Visiting staff scientists are enrolled to conduct specific re-
search on a particular topic. They are accepted on the basis of the partic-
ular research they propose to conduct. In 1971 ISA's staff of permanent
scientists did not exceed 70 persons.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Crsetion of the ISA hes encoursged the tormetion or netionel comittees end
other orgenisetions for epplicetion oi‘ systens enslysis so es to provide for
broader use or systees nethods in solving the problems of their respective
countries. In this process the institute hes pleyed the role of s cetelyst
initisting development of systems reseerch et the netionsl level. As e
rule these couittees ere working bodies of nntionel ecedemies of sciences,
through which they perticipete in the sctivity o: ISA. They discuss the ten
list or scientii‘ic topics end send their suggestions to the institute. they
reconend or select scientists from their countries to he cendidetes for
work in the ISA. end they coordinete the use by netionel orgenisetions oi‘
reseerch results echieved in the ISA.

In the USSR the Comittee for Systems Anelysis or the Presidium of the USS!
Acedew of Sciences, which wee toned in November 1972, is such e body.

The coesnittee hes escerteined the msin scientific directions for development

or work on systems enelysis in the 0883. hes built on orgenisetionel neche-

nism for the conduct or reseerch. end hes set up scientific councils for
eech of those lines of reseerch.

The following scientific councils Motion in useocietion with the Conittee
on Systems Anelysis:

1. Methods end Meens ooi‘ Contemporery System Anelysis;

2. Principles end Methods of Constructing Orgsnisetionel Systems of Menege-
sent;

3. Optimisetion end Menegement of Complex Dynuic Cepebilities;
h. Integrated Bystens for Menegement of Luge-Scene Production;

5. Methods of Systems Anelysis Used on Problem or Optim‘m Use of Energy
end Energy Resources;

6. Methods of Systees Anelysis Used on Problems or Optima Utilisetion or
Meter Resources;

7. Menegement or the Develop-est end Functioning of Cities end Cluster
Systems or Settlements;

8. Bcologicel Systems end the Environment;

9. Systems Analysis in Biology end Medicine;
10. Computer Techniques end Computer Systems;
ll. Msn-Mede Intellect;

33
PO! OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

12. Application of the Methods of Systems Analysis to Automation of ProJeet
Planning;

13. Food and Agriculture.

Participation of national scientific organisations in the activity of the
ISA is analogously coordinated, for example. by the United States National
Academy of Sciences. An Advisory cemittee on Participation in the ISA is
associated with the academy. Within the comittee there are four subcommit-
tees for particular directions within systems analysis: energy systems, wa-
ter resources. urban and regional systems. and review-reference publications.

In view of the obJective need for further development in the USSR of inter-
disciplinary systems research on the ever more complicated problems of so-
cioeconomic and scientific-technical development. the State Committee of the
USSR Council of Ministers for Science and Technology and the USSR Academy of
Sciences established in 1916 the WIISI [All-Union Scientific Research In-
stitute of Systems he march] of the State Comittee for Science and Technol-
on and the USSR ACM w of Sciences.

The institute's principal aim is development of basic principles and methods
of systems research and their application to solving complex and large-scale
problems in econoeic development. The results of this research will be used
in the practice of managing the econow and its individual parts and in the
activity of ministries and departments and enterprises and associations. As
research is done on specific problems which are comprehensive in nature the
institute will cooperate in every way with leading Soviet scientific re-
search institutes in the social sciences and the natural and engineering
sciences.

One of the institute's most important tasks is to sunsriae foreign experi-
ence in the use of systems analysis to solve complicated interdisciplinary
problems in management theory and methodology. The scientific relations
with the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis will he devel-
oped for that purpose.

In the first '4 years of the ISA's existence it became established practice
for the results at the end of work on each topic to be presented in the form
of papers at an international conference specifically organised for that
purpose. These conferences, in which leading scientists of the member-coun-
tries and representatives of organisations interested in the use of the re-
sults of the projects take part along with those from the ISA and national
scientific organisations who actually took part in the preJects, have become
representative scientific fame enJoying considerable prestige in the sci-
entific world. Interested persons and organizations have an opportunity to
verify on the spot details which have fundamental sinificance. enter more
deeply into the methods used. and familiarise themselves with the technical
equipent used during the proJect. This makes for speedier practical appli-
cation in the memberocountries of the research results achieved in the ISA.

36
POI. OFFICIAL 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Comittee for Systems Analysis of the Presidium of the USSR Academy of
Sciences regularly receives the institute's publications and distributes
them to its scientific councils depending on the specific subaeot. This
makes it possible to dissemination information on the institute's work to a
broader group of Soviet scientists working in various fields of systens re-
search. This information is of the greatest interest to scientific organi-
sations which are not taking direct part in the work of the ISA. For them
the ISA publications are an effective means of bringing them closer to the
activity of the institute and for popularising its activity throughout broad
circles within the country‘s scientific enmity. This helps to arouse
more interest in the proJects of the institute. to invigorate the activity
of the Ccsmittee for Systems Analysis and to expand the membership of its
scientific councils.

Certain research results of the ISA have already been applied directm in
the proJects of Soviet scientists. for instance, a method of mathematical
simulation proposed by Canadian scientists, which makes it possible to fore-
cast developaent of insect populations in relation to various external im-
pacts, was the basis for working out an optimm strategy for controlling
insect pests of Soviet forests. The 13-year experience of working to regu-
late the numbers of pests of conifers in Canadian forests (instead of futile
attempts to completely eradicate them) has won high praise from Soviet sil-
viculturists. who have been using this method to develop their own optimum
strategy for controlling pests of oak trees. In addition to success in
solving the main problem-u-forest conservation, there has been a substantial
saving on chemical poisons and a corresponding reduction of pressure on the
ecological coamunity of the forest and on the environment. The interests of
Soviet scientists in an original method of solving an urgent problem grew
into creative cooperation between scientific organisations of the Soviet
Union and the staff of the ISA's ecological project, and this was reflected
in an ISA international conference held on this problem in late October 1976.

A him interesting review sunarising the experience of a number of lead-
ing firm of Japan. the United States, England and Belgium in the field of
development and application of systems for management of organisational
processes and control of manufacturing processes in the steel founding in-
dustry has been used in the head proJect planning organisations and at en-
terprises of the Hinistry of Ferrous Metallurgy and the Ministry of Instru-
mentmsking, Automation Equipment and Control Systemsuspeoifically in modi-
fication of the technology for continuous hot rolling of strip on the "1700"
nill of the Kareganda Metallurgical Combine. Materials on standards ob-
tained from the ISA have helped the Ministry of ferrous lietallurgy in devis-
ing industrywide standards and principles for expert evaluation which are
being used in creating industrywide designs of computerized systems for pro-
duction management.

The participation of Soviet specialists in the activity of the ISA. their
papers end co-inications published in English. the results of their re-
search done both in the USSR and as part of the international scientific

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tear-all or this is unquestionably furthering the dissemination and foreign
recognition of the achievements of Soviet science. For exanple, the dialog
logical system for comuniostion between the operator and the computer,
which was created by Soviet scientists, has aroused vidsspread interest on
the part of their foreign colleagues and is already being used for informa-
tion support of the energy program.

He should uphasize in conclusion that the 10-year activity of the Interna-
tional Institute of Applied Systems Analysis has demonstrated the potential
not only or system analysis, but also or this form of international coop-
eration in solving large-scale problems counon to all humanity.

COPYRIORI': Isdatel'stvo ”Znsniye," 1978

70'I5

680: 1800
3ND
36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY