APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02100: CIA-Ropoz-ooooonooo1oooaoooo-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030006-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8303
2 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOU0 No. 623

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030008-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
'ransmissions and broadcasts. Material: from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
itea originate with the source. Tiles within itemm are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGi'l' MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE INA? DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
e.
. Proton-ea Ouamaauoe New and Adduaa l0. Monet/1 nluhua Law No.
Joint Publication Iaaearch Service

‘000 "arm a.“ ”.6

Arlington. Virginia 22201
I). Typem cl Repeat a: Penn-J

  
  
  
 

  
 

n. Speaaanag Organ-amen Nana and Mdnaa

  

Aa above

 
 
   
 
  

Ii. Sunken-ten Nola

   

.Abanarta

 
 

The report containa intonation from African and apecialized ﬂeet European
publicationa and radio on political. econonic. and sociological developments.

  

     
 

'7. Key Verde and Darn-eat Aulyaia. ”a Deacubma
Political Science Liner-African AH. _X_Ghana _Ruanda

       
         
     
            
     
 
      
       
      
      
      
     
       
     
  

   
 
  

Sociology _X' Angola _X_cuinea __$ao Tone and
Economics Llanin Guinea-Bissau Principe
Culture (Social Botavana :lvory Coast ASenegal
Sciences) Inurundi _Kenya _Seychellea
Technological _Ca1|eroon _Lcaotho _Sierra Leone
_Cape Verde __Liberia _Sonalia
__Cantral African _X_Hadagaacar _South Africa
lapire _Halnvi _Svaziland
X Chad _X_Hali _‘l'anzania
ICouoro Ialenda _liauritiua _‘l'ogo
_Congo __Xﬂoulbique _L'ganda
_Dj ibouti ___Naaibia _Upper Volta
_Equatorial Guinea _uiger __Zaire
m. “equate/outlet)! Tame ngzpu Ami: _2anbia
_G"b10 :Ihodeaia

 

 
 
    

m. cos": Field/Gee, 02.50.50.“
ll. Availabaluy Scale-ecu

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Huber of
Copies Available From JPRS

  
  
 

m—
l“ . I 58
Wk

rue roeu an a: acvnooucen “"M'“ """"'

    

  
 
   

C... hilt-I. IQCV. 0-7.0
FOR OFFICIAL USE (”LY

JPRS L/831
2 March 1

TRANSLATIONS M SUB-SAHARA" AFRICA

P000 “0 . 623

Comurs

”TEE-AFRICA" AFFAIRS

Future of Democracy in Africa Analyzed
(Canara Souleynane; JEUNB APRIQUB. 27 Dec 78-

3 Jan 79)..............................................

France Reportedly Planning xieeile Baeee in Zaire, Gabon
(Pode Anedou; URINE-A813, 22 Jan-6 Feb 79)...........

Principles of French africm Policy Explained
(Editorial; MARCHBS TROPICAUX B‘l‘ MEDITERRANBENS.

12 J.“ 78)...Oo00000.0O00.0000.0.0000000000000000000000

Reportage on Lama, RDA, ems Activitiea
(mates TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEENS. 29 Dec 78).......

C8090 Activitiea
M Activities
OHVS Activitiee

African Crop Planning Criticized
(Sophie Beanie; JBUNB APRIQUB, 27 Dec 78-3 Jan 79).....

Hall. Senegal Intenaifying Cooperation
(REUTER. 13 Peb 79).

Briefs
Nev Military Publication
ODE“) Diapute
ACCT Diapute
CIHO Internal Conflict
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
ANGOLA

why Angola Must Still Rely on Western Cooperation
(Jacques Letrenoliere; HARCHES TROPICAU! ET
mtmﬂm. 19 J” 79)sesssoseeessssesslsoosssossee

BENIN

Action of Bnenies of Revolution Reported
("Ir“- 5,010: AFRIQUB-ASIB. 25 Dec 78)essssssssessasse

BURUNDI

Nation Developing After Long Econonic, Social Stagnation
(Paul Nvesi; APRIQUB-ASIE. 22 Jan-b Feb 79)............

Prolinat Launches Offensive: Arsda Falls
(mm. 19 yeb 79)seseeeesseeaeseasssesseeesseseseeses

COMORO ISLANDS

New Ben Ali Cabinet Includes Pew Changes
(HARCNBS TROPICABX 3T HEDITERRANBENS. 5 Jan 79)........

GABON

Benocratic Party Convention Resolutions
(Rmn. 27 J.“ 79)....0OIOI0......-IOOOOIOOOOOOOOOIOO.

Briefs
New Oilfield Discovered

GHANA

List of Petroleun Conpanies Revised
(HARCBBS TROPICAUX 3r HEDITERRANBBNS. 29 Dec 78).......

Briefs
Reads. Export, Business Financing
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
IVORY COAST

ﬁltering of Economy Raportad
(Siradtou Mano; 1m AFRIQOB. 27 Dec 78-3 Jan 79)...

MADAGASCAR

Expand“! Cooperation with but. t'aat
(llamas moncwx 3r mzmms. 5 Jan 79)........

“ALI

Briafa -
French margy Loan

MMIQUE

Briat’a
Dutch Drainage Syata-a Loan
Mozambique-Iraq Agraaunt
Montana-Kuwait Agree-ant

NIGERIA

Brtafa
Patroleun Production

8m

Brtafa
Fourth P011t1ca1 Power

-c-
M OFFICIAL USE “LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

FUTURE 0? WW IN AFRICA ANALYZBD
Paris Jame AFRIQUE in French 27 Dec 78-3 Jan 79 p 17

[Article by Caaara Souleyaane of Conakry (minea). in "Forua" colum: "We
Are Ripe for Deaocracy". Editorial disclaiaer: "mm: AFRIQUE does not neces-

sarily approve of what is published under this heading; it is the author's
responsibility."]

[Text] Certain African leaders are veritable postcolonial potentates. They
exercise over their people a power of divine right, right of life and death.
who would have believed it--froe Africa worse than colonial Africa? A poll
taken at the present tiae would painfully reveal a strong aajority of the peo-
ple who, rather than say yes, would abstain froa responding.

1hose absolute sovereigns parachuted into the highest office are for the most
part but socially nixed-up people who find in the exercise of power an unex-
pected gift from the gods. the aeans of gratifying their aabition and unhealthy
hatred. Power is their reason for living. their soul. In their concern for
guarding it at any price-oeven at the risk of their lives--they are putting in-
to practice a diabolic Nachiavellianisa in order to subjugate the people:

A totalitarian single party channels the people and supervises their ac-
culturation by loans of stuffing than ideologically.

Producing pennanent tension creates a cliaate of general suspicion. by
means of broadcasting gaaes quoting unceasingly and without respite ia~
aginary plots against the security of the state. A weighty arguaent for

isolating the country froa the outside world and aaking the governaent
safe froa foreign news organs.

In that ataosphere of psychologic tension a similarly repressive police

force, alias a popular ailitia with alaost unliaited power, is sowing ter-
ror and desolation everywhere.

As a cover, there is no end to the labels: revolutionary, anti-iaperialisa,
anti-neocolonialisa. anti-oisa.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

Faced with this organized hell, which even colonialisa would have disapproved
of and which is condemed by the huaanitarian organizations of the entire
world, the highest authority of independent Africa, the GAO, pretends to see
nothing, to hear nothing, out of divine respect for the sacrosanct rule that
the internal affairs of a state lust not be interfered with. This dcfeatist
and dangerously abetting attitude is causing Africa to lose thousands of
brains and aillions of eras which it so badly needs to eaerge fro- the abyss
of aisery that is called under-developaent.

And when the people, in a final awakening launched by the unshakable instinct
to survive. organize, take to the underground. install guerrilla warfare in
order to free themselves froa this servitude--as shaaeful as it is cruel--its
torturers screen at iaperialisn and neocoionialisa and i-ediately appeal to
foreign forces in order to aaintain theaselvos in power.

The aisfortune which is befalling our continent cones in large part from its
own sons. afflicted with the virus of power without sharing, who are introduc-
ing "the wolf into the sheepfold". Nhite wolf or red wolf, aggressive wolf

or peacable wolf, it is all wolf, the plan being the same: to devour the laab.
Africa is suffering the tragedy of the laab.

The OAU Inst be operational, if that is necessary in order to stop or strangle
the adventurousness of certain leaders who are using their people as guinea
pigs. Any acute internal problea of one African country concerns all Africans,
the OM! first of all. The 0A0 mst prevent the sacking of the continent by
hordes of shaaeful legiennaires froa Havana or Paris, froa Moscow or ﬂashing-
ton. But it is indispensable for rational developaent that the people, in its
diversity of language and thought, list participate fully in working out and

executing its prograas. That can be accelplished only in a clinate of true
deaocracy.

The birds of ill oaen and the fisher-en in troubled waters who are hurling at
us this bitter challenge--"Africa is not ripe for deaecracy" are the very sane
ones who by feeding the fires of tension are taking advantage of the continent's
being torn apart to build or consolidate their empire on the bones of their
sons. Deaocracy is the prerogative of no people. of no continent. It is the
categorical choice of responsible aen responding to the criteria of leaders.
Africa still possesses men of such courage, a nuaber of when have been sacri-
ficed on the altar of intolerance and political hatred.

As if they were listening to us in this continent so torn apart and lusted af-
ter, two nations in love with freedoa have just taken up the bitter challenge:
Senegal and Upper Volta, two poor countries, Sahelian to boot. with everything

against then, are laying the cornerstones of the continent's de-ecratic edi-
fice. -

COPYRlGi'l': Jame Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

8946
C50: 4400

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Y0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

mos REPORTBDLY PLANMIUG MISSILE BASES Ill ZAIRE. GABON
Paris AFRIQUB-ASIB in French 22 Jen-A Feb 79 pp 26-25
[Article by Pods Amadou: "French Missiles in 2aire?"]

[Text] Missile bases in Zaire and Gabon. This is the Giscard-Bongo-
Blobutu trio's latest African initiative.

A consortius of French conpsnies. backed by Paris, is actually on the
verge of concluding with the Zeirisn authorities a contract for the in-
stallation of a nissile test base. The specialists in charge of the
technical portion of the project are recs-ending that it be located on
the parallel that passes approximately through Hatadi and Kananga, by
way of Tschikapa. 5 degrees south of the equator, north of the Angolan
border.

The groundwork for the project was laid in Hay 1977, shortly after the
French government agreed to provide Zairian President Hobutu with logistic
support to put down the first Shaba uprising. Hobutu, who was already
congratulating himself that he "never has problems with the purchase of
arse fron France," could hardly avoid turning a favorable ear to this sug-
gestion. which had the twofold merit of not only ensuring that his allies
would bail him out of trouble at the least sign of it. but also of provid-
ing him with conforting revenues. But the negotiations "in the Zairian
style"--that is, with gratuities. receptions. ca.'s and residences being
offered to the negotiators--bogged down, the more so as the government's
instability following the'Shaba occurrences and the worsening of the econonic
crisis trade it necessary to consider a pernanent regeneration of the local
partners, hardly facilitating the work of the French negotiators. The
latter was reopened by the‘second Shaba uprising and the intervention by
the French paratroopers.

During his round of th..nka. Mobutu heard it nade unmistakably clear to
him by French President Giscard d'Estaing that those projects which are
part of the grand Giscsrdian design for Africa lust be brought quickly to
pass.

3
FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For Giscard, it was not a nattsr of seeming to let Gerlany outdo his in
the region with OTRAG (Orbital Transport and Rocket, Inc], which since
the beginning of 1276 has been installing its launching pads on the shores
of the Tanganyika.

what is more, the president of OTRAG had intentions that could disturb
public opinion when he said, "We are trying to do as little her- as possi-
ble to project 'Ariane.’ But 'Ariane' is a little like 'Concorde.‘ And
it is certain that. couercially, we will be hard to best." But this warn-
ing was not intended for the French leaders. At lost, its intent was to
spread confusion.

Although French ailitary and diplonatic circles were indeed concerned, at
the tine of the revelation by AFRIQUB—ASIB. that the OTRAG operation night
in fact be, for the Federal Republic of Geraany, nothing other than a means
of circumventing the prohibition against its manufacturing any atoeic wea-
pone, there was, at the sunit, neither surprise nor new discovery. That
Belaut Scluidt had personally advised Giscard of the (mac operation can
be deduced from the tvmmc STANDARD announcenaat, soae tiae after MRIQUE-
A512, that a ﬂeet Ger-an coapany, "connected with the govern-est," was in-
stalling s aisaile test base in Zaire, as a result of "a joint operation
between France and the Federal Republic of Geriany." And the British news-
paper gave Iany details concerning the planned launching of missiles with
nuclear nose cones. '

And if Giscard agreed, it was for various reasons: France, who wanted to
project a sound African iaege, found herself, on the one hand, the fervent
supporter of the puppets of the 011er [National Union for the Total Inde-
pendence of Angola], the FNLA [Angolan National Liberation Front}, and the
FLEC [Front for the Liberation of the Cabinda Bnclave]-dedicated to the
destabilization of Angola. a country which enjoys great prestige in African
public opinion-and. on the other hand, a not inconsequential partner of
South Africa, particularly as regards anament. It was not a bad idea,
therefore, to let the spotlight shine on a neighbor who was in a fair way
to beconing a dangerous African rival while reaaining in the shadows.

Fro- another viewpoint, the "Ariane" eissile, constructed principally

by Aerospatiale for the European Space Agency, and due to be launched fro.
the Kourou base in French Guinea, would be needing a new infusion of funds
for the next stage of the work in course, during which construction was to
start on the first six flight model-s. By closing his eyes to the OTRAG
project, Giscard saw a means of easing his way over this hurdle. Besides,
in this way, he also obtained assurances that nothing would be undertaken
against the "Ariane" project, a prestige prop necessary to the role the
president of the French republic counted on playing in the European concert,
which also would enable his to deny any potential accusation of Atlantic

Pact partisanship. -

 

*See AFRIQUE-ASIB Nos 141 of 8 August 1977; 165 of 3 October 1977; 166 of
17 October 1977; 157 of 29 March 1978.

1.
ion orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Last, and not to be cast aside, is the fact that the French chief of state
thus saw to it, through the German chancellor, that there would be no Euro-
pesn backwash if France herself installed niesile launching bases in the
countries she deened especially favorable for then because of geographic
and political situation, like Zaire and Gabon.

It is also without surprise that we learned recently, from generally well—
inforned sources, that it was not just for a Christmas Eve party that the
French president, after his visit to Guinea, flew to Libreville. Bongo's '
country, which already shelters an air base on which several hundred French
military personnel are permanently stationed and which is the hub of the
French special services for "est Africa, is to be the scene of construction
of a missile launching bass. to which, as a little Chriatsas present, the
Gabonesa chief of state gave his agreement to Giscard.

Shelving and Assassination

An obviously essential military intent: These countries close to the equa-
tor provide the bcst locations for the launching of niasileam-it is to be
noted that Kourou (French Guinea) is located at 5 degrees north of the
equator. with Hatadi-Kananga 5 degrees south of the equator. and that Gabon
itself is right on the equator. The geographical situations of Gabon and
Zaire, moreover, enable the surveillance within missile range of the entire
African continent from north to south and from east to west. Also an eco-
nomic intent: The southern zone being. as is well known, particularly rich
in minerals of all kinds. France intends to exploit and protect it. And
lastly, a political intent: France. desirous of proving to her African
"friends" that she can come to their aid at their minimum call, will find
it necessary to reinforce her military potential on the continent.

Alas! All these military-politico-economic subtleties 0a u'iscard's inse-
diate entourage and of Giscsrd hisself, shrouded as they are in the most
rigorous secrecy, are not inediately perceptible at all levels, and the
various special services, poorly informed of all these sins, find them-
selves somewhat at a loss. Has this the reason for the shelving of the
officinl who, in a fit of seal, took it upon himself to charter a plane
from Dar-es-Salsam to fly over the O‘l'RAc firing range? Has this the rea-
son behind the assassination, reported by the daily news bulletin m-
HENTS 81' ”16me of 30 November, of one of the members of the body-
guard of the director of DRAG-France, created in Paris in June?

Be that as it my. and even though an atmosphere of crisis prevails sarong
these services. the negotiations between the French and the Zairians for
the installation of the missile launching base are proceeding. and, at the
highest political level. they were on the business agenda of Hobutu's
visit to France.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

9399
C80: “00

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rum-Amen muss

mm OP men AFRICA! POLICY WWII)
Min W MHGMIX H mm in French 12 Jen 78 PP 59-60

[Mitorielx “m Principleo or hence'o M'ricen Policy]

[Text] Uith e yeer here): ended during which mice we.
the theetre of events which in eone ceeee led hence to
intervene either by diplonecy or ite ened forcee. the
principlee end prospects of kench policy vie-e-vie Atrice
were meter-hm: mounted before the Oversees Acndeq of
Boiencee by one of the-very high ottioiele who teke en
ective pert not only in executing thet policy but duo in
ite tormletion. 0w Georg. director of Africen end .
m entire et the moi d'Ox-eey [linietq of Poreiu
Arteiro].

net policy. or certein of ite eeniteetetione. hove et
tines been contented in hence en well on ehroed. It
wee than en opportune tine to recell the principlee of
thet policy vhile resetting its evolution in their inter-

netionnl environ-eat.

than end beyond the continguciee of hietou. hence'e doctrine with
regerd to Atrice. ee with neprd eoreover to ell or what no then "the
Preach mire.” we. when by e max-kale cmtinnity. until the eve of
ﬂorid Her 11. hence. unlike “met hritein. pnrened e poliq of
eeoiniletim thet it deﬁed to he not suited to ennui-in; the edvence-
nent of the Atrioen.

In the yeere [i-edietely] efter the ver. the evolution of ideee. the

notion of politieel pertieo in hence end of Ween netioneliet novenente.
end the neturetion of the colonize". the colonized [peoples] end interne-
tionel opinion vere e11 contributing fectoro in the orientetion of bench
policy toverd e toe-min of eeeocietion thet vee to he treneleted in the
Conetitution of 196 by the erection of the French lbion. To yeere leter.
the cure-w or June 1956 m to definitively ehendon eeeiniletion in mm-
of ulooietim. Intern]. entonoq m to he ecknovledsed h: the Constitution

6
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of 1958 end .mlloved repidly by the independence of Medeuecer end ell the

territoriee thet hed conprieed Pronch Heet Africe end French Equetoriel
Africe.

'i'he nere fect thet. in noet of the French-epeehing etetee thet hed becone
independent the toner governor. heving quite neturelly becone high
co-ieeiener end then preeident of the comcil of sovernnent. vould preecnt
hie credentiele ee enbeeeedor to the nev chief of etete. illuetretee the
continuity of hench policy end et the eene tine expleine the neintenence of
privileged linke between 'rence end nuneroue Africen etetee. It eleo
expleine Prence'e deeire to see the «colonization of the entire Africen
continent conpleted. For ite pert. hence recognized Djibouti'e independence

in July 1917. It viehee thet the decolonizetion proceee in Rhodeeie end
llenihie vin be concluded.

Bevin; become independent. the neat etetee found the-elven feced with ee-
eentielly two problem: thet of their bordere. erbitrerily drevn by the

coloniel povere. end thet of chooeing e nodel for politicel end econoeic
developent.

Very quickly. in 1963. the principle of the inviolebility of bordere vee
procleined by the 0m Cherter. end there vee e areduel etrengthening of the
identity of eech nntionel group. the force of which vee etteeted to et thet
very tine by euch conflicte ne thoee of the Horn of Africe. eo nuch eo thet
Mr Georgy ie led to believe thet the 21.: century will be the ”century of
netiomlitiee" for Afr-ice. Juet en the 19th catury vee thet for Europe.
‘1‘on there in not e einnle Africen etete thet ie reedy to give up e fev
equere hilonetere of ite netionel territory. evn if they were devoid of
eny vegeteble. eninel or ninerel reeeurcee.

A: for the nodeln of develnpnent propoeed by the Ueeternere. vhich ectuelly
cone down to two. libereliel end euthoriterienien. both heve ended up
dieeppointins Afr-ice. Libereliee. if the Africen elitee cen eppreciete ite
edventecee. ie ill-euited to the Africen etructuree end in too often
perceived by the neeeee ee e eyeten vhoee conplexity ie inecceeeible to then
end one vhich in reelity excluively fevore the rich end powerful.

Beceuee "eocielien" theoreticeny nine et en equitehle dietribution of veelth.
it let vith nore fenilier vibraione in the ninde of the Africene. who ere
eccutoeed to comnity life vithin their feeiliee end vinngee. But the
reeulte of the econoeic nemaent of the Africen etetee thet hed edepted
eocielien ere fer fron [neeting] the hopee of their peoplee.

Africe ie thue eeehing en originel peth nore in confbrnity with ite tre-
ditionel veluee end leee elienetiu for [the Africen] an then Veetern
eocietiee. Uhetever quelificetione new be given to thet eenrch (euthenticity.

negritude. Africen eocielien), it reflecte e tendewy thet cennot but eeeert
iteelf.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US]! ONLY

‘l'he etreluthuing of netionelie- end eeerch for en originel. peth of develop-
eent ere therefore fundenentel fectore thet the hatch Africen policy not

tehe into coneideretim. ‘lhet policy in beeed on the eeintenence of pence.
reepect for internel regimen, the eeintenence of conperetion end the coneolide-
tion of ell Afr-ice.

Iiret of en. peeoe. without pence on the continent. Africe will not he ehle
to tehe up the foreideble chenenge elreedy fecine it. thet of feeding ite
popnletion end eneuring ite developeent. A report preeented lent Septenher et
Amhe during the now tenth regionel conference indicetee e food ehorteae of
ebont 20 percent by 1985 (eee mm MPICAUX m' Hummus. lo. 1718.
13 October 1918). Africe not therefore devote en ite reeourcen end energiee
to rectifying thin eitnetion rether then to the purcheee of eneeente.

‘lhe eeintenenee of peece in en Africe thet hen becoee e etehe for the greet
powere inaliee the integrity of the bordore eet hy the coloniem. ee ieperfect
no they eey be. reepect for independence. end rejection of interference in
internel effeire. ‘i'hoee ere the principlee effireed hy the II end 0A0 end
recogaited by hence. ‘i'heir epplicetion eonetieee poeee thorny probleee. en

in ehown by e nuwer of inter-Africen conflicte (Ueetern Sehere. Eritree). but
hence reeolutely condo-u eny externel eureeeion ezeinet en Africen etete.

It feele thet the eolution to thee conflicte met 'oe eoudat by the Africene
thanelvee within their own oronizetione. perticuierly the 0M]. whoee efforte
hence eupporte. If it hoe heppened thet hence hee intervened Iiliterily in
Shebe Province end lienritenie. for one-pie. thet involved ehortlived operetione.
with only very eeell nuhere of nilitery. undertehen et the reqneet of eovereign
aoverneente end eieed et ahencinc the eeeroh for e peecem eolution.

In fect. hence heliovee the Africen etetee heve e right to eecnrita within
their internetionelly recognised horde” end to reepect for their independence.
Moreover. the letter in en eerimly threetcned by internel. eubvereion ee it ie
by frontel. foreiaa etteche thet generelly evoke Ill intervention end ere ~
condued hy internetionel opinion. It in to etrengthen the independence of
friendly etetee. end only upon their requeet, thet hence ninteine e few
sen-ieone in Africe end eekee eeeieting eilitery pereonnel eveilehle to thoee
etetee. Moreover. the nuher of ouch pereonnel ie nowhere neer the outer-e

of Cubene. Soviets end Beet hropeene in Afrioe (10,000 hench sander-en in
DJibonti. end 1.600 hench eeeieting eilitery pereonnel for ell. mice).

Along with the ruht to reepect for independence in the right to repect for
the regimen end inetitntione choeen by the Africen etetee theuelvee. hence
thne eeinteine tiee of friendehip end cooperetion with etetee whoee intitutione
ere heeed on widely divergent politicel philoeophiee. Prence'e reconcilietion
with Ooinee ie e recent eel-pie of thet will of hence to retein ite old
friendehipe end cein new onee. ‘ihet ie the retionele for the overture eede w

heech diplo-cy towerd naieh-end Portugueee-epeekinc Africe end for the

developent of eacaente for economic end technicel coo etion with ete
which prior to the ere of independence were reletively gercqueinted with tee

hence end the hench-epeehing territoriee. but which todey ehow theeeelvee

8
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to be desirous of developing their reletiuns with the. end benefiting fru
French oooperetion.

tree the 1960s on. hence hes essiyaed iron }. to 5 billion frence to coopere-
tion with Africe. which puts hence in first plece enong the industrielised
countries providing eid to the Afrieen continent. lunch eid. given to ell
countries desiring it. whetever their regines new he like. is epprecieted

end increesingly heing requested. It essunes mre end nore sophisticeted
form in the eree of treining Africen cedres. es for sample in teeching
scientific disciplines. end is designed to ohtein e mtiplying effect in
order to help in the nohilisetion of resources sveilehle from the other
industrielieed countries. hence hes set up new funds (Africsn Soliderity
m. en exceptionel fund for the pronotion of Africe) end. in recent yeere.
hes stepped up its efforts within nultileterel bodies. in perticuler the
umpeen Developent me. of which hence provide: 26 percent of the finencing
(i.e.. es such es the Isderel Republic of Ger-eny. who“ Oh? is higher then
thet of l'rence). hestly. hence is endeevoring, within the context of the
North-South dielogue end ell internstionsl negotiations. to obtein for Africe
es for ell the developing countries s guerentee of their resources. especielly

of their receipts for exports. end the stehilisstion of nerket prices for rew
neteriele.

This policy of help for Africs is hesed on the conviction thet it benefits

not only Africe hut hence end We ss well. Africa will been-e incressingly
indispcnseble to Europe. which depends lergely for its industriel sctivity on
its inports of energy-producing products end rew neteriels. ﬂeet is eepecielly
true of hence. which depends on i-porte for 60 percent of its needs in this
field. ‘lhc other greet continents or subcontinents endowed with m neteriels
ere elreedy reserving then for their own needs end ere exporting only s very
snell portion of then (thet is the cese of the Soviet Union end the United
8tetes). or heve opted for e policy of developent thet will leed th- to use
those neteriels donesticelly lore end sore (thet is the cese with Asie end
Indonesia). Africs is therefore being celled on to hecoee nore end sore

the privileged supplier of hence end Europe. ‘Ihe ninerel end other resources
of the Africen continent ere indeed enornous end ere still reletively unexploited.

nae reciprocel neture of the interests involved is certeinly the best gusrentee
for Africe thet French end mropesn eid will be enduring.

It eleo represents for Africe e certeinty thet future reletions with the former
coloniel powers'end the outside world will he hesed increasingly on equelity
end thet Africe will he trested es s respected pertner. ﬂoreover. the quelity
of the Africen leeders wellohnown to those who. like the director of Africen
end msgesy effeirs in the Ministry of Foreign Affeirs heve hed to conduct
negotietions with tho. suffices to give essurence thet the young Africen
stetes will he nore end nore ehle to discern where their own true interests lie
end to elude the snsres of "neocolonielisn." It is elso e precise of stebility.
for the future.

9
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prence for ite pert hee opted for eoliderity with Africe. French policy.
refreining fra eny interference in the internel effeire of Africe end fro-
eny ettalpt et dneinetion. givee perticuler ettention to coneolideting
Africe'e internel coheeion. of which it will heve the greet..et need in the
coeing yeere. In feet, between now end the end of the century. Africe will
probebly undergo e period even eore difficult then thet of decolonielieetion
end the building of independence.

Africe will in feet heve en increeeing need for cepitel to continue with

it. own developent. It u elreedy heewily in debt (emu $100 billion).

‘lhe for-er coloniel were now feel nore or lose free of their reeponeihilitiee
towerd Africe. end the other induetrielieed eid-giving auntriee ere thu-
eelvee guing through the worldwide econoeic receeeion. The reeourcee of

the petroleu-producing countriee heve reeched their lieite feirly quickly.
teeth. the mtriee with cepitel new be teepted to nee: invent-onto with e
higher return in countriee thet ere nore developed then Africe or on new
eerhete opening to thee. euch en the Chineee nerhet.

hence end Europe nuet \nderetend thet their duty ee wen ee their intereet
cupel the. to concentrete their eid end invent-eat on the Africen continent.
“rice for ite pert will heve to give ettention to finding the beet weye to
uee thoee inveeteente for ite developnent. by defining prioritiee beeed
solely on the cmeideretim of the intereet of ite populetione end by fore-
going levieh expendituree end preetigioue works.

At the one tine thet Africe will heve to overcue ite econcnic difficultiee.
it will be prey to the aceeeee of netionelien end the eppetitee of foreign
powere who will eeeh to exert influence over it.

he windo- end pregnetien of the Africene. peoplee of peeeente end ehepherde.
ere bound to enehle they- to reeiet foreign eeduction. If eeculer treditioee
of hoepitelity eehe it poeeible for ell netione to penetrete en Afr-ice thet
wente to be open to the outeide world. recent hietory confine on the other
hend thet if it in difficult to exert influence on Africe. it ie even herder
to neintein thet influence.

The reel denger for Africe lice rether in the teeptetione of netionelien.
end it would be drentic if Africe were in ite turn to experience the civil
were thet heve nerked the hietory of Europe end thet of the decolonielinetion
of the Letin Anericen continent.

It ie through e etrengthening of their feeling of eoliderity thet the Africen
etetee not expect to overuse the problen of the bordere. herge entitiee
heve elreedv been eetebliehed (the ante-e end Economic thion of Centrel
mice. the Coucil of the Betcnte, the Econo-ic (ﬁe-unity of ﬂeet Africe. the
Econoeic emit: of the Veet Africen Stetee. the Co-Inita of the Greet
men. etc.). within which the Africen etetee ere becoeing «were of their
couplaentery neture end noting thet the develop-eat of the ecanoq of eech
of thee cennot be eeeured within the linite of ite own bordere. At the eene

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL bSB ONLY

they ere easing the need to evoid entrusting foreign forces with seeing to
it thet their territoriel integrity is respected. end ere noting eccordinaly.

In 1963. sue yeers ei‘ter independence wee ecquired. Africe hed the wisdo-

to entrust the settluent of its conflicts to e suprenetionel orgenizetion.

the 0A”. the of the greet tests of the Afrieen stetes will be thet of 81'103
the ow nore euthority end powers. As for hence. it supports end will continue
to support ell Africen initietivee towerd the establishment of regionel entities
end will continue to support the ection or the us end the ow.

At the close of his presentetion. Mr Georg cited en African proverb: ”‘lhere
is no good wind tor the person who does not know where he vents to so."
hence hes e cleer vision of the nine oi‘ its Atricen policy end of the

principles on which it is heeed. ‘l'henhs to the ties thet hevc hound it to
Atrice tor decedes. end in sane ceeee for centuries. it hes ecquired e knowledge

of Atricen an end reelities thet predisposes it to earplein to Arrice end

Europe thet it is their destiny to hecole lore end nore closely involved with
one enother for their con-on good.

QPYRIOHT: Rene )breux et Ole. Paris. 1919

5336
080: “00

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

“PORTAGE 0N cram. MA. (INS ACTIVITIES

CBDEAO Activities
Paris NARCHBS TROPICAIJX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3557
[Tent] President Senghor and Security within cmuo

When Mr Ilaru-a bin Muse. the new albesssdor fron Nigeria to Dakar. presented
his credentials 13 Deceeber, President Senghor seized the opportunity to
propose that questions of security be added to those of cultural, econonic.
and financial cooperation with which CBDEAO [Nest African States Beononic
Co-unity. which includes 16 countries] had been involved to the present.

The Senegalese head of state pointed out that his security. to be effective,
should not he organized according to ideological differences. but along geo-
graphical and cultural affinities. In consideration of this. he enphesized
that the nenber countries of CEDBAO "constitute a geographically, culturally.
and econonically solid bloc", and the spirit of nethod. organization. and
brotherhood of this group "is an emple for all Africa."

Hr Senghor added that the CEDBAO emit, which will be in Dakar the first
two weeks in hay. will aark an inportent step in the life of this organiestion.

Che-hers of Conan Hish to be Consulting Organ

During its sirth conference, which was held during the International Dakar
Fair at the beginning of Decenber. the West African Federation of Che-hers
of Cos-erce expressed the wish to become the consulting organ of CEDEAO.

Hr Isse Diop fron Senegal was charged with presenting this request to the
CIZAO Council of Ministers. which will neet again in Dakar next Hey. The
Federation. which includes 13 countries of Heat Africa. hes also elected
its new officers and adopted its laws. The new officers are presided over
by Hr Koffi Djondo fro- ‘l'ogo. and his deputies are Chief A.0. Lawson fro-
Nigerie. Hr barou froe Ivory Coast, and Mr Haturi fron Sierra Leone. Isse
Diop was elected General Treasurer and Mr Pierre Njie his deputy.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UHOA Activities
Paris HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3557
[Test] Loans fros PRC and the Swiss

By the terms of a contract signed 2l December at Lose, the German Develop-
sent Cospany (DEC) with headquarters at Cologne. granted a loan of DH 10
sillion (about 1 billion 150 sillion CPA francs to the West African Develop-
sent Bank (BOAD) with headquarters at Lose.

This sum is elloted for the financing of industrial and agri-industrial
projects. to be carried out in the nesber states of the west African Monetary
Union (UHOA. which includes Benin. Ivory Coast, Upper Volta. Niger. Senegal,
and Togo). The loan is granted at an interest rate of 7 percent per year for
a period of 12 years.

The Swiss government has also granted BOAD a loan totaling 9.25 million
Swiss francs (about 1,l93.250,000 CPA francs and a gift of .75 sillion Swiss
francs (about 96.75 million CPA francs.

The loan. which is granted for a period of 16 years. with a 6-year grace
period and a rate of 2 percent per year. will be used by the bank for the
financing of development projects. Preference will be given to the most
needy peoples of the member countries of UHOA. The gift will be used to
finance studies initiated by the bank and for Swiss technical assistance.

The Lose press release which announced the news specified that the loan
agreement had been signed 20 December 78 at Abidjan by the Swiss asbsssador
to Abidjan. Hr Roch, and by Pierre Clever Dasiba. president of BOAD.

Kinisterisl Conference at Abidjan

A UHOA sinisteriel conference was held at Abidjan 19-20 December, with min-
isters of finance from six somber countries participating.

Two principal questions were discussed: the allocation of the profits of

the Central Bank of the West African States (BCBAO) during the fiscal year
1977/1978 and the level of assistance which the bank will allocate to the

financing of the cconoeic development of the six countries involved.

OHVS Activities
Paris HABCRES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBBBARBBNS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3557
[Text] Council Sets 1979 Budget at 432 Million CPA Francs
During its tenth session 18-20 December at Bamako, the council of ministers

of the Senegal River Development Organisation (OHVS) has set the 1979 budget
for the organization at 632,096,809 CPA francs.

13
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The final cos-unique of the session indicated that the council of ministers
who prepared the susnit of 21 Decenher have also given instructions that
"the pre-selection decision of the Hanantali das be Iade as soon as possible.
and that the work on the Diana den begin during the last half of 1979." The
council also “adopted the fiscal and tariff policies applicable to the pro-
gressing studies and works which allow cutting costs of the substructure of
the bases of the two dens." In addition. it has submitted for approval by
the heads of state the draft agree-en: concerning the legal status of joint
projects.

President Senghor'e Resarks on the OHVS Sunnﬂ‘

Following up the work of the Council of Ministers, the 21 Deceeber sue-it of
the ONVS heads of state adopted two legal texts which define the extent of
the future involvesent of the organization. After having participated in

the summit. President Leopold 8. Sengher indicated on his return that the
sun-it sarked a "point of no return." The Senegalese head of state recalled
that the necessary financing for the two dass has been secured (HTH 17 New 7Q
p 3027). The laying of the cornerstone of the Hansnteli den will take place
during the first half of 1980. It is expected that the total project will
produce 800 nillion KHh. irrigate 300,000 hectares of frsnlsnd. and asks the
river navigable free Knyes to its south at Saint Louis in Senegal.

The cost of finishing the first phase of this project which extends to 1985
is estimated at 750 million dollars. of which 660 million is for Hananteli

end Diana end 290 Iillion is for the agricultural cultivation of irrigated
lends.

According to President Senghor the two docusents signed 21 Deeeaber are an
amend-cut to the OHVS charter to reassure the investors. and a declaration
asking the constructions the common property of the three sesber states
(Senegal. Hall. Mauritania). According to the Senegalese president "no
threat of disherlony is hovering over the organisation". Pinally. it is
noted that the Mauritanian head of state, Col Ould Seleck. will succeed
Gen Mousse Traore from Mali as president of the organisation.

COPYRIGRT: Rene ﬂoreux et Cie. Paris. 1918

9370
080: 6600

14
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

AFRICAN CROP PLANNING CRITICIZBD
Paris JBUNB APRIQUE in French 27 Dec 78-3 Jun 79 pp 61-66
[Article by Sophie Bessie: "Food Crops. Disliked by Planners"]

[Text] Feeding is a worsening African problen. However. all investnents
go to export products.

Drought in the Sahel. famine in Ethiopia. emergency aid to Sonalia, con-
siderable shortages in Nigeria. bigger rice and wheat imports to nest of
the countries on the continent. . . . Despite all develop-ant progress
food production is not increasing in Africa and the shortage seens to be
worsening with every passing year. Is it weather ill luck? 0r extensive
negligence on the pert of those in charge of the vital sector which. how-

ever. hes the inconvenience of increasing state revenue poorly? Probably.
both.

According to the PAD. African food production rose by no sore then 0.5
percent per year between 1971 and 1975. Between 1976 and 1977 it-did not
increase at all. Per capita production dropped 2.1 percent per year be-
tween 1971 end 1975 reaching a 96 index in 1976 conpared with 100 as set
for 1961-1965. This is elarning situation for a continent whose popula-
tion is growing rapidly end which, in fact. has all the necessary poten-
tial to nest the food require-eats of its population.

The little interest displayed in basic food crops and peasant production
has resulted in the stagnation or regress of a large share of so-celled
traditional crops: Hard wheat and barley in North Africa. nillet and
sorghun in the Sahel-Sudan area. and roots and tuber crops in the rain
part of Africa. Investnents and the necessary production factors for a
rapid increase in output have been focused exclusively on products raised
within the franework of a lore nodern agriculture. basically aimed at
urban narkets-rice. soft wheat. and sugar. essentially. Actually, if
the rural population-ebout four-fifths of the total population of the
southern part of Africa and the Sahara. and 55 percent of north Africa--
would raise in a nornsl year the food needed for its conaunption. it

would no longer be capable, today, to neet a very rapidly rising urban
deaand.

15
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alarming Situation for a Continent which. in Pact. Could Meet its Food
Requirements

The food problem in Africa is not, so one might wish to believe. the con-
sequence of some sort of over-population but rather that of the far more
rapid growth of the urban comparsd with the total population. At the pres-
ent time the urban population is rising by five percent per year as against
1.7 percent in the rural areas. This situation has a substantial effect

on agriculture which is thus deprived of manpower»

Root and tuber crops are the basic staples of the moist tropical areas.
The two most important crops among them are manioc and yam. However. re-
cently a number of other crops such as sweet potatoes and taro have been
added to them. Since such vegetables are not extensively sold. it would
be hard to determine their annual output. Crop surpluses. if such exist.
could be preserved with difficulty over the year and delivered to urban
markets.

All such items account for most of the food production in the countries
involved; for example. they account for 60 percent of the nutrition of
the Ivory Coast population. The Ivory Coast produces about 4.5 million
tons of root and tuber crops per year and hopes to reach 5.5 million tons
by 1980 thanks to a series of measures aimed at encouraging production.
Cameroon intends to double its output in the course of the current plan,
increasing it fro. 3.2 million tons in 1975-1975 to.6.2 million tons in
1980-1981, particularly by tripling yam production. however. this target
seems to be more in the nature of a pious wish considering how modest in-
vestments allocated to this sector are. In Zaire the production of manioc
is in the vacinity of 12 million tons per year and should be raised. one
is not quite certain how. to 13.5 million tone by 1980. Other countries
such as Congo or Cameroon are organizing large agroindustrial units for
msnioc growing. part of whose byproducts will be used for human consump-
tion.

Actually manioc is the only feculent root which is beginning to be dis-

covered. Very productive varieties have been developed and new uses are
being regularly discovered. Brazil appears even to have discovered a way
to use it as fuel! However, the new interest created in manioc is essen-

tially due to the possibility to be used. after processing. as cattle
fodder.

Hould this be a confirmation of the rule according to which tropical crops
draw attention only if they can satisfy the needs of developed countries?
For the time being everything confirms that this may be the case.

Secondary crops are also important to the nutrition of African populations
and pose acute problems of a different nature. Other than corn. raised

more or less everywhere. they cover the low precipitation areas. from the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sudan-Sahel to the Haghreb area. and react to the whine of the weather.
Africa, producea about 25 million tone of millet and aorghum per year elmoat
all of which goea to local conauaption. No more than 10 percent of the
overall 'output ia marketed.

In moat of the Sahel comtriee "plane for integral rural development" are
relied upon for purpoaaa of increaaing output. linking caah with table
cropa and. to the extent of poaaibilitiea, the growing on the aide of com-
patible cropa. It ia thua hoped that the efforta made to grow peanuta or
cotton. to which the virtually total amount of fertilizer and plant pro-
tection facilitiaa go, and that efforta to develop and make available new
more productive tachnologiee would indirectly benefit the production of
foodatuffa. Therefore, all the cotton-growing areaa in Africa. from weat
of the tired to Senegal. have been aubjacted to integrated development.

Even though. here and there. a certain amount of encouraging progreaa
and increaaad crop yielda have been noted. overall the experiment doea
not aeen to be concluaive. for no aingle Sudan-Sahelien country haa been
able to cover ita food ahortagea which woraened thia year even further.
It ia true that precipitation waa irregular. aowaver. the drought which
haa been frequently blaaed for the peat few yeara ia not reaaon enough to
explain the peraiatent ahortagea in the area.

However, would thia trend be reveraed with the new orientation of the
World Bank. followed by the main Heatern fund auppliera who are henceforth
giving priority in their financing to the development of food cropa and
which channel into thia aector a greater ahare of their inveatmenta? It
ia atill too aoon to determine thia. Heanwhile. the proapecta are far
from brilliant. Another hope, aa yet weak. ia developing in the area of
agricultural reaearch which. after having long neglected traditional cropa
in favor of rice and wheat, in beginning to develop more productive atraina
which cauld raiae yielda by one-half.

Finally, corn ia grown everywhere in Africa: Out of an overall annual out-
put of about 20 million tone. over threa-quartara ia conaumed in the rural
areaa. Development efforta ahould focua above all on conaervation and
atockpiling. aa warehouaing loaaea in eome areaa reach nearly one-quarter
of the crop.

Other than in Madagaacar and come other areaa, rice ia not a traditional
African food crop. Ita annual production ia no more than aoma four million
tone. The wheat aituation ie ainilar: In Black Africa only two countriea
-8udan and Bthiopianhave a wheat output in excaaa of 100,000 tone.

However. the very high increaaa in urban demand. the fact that thia output

ia almoat entirely marketed. and the earning of foreign exchange from
maaaive exporta to comtriea which have become very big conaumera have

conaiderably developed wheat and rice growing which, for aoma lO yeara.
have been the beneficiariea of aubatantial inveateente.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Further-ore. the type of urban consumption is becoaing ever more different
from rural consumption. influenced even further by the Heat. thus con-
tributing to the creation of new needs. Therefore. the governments begin
to pay far greater importance to the new crops and lose interest in rural
food production. thus creating a situation which. in many respects. could
become explosive.

In the Maghreb most of the arable area is efficiently cultivated and the
solution of the problem. therefore. lies in the coﬁined development of
irrigation. productivity. and the production of crops better suited to
aeet the population's needs. South of the Sahara. however. the entire
soil and water potential is far from being fully utilized: Less than one-
half of the arable land in the area is under cultivation, and irrigation
is only embryonic. It is. therefore. possible to increase food production
considerably. particularly if it is.ence and for all. allocated the most
fertile land. which is still far from being the case.

Is it known that in 1971. one of the worst droughty seasons. the Sahel
countries exported 15.000 tone of out-of-season vegetables to Europe?
Scarcity. therefore. is not a fatality. and providing that current talk
of self-sufficiency tasrlts the beginning of a real awareness and of in-
creased efforts in this area. everyone agrees that it could be eliminated.
Conversely. if the current trend, i.e.. a modest annual increase in food
production goes on. by 1985 Western African would have to import 6.8 mil-
lion tone of foodstuffs. four million tone by Nigeria alone. and one mil-
lion by the 8ahelien countries. coastal countries such as the Ivory
Coast would also turn into regule' purchasers. Central Africa will be im-
porting 500.000 tone of cereal crops annually while Bastern Africa will
be importing 700.000. In the Haghreb the two main importers will be
Morocco and Algeria. one million tons each. As to Egypt. by 1985 it will
have to import 2.750.000 tone of cereal crops to meet its requirements.

Rice is developing everywhere at the expense of traditional foodstuffs
and it is.considered that in Africa it may soon assume first place in
urban food consumption if such is already not the case. Considerable
investments have been made in rice growing: In Cameroon the 1976-1981
plan calla for an overall investment of 20.8 billion CPA francs in the
food sector. some 12 billion or nearly 60 percent. in rice which is the
beneficiary of inertant foreign financing. French above all. In the
Ivory Coast 17 billion CPA francs will have been invested in rice produc-
tion during the 1976-1980 plan. In Senegal. the SARI), a state company in
charge of developing the delta and valley of the Senegal River. essential-
ly for purposes of rice cultivation, is planning an overall investment of
nearly 30 billion CPA francs between 1977 and 1901; four-fifths will be
financed by hence. the Federal Republic of Germany. the United States.
the Rorld Bank. etc. As to the major irrigation farming projects of the
fluvial and lacustral basins of the Sudan-Sahel arch-Senegal. Castle.
Niger, the Voltss.- bogone, uteri. and Lake Chad-u substantial share of
their future irrigated areas will be used to grow rice and wheat.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In fact. greet priority in being given to wheat in virtually all farming
program of Black African comtriea: Africana are eating lore and more
bread. Prom Cameroon to the Sudan areaa in wheat will be expanded 10-fold
in the courae of the next few years: Senegal and Caneroon hope to produce
30.000 tone each by 1981 compared with virtually no production today:
Sudan hopea to nine ita output fron 360.000 to 670.000 tone by 1983. etc.
These are tvo cropa the final word about which has not been aaid.

mPYRIGlT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

5157
080: 6600

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

MALI. SEREGAL INTBISIFYING COOPERATION
London “UTE! in French 0267 GMT 13 Feb 79 PA

(Text) Renato, 12 Feb (RBUTBR)--'rhe governnents of Senegal and Mali have
reached "total agree-eat" on intensifying cooperation between the two
countries. Hr Abdoulsys Anadou Sy, Hali's minister of transportation and
public works. announced on Monday.

The two governments agreed on the need to grant the businessmen of
Senegal the right to inport industrial products fro. Hsli in accordance
with decisions of the can ("set African Economic Co-unity). They also
decided to further the integration of their railroad system and promote
the creation of an international [word indistinct] to Kidira as well as
to search for financing of the 'ranbscounda-Kayes route.

Mr Abdoulaye Sy noted that Senegal is willing to grant Kali new storage

facilities at the port of Dakar. He added that he had delivered a nessage
from Gen Houses Traore to President Senghor.

cso: 10600

20
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

has Just appeared. This quarterly publication is published in Paris by the
Cible Company. it costs 20 francs. The new periodical is chiefly addressed

to rank-andefile Africans and political and econoaic leaders. The Journal says
it is open to new ideas. but refuses to be a political rostrua. The project
started from a simple established fact: the lack of specialized, manifold and
available inforaation. "Military infatuation is one of the ferns of dissuas-
ion, a Iodern expression of the war against war." its purpose is to also known
“the facts that determine whether there will be war or peace, from the shores
of the Mediterranean to the Cape"; such is the undertaking of the journal. which
intends to remain independent. The contents of the first issue: an exclusive
interview with Gen liyadeaa, president of the Tagolese Republic and a scorching
dossier on the South African military aachine with this attention-getting title:
"is the South African Army invincible?" Finally. and this is the great origin-
al feature of the REWB AFRICAINE DB STRATEGIE. tno digests. one it. English

and the other in Arabic. conclude the publication. [Text] [Paris JEUNE
AFulQUE 27 Dec 78-3 Jan 79 p 75] 8946

CSDEAO DISPln'Buln the CEDEAO [lest African States Economic Conunity] the
torch is burning between the lvorian Diaby Ouattara. secretary general. and one
of his deputies. the Liberian Romeo Horton, director of the Organization's De-
velop-cut Fund. in order to unravel the crisis. some chiefs of CEDBAO nember
states have asked the president of Liberia, William Talbert, to recall his coe-
patriot. [Text] [Paris JBUNB AFRIQUE 27 Dec 78-: Jan 79 p 27] mo

Agency experienced some agitated hours during the night of lS-ls Deceder in
Paris. Several so-calied scandalous affairs were brought up. The most serious.
raised by Bernard Dadie. lvorian Culture Minister. concerns a letter sent by
one of the deputy secretaries, the Tunisian Abdelasiz Driss. to President of
Benin Matthieu Kerekou. it accused the leninese minister of Youth and Popular
Sports, Francois Kouyami. by name. At the end of Septeaber Francois Kouyaai
gave his agreement to Secretary General Dan Dicko to withdrawing financial
augotluoay from his deputies. [Text] [Paris sauna AFRIQUE 27 Dec-3 Jan 79

p 7 8946

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oli OHICIAL "8!! ONLY

0208M) 1mm“. CONFLICT-4110 diapute within the mono [Heat African

Stataa Bcono-ic Co-unity] which oppoaea ita aacretary genarai. Diaby
Ouattara (ivory Coaat) to the director of the organiutiona'a dawiopunt
fund. limo Horton (Libaria). «an to have raachad the point of no-re-

turn. Failing to aacura the recall of his country-an by Liberian Praaidcnt '
Uiiiia- Talbert. the Ivorian haad of atatc. Felix Houphouat-loi; . raport-
adiy dacidad. ahort of ao- nev develop-ant in tha can. to racall Diaby
Ouattara. [Tut] [Daria JEN! ammo: in trench 10 Jan 79 p 29] 2662

0880: “00

22
P03 OHICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

"NY ANGOLA HIST STILL RBLY W WESTERN COOPERATION
Paris “ARMS TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS in French 19 Jan 79 pp 121-126

[Article by Jacques Latrenoliere: “the Difficulties of Angola's Econonic
Transfornation")

[Text] "France is gradually heconing an eneny vhich nay attach Angola at
any tine." Agoatinho Neto stated a few nontha ago. This judgnent reflected
the attitude of the French Government at the tine of the Shnba affair. To
a certain extent. it did later prove to be justified. But it now seena to
be invalidated by the efforts of Luis de Alneidn. anbassador of the People's
Republic of Angola to Brussels and Paris. to normalize relations between

Luanda and Paris (see Hams TROPICAUX. 26 November 1978. p 3801: "France's
(ﬁnances in Angola").

Angola‘s econuaic orientation is no less difficult to deter-inc based on its
internal activities and the renarks of its leaders. On 30 October 1976.
Agostinho Neto said at a neeting that the country could not he considered
independent as long as Angolan oil. dianonds and iron were not totally under
the control of the government. At the sane tine. he enphasired the gener-
osity of the Soviet and Cuban aid, contrasting it with the self-seeking na-
ture of Western cooperation. It is true that he neant that of the aulti-
national conpaniea. the only ones active in Angola. "The private enterprises
that still exist will have to pack their bags." Lucio Lara. political secre-
tary of the W (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola). stated ‘
in Hay 1977. The secretary general of the National Union of Workers of
Angola (WA) went even further in 1978, denanding the dictatorship of the
proletariat and the transfer of all neans of production to the people.

These radical state-ants would henceforth be opposed by the nnnerous over-

tures' node toward and the transactions granted to European and Anerican
enterprises.

The social franework within which Angola's activities fit. whether it be a
question of lining. industry or agriculture. gives rise. in the final analysia.

to divergent interpretations. depending on the political hue of those naking
than. Sone say that what one has is the task of building socialin. backed

by the self-sacrifice and enthusiasn of the people. Others clai- that it

23
NR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in a society stricken by econouic catsclysn and aost of whose driving forces
have disappeared. The only economic sectors operating are those in which
Westerners are tolerated because they are indispensable to production.

It judgments differ in these three donains. it is because just as in the

csse of the Spanish. or Portuguese. inns. Isny observers find in Angola only
what they take there. It is slso probably because the situation in itself is
couples and contradictory. One nust exclude value judgments to the maxi-u-
extent possible end then examine the facts. classifying than into fairly
predoainant categories. This method does not enable one to give definitive
evaluations of the current situation of the future orientations of the Repub-
lic of Angola. but at least it has the nerit of pointing up certain snoualies.

Civil Her

lnfornation released about the recent reconciliation of Hobutu and Neto night
lead one to think that the coin adversaries of the Luanda government: the
PNLA (Angolan ﬂstionsl Liberation Front) of Holden Roberto. and the UNITA -
(National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) of Jonas Savilbi. lack-
ing all finsncisl end logistical support. sre now neutralized and that norlsl
air. rosd and telephone coemunications have now been restored between the
capitsl and the chief towns of the provinces.

Actually. if the reconciliation is in fact confirmed. the activities of the
FNLA. which remains all-powerful in the eastern provinces of hslsnje and
Lunda. will necessarily have to be reduced. 0n the other hand. it would not
appear that the UNITA would suffer from it. Solidly organized in its sanc-
tuaries in the southeastern province of Cuando-Cubango. its intentions are

purely nilitary. unlike the PNLA. which is based on political indoctrination
and the maintenance of a parallel eduinistration.

Backed by 12.000 reletively well-armed and well-trained Ien and a substantially
equal number of auxiliary forces. undoubtedly supplied frou Nanibia. endowed
with nissiles. norters and recoilless guns node in China. the ”RITA carries
out lightning raids on the benguele rsilrosd ‘~ '40 00* Henicn provinces and
inflicts light danage whose repair provides opportunities for surderous an-
bushes. It is difficult to nets s precise evaluation of the effectiveness

of the UNITA's sctions. Nevertheless. it will be noted thst the reopening of
the railroad. which would be of more obvious interest to Zaire and which was
scheduled for November. since the bridges have been repaired for Ionths. has
not yet cone about. despite official resssursnces. Likewise. protection of
the Calueque Dan in Cunene Province on the hanibisn border. provided for a
tine by Cuban troops. was interrupted at the sane tine as the work.

The very existence of an Angolan arny of 50.000 Ien. including armored vehicles
and planes. flanked by a Cuban expeditionary corps of 2d.000 men. all com-ended

by a Soviet general. could scarcely be justified if the Angolan “Vendee”
could henceforth be considered inoffensive.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to thia nrned oppoaition. from which only the coaatal provincea.
Hocanedea. henguele. aouthern and northern Cuanea. Zaire end the coffee
province of.Uige in the north are truly aafe. the governnent ia faced with a
factional oppoaition within the MPLA. whoae leadera were arreated at the tile
of Nico Alvea' attenpted putach but which continuea to rennin active through
the two underground organicationa called Revolta Active and Revolta do Leate.
The official bulletina which acconpanied the recent reaignation of the prime
niniatar. ain aenbera of the Cabinet and two high officiala are eloquent proof
of ita paraiatence. There ia no newa of the leadera of the abortive coup:
Nito Alvea. Cita Alvea and Joae Van Dunen. The number of political priaonera.

never preciaely known. probably ramaina high deapite the anneaty meaeurea perio-
dically announced.

0n the whole. the atnoaphere ia one of civil war. varying in intenaity depend-
ing on the region. It ia revealed. even in Luanda. by aupply difficultiea

and the linea before public food etorea. Age Khan’a appeals on behalf of

the refugees abroad. the Church'a oppoaition to violationa of individual

righta. the cloning of church achoola and the ban on Radio Bccleaia are other
nanifeatationa of the aituation.

Thia country at war ia alao an occupied country. Even here. one can profeaa
contradictory opiniona on the motivea for the Rueaian or Cuban aid. But the
preaence of foreign eoldiera ia a fact and it ia alao a fact that it lacka
diacretion. In Luanda. the honee and apartmenta in reaidentinl areaa are
requiaitioned by the Ruaaian and Cuban officera. They live in a cloned cir-
cuit with an eutononoua aupply ayaten that nakea then privileged peraona com-
pared with the poor urban proletariat. a little like the American army in the
large citiea of France and Italy at the end of world war II. There ia un-
doubtedly no reaaon to be ahockad by it but it in equally difficult to prevent
the fact that in the eyee of the population. thia foreign caate. which replacea
another in the acne dominant aituation. ia aaainileted with it.

Contracta and Bargaina

The choice of Angola's cuatonera and auppliera ia a priori without any connec-
tion with the choice of the country'a economic etructurea and optiona. In
thia field. cuatoma. tranaportation. buying channela. and international pro-
ceaaing and aalea circuita hold away and political orientationa emerge only
intangibly. Thia ia not the caae. however. when it ia a queation of the aale
of technology or partnerahip with foreign firma. It ia quite remarkable

that noat of the contracta concluded are with Heatern firma. no matter how
many Soviet adviaera are poated in the technical miniatriea.

It would'aeem natural. for example. for Angolan civil aviation. following

the example of ita military aviation. to have Soviet equip-eat. Thia in not
the caae. TAAC. the ﬂational Air Transport Company. purchaeed four Boeinga
(707'a and 737'a) for ita international routea in 1976 and 1977. Alitalia haa

aaaumed reaponaibility for training Angolan technical peraonnel. The firm of
Aataldi Batero ia doing expanoion work on the Luanda airport. The $380

25
I0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[expansion unknown] Airport Engineering of Milan is building a 3.700-neter-
long runway in Catuabeln. It will be the second longest in the country.

In the field of mining. the Angolan Govern-ent is negotiating with a Swedish
firs. Oranges International. which would take over the operations of the
for-er Lobito Mining Cospany. The national company SONANGOL [expansion
unknown]. which has a theoretical monopoly over oil operations. is actually
granting proapecting concessions to over 20 foreign conpanios. including

the CHI-A61? [National Hydrocarbons Agency-Italian National Oil Coapany].

a latecoaer but the cost active fire. which is training Angolan oil techni-
cians in Milan.

Concerning sutoaotive vehicles. large orders placed with Brazil Volkswagen
(‘75 vehicles) and Volvo (950 heavy trucks) counterbalance the supplying of
500 trucks by the Ger-an Desocratic Republic and Czechoslovakia. A $6 nillion
contract has just been concluded with the French firs Titan. lnc.. for the
setting up of a tank truck and vehicle assesbly line in partnership with the
nuarte Perreira Metallurgical Coapany of Lisbon.

This brief enuseration of the lost recent transactions between the Angolan
Government and Uestern enterprises shows that no one is excluded. Actually.
it is the financial difficulties afflicting the country that check its
reconstruction. Curiously enough. the role of the USSR is limited to the
sector of Iaritine fishing. here. as in South Yenen. the Russians have made
a eajor effort: 10 boats. 10.000 facilities for cold-storage workers. 100
radio connunicationa apparatuses. 20 refrigerated trucks. without aentioning
the deliveries of fish (20.000 tone of frozen fish and 10,000 tons of fresh
fish in 1977) to supply the population. Also as in South Yenen. they have
received sonething in return in the establishment of a joint fishing venture

whose articles of association provide than with 80 percent of all catches.
The Soviets' efforts to penetrate the disnond production and sales circuits
have been fruitless. The cubans seen to have taken over the for-er sugar
cospany Bo- Jesus. which is now an Angolan-Cuban friendship enterprise. but
it is s nini operation whose production is only 3,000 tons.

Current Resources

In order to understand the singular situation which results in the fact that
the lessive aid provided by the USSR and Cuba in the ailitary field and even
in the social and nedicsl areas is not accospsnied by any nanifestation of
major econoaic cooperation. one sust recall that the former nother country.
whose custoe it was to present Angola as a land where the Portuguese people

had long settled -- a halfway fallacious presentation because it was not
until a recent date and under the Salazar government that the enigrstion

of settlers was organized and their nulber never exceeded half a nillion -
actually operated through large international conpenies. using nethoda long

abandoned by the other European nations in their African colonial donains.

The nationalization of ease of these conpenies gave rise to great hopes.
Actually. in the best of cases. it resulted in the replacement of the former

26
IDI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPlCIAL USE ONLY

private eaployer by the govern-ant. while atructurea remained the aaae and
working conditione grew worae due to the acarcity of upper-level pereonnel
and the deatruction of equipment. Difficultiea were even woree in the ceee
of nationalitatione due to a ainple abandonment by the former operating com-
paniea. The failure of the USSR and Cuba to provide aupport under auch
circoaetancee gave riee to a dieappointaent equal in diaenaion to the hopea
which the intervention of theae two countriea trad created.

It ia atriking to note. in the capital of the international coapanica that
have heretofore enaured -- and to a large extent. etill aeea to eneure. in
new for-a - the working of the three nain reaourcee of the Angolan aubaoil:
oil. diamonde and iron. the involvement of European and Aeerican fir-a.

Gulf Oil. which operatea the Cabinda offahore depoeite. in part of the Mellon
group and ia linked to the intereete of Alcoa. Koprere and Heatinghouae. with
ita production of 1 million tone of crude oil in 1973. it wae already aupply-
ing 50 percent of Angola'a foreign exchange. Today. with a production of

7 aillion tone. it providea nearly 85 percent of the oil exporta in terla of
value and 60 percent of the government'a incoee.

The halting of ita operation in December 1976 waa reveraed in May 1977 aince
neither of the two partiee had any intereat in prolonging the hiatue. The
negotiationa undertaken between Gulf and the Angolan Government tend to give
SONANGOL 50 percent of the capital and ehould aoon be concluded inaenuch ae
there doea not aeen to be any eolution enabling Angola to work ita oil while
doing without the American conpany.

A number of oil conpaniea were nationalized on behalf of SONANGOL and brought
into PSTRANGOL [Angola Petroleum Company]. which linke PETROFINA [expenaion
unknown]. a Belgian company connected with Shell. with French and American
compeniea. and which worka the land areae of the Cuenra and Cuango areaa

and the maritine tone of Cuenta. with a production of about 1 million tone.
Iut SONANGOL remaine a nanngement company with government participation. It
doea not have the technical meane to eneure operatione and the USSR did not
aupply then.

The eane ia true of diemonda. The Diamang truet. whoee capital includee.
along with the Iurnay and Neuflite-Schlumberger banke, the General Company of
Belgium. the Ryan and Guggenheim firma. the Diamond Corporation and the Anglo-
American Corporation (Oppenheiler and 0e Beera). will henceforth have govern-
ment participation amounting to 61 percent of the capital. But the govern-
aent'a ehere ie made up of the buying back of 852.000 eharea of amell ehare-
holdera and haa not affected the 21 foreign companiee which. with a few modi-
ficatione involving the adminietration exercieed by the truat within the
conceeeiona. continue to have control of technical management. Moreover,

the compeniea in charge of the aarkating of production reaain in foreign.
particularly South African, henda. (National revenue fro. diamonde waa
equivalent to 25 billion CPA france in 1975.)

Iron production. mainly located in the region of Henongue and Caaainga. wee
9 nillion tone in 1973. including the attached depoeit of Caaeola. Operatione

27
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

were coeplately shut down in 1975. The English. French. Japanese. South
African. Aeerican and Swedish interests rub elbows in the ease mining coe-
pany. The Denguela railroad. which before independence carried all of
Zaire's copper and ‘9 percent of Zambia's production and whose reopening has
been postponed eonth after month by the UNITA sabotage. is itself 90-percent
owned by an English coepany. Tanganyika Concessions. Ltd.. which has now
become Tanks Consolidated Investment. Considering the closure of the line
since 1975 end the company's failure to pay its debts -- it paid no dividends
in recent years -- one can understand why the Angolan Government is not in

a hurry to ensure its nationalisation.

Another example of the government's hesitation to nationalize is furnished is
the ceeent sector. in which Secil Ultra-er was taken over only to the extent
of the 29 percent held by the parent coepany Sscil of Portugal and the shares
owned by small shareholders. Furthermore. it did not touch foreign participa-
tion -- particularly Danish shsres - end negotiations are even underway

with a Swedish firm to have it buy back part of the capital. It had pre-
viously supplied technical assistance.

in sun. when one examines the strategy of the Angolan Government in the mining
and industrial fields. one notes that the rather precarious equilibrium of

its balance of payments is obtained only through the activity of foreign
companies which, under fairly relaxed control and with capital participation
eainly stenming free the nationalisation of stock held by small shareholders.
ensure production that is substantially equivalent to what it was before
independence. except for iron. in which the delay has not been rectified.

The government allows a foreign private sector to subsist. Hith drops in
production on the order of 20 to 50 percent compared with the 1960‘s. the
sector saintains the einimal indispensable activities in the areas of edible
oils. soap. tobacco. rubber. electrical equipment and even road work. A

few nationalised enterprises - rather rare in number. as previously noted --
receive Russian or Cuban capital aid and technical assistance. The number
of economic undertakings that are strictly Angolan is very limited.

Another category of nationalised enterprises is the one resulting froe their
outright abandonment by European owners and nanagers. In the vest najority
of cases. the resumption of these businesses encounters insurlountable
difficulties having to do with operating funds. supplies of raw eateriale
and Ianagelant. The capital which they represent for the state in tar-a

of real property and equip-ant is depreciating due to the abundance of
supply and the scarcity of deland and they still constitute a heavy burden
due to Iaintenance coats. '

These structures. whose collapse sakes it difficult to get industry on its
feet again without the help of foreign techniques and capital. are also
unfortunately in the agricultural field. particularly the coffee sector.
whose production was Angola's second-ranking export in 1973. coming after
oil. Angola was in third place among the African producers and in fifth
place in the world. with a total of 5,755,000,000 escudoa (or kwanaea. to

28
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uaa the terninology adopted eince the converaion of the currency in January
1977). or aome 61 billion CPA france.

Thie crop wee 90 percent concentrated in the provincee of Uige and South
Cuenee end elao North Cuanaa and Cabinda. lt wae raieed on 500 plantatione
or feaendea ranging in eire fron 300 to $00 hectaree on the average and
belonging to Portugueee conpaniea euch ae the Angolan Agricultural Coupeny.
Satabliahed in regione which had a low population denaity. coffee growing
depended greatly on the contract recruit-ant of 100.000 aeaaonal workera in
the aouthern provincee by the territorial authoritiea. heat of the plante-
tione were nationalized when the for-er ownera abandoned them end in the

ceae of 386 of them. the government had to take over their eeneganent. trying.
without greet aucceaa. to reeatebliah the eeeaonel contracts and trying to

eend unemployed workara end "volunteere" fron the urban centere to the plan-
tltion. a

It ia difficult to know whet tonnegea were produced by theae expedienta.
which the atmoephere of civil war could hardly have facilitated. The govern-
ment puta then at 37 percent of the 1975-1976 figure. or none 80.000 tone.
Tonnagea of unproceeeed timber. cottonaeed. tobacco end auger cane. which
along with coffee were the main export producte. auffared the eame declinee.
Thia ia aleo true of lumbering. which wee one of the reaourcee of the Cabinde
enclave.

Economic Policy of USSR in Angola

In an article publiehed here in October 1975. we wrote that the dieordere to
be feared from the Angolan independence were lore coapareble to thoee that
night reault from a eudden reeignation of upper-level peraonnel in Rhodeeie
than to the convulaiona of the forner Belgian Congo. whoee population wee.
proportionately apeeking, leee engaged in the market econoly.

The fecte have only half confirmed the prediction eince in the caee of the
big companiea at least. the European peraonnel remained in Angola. albeit
in ennller numbere. except in provincee in a etete of dieeidence or eemi-
dieeidence. Thia aituetion reeulta from the apparent inability. or even
unwillingneaa. of the USSR to eeeuae the eocial and technical reeponeibili-
tiee of the European capitaliet entrepreneur and la the neat reeerkable
fact of thie period.

If it ie a queation of unwillingneee. it can be explained. inaofer ea oil
operations are concerned. by the deaire not to develop eourcee of eupply
whoae uee would be reaerved for the Heat beceuee of Angola'a geographical
aituation. One can eee the ceuae in the refuael to aaeume unpopular reopen-
eibilitiee in the place of the multinational coepaniee. Pinelly, one can
take the poeition that by ao doing. the USSR intende to limit ite action in
Africa to erretegic objectivee. but ite attitude in each aore likely the
reault of a lack of available eaporteble capital and technology.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

whatever the true eotives. this attitude has important consequences. It ex-

plains the reproaches addressed to Podgorny by Julius Nyerere when Podgorny
was visiting Tanzania. It is at the root of the upheavals in the HPLA and

the revolt of factions that were disappointed to see that the departure of
the Portuguese colonial power basically changed nothing in Angola. but
rather. accelerated the drops in tonnage and the yields of agricultural pro-
duction. Finally. it furnishes an explanation for the Heat's advances toward

a govern-ant which. whatever its political options. is forced to seek the aid
on which its very existence depends from those who are not its allies.

It is not a question here of overburdening a people long the victim of ans-
chronistic exploitation or of denigrating what are after all praiaeworthy
efforts of its leaders to pull the country out of an underdevelopnent which.
behind a soeetimea brilliant facade. constituted its daily reality. Is the
solution therefore one of being content to use government participation

in joint ventures to tesper the eethoda of the past. instead of building a

new scone-y endowed with internediats structures? There is a great gap be-
tween the fairly free work of imported workers. albeit in the name of social-

ism. on the Angolan plantations and the direct interest of the Ivorian producer
in developing his production. structured into cooperatives and guaranteed

against the fluctuation in world prices by stabilization organizations.

If this is the type of support that the Angolan Govarnnent is seeking. French
cooperation could well supply it. Likewise. its future membership in the
Euro-African Lone association would undoubtedly be better adapted to its
needs then a rallying to COHBCON. which. moreover. it has just rejected.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horaux et Cie.. Paris 1979

11.466
080: 6600

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYI’ICIAL USE ONLY

BENIN

ACTION 0! 9194138 01" REVOLUTION RBPOR'I'ED
Perle APRIQUB-ASIB in French 25 Dec 78 pp 26. 35-36
[Article by Heriee Syele: ”Serioue New Threete"]

[Text] In order to epreed confueion. to trick the
vigilance of the Africen peoplee end to prepere the
wey for e new etteck. the one-lee of the revolution
heve invented e docuent which ie e couplete forgery.
Rut...

Leet 30 Noveeber the Benineee people celebreted the third ennivereery of
their netionel holidey. which coincidee. ee we know. with the founding on
30 Rove-her 1975 of the People'e Republic of Benin end the creetion on the
one dete of the People'e Revolutionary Percy of Benin (PRPB). the epeer-
heed orgenieetion celled upon et thet tile to guide end direct the
ectivitiee of the country.

At the use tine. the netionel holidey relinde ue inevitebly of two other
inportent evente which blered the treil for the progreee of the benineee
revolution: the Coho epeech. on 30 Rove-her 1974, in which the option
of the eocieliet peth wee procleiled end. 2 yeere eerlier to the dey,

the policy etetelent which. 1 south efter the leunching (26 October 1972)
of the revolution of the lenineee ereed forcee. with the eupport of the
populer Ieeeee, procleiled the goele of notional liberetion end true
independence. which fro- then on were to be cerried out.

Sobriety end revolutionery vigilence: thoee ere the wetchworde which ,
thie yeer, reigned over the netionel holidey. to which e very denocretic
feeling wee to be given eleo. ‘l'hie wee how the daenetretione end
feetivitiee cent to be held in the dietrict centere of the 8‘ dietricte
of the country, while e nee .eeting, preeided over by the chief of
etete hed been orgenieed the day before. in the Cotonou Bell of Sporte,
in the presence of eelebere of the PR" Centrel Co-ittee. of the Netionel
Council of the Revolution end of the Revolutionery Rilitery coveruent.

31
FOR ORIGIN. OS! OBY
FOR OPPICIM. US! ONLY

Considerable Progress

These watchwords reflected. users or less. the situation the Benineee revolu-
tion finds itself facing. The progress ads in only 6 years is. we know.
considerable. In all areas. everyone is harnessed to destroy the foreer neo-
colonial "order." National conpenies took charge of the key sectors of the
econoey. of finance and of insurance. And the raforn of the territorial
edeinistretion. which took place at the and of 1973 and the beginning of 1976
has totally changed the sociopolitical face of the country. To bring together
the sdeinistration and the people edeinistersd. to decentraliee the decision-
nahing power. to give the minus responsibility to local groups: that was
the goal of this refers.

‘l‘hus new structures were established at the provincial level-«in which
collective leadership is guaranteed by the state provincial adeinietration
coeeittee (cm); at the district levsluby the revolutionary conittee of
the district adeinistration (cm) and at the co-unity level. the neighbor-
hood level or the village level—by the executive secretariat of the local
revolutionary council (0111.). Each of these local groups was granted. at its
own level. financial and corporate autonomy.

The recent creation of various provincial coepanies should contribute to in-
creasing the responsibility and decision-oaking power of the local collec-
tivities in the scononic sphere and to permitting a greater coordination

of activities at the regional level. Let us reeeeber again that the leader-
ship of the local collectivitiaso-with the exception of the regional prefects
and the district chiefs. vho are appointed by the central govern-entnare
elected duocraticslly by the people and are subject periodicall: to its
review. Sinilerly. the local units of the National Revolutionary Council--
the coaaittea for the defense of the revolution (can). tho coneirtea for

the organisation of youth (00.)). the co-ittee for the organisation of
woesn (OOP)-have been set up. All these structures are privileged bodies
in which the popular lessee learn about denocracy. about uensging public
affairs and where they acquire increased political consciousness and know-
ledge. ‘No phenoaane. radically new coapared to past practice. characterize
all activities in Benin: the collective developIent of all new decisions
and the pereanent mobilisation of the popular easses. This mobilization
has as its siwle but basic watchword. one which was i-ediately understood
and put into practice by the people: rely on their own strength.

The tasks of national reconstruction have led to spectacular results; each
year. we have seen throughout the country hundreds of schools. aedical
facilities. recreation centers or eeeting halls. wells. trails and roads,
due. bridges. playing fields. built by the people themselves. the ease
is true for the qualitative and quantitative improve-ant in agricultural
production. which is no longer left up to the peasants alone; each factory.
bank or edeinistretion. each local or uses organization actually has its
own field or center for cattle raising.

32
FOR OHICIAI. USE GUI-Y
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

The Main Accoapliehnente

In this new clients. there is an effort being leads to change old habits. to
introduce the use of animal power and nechenieation and to encourage the
peasants. under a voluntary systen. to organise thenselves in revolutionary
organizations with a cooperative purpose (CRVC). while experimentation with
agricultural cooperatives of the socialist type (CATS) is being tried.
"Today.” emphasized President Rerekou in hie speech on 29 November in
Cotonou. "we can say. mistakenly. that all social levels in our country,
in Benin. eat well and have all they want."

This cursory review should not neglect the wergence of the new schools-
this kind of school which is to be not only a center for preparation for
active life and political and patriotic education. but also a production
unitnnor the two aain accoepliahnents of the past 2 years. He aean the
first 3-year plan for econoaic development. the first year's sag-ant of
which (1978) has been by and large coapleted. in spite of gaps and shortages.
in satisfactory fashion. and the Basic Law. which is to both reinforce the
structures of the revolutionary regime and increase deaocratization and popu-
ler participation. in particular with the establish-ant of the National
Revolutionary Assembly. On this eubjact. we know that s first step has been
taken with the registration on the voter lists of the entire population old
enough to vote.

This task. which was accompanied by a vast sensitizing campaign. was pre-
sented as a patriotic duty and the voter registration card will now serve.
lore or less. as an identity card. Rs are now getting ready for the second
and decisive stage. that of choosing. under the palevar tree. that is by
direct democracy. at the grassroots level. in each neighborhood and village.
in each production center. candidates for unpaid positions as the people's
co-issioners to the ANR [National Revolutionary Assembly]. This is to say
that the People's Republic of Benin has not only become an intense work site.
it has also been transforned into a vest school for political and patriotic
education. into a gigantic entrenched ceap, where the wetchword is:
"Vigilance at every aonent." This is how the courses in ideological.
patriotic and generalized prenilitery training are systenetically conducted.
at every level. with all levels of the population.

While the Beninese revolution is prepared to weeks a new leap forward. this
concrete vigilance must necessarily be reinforced. Indeed. the eneaies

of the RP! [People's Republic of benin] are far froa having learned the
lessons of the failure of all their atteapts at destabilization and.
especially. of the inperialist strike. led by a hundred or so mercenaries.
headed by Bob Denerd. on 16 January 1977. On the contrary. everything is
going on as if that failure had increased their ill-tenper toward the
revolution which. although it is very young, has proven its profound
acceptance by the masses. its irreversible character and no longer is
afraid forcefully to affirm its undying support for all the struggles of
national liberation which are going on in the Third world. free the Sahara
to Zilbabwe. from Palestine to Nanibie. from Dhofar to South Africa.

33
ion orncm use out!
FOR OPYICIAL USE ONLY

And so, recently, the agents of imperialism circulated secretly, among certain
African leaders, a document which claims to be political analysis and is
cynically attributed to the central leadership of the PRPB. But it is a
complete forgery, concocted in the den of imperialist subversion and which
resembles to a "T" the document of "political analysis" abandoned in the
"trunk of Colonel Haurin," after the hasty withdrawal of his mercenaries.

A Hell-chosen “onset

The goal of this psychological operation is clear: to spread confusion. to
trick certain African states so as to obtain their active complicity. or
at least their guilty silence, should there be a new attack on the PR3.

All the information in the hands of the leadership of the Beninese revolution
proves that this aggression is being actively planned with the help of local
agents of imperialism and "other African traitors." That is why the political
bureau of the PRPB Central Committee launched on 5 December an appeal to the
vigilance of all the African leaders whom imperialism is trying to lead
astray through this fraudulent document, while all the militants, all the
local units of the National Council of the Revolution and of the party, all
the mass organisations, the people's armed forces and security units were
asked to keep themselves ready, throughout the country, to defend the father-
land and the revolution.

This is why the watchwords which galvanize our energies today are: "The
fstherland or death!" and "the revolution or death!"

So it is not by mere chance that the threats which are seen abroad coincide
with a resurgence, domestically, of intrigues and reactionary activities

(a profusion of subversive tracts, defeatist propaganda, economic sabotage
and even crimes).

All that comes, and is developing, at the moment when the struggle is intensi-
fying and is spreading over several fronts. Against bureaucratization first
of all, an old problem that colonization and the regime of national resigna-
tion which followed deeply planted in the civil service, certain elements

of which persist in old practices. Against a certain confusion which
developed over the role of the state and that of the party, and of the
primacy of the latter. Therefore a campaign to enlist the support of
militants who have proved themselves in the field in revolutionary action
groups (GAR)-baaic cells of the party-—is now being conducted throughout
the country so as to reinforce and broaden the bases of the PRPB. Earlier,
in recent months, efforts were directed toward establishing everywhere,

even in offices and factories, the mass organizations (CDR, COP, COJ, etc.)
which are the satellites of the party.

The struggle is also being undertaken against the disastrous practices of
feudalism. of fetishism, of witchcraft; against a plague, perhaps even more

34
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

serious. which continues to afflict the national coepanies and production units.
On this subject an appeal was sade to the couittees for the defense of the
revolution. estnbl ished everywhere. so that they night intervene. nore resolute-
ly and nore effectively. with the purpose of wiping out once end for all
bureaucratic. authoritarian and diehonest practices. Finally. we met get

rid of a kind of lethargy. which appears here and there. due. most likely

to the lack of experience and neturity of certain eilitante and also. perhaps.
to the slowness which characterizes the establishoent of the Basic Law.

But all theee insufficiencies and pereistent gaps. these defeatist tendencies.
are syeteneticelly driven out and publicly disclosed. brought to the knowledge
and attention of the popular nassee. so as to be fought sore effectively.

Therefore. the eneniee of the beninese revolution should have no illusions.
In this country. where the one of Behanzin has never been forgotten. the
peesante and workers in the towns are ready. at any noeent. just as on that
Sunday. 16 January 1977. to becoee mobilized for the defense. by any means.
of their country and their revolutionary scconplisllente.

COPYRlGﬂT: 1978 Afrique-Aeie

8956
C80: “00

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

BURUNDI

mmou nsvwnmn mm was sanctum. 300m snowmen
Pm. Amen-ms in French 22 Jen-lo Feb 79 p 26
[Article by m1 mm ”A Country ‘i‘hst ls casing Bsck to Life']

[Text] ibllowing s period of politicsl rensisssnce.
the Secom Republic is settling down to the tssk of
econosio reconstruction.

me situstion thst prevsiled in Burundi under the nice-hero regise invited
chsnge in every spare of sctivity. Decsuse of the feet thet the bssic
objective of the sovelent initiated on i hove-bet 1976 by the responsible
elesents of the ersy uith the support of the progressive forces of the
nstiono-s sovesent thst led to eeteblishsent of the sdsinistrstion of
President Jenn-asptiete Beyer-wee to bring sbout genuine socisl Justice.
csrtein names were tsken issedistely following the edvent of the Second
Republic thst were like winds of liberstion blowing scross our hills.

mess sesslaree included. for exssple, the elinimtion of the sinisun
persoml tor-s 'hesd ten" thst hsd becose s sysbol of exploitstion end
reweesion. Oonwrrently. s. syste- hss been estsblished thst ensbles
peessnts not only to ssve for s rein dsy but sleo to psrticipetsust their
sodsst level--in the [recess of investsent.

Blininstion of the uhgererwsL-ending the centuries-old mm petronsge
systesuhss hsd the effect of confining the detereinstion of the new
regiee to lsbor tirelessly in behslf of its people. Other sotion hes been
tsken in this connection. ss for mp1s the decision to return to the
nstionsl dossin those stste lends thst hsd been tnnsferred in en irregu-
lsr ssnnsr. generslly to hig: goverment officisls end srny officers. The
incresse in the price of coffee end cotton st the level of the producer
hss slso benefited the psssents. with the result thst their lsbor is now

resunerstive.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nothing. houovor. could bo dono without tirot m1“ tho potty opporotuo.
tho Iodtinory or aovormont. ond tho nogiotrocy. ‘lho toot io thot mm
[nonom Unity out mam Forty]. which npnoonto tho populor will no
"No itoolf oo tho inotruoont for tho tronotorootion of otructuroo ond
Iontol ottitMoo. woo locking in oodroo who ooro (lynooio ond coooittod.

It Inc in thio otooophoro of politicol ronoiooonco thot tho wormnt of
tho Socond Ropublio dovolopod o 3-yoor procto- ct notionol roconotruction.
togothoo: oith o 5-yoor plon of oconooic ond oociol dovolopoont ohooo
obJoctivoo no noo in procooo or ottoimont. lnooouch oo ioplooontotion of
thio plon roquirod nJor copitol invootoont. tho firot otop tokon woo to
cloon up tho nnogooont of tho public timnooo by olioinotiu tho corrupt
ololonto ond placing oovoro rootrointo on tho divoroion or public tundo.
Ponign notionolo who uoro poot oootoro in opooulotion ond corruption ooro
oxpollod froo tho country. ond bonk occounto nintoinod in {onion coun-
trioo by Burundi“ citioono ooro ropotriotod.

‘lhio plan-which oxooplifioo tho dotoroinotion of tho Socond nopublio to
roly {trot ond toroooot on ito con rooourcoo ond to conoolidoto mtionol
indopondonoouoccordo oaiculturo o proooimnt ploco. mo initiol obJoot vo
io to loot tho food roquirooonto of tho populhtion ond intomity tho growing
or oxport cropo.

To thin out! o Mm-mmm Hixod Ooopony for Agriculturo (AGRIBUIDH)
hoo boon forood to dovolop cortoin londo by tho oothcdo of intonoivo ogri-
culturo. For ito port. tho non Procoooing Plant. 00-1:on (sumw) u in
tho mcooo of organising tho oxploitotion ond oorkoting of tho tiohory
rooourcoo or [do mm.

In tho irliuotriol ooctprubocouoo it io vioood oo o ooctor thot motoo now
ooployoont opportunitioouo uni-boa: of notion-.1 ond oixod ontorwiooo hovo
boon motod. \lo m cito. for can-pk. o toxtilo cooploat now undou- con-
otruction ot Dujuobunu o foctory for tho nmhcturo or {on ioplooontou o
plont for tho mooning of hidoo ond okino; o notioml ontorpoioo tor
producim lioo ond cooonta out o Nixon economy for tho conning of Vogotoblo
ond Hoot Producto (SOHILEVIA). In tho coolorciol ooctor. o docioion hoo
boon tokon to otrongthon tho Notionol Mo Oi‘tico for tho pug-poo or
cooboting poriodic ohortogoo ond opoculotion. on! tho offico hoo olnody
oponod bronchoo in o nuobor of troding contoro. A Mundi ‘h-onoportotion
Offico (mm) hoo oloo boon crootod: it hoo olroody put into oorvico o
nan-bot of vohicloo for tho tronoportotion of Mom ond within tho noor
futuro will oloo bo piocod in «homo of tho tronoportotion of froiQIt.

No cooponioo oro onacod in tho took of ovorcooiu tho maophiool
mum» at tho country: 1mm [Inurnotionol non-pomuon (Jo-pony].
which hoo boon in oxiotonco for oovorol oontho, on! Air Burundi. on oi:
tmportotion coopony. no“ tho wodocto undortokon in connoction with

tho him iMrootx-ucturo oro tho oopholtim of cox-thin noticnol and
rogionol routoo. inoludim no“ cthoro tho mono-Wu. Bum-bun-

37
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l'ICIAL USE ONLY

Notonboro. BuJulburo-Cibitoko ond DuJunburo-Nilo hooduotoro highvoyo. Hith
roopoot to tho oootor of goolog ond lining I. ohould oloo oontion tho
fonotion or o Rmonion-Burundion hixod Coopony (SOHIBUIDN). uhich hoo boon
ploooti in chomo of roooorch ond oxploitotion. on! tho crootion of tho
Notionol Poot Oﬂico (alumna).

Proaooo hoo oloo boon ochiovod in tho orooo of hauling. public hoolth ond
oducotion. A procto- for tho conotruction of 500 duollingo io undo: m
in tho oitioo of Bujuoburo. (31qu on! Nsooi. In tho mol orooo tho oil
io to induoo tho poooohto to too-cup thouolvoo into villogoo. but thio
oonnot bo ooooopliohod unlooo it. io prooodod by o coopoign to hoiduton
thoir ouoronooo.

In tho public hoolth oootor. tho prilory concorn of tho sworn-out. hoo boon
tho rooquippim of tho hoopitolo onli dioponoorioo. In conclusion. no In
Iontion thot it. in plonnod to roploco troditionol oduootion with on originol
typo oi“ oduootion boood on tho looming of o truio. A propo- ror tho
ootobliohoont of mo contoro of polyvolont oducotion io in wocooo oi‘
ioplooontotion throughout tho notion. A contor uhoro tho phyoicolly hurli-
coppod cu loorn o trodo hoo oloo boon conotructod.

fhio io. in briot outlino. tho now toco of Bun-midi. o country thot io
cooing book to lito ond dovoloping ito oconooy ottor Ion: your-«Ibo:
your-of lothorg on! of oconooic ond oociol otognotion.

commm 1979 miquo-Aoio

10992
«no. “00

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY

“OHM! LAWS OFFENSIVE; AMDA FALLS
London norm in French 1343 m 19 Feb 79 PA

[Text] Perie. 19 Feb (mn)--Apperently profiting free the recent fight-
ing in Ndjenene. the rebele of the Netionel Front for the Liberetion of
Ched (ROLIIWI') heve leunched en offeneive egeinet eeverel Chedien loceli-
tiee. of which Arede. which hee fenen into their hende. end Biltine ere
in lideeetern Chad. it wee leerned in Perie on Hondey fron e reliehle
eource.

Arede end Biltine. north of Abecho. hed been coneidered etronsholde of
Prise Hinieter llieeene Rebre. whose "erned forcee of the north" confronted
the reguler eny (ﬂeet week) [worde indietinct] cepitel.

The for-er mum: chief had reconquered Arede efter joining the regime
in Magnet.

At the eide of the reader iorcee end the French contingent. (1it hed been
need) to prevent my new incureion of the Goobni Oueddei rebele eouth

of the ceeee-tire line (“greed upon) in Herch in Libye. the line dividing
Ched in two (urea) Leke ched. in the went. to Abeche. in the eeet.

According to reporte reeching Perie. ﬂebre reportedly etripped Arede end
Biltine to etreogthen Abeche. where hie forcee. ea in Ndjenene. oppoeed
the resale: eny [word indietinct] week.

(:80: “00

39
M ORIGIN. US! ONLY
POI! OWICIM. USE ONLY

MRO ISLANDS

NEH BEN ALI CABINET INCLUDES m CHANGES
Perie mans TROPICAUX 81' NBOITBlllAN-ls in French 5 Jon 79 p ’01
(Article: "Selie Ben Ali Bee For-ed llie New Govern-eat")

[Text] Appointed prise ninieter on 22 Deco-her 1976 (eee m of 29 Decelber
1978, p 3575). Selie Ben Ali ennounced on 29 Deoeﬁer the for-etion of

hie govern-Int in which few chengee ere noted cowered to the Cebinet of
hie predeceeeor.

"the toner prile einieter. Abdellehi Noheeed. wee eppointed Ninieter of
Stete in cherse of Juetioe. Hoelee Affeire. Treneportetion. 'rouriee. end
'oreisn ‘rrede.

Ali Nroudjee ie continued in hie poeition of Hinieter of Foreign Affeire
end Cooperetion, while Seid Keie reteine the portfolio of Hinieter of
Finance. Iconoly. end Plennins.

Anon: the newcoeere ie Tere Neeche. eppointed Hinieter in cherse of
Sociel “hire. Public Neelth. Netionel Bducetion. Youth. end Sporte.

rhoee who left the govern-ant include seid ueeeen Seid Ilechie. for-erly
einieter of production end induetry. who wee recently elected governor or
Grende Coeore.

the firet Courien Pederel Aeoeebly let on 29 Deoednr 1978 et Horoni
under the preeidency of Alleoui Soﬁe. deen by virtue of eeniority. The
letter etreeeed the deeocretic choice nede by the new euthoritiee eince

the ecceeeion of Preeident Ahmed Abdelleh to power.

On hie pert Seli- Ien Ali. who ettended the eeeting. beeed hie epeech on
the than of unity end work.

COPYRIGHT: lone Korea! It Cie.. Peril. 1979

2662

O: “00
CS 60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DWIIC PARTY WIN RESOLUTIONS
London m in French 1552 CHI 27 Jen 79 PA

[Text] Libreville. 27 Jen (”Wk-The Gehoneee Denocretic Perty con-
vention todny expreeeed ite "eheolute eupport for denocretic end orgenired
progreeeien."

It [word indietinct] reeolutione on politice in generel. finenciel end
economic policiee. the eociel end culturel eectore end the reforn of
inetitutione.

It eehed the govern-cut to etop eppointing [vorde indietinct] in public
end privete eectore end to elininete the concentretion of iunctione eo no
to ”eehe e plece for uneqloyed youthe."

It edvoceted struggle egeinet ”hoieteroue end folkloric [ee received]
Iilitency to pure the vey for e true civic epirit" ee well ee the clini-
netion of "denegogy, interning. elender end the eprending of felee
ruore" iron the rent. of the Politicel Bureeu.

In regerd to foreign policy. the congreee reeffirud Gehon'e eupport for
the 0M! end UN chertere end the decleretion on hueen righte. It etreeeed
ite policy of nonelineunt end ite eupport for the African liheretion

love-ente recognised by the 0M! ee vell ee the Peleetiniene. It con-
demed reciel end Zionien.

0n the cconouic end finenciel eituetion. it recon-ended the edoption of
”neceeeery neeeuree" to develop the infreetructure end to fevor inveet-
Ient in production eectore.

‘l'he congreee eleo condemed the "devietione. dietortione end other ehnor-
nel force of hehevior which hern the Gehoneee nind end eociel etructuree"
end reco-ended "working fro- the beeee."

The congreee will proceed during the dey to elect neebcre to the perty'e
Centre]. Co-ittee.

C80: 6600

61
P03 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
NR OHICIAL "8! ONLY

GABON

IRIS”

m 01mm DISCOVIRBD-ouwevule. 8 m (m)-ceboaeae ulna. later”
and Hydraulic Reeourcea Meter Edouard-Alexia “bounty-Boon“ conﬁned on

Hedneadey that an otlﬂelda bed been diacovered 1n Gabon. The hporunce
o: the find ehould be evaluated vtthtn 6 o: 8 untha. [tendon mm in

French 1336 an 0 reb 79 PA]

080: “00

‘2
m OFFICIAL USS OIILY
FOR OHICML 088 ONLY

LIST OF PETROLEUM OMAN!” REVISED
Patio W 1'80le 31' BDI‘I‘IRMNIBNS in Punch 29 Dec 78 p 35“

[13:57 The director of the Chen Department of Geological Studiea, Hr 8.0.
Keaae. recently gave one preciae detaile on petroleum operationa in Giana
in a lecture delivered in Juoeei before the Aahenti regioul branch of the
Ghana Meocietion oi Science ‘l‘eachera. ketrecing the hietory oi the aearch
for petroleul in hie country, Kaaee aeid that thia eearch had begun in 1096
and that. in 1957. l7 boreholea had already been drilled. Thin lumber hea
increaaed today to as. 28 offehore end 20 onehore. According to Keeee. five
coupeniea are carrying out operationa: Agri-Petco International (Ghana) Inc.
Phillipa Petroleum, Texaco International, Offahore Hydrocarbon end J.J.
Simona Go. he cited neither Getty Oil nor AGIP, whom we had previoualy
eantioned (urn 27 hove-her). -with regerde to Agri-retco. without actually
aaying that up until no» they were the only company to have aterted opera-
tiona, he nevertheleaa stated that the agree-ent they had reached with the
govern-ent had been in the beata intereata of Ghana. Under the tem of
thia egreenent, he aaid, 12.5 percent of production ie paid aa royaltiea

to the African atete which. loreover. hae the option of buying 50 percent
of their production at world oarhet pricea. Keaee eleo indicated that
bituinoua coal depoaite had been diecovered in four very diatrict loca-
tiona: in the Tao baain,- the Volta beain, the Kate zone and all along

the coaatal bank. The later region haa been divided into 22 parcela each

of vhich may be leeaed. tor a uni-u- exploretion period of 2 yeara, at
810,000. by any intereeted company.

9330
($0: 5600

43
’01 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

ROADS. EXPORT. BUSINESS PINANCINco-‘l'he luropeen Developeent Fund (EDP) hoe
recently greated 76.6 eillion cedie in iinencin; to Ghene for the coepletion
of three typee of projecte. The (iret end principel project will receive
66.6 nillion cedie. including 66.7 eillion except fro. dutiee end 17.9 nil-
lion in the for- or e loen et 1 percent intereet for 60 yeere with e lO-yeer
defenent. It ie for the 93-kiloeeter Mie-hepetebe-Bluho roed. which ie to
becoee pert of the Irene-ﬂeet Mricen highwey. The eection will include e
bridge over the ﬁne. which the Africen Develop-eat Benk (BAD) end the
Gheneien Govern-eat heve egreed to finence jointly. The eecond project will
receive 3.6 nillion cedie end involvee the developnent of exporte. The null
will neinly he need by the Gheneien Council for the Proeotion of Exporte end
the Gheneien Export Coupeny. Pinelly. the third project. which will receive
e 6.6-.illion-cedi loee under the eeee conditione ee the previouely nentioned
17.9-eillion credit. concerne the development of enell end everege-eite
induetriee. The enount of the lam will be jointly edeinietered by the Ben]:

of Chene end the Netionel lnveetnent Seek. [Text] [Perie ms mum
IT tantrums in French 19 Jen 79 p 161] 11,666

C80: 6600

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA

BRIEFS

rmcu LOAN ton mum ite l6 Decuher meeting, the Council of the (French)
Ceieee centrele [Centrel 'lreeeury] for Economic Coorporetion grented Quince
e loen of 1.3 Iillion frence (ehout 6 million eylie), which will cover the
entire coet of e etudy on the rebuilding of the Greet Pelle Den. which
euppliee weter end electricity to Coneltry. Thie in the firet operetion the
Ceieee centrele hee cerried out in Guinee eince thet country’e independence
in 1958. It night he the prelude to such lerger inveetnente. Text-7 [Perle
MARCH” 1110le 31‘ monuments in French 29 Dec 78 p 3362 9330

380 mm Humane LOAN--Pinencins for the Senoyeh textile caplex. The
mineen Hinieter of Plennins, N'l’ely Sengere. end the Buropeen cmieeioner
in cherse of Development, Cloude Cheyeeon, eigned on 22 Decenber in Brueeele
e finencing egreelent reletive to nodernicetion of the Senoyeh textile plent.
The totel coet of the project euounte to 30 eillion Europeen unite of eccount
(1 no - 3.7 Ft). The Europeen Develop-eat Fund (EDP) grented e eubeidy of
26 uillion uc to mince on_thie eu- end e loen with epeciel conditione et-
teched or to “Him uc. mg Em- mmms rmrcmx 81' Hummus

in French 29 Dec 70 p 3562 9330

IDA "MIR, ELECTRICITY MAN-“rho lnternetionel Develop-ent Auocietion (IDA),
e brunch of the Horld Bonk, hee grented Guinee two credite totelling $13.63
nillion, ee followe: $12.5 lillion for e weter cenelizetion end purifice-
tion project. end 61.13 million for e project of etudy end dewelopnent end
nintenence of on electric eyeten. The wetcr ceneliution end purificetion
project will uke it pouihle to build new reeervoire end iwrowe dietribu-
tion eervice in Coneltry. 'l'he percentese of the populetion eerved will elnoet
double since it will increeee fro- 13 percent now to 36 percent in 1982. The
goel of the eecond project it to finieh preperetory work an e ler e project
to renovete Coneltry'e electricity dietribution eyetea. flex; [grin mucus
1‘30le 81' momma: in French 29 Dec 78 p 35697 9330

G0: “00

65
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IVORY COAST

IALTBRIIB 0P rcomm urom
Perle JBWB MO!!! in French 27 Dec 78- 3 Jen 79 pp 50-52

[Article by epeciel correepondent Sirediou Diello: "The Peuee; the Ivory
Coeet Beonoey Hill not be Able to be Indefinitely Protected Bron the Crieie
Sheking up the Heetern Contriee. It ie coping undreneticelly but in e
voreened clieete")

[Text] 1he yeer 1978 reneined treditionel. Ae in the peet. the «rennin
nerking the ennivereery oi the independence geve the leedere the opportun-
ity to drev up the helence of the peet yeer end outline the proepecte for
the future. he romd eterted by Preeident Felix Ilouphouet-loigny. eyn-
bolieing the equelity end helence of ell provincee. vee neinteined.

0n 7 Decenber. on the occeeion of the 18th ennivereery. it wee Seguele,

the city loceted in the center of the country. thet vee procleined cep-

itel of the dey. It velconed ell the digniteriee, big end enell, of the
Ivory Coeet. eterting vith the preeident end the leeding perty end etete
officiele.

Notevorthy Concept

1hie celehretion. en exceptionel event in iteelf. wee eleo the tine choeen
hy Preeident Bouphouet-loigny to ennomce e few Iejor decieione, expreee
the reeeone for hie eetieiection (or concerns), ieeue verning ., end eer-
eerk the vey to he folloved.

‘Ihe officiele did not niee the opportunity to preiee the virtuee of the
regine. perticulerly ite econoIic eucceeeee. The preee wee pleeeed to pub-
lieh the reeulte. Over the peet three yeere the growth hee evereged 12.5
percent. The Ivory Coeet ie on the vey to becoming the leeding world
producer of cocoa. beating (:hene. It ie elreedy the third biggeet pro-
ducer of cotton. the third biggeet exporter of peln oil end, by fer. the
leeding Airicen exporter of pineepplee end benenee.

In hie treditionel leeeege to the netion. Preeident Bouphouet-Ioipy en-
pheeired the: the Ivory Oneet hee no eneniee end thet it ie inteneifying
end divereifying ite friendehipe. He then eteted: "then” to ite both
firn end flexible policy end mreneee of ite internel peece end proeper-
ity, it hee developed e good huge."

56
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yet. for once. this chorus of satisfaction formulated by the officials and
the media contained false notes. More than usual. both official speeches
and writings showed no hesitation to launch a war against "sad spirits."
"ill will individuals" and other "ispenitant detractors."

Such reactions which are in strange contrast to the traditional easy husor
and flagnatic attitude in the face of the criticise of their policy of
controlled liberalism. reveal the type of climate currently prevailing in
the country. They prove. if not a real concern on the part of official
circles. at least a certain embarrassment as to the way the situation has
evolved.

Greatly depending on world circuetences, the Ivory Coast economy could
not rennin indefinitely protected from the crisis which is shaking up the
Western countries which are. by far. its main suppliers. As of the second
quarter of 1977 the economy has shown a halt.

Surplus Balance

It is certainly exports that are exposed to the risks presented by the
international situation. The rates of the coffee and cocoa (together with
lumber the Iain sources of foreign exchange) have been steadily declining
since the spring of 1977. horse. in the 1977-1978 season coffee produc-
tion declined 30 percent cempered with the previous crop. This was a drop
which a better cacao crop was unable to balance. at least in terms of
marketed tonnage. Titer exports followed the ease movement. The poor
foreign trade results. therefore. worsened further. However. this will not
prevent the balance of trade. once again. to be positive.

The most worrying situation is that of prices. Not only have the prices
of imported goods shot up in the course of the past 15 months but the
rising curve has been followed by domestic goods as well.

Fighting Inflation

Every quarter the shopping basket of the housewife is becoming lighter and
lighter. Attieke and Poutou. foodstuffs based on menioc. yam. and plantain
bananas. which are the basic popular staples. are beconing "unaffordable."
we were told by a cab driver. Unquestionably. this rise is partially due
to the inflation whose gangrene is affecting the economies of the supply-
ing comtries. however. it is equally attributable to failures of the
Ivory Coast distribution circuits. The latter stake it possible for dis-
honest merchants to profit from the scarcity of goods (unless they organ-
ize it thaselves) in order to speculate and become richer with less
trouble at the expense of the co-unity.

The authorities have indeed restricted credit for the sake of fighting
inflation better. Furthermore. important public investments made in re-
cent years. specificelly in construction and public works. were substan-
tially reduced in 1978. Nevertheless. the results of such seasures will
not be felt i-edistely. Their extant will be determined in the second
quarter of 1979.

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are sons who no longer conceal their concern. This applies above
ell to "expatriates." to French-en living in the Ivory Coast. All of a.
sudden. such people who had lived over the past 18 years without trouble.
in a rather soft environ-ant. are seized by panic. Sole expect if not
nationalization at least a rather substantial appropriation by the state.
infringing upon the ownership of their enterprises. Others are convinced.
rightly or wrongly. that the period of prosperity belongs to the past and
that inexorably the Ivory Coast will experience econonie difficulties if
not political upheavals.

0n the ow; of the 7 Dacenber celebrations. the supporters of the oyster:
theneelves had joined the discontented. Using as a pretext robberies of
which they had been the victim. specifically in houses in the vicinity

of the Cocody Technical lligh School. French technical assistants threatened
to stop their work "due to lack of adequate security." They addressed
thaselves to the French enbassador and the Ivory Coast chief of state.

It bees-e necessary to increase the nunber of police patrols, occasionally
reinforced by French nilitsry personnel free the Port-Bouet Base.

Nevertheless. on 7 Decenber there were few whites in Abidjan who dared to
leave their holes. is a result of anonynous leaflets predicting a"'blood
bath" nany of the- were expecting that day a real "Saint Bartheleny of
cooperation." Naturally, nothing of the sort happened. In order to put
an end to this setter. on 12 Decednr the president issued an ”appeal to
cal. and tranquility."

"This is not the first tine that the whites have fallen prey to such panic."
we were told by an Ivory Coast official who ’naintains were working rela-
tions with thu. "In Europe not a single day goes by withOut the nedia
reporting aggressions. A single shot fired in Africa would suffice for

the whites to be terrorized and threatened to pack their bags." another
official clained. clearly annoyed by the attitude of the French assistants.
Let us point out that they are afraid. above all. of what will happen after
liouphouet.

Is it in order to cut short such worries that the chief of state recently
proclained his intention to request the renewal of his nsndate in 1981?
This would not be excluded. Nevertheless. this initiative. which breaks
with a deeply rooted tradition according to which the president would
annourme his intention to seek a new nandate only at the met Congress
(Denocrstic Party of the Ivory Coast. whose leader he is). has not calned
the people down.

In any case. the set-tos and incidents which asrked the October 1978
nunicipal elections contributed to the resurgence of debates on the ad:-
jact of succession, particularly since the president's decision to organ-
ise s new balloting in all districts. This was seen by sons as the dis-
owning of Philippe Yace. the party's secretary general, who had
supervised these elections.

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the course of its 18 years of independence. the Ivory Coast has avoided
asny a trap and suraounted severe crises. It will certainly be able to
handle edsily the eddies of this year's end.

haphael-Leyguea' Departure

"The attitude of my coapstriots is totally groundless." Jacques Raphael-
uyguee. French ambassador to the Ivory Coast. makes no effort to conceal
his "surprise" and "disappointaent."

The wind of panic blowing over the French cos-unity in Abidjan corresponds.
curiously enough, to the end of an epoch represented by Ambassador Raphael-
l.eygues. Since his arrival in the Ivory Coast. in February 1963. at a
crucial ties in the country's political life, this forner naval officer
rapidly adapted to life in Abidjan.

A long stay in Indochina had trained hie well for the genes and intrigues
inherent in his new career. llis familiarity with the parliament under the
Fourth Prench Republic had enabled him to establish useful contacts with
the African representatives. one of whom was the future Ivory Coast chief
of state.

Jacques Raphael-Leygues added to these valuable advantages an acute feel-
ing for public relations assisted by an exceptionally good aeraory. to the
point that today he is the only diplonat in Abidjan who can address faail-
iarly any sinister. high official. or officer.

Siaple. courteous. and even-tempered. he is equally at hone in offices.
social receptions. and the streets. while remaining particularly closely
linked with President houphouet-boigny toward whoa he displays unliaited
odairetion.

In the salons of Cocody it has even been said that he had become llouphouet-
boigny's best ambassador to France rather than vice versa.

As long as the Gaullists occupied the Elysee and Hatignon palaces and the
Quai d'Orsay. such a situation could have lasted indefinitely without
anyone objecting. Jacque Raphael-Leygues being. hiaself. part of that
group. however. everything changed with the advent of Giscard's regiae.

It is being said that President houphouet-Boigny had to display all his
power of diploascy to extend by several years the Ivory Coast career of
Jacques Raphael-hygues, his friend and neighbor (they are house neighbors
in Cocody). At this point. having reached the age liait. the adussador
could no longer stay: "Unfortunately, I cannot amend lay birth certificate."
he told us jokingly.

Jacques Raphael-hygues will be leaving Abidjan in January, after a 16-
year stay. lie will be replaced by hichel Dupuch, a proper Giscardian.

oorrnzcar: Jenna Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

...- 69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

EXPANDED COOPERATION "I‘m EAST. "881‘
Paris WES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAMEEMS in French 5 Jan 79 p 41
[Text] French-Malagasy Cooperation

During a visit by the French stassador, Mr Canpredon. sccoapanied by the
new chief of nission. Mr Lechiguero. to the Malagasy Minister of Rural
Develop-ent and Agrarian Reforn, there was discussion of the possibilities
of cooperation between the two countries in the field of hydraulics and
agricultural Iechanisstion.

0n the occasion of an earlier visit the French chief of nission had lads
a survey of the projects under way and nentioned the prospects for the
training of cadres such as veterinary surgeons. agronoeists, and those in
the waters and forestry services.

Further-ore. the ambassador of France. received by the Malagasy Minister
of Transportation. Food, and Tourisn, had discussed with the latter
cooperation in the field of air. railroad, and ocean transportation as
well as the extension of the Rational School of Naval Instruction at
Msjungs.

The nationalization of the French Girsrd and Robic nilitary hospital at
Antananarivo on 1 January 1979 was the topic of discussion between the
Malagasy sinister of defense. Sibon Guy. and the French aﬁessador, Mr
quredon. on 20 Deceder 1978. The talks also bore on French-Malagasy
cooperation in the fields of education. the econoly. and defense.

Very Diversified Cooperation

Mr Van der Millingen. new anbasssdor of the Netherlands to the Denocratic
Republic of Madagascar. presented on 20 Decsder 1978 the numbered copies
of the letter of recall of his predecessor and of his own credentials.
Assistance of 165 Iillion Malagasy francs has been granted to Madagascar
for the supply of equipnent and naterials to inprove braodcasts and re-
ception of the Malagasy rsdio network. Radio Mederland. which has a broad-
casting station for Africa and the Indian Ocean region in the environs

of Antananarivo. will provide technical assistance.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

The Malagasy Minister of Public Works requested the assistance of Switzer-
land in the field of neintenance of equipsent and isprovesent surveys
relating to the various national highways in Madagascar free the Swiss
charge d'affaires, marles Abegglen. when he received on 12 Decewer 1978.

The Malagasy Minister of Youth and Sports received Mr Make-aura. asbessador
of Japanyon 11 December 1978. The sinister requested that exchanges of
youths be planned as well as assistance in the installation of saall pro-
duction plants to turn out sports equipsent.

The Malagasy Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research received
the charge d'affaires of China. The discussion bore on the reforn of
scientific research. The esteblishsent of research institutes in cultivable
areas was deemed necessary as was the initiation of a policy of training
researchers. The two officials then discussed the exchange of researchers
and scientific docusents.

Loan Agreesent for Telecoe-unicatione Signed with Japan

Rakotovao Rasakeboana. Malagasy sinister of finance and planning. signed
on 28 Decesber 1978 in Tokyo with Kaneo Ishihara. president of the Japanese
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, an agree-ant under whose term Japan
will sake available to Madagascar a loan of 6.5 billion Japanese yen, that
is, about 4.8 billion Malagasy francs, for the teleco-aunications project
of southern Madagascar (see MTM of 29 Decesbar 1978. p 3516).

The execution of this project was entrusted to the Susitoso Corporation and
the Nippon Electric Coupany.

The Japanese loan carries interest at 3.5 percent a year and is reidsur-
sable in 25 years which includes a 7-year grace period.

Civil Aviation: New Soviet Aircraft

An Antonov-lz turbcjet and a Yak-60 tri jet of ‘Soviet manufacture made their
appearance in the Malagasy skies at the end of Decedaer 1978.

The Antonov-l2 aircraft. an intermediate-range transport, was loaned for a
year by the USSR to Madagascar to sake possible the supply and outshipsent
of products free its less accessible regions. As for the m-ao, an
intermediate-range transport in its "executive" version, it is a gift of
the Soviet Union to be used by President Didier Ratsiraka for sore cosfort
on his trips.

These new sircrafts are in addition to the MiG-l7 fighters placed at the
disposal of the Malagasy air force by North Korea pending the delivery of
the MiG-21 jets ordered by Madagascar fros the USSR. For the tine being.
these planes are flown and naintained by Soviet and North Korean specialists.
The training of Malagasy pilots is under way.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Morena et Cie., Paris. 1979

2662
cso: mo 51

u..- -—---.- e.-.— . .—..
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

MALI

BRIEFS

FRENCH ENERGY Limb-The (French) Central 'l‘reaaury for Economic Cooperation
granted Heli, on 19 December. a loan of 25.2 million French [ranca (2.52
billion Halian trance), which will cover the entire Bnergy of Mali (80H)
inveat-ent program. Involved ie the reinforce-em of the neana of thermal
production while waiting for the opening of the Selingue hydro-electric
plant and enauring diatributien poaaibilitica at Bamako of the current

thie plant will produce. At the rue time the ID? [french Electric Co-pgn17
will help 30H create a nedern conau-er adainietration aervica. [Text] [Daria
MRCIIIS TROPICAUX 31' mmmtm in French 29 Dec 78 p 35627 9330

(30: M00

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum

BRIEFS

0010}! ”AIME 823m LOAN-4 vaat project for draining rainwater ia going
to be carried out in Maputo, at a coat of about 200,000 contoa (86 million).
The atudy of the project began thie Septenber and a preliminary report ia

to be preaentad to the national Heterboerd this month. A tee- of Dutch tech-
niciana ie collaborating on' the project, which ia financed with the help of
the Dutch govern-eat. Conatruction work on the principal drainage canal.
which will go from a peripheral zone not far true the airport to Maputo Bay.
ie to be finiahed by July 1980. The object of the project ie to prevent, or
at leaat limit, flooda which each year during the rainy aeeaon ceuee great
danege to houaea and roada in Maputo and ita auburba. It will alao make it
poaaibla to uee rainwater to irrigate vegetable gardena in the euburba. Con-
atruction of new drainage ayate-a in already being carried out in two other
citiea in Hora-bique (Beira and Tote). In Beira, the project calla for ex-
tgnaive uge of rainwater to irrigate the rice paddy fielda of the region.
£133.57 LParia HARCIES TROPICAUX 81' mommm in French 29 Dec 78 p 35727
9330

WNW-IRAQ Am--Hozanbique haa juat eigned with Iraq a dewelopgent
agree-ant providing for new conercial and econo-ic exchangoe. ﬂax-37 [Paria
mas TROPIGAUX 31' mzmmmcs in French 29 Dec 78 p 35727 9330

WIN-WAIT AWHA development agreement has juat been eigned

between Mozambique and_xuwait;_it providea aid for an irrigation project in

the unpopo mm. [my Lam mucus moucmx 81' moms in
French 29 Dec 76 p 357g7 9330

(80: M00

53
V03 OI'PICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NIGERIA

BRIEFS

931801.81»! PRODUCTION—Nigeria'e petroleum production increaaed from
1.638.000 barrela/day in January 1978 (2.197.000 in January 1977) to
2.396.000 barrelalday in Dace-bar (1.852.000 in Decenber 1977). The
average for the year is a very respectable 1.907.000 barrela/dey con-
pared to 2.098.000 in 1977. The increase begun in April continued ateadily
to the end of the year. with the exception of a alight drop in October
which vae quickly recovered. The higher Deceaber figure nakea it poaaible
to predict. given the favorable international aituation. that 1979 produc-
tion nay reach the generally accepted figure of 2.7 nillion barrele/dey.
The Nigerian National Petroleum Coupany (NNPC). which controle all the
exploiting conpaniea. hea in fact authorized the: to increase production
reapectively by the following aaounta (barrela/day): Shell-bP-+90.000;
Gulf—465.000; Mobil-460.000: Agip and ELI-470.000. [Text] [Paria
HARCIIBS 110le 81‘ mum in trench 19 Jan 79 p 142]

680: 6600

510
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

SENEGAL

BRIEFS

FOURTH POLITICAL Pufﬁn-water. 9 Feb. WnSenegal today recognized the
country'e fourth political power. the rightwing Senegel Republican Novenent.
The party. led by lawyer loubacar Oueye. vaa founded in July 1977. It calla
for free enterpriee and the abolition of monopolies. Provioualy. only
three political etenda were allowed in Senegal: eocialien, repreeented by
the.party led by Preeident Leopold Seder Seashor; liberalian, repreeented
by the Senegal Democratic Party; end Hernia-minim. put forward by the
African Independence Party. The republican love-en: believea lettving
ideologiea cannot provide aolutione for the country's economic problem.

It advocatea a ainale currency for the Organization of African Unity

nenber countriee and cloaer cooperation with “traditional irienda"-

France. the United Statu. the nine-nation European Conon nerket and the
Arab etatee. [Text] [london ENTER in English 1711 GMT 9 Feb 79 PA]

050: “20

55
m OFFICIAL 083 ONLY