APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82~00080R0001000400484
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8412

20 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 22/ 79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Naterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT IAHS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas mm:
20 April 19

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(P000 22/79)
CONTENTS
ELI-IC‘I‘RONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

Microwave Radiation of the Surface of the Earth where
Vegetative CoVer Is Present

(K. P. Kirdycshev, et al.; RADIO‘I‘EKIINIKA I ELEK'l'RONIKA,
Feb 79) ..............................................

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS

Joint Meeting oE'Sectiona of Scientific Councils of the
State Comittee on Science and Technology and USSR
Academy of Sciences
(V. P. Trofiaov, K. s. Adzerikho; INZNENERNO-
l-‘iZiCllESKIY ZIIURNAL, Feb 79)

PUBLICATIONS

Magnetic Finids--Naturai Convection and Neat Exchange

(P. E. Fertmn; MAGNITNYYE ZNIDKOSTIHYBSTES‘NENNAYA
KON‘IEK'I‘SIYA I TEPLOOBHBN,1978) .......................

Automating the Design of Complex Logic Structures
(V. A . Gorbatov; AV‘I’OHATIZATSIYA PROYBKTIROVANIYA
SLOZIINYKII LOGICIIESK IIOI STRU'KTUR, I978) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Arithmetic Unite of Digital Co-putera
(C. N. Solov'ycv; ARIFIBTICNESKIYE USTROYS‘WA EVH, 1978)

Design of Functional Subaasembl ice for Digital Computers Uaing
Integrated Circuits
(KONSTRUIROVANIYE PUNKTS IONAL'NYRII UZWV EVH NA
IN’I‘BGRAL'NYKIISKNEHAIGI.1978).
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONrEN’l‘S (Cont inucd)

thcction of Ionizing deiation
(Ziysc Adbullovich Al'bikov, ct ol.; DETEKTORY
INPUL'SNOG) IONIZIRUYUSHCIIEOO IZLUCHBNIYA. 1978) .....

Neutron Methods of Analysing the Composition of Matter
(Yevsoniy Rostis lsvov ioh Ksrtoshcv. Aleksandr
Sorgoycvich ShCan' ; NBYTRONNYYB HE'I‘ODY NEPRERWNOOO
ANALIZA SOSTAVA VBSRCHBS‘NA. I978) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Particles in Plasma Research
(Yuriy Vladimirovich Cort; VZAIKJDEYs'l'VIYE CllAS'l'I‘l's 8
VBSIICHES'NOM V PLAZIENNYIO! ISSEDOVANIYAKH. 1973)

Holographic Methods, Equipment

(Yo. A. Antonov, ct al.; OPTICHESKAYA GODOGRAFIYA:
PRAK‘I‘ICKESKIYB PRDENBNIYA. 1978) .. ..................

Properties of Negative Iona and Associated Procesacs
(Boris Hikhaylovich Smirnov; OTRI‘I‘SARL'NYYB

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.396.962:550.35

MICROWAVE RADIATION OF THE SURFACE OF TNE EARTH "HERE VEGETATIVE COVER IS
PRESENT

Moscow RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLBKTRONIKA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 256-264

[Article by K.P. Kirdyashev. A.A. Chukhlantsev and A.M. Shutho, manuscript
received 27 Dec 77]

[Text] The results of experimental studies of the
spectra of the microwave radiation of the earth's
surface where vegetative cover is present are given.
The specific features of the microwave radiation
inherent in various types of vegetation are establish-
ed. Quantitativeastimates of the influence of vegeta-
tion on the radiation of the earth's surface are de-
rived. A relationship is ascertained between the
characteristics of the microwave radiation and certain
biometric parameters of the vegetation.

The need arises for the derivation of quantitative estimates of the shield-
ing influence of diverse types of vegetative covers, agricultural crops.
grasses. undergrowth. trees. etc.. in connection with the development of
microwave radiometric methods and equipment for the remote display of the
state of a auhjacent surface: the determination of soil humidity, the degree
of bogginess of terrain, its passahility. and the localization of centers

of forest fires [1-3].

Along with a study of the shielding influence. it is also of interest to
study the capability of determining some of the biometric characteristics

inherent in the vegetative cover: the biomass, height, etc., based on the
data of microwave radiation spectralsessurenents.

I. Some results of original experimental research in this field. conducted
at thclnstitute of Radioengineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of
Sciences over the period from 1965 to 1976. are presented in this paper.

The experiments were conducted at a permanent ground station. froa on board

aircraft and earth satellites in a broad range of wavelengths from 0.8 to
30 cm (see the table).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.03." .0333!- :.~onooolwo8: .z

“.30 Judd hum .Juém
E03»: .133: H9530 .32! 350m .0
"no: .0550»: zneulaoﬂnon: .m

“haul Jaugonuuuu—

.3": H9589 Janna nhqxnugvug
.38 ha...— Jmnnao anon—«.5 Joann—o 3080: .m

                 

ocean: hunch
.auuouOu $0.335 83:1..- 5.3%.:—

uucounou >32. .ou-oue $230.6

manage coo-auo .uuunno :ouuoz

2.3.8» £913 £250 :96

“sauces

.aucuﬂauanuoa vouon v9.9.8 anon—clue.—
«cowuanoaun 3933.

“—3300 one

no 3:393 038 a um x o 555333
300.506 3—qu— osu 50.6 9—93 33:30.30

43 I .383 cs: 25

     
               

locus < I033:

3.8.

 

.0
..U
.n

.<
.n

.~
4 £3.

.u 2.3 6390238.. 8: h

 

can-$388 .33 .395 .5: .H-muu< 55.6. .._ 82 {3.83. 8: o u
. CV N
|ll | ll|ll53l I'll |.||l M
«one: u Hum—5.30.: 32.. naughmo o... «I: .— 23 «A: m M
8 “8 _ «awaken ancouwou A3 2 m
. . >32. .333. «a: I C
s. .n .3.“ 55.. 5... . 3 4....
"9.... as .303 ”3:333: :5.ng Jﬁuﬂw .h .333. 6...": v m
g icon-n .5358 .238: 0
01:33.33 .155 in can.“ :30 c5... «HR—H R
.0: nan-850338.359 5.3: :39 «8609.82 6.. aha—Ink: .29.: n W
Nam .32..” u #3 :33 0 an! H aid
.3»: g .31: :39 5238.82 0F. Smawmmoﬂ ..ﬁ= N

 

  

   

    

nun-Bee .393.— noun-2:

god-nouns
hvsum no 30030

.190 Ila—9.9.00: A<¥a§ OI

    

  

gotta-loan
Iii-Kg SISQL

:u 30:) £3qu“

canon-63!.

Fun...— 3:05.39.»

in “$783

«no: once-«=99

egg in I cloak...»
and». vs... 23.3.2300 Hauuom
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The values of the brightness temperatures and emissivities were estimated
taking into account internal calibration standards. as well as on the basis
of the radio brightness gradient of a smooth water surface with a known

water temperature. as well as for sections of thick forest. The emissivity
of a water surface was determined from the Fresnel formulas, while the emis-
sivity of the calibrating forest sections was taken equal to unity. The
error in the measurements of the brightness temperatures amounted to 5-15' K.

Measurements of the microwave radiation of ground covers demonstrated that
the influence of vegetation on the radiation of the earth's surface is de-
termined by the type of vegetative cover and its condition. The parameters
which determine the radiation level are: the emissivity of the ground surface.
the factors of radiation reflection and transmittance by the vegetation. and
the degree of coverage of the ground surface by the vegetation. The specific
radiation features inherent in different types of vegetative covers arise as
a consequence of the differing ratio of the magnitudes of these parameters.
Depending on the nature and degree of influence of the vegetation on the
radiation of the earth's surface. the following types of vegetative covers
can be differentiated: a) agricultural crops in the early stages of vege-
tation, spike and grass covers; b) "broad leaf“ agricultrual crops (sun-
flowers, corn, beets. etc.): c) underbrush and forest vegetation.

Characteristic radiation spectra are presented in the paper as applied to
these types of vegetative covers and the corresponding attenuation levels
are eveluatcd. Examples of the recordings of the brightness temperatures
T3 of the ground surface are shown in Figure 1, which are characteristic for
the indicated types of vegetation. The spectral curves of the emissivity
r(A) of the discriminated areas are shown in Figure 2.

The data of the measurements. which are shown in Figure la, were obtained
from experimental fields of the Yenisey hydrological station by means of the
radiometric complex installed on-board an IL-lh aircraft. A comparison of
the radiation spectra for a field of winter rye with a height of 20-25 cm
and plowed ground with a value of soil moisture close to that of the rye
(based on data of ground observations. the soil humidity for both fields
amounted to 27..)01) shows that the influence of this type of vegetation

is substantial in the centimeter band (Figure 2a). The noted increments

in the level of the emissivity due to the influence of vegetation amount to
0.05-0.l$. In the decimeter band, the radiation of areas with vegetation
differs little from the radiation of the open soil. An analysis of the
radiation spectra of grass vegetation, covering a pasture (Figure la). forest
giadea and cut over areas (Figure 1c). as well as the boggy regions of the
ground surface (Figure 1d). shows that the influence of grassy vegetation

is likewise manifest primarily in the centimeter region of the spectrum and
little at decimeter wavelengths.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

see-eaten", ,,

Figure l. Heaeples of the recordings of the brightness temperatures
of the earth's surface where vegetation is present:

I).

d.

.e

Area of nixed forest (T), winter rye (II), plowed lend (III)
and pasture (IV) at wavelengths of 2.25 cl (1), 10 on (2)
and 30 cl (3); .

corn fields with dry (I) and Ioiat (II) soil. dry psature
(III) and sunflower fields on dry soil (IV) at wavelengths
of 3.10 c- (l) 10 ca (2) and 30 on (3):

Forested terrain in the Krasnoyarak trey. including coni—
ferous and nixed forest (I), flooded regions (II) [sic]-
boggy areas (III) and a lake (IV), at wavelengths of 2.25 ca.
(1). 10 on (2) and 30 CI (3).

The boggy lol'ehoy Khingan region in the Par last (I) and
Siberian forest (II) at wevelengvha of 3.4 en (1) and

8.5 c- (2);

The Sahara Desert (I) and the boggy region of the Upper
Nile (II) at wavelengths of 1.35 c. (l). 3.6 cl (2) and

8.5 ca (3).

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(b)

  

I :0 ecu
(«0‘

Figure 2. Spectral curves of the emissivity
of various types of vegetative

covers:
a. A field of winter rye (II) and as (c) +
a plowed field (III): \

b. Corn on dry (I) and (II) soil.
dry (III) and moist (III')
plowed fields:
c. Flooded forest (II in Figure 1c).
a. M’s
A study of the radiation spectra of broad leaf crops was carried on the
irrigated fields of the Crimean oblest (Figure lb). A distinctive feature
of the radiation spectra of such crops is the reduction in the emissivity
level with a shortening of the wavelength. A change in soil humidity has
practically no effect on the emissivity of a cornfield in the centimeter
region of the spectrum and exerts a marked influence in the decimater re-
gion (Figure 2b). This fact indicates the complete shielding of the soil
radiation by the vegetation in the centimeter band (the height of the corn
is l.5-2 m). A lower value of the emissivity of a cornfield with dry soil
for short wavelengths, as compared to longer wavelengths. can be explained
by the increasing influence of the reflective properties of broad leaf vege-
tation with the shortening of the electromagnetic wavelength.

An investigation of the radiative characteristics of forest showed that thick
forest masses on dry soil are characterized by the greatest emissivity, which
is close to unity in the frequency range studied. An idea of the shielding
properties of forest vegetation can be obtained from a consideration of the
radiation spectra of a flooded pine forest (Figures It and 2c). Based on

the data of ground observations and aerial photographs, the underlying surface
under the trees was flooded with water in the amount of 60-801. As follows
froo Figure 2c, in the centimeter band. the emissivity is close to unity.
something which indicates the cosplete shielding of the radiation of the
underlying surface by the forest canopy. The observed spectral dependence

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

of the radiation intensity in the decimater band attests to the "semitrans-
paruncy" of the canopy for decimater wavelengths. The spectral features
noted here for the radiation of forest regions, which are characterised by
a high level of moisture in the subjaeent surface, were observed when re-
cording the microwave radiation of the earth from the "Kansas-263" and
"Kosmos-38b" satellitrs (Figure 1e).

A comparison of the radiation spectra of a ground surface with grass and
forest vegetation shows that these two types of covers have spectral curves
for the emissivity which are close. and are characterized by a monotonic
reduction in the emissivity with an increase in wavelength. A substantial
difference between these types of vegetation consists in the extent of the
shielding influence. which is considerably greater for forest vegetation.
This is clearly manifest in the analysis of the radiation spectra of boggy
areas with an emissivity of the subjacent surface close to the emissivity
of water (Figure lc. d. e). Such studies show that the forest cover com-
pletely shields the radiation of the subjacent surface at (Intimater wave-
lengths and leads to an increase in the emissivity of the *forest-water
surface" system in the decimeter range up to 0.8-—0.9. Grass cover proves
to be semitranaparent throughout the entire range of frequencies which were
studied (the increases in the emissivity amount to 0.l-0.6).

2. Based on the data of the experimental studies which were carried out,
quantitative estimates were obtained for the levels of attenuation of the
microwave radiation for the indicated types of vegetative covers.

The characteristics of the attenuation in a layer of vegetation of the
winter rye type were determined from a comparison of the emissivity of areas
with vegetation and the emissivity of plowed ground with close values of
soil moisture content (Figure 2a). The integral attenuation of the radia-
tions 1 can be expressed in terms of the emissivity of an area with vegeta-
tion x and plowed ground rI, neglecting reflection from the vegetation:

 

' i 1"“.
(l) t 7h 1-);

where r - l -Re‘2'; x. - l - R; R is the factor for radiation reflection

from the soil. The integral attenuation in winter rye, obtained from measure-
ment data, amounts to'0.05-0.3 nepers (Figure 3) (estimates of the error in
the determination of 1 due to the difference in temperature and moisture con-
tent of the fields studied in the given experiment show that the size of the
error does not exceed 0.05 neper).

To interpret the results of measuring the emissivity of broad leaf crops
(Figure 2b), it is necessary to account for the effects of reflection from
the vegetation. In this case, the emissivity of the cover should be con-
sidered in the form [2]:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

x-xd' (‘_n)10+1‘45x0.

(2)

where K0 is the emissivity of the vegetation layer: q and

 

“a- l -q '7.

9
i-rR'

r are the

transmittance and reflection factors for the vegetation radiation. The
parameters q and r for broad leaf crops. in particular. for corn, can
be found from a comparison of the emissivities for a corn field and plowed
areas having close values of soil moisture content (Pigure 2b):

(1)

no‘ "4“) R .(l-m)
"W )—R. (f—Xglf.’

(1.) q_[(x.-X.)(l- lt.r)(l— 41!) "-

R.-If.

where :1 and :2 are the measured values of the emissivity of the corn field
with dry and with moist soils; R1 and R2 are the radiation reflection factors

r um
' ’ 1, ncpers

 

0 10

20 41, (It

Figure 3. The spectral
curve of the integral ut-
ienuntion of the radiation
by winter rye based on
experimental data (1) for
area ll in Figure la, and
that calculated for values
of 0m - 40 quintals/hectare
(2) and QI - 70 quintels/
[hectare (3), where Q is
the biomass and m is the
moisturr content by weight.

from dry and moist soil. defined in terms of
the measured values of the emissivity of
ploed ground x'l 2 - 1 - R1 2. Based on the
measurement data, the size of the reflection
factor does not exceed 0.1, while the trans-
mittance factor varies within limits of 0.3-
0.8 (Figure 6).

Based on the radiation spectrum of flooded
forests (Figure 2c). it proves to be possible
to deter-inc the integral attenuation in the
canopy. The difference between the emissivity
and unity in the centimeter band is determined
by the presence of "gaps" in the vegetation.
The emissivity of the cover where gaps are
present in the vegetation can be expressed as

[2]:
(5) ""‘”¢"'-RE(I-e")(t-te"+2e~').

where E is the relative area of the gaps. In
the case of considerable absorption. 1 >> 1,

the difference between the emissivity and unity
is determined by the quantity R52. To esti-
mate R, it is convenient to consider the
graphical function: ln(1 - x) as a function of
l/x, where A is the wavelength. Based on the

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtained values of R = 0.3 and C e 0.35. values of the integral attenuation
in the canopy for deciseter wavelengths were detersined from (5). where
these values varied within a range of 0.5-l.5 nepers (Figure 5). it

sluuild he noted that the quantity c. taken as a constant in the calculations.
generally speaking depends on the radiation wavelength because of the fact
that for wavelengths comparable with the geometric dimetzions of the gaps.
diffraction effects appear. Establishing the relationship of the radiative
characteristics to the degree of coverage of the earth's surface by vegeta-
tion requires further research.

3. He shall consider the relationship between the quantities obtained for

the attenuation and the biometric parameters of the vegetation, and in this
case. we shall work from the expression derived in paper [3] for the integral
radiation attenuation in s vegetation layer with elesents in the fore of small
disks and cylinders:

(a) «algkwvanmamo.

where u - l and u - 2 for cylinders and disks respectively; k - ZIIA is
the wave nuaber; V and N are the voluae of n vegetation element and the
number of them per unit volume; G is the volumetric moisture content of

an element of vegetation; c3 is the imaginary part of the complex dielectric
permittivity of water; h is the height of the vegetative cover; and 0 is
the viewing angle.

Expression (6) can be reduced to the

form:
(7) 1- 23+?. ~10"Q[a/¢a]ma.'.

which relates the attenuation to the
biometric parameters of the vegetation:
the biomass Q (equal to the mass of
vegetation referenced per unit of area)
and the moisture content by weight a,
defined by the ratio of the weight of
water contained in the vegetation to
the weight of the dry vegetation.
Experhaental values of the attenuation
in the types of vegetation which were
studied are compared in Figures 3-5
with the calculated values, coaputed

in accordance with expression (7) for

 

Figure 4. The spectral dependence
of the reflection factor (1) and
the transmittance factor (2 and
2') for corn.

I, 2: “used on experimental data the nodal of cylinders (the transmit-
(urens l and ii in Figure tance factors q (Figure 4) are con-
Ib); pared with the calculated values a -

2': Calculation results for values . e“). The quantities for the
at Q” - 600 quintallhectarc.

5
son OFFICIAL use outr
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

biomass and moisture content used in the calculations were taken from
ground observation data.

fun”, r. nepers he follows from Figure 3-5. the calculated
1 values satisfactorily agree with the ex-
perimental ones. The observed differences
can be explained by the approximate nature
\ of the model assumptions which were adopted
\ as regards the shape and nature of the
*J spatial distribution of the elements of
\ the vegetative cover. In the general case.
3 ‘£ when interpreting the data of radiophysical
measurements. it is likewise necessary to
take into account the relationship between
0 U 20 A,“ the fractions of the biomass included in
. . _ the quasichaotic portion (leaves) and in
znﬁgrzf5th:h:n::::::.:c:::32d the oriented elements (stems, trunks) of
ntlon of radiation by a forest the vegetative cover. The contribution of

“ these components depends on the angular co-
522291;)bazgdagzuezgeitmental ordinates of the sounding direction.

Figure lc. and that calcu-
lated for a value of On -
- 700 quintel/hectarc (2).

Expression (7) can be employed for esti-
mate calculations of the radiation attenu-
ation in vegetative covers.

Based on the values obtained for the attenuation. the influence of vege-
tation on the radiation of the cover was quantitatively determined. This
influence is characterized by the quantity B:

An 9'
‘8’ '3?" (Ham-m7)"

expressed as the ratio of the change in the emissivity of the cover Or to
the change in the reflective properites of the surface AR. Hhen measuring
the moisture content of soils by microwave radiometry l6]. 8 has the mean-
ing of the coefficient for the reduction in the slope of the radiation-
moisture content curve 6T3 - 8f(AH), where H is the soil moisture content.
Values of a for the types of vegetation studied are shown in figure 6 and
vary in the centimeter band within a range of 0-0.6. and in the decimeter
band. within a range of 0.3-l.0.

The dependence of the shielding influence as function of the state of the
vegetation in various stages of growth should also be noted. The indicated
curves were derived for the case where the microwave radiation of cotton
fields in Central Asia were studied. The measurements were performed from
on-board an AN-Z aircraft at a wavelength of 18 cm. A comparison of the

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USl-I ONLY

emissivity of a cotton field with s plowed area, close in terms of soil
moisture content, shows that in step with the growth of the cotton plants,
their shielding influence increases (Figure 7). when the cotton height
increases iron 60 em up to l m, the size of 6 changed from 0.9 to 0.75.

 

Figure 6. The spectral depend-
ence of the coefficient for
the reduction in the slope of
the radiation-moisture content
curve where a winter rye type
of vegetative cover is present
(1) as well as for corn (2)
and forest (3).

 

I
no (runs ' 5
Jay Sept‘e’nber

Figure 7. The increase in
emissivity of a cotton field
above the radiation of plowed
ground (1) and the cotton plant
height (2) during the experi-
sent.

Cbnciuaions. l. The experimental studies which were performed ascertained
the specific features in the microwave radiation spectra of ground cover,
which are inherent in the specific types and states of the vegetation.

2. A comparison of the experimental data with the results of the model
calculations, which take into account the biometric and electrophysicsl
indicators of the corresponding types of vegetation, allowed for the deri-
vntion of quantitative estimates of the attenuation and reflection of elec
tronagnetie waves by the vegetation in a range of 0.8-30 ca.

1. Quantitative estimates were derived for the shielding effect of the vege-
tation on the radiation spectrum of the subjscent surface. in particular,
the values of the coefficients for the reduction in the slope of the radi-
ation-moisture content curve were determined.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. The presence of a correlation was ascertained between the characteristics
of the microwave radiation and the biometric indicators of the vegetation
(biomass. height. moisture content). something which indicates the basic
capability of obtaining certain estimates of biometric indicators from the
results of radiometric measurements.

The authors would like to express their gratitude to A.Ye. Bashnrinov for
his constant interest in this work and the discussion of the results.

ﬂIBLIOGRAPﬂY
l. A.Ye. linsharinov, l..'l'. Tuehkov, V.N. Polyakov. NJ. linanov. "Izmereniye
rndiuteplovykh i plnzmennykh izlucheniy v SVCh-dinnazone" ("The Measurement

of Rndiothermnl and Plasma deiations in the Microwave Band"]. Sovetskoye
Radio Publishers, I968.

2. A.Ye. Bashorinov, A.S. Curvich, 8.1. Yegornv. "Radioizlucheniye Zenli

kak Planety" l"The hadio Emission of the Earth and Planets"]. Nauka
Publishers, l97b.

3. L.F. Borodin. K.P. Kirdyozhev. Yu.P. Stoknnkin. A.A. Chukhlantsev,
RADIOTBKHNIKA l ELEKTRONIKA, 1976. 31. 9, 1955.

a. Mo. Bashsrinov. mu. Shutko, METEOROLOGIYA r cmaowcm, 1971.
9, n.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Nauks." "Radiotekhnika i elektroniks." 1979

8225
050:1870

1!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OPEICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENTISTS AND SCIENTIPIC ORGANIZATIONS

JOINT MEETING OF SECTIONS OF SCIENTIFIC COUNCILS OF THE STATE COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND USSR ACADEMY OF SCIENCES

Minsk INZHENERNO-FIZICNESKIY ZHURNAL in Russian. V 36 No 2, Feb 79.
pp 372-373

[Article by V. P. Trofimov and K. S. Adterikhol

[Text] A Joint session of the section "neat Exchange by Radiation" of the
Scientific Council on the problem "Mass Transfer and heat Transfer in Tech-
nological Processes" of the State Committee of the Council of Ninisters
USSR on Science and Technology and the heat and mass exchange section of
the Scientific Council on the "Complex Problem 'Thermal Physics' of the

AS USSR" was held 6-7 April 1978 in Minsk.

TVo of the problems discussed were:

1. Present state of the problem and basic trends of development of methods
of mathematical modelling of radiation and complex heat exchange in
technological processes.

2. Proposals of the commission on development of a mathematical model of
a forest fire.

R. l. Soloukhin. chairman of the Council of Directors of [THO [Institute of
Heat and Mass Exchange] imeni A. V. Lykov of the AS BSSR. Corresponding
Member of the AS USSR opened the conference. Corresponding Member of the
AS USSR 3. S. Petukhov and Doctor of Technical Sciences A. G. Blokh, chair-
men of the sections indicated above conducted the work of the conference.

Problem addresses on the first problem described the contemporary state and
means of further development of methods of mathematical modelling of heat
exchange by radiation in the real spectrum (V. c. Sevast'yanenko). mathemat-
ical methods of solving problems of radiative-conduction heat exchange

(A. A. Kobyshev) and methods of mathematical modelling of radiation heat
exchange in metallurgical heat engineering (A. s. Nevskiy, V. G. Lisiyenko).

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Several upenkerr discussed mathematical modelling of optical characteristics
of molecular gases (V. c. Sevast'yansnko. R. I. Soloukhin and l. P. Galo-
vlyev) and methods of calculation of their radiation based on modelling of
the spectral composition (Yu. V. Khodyko). There was considerable interest
in a report concerning mathematical modelling of complex heat exchange with
consideration of the spectrum of products of combustion. scattering and re-
(iectlon of flows for a plane layer in which a selectively absorbing, radia-
ting and scattering medium is moving (5. P. Detkov and o. A. Khalevich).

For solution of a problem of hypersonic flow around a blunt body by a radia-
ting gas in the presence of intense vaporization of the frontal surface

there was used a gas dynamic model of flow of a non-viscous gas with consider-
ation of its optical characteristics in the shock wave and products of evap-
oration (V. I. Hirskiy and V. I. Stulov).

(Me report (I. R. Hikk) presents methods of measurement and processing of
experimental data in studies of complex heat exchange.

There were presented results of studies conducted by a collective of authors
(K. s. Adzerikho. V. l. Nekrasov. V. P. Trofimov and others) on modelling
problems of radiant heat exchange in media of plane geometry and an algorithm
of calculation of spectroscopic characteristics for a finite cylinder.

Mathematical modelling of radiation properties of surfaces and their use in
calculations of heat exchange by radiation. including radiation with consid-
eration of anisotropy. was the subject of several reports (L. N. Ryshkov.

S. P. Ruain. V. D. Dmitriyev. S. G. Arababov and others) which produced great
interest among conference participants.

The reported results of application of mathematical modelling of radiation
and complex heat exchange in electric circuits (Yu. H. Ageysv and others)
were considered to be quite important. These speakers emphasized the pros-
pects of use of electromodelling for these purposes on the basis of modern
electrical engineering devices and computer technology.

A theoretical study (Yu. A. Surinov. L. B. lonomareva) described the use of
a third form of the generalized tonal method for the most general statement
of a problem concerning radiant heat exchange in a rectangular multizonsl
chamber of random length. filled by a heterogeneous absorbing and scattering
medium.

More precise definition of individual parameters of the zonal method of cal-
culation of radiation of triatomic gases and coke particles based on generali-
zation of experimental data permitted recommendations for calculating heat
exchange by radiation in furnaces of boiler units (V. V. Vitor. I. I. Kopo-
pel'ko and L. V. Latysheva).

There were reports concernin° analytical and numerical methods of calculation
of radiation conduction heat exchange as applied to elements of elsetro-vscuum

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

devices. the use of which permits rather rapid production of necessary infor-
mation concerning their thermal state (V. s. Koshelev. c. H. Tsymbalov and
V. l. Shevstov).

Decrees adopted by the section emphasized the urgency and great importance
of further development of physical and mathematical bases of modelling pro-
cesses of radiation and complex heat exchange. analytical methods of the
theory of radiation heat exchange. mathematical modelling of optical char-
acteristics of gas media and radiation properties of construction materials
of surfaces of assemblies and also development of studies in mathematical
modelling of radiation and complex heat exchange in respect to specific tech-
nological processes and industrial apparatus (metallurgy furnaces. tubular
furnaces of the petrochemical industry. combustion fireboxes of steam gener-
ators and others). There was recognised the benefit of beginning standard-
ised methods of heat design for basic types of some assemblies (including
metallurgical furnaces).

There is noted the necessity of further development of zonal methods of cal-
culation of heat exchange by radiation in metallurgical furnaces. tubular
furnaces of the petrochemical industry. fireboxes of heat engineering as-
semblies and others with consideration of combustion processes.

At some sections. it was noted that an important problem for development of
mathematical models of radiation and complex heat exchange is their coordin-
ation with real technological processes.

Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences A. N. Grishin discussed. in
relation to the second problem. a conference involving a temporary committee
on development of a mathematical model of a forest fire.

Presently existing models of forest fires describe either individual forms of
fires or individual aspects of this phenomenon without considering the entire
complex of the processes occurring which have a significant effect on it.

As a result of discussion of preliminary materials. there was proposed a
physical and mathematical model. developed on the basis of the mechanics of
the reacting media. A positive distinction between it and other models is
that. in it. there are taken into consideration basic physical and chemical
processes. arising during forest fires and its mathematical description
involves the laws of conservation of energy. momentum and mass. The model
proposed considers the effect of atmospheric processes. the type of forest
vegetation. structure and types of combustible materials and the topographi-
cal characteristics of the locality.

Approving the work of the temporary committee. the sections approved the
proposals of the committee for mathematical modelling of a forest fire.

A continuation of work on improvement of data and the creation of particular
models for the purpose of practical application of them for development
of methods and means of extinguishing forest fires was recommended.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Organizational neasures for practical checking of scientific research in
this area were proposed. ,

The problems discussed created greet interest. There were in attendance 77
npeciniists (including 2 corresponding seebers of the As USSR. 21 with Doctor
of Science degrees and Al with Candidate of Science degrees. representing

66 scientific research organisations and colleges of the country. (TsKTI
[Central Scientific-Research Design and Construction Institute for Boiler
Turbines]. ERIN [Power Engineering Institute i-eni c. H. Krzhizhanovskiy].
IVTAN [USSR Acedeey of Sciences Institute of High Temperatures]. ITHO of

the BSSR Acedeey of Sciences. ITTF AN 888R. Institute of Philosophy of the
BSSR Academy of Sciences. VNIIHT [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of
Metallurgy and ﬂeet Technology]. HEIIHoscow Power Engineering Institute].
etc.) 0

COPYRIGHT: "Inzhenerno-fizicheskiy shurnsi." 1979

2791
C80: 1870

15

FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIORS

MAGNETIC PLUIDS-NATURAL CONVECTION AND HEAT EXCRANOE

Minsk MAGNITNYYE Z"IDKOSTI--YESTESTVENNAYA KONVEKTBIYA I TEPLOOBHEN in Russian
1918 signed to press 6 Jul 78 pp 2-h, 205-206

[Annotation. table of contents and introduction from book by P. 3. Port-an.
Isdatel*stvo "ﬂanks i Tekhnika." 1.100 copies. 208 pp]

[Text] This book discusses the main methods of synthesizing magnetic fluids
and their physical properties. Original results from studies of convective
heat exchange in magnetic fluid layers of various configurations located in
sonhomo‘zeneous magnetic fields are presented. The rapid development of the
thermomechanics of magnetic fluids. at the interface letween mechanics and
electrodynanics of continua. has been accompanied by extensive incorporation
of the new material. magnetic fluid. into industry. The publication of these
results will acquaint a vide range of specialists with the properties of
magnetic fluids and may expand their use.

The book is intended for scientific personnel and engineers dealing with
thermophysics. fluid mechanics and heat engineering. and may be used by col-
lege students.

Tables. 3; illustrations. 51; bibliography. 187 items.

Contents Page
Porevord 3
Important symbols 5

Chapter 1. Preparation and Properties of Magnetic Pluids............... S
The magnetic fluid: an artificially created medium. . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Methods of preparing magnetic fluids............................. 16
Static magnetic properties......................................- 27
Electrical properties............................................ ho

Viscosity........................................................ b3

iieat conductivity and heat capacity.............................. 51
Applications of sagnetic fluids 55
Magnetic fluids. a promising potential heat carrier.............. 61

HPHE‘HHHH
O-IQUIE’U'OH

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter 2. Main Equations in the Thermomechanics of Magnetic F1uidu..... 6h
2.1 Conservation laws in continua..................................... 6h
2.2 The quasiatationary isotropic model............................... 69
2.3 Kinetics of magnetization......................................... 81
2.5 Thermomechanical equations with allowance for internal rotation... 85

Chapter 3. Convective heat Exchange in Magnetic Fluids.................. 95

3.1 Conditions for convective stability of a nonisothermic magnetic

fluid...o.u.o.o.n.u...........no.....uo.u.noo...o..u.... 95
3.2 Convective instability with magnetic field disturbance............ 100
3.3 A vertical layer heated from the side in a magnetic field with

a constant vertical intensity gradient.......................... 113
3.h Effect of a constant horizontal intensity gradient on heat

exchange in a vertical 1ayer.................................... 118
3.5 heat exchange in annular layers in magentic fields with a

variable intensity gradient..................................... 126
3.6 heat convection in a vertical layer in the magnetic field of

a current-carrying sheet........................................ ihh
3.1 heat exchange under forced convection............................. 152

Appendix 1. The Effect of Asymmetric Properties on Natural Convection
of a Magnetic Pluid.................................................... 160

Appendix 2. Methods for Numerical Solution of Problems in Convective
Heat Exchange of Magnetic Fluids....................................... 11?

Bibliography 192

Foreword

The development of modern engineering has been accompanied by the search for
and development of new working media which make possible effective use of
power production equipment and the development of original industrial processes
and equipment designs. 0n the other hand, scientific research in energy (heat)
and mass transport has been aimed at establishing interconnections between
relatively independent processes. This tendency was noted by A. V. Lyhov in
the early 60's. In particular. the study of the interaction between electro-
magnetic fields and fluid and gaseous media has been especially fruitful.

In the last decade. the attention of a wide range of investigators has been
drawn to a new industrial material. the magnetic fluid. whose interaction with
an external magnetic field is governed by its powerful magnetic properties.
The study of this interaction is the province of what is called ”ferrohydro-
dynamics". It expands the traditional range of magnetohydrodynamics and is
located at the interface between continuum mechanics and electrodynamics.

In view of the interrelationship between the temperature conditions of a medium
and the electrodynamic interaction between the magnetic fluid and a field, we

17
have related the questions discussed in this book to the thormomechanics of
aagnetic fluids. Primary attention has been devoted to identifying the nature
of nonvective heat exchange in magnetic fluids, but at the same time much
information on the physical properties of these fluids has been presented and
an attempt has been made to systematize theoretical models.

Naturally. in an introductory work such as this many important questions have
been left out of the discussion. But the author hopes that the book will help
the reader to form a rather complete conception of the development of this
relatively problxm in fluid dynamics.

Materials prepared by V. K. Rakhubn and N. P. Matuscvich were used in the pre-
paration of section 1.2. materials prepared by Y. 0. Bashtov and I. Pavlinovn
in section 3.2. materials by A. M. Vislovich in Appendix 1. and materials by
V. K. Polovikov in Appendix 2. B. E. Isshevskiy took part in the writing of
Chapter 2.

The author expresses his gratitude to all the above comrades for their work.
The author is deeply grateful to Dr. of Physical and Mathematical Sciences

3. M. aerkavskiy. who proposed the idea of writing this book. for hi: constant
interest and scientific assistance.

COPYRIORT: Isdatel'stvo "Ranks 1 Tekhnika". 1978

83:80
C80: 1870

18
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-Z “NLY

l‘1llﬂ.‘ CATIONS

AUTGMTING THE DESIGN 0? C01?ka LOGIC STRUCTURES

Moscow AVTGIM'IZA‘I‘SIYA PROYEKTIROVANIYA SLOZHNYIOI LOGICHESKIKR STRUKTUR in
Rusnian 1978 signed to press 10 Oct 78, pp 2, 351-352

[Annotation and table of contents from book edited by V. A. Gorbatov, Ener-
giye. 352 pages, 7000 copies]

[Tcxtl NOTATION

This book is devoted to automating the designing of logic structures from
specified integrated modules based on existing programs that automatically
take into account the design semantics of realizable transformations. This
lakes it possible to work out an otpimum strategy for the automated design
of high-quality complex logic structures. Realization of such program! is
achieved by using the proposed software. nanely, the system for interpret-
ing Boolean logic (SIBUL). Examples are given for implementing logic struc-
tures using multifunctional adaptive modules used in industrial automation.

The book will be useful to specialists who are working on automating the
design of numerical control systems, as wall. as for graduates and students
of the appropriate specialties.

CONTENTS Page
Preface 3
Introduction 5

chapter l.’ The Problem of Creating an Automated System for
Designing Logic Strut turcs

1.1 Structure of an automated system of design using pro- 7
gram modules
1.2 Notation (or frequency arrays of relationships 13
1.3 Choice of algorithm in designing a routine 19
1.6 Subjective interpretation of a routine 28
1.5 A frequency-minimal covering algorithm 30
1.6 Formalizing the routine by using algorithmic language 39
1.7 Designing the module $0
19

FOR ()l-‘FICIM. USE ONLY
FOR Ill-‘FICHI. USE ONLY

Chapter 2. A System for Interpreting Boolean Logic
2.1 Methodology for computer design of logic structures
2.2 SIBUL. a system for interpreting Boolean logic
2.3 Dynamic allocation of memory
2.6 Operation with files

Chapter 3. Computer Minimization of Boolean Functions
3.1 Approximate structural minimization of Boolean functions
3.2 Modules that make possible the formulation of a list of
maximal intervals
Modules of equivalent transformations of Boolean func-
tions
Modules of a supervisory and dispatching routine

Simultaneous minimization of a system of Boolean func-
tions

UU U
.o .
usa- U

Chapter 6. Computer Construction of Structural Diagrams
4.1 Diagram and properties of quasi-equalities
4.2 Transitive orientation of diagrams of quasi-equality
6.3 Optimising functionals in the construction of struc-
tural diagrams
4.6 The "structure" routine

Chapter 5. A Structural-Compositional Design of Logic Systems
Using Computers
5.1 Structural algebra
5.2 Strict symbolic representation of structural algebra
S.) The "K-diagram" routine

Chapter 6. A Structurel-Decompositional Design of Logic

6.1 Inverse operation of structural diagrams
A frequency-matrix discrimination of lo diagrams
Decomposition of structural diagrams into to subdia-
grams
Functional decomposition of structure diagrams
Dendritic realization of coalgebrs diagrams
Automated design of logic structures for industrial
application
.7 Characteristic controls in automated design systems

UN

0‘ @0‘0 3‘0
. s .
ama-

Bibliography
Alphabetical index

COPYRIGHT: lzdatcl'stvo 'Qnorgiya," 1978

6948
C80: 1870

20

F0“ OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

ARITIIMETIC UNITS OF DIGITAL COMPUTERS

Moscow ARlFHETICUBSKlYE USTROYSTVA EV“ in Russian 1978. signed to press
23 Aug 78, pp 1-6, 177

[Annotation. Introduction. and table of contents from book by c. N. Solov'yev.
Energiya. 15,000 copies. 177 pages]

[Text] ANNOTATION

This book explores problems of designing arithmetic units used in existing
and newly designed digital computers. Number systems and means for repre-
senting numbers are presented. with a great deal of attention paid to the
methods of implementing arithmetic operations using both fixed- and floating-
point arithmetic. Design questions are treated in the book by presenting
information on registers. summers. arithmetic unit circuits of various types.
methods for controlling transmissions. arithmetic and logic transfer-s. and
so forth.

The book is intended for a wide circle of specialists occupied with questions
of designing and applying digital computers. as well as for students in the
fields of design and application of digital computers.

INTRODUCTION

Of all tasks related to the theory and design of digital computers during the
30 years of their existence. the established and most stable have been the
foundations of theory and design of devices that implement the arithmetic and
logic transforaations of binary information.

The present publication is devoted to this topic. The book reflects an
attempt to present that material which has been filtered out by the 30-year
period of existence of digital computers. Accordingly. the entire content of
the book is oriented exclusively to the binary system of numbers and in dis-
cussing the theoretical foundations only those aethods are considered that
have found use in digital computers of the second and third generation and
about which there is no doubt as to their use continuing into future genera-
tions as well. Such an approach is characteristic for both circuit and sys-
tcn design questions considered in this book.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR ill-'FIIIIAI. USE ONLY

The vntlro content of the book represents the results of the desire of the
author to present material from general points of view without extraneous
details. particularly in circuits of the devices considered. and not from
the point of view of a specific digital computer.

In choosing material. the author has attempted to give an integrated presen-
tation on questions related to the topic under consideration. Within the
framework of a single publication and along with the traditional arithmetic
foundations. the registers and summers. and the methods of increasing the
speed of performing operations of multiplication and division. the following
are considered:

The foundations underlying the operation of arithmetic units in a parallel.
sequential. and sequential-parallel operation for numbers with fixed- and
floating-point representation;

Control of the operation of the ariumntic units. where the main attention
is turned to the direct and continuous control of problems. arithmetic and
logic transformations. modulo 2:

Dynamic storage and shift registers;
The foundations of representation. arithmetic operations on numbers in the

binary-decimal system of numbers. basic questions of implementing tabular
arithmetic. rounding the results of arithmetic operations on numbers with
fixed- and floating-point representation. and a number of other specific
questions of arithmetic foundations that find broad application in digital
computers of the third generation.

All the material in the book. particularly Chapter 6. is designed for use of
integrated circuits. Basic questions of integrated circuit technology illu-
minated in Chapters 1 and 3. in which the logical foundations are given in
terms of volume necessary for the formal description of algorithms for arith-
metic and logical transformation as well as circuits for the basic components
of arithmetic units. free the reader from the need to turn to specialized
literature in studying and becoming familiar with the present book.

Obviously. a book that reflects such complex questions is quite limited in
scope and necessarily has to be short and laconic in the presentation of a

number of topics. The reader has to judge as to what extent it has been pos-
sible to achieve the above-presented ideas.

in the author's opinion. the present book will be useful for students in the
specialty of electronic computers as well as for specialists working in the

field of computing technology.

The author would like to express his gratitude to the instructors of the
electronic computer faculty of the Moscow engineering physics institute.
whose practical comments have led to the formulation of the present book and
to his colleagues on the faculty for the great help in preparing the manu-
script for publication.

22

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I UNLY
FUR ”Fl-'HZIAI. INF 0le

CONTENTS

Introduc t ion

Chapter
[.1
1.2

2.3

2.8
Chapter
3.1
3.2

Chapter

1. Elements of the Foundations of Logic

Elementary logic functions

Functionally complete systems of elementary logic
functions

Elementary equivalences

Representation of logic algebra functions in various
number bases

2. Arithmetic Foundations

Number systems

Choosing the number system

Conversion of numbers between number systems
Methods of representing numbers

Arithmetic operations on numbers with fixed radix
point in a binary number system

Arithmetic operations with numbers represented by
floating-point radix in a binary number system
Arithmetic operations in a binary-decimal system of
numbers

Hethods of rouMing results of arithmetic operations

J. Fundamental Concepts of Digital Computer Elements
Types and systems of elements
Examples of possible systems of elements

Io. Registers and Sumers. the Basic Subassemblies of

Arithmetic Units

6.1
6.2

Chapter
and
5.1
5.2
5.3

5.6

M
o

U‘Ul
‘10 U‘

s 0

Storage and shift registers
Summers

5. Examples of Arithmetic Unit Circuits for Sequential
Parallel Operation

Organizing the execution of transfers to an arithmetic
unit using parallel operation

Arithmetic unit in parallel operation for executing
multiplication operations

Arithmetic unit in parallel operation for addition and
subtraction of floating-point numbers

Arithmetic units in sequential operation for performing
addition and subtraction

Arithmetic unit in sequential operation carrying out
multiplication operations

Arithmetic units employing sequential-parallel operations
Considerations for selecting complementary or inverse
codes for making additions and subtractions

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX
Hm I'M-'HJM. "SI-2 I‘N'.Y

Chapter 6. Increasing the Speed of Perforning Multiplication
and Division Operations

6.1 logical methods of increasing the speed or multipli-
cation

6.2 Machine eethods for increasing the speed of multipli-
plication

6.) Increasing the speed of division
Chapter 7. Iesic Methods for Controlling Arithmetic Units
7.1 Purpose and cleseiiication of control methods
7.2 Test control
7.3 Control eeploying modulo 2
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo "Energiya," 1978

6968
CSO: 1070

26

FOR (WFICIM. "SI: max
l-‘Im IWI’ICIM. "5|: UNLY

NB Ll CATI ms

DESIGN 0? FUNCTIONAL SUMSSNLIBS FOR DIGITAL COMPUTERS USING INTEGRATED
CIRCUITS

Moscow KONSTRUTROVANIYB FUNXTSIONAL'NYKH UZLOV BVH NA INTEGRAL'NYKN
SKHDIAKII (Design of Functional Suhaasesblies for Digital Computers Using
Integrated Circuits) in Russian 1978 signed to press 28 Feb 78. pp 2, 199-200

l‘l‘itlc. annotation. and table of contents from book by B. I. Yersolayev et
al.. Sovetakoy liadio. 22,300 copies. 200 pages]

[Text] Methods are presented for designing the basic functional suhassesbly
of a digital coeputer. the plug-in nodule. that contains discrete elenents.
Integrated circuits. printed circuit boards, and connectors.

The book is intended for a wide circle of specialists working in the field
of computer design.

CONTENTS Page
Preface 3
Chapter 1. Peculiarities of Designing Functional Suhasaenblies 6
for Digital Computers
1.1 Factors that deternine the design of a plug-in nodule 6
using integrated circuits
[.2 Developnent of Iicroelectronics and the design of 7

digital cosputers

[.3 Influence of the integrated circuit design on the solu- 8
tion of circuit engineering prohless
1.6 Hethesatical tools used in conputer design of integrated 12
circuits
1.5 Statistical analysis of integrated circuits 21
1.6 Optisising paraseters of integrated circuits 26
Chapter 2. Design and Production Hethods for Integrated Circuits 32
2.1 Hanutacturing processes (or integrated circuits 32
2.2 Photographic te-plates 38
2.3 Assn-My of integrated circuits '01
2.6 Thersal calculation for integrated circuits 52
2.5 Pro-icing nethods {or creating integrated circuits 6‘

25
mm OFFICIM. Us}: ONLY
rnu thIEIAL "Sr HNLV

Chapter 3. Design of Plug-in Modules Using Integrated Circuits

3.1

UUUUU
.
owt‘uu

3.8
3.9

chapter
6.!

§§§G~
. o o s
UFUN

g.
e
0

Chapter
Sal

U‘U'U'U‘U‘
o o
@MbUN

Chap e

UNH'I

00‘ 000”
M’

Characteristics of the basic design elenents for plug-in
nodules

Drinted circuit boards of plug-in nodules

Materials for printed circuit boards

Analysis of elencnts of printed board layout

Structure of nultilsyer printed circuit boards

Selection of functional scope and overall dimensions

of a plug-in nodule

Preliminary design stage of plug-in nodules. Choice of
design

Engineering design of plug-in nodules. Detersinntion of
para-eters

Repair of plug-in nodules

6. Standardization

Directions in the standardization of integrated circuits
Regulation of design norns for integrated circuits
Standardization of plug-in nodules

Design norns for printed circuits of plug-in nodules
General design requireaenzs placed on printed circuit '
boards for plug-in nodules

Standardisation as a scene for increasing product quality

5. Control and Testing

Types of effects and their influence on the ability of
the plug-in nodule to operate

Types of tests

Testing plug-in nodules for stability to external effects
Test equipnent

Selecting dinensions for test chanbers

Engineering quality control and the production process

6. Auto-sting the Design Function

Systens of design auto-scion

Documentation for design sutonstion

Autosated design systens for various stages of produc-
tion and product application

Basic goals of an autonsted design systen

Design of functional subasssnblies of the unified syste-
of digital conputers

Bibliography

Subject

Index

COPYRIGHT: ladstel'etvo Sovetshoye Radio. Moscow. 1978

6968

cso: 1870

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

DOC 539.107.6
DETECTION OF IONIZING RADIATION

Moscow DETENTORY IMPUL'SNOGO IONIZIRUYUSHCHEGO IZLUCNENIYA (Detectors of
Pulsed ionized Radiation) in Russian I978 signed to press 22 Dec 77
pp 2-4. [72-173

[innotntlon. table of contents and Introduction from book by Ziyat Adbul-
lovich Al'bikov. Aleksandr lvanovlch Vegetennikov. Oleg Vssil'yevich Roz-

lov. Atonlzdat. [.980 copies. 176 pngeg/

[Teag7 The measurement of pulsed ionizing radiation is an urgent problem of
experimental physics and radiation technology. it is necessary to make
such measurements when developing and using pulsed X-ray equipment and
particle accelerators. in theraonuclear research. medicine and other fields
of science and technology.

Detectors designed to measure pulsed ionizing radiation are exanined in the
book. The principles of their construction are set forth and estimated and
experimental data on the characteristics of the detectors are cited.

The amplitude, time and spectral characteristics of detectors of various
types. as well as the limitations connected with statistical fluctuations
of output currents are examined. The main attention is devoted to detectors
with nanosecond and subnanosecond resolution.

The book is intended for experimental physicists and specialists in the
field of nuclear instrument making.

65 figures, 2l tables 2&6 references.
Contents Page
Chapter 1. Characteristics of Detectors of Pulsed Ionizing
Md!nt10n.........................l. 5
1.1. Main Parameters of the Fields of Pulsed Ionizing Radiation S
6

1.2. Classification and Features of the Characteristics of De-
tectors of Pulsed Ionizing Radiation. . . . . . . . . .

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I916

Chapter
Zels
2.2.
2.3.
2.5.

Chapter
3.l.
3.2.
3.3.

Chapter
4.1.
6.2.
5.3.
4.4.

Chapter
5.1.
5.2.
503'

Chapter
6.1.

OOGC‘

o
UV§UN
e e

O
R

NNNg
o o o
UN—n
o 0

Chapter
8.1.
8.2.

Chapter
9.].
9.2.

9.3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main Characteristics of Detectors of Pulsed Ionizing
Md‘nt lo“. 0 O 0 I O I I O D O C O I O O O O O I I

2. Charge Detectors of Charged Particles. .

Layout and Principle of Operation of Detectors

Tile Resolution of Charge Detectors. . . . .
Effectiveness of Recording and Sensitivity .

e

c

Linearity of the Amplitude Characteristic in Quaslstatic
oﬁd Dymnic mdeoO O l 6 D 6 O O 0 O 0 O I O O l O 0 O

3. Charge Detectors of )r-quanta and Neutrons

Vacuum Charge Detector of Y-quanta. . . ..

Charge Detector of )l-quanta Hith a Dielectric

Charge Neutron Detectors . . . . . . . . . .

6. Scintillation Detectors. . . . . . . . .
Scintillntors and Photoelectric Instruments.
Construction of Scintillation Detectors. . .
Sensitivity and Spectral Characterization. .
Linearity and Tine Resolution. . . . . . . .

o

e
e
s
e
a

close

Scatterer

00...

so...

5. Cerenkov Detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Characteristics of Radiators and Layout of Detectors

Sensitivity and Spectral Characteristics . .
Linearity and Tine Resolution. . . . . . . .

6. Semiconductor Detectors. . . . .
Layout and Principle of Operation. .
Tine Resolution. . . . . . . . . . .
Amplitude Characterization . . . . . . . .

Sensitivity and Spectral Characterization. .

o . o
o e o
e o .
. o . e

e

a...

see

Radiation Resistance of Semiconductor Detectors.

7. Caloriletric Detectors . . . . . . . . . . .
Layout and Principle of Operation. . . . . . . .
Sensitivity of a Perroelectric Detector. . . . .

Tine Resolution and Output Current at Detectors on

coo...

a... no...

see...

so...

a...

too...

ace.

.0... sees

the Basis
of Perroelectrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8. Statistical Pluctustions of the Current at Detectors
Scintillation and Cerenkov Detectors . . . . . . . . . .
Comparison of Detectors of Various Types . . . . . . . .

o

9. Detectors With a Logarithaic Amplitude Characteristic.
Amplitude Characteristic of Logsrithaic Detectors. . . . .

Tine Characteristics of Logarithmic Detectors . . . . . . .
Principles of Construction of Logarith-lc Detectors . . . u

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16
lb
22
31

33

38
38
52
60

63
63
73
76
82

86
86
9|
95

101
101
103
110
11k
121

126
126
127

130

133

133
138

162
163
164
165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter [0. Methods of Measuring the Characteristics of Detectors
ofPulaedelutlon......................-e '50
lo.i. Measure-eat of the Spectral Characteristic of Detectors . . ISO
l0.2. Measurement of the Spectral Characteristic of Detectors

of Neutron Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . [53
[0.3. Measurement of the Pulsed Characteristic of Detectors . . . 153
l0.&. Measurement of the Amplitude Characteristic of Detectors. . 157

l!lbiiography............................159
Suhjcctlndex............................170

Introduction

1he seasurencnt of ionizing radiations is of great iaportance in modern
science and technology. With the introduction of the achieve-eats of ex-
perimental nuclear physics in industry. aedicine and other sectors of the
national economy more and more attention is being devoted to the measurement
of the para-etera of the fields of ionizing radiation. which not only hear
information about the operation of the devices which are the sources of
radiation. but also present inforaation on the operating conditions in

these fields of the objects of observation and service.

A peculiarity of aany devices. which are presently being used as sources

of ionizing radiation. is the pulsed node of their operation. The surround-
ing fields of ionizing radiation in contrast to the fields created by static
sources. the average intensity of the radiation of which is constant or
changes according to the laws of radioactive decay. are of a pulsed nature
in this case.

The detection of ionizing radiation is based on the transformation of the
energy of the particles being recorded into an electric signal at the out-
put of the detector. which is subsequently processed by Icons of radio-
electronic equipment. According to the type of output signals the detectors
of ionizing radiations are divided into discrete detectors. at the output

of which a sequence of electric signals (pulses) is formed froa the in-
dividuai particles. and analog detectors, at the output of which the signals
from individual particles are not differentiated. while the infatuation on
the recorded radiation is obtained according to the value of the electric
current in the output curcuit of the detector.“

in the ucasureaent of the parapeters of pulsed sources and fields of ionic-
ing radiation the form of the pulses of radiation. their aaplitude (laxi-
nun intensity). the intervals betveen the pulses in the case of the

 

ﬁﬂlis division of the detectors 11 arbitrary, since as the intensity of

the radiation increases and the number of recorded particles corresponding-
ly decreases. the analog detector shifts to the discrete node of opera-
tion.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘I-‘liillil. USli ONLY

emission of a series (or train) of pulses and the form of the individual
pulses in the series are of great interest.

Analog detectors are usually used for the measurement of the indicated
parameters of pulsed ionizing radiation when using the appropriate radio-
clectronic equipment. since the use of discrete detectors for these pur-
poses in practically impossible. especially given a nanosecond and. what

is more. a picosecond duration of the individual pulses or series of pulses
of ionizing radiation.

Discrete detectors of elementary particles. which are designed for record-
ing ionizing radiation of static sources. have been described in many mono-
graphs.“ At the same time the authors do not know of any works. in which
the questions of the theory and use of detectors of pulsed ionizing radi-
ation were systematized. An attempt is made in the book to set forth the
sale questions of theory and the practical results obtained in the area of
the development and use of analog detectors of pulsed ionizing radiation;
here the main attention is doVoted to the analysis of the possibilities of
using these detectors for measuring pulses of radiation in the nanosecond
and subnanosecond ranges of activity.

In setting forth the materials the authors were guided. where possible. by
the All-Union State Standards issued in the USSR in recent years. However.
this was not always possible. The greatest difficulties arose in the area
of terminology. and this is natural in connection with the novelty of the
question being covered. In describing the characteristics of the detectors
new definitions were introduced. which. in the opinion of the authors. are
practically necessary. logically stem from the principles of operation of
the detectors and ensure the metrological nature of the measurement of the
parameters of radiations. In this case analogous terms from other fields
of metrology were used.

The authors did not set as a goal of the book the description of the meth-
ods and equipment for measuring the parameters of pulsed radiation-this is
unquestionably of independent interest to broad groups of readers. however.

 

*V. Veksler. L. Croshev. b. Isayev. "Ionizatsionnyye mgtody issledovaniya
izlucheniy" Llonizstion Methods of Studying deiationgl. Moscow-Leningrad.
Costekhteorizdat. 1950; s. Rossi. h. Staub. "Ipnizatsionnyye kamery i
schetchiki" [Ionization Chambers and Counters]. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo ino-
strannoy literatury. 1951; V. Price. "Registratsiya yadernogo izluchenlya"
[hecording of Nuclear Radiation]. Moscow. Izdatel'stvo inostrannoy litera-
tury. Moscow. i960;_y. I. Kalashnikov. M. s. Kozodayev. "Datektory elemen-
tarnykh chastits“ [petectors of Elementary Particle§7. Moscow. "Mauka".
1966; V. V. Matveyev. b. l. Khszsnov. "Prlbory dlya izmereniya ionizi:_
ruyushehikh izlucheniy" LInstrunents for Measuring Ionizing Radiationgl.
Moscow. Atomizdat. 1972; L. 5; Corn. 3. I. Khazsnov. "Izbirstel'nyye radio-
setry" 1§elective Rediometergl. Moscow. Atomizdst. i975. and others.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in some instances the authors were forced to set then forth in brief. since

otherwise sole characteristics of the described detectors and the possbil-
ities of their practical use would have resained unsubstantiated.

The lntmductlon and Chapters 1 and 9 were written by A. l. Veretennikov:
Chapters 2. 3. lo. 5 and 8 by 0. V. Kozlov; Chapters 6. 7 and lo by Z. A.
Al'biltov. The authors are grateful to V. A. Novikov, S. A. Kuchay. Yu. A.
Brusev. L. z. Nasnrova and L. H. Shishlyekova for useful remarks and as-
slstanee in the work on the book.

COPYRIGHT: Atouizdat. 1978

7801
680: 1870

31

FOR OHICIIJ. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

539.125.5.17
NEUTRON METHODS OF ANALYZING THE COMPOSITION OF MATTER

Moscow NBYTRONNYYB MBTODY NEPRERYVNOOO ANALIZA SOSTAVA VBSMCMESTVA (Neutron
Methods of the Continuous Analysis of the Composition of Matter) in Russian
1978 signed to press 28 Sep 77 pp 2-5, 159

[Innotatlon. table of contents and introduction from book by Yevgeniy Rosti-
slavovich Knrtashgy and Aleksandr Sergeyevich Shtsn'. Atomizdat. 1.530
copies. 159 pages]

11er5/ In the booh the principles of neutron methods of the continuous
analysis of the composition of matter are set forth. the principles of the
construction and the features of various types of neutron analysers are
examined. Particular attention is devoted to the theoretical and physico-
technical principles of the continuous activation analysis of matter in a
stream as one of the new and very promising methods of automatic produc-
tion control. The characteristics of various types of neutron sources. as
sell as of detectors and recording equipment. which are used in neutron
analyzers. are examined in detail. Examples of the use of neutron methods
for the continuous analysis of industrial products or the analysis of sub-
stances without tskins samples under field conditions are cited. The neu-
tron methods and equipment for the continuous analysis of letter, which
were developed both by the authors of the book and under their guidance and
by other authors in the USSR and abroad. are described in the book.

89 figures; 26 tables; 157 references.
Contents Page

Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 1. Continuous Analysis in the Automatic Control of Techno-

logical Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.1. Demands on Industrial Automatic Analyzers . . . . . . . . . 6
1.2. Methods of Automatic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.3. Nuclear Physics Methods of Continuous Analysis. . . . . . . 16

Chapter 2. The Use of Neutrons for Element Analysis. . . . . . . . 17

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Basic Elements of Automatic Neutron Analyzers. . . . . . 26
3.1. Typos of Neutron Analyzers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2. Neutron Sources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3. Detectors of Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.A. Data Processing Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

Chapter 6. Distribution of Neutrons in Analysed Mediua. . . . . . . 46
6.l. Distribution of Fast Neutrons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.2. Distribution of Thermal Neutron: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ‘8
6.3. Distribution of Theraal Neutrons in Absorption Medium. . . . 51

Chapter 5. Activation Analysis of Solutions and Slurries in a Stream 5‘
5.l. Principles of the Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56

5.2. Influence of the Agitation of Solutions on Controlled

Actlvtty I O O I O O O C 0 O I O O I O O O C O O I 8 O C 0 $9
5.6. On-Streaa Activation of a Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5.5. Recording of the Emission of an Activated Solution . . . . . 70
5.6. Optimisation of System Parameters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
5.7. Accuracy and Sensitivity of the Method . . . . . . . . . . . 79
5.8. Means of Increasing the Accuracy. Sensitivity and Selectivity

of the System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

Chapter 6. "Instantaneous" Neutron Methods of Analysis of Solutions
and Slurries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . lOl
60‘s mutton-Mutton “othodﬂ of mly.‘.e a s a e s a a e e a e a [0|
6.2. Methods Based on the Radiative Capture and Inelastic Dis-
persion of Neutrons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117

Chapter 7. The Continuous Neutron Analysis of Bulk and Solid
mter101.e O O C I O C O I O I O 0 Q 6 O 0 O I O O O O l O C O I 0 ‘20
7.1. Blenent Analysis of Bulk Materials on s Transporter. . . . . 120
7.2. Continuous Determination of the Moisture Content in Bulk .
Materials . . .'. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131

Chapter 8. Neutron Methods in Solving Some Problems of Geology.
Technological Control and Scientific Research. . . . . . . . . . . 139

8.1. Analysis of Rocks and Ores in a Natural Bed. . . . . . . . . [39
8.2. Control of Sane Technological Parameters . . . . . . . . . . 147

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

Introduction

The increase of labor productivity in industry largely depends on the level
of automation of production processes. Continuous processes can be auto-

mated easiest of all. In this case the control of such automated processes
can he accomplished from a single control center by means of control can-

puters. As a result of the monitoring of technological processes and the
possibility of maintaining the optimum production schedule the utilisation

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of technological equipment increases considerably and products of better
quality are produced. The automation of technological processes improves
working conditions and reduces to a minimum the number of people working
directly under harmful conditions.

One of the important conditions. without which the automation of technologi-
cal processes is virtually impossible. is the need (or the automatic or
semi-automatic monitoring of the course of t'..e process. Without exaggera-
tion it can be stated: monitoring is the main link of all automatic pro-
ductlon equipment. Merely by knowing the level. density, moisture content.
thickness. chemical content or any other parameters essential for the pro-
cess. it is possible to control this process.

For mny years now radiation instruments have been used as sensitive ele-
ments (sensors) in many production processes. Much experience in develop-
ing and using automatic industrial equipment on the basis of these instru-
ments has been gained in the USSR and many other countries. By means of
primary radiation converters in many cases it is possible to determine the
technological parameters without contact. which favorably distinguishes these
sensitive elements from others which require contact with the medium being
monitored. This advantage is particularly important in the automation of

many processes in metallurgy. chemistry and several other sectors of industry.

in order to control many processes it is necessary to know the chemical
composition of the mediums being monitored. iiere continuous high speed
processes require also the use of continuous methods of analysis. Numerous
automtic analyzers of coqosition. including radiation analyzers. have
been developed and are being used in practice.

IiuweVer. there are no and. apparently. never will be any universal methods
and instruments. which are capable of meeting all the diversity of demands
made on them by various sectors of industry and various technological pro-
cesses. Therefore. at present the study of new methods of continuous analy-
sis is being continued. the development of instrtimenta with the use of the
latest achievements of science and technology is being carried out.

Experience shows that at enterprises of nonferrous metallury approximately
half of all the analyses made at the central plant and shop laboratories
are necessary for use in regulating technological processes. Usually the
majority of these analyses are still made by the traditional "wet" chemical
methods. Only slightly more than 10 percent of all the analyses are made
in the laboratories by instrument methods. But even these methods for the
most part require the taking. and than some preparation of the samples
(weighing. dissolving. placement in an awoule and so on). The increase of
the accuracy of the analysis in many instances is checked by the iwerfec-
tion of the methods and system of sampling. Often the error of sampling
is much higher than the error of the analysis itself.

Continuous analysis. in addition to the possibility of using its readings
for controlling the course of technological processes. has a number of other

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHCI'M. "Si-2 ONLY

advantages over the ordinary laboratory methods of analysis with the taking
of samples: l) as a consequence of the increase of the amount of material
being analyzed the representativeness of the results of the analysis in-
crease» and the error of sampling decreases; 2) the subjective errors of

the analysts are eliminated: 3) the possibility of contactless continuous
analysis. including through the walls of pipes and technological vessels.
arises: A) it is possible to make an analysis of the rock and ores in a
natural bed; 5) the passivity of service personnel in the use of the results
of the analysis for controlling the processes is eliminated.

11w methods of continuous analysis. which are now being developed. for the
most part are based on the further development of ordinary laboratory meth-
ads of analysis: titration. polarography. flame photometry and so forth.

in recent years much interest has been show for neutron methods of the con-
tianons analysis of matter and the automatic monitoring of other technologi-
cal parameters. intensive research and development of automatic neutron
analyzers of composition are being performed in the USSR. the United States.
England. Canada and several other countries. The number of publications
devoted to these problems is increasing like an avalanche. The analysis

of patent materials shows a slightly different picture: some main Patents
and authorship certificates. in which the means and general diagrams of
devices of the continuous analysis of composition are set forth. were sub-
mitted comparatively long ago (1955-1960). while in the technical patent
materials of recent years only a few special questions of methods and the
improvement of some assemblies of known devices are developed.

There are a large number of sectors of industry and industrial objects.

at which it is expedient to use neutron methods of continuous analysis:

the monitoring of the processes of extracting valuable components in the
mining and metallurgical industry. the monitoring of the parameters of some
intermediate products (for example. monitoring of the moisture content of
agglomerate in ferrous metallurgy. determination of the protein in albumin
products). the monitoring of some special processes (determination of the
content of boron and the products of fission of nuclear fuel in the stream
of coolant at nuclear electric power stations). monitoring of sewage for
various contaminants (fluorine. uranium. mercury and so forth). the deter-
mination of the impurities in petroleum products. The problems of analyz-
ing the rock and ores in a natural bed on the surface of the earth. in mine
drifts. at the bottom of seas and oceans and on the surface of other planets
are a special group of tasks. The methods of determining the consumption
and rate of movement of liquid and bulk products. which can also be solved
by means of neutron methods. border on analytic methods.

The mere enumeration of examples of the possible use of neutron methods of
continuous analysis and monitoring shows their great promise. However. so
far. not counting several short surveys. ﬁ-g7. not one work has been pub-
lished which systematises and eta-arises the achievements in this field.
The authors have taken the liberty to fill this gap.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX

It Is necessary in note that questions of the theory and practice of neutron
mulhmln nl' Imminr, hun- holes have been omitted from thin work. Legging:
nceurdlug to the meihuds of accomplishment. the equipment and the means of
interpretation of the results in many respects differs from other methods

of continuous analysis. Moreover. neutron logging was proposed several
decades ago; the research devoted to this method is set forth in much patent,

scientific and technical literature and was generalized in several mono-
graphs.

The various methods and equipment are examined in the book with a varying
degree of detail. which was caused in some cases by the lack of available
information and in other cases by the varying level of elaboration of the
problem. The research performed by the authors is covered somewhat more
extensively in the book. Sections 5.3. 5.6 and 5.5 of Chapter 5 were writ-
ten with the participation of V. L. Chulkin.

The authors realize that in this work, which is being undertaken for the
first tine, some shortcomings or inaccuracies might be encountered. The
authors will gratefully accept critical remarks and suggestions.

in conclusion the authors take the opportunity to express their gratitude

to N. D. Tyufyakov, V. L. Chulkin. N. Yu. Harkun and s. V. Shagov for par-
ticipating in the performance of the experiments and the useful advice
given in the discussion of the manuscript of the book. The authors are also

grateful to B. V. Ivlev and L. A. Pronina for much assistance in putting
the manuscript into order.

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat, [978

7807
C50: 1870

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

PUBL ICA'I‘IONS

UDC 539.9.08253332‘
PARTICLES IN PLASMA RESEARCH

Moscow VZAIMODBYSTVIYE CHASTITS S VESIICRESTVOH V PLAZHENNYKI! ISSEDOVANIYAKII
(The Interaction of Particles Hith Matter in Please Studies) in Russian
1978 signed to press 17 Jan 78 pp 24. 271-272

Linnotntion, table of contents and preface fron book by Yuriy Vladimirovich
Gott. Atonizdat. 2,550 copies. 272 page_s_7

_/_'l‘ex_t_/ The available theoretical and experissntal data on the losses of
energy. scattering and ranges of ions of nonrelativistic energies in solid
(asorphous) and gaseous substances are generalised and systeeetired in the
book. Questions of the radiation damage to the first wall of a thersonu-
clear reactor under the effect of neutrons and charged particles are ex-
anined. The results of the practical application of the events. which oc-
cur in the interaction of particles with a solid. for the corpuscular diag-
nostics of laboratory and space plassa are cited.

The book is intended for specialists working in the field of plesn physics

and nuclear physics and for students of M's of the corresponding special-
ties.

3!; tables. 381 figures, 583 references.

Contents POE!
Preface.........o..................-. 3
Chapter I. Losses of Energy by Particles as a Results of Elastic

Collisions........................... 5

f l. Kinenstics of Elastic Collisions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . S
5 2a Calculation of Atollc Potentt.1.e s e s e e e e e s e e e o 9
5 3. Potential Energy of the Interaction of Colliding Particles. 39
f 4. Effective Sections of Scattering and Losses of Energy in
ElasticCollisions..................... 61

lellogrlphy.......................... ‘7

Chapter 2. bosses of Energy in Inelastic Collisions . . . . . . . $0
5 S. bosses of Energy in Inelastic Scattering in Individual

“111.10n.0 I O O I D O O O O O O I O O O O O O O O O O O 0 so

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘Oli ()l-‘F’ICIAI. USE ONLY

S (I.
5 I.
ill.
5 9.

Pulnrlsnuun lumen of Energy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Stnpplnuuf l'nrilclvn In I’lnum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Statistical Spread 01' bosses of Energy by Particles in Hatter
Casparison of the Theory Hith the Bxpsrisont . . . . . . . .

BIbtioBr‘physeseessesssDeestsseessesess

Chapter 3.

mttcr.‘I.....D.........l‘....
.2b1LOSIUPhYssssssssessssssssssss

Chapter ’0.
‘ 10'
i ll.

Scattering of Particles in Hatter. . . .
“'0', 0‘ mtipl. sc.‘:.r1n8 s s s a e s a
Inverse Probles oi the Theory of Scattering

Ilbllogi‘nphy.............o.o...

Chapter 5.
5 I2.
5 l3.
5 lb.

0
s
e
e

0

aces

Ranges of Particles in Hatter . . . . . . . . .
Theoretical Data on Ranges of Particles in Hatter
Statistical Spread of Ranges of Particles in Hatter
Experiscntal Data on Ranges of Particles in Hatter.

Bibllngrophy.......................

chapter 6.

Experimental Data on losses of Energy by Particles

s

a
s
e
s
s

Bxperlnsntnl Hathods oi Studying the Interaction of

in

sees

s
e
e
a
a

Pll'tlclcﬂlnﬂnttet......................

5 is.
5 16.

Preparation of Targets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
lieasuresent of bosses of Snergy and Ranges of Charged

Pnrtlclel...o...................
Bibliogtaphy............................

Chapter 7.
5 l7.

i [8. Defects of the Crystal Structure of Solids.
5 l9. Volusstric Radiation Dosages. . . . . . . .
5 20. Surface Radiation Disturbances. . . . . . .

Bibliography...c................

Chapter 8. Diagnostics of Laboratory and Space Plasma
$21.3quipaent............
S 22. Heasuresents in Laboratory Plassa
5 23. Heasurenents in Space Plassa. . .

Blbllogrnphy..............

Appendix..............
Bibliography...........
Sysbols of Main Values.. . . . .

Preface

s

s

e
s
s

s
s
s
e

sees

essse

sesss

s

e
s
e

seese

s
e
0

see.

sees.

saese

sees

ass

essee

Radiation Daaages to the Halls of a mononuclear Reactor.
liechanical Properties of Solids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59
CI]
75
82
56

90
131

136
”6
I62
165

168
168
175
I76
I92

195
I95

202
205

210
210
2l3
215
220
2210

229
229
2102

258
259

263
265
266

In recent years the interest in the events which accompany the interaction

of particles (atone. solecules. ions. electrons. neutrons) with a solid

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pill: ilPl-‘HHM. llSl-Z ONLY

lum atrmllly lm-ruwuul. ‘llu-m- quemtlnun are nusumlur, pnrllcularly nrwu
Importance in connection with the hopes for the development in the future
of a controlled thermonuclear reactor (ll'i'll). in an m the first. Vacuum
wall of the chamber will be subjected to the effect of large streams of
various types of radiations. The interaction of the radiations with the
materials of the wall leads to a change of the physical and mechanical

properties of the latter and to the contamination of the plasma by the
materials of the wall. .

The effects occurring with the interaction of particles with solid matter
and plasma are widely used in the corpuscular diagnostics of laboratory
and space plasma.

or course. this entire wide range of questions is difficult to set forth in
a single book. Therefore. the author strove to cover in detail the results
of theoretical and experimental research on the losses of energy. scatter-
ing and ranges of heavy (with a mass many times greater than the mass of an
electron) particles in a solid (Chapters 1-6). The second part of the book
(Chapters 7. 8) is devoted to an account of the practical application of
these pehnomena in plasma physics.

Unfortunately. in spite of the fact that the study of the passing of par-
ticles through matter has been engaged in now for more than 70 years (the
scattering of d-particles in matter was discovered in 1906, the subsequent
classical studies of Geiger. lisrsden and Rutherford led to the discover in
l9ll of the nucleus.of the atom). our knowledge is still quite modest.
Since no one has yet proposed to mslte the walls of an an out of monocrys-
talline materials. the interaction of particles only with amorphous sub-
stances is examined in the boolt.

In speaking about the energies of interacting particles, we will use the
following terminology: particles of small energies are particles. the
velocity of which is less than the velocity of any electron in an atom of
the target. the velocity of particles of great energy exceeds the velocity
of any electron of an atom of the target. All the remaining particles have

intermediate energies. When examining these questions we will confine our-
selves to the domain of nonrelativistic velocities.

Everywhere that it was possible empirical and spproximste terms were used.
The physical values are designated by symbols which nearly do not differ
from the original works used by the authors. Therefore. often the same
letter designates different physical values (for example. f is a parameter
of aiming. the density of the substance, F is the average range expressed
in dimensionless units, {a is the average projective range). In studying

the materials set forth in the boolt. the reader will probably understand
these symbols without difficulty.

The author considers it his pleasant duty to express deep gratitude for the
useful considerations. discussions and advice to H. s. loffe. B. I. Kansyev,

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

R. A. Kovruhkm. R. I. Sobolcv. V. 6. Tol'kovakiy. V. V. Tonnyy. O. B.
l-‘lrnov. Ya. Ya. Yuahunov and Yu. N. Yavllnokiy.

(XWYRIGII‘I‘: Atonlmlnt, ”78

7807
cso: [870

(00

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bumca-nous

UDC 621.373.826
IIOIDGMPNIC MODS. EQUIPMENT

Hoscov OPTIClIESKAYA GOLDGMPIYA: PMKTICIIBSKIYB PRIWIYA (Optical Holog-
raphy: Practical Applications) in Russian 1978 signed to press 20 Jun 78

pp 2-4. 237-238

_/_Annotation. table of contents and introduction from book by Ye. A. Antonov.
V. H. Ginzburg. Ye. N. Lekhtsiyer. B. V. Horor. B. 6. Semenov. B. H. Steps-
nov. N. s. Khanin. V. Ya. Tsarfin. Isdatel'stvo "Sovstskoye radio". 19.000
copies. 238 page_s_/.

ﬁexg] The experience of using new holographic methods and equipment see
"Cologrnfiyn. Hetody i npparatura" Luolography. Methods and Equipment .
edited by V. n. Ginsburg and B. H. Stepanov. Moscow. ”Sovetskoye radio .

1971.) for the solution of practical problem in various fields of physics.
technology. biology. medicine and fine arts is generalized in the book.

The new results of a number of holographic studies are cited. including

the studies of: optical self-focusing fibers. which are used for telecom-
municntions; blood cells under cryogenic conditions: high speed processes
(explosions. the cosbustion of condensed substances. gas-discharge plasma.

the atonization of fuel by injectors. gas dynamic streams in the 'r-shape
pipe joints of the intake-exhaust system of motor vehicle diesel engines
and others); the deformation of the images of murals depending on climatic'

conditions and others.

Hotrologicol problems of holography are examined. Methods of nondestructive
testing of industrial items are given. The ml-l holographic microscope,
which has been series-produced since 1976. as well as devices for obtaining
‘round and multi-angle holograms and holographic interferograms and their
use are described.

The book is intended for specialists working in the field of holography
and its use in various fields of science and technology.

23 tables; 135 diagrams: 155 references

’01

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1188 ONLY

Contenta

IntrodwtlonI I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
Chapter 1. Hethoda and Bquipeent of Optical Holography . . . . . .
lIlI “ch“. and o‘.sr.ul I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
1.2. Denanda on Radiation Sourcea. Holographic Equipaent and
Recording Hediuna Hhan Obtaining Hologram. . . . . . . .
1.3. Industrial Holographic Equipment. Radiation Sourcea and
RecordingHediuna....................
1.1.. Features of the [lee of Pulee Laaera and Anplifiera in
'blosrop‘|y I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
1.5. Hotrological Problem of Holography . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. Holographic Hethoda of Hondeatructive Tooting and Their
Application...........................
2.1. Hethoda of Obtaining Holographic Topogreaa. . . . . . . . .
2I2I m Mr’1on mtw. I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
2.3. The Use of the lnterferoaetry of Diaplaceaant . . . . . . .
2.6. The Uae of Round and Hulti-Angle Holographic Syateao for

Nondestructive Teeting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.5. Deter-ination of the Option Teaperature and Hoiature Con-
ditiona of the Storage of Honualantal Painting . . . . . .
2.6. The Cae of the Hethod of Leeer lnterforoaetry Hhen Teating
the Topography of the Surface of Magnetic Dieca . . . . .

Chapter 3. Holographic Hicroacopy of Tranapareat Objecta . . . . .
3.1. Pieldaoprplicetion........ .. ..

3.2. The MCI-l Holographic Interference Microscope . . . . . . .

Page

55
55
66
75

80
91
95
100

100
107

Chapter A. Hondeatructive Tearing of the Dietributioo of the Indicator

of Refraction in Optical Fibera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.1. liethodoflieaaureaenta...................
6.2. Influence of the Refraction of Light on the Accuracy of the

Heaaureaenta........................
6.3. stay of selfoc Lisht'FocuIﬂls Fibere e a e e e e e e e e e

Chapter 5. The Study of Artificial Cryatela and Biological Objecta

5.1. Teatiag of the Distribution of the Concentration of a Solu-
tion in the Proceae of the Growth of a Cryatal and the

Study of the Uniformity of the Crown Cryatale . . . . . .

5.2. Study of the Vitality of Biological Objecta at Dow Teapera-

Cute....o...........o.-..o.o...

Clmpter 6. The Study of Hicrocoaponent Syeteea . . . . . . . . . .
6.1. Main Characterietica, Teaka of the Study. . . . . . . . . .
6.2. Featuree of the Holographic Heaaurenenta of the Paranatera

of the Diapereed Phaae of Hicrocoeponent Syateu. . . . .

3. Heaaureaent of the Unifonity of No-Phaae Currenta . . . .

1., Measure-eat of the Dietribution of Velocitiea in an Overflov

Strean..........................

62

6.
6

e

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

121
121

136
137

166

166

157

166
166

167
170

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6.5. Study at the Dispersed Phase of the Products of the Colubus-
tlonOICondonaedsyOtels...o.............. ‘78

6.6. Study of the solid Phase of the Products of tho Combustion
ofCondensedSystens....................185

6.7. Study of Model Hire Explosions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 198

Chapter 7. Holographic Methods of Nondestructive Testing of the Operat-
ing Processes in Motor Vehicle Diesel Engines. . . . . . . . . . . . 205
7.1. Study of the Atomization of Fuel by the Injectors of Motor

VehicleDieselEngines. . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . 206
7.2. Study ofthe Characteristics of the Gas Dynamic Streams in
the Intake-Exhaust Systems of a Diesel Engine. . . . . . . . 217-

Bibliography............................. 226
Subjecthdem............................235

int reduction

At present holographic methods are being widely used in solving practical
problems and in scientific research. holography is being used in studies
of high speed processes (explosions. combustion. gas-discharge plasma and
so forth); for measuring deformations which occur in an item under the in-
fluence of various factors; for nondestructive testing of quality; for
detecting internal defects of itens (in introscopy): in studies of living
cells and microorganisms. the process of the growth of plants; for obtaining
three-dimensional images of the internal organs of man and animals; in
operations on the restoration and deternination of the optimum storage con-
ditione of masterpieces of painting and others.

The methods and domestic equipment, vhich make it possible to perform
holographic research in the optical and ultra-high frequency beads of waves.
are described in the book "Golografiys. Metody i appsratura" Lﬂolography.
Methods and Equipment] (edited by V. M. Ginsburg and B. M. Stepenov. Moscow.
"Sovetekoye radio". 1974). These methods and equipment. as well as the
methods and equipment. which were developed later and are presented in this
book. are being used in the Soviet Union and 'ebroad for research in the
field of physics. medicine and technology. The results of the basic re-
search were published in the periodic press during 1976—1977. At the same
time. until recently there have -been no eystentited account of the practi-
cal aspects of holography. a description of the methods and their use and a
generalization of the experience of the practical use of holography in solv-
ing specific problems of the national economy.

With this book the authors have attempted to fill this gap: to eyeteutire
and generalize the experience of using the developed methods and means of

holography for solving problems in a nunber of fields of science and tech-
nology.

Taking into account the broad interest in holography and its practical use
on the part of readers of various specialties. the authors give a brief

’03
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

account (Chapter 1) of the basic data on the methods and schemes of holog-

raphy. reference data on holographic equipnsnt and radiation sources. ques-
tions of the neurological guarantee of the seasures and cone other inferna-
tion which is necessary for work with holographic devices.

A description of new holographic instrusente and devices: the K34 holo-
graphic nicroscope. round and sulti-angle systeaa which sake it possible to
enlarge the field of use of holographic Iathods of asasureaenta and nonde-
structive testing. is given in separate chapters.

In the book the main directions. ssthods and practical questions. which are
connected with the use of holography for the nondestructive testing and mas-
urcncnts of various itens and processes, are set forth using specific
practical problems as era-plea. Topographical nethods of nondestructive
testing of the fore of reflecting and transparent objects (including the
inersion nethod of testing the forn of reflecting item, which is at the
basis of the draft standard of holographic neasureaents); the asthod of con-
paring the surfaces of a conplicated for- with standard item are exasined;
the results of the use of holography and laser interferosetry for the non-
destructive testing of deformations which occur in reflecting objects under
the influence of environmental factors are cited.

Studies of the deformations of the iaagss of the nurals in the cathedrals
of the Moscow Kremlin subject to cli-tic conditions for the purpose of de-
ternining the option. teapereture and moisture conditions. which ensure the
safekeeping of the nonmantal painting on the walls of the cathedrals; the
contactless testing of the topography of the surface of aagnstic discs.
which are used in storage systeas; the use of holographic Iicroscopy for
the nondestructive testing of quality and sensurenant of the distribution of
the index of refraction in optical fibers; the use of holographic nicro-
scopy for studying the vitality of cells. particularly blood cells under
cryogenic conditions. are described.

The distribution of the concentration of the solution in the process of the
growth of crystals is studied. An explanation of the previously observed
phenosenon of the stratification of the solution when growth crystals of
RBI! in a static node was found on the basis of this research. The results
of the study of the unifornity of artificially growth crystals by the neth
of holographic interferosetry are cited.

The application of holography for the study and neaaureaent of the parameters
of sulticoaponent rapidly changing systems. which contain a liquid, solid
and gaseous phase and a plasma, is ennined. the min characteristics are
cited and the probleas of studying such system are specified.

A nusber of practical energies of the use of pulse holography for the cal-
culation of the density of currents, the distribution of velocities in an
overflow stress, the study of the process of cosbustion of condensed sys-
teas. the analysis of the distribution of charged and neutralized particles
in please are given. The process of the atomization of fuel by injectors

Mo

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the characteristics of the gas dynanic streams in the intake-exhaust
systems of sotor vehicle diesel engines are studied.

The book was written by a collective of authors under the general editor-
ship of V. H. Ginsburg and B. H. Stepanov. The following people worked on
the book: Ye. A. Antonov (i 1.1, 1.2). V. Ya. Tsarfin (5 [.3. 1.4. Chap-
ter 6). B. c. Seeanav (S 1.5. Chapter 2), V. H. Ginsburg (Chapters 2-7.

5 1.3). B. H. Stepanov (Chapters 2-6. 5 1.3). Ye. N. Lekhtsiyer (Chap-
ters 3-5). B. V. Hero: and N. s. Khanin (Chapter 7).

The authors hope that the book will be useful for specialists who work in
various fields of science and technology and who use holographic methods
for solving practical probleae and in scientific research.

The authors are extremely thankful to the reviewers of the book: Correspond-
ing Hesber of the USSR Acadely of Sciences Doctor of Technical Sciences
L. D. Bakhrakh and Doctor of Physicoeatheeatical Sciences Yu. A. Bykovskiy.

(or a number of valuable suggestions which were taken into account when
correcting the book.

The authors express gratitude.td Va. A. Gabelcv for such assistance in the
preparation and editing of the eanuscript of the book.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Sovstskoye radio". 1978

7807
C80: [870

65

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l'ICIAL USS ONLY

PUBLICAT IONS

UDC 533.9.13
PROPERTIES OI" NROATIVB 106 AND ASSOCIATED PROCESSES

Moscow OTRlTSAl‘BL'NYYB IONY (Negative Ions) in Russian 1978 signed to
press 11 May 78 pp 2-6, 176

ﬁnnotation. table of contents and preface from book by Boris Hikhaylovich
Seirnov, Atonisdat. [.830 copies. 176 page}?

[13:57 Information. which pertains to the properties of negative ions and
the processes which take place with their participation, is presented. The
methods of determining the energy of the affinity of electrons to the stern
and the molecule are analysed and the present veluee for these magnitudes.
as well as for the energies of dissociation of molecular negative ions end
the parameters of auto-ionized states of ions, which are formed in the pro-
cess of collision of electrons with molecules. are cited. The processes of
the formation of ions in paired and triple collisions of electrons with
molecules. as well as the processes of the recombination of positive end
negative ions in paired and triple collisions are studied. the processes

of the photoejection of an electron from a negative ion. the photodissocia-
tion of a molecular negative ion. as well as the photo-attachment of an
electron to an aton or a molecule are emined.

The book contains much reference material. It is intended for specialists
working in the field of the physics and chemistry of plasma, atomic and
molecular physics. as well as in related fields. who need information on
the properties of charged particles and the elementary processes taking

place with their participation.

’09 figures. ‘0 tables. 698 references.

Contents Page

Preface. O O 0 O O O I 0 O C 0 0 I O 0 O I O O O O O O O O O 0 O O 3

Chapter 1. Properties of Negative Ions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . S
i 1.1. Methods of Determining the Energy of the Bond of an Elec-

troninehegativelon................. 5

5 1.2. Energy of Affinity of Atoms to an Electron . . . . . . . 23
f 1.3. Enegry of Affinity of Holeculee and Radicals to an
31ectron........................ 27

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 1.4. Behavior of a Neatly Bound Electron in a Negative Ion. . . 37
Bibliography........................... ‘8

Chapter 2. Complex and Unstable Negative Ions . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5 2.1. Energy of Dissociation of Negative Complex Ions. . . . . . 56
S 2.2. Formation of Complicated and Complex Negative Ions in
Triple “111.1“.I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I s?
i 2.3. Formation of a Negative Complex Ion in the Process of At-
tachment of the Electron to a Complex Molecule . . . . . . 63
i 2.10. Auto-ionized States of Negative Ions . . . . . . . . . . . 66
n‘bl tosr‘phy I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 68

Chapter 3. Processes of the Collision of Negative lens Nith Atoms . 70
5 3.1. Interaction of the Negative Ion Nith Atoms . . . . . . . . 70
i 3.2. Destruction of the Negative Ion in a Collision With an Atom 80

i 3.3. Release of an Electron in Collisions of a Negative Ion in
a ca.l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 88

5 3.‘. Resonance Charge Exchange Nith the Participation of Nega-
tive Ions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9‘
81b! ‘osraphy I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 99

Chapter 6. Formation of Negative lens in Cases. . . . . . . . . . . 102
56.1. Dissociative Attachment of an Electron to a Molecule . . . 102
56.2. Distribution of the Products of the Dissociative Attachment

of an Electron to a Molecule According to Energies and
Angles of Divergence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
56.3. Attachment of an Electron to Complex Molecules . . . . . . 118
54.5. Formation of Negative Ions in Triple Collisions of
Electrons Nith Molecules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
Bibliography I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 131

Chapter 5. Recombination of Positive and Negative Ions. . . . . . . 133
55.1. Paired Recombination of Positive and Negative Ions . . . 133
55.2. Triple Recombination of Positive and Negative Ions in a Gas 161

Blhl togropl‘y I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 153

Chapter 6. Processes of Interaction of Negative Ions Nith Radiation 155
56.1. Photodecay of a Negative Ion of an Atom. . . . . . . . . . 155
56.2. Radiation Attachment of en Electron to an Atom or a

mlecule I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 169
56.3. Photodissociation of Negative Ions . . . . . . . . . . . . 172
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17‘

Preface
Negative ions play an iaportsnt role is weakly ionized gas. The transfer
of the negative charge from the electron to the negative ion leads to a

sharp decrease of the conductivity of plasma and changes the rate of the
recombination in it of the positive and negative charges. The process of

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the phoro~atiaehment of an electron to an atom influences the radiating
properties of a weakly Ionized gas. Thus. the formation of negative ions
of hydrogen in the photosphere of the sun with the photo-attachment of an
electron to an atom of hydrogen determines the radiation of the son in the
optical port ion of the spectrum. The luminescence of the night sky to a
great extent is connected with the photo-attachment of an electron to an
atom of oxygen. Negative ions play an important role in the upper atmos-
phere of the earth. where at an altitude of up to 100 km the negative
charge of the atmosphere is connected with negative ions. and the main type
of negative ions depends on the altitude and the time of day. The list of
examples demonstrating the role of negative ions could be continued. and
their number is increasing with the development of applied science in re-
cent times. mainly in connection with the development of capacitive gas
lasers. gas-discharge instruments and plasma cheaistry. All this creates
the need for information about negative ions.

The goal of this book is to present information on negative ions and the
elementary processes in which they participate. At the basis of the book
is the material of the previous books of the author_on this theme ("Atomyye
stolknoveniya i elementarnyye rotsessy v plasma" LAtomic Collisions and
Elementary Processes in Plasma . Moscow. Atoaiadat. l968;_"Iony i vosbuzh-
dennyye atomy v plat-e" [tons and Excited Atoms in Plasma]. Moscow. Atomis-
dat. 1976). This book has retained the direction of the preceding books.
the nature and manner of exposition. and for those questions. in which no
new information appeared. the materials of the preceding books were used

in it.

Along with this a large number of problems were subject to serious treat-
ment. There are directions in which in recent years fundamentally new re-

sults have been obtained. For example. a new method of measuring the ener-
gy of affinity of an electron to an atom and a molecule. which was developed
several years ago and is based on the study of the photodscay of negative
ions upon the intersection of a beam of negative ions with the beam of an
adjustable laser, made it possible to obtain a wealth of information on the
energy of affinity of electrons to an atom and a molecule with a previously
inaccessible accuracy. Modern methods made it possible to determine the
parameters of auto-ionized states for a number of molecular negative ions.
These states are formed in the process of the elastic and inelastic scat-
tering of an electron on a molecule and therefore contain intonation on
the collision of the electron with the molecule. In recent years measure-
ments of the sections of photodissociation for negative ions were made.
which previously were entirely lacking. For many problems new information
has been obtained. which is extending our notions about the topic and. of
course. is also included in the book.

in foreign literature there are a large nuﬂsr of surveys and monographs on
negative ions. The most complete one is the monograph of ll. "assay. which
has run three editions (Ii. 8. ll. Massey. ”Negative Iona.” Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. I976).

COPYRIGHT: Atomizdat. 1978

7807

C80: 1870 EN!)
‘8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY