APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000100040024-0

FEW N 1 D
.0 mm. 1979 N0. 2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pluyslral-st-ltiatleal relationshilm not taking into account the dynamics of
Infiltration and using some integral indices of soil water almorptivlty.
M the some time. the use of models of heat and moisture transfer in the
soil can considerably broaden the possibilities of computing these imiices

nnl deepening their physical content.

The most important information on the water-absorption properties of the
«oil in the formulation of the physical-statistical relationships for pre-
dlcting the. volume of the spring high water is contained in data on the
reserves and distribution of soil moisture content. but due to the great
variability of soil misture content over the area and the inadequate. vol-
ume nl observations, in place of the measured moisture reserves it is cus-
tomary to use their indirect characteristics, which are found using the
water balance equation on the basis of measurements of precipitation and
evaporation data. For example. as an indirect characteristic of the mis-
tnre reserve prior to the onset of winter it is most common to take the
sums of precipitation during the preceding three mnths with evaporation
'-|ililr:li'tt'il [lo]. Such indict-s do not take into account the processes of
moisture migration in the soil which can play a significant role in the
rhange in moisture content of the upper soil layers. especially during
Ihe period of freezing of the soil and with the ground water at a shallow
III‘PUI.

As an indirect characteristic of the thermophyslcal processes transplring
during the winter. in long-range predictions of spring runoff it is most
common to use the measured depth of soil freezing [h]. The principal
shortcoming of this index is that it does not always reflect the tempera-
tnrc regime by the time of snow melting. In addition. it must be taken
into account that the depths of freezing differ considerably in area and

the accuracy of measurements of these parameters at individual points is
low.

The equations of heat and moisture transfer make it possible. using such
readily available hydrometeorological data as those which are obserVed in
determining the usually employed indirect characteristics, to compute the
development of the principal processes of heat and moisture exchange in
the soil and to find those indices which to a considerable degree are free
.-r the shortcomings of these characteristics.

.‘.elow we will examine the method for obtaining such indices and we will
demonstrate the possibilities of their application for long-range fore-

easting of the volume of spring high water (in the example of the Kos-
troma RIVer basin as far as Buy station).

(imputation of Moisture Reserves and its Distribution in Depth

The dynamics of soil moisture content can be described using the moisture
diffusion equation

9!
FOR OFFICIAL USE max
FOR UFFICIAL USE ONLY

32; a an axon
e! 'Wl”‘"lw " T" (n

where 0 is the volumetric moisture content of the soil. 2 is the vertical
coordinate. directed downward, t is time, 0(9) is the coefficient of mole-
ture diffuniun, K(6) is hydraulic conductivity.

Due to the fact that in this case we are interested in the neon moisture
contentu for the drainage basin. as the initial conditions for solving
equation (1). clue to the great spatial variability of the moisture content
It In usually ispnsnible to use the mauured moisture content profiles
(oven in a ruse when such measurements are available for a large number of
paints). Therefore. computations made using equation (1) should begin from
the moment of disappearance of the snow, when the soil in the entire basin
In still close to total saturation. Taking into account that for determin-
ing the prewinter or winter moistening of the soil the computations in this
vane must be carried out for a long period of time and the main influence
an the mioture content of the active soil layer will be exerted by the hy-
Ilrom‘teorulogicsl conditions at the soil surface. the influence of gravita-
tional forces on mistnre content and the variability of soil hydrophyslcal
rharaeteristicn can be neglected. Then from (1) we obtain the equation

0" 0:0

where D is a constant value which can be selected using observational data
on soil moisture content.

The lcwer boundary can be stipulated at the depth where the moisture con-

tent during the sinner-autumn period changes little and it can be consid-
vrecl constant.

At the upper boundary of the considered soil layer we stipulated the condi-
t ion

-.. - a
u E .o d: "he" 0(r.0)<~..

(3)
U (I. 0) = u_ when 9“, 0) 39..

where 0 m in the maximum moisture content of the upper soil layer. R is
the intensity of precipitation. E is the intensity of evaporation from
the null surface.

For mmputing evaporation we used the formula
_-!-.u-_

rim L-.d.nc "‘“

nl’ the simpler formula
Ift')r-Ind.(l)e(0. t—ll.

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE llﬂlh'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[ll - air, If - soil] where ammo) is the deficit of soil moisture content
in the upper layer A z. duh-(t) is the air moisture content deficit, In and
k2 are emirieal constants.

Thr. dsgiﬂt) Vn!ne can be determined from the water balance equation for the
layer 1:

I I
d.(()-.—. A:iﬂ_ .-o(o, az)|_£pm +ZEU) +
[-0 1-»
(6)

+ {Noel/(1".

1-0 1--

H! - soill where q(t) is the runoff modulus,

co
l"'00—-L...' (5)

Thus, the entire model of dynamics of soil moisture content includes three
parameters: D. k and 9... The last of these parameters was stipulated us-
ing observational data on soil moisture content (as the maximum value of
the observed moisture contents).

A numerical integration of equation (2) was carried out using an implicit
four-point difference scheme with use of the "elimination" method [5].

The depth interval A: was assumed equal to 10 cm; the time interval was
assumed equal to 1 day.

on the basis of available observations oi moisture content at individual
points an optimization of the coefficients D and It was carried out and
rontrol computations were made; the latter revealed that in general the
used moisture transfer model satisfactorily describes the dynamics of mois-
ture content of the soil during suuaer and autumn. Then the optimum values
of the coefficients 0 and It were used in computing the moisture distribu-
tion with depth on the basis of the hydro-eteorologicul data averaged for
the area of the basin, beginning from the time of disappearance of the
snow to a stable transition of air temperature through O'c in autun. ‘l'he
misture distribution on the latter date was used both for determining the
index of autumn moisture reserves and as the initial conditions for comput-
ing the thermal regime of the soil in winter and prior to snow melting.

Computation of Characteristics of Soil Teaperature Regime

For describing the soil freezing process we use the following basic assump-
tions:

93
FOR m-‘FlClAL USE ONLY
FOR lil-‘FICIAI. "SI-I "NLY

I) mluture transfer in the snow and soil. except for migration of tools-
tun- from the Hum-d zone to the freezing front. exerts a weak influence
on heat transfer:

2) with migration of moisture toward the freezing front it is possible to
neglect gravitational forces;

'i) phase transformations in the some are absent:

I.) snow density and depth of the saw cover change slowly.

The introduction of these nssmptions makes it possible to reduce computa-

tions of the temperature and moisture content regises of the soil during
freezing to solution of the following problem:

 

07' (”T _
7”; "K! m; for u < z< h (f).
or! ' I f I
a, =K. ("1: of 0<g\1,,
for , (6)
or _ d: r. R 2 L.
‘f‘mn' ‘ <

T. ('1- !) = T! ('i. ”=0. Tr::r0= Tull“!

lor. m

'7 "ﬁn—‘7? =L.9!9--0.(0)]"-

19"") ‘l '

T, = ?( %). v.m<z<L.

9 (1.. I) ~-- 9. (0-. e (I. :) --_- «v

lc - snow: H - frozen soil: T - thawed soil] where z is the vertical coor-
dinate. directed downward and reckoned from the soil surface. Ts. Tfs and
T." K”. K“. and K: are the thermal conductivity coefficients. 1 fs and

A are the effective heat conductivity coefficients of frozen and thawed
wail, La Is the latent heat of fusion of ice. V'Ut) is the depth of free:-
ing. T(i) is the air temperature near the snow surface. Ts(t) is the stip-
ul-ltcd soil tenperature at the depth 1.. where the temperature variations

are traced poorly. P is water density, is the volume soil noisture con-
tent. D is the coefficient of moisture diffusion, 6a is constsnt soil mois-

lurc- content. stipulated at the depth 1.. 9n(0) is the quantity of water not
freezing at 0°C.

Ilu- phase transitions of water. not freezing at 0'6, are indirectly taken
into account in the effective thermal conductivity coefficients and the
UlCl'I-‘ll diffusivity coefficients. 60], t) is considered close to 9 n(°))°

910
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IlFFliIIM. USE ONLY

l-‘or numerical integration of systes (6) we used the "through calculation"
metimd with an implicit difference nchese reconnended for solution of the
Stefan probles in [5].

amputations were made for the soil layer 1.5 n with intervals A s - 1.0 CIII
and At . 1 day.

The coefficients Km. lit, “(3 and 7h. and also the quantity of water not
freezing at 0‘0 were found by the optissization method using observational
dnta on the depth of freezing. The K. value was determined tron snow den-

sit usln the Yanson forsula
y “ K. = 86.4 (12 p: + 0.1 9." +3.8)-

lc - snow] where P. is anew density. glen).
Derivation of Prognostic: Expressions

As the indices of autumn moistening of the basin. on the basis of the con-
puted moisture content values we determined the value

3' w u” (l

WO-IG = 2 e (2‘, (0"
”-0

where to is the date of stable transition of air temperature through o'c
and an the indices of mlstening of the basin prior to selting of the snow

we use the characteristic of soil ice content. which was found as

I. so!

J! = 2 I9 (1... I.) - ”. (0)] 9 ('11). (7)
ms- 0
where 7}. is the sexism depth of freezing. 9 ('11) is a weighting func-
tion. selected in such a way that the greatest value was assigned to the
upper soil layers.

As the index of cold reserves in the soil prior to snow selting we used the
value
I. u I.

H: 2 "no. +p.C.e.(on re.) +9.L9.(1.)li?(8:)- ‘8’

'[F0

[ll - sniil where 0'30“ is the volumetric weight of the soil. P" and
P l are the densities of water and ice respectively [B - water - w, .n I
lee - ll, c” and Cu are the heat capacities of the soil and water (the
value C“ - stI ask [3), 91(21) is volunetric ice content.

Taking into account that the heat content of the soil skeleton and the non-
freezing water is usually appreciably less than the quantity of heat neces-
sary for the thawing of the ice contained in the soil. the li value is also
an index of the ice content.

95
Pilli "VFICML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1hr vnluuu w0_‘ u' l llllaunllllnl were computed for all years for which
runoff observot ons were available (1962-1973) on the basis of area-aver-
aged data for hydromcteorologicai observations in the basin of the Kostroma
River to Buy station (the area of the basin was 8,870 km .

in order to derive the dependences between tie runoff volumes at high water
and the principal factors determining it. we used data from hydrometeoroiog-
icai observations during the period from 1942 through 1963. 0bservatioaa1
data for the neriod from 1966 through 1973 were used in making trial fore-
casts of meltwater runoff.

The water reserves in the snow by the onset of snow melting were computed
using data from snow-measuring surveys.

hor determining the maximum water reserves in the snow at the end of winter
we used ubservationni data in field sectors of the basin, since regular
«now-measuring surveys in the forests in the considered area began only in
1967. The snow reserves in the forest were determined during the entire
uhscrvatlou period by multiplying the snow reserves in the field sectors

hy the factor 1.1. The mean maximum water reserves in the basin snow were
computed using the formula

ls; |— San
s,. ( «H n (9)

( 5- b(usin); "- f(ieid); n - for(est)] where Sf, Sfor are the mean water
reserves in the snow, for field and forest sectors of the basin respective-
ly; <1 is the forest cover of the basin in fractions of the area, assumed
to be equal to 0.75.

The dates of onset of the maximum snow reserves were averaged for the basin.

in the vaiue of the water reserve in the snow cover we added the precipita-
tion during the period of thawing of the snow and the water reserves in the
ice crust at the soil surface.

From the volume of spring runoff of the Kostroma River at Buy station we
excluded the ground water and rain components of spring runoff. The ground
water runoff was determined by means of horizontal cutting. rain water run-
off was determined by cutting of the high water on the high—water hydro-
urnph using a typical dropoff curve.

The dependence: yt - f1(s, ”0-100), y: - £2(s, I) and y: - f3($, N). where
y is the volume of the spring high water. 5 is the total water reserve in
the basin, are given in Fig. l.

The scan square error in the dependence y; I f1(S. ”0.100) for the years

which were used in its construction was found to be equal to 13 mm with a
ratio of the mean square error s to the standard deviation of runoff from
the norm s/C7'- 0.26 for the dependence y! - ((S, i) -- 10 mm when s/cr -

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fun uH-‘ICIM. llSl-t ONLY

0.20. for the dependence y: - f(S. ll) -- ll nu when old - 0.22.

 

0 unwummmsm

Fig. 1. Dependence of runoff volume of Kostrona River during high water per-
lod on snow reserves and lndlces of soil noistening 'uy onset of winter "0-100
(a), tee content of upper soil layers before snow melting I (b) and cold re-
serve in upper soil layers before snow melting H-lO'l (c).

For the years which were not used in constructing the dependences, the error
for the dependence y . f(S. H) is equal to 11. II when s/d - 0.28, for the
dependence y; - ((8,!) - 13 II when s/O' - 0.26. for the dependence y: -
{(8, ll) -- 13 II when s/O' - 0.26.

According to the lnatrucr lons for the Forecasting Service [3], such prognos-
llc dependence» can he classlf led as good. whlch indicates an adequate in-
Inrnntlnn content of the used runoff loss indicea.

8 131.106th

I. Kullk. V. Ye., "H’del of Water Infiltration into Frozen Soil and Its Ap-
plication for Computlng Meltwnter bosses," METEOROIDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA

(Meteorology and Hydrology), No 8. pp 106-58. 1973.

2. Motovllov, Yu. (2., "Numerical Modeling of the Process of Water Infiltra-
tion into Frozen Soils." METEOROWGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA, No 9, pp 65-75.
1977.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NASTAVLENIYF. P0 SLUZIIBP. VROGNOZOV (Inatructlons for the Forecasting
Service). Section 3, Part I, Leningrad. Gldroneceoudac. pp 51-57,
1962.

RUKOVODSTVO P0 GIDROLOGICRESKIH PROCNOZAH (Manual on Hydrological Fore-
cnatn), No 2. Leningrad. Gldronetooizdat. 1963. 279 poses.

Sanarckty. A. A.. WBDENIYB V TBORIYU MINOSTNYKH SKHEH (Introduction to
the Theory of Difference Schema), Moscow. "Hanks," 1971, 550 pages.

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR HFFICIAL "SH “NLY

UDC 556.06(070.03)

PREDICTION OF HYDROGRAP" 0? SPRING INFLOH 0P HATER INTO RAMA RESERVOIR FOR
UP TO 190 MONTRS IN ADVANCE

Hnscnw METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOCIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 80-87

[Article by Doctor of Geographical Sciences V. I. Ssposhnikov. USSR liydro-
meteorological Scientific Research Center. submitted for publication 16
June 1978]

Abstract: The article describes methods for the
long-range forecasting of the hydrogrsph for
water inflow into the Kean Reservoir based on
the 10-day period distribution of the voluae
of spring runoff (predicted on the basis of
snow reserves) from five parts of the basin
using standard high-water hydrogrsphs. The
latter were obtained taking into account the
water levels on rivers at the tine of the fore-
cast, the anticipated 10-day air tesperature
during snow aelting and the 10-day runoff pre-
dicted on the basis of hydrnaetric and meteor-
ological data. The hydrogrsph predictions are
given at the end of each 10 days of the ini-
tial stage of high water.

[Text] The Kass Reservoir was formed as a result of blocking of the Kama
River in 1956 by the duo of a hydroelectric power station above Peru'.

lt collects water fro. an area of 168.000 Iul of wooded plain and the western
slopes of the Ural Mountains. The entry of salt and rain water in this basin
1s characterized by a considerable nonuniforaity in space and tins.

Daily information on the actual inflow of water into the reservoir Qin for
providing data to the hydroelectric power station are determined by the
method developed at the Kean Hydroaeteorological Observatory. taking into
account the sun of water flows of the rivers entering the reservoir:

[W - in(flow) 0...: '--' 01.: rOIJ-I- 03.: +Qc.a+Ql.t. (I)

where 01, 02”... Q are the water discharges in the rivers: 1) Kane e5 Bon-
Ilyug village (66, o 3.2), 2) Vishera st Ryabinino village (30,900 In: ).
J) Chusovaya at Lyaaaino station (21,500 lunz), lo) Sylva at Podkalnnnyy
99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

village (l9,700 kmz) and S) from a lateral area, equal to 69.600 kmz.

The inflow from the lateral area 05 is computed approximately using the
equation

95'0-|3(Q:+Qa)+ L51 Q.+s.520.+2.oe Q.+1.28 o.+1.45 o... (2)

where the subscripts for the water discharges designate the statioas: 6)
Ust'-lgum village on the Yayve River (573 km2 ). 7) Oshchepkovo village on

the Kondasa River (896 km2 ), 8) Sludka village on the In' ve River (5. 213
kmz). 9) Rozhdestvenskove village on the Obve River (5, 560 km2 ), lO) Ontanino
village on the Koa' ve River (6 220 kmz).

1his inflow into the reservoir computed on the basis of formulas (l) and (2)
during the spring high waters of past years is used for developing a method
for the long-range forecasting of its hydrograph. Such work was done sep-
arately for each of the five partial basins (1). As a result. it was pos-
sible to take into account the spatial and temporal variability of runoff
in the basin of the Upper Kama. exerting s substantial influence on the
form of the high water hydrograph. The spring runoff volumes necessary in
this case for parts of the basin are predicted using its dependences on

the water reserves in the snow cover [1]. During the development of high
water its volume is refined on the basis of the runoff of small rivers,
taking into account the remaining ane~ reserves using the method proposed
by Yu. V. Gorbunov and V. A. Zykova [2].

The anticipated volume of spring inflow from each part of the basin is dis-
tributed during the time of the high water using standard hydrographs ob-
tained using the characteristics of the actual and anticipated (on the
basis of a weather forecast) state of hydrometeorological conditions with
subsequent summing of the high-water hydrographs for high water from all
parts of the basin (1).

The initial data for developing the method for predicting the inflow hydro~
graph were the mean lO-dny water discharges during the high-water period for
1936-1971 (or four rivers flowing into the reservoir. The hydrographs from
the lateral area for the past years were computed using equation (2).

The method proposed below for the long-range forecasting of the distribu-
tion of spring water inflow into the Kama Reservoir by 10-day periods pro-
vides for the preparation of forecasts at different times in the initial
high-water stage. Usually the high water on the rivers in the basin of the
Upper Kama begins during the first l0 days in April. Therefore. for predict-
ing the hydrograph of inflow into the reservoir we used constant dates: 31
lurch, 10. 20 and 30 April. These data were used in a classification of the
high-water hydrographs for the five parts of the Kama River basin above the
line of the Kama Hydroelectric Power Station, including the four rivers
flowing into the reservoir and the lateral area. The anticipated volumes

of spring discharge at these times are distributed for the high-water period

100

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
FOR (IFFICIM. USE UNLY

by mean ten-day water discharges to the end of July.

As lndlces of the actual state of the water regime in the classification we
usrd the water levels on the rivers at the time of the forecast. The antic-
ipa :ed conditions for subsequent melting of the snow. exerting an influence
on the intensity of development of high water, are characterized by the pre-
dicted 10-day air temerature [3. 4].

At the adopted forecast times a using the mean long-term water levels "11 on
rivers flowing into the reservoir (1). and for the lateral area (2). whose
runoff was aasmed to characterize approximately the levels of the Kos'va
River at Ostenino. all the spring high waters were divided into two groups
which had water leve_l_a at the time of the forecast Iln greater than and less
than the neon level II“. The group with the values lin>iln was related to the
early hluh waters. since by the time of the forecast the levels had already
definitely developed and had attained values higher than the usual at these
times. “me spring high waters whose water levels at the time of the forecast

were less than the mean values on these dates ﬂn<ﬁn were classified as
"late."

Since the mean of the positive air tewerature values for the 10-day period
after preparation of the forecast '9 +10 was used as a "harmony" index for c
the development of high water. all the spring high waters for which 3 “+10
was above the mean for the long-ten period 5 n+i0' are assumed to be har-
monious 6M10)9 n+l0' when after the date of the forecast the 10-day air

tewerature was lower than the mean value 3w0<9 "+10. then such spring
high waters are classified as "nonharmonious.'

Thus. on the basis of two criteria - the water levels on the rivers at the
time of the forecast ﬁn and the anticipated 10-day air temperature 6 “+10
-- all the spring high waters in each special basin 1 were distributed in
four groups J, whose hydrographs are arbitrarily called:

— I. — '
early nrmonious ”'9’“. 6.no>9..ouo:

- early nonharmonlous II.>II.,§....<—e..w;
-- late harmonious ”n<”m—9mo>§.-m;
-- late nonharmonious II..<I7.. 6auo<enuo

For thesv groups we obtained the mean herographs of the 10-day high-water
discharges

61.1.: = 7:, 2 Qt. I. h

[II

where N Is the number of spring high waters in each j-th group of the i-th
special basin.

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ”FFICIM. USE ONLY

'l‘ln- hydrnnruplm nhiaIm-ul In this c'mu- are reduced to the menu long-term
high-water runoff in the i-th part of t basin using the expression

£62.

QI-I-I 7' 'T—_ 1.1.:-

Z'vl. I. I

which includes the sums of the Eater discharges during the period of high
water T of a normal hydrograph 6%,: and the mean hydrograph for each j-th

nroup of spring high waters during this sane time 61 . The water dis-
charges of typical spring high waters are plotted in'fdgles. which are
usually used in the preparation of forecasts.

(3)

We note that in developing the method for predicting the hydrographs for
Inflow into the reservoir and in their classification use is made of the
obserVod air temperature in the basins. and in the prediction - the pre-
dlutcd air temperature in the basins [3, a], which makes it possible to
Lake Into account the anticipated (on the basis of the weather forecast)
um-teorological conditions. At the time of the forecast, for each special
hasln it is necessary to know two classification criteria -- the water lev-

vls on the rivers and the air temperature predicted for the subsequent 10-
dny period. Using these criteria it is possible t2 establish the type of
anticipated hydrogrsph for the high water season 01.3.: from each part of
the basin and the predicted water discharges are computed using the expres-

sion .3. a
Q " i..l'
I,LI " I (4)
in which yg is the predicted spring runoff, 7 is its norm, 31 t are the

water discharges from an i-th part of the basin (j-th standardjhigh-wster
hydrographh reduced using formula (J) to a long-tern series.

The substitution of the computed values (6) into (1) gives an expression for
the long-range forecasting of the water inflow hydrograph during the time
of high water for the waters flowing into the Kama Reservoir

In. inUIOUH q, ,22‘1L301 I (5)
III}: . . .

In the example of 1974. without going into detail, we will illustrate the
ucaunacc for preparation of a long-range prediction of the distribution of
lhe nprlng inflow into the Kama Reservoir by 10-day periods. The prediction
is given using the predicted volume of high water using standard distribu-
tions of spring runoff from 10 April through the end of July. The initial
data necessary for such a forecast - the anticipated layer of spring run-
off y. its norn ; and the modular coefficient k - y/y, the water levels on

102
FOR HFFICIM. USE (INLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l0 April “to [‘1' their norm i 0 IV and the mean 10-day air temperature

611-20 1v expected from the orecast) are given in Table. l for five parts
of the basin.

The volumes of spring runoff y for special basins - the Kama River to Band-
yug. ilw \‘lshom River to Ryabinino and the Chusovsya River to Lyamino --

are predicted using the dependencea (derived at the State Hydrological In-
stitute [1]) on the maximum water reserves in the snow y - f (s) and_on the

snow reserves. taking into account the precipitation norms y - f(s+x). For
special basins -- the Sylva River to Podksmennyy and the lateral area
(69,600 kmz) -- the anticipated later of spring runoff is adopted using the
same dependences derived for the entire basin of the Kama Reservoir.

Using the characteristics H10 IV and 6114.20 IV cited in Table 1 it was pos-
sible to establish corresponding standard hydrographa for each part of the
lmsin. Their water discharges are taken from the above-mentioned summary
tables. Then the discharges are multiplied by the modular coefficients of

the anticipated spring runoff and for each 10-day period to the end of July
.Ire sumed from the five parts of the basin (5).

For predicting the hydrograph of water inflow into the llama Reservoir at

the above-mentioned times we also developed a second method, which makes it
possible. using the volume of spring runoff together with the use of water
levels on rivers at the time of the forecast H“, to take into account the
mean water discharges Qn+10 for the subsequent 10-day period as a character-
istic of the harmony of the high water period. As a result of separation of
the high-water hydrographs for past years on the basis of these criteria

into four groups. their averaging and reduction to the norm (3), the four
following types of spring high water were defined:

-- early harmonious

{1.)}7'". m||o>§n0lm

- early nonharmonious 1!,»le 0:.,°<Q_.,,,

-- late harmonious MK”... 6nono>3mo "

-- late I-onharmonious Il..<”... 6...o<6a-uo.
where 5mm are the mean long-term 10-day water discharges.

In each special basin, on the basin of hydrometric data and the course of
snow melting and rains. we obtained dependences for prediction of 10—day
runoff. For the first 10-day period after the date of preparation of the
hydrograph forecast we use the predicted runoff using the dependences on
channel water volumes at the time of the forecast and the predicted inflow
of melt and rain water, whereas for the subsequent 10-day periods the runoff

is determined on the basis of its standard distributions using the formula
(5).

103
Fox mucus. USE ONLY
diction of ﬂydrograph of Spring Water Inflow into Kama Reservoir Prep

.91: of "are: Levels in Rivers at the Time of the Forecast H10 IV’ Ant
:uperamres 6 11-20 IV and Spring Runoff Volumes y in Five Parts of Ba

__—————

 

_—_———-——

2 Omnzacuue nun-me pouch: scan at n, n t,
____________—-——

y .—
'5' ”'0" WWW 0"_,,w Tun lllEab 3‘ uni {I l mu» 5
l I II I"

y u :41 .
1 ll lm I I lu lm

7 p Kan—c. Sana-o.-
.06; m | 89 I—I.0|pu | 17¢.518I2meIu9lI2mIsrm 699]

 

 

8 p. Buuepa—noc may...»
"47 l 102 | 98 | -—I.5 | pun | 260i ‘38ll514lﬂk';2|:ﬂ1?_2tlu| Hill 945]

9 p. qymu—m..7uuuo
1.09] m | 284 | 9.9 | mu | 251] cuﬂ||6l3|lw; 380: “1 J59! I3“

10 p. C-uu—r. ”Wauw
l.l0| 391 | I77 I 4.5 I In I 959 75213?“ 22mm": Ital ml I3“

11 6m Mo. 49500 a! (ypouu: p. Kenn—0. Ornvnmo)
1.0 I m I m I 1.42I mu I me 1517 I um; um I was: um I l267| 80*

12 06mm npum 1 Karma: ooaoxpanuJquc

753‘) 9789 10149 77”

30!?- “43

 

 

 

14 q.;__ __ I ”sue 7109mm soot ml 4.512 no"
‘5_ Orv-ow“ .42. 25.7 2.2 15.1 13.1 4.4 3.: -43.:

 

 

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KHY T0 TABLE 1:

1. Type _ =

2. Anticipated [0-day water discharges Q1. Pm - "iQi,j.t mJ/aec
3. April

’0. Ha)

). June

6. July

7. Kama River - Bondyug village

8. Vishera River - Ryahiniao village

9. Chusovaya River -- Lynmino station

10. Sylva River - Podkaoennyy village

ll. Lateral area 49.600 luaz (levels: Kos'va River - 0stanino village)
l2. Total inflow into Kano Reservoir

I}. predicted

[4. actual

The dependences for predicting the 19-day runoff ill-”lo for each special basin
include three components of the anticipated runoff

'Q'.m-'Q.+Ua+'03. (6)

mused. respectively, by the channel water volumes at the tine of the fore-
cast. the water inflow into the river network at this same moment and the
anticipated entry of melt and rain water.

The channel reserves Rn and the inflow into the river network on at the time
of the forecast are computed in each special basin at 3-6 hydronetric sta-

tions using the formulas .v
W 7.: E. “I Q“ (7)
q .-. o, + .\ W. (8)

where a' are constant coefficients. determined taking into account the water

travel time in river reaches. Q1 are the water discharges at N stations.
All in the change in water channel volumes during a computation time unit
equal to two days.

The components in equation (6) for each part of the basin are determined in
the following way. first using observational data _f_or past years we con-
struct curves of the dependencea of 10-day runoff Qua-10 on the channel
water volunea at the time of the forecast "11(7). for the declining part of
the runoff. froa the envelope from the direction of the volumes axes we de-

termine the component 01 - all", where a is a constant value. From the dif-
ference Qn+10 - all“ and the water inflow into the river network at the tine
of the forecast an (8), for the period of decline we obtain the dependence
of the component Q; - be". where h is a constant coefficient. The actual

105

FOR ilf‘f'lillfd. USE ONLY
FUR (lFFliIIM USE ONLY

values of the component 63 caused by meltwnter-rainwnter runoff. are deter-
mined from the differences Qn+10 - all" - ban. for which their dependencea
on the anticipated receipt of melt h: and rain hr water are determined.

The method for computing the receipt of melt water at the basin surface

has been developed quite fully by V. D. Komarov [S]. The method uses the
maximum water reservoa in the snow. their probability curves for field and
forest. and the constant coefficients for melting in open and forested
areas. After approximately 201 of the snow reserves are melted the water re-
lease from the snow cover begins [6]. Therefore. the computations of receipt
of melt wnter at the surface of open and wooded parts of the basin usually
begin after accumulation of the sum of degrees of positive air temperature

86.4» '~'- 04.2."... n (9)
‘

IMAKC - max; e - thaw(inn)l where h.“ are the maximum water reserve'I in
the snow cover. The thawing coefficient it how is assumed for the field and
forest to be S and 2 on respectively per degree of positive mean daily air
temperature. For the initial sum of degrees of positive temperature in ac-
vurdance with expression (9) we adopted the values for an open area

28+ H 0.04 In.“
and for a wooded area

:9 f = 0.0l I'm“-
[HAKC - max]

The probability curves for snow renerves, necessary for computing snow thaw-
ing. for the conditions in the Kama River basin. were taken as determined
by the V. V. Rakhmanov method [7]. They were computed from the curves for
the micro-and merodiatribution of the snow cover and in essence more fully
characterize the conditions under which the snow lies in the five consider-
vd parts of the basin.

The preeomputatlon of the melt-rain component '53 on the basis of the course
of snow melting and precipitation is accomplished for each special basin
using the formula

 

_ 3-"..‘r-.,,04_" nun -
63. um __ 5" a i -_ . I 2 k.(h,+h.)p :1, IO). (10)
2 him may“, l0) 1"
Isl-l0

IT - u'haw). ll - rninl where all-10 are the mean water discharges for the
PM: (u-lo) 10-day period. "“40 and qn—io are the channel volumes and in-
flow Into the river network at the beginning of the past 10-day period
(n-IO). kl is the conversion factor from the runoff layer in millimeters
in the water discharges in mJIsec, h and brain is the layer of melt and
rain water entering into the basin (determined l0 days before the time of
the forecast and [0 days thereafter respectively). The transformation of
the layer of melt and rain runoff in each special basin is accomplished
using the travel time curves p(f). which are determined from individual

106
FOR ”FFICIAL list: mm
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high waters formed from the precipitation falling during the computation
time interval. lly means of averaging for lO-day time segmnts of these

curves we obtain the distributions p({ . 10) for computing the 10-day
runoff [8].

0n the right-hand side of expression (10) the ratio of the coaponent 03.“-10
during the past lO-day period. computed on the basis of hydrometric data,
on the one hand. and on the basis of the layer of melt and rain water up

to the forecast time. on the other hand. is a relatively stable value.
Computations for a number of spring high waters indicate that this ratio
changes. for the most part. from high water to high voter in the range
0.02-0.05 and is somewhat less variable during a period of high water. Ac-
cordingly. in a prediction of the component 03 "+10 the persistence of this
ratio is admissible only vithin the mentioned liaits. The value of the com-
ponent Q],n+10 for the next [0-day period is computed from the receipt of
melt water at the basin surface. predicted taking into account the antic-
ipated air temperature. The lO-day runoff precomputed in this way is used
in predicting the total inflow into the Kama Reservoir during the 10-day
period after preparation of the forecast and in determining the standard

hydrograph for the subsequent lO-day periods on the basis of the H“ and
Qn+10 criteria.

A prediction of the lO-day inflow of vster into the Kama Reservoir at the
time of high water is made using the sum of the predicted values of this
inflou from five parts of the basin

0

in .. lnl '0»..+no=2(a.W...+b.o...+O'..,..,,,). on
Is'

In this expression the anticipated values of the component of the lO-day

runoff from snow melting after the prediction date are computed using for-

mula (10). During the first period of high water the relative role of this

component is great: in the second case. after snow melting. it decreases
substantially.

An evaluation of the probable success of long-range forecasts of the hydro-
;raph of water inflow into the Kama Reservoir for a 35-year period was made
for the entire high-water period on the basis of calendar lO-day water dis-
charges. First for each lO-day period for a long-term period we determined

the standard deviations Crof voter discharges and the mean square errors in
predictions of the [0-day water dischargea s. Using the ratio s/Zr ve deter-

mined the effectiveness of the method for predicting the lO-day vater dia-
chargea during the time of high water.

The computations ande by Z. l. Rubtsova and V. T. Kurbatova demnstrated
that for most of the lO-dey discharges of veter inflow into the Kama Res-
ervoir. predicted for a period of up to too months. sla’ is 0.52-0.84.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

6.

FOR (ll-'FICIM. "SI-2 ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Alyushinsknyn. N. H.. Osadchaya. N. N.. Savine. L. K.. "Peculiarities
in the Formation of Spring Runoff in the Upper Kass Basin and Evalua-
tion of the Possibilities of long-Range Forecasting of Hater Inflow
into the Rana Reservoir." TRUDY GGI (Transactions of the State Hydro-
logical Institute). No 233. pp 27-h0. 1977.

Gorbunov. Yu. V.. Zykova. V. A.. ”Prediction of Hater Inf1ow into the
Kama Reservoir During the High-Hater Period Using Data on the Runoff
of Snell Rivers." TRUDY GIDROHET'SENTRA SSSR (Transactions of the USSR
Nydroneteoro1ogicnl Center). No 113. pp 118-126. 1973.

Kata. A. 1.. "Seheae for Synoptic-Rydrodyna-ic-Statistical Heather Fore-
casting for 3-10 Days." HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA (Meteorology and
Hydrology). No 6. pp 15-25. 1973.

Kate. A. L.. Burlutakaya. V. H.. Fedulova. H. N.. "Prediction of the

Neon Temperature of Spring Ten-Day Periods with Allowance for Future
Circulntion Charts." TRDDY GIDROHETTSENTRA SSSR. No 1&6. pp 66-55. 1975.

Konnruv. V. 0.. CIDROLOGICRESKIY ANALIZ I PROGNOZ VESENNEGO POLOVOD'YA
RAVNINYKR REX (Hydrological Analysis and Prediction of Spring High
Water in Lowland Rivers). Leningrad. Gidro-eteoizdat. 1955. 304 pages.

Lebedeva. N. 0.. "Method for Short-Range Forecasting of the Hydrogrsph
For Inflow into the Kass hydroelectric Power Station Reservoir." TRUDY
TsIP (Transactions of the Central Institute of Forecasts). ho 130. pp 87-
125. 1963.

Rakhnnnov. V. V.. "Ssoothing-Out of the Empirical Distribution of Snow
Reserves in River Basins Using Pearson Curves." TRUDY GIDROHETTSENTRA
SSSR, No 55. pp 92-101. 1969.

Sapozhnikov. V. 1.. PROGNOZY STOKA REX V BASSEYNE VOLGI P0 RUSLOVYH
ZAPASAH VODY I PRITOKU V RECHNUYU SET' (Predictions of River Runoff
in the Vo1ga Basin from the Channel Reserves of Hater and Inflow into
the River Network). Moscow. Gidroneteoizdat. I960. 289 pages.

108
FI)“ "FFIC'I‘IL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 556.132

APPLICATION OF SIMILARITY THEORY TO COMPUTATION OF EVAPORATION FRO“
A HATER SURFACE

Hoscow HETBOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 88-95

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences R. 1. Gets, Limnological
institute Siberian Department USSR Academy of Sciences. submitted for pub-
lication 30 Hay 1978]

Abstract: On the basis of processing of observa-
tional data an evaporation from a water surface

by the methods of similarity theory it was pos-
sible to define tvo evaporation regimes. Equations
were derived for the dependence of the dimension-
less evaporation rate on the determining factors.
For the case of forced convection in the region
B-lO‘C Re<20° [05. corresponding to a wind velo-
city from 1.7 to 6.0 m/sec. the dimensionless evap-
oration rate is an unambiguous function of the Rey-
nolds number. It is shown that the evaporation rate
is directly proportional to the wind velocity in
the power n (less than unity) and is inversely
proportional to the extent of the evaporating
surface in the power l-n. A dependence is deriv-

ed for computing the conversion factor (reduction

coefficient) from the readings of one evaporation
apparatus to another.

[Text] Despite the extensive literature on the problem of evaporation from
a water surface the problem of its reliable determination is far from solv-
ud. Among the existing methodological approaches to the estimation of evap-
oration from water bodies the one of the greatest interest from the prac-
tical point of view is the hydrometeorological method. This makes it pos-
sible to compute the evaporation value on the basis of empirical expres-
sions and using standard hydrometeorological observations. Many such ex-
pressions have now been accumulated. However. the complexity of the evapor-
ation process, determined by many factors of the evaporating medium and
the atmosphere situated above it and the absence of a clear idea concern-
ing some details of its physical structure have not yet made it possible
to obtain a dependence satisfying the most uifferent conditions.

109

FOR OFFICIhL USE ONLY
FOR HFVICIAL USE ONLY

Hunt of the existing empirical dependences are represented in the form

I:'-A (r.— .-,....)u ‘ Bit/g"). (I)

the values of the constant factors A and B ard the exponents a differ rather
broadly in the writings of different authors, corresponding to the hydro-
dynamic conditions of water vapor transport from the surface of a specific
evaporator into the atmosphere during some period. Accordingly. the empir-
ical dependences have a local character. The extension of the region of
their application to other evaporators uni to other natural conditions
usually results in a decrease in their accuracy.

Strictly speaking. the empirical dependences are applicable only in those
conditions and in those evaporators for which they were obtained. In this
respect turbulent diffusion methods are more flexible; they take into ac-
count hydrodynamic evaporation conditions not averaged over the water area
and with time. but in dependence on the state of the evaporating surface
and the near-water air layer at a definite point at a specific moment in time.
To be sure. a number of assumptions. the low reliability in determining the
parameters of the turbulent diffusion formulas, the need for a poorly sup-
ported interpolation. and in particular. their extrapolation over the area
of water bodies (frequently having a complex morphological structure. and
hence nonuniform hydrodynamic and thermal conditions of the water surface).
and finally. the inevitability of their averaging over the computation time
intervals. virtually wipe out the advantages which are given by these for-
mulas due to a more rigorous allowance for the physical side of the process.
As a result. the turbulent diffusion formulas are reduced to the level of
local empirical dependences.

The existence of a large number of computation dependences is a normal con-
sequence of inadequacy of the methodological approach and the mathematical
expression of the physical essence of the evaporation process to the pro-
cess itself. Thus. the manifestation of a dialectic contradiction in learn-
ing about any natural phenomenon is clear. Naturally. for eliminating the
contradiction which arises there must be a qualitative jump both in the
experimental study of the process and also in the approach to formulating
its mathematical model.

in this paper. for interpreting the results of standard observations of
evaporation from a water surface, we have used similarity theory methods
making it possible to take into account the conditions and degree of similar-
lty or the studied phenomenon.

The soundness of applications of similarity theory is contained in a whole
series of studies by Soviet and foreign authors [2. 6. 7. 8. ‘1. 16-17 and
others]. It can be summarized as foilovs. A set of dimensional parameters,
characterizing a definite process. is equivalent to a set of dimensionless

complexes (similarity criteria) formed from them, and therefore, the inte-
gral of the differential equation. describing the process, can be repre-
sented as a function of the mentioned dimensionless complexes. At the

110
FOR OFFlCth USE ONLl
FOR OFFICIAL "SF. ONLY

same time. similarity theory applies to the dissemination of the experi-
mental results only to similar phenomena. establishing. on the basis of
an analysis of similarity criteria. the limits of the latter.

Similarity theory has found its broadest application in technical applica-
tions. especially is the solution of heat exchange problems. for which it
has been adequately well developed. Since the processes of heat and mass
exchange are described, in principle. by one and the same differential
equations, the criterlal or generalized methods for solving applied heat
exchange problems, developed on the basis of similarity theory. are also
applicable to mass exchange processes.

The Pick equation

%=D(%+%+%)' (2)

relating the rate of mass transfer dq/dc to the field of concentrations

q in the solution of the stationary problem for the case of forced convec-
tion. makes it possible to generalize data an evaporation in the form of
.1 criteria! dependence [6, 9. 10]

Nuo = KRQ“ Pig. (3)

where Nun - PL/D is the dimensionless coefficient of mass transfer (ﬂus-
selt diffusion number; in the foreign literature known as the Sherwood num-
ber. Sh): Re - "LIV is the Reynolds number; Prn - 9/0 is the Prandtl dif-
fusion criterion. sometimes called the Schmidt number. Sc; H is the velocity
of movement of a fluid or gas; # is the mass transfer coefficient; L is

the characteristic dimension; 'v is the coefficient of kinematic viscosity;
0 is the molecular diffusion coefficient.

Among the attempts at application of similarity theory to study and cowut—
ations of evaporation from a water surface. carried out on the basis of

laboratory experiments. we will mention the equations derived by L. S. bey-
henzon [9]. A. c. Kolesnikov [5]. A. V. Lykov [9] and A. V. Neeterenko [12].

According to Lykov. the equation for the evaporation rate in dimensionless
coordinates has the form

.I . KRc'. (1.)

where K and n vary in dependence on the Re number. The Lyhov dependence it-
«ell’ was approximated graphically using a curve convex to the Re axis. Lat-
er I. P. Budnrov [1] found its analytical expression

A-6.3+0.l62 Re”. (5)

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFICIAL USE UNIX

The first attempt to use similarity theory for study and description of
evaporation from evaporators and evaporation basins. insofar as known to

the author from the Russian literature. was made by z. Sakipov [13]. Taking
the Lykov scheme as h's basis. Sakipo: obtained a dependence which in the
first approximation is described by his using two equations:

A =0.072 R'J‘”. [of thc region 2X '0‘ 5 R” 5 (”00’ (6)
A "0.002 Row for the V0810" Re :5 3X10'. (7)

Equation (6) is derived easily by proceeding from the following reasoning.
According to Dalton's law, the evaporation rate 138 can be represented by
the exprersion

A E-ﬁsiqo—m). (0)
hence b _ AE
" ”NT-7;)“
(9)

Here ﬂ is the already known mass transfer coefficient (evaporation coef-
ficient); qo and q; is air specific humidity at the water surface level
and at a height of cm; 3 is the area of the evaporating surface. equal
to the product of L x L; L is a side of an equivalent square. used as the

characteristic dimension. (For evaporation apparatus with an area of 100,
20. 3 and 0.3 m2 L was assumed equal to 10.0 a; 6.5 n; 1.7 m and 0.56 m
respectively).

Substituting (9) into the formula for Nun and converting from specific humid-
ity to water vapor elasticity, we obtain the expression

T—u- m__ m) = K Re“ Prg. (10)

where R‘ is the universal gas constant. kg'n/(mol-degree); T - 273 + t (t
' (to + tzoo)/2, to and :200 is the temperature of the water surface and
.nir at a height of 200 cm; "va [ﬂ'- vap) is the molecular weight of water
vapor. kg/mol; D is the diffusion coefficient_for water vapor in the air.
adopted from [10]. equal to 0.0792 + 0.00041. c, mzlhour.

The kinematic viscosity coefficient \’in determining the Re number was com-
puted from the dependence [1!)

v . (menace?) x 10-0. mzlsec. (11)

The value of the Prsndtl diffusion number for water is close to unity (about
0.75) and the value of the exponent m varies from 0.30 to 0.6b, averaging
0.33 [9].

Dividing the equation (10) term-by-term by Pr; and denoting its left-hand
side by A, we obtain the sought-for expression A-KRC“

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“A

 

Fig. 1. Dependence of dimensionless evaporation rate A on Reynolds number
Re. 1) 061-3000 evaporator in around; 2) 001-3000 evaporator in water body
(Kenglrskoye Reservoir); 3) evaporation basin with area of 3 .2 in ground;
In) evaporation basin with area of 20 a2 in ground; 5) evaporation basin
with area 20 s2 in water body (Kengirskoye Reservoir): 6) evaporation basin
with area 100 I2.

Hith known A the evaporation rate A 8 is deteruined using the equation
AE-A 9i, (la—em). (12)

For determining the numerical tors of the dependence (6) we used observa-
tional data from the water evaporation network of the USSR usin Got-3000
evaporators, evaporation basins with an area of 3, 20 and 100 a , located
in different natural zones and taking in the tile period from 1953 through
1969 inclusive. As a result of the cosputations nade for sonthly tine in-
tervals (totalling 316 nonth-points) we obtained the dependence of the
evaporation rate on the determining factors in dimensionless coordinates
(Fig. l). The dependence has a couple: character and is described by the
equations

I. A-ll2 Rt"~°‘" (13)

for the region he‘d x 10" (cot-3000 evaporator)
and

for the region a x 10% Res 20 x 105

Ill. A-0.083 Rea" (1‘)

(apparatus of all types):

113
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll. A-lSl-l Rt“-"" (15)

for the region ne4§5 x 105 (basin 20 m2).

It can be seen from the cited equations (l3)-(15) that in a forced convec-
tion regime (dependence (16)), corresponding for the evaporation basins to
wind velocities of 1.6 m/sec or more. the dimensionless eVuporation rate

for all the enumerated types of evaporation apparatus is an unambiguous func-
tlon of the Re number.

with a decrease in wind velocity the influence of the Re number on the in-
tensity of evaporation is lessened. which on the graph (Fig. l) is manl-
iested in a decrease in the slope of the correlation line to the Re axis.
The latter hypothetically indicates that with definite dimensions of the
evaporating surface and small wind velocities the evaporation rate becomes
self-similar relative to Re. A tendency to this can be traced easily, in
particular, from equations (13) and (15), describing the dependence of the
dimensionless evaporation rate on the he number for the 061-3000 evaporator
and an evaporation basin with an area of 20 m2 for small wind velocities.
Un'ortunately, the shortage of factual data at our disposal did not make it
possible to derive such dependences for basins with an area of 3 and 100 m2.
The latter in the range of low velocities is characterized by only one point.

In the case of low wind velocities. below 1.6 m/sec, when the influence of
the dynamic factor on the intensity of evaporation lessens. in addition to
the Prandtl number. the Grashof number also becomes determining, the latter
characterizing the influence exerted on the evaporation rate by buoyancy
forces

Gr '.:£$—(—:% -—|).

(16)
IB - air; ﬁ'- vapor] where g is the acceleration of free falling; P‘s and
P-v are the molecular weights of air and water vapor.

it is not impossible that the condition of self-similarity of the dimensionless
rate of evaporation relative to the Reynolds number at low wind velocities

ls already satisfied for a basin with an area of 100 m2. Thus, one can al-

most conclude that for estimating the evaporation from water bodies of suf-
ficient extent the wind term in equation (1) becomes superfluous and can even
be a source of additional errors. The influence of the dynamic factor in this
case is taken into account by the air humidity profile, which to a certain
degree is itself a function of wind velocity.

1he introduction of a correction for wind velocity into the computation for-
mulas therefore follows not from the physical evaporation law

A E- C(qo-q' )s

but from the conditions of its observation [3,6]. The necessity for the ad-
dltinn of a wind term in the evaporation formulas is caused by the influence
of local factors essentially different even for two stations situated close

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ill-'I'ICIM. "SH ONLY

together. "owavcr. if the factors exerting an influence on evaporation are
quite unifcrm. as is characteristic for large water bodies, the proportion-

ality factor .ith q - q: will be relatively constant, not requiring correc-
tions for wind condYtions.

Dependence (12) can be transformed to the form
E -. c 7%.. Wh(¢.-¢ml. may. (17)

where c' is a constant factor equal to
2‘ Kuptz
R‘I."" .

Taking into account that D/TaI“ is a function of temperature (E). equation
(17) can finally be written in the following form convenient for computa-

 

tions: - -.

£— (015‘ +0.00024 ‘) wg‘o‘ (Go—03¢). n’dly (18)
for a wind velocity up to 1.7 m/sac inclusive and

E— (o.Ia's-o.ooo72 ii 172:." (co—em) ,_ u/dsy (19)

for higher wind velocities.

0n the basis of the dependencea (18) and (19) for the stations Kamen'-na-Ob'.
Bratsk. Angarak, Bol'shoy Ushkaniy Ostrov, we carried out a selective check-
ing of the correspondence between the observed and computed evaporation val-
ues (Table l). The table shows that computations made using these dependences
gave evaporation values more or less close to those observed, whereas the
errors in computations made using the B. D. Zaykov formula (State Hydrolog-
ical Institute), recommended for determining evaporation from water bodies.
in almost all the considered cases were appreciably greater.

One of the merits of representing the results of evaporation observations in
the form of criterial dependences is the possibility of its modeling. taking
Into account the equality of the similarity criteria.

In the case of forced convection, such a criterion, as we have seen. is the
Reynolds number.

An analysis of the equations for the dimensionless rate of evaporation shows
that all other conditions being equal, the intensity of evaporation is di-

rectly proportional to wind velocity in the power n and is inversely propor-
tional to the extent of the evaporating surface in the power lvn.

With wind velocities greater than 1.6 m/sec (averaging 1.7 m/sec) the expon-
vnt n is an identical value for all types of evaporation apparatus. In the
vase of lower wind velocities it is dependent on the extent of the evaporating

surface. The greater the extent of the water surface in the direction of the

115

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY
FOR ‘WI’ICIM. USE ONLY

air flow. the lesser, all other conditions being equal. is the influence
exerted on the intensity of evaporation by the horizontal wind velocity
component.

Table 1

Comparison of Observed and Coaputed Evaporation Values for Season from the
Surface of a ZO-n Evaporation Basin

 

    
   
  
   

5 0mm. ‘5

3.7313?” Ff: ”u” {21‘3"3‘)”

l 3 5m. MM

r0] [u I a. I. ‘.
aﬁng'm 7?a’p"’§'('u°5'y""
2 6

 

    

7 Karat-Moon
I97! I 49') | m | 606 I 23.0 | 2M
8 Spam
I969 210 I“ 202 -|5.6 -1.3
I972 292 I 27! I 290 —1.2 —-o.7
9 Amp“
I954 433 «ll ‘32 5.5 —0
I968 444 47! “3 SJ -0:;
ID7I 42! £30 427 2.! 1.4
1972 134 459 (3| 548 -0.7
1974 .132 m 362 8.8 2.8
10 Seaman .meauua ocrpoo
1968 - Sill g .134 334 1.‘ 7.

  
   
    

in
301

I. Year

2. 301,3, I‘ll:

l. E , mu

’0. Eggg

5. using Znykov formula, State Hydrological Institute
0. uslng equations (18) and (19)

7. Kanon'-nn-0b'

3. Bratsk

0. Angarsk
I0. uol'shoy Ushkaniy Ostrov

Evidently, a decrease in this influence occurs in conformity to a hyperbolic
law, with definite dimensions of the water surface attaining some stable value
governed by the therml and hygrometric properties of the evaporating sur-
face and the atmosphere.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strictly speaking, the derived dependences can be used only in the iieits
bounded by the observed values of the Re number. In other words, they are
applicable for conputations of evaporation ron Gel-3000 evaporators and

evaporation basins with an area up to 100 n with wind velocities fro- 0.5 to
6.0 n/sec.

The extension of the region of their applicability to large water bodies
nevertheless requ3res a corresponding experisental validation with the
subsequent processing of observational data by similarity theory methods.

We should also nention the possibility of using the generalized dependences
for obtaining factors for conversion fro. the readings of one evaporation

apparatus to another more soundly and reliably than when using known reduc-
tion factors.

1hc expression for the conversion factor (reduction coefficient) r1-2 in
this case is written in the form

x. 1;": D. r, ~,"= mg, qo..—e...). (2°)
I'|_2=— —_—_‘——-

x, L,"I 0,. 1’. ~."' V33, ire—m).

With evaporation in a forced convection regine (equation (14)) the coef-

ficient rzo.o,3 for conversion fro. the readings of the 601-1000 evaporator
to an evaporation basin with an area of 20 "2 in the case of an equality
of wind velocities is deternined using the equation

D; r.;( V”)m ('0 _' M).

raw-0.3 = 0.78 3;; '1'; T m— an)“ ' (21)

In the range of low wind velocities (on the average less than 1.7 slsec) the
expression for r20_o.3 assures the form

on 70.8 v3“ .33 («—w» (22)

r = 2 33—-— —_ '
10-” ' D” 7‘. VI: ;m‘=; (Os—law)”

ﬁttﬁﬁ

117

FOR OFFICIM. USE ONIJ
l.

2.

3.

So

9.

'0.

ll.

'2‘

FOR Ill-'FICIM. USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Budnrov, l. P., "Equation for the Rate of Evaporation of a Fluid Under
Conditions of Forced Convection," ZﬂURNAL FIZICHBSKOY KRIHII (Journal
of Physical Chemistry). Vol XXXllI, No 6, pp 920-921. 1959.

Gukhnsn. A. A., PRIMENENIYE T30R11 PODOBIYA K ISSLEDOVANIYU PBDTSESSOV
TBPLO-HASSOOBENA (Application of Similarity Theory to Investigation of
Processes of Heat and Mass Exchange). second edition. revised and
supplemented, Moscow, "Vysshsya Shkola," 1976, 328 pages.

Davydov, V. K., "Evaporation from the Surface of Lake Sevnn," MATERIALY
P0 ISSLEDOVANIYU 02. SEVAN I YBGO BASSEYNA (Materials on Investigation
of Lake Sevnn and its Basin), CHAST' II (Part 11), No 2, Leningrad,
lad. TsUYecMS, I935, 106 pages.

Znykov, B. D., "Evaporation from the Water Surface of Ponds and Small
Reservoirs in the Territory of the USSR," TRUDY GGI (Transactions of
the State Hydrological Institute), No 21(75), 1969, 56 pages.

Kolesnikov, A. 6., “Investigation of the Mechanism of Evaporation During
Free Convection by the Optical Method," IZVESTIYA AN SSSR, SERIYA GEO-
GRAPICH. I GEOFIZIcu. (News of the USSR Academy of Sciences, Geograph-
ical and Geophysical Series), No 5, pp 639-656, 1960.

Konakov, P. K., TEORIYA PODOBIYA I YEYE PRIHENBNIYE V TEPLOTEKHNIKE
(Theory of Similarity and its Application in Heat Engineering). Hoscou—
Leningrad. Gosenergoizdat, 1959, 208 pages.

Kutateladze, S. 5., OSNOVY TEORII TEPLOOBHBNA (Principles of heat Bx-
change Theory), Fourth Edition, supplemented. ﬂovosibirsk, “Nauka,”
1970, 659 pages.

Keys, V. H., KONVEKTIVNYY TEPLO- I HASSOPERENOS (Convective Heat and
Hans Transfer), Moscow, "Energiya," 1972, 666 pages.

Lykov, A. V., TBORIYA SUSHKI (Theory of Drying), Moscow-Leningrad. Gos-
energoizdat, 1950, 616 pages.

Matveyev, L. 'l'., OSNOVY OBSHCHEY h‘BTEOROLOGll. PIZIKA AWSFERY (Funda-
neatals of General Meteorology. Atmospheric Physics), Leningrad, Gidro-
neteolzdat, 1965, 876 pages.

Mikheyev, H. A., OSNOVY TEPLOPEREDACHI (Principles of Pest Transfer),
Moscow-leningrad, 1969, 396 pages.

Nestercnko, A. V., "heat and Mass Exchange During Evaporation of a Fluid
from a Free Surface," ZHURNAL TEKHNICHESKOY FIZIKI (Journal of Technical
Physics). Vol XXIV, No 6, pp 729-761, 1955.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I].

I5.

15.

16.

'7.

Filli lll-‘FICIM. "SE ONLY

Snkipov. 2.. "0n the Possibility of Modeling of Evaporation fro. the
Surface of n Reservoir-Cooling Surface." PROBLEM GIDROENBRGBTIKI i
VODNOGO KliOZYAYSTVA (Probleu in ﬂydroelectric Power and Water Manage-
nent). no 6. Alon-Mn. "Nunkn." pp 170-175. 1968.

Scdov. L. l.. HETODY PODOMYA I MZHENNOSTI V HEKIIMIKE (Si-ilaricy
and Dinonaioneiity Hethoda in Mechanics). third edition. revised and
supplemented. Moscow. Goatekhizdat. [956. 328 pager.

Spalding. l). 3.. KONVEKTWNYY HASSOPBRENOS (Convective Mano Transfer).
Hoscw-igningrnd. "l-inergiyn." 1965. 386 pages.

frunk-Knuenotokly. I). A” DIIFUZIYA i TBPLOPERBDACIM V KNINIGIBSKOY
KINETIKH (Diffusion and llent Tronofor in Chenicol Kinetics). Second
edition. tbs-Icon. "Nnuko." 1967. 692 pages.

Hckcrt. E. R.. Drake. R. H.. TBGRIYA TEPLO— I HASSOOBHEIM (Theory of

lient and Haas Exchange). Moscow-Leningrad. Gooenergoizdot. 196i. 680
P0809.

119

FOR (ll-'FICIM. lﬁ's'f: ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC SSI.50:633.1

METHOD FOR PREDICTING TﬂE STATE OF "INTER CROPS U? TO CESSATION OF THEIR
GROHING SEASON

Moscow METEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 96-l02

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences T. A. Haksieenkova. USSR
Hydroneleoroiogical Scientific Research institute. submitted for publica-
tion ll July [978]

Abstract: Thls is a brief analysis of agro-
ueteorological conditions during the period

of the autumn growing season (or winter

crops in the European USSR. For the first time
a aethod is proposed for predicting their
state up to the tine of cessation of their
growing season for the territory of an oblaat.
kroy and republic (or different times in ad-
vance a

lTextl the leading place in the grain balance of the country is occupied

by winter crops. which yield more than a third of the gross grain harvest.
1he autumn period is very important in the life of winter grain crops.
During this period the winter crops undergo processes of organogenesis

In the apicalnnnv and accumulation of reserves of energy-bearing substances
whirh play a great protective role during the wintering period. Under favor-
able agronoteorological conditions during the autusn period there is an in-
tenaive developaent of leaves. vegetative shoots and the root ayatea [2. 6.
9|. Under unfavorable agroseteorological conditions during this period

the winter crops end the autumn growing season with little thickening out.
with an inadequately developed root systea, with reduced resistance to win-
Ier conditions. and with a small accumulation of nutritional and protective
substances. This leads to the death of the plants during the wintering per-
iod. to a decrease in the number of ear-bearing stems. and accordingly. a
decrease in yield ([0].

The principal reason for the poor state of winter crops in part of the area
of sown crops in the Nonchornozen zone is the unfavorable agroaeteorolog-
iral conditions during the presowing period. which leads to late maturing
of the crops occupying fallow and a shortening of the growing season. and

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE WIN

In the Nonchernozen zone -- to the deanication of the null in connection
with the deficit of precipitation. The aowing of winter crops in such
cones in delayed to later tinea. the plantinga are frequently under un-
favorable conditions of heat and moisture supply. leading to an increane in

the area with a poor ntate. enpeeially with renpect to nonfallow predecea-
norn I7. 9|.

 
        

' §-\\\\\€ . ~:‘ ~ ,‘jlil'

‘ - ‘-‘\ ..

éysl'igjva 9.1,)”, hi
. . ' " ". 'lgi‘ '.

Fig. I. Mean long-tein duration of autuaa period. 1) lens than £0 daya.
.‘l Lil-$0 days. 3) 51-60 daya, 6) acre than 60 daya

The area with poor aowinga in spring in not cues in determined by the
extent of the area with poor planting: in autumn and the area in which
line winter crops perished completely or were greatly thinned out in winter.

The extent of the area with a poor atate of winter crops in auto-t haa a

great spatial and temporal variability. The Maximo area in in the south-
western European USSR. and the ninim in in the Nonchernozel tone.

During the iaat [2 years the average area of plantings of winter cropa with
a poor state in autuan an a whole for the USSR waa 81. and for individual
region it was considerably greater (20-251 of the entire sown area). in

none years the area of the poor planting. in autm for individual ohiaeta
In the steppe lone attains pure than half of the 9mm area.

12]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR WFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. an evaluation of the state of winter crops and a determination
of the extent of their areas in different states during the autumn period

is of great interest and in of very great importance to the national econ-
"my.

In the European USSR during the period of the autumn growing season of win-
ter crops the agroneteorologiral conditions are very diverse. The duration
oi the growing season for winter crops in autumn in the northwest is al-
most I l/2 times greater than in the southeast (55-60 days instead of on)
(Fig. l). The sum of temperatures (effective temperatures -- above 5°C and
positivv temperatures -- above 0°C) during the period of the autumn growing
season for winter crops. according to mean long-term data, agrees very well
with the duration of the period of the autumn growing season and also de-
ureaaes from northwest to southeast.

Ihe quantity oi precipitation falling during the period of the autumn grow-
ing season for winter crops in the ﬁuropcan USSR also has a great spatial
varlahillty. in the Baltic area. in the western oblasts of the RSPSR and

in helortmsia. the sum during this period is loo-150 mm. and in the southern
Fkralne. in Rastovskaya and Volgogradskaya Oblssts. in the eastern part of
Saratevskaya Ohlast and in Orenburgskaya Ohlast -- only 1:5 1-. that is.

lwu or three times less. in the remaining regions of the European USSR the
precipitation total during the period of the active growing season for
winter crops is predominantly 60-100 m.

the dlstribution oi moisteniag of the upper (0-20 cm) soil layer used (or
winter crops during the autumn period agrees quite well with the territorial
-ue oi precipitation. decreasing to the southeast of the European USSR al-
~nut hv a factor 0f IN“.

A. a. ﬁhlgelev [II]. S. A. Verigo Ill. Ye. S. Ulanova [10]. A. Ya. Grudeva
II], V. A. Hoiseyehik [9| and others have established that the principal
:acinro in the life of winter crops in autumn are air temperature and soil
rMi-:turr rontent. but the dependences of the duration of the interphase
pert-d. were obtained hv then on individual factors with optimum values oi
lhv nth-ru.

2e Investigated the conplex influence oi these main agrometeorological fac-

luv. H" the development of winter wheat oi the Hironovsksya-SOB. Beanstaya-
' and Racial varieties.

Funnl-x dependenees oi the duration of the interphase periods (a) of winter
wropu for theue varieties on the mean air temperature during the period and
the reserves oi productive moisture of the cultivated soil layer were es-
Iahliuhud fur the first tine. They are effective with both an adequate and
.ith an inadequate heat and rrﬂsture supply of plantings of winter crops
unwn with noniallow prederessors.

FUR nrYlCIAL FEE "ﬂLY
Hill "H'ICIM. "HI-I "NLY

lite analytical expression of the dependences of the duration of the inter-
phase periods on temperature and soil mistening is the following:

sowing-sprout ing "-64: E, - 1:3
It goes - 5.2: n malt-0.73 6+ 0.0: «7’; n can: “3'"
sprouting-third leaf n-66; E,~4
n—SIJI -6.367+o.2l P+0.487i---0.0I 5’; n-OJI; days:
third leaf-onset of tiliering "-70; £’~5
11—29384!“ ("+3404 (1- 0.“ E+9-l0"5’: 11-050; days.

in the enumerated dependenres t- is the neon air temperature. a are the lean
reserves of productive moisture (us) during the corresponding periods.

An analysis of the presented dependences indicated that the slain influence
on the duration of the sowing-sprouting period is exerted by the reserves
of misture and air temperature to an almost equal degree; during the sub-
sequent development of plantings of winter crops more and nre influence

on the duration of the periods is exerted by air temperature, especially in
the ease of late arming tines.

As indieated by our investigations [8]. the reserves of productive Ioiuture
exert a significant influence on the density of the sowings. With reserves
of productive moisture during the 10-day sowing period of 30-60 on the nun-
her of plants by the tine of cessation of the growing season per i n2 is
about 500 and the condition of the savings is excellent; with soisture re-
Nerves of 25-10 and 60-55 In the condition of the sowings of winter crops
ran be evaluated as good (the nunber of plants is about 600). with a further
decrease and increase in the noisture reserves in the cultivated soil layer
the density of the sprouts of winter crops worsens. In fields with reserves
of productive solsture in the rultivated soil layer of less than 15 u- it

is undesirable that winter crops be sown until there is considerable precip-
itation, since with surh reserves the winter crops by the tise of cessation
of the growing season are thin (less than 200 plants per 1 II).

M imlieated by our investigations, soil moisture content and air tespera-
lure also exert a significant influence on the length of the apical cone

of the plant's Iain growth ahoot. it was found that the longer and store
IavoraI-le is the period free: the onset of tiliering to the cessation of the
:zrowing season and the greater is the temperature sun during this period. the
ureater is the development of the growth rone. Analytically this dependence
is: expressed hy the regression equation:

I-O.23$+6- l0" 1—7- I0" 0.

[2)

Full IlFFIiIli-l. IYNI’Z illim‘
Filli IlFl-‘liilAl. "SH "NIX

where L in the lenuth of the growth cone of the main growth shoot (determin-
ed by the laboratory of the biology of plant developsent Moscow State Uni-
vernlty): t is the sun of positive air tesperatures during the period onset
of L iiering -- cessation of growing season:

11-032; Ii -.-- IOG; F,- 10.00 .u.u.

The length of the growth cone of the main growth shoot correlates well with
the huohiness of the winter crops by the tine of cessation of the growing
season ('1 - 0.80-0.90). Therefore. the indices for evaluation of the roadi-
tion of winter crops in autumn on the hasis of the degree of hushiness.
adopted earlier in agroaeteorology. characterize not only the morphological

rendition of the plants. but also the size of the growth cones for autusn
shoots.

These dependences sake possible a sore precise determination of the role of
the autuan period in the life of plants and also to determine the influence
or the eonditions of the outllut growing season on the productivity and winter
resistance of winter erops. The good developuent of the growth cone in plants
In autumn is an index of their high productivity. however. plants with over-
nruwn urowth eones will have a reduced winter resistance. P. H. Roper-an and
V. A.:t.|ueyeh|k [6. 9| established a close inverse proportional dependence

between winter resistanee and the length of the growth cone in winter wheat
I-lunts.

IhuM. having data on the soisture reserves in the soil and air tesperature.
nulnn the dependences which we have derived it is possible to evaluate the
lurunrreornloeleal situation of the autumn growing season and determine the
iiuie of winter crops in specific fields.

hnuover, at the USSR hydroaeteorological Center specialists annually give a
quantitative evaluation of the condition of winter crops not only in spe—
tifir fields. but also for greater areas. The actual areas with different
runditluns of winter crops are determined on the basis of aerial and around
fevnunllnﬁuncc. nut these observations are carried out sporadically and not
Inr every obiaut. krsy and republic. Therefore. our task was to develop a
twthod for calculating the areas with different conditions of winter crops
in autumn on the hasis of territorially averaged indires. both with respect
to individual fnetors and their totality.

Jur investigations indicated that the greatest influence on the extent of
the area with a poor and a good state is exerted by the reserves of pro-
JuetIVenallature in the cultivated soil layer. the precipitation sun

nod air irmpvrdiurﬂ observed here. but the isportance of these factors in
different regions of the European USSR is not the same.

In the Ukraine. htlhldnvia and in the Northern Caucasus the main influence
on the condition of winter grain crops is exerted by the reserves of pro-
Joetive moisture in the sowing period and the precipitation totals during
the autumn growinn season ('1- 0.67-0.75). in the territory of the Central

12b

FUR illt'li'liiliil. l7\II ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I UNIX

(mernozen oblasts and in the rayuns along the Volga the influence of the
moisture reserves in the cultivated soil layer and precipitation on the
state of winter crops is alaost the sase ('l- 0.60); the role of air tes-
perature here is somewhat increased (VII 0.68). In the Nonchernoses zone

of the European USSR precipitation exerts a lesser influence on the extent
of the area with a poor condition of winter crops ( n - 0.56). In this tone
it is air tesperature which is the principal limiting factor (r[- 0.66).

The closest correlation of the extent of the area of winter crops with a
good and poor condition of the sown areas has been established with the
ousber of plants per 1 n2 in autumn. both in specific fields and as a
whole for an ohlast. kray and republic.

As already mentioned. the number of plants per 1 s2 by the tine of cessation
of the growing season for winter crops is dependent on the reserves of pro-
ductive anisture in the cultivated soil layer and characterizes well the
owerall state of the sown areas in specific fields. This index proved to he

a reliable characteristic for sown fields over great areas (oblast. kray.
republic).

The correlation between the mentioned factors was cosputed for different
zones in the European USSR and was analytically expressed for

Ukraine. Moldavia and Northern Caucasus
.T= mes + 21.735 5—0 459 it;
n 0.70:0.02; I. ~ ' 3L7. n -l76.
Central Chernozes Oblasts and Volga Region
u' "0.20 l 22.01:. :5 0.352 E}.
!]H0.70=0.03. .’ 1 .' 15.5. n '- 74.
Nonchernozels Zone
.T-.- "7.15 n 22 25a :5 -030: 12*.
nnﬂmLQm; !"1$5. ﬂ'm.

where 5 lg the scan number of winter crop plants per 1 s2 (averaged for an

oblast): w are the mean reserves of productive soisture (averaged for an
ohlast) (when 202 of the oblast is sown in winter crops).

It was found that with scan reserves of productive soisture in the cultivated
soil layer of 25-35 an (averaged for an oblast) the condition of the sown
llelds is optimum (600-500 plants per i n2). Thus. already in the 10-day
period of large-scale sowing (when 202 of the area of winter crops for the
ohlast is sown) it is possible to cospute the density of the sown areas and
determine their condition by the tise of cessation of the growing season

over the territory of an oblast, kray or republic. since the nu-ber of plants

per l s2 is closely related to the extent of the area with a different condi-
tion of winter crops.

[25

FOR Illt'r‘lilliil. USE (INLY
FUR ilFI-‘liIIM. “SI-l “NIX

Table l

hependence of State of Winter Crope on Nunber of Plante per Square Meter

 

 

 

 

   

Tcpputopne 1 Spanneuue 2 l r n E,
3 IIrurI-nozcunae aoue S.-- 3.06: ENE?“ —0.7 6| *1 9
s..,-u.l4eii--1.553 0.017 6| .9;
b llelupaam-‘lepnoxwue Jena In No. _ -
louse Ska—0.02 I+J‘.“ -0, ' N 1‘38
s..,-o.2s: 77-110; 0,: 14 “3,9
5 Mom»- u avenue plﬂoul leennu s.-—o.mi+ man .0;- 47 . g .
6 iklaauguc [mum-u hpennw e Ceeep. _ . '
man ham: c- —0.|03u+5|.l60 "0. I34 37,”
7 )‘upenna. Mouton e Creep-ma Kee. __
"I ‘..,-0.|Uu—IUJ‘J 0.?! I76 :73

dHY:
l. Territory
1. Equation
3. Nunchernozen zone
h. Central Chernozen zone and Volga Region
5. lioidnvie and southern rayone in Ukraine
6. Remaining regions of Ukraine and Northern Caucnene
7. Ukraine. Moldavia and Northern Cauceeue
uvte: so in the extent of the area of winter crope (in X) with a poor
utote by the tine of ceeeation of the growing eeeeon; S ood ie the ex-
tent of the area of winter crope (in 2) with e good can ition by the
Llne of ceaention of the growing season; u ie the nunber of plants
per 1 n2 by the time of cessation of the growing eeeeon.
8. good

1he dependence of the extent of the area (in I of the eown area) with good
and poor vondl ione of winter crops in nutunn on the neon oblaet number of
plants per 1 II for different zones ie given in Table 1.

Knowing the reeervee of productive noieture in the cultivated eoil layer
Jurlnn the 10-day sowing period. ueing the derived expreeeione it ie poe-
<ihle tn predict the condition of winter crope by the tile of ceeeation of
the growing eeaeon two months in advance. The forecast givee the extent of
the area in percent of the eown area with good. satisfactory and poor con-
dltiunn ur sown arena for oblnets. kraya and republics.

nut at this tine winter crops have already been partially sown and it is
late for solving the pruhlee of the structure of their eown areee.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR HFFICIAL "SE “NIX

Therefore. the need arose for determining the agroseteorological factors
in the period preceding sowing on which the moisture supply of winter crops
during the 10-day sowing period are dependent.

L. A. Rasumova, Ye. S. Ulanova and N. B. Meshchaninova and others estab-
lished a quite close correlation between the reserves of productive moisture
In different soil layers. This enabled us to postulate the existence of a
correlation between the reserves of productive moisture in the meter soil
layer during the aonth prior to the sewing of winter crops and in the cultiv-
ated layer during the 10-day sowing period. The regression analysis of the
results of detersination (in a large network of sgroaeteorological stations
during the last 12 years) of the reserves of productive moisture in the
loo-n soil layer in the case of nonfallow predecessors in the fields a month
prior to the sowing of winter crops and the reserves in the 20-cm soil layer
in the 10-day period of sewing of winter crops. which we carried out. indi-
rated the presence of a close correlation between these values. An exception
was the years when nhundant rains fell before the onset of the latest pos-
sible tines [or the sewing of winter crops.

Our investigations indicated that if a month prior to the sowing of winter
rrops in the case of nonfallow predecessors in the soil layer 0-100 cm in
the southern half of the European USSR there were less than 50 mm of pro-
ductivo moisture. in the cultivated soil layer during the 10-day sowing
period with the optimum times of sowing the reserves of productive apisture
will he less than 15 In. which is inadequate for the growth and development
of winter crops. in these cases the sewing of winter crops must be done at
later times. whereas in the case of absence of an adequate quantity of pre-
cipitation b0—50 days prior to cessation of the growing season it is abso-
lutely inadmissible to sow winter crops in the case of nonfallow predeces-
sors. An exception are the southern regions of the Ukraine. Holdavia and the
Northern Caucasus. where the growing season for winter crops is a possibil-
ity during individual periods even in winter.

The correlation between the reserves of productive moisture (mm) in the 0-20-
cn soil layer during the 10-day period of the sowing of winter crops and in
the meter soil layer a aonth before their sowing has a linear character.

H-r the territory of the Ukraine. Moldavia and the Northern Caucasus region
it is expressed by the regression equation

”-012x+01

where x are the reserves of productive Ioiature (mm) in the soil layer 0-100
en a month before the seeing of winter grain crops; y are the reserves of
produetiveluvisture (mm) in the soil layer 0-20 cm during the 10-day period
of the sewing of winter crops. The correlation coefficient r - 0.9310.01:
the number of cases is n 0 186; By - £3.69 II-

127

FOR "Fl-1cm. izsr: ONLY
FOR (ll-‘FllIlM. "SH UNI-Y

11in». mains the derived «lepentlenceu, it is possible to determine the antic-
ipated condition of winter grain crops even prior to their saving and on
(his hanis determine more precisely the noun areas for the territory of
ahlnstu. During the 10-day period of sons sowing of winter crops the predic-
lieu of the condition of the smun art-nu In refined.

‘l

I".

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vurlgo. S. A.. Razumva. L. A.. POCIWFNNAYA VLMM l YEYE ZNACIleYl-I V
3:1;1.‘SKUKIIOZYM'STVI-NNM PROIZVODSTVF (Soil Hoieture and its Inportance
in Agricultural Production). Leningrad. (:idrooeteoizdat. 196). 288 pages.

(:rudvvn. A. Ya.. "livaiuating Agroneteoroiogicoi Conditions of the Auto-m
craving Sennon for Winter Crops." HETEOROLOGIYA I CIDRDLOGIYA (Meteorol-
nuy and Ilydrolosy). No 5. pp (oz-as. i966.

(:rushka. l. 6.. Dmitreako. V. P.. "Computation of the Anticipated Times
of Swing or Winter Wheat and Evaluation of its Effectiveness. TRUDY
llkerCHl. No 810. pp 63-710. 1969.

llulik. H. 5.. "Evaluation of Agroueteorologicel Conditions of the Autum
Growing Season for "inter Crops." HRTEOROLOGIYA l GIDROLOGIYA. No 8, pp
16-22. [966.

Kupernan. F. it. "Physiology of Develop-sent. Growth and Organogenesis of
"heat." FlZlOLOGIYA SEL'SKOIOiOZYAYSTVEN‘NYKli MSTENIY (Physiology of Ag-
ricultural Plants). Moscow. H60. pp 7-26. I969.

Kupermn. F. H.. Holseychik. V. M. HETOIHCHESKOYE POSOBIYE P0 OTSENKE
Sns‘l’oYANlYA oznmu KUL'TUR V OSFﬁNl-z-ZIME-VFSENNIY PERIOD NETODOH BIOLOG-
ltrlltISKOGO KONTROLYA methodological Aid for Evaluating the Condition of

Winter Crops in the Autum-Hinter-Spring Period by the Biological Con-
trol Method). Moscow. Gidroseteoizdot. 1973. 20 pages.

Kupemn, P. M.. Hoiseychik. V. A” WPREVANIYE OZlHYIOl Kill/Till! (Sprout-
lap; of Winter Crops). Leningrad. Cidroneteoizdat, 1977. 167 pages.

ﬂukuimnkova. T. A.. "Dependence of the Condition of winter Grain Crops
in Autum on Agroaeteoroiogicai Conditions in the Chernoxen Zone." TRUDY
(:lDllOHﬁ‘l'l'SENTM SSSR (Transactions of the USSR llydroneteoroiogicai Cen-
h‘r). N0 176, pp 146-52. 1977.

Halseychik. V. A.. AGROHHTEOMLOGIGIESKIYE llSLOVIYA I PEREZIMVKA 021M-
YKII KUl.'TUR (Agroneteoroiogicai Conditions end the Hintering of Winter
(Imps). Leningrad. 1975. 295 pages.

lllnnova. Ye. 3.. AGROMETEOROWICNESKIYE USLOVIYA I UROZHAYNOST' OZIKW
PSIIICNITSY (Agroaeteorologicai Conditions and the Yield of winter Wheat).
leningrad. Gidronetooizdst. [975. 302 pages.

128

Fun on‘uzlm. UM»: (mu
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

11. Slllsolev. A. A” RUKOVODSTVO DLYA SOSTAVLENIYA PENOLOGICIIESKIKII PROG-

NOZOV (Manual for the Preparation 0! "analogical Forecasts). m0!)-
ICHBSKIYE UKAZANIYA (Methodological Instructions). No 15. Moscow. Izd.
To”. 1951. 35 pages.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 551.(558.1+577)(h70.23)

CONVECTION UNDER THE CONDITIONS OF A LARGE CITY
lbscnw HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 103-105

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences N. I. Novozhiiov, Main Geo-
physlcal Observatory, sub-itted for publication 25 June 1978]

Abstract: it is demonstrated that teaperature
second"ection. determined from the interdiur-
nai variability of temperature. is observed
more frequently in a city than outside a city.
it exerts an unfavorable effect on convection
and therefore the lost active formation of
showers. judging from the mean daily quantity
of precipitation. is not observed in the city.
but outside it.

[Text] During recent decades observations have shown that appreciably more
precipitation falls in large cities. aonetines by 10-30:, than outside the
city. This is observed due to the more frequent recurrence of relatively
light rains in the city. Although in sone cities (London. Hashington) there
have been cases of intensification of local convection, as a result of
which heavy rains fall. nevertheless. this process is not typical for

large cities. The distribution of precipitation in Leningrad and at Voyey-
kovo. situated 26 he to the east of the urban meteorological station, was
also in confornity with the noted pattern.

During the three smnaer months in Leningrad there were 63 days with shower
precipitation and at Voyeykovo there were 37 such days. The quantity of
falling precipitation was 261.5 In and 219.6 In respectively. that is. the
mean daily quantity of precipitation at leningrad was 5.6 II and at Voyey-
kovo it was 5.9 as. This means that the intensity of the shower-foraing
process outside the city was soaewhat greater than in the city.

The influence of enormous aodern cities is extended to phenomena of a asso-
scale nature. and therefore for explaining the peculiarities of precipita-
tion it in desirable to use the sesoacale characteristics of the lower
troposphere. But first of all we will briefly examine the results obtain-
ed during recent years free study of the structure of air flows over a

city without citing the extensive literature well known to specialists.

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLN

lncreaaed friction over the city "squeezes" the air currents into the

higher layers of the atmosphere. where. accordingly, there is an increase

in relative humidity and the streamlines fall closer together. But the

city is also a heat focus: in built-up areas in comparison with the suburban
sectors the temperature is usually 2-3’c higher. However. this heat focus

is not uniform and is conspicuous at altitudes not greater than 500 m. Even
in such large cities as Moscow and Tokio the influence of urban heat does
not extend beyond the limits of the boundary layer.

The air is propagated over the city from the heat focus in the form of non-
uniform tongues. since the focus has a spotty nature.

Over the city these tongues create an alternation of relatively warm and
cold layers. As a result, the boundary layer stratification over the city
is more stable then over suburban areas. An increased aerosol content in
urban air favors activation of radiation heat fluxes, and at the same time.
maintenance of temperature contrasts between the air flow layers.

The vertical convergence of the flow arising over the city. although it
leads to the formation of a week mesojet at a height of 100-200 m above
the roofs of buildings, nevertheless is unrelated to the horizontal con-
vergence of flow, and therefore here there is an absence of those typical
conditions for an intensification of convection under which the latter
could undergo transition into a mesoscale process [2]. It is possible that
the low urban mesojet impedes the formation of a aesojet under the clouds.
having a decisive importance for the development of mesoconvection.

Thus. a city does not favor activation of either Cu convection or mesocon-
vection. An increased quantity of precipitation and an increased number of
days with precipitation in the city must be considered the result of an
increased concentration of condensation nuclei.

1he activation of convective activity is usually reflected to a consider-
ably greater extent on the leeward outskirts of the city, where in specific
cases there is an increase in shower precipitation and thunderstorms. But
this does not lead to the formation of suburbs with anomalous phenomena,
since with a change in wind velocity and direction there is also a change
in the position of the leeward part of the outlying area.

Now we will examine a method for the mesoanalysis of shower-forming activ-
ity during the summer period, based on allowance for the day-to-day vari-
ability of temperature.

As is well known, at the end of the process of transformation of an air
mass the day-to-day temperature variability of this mass is insignificant.
about tl-Z'C. In this case the temperature field is uniform within the
limits of mesoscale distances - several hundreds of kilometers. In our
method the mesoscale temperature field was assumed to be uniform in those
cases when the day-to-day variability did not exceed 2°C over a period of

at least two days. With an impairment of this condition the mesoscale
131
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Fill! OFFICIAL USE (ELY

temperature field was considered nonuniform. We used the values of the
day-to-day variability of temperature at the ground level at 0700 hours

at Leningrad and at beeykovo. and also at the 700-mb level using data from
the release of a radiosonde at Voyeykovo at 0300 hours. Hesondvection was
determined at the beginning of the day during which precipitation was ob-
served. The nature of the precipitation under conditions of different tem-

perature fields at the ground surface is given in Table 1.

Table 1

Nature of Shower Precipitation Under Conditions of Different Temperature
fields in June-August 1966

—-——-——_——_—_

 

 

 

 

 

0.1!") now 1 use. "VENOM-1""?
_ 1 [Inﬁnmw "(:10 :kurpa'l‘ypl m:
\me.‘rpllﬂlll| 2 mm 3
ﬂrmm- . _ I ﬁrm-u-
- mm]. Humming; rran‘ Boeinoso 5
6 ‘Iurm mar. c u-nm-‘I rulymypoﬁ "ill“:m‘lyp-
unm no.1- . . . . . . . . . . 52 ' 49 40
In-umun m "mum. mama Anti) (5?! (53) (£3)
7 ‘lnrno ,1". I: c .mr-n-nuwu oraxxmm n ymosun)
.mmuu- :wmpnylmom noan . . 20 16 I7

mama-m m occur-m Irma ant-'1 r arr-new:
wl (Kujnmll . .

8 Kmmntrto .1-n:..-nu. session. .uu

(IIPOIICIII 01’ or-ulrro KOMINCC‘IIO Juan-cans
IMAM)" . . . _

(50 (37) (46)
I 72.7 08.0 «.7

(80) (23) (20!
7.0 4.2 4.2

 

9 (12“ I'I(\‘I'|ll'0| 5 I.‘--Nl‘(‘"|ﬂ (If-"1K0“. "II

 

KEY:

I. Characteristics

2. Uniform temperature field

3. Nonuniform temperature field

a. Leningrad

S. Voyeykovo

6. Number of days with particular structure of temperature field
(percentage of total number of days)

7. Number of days with shower precipitation under conditions of a
particular temperature field (percentage of total number of days
with shower precipitation)

N. Quantity of shower precipitation. mm (percentage of total quantity
of shower precipitation)

9. Mean daily quantity of precipitation. am

At Leningrad, as indicated in Table 1, there were approximately 202 fewer
days with a uniform temperature field than at Voyeykovo, whereas the num-
ber of days at Leningrad with a nonuniform field was greater than at Voyey-

kovo.
132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FGR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this evaluation what constitutes uniform and nonuniform temperature
fields?

We have already seen that over a city a disordered meaoadvection of best
is in tuently noted. in this process vertical currents can be manifested
rniy .a warm and cold layers of relatively small thickness. Therefore.
iavorable conditions for a considerable convective rising of air in a
rity are observed more rarely than outside the city. Since urban heat is
realized to a considerable degree bv means of the mesoadvection of tem-
perature. we assume that a uniform temperature field is observed in the
absence of mesoadvection. whereas nonuniform fields. on the other hand.
are observed in its presence. This criterion makes it possible to explain
some peculiarities of the urban precipitation regime.

in actuality. in the city. as indicated in Table l. the number of days
with a nonuniform field. that is, with aesosdvection. constituted some-
whatiw're than half of all the days. whereas the number of days with
shower precipitation under these conditions was only a little more than
one-third of all the days with showers. with respect to the quantity of
precipitation. during these days in the city there was only about one-
quarter of the total quantity of shower precipitation during the summer.
"a days with a uniform temperature field. when convection was impaired
less by mesoadvection and therefore mesosdvection occurred more frequently.
in the city it was relatively more common to observe showers. but the
falling quantity of precipitation constituted about three-quarters of its
total quantity. The low shower-forming activity in the city under the con-
ditions of a nonuniform field and the more considerable activity under

the conditions of a uniform field is also confirmed by the mean daily pre-
cipitation quantities.

Table l shows. in addition. that a nonuniform temperature field is rather
frequently observed also outside the city and its influence on precipita-
tion is as significant as in the city.

Now we will investigate the activity of the process on those days when a
uniform temperature field was observed not only at the ground level. but
also at an altitude of 700 mb. where the nature of the field was assumed
to be identical for both points and where the field most frequently was
uniform. The results are given in Table 2.

fable 2 shows that although the number of days with shower precipitation
under the conditions of a uniform temperature field at two levels in the
lower troposphere is only half the total number of days with shower pre-
ripitation at a particular point. the fraction of falling precipitation
on these days is rather considerable. as is also confirmed by the more
significant mean daily precipitation values. particularly Outside the
city. These data make it possible. thus. to detect the conditions for the
most active shower-forming process. However. this process under uniformr
ity conditions at the upper level is not more active in the city. but
outside the city.

133

FOR OFFTCIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0iFlCIAl.lHﬂIi)NLY

Table 2

Characteristics of Shower Precipitation in Presence of Uniform Telperature
Field Simultaneously nt Earth and at 700-nb Level in June-August l976

Characteristics Leningrad Voyeyhovo

Number of days with shower precipitation 22 19

(I of totalxuuber of days with shovels) (Si) (Si)
Quantity of shower precipitation. nu 161.6 l65.8

(I or total quantity of shower precipitation) (68) (75)
than daily quantity of precipitation, an 7.‘ 8.7

(Z of mean daily Values for days with nonuniform

temperature field) (176) (207)

1he cited data evidently reveal quite convincingly the retarding role of ten-
peraiure mesoadvection on convection under the conditions prevailing in a
large city. it can be foresern that in the further evolution of the clinate
of a city the most characteristic peculiarities of its weather will more
.uulnmre often be low cloud cover and fine-droplet rain.

the intensity of the mentioned "leeward" phenomena will increase. as is al-
ready heing noted in some cities of the United States. The weather con-
Irautu between a city and its outskirts are inevitably intensifying. that
in. the processes here are assuming a clearer uesostructure. This will be
the contribution of the city to that general process of change in atmo-
<pherlc circulation which. according to the data in [i]. can transpire under
the influence of anthropogenic contaaination of the ataosphere.

we also note. as indicated in Table 2. that the quantity of precipitation.
depending on the presence or absence of tenperature uesoadvection, differs
in the city by a factor of more than 1 1/2. and outside the city -- by a
factor of more than 2. Allowance for neaoadvection could substantially in-
prove the prediction of convective phenomena.

In conclusion the author expresses appreciation to Professor A. Kh. Khrgian
for editing of the article. naking it possible to focus the reader's atten-
lion on the lust iaportant probiens.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. Wlfiﬂunkﬂv. Ye. v.. "Develop-eat of the Fuel-Energy Base and its Influ-
ence on Weather and Climate," HETEORDLOOIYA I GIDROLOOIYA (Meteorology
and Hydrology), No 2. pp 3-16. 1977.
J. Novozhilov. N. l.. "Hesoscale Structure of the Cloud Cover and the Mech-

anism of Fornation of Hesosystens of Convective Clouds." HETEOROLOGIYA
i GlnROLOGlYA, No 1. pp 112-117. 1977.

136

FUR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SP. ONLY

1. Pogonyun. Rh. P.. nachuttna. A. A.. "So-e recall-titles of the Meteor-
ological Rtginc of Inrgc Clticn." IZVESTIYA VSESOYUZNOGO GEOGR. OISﬂCH-

VA (ﬂaws of the All-Union Geographlcol Society). 107. No 1. pp 2‘5-2‘8.
I975.

135

FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

006 $51.k65.7l

PARAMETBRIZATION 0F ATMOSPHERIC BVFECTS 1N PROBLEMS OF NUMERICAL
iDOELING 0' 88A DYNAMICS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp lOS-IOB

[Article by Ye. A. Tsvetovn. Computation Center Siberian Department USSR
Academy of Sciencea. subaitted for publication 28 March 1978]

Abstract: The article describes a eethod

for nodeling the wind regime for stipulat-

ing the boundary conditions at the surface

of a water body. based on the sethod of stat-
lstlcal sodeling and using climatic inferna-
tlon on the pressure or wind fields and their
regiae characteristics. The aethod is discuss-
ed in the exasple of Lake lsyhal.

[Text] The foruation of currents occurs during the continuous interaction
between a water seas and the steosphere. in this connection the probles
arises of selection of paraaeterisation of ateoepheric effects properly
reflecting the principal characteristics of the hydroseteorological re-
gise over e water body.

in problens of the eodeling of water dynasics es the boundary condition at
the surface it is custoeary to stipulate the wind shearing stress. which
is cosputed using the known formulas through atsoapheric pressure or wind
velocity. Depending on the purposes oi the coaputations. the boundary con-
ditlons are stipulated either as constant or variable with ties.

The method described below for aodeling the wind regise is used in a eodel
nf the dynnsics of Lake suykal [5]. A classification of the wind and pres-
sure fields prepared by N. V. Savinove [3] was adopted for the para-eter-
lantlon of aruosphuric effects. It was possible to define six principal
typen of wind fields. divided into subtypes and differing by having seven
wind velocity gradations. The regiae characteristics. such as the frequency
«f recurrence of standard fields. the succession of types. continuous dur-
ation of their effect. err. [ll were also coeputed.

136

FOR "FFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the proposed method the standard situations are examined as a basis

for approximate representation of real meteorological fields. and the or-
der of alternation of meteorological situations is deternined by the

Monte Carlo method in accordance with the tables of regime characteris-
tics. In the modeling we used archives of standard situetions. examined

as a totality of random values. Each element in the archives is repre-
sented by three two-dieensional fields describing etsospheric pressure

at the lake surface. the direction and modulus of the wind velocity vector
and a three-digit code number in which the first digit defines the type

of wind, the second - the subtype. and the third -- the velocity grada-
tion. The identification and recognition of archives elements is accom-
plished on the basis of the code nuber. At the present tise the archives
for Baykal winds includes about 70 standard situations. The character-
istics necessary for sodeling the changes in the wind regime with time

are contained in tables of the frequency of recurrence. succession end
mean and maximum continuous duration of the effect of wind types by months.
The method for preparing these tables and their numerical data are given
In ‘J’e

Using the Monte Carlo method. we successively carry out the two principal
stages: determination of the number of the type of wind and determination
of the time of effect of the selected type. For determining the number

of the type we will form additionally a one-dimensional mass of numbers
of types and subtypes represented by the first and second digits of the
code nunber. To each element in this sass we will assign numbers from I
to N. where N is the total number of types and subtypes. and in contrast
to the code number, we will call it the sequence number of the type.

we will represent the table of frequency of recurrence by s two-dimension-
al date ease in which the number of the row is determined by the sequence
nuber of the month and the number of the colu-I is determined by the
sequence number of the type. There is a mutually unambiguous reletionehip
between the table columns and the mess of sequence numbers of types. The
table of the frequency of recurrence is prepared in such a way that the
sun of eleeents In each row is equal to unity. This makes it possible to
regard the elements in the rows as the probabilities of appearance of the
corresponding wind situations in each month.

He will denote the row elements by p1, where i - l..... N is the sequence
nueber of a standard situation. Examining p1 as the probabilities of ap-
pearnnce of a situation with the number i in a particular month, we will
assume that the sequence number of the wind situation is a discrete random
value , . distributed with the probability {piu - i....,n). ]

1hus. determination of the situation number was reduced to finding the dis-
crete random value 0‘. assuming the value i with the probability p1. For

solving this problem we will use the algorithm described in [2]. The es-
sence of this algorithm is as follows.

137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-'IiZMI. USE ONLY

Ammmc that there is a rnndns value at. uniformly distributed in the in-
terval [0. 1]. on well as a discrete randon value 3' . seaming the values
at with the probability p1. Then the inequalities

I-l

I -1
2pm“: p. or °<"’th<h (1)
h. ." Isl
determine the number j for which i - nj. in the case which we considered

n - 1; therefore g - j. The inequalities cited above always snake sense
a are

l

N
2"“ V..." I<A. Zp.-I. (2)

Del ...

Thus. for deternining the number of the wind type it is necessary. using a
procedure generating random numbers uniformly distributed in the sewnt
[0.1]. to obtain the number 06. then. using the inequalities (l). to com-
pute the sequence number of the type. from which we then deter-sine the
code of the type and the archive element corresponding to it. After the
wlnd situation has been selected. it is necessary to determine the dura-
tion of its effect. A duration table. for each standard situation. in-
cludes two characteristics: mean duration a and naxinus duration b. He
will assume that the duration of the effect of the meteorological situa-
llun is also a random value and we will consider the procedure for its
ruldt‘liﬂli. Using the two parameters a and b. we will stipulate the dis-
tribution law in the form of s piecewise-linear function

2:

75" when 0"“ (3)

,.

2 —a
ﬁ- ""9" a<x<o.

We have the following relationship:

_".. when 00“ (1.)

ab

_ x—O .<;<o.
l Ho—«n' when

5

j. yd:-

Usinr. the relationship expressed by the N. V. Snirnov transformation [2].
between the value a uniformly distributed in the segment [0. 1] and the
random value with the stipulated distribution law

I
5 ydx-O. (s)
for x we obtain the expression
— a
that . when ad T (6)
l n a _
0-— v‘m. when 1 > T

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The x value computed in this way is the continuous duration of effect of
the wind type in hours.

Further modeling is carried out using succession tables, whose elements are
regarded as the conditional probabilities of transition of one type into
another. Each of the rows in the table has a normalization similar to (2)
and can be regarded as a table of the probabilities of occurrence of a new

wind situation. Therefore. the algorithm for computing the number of the
new situation uses the procedure describtd above.

In accordance with the succession table there can be a repetition of the
number of the already effective type. In this case in computing the con-
tinuOus duration we take into account the entire time interval during which
there is no change in the number of the type. The effect of the wind situa-
tion ceases upon elapsing of the interval of the maximum continuous dura-
tion and the next number of the situation is not computed from the succes-
sion table. but from the table of frequency of recurrence. That is. consult-
ation of the table of frequency of recurrence occurs either at the beginn-

lng of the computations or in connection with exceeding of the interval of
maximum duration of the effect.

The "calendar" of types prepared in this way serves as the input informa-
lion in models of dynamics. in accordance with this. at definite moments
in time we select from the archives different meteorological situations.
With the multiple use of this procedure in the numerical modeling we use

the statistical structure of the fields entered in the tables of regime
characteristics.

Information on the wind and pressure fields and their regime characteris-
tics in the form of atlases and tables is available for many internal water
bodies and oceanic regions (for example. see [6]). Therefore. we feel that
the described parameterization method will be useful in many modeling prob-
lems and especially in those where reference is to the prediction of the
future state of the water body in connection with man's economic activity.
The use of the methods of statistical modeling of random values with dis-
tribution laws obtained as a result of processing of actual information
will make it possible to take into account the principal characteristics

of the climatic regime and the most characteristic meteorological situa-
tions over the investigated object.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. ATLAS VOLNENIYA I VETRA OZERA BAYKAL (Atlas of Waves and Hinds Over
Lake Baykal). Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 1977, 117 pages.

2. Yermakov. S. H.. HETOD MONTE-KARLO I SHEZHNYYE VOPRDSY (Monte Carlo
Method and Related Problems). Hoscow. "Nauka." 1971. 327 pages.

3. Savlnova, N. V.. Yanter. N. N.. "Typical Wind and Rave Fields on Lake
Baykal," TRUDY ZAP.-SIB. RNICHI (Transactions of the Heat Siberian Re-

gional Scientific Research Hydrometeorological Institute). No 10, pp
113-132, 1973. 139

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. SPRAVOCﬂNYYE DANNYYE P0 REZRIHU VETRA I VOLNENIYA V OKEANAKH (Refor-
encc Data on the Wind and Have. Regine 1n the Oceans). Moscow-Leningrad.
"Trunnport." 1965. 235 pages.

5. Tavetovo. Ye. A.. "Mathellttcal Modeling of Hater Circulation in Lake
Buykal." TECHENIYE V BAYKALE (Currents in Bayknl). Novoltblrok, "Nuuka."
pp 68-82, 1977.

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 551.682.212

REASONS FOR THE FORMATION OF RIDGBD RELIBP 0N Th3 SURFACE OF FLOODPLAINS
0F HBANDERING RIVERS

Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 108-109

[Article by Yu. I. Kaaenskov. State Hydrological Institute, submitted for
publication 2 Harch 1978]

Abstract: The author clarifies the mechanism

of formation of one of the principal morpholog-
ical peculiarities of the floodplains of meander-
ing rivers - ridges or channel banks forming
along the convex bank of each meander.

[Text] A distinguishing characteristic of the floodplains of meandering
rivers. repeatedly mentioned in the literature. is the formation of ridged
surface relief. This peculiarity has a single explanation. whose earliest
formulation can be found in [5]: "The displacement of the channel seeming-
ly occurs in jumps from high water to high water; its magnitude is depend-
ent on the intensity of the overflow. varying from year to year. and on
the dynamics of the flow specifically at the particular moment in time.
not being the same due to the continuously transpiring channel deforma-
tion. These sane variables govern the quantity of entrained alluvium car-
ried from the shoals along the channel. As a result. first. the zone of
their accumulation shifts in a jump, and associated with this is the for-
nation of a series of parallel isolated ridges which on the floodplain sur-
face mark the successive stages in channel displacement. and second. this
governs the nonuniform height of the ridges."

Such an explanation. on the one hand, contradicts the fact that the chan-
nel banks (ridges) are foraed in the stage of dropoff of high water [5]

or at the time of low high waters [1]. that is, when there is an appreciable
curvature of the water flow [k]. and on the other hand. it is understood
that the channel banks are formed very rapidly - in one. or in an extreme
case, in two years.

By measuring the distances between the ridges and the rate of horieontal
channel displacement it is easy to confirm that the period of formation
of one ridge in many cases is 10-20 years. In this case the variations in

151
FOR (DFFlClo’ul. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the height of high water from year to year and the jumplike nature of the
horizontal channel deformations cannot explain the separation of the ridges
by troughs. In addition. in clarifying the reasons for formation of the
ridges it is necessary to take into account the following circumstances:

I) on the surface of a sandy beach there is only one forming ridge or its
base in the form of a raised strip - the longitudinal crest of the sandy
beach: 2) the beach is clearly bounded in the direction of the floodplain
by the first ridge from the channel. which, in essence. is the brow of

the convex bank of the flow in the meander during the high-water period

and virtually does not differ in height and structure from the more ancient
ridges; 3) the broadest sectors of the main channel at the time of high
water are situated over the banks.

From everything which has been stated above. we obtain the following pic-
ture of the process of ridge formation. The erosion of the concave bank
causes an increase in the shoal along the banks. the formation of an ex-
cessive channel width and differences in the configurations of the convex
and concave banks. Therefore. during the period of high water along the
convex bank of the meander or along the river slope of the first ridge

from the channel there is formation of a zone of cutoff of streamline flow
or a relatively stagnant zone. within its limits the transport and accum-
ulation of bottom sediments will be expressed to a lesser degree than at
the contact between this zone and the main water flow in the channel. Ac-
curdingly. the zone of greatest accumulation is situated at some distance
from the brow of the alluvial bank or the river slope of the first near-
rhannel segment from the channel. This zone (ridge base) can be formed

not In the course of a single year. but in the course of a number of high
waters and low-water periods. increasing gradually downstream and increas-
ing its height. Taking into account the annual increment in the horizontal
channel displacement. the downstream part of the longitudinal crest of the
sandy beach. augmenting itself in a downstream direction. can more and more
deviate from the brow of the alluvial bank (or the river slope of the first
ridge from the channel) and can also approach to it. The possibility of the
first or second case is determined. on the one hand. by the relationship of
the horizontal deformations of the meander in its middle and downstream sec-
tors, and on the other hand, by the rate of ridge formation. In the first

case a so-called backwater is formed in the downstream part of the beach.
As a result. the ridge will grow in a downstream direction (against the

background of horizontal deformations of the meander); its upstream sector
will have the greatest width and the gentlest slopes.

The fact that small ridges. transporting alluvium from the underwater part
of the shoal onto the beach, are situated near the lowvwater line, whereas
in the above-water part of the entire shoal there is a predominance of
longitudinal ("running" with the current) and larger ridges. suggests that
the beach to a high degree consists of particles transported from the above-
lying meander. The upstream part of the ridge. developing on the surface

of the sandy beach. is the first sector on the path of the alluvium-saturat-
ed currents of the flow passing along the erodable bank of the above-lying

152
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

neander. Therefore. it will increaee in height core rapidly then the down-
etreal part and earlier will love out iron the cone of frequent and pro-
longed inundatione.

After the height of the upatrean part of the for-ing ridge approachee the
nexinun water level with a 50: probability. the channel flow in a large
part of the periods of high water will hand around the ridge. But during
the tine of growth of the ridge in height and length. as a result of hor-
izontal deforeationa of the leander there will again be e noncorreepond-
ence in the outlines of the browe of the concave and convex banks of

the channel in the oeander. that ie. the channel becoeea exceaeively
breed. Therefore. in front of the forced ridge there ie for-etion of a
zone of cutoff of etraaeline flow end the foreation of a new ridge be-

gins and thia will also be eituated at eoee dietance free the preceding
one .

Thus. each ridge paeeee through the principal stages in its developeent
into the phase of ita positioning along the channel. that is. ia situated
on the surface of the sandy beach.

The first ridge free the channel has virtually the ease longitudinal elope
no the other. older ridgea. Accordingly. the slope of the eurface of the
segment and a decreaee in the coarseneee of the alluviu- in a downstrea-
direction are e reault of the eieilar peculiarities of the eandy beach
surface. the upper (upstream) part of which ia the first eeglent on the
oath of the currents loving along the concave bank of the above-lying
meander and saturated with the producte of its erosion. The water cur-
rents. straightening the eeglent at the tile of high water. in actuality
lose the greater part of their energy and alluviul over its upetrean part
[1-3]. but this process does not create. but only aolewhet increaaee the
already created longitudinal slope of the eegnent surface and also leade
to none eoftening of the ridged relief. eince between the ridgea the lay-
er of depoaite is greater in this caee than at the tops of the ridges.

Most frequently sufficiently large eeandering rivera fern floodplains with
a ridged eurfnce relief. But there are floodplains of meandering rivere
with a level surface of the eegnente along the channel. Such a caee can
evidently be attributed to a conbinetion of eeall ratea of horizontal de-
forentione of the channel and great river turbidity. which cauaea a con-
nideroble accululation of suspended alluviue within the lieite of the
narrow zone of cutoff of etrealline flow.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. Zoe-enekaya. N. 5.. "Formation of the Relief on Floodplain: of Meander-
ing Rivers." TRUDY cot (Transactione of the State Hydrological lneti-
tute). No 209. pp 91-102. 1973.

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hakksvcyov. N. 1.. RUSLO REX! I BROZIYA V YEYB BASSBYNB (River Chan-
nel and Erosion in its Basin). Moscow. tad-v0 AN SSSR. 1953. 248

pages.

Ostanin. V. Yc., "Peculiarities of Structure and Formation of Flood-
plain Relief for Meandering and Branching Rivers in the Ens-pie

of the lrtysh. Severnsya Dvina and Vychegda." VESTNIK H60. SERIYA
GEOGRAP. (Herald of Moscow State University. Geographical Series).
No 5, pp 60-61, 1961.

Chalov, R. 8.. "?ornation of Floodplain Relief for Meandering livers."
GEOHORPOLOGIYA (Geo-orphology), No 2. pp 71-77. 1973.

Shantaer. Ye. V., "Alluvial of Rivers in the Temperate Zone and its Ia-
portance for Understanding the Patterns of Structure and Pornation of
Alluvial Suites," TRUDY lN-TA GEOL. NAUK AN SSSR. GEOL. 88R. (Trans-
actions of the Institute of Geological Sciences USSR Acadely of Sci-
cnccs. Geological Series), (No 55), Vyp 135, 1951, 276 pages.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"00 551.593.576

HULTKPLE SCATTERING IN TURBID MEDIA CONSISTING 0P SPHBRICAL PARTICLES
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 110-113
(Article by R. I. Bogdanov. Candidate of Physical and Mathematical Sci-

cnces A. Ye. Tyabotov, Doctor of Physical and Mathematical Sciences V. I.
Shlyehhov and A. l. Shupyatskiy. Central Aarological Observatory. submitt-

ed for publication 14 April 1978]

Abstract: The article describes a method for
determining the limits of onset of multiple
scattering and its values in the case of laser
pulsed sounding of turbid media consisting of
spherical particles. As a result of backscat-
taring of plane-polarized radiation in such
media the degree of polarisation of the regis-
tered signal differs fro. the polarization of
the irradiated wave. Such a change in polariz-
ation occurs as a result of multiple scatter-
ing, whose onset and value are dependent on
the optical density of the scattering medium.
The authors give the results of experimental
measurements of the dependence of the degree
of polarization of the scattered radiation
and the distance froa which multiple scatter-
ing appears on the coefficient of attenuation
of radiation in a cloud.

[Text] A determination of the limit of onset of multiple scattering and its
value is one of the important problems in the optics of turbulent media.
Until now. in solving a number of practical problems in this field. such
as in determining visibility in clouds and fogs or when ascertaining their
nicrnphysical characteristics. etc.. these parameters were determined with-

in the limits of single scattering, taking into account a correction for
multiple scattering which was found by means of complex solutions of integro-
differential transfer equations or by the Monte Carlo method. A bibliography
of studies uhich discuss the methods for such solutions is given in [A].

1he difficulties involved in determining the optical thickness of the medi-
as. from which multiple scattering begins, and also its values. with respect

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to experimentation. are yet to be overcome. however. the investigations

which have been made of changes in the degree of polarization of scattered
radiation of n lidar in dependence on the optical density of the medium

have indicated the possibility s! an instrumental determination of the
limits of onset of multiple scattering and its values [1, 3, 6].

 

Fig. 1. Block diagram of lidar.

KEY:
A. Droplet cloud
3. Limit of onset of multiple scattering
C. Limit of onset of single scattering

me—O—s—h—h—O—O—d

0‘
l I :
h\JI

_- ' ,
.c—VTV—

 

flectcd from droplet clouds. Scannin arization P (l) and distance (2) on

Fig. 2. Oscillogrsms of signals re- slPig. 3. Dependence of degree of pol-
nf 1 cm in 0.1 sec. a.

In this study we present the results of experimental investigations of
these parameters in droplet clouds and also the results of investigstion
of the possibility of using the polarization method for determining

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

the coefficient of attenuation in turbid media consisting of spherical
particles. For this purpose we used a method based on the determination

of the degree of polarization and the time shift of two mutually orthogon-
al components of lidar backseattered radiation [1]. The realization of

this method was accomplished using an instrument whose block diagram is
shown as Fig. l. The light source used is a ruby lidsr 3. emitting plane
polarized pulsed signals with a power P1 - 2 HR. The duration of the emitt-
ed pulse at the level 0.5 of the maximum amplitude is - 30 nsec; the
divergence of the emitted beam is 9P1 - 10 min; the angle of the field of
view of the detectors is 9'2 ' 1'.

As is well known. with the passage of polarized light through a turbid me-
dium. consisting of a great number of spherical particles, such as through
droplet clouds or fogs. the reflected signal will be partially depolarized
[S]. In such media depolarization arises as a result of multiple scatter-
ing. The scattered signal is received in a backseattered direction using
two detectors 4 and 5, each of which consists of a telescope, photomultiplier
and polaroids l and 2. situated at the input of these detectors. The polar-
nid at the input to the detector 4 transmits light whose polarization plane
coincides with the polarization plane of the emitted wave. whereas the
polaroid installed at the input of the detector 5 transmits light with a
polarization perpendicular to the polarization plane of the emitted wave.
With such a receiving system the first detector will receive all the radia-
tion scattered in a back direction. as well as multiply scattered radiation
for which the plane of oscillation of the electric vector coincides with
the plane of polaroid transmission 1. The second detector will receive the
orthogonal component of scattered radiation. that is. the signal caused

by multiple scattering. the plane of oscillation of whose electric vector
coincides with the transmission plane of the polaroid 2.

Signals are fed from the photomultiplier to the indicator 10 through the
amplifiers 6 and 7. 0n the record of this indicator the leading edge of
the depolarized signal 13 will be displaced relative to the leading edge
of the main signal by the distance from which multiple scattering begins.
The beginning of the leading edge of the appearing depolarized signal
shows the limit from which the multiple scattering begins. The doubled in-
tegral value of the entire depolarized signal. taking into account the
angle of beam divergence and the angle of the field of view of the detec-
tor.shows the multiple scattering value. here it is assumed that the con-
tribution of multiple scattering to the signals received by the two detec-
tors will be identical. Such an assumption can be sade. allowing a mean
arithmetical error of not more than 32, since. as shown by computations.

made by the method described in [S]. the components of intensity of doubly
scattered lidar radiation on the average differ from one another by such
a value, although in individual cases. in dependence on the microstructure
of the cloud medium, the difference in these components can attain up to
[02. It was established from an analysis of the results of these compute-
tions that the main contribution to multiple scattering is introduced for
the most part by the doubly scattered lidar radiation. since the intensity

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of multiple reflections above the second accordingly thou will be about
2-3 orders of magnitude lees. Hence. subtracting from the signal received
by the first detector the signal received by the second detector. we oh-
tain the value of the singly scattered signal.

It should he pointed out that the angles of the field of view of both de-
tectors in this case should be identical.

Ihus. on the basis of the time shift of the signals received by two detec-
tors discriminating the orthogonal components it is possible to determine

the limit of multiple scattering and its value in turbid media consisting

of spherical particles.

Pluuro 2. as an example. shows oscillograms of the signals scattered in a
hack direction by droplet clouds with different density. The oscillogram
(a) shows the signal 1 received by the detector 6 and the signal 2 receiv-
ed by the detector 5. These signals were received during the scattering of
laser radiation by clouds with an attenuation coefficient 0" 0.106 m' .
1his dense cloud is caused by the high depolarization of the signal. as a
result of which the degree of polarization P - 0.65. On the cscillograms
(h). (c) and (d) we see signals received from clouds with the correspond-
ing attenuation coefficients 06- 0.081. 0.036 and 0.012 m'1 and P - 0.73.
0.82 and 0.91.

In order that during registry with a single-channel oscillogrsph the receiv-
vd signals not be superposed on one another, the depolarized signal is shift-
ed in time by means of the delay unit 9 by the time t - 0.25 pLsec relative
to the main signal 12. In Fig. 2 these signals are denoted by the figures

2 and l respectively. with reflection from a plane surface the depolarized
signal 2 must begin t . 0.25,Lsec after the main signal 1. that is. from

the dashed line indicated in Fig. 2. However. with scattering by clouds of
different density the signal 2 appears from a different depth r and its
value. and accordingly. its polarization. are essentially dependent on

cloud density.

”n the oscillograms in Fig. 2 the r value is determined from the time shift
AIL The conversion from the time characteristics to the range characteris-
tic is determined from the expression
a

”5+- (1)
where A( is the time interval between the arrival of two mutually orthogon-
al components of the backscattered lidar radiation at the detectors and c
is the speed of light.

Figure 3. in the form of the curves 1 and 2 respectively. shows the depend-
ence of the degree of polarization P and the depth r from which multiple
scattering begins on the attenuation coefficient at. The numerical values
of these parameters are also presented in Table 1. In this case the P

148

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

value was determined on the basis of the laxinun values of the saplitudea
of the nain and orthogonal components of the received signal. These re-
suits were ohtained using a lidar installed on an ILPlB aircraft of the
Central Aerelogical Observatory. At the ease tine. by the lidar sounding
of clouds we carried out aessurenents of the attenuation coefficientstby
the method in [2].

Table 1

Value of the Attenuation Coefficients 0!. Degree of Polarization P «ad the
Distance r Between the Orthogonal Components of a Reflected Signal of
Lidar Apparatus

 

 

u a-' I I’ l Ill II at n-' I I’ I ”I
_. . .._ . "._H. ___._____._______,________

an: ' nin | Is ' noun I um» I I9
new ‘ -mn. - ll { 00: us! I I2
nom ' tall I 9 . ups: as: | 14
mun I do. a i «or. 0:5 IO
urz' : «en lo out. : 0:: I s
up“. ' Ora . In .nnu l 015 ' H
'Uu; us! ll nan l at: : In
00L: ' "' ' 0.019 . 0.79

0.120 I 0.5-5

OJNJ I 0

mas o

 

Joint neasureaents by means of a lidar and apparatus for measuring cloud
transparency [2] were carried out in such a way that first there was laser
sounding of the cloud during a pass of the aiicraft at the distance R -
600-500 a free it and then the aircraft entered the cloud and at a depth
of 20-60 a iron the cloud edge it flew in the opposite direction along
this some route. In this case there was continuous registry of the atten-
nation coefficient in the cloud at a distance equal to the length of the
wing. since the reflecting prise was aounted on its end. The tie-in of

the results of the measure-ants to the results obtained using the trans-
parency aeasuring apparatus was accoaplished taking into account the
length of the aircraft flight path and its velocity over the cloud and in
the cloud. The length of the path was selected at not more than 10 he. Dur-
ing the tiee of the pass along such a path no significant changes occurred
In the cloud structure. The passage of the aircraft in the cloud at the
mentioned depths was desirable because the laxieua of the reflected sig-
nals during laser sounding from an aircraft at distances R - 400-500 a

from the cloud corresponded to these depths.

It follows from an analysis of the oscillograns cited in Fig. 2. and also
the results of measurements of G‘. P and r. presented in Table l and Fig.

l. that during the scattering of laser radiation by denser clouds the
depolarized signal appears from a lesser depth. Its amplitude is sufficient-
ly great. but the degree of polarization P is less than during scattering

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In less dense clouds. For example. with 01- 0.103 III"1 P - 0.62. r - 5 m.
with d-- 0.l06 m‘l P - 0.65. r - 6 m. Hith lesser at values the P and r
values are larger. If u! - 0.016 r1. then r - 0.9. r - 19 m, with a. -
0.012 m‘1 r - 0.91. r - 21..

It can be seen that the data collected on the correlation between P and r
andlx agree qualitatively with the results of computations carried out in
Ill. A close coincidence is not ohserved due to the fact that the compute-
tions in [3] were made for a lidar with other instrumental parameters.

It should be mentioned that the P and r values are significantly dependent
on the geometrical parameters of the lidar. For example, with a decrease
In the angle of the field of detector view the strength of the signal
shaped as a result of multiple scattering will also decrease and the value
of the degree of polarization P will also increase. The distance r from
which multiple scattering begins will in this case also increase.

with an increase in the angle of the detector field of view the strength
of the signal shaped as a result of multiple scattering will increase and
the r and r values will decrease. In a general case the geometrical para-
meters of the lidar will enter into the formula for polarization P [SI

of a hackscattered signal in the following form:

P I.."Pgn’ol 2
p -_ez_i._._._:.)°.:‘-_-_.. ( )

I g.

where as'" .
I“ _, I": + ’”: : P" - W.
I a

Luau?|m+4p+(R+rnR+r+hn+(R+'+Lum

 

. " 1... tr' %'- [m + R (R + L...) + (R + Lea-PI

[llB - d(oubly). 011" I a(ingly)] here Pd is the degree of polarization of
doubly scattered radiation. ‘dl and 142 are the intensities of doubly scat-
tered radiationregistered for the longitudinal and transverse components

of the electric vector respectively. ‘P1 is the angle of divergence of the
transmitter ray, 9’2 is the angle of the detector field of view. r is the
depth of the medium from which the double scattering begins. R is the dis-
tance to the cloud. L3 and La are the thicknesses of the layers with single
and double scattering respectively.

Hith 'd1 = 152 formula (2) assumes the simpler form:

Pea- lol- I (3)

Jae. V Jcan .

P-

Here the values lg, Id and k are determined experimentally. P. I 1, since
the medium is irradiated by a plane polarized ray. Thus, from an analysis
of the results of our measurements it follows that a method based on the

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFICIAL USE ONLY

measurement of the degree of polarization of scattered lldar radiation
makes it possible to determine the limit of the onset of multiple scatter-
ing and its value in turbid sedia consisting of spherical psrticles and
also the value of the attenuation coefficient in these nedis.

B IBLIOGRAPIW

l. Bogdanov. R. 1.. Tyabotov, A. Ye.. Shlyakhov, V. 1.. Shupystskly, A. 5..
"Method for Deter-ining the Lilits of the Region of Multiple Scatter-

ing in Optical Media," Author's Certificate No 373602. BYULLBTEM' (Bul-
letin), No lb, 1973.

2. Zebrodskiy. c. M.. ”Results of Experinentsl Investigations of the 0p-
tlcnl Density of Clouds ." TRUDY VSESOYUZNOGO NAUCIINO-HETEONIDGIOIBSK-
060 SOVESMCMAN1YA (Transactions of the All-Union Scientific Meteorolog-
icnl Conference). Vol 6. Leningrad. Gidroneteoizdat. pp lO2-l06. 1963.

3. Zuyev. V. Ye.. Krekov. C. M.. Matviyenko. C. 6.. Popkov. A. 1.. "invest-
igation of the Polarization Characteristics of Backscattered Signals
in the Laser Sounding of Clouds." LAZERMOYE ZOMDIROVANIYE ATMOSFERY
(Laser Sounding of the Atmosphere). Moscow, "Msuka." pp 29-46, 1976.

1., Ivnnov, A. 9.. OPTIKA RASSEIVAYUSHCHIKR SRBD (Optics of Scattering
Media). Minsk. "Nauka i Tekhnika." 1969. 571 pages.

5. Pshonkin. V. S.. Tyabotov. A. Ye.. Shlyakhov. V. 1.. Shupyatskiy. A. 3..
"Polarization of a Lidar Ray During Scattering by a Polydisperse
Medium Consisting of Spherical Particles Hith Allowance for Double
Scattering," TRUDY TeAO (Transactions of the Central Aerological 0b-
servetotY). N0 105. pp 57-68. 1973.

6. Tyabotova. A. Ye.. "Results of Measurements of the Volume Scattering Co-
efficient of Laser Radiation at A- 0.69pm in Droplet Clouds with A1-
lovance for Multiple Scattering." TBZISY DOKLADOV MA 111 VSESOYUZMOM
SIHPOZIUHE P0 UZERNOHU ZONDIROVANIYU AMSFERY (Sulllsries of Reports
at the Third All-Union Syepoeiun on Laser Sounding of the Ataosphere).
Tonsk, pp l39-163. 1975.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0h-Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 551.509.58:639.206

EXPERIENCE IN SU?PLYINC TEE FISHING FLEET HIT“ DATA ON THE REGIME OP
DANGEROUS AND PARTICULARLY DANGEROUS NYDROHETBOROLOOICAL PNENONBNA

Moscow METEOROLOCIYA I GIDNOLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 116-117

[Article by Candidate of Geographical Sciences 0. G. Kornyushin and A. P.
Tyurin. All-Union Scientific Iasearch Institute of Hydrometeorological

Information - Horld Data Center and the Main State Fishing Fleet Inspec-
torate USSR Fisheries Ministry. submitted for publication 10 March 1978]

Abstract: The article describes experience
in investigating the regime of dangerous
and especially dangerous hydroeeteorolog-
ical phenoaena affecting navigation and
fishing in the world ocean: storn winds
and waves, restrictions on visibility,
icing of ships. tropical cyclones. ice

and icebergs. The author describes the
method for preparing specialised atlases
of dangerous hydroseteorological phenomena.
The content of these atlases is briefly
discussed. The prospects of development of
work in this direction are outlined.

[Text] The ayatea for routine hydrometeorological support for ships in the
fishing fleet and for fish ferns has now been organized quite well. Fish-
ing expeditions as a rule receive all the routine hydroneteorological in-
formation necessary for ensuring the safety of navigation and increasing
the efficiency of fishing free the operational agencies of the USSR aydro-
meteorological Service: weather bureaus. hydrometeorological bureaus and
synoptic groups situated on ships of the fishing industry directly in fish-
ing regions. These operational agencies prepare short-range weather fore-
casts, storn warnings, warnings on the threat of icing, ice information.
predictions of sea waves and other routine suannries for ships. All this

information is broadcast for ships by on-shore radio centers or the radio
stations on ships carrying synoptic groups. In individual cases the ships
of the fishing industry fleet receive weather bulletins for ships trans-
mitted by the radio centers of who participating countries.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I 't-_'. '

1'
I
I

 

Fig. i. Zonea of icing of ehipa in January. 1) alov icing. 2) rapid icing,

3) very rapid icing. 6) limit of poaeible insignificant icing during par-
ticularly revere vintere.

      
      

\‘ \‘ \‘ \‘ - --. n- n.” ,

‘ ,—\.a--.- ” on. -.

 

represent the prevailing direction and frequency of recu
with velocitiea of 17 line: or note.

frequency of recurrence 21~401.
quency of recurrence 61-802.

rrence of winds
1) frequency of recurrence 0-202, 2)
3) frequency of recurrence 61-601. 4) fre-

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IWFICIM. "SF. ONLY

During their passage through the oceans from port to the fishing areas

and back the ships of the fishing fleet and fish farms make extensive use
of the recosmmndations of the operational agencies of the USSR Hydrometeor-
ological Service on the choice of the optimum navigation routes in depend-
ence on the current and anticipated weather conditions and the hydrolog-
ical regime along the navigation reutes. During 1977 such recommendations
were used by 876 ships of the fishing industry. The time gain from this
type of servicing as an average per ship was 9 hours for the Pacific Ocean
and 6 hours for the Atlantic Ocean.

in addition to routine hydrometeorologicsl data. the ships of the fishing
industry and the fishing organizations were interested in obtaining regime
hydrometeorological data for the navigation and fishing regions. This in-
formation is necessary for planning the periods of fishing, the times for
beginning and ending work. distribution of the fleet. planning fishing op-
erations for different types of ships and ensuring the safety of navigation.
The most important information for these purposes is data on the frequency
of recurrence and the intensity of dangerous and particularly dangerous
hydrometeorologicsl phenomena arising in the fishing regions of the world
ocean. including storms. hurricanes. heavy waves. occurrence of ice, icing
of ships. reduced visibility. etc. Studies on creating aids characterising
hydrometeorological conditions which are dangerous and especially danger-
ous for navigation and fishing have been carried out for a number of years
at the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometsorological In-
formation in collaboration with the Main State Inspectorate of Navigation

Safety and Port Supervision of the Fishing industry Fleet of the USSR Fish-
eries Ministry.

ﬁne of the most dangerous phenomena for the fishing fleet is the icing of
ships. The USSR Fisheries Ministry. with participation of specialists of
the USSR Nydrometeorological Service, has carried out expeditionary in-
vestigations of the hydrometeorological conditions for the icing of fishing
vessels and the conditions for ice deposition on ships during the period

of the most real development of this phenomenon. Field experiments made

it possible to develop a method for predicting icing and made it possible
for the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hydrometeorological
information-world Data Center and the Main State Fishing Fleet Inspectorate
to compile and publish in 1968-1972 atlases of the icing of ships for the
principal fishing regions of the northern hemisphere. These atlases are
regarded as obligatory aids for fishing ships and are used by them.

The basis of the icing atlases is monthly maps which show zones of slow,
rapld and very rapid icing (Fig. 1). These criteria were selected on the
basis of investigations of conditions for the icing of ships which were
rarried out in the Far Eastern, Northern and Hestern basins. As the "3:3“-

dard" vessel in the development of these criteria we used the most massive
type of fishing vessel - the SRT intermediate fishing trawler with a
length of 39 m, a displacement of 650-662 tons. with a crew of 24-26 men.

156

FOR UFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the principal indices for detersining the criteria of the rate of ship

icing we used: 1) the time required for the ship to reach critical instab-
ility if the crew does not take leasures for contending with icing; 2) the
capability of the crew to ensure safety of the vessel when there are nan-

ual leans available for contending with icing.

In the case of slow icing the rate of ice deposition on the ship lust not
exceed 1.5 ton/hour. In this case the ship attains critical instability af-
ter sure then 26 hours. Hith such an intensity of icing the ship's crew
can independently contend with the chipping away of the ice and ensure the
ship's safety.

in the case of rapid icing the rate of ice deposition on the ship is 1.5-
b.0 ton/hour. Critical instability of the ship is attained after 12-24
hours. The ship‘s crew can contend with the chipping away of the ice on
their own provided there is continuous work by the entire crew other than
the captain. the on-duty engineer and the radio-an.

Very rapid icing is characterized by a rate of ice deposition on the ship
of more than 6.0 ton/hour. Critical instability of the ship begins in less
than 12 hours if seasurea are not taken for contending with the icing. The
crew through its own efforts can lessen the icing and prolong the ties of
onset of critical instability, but seasures must be taken to renove the
ship from the danger zone and in case of necessity call larger vessels or
a rescue tug to its assistance.

The icing of vessels arising in the zones indicated on the naps occurs un-
der the following hydroneteorological conditions.

Slow icing:

a) air telperature fro. -l to -3°C, any wind velocity, presence of spraying
of vessel or at least one of the phenomena - precipitation. fog, sea stesar
108:

b) air temperature -6'C or below, wind velocity up to 9 a/sec. presence of

ship spraying or at least one of the phenomena - precipitation. fog, sea
steaming.

Rapid icing:
air teapernture from -6 to -8°C and wind velocity from 10 to 15 a/sec.

Very rapid icing:

a) air temperature -6’C or below, wind velocity 16 a/aec or acre;
b) air temperature -9°C or below. wind velocity 10-15 n/sec.

A continuation of the work on supplying the fishing industry with regiae
data on dangerous and particularly dangerous hydroaeteorological phenoaena

was the developnent and publication of the SPRANOCHNIK PO 08030 OPASNYH
155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l Ol'ASNYH (llDROHI'ZTIiOROIDGlClll-‘SKIH YAVLHNIYAH SHVERNOY CIMSTI ATLANTICIIESK-
UGO OKEANA (handbook on Dangerous and Especially Dangerous Phenomena in
the Northern Part of the Atlantic Ocean) (Moscow. Gidrossteoizdat. 1976).
'ﬂnis handbook gives information on the frequency of recurrence of direc-
tions, the mean and maximum number of days with wind having a velocity

"f 20 m/sec or sore. on the frequency of recurrence of wave heights of

8 n or sore with a wind velocity of 20 nlsec or more and on the principal
characteristics of tropical cyclones and the ice regime.

A further investigation of the influence of dangerous and particularly dan-
geruus hydrometcornlogical phenomena on the work of the fishing fleet and
an analysis of the shipboard use of earlier published regime hydro-steer-
nlogicai materials on dangerous phenomena made it possible to proceed to
the preparation of more perfect and more complete side on hydrometeorolog-
ical phenomena dangerous and particularly dangerous for navigation and
fishing. For example, in 1975. at the All-Union Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Hydrometeorological Information-ﬂorid Data Center. in collabora-
tion with the Main Fishing Fleet Inspectorate. work began on preparation
of a series of atlases of dangerous and especially dangerous hydroseteor-
ological phenomena threatening navigation and fishing arising in the world
ocean. Also participating in the preparation of these atlases was the USSR
Hydroeeteorological Center and the Murmansk Division of the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute. They constitute the first spec-
ialized aids for navigation and fishing, most fully revealing the struc-
ture of dangerous and especially dangerous hydro-eteorologicsl phenonena.
taking into account the peculiarities of operation of the fishing industry
and fish farm fleets and the types of fishing vessels.

The atlases in preparation will consist of seven parts, in each of which
histograms and isolines will show the distribution of dangerous hydro-
moteoroiogi cal phenosena.

The first section will give the characteristics of the distribution of
strong winds (Pig. 2). Three series of maps will reflect the distribution
of the frequency of recurrence and continuous duration of winds with velo-
cities of 15. 17, 25. 33 n/sec or more and also the maximum registered wind
velocity. wind direction and stability of the storm wind.

The second part will give information on the frequency of recurrence and
duration of waves with a height of b, 6, 8 m or more. and also wave heights
with a 11 guaranteed probability.

The third section characterizes the spatial-temporal structure of decreases
In visibility (2. l, 0.5 miles, 1 and 0.5 cable lengths or less).

The fourth section will present information on the average and extremal po-
sitions of the limits of drifting ice and the distribution of icebergs.

1he fifth section gives the latest information on the intensity of ship
icing. Here, supplementing earlier published atlases of ship icing. for
the first time we will propose the characteristics of the probability of
ahip icing with different intensity.

156
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIC Ml. USE ONLY

In the sixth and seventh sections an evaluation is given of the circula-
tion peculiarities of develop-ant of severe stores lost dangerous for
navigation and fishing. The sections will give the generalised character-
istics of tropical cyclones. Data will be given on the extent of store re-
gions end the duration of store winds in dependence on distance to the
center of the hurricane. Here the regions of foreation of severe storms

in the extratropicnl latitudes will be given for definite standard syn-
optic situations.

The atlases which will be prepared are intended for the seat part for the
navigators of ships of the fishing industry and fish fares. specialists

in the fishing industry planning fishing operations. directors of fishing
expeditions and also workers of the Main State Fishing Fleet lnspactorate

and its agencies in the field concerned with the setters of ensuring the
safety of navigation and supervision of fishing. Like the ship icing at-
iases. the atlases of dangerous end especially dangerous hydroseteorolog-
lcol phenosena will enter into the list of sandatory aids for ships in
the fleets operated by the fishing industry and fish fares. In addition.
they can be used by navigators of ships of the Merchant Marine Ministry
and other sinistries and deperteents end also by acadesic. scientific and
prognostic subdivisions.

The need for further improvement in the servicing of ships in the fleets
operated by the fishing industry and fishing organizations with regime
hydroneteorological eaterisls for different regions of the world ocean
places before the USSR Hydroseteorological Service the problee of creat-
ing new. lore extensive archives of marine hydroeeteorological inferna-
tion. At the All-Union Scientific Research institute of Mydroneteorolog-
ical Infornstion-Horld Data Center work has already developed on the form-

ing of more extensive archives of such inforeation on sicrofilns and neg-
netic tapes with the use of the most modern technical seans.

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REVIEW OF MONOGRAPH 'UATER RESOURCES 0P RIVERS IN THE ZONE 0? THE BAYKALPAHUR
RAILROAD LINE' (VOONYYE RBSURSY REX ZONY BAH), EDITED BY A. I. CHEBOTARBV AND
V. H. OOBROUHOV. LENINGRAD. CIDROHBTBOIZDAT, 1977. 271 PAGES

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 p 118

[Article by Doctor of Geological and Mineralogical Sciences 0. N. Tolati-
thin]

[Text] The hydroseteorologicel Publishing house (Gidronateoiadat) has pleas-
ed specialists with a necessary and good book written at the State Hydrolog-
ical Institute and devoted to the water resources of rivers in the zone of
the Baykal-Asur Railroad Line. The teen of authors has succeeded in creat-
ing a monograph which is uniform in structure. level of processing and an-
nlysis of the extensive factual saterial. The monograph reflects the con-
plex and diverse aspects of the hydrology of an enornous area constituting

a considerable part of Eastern Siberia. In this study, with exposition of
all the principal characteristics of the water resources and characteris-
tics of the hydrological regime of rivers in the zone of the laykal-Anur
Railroad Line. one is well iapreased with the logical and laconic present-
ntlon. clarity of references and conclusions and the successful interre-
lationship of the volumes of descriptive material and tabular and graphic
factual saterial.

unrk engineers and planners. sanagesent directors and construction sen will
find here the information which they require on the annual runoff of rivers
and its distribution by seasons of the year, data on the maximum and mini-
nun runoff indices, peculiarities of formation of sediments and nudflows,
ice regime. channel and ice encruststion processes. The nean annual runoff
values have been characterized on the basis of reduction of data for differ-
ent periods to long-term values, which will considerably increase the reli-
ability of the characteristics and the reliability of their use for all pos-
sible computations and predictions. Recomndations on coqutation of the
intraannual distribution of runoff of unstudied rivers can be of great
practical isportance.

.tﬁﬁt

158
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

i would especially like to note the high level of design and printing of
the book. although these qualities are characteristic for this publishing
house. The colorful dust jacket of the book. the fly-leaf uhich carries

a map of the Baykal-Anur Railroad zone with the river network and the
route of the future railroad. the clrrity of the headings and the purpose-
Iuiness of the type-settings used ensure a correspondence between the con-
tent nnd the form of the book. I want to take it in my hands to examine it
and after examining it -- read it.

Thinking about the book gives rise to a number of questions which have not
been adequately dealt with in it. This relates. in particular. to an in-
vestigation of the theoretical and regional patterns of fornation of water
resources. the influence exerted on the hydrological characteristics of
rivers by a cosplex set of natural factors. including permafrost and hydro-
geological. Taking into account the intensive exploitation of the Baykal-
Amur Railroad zone. such an analysis can have the lost direct practical
interest; it will assist in a more precise prediction of the reaction of
water resources to a change in the regional conditions for their forma-
tion, caused by man's economic activity.

In this connection it is worth giving attention to the specifics of formation
of the hydrochemical regime of rivers caused by the prolonged period of sett-
ing in of the ice. low nean annual air temperatures and water temperatures.
ice encrustation and peruafroat regulation, as well as the close interac-
tion between surface and ground water. Their discussion would make pos-

sible a more thorough approach to the problems of rational use and preserva-
tion of water resources. a considerable expansion of the extremely general
concepts in this field presented in section 2.1 of the book, a presentation
of useful and tinsly reconendations on how to take care of the water re-
sources of the Bayksl-Aaur Railroad zone and organize their most desirable
exploitation. The published book is a good basis for such work.

159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MONOGRAPH BY L. P. AFINOGENOV, S. I. CRUSHIN AND YE. V. ROMANOV ENTITLED
"APPARATUS POR INVESTIGATING THE SURFACE LAYER OF THE ATMOSPHERE" (APPAR-
ATURA DLYA ISSLBDOVANIYA PRIZRHNOGO SLOYA ATHOSPBRY), LBNINGRAD, GIDRO-
METBOIZDAT. 1977. 319 PAGES

Moscow HETEOROLDGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 118-120
[Book Review by A. A. Gurevich]

[Text] One of the significant difficulties which arises in the broad in-
trodnction of automated systems for the processing of data in all branch-
es of the national economy is the overcoming of the human psychological
barrier, since man does not fully comprehend the methods and possibilities
of the new technique. It is clear that one of the ways for overcoming this
contradiction should be continuous self-education. giving rise to a need
for special literature addressed to a specific reader. He feel that this
literature should meet the following requirements:

- it should define important aspects of the measurement method and the
method for processing the results to the detriment of technical details;

- it should draw attention to the new possibilities which are afforded

by the new measuring apparatus and the new data processing methods;

- it should devote great attention to aspects earlier inadequately dis-
cussed in the special literature;

- it should combine clarity and simplicity of exposition with a sufficient-
ly high theoretical level.

The reviewed book to a considerable degree corresponds to the formulated
requirements and is addressed, in particular, to the operating personnel
in the network concerned with self-education in the field of measurements
and instruments. It can also be useful to engineers concerned with the
formulation of hydrometeorological experiments and students of meteorology.

The book consists of two parts and contains 12 chapters.
The first part (seven chapters) is devoted to a description of the primary

measuring converters of meteorological elements. The first chapter gives a
formulation of the problems involved in measurements in the surface layer

160
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the atmosphere and covers the requirements on different classes of
meteorological information.

On the basis of the measurement problems it uas possible to formulate the
general requirements on the corresponding apparatus. The authors of the
monograph have introduced the concepts of the dynamic properties of meas-
urement converters. their statistical characteristics. static and dynamic
measurement errors and some ways to compensate static errors. llere it is
of particular interest to analyse the calibration principle.

0n the basis of the requirements formulated in the first chapter, the chap-
ters which follow (Chapters 2-7) examine the measurement methods and the
principles for constructing the measurement converters for the principal
meteorological elements characterizing the state of the surface layer of
the atmosphere.

The authors successively examine the measurement of temperature, humidity.
wind. atmospheric pressure. radiation and the characteristics of atmospher-
ic electricity.

The material cited in these chapters for the most part covers modern elec-
trical methods for measuring the elements. making it possible to organize
automated measurements. and also methods based on new principles and the
component base. These sections also contain material earlier inadequately
«'overed in the academic literature. The second chapter. for example. de-
scribes temperature converters on the basis of semiconductor instruments
and quartz plates. The fourth chapter devotes particular attention to
acoustic methods for measuring wind parameters, etc. Such a principle

is also characteristic for the remaining sections in this part of the
monograph. '

The second part of the book contains five chapters (Chapters 8-12) and is
devoted to an examination of the components of secondary measurement con-
verters, and also to an analysis of measurement systems.

1V0 chapters are devoted to gradient and pulsation measurements. The mat-
erials in these chapters. especially on pulsation measurements, in our
opinion are of special interest because these sections up to now have been
inadequately represented in the literature on meteorological measurements
and instruments. Here also, with justified completeness. there is a dis-
cussion of both methodological problems and the principles for scheme :ic
realization.

In conclusion, there is an examination of measurement data system. The
monograph discusses the trends in their development, the principles of
organization and standard structures. Also discussed are the principles
of organization of an automated experiment with the use of computers. As
examples, the authors examine the structures of automated stations used
in the llydrometeorological Service.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

without having the possibilities for a detailed analysis of each chapter
as a whole. it can be noted that the authors of the book to a consider-
able degree have succeeded in meeting the requirements formulated at
the beginning of the review.

As a rule. the attention of the reader is centered on the fundamental meth-
odoiogical problems of formulating this type of measurements. Particular
attention has been devoted to an analysis of the measurement errors and
ways to contend with them. as is particularly important. taking into ac-
vount the needs of the information user -- the meteorological engineer.

In addition to the already adopted means and methods, sufficient attention
has been devoted to promising methods and technical means. Along these
lines. we feel that the llth and 12th chapters are particularly informa-
tive; they successfully generalize the materials set forth in periodicals
and related literature.

The authors for the most part have succeeded in adhering to a style of ex-
position combining a high level with comprehensibility. The book does not
contain detailed descriptions of apparatus and schematic details. which

is more fitting for handbooks and instructions and which overburden some
academic aids.

A consideration of the general principles for the measurements and process-
ing of information in the book is combined with successfully selected
examples illustrating the use of the presented principles in the practice
of hydrometeorological instrument making. The bibliography has been suc-
cessfully selected; this facilitates the use of the book for deepening the
study of the sections of interest to the reader. The book is well illus—
trated and is tastefully designed.

Together with the list of merits. presented above and by no means complete.
it is not free from a number of shortcomings. For example. it is hard to
understand why the authors have not included sections relating to measure-
ments of the meteorological range of visibility, widely applied at the
present time in aviation meteorology and in other fields.

we feel that the sequence of exposition of material is not entirely justif-
ied. For example. the section on "Components of Secondary Measurement Con-
verrors," containing. in essence, information not only on components. but
also on some principles on the measurement and processing of data. is not
given at the beginning of the book. but in its second part. As a result,
the examination of a number of measurement methods in the chapters in the
first part is without the necessary basis. An example is the description

of acoustic anemometers in which use is made of diagrams of time measure-

ment and other diagrammatic representations unclear for the uninformed
reader.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In general. this section does not contain some basic information used in
the other sections. for example. the concepts of logical elements. Neither
this not the other sections of the book cover with methodological clarity
or completeness the compensation principle of measurement used repeatedly
in different applications (Chapters 5. 6). here the authors deviate from
the principle of discussion of the principles of the method, replacing it
by an illustration.

1n the first chapter the author introduces the concept of dynamic error.
which, unfortunately. is not always used in the subsequent analysis of
methods and instruments. It appears that the modern mathematical prepara-
tion of meteorologists would enable the authors to give a more detailed
examination of the problem of the transpiring of the random process in
the dynamic channel and also to provide a sound basis for rational time
and level quantization. The necessary additional mathematical approach
could be given in an appendix.

It goes without saying that all these wishes would require a substantial
increase in the volume of the book. but. it appears that this increase
would be justified. Any new book cannot be without some shortcomings. We
feel that in this case the shortcomings are in no way couensurable with
the merits of the considered book.

Heteorologista have received a good and timely book. He believe that it
will be of great service to all who work in the field of technical re-
cquipplng of the hydrometeorological service engaged in scientific and
practical work involved in hydrometeorological measurements.

163
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"[6“ AHARDS
Moscow HETEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 p 121

[Unsigned article]

[Text] By a decree of the Presidium of the Suprese Soviet USSR. dated 27
October 1978. entitled "Ansrding of Orders and Medals of the USSR to the
Workers Host Distinguishing The-selves in the Successful Ilplelentation of
uinter Arctic Voyages for the Delivery of Freight to Regions of the Far

North." the following workers of organizations of the State Collittee on
Hydrometeorology were presented awards:

Order of the Red Banner of Labor

Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Girs - director of a division at the Arctic and
Antarctic Scientific Research Institute.

Aleksandr Serafiuovich Glszunov -- chief of a division at the Dikson Adsin-
istration of the Hydroseteorologicsl Service;

Order "Emblem of Honor"

Alina Petrovna Golovina -- senior engineer of the hydroseteorological 0b-
servatory of the Tiksi Administration of the Hydroseteorological Observa-
tory.

Aleksey Vasil'yevich Krutikhin - senior engineer of the ssseahly teas of
the Amdcrnn Adninistretion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Vladimir Pavlovich Popov - senior engineer of the Northern Administration
of the Hydroseteorological Service;

Medal "For Outstanding Work"

Vulcriy [l'ich Andryushenko - junior scientific associate Arctic and Ant-
arctic Scientific Research Institute.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nadezhda Prokop'yevna Gudkovn - radio operator of the territorial con-un-
lcations unit at the Tiksi Adninistrntion of tho Hydro-eteorologicsl Ser-
vice.

Boris Dnitriyevich Popov - division chief at the Hurnansk Administration
of the Hydro-eteorological Service;

Medal "Fbr Distinction in work”

Yuriy Nikolayevich Yeaelin - division chief at the Dikson Administration
of the Hydroseteorological Service.

Alla Andreyevna Kotlyarova - weather bureau chief at the Andcrna Admin-
istration of the Hydro-eteorological Service.

Aleksandr Nikolayevich Nekrasov - division chief at the Pevek Ad-inistra-
tion of the Hydrometeorological Service.

Tannrn Alekaeyevna Pavlova - senior technician at the hydroneteorological
observatory at Cape Shnidt of the Psvek Administration of the Hydro-eteor-
alogical Service.

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SIXTIETN BIRIKDAY 0F VASILIY GRIGOR'YEVICH PAVLZNKO
>hscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 121-122

[Article by the Board of the USSR State Committee on hydroueteorology and
Environmental Monitoring]

[Text] The day 23 February 1979 marked the 60th birthday of Vaailiy Gri-
gor'yevich Pavlenko. chief of the Sakhalin Administration of the Hydro-

meteorological Service. Veailiy Grigor'yevich began his work activity

in the Hydrometeorological Service in May 1951 after graduating from the
Fendoaiya hydrometeorological Technical School. During the yeara of the

Great Fatherland war he was in the active army. he was given auarda for

participating in combat on the Karelian front, where in 1966 he entered

the ranks of the crsu.

 

During the period 1965-1956 V. C. Pavlenko worked in Azerbaydzhan as chief
of the marine hydroneteorological stations Arten Island and Neftyanyye Kan-
ni, whose materials were used in the planning and operation of see petroleum

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

facilities along the shores of the Apsheron Peninsula. During this period
he combined his successful productive activity with correspondence study
at Azerbaydzhan State University. from which he graduated in 1960.

Vasiliy Grigor'yevich proved himself to be a highly qualified specialist
and an able organizer and in 1958 was promoted to the post of deputy chief
of the Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service of the Azerbayd-
than 553. and since 1969 has been working as chief of the Sakhalin Admin-
istration of the Hydrometeorological Service.

During recent years. under the direction of and with the direct participa-
tion of V. 6. Pavlenko the Sakhalin Administration of the hydroeeteorolog—
ical Service has achieved considerable successes in the development and
improvement of hydroneteorological servicing of the multisided and complex
national economy of Sakhalinskaya Oblaat, especially aviation, the fishing
industry and the merchant marine. agriculture. coal, petroleum and gas in-
dustries. and also other branches of the national economy and population.
The tsunami warning service has received further development. V. G. Pav-
lenko devotes much attention to the development of work for study of the
climatic and water resources of Sakhalin and the Kuriles, the hydrometeor-
ological regime of seas. monitoring of the contamination of the natural
environment. introduction of new methods and technical equipment into the
practical activity of operational-productive and research activity of the
Sakhalin Administration of the Hydrometeorological Service. We should es-
pecially note the great work of Vssiliy Crigor'yevich on the introduction
of automatic stations.

The personnel of the Sakhalin Administration have repeatedly emerged the
victor in socialist competition among the administrations of the Hydro-
meteorological Service; it was awarded the Challenge Red Banner of the ﬂy-

drometcorological Service and the Central Committee of the Trade Union of
Aviation Horkers.

Vasiliy Grigor'yevich combines high requirements on himself and his subor-
dinate workers with constant concern for improving the material and living
conditions of workers of the Sakhalin Administration Service and network.
which has favored a decrease in the turnover of personnel and the arrival
of new specialists in the Administration of the Hydrometeorological Ser-

vice. whose education and training receives much attention from V. G. Pav-
lenko.

Vasiliy Grigor'yevich Pavlenko. in addition to great routine-productive
and organizational activity, actively participates in public life. The
professional and personal qualities of V. G. Pavlenko. his demanding but
sensitive attitude toward workers, have won him meriten authority in the
organizations of the State Committee on hydrometeorology and other depart-
nents. For his work successes he was awarded the order "Emblem of honor"
and medals.

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vnatlly Grlgor'yavlch anlenko meets his 60th birthday full of creative
forces. In congratulating Vautliy Grlsor'yevlch on this birthday. we wish
Mu good health and further work auccauea.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AHARDS AT TﬂE ALL-UNION EXHIBITION OP ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Moscow NBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOOIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 pp 122-126

[Article by H. N. Kuznetsova]

[Text] The USSR Main Committee of the Exhibition of Achievements in the
National Economy (AEANE) has presented awards to participants in the
AEANE USSR 1978 for the "Hydrometeorological Service" Pavilion.

First-Degree Diplomas:

Order of Lenin Arctic and Antarctic Scientific Research Institute - for
creating a method for long-range meteorological weather forecasts for a
long period in advance; for formulating the fundamental principles for
determining the influence of the ice cover on navigation; for developing
methods for infrared aerial thermal surveys of arctic seas and introducing
them into routine practice.

Order of the Red Banner of Labor Institute of Applied Geophysics - for
organizing an operational constantly operating service for the monitoring
and prediction of radiation conditions in circunterrestrial space and en-

suring the availability of regular data for the "Salyut" and ”Soyuz" manned
space stations.

Second-Degree Diplomas:

“all Prevention Service Azerbaydzhan SSR - for operational support for
protection of valuable agricultural crops against hail in a territory
ureater than 700,000 hectares; the economic effect from work for protec-
tion against hail falls was 15 million rubles in 1977.

Hail Prevention Service Tadzhik SSR -- for operational support in the pro-
tection of valuable agricultural crops against hail in the territory of

the Tadzhik 88R over an area of 520,000 hectares. The economic effect

from work for protection against hail falls was 8.8 million rubles in 1977.

Departmental Subdivision on Hail Protection Ukrainian SSR - for the opera-
tional support for protection of valuable agricultural crops against hail
in the territory of the Ukrainian SSR over an area of 275,000 hectares.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The economic effect from protection of agricultural crops was more than
7 million rubles in I977.

Central High-Elevation Hydrometeorological Observatory -- for the introduc-
tion of the first part of a system of automated observations and monitoring
of the environment (ANKOS-V) in the Moscow River basin.

Ashkhabnd Heather Control Bureau Turk-en SSR - for highly effective hy-
drnmeteorological support of the migratory livestock industry.

Magadan Weather Bureau of the Kolyma Administration -- for organizing and
regular implementation of helicopter inspection of reindeer pastures and
highly effective hydrometeorological support of reindeer grazing.

State Oceanographic Institute -- for investigating the world ocean for the

purpose of improving weather forecasting for the national economy and par-
ticipation in constructing hydrometeorological charts of the world ocean.

Ufa Hydrometeorological Observatory of the Ural Administration -- for carry-
ing out operational and methodological work on refining forecasts of the
vield of sugar beets. potatoes, spring wheat. computing moisture reserves

in reconnaissance investigations, studies of heat supplies in the growing
season. As a result of the measures which were carried out on an experimen-
tal basis at a number of forms the mean increment in yield was: grain crops
-- 2 ceatners/hectare, potatoes - 20 centners/hectare. sugar beets -- 30
rentners/hectare. green mass of corn - 30 centners/hectare.

Third-Degree Diplomas:

Vnronozh Aviation Meteorological Station of the Central Chernozem Oblasts
-- for ensuring accident-free. highly effective meteorological servicing

of civil aviation and the introduction of new forms of meteorological sup-
port of aircraft flights.

Gnr'kiy Hydrometeorological Observatory of the Upper Volga Administration
-- for developing and introducing a method for preparing latex envelopes
making it possible to raise the ceiling of radiosondes and radio pilot bal-
loons and to have annually a stable altitude for the ascent of radiosonde:
to 30,460 m and radio pilot balloons to 31.160 m.

Hydrometeorological Bureau of the Gorno-Altay Region of the Heat Siberian
Administration - for carrying oat special expeditionary investigations
and developing a method for zoometeorological evaluation and allowance for
the influence of weather conditions on the carrying out of winter grazing
of sheep and goats in mountainous regions. The economic effect from hydro-
meteorologicsl support of migratory animal husbandry during the winter of
1976-1977 in the Cornyy Altay was 5.5 million rubles.

Frunze Weather Bureau of the Kirgiz SSR Administratioa -- for support of
Investigations of seasonal pastures. the results of which were used in the
distribution of herds of cattle and in the distribution of emergency fodder.

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-'
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

The economic effect during the period of cattle transmigrations was about
3 million rubles.

Leningrad Heather Bureau of the Northwestern Administration - for develop-
ing a program for transmitting and introduction of a method for sending
hourly hydronateorological information through the autoinformer of the
Leningrad telephone station via the Lengorspravka systen.

Southern Sakhalin Heather Bureau of the Sakhalin Administration - for de-
veloping and introducing the sending of warnings to national economic or-
ganizations. making it possible to reduce the time required for the send-
lng of warnings to users by a factor of 10-15 and for around-the-clock
supplying of the population and national economic organizations through
the "Sakhalin-meteo" radio station with forecasts and warnings on danger-
ous hydromstaorological phenomena.

Arkhangcl'ak Heather Bureau of the Northern Administration - for ensuring
transmissions by radio and television for the population of Arkhangel'skaya
Oblast with weather forecasts and other information. The economic effect
from the use of agrometeorological information alone in the agriculture

of Arkhangel'akaya Oblast in 1977 was about 10,000 rubles.

A number of workers of the State Connittee on Hydrometeorology were awarded

medals of the All-Union Exhibition of Achievements in the National Economy
USSR.

Gold Medal:

Yu. S. Sedunov. S. l. Avdyushin. A. A. Girs. P. A. Gordiyenko and Ye. A.
Sobchenko.

Silver Medal:

A. G. Akopov, V. V. Bogorodskiy, I. I. Burtaev. 2. I. Volosyuk, P. P. Grish-
nkov, 2. N. Gudkovich, E. A. Kozhushiyan. L. N. Korennoy. N. I. Kuznetsov.
I. S. Lukicheva. H. A. Nasterskikh. G. H. Hikhaylova, V. L. Nezhevenko. N.
K. Pereyaalova. T. A. Pobetova. I. V. Privalova, V. S. Ragozina, A. A.
Rybnikov, P. H. Svidskiy, 6. N. Sergeyev, G. P. Sokol, V. A. Spitsyn, V. H.
Fedorov, Yu. S. Tsaturov.

Bronze Medal:

A. Aznmatov. H. H. Aleksandrov, V. D. Andreyev, I. L. Appel', A. I. Arik-
nynen. K. A. Aatakhova, I. V. Balashova, P. D. Bantikov, P. 2. Battalov,

M. Sh. Bolotinskaya, V. P. Bolotskikh, N. N. Bondarenko, V. V. Borets,

V. A. Varfolomeyev. V. P. Vasil'yeva, V. P. Vashchenko, Z. N. Velichko.

N. D. Vinogradov, V. P. Gavrilo. A. S. Genesina, B. H. Ginsburg, Ye. Ya.
(bl'nik. G. 6. Gromova, A. Ya. Crudeva, A. V. Guaev, P. L. Dliknan, I. P.
Dolgushin, V. M. Dubrovskiy, V. P. Yefimova. V. G. Zaytsev, V. c. Zakharov.

171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. A. anhozhiy. T. G. Ivanidze. A. P. Ivanov. I. G. Ivanov, 0. P. Kaddo,
6. V. annirchuk. I. D. Katalin. L. A. Kataaev. N. S. Kin. 0. I. Klinenko,
V. I. anenko. A. A. Knlotilkina. S. A. Kreatnikov. 6. I. Kreat'yaninova,
A. H. Krechetovn. Vu. H. Kulagin. T. P. Kulakova. S. A. Kurbanov. I. I. Lyt-
him. I. N. Nnhiyenko. 'l‘. A. Nekaiunkova. A. B. Mnlyehev. G. B. Haehkova,
I. P. Ninehenko. A. V. Nironovich, T. K. Nonaeyeva, Yu. A. Marina. 8. N.
Moshonkin. L. N. Neeterova. E. N. Novikova, N. V. Nikiforov. G. A. Nikul'-
shine. L. R. Orlenko. L. P. Panova. N. N. Pegoyev. B. H. Patrov. Yu. I.
Portnyagin. 6. Yu. Poetanogova, B. Reyinkulyyev. c. 0. Reahetov, L. A. Ro-
nanov, I. A. Serebriyakiy. A. I. Snitkovekiy, A. P. Skokova. A. L. Sokolov,
R. P. Soanovakaya, V. F. Sukhovey. A. V. Taubovtaeva, F. N. Tikhouirova,

I. P. Traktin. G. V. Trepov. c. P. Khokhlov, H. V. Tavetikova. L. A. Tayl-
halyuk, Ye. A. chiatyakova, S. P. Chuprin. K. A. Shatalov, V. N. Shirya-
yev, R. I. Shul'ginakaya and N. A. Yudin.

The total number of participants was 636. In addition to the workers of

the State Couuittee on Nydroneteorolosy. the Main Connittee of the USSR
Exhibition of Aehievenenta in the National Economy for the Pavilion "Hydro-
meteorological Service" awarded prizes to specialists of unaffiliated organ-
izations directly participating in the develop-out of a nu-ber of themes.

172
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONFERENCES. MEETINGS AND SEMINARS
Moscow METEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 124-125

[Article by V. G. Simov, Yu. G. Slatinskiy. V. S. Vuglinsltiy and V. I.
llabkin]

[Text] A conference-seminar on investigations in the muth regions of rivers
in the Sea of Azov-Black Sea basin was held on 10 April 1978 at the Sevast-
opol' Division of the State Oceanographic Institute. meaty-three reports
were presented on a wide range of problems related to the development of
predictions of the influence of water management measures on the hydro-
logical and hydrochemical regimes of the mouth regions of rivers.

In the reports and addresses of the conference participants it was noted
that the continuously increasing volume of water consmtion in the south-
ern regions of the country, the execution of major water management meas-
ures (the creation of reservoirs, construction of major canals for irriga-
tion and water supply and the redistribution of runoff among individual
basins. etc.) require a many-aided economic evaluation. the development
of variants of the most effective use of water resources and nintenance
of the developing environmental conditions. However. the lack of scien-
tifically sound forecasts of economic and social consequences of the re-
distribution of river runoff can have extremely significant negative con-
sequences. In particular, it was noted that during the last two decades
the runoff into the Sea of Azov has been reduced by almst one-third. The
removal of water. increasing with each passing year. together with periods
of natural low water, served as a reason for a stable increase in salinity
of the open part of the Sea of Asov by l.5-2°/oo and Tagsnrog Gulf by 6-
5°/oo. As a result. there was a marked change in level and the nature of
the biological processes, which led to a considerable reduction of the
ranges of the most valuable migratory and semimigratory fish. to a deterb
[oration of the conditions for the feeding of fish and a decrease in the
fish productivity of the entire water body as a whole.

The appearance of some typical Black Sea organisms, never encountered there
previously, has been noted in the mouth regions of rivers.

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR UVFICIAL USE ONLY

A complex situation is developing in the mouth region of the Dnepr and

the Yuzhnyy Bug. The systematic increase in the nonrcturn removal of
water from the reservoirs of the Dnepr cascade is leading to a stable in-
crease in the salinity of waters in the Dnepr-Bug estuary and the adjacent
part of the northwestern region of the black Sea.

In order not to allow an irreversible change in the entire ecological sit-
uation in the basin, and especially in the mouth regions of the river,
specialists have proposed different variants of regulation of water re-
sources. In addition to the shifting of the runoff of northern rivers,
specialists are considering the problem of redistribution of local water
supplies.

In particular, plans call for blocking off the Dnepr-Dug estuary at Ochakov
and a large canal for shifting a part of the Danube runoff into the Dnepr
basin. The canal, with a length of about 300 km, would have its origin

in the lower reaches of the Kiliyskiy distributary of the Danube delta,
would pass through the channels of the Sasyk—Shabolatskaya group, would
intersect the Dncstrovskiy channel near the Tsaregradskiy strait, bend
around Odessa and reach the Dnepr-Bug estuary in the neighborhood of Och-
nkov. The plan calls for the construction of about 10 pumping stations on
the channel. Provision is made for reinforcing the barrier benches separating
the coastal lagoons from the sea and transforming them into large reser-
voirs. At the present time the construction of the first stage of the canal
ls underway -- the channel connecting the Sasyk estuary with the Black Sea
has been blocked off. the building of a dike along the barrier beach is
being completed. and in the coming years this will make it possible to ac-
cumulate in this water body not less than 0.7-0.8 kn3 of fresh water for
irrigating the regions in the southern part of Odesskaya Oblast.

In order to prepare a technical and economic justification for the channel
It is necessary to carry out a rather significant volume of investigations,
in particular, to study the problem of the fate of small rivers along the
path of the channel and to evaluate the possible changes in the regime of
runoff currents at the mouth of the Danube, in Tsaregradskly strait and in
Kinburnskiy strait. Similar investigations for the prevention of unfavor-
able consequences in connection with the planned construction of the Ketch
hydroelectric power complex must also be carried out in the deltas of the
Don and Kuban'. In this connection each year there is an increase in the
volume of observations carried out by mouth stations and hydrometeorolog-
icnl observatories under the scientific-methodological direction of the
river mouth laboratory of the Sevastopol' Division of the State Oceano-
graphic Institute. During 1977 alone about 2,000 individual stations were
occupied. 79 multiday stations were occupied (about 900 series of observa-
tions) and 13 automatic buoy stations with automatic current recorders were
placed. The total volume of collected information is about 9,000 observa-
tion horizons. A particularly great volume of work was carried out in the
Kuban' River delta. It has involved an extensive sector from the lowest-
lying station at Tikhovskiy village to the sea margin of the delta. There
were more than 50 synchronous measurements of discharges in delta

174
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

distributaries, multiday measurements of water discharges in the straits
of coastal inlets (Soiov'yevskoye. Kulikovskoye. Peresypskoye straits).
salinity surveys in the delta distributnrics. measurements on 10 control
profiles at the points of channel branching and other studies.

During 1978-1979 plans call for carrying out major complex expeditions in
the mouth region of the Don in the reach between the Dolgaya and Belosar-
ayskaya spits. in the Dnepr-Bug and Dnestr estuaries. 0n the basis of the
collected data specialists will develop a method for computing water ex-
change in mouth water bodies (gulfs, estuaries) with the open sea. which
will make it possible to investigate the problem of the direction of
changes in the hydrological and hydrochemical regimes of these water bod-
ies in accordance with the volumes of extraction of river runoff planned
for the coming 10-15 years.

A resolution adopted by the conference participants formulated proposals for
collating the research plans of different departments in the mouth regions
of rivers in the Black Sea and Sea of Azov basins. Recommendations were
adopted for all Administrations of the Uydrometeorological Service in the
basin for the further development of the operating network of stations

and posts at the mouths of rivers, their strengthening by additional

trained personnel, outfitting with instruments, equipment and ships. In par-
ticular. it was decided to ask the Administration of the Hydrometeorolog-
ical Service Ukrainian SSR to establish at Belgorod-Dnestrovskiy a mouth
station on the basis of the existing local hydrological station and to

ask the Sevastopol' Division of the State Oceanographic institute and the
Northern Caucasus Administration of the hydrometeorological Service to ex-
amine the problem of broadening research in the lower pool of Krasnodarskoye

Reservoir. Plans also call for refining the research program in the mouth
region of the Danube.

iii

During the period from 20 to 22 June 1978 at the Valday Scientific Research
Hydrological Laboratory imeni V. A. Uryvayev there was a conference-seminar

on the subject: "Computation of Channel Hater Balances With Allowance for
the Use of Water."

The participants examined the status of introduction of a unified system
for the state inventory of waters for the USSR (Bdinaya Sistema Gosudsrst-
vennogo Ucheta Vod - YeSGUV) with respect to quantitative and qualitative
indices and they generalized the experience in computing channel water bal-
ances and the balances of chemical substances in individual river reaches
and in river basins as a whole.

In the reports of I. A. Shiklomanov (State Hycrolcgical Institute) and
L. V. Brazhnikova (State Chemical Institute) the authors examined the
prospects for use of the YeSGUV for evaluating the influence of economic
activity on the quantitative and qualitative indices of river water.

175

FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE “NIH

ﬂue results of generalization of the experience in determining channel
wat-t aalances for the Volga, Kuhan', Dnepr, Amudar'ya. Ural, Irtysh.

Tom and Lena. taking into account data on the use of water for 1976 were
presented in a report of specialists of the State Hydrological Institute
K. P. Voskresenakiy. V. I. Bahkin. G. A. Plitkin. I. B. Ivanova and T. Ye.
Grlgorklna.

The methodological problems involved in evaluating accuracy and hydrolog-
ical monitoring of data from the state water inventory and its use. the
determination of the balances of chemical substances and channel water bal-
ances were discussed in the reports of B. S. Ustyuzhanin, I. U. Vol'fteun.
V. P. Novikova. Yu. V. Russ (State hydrological Institute). T. Kh. Koles-
nikova and V. H. ivanik (State Chemical Institute).

The representatives of the Northern Caucasus Administration of the Hydro-
meteorological Service. the Administration of the hydrometeorological Ser-
vice of the Kazakh, Uzbek. Kirgiz, Turkmen, Georgian. Armenian, and Azer-
haydzhan SSRs familiarized the seminar participants with the results of de-
termination of channel water balances during monthly and annual time in-
tervals In river reaches with intensive economic use. A general analysis of
the status of work on the preparation of channel water balances at the Ad-
ministrations of the Uydrometeorological Service and an evaluation of their
accuracy was given in communications by A. V. Ssvel'yeva and V. P. Smirnova
(State Hydrological Institute).

The conference-seminar declared that the State Hydrological Institute, the
State Chemical institute and the Administrations of the hydrometeorological
Service have carried out considerable work on the organization of the

state water inventory and water use in the unified system for the USSR with-
in the framework of the surface waters section. In particular, methodolog-
ioal recommendations have been prepared on evaluation of the accuracy and
Hydrological monitoring of data from the state water inventory and water use.
(1977); jointly with agencies of the USSR Hater Management Hinistry special-
ists have prepared lists of enterprises, organizations and institutes ex-
tracting water directly from surface water bodies or dumping waste water
into them; there was a generalization of results of computations of chan-
nel water balances during 1976 for the river basins of the USSR and their
individual reaches.

A resolution of the conference-seminar noted the principal problems in the
further introduction of the chcUV in the system of the State Committee on
Hydrometeorology. In particular. it was deemed necessary to match the com-
putation reaches of the rivers for which the agencies of the State Committee
uh Mydrometeorology prepare the channel balances and the balances of chem-
lcal substances with the reaches for which water management balances are

being prepared in the Water Management Ministry USSR. It was decided that
this ministry would be asked to improve the primary inventory of water use.

It was decided to sctivate the work of the Administrations of the Hydro-

mcreorelogical Service in selecting the computation reaches for determin-
ing channel and inventory water balances and balances of chemical substances.
176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was deened advisable at the Administrations of the Hydroaotaorolog-
icnl Service of the Estonian, Ukrainian. Belorussian. Armenian, Georgian.
Azerbaydzhan SSR‘s and the Upper Volga and Ural Central Hydronetaorolos-
ical Observatories to carry out work on the preparation, in 1979-1980. of
the inventory balances of chemical substances in one or two experimental
river reaches under a program coordinated with the State Chemical Insti-
tute. The State hydrological Institute and the State Che-ital Institute
were called upon. in 1978. to carry out coaputations of channel water bal-
ances and the balances of chemical substances. taking into account data

on water use in 1977.

It was also deemed necessary to increase the accuracy of hydroaetric work
and conputations of runoff. especially at the sites of hydroelectric power
stations.

177
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NOTES FROM ABROAD

Moscow HBTEOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2. Feb 79 p 126

[Article by B. I. Silkin]

[Text] As reported in INTERAVIA AIR LETTER. No 8973. 1978. in accordance
with the participation of the United States in the 6A8? program. beginn-
ing in December 1978 a system of artificial earth satellites. designated
GOES-A. GOES-B and GOES-C. will be put into operation. The three satel-

lites GOES "03'"B." and "F" are a further development of this system of

meteorological satellites.

The first of these satellites will be put into a stationary orbit at a
point situated over 75‘". The mass of this artificial satellite. like

the other two satellites identical to it, is approximately 320 kg. An
infrared radiometer with circular scanning is mounted in its cylindrical
body with a length of about 6.5 m and a diameter of about 2.? m. This in-
strument gives two-dimensional images of cloud cover. collects information
on the velocity and direction of cloud movement. and data on the tempera-

ture and humidity at altitudes of up to 15 km above the underlying sur-
face.

in addition to the radiometer. each satellite carries instrumentation col-
lecting data transmitted by the telemetric systems of surface and ship-
hoard meteorological stations. seismic stations and meteorological buoys
situated in different regions of the western hemisphere and also instru-
ncnts for registering the level of solar activity.

kﬁi

As reported in SCIENCE NEWS. Vol 113. No 4. 1978. one of the commonly used
methods for determining climate prevailing in remote eras is a study of
the thickness of the annual rings on tree trunks. However, this frequently
leads to contradictory results.

A new method. involving the use of direct radioisotopic wood analysis. was

developed by the geochemists S. U. Epstein and c. Yapp (California Insti-
tute of Technology). The method is based on measurement of the ratio of

178
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

deuterium to hydrogen in the cellulose of the plant mass, which is direct-
ly related to the ratio of these elements in the water participating in

the formation of molecules in this cellulose. The latter. in turn, is de-
pendent on the temperature observed at the time when this water fell from
the atmosphere in the form of precipitation. It is known that for the heav-
ier water molecules containing deuterium to be condensed the air masses
must have a higher temperature then is necessary for the condensation of
molecules of "ordinary" water. Therefore, for regions with a cold climate
there is characteristically precipitation with a lesser specific weight

of water containing deuterium.

After carrying out an analysis of the wood in 60 trees growing in different
regions of North America in the zone of the last glaciation. researchers
were able to determine the air temperature in the period between 9.500 and
22,000 years ago. The age of the trees themselves was established using the
radio carbon (C 16) method.

It was found that the cellulose of trees growing lb.000—22,000 years ago
contains more deuterium than is typical for present-day trees. It is evi-
dent that the climate during this period on the average was milder than
law; the winter, evidently. was warmer and the summer was cooler.

Under such conditions. as a result of the abundance of air saturated with
moisture, moving from the oceans and carrying snow, the continental glac-
iers were subjected to lesser melting in summer and received a greater in-
crement in winter than occurs now when the cold dry (with little snow)
winters are customary for the largest regions of glaciation - Greenland
and Antarctica.

An analysis of wood with an age from 10,000 to 12,000 years also confirmed
that the transition from the conditions of glaciation to our modern cli-
mate was very sharp and occupied a total of approximately 2,000 years.

It.

As reported in SEA TECHNOLOGY, Vol 18, No 12, 1977, the oceanologists of
the University of Texas, working in collaboration with specialists of the
St. Louis Research Laboratory of the US Navy. established that in the deep
part of the northern regions of the Gulf of Mexico along the meridian
91'20'H there is a basin of waters with an anomalously iigh salinity

which they assigned the name Orca.

In a deep layer with a thickness of 200 m the salinity in this basin at-
Lains 258°Ioo. Such concentrations of “brine" were earlier discovered at
the bottom of the Caribbean Sea. but their area is two or three times less
than the area of the Orca basin. The upper boundary of the concentration
is at a depth of about 2.600 m. The water temperature in it is only l.5°c
greater than the temperature of the surrounding layers. This also distin-
guishes the Orcn basin from the corresponding regions of the Red Sea, in

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which the saline waters are characterized by a considerably greater heat-
ing. In the sea floor layers underlying the Ores basin there are large

salt deposits. 1he dissolving of this salt Probably accounts for the for-
mation of this phenomenon.

180
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IN MEMORY OF VALBR'YAN ANDRKYBVICH URYVAYBV (1908-1968)
Moscow HETBOROLOGIYA I GIDROLOGIYA in Russian No 2, Feb 79 pp 127-128
[Article by V. Koraun. A. A. Sokolov and I. V. Popov]

[Text] The day 23 December 1978 marked the 70th birthday of the outstand-
ing scientist and hydrological engineer Valer'yan Andreyevich Uryvayev.
His name is inseparably related to the development of hydrology in the

USSR. and he is rightfully regarded as one of the founders of Soviet hy-
drology.

V. A. Uryvayev was designated director of the State Hydrological Institute
in 1962 during the severe days of the Greet Fatherland Her, requiring a
radical restructuring of hydrological research in the interests of support-
ing combat operations of the Red Army.

It was necessary to possess remarkable capabilities as a scientist and tal-
ented organizer in order to be able, over a period of 34 years, to head a
great body of skilled professional hydrologists. to assume and enjoy undis-
puted authority and respect.

In examining the scientific activity of V. A. Uryvayev, it is impossible
not to note the broad range of his interests, deep penetration into the es-
sence of the phenomena and processes which he investigated, the ability to
generalize different facts, to formulate and solve many complex scientific

and practical problems in the field of hydrology in the interests of devel-
opment of the national economy.

Already in 1941 V. A. Uryvayev compiled a new isoline map of the least an-
nual mean diurnal water discharges having great importance in water manage-
ment planning Work and proposed a method for taking into account the influ-
ence of lakes on minimum runoff.

V. A. Uryvayev contributed much work to completion of compilation of the
VODNYY KADASTR SOVBTSKOGO SOYUZA (Hater Inventory of the Soviet Union).

Ixmlnu the period of the Great Fatherland Her, under the direction and on
the initiative of V. A. Uryvayev, multisided investigations and studies
for meeting the needs of different branches of the Red Army were made.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR HFFICIAL USE ONLY

llc systematically prepared consultations on hydrological conditions at

the fronts. worked out important aids for troops, carried out special hydro-
logical computations and forecasts. V. A. Uryvayev organized and carried
out complex field experimental studies for investigating the passability

of terrain by different kinds of military equipment, the results of which
were included as an important part in special standard-setting aids, mono-
graphs and courses of lectures.

The present-day hydrological network, which V. A. Uryvayev considered to be
the basis of hydrolosy. owed much to him. especially with respect to the
formulation of the scientific principles for the distribution of observa-
tion stations, the writing and use of methodological manuals on the carry-
ing out. processing and generalization of hydrological observations, and
also with respect to the training and improvement of knowledge of profes-
sional hydrologists.

Not only stationary hydrological observations, but also expeditionary hydro-
graphic work on rivers carried out on an extensive scale during l9k5-l948,
were under the constant supervision of V. A. Uryvayev.

However perfect might be the control hydrological network, for revealing

the essence of many phenomena and processes it is necessary to formulate
special experiments, as a result of which it is possible not only to collect
new facts, but also to penetrate into the essence of hydrological phenomena.
This was obvious to V. A. Uryvayev, who was constantly concerned with the
leading role of Soviet hydrology.

The term “experiment" was understood by V. A. Uryvayev in a broad sense.
This combination of continuous and detailed stationary observations and
expeditionary studies in basins, and at the same time, an active field ex-
periment, in which the different natural conditions were changed and a
study was made of the effect of different kinds of human activity on hydro-
logical phenomena and processes. was characteristic. 0n the initiative of
V. A. Uryvayev, already in 19b5 work began on construction of the large ex-
perimental laboratory base of the State Hydrological Institute near Lenin-
grad, at Il'ichevo village. Now this is a whole scientific city with beau-
tifully equipped laboratories, uhich is widely known in the USSR and
abroad.

During the post-war period V. A. Uryvayev carried out an enormous amount
of work on transforming the Valday Runoff Station, which was virtually com-
pletely destroyed during the war, into the world-renown Valday Scientific
Research Hydrological Laboratory of the State hydrological Institute
(VNIGL), now bearing his name. This laboratory is carrying out an exten-
sive complex of water balance and hydrophysical investigations and is out-
fitted with unique instruments and apparatus. Such a laboratory has been
established for the first time in the world.

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Giving great importance to experimentation in hydrology. V. A. Uryvayev
endeavored to organize the work in such a way that the key specialists

at the institute took a direct part in the work of the VhIcL.

V. A. Uryvayev always had good will toward, but at the some time put high
demands on young people. He carried out active and productive teaching ac-
tivity at the leningrad Hydrometeorological Institute and in different
courses used extensively by the VNIGL as a basis for the practical work
of students at many schools of higher learning. V. A. Uryvayev made exten-
sive use of his experience at the VNIGL for establishing a number of run-

off (water balance) stations in zones throughout the country having dif-
ferent natural and hydrological conditions.

The development of experiaental hydrology required the creation of funds-

mentally new instruments and apparatuses and more complex equipment. V. A.
Uryvayev had unexcelled capabilities as an inventor. He developed a de-
sign for a unique soil evaporator (36!), an original flume for calibrating
hydrometric current asters, and a series of instruments for studying the

physical properties of the snow cover.

V. A. Uryvayev made a considerable contribution to study of precipitation.
He constructed gradient towers for making observations in forests and or-
ganized the study of precipitation by means of radar with the simultaneous

creation of a dense network of posts for measuring showers.

V. A. Uryvayev was the initiator of use of aerial methods for making hydro-
metric measurements in rivers and very rightly he can be considered the
creator of a new branch of hydrometry - aerial hydrometry.

The history of hydrology is rich in major expeditions, not rarely affecting

great areas and entire basins. However. it is precisely to V. A. Uryvayev
that we owe the creation of a new type of expeditionary investigations
characterized by a broad complexity and a combination of expeditionary sur-

veys with the creation of a temporary hydrological network. The expedi-
tions organized under the direction of V. A. Uryvayev made a detailed

study of the water resources of the virgin lands -— Kustanayskays, Kok-
chetavskaya. Pavlodarskaya and Zapadno-Kazakhstanskaya Oblasts, Altaysk-

iy Kray and Turkmenia.

Monographs published on the results of expeditions.under the editorship of
V. A. Uryvayev, have found very extensive application at planning and de-
sign organizations and represent a significant contribution to the ex-

ploitation of the virgin lands.

The achievements of hydrology, especially during the post-war years, enabled
V. A. Uryvayev to proceed with initiative in creating a series of norm-

setting manuals on hydrological computations, so necessary for the needs
of planning on rivers. The creation of these manuals required the organ-

lzation of additional investigations specially carried out by large teams

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of scientists at the State Hydrological Institute. Some of these manuals
have been adopted by Gosstroy as an All-Union State Standard; some of them

have an interdepartmental character.

V. A. Uryvayev engaged in enormous and productive international activity.
He was an active member of the USSR Interdepartmental Cbmmittee 0n the
international Hydrological Decade and he enjoyed broad recognition and
respect in international organizations and among foreign scientists due
to his contribution to the development of international cooperation in
the field of hydrology.

Valer'yan Andreyevich dealt with great seriousness relative to his foreign
activity and endeavored to strengthen and maintain the high international
authority of Soviet hydrology.

The activity of V. A. Uryvayev was recognized by many governmental awards,
including the Order of Lenin. He also received an award from the All-Union
Exhibition of Achievements in the National Economy.

The day 11 October 1978 marked the 10th anniversary of the premature death
of V. A. Uryvayev, but the memory of him as an outstanding scientist, en-
gineer. friend and comrade is not lessening. His name is associated with
an entire epoch in the development of Soviet hydrology. The ideas and
thoughts of V. A. Uryvayev are receiving further development in our day

in the solution of new and complex hydrological and water management prob-
lems directed to the rational use and conservation of the water resources

of the Soviet Union.

In memory of the services of Valer'yan Andreyevich a prize was established
in 1971 in his name and in the name of another outstanding Soviet hydrol-
ogist, V. c. Glushkov; this is awarded once each three years for the best
work in the field of hydrology of the land and experimental hydrological
investigations.

(MPYRIGHT: "Heteorologiya i gidrologiya." 1979

5303 -END-
C50: 1866

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040024-0

END 0|
FICHE
DATE Flll

IL

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040024-0