APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100010033-3
FOR OH‘ILIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8226
17 January 1979

SELECTED TRANSLATIONS FRO‘I THE SOVIET
JOURNAL OF THE OPTICAL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the origins! phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIWS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recosnended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, ".8. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6 howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
$03" ‘I -

 

 

REPORT MUUEMAWN h neon "°~ 2- ll lama Anne-en m
m: : spas L/8226 _ ' _._..

e. um and will. ' " " .‘._-.. - - ‘ "—— '_"" .‘.__.. 1 loan om 79
SELECTED msunons non ms sovm JwRNAL or me ‘ 17 “n“ 19
OPTICAL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY I

. Mm owe-“ulna Home and Asian I l0. munnm; W ”I
I
Joint Publications Research Service m-
1000 North Glebe Road I“
Arlington, Va. 22201 ho:
ILWML‘MMNW u. .,..n...u...;‘c:.:.';"“

As above

at W «cm
OPTIKO-HEKBANICHESKAYA PROHYSEENNOST' . Leningrad. 1978

lemma-mm“

This report contains a selection of articles on optical information processing
systeas. electrooptical direction-finding equipment and electrooptical scanning

systems, and photodatectora. Several articles are devoted to characteristics
of various types of optical glass.

 

)1. lie-M Male a. Dew-n

USSR Direction finding lnterferogran
Optics Scanning Optical glass
Information processing Photodetectors Dielectric mirrors

I» WW um

continuum—L73, 17c, 17H,_ 20?

 

 

 

 

lt—MM nemm.mw» 2|.Mel'J”
Pox orncm. us: our. united masher of -msuua._ I 85__ _ , ,__
copies ava ilabls fro- JPRS a. sou-cu cu- am no» u. m.
Uncle ‘ sified
Mans-nel- lame-luau manna-m

(7000.097 mes-u)
W‘m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8226

17 January 1979

SELECTED TRANSLATIONS FROM THE SOVIET
JOURNAL OF THE OPTICAL ENGINEERING INDUSTRY

Leningrad OPTIKO-MBKHANICKBSKAIA PROHYSHLBNNOST' in Russian 1978
No 8 pp 5-9, 17-23, 42-44, 59-61 and No 9 pp 7-10, 25-28, 36-42,

46-47, 56-58, 71-73

CONTENTS

The Relation Between Parameters of an Optical Information Processing
System and Characterietice of the Optical Elements
(Le 1e mpoV. 0t 81.)”...u...”cu...”nun-”unnuunu

Evaluation of Star Seneor Errors in Electrooptical Direction-Finding
Inetrumcnta

(V. D. Smirnov)................................................

Concurrent Optimization of Optical and Electrical Filters in
Scanning Electrooptical Systems

(YUe “e ”makty)eeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaeeea

Analyeie of Methods for Taking Into Account Raster Dietortiona and
Inatabilitiea in Electrooptical Instruments Hith Electronic

Scanning
(V. K. Sablin, et al.).........................................

An Illuminating Device for Teeting Coordinate-Sensing Photo-
detectors
(Ye. N. Vyeotakiy, et al.).....................................

Method for Determining the Nonlinearity of Photodetectora
(Le Ne Abyutov, Ge Ke KMIOPOV)..."on.n..u.....un...nu

Automating the Proceaeing of Interferograaa in the Testing of
Optical Syetema

(Va A- 2'02". Gt .1m)meaeaeeOeeeeeeeaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeel

PAGE

12

22

30

60

- a - [I - ussn - L r000]

POI? OPPTPTIT. "SR ONT-Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WMBNTS (Contimled)

Computer Processing of Interferograna and Detemination of the
Point Spread Function and Optical Transfer Function in Tooting
and Finishim of Optical System
(“0 A. en“. .t 01.).ODOOOOOOOOOOD0.0....OOOOCOO....I'..OOOOQO

Catalog of Optical Glasaes of the USSR and 60!:
(c. T. Petrov'kiy’ .t .10)....OIIOOUOOOOOOOOOOOIOIIOOOOOOOI.O

Mechanical Strength and Thsrnal Stability of Needy-ital classes
(V. “a H1t2m, at .10)Oaaseeeeoeaeeeeaseeseeaeeeessooeesaeeo

Hide-Band Dielectric Mirrors Made of Titanium and Silicon
Dioxidea
(L. L. “takevl‘h, at ‘1.)OOOOOIOOOOIOOIIOIOOOOOOIOOOIOIIOIOO

Heaaurins Badii of curvature and local Distortions of Hirror
Surfaces
(“0 LI “1“:1' Ct .10)....0...I.OIIOOOIOOO0.00000000000IOCOOO

An Electtooptical Modulator iii-ch Snell Nonactive Losses
(T. A. m:°vbv.)00000.0.0.000000000.00000IOOOOOOIOIOOIIOCOOI

An Infrared Radio-etc: Based on a Galliu Anenide Injection
Photodiode
a“. A. “tw‘n. .t ‘1')...OO....00.DOOOOIOOOIOOOIIOIIOOOOOI

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

108

57

62

70

710

79

81
u

o.

u

SELECTED TRANSLATIONS FROM THE SOVIET
JOURNAL OF THE OPTICAL ENGINEERING
INDUSTRY

OPTIKO-MEKHANICHBSKAYA PROHYSHLENNOST'

Optiko-Htkhantcheahya Ptonyahlcnnoot'

Lon ingrad

1978

Optilw-Hekhnnichuhyn Pro-yshlennost'
1978
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THE RELATION BETWEEN PARAMETERS OF AN OPTICAL INFORMATION
PROCESSING SYSTEM AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE OPTICAL ELEMENTS

Leningrad OPTIKO-MEKHANICHESKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian
No 8, 1978 pp 5-7

[Article by L. I. Akopov, A. A. Ayazyan, v. Yu. Pedorov, and
Ye. G. Tsitsishvili; all figures missing in original]

[Text] The relation is defined between the frequency con-
trast characteristic of an optical system and the
basic parameters of an optical information processing
system: volume of information, speed of operation,
and reliability, which are determined by the density

of information channels and the output power ratio
between “one“ and “zero" signals.

Recently in the development of computer equipment a great deal
of attention has been given to the creation of systems for
reading, writing, and transmitting discrete optical information
in pictures (large blocks) consisting of combinations of light
(“one") and dark (”zero") points [1-4]. Therefore it is
necessary to evaluate optical elements in order to determine
the possibilities for using them in computer systems. The
most important characteristics of these systems are volume of
information, speed of operation, and reliability. These
parameters are interrelated, since the Operational reliability
at low signal levels is determined by the ratio of the energy
of the "one" signal, 11' to the energy of the 'zero' signal,
10, at the system output, and the value of these energies is
related to the dimensions of the information points, the light
flux density (luminance or illumination) on them, and the time
the signal is present at the photodetector.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However, optical image transmission systems are characterized

most fully by the frequency contrast characteristic (fcc) [5-8],
which is essentially the coefficient of image contrast trans-
mission as a function of the spatial frequency.

The light intensity distribution in the image plane i(x,y) is
defined by the expression [6.7]

+0

where can is the light intensity distribution in the object
plane (the information picture): su-t-v—i) is the "scattering
function” describing the light distribution in the (x,y) plane
produced by a point source in the object plane (i. t). It is
assumed that the "scattering function" is independent of
possible noise (such as flashes in the image plane and the dark
background). Therefore, strictly speaking, the following
results pertain to “passive“ systems of this kind.

Clearly the most "critical" type of information picture is the
case of a “zero” surrounded by ”ones". In this case the light
distribution in the object plane may be expressed as

on. c)-o,u. :)+u.-Iom(3f-)m(’7‘ (2)

where 0,“. n is an infinite periodic function with basic period
a (equal to one step in the information picture) having the form

I s
’I'Mhenl‘KﬁlCN-f.
0 d g
or“ 0- ’thenl!|<-§'. 3- «(k-7;
luv}. -§-<m<-;-.

Here 31 and Jo are respectively the intensities of a 'one' and
a "zero' in the information field.

formula (2) is written with the assumption that the linear
dimensions of the information picture are much greater than its
step. a. Having obtained the Fourier transformation of
functions 0(3. t). and sot-t u—u and notin that the transform of
the function su—t 1—0 is the fcc “On“: and integrating
according to formula (1), we obtain

2!
w“)— . E: o...(-:l,% .Ttoum) _
“-3—-

Iln;e,ssln-;-u,a

X ‘ (”a n’) .ber-q’ ”. (3)

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As follows from (3), to find a clear form of the function i(x,y)
it is necessary to know the analytic form of the fcc ﬂea-ﬂ or

to perform the numerical calculation (along the specific fcc
curve for each optical element). Examination of only the periodic
part of expression (4) simplifies the problem considerably and
makes it possible to obtain qualitative results as well. Under
these conditions the information picture is a collection of all
the 'ones" between which appear nothing but ”zeroes". Since

for such an information picture the ratio 11/10 is less than

that of the real picture, it is clear that the results obtained
in this case will be low.

The intensity distribution in the image plane will be of the
following form:

to. y)-D..uo.o)+2ZD.Q(%-°)W%"+
I:

+320.” %.O)m-?u+'4 EDMX
I)

l,->I

2:
x(%. % tool‘s-nym7u.

where . .
apart-4.; ppazgmh I

Du-Jﬁ-lznishi-nln in: n90, cal-0.

If the image transmission scale in the periodic picture case is
taken to be one, then the energies of “one“ and “zero" at the
output of the system will be, respectively,

and

((1. ”0- (4)'

Performing the integration, for the ratio 11/10 we obtain
,. (a+-’r:)«°)+(%)’%-')s'+%(%)‘(€:-')&
7: (3+7})qo)-7'(% '(ﬁ—IP. '

  
 

(S)

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlClM. USE ONLY

where

a>l

s,..2,1:11m_-1)-_ I___

II a

It should be noted that in general the fee is a two-dimensional
function. However, in view of the fact that the optical
elements used must be axisymmetric, but the image plane must
coincide with the surface of the image of mean curvature, the
fcc does not depend on the direction of the spatial frequency

and
,(2. _)-$(V5"-'*E.

d a a

 

Expression (5) with a known fcc makes it possible to construct
the ratio 11/10 as a function of the density of information
channels. Thus, for example, the fcc's presented in fig. 2
(for Jl/J 820) represent the functions shown in fig. 3.
Corresponging to these curves, for information densities of
interest it is clear that S;< 1.2 110) (the series (4) with
mm) 3 quickly diverge), and 11/10( 8. From formula (5) it also
follows that with sufficiently large values of Jl/J (specific-
ally, J /JO» 3), 11/10< 13. For a given value of the ratio
11/1 , iormula (5) makes it possible to estimate the corres-
pond ng minimum value of 1a n(l/a), and consequently also the
maximum possible operating density of information channels
satisfying the required relation

 

~(%)~(%)’ . (Hi-ﬁlm ' .m
(7)2W‘T()(7§)2WT‘

Thus, for example, for Jl/Jo-zo and Il/Ion4, 1hin(l/a)-0.62 t(0).

As indicated, examination of a periodic picture ives a low
result. At the same time, the largest value of (l/a) obtained
in examination of this picture is greater than the value of

13 (11a), corresponding to the true value of the operating

den ity of information channels. It follows that an approxi-
mate estimation of the Operating density may be obtained from

expression (6).

l.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus examination of a periodic picture makes it possible to
obtain relations from which one may determine, according to
the fcc's of the optical elements, the operating density of
information channels in an Optical information processing
system as a function of the required value of the ratio of
energies of a "one” and a “zero”, 11/10.

however, it must be taken into account that 11/10 is the ratio
of mean optical signal levels, which are of course subject to
fluctuations. The degree of these fluctuations decreases as
the signal level increases: that is, in order to guarantee
reliable operation of a read/write system it is necessary to
maintain the signal level as the signal passes through the
optical system. There are methods of determining both the
degree of fluctuation of the signal levels of "1's" and “0's“
passing successively through an optical system [9] and the
optimum receiver threshold providing the minimum probability
of signal detection error [10]. If n is the minimum number
of light quanta providing a given progggility of reliable
system operation and A t is the time the signal acts on the

photodetector, then taking into account the fact that the
signal power is °ﬂa§a (N is the number of information channels

per unit area and E is the value of the density), we obtain
% "«';'"ue.
where if is the energy of a light quantum with wavelength 1.

Thus in choosing the parameters of systems for converting and
transmitting optical information it is necessary to take into
account both the fee (the determination of the density of
information channels) and the indicated mutually limiting
relation between the speed of operation and the light flux
density of picture elements.

In conclusion the authors eXpress their gratitude to M. Ye.
Perel'man for his interest in the work and useful discussions.

References

l. Shigin A. 6., Deryugin A. 3., "Tsifrovyye vychislitel'nyye
mashiny,’ Moscow, ENERGIYA, 1975. [Digital computers]

2. Kitovich V. V., 'Magnitnyye i magnitno-opticheskiye
operativnyye zapominayushchiye ustroystva," [Magnetic and
magnetooptic operational memory units], Moscow, ENERGIYA,
1975.

3. Chzhan' Ti, Zuk D., TIIBR, 1975, vol 63, no 8, p 137.

4. Mikaelyan A. L. 25 al., KVANTOVAYA BLEKTRONIKA, 1971, no 1,
p. 79.

5. Perren P., USPERBI P12. Manx, 1962, vol. 18 no. 2, October,
p. 307

6. Neyl 3., 'Vvedeniye v statisticheskuyu optiku,‘l [Intro-

5
FOR OFFICIAL 038 ONE!
0O

10.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

auction to statistical optics] Moscow, MIR, 1966.
Mareshal‘ A., Franson M., “Struktura opticheskogo
lzobtaZheniya," [The structure of an optical image]
Moscow, MIR, 1964.

Semenov, Ye. P., OPT.-MEKH. PROMYSH., 1967, no 1, p. 12.
“Kaskadnyye e1eknronno«0pticheakiye preobrazovateli i ikh
primeneniyc," (Multistage image converters and their
application], ed. by M. M. Butslov, Moscow, MIR, 1965.
Curran T. 8., Ross H., 93°C. 0? THE 1335, 1965, vol. 53
no. 11, p. 1769

Received by editors 1 June 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost', 1978

9187
C50: 8144/468

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

EVALUATION 0? STAR SENSOR ERRORS IN ELECTROOPTICAL DIRECTION-
PINDING INSTRUMENTS

Leningrad OPTIKO-MEKHANICHBSKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian
No 8, 1978 pp 8-9

[Article by v. D. Smirnov]

[Text] An analysis is made of the effect of primary star
sensor errors on the accuracy of determination of
the direction in space to the star tracked. Formulae
are derived determining the instrumental errors of
a generalized model of a three-axis star sensor based
on a two-axis gyrostabilizer. An expression is
obtained for determining the magnitude of the total
rms error of the star sensor.

Astronomical equipment has found wide use in highly complex
navigation systems [1]. The basic subassembly determining
system accuracy is the star sensor, which may be implemented
both in a television version (an astrotelevision system) and
in an optical tracking version (an automatic optical star
tracking system). An analysis of the effect of instrumental
errors of the star sensor on the precision with which the
coordinates of a star are determined is necessitated by
increased requirements for precision in astronomical equipment
used to correct navigation systems [2].

The effect of instrumental errors on the precision of deter-
mining a given direction in space is most conveniently investi-
gated by the method of solving spatial problems which was
proposed for application to angle-measuring instruments [3]

and is based on the use of spherical trigonometry. As distinct
from optical angle-measuring instruments, whose geometric
schemes are most often implemented in the altazimuthal version,
star sensors may be built in any of three versions: ortho-
dromic (horizontal-cruciform), equatorial. and altazimuthal.
The most widely used are the first and third versions.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY
FCIR ()FFILUI. USE ONLY

Therefore it is upprOpriatt to examine a generalized geometric
model which combines the ortho-
dromic and ultazimuthal schemes.
Chosen as the model is the
five-axis system shown in thu
figure. Including a three-

axis stur sensor and a twu~
axis gyrostabilizer. The
measurement axes of this

system are a-a, b-h, and

1-1. Fixing one of the axes
(a-a or b-b). one obtains

the orthodromic or the
altazimuthal version of the
system. AXes c-c and d-d of
the two-axis gyrostabilizer,

the roll and p tch axes,
stabilize the me:curement axes Geometric model °£ a
of the system in space. five-axis system.

 

The relation of the altitude h and bearing angle [3 of the star
to the angles b,1 , and V measured in the system is determined

from the spherical triangle 5A2 by the following equations:

stake-rouse“.
slut? -9)mh-alnl¢osb, (1)

an -COI“! - 9)¢o\h.
The equations relating errors in altitude and bearing to errors
with respect to the measurement axes may in the linear approxi-
mation be obtained by differentiating (1):

ban—Ncmhlm—Mrou.
mom--umb¢on+amm._v,mn.

(2)

where A2, Ab. and N? are errors with respect to the measure-
ment axes caused by faults in the manufacture and assembly of
the system’s is the angle between arcs of the great circles
[~a(90‘-b) and~.ah; in the right spherical triangle.

Errors in the determination of a given direction in space by
the system may be suitably estimated by the magnitude of the
ellipse of concentration on the celestial sphere with respect
to the point whose direction is to be determined. The
resulting magnitude of the ellipse is independent of which two
axes (one of the measurement axes is unnecessary) the initial
instrumental error was preliminarily assigned to. Therefore
in further analysis of the given geometric model instrumental
errors resulting from construction faults will be assigned to
the b-b and 1-1 axes of the system.

FOh OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Treating errors A b, AI, and AW” as random. and mutually
uncorrelated, on the basis of the system of equations (2) it is

simple to proceed to the rms errors of the system in altitude
and bearing:

a: u- a: to” 010': + a: to.“ s,
t: cos": no} (03' b 403’. +5: sln' a. (3)

The system of these equations determines the desired parameters
of the ellipse of concentration of the point of intersection of
the sighting line with the celestial sphere. From (3) we

obtain a simple expression for determining the total rms error

' - °: + .3009" utftm‘t 4-0:.

(4)

The task of the following analysis is to determine the relation
between the magnitudes of errors with respect to the measure-
ment axes of the system (b-b and 1-1) and the magnitudes of

the initial faults producing these errors. Among initial
faults in this case we include those faults in planning,
assembling, and aligning the instrument which will, as the
system rotates about its measurement axes, lead to a deviation
of the optical axis from its intended trajectory in space.
Included are non-orthogonality of the vertical axis of suspension
a-a with the outer measurement axis l-l; non-orthogonality of
the 1-1 axis with the inner measurement axis b-b: non-ortho-
gonality of the optical axis of the system with the b-b

suspension axis (collimation fault): and tilting of the vertical
axis a-a.**

Instrumental error resulting from the fault of non-orthogonality
of the a-a axis with the 1-1 axis is assigned to two axes and
is expressed in the form

u-mghln l.
60,—6.0-(030. (5)

'Brrors Ab, AI , and AV result from a series of random faults
in manufacture and assembly having a Gaussian distribution.
Therefore they also are random and are characterized by the same
distribution.

nTilting of the a-a axis is a fault not of the star sensor but of
the stabilizer and therefore will not be considered in the
following. The effect of this fault on the measurement of altitude

and bearing is determined by the well known relationships [1]:
M-—.llsls3+ Mow n A,-slgk(0l¢09§+ «an».

where Ai and A6 are compensation errors of the roll and pitch
angles.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR «\FFICIM. "SH ONLY

where c1 is the magnitude or non-orthogonality of the axes.

Errors produced by the second fault (non-orthogonality of
the 1-1 axis with the b-b axis) are assigned to only one axis
(the error assigned to the second axis is negligible):

-‘I:—-|,Ig b. (6)
where c; is the magnitude cf non-orthogonality of the axes.

And finally the instrumental error resulting from collimation
fault is also assigned to only one measurement axis:

l
M'"*(¢osb _')’ (7)
where k is the collimation fault.

The formula [or the total rms error produced by the faults
examined above, based on the expressions in (4) and taking into
account equations (5)-(7), assumes the form

6 o- : :i (I - cos 6P+ c1|alnﬂﬂnﬂ+ll~¢olnp -l-
+ 0:. sin’ him. (8)

where 0'" is the magnitude of the rms error of non-orthogonality
of the optical axis with the inner suspension axis; 0'c1 is the
magnitude of the rms error or non-orthogonality of the a-a

axis with the 1-1 axis: and 03 is the magnitude of the rms
error of non-orthogonality of the inner suspension axis b-b
with the outer axis 1-1.

It should be remarked that in optical angle-measuring instru-
ments one of the manufacturing errors listed -- the collimation
fault k -- is usually reduced by adjustment during the tuning-
up process, and therefore its effect on the total rms error of
the system is minimal (the magnitude of k does not exceed a

few tenths of an arc minute).

The two remaining construction errors c1 and c; are not elimi-
nated in the tuning-up process because of the complexity of
adjusting the suspension axes. As a result their magnitude

is determined only by the technological precision of the manu-
facturing process and attains somewhat greater values (0.5-1.5'l
than the collimation error. Thus, taking into account the

fact that the greatest contribution to the total error is made
by the second and third terms in expression (a), this may be
rewritten in the form

U-It}.[swnia'l-l-(|-¢080'l+‘3.lla'0|m. (9)

[0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of the formula obtained shows that errors in the
generalized geometric star sensor model examined are minimal
in the region near the zenith and increase as the sighting
axis moves away from the zenith.

We will determine the specific value of the total rms error of
the star sensor when it operates on the horizon: i. e., under
conditions least favorable from the point of view of the
accuracy characteristics of the angle-measuring instrument. In
this case, when there is equality among the values appearing in
the formula for the rms errors of non-orthogonality of the
suspension axes (mun-0:), we obtain

0 - [ 0:“an sln'H-(l -¢og 1). .5. maul”- 1.7,"

that is. the value of the total rms error of the three-axis

star sensor model examined, operating under the worst conditions.
may vary within the limits

0-1.7(005‘los.)”1.-205'0
Conclusions

1. Analysis of expression (8) shows that errors of the three-
axis star sensor are minimal in the region near the zenith
(with 1-bn0) and increase as the optical axis moves away from
the zenith. The greatest contribution to the total error is
made by the second and third terms of the expression,
characterizing the quality of the inner suspension axes.

2. when the initial errors appearing in expression (9) are
equal. the total rms error of the three-axis geometric model

9"]‘0 In practice the values of errors of non-orthogonality
of the axes may be reduced to Ub-O.S-1.S', and as a result
the total rms error of the three-axis system is a’-l.0-2.5'.

References

l. Vorob'yev L. M., 'Astronomicheskaya navigatsiya letatel'e
nykh apparatov,’ [Astronomical navigation of aircraft and
spacecraft], Moscow. MASHINOSTROYENIYE, 1968.

2. O'Donnel K. P., 'Inertsial'naya navigatsiya. Analiz i
proyektirovaniye,“ [Inertial navigation. Analysis and
planning), Moscow, "AURA, 1969.

3. Pogarev G. V., 'Yustirovka opticheskikh priborov,”
[Alignment of optical instruments], Leningrad, MASHINO-
STROYBNIYB, 1968.

6. Venttsel' Ye. 8., ”reoriya veroyatnostey.“ [Probability
theory]. Moscow. PIZMATGIZ, 1962.

Received by editors 21 November 1977.
COPYRIGRT: Optiko-Hekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost'. 1978

11
9187
' cso: 8144/5613 FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL!

CONCURRENT OPTIMIZATION OF OPTICAL AND ELECTRICAL FILTERS IN
SCANNING BLECTROQPTICAL SYSTEMS

Leningrad OPTIKO~MBKHANICHESKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian
No 8, 1978 pp 17-20

[Article by Yu. N. Rakovskiy]

(Text) A method is proposed for concurrently optimizing
the optical filters (of wavelengths of electro-
magnetic radiation) and electronic filters of a
scanning electrooptical system taking into account

internal noise and the interference of a nonuniform
background.

We will examine a scanning electrooptical (eo) system whose
output signal is formed by the relative displacement of an
image of objects and the photodetector. The incoming optical
signal is subjected in the eo s tem to both spectral filtering
(of wavelengths of electromagne c radiation) and (after
conversion by the photodetector to an electrical signal)
temporal filtering in an electronic amplification channel.
Clearly the reaction of the system both to the useful signal
and to the interference (background) is determined by the
joint action of the optical and electronic filters.

This work is devoted to the problem of the optimum choice of
the corresponding filters. Since in the scanning process

there is a conversion from a spatial to a temporal signal,

the electronic filter may be viewed as spatial, and the optimi-
zation of the so system filters as spectral and spatial.

It will be useful to consider the signal from a point source,
specified by its spectral irradiance at the input pupil of

the objective lens of the eo system. Interference effects are
internal system noise (basically, photodetector noise) and the
external background. generally speaking a nonuniform luminance
field. We will assume that the background is given either as

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a finite set of spectral luminances of the various objects
forming the background or as the spectral and spatial correla-
tion function of the random luminance field as a whole. More
detailed information on the background (higher order moments,
multivariate distributions, and so on) is in general entirely
lacking, and methods for practical use of it have thus far

not been developed.

We will express the reaction of the so system to the useful
signal and the background interference by functionals of the
optical filter k(A) (the light filter) and of the electronic
filter, which will be described either by its transient
response h(t) or by its transfer function K(o)). One of the
most important characteristics of the system is the output
ratio of useful signal to internal noise. This parameter is
easily monitored, and its comparison to the maximum possible
(optimum for a given internal noise) value immediately shows
the cost of achieving one or another degree of suppression of
background interference. The signal-to-noise ratio at the
output of a scanning eo system is

V53" D’(- )*5_

“‘5 IK.,(~.)I73.TS7:' (1)
where B is the integral irradiance of the input pupil produced
by radiation from a point source: so is the area of the input
pupil of the objective lens; 110 is the total transmittance
coefficient of the objective lens (at the maximum of the spectral
transmittance characteristic curve): D*(hk) is the detection
capability of the photodetector (at the maximum of its spectral

response). measured at the frequency uh: Sip is the photo-
sensitive surface area of the detector; K(t)) is the detector
transfer function;

Ann-+1,~ ”.1? more!» (2)

is the equivalent noise band of the so system (G(hl) is the
energy spectrum of photodetector noise);

h-m'ul/cu) . h(t) . WM (3)

is the transmission coefficient of the pulse amplitude of the
useful signal for the detector (h1,(t)) and the filter (h(t)).
while f¢(t) is the form of the useful signal, which with con-
stant scanning speed is the convolution of the scattering spot
of the objective lens on the photosensitive area of the detector
in the direction of scanning (in the time domain); and ' is

the operation of convolution.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Useful signals may be unequal both because of a difference in
the objects themselves and because oi variations in the condi-
tions under which they are obserVed. If it is necessary to
provide given output characreristics of the so system for all
possible signals, that is, even for the weakest, then it is
natural to examine in the {allowing form the integral irradi-
ancu of the input pupil appearing in (l):

b' m win [‘5 0.7) L“... (A) I. (l) 10.. (a)
7 ‘

.. '9
where an,” is the spectral irradiance of the input pupil (l is
the vector of parameters defininn the various possible useful
sienals); kupvl is the relative spectral response of the system
consisting of optics and photodetector; k(X) is the desired
filter; and A is the region over which the functions under the
integral are defined.

It is convenient to introduce the normalized (with respect to
signal amplitude and noise level) relation

v-- {f 0.. - mm.

where Tbta/v is the duration of the useful signal (a is the
angular size of the photosensitive area of the detector in the
direction of scanning: v is the speed of scanning), and the
quantity

I K” (uh) I Sly

S..v'..o°(-.) “ii-“- (5)
From (2) and (3) it follows that the quantity W’is the functional
of the electronic filter, that is, W-W(RUH- The integral
irradiance of the input pupil (4) is the functional of the
filter any ﬂ-EliOH- Therefore, taking into account the
quantity (5), the output signal-to-noise ratio (1) may be
re-written in the form

I h
9- 3' 5 (NH) ‘|' MUN.
The maximum possible signal-to-noise ratio is

l £9?
- .— _. Emu ._—L
"" .335,» 6‘ 2'5? no?" 6 '

where . q
5,-eml) =- u. 'I'o-‘I {MM

and h°(t) is the transient response function of the electronic
filter which maximizes the output signal-to-noise ratio.

Normalizing
r mnliEo-e It 0))

and _
" l0 WINE-“MOI.

ultimately we obtain

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

e-quumw IMO)-

The normalized functionals e and W directly define losses in

the magnitude of the signal-to-noise ratio caused by measures
taken to suppress background interference: the value osesl
defines losses resulting from limitation of the spectral band,
and the value 0(‘Vél.defines those resulting from non-optimal

(for a given internal noise) filtering in the electronic
channel.

We will examine the reaction of the eo system to background
interference. If, in addition to a set of spectral luminances
of various background objects. there is no other information
on the background, then background interference is usually
treated as the response of the system to a drop (or jump) in
luminance produced by the transition of the instantaneous
field of view of the scanning system from one background
object to another. The spectral luminances of the background
objects may be either averaged over all possible conditions
of observation or related to specific conditions. If it is
necessary to provide a given quality of eo system operation
in all (even the worst) background conditions. then the inte-
gral drop in luminance must be examined in the form

68-68 (*0). lifting” [810. ‘)—BI (A, 51X *”(l)k(l)dl . (6)
where 3'13 the vector of observation cOnditions and 31(Apa) and
B (A,§) are the spectral luminances of the ith and jth back-
9 ound objects, respectively.

The reaction of the so system to a drop in luminance AB may
conveniently be related. as with the useful signal, to the rms
value of the internal noise: that is, the output signal-to-
noise ratio may be considered to be

a... ""“Iﬂmum.

 

where 9" is the solid angle of the photosensitive area of the
detector (the instantaneous field of View), and the functional

Nlhml has the same meaning as ‘I' 91(1):. except that the form of
the useful signal fc(t) in (3) must be replaced by the form of
the interference fn(t):

mum --:-:-m}1;u:x 1.0). 1).,(1) . Mel.

O
a
where l-(O-Sldof- is the normalized response to a jump (the

0
Heavyside function) without taking into account the detector
inertia or the effect of the electronic filter. If the eo
system were optimized only according to internal noise, then

15

P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the background-to-noise ratio would clearly be

m.
no”?! 1‘8"“) -' I: N “5"); In 3):".- I‘m”.

Ala-wane) - 1:. ~.-N:n.un.

In the general case the background~to-noise ratio may be
written in the form

n-mouonunw» (H
where
6 (N1)! - 08 {I (With
and , (a (4)) - N In (mm.
are normalized functionals determining the degree of suppression

of background interference by the methods of spectral and
temporal filtering respectively.

The output signal-to-background ratio may be expressed
similarly:

“-3--..“ mm 9 um». (a)
where
m—b—fﬁk («u-ﬁrm
and
«mm- "" ‘

: ) '
9 than - , {2(3' .

For background having a given spectral and spatial correlation
function of the random luminance field. we will also examine
the background-to-noise and signal-to-background ratios,
except that the response of the so system to background inter-
ference will be characterized by the variance of the output
signal from the background. we will derive an expression for
the functionals corresponding to this case.

We will assume that at least approximately the spectral and
spatial correlation function of the homogeneous (stationary in
space) luminance field may be expressed in the form of a

product
KOI' 1"- ’) . B “I. ‘1)R("’)I

where R(x.y) is the correlation coefficient and satin 1, the-

correlation function or spectral luminance, defining the
variance of the integral luminance of the background in the
following manner:

‘73-£J;8(lu’1)*u,(ln)t~(l.)k(l.)&(la)a.ah, (9)

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ratio of the rms values of background interference and
internal noise at the output of the so system is
one, A. encuuon ,
"OI-Tn" o. NMU)" (1°)

 

where

am 0 (no . to
*3-43-H -3-;3—.,~,—’1 IK...,(~,. ~,) I’ I K... x (90;)K(Wr)l’d“1d‘y-

Here Kup(“1-'y) is the spatial and frequency response characteristic
of the system consisting of the objective lens and the photo-
detector: K (0..) is the transfer function of the photodetector

as an inerti'al element (the Fourier transformation of the
function h» (1)): law) is the transfer function of the electronic
filter (the Fourier transformation of the function h(t)): 0.(~..~.)
is the Wiener spectrum of the integral luminance (the two-

dimensional Fourier transformation of the spatial correlation
function 4.1m. n

9.. - ﬂ R(x.y)d.tdy

is the background parameter, which for non-negative R(x,y) is
the correlation region of the background (by analogy to the
correlation interval for a one-dimensional process).

The background-to-noise ratio has the same form as in (7), but
the functional Hunl'in this case is

a no) a x
m(n|_..—fm.’ -1333,
where 0. (0(1)) is determined by expression (9). and the functional
of the electronic filter v-NIHOIHVo is determined by (10)

since Nada. The same must be taken into account also in
the signal-to-background ratio (8), where in this case '00-an

Thus all necessary expressions have been determined for the
output ratios of signal to noise q, background to noise n, and
signal to background m both for the case when the background
interference is treated in the form of a response of the so
system to a jump (or a drop) in luminance and for the case when
the response of the so system to the background is considered
as a variance of the output background signal. Based on the
expressions obtained, any criterion for the Optimization of the
filters may be formulated as a conditional or unconditional
extremum problem:

cm PM. u).
00)..”
rm. I)“: (conditional extrenmm) (ll)
17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR IlF"'I('ln\ I. "til: ONLY

01'

.J;QMF(W") (unconditional extremum) (12)

where r(q,n) are given functions (the optimization criterion)
of the functionnln q and n: and C is a given constant.
Examples of various criteria are

q I
max 1;. nm fl. mu ('I""'- max "-1122
011:3“) IN Am ‘ mun) ntl).nu|V|-I°n‘
I

and so on.

The first or the listed criteria is most appropriate when the
background is given only as characteristics of separate compo-
nents of the objects and the background-to-noise ratio has the
meaning of a response of the en system to a drOp in luminance
between two different objects relatiVe to the rms noise value.
It is natural to use the last criterion when the background
interference is :valuated as a variance since it represents
the unconditional maximization of the ratio of the useful sig-
nal to the sum of the variances of the internal noise and the
background interference. If additionally noise and background
are time-independent Gaussian processes, then the so system
optimized according to this criterion will be optimal statis-
tically as well (in the probabilistic sense). ‘

We will show that problems (11) and (12) may be solved easily
if we have all possible solutions to the problem

min (a).

‘3': 2;" (13)

or the problem

I“: (q)
a (n. a m ( 14)

I‘D.

that is, all possible pairs of filters k°(A) and h°(t), each
corresponding to a Specific value of the threshold level q.euuu
in problem (13) or mélmnain problem (14). Since (13) and

(14) are a dual problem pair [1, p 87], their solutions “on“d
and sum) are mutual inverse functions, and sets of optimum
filters coincide if the limits qn and n" are varied through the
entire range of their possible values. This property of a
dual problem pair makes it possible to limit oneself to any

one of them singly.

Let there be a complete solution to problem (13), that is, a
function 0-h(00 and a set (practically speaking, of course, a

finite collection) of pairs of filters k‘(A) and k°(t). each
corresponding to a specific value of qx from the interval [0.qol.

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Based on the results of [2] we obtain

. of?“ mg. n) - 03:: I“. (v... nun. (0-)).

I’m. a) .1 C. F. (q... 0-:th '< C.

that is, the conditional extremum of the functional of
functions HI) and Mt) is reduced to the determination of the
extremum of a function of one variable q“. within a certain
range defined by the condition Fa(o..n.u.(qu)=rc- Similarly, problem
(12) is reduced to the determination of the extremum of the
function P(q..u...(q.)) in the variable q.R over the entire range of
possible values of this variable. According to the value of
q; yielding the extremum of the Emotional P1 (or F) , we choose
from the already determined set of filters k'Q) and h° (t) the
pair of filters which corresponds to this particular value of

q;-

We will now show that the solution of problem (13) also in turn
reduces to finding the extremum (minimum) of a function of one
variable if all solutions are known to problems similar to (13)
but related to each type of filtering (spectral and temporal)
separately. In fact,

uln (Io-an mm x. (to): w mm- molar (k (1)) gun mum]-

AMA“) s in h
0 v. ﬂimsy“); 20.11. (I) HMO; a c9140»)

mm [a mu: ~...(e,;,—l'1'm,- ] - n. a}: [0... u.) .._., (7%)]

where into.) is the result of solving the conditional extremum
problem for spectral filtering

:1!::b;A-().);
use») 4.
for all en from the interval [0,1] and ~-n(¢.) is.the solution to
the conditional extremum problem for temporal filtering

mu v mm
A (I)
a, pm] : c.

for all 0- from the interval [0,1].

For optimization criteria formulated as an unconditional
extremum (12), it is sometimes more convenient to represent
the solution in the form of the extremum of a function of two
variables:

can Pu. n) — em F(g.c¢.n,bv)—

“th HIM“!
- '0": My. (1*. Uo‘mn (fl) 'Ih (“”v
r a
19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For example,

a (33'5"; )’ ' + n' “.31: VI + n. a... a.) v5. m)“
We note also that any criterion P(q,n) may be replaced by own».
where m-q/n is the signal-to-background ratio, and the “basic"
problem instead of (13) becomes

III! n:
IN- NO( ).
C)!"

Thus for concurrent Optimization of filters according to any
criterion it is necessary to have all solutions to conditional
extremum problems for spectral (15) and temporal (16) fil-
tering separately. The remaining operations (determining the
extremum of a function of one or two variables) are elementary.

Methods for solving spectral filtering extremum problems for
functionals (4). (6), and (9) are examined in [3]. The condi-
tional extremum problem for the filter h(t) in its general
form is quite complex. However, in the practically important
case in which the structure of the filter is given and only
its parameters are to be determined, this problem is algorith-
mically simpler than the problem of spectral filtering. In
this case it is necessary to specify a set (in practice a
finite collection) of parameters of the filter, and by this a
set of filters, and among them to find those which satisfy
the conditions of the extremum problem. If all these filters
are enumerated, then the problem itself (16) takes the form

M‘s-q

9‘),-

where i-l, 2..., N is the filter number. The solution of
problem (17) may be obtained, for example, using the following
algorithm.

(17)

We will order the collection of all previously calculated
values of'Vso as to satisfy the strict inequalities
v.<v.<...<m. (M < N).
For this we will exclude all filters (except one) which reduce
to equal values of‘P, that is, in each group of such filters
we will leave only the one which gives the smallest value of
the quantity V. (If in the group of filters corresponding to
equali”: there turn out to be several filters giving lowest
but equal values of‘v, then clearly it is possible to choose
any one of them). Now, proceeding step by step from the end
of the ordered sequence to its beginning (that is, beginning
from the number M-l), we exclude from it all elements 9‘ for

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which ~:>~» where r is the number of the element left (that is,
not excluded) at the previous step of this procedure. Then
the remaining elements W and v and the filters corresponding
to them will be solutions to problem (17) at the points vu-h

In conclusion we note that the proposed method for concurrently
optimizing optical and electronic filters. based on the prelimi-

nary solution of problems for spectral (15) and temporal (16)
filtering. has a number of advantages.

1. The solutions to problems (15) and (16) are “building
blocks" which may be used to synthesize widely differing eo
systems according to various criteria for optimization.

2. These solutions directly determine the effectiveness of
that type of filtering, that is, they show what price (what
reduction in the ratio of useful signal to noise) is paid for
gne or another degree of suppression of background inter-
erence.

3. If one of the filters is given and it is necessary to find
the other one, then the method is easily simplified: if the
filter k(A) is given, then

"do .‘nohmn (‘3‘)-
and if the filter h(t) is given, then
lob-Invioh(i#'-

References

l. Gol'shteyn Ye. 6.. 'Teoriya dvoystvennostl v matematicheskom
programmirovanii i yeye prilozheniya,” [Duality theory and
applications in mathematical programming], Moscow. NAUKA,
1971.

2. Rakovskly Yu. N., Smirnov A. P., OPT.-MEKH. PROMYSH., 1975,
no. 2' pp. 1‘-150

30 Rakovskiy Y“. Na, OWL-“BK“. PROHYSH.. 197‘, no. 11' Pp.
16-17.

Received by editors 17 November 1977.
COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost', 1978

9187
C80: Gibb/568

21

FOR OFFTCIAL USE ONUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANALYSIS OF METHODS FOR TAKING INTO ACCOUNT RASTBR DISTORTIONS

AND INSTABILITIBS IN ELBCTROOPTICAL INSTRUMENTS WITH ELECTRONIC
SCANNING

Leningrad OPTIKO-NEKHANICHESKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian
NO 8; 1978 pp 20-23

[Article by V. R. Sablin. V. A. Osipik, and V. I. Pedoseyev]

[Text] Examines the effect of distortions and instabili-
ties on the electronic raster in electrooptical
instruments with electronic scanning on the precision
of measurement of coordinates of point targets.
Relationships are derived determining measurement
error for various calibration methods.

It is well known that electrooptical instruments with electronic
scanning have. in addition to substantial favorable qualities.
one drawback -- the occurrence of instabilities and distortions
in the electronic raster. This article examines methods for
taking into account these facts in relation to the measure-

ment of coordinates of point targets and shows that with the
appropriate choice of one or another method a high degree of
measurement precision may be obtained.

General relationships

In an electrooptical instrument a two-dimensional image is
converted into an electrical signal so that each point in the
observed portion of space (the field of view) is assigned a
pair of numbers determining the position of that point with
respect to the electronic raster. These numbers will be
called the raster coordinates and designated (t,r).

If a system of rectangular coordinates x, y is introduced in
the object plane such that the x-axis is parallel to the
direction of line scan in the center of the raster, and the
coordinate center lies on the sighting axis of the instrument.
then for each point in the object plane with coordinates (x.y)
there will be a corresponding pair of raster coordinates (t,T).

22
FOR¢E7ICIAL USS ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore we will consider that the instrument performs a

mutually single-valued transformation of (x.y) coordinates
onto (t,T) coordinates:

3-‘(h 7)- ’-)’“n 7’.
Ig‘f‘ﬂ. “(T-(1'9. (1)
in which the functions x(t,T) and y(t,T) are sufficiently

smooth. Because of the presence of raster distortions this
transformation is nonlinear.

Measuring the coordinates of a point target requires that for
values of (t,T) fixed by the instrument. the corresponding
true (x,y) coordinates be determined.

If distortions and instabilities are not present, then the
functions in (l) have the form

a". T)-x(l)nv, (f— '5)-
!“ rI-y(l)-U,(T— 7a).

where (t°,T ) is the initial measuring point and vx, v are
known coefficients determining the scale of the transtrmation.

Further analysis will be performed only for x-coordinates: all
relations are analogous for y-coordinates.

In the general case the functions in (1) may be written in
the form of a Taylor series [1]

w. n-w. r.)+x;a.. r.w-:.)+
+x',u.. nur- 7.) +-§-[:I.(I.. nut-tow

tuba. nut-wr- 7.) +
+x'nu. 7.)(r- rm] +...

Reordering terms we obtain

w. n-:«. mum. 7.)(l-Q+R(I-lo)+
+dtvtl-l. 7- To). (3)

Here R(t-t ) represents the sum of terms containing only (t-to)
of degree through 00, and in the last component are included
all terms containing (T-To) in various degrees. The component
R(t-to) is associated with deflection nonlinearity along the
Scan line, and 4” is associated with geometric distortions.
It is important to note that since in Amethere appear components

containing the factor (T-To) in various degrees, when T-To we
have My ﬂo .

Measurement without calibration

In measurement without calibration the relations in (1) nbtain,
that is, they are considered linear, having the form of (2)
with known parameters to, To, vx, and vy. Subtracting (2)

from (3), we obtain the absolute measurement error

23

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U8” ONLY

h ~\r.. + W..." .. I.) + RU -- I.) 4'
+ A" (1 - I“ 1‘- 7.).

where “In-mo. r.) is the error caused by uncertainty of the true
position of the initial measuring point: Min—Mo. 70-». is the
error resulting from uncertainty as to the true magnitude of
the scale of transformation at the initial point: Bit-to) is
the error caused by variability in the scale of the trans-
formation along the line of scan (because of nonlinearity):

and amt-l. r-r.) is the error resulting from geometric
distortions. Since (see. 3. 51., (ll)

RU-l.) c 4-5:? lrﬂl. falu—ur-g‘U-M’.

I: a Iii-H». (1-1.) + 41- (I—I.)’ 441..
Here

M, — 9H4,“ 1.)].

we choose the initial measuring point in the center. that is

I +:
0-37"- Thus the error in the region of the center will be

minimal. Designating by x the dimension fo the field of view
along the x-axis. that is. xavx(t2-t1), from (4) we obtain an
estimation of the relative error

fii‘..<-ﬁ-H ‘ +37%? +‘a‘ua ”:7. +9.33%. I (5)
where ‘n‘h'a'm‘a‘: are the corresponding maximum errors.

 

In order to calculate the value of M2 it is necessary to know
the specific form of the function x(t,'r) . M2 may be estimated
if the nature of the function x(t,'r) is known, along with the
coefficient of nonlinearity of transformation (1)

, _,g'...-x'... axis-:3...

a ‘Ln+’.na " .
where x5,“ and acid are the maximum and minimum scales of
transformation in ghe scan line.

we assume that xit,T) may be approximated as a function of t by
a polynomial of degree no higher than 3, As shown by experi-
mental investigations, this is valid in instruments with high
linearity in the variation of deflection currents. Then x;t(t,T)
is a linear function of t (see figure) and the coefficient of
nonlinearity may be expressed in x'(t.T) as

'aln
I

5—7: S x}, (I. ma. (6)

his

26

FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where t and t are the points at which x' and x'
occur, géapectiv3i§. min max

t!!!)

1.1!: I)

 

Graphs of the function x(t.T) and two deriVatives with
fixed T in the case of third-order nonlinearities.

Taking into account the fact that x"(t.T) is a linear function
in t, we may write

’IH

jﬁmnm

'au
so that strict equality holds in the case when xgt(t.T)
passes through zero within the interval (t1,t2).

>~.'.'.~.7_«-:'~s. (7)

 

 

From (6) and (7) for N; we obtain

2h.g,_ 4h.v,_
M'<l‘sm-'uhl“t*‘l‘ _ (8)

Taking this into account. the general expression for calculating
the relative maximum error (5) may be written in the form

tr t I i 0 l a :
+<~ﬁ5+pﬁf+7t+4r2

We note again that this expression was obtained with the
assumption that nonlinear distortions were of order no greater
than three. If we proceed from the assumption that x(t,T) is

approximated by a second-order polynomial, then it may be
shown that the kdzterm is replaced by are

As an example we will examine measurement without calibration
for typical values of parameters

1-12—0115; 1171-0»; h..-o.os. “ﬁg-0.0:.

The maximum error is 14‘ of the size of the field and is
reached at the edge of the field.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
)‘0R OFFH‘JM. "til-2 ONLY

Measurement with a single reference point

This method is implemented in the following manner. Projected
onto the photocathode oi the detector, in addition to the
image of the target is a light point (the reference point)
whose coordinates x10) and y 9) are known precisely: coordi-
nates t and T are nmaaured with respect to thin point and are
taken as the initial to and T . Since xo=x(t°.To) and
yg-y(t°,To) are known precisely, ﬁ.x.~ hqvam Then from (5) we
0 tain

in r l l. 0, l I, - I. a!” t
_ .- ._ .. .. , .. .. '.'-
.‘ ' I I‘. r 8 A" Q" . 0‘ .

If the nonlinearity of the transformation is of order no
higher than three, then M2 is estimated from formula (8).

with the same data as in the previous example we obtain

s
-35-~u$ . and the maximum error occurs at the edge of the field

as before.

The use of a reference point in the center of the field of
view makes it possible to achieve high accuracy in the central
zone, where it is possible to ignore geometric distortions and
nonlinearity. In a small central zone of size a we have

“' 'Eﬂbz‘

‘3‘ ‘7 0' T.

with the same value of Jig-as in the previous example, for

a 10‘ central zone 53‘“ that is. the error resulting from

raster instability may in practice be ignored. These results
were confirmed experimentally under strict operational
conditions.

Measurement with a coordinate grid without interpolation

This method is known in the literature as the method of
measurement with descrete image partition [2]. For measuring
x-coordinates the method entails projecting onto the photo-
cathode of the transmitting tube a coordinate grid consisting
of n+1 straight lines dividing the entire scan line into n
equal intervals. A rough determination of the x-coordinate
is made by counting the number of grid lines from the begin-
ning of the coordinates to the target. and a precise deter-
mination is made by measuring the difference in raster cpordio
nates between the target t and the last counted line t‘k .

In exact measurement, the coordinate of lines t‘k) is taken
as the initial asu in oint alon the sea ine within the
rim, ,9 P 9 '26

interval (t‘k). The coordinate of x , corresponding
to t(k), is known precisely, so meIO. From (4) for points

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the interval (t‘k).t(k*1)) we have

u . w,» o 4‘") + -.§-M.(I -I'")' +

‘I' ‘19, (I I. l‘". 7- ru)| (9)
where
00:” us; (lm. T) - Cu:

‘3“,(':‘) 1 g
the integvahe(zrgprtrgsflting from geometric distortions in

For third-order nonlinearities the maximum relative error in
speed is

If the t(R)-coordinate of the coordinate line is measured
for T equal to the value of the T-coordinate of the target
(that is. calibration is performed in the scan line in which
the target is located), then in (9) it must be considered
that TWO-0 and 14”“ -—l‘”, T— I‘D-.0.

Then, taking into account that
m.‘ (l-‘(“) _h—n-ﬂ(l +‘.).
from (9) in the case of third-order nonlinearity we obtain
a: Iv l+h 1+5:
A" '~ ("27‘ W)“;- +’(":T‘)-
us

With the same parameters as previously and n-lS we have-1r¢0n§

for the entire field of view. In experimental investigations
with n-ls and the number of raster partition elements 128x128,
a total error resulting from raster distortions and from the
discrete nature of the partition of less than 0.8\ of the size
of the field of view was obtained.

Measurement with interpolation

The problem of determining the target coordinates (x,y ) from
the known coordinates (t T) may be approached differently.
He will assume that the form of function (1) is unknown (as
in fact it is). if values of functions (1) are known at
several points (t ’T D), then by interpolation their
values may be determined ati :ny (other point (t, T) not too
far removed from mints (t1 The solution of this
problem in the general form for functions of two variables
encounters certain difficulties both in principle and in
calculation. More expedient is interpolation according to
each of the variables separately.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONEY
FOR OFTIMAL USE ONLY

We will examine xtt,T) for a certain fixed T=¥. Then x(t,¥)
for t t [t1.tzl is a -u ctlYn of the single variable t.
According to Val??? x 0 ,? ....,x(n), which x(t.$) asuumes
at pointu t(°),t ,....t n). it is necessary to determine
the value of x(t,53 for any point t a [t1,t2]. Such a
problem may be solved, for example, hiLh a Lagrangian poly~
nomial of degree nLn(t) (3}. The interpolation error depends
on the choice of interpolation points t 0 ,tll),...,t(" . It
as interpolation points we choose roots of the Chebyshev poly-
nomial of degree n+1 on the segment (t1,t21, then the error
will be minimal.

In measuring we may freely choose only the coordinates x‘l) of
the calibration marks. The t -coordinates are obtained
through measurement. Therefore, in general, it is not
possible to arrange for the interpolation points to coincide
with roots of the Chebyshev polynomial. However. as a result
of the approximately linear dependence of x(t,¥), the inter-
polation points "ill coincide approximately with the roots of
the Chebyshev polynomial on the segment [t .t 1 if as the x )
we choose roots of the Chebyshev polynomial oi degree n+1 on
the segment [x1,x2).

As an example we will examine the simplest case n+l=2. Then

,(l)_,m u m_ n (on
I.|(!)—;m-:Tal+x( :m_':“ ,

 

'30. h—L. (I)! 4 -: 5"'(I’-ol.)'.

The roots of the chebyshev polynomial are
"‘I'J'""'z'2-('a-lo)+'x!‘1‘;ﬂ; xl.lII‘_ ﬂ("_x‘)+MT-h-_

4
The error in this case may be estimated as follows:
Ixu. h- 1.. (0| < 1';- map-1.».

For the same parameters as in the preceding examples, with a
third-order nonlinearity we will have the following error

values:
a) if x1 and x2 are taken as calibration points, then

lxn. r —L.(n <_fl=__z“;
b) if x£°) and x1°) are taken as calibration points, then
Ian. -L («I < ﬁs-um.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If more than two calibration marks are chosen and polynomials
of higher degrees are used, than the interpolation error

may be reduced. To calculate it, the maximum value of the
derivative of the function x(t,?] of order n+1 must be
estimated, and this is difficult in practice since the forms
of the functions in (l) are not known to high precision.

When there are more than two calibration marks, it is possible
to use linear interpolation in each of the intervals between
successive interpolation points. If there are n+1 calibration

points (n intervals). then the error may be estimated by the
following expression:

Ix“. ﬁ- mm: + “(iii)"

With n-lS for the same parameters as in the previous examples,
in the case of nonlinearities of order not greater than three,

the error will not exceed 0.01! of the size of the field of
v ew.

Thus, using this or another calibration method, the error of

an electrooptical instrument resulting from instabilities,
deflection nonlinearities, and geometric distortions may be
reduced to a negligibly small value. At the same time, in

view of the ever expanding use of computer equipment to process
measurement results, the implementation of complex interpolation
algorithms providing extremely high precision is entirely
practicable.

References

1. Korn 6., Korn T., "Spravochnik po matematike dlya nauchnykh
rabotnikov," [Handbook of mathematics for scientific
workers], Moscow, NAUKA, Chief editorial board for litera-
ture in physics and mathematics, 1968.

2. Polonik v. 3., ”Televisionnyye avtomaticheskiye ustroystva,"
[Automatic television devices], Moscow, SVYAZ’, 1974.

3. Berezin I. 8., Zhidkov N. 9., "Metody vychisleniy,”
(Calculational methods], Hoscowp NAUKA, 1966.

Received by editors 25 August 1977.
COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Hekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost', 1978

9187
C50: 8144/468

29

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AN ILLUMINATING DEVICE FOR TESTING COORDINATE-SENSING
PHOTODETBCTORS

Leningrad OPTIKO-MBKHANICHBSKAYA PROMYSRLBNNOST' in Russian
No 8. 1978 pp 42-44

[Article by Ye. N. Vysotskiy. I. V. Reznikov, and h. N.
Tikhomirovl

[Text] The Optical design is described for an illumi-
nating device having continuously regulable
illumination and a field nonuniformity of l.S\.
Blurring at the edge of the image projected onto
the photodetector is calculated.

High-quality light sources are the basic means for testing the
parameters of coordinate-sensing photodetectors (cspd):
dissectors. vidicons. scanistors, solid-state charge-coupled
detectors, and so on. Features of the cspd's determine the
quality criteria for light sources. For testing coordinate
sensitivity over a field it is necessary to have sources
with illumination nonuniformity not exceeding 2-3‘. In
determining the limit of output signal nonlinearity with
respect to illumination and threshold sensitivity, sources
are required having continuous regulation of illumination
with unvarying color temperature. Illuminators produced by
industry and described in the literature do not entirely
satisfy these requirements. The four-channel illumination
system of the EM-536 projector with the "Mikronar-GOO'
objective lens has an illumination nonuniformity of approxi-
mately St, and in addition cannot be regulated in illumi-
nation and is complex to construct. align, and use. The
raster illumination system described in [ll allows an illumi-
nation nonuniformity of greater than 5‘ at high illumination,
and it also has some of the same characteristic shortcomings
as the 8M-536.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The design for testing cspd‘s using a distant light source
and a mask placed directly on the cspd is both theoretically
sound and practically proven. With this testing design the
basic requirements are high illumination uniformity over the
field and a minimal gap between the cspd and the mask.

Presented in fig. 1 is an illuminator using this design for
testing cspd's. The 80-2 incandescent lamp, light source A.
has a color temperature T-2854K
[2]. The light-absorbing
screen. 2. reduces bright
spots on the back wall of
the lamp casing. 3, and the
bulb. Diaphragms, 4. forming
the light channel. act as a
blind for protection from
bright spots occurring on the
internal surfaces of the walls Pi . 1. Optical design of
of the telescope tube, 5. il uminater: l -- light source

A (so-2 incandescent lamp).
The positions of the diaphragms 2 -- light absorbing screen,
are chosen so that they elimi- 3 -- lamp casing of illuminator.
nate first- and second-order 4 " light-restricting diaphragms,

 

bright spots (3.4], and in 5 -‘ telescope tubeo 6 '-
combination with the matte neutral light filters, 7 '-
black coating of the inner test mask. 8 -- tube displace-
surface with KhS-llO'IGM ment device. 9 -- readout

enamel they essentially pre- device, 10 -- cspd tested.

vent any light from the sides 11 " light-tight chamber.

of the tube from reaching the

cspd, 10. The diameters are chosen so that they continually
narrow the illumination angle in order to prevent light
diffracted from the edges of the diaphragms from striking the
cspd. Neutral light filters, 6. allow the illumination of

the cspd under test to be varied in steps. The mask, 7, forms
the required test pattern on the cspd. depending on the test
mode. The pattern on the mask (the test matrix) is produced by
photolithography on a bimetal [5]. The metal mask, as distinct
from a glass or film mask, makes it possible to create an

image with 100‘ contrast, very important for testing dissectors
and photomultipliers operating in the single-electron mode.

The use of a design with a distant light source and a system

of light-restricting diaphragms has made it possible to achieve
an illumination nonuniformity not greater than l.S\ over a
field with a diameter of 35 mm.

Continuous variation of the illumination is achieved by moving
the light source away from the cspd using a device for
displacing the telescope tube, 8. In combination with

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE 0ND!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

step-wine regulation by the light filters, the illumination is
varied from 10 to 0.001 lx in the visible wavelength range.
With continuous regulation the illumination varies in propor-
tion to the square of the distance. so that within the limits
of variation of the size of the telescope tube (400-500 mm)
the illumination varies by a factor of 1.7 over all intermedi-
ate values. with the minimum variation determined by the scale
value of the readout device. 9. -- 0.6;.

The degree of blurring of the edge of the image is determined
by the distance I from the mask to the sensitive layer of the
cspd (fig. 2). Taking into

account the small viewing , , 0
angle of the lamp filament, l, 1 _u., - .D .
in the mask opening, 2. it ‘ ~4.:~‘- 343’- -' 1’:
is possible to approximate ' F ‘
with sufficient precision the --~“~-J --~ --L~-
degree of blurring of the
edge of the image projected Pig. 2. For calculating the
onto the cspd. 3. using the blurring of the edge of the
formula (not taking into projected image: 1 -- lamp
account diffraction effects) filament, 2 -- mask with
X-an opening, 3 -- cspd tested.

where x is the degree of blurring of the edge of the projected
image; 1 is the distance from the mask to the sensitive layer
of the cspd: b is the size of the filament of the light source:
and L i: the distance from the filament of the light source to
the man .

With Lnlnadoo mm, b-l mm, and 1-4 mm we obtain x-io m, which
in many cases is considerably less than the resolvi 9 power of
the cspd.

The distance from the mask to the sensitive layer of the cspd
is determined by the thickness of the glass envelope, which
ranges from 2 to 4 mm.

For solid-state charge-coupled detectors the degree of blur-
ring may be considerably less (less than l/un) because of the
reduction in tne magnitude of 1.

The degree of blurring of the edge of the projected image is
taken into account in testing the resolving power of the cspd
for given parameters of the test matrix on the mask.

The illuminator described is relatively simple to construct
and completely satisfies cspd testing requirements for nonuni-

formity and continuous regulability of illumination, contrast,
and degree of blurring of the edge of the projected image.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

3.
4.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

References

Bolotnikov V. A. 35 21., ELEKTRON. PROMYSH., 1975 no. 6,
p. 29-34.

Karalis v. N., Korneyevs E. A., "Apparatura dlya fluores-
tssntnogo snalize," [Apparatus for fluorescent analysis],
Moscow, Committee for standards, measures, and measuring
instruments of the USSR Council of Ministers, 1970, p. 27.
Sakin I. L., 'Inzhenernays optiks,” [Engineering optics],
Leningrad, MASHINOSTROYENIYE, 1976. pp. 151-154.

Kruger M. Ya. st sl., "Spravochnik konstruktora optiko-
mekhsnichoskikﬁ'bfiborov,' [Handbood for the designer of
optical engineering instruments], Leningrad, HASHINOSTROYE-
NIYB‘ 1968! pp’ 385-3900

Medggdeva I. Ye. g; 2;., OPT.-MEKH. PROMYSH., 1976, no. 2,
p. .

Received by editors 20 July 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost'. 1978

9187
C80: 8144/668

33

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE NONLINEARITY OP PHOTODETECTORS

Leningrad OPTIKO-MBKHANICHESKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian
No 8, 1978 pp 59-61

[Article by L. N. Aksyutov and G. K. Kh010pov]

[Text] A method is described for numerically determining
the nonlinearity of photoelectric radiation detectors,
based on the measurement of their relative differ-
ential sensitivity as a function of the magnitude of
the output signal.

In order to make precise photometric studies, the ratio between
the magnitude of the output signal of the detector system and
the measured magnitude must be known over the entire range of
the detector. This requirement is satisfied if the detector
system is linear. The linearity of a detector system in which
a photodetector acts as the sensing element is judged by its
energy response characteristic. However, it is known that
nonlinear distortions in photodetector electrical circuits
depend not only on the magnitude of the light flux incident

on the detector, but also on parameters of the electrical
circuit [1]. Thus linearity of the energy response characteri-
stic of the photodetector is not sufficient to guarantee
linearity of the detector system as a whole. Consequently,

for testing the linearity of a detector system or estimating
its nonlinearity, special measurements must be made using the

system.

The essence of traditional methods for determining the nonline-
arity of radiation detectors [2] is the creation of a known
level of illumination at the detector or the variation of the
illumination according to a known law, presupposing graduation
or calibration of the measuring equipment.

The object of this article is to demonstrate the capabilities

of a method for numerical estimation of the nonlinearity of
photodetectors, based on the measurement of characteristics

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of their relative differential sensitivity. The method does
not assume knowledge of the magnitude of detector illumination,

nor of the law governing its variation.

The nonlinearity of a pnotodetector is determined by the rela-
tiVe variation of its sensitivity at differing illumination
levels and is expressed by the value of the coefficient of

nonlinearity [3]
K-(S/S°)-l (l)

where s is the sensitivity of the detector to a certain
radiation flux producing an output signal N and a corresponding
illumination 5; s is the sensitivity of the detector to a
certain arbitrariYy chosen flux, corresponding to illumination
30, which produces an output signal No. In practice 80
corresponds to minimal light fluxes incident on the photo-
detector, and B to any value of the flux in the dynamic range
of measured values. Thus it is assumed that E>E°.

In accordance with expression (1) a linear detector, for which
s-so, is characterized by the value x-o. When K-const#0, the
detector is also linear, but its sensitivity is different from
so. The criterion of detector nonlinearity is'Kﬂconst, with
K) 0 corresponding to the case in which detector sensitivity
increases with increasing illumination, that is, “superlinear”
sensitivity, and with K<,0 corresponding to the case in which
sensitivity decreases with increasing illumination, that is,
"sublinear" sensitivity.

Since for detector sensitivity 8 we are taking the ratio of
its output signal N produced by illumination 3 to the magnitude
of this illumination, expression (1) may be rewritten in the

form
K-(NBO/NOE)-l (2)
In accordance with the energy response characteristic of the

detector, the value of the illumination is determined by the
expression

.‘ .v
E a: f (ON/0E)" «IN = If. 4- £(0N,‘0E)" dN. ( 3)

Substituting (3) in (2) we obtain
0
K = {IV/[M + f «mm W)“ -- I. m
.\'.
where thdE is the differential sensitivity of the detector [1]:

ﬁiN)"(05705V(NJ50 is the relative differential sensitivity
characteristic of the detector.

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mu (‘l-‘FI’C'M. USE ONLY

Expression (4) indicates the possibility of determining the
nonlinearity of photouetecturs according to the known value

or the output signal when. rather than the value of the
illumination. the differential sensitivity of the detector

is measured at a function of the magnitude of the output
signal N. In this case the value of the differential sensi-
tivity dth background illumination E::0 corresponds to output
signal Nn produced by a modulated fluu (the signal flux [1]),
created at the detector by an additional illumination ”0 above
backdrOund. It the background illaminatiOn E (the background
Elna (1]) is incrvnscd. then the changed value of the
differential sensitivity at a constant value of the signal
flux (Ho=censt) corresponds to the changed value of the output
signal "5‘

Taking measurements or the function N3=f(8) similar to measure-
ments of the background characteristic [4], and simultaneously
measuring the va‘ue of output signals N with identical modula-
tion or the bactcround flux produced by the total illumination
H+EO, it is possrble to construct the relative differential
sensitivity characteristic of the detector (Ni-Mg/NO. This
function, according to formula (4), determ nes the value of

the coefficient oi nonlinearity K for a given magnitude of the
output signal from the detector.

From formulae (2) and (4) it follows that the numerical value
of the nonlinearity, expressed by the coefficient K, for a
given value of the output signal N will differ depending an
the value taken for No. In practice the value of No is
determined by the minimum signal-to-noise ratio, established
for the specific case, and the maximum value of N is deter-
mined by the values of illumination at which the detector
sensitivity begins to saturate. Knowing the nonlinear
characteristic of the photodetector and the value of illumi-
nation corresponding to a particular value of N, it is possible
to construct its energy response characteristic as needed.

To illustrate the foregoing -¢ L ——S u "

we present results of the -‘ ~---"’l§° “3|;
determination of detector ,ﬁa"";"fﬁgt: I “
nonlinearity obtained by {".6 CSV"'

the method of measuring the )u l_ ¢

relative differential sensi- ".4 b

tivity. The measurements _ , _
were performed on a device Fig. 1. Diagram of the measuring

device: a) 1 -- source of back-

5 o c of the ver ions of
l l! n 5 ground flux; 1' -- source of sig-

which is shown in fig. 1.

The design of the source.
1, and its placement rela-
tive to the detector
studied provides for varia-
tion in the background
illumination proportional

36

nal flux; 2, 2' -- slit/dia-
phragm; 3 -- spherical mirror; 4,
4' -- modulators: 5 -- photode-
tector tested: b) relative posi-
tions of incandescent elements of
source: 1 -- tungsten ribbon of
width and slit, 2, of width h.

FOR OFFICIAL USE 05L?
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

to the width of the slit, 2, making it

possible to measure the

energy response characteristics of detectors on this device.

Fig. 2 shows differential characteri-
stics of Cds photodetectors measured
for two values of No at each modula-
tion frequency. The displacement of
curves 1 and 3 along the N-axis rela-
tive to curves 2 and 4 is caused by
the increased sensitivity of the
photodetector at a modulation fre-
quency of 450 "2. though the maximum
values of (i correspond to the same
value of illumination in each case.
The form of the p(n) curves indicates
that the sensitivity of the photo-
detector is superlinear over the
entire range of measured signals and
that there are no linear segments in
its energy response characteristic.
clearl the determination of the non-
linear ty of photodetectors with
superlinear sensitivity used as
radiation measuring instruments is
meaningful only at values of energy

NM

I
l o

  

Pig. 2. Relative differ-
ential sensitivity
characteristic of Cds
photoresistor: N -36[l],
21m, soom, 368t41/N:
1.3 -— 65 Hz: 2, 4 ~-

450 Hz.

illumination at which sensitivity saturation has not yet occurred.
This value (see fig. 2) corresponds to the maximum output signals

for which 9 (N) z 1.

Nonlinearity characteristics for a Cds
photodetector were calculated from
p(N) characteristics using formula (4)
and are presented in fig. 3.

The reproducibility of results of
nonlinearity determinations by this
method was established by us earlier
[3] in the study of a photomultiplier,
for which the deviation from linearity
was relatively small. Comparison of-
the energy response characteristics
of the cas photodetector calculated
from results of the nonlinearity
determination with those measured
directly (see fig. 4) demonstrates

    

m
x

3 S.

M ”5

ﬁns

2 s

u o‘

3.5,

’3’?

ocvn' n’ n' n‘ 19’
Output signal N, [N

Fig. 3. Nonlinearity

characteristic for Cds

photoresistor: l, 2 --

65 Hz: 3, 4 -- 450 Hz.

the reproducibility of the results for large nonlinearities as

well.

37

FORIW?KHALISE(mMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We have used this method and the measuring device whose

design is shown in fig. 1 to determine the nonlinearity of
radiometers. he an example we may

cite the results of determining the
nonlinearity of two specific radio-
meters with Pbs and InSb photo-
resistors as the sensing elements.
The relative differential sensiti-
vity characteristic of these radio-
meters is of the sublinear sensi-
tivity type and may be espreased
by a function of the form
where for the Pbs radiometer:
cat-0.19 v‘l. No-iooNn-vumusav:
for the Ins radiometer: ¢ﬁ ﬂ ' 0
‘-2.021 mV‘ , No”}°"n;25°€”‘"525dmv’ Slit width. mm
N a the output s.gna va us: an Pi

, g. 4. Bner res-
Nn is the noise value at the output ponse charactgiistic

°f the radiometer. of eds photoresistor:

1 -- 65 “2: 2 -- 450 Hz:
solid lines are cal-
culated curves: circles
are experimental data.

d.
a

   

Output signal, 3V
*5. 3.. ‘3.

3.

In accordance with equations (4)
and (5), the value of the coefficient

of nonlinearity of the radiometers
is expressed by the formula

IN
K“‘Tra=-.N,‘“-

As demonstrated in the practical determination of the nonline-
arity of photodetectora by the method of measuring their rela-
tive differential sensitivity, this method of testing nonline-
arity has the following advantages over traditional methods:

1. No calibration or graduation of the measuring equipment is
required.

2. Use of the method is independent of the polarization of the
radiation and of the polarization properties of the apparatus
tested.

3. Results of determdning the nonlinearity are reproducible
regardless of its magnitude.

4. The method requires little labor and only simple equipment.

5. Nonlinearity may be tested with various spectral compositions
of the signal and background fluxes.

38

FOR OPP'ICIM. US! ONLY
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

References

Korndorf s. P. g; g;., 'Reschet fotoelektricheekikh teepey,”
[Design of photoelectric circuits). Moscow, ENERGIYA, 1967.
Msygtov L.‘g.' KhOIOPOV Go Xe. OWL-MEX". PROMYSHH 1973'
no. 0' p: a

Moyutov I): Na. KhOIOPOV Go K0. OPT.-MEKH0 PROMYSH.. 1971'
no. 10. p. 65.

Aﬂtlf'yev A. 10. Kholopov Go Kn, OPTU‘MEKH. PROMYSH” 1969'

no. 10. p. 1.
Aksyutov L. N.. Kholopov G. K.. Melent'yeva L. 9., Inventor's

certificate no. 450715. BYUL. IZOBR.. 1975, no. 4.

Received by editors 3 October 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhanicheakaya Promyehiennost'. 1978

9187
C80: 8144/468

39

909 (II-T‘N‘Tl' "QB WV
l-‘Oli IWI-‘li in“. USE ONLY

UDC 535-317.?
MH‘OMM‘iNG THE PROCl-Zﬁﬁiiiﬁ Oi" INTERFEROGMKE IN THE TEGTINO OI" ONION. RYSTDB
Leningrad OVI‘IKO-HEIGiANICIIESKAYA PRCiWSliiiﬁﬂNOST' in Russian No 9, 1978 pp 1-10

[Article by Candidate of Sciences '1. A. 2verev. I. P. Agurok. Candidate of
Sciences 8. A. Radionov and Candidate of Sciences ii. ii. Sohol'shiy]

{Text} The mathematical apparatus and the programming system
for computer programming or interferogramn and a method of
eliminating errors produced by the interferometer are pro
sen-ted. These will make it possible to determine the topo-
graphy of wave front deformation and the main quality charac-
teristics of the optical image. The results of processing of

“ interferosraes obtained during testing of a hyperbolic airror
with a diameter of 1.100 m are presented.

The interference method is traditional in the testing of optical systems and
surfaces. Visual evaluation of interferogrsmn makes it possible to deter-nine
the extent and position of local wavefront deformations, as well as astig-
cations. however. computer processing of the results is necessary in order to
utilize most fully the possibilities of the aethod and to obtain the necessary
intonation about a mirror surface or the wave aberration of an optical system.
or to determine the quality characteristics of an optical image. This article
describes the automation of interferogram processing during testing with an
unequal-path interferometer.

Obtaining the interferogram

The system for testing with an unequal-path interferometer is well known (Fig.
l-a). however. in order to reconstruct with good quality a wavefront defor-
mation it is necessary to allow for errors produced by the system itself. some
of which can be eliminated by subsequent computer processing. and others of
which can be minim‘lzed by following the recommendations presented below.

[Errors which cannot be eliminated by subsequent computer processing./ ‘i'hsse

include a discrepancy between the recording surface 7 and the surface next to

the output pupil of the system being tested. since in this case deformation of
50

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the wavefront on surface 7 will result in an observed shift of the wave phase
because the wavefront is propagating equidistantiy while diffraction phenom-
ena are affecting it strongly. In the testing of optical systems we are in-
terested in the deformation of the anefront in the plane of the exit pupil.
Just as in testing of the surfaces of manufactured parts. since the main aim
is to determine quality characteristics of the optical image on the basis of
the scalar theory of diffraction, in which it is desirable to use the wave-
front in planes where the Kirchhoff conditions are adhered to, i.e. in the
system pupils [2, h]. A second error results fron the difference between the
shape of the recording surface and the nearest comparison sphere of the wowe-
front, which produces distortion. This occurs when the forward focus of the
obJective)6 does not coincide with the autocollimation point A of the system
P18. 1‘b e

In experimental practice. of course. it is
impossible to eliminate these errors com-
pletely. But minimization of FA (Pig. l-b)
to within 1-3 mm and focusing of the object-
ive 6 on the pupil will guarantee that their
effect will be insignificant.

IBrrors which can be eliminated by subse-
quent processing./ He will consider the
causes of these errors. Methods of elimin-
ating them are described in the next section.
They include longitudinal and transverse de-
focusing resulting from the shifting of points
A and A' (Pig. l-a). introduced to produce
the required type of interference pattern;

 

Fig. l. The Optical System inclination of the photographic objective
with respect to the axis of the beam leaving
Key: 1. Laser the system, leading to distension in the
2. Focusing objective interferogram equivalent to additional astig-
3. Beam splitter matism; and inaccuracies in the manufacture
h. Surface under test of the standard mirror and additional spher-
5. Standard sphere ical aberration arising with apertures greater
6. ObJective than 0.30.

7. Film plane

Obtaining Digital Information

In order to process by computer the information in the interferogram. it must
be converted to discrete digital form. For this purpose the interferogram is
measured. The measurement procedure depends on the mathematical apparatus
for reconstruction of the wave aberration function. An interferogram on film
is measured using a DIN-21 (23). The distances from the axis of rotation of
the measuring table to the points of intersection of rings by radii at angles
selected so as to encompass all the characteristics of the interferogram, or
the x.r coordinates of the rings (or fringes). are measured. In addition the
X and Y coordinates of 10-20 points on the edge of the pupil are measured. The
bl

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN DFP'KIAL "SH 03L?

main source of noise in m-nnuring the cunrdinates or the rinsn is the indeter-
minacy or the position of the obdt‘ﬁt or interest. the photometric maximum
(minimum) or a fringe. when observing with a visual instrument. its relative
nine in about t 0.05-«0.08 or the v‘sitie breadth oi‘ the fringe.

f11th-nr-i'lcui Apparatus

/i-2iininntior. of the error r- :ultir." from incEinatinn oi‘ the axis of the photo-
graphic ochctive relative to the rui-s or the hem leaving the system being
LentrdJ In order to eliminate th‘n error we nun'. uetcmine the ellipticity
of the pupil harder it. the interfere iron and :mrrect the measurement results
to a circular pupil. Tne coordinates of the center of the pupil are determined
in advance as the urithmeticai remdts of measurement or the x and Y coordin-
atcs or points on the pupil border. The coordinates of X0 and Y0 thus derived
are the starting point for a nonlinear least-squares analysis, involving ain-
imitation of

N
1 on. on
gJﬁo- lit-ac; 66‘. - 17-}, Mr]-

where

ex : X0; C, '5 Y0. Ri- Mil—£6,” 171- ’55“

and J is the index of the iteration interan [l].

The pupil border is given in polar coordinates as follows:
p-r+scos?(-'_a.-a).

where p and iv are the radius vector and the polar angle; and p. a and at are
unknowns. To determine the unknown parameters we use the following series of
relationships in discrete form:

{a 23 1a
3 M? wary (:-r)u:.-a’:[ .ﬂ’éja-arasln’h.
. J .
The resultant r. a and 0‘ are the initial conditions for the nonlinear least-
squnres analysis with convergence criteria A r- 10.3. A a-lO'3. Act-S - 10-h
rad. These parameters must be determined beforehand, since the least-squares
method may converge to a false extremal. [1]. Real values for a are about 0.05.

IReeonstrueting the wave aberration for the system being tested./ The inter-
rerogram being studied reflects the wave aberration we are seeking with deroc-
uaing. The rings (fringes) of the interference pattern are the degrees of
discretimation of the wavefront by A . 'i'he detocusing is an additional
Motion and must be eliminated:

P(X.r)-m+c1 . x+smr¥am (As-HRS
'i'he derocusing is eliminated by the least-squares method with the criterion

42
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a-
94W“: 'a)-”(xl: Y,)|—mln.

where the summation is carried out for all measurements. giving the minimum
mean square wave aberration, and accordingly the maximal Strehl number [2].

The fact that the total defocusing produced in the interferometer system and
contined in the wave aberration of the system is eliminated means that analysis
of the image quality will be carried out on the optimal plane of the apparatus
and at the optimal point on it. In the operation of a spherical mirror. the
spherical aberration which is linearly dependent on 020 (1) does not arise
from the aplanatic point or an aspherical mirror with a corrector under the
same conditions.

here (with an aperture greater than 0.35) the defocusing is eliminated using
a K determined in advance by calculation from the test system:

N
,2} [Fun m-mxu m: -K - can [m )7] -

m- ans. (9)

In order to construct the wave aberration diagram of the system in question.
which is required. for example, in industrial testing of mirrors. and also
for image quality analysis, it is necessary to reconstruct a two-dimensional
wave aberration function. This function is reconstructed by a least-squares
approximation with analysis of the significance of the coefficients that have
been derived, making it possible to eliminate measurement noise. Three var-
iants of least-squares approximation have been developed.

The first method makes use of Zernike's polynomials. orthogonal on a circle.
The system of normal least-squares equations is solved by the Gauss method.

As indicated in [7]. the nmber of operations required in solution of a system
of linear equations by the Gauss method is close the the theoretical minimum.
Operation of the program in the test mode indicates a good degree of de-
pendence in the system of linear equations.

The second approximation method also uses the Zernike polynomials, but the
system of normal equations is solved by the orthogonalisation method [1, 8].
The selected basis (the Zernike polynomials) is orthogonalized on a random
sampling function using the Gram-Schmidt method [8]. Neither of these programs
requires prior elimination of defocusing, since the defocusing polynomials

are present in the basis selected and the approach to elimination of defocus-
ing described above is retained.

In the third variant, the system of normal equations is also solved by the
method of orthogonalisation. but the orthogonal basis is produced as described
below. This method requires measurements along the radii. The defocusing is
eliminated beforehand in accordance vith (2). On each measured radius, we
construct according to the Forsythe relationship [1. 3] the orthogonal basis
Q1.“ , ). where m is the number of radii and i is the degree of the polynomial.
after which we construct an orthogonal basis inf-Vim“ the sampling iunction

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR iW'I‘H'IM. USE ONLY

function for the radio: angina. '..'.~ treat the polynomials mm as a Magic
polynomial (m1 sconnt) by joining. the coefficients of the l-‘orsythe recurrence
relations by apiinen. it in easily rccn that the basin \i’ (if )eQi(’a) is also
orthogonal. This nethod is promising "or iwme sampling functions. After
finding the coefficients we analyze their significance by the tent Ii]

a.’ ' I ' .. . .
(a -Jiﬁf-‘Ii‘f‘h'li”. .07? .- :-..,....
r the coefficients cntsined. 9(0)

the par-t'aetrrs and oh‘m m '3b

is the covariat ion

where 3 is the water 0
in the hypothesis.

matrix for evaluation of

in the second and tnird variants we analyze the hypothesis; 1 e 0. where
2&0). while in the first variant we

in. 2.....m (b=i. Qsio, 0. 1.....0'.
the coefficients are ana‘

analyze a more complex hypothesin in which h! 2. he
lyted in pairs starting with o 1 and O 1. i9 and then additionally with the

highest correlations. iiext the error of the standard mirror which has been
thod is subtracted from the recon-

dctcmincd in advance by the three-mirror he
ntructcd wave aberration.

in cases of large lo-‘al errors we use the second method of reconstruction of
th wave aberrations we use the first;

the wave aberration.
am systems with several methods for reconstructing the

the existence of progr
save aberration ashes for high quality and reliability of results.

Analysis of image Quality of the System Under Test
Analysis of image quality entails determination of diffraction point
spread functions. the energy concentration mnction and the two-dimensional

optical transfer mnction. According to the scalar theory of diffraction

I2. h]. the point spread function is determined by applying the fast discrete

Fourier transform (rpm) method to the pupil function. Introductions to the

FD” algorithm are given in [5] and [6}. A special version of the fast four-
ion and with a shift in the coord-

ier transform algorithm without bit invers

inatc origin. without an increase 1
zeroes bordering the pupil function, has been developed. To determine the
OPP (optical transfer mnetion). an algoriti- for transformation of the real
function is used. The tion function (”(2) is computed by in-
ction (PS? (mi) over circular domains by the
Simpson method. The energ concentration function. the point
y-phase cross sections and the

diagram. the frequency-contrast and frequenc
frequency-contrast curve on a logarithmic scale are output on a printer.

he use of this mathematical apparatus and the computer programs
ulations on interferogrm thrOugh the example of testing of
the ATP-2h telescope.

.100 III in diameter. of
tor of curvature of

The interferogram shown in Fig. 2 was obtained from the cen
pherical aberration compensator applied to the mirror. Pig.

the mirror with a s

3 shows the wave aberration contours of the mirror after selection of the opti-

aal comparison sphere. The printer also produced a cross section of the sur-
int spread Motion. the frequency

face deviation iron the ideal over 55°. the po
point spread mnction and the

frequencyocontrast curve and a contour map of the
frequency-contrast curve. Fig. 1. shows a graph of the frequency-contrast curve

and the energy concentration curves. The broken lines are for the ideal system.
1:4

FOR OFFIClM. CSE 031.?
.SE ONLY
The calculations were made for A I 0 63 microns and a central screening value
of 0.5.
This automated method for Intel-fer
and is new
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

   

—-L—u-—L—J
a .: :9 2: a: gar

Fig. 2. The lnteri‘erosraa Fig. 1:. a: Energy distribution in

scattering spot.

Central screening 0.5 (r I ﬁle is the
radius of the diffraction scattering
spot; u is the rear aperture).

1:: Frequency-contrast characteristic
T0
BIBLIOGRAPHY

D Hudson. Statistics for Physicists. Mir, 1970.

H. Born; and 3. Volt. Mdanentals of Optics. Nauka, 1970.
R. V. liming. Numerical Methods. Ram. 1972.
0. Goodman. Introduction to Fourier Optics. Mir, 1970.

J. H. Cooley; and J. u. Mey. "An Algorittus for the Machine Calculation
of Couple: Pourisr Series." HATE. COMP” 19 (April. 1965).

Porsytgg. Koler. Ruericsl Methods for Solving Systems of Linear Equations.
Mir. 1 9.

46
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

8. nukhvnlov. Chiolennyye metody [Numerical methods]. Nnuko. 1975.
Received 16 January 1978.

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhnnicheokaya Promyahlennoae'. 1978

8h80
080: 811116/0569

‘7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC- 535.8l:778.h

COMPUTER PROCESSING OF INTERFBROGRAMS AND DETERMINATION OF THE POINT SPREAD
FUNCTION AND OPTICAL TRANSFER FUNCTION IN TESTING AND FINISHING OF OPTICAL

SYSTEMS

Leningggd OPTIKO-MEKHANICHESKAYA Paonvsanuuosr' in Russian No 9. 1978
99 5~

[Article by M. A. Gun. S. I. Ustinov, V. P. Kotov, P. A. Sergeyev and I. N.
Tsvikevich]

[Text] A method for constructing a complete contour map of
wavefront deformations and calculating optical transfer
functions (OPP) from the results of interferogram proces-
sing is discussed. The method is based on approximation of
wave aberrations by polynomials which are orthogonal over a
discrete set of points and utilization of the fast Fourier
transform. It is demonstrated that calculation of optical
transfer functions for actual vavc aberrations is in good
agreement with results from recording of two—dimensional
optical transfer functions by the holographic method.

The high requirements for image quality of modern optical systems for various
purposes such as large-size astronomical and photographic systems [1], ob—
Jectives for microelectronics, optical systems for coherent computer devices
[2] and so on require not only design of practically aberration-free systems
but also accurate testing, assembly and adjustment of optical products.

Accordingly it is a pressing problem to determine the level of acceptable re-
sidual aberration and to compensate manufacturing defects in optical parts
on the basis of results of wavefront defonmation testing. Since the accept-
able level of aberration is determined by the diffraction structure of the

image. it is necessary to calculate the point spread function (PS? [PRT])-—
the image of a star-and the optical transfer function (OT? [OPF]) for the
real vave aberration of a system during its finishing and testing.

Quantitative analysis of the effect of manufacturing defects is apparently
carried on by the leading foreign companies [l3~15]. which in combination
with an automated retouching process enables them to significantly speed up
the finishing of complex optical systems.

48

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Real wave aberrations are usually not symetrical. which makes the task of
presentation of the calculation results required for decisions regarding
correction of the optical system significantly harder. In addition to cal-
culation of such generalized criteria as the standard deviation of the wave-
front and the Strehl number [3], methods for the presentation of two-dimen-
sional point spread functions and optical transfer functions using computer-
controlled alphanumeric printers and graph plotters are necessary.

The remarkable properties of the Twyman interferometer [h] as a device for

testing optical systems were noted as early as the 30's by many investigators
[5. 6]. but extensive application of this method was hindered by the lack of
a source of light with a large coherent length. In addition. the processing

of interferograms by graphic or graph-analytic methods required long periods
of time.

The development during the last decade of effective methods for computing
Fourier transforms and the use of computers has apeeded up the processing and
interpretation of interferograms. The use of the laser as a light source
made it possible to develop a compact and rather universal unequal-path inter-
ferometer [7], which is apparently the most widespread and convenient method
for testing wavefront detonation in both the assembly and the final testing
of optical systems.

holographic optical components (608) are used in image formation systems and

in optical information processing devices. The interferometric method is suit-
able for testing these components, since the recording device is easy to
change over for testing of the wavefront to be reconstructed by these com-
ponents.

Illumination extrema appear on the interferogram as a line of constant phase
difference between the reference wavefront and a wavefront which has passed
through the optical system ( if the tests are carried out with an autocollimated
device it is necessary to allow for the Q factor for passage of the light
through the optical system under test.

After the coordinates of the interference fringes have been measured and the
corresponding numbers assigned, we obtain the values “R for the discrepancy
between the wavefront being studied and the reference wavefront over: a system
of points (x. Y) ; 1-1, as J Il. p1} . where i is the number of the inter-
ference fr nge. xgcordingly the wavefront discrepancy w can be written as
"30:, y)1 ahi/Q. where A is the wavelength of the ligh used to make the
interfere ram. According to the superposition theorem [3],

'Vn- "+ '32- m
where w is the wave aberration relative to the nearest reference sphere and
(for small aberrations) . . .
W330". n-D(X’+M+L,:+Lw+c- (3)

where D, 1.x, 1., and c are parameters characterizing the transition
from the reference sphere for which the interferogram was obtained to the
nearest sphere for the wavefront being studied.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAI. US}: ONLY

In general the system of points ((X, H”) is irregularly distributed over
the surface of the interferogram and the selection of the reference sphere is
not the best possible for assuring minimum deviation from the wavefront being
tested; moreover, inclination m- defocusing oi‘ the reference front makes it
easy to number the fringes, so that additional processing of the

fringe coordinates is necessary to obtain thr distribution of the wave
aberrations w. This processing comprises two stages: determining the
optimal parameters of the reference sphere, and interpolation of the wave
aberrations w for a nonuniform [nttcm {(X. “1 }. The latter is necessary
both for presentation of the wave aberrations in the form of contour maps and
for the computation of the point spread mnction and the optical transfer
function.

Both stages of the processing of the interferogram can be carried out by ap-
proximating the function "a by a system of mnctions “mm" 1m Wm I new“).
while the coefficients and“ can be obtained by the classical least-squares
method [1]. This requires the setting up of a system of normal equations. He
carry out a sequential numeration of the points (X. Y)”. (X. ”k' 101, Ii.
where Iii pp ... +pn.and of the quantities "hi '"Rk' as well as a sequential
numbering gt the coefficients 3mm": and of he functions Vn .- w, , where

" ((mon) + 3m+n}/2. Then the system of normal equations takes the form
I.

gunned-[wt]. o-o.....z.
where L-M(M+ 3)/2; M is the maximum degree of the two-dimensional polynomial
9‘; and [l are Gaussian brackets indicating sensation over it from 1 to N.

The coefficients of the system of normal equations depend on M. and accordingly
to increase the degree of the polynomial from M to M1 it is necessary to set
up and solve a new system of I. equations for a new value of ii: in order to
avoid this difficulty we carry out an expansion of the function "3 to be ap-
proximated. in terms of functions 0; which are orthogonal over the discrete set

of points “X. HR} and normalized. ige.

The system of functions 0: can be obtained by orthogonalizing the system of
independent function ‘4'. by the Gram-Schmidt method (functions which are
linearly dependent over the system of points ((X, 1):} must be excluded).

Suppose that 1- l coefficients at?” of the expansion of "R by the system of
functions ‘P; have been calculated; then the non-normalized orthogonal mne-
tion F} corresponding to ‘P, is determined by the following formula:

‘0'
71-; 9”,; + he (3)

a
-- ..

"u " " "MP

where

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In addition we calculate the non-normalized coefficients ‘3“ x
i,-|. can (-1,

.. "" (i)
MPEM'M can o<I<I.

next we normalize

9 -? m3? um.
I I I l (5)

1...-7..Niil)”-

Nov it is simple to compute the coefficient F. in the ex sion of HR corres-
ponding to if. and the changes in the coefficients “1 0‘ i ‘8 )

t-Imr 1°»

and ﬂung?”
- (7)
.3"-.['-"+a,1u(o<1any]

The condition for termination of the calculation is either attainment of the
required accuracy (evaluated by standard deviation or the absolute value of
the maximum deviation at each point) or attainment of the specified degree of
the polynomial.

In addition. statistical analysis and evaluation of the significance of the
difference from zero of the coefficients ,5; is carried out according to the
Fisher test [9]. The initial conditions are given for f IO by the following

relationshi s: ..
P “-7. - L

Calculating the first coefficients ans 5 makes it possible to determine the
optimal (in terns of standard deviation) values of the parameters “83‘

(IDs-0.; '

lx-s‘ -s .xtr—s’na..; I
nut-wem-(asnnn

In addition the effective value of the astigsatism A and its orientation

are calculated:

homer-"ruin”
0 - 05 mt: (‘uK‘a- a.»

If the above-mentioned conditions for termination of the calculation are not
fulfilled. the degree of the approximation polynomial is increased by l and
the calculation proceeds according to formulas (3)-(7)- The coefficients an.
found in this vay are revised in accordance with expression (1) and ultimately
_ the coefficients of "n m for the expansion of the real vave aberration in a
Taylor series for the plane of best placement are obtained. The vave aberra-
tion can be simply calculated for any point in the pupil using the coeffici-
ents of H“...

51
FOR OFFICIAL L'SE ONLY
.. - ; - a n. :I- 1:1. ‘-.'- I-uu I :i.‘.‘ Liv: Hi'l‘FHF
'I; 5 . . z - . \i i '-u' ' . -: nun-11' :n'. 'I'i")]-!€.i ill I‘ll?! I.)
required; for this purpose ve have provided for a supplementary call of
INTHIL. which searches for the optimal. a hero for comparison and interpola-
tiOn by a locally linear method. We have also provided for linear and non-
linear correction of distorted interferogram scale.

Processing of the interferogram provides information on the phase composition
of the pupil function P(Xp. Yp) in some cases (mg. in optical systems oper-
ating with Gaussian laser beams and holographic optical elements). This in-
formation should be supplemented by the amplitude component of the pupil mne-
tion [\(Xp. Y9). when the overall function will have the fans

mx, Y,)—A(,\',. 7,)upmmx,. 7,».

where (:3. Yp) are normalized coordinates [10]. The pupil Motion is related
to the int spread mnction and the optical transfer function by the vell-

knoun relationships [3) crux. r)..c.|r(p(x,. mm. (s)
one-(1x. ~,)-c.r(epr(x. m (s)

where i“ is the two-dimensional Fourier transform operator. X and Y are the
normalized coordinates in the image plane [ll],vx ande are the normalized '
spatial frequencies in image space [11]. and c1 and Ca are constant multipli-
era.

The calculation of the point spread function and the optical transfer function
by (3) and (9) is carried out by the OTFDF subroutine using a fast Fourier
transform (BPP). The use of the fast Fourier transform makes it possible to
calculate the point spread function and the optical transfer function directly

using the discrete Fourier trnasform, but satisfactory accuracy required stor-
age and processing of large quantities of intonation which are not stored in
the working memory of the computer. Accordingly we used magnetic drums to
store the calculation results and certain intermediate data. but the inter-
change with the drum was organized in large blocks of intonation using the
BAROBMEH subroutine system [ll]. The Mundh method vas used for transposi-
tion of matrices, required in the performance of the two-dimensional Fourier
transform [12). The above enabled us to make full use of the advantages of
the fast Fourier transform. The current variant of the program for the “Sh-6
computer can calculate point spread function and optical transfer func-
tion matrices with sizes from 631x 610 to 256: 256 elements.

As an example we consider the processing of an interferogram of an astronom-
ical objective with a pupil diameter of 500 an obtained on an unequal-path
laser interferometer for a point on the axis with A I632 nm.

Fig. 1 shows the distribution of wave aberrations vith respect to the plane
of best placement and Pig. 2 gives the results of calculation of the point
spread function. here the mean square value for wave aberration was 0.1,:
and the boundary values -0.65A and «L381 , the effective astigsatism
a-o.26 A and the Strehl number 0.5.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN HFPICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 1. Havefront Contours (Distribution of Wave Aberration).
xp and Y are normalized coordinates on the screen. The contour interval
correspogde to a wavefront difference of 0.125 X .

 

Fig. 2. The Point Spread Function (Norlalized to the Strehl Number).

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlﬁlAL USE ONLY

The rcnults of calculation of the two-dinennional optical transfer function
from the interferogram were compared with results from recording the modulus
of the two-dimensional optical trannrer function holographicslly obtained by
P. A. Sergeyev and I. N. Tsvikevich. Thin method is based on holographic
recording of the overall amplitude diotribution in the image of a point and
is analogous to the implementation of the digital method of computing the
optical tranufer function. The resultn of calculation of the modulus of the
two-dimensional optical transfer function for an obJective are shown in

Pig. 3. Fig. h presents a graph or the moduli of the optical trsnofer func-
tion in the best and worst crona sections. As can be oeen from the figures,
the calculated and measured valuea agree uith an accuracy of 3 0.03. which

does not exceed the error of experimental determination of the modulus of
the optical transfer function.

It should be noted in conclution that contour maps of vave aberrations can
be uned to detenmine the areas and amounts of retouching; in addition, it is
possible to determine the effectiveness of retouching by computer modeling.

 

Fig. 3. The Modulus of the Optical Transfer Function.

54

FOR OFFICIAL U55 ONLY
E‘OR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

 

all R19 457 an (0’ v

 

”1010 001030000”

Pig. h. Comparison of the results of calculation of the optical transfer
function for real wave aberrations (Fig. l) with data obtained by the holo-
graphic method: a is the modulus of the GT? in the best section. b is the
nodulus in the worst section. c is the modulus for a corresponding optical
system without aberration. Broken lines represent calculated values. circles
represent experimentally measured values.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. D. 8. Volosov. Fotograticheskaya optika [Photographic Optics]. Moscow.
Iskusstvo. 1911.

2. K. Preston. Coherent Optical Computers. noecow, Mir, 197'!-
3. M. Born; and 3. Volt. Fundamentals of Optics. Moscow, Nauka, 1970.
h. F. Twyman. PRIL. MAO.. Vol 35. No 1 (1918). P I'9- A

5. 6. Ivan. Metody kontrolya opticheskikh poverkhnostey [Methods of Tbsting
Optical Surfaces]. Moscow, Leningrad. Oborongiz. 1939.

6. L. P. Moroz. 0MP [Optiko-Mekhanicheskaya Preqyshlennost']. No 11. 1936,
pp 17-18; No 12. 1936. p 135-16; No 1, 1937. PP 11-18.

1. V. A. Savin; and L. c. Fedina. novaya tekhnika v astrononii [New Equip-
ment in Astronomy). No 3. Leningrad, nauha. 1970. pp 207-212.

8. I. M. Gel'rand. Lektsii po lineynoy algebre [Lectures on Linear Algebra],
macaw, Nauka. 1966.
55

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR DPP'CIAL USE ONLY

9. 0. Hudson. Statiscice for Physicists. Moscow. Mir. 1970.

10. u. n. Hopkins. JAPAN JOURNAL OF APPL. PHYSICS. Vol. u. no 1 (1965).
pp 31-35.

11. V. I. Skripnichenko. Alsoritui nebesnoy ackhoniki [Algorithms of
Celestial Mechanics]. Leningrad. 197k.

12. a. o. Eklundh. "1888". Vol 21. No 1 (1972). pp 801-803.
13. a. Beragren. oprrcsn SPECTRA. Vol 12 (1970). pp 22-25.

lh. M. P. Riuner; c. “1 King; and D. a. Fox. APPL. 0PT.. Vbl 11. no. 12
(1972). PP 2790-2796.

15. J. J. Bruhing at 31. APPL. 0PT.. Vol. 13, No 1 (191b), pp 2693-2703.
Received 10 June 1971.
COPYRIORT: Opciko-Hekhsnichesksys Pronvshlennost', 1978.

6h80
C80: Blhh/Ohé9

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

006 666.11.011535-323
CATAIDO OP OPTICAL GLASSES OF THE 088R MD ODR

#11313qu OPPIKO-MBIOIANICHEKAYA PROMXSHLBIINOST' in Russian No 9. 1978

[Article by Corresponding Member of the 088R Academy of sciences 0. '1‘.
Petrovskiy, I. M. Bushinskiy and Candidate of Sciences V. 3!. Poluhhin]

[Text] The efforts to develop a Joint tress-ans catalog of
optical glasses are briefly characterised. their structure
and content and the product range described, and the in.
portance of the issuance of the catalog for current and
future development of socialist integration in the optical
glass field evaluated.

In keeping with the plan for scientific and technical cooperation between the
USSR and the con in the area of optical glass making. in 1976 a catalog of
optical glasses of the USSR and ODR was compiled and issued. The compilation
of the Joint catalog by the two largest producers of optical glass. each of
which has its own long individual developmental history and traditions. is
the first such experience in worldwide practice.

Colpilation of the catalog required the solution during 1973-1916 of a complex
of organisational, scientific and technical problem. _

with the participation of a large number of specialists, the USSR-Bast German
working groups solved the key problems. without a resolution of which it
would have been impossible to compile a Joint catalog of optical glasses. A
unified system of norms for the main optical glass parueters was worked out
and unified norm and reference values to be included in the catalog were es-
tablished. Unified methods for testing the numerous glass parameters were
found. We should note that at this stage the testing methods and apparatus
could not be coapletely unified, but it was reliably demonstrated that in
spite of the existence of differences they gave identical results in measure-
ment of glass parameters. Unified quality requirements for optical glasses
were determined and unified evaluation criteria adopted. The catalog listing.
consisting of 238 glasses (an equal number for each of the two participants)
was developed. The determination of the list was a complex problem, since it

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was connected with established production of optical instruments on both
sides and accordingly alterations in it could not always be made quickly
where desired. Accordingly it was necessary to include in the catalog a
large number of "duplicate" glasses; this is why the catalog is called
"Joint" and not "unified.” Complete unification of the list is a future
task. which will be intricate and prolonged.

The list of optical glasses was approved during compilation of the catalog:
as new varieties of glass with extreme optical constants were incorporated.
offering new possibilities for instrument making. and little-used and non-
recommended glasses were eliminated. The glasses on the list are at the

same level as those of the leading foreign companies. and in some cases sur-
pass it. This catalog initiates the inclusion of not only optical glasses
but also quartz glass, glass for fiber optics. and glass for bifocal eye-
glasses with an invisible dividing line. Unified forms of supply were estab-
lished and regulations for designation and coding of glasses coordinated.

In order to carry out these measures, the specialists on both sides conducted
an immense amount of supplementary investigation of glass quality. testing of
procedures. review. revision. updating and expansion of information on the
physical and chemical properties of glasses. and also developed new procedures
for investigating quality and rating properties.

During compilation of the catalog. the quality of optical glass was improved
in s nunber of respects, including such important ones as light absorptivity
and bubble content. A'special section was devoted to specially pure glasses
with light absorption coefficients of 0.1-0.3 percent per centimeter. Glass
products with smaller tolerances and improved quality indices were included.

The Joint catalog of USSR and con optical glasses is the most complete single
modern reference work on optical glass. The extremely detailed text. includ-
ind a description of the catalog. appendices and also lists of the properties
of each type of glass. gives the designer exhaustive information about the
glass, its quality and the available forms. significantly simplifying the
correct selection of glass and expanding the range of its applications.

The catalog gives for the first time refractive indices for all laser frequen-
cies, provides a dispersion formula for calculating refractive indices for
other wavelengths. and presents diagrams for the selection of pairs of glasses
with minimal secondary spectral values in four wavelength regions:

lI-i’if'n. is—PU’n Iran-cu. Inn—‘4

along with complete data on the light transmissivity of domestic glasses
(ordinary and high-transmissivity) for the entire spectrum.

The catalog gives 153 characteristics for each glass (the Alannion State
Standard 008? 13859—68 gives as).

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Table 1.

U8IIR Gleason Cvma CIZCI'

M Mama 1 Roman

 

I .’IK| LK 00I mam 68.8! III 1m: 3? 239 I.0I4I3 40.01
a mm 00) 1.44749 10.04 82 0024 m muss 30.11
a mu ooI 1.4001 03.0! m 5023 24.1 I.6071J 48.I I
4 mm 001 L410" 60.03 N 6020 m5 INS 38.41
5 JIK7 009 M8287 00.30 05 6027 240 mom 43,97
0 JIK8 (III “7000 60730 66 0028 240 IMIN 35.04
7 QKIIFK cm I I997 69." 07 5032 2I9 I579" 88.69
a can on W887 67.60 08 1604 war 27I I.17m 38.08
9 M04 0'» I510” 65.00 09 T603 210 M8500 4I.I8
I0' 70mm 0I0 LWI 05.22 70 11508 274 IN! 3.04
II KIM M0 I592!“ 50.01 7| 1809 275 IMIT 42.77
I2 742 080 I000" 30,02 72 18025 ‘ 270 was 31.45
I3 K3 084 mm 80.36 73 1’60» 271 I.0I40I 30,42
I4 KB 080 mm 64.01 74 1'60" 218 1.01011 43,03
I8 RN 080 I5II78 00.03 75 1005 LI‘ 298 I 7 «3|
I8 K I5 00I I535? 55.47 70 007 298 I578I2 4I.I I
I7 KI8 051 mm 60.38 71 new 209 588782 42,0I
I8 KI9 084 I.8I878 0|.69 78 Mg 300 L800“! 33.0I
I0 K20 060 1.82m 00.“ 19 mm 30I I.5I8II 45.01
20 5K4 BK on: 7.83079 07.47 no IIQII .1»: I560!" 48.70
27 ENG IN I539” 59.67 8I .1002 (IN IWI «.07
'12 BK!) 085 1.34678 62.10 82 «w p m was 30.98
23 BKIO 080 L668“ 83 02 an I.6I0$ 36m
24 6103' 093 1.8500 8I I5 84 04 370 Imus 05.01
)5 7K2 I01 M7249 57,“ B '98 822 mow 37.97
a: 7x4 I09 mm" a 08 09 301 mm 34.58
27 TK8 III I.6I4Io 6M3 87 ¢I3 329 1.0m 80435
28 "(9 II: I.6I720 5!.“ 88 M8 as! mm 35.20
29 TKI2 us I.50888 €0.03 39 '70! 7F JII 1.6476: 31.87
30 TR I3 I I1 Law 60.8! m 1'02 344 1.01260 32.23
m mu m 1.61309 00.50 9| 1'03 348 mm 29.5:
3: ”(In I2! 7.61m 33m 92 1’04 347 1.1m 2m
:13 TKI7 I24 Imam 59,35 90 705 w - 576523 27.53
34 mo I28 I.622I0 7| 94 1'01 am 51282: 2004
.1“. "gal I27 1.65m am: 95 1'08 353 L689» am:
38 74428 I29 I.589III mm 98 T¢l0 353 km

31 CTR-1 81‘ I66 I.65900 57.15 97 Ton .387 mum 3|.59
30 cuts“ 168 mum $859 98 Ton 358 was" 25.61
89 CTK8 lee L70": £9.09 19 TOIa 089 M8466 26.33
40 cm 170 1.7425; 50.74 I00 (:10: ST? 366 mm 20.42
4| CTKIII I72 I.7379I 48.! I IN cm: 37 2.I70I8 17.00
02 C'I‘KI2 I74 I.6920I 55.0I I02 CNN 38 2.06624 I603
43 (:‘I’Iils I78 I.70J3I 54.71 I00 o¢I OF 308 1.82040 sun
44 c7KI6 I77 M8808 45.62 I04 003 :09 1.81242 44.00
45 CI’KI9 I78 I.744I:I 50.42 IN 001 390 IMO 40.46
48 C‘I’K'JU Ian I,76482 50.25 I08 005 am - 1.66m! 4|.78
I7 OKI I9I L522." 78.35 I07 008 392 mm 5|.04
III 0K2 100 1.9027 73.08 I08 IIIII KO 1.50 1.45446 61M
49 KM 10‘ 202 I.5I8III 58.93 IQ KY2 75! I358“ 87.18%
:0 K06 208 Im 57.2! no KB 752 I.“ 67.“
8| K07 m1 I§I789 5|.l5 III RH 78:! 1.45348 67.”
52 5M B? 211 4.52419 54.06 II2 K3.» -R 1.54 1.45848 81.84
83 504 2I9 1454809 53.” In 65K3 774 IMIO 57.8
54 I306 22I 1.50970 49.45 III SOKI 770 Mm 7
as rm m ”7960 $9.97 us 6002 p m I520 36.7
m I»: 228 1.5321: 46.41 ms was: 083 1.8820 52.51
51 SOII 227 I524“ so." II7 86508 858 I585?) “.20
58 BIPI'I 219 Im 39.") I I8 BCSI3, “2 l.5|:II I 64.54
30 MI: ”I mm 4821 II9 m m Isms 05.5I
no now 270 mm 41.29 m JIK5 LK 008 I.~I78I7 65w

 

Key: 1. Variety 2. Code number

59
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'II‘II (Hi-J! '."7 (“CM-H |'II'

WM" "IF-.4- .- ——..-. --—-—-—-Mnn~

 

 

 

 

.\‘: MI III 'I. Koaomh" I I) In “a ‘ I '\0 IINI"

IIIII “(cl-I nouns | 77,; ‘1 II I I ‘ "l...“ I "3...", "J I ”II
I I h) Ina III-m I.-.I--' r-I .m-‘J .Im 1.35mi I 5)
II F K6 um I .43; III 0-9,!!! «I III SI‘I. .157 Lax-m 4%!»
3 I'SKI on I,.- IIII I ..:. I I'-.' II -I I 3:.3 LOW-‘1 43m
-I PSKJ II II I..'-5‘) I . I- I. I'_' In "II-‘3 .159 I 7.0729 .93]
.s I’SK'I 0‘5 1M3" “LL - m ml 1 .Im I'eoeIII I630
.5 mm 0.58 I. I9 I-‘l- N- a; I.5 II.|-' 3.52 IONS“) III.”
7 mm 05') I. mm m. I4 M “an! .Im I um I700
3 IIKI uqu I.‘.Ifn76 73'. y) (' mm my. I mm 47 '50
II "III 0076 I. am 6': I? as IIaI’Io an I 'onm II. II

III III" 068 LSIW 6|. H 59 Km 39 I 551 Is 49.60
II IIII IOI IMIIIJ 6|.50 70 KII’S.‘ :ISI $573! $1.64
I? I.Iu 102 ~ MOI-10 56.46 7I KIFSI mus I «306 I3.”
Ia KI IN I 978.76 II. a: 72 ms am I 'szIII mo
N m I07 Mb .331) 7.1 mm :m was” 6|. I2
I5 KIJ IUJ Iii-21.40 {I I." N I..II’ «II I .697l'2 66.97
I6 KM I'o I.) a2cl‘l $.61 75 LIV 402 I .73I II I632
I7 KII Ila I.6'.'I.I 58.5.} 76 LI!“ 409 I .770I3 40.76
Ia 2K7 m Lyn“ em: 77 usv IzI Lam 30.09
III III? l27 mm 60. I3 76 I ASP -I2I ”53986 28.37
90 ZRI I26 I531“. as. 0| 79 [W 457 [57502 “.33
2| 2K5 I'J‘J I'JII'J $.13 60 ”‘3 460 L662“ 42.03
22 SILK? H2 IMHO 6|.M III F: ~I7I I. 59550 39.?)
23 ISIK? I53 lbl'm 59.63 8': FIG 475 I. 599 H 36.40
24 oaks 156 mm 55.57 :u H. 477 mom {was
2‘, In!“ I53 IMIIIII 50.00 N Is In Lem: 36.98
26 ml“ 19) I. .0248 57. 4.5 85 H ‘80 IMO.” 36.6I
27 IIIII'III II?) ”:65” 50:03 Oh F? 4:" mm 35435
2.4 SKI! I7I IMIII'» no.7:I II7 PI I In Low» .53»
29 SK!) I13 I 339'? 61.20 6., P1 . 485 IMSJG

30 SKIS I7! L60"? 53.2.1 89 IIaSFJ sII I.607l7 40.26
3| SKII I76 LIAN! 60.96 IIII II am 503 IMII'IS 39.03
3.: SK: I77 man so." In MP4 . 50! mm an
31 SKI III Wow 59.63 92 mm 505 meow «.54
3I 5K6 m I.6I376 56m 93 IhSI-‘z £05 [.66I46 III
35 5K9 IM [bl-I06 53." 97 IIaSI-‘II 507 IM755 “.98
an SSKII I65 I .6I766 55A! 95 835” 3m ”(“55 «JG
37 SKI6 I66 I 26.“? 60.26 W "3393 509 1.723 In as.”
36 SKI6 I87 I .62290 55.0 97 SP7 6?" 1.63978 3m)
39 SK“) I60 I .67260 56.67 9‘ SF: 522 1.6069 3.1.67
40 SKIB I69 L635) 55:5 99 9 526 l.66.'.0I 3.1.19
II SW“ 20.; I .661?) 56.“ Im II) .523 ”66x" 33.")
I! 5K2? 204 I.67II07 55.00 II)! 5 $26 ”.7270 32.24
63 SSKIO 206 1.603“ 63.56 III! II 527 ”6693 :II.I5
II SSKII 219 L751!» 63." I03 I5 am Im 30.06
I!» SSKI 26'} I. 6I7I') “.05 IN I 579 \ I.7I736 29,50
46 SSK7 265 I .oIoIs 50.35 I06 Io SIII l.7-2Im mas
-I7 SSK2 266 I. «ma SLI-I I06 3 5“ L739” III
48 SSK5 '167 I656“ 50.86 I07 I3 532 I.74076 27.7I
4') l. LFII 2M woo: 45.I5 I08 4 5.1.3 I,7.‘.5'.'0 27,31
50 KI‘J am I SI-L‘rI 5|.66 Iw S?“ {m I.16IIII 26.51
5| Kl'a 301 |:5II16 8x96 . III) SP" 516 ”847.! 23.73
52 was (III) I M740 SL6! III SF6 536 Iﬂblﬁ 25.46
S! BJLFI an IJSNS 60.69 II2 SFSI 5.17 mm 20.96
M IIaLI'J 322 I§7IM 63.“) III! I an 1.45651 67.14)
55 MI.“ 3‘." 1.57967 smo II I 2 67': MS“! 67.50
:15 new :27 1.5m 5m: II: 03 87:} new I57. I»
57 LII-'6 :m ISII7I 48.90 ms 87.)! 373 I353 I6 67M
6: LU") 339 MOON 47.25 II7 n I 933 ”33867 84. 74
50 LLI’7 {III UAW) -I5.-|l Ila KLI’ 362 I629 I-I SI .73

M
Key: 1. Variety 2. Code number '
60

FOR 0F;~‘II‘.I.-\I. 3'53. .WLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

The text of the catalog includes the following sections. which Rive scientific
descriptions of the determining properties of glasses: optical constants,
transmissivity and scattering, chemical stability. temperature characteristics.
mechanical properties. electrical and magnetic properties. quality indicators,
forms cf availability. test logs, lists of data on properties (an individual
list for each variety). diagrams of glass types and the characteristic dis-
persion curve for the spectrum.

The appendices give tables of reflectivities as a function of refractive index.
nomograms for determining the internal transmissivity and the overall trans-
missivity from the light absorption coefficient; tables of coefficients for
converting the measurement units used in the catalog into the international
system of units. and geometric dimensions and tolerances for various available
shapes (Appendices 81 and D1); changes in the list of glasses of codes 3 and
D (Appendices 82 and D2); optical quartz glass (Appendices 83 and D3); opti-
cal glass for fiber optics (Appendices 8k and Dh); optical glass for eye-
glasses (Appendices SS and D5); and high-transmissivity optical glass (Appen-
dices 86 and D6).

The catalog is compiled in two languages and printed in two identical Variants:
variant 5. in vhich the description begins with the Russian text. and variant
D. in which it begins with the German text. The designations of the catalog
are: complete catalog: version 3. 061; version D. ODl. A list of the
glasses included in the Joint catalog is given in Tables 1 and 2.

In the opinion of specialists on both sides, the catalog is a document of
great importance for the further development of optical glass and optical
glass making and an example of successful implementation in practice of so-
cialist integration.

Even during the preparatory stages, optical and mechanical experts on both
sides made successful use of new optical glasses included in the Joint cata-
log in the development of new optical systems.

The introduction of this catalog will make it possible to improve the quality
of optical-mechanical instruments as the designers use higher-quality glasses,
and vill lead to greater specialization and extent of socialist integration,
and as a result higher output and greater quality of optical glass.

Interested organizations may obtain the Joint catalog of USSR and GDR optical
glasses from the House of Optics in Moscow.

Received 10 March 1978.

COPYRIGRT: Optiko-Mehhanicheskaya Promyshlennosy', 1978

once
cso: Gibb/0569

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL U315 ONLY

UDC 666.1z621.375.9:535
MECHANICAL STRENGTH AND THERMAL STABILITY OF NEDDYMlUM GLASSES

Leningrad OPTIKO-MEKHANICRESKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 9. 1978
pp 39-h2

(Article by V. H. Mit'kin, Candidate of Sciences 0. S. Shchavelev and V. B.
Zheltov]

[Text] The results of a study of maximum stresses of the
lateral surfaces of active elements and comparison of these
data with thermal stabilities are presented. It is shown
that the mechanical strength of phosphate glass specimens
is within the 150-300 kg/cma range and that for silicate
glasses in the 300-600 kg/cm2 range. The thermal stability
of optical glasses of various chemical compositions is
studied. A method for evaluating the thermal stability of
glasses from their composition and coefficient of thermal
expansion is presented.

Neodymium glass, which is used in laser engineering for the manufacture of
active elements, has been an obJect of study for some time. Investigations
which were limited to questions or spectroscopy, thermal optics and manufact-
uring processes have resulted in the development of extremely promising
glasses [1, 2]. Further possibilities for the use of neodymium glasses in
laser engineering depend to a significant degree on the problem or their me-
chanical strength and thermal stability [3]. However, the literature con-
tains insufficient infonmation about these properties.

We shall discuss the results or studies of thenmal stability and maximum
stress on the lateral surface of cylindrical active elements and data on the
dependence of the thermal stability of optical glass on its chemical composi-
tion.

In contrast to the classical methods of breaking of samples (tensile testing.
bending, impact and so on) we created mechanical stresses in the active ele-
ments while they were in the laser head by optical pulping (internal heating)
and intense cooling of the lateral surfaces with liquid (see e.g. {bl}. This
produces a quasi-stationary parabolic temperature distribution across the
active element as the pumping pulses are periodically applied, resulting in
stresses with a similar radial distribution in the material [5]. The maximum

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stresses occur at the center (compression) and on the lateral surface (exten-
sion). Tensile stresses on the lateral surface result in breaking when the
maximum value is exceeded. in the method employed by us. the stress on the
surface of the sample is uniquely determined by the frequency of the pump
pulses and is monitored through a conoscopic pattern observable when the
sample. located between crossed polarizers. is illuminated. For calculating
the stress on the lateral surface of the cylindrical sample we used a formula
with rather wide approval in quenching technology [6. 7]:

o...-2~'1'-z-: (n

where n is the number of rings in the conoscopic pattern; A. in the wavelength
of the illumination source; 1 is the length of the sample: and B is the
optical load coefficient.

It is well known that the strength and durability of any glass sample depend
on the condition of its lateral surface and depend in practice on the presence
or absence of microcracks. A temperature fluctuation mechanism correctly ex-
plains breaking [8]. The actual strength of a glass sample is considerably
lower than the theoretical strength determined from the strength of the

glass structure [8], i.e. glass breaks before the yield point is reached as

a result of defects in the lateral surface [8]. This circumstance and the
fact that the radial stress distribution in quenched samples and the samples
described above are identical (this is shown experimentally in reference [h]
by mutual compensation of stress) enabled the authors to use formula (1) to
calculate the stress 6-” resulting in breaking of the sample. For this pur-
pose we determined the number of rings “r“: in the conoscopic pattern before
breaking of the sample and substituted the value into formula (1). The values
for the breaking strengths thus obtained for active elements with a diameter
of 10 mm and a length of 130 mm with an etched lateral surface are presented
in Table l. The error in the values for c.“‘ which were found results pri-
marily from error in measurement of the number of rings n.u, , which amounts
to about 2 0.5 and 2 1 respectively for a small (approximately 5) and large

( 1 10) number of rings.

Table l.
For systematic study of the ihvnm‘i :r':-|-ii;:y u:’ .1”qu as u function of
their commsitloa we unm: etched :i'u'ii-h'. -4".!- dimensions hf 9.5x9.'3x 61 mm

with a l-mm bevel on the edges. mahlc'a': n-- : :‘uum '1) llnlUstl‘ial and experi-
mental optlcal Mill nun-iylhlum alarm-x whi-‘l. :E'l'erml i‘v'nne-uan-‘rclal glans.
whunv thermal ntahillty in rather 'u‘ii shun-"i (her "4:. [(‘H by a high volume
homogeneity of phyniea. anal r'hm-Ihru‘. prawn-U --.s and an: extremely broad range
of chemical compositions tuned nu .lne'i‘r-senl mane—formers (emu phosphate.

silicate and so on). The uamnlea were c‘..' fr'..:. highly homogeneous bubble-
free pieces of glass. I. tor po;.::hinn with iii}? powder for silicate and M5
powder for phosphate glasses. the LEUII'i‘PS were etched to decrease the number
and the amount of danger from defecu am: to distribute them evenly over the
entire surface. The above was aim-.1 at dowenzaing the difference in homo-
geneity of properties between samples of a single variety of glass, which plays
a significant part in the dispersion of experimental thermal stability values
(for example. the great dispersion 01‘ t ermal stability of samples of non-
homogeneoun technical glasses). The initial measurements taken on a large
number of samples of the glasses RGSiilozl and $431 (38 and 33 samples respect-
ively) indicated that as a result of the above measures. the dispersion of
thermal stability value for different samples of the some variety of glass
was extremely small ( no greater than 2-).“ C). making it possible in subsequent
experiments to limit ourselves to 10 specimens of glass of each variety, or
even to five in a few cases (it must be noted that the dispersion of values
for each variety of glass did not exceed the value indicated). The thermal.
stability was determine-i by dropping samples heated in a special mrhace into
water at room temperature. Before dropping into the water. the samples were
held at each temperature for 20 minutes. liear the expected maximum loads. the
furnace temperature was increased by a-ncgree increments between trials uni 11
all samples had broken. In design. our unit differed from the standard unit
used in determining the thermal stability of comercinl glasses [9] only in
the dropping mechanism.

The experimental thermal stability values AT in Fig. l were compared with the
values for the coefficient of thermal expansion 0‘ for the glass in the tem-
perature interval 20-120° c using measurements obtained by the interference
method. Although the nature of the relationship '1'- f(ot) for optical
glasses in general is similar to the relationship given in the literature for
commercial glasses [9]. the presence of glasses from five different chemical
composition groups was clearly observable; for these glasses the relation-
ship can be written using linear equations with different coefficient values

'U o
(hum "‘ nan—TNT. ' (2)

where 61“, is the thermal stability of a hypothetical glass with a: 0-, and
«HUN/da- is the angular coefficient of chat-.93 of thermal stability. The
thermal stability of glass samples is calculated from equation (2) with almost
the same accuracy as the experimental determination.

For glasses in the first group, including horosilicates with a coefficient of
thermal expansion not greater than 50 - 10' deg-1. the thermal stability de-
creases sharply as the coefficient of expansion increases. The glasses in the
other groups also showed decreasedd'l‘ as the coefficient of thermal expansion
increased. but they had a practically identical value for the coefficient
6t
FOR OFFICIAL CSE 051.?
i’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'95
8:.

   

seseessisss

um am an mmmm-UW' «3-1

Fig. 1. Relationship of Thermal Stability of Optical Glasses to Coefficient.
of Thermal Expansion.

Q-Borosilicates; Q alkali silicates; o alumoborate-silicates; ‘f calcium
phosphates; I calcium-strontitm phosphates; 0 barium and lead phosphates;
':. alumofluorophosphates; A polylead silicates.

dCGTVda- . about one-sixth that for borosilicate glasses in the first group.
Accordingly glasses have different thermal stabilities for the same coefficient
of themal expansion. This coefficient is highest for the alkali silicate
group. Among phosphate glasses. those with calcium oxide are the most therm-
ally stable. Barium-phosphate. lead-phosphate and fluorophosphate glasses

are less thermally stable than calcium-phosphate glasses. The lowest thermal
stability is observed for multi-lead silicate glasses. The thermal. stability
levels for glasses in the four latter groups differ by approximately 20° c.

The thermal stability of active elements 130 m long made of a number of indus-
trial ncodymium glasses were determined as a function of their diameters with-
in the range S~lS In. The relationship our to the diameter d which was ob-
tained is shown in Fig. 2, and for samples of 10 us diameter also in Table l.
The figure shows that the thermal stability of samples decreases as their
diameters increase. here in order to obtain a straight line we also included
points corresponding to the thermal stability of samples with square cross
sections which were used for systematic studies, taking the maximum cross-
sectional dimension (the diagonal) as the diameter. The extent of the de-
crease in thermal stability in a rod of silicate glass as the diameter decreases
by a millimeter averages 5.2 degrees. and that for phosphate glasses 2.7
degrees. The divergence of these values within the groups studied did not
exceed 1 deg/In.

The thermal stability values which we obtained for neodymim glasses agree well
with the data of other authors [10]. He used them to calculate the maximum
stress in rods 10 ms in diameter x 130 u by the well-known formula:

4,“ -738:- mus... (a)

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "iii-Z ONLY

Pig. 2. 'i‘hm'uul litubility of Neodymium
Glasses n.‘ a Function of Diameter

E;

 

m
N Phosphate glasses:
:0 1. RES?!”
2. 01.822
)0 3. VAX-$163“
‘0 ' :lillcatc glances:
50 h. KGSSS‘I‘
M 5. 01553-2
16 6. 61.93
7- (“Si
N

o s a as 1: Mn»

where E is Young's modulus; ,4 is the Poisuon coefficient; and his“ is a co-
efficient depending on the intensity of heat withdrawal and the shape of the
specimen [5]. The values of his.I in the mnction for Biot's criterion char-
acterising the intensity of heat removal from the lateral surface of the sam-
ple for rod-shaped samples with circular (curve 2) and rectangular (curve 1)
cross section are shovn in Pig. 3 (data from reference [6], supplemented by
the authors for cylindrical seaples). Under the experimental conditions,
ms, 3 0.65. The results of calculating a i' are shown in Table 1. There
is good agreement with the values of a as» $9 indirectly confirming the
suitability of the method presented above for finding maxi-um stress.

    

310.9904“

Fig. 3

The connection between the tensile stress on the lateral surface of the sample
and its themal stability can be described not only by the formula given above.

but also by a siapler formula obtainable by substituting in (l) the double re-
fraction value “max A 411st 0

c3" — 2 77 AT. (4)

where Q is the themoptical characteristic of the glass as given in [2]. The
calculated values «a, are given in Table 1; an average value Q/BS 3.1 for
the glasses van used in the calculation.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus the investigation establishes that the mechanical strengths of the samples
or neodymium phosphate glass are in the 150-300 kg/cm2 range and those for the
neodymium silicate glass samples in the 350-600 kg/cm2 range. The breaking
stress may be calculated rather accurately from the therml stability at the
sample. It may be found relatiVely easily by experiment or estimated from the
composition or the glass and adJusted for the diameter of the sample.

In conclusion we note that the stresses withstood by the glass samples depended
on the time or heating [ll]. The maximum load values were greater when this
was short. Fig. It shows the change in breaking stress on the lateral surface

of a sample 10 III in diameter by l30 mm long of (“.81 glass as a function of
the heating time t. The value “max determined from the thermal stability

corresponds to small t. The relationships obtained are described by the vell-
knovn formula [11]

Here t is the durability of the sample and A and K are constants of the mater-
ial which depend on the temperature.

Table 2.

 
  

  

manta K0“
llOIGIfOI. MC.

 
 

2 muons. 11,0 1—25 m 4.1

""“"°'°' no ”4s m ~03
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

A”
0 J0
60 MAC.”

Fig. la. Effect of Duration of ﬂoating on Sample Durability

Key :

3:: experimental values

Solid line: curve calculated from formula (5)
Assumed values: A-30.000. Kao.01158

1.

2.

9.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
M. M. Bubnov et a1. KVAM'OVAYA MWNIKA. No It (16). 1973. p 113.

0. S. Shelmvelev et a1. 0MP [OPPIKO-MBICHANICRIKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST'].
No T, 1.976. p 32.

A. A. ﬂak et a1. KVARTOVAYA ELEKTRONIKA. Vol 2, No 1., 1975. P 850.
V. M. Mit'kin. OHP. No 8. 1976, p 26.

B. a. Beloatotskiy; and A. s. Rubanov. Teplovoy rezhim tverdotel'nykh
am [The Thermal Regime or Solid-State Lasers]. Moscow, Energiya, 1973.

G. M. Bartenev. uekhanicheskyye svoystva i teplovaya obrabotka stokla
[Mechanical Properties and Thermal Treat-cut of Glass]. Mouow. Stray-
izdat, 1960.

I. A. Boguslsvakiy. Vysokoprochnyye zakelennyye atekla [High-Strength
Tempered Glasses]. Moscow. Stroyizdat. 1969.

G. M. Bartenev. Sverkhprochnyye i vysokoprochnyye neorganicheskne atekla
[Super-Strength and lush-Strength Inorganic Glasses]. Moscow. Stroydzdat.

197'.
H. Schonborn. J. 800- GLASS TECHN., Vol 20, 1936, p 81.

10. I. M. Buzhinskiy; and S. K. Manonov. TRUDY MV'I'U. Vol 1830, 197h. p 181.

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0.\'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. A. Ya. Bokin. Mekhonicheskyye avoystva eiiikatnykh atekol [Mechanical
Properticn or Silicate Glasses]. Leningrad. Nauka. 1970.

Received 21 June 1977.
COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhnnicheaknyn Pronyahlennont', 1978.

8h80
€80: 81hh/oh69

69
FOR OFFICIAL “SE ONLY
UDC 539-23h
WIDE-BAND DAELEOPRIC HIRROR3 HLDH UP PITAhIUN AND SILICON DIOXIDES
Leningrad OPTIKO~HEKHANICHESKAYA FROMYSHLBNNOST' in Russian No 9. 1978 pp “6-”?
[Article by L. L. Mntskcvich. V. V. Burninov and h. V. Ruchinskiy]

[Text] A method of producing broad-band dielectric merrors
for the 0.h-:.0 micron range from T102 and SiOp, in which
the T102 in 1pplied by reactive evaporation of TiO, is
described. Graphs of the spectral transmission of 17-.

21- and 33-iayer mirrors are presented.

Currently it is mainly ZnS and fiourides [1-3] which are used to produce
broad-band dielectric mirrors with a reflectivity above 90 percent. but these
mirrors have low operating characteristics. The process of application of the
refractory oxides Snoz, Zr02 and $102 by electron-beam evaporation in a vacuum
[h] which has recently been developed does not solve the problem of manufactur-
ing broad-band mirrors, owing to the low refractive indiccs of Shoe and 2r02
films. By resistive evaporation of titanium and silicon monooxides in oxygen
[5] it is possible to produce two-oxide films of these substances with satis-
factory refractive indiccs. But this method is very labor-consuming in the
manufacture of mirrors with large numbers of layers.

We have demonstrated the possibility of producing beam-splitting and reflect-
ive surfaces with T102 films by reactive evaporation of titanium oxides [6].
Using the process of reactive evaporation of T102 we produced broad-band
dielectric mirrors for the 0.h-l.0 micron range. The coatings were applied to
a substrate of K8 glass, either unheated or heated to 350-h00° C. The re-
fractive indices of the titanium dioxide films vere determined spectrophoto-

metrically [T].

The films applied tc the unheated substrate have a refractive index of 2.15-2.2
in the visible portion of the spectrum. Studies conducted since the conclusion
of the work presented in [6] have indicated that the refractive indices ob-
tained for titanium dioxide films depend on the quantity of the starting sub-
stance (Tio) evaporated, i.e. the chemical composition of the substance in the
electron-beam evaporation crucible, which tends to have an increasing oxygen
content, so that the refractive index of the T102 film increases. The change

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in chemical composition of the material in the crucible can be observed
visually. since after the Tio has been he ted in the crucible for 30-110 min-
utes in the presence of women (~ 5 - 10" mm of mercury) the yellowish-brown
Tio is converted into a mixture or blue-violet higher oxides (T1203. Ti3o and
so on). when these higher oxides are exaporated. TiO films with retract ve
indices of 2.5-2.2 are obtained. The refractive indices 01‘ T102 films ap-
plied to a substrate heated to 350-h00“ c are 2.6-2.65 in the visible range
and decrease to 2.105 at a wavelength of 1.0 microns.

The broad-band mirrors were prepared from two oxides. titanium and silicon
dioxides. Both materials were evaporated by an electron beam evaporator. The
mirrors consisted of several elementary quarter-wave mirrors with intermediate
reflective bands [1. 2]. The mirrors all had the same design:

M k. k) )u )s’
s (sa...s) man (ss...s) HBH (sn...s)
11 layers 9 layers 1 layers
(33-layer mirror on heated glass substrate)

Here 3 is the substrate. K8 glass; 3 is the T102 layer. with a thickness of
Mb. I! is the 8102 layer, with a thickness ofA/lo; A1, A3 and ). are the
wavelengths for which the optical thicknesses of the 7-. 9- and 11- ayer were
controlled; and A 2 and h 1, are the wavelengths for which the optical thick-
nesaes or the intermediate layers were controlled; A 2 and M. had values
intermediate between A1 and A and X3 and 7x5 respectively. A rice-3102
system consisting of 21 layers ?see figure. graph a, curve 1) was applied to
the unheated substrate.

The integral reflection was measured with a selenium photoelement with a cor-
reeting light filter made or 288 and ZhZSlﬂ colored glasses; for the mirror
in question it was 93.55 with a transmissivity of 5.65. The accuracy of meas-
urement of the transmissivity and reflectivity was 0.1% and 0.2, respectively.
The light scattering. measured with a rue-36, was 0.13%

man J"
I”

    

(U I?! «U (”f a] a! [(fl 4! (c) ﬁ ”6‘ ”I” 271%)!

Spectral Curves of Transmissivity oi‘ Dielectric Mirrors

Key: a: curves 1 and 2 are for Zl-layer mirrors on cold and heated

substrates respectively.
1): curves 3 and I: are for 17- and 33-layer mirrors on a heated substrate.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A series of mirrors consisting of 1?. 21 and 33 layers were prepared on heated
substrates. The integral mirror characteristics are shown in the table and
the spectral characteristics are given in the figure.

1 "”113“! l? | an l m.

 

2 Ilnrclwnuun

3333315? 'r. 91.0 96.5 41.0 own-mo

"mammal“!
Mommies!
scream. I 0.12-0J3 Ill l—0.l6 ".28 ~03"

 

Key: 1. number of layers
2. Integral reflectivity, S
3. Integral coefficient of scattering. f

The soisture resistance of the mirrors prepared on both the cold and heated
substrates was evaluated by holding them in a climatic chamber (temperature
loo° c, relative humidity 98%) and in running water. After 10 hours in the
chamber, none of the mirrors studied had changed its mechanical strength or
optical characteristics.

Thus moisture-resistant and and mechanically strong broad-band mirrors based
on TiOg-SiOa applied to heated and unheated substrates have been prepared
using the vacuum method.

Prom analysis of the relatively high scattering coefficients of the mirrors
we may conclude that these values are primarily determined by the number of
layers in the system rather than by the high temperature of the substrate.

In addition, the scattering level in the T10 layers is significantly lover
than in layers manufactured by the cathode [3] or high-frequency [9] methods,
uith comparable optical and mechanical characteristics. This attests to the
advantages of the ‘reactive method of producing the T102 layers. The search
for ways of decreasing the light scattering will continue.

BIBLIOGRAPKY
i. F. A. Korolev et a1. OPT. I SPHCTR., Vol 28, 1970. p 775.
2. A. P. Turner; and P. U. Batmeister. APPL. 0PT.. Vol 5. 1966, p 69.
3. s. 1.. Perry. APPL. om, Vol. 1., 1965. p 981.

h. A. P. Perveyev; B. I. Fadeyeva; and G. A. mranova. 0MP [OPTIKO-
WICHEKAYA PROMSHWWT'], No 11, 1973, p 66.

5. V. l. Roshdestvenskiy; and E. I. Padeyeva. 0MP, No 12, 1975, p M.
72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. L. L. Mntakevich; and V. V. Bazhinov. 0MP, No 2. 1977. D lol.

7. 0. lam»; and R. Tun. The Physicn of Thin Films. Moscow, Mr. 197?.
P 136.

8. o. A. Motovuov; and o. 9. Radian. 0MP. No 6, 197)., p 36.
9. A. P. Perveyev et. a1. 0MP, No 3. 1975. p h3.

Received 18 December 1917.

COPYRIGHT: Opuko-Mekhenicheekaya Pronyshlennost' . 1978

81080
C80: 8111M 01:69

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "Fl-'lClN. USR ONLY

UDC 531.717.8:778.3B
MEASURING RADII 0F CURVA‘NRE AND LOCAL DIS‘IOM'IONS Ol’ MIRROR SURFACES
Leningrad OPPIKO-WICHESKAYA PROMYSBIENNOST' in Russian No 9. 1978 pp 56-58
[Article by M. L. Ourari, A. P. Golikov and s. I. Prytkov]

[Text] Rndii of curvature and local distortions of optical
mirror surfaces are measured without using high-quality
optics by the holographic shearing interferometer, vhose
size does not depend on the curvature of the mirror being
studied.

The problem of accurate measurement of radii of curvature and defects of shape
in the surfaces of mirrors in optical components using interference methods
[1] becomes muchmore difficult as the dimensions and radii of curvature of the
mirrors increase.

The contact_ interferometric methods vhich are in broad use under production
conditions (e.g. the test glass method) produce greater errors as the dimen-
sions of the mirrors increase, necessitating frequent readJustment of the
etalon.

In non-contact interference instruments. such as the Mun-Green unequal-path
interferometer [2], shear interferometers or scatter-screen interferometers
(3-6], the base of the measuring device typically depends on the radius of
curvature of the mirror being tested, so that the possibility of testing

large mirrors with increasing radii of curvature is limited by the increasing
role of vibration, air currents and the like. Testing of come; mirrors under
similar conditions requires large-diameter matching objectives, whose precis-
ion manufacture is troublesome.

The possibility offered by holographic interferometry of comparing wavefronts
of any form recorded at different moments of time has made it possible to de-
velop a method of precise measurement of radii of curvature and surface shapes
of large mirrors using a device of relatively small dimensions and independ-
ently of the value or sign of the radius of curvature of the mirrors.

7‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A schematic of the measuring device is given in Fig. l. The mirror to be
tested is mounted on a movable dolly, enabling it to be gradually moved along
or perpendicular to the optical axis or to be turned relative to the apex. A
di ffuser, covering the aperture of the mirror to be tested, is placed before
the mirror at as small a distance as possible. The main requirement for the
diffuser is that the intensity ‘of diffusion of the scattered component of the
radiation be less that the intensity of the wave passing through it without
scattering. The mirror is illuminated through the difmser by a divergent
beam from a coherent point source located on the optical axis of the mirror.
The radiation reflected from the mirror passes through the diffuser in the
reverse direction. falls on a photographic plate and serves as the object
beam in the recording of the hologram. The entire unit is mounted on an
anti-vibration platform whose dimensions are determined primarily by the re-
quirement of optinal illumination and coverage of the mirror by the diffuser.

While the hologram is being produced. the photo plate is not moved from its
exposure position. The diffuser surface is viewed through the hologram that
has been obtained. The mirror being tested is moved from its initial posi-
tion, producing an interference pattern located in the plane of the diffuser
and recordable behind the hologram. The shape and period of the fringes in
the interference pattern contain information about the radius of curvature
and the shape of the mirror surface.

The observable interference pattern is produced primarily by the component of
the initial illuminating beam which passes through the diffuser without scat-
tering. is reflected from the mirror surface and is scattered as it passes
back through the diffuser. Two such waves are observed simultaneously: one
is recorded on the hologram. and the other is observed directly and corresponds
to the mirror in its shifted position. It can be shown that the observable
pattern is equivalent to the interference pattern in the diffuser produced by
waves from two identical sources: images of the illumination source in the
mirror in the initial and shifted positions. During testing of a spherical
mirror this pattern has the form of equidistant straight lines with a period

same—=41.

where A is the size of the transverse shift (perpendicular to the axis) of
the mirror. R is the radius of curvature of the mirror, and sq and 3s are the
distances along the axis from the mirror to the diffuser and the source respect-
ively. When the diffuser is close to the mirror (zq/za-ro) the formula is

i 1 :
smper 3=%§.

High measurement accuracy is obtained by employing a compensation procedure
in which successive transverse and longitudinal (along the axis) shifts of the
mirror are made along with a compensating rotation of the mirror in the plane
which contains the optical axis and the vector of transverse movement, with
the total spatial shift of the mirror equivalent to its rotation with respect
to its own center of curvature. In this case local surface nonuniformities

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fig. 1. Diagram of Holographic Shear Inter-
i‘eromoter with Diffuser.

Key: 1. Beam splitter
2. Lil-38 laser

 

3 . Mi rror

la . Etalon

5 . AdJutment unit
6 . Di fma er

7 . Polaroid

8 . Hologram

are observed in the same way as in shear interferometers [7], while the radius
of curvature is determined from the measured sizes of the movements:

R=-“‘-.
where 9 is the angle of the compensating rotation.

Highly accurate measurement of the transverse shift presents no difficulty,
since its size is specified in the experiment more or less as desired. The
corresponding angles of compensatory rotation are generally very small. Since
it is difficult to measure them with a high degree of accuracy, in order to
measure the radius of curvature a small diameter standard mirror mounted to-
gether with the mirror under test was used.

The difference in radii of curvature results in a difference in the interfer-
ence patterns observed on the two mirrors after an identical shift of position.
This makes it possible to calculate the difference in radii of curvature be~
tween the two mirrors without measuring the compensatory angle and increases
the accuracy of measurement of the mirror under test.

Measurements were conducted on a series of mirrors with diameters up to 220 mm
and with radii of curvature from +10 to -30 meters on a stand about 180 cm
long. At the same time these mirrors were tested on an unequal-path 'hryman-
Green interferometer (aperture 150 mm), measuring their radii of curvature
with an autocollimation system. Within the limits of accuracy of measurement
on the autocollimation stand -(for R: 20 meters the relative error of measure-
ment was 0.5%) no discrepancy between the measurement results was observable.

Pig. 2 shows the interferogram obtained for one of the mirrors in the series
(diameter 200 m. radius of curvature -18 m) made for the purpose of measuring
local nonunifomities of shape. The measurements were made with tuning to the
finite-width fringes [nastroyka na polosy honechnoy shiriny] parallel to the
vector of the transverse shift; the shift was 27 mm. A strong deviation of
the fringes in the peripheral section of the mirror corresponds to a wave ab-
erration of ~ 0.1 microns measured with the Twyman-Green interferometer.

Thus measurement of the radii of curvature of large mirrors and local nonuni-
formities on their surfaces by the above method is carried out with a compact
device whose dimensions do not depend on the sign and size of the radius of
curvature. 76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. 3. Shearing Interferogram of a Spherical Mirror with Diameter 200 mm
and Radius of Curvature 18,000 mm.

The method is advantageous for testing convex mirrors and small-curvature con—
cave mirrors with radii of curvature ranging from several meters to several
dozen meters with a surface reflectivity greater than 20%. The universal
method of illuminating all mirrors by a divergent spherical wave from a fixed
point source renders the above method suitable for testing of mirrors over

an extensive range of diameters. The upper limit on the diameters stems from
the requirement for ease of illumination and observation, coherence of the
radiation in the mirror aperture and simplicity of interpretation of the in-
terferograms. with source coherent length l, for example.anda.diatance L
between the diffuser and the hologram, it is theoretically possible to conduct
measurements on mirrors with diameters up to

2LV2—'[-+-ln-.

With the LG—38 laser used in the experiment, the coherent length of which is z
30 cm. and a platform length L25200 cm, it is possible to measure mirrors
with diameters up to 220 cm. Mirrors up to 50 cm have been measured in prac-
tice. With a laser beam output power of 0.03 W, the delay required to pro-
duce the hologram was 100 seconds (a VR-L Mikrat photoplate was used with a
radiation wavelength of 0.6328 microns). It would be possible to decrease
the exposure time to several seconds by switching to other types of lasers,
for example an argon laser with a beam power of l V. Using the above method,
the measurement of local surface nonuniformities can be carried out with an
accuracy approximating that of shearing interferometry. An accuracy of about
0.1 percent was attained in experimental measurements of radii of curvature.

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010033-3

F'.“ ”IJ’ICIAL *'I-' l'|'\'l‘,'
A mndH'lvul. .1. a; l.=-.- .- | ,l-‘l' '-.-.;r:. ii '1' itslhlt.‘ [.0 ll

curacy of :ncuzmu-n cn'. rn-I I .~ mun. :lr- mam» -nl' ummchrn mu
Mare 01‘ the mirrorn Lim', mm m- Muted.

9' .‘l. I"'-l-f.i F"

‘. I. I. Dukhnru‘l; tl‘. 3- '3 "’ Hm “I“ [47”:KKh-MEE‘EIANICH
l-Eﬂﬂl“'..'-'l"l. Ila 3, l.- L p 50.

2. V. A. Saving and 1-. (i. .-‘-:d.|.=:\. NOW‘YI: .‘EI’IHNIKA V ASTROH
p 207.

3. n. Langenbcck. .zosa. Vol 61. N" 2, 1971. p 172.
h. v. A. Kouiasaruk. 0MP, No 7. 1969. p 8.

5. n. M. Scott. mm. mm. vm. 3. 3m :s. 195‘." 1- 531.

6. J. Random. us Patent No 3199673. 1972;.

7. J. a. Saundern. APPL. 0mm. Vol 9. No 7. 1910. p 1620.
Received 12 August. 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Optlko-Hekhanicheakaya Promyshlennoot' . 1918

8h80
CSO: 811:10/01069

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100334
FUR HFPIGIAL UHH HNLY

UDC 5h8.0:535:771.36
AN ELECTROOPTICAL MODULATOR WITH SMALL NONACTIVB LOSSES

Leningrad OPTIKo-MEKHANICHEBKAYA PROMYSHLENNOST' in Russian No 9. 1978
pp 71- 2

[Article by T. A. Kuzovkova]

[Text] Decreasing non-active losses in the Pockels cells used to modulate
light and to control laser generation is a pressing problem of electrooptics.
The effort to solve it has stimulated both a search for new types of electro-
optical crystals with low absorptivity [l] and the search for new cell de-
signs using short modulating elements.

In some modulators based on the longitudinal Pockels effect in crystals of the
KDP and DKDP types [2]. the lenght of the modulation element is chosen as
2.5-3 times the diameter. This is because with strip electrodes this is the
only way to assure uniform transmission of light in cross section [3].

In order to decrease the length of the modulator element we attempted to con-
centrate the electrical field in a narrow section of the crystal by using

wide tubular electrodes enclosing the lateral surface of the crystal and pro-
truding beyond it for a distance approximately equal to the diameter of the
crystal. The gap between the electrodes is chosen with reference to the ne-
cessity of maintaining its resistance to breakdown. Here the proJecting parts
of the electrodes screen the ends of the crystal from effects of the potential
in the surrounding space. As a result the electrostatic field is concentrated
in a smaller volume than if the electrodes did not project.

The concentration of the field can be strengthened even more if the parts of
the electrodes proJecting beyond the crystal are galvanically separated from
the electrodes on the crystal and given a charge opposite to that of the ad-
Joining electrode.

Fig. 1. presents a cross-sectional diagram of the modulation element with
electrodes protruding beyond its end. Fig. 2 illustrates the calculated dis-
tribution of residual transmissivity T of the modulator using a KDP crystal
and with a length-to—breadth ratio of 1.5.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Experimental testing or this modulator indicates that the length of the elec-
troopticol crystal can be decreased to 2/3-1/2 or that in existing designs,
and conficna that the projecting parts of the electrodes effectively influence
light transmission. Jith a length-to-breedth ratio or 1.5 for n KDP crystal.
for example, and a residual tranamissivity through the center of l} in the
off state, the use of protruding electrodes decreased trensmisaivity by an
order of magnitude.

In conclusion we note that when single-polarity voltage pulses ere red to the
modulator located inside a grounded screen, the grounded part does not need
to be screened from the end or the projecting electrode.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. I. 8. Rex. In Svoystve materialov. primenyayemykh v ustroystvakh opto-
elcktroniki [Properties of materials employed in optoelectronic devices],
USSR Academy of Sciences Corresponding Member K. s. Aleksandrov, ed.

Krasnoyarsk, 1975-

2. M. P. Lisitsa. KVANTOVAYA ELRKTRONIKA, No 6. 1972 pp 3-h8. Kiev, Naukova
Dunks.

3. M. G. Vitkov. OPTIKA I SPEKTBOSKOPIYA, V01 2h, No 5, 1963, pp 786-79h.
Received 20 July 1977-

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Hekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost', 1978

8h80
CSO: 81hh/0569

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 539.1.07h
AN INFRARED RADIOMETER BASED ON A GALLIUM ARSENIDE INJECTION PHOTODIODE
Leningrad OPTIKO—MEKHANICHESKAYA PROMXSHLBNNOST' in Russian No 9, 1978 pp 72-73

[Article by Yu. A. Abramyan, I. D. Anisimova, V. P. Kalyayeva, E. G. Mirza-
hekyan, I. I. Mikhaylov. a. G. Simonyan and v. I. Stafeyev]

[Text] One method of detecting infrared radiation and measuring its intensity
against a background of noise which is several orders of magnitude greater

than the signal is a radiometer whose detection range is governed by an input
photodetector. In the spectral range of 0.7-0.95 microns, the photodetectors
most commonly used for radiometers are gallium arsenide inJection photodiodes.
He used photodiodes with a pi£_structure, where the 1 region is high-resistance
gallium arsenide doped with chromium. These photodiodes work with a forward
bias, acting as internal amplification photodetectors, and have little noise
and an integral sensitivity in the hundreds of milliamperes per lumen.

face of the gallium srsenide photodetsctor. An FDK-l photodiode and an ALlOTA
light-emitting diode, used to produce the reference signal, are located op-
posite each other on the two sides of the rotating disk. The phases of the
reference signal and the signal arriving at the gallium arsenide photodetector
are adjusted precisely by shifting the FDK-l and the AL107A relative to the
opening in the radiation modulator. The inner surface of the modulator with
the abovementioned components is blackened.

The electrical signal from the photodetector passes to the input of a preamp-
lifier useing a KPZOZYe field transistor. With an input resistance of 10
uegohms, the preamplifier noise arriving at the input is 15-17 microvolts.
After preamplification and the subsequent amplification stage the signal ar-

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY'
Diagram of IR Radiometer.

Phase detector

Matching output stage
Reference signal amplifier
Reference pulse shaper

Key: 1. IR radiation modulator
2. Low-noise preamplifier

3. First amplification stage

h. Synchronous integrator

5. Second amplification stage

a

‘OO-Ja
0

Next, after amplification by a K28hUDlV operational amplifier with negative
feedback for stabilization of the gain. the signal passes through a phase
conversion stage and the required emitter repeaters and is fed to the input
of a phase detector based on a differential amplifier stage with a current
stabilizing transistor (KlUT2218). Tb trigger the phase detector. a reference
voltage is also fed to the KlU2218 microcircuit. The utilization of the syn-
chronous detector is Justified by its good selectivity and its transmission
coefficient greater than 1 [2].

The signal from the output of the phase detector is fed via a differential
emitter repeater (a lNTSQlA microcireuit) to the output for recording by a
KSP-h recorder with a lO—microvolt full-scale deflection. The radiometer

time constant is -3 seconds. The threshold sensitivity in recording is

1.5- 10'15 H-Hz‘l 2 (using a photodiode cooled to 77° K). The threshold
sensitivity of the radiometer with an uncooled photodiode is 3- 10‘13 H-Hz‘l/a.
An LED with a wavelength of 0.8 microns was used as the radiation source.

The use of recently-developed inJection diodes with a threshold sensitivity of
5- 10-16 w-md/2 (at 11° K) in the radiometer will improve its threshold
sensitivity.

BIBLIOGRAPﬂY
1. A. V. Ipatov; and A. 8. Berlin. IZVEBTIYA VUZOV, Vol, 16, No 5, 1973.

2. M. S. Reytman; and Yu. N. Rybin. Elektronnaya tekhnika v avtomatike
[Electronic Equipment in Automatic Control]. Yu. Konev. ed. “o h, 1973,

P 79.
Received 20 July 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Optiko-Mekhanicheskaya Promyshlennost', 1978

8480
050: 8144/0469 END

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY