APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: CIA-RDPOZ-00060R000100020020-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020029-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8284
23 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOOSOROOM00020029-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. [here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGﬂ' [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNBRSHIP 0P
H‘TERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIMTION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LRpmNc. JJ " I'A nus».

epsu . a"

23 Febru- ' '

 

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(F000 8/79)

 

I. Perlomu-g Ousnmlwn New.
9.

 
 
    
   
   
   

9. l’etluminp Omssissiion Name sod Maven I0. Ptoiecc/Tssk/Iook Um: No.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glabs Rood
Arlington, Virginia 22201

    

ll. Contact/Gun No.

II. Sta-seeing Ousniuuon None and Mduss II. Type ol Repeal & Per-oi
oveve

ﬂ 2
s

As above

 

l3. Supplsosseuy Notes

0. Absuaets

The serial report consists of translations fro- the world press and radio
relating to low. law enforcement. illicit traffic and personalities concerned
with narcotics and dangerous drugs.

. Key 'enls sad oeunsu Analysis.

Narcotics

Drug Addiction

Lev (Jurisprudence)
Lev Enforcmnt

lib. Identilien/Opes-Ended Tee-s

Dangerous Drugs
Drug Control
Drug Traffic

in. COSATIFieH/Oswp 5K, 60. 61'

llhvailabilisy State-eat 2" x°’ °' Pages
For Official Use Only. . 55
united Number of _Copies Avsilsble From JPRS. mm

ID... N'lﬁ ll Il‘v. l-Vll “I8 '0.“ “A? .E IEPIOOUCED VICOUItOC ‘oO’l~"-‘
TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(moo 8/79)

Conreurs

ASIA
3mm

Government Successml in Antimrcotics Drive
(xmm, 17 Jan 79) . .................. ........ . ......

INDONESIA

narcotics Arrests in North Sumatra Reported
(mm mamas Dec 78) ................ . .....

mm
Drugs Campaign

PAW

Briefs
Seized ﬂashish
5225 K3 Chin-as Seized

THAILAND

Three Australians, 1 Thai Arraigned for Heroin Peddling
(mm): POSI',6Feb 79) .......... ................

Briefs
Beroin Producers Sentenced

m mom
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cums (Continued)

LATIN AMIGA
mm
Briers
mug Trafficksrs Arrested
BOLIVIA
Briers
Cocaine Seized
BRAZIL

Sso Paulo Police Seize Cocaine Coming Fran Bolivia
(0 mm vs 8A0 mum, 18 Jan 79)

Police Seine hrihusm, Am in Providencis Districts
(3mm. DOBRABIL, 7, 19 Jan 79)

lurihuans Found in Sewer
Hen Contains hrihusns, Weapons

Rio Death Uncovsrs trafficking Network in Providencis
(Various emcee, various dates) ...................

Discovery of Trafficking network
Fourth Supply Center thcovered

8&0 Paulo We Use, Distribution Patterns Surveyed
(Remto Imbsrdi; 0 39mm ns aso mum, 1n Jan 79).

Report on Drug Addicts Anonymous Activities in Sec Paulo
(0 mm m; 8A0 mum, 25 Jan 79)

Police [hoover Mode of Drug Entry Into Rio Prisons
(cmo mm, 21 Jan 79)

Briefs
Agreements notified
Drug Trafficbrs Arrested
thor Brasilia ‘h‘sfnckers Arrested
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

com-sure (Continued)

om
Three me After Raids Yield 1 Million Dollars worth of
)hrihunns
(George Baird; GUYANA momma, lo Feb 79)
mo

ibdersl Forces Accused of Terrorism in Drug Probes
(m m, 19 J” v) .O...’.O..OOI.U...OOOOO'OI...-

TiJuens Bank manger Arrested for Drug Snaesling
(M van m: H mm, 10 Jen 79)

traffickers Arrested With Heroin From Sinelos
(IA voz m: m mom, 20 Jan 79)

Heroin Trafficking Discovered in Rehsbilitstion Center
(at. nmzo 03 mo mm, 13, 18 Jen 79)

Innte's Accouplices Identified
mrtickers like Preliminary Statements

Briefs
Conlmih Struggling Sites Identified.
Bight Trefticbers Sentenced
Heroin ﬁzz-stacker Denied Appeal
Police Chief Led Trafficlusrs
Abandoned hrihmns Carrier Found
Americans caught with Hashish

Briefs
Administrative Corruption

Smuggling Gsnes' Arrest
mm

Air Force Ordered To Shoot Down Drug Traffickers' Planes
(M’ 28 J“ 79) CO.O...QCCCOOOOJICOOOOIOIICIOOUOIOI

- c -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm SWBSFUL IN mmcorrrcs DRIVE

Beijing [Poking] XIML'A [RNA] in English 0722 M 17 Jan 79 W

[mt] anncoon. 3m: 17 “numb-mom node by the aim" noun-ant to prohibit
the urouim, uio and taking or nuootio drug hue boon crowned with initial auooous.

An onti-mrootio drug nbnno wool: rm Jamar, 2 to 9 m sponsored by the Ringoon division
co-ittoo for 0310in nuptial «can: mootio drug abuse in Won. Exhibitions.
loom”: on: competition- of mutio works against thus-coking were ormind in vorioun
divinions. 1: was reported but 2.60} «dim have rumored for treatment a: the
poycmtrio honpinl. 10 per oone or the- being undone: baweon 20 to 25.

680: 5300
RARCOTICS ARRESTS IN NORTH SUMATRA REPORTED
Jakarta HARIAN UMUM in Indonesian 28 Dec 78 p 6
[Articles “Kodak II Arrests 27 People Involved in Narcotics")

[Text] The chief of the information section for police regional
command II [Kodak II] explained that during its Operation
Harun Manis, which was carried out by police in the second
division of Kodak 11 during August and September 1978, they
were able to confiscate quantities of opium, instruments used
to smoke it, banned drugs and marijuana leaf.

The operation was carried out around the city of Medan and
in the Deli Serdang, Tanah Karo, Simalungun, Asahan, South
and Central Tapanuli regions as part of Kamtibmas [public
security and order] efforts to reduce crime in the field of
narcotics, including smuggling, distribution, accumulation
and storage.

Operation Harum Hanis was successful in arresting 27 people
thought to be involved in narcotics use. Ten of these have
been proven guilty of the charge. Of these 10, two are from
Medan, four from Sibolga and four from Belawan. Police were
also able to seize from them four packets of opium, some
banned drugs and instruments associated with narcotics use
to be used as evidence.

The information section chief further explained that 67 nar-
cotics offenses occurred in North Sumatra in 1978 with 115
people involved. The narc:otics offenses were 24 cases of
marijuana leaf distribution with 36 people involved and
112,345.145 grams confiscated. There were also 34 cases of
opium smoking with 60 people involved and 328,506 grams of
Opium leaf being confiscated. There were two opium possession
cases with 7 people involved and 2,610 grams of Opium in

78 packets confiscated. There was one case of illegal use

of drugs without a doctor's prescription involving one person
with six capsule confiscated.
BRIEFS

DRUGS CMPAIGluDurins ita "Operation Order" caapaign the North Suntra
police have solved 67 cues of drug offenses involving 115 persons. A
total of 112 kg of ganja leaves and 2.610 grass of coin. and a nulber of
091‘. smoking utensila vere confiscated during the campaign. (Jakarta
Do-utic Service in Indonesian 0700 our 21 Dec 78 BK]

E

5300
BRIEFS

SBIZED HASMISH--The Staff of Customs Special checking Squad last night
seized over 10 kilos of semi-liquid hashish from the toilet of a PIA air-
craft parked at a distant bay of Karachi Airport. The price of the seized
hashish is about ten lakhs. On a tip from PIA sources. the Customs S;aff
went on board the plane which had earlier come from New York and had no
immediate schedule to a foreign destination. Tho packets containing hash-
lsh were found lying abandoned in the toilet of the plane which were
seized on the spot. Further investigations is in progress. [Text]
[Karachi THE SUN in English 25 Jan 79 p 7]

5225 KC CHARAS SEIZED—-The r stoma authorities on Monday seized 5225
kilograms charas and nine kilograms of crude opium, in an operation near
Khairabad on the G.T. road today. Customs sources said that contraband
articles, were being transported to Karachi, by a truck. About 12,000
yards of foreign cloth and 50 bags of Biri was also seized from the truck.
The truck driver and cleaner, Zeenat Shah of Khyber Agency and Javed
Rehman of Kohat, have been arrested. The truck No PRA 8111 has also been
impounded. [Text] [Peshauar KHYBER HAIL in English 26 Jan 79 p 8]

C30: 5300
HIREB AUSTRALIANS, 1 THAI ARRAIGNED FOR REROIN PEDDLING

Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 6 Feb'79 pp 1. 3 BK

[Test] Three Australians and a Thai held on charges of possessing 8.6 kilos
of heroin with intent to sell submitted a plea of not guilty during the pre-
liminary hearing held at the criminal court yesterday.

Judge Urs Hengomklang set 26 February as the first date for the hearing in
the case of Sydney rugby league star Paul Cecil Hayward. hairdresser warren
Edward Fellows. former Bangkok bar-owner Hilliam Charles Sinclairand their
alleged Thai accomplice Kitti (Noi) Imsap.

The four men were brought from Khlong Pres light jail under heavy escort
shortly before ll a... All had their legs in chains and were handcuffed in
pairs. They appeared to be in good health.

Hayward's pregnant wife Gale, his brcther Nick. Fellow's wife Janet. and
Sinclair's son from his first marriage Gregory, were waiting in front of
the court's detention room when the suspects arrived. They attended the
15-minute preliminary hearing.

Judge Ura ordered the men to stand up and hear formal charges against them.
Sinclair was the first to plead not guilty. followed by Fellows, Hayward and
Kitti, all of when said they had appointed lawyers to defend them in the hear-
ings. In their earlier statements during police investigations, Hayward,
Fellows and Kitti had pleaded guilty to all charges. They made the same
pleas before the public prosecutor when they were formally charged in court
last week.

Hrs Hayward and hrs Fellows broke into tears while escorting their husbands
into the detention room. Hrs Fellows, herself held in Sydney 3 days after
the ll October arrest in Bangkok of her husband. and charged with possession
of 185,990 Australian dollars acquired by possibly unlawful means, had bailed
herself out for A54.000 and flown to Bangkok to be with her husband.
The two wives, who refused to talk to 1ournaliats at the court. are to leave
Thailand today after visiting their husbands for the last time at Khlong
Pres Jail where they were returned after the court hearing.

Sinclair's son. Gregory. said he had handed over full charge of the case to
his lawyer "in whom I have full confidence."

Sinclair's wife. Panchan, last week nade an unsuccessful bid to bail her
husband out for 2 million baht. Gregory. when asked whether he would sub-
sit another application for bail on grounds that his father is old and in
poor health. said he will only do what his lawyer advises.

Hayward and Fellows were arrested with the heroin in front of their hotel

in the Phatphong area. Sinclair, alleged mastermind of the drugs syndicate
which Thai-Australian narcotics agents believe was operating between Bangkok-
Sydney. was arrested later froa his house in Sukhunvit [Road-FBIS].

On 20 January this year, Kitti was arrested by narcotics suppression police.
He allegedly supplied the heroin to the three Australians from his house
in Lat Phrao area.

Police investigators had earlier tried to have the four uen face summary
prosecution under article 200 of the constitution but this was rejected by
Interior Minister Gen Lek Neaonali who said the three suspects should be
tried by normal court procedure.

080: 5300
BR I BPS

HEROIN PRODUCERS SENTENCED--Exercising his absolute power under article 200.
Prime Minister Kriangsak Chanannn yesterday passed a verdict of death against
a Chinese haw heroin-maker and sentenced his two accomplices to life.
imprisonment. The heroin-maker. identified as Ha Chins-ling alias Lee Ming.
In however. still at large and police the been ordered to arrest him as
soon as possible for execution. China-ling was arrested on 5 October last
year at his laboratory in Mac Sai District of Chiang Rai while the two
othera--Chuaak Tansiri and a hilltribesnan. Pulo Hangluangsan--were arrested
earlier that some day in the provincial town of ﬂat Yai in Songkhla Province.
The three men. the first to be prosecuted in a drug case under article 200.
were charged with attempting to sell 166.48 kilograms of "white dragon
pearl" heroin and no. 3 brown sugar heroin to two Malaysian undercover
agents for 2 million baht. The heroin was to be made by Chins-ling and
delivered by the two others. The arrests were the result of a long inves-
tigation between the American drug enforcement agency and Thai narcotics
suppression police in Bangkok and Yat Yai. [Excerpt] [Bangkok BANGKOK POST
in English 24 Jan 79 p 1 BK]

(150: 5300
BRIEFS

DRUGS CONFISCATEDnIu 1978 the Yugoslav customs authorities at the Gradina
border crossing point: near Dinitrovgrad on the Yugoslav-Bulgarian border
found and confiscated from smugglers a total of more than 1.800 kg of nor-
cotles, including 662 kg of narcotics confiscated in December alone. In
1978 the Gradinn customs officials also caught heroin smugglers for the

f irst time: 51 kg of heroin were confiscated fro- nine smugglers. [Zagreb
VJESNIK in Serbo-Crostisn 9 Jan 79 p 16 AU]

080: 5300
BRIEFS

DRUG TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--Buenos Aires. 9 Jan (TBLAH)--The federal police
have arrested seven men and a woman who were trafficking in aarihuana and
cocaine base from Paraguay. The arrested persons are Omar Eduardo Villa.
Horacio Victor Marzon. Juan Carlos Garofslo. Carlos Osvaldo Burzzalino.
Victor Hugo Lezcnno, Carlos Alberto Pepe. Jose Norberto Pugliese and Lili-
ana Haydee dc Posis. lBuenos Aires TELAH in Spanish 2150 GMT 9 Jan 79]

C80: 5300
BRIEFS

COCMNE seam-Officials of Puerto Suarez last week seized 5.1;? kus of
cocaine on its way to Corunba froo Santa Cruz. The cocaine was seized fro-

two couriers which were using air taxis to transport their Ierchandise when
they were discovered by custom! officials and border police. [La Paz Radio
Pnnnnericnna Network in Spanish 0000 GMT 1 Feb 79 FY]

CS": 5300

10
8A0 PAULO POLICE SEIZE COCAINE COMING FROM BOLIVIA
Sao raulo 0 ESTADO DE 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 18 Jan 79 p 28

[Text] Airplane pilot Jose Veloao Pilho. 28. single. resident of Caceres,
Hato Groaso. was arrested with 1 kilogram of cocaine in the Perdizes branch
office of the Itau Bank on Cardoso dc Alneida Street and booked in the
Narcotics Division of the DEIC [Criminal Investigations Department].

Using information provided by Jose. police arrested other persons involved
in Sao Paulo cocaine traffic and addiction and learned that many Sno Paulo
persons trade automobiles for cocaine in Caceres and neighboring cities
near the Bolivian border. Jose Veloso Pilho was followed. photographed and
filmed by $01--0perations and Intelligence Service--investigators from the
Narcotics Division. who asde use of expensive cars in the operation.

The trafficker arrived in Sao Paulo last week. landing at the Congonhas
Airport. He was carrying l kilogram of pure cocaine which he had bought
for ii0.000 cruzeiros in Vila San Matias. Bolivia. and already had an as-
sured buyer. The other times that he went to Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo
Jose traveled by car. but this time. as he had to get the noney quickly. he
decided to travel by air. he registered at the Rio Jordao hotel on Dino
Bueno Avenue. awaiting a telephone message to deliver the "merchandise" and
receive 220.000 cruzeiros.

Delivery

On Tuesday morning Jose Veloao Pilho received a telephone call informing
him that the time of delivery would be 1600 hours. when he entered the
branch bank. the ttafficker met up with deputy Carlos Perreira Castro. who
arrested him. Minutes later. the buyer--police withheld his name-~arrived
and was also arrested. Alarmed. Jose told reporters that he intended to

give up selling cocaine and return permanently to Teresina. Piaui. where
his relatives live.

He said he became a narcotics trafficker when he served in the Army Border
Battalion in Caceres. As soon as he left the service he began to transport
cocaine to Rio de Janeiro and later to Sao Paulo. During the past year he

ll
vas given two bad checks and quit associating with "Rio de Janeiro buyers
and dealt only with Sao Paulo individuals. who distributed sole of the
drugs here and sent the rest to‘sio de Janeiro."

Jose nuns an automobile agency and has traded several vehicles for cocaine.
According to his. "residents of the city of Sao Paulo have the greatest de-
Innd for the drug." He also said that he did "some business with pickup

trucks and passenger cars." Narcotics Division police hope to identify and

arrest by the end of the seek addicts and snail traffickers associated with
Jose Veloso Pilho.

8836
cso: 5300

12
POLICE SBIZB HARIKUANA, AEHS IN PROVIDENCIA DISTRICTS

Harihuana Found in Sewer

Rio de Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 7 Jan 79 p 27

[Text] Hidden in a paved-over drainage ditch under a vacant house on
Providencia Hill. 92.5 kilograes of Iarihuana--nostly conpressed--2 kilo-
grass of a yellow powder (which could be cocaine). weapons. ammunition and
a precision scale were discovered by police of the 5th PM [Military Police]
Battalion yesterday after they decided to break up the paving with hammers.

Police deny that the raid was based upon inside information andsmkee point

of explaining that the seizure--"the biggest yet. at least by us"--was the
result of a great effort.

Hollow Concrete

Hithout hiding their pleasure and pride in having participated in the
Providenciaﬂillinvestigation in Bureco Quente. the five policemen. led by
Sergeant Nery. arrived at the 5th Battalion headquarters about 1430 hours
piled everything in the patio to be photographed. Relaxed. they talked
about how the operation went. although being careful to avoid photographers.

wrapped in brown paper and plastic. compressed bars of narihuana bigger
than large shoe boxes were being stacked up beside small blue packages

filled with seall Cylinders ready to be sold--"they would be the 100-
cruzeiro 'eatucas' [literally: horssfliesl," the police suggested. adding
that nest of then were "for the wholesale trade."

The powder. very yellow. was contained in two plastic bags. A pellet. larger
than a gude [translation unknown) ball. and a soldered 38-caliber bullet
were taken by Major Duran--responsible for battalion operations--"for
laboratory examination."

The 7-kg-capacity Iara precision scale. magazine paper. a 22-caliber Urko
carbine. 2 revolvers-—a bS-celiber Colt and a 38-caliber--a Winchester 46
carbine. along with sole of the drugs. were inside an old suitcase. as were

13
twenty-eight hé-milliseter. three 9-ailliaeter and two Ja-aillileter cart-
ridges.

Sergeant Mary said that he became suspicious of the place when he was there
with his colleagues on previous investigations: “The suspects always ran
away and disappeared in the place w‘are the drugs were stored."

And he continued to discuss the discovery: "We knocked on the concrete pav-
ing and it sounded hollow. He then broke it open and went into the drainage
ditch.“ Soldiers Miranda. Moreira and Roosevelt. all very dirty. dis-
covered the stockpile just beyond the hole sade in the ground. beside the

wall of a house. which was broken into during the afternoon. when they re-
turned to the scene.

Inside the three—room house. with electricity and sintecada [translation
unknown]. were only two pictures of saints, illuminated by small nightlanps.
Police suspected that it belonged to the gang's leader. who escaped. No one
on the hill is saying anything; they pass by and look in alarm. Free a dis-
tance they shout Iany insults and warn. also with shouts. anyone who goes
near: "Keep your south shut. you fool. Hhoever talks on the hill. dies."

Hell Contains Harihuana. weapons
Rio dc Janeiro JORNAL DO BRASIL in Portuguese 19 Jan 79 p 30

[Test] About 100 kilograss of compressed sarihuana, a rifle. an Urko car-
bine. three bé-caliber revolvers. an old-fashioned short firearm and ever
300 bullets of 65. 7.65, 38 and 7.63 caliber-the latter for Patsn subma-
chineguas used by the PH--were seized on Providencia Hill early yesterday
morning by agents of the 5th Hilitary Police Battalion.

All the weaponry and drugs were hidden in a well in Largo do Cruseiro, at
the top of steep Barroso Street. According to lieutenants Daltro and

Antonio Csrlos--who commanded the 10 soldiers during the raid--the saterial
belongs to the traffickers known as "Cocos" and "Pacoca."

As the quantity of sarihuana was large. the commandant of the 5th PM Sat-
talion. Lieutenant Colonel Medina. instructed his sen to notify federal
police. who sent an expert to the scene of the raid. The sarihuana and

weapons were taken to the Narcotics Suppression Station of the federal
police.

According to PM officers. the place where the traffickers were storing the
drugs had been under observation for several days. but they also hoped to
arrest "Cueca" and "Pacoca." 0n Hednesday evening they were informed that
the two traffickers would be going to the place that was under surveillance.
About 0300 hours yesterday morning the criminals arrived. but soseonc tipped

the. off and they managed to escape in the sidst of an exchange of gunfire
with police.

8836
C80: 5300 14
RIO DEATH UNCOVERS TRAFFICKING NBTHORX IN PROVIDENCIA
Discovery of Trafficking Network
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DE 8A0 PAULO in Portuguese 25 Jan 79 p 36

[Text] Rio de Janeiro--Por the first time in a case of death involving drug
use. Rio de Janeiro police have all the facts in hand. They know where and
when Felipe Aguiar de Oiiveira. 20. died. who was in his conpany when he
jumped or was thrown out the bathrooe window of his friends' Leblon apart-
sent, and even who was furnishing cocaine to the group of Felipe's addicted
friends. Leblon aurfboardera belonging to the "tattooed gang." Police also
discovered the source of the cocaine sold by trafficker Ricardo Helansky to
the "tattooed gang." He was buying it on Providencia Hill. where the three
large nsrihuana hideaways located there d0500.000cruzeiroa of business
daily.

0ncesgafh.however, it is unlikely that the mystery will be solved or the
Lower Leblon drug traffic be disturbed at all. Police are inclined to ac-
cept the suicide story and the trafficker's arrest is considered a separate
case.

That is because Melansky. arrested in a Fiat in Lower Leblon the day before
yesterday with 50 grams of cocaine. denied that the drugs were his. About
30 young men and women. all with tattoos on their arms. were following the
Fiat on the night that helansky was arrested. inpatient at the trafficker's
delay. The ease young nan who by day ride the waves on brightly colored
surfboards.

Felipe de Aguiar Honteiro died on 17 January shortly after arriving at the
home of brothers Jose Claudio and Luis Claudio. who were still sleeping.
Pelipe--according to Denise Ferreira. nether of his friends--locked himself
in the bathroom and stayed there for some time. Then Denise and her six
servants in the penthouse apartment at 108 Atauaipha Plaza heard a strange
sound coming from the bathroom. when they managed to break open the door.
they did not find Felipe.

he had been hurled through the tilted window of the bathroom. There were

blood stains on the floor and a hypodermic syringe with traces of cocaine
was found in the bathtub.

15
Police ol the ihth DP [Police Station] in Lebion. who will not begin to take
testimony from those who were present in the apartment until toeorrow. are
convinced that it was a case of suicide. They explain: "The lady of the
house ahd her servants said they found the bathroom door locked 'from the
inside.’ That circumstance rules out the possibility that Felipe was pushed
out the window." Narcotics deputy Hoacir Novels. however. prefers to wait
for results of investigation of the scene: "The Cries Institute will de-
cide. if it was suicide. the body would necessarily have fallen farther
away from the building."

Providencia Hill

in the Narcotics Station jail. however. Helansky spilled the beans to his
cell-ates. One of them leaked the information to the police: "The drugs
are from the bigshot: he bought the- in 'Passoca's' hideaway on Providencio
Hill." The hill. in the Santo Cristo neighborhood. in back of the Federal
Railway Systea station in the center of town. has three aarihuana hideaways.

Last year police of the Narcotics Station arrested Sebastiao Correia dos
Santos. "Tainhs." owner of one of the three largest hideaways on the hill.
Last October they arrested "Tainha's" brother-in-law. Elcio Lima de Oliveira,
"Cueca." 25. This made no change in traffic on the hill. "Tainha's" place
is being operated by Joao Fir-inc; Wilson Santos."PassocaJ'and his partner.
”Passe." operate ”Cueca's" hideaway (”Cueca” gives the orders from the
penitentiary). and Alvanir Pigueiredo. "Vanir." is owner of the third drug
sales center.

The cocaine. which cones from Bolivia. goes to the hill and is bought there
by the major traffickers. who adulterate it and redistribute it throughout
Rio de Janeiro. with the largest concentration in Lower Leblon.

There are sarihuana hideaways such as those on Providencis Hill in other
alone and hillsides of the city. "Parrancho" sells drugs on Matrix hill
and Sabaro. although in jail. controls the traffic in Cachoeirinha. Only
buyers of large quantities. who later adulterate the powder. go to these

places. The greater the mixture of sugar. baking soda. sarble powder or
whatever. the less is the drug's value. It is later sold on the street in

successively smaller portions. which become unusable for inhaling. For
this reason the cocaine is eventually applied intravenously. as was that
found in the syringe in the bathroom free which Felipe either jumped or was
thrown.

Fourth Supply Center Uncovered
Rio de Janeiro 0 GLOBO in Portuguese 26 Jan 79 p 13
[Text] Police of the 5th PH [Military Police! battalion seized 62.2 kilo-
grams of compressed marlhuana yesterday at the hose of drug trafficker

Carlos Roberto Santos da Rocha. 25. at l7? aua do Bica on Providencia hill.
it was the fourth narcotics supply center discovered on that hill within

16
less than a month. Carlos Roberto was arrested and taken to the Narcotics
Combat Division of the federal police. where the marihuana was also taken.

The trafficker was sighted by a PM patrol that was making its rounds in the
vicinity of the health Ministry at about 0330 hours. when police ap-
proached him, he fled and hid in his home. which was entered by the sol-
diers. In searching the house the marihuana was found in a water tank on

the bathroom well. covered up by a mirror; there was also a precision scale
used to weigh drugs.

Carlos Roberto, who said he was undergoing psychiatric treatment at INAHPS
[National Medical Care and Social Security Institute]. asserted that he was
the sole owner of the sales point. and has no connection with the traffick-
ers known as "Pacoca" and "Cases." who operate in Providencia Hill marihusaa

traffic. Carlos Roberto refused to say where he bought the marihuana he
was selling.

Shootout

Also on Providencia Hill. the drug trafficker known only as Adauto died the
day before yesterday after exchanging gunfire with police of the 5th 3PM
[Military Police Battalion] and federal police: 19 packets of marihuana and
cocaine. ammunition and a bS-caliber pistol were found in his possession.
Adauto. who was spotted in Pedro Lisa with his partner, Joaozinho. managed
to get to Vila Portusrio. where he was shot; the other trafficker escaped.

A "ill with Much Access to Drugs

Providencia Hill in Santa Cristo is known as one of the major supply centers
for drug addicts and traffickers in Rio de Janeiro. since its location and
approaches facilitate escape by traffickers and their customers. According
to Narcotics Station police. "every afternoon and evening a large number of
cars belonging to addicts and traffickers. even some from other municipali-
ties. are parked near Providencia Hill. providing traffickers there with a
profit of about 500,000 cruzeiros daily."

The major marihuana and cocaine traffickers on Providencis Hill are. accord-
ing to police. Sebastiso Correia dos Santos. ”Tainha" (arrested in 1977 and

sentenced to 18 years in prison), Blcio Lima de Oliveira. "Cases." and an—
other known only as "Pacocn."

Since December of last year 5th 3PM police have been making raids on
Providencia Hill; in addition to drugs. they always find weapons and house-
hold appliances. the latter generally exchanged for drugs by addicts with
no nosey. 0n 8 Decesber one-half kilogram of cocaine. wrapping paper for
the drugs. weapons and ammunition were seized in a townhouse and two shan-

tiea at Large do Cruzeiro; on that occasion. the trafficker Pacoca managed
to escape the police net.

17
0n 6 January. in n paved-over drainage ditch under a vacant house, police
found 92.5 kilograss of nsrihunnn. 2 kilosrans of an unidentified yellow
powder and a precision scale. as well as weapons and aI-unition. On 18 Jan-
unry about 100 kilogrsls of calprcsssd Isrihusns. a rifle. s carbine, re-
volvcrs. an old-fashioned short firesrn and allunition were seized.

8834
680: 5300
5A0 PAULO DRUG USE, DISTRIBUTION PATTERNS SUWBYED
Sao Paulo 0 ESTADO DB 5A0 PAULO in Portuguese 14 Jan 79 pp 48-49
[Article by Renato Lombardi: "The Great Drug Route in Sec Paulo"]

[Text] Crimes, holdups, robberies, murders, extortions,
broken families, physical and mental addiction, police
corruption, and profit; on the path of drugs any obsta-
cle is removed with minimum doses of drugs or by force
so as to increase the number of drug addicts. enlarge
fortunes, provide "work" for scores of unemployed and
create dreams which have to be renewed.

mat complicated dream machine can be present in an in-
nocent-appearing ice cream wagon or in the most sophis-
ticated bars and stylish nightclubs, each of them a
small gear which challengers the police end medical
authorities of the entire country. From marihuana to
LSD, from cocaine to barbiturates, we are witnessing
the growing number of addicts and drug traffickers
with national and international connections, always
concluding in crimes and inexplicable suicides which,

logically. are filed away among the "unsolved“ police
cases.

But where are the drugs? Where do they come from?
Who is responsible for their distribution throughout
the city of Sao Paulo and throughout the entire
country? "hat are the sale and purchase points? How
is surveillance made? what are the dangers of drugs
and the experiences caused by their use? In these
two pages 0 ESTADO traces a route of the consumption
of drugs in Sao Paulo, it shows how the drugs arrived

in the country and contains the stories of some
addicts.

19
'lhere are more than 200,000 drug addicts in Sno Paulo according to the
l'ederal Police. Drugs can be obtained with some facility in the center
and the districts of the city. Last year six pertons died as the result
of cocaine. morphine and 1.50 use. The Nnrcrtics Division of the Criminal
Investigations Department [0818] arrested 2.1076 persons. 0!: these. 676
were indicted after being caught in the act--282 dealers and 39b addicts.

'lhe South Zone of the city shows the greatest percentage of addicts (40.3
percent) followed by the Best Zone (29 percent). center of the city (27

rcent), and the North and Eastern Zones (3 percent). The "fliperamas"
meaning unknown]. massage parlors and some stylish restaurants are the
places where the dealers meet the addicts. In the case of cocaine.
delivery. in most cases. is made "at home." The dealer himself telephones
the "customer" asking about the amount of the drug desired.

Rio de Janeiro continues to supply the Sao Paulo market. l'nch month 80 kilos
of cocaine arrive in Sao Paulo. which brings approximately 320 million
cruseiros to the dealers. Marihuana comes from Paraguay. Hato Grease and
the northern part of the country. On the average. 500 kilos of marihuana
are consumed every month from March to May. Later. when the harvest is
better. Sso Paulo receives a ton every month.

'lhe profits of the marihuana trafficker are smaller than those of the dealer
in cocaine. 'Ihe "grass" is sold at 5.000 cruzeiros per kilo while cocaine
goes for between 500.000 and 600,000 cruzeiros per kilo. During the past

3 years. the Sao Paulo police seized 991. kilos of msrihuana. [2.1031 kilos
of cocaine, 412 LSD tablets. two grams of morphine. a gram of opium and

300 milligrams of heroine.

One of the principal cocaine dealers. who services part of high society and
theater and television actors of Sao Paulo. Santos and Campinas. lives in
Corumbs in Hate Grosso. His nickname is "Baiano" and his connections also
cover Rio de Janeiro. ln s blue-covered notebook. "Baiano" has a list of
names. telephone numbers and addresses. The addicts first deposit the money
in the trafficker's bank account and then receive the drug.

A few days before make a trip. "Baisno" makes a call. and as an addict says,
"he takes orders. gives the price and then waits until the bank advises him
of the arrival of the money before initiating delivery." in 2 months

the police of Rio de Janeiro arrested him twice but they managed to prove
nothing. In his suitcase they found documents which verified his employment
as a seller of stocks and land in Goias. Among the "customers" of "Salem"
is a former television prcgram panelist, men with connections in the fi-
nancisl market. business managers, high bank officials. the owner of a
network of factories. and doctors.
Another cocaine dealer. who also serves high society and show people.

is a former federal official who lives in a house with many rooms at

llha do Governador in Rio de Janeiro. lie is tall, thin. almost bald and

50 years-of-age. he travels to Sao Paulo every 2 weeks and he frequents

two restaurants which are close to each other on Cidade Jardin AVenue.

lle makes his contacts on Saturday during a feijoeda [Brazilian traditional
meal of beans. pork fat. dried neat and so forth]. On Sundays. at break-
test. he receives the eoney and he then sends the drugs by bus or airplane.
Delivery is made by two youngsters. white and young, who seek out the buyers
in their work centers or at the two restaurants.

ln lbirapuera

At lbirapuera Park. the place chosen by the pushers and addicts is the yard
in front of the old Concerto Cafe. "Banana," a motorcyclist who always
dresses in "jeans" and a green jacket, sells marihuana, cocaine and
Pervetin to the youngsters who use the drug in autoeobiles or by the lake.
Another place visited by addicts is the Horunbi in front of Bandeirantes
Palace [governeent house].

On Sumare Avenue. delivery of drugs is made at a launderette and those who
do the selling, eainly cocaine. are two brothers. In Pinheiros. on
Theodore Seepaio Street. near the site of the Forensic Medicine lnstitute.
an engineer who is under two indictments is the one who sells the drug.

0n Sao Carlos do Pinhal Street and Santos Boulevard, between Brigedeiro Luis
Antonio Avenue and Pamplona Streets, distribution of marihuena and cocaine
is made to school students inside automobiles. The pushers are ice creae
and peanut venders. automobile guards. and parking lot attendants. in the
past 2 years the Narcotics Division of the MIC indicted more than 50
students caught in the act as either users or dealers. mainly of earihusna.
According to a policeman, more than 5.000 students of two preparatory
schools are addicted to drugs.

Luis is a trafficker who lives in Arecatuba and he sells cocaine to
businessmen. students, some actors and married women. llis meeting place
is the parking lot at the lbirapuera Shopping Center. He arrives in the
morning. parks his earns white Puma-onear the access ramp and tends to his
"custoeers" in their automobiles. For some businessmen, he makes "hoes"
deliveries.

The so-called "round" of the clubs considered elite for the delivery of
cocaine. is made by trefficker "Goealina," who on Tuesdays and Fridays.
after 0300. tours the parallel streets delivering "contracts" of from one
to five graes of the drug. He is always in a white Volkswagen and is
connected to "influential" people.

21
In Do- Retiro, addicts and dealers frequent a restaurant where police also
go. Sons cocaine buyers are friends of a very well-known politician in

Sao Paulo.
Nightclubs

A nightclub on Major Sertorio Street. which appears in the Secretariat of
Touriso Guide and is frequented by businessmen. executives and police.

is pointed out as a nesting place for many addicts and pushers. According
to a for-er drug addict, eany persons. in order to avoid being caught red-
handed. have watches with a space in the clasp into which a "contract"

of one gran of cocaine fits exactly. Others carry the drug inside their
coat buttons. The najority of the woaen who visit nightclubs take drugs.
Many offer drugs to their escorts and wind up being inter-ediaries between
the pusher and the addict.

Sm of the wonen are friends of the police and even go on to practice
extortion on the "custoaers." They notify the police when they deliver the
drug and any tines the addicts are eVen threatened with inprisoment while
in their own offices. Fearful, they wind up paying large sums. Soc-e months
ago. a bank neneger was black-oiled out of 60,000 cruzeiros.

Many stories are told about another nightclub on lpiranga Avenue. which is
also frequented by executives. They say that in the mezzanine there is a
table used for snorting pure cocaine. Despite the fact that it is indi-
cated as a nesting place for addicts. the police rarely appear while on
duty. Many pelicaudeputiee. investigators. and patrol car officers--are
seen there but only on their days off. The Gel-nan wonan supposedly involved
in the eurder of "panther" Angela Diniz was spending soee days in Sao Paulo
after the crime and she went cut with any persons. Gabriele was the guest
of the owner of that nightclub and confessed that she was a drug addict.

in an interview with a oagazine, at that tine. she explained that she "was
having a good tics in Seo Paulo." A young woman fro- llio Grande do Sul.
she ju-ped (or was thrown) from a building on 2!. de Moio Street, and the
police filed the case as a suicide. An hour before. she had left a night-
club located at the corner of lpirsnga Avenue and Bpitacio Pessoa Street.
She was coupletely under the influence of drugs.

”Distributors"

Marihuana continues to be the most used drug by a large part of the young,
according to police. In the Northern Zone are concentrated the large dealers
who distribute the "grass" to other parts of the Capital. in a lesser way.
the sane dealers also sell Pervitin and pills such as Stenanina. Desbutal.
and snphetseine salts.

The nan responsible for distribution in Villa Brasilandia is Joeo do Chapeu,
who has his station 0n Parapue Avenue near a dancehall. There are two

22
traffickers on Vila Schimidt: “Neuzinhn” and "Choln." who deliver drugs

at a bar on lracena Street. "Joao Capote" is the trafficker at Vila Santa
Maria. he is found every day at Rodriguea Lane. At Vila Nova Cachoeirinha.
"lsaias" sells marihuana and rervitin capsules near the Thea Transportation
Coapany garage. In the lnirim district, "Roberto Batalha" has his station
in a bar near the Church of Nossa Senhora das Grecias.

At Parucho Park. Antonio Nestor Fortunate. "Crica." is in charge of selling
narihuana and barbituates. He is always in a bar on Zilda Street. In
Thcuruvi. on Rosa Maria Street. there are three drug pushere: "Cleuza."
who also uses the naees of "Valerie" and "Zulniraz" "Hecale" and "Luzinho."
In Jacans. "2e Hecaco." has his post on Benjamin Pereira Street. in the
Edu Chaves Park--Stanatis Avenue. near the Mimosa elun--"Nege Tebas" and
"Baisninho" are the suppliers of drugs. including to gangs of young girls.

In Vila Maria, the lembers of the so-called "damned family" continue to
operate in the drug business with a station in Belchio Deordas Street.
In the seas district, on Cerejsiras Lane. the meeting place for several
traffickers is the Patina Bar. In Vila Ede on the Conceicao highway.
trafficker "Bosnia" sells nerihuana and pills tc a large number of the
addicts of Vila Sabrina, Jardia Japao. Vista Alegre and Vila Guilhere.

In the North Zone. a trafficker who is getting "a piece of the action"
according to addicts arrested last week, is Altaairo Bosco Diniz, 'tabeao"
who is constantly making trips to Paraguay from where he always returns
with suitcases full of aarihuana.

1n the Heat Zone, there are five criminals who control the drug traffic.

In the Hirante District it is "Tbninho; in Vila Poscina. "Filao" and
"Teleo." in Vila Pereire Barreto it is "Tonieo Portugues" (the letter also
distributes aarihuana and barbiturates in Laps. Vila Hanburguesa and
Pirituba). and "Juscelino," who was an innate at the Cotia Jail. Even when

he was a prisoner he was in charge of the sale of aarihuane in a large part
of the Heat Zone.

1n the East Zone, the principal trafficker is "Hazdinge." who replaced
Horacio Pidslgo-okilled sous years ago by the "Death Squadron." There are
other snail-tine pushers such as "Huleto," who operates in See Miguel
Paulista; Ernelindo Hateraszo, ltain Paulista and ferrsz de Vasconcelos.
"Hulato" is suspected of having shot a wooan to death some weeks ago when
she attespted to sell drugs in sous of the districts where he was accuse
toned to dealing.

in the Scuth Zone, in the lpiranga District. "Aleeao" is one of the main
sellers of nerihuana. ln Vila Olimpia, Cidade Honcoes and Brooklin. Jose de
Silva, "Capiau" police inforoant. was the principal aarihuane dealer.
"Capisu" was shot to death by addict Renato Ferrelra. The traffickers meet
to deliver narihuana to the "fliperanas," amusement parks and massage par-
lors. In [tail Bibi, in an elegant lassage parlor-caven frequented by "high"

23
authoritiesuthe use and traffic of cocaine was recently revealed. Anong
those who were accustoaed to having aassages and showers every week in this
parlor were proainent figures in Sao Paulo politics.

In the Center Zone. the district of Bela Vista continues to be an oper-
ations point for traffickers. particularly Santo Antonio and 13 de Haio
Streets. Near seas theaters. the addicts seek out the pushers who stay in
their autoaobiles and are soeetines confused with vehicle guards. In the
Olicerio low area and in Vi la Buarque. bars and nightclubs are the places
chosen for the distribution of narcotics.

More than 60.000 addicts. aostly narihuana and barbiturates (Pervetin and
Steneain). have records in the files in the one Narcotics Division. in the
past 2 years the nuaher of persons addicted to cocaine increased. Statis-
tics on the traffic and use of narcotics are unreliable in Brazil but the
Federal Police estiaate that there are approximately 500.000 addicts.

There are four factors. which according to psychiatrists lead to addiction:
curiosity-intentionally or not. curiosity leads an to narcotics; assertion.
challenged. nan accepts the narcotic in a gesture of assertion; escapism.
desperate because of problems of aaterial. moral or spiritual type. he
escapes fro. the- through drugs; illness. a an in a latent psychotic state
can be led to narcotics.

3.. is years-of-age. son of a judge. has been a cocaine addict since the
age of 13. hhen he was 12 years old. he began to saoke aarihuana at school.
The trafficksr who provided the "grass" induced hia to use cocaine. and in
order to obtain the drug. 8. began to sell it. Together with other minors.
he would go to Rio da Janeiro to buy cocaine at the leprosariua of
Jacarepagua. lie also bought it from a well-known politician in the city.
in one of the hillside slums of Rio. he becaae involved in a shootout anong
traffickers and was shot.

8. said that when he was in a convaleecent clinic. he earned five grams

of cocaine per day as a pusher. lie used his quota-cone gram-and he sold the
rest. During his talks with psychologists and psychiatrists. the minor con-
fessed that he lived in tents of narcotics. He escaped a few tines and

was taken back by his parents. who paid 10.000 cruzeiros per aonth to the
hospital. Al-ost a year ago. 8. left one aorning and never returned. Not
even his parents aanaged to convince hia to return. As far as the doctors
are concerned. 8. is practically a lost cause.

in the C linic

in a private clinic-which has an agreement with acne secretariats of state--
specialized in the treat-tent and rehabilitation of drug addicts. the police
discovered a short tiae ago that there was drug traffic within the estab-
lish-ent itself. An investigator was adaitted as an addict and soae weeks
later. traffickers. who entered on visiting day in the guise of friends

of patients. were arrested.

26
An intelligent person, one of the best students of his class in the Engl-
neering School in Bahia. P. cane to See Paulo [or rehabilitation. He was
addicted to cocaine. narihuana. morphine and injectable Pervitin. Because
of drugs he engaged in a number of holdups and he escaped from the clinic
twice. Today P.. at 32. with three children. has been rehabilitated. He
remained in Sao Paulo. obtained a job and made new friends. He is sure
that if he were to return to Salvador some day he could return to drugs:
"lts your colleagues." he said. "if you do not participate they call you a
coward."

B. is 38. harried. a manufacturer who lives in Barretoe. He was a cocaine
addict for l2 years. He snorted so much Cocaine dust that he had to go to
the United States to have his nasal septum repaired with platinum. He spent
a great deal of eoney on the drug and to pay the police to stay out of jail.

At this tine. despite the fact that he has been rehabilitated. 3. still
has the habits of a cocaine addict: he constantly places his hand to his
nose and sniffs.

L. IS years-of-age and daughter of a teacher and a lawyer. is a narihuana
addict. She has already been arrested a few times and confessed that her
first experience with narcotics was at the school where she studied at the
Higienopolis district. Later she fell in love with youngsters who were also
addicted. and even when admitted to several rehabilitation clinics. she
continued with her addiction. There are scores of young girls like L.

who fro. narihuana go on to barbiturates and then to cocaine.

LSD. according to doctors. is not physically addictive but it is much more
harnful than any narcotic. In the Nosso Lar Huean Relations Center of
ltapecerica da Serra, is H.. a philosophy student who ingested four doses
of acid at the sane tine and became conpletely unbalanced. He could not
get along with the other inestes and sonatines initated animals. For a
eonths he was examined every day by a medical board and he did not show any
improve-ant. His parents took hie to Europe to try to get him cured.

Access to Drugs

1. long haired. books and notebooks under his ens, J. l6 years-of-age. a stu-
dent at a school on Higienopolis Avenue. approaches a peanut vendor and asks
for "a saall bag of roasted peanuts. the special ones." He receives the
peanuts and two narihuana cigarettes. The pusher. a young l7-year old nan,

is arrested and confesses that he is a member of a group which sells drugs
near schools.

2. Driving a 500 cc motorcycle. H.. 20 years-of-age. son of a eanufacturer
and a second year law school student. arrives at an ice cream shop at
Gabriel Hontero da Silva Boulevard. He greets a group of scooter drivers
and he walks to a house where he fishes around in the leaves of a tree.

Hhen he returns he is arrested. In his possession the police find three

aarihuana cigarettes rolled with newspaper. 1n the garden wall are found
300 cruseiros left there for the dealer.

25
3. ll.. a successful husinesaaan. owner of a chain of drygoods stores

on 25 de llarco Street. with an approsiaste incone of 3 nillion cruzeiroa
per nonth. is arrested when he leaves a aaaha dance hall on llui Barbosa
Street in Bela Viata, with 30 graas of cocaine. At the police station he
confesses he is an addict and says that he receives the "asrchandise" in
acne nightclubs, at the septa dance hall and even at his place of bio-iness.

lo. 'I'. was arrested on Parapua Avenue in Vila Basilandia. In the satchel
he carried were found several l’ervitin aepules. a hypodereic syringe and
alnost half a kilo of urihuane which he had just bought. 1'. is a nonher
of a gang which engages in holdups. rapes and car thefts. When he was
arraigned he said that his fellow gang use-hers are only active when they
are drugged.

The Price of the llahit

Last week the l’edaral Police sent a report to its precincts listing the
present price of narcoticsuto the addicts and at the aource:

Harihuana: One run of "tininho" [narihuana leaves]. 20 cruzeiros; two
grams "hasaado" falso leaves], 50 cruzeiros; J-graa "trousinha" [literally
saall bundle]. $0 cruteiros; a S-graa "dolar“. loo cruteiros; a lo and 30
gran ”parango". 200 and 600 cruseiros; a ”quilonetro" (a kilo). 5.000
eruseiros. a kilo of urihuana costs 500 cruceiroa at the sources.

Cocaine: a one-gra- hag "papelota". l,500 cruzeiroa. a kilo of cocaine
costs 80.000 cruseiros at the source and the dealers sell it at prices which
range tron 500.000 to 600.000 cruzeiros.

ISO: 250 or 300 cruteiroa for a "aicro nto“ [literally a aicrodot. a
tablet with a colored drop of LSD on it 3 tablets, 200 cruzeiros each;
bag. l00 cruteiros, and pill, 200 and I400 cruzeiros.

Anphetaeine Salt: hag. 500 cr-uaeiros; gran 3.500 cmzeiros. a kilo. 2
nillion cruzeiros.

Pervitin: a-pule. loo cruzeiros: Desbutal. l0 pills for $00 cruzeiros;
Hendrix. $0 crueeiros per pill.

Barhiturates. according to the Federal Police list "are preferred by those
dependant on drugs who are no longer young. The other nind-hending drugs
are reaching a larger consunption anong the young. particularly aaong stu-
dents. lihcn Deshutsl hecoaes scarce on the illegal earket. those who have a
drug dependency usually six other aedicines which contain substances of that
drug. ‘lhey aka a sort of cocktail and they either drink it or inject it
intravenously.

26
The newest thing with respect to mixtures made by addicts. "consletn of
adding condensed milk to automobile brake fluid." it is taken orally.
lts effects are still not known by the police.

Brazil. the Connecting Point in latin America

Brazil is close to large cocaine producing areas such as Bolivia and Peru.
which together with Colombia are considered the greatest world producers of
that narcotic. for that reason the country has become the connecting and
reexportation point for cocaine to Europe and the United States.

in Sao Paulo, coca paste is turned into chlorate of cocaine--this also
happens in Rio de Janeiro--and is then placed on sale. The cocaine arrives
in Sao Paulo mainly from Bolivia, country with which Brazil has 3.l26 kilo-
eeters of border. The coca leaves are exported from Bolivia. Peru and
Colombia in lSO-kilo bundles or drums. which are sold as an average for
8300 each and transported in aircraft. trucks and trains.

However, to reach Brazil, the traffickers follow a route which begins in
Cochabamba or Santa Cruz de la Sierra, to Coruaba then Canpo Grande, and,
finally. Soo Paulo or Rio de Janeiro, where the drug is distributed. From
La Paz, cocaine arrives in Sao Paulo nainly by air after having been trans-
ported on the Mamore River by the traffickers to Guajara-Hirin. Porto Velho
and Rio Branco. from these places the drug is placed on small airplanes and
taken directly to areas near Sao Paulo.

The paths for the drugs are various. The Federal Police even discovared
routes that begin in Cochabaeba and reaching Bela Vista-~near the border
with Bolivia-othan passing through Aquidauana, Rondonopolis and Fatima do

Sul before arriving in Sao Paulo. in order to reach the capital, traffickers
in the majority of cases travel by car. when the drug is brought by
Bolivians. they use buses as well as airlines.

To avoid problems with the checkpoints set up by the Highway Police, the
Brazilians coming back with drugs "cut out“ many cities of the interior.
According to federal agents. the most common route is Presidente Prudente.
Penapolis, Bauru and Sao Paulo. According to the Drug Enforcement Ad-
uinistration (DEA) of the United States. the agency which operates through-
out nost of South America in the fight against drugs. more than 80 gangs
are involved in the coca traffic. Half of these groups are as sophisti-
cated and disciplined as the "families" of the Mafia. They have large
amounts of capital, work with $0 to 100 persons and have great influence,
which keeps the leaders from suffering the penalties of the law.

The transportation of refined cocaine from the producing countries, accord-
ing to the Federal Police. is also accomplished by passengers on nor-al
flights of private airline companies. by persons who provide themselves with
forged documents. trips by students who earn fro. $l.000 to 52,000 plus paid
expenses, and sonetiaes also by the crew eenbers of aircraft. ships.
launches. eerchsnt ships and vehicles.

27
Control Still Accomplished From Abroad

Mafia member Tomaso Massimo Buscetta. who was expelled from Brazil 6 years
agoo-he was installing a branch of the Mafia in Sao Paulo for the traffic
of nercoticouevsn though a prisoner in the city of Piedmont [ltaly] con-
tinues to lead an international organization called ”the Latin American
Connection."

Many stories are told about Tomaso. One of them is that he is free and
using an alias, living alternately in British Guiana and in Ecuador and
that he makes frequent trips to Sao Paulo. Another trafficker. who also
heads part of the drug traffic in Brazil. is Ricordi. now a prisoner in the
“it“ stat..a

ln Deceoher, 8ao Paulo police arrested traffickor Berthier Baceller. a
member of the Tomaso gang, in Rio de Janeiro. Lebron District. Police in-
spectors Angerami and Nelle and investigator Lasinho, who had been trying
to find Bertheir for some years. also seized i'our kilos of cocaine valued at
20 million cruzeiros. his drug was pure and with it the traffickel had
another lo kilos of narcotics. 0n the way to the precinct. where he would
be charged in Flagrante, Berthier allegedly proposed to the Sao Paulo police
that he be released in exchange for 5 million cruzeiroa plus the cocaine.
aertheir has been sentenced by the Sao Paulo courts and his imprisonment
caused the flight of several non. “contacts."

ln Sao Paulo. the activities of groups of trattickers linked to interna-
tional gangs are also being investigated by the DEA. which receives infor-
mation from the entire country. And through the DEA, the Federal Police
managed to arrest the seven Americans at Galeao Airport and seize 17 kilos
of cocaine and a laar Jet. There is the suspicion that those arrested were
involved with Bertheir Bacallar.

ﬂariluanao-the Greatest Consumption

After alcohol and tobacco. marihuana appears in statistics as the substance
most used throughout the world. Its use and abuse are increasing. increas-
ing and becoming more sophieticated in all areas. it is one of the most
ancient nonfood plants cultivated by man. its origins are lost in time.
Archeologicel research discovered that it existed years ago [presuoably
means centuries ago].

‘lhe name "Angola tobacco" points out the introduction of that plant into
Brazil by blacks from Africa who went to work in the sugar mills ol’ the
lbrtheest. 1he slaves brought hemp seeds in rag dolle tied to the end of
their loin-cloths. The use of marihuana increases the heart-beat rate.
causes tachycardia. a slight increase in blood pressure. stimulates the
appetite. dehydration, dilation of the pupils, drynese of mouth and throat.
dizziness. nausea and difficulty in concentration.
Harihuana users who cease using the drug do not show withdrawal symptoms
siailar to those caused by opiates. -

Transportation

During the oarihuana harvest season in Paraguay-drool June nnumenhers of
the gangs who help to transport narihuana to Brazil. go there. A survey
Isade by the Federal Police shows that sore than 50 percent of the uarihuana
used in Brazil. priaarily Rio and Sao Paulo. comes from Paraguay. The drug
is brought in luaber trucks. automobiles and aircraft which land at clandes-
tine airports.

in liato Grosso. Coruaba is the priaary point (or distribution. followed
by Cuiaba. Anapolis. in Goias is another important distribution center.
Pro- there the traffic is spread along different routes until it reaches
the large consumption areas. Ponts Pore is also another border point very
ouch used for the entry of Paraguayan aarihuans. The route reaches Rio
lrilhante. Dourados and Caapo Grands. 1here are aloe routes which pass
. through the cities of Bela Vista, Jardin, Aquidauana. Rondonopolis. Patina
do Solo-in Hato Grossouraaching Sao Paulo through the highway system. In
Parana. Paraguayan aarihuana enters primarily through Po: do iguacu. Once
past this city. the drug reaches Cascavel. Guarapuava. Ponta Grossa and
Curitiba and is then redistributed to Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. In
addition to Pot do lguacu. the city of Guaira is also an initial receiving
point tron narihuana. Frau Guaira the narcotic continues on to ”mourn".
Cianorte, Parenavai, Naringa, landrina, Cornelio Procopio, Jacarai and from
there enters into the state of Sao Paulo through Orinhos. The Federal Police
discovered that in recent months l.ondrina is becoaing an important narihuana

distribution center.

The "grass" that coaee from the north first passes through Rio de Janeiro
and irons there is redistributed to Sec Paulo and Belo Horizonte.

Barbiturates

'Ihe traffic in barbiturates (Pervitin and anphetanines) is carried out
through two countries of the River Plate Basin. Argentina and Uruguay,
the resin producers of Pervitin. a drug very much accepted by Brazilian
addicts. There are clandestine laboratories in Argentine and Uruguayan
territories. which devote themselves to the manufacture of Pervitin alone.
destined exclusively for the Brazilian market.

The cities of Uruguaiana, ltaqui. Sao Borja. Porto Lucena. Quarai. Santana
do Livraaento. Porto Acegu. Jaguarao, Chui. Rio Grande. Pelotas. Santa
Maria. Sao Leopoldo, Porto Alegre and Vacaria serve as a point of contact
for obtaining the drug. Pro- Rio Grandc do Sul, aaphetaaines are taken
to Parana. tron there entry into Sao Paulo is easy. Pervitin and Desbutal
also coae through Paraguay. entering along the border with liato Grosso and
Parana.

29
These drugs are such prised because their effects are similar to those of
cocaine. Traffic in Desbutal is concentrated in laboratories and pharmacies
through the misappropriation of stocks. free samples and illegal sales.

Cocaine and its Effects

Cocaine addicts in Sao Paulo inject the drug between the fingers and toes.
Hoaen also shoot into the inner part of the thigh and men into the underside
of the foreana because the heir hides the tracks. Snorting cocaine. however,
renains the cost usual way to use it. Pine point plastic pens or new bills
are used for inhalation into the nasal aucous membranes.

According to doctors heard by inspector Hurilo Hacedo Pcreirn. cocaine pro-
duces a state of psychological oxaltation. extremely strong in non. involving
feelings of euphoria greater than those produced by any other drugs. 1he
drug causes suicidal and hoaicidel tendencies. Under the effect of excessive
dosage. the addict believes that people are speaking about him or making
coo-ants about hie.

Psychological depression of the addict follows within 30 ainutes. That de-
pression is as intense as the previous sensations caused by the intravenous
injection of cocaine. Under the influence of coca. the pupils of the addict's
eyes reaein dilated and do not react to light. 1hey develop a nervous tic

and a tendency to rub their nose constantly. Ihey also grind their teeth.
1hey are headless and ozcited. it being difficult for then to pay attention

to anything.

1here are two types of cocaine poisoning: one characterized by a circula-
tory collapse. and another by syaptoas of poisoning of the central nervous
systea. The collapse occurs in persons after relatively small doses and is
characterized by pellor. vertigo, nausea, loss of pulse and consciousness.
foieoning of the nervous systea is characterised by delirium. increase in
reflexes. convulsions and violent behavior.

“hen the drug is first used. there is an increase in blood pressure. probable
result of the power of cocaine to constrict blood vessels. However. blood
pressure falls gradually as the central nervous systea stimulus caused by the
drug is followed by depression. 1hat begins in the cerebral cortex and
shortly thereafter reaches the lower centers (aedulla). If it was a very

big dose. depression will continue until breathing ceases. bringing on death.

Still according to Murilo ﬂacedo in his book "Coca-Cocoine." when use of
cocaine becoaes chronic. initial aentel stieuletion is followed by halluci-
nations. lact of appetite. declining interest in work. lack of ambition.

of will. negligence in personal hygiene and a mind without objectives.

The Beginning and End of Everything
”it is horrible the first tine: it causes dizziness. vomiting; it see-s that

the world is going to explode. After o few snorts it is practically ia-
possibla to leave the habit. Uhen an addict is already snorting two grans

30
of cocaine. it is the end of everything. He is e destroyed man, without
eotivation. who only thinks of one thing: death."

This stateuent was node by L.O.N.. 30 years-of-age. an addict since the age
of la, and who last week attempted suicide shooting hieself in the chest.
Adeitted to the Clinic Hospital, L.0.N. will be transferred to the psychi-
atric section of the hospital in the drug addict wing where another #0
addicts are receiving treatment.

Like L.O.N.. 20 narcotics addicts try to kill themselVea ovary month.
according to a survey made recently in the network of hospitals and first aid
stations. The police are still investigating the death of businessmen
ﬂilton de Sa a Silva. 53. married and the father of three children. who in
letters addressed to the secretary for security revealed that drugs (cocaine)
caused him to lose "almost everything I owned.“

Hilton was the owner of Servancin. a package delivery coapany which served
lore than half of the country in the delivery of correspondence. he always
drove new iaported cars. but in l973 he began to fail in his business. His
wife Threzinha de Sa e Silva declared (at the investigation on the death

at the lSth precinct) that she had been earried to ﬂilton for I? years and
that she began to notice her husband's behavior because "he did not sleep
such. and he drank too such."

According to Tbrezinha. when she asked her husband why he was always irri-
table. argued over anything and did not sleep "soeetiees for 2 or 3 days."
she found out that he was a cocaine addict. She tried to coeait him but
could not do it. hilton's relationships were with addicted Ian and woman.
and in June l977 she went so far as to consider a legal separation. "ﬂilton
said he would change and, indeed. for 3 months he had an exceplary behavior

until he returned to the habit and worse this time. He began to be obsessed
with the idea of suicide."

Ibrezinha declared that her husband "became an incorrigible addict in the
use of drugs."

hm htur

hilton de Se e Silva left a letter for the secretary of security, Col
Antonio Bras-o Dias. dated 26 November 1978. the day of the suicide. ln it
he eased five persons as being traffickers. addicts and seugglers. and he
asked the secretary to counsel his [6-year-old son. (see the text below).

Secretary Antonio Eras-o Dies ordered the inspector general to investigate
the charges aade by ﬂilton Sa e Silva. The Narcotics Division of the Dale
began an inquiry and several persons have already been heard. Of those

accused by the business-an. three are listed in that depart-ant as drug
traffickers.

31
Ricardo Roles, 38, lawyer, for-er police secretary, was questioned and a
dossier pads on his: at the Narcotics Division on 26 Move-her I969. lle was
accused by Pedro lioacir instein of being a cocaine dealer. He bought drugs
in Rio de Janeiro, according to Pedro, to be sold at a gambling club on
Rage Preitas Street.

Valdoairo da Silveire, "Dinho," Mo years-of-age, has had a record since li
October 1963. It is known that he is a habitue of a Seaba hall on Ruy
Barbosa Street in Vela Vista, and was charged in the investigation by the
for-er Vice Depart-ant of the 0316 and subsequently indicted. In April 1977
he was arrested by the Narcotics Division, accused of trafficking in drugs.

Adeeir Cury bitter, 32, is a businessman. On 20 January l977 he was arrested
for trafficking in cocaine. on 24 February of the seas year he was charged
in an investigation for selling Iaarihuna to Nerves Brocodo Halheiros. On
that sane day he was also accused of selling 30 grams of cocaine to ﬂelio
Assn.

Daniel Gargalach and Roberto Teixeira Nelti are being investigated by
the General Investigations Division.

The latter

The letter free liilton Silva to the secretary of security is as follows:
“Colonel Bras-o Dias. Knowing that you are a good aan and are concerned
for the safety and well-being of all who live in this city and state, this
is an appeal for you to investigate with the greatest dedication, the life
and habits of the persons 1 describe below: Dr Ricardo Dolos, Daniel
Gargalech, Valdeaar Silveira (Dinho), Adeair Cury [litter and Roberto
Teixeira Nelti (llilton provided the telephone number for all of then).

"Ricardo, a coca addict who induces other persons, even wooen to use it;
Daniel, an addict and sauggler; Valdemar, addict and trafficker who induces
ainors as well as married woeen into the habit; Adenir, a coca addict who
also uses cocaine intravenously; Roberto-a swindlur.

I shall now introduce ayself: llilton de Se e Silva, businessman, father

of three children, asrried and also an addict, having lost almost everything
I owned. 1 surrendered to drugs in order to destroy ayself and l have now
resolved to end ay life. Dr Ricardo Boles, because he is the friend and

lawyer of Dr Apolonio and sense investigators, assuusee the ownership of drugs
when acne friend is caught.

"in conclusion, as the father of family who leaves never to return, for the
love of God aalte a war on drugs. Hy son F is l6-years-old. invite his to
see you or visit hin, please, and counsel him in this respect. 1 hope that
you have great success in public life, goodby. llilton."

32

908
SO:

Cocaine
Cocaine
Harthuano
Barblturatcs

S300

.ﬂlﬂl

ﬁr-

owm cum: At: sAo Mum
REPORT ON DRUG ADDICTS ANONYMOUS ACTIVITIES IN SAO PAULO
Sso Paulo 0 ESTADO DE SAO PAULO in Portuguese 25 Jan 79 p 36

[Text] Solidarity and reporting of personal cases of drug dependency. ar-
rests and psychiatric treatment: every Hedneaday evening that scene is re-
peated in Sao Paulo and it is how Drug Addicts Anonymous was able to re-
habilitate 30 addicts during its 6 months of operation.

Its three founders. former alcoholics and drug addicts. had no trouble in
establishing their working method. One of them was already a member of
Alocholics Anonymous and decided to apply the same principles in rehabili-
tating drug addicts: periodic meetings where each member of the group
gives personal testimony. Above all. the basic intent of each participant
is "not to return to addiction."

Since the experiment has been successful. Drug Addicts Anonymous intends
to form other centers in Sao Paulo. Every Thursday they hold discussions
in the Maia Clinic. a Sao Paulo psychiatric hospital. and are ready to

guide and provide information to any person who intends to organize groups
in other states.

As in Alcoholics Anonymous. the program is entirely without charge. it at-
cepts no type of donation whatever and. although it operates nextdoor to
St. Jude's Church at 2920 ltacirs Avenue. Jabaqusra. it has no religious
nature. "There is no priest. physician. treatment. remedy. advice or any-

thing of the sort. Re are a group of persons discussing their common prob-
lems." one of the members says.

One of the founders of the group explained that persons do not come into it
saying that they are going to give up addiction forever: "Each 26 hours."

he says. "the individual renews himself. until he eventually arrives at the
stage of no longer feeling a need for drugs." The time of recovery. ac-

cording to him. depends upon each person. but the will to give up addiction
is essential.

The ex-addict comments that. unquestionably. life becomes more monotonous
after giving up addiction. "But relief from the so-called hangover." he

35
Itates with conviction. ”lakes up for it. to say nothing of nddiction's
lore advanced stage. which is paranoia."

The experience of all the group's participants is sinilar: "An addict is
a urginal person. The drug addict. who at first is just sick. beconea Inr-

ginalised. Ila begins to buy without noney. later turne to being a pusher
and. finally. because a trafficker."

Bach Rednesday evening. beginning at 2030 hours. when the seating opens.

the were of Drug Addicts Anonynous listen to a series of dramatic stories
that tell of drug dependency. fenily breakup. involvesent in traffic end.
at tines. death. arrest end long periods of confine-ent. And it is through
this therapy that they nanage to resist drugs.

Recalling his personal experience. A. C. says that he was an alcoholic and
a drug addict. “No years ago he was arrested for drug trafficking; he
served tine for being a pusher and associated with addicts. "l was always
under the influence of cocaine and alcohol.” he says. "I then decided to
enroll in Alcoholics Anonynous. because I saw no other possibility of re-
covery. I later felt the need to give up drugs. which are such sore diffi-

cult to give up than alcohol. At that point we forned the group and began
to work."

As n setter of fact. Drug Addicts Anonynous is a revitalized group. Seven
years ago a similar experinent was nttenptcd but. because of infiltration
by police trying to discover traffickers, the group eventually broke up.
Now. with the support of the D310 [Crininnl Investigations Depertnent].
especially the Narcotics Division. and deputy Carlos Perreira Castro. the
new group enrolls drug addicts. keeping their noses secret.

All rehabilitated ushers of the group now work for clinination of the
trefficlter. "lie in the big offender." says A. c.. "because he places the
pusher in strategic locations."

883‘
cso: 5300

36
POLICE UNCOVER MODE 0? DRUG ENTRY INTO RIO PRISONs
Brasilia CORRBIO IRAZILIBNSE in Portuguese 21 Jan 79 p 18

[Text] An operation carried out in the late hours of the night on the day
before yesterday by a teen free the lat Military Police Battalion resulted
in discovery of a nethod of traffickers for introducing drugs in the prison
coupler on Prei Canece Street [in Rio de Janeiro], where the Helio Genes,
Hilton Dias Horeire end Lenos Brits prisons are located. Authorities con-
cerned about entry of narihuane. cocaine and other narcotics into prisons.
considered to be the aain cause of recent killings there, decided to make a
raid on 8ao Carlos Hill. at the foot of which the prisons are located. and
aanaged to surprise the traffickers known as "2e Mauro." "Marquinhos" and
"Pernandinho." one of when was carrying a package under his era. Police
innediately formed a net to capture then. but the traffickers quickly be-
came aware of the operation and tried to shoot their way out, at the sane
tine sending the package they were carrying rolling down the hill: it landed
in a vacant area near the walls of Lenos Brito Penitentiary. The soldiers.
despite Iaking pursuit, lost track of the traffickers. but bceane intrigued
by the package they were carrying and decided to search the area where it
landed. which was covered with weeds and rubbish. After a thorough search
they found the package and. upon opening it. they found 56 small packages
of Isrihuans and 10 packets of cocaine. The seized aaterial was taken to
the let 3?“ [Military Police Battalion] and yesterday earning transferred
to the Narcotics Station in Praca Haua.

Lieutenant Honteiro. who has been asking a survey of the traffickers' ac-
tivities for several days. inforned reporters that he had been aware of
entry of drugs into the prisons by way of Sao Carlos Hill. Usually. ac-
cording to his. they go to the so-called Li-eira Pield and stay there await-
ing a signal from the prison to throw packages containing drugs and even
weapons. an action farilitated by the height of the hill. which at that
point is above Laurindo Rebels Street at a height of about 30 asters. where-
as that of the prison‘e interior is about 10 neters. The packages can thus
be thrown so as to land directly on the soccer field. where they are picked
up by prisoners who distribute the drugs to addicts.

8836
C80: 5300
37
“IBIS

mums MTlPllD-drasilia. 15 Jan (APP)--Bratil and Peru exchanged
ratiﬁcation. today on tvo agreuents. one on reciprocal assistance for
the repression of illegal drug trafficking and another on utilisation of
coastal stations and ships in the Anson region. Sinultaneously. an
exchange of ratification on an agreeaent on river transport and products
supply took place in Lina. All these agree-eats vere signed between the
tvo coutries by Presidents Ernesto Ciesel and Prancisco Horsles bernudea
in Dec-her 1976. [Paris APP in Spanish 003‘ (m 16 Jan 79 P?!

owe MICE” ARRESTED—Jose Veloao Pilho. 28 and single has been
arrested with 1 kg of pure cocaine by the Sao Paulo police of the criainsl
investigations departaent. With the infomtion provided by Veloso. the
police arrested other drug traffickers and addicts in Sao Paulo. Veloso
had bought the cocaine in San Platiaa village in bolivia. lie was followed
and photographed by investigations police of the operations and inforns-
tion service. [Sao Paulo 0 mm D! 8A0 mum in Portuguese 18 Jan 79

p 28 P1]

MAJOR BIASILM mmczns WIrasilia-In the satellite city of
‘rsguatu. near Brasilia. federal police yesterday seized 3S kilograas of
Isrihuana which one fro. the city of Pedro Juan Caballero. Paraguay. and
which was in the hands of three traffickers. According to the DP! [Federal
Police Depart-ant]. the asrchandiae is valued at about 1.5 aillion cruseiros.
the largest amount ever seissd in the Pederal District. The DP? also re-
ported tbat the three traffickers. vhoae ones were not divulged. are re-
sponsible for a large part of drug distribution on the Brasilia region—

one of the nation‘s asjor consuning centers. [Text] [Rio de Janeiro 0
61.030 in Portuguese 2‘ Jan 79 p 3] 8836

cso: 5300

... ~""

—.. -wﬂav
BRIEFS

have TRAFFICKBRS’ ARREST--Gunyequil, 7 Feb (APP)--Interpol agentn hnve
contineeted 8 kg of canine pente which wen to be nent to the United Staten.

They nlno nrrented where of n nnrcoticn gens led by Onlo Cnnenn, who con—
(enned thnt he bought the cocnine in Peru to be refined in Ouaynquii. The
other Ienbern of the sen; were identified en Ger-en Cueve, Felipe Riven.

Glorin Ortiz end Pedro Velez. [Perin AP? in Spnninh 1838 GMT 7 Feb 79 PA]

680: $300

39
[Article by George Baird]

mm: m Ann “108 YIELD 1 Human DOW um 01' MRIHUAM

Georgetown mm maucu in Buglhh b Feb 79 p l

uwum mummuu¢

gummy WM.

 

m
d.
n.
d
.

 

.hnmmw hum m-“mmwmmuuu
,2“ ”ML” "maﬁgm a.
_,. amfmm x: mm: ~er mum.
farm 2L mm: In Fa

mum. routers ACCUSED or mama Di Imus nouns
hueyo Lardo ll. mum in Spanieh 19 Jan 79 See A p 5

[Text] liexico City. 18 January—hderal Deputy Agapito Gonzalez Caveroe, gen-
eral eacretary oi the Hate-oroa Uorhera Yederation. declared: "In over a year
during which they have been aeeigned to coehet the drug traffic in northern
Tenaulipae. groupa oi agente iron the rederal Security iorcea and the Pederel
Judicial Police have not nade any drug diecoveriee. but have. indeed. epreed
terror in the area.”

The legialator added: “strangely enough. during the period in which the fed-
eral agente have operated. there have been any kidnappinga, including that
of Arturo Garza Cantu. of Rio Bravo. who waa held for 3 aontha. after which
he wa'a releaaed in the Federal Diatrict. and hed 3 nillion peeoa taken fro-
hia.

Deputy Gonzalez announced that he had already brought a coqlaint to the pre-
aident of the republic; and. upon being naked whether it wea not dangerous
for hia peraonally to expoee the federal egente, he eaid that hia public
atateaenta were in thenaelvee a guarantee of eecurity.

lie aid that. laet year. there had been eewerel kidnappinga or individuale
who were later lound dead.

lie cited the ceeea of a peraon neaed Andaru. end a driver. both of when were
kidnapped and killed.

lie aaid that the rederal Judicial Police have adopted the eyotea of arreeting
reaidenta of Hate-oroa. and taking the: to Nuevo Laredo. allegedly for inven-

tisetion, end vice veree.

lie aid that the logical procedurea when anyonein held for inveatigation in a
particular town ta to put hia in jail in that location.

The federal deputy eaid that the Pederel Security and Federal Judicial Police
groupa are operating annoy-ouely and dieeociated fro- the local euthoritiee.
”of who. they take no account.” lie added: "It in known that there are special
groupa of agente. because they arbitrarily erreat reaidenta of Tanaulipaa in
eearch of druga. but they have not found any."

2909 .

(:30: 5330 62
‘l'lJUAMA 3AM MANAGER ARRESTED NR DRUG SMUGGLIMG
Mexicali LA V02 03 LA PRONTERA in Spanieh 10 Jan 79 Sec 3 9 lb

[Text] Tijuana-8arly thie year. the Federal Judicial Police have dealt anoth-
er heavy blow to the drug traffic. by arreating Ignacio Rivera Vargas. manager
of the Rural Branch of IAMCOMER [bank of Commerce] in this city. after an ex-

hauative inveetigation which proved thatRivcra Vargas wee a key figure in the

drug traffic between Mexico and the United Statee.

In an operation conducted aimultaneouely with the capture of Rivera Vargas.
officiale from the DEA [Drug anorceaent Agency] arrested Martin teal Pala-
tueloe. Gilberto Alfredo Leal. Alberto Buetamantc Padilla and Miguel Bazan
Padilla. in Loo Angelea. California. They are alao neobera of Ritcrn Vergna'
ring. vho had in their poeeeeaion l kilograa of cocaine valued at $1 million.

following theae arreete. Luie Munberto lazan. an accomplice of the aforemen-
tioned individuale and owner of the ”Lee Golondrinae” restaurant. at P and
7th Streeta, wee alao captured in Tijuana.

All of thie action wee directed in Mexico City by Gen Joaquin Figueroa Luna.
and on thie border by Carloe Aguilar Garza. coordinator of the antidrug can-
paign in the northweatern part of the country.

According to Aguilar Garza. the aforementioned banker was arrested in the bank
where he worked. located at 201 Bacuedron Street at Salinas Boulevard. while
he wee teeting the quality of a "batch" of 25 green of cocaine. an an to noti-
iy Loo Angelee of the reeulte of that "teat." eo that they could pick up the
druge; becauee the money had already been paid and depoaited in the bank.

It waa alao said that Rivera Vargae. aged 32. had been employed by BAMCOMER
for 8 yeare and had been engaged in drug trafficking for a long time. using
hie own office in the banking inatitution for hia illegal activitiea.

All thoae under erreet have confeeaed. and have been held in the Federal Judi-
cial Police jail in thie city. eince thie inveetigation. which began at 1900
houre laet friday.

2909
680: 5330

63
W W with mom M SM
Nexicali LA V02 DB LA mm is Spanish 20 Jan 79 Sec B p 16

[Text] Hexicali—ln two heavy blows dealt to the drug traffic. the Pedersl Ju-

dicial Police seissd 398.5 green of heroin fros Sinsloa. and succeeded in ar-
resting four suspects.

Under arrest are lluﬂwerto Can-cho Pelix. aged 50. a native of Pericos. Sina-
loa. and his wife. Bstela Gonzalez de Canacho.sged ‘5. a native of Hocorito.
Sinsloa. who reside at 1339 Vicente Suarez Street; as well as Eva Chavez 1's-
pia. aged ‘2. of Zihuatanajeo. Guerrero. who resides at 1633 Rasos Arizpe
Street.

Castulo hanjarres Calderon. and an individual known only as Vrancisco “N.”
sliss ”Pancho.“ are still at large.

According to the investigation conducted by Pederal Public Ministry agent
Oscar Felipe Castro San lhrtin. huaherto Canacho Pelix has a nachine shop.
which was visited about 8 sonths ago by Francisco "N.” alias "Pancho." who
wanted his truck repaired. 'i'hey becsae friends. because they are fro. the
seas location.

On 19 Deceder 1978. Pancho returned to the shop. but with Castulo Hanjarre:
Calderon. who lives at 11:33 Raaos Arirpe Street. with Eva Chavez Tapia. They
wanted his to repair the truck again. and asked his to give lodging to Pancho.
At the sane tins, they offered hia a good business in which he could earn
"asny fine dollars."

They specifically requested that he take Pancho to Csstulo'a house to sell cone
of the 18 portions of heroin that he had brought froa Sinaloa. In 2 days.
Castulo notified underto that the purchaser was at his house. advising his

to bring Pancho.

lie did so and. upon reaching Castulo's house. he found a young man waiting
for then in the kitchen. Pancho turned over the drugs to the owner of the
house: and the latter. in turn. gave then to the purchaser. who paid $19,200
for eight portions.
Of that asount of honey. $9.600 went to Pancho. and saoo to Humberto. for
having brought his. Pancho still had 10 more portions. and Caatulo was to
notify huaberto again when there was another purchaser.

Castulo went to Sinaloa a few days later. and Pancho becaae tired of remaining
there without d ing any illegal bualnesa. Therefore. at the beginning of the
year he decided to go to that sane state. and left the drugs with Nunberto.
with the instruction that he was to sell then for $1.800 a portion. and that
he would receive $900 of that so. for each one. Nunberto gave the drugs to
his wife. Sstelo. to hide.

A few days ago. Eva Chavez Tapia told then that there was a purchaser at her
house. Estela put the drugs into her handbag and. as they were leaving the

house they were arrested by the Federal Judicial Police. who arrested Eva
shortly thereafter.

In this blow. they seized 256.5 grams of heroin.

Another Blow

The other blow ended in the arrest of Ramon Alvarez Barrera. aged 29. from
Navolato. Sinaloa. fro. who- they seized 163 grass of heroin that he had con-
cealed under the sink in the hotel roos that he was occupying.

Federal Judicial Police agents captured his at the Orizaba Hotel on Alcerreca
Avenue. where he was staying in Roos No 7.

Upon being questioned. he confessed that he had cone fros Navolato a few days
earlier carrying 8 portion of heroin. that he had bought for 80.000 pesos.

he stayed with a cowsnion pt the Cucapa Hotel. and succeeded in selling two
portions of the drug for $7.000.

he kept $500 of that amount. and sent a check for $6.500 to Sinaloa with the
person accoapsnying his.

Last Friday. he changed hotels and. on Saturday. they arrested him at the Ori-
subs. as he was leaving.

2909
C30: 5330

65
"MIN TWICRINO DISCOVERED Iﬂ REHABILITATION CENTER
Insate‘s Accosplicss Identified
Nuevo Laredo Kl. DIARIO DB NUEVO MRSDO in Spanish 13 Jan 79 Sec 8 p I;

[Tent] Drug trafficking was discovered in the municipal prison when Federal
Judicial Police agents nansged to seize from innate Bailio Flores Ncndosa 20
grass of heroin that was to be distributed among the addicts in that location.

In a fast raid asde by the agents at the Social Rehabilitation Center. upon
searching the insates' cells they found that the aforementioned drug was hidden
in the call occupied by federal prisoner Emilio Plores Hendoea. It was confis-
cated by the seabers of that policy entity.

when the innate was questioned. he said that the heroin had been brought into
the La Loss prison by his wife. Angelina Flores. who is a fugitive froa jus-
tice. She did this illegally on several occasions and, upon visiting hin. hid
the drugs in her belongings. giving thee to her husband once she was in his
cell.

In connection with this case. and after the confession ends by Emilio Flores
hendosa to the agents. it was also established that an individual who answers
to the naae of Jesus lolano Liscano. aged 35. and a resident of 5514 Gutier-
res Street.took part in the distribution of the drugs.

The agents captured this individual in his own hose. and took his to the of-
fices of the police entity for questioning. he confessed that the confiscated
drugs were part of a large shipsent that had been sent a few days ago to the
United States. adaitting that he worked for the federal prisoner. Sailio Plo-
res Mendoza. who is serving a 6-year prison sentence for crises against health.
consisting of the possession and trafficking of drugs.

federal Judicial Police forces are intensifying the investigntion of this case
in order to discover the whereabouts of Plores hendosa's wife. uho has been
supplying hia with these drugs inside of the prison.

66
'l‘refﬂckere Hake Preli-inary State-ants
ﬂuevo Laredo Ill. MARIO I)! «um LARBDO in upenlnh 18 Jan 79 3°C 3 P 3

[Text] Today. three individuals uho ere serving sentences tor Criees against
heelth will nets their prelininery enter-eats in a new trial that has been
initiated in their cent for the sees crine.

At 0930 hours this norning. in the third district court. a series of probes
viii teke piece in order to entehiinh the presumed guilt of Jesus boianos
Lieeano. Fred lechtt end lento mores Mendoza. egath than the Office of
the Attorney Oenerei oi the Republic has brought charges or a crime egninst
health in the degree of heron treﬂtcling.

On 12 January. federal Judicial Police egents raided the in Lone nunicipal
prison to nuke e enerch. and found hiiio Pioree biendoze to have 20 green of
heroin in hie pomeeion.

Hhen questioned. Ploree iiendou conteued the: his accoqiices were Jesus Bo-
lenoe Lieceno end the Anseicen, Prod beekett. sdeitting that the drugs found
in his poeeeeeion hed been brought to hie by his wife. Angeline flares. who

has not been epprehended.

2909
680: $330

1'07
BRIE”

OOAHUILA SWING SITES IDBNTHIBDm-Torreon. Coahuila-wln this ihtense bat-
tle against drug trafficking. the intention is to eradicate it completely.
According to infomtion provided by the consnder of the Federal Judicial
Police detailed here. Hr Luis Huarecha Lopez, it has been discovered from
drug traffickers that the lake region is the backup point for the illegal
ship-ant of large amounts of sarihuana and other drugs to border towns and
fron there to the United States. It was also learned that the smugglers are
still using the rather well-known location of Ceca de San Pedro. Ooahuila

(a night-tins airport), as a landing strip for aircraft carrying contraband
items, which return loaded with narihuana. According to records bn file
here, there have been shipments of drugs brought from Oaxaca, Guerrero,
Hichaocan and Sinaloa; added to the fact that. in the direction of 'rlahual-
lilo. wrango, it was known previously that there were clandestine landing
strips located as well. used by mgglers and drug traffickers. bondr Hua-
racha Lopez likewise reported that. this week. they would be receiving from
the Federal Judicial Police headquarters a special sir-seat plane for flying
at high altitudes and landing within a radius of 100 aeters. with which they
can readily detect the snugglars from the air, and eliminate them completely.
[Text] [Piedrss Negras El. MARIO DE PIEDMS NEGRAS in Spanish 16 Jan 79 p 8]

2909

3mm TRAFFICKBRS SENTENCE-4PM state‘s second district judge. c'ayetsno
hemandez Valencia, sentenced eight drug traffickers this week to over 60
years in prison and isposed fines of 50,000 pesos on then. The c'ourt offices
announced that the sentenced drug traffickers are the following: Lucio Ortega
Villegss. sentenced to 5 years and 8 months in jail, and a fine of 5.000 pesos;
Jose Ernesto Hana Ruiz. 5 years and 3 months. and a fine of 5,000 pesos; Mario
Benny Zepeda and Juan olguin Estrada, 5 years and 3 nonths, and a fine of 5,000
pesos each; Rodrigo Ramirez Vazquez and Rene Luzania Acosta, both 6 years'
inprisonnent and a fine of 10.000 pesos; Oscar Enrique Astiguieta Luna. 5
years and 6 soothe, and a fine of 5.000 pesos; and Cristoforo Buelna Cote.

5 years and 3 aontha, and a fine of 5.000 pesos. All of the convicted drug
traffickers are incarcerated in the local Social Rehabilitation Center. [Text]
[Nogales DIARIO DB NOGALBS in Spanish 12 Jan 79 p 6] 2909

’48
HBROIN TWPICKBR DENIED APPEAI.-—Yesterday. the district judge. Eduardo Agui-
lar. notified the nevspsper El. DIARIO that the sentence imposed on drug traf-
ficker Moises Alsarnz Medina had been confirned by the Iangistrste oi‘ the
Eighth Circuit United Court located in Torreon. Coahuila. it vas said that
Moises Alnaraz Medina filed an appeal. because he considered the sentence

set by the district Judge to be to severe. but that appeal did him no good.
because the united court decided that the sentence passed on Allaraz Medina.
who is nicknaned "La Yufs." should remain as it was. that is. 6 years' in-
prisonnent and s fine of 10.000 pesos. As may be recalled. "La Yufn" was ar-
rested by the Federal Judicial Police with a package containing heroin in his
possession. Yesterday. the amount with which he was captured was not reported.
or rather was not repeated. A trial was held for the crime of possession and
attsspt to sell herein. in the pertinent degrees. [Text] [Piedras Negros El
MARIO DE PIEDMS NEW in Spanish 13 Jan 79 See A p lo] 2909

POLICE CHIRP LED TWPICKERSv—Mazatlan. 23 January-The Pederal Judicial Po-
lice broke up s drug trafficking ring which was headed by the municipal po-
lice chiei‘ of Santa Catarina. Pranciaco Cruz Tirade. and seized fros then
half a ton of narihuana. a snail truck. on electric bag sealer and several
heavy caliber weapons. and destroyed seweral of their narihuana plantations.
The Federal Public Ministry agent. Jose Luis Flores Medellin, made the fore-
going announcement. stating that. together with the police chief. his accen-
plices, Sebastian Cruz llernsndez, Joaquin Cruz and Jesus Valdez Cabanillas.
were arrested. They adsitted to being growers of narihuana which. with the
protection of the municipal police chief, they were shipping to Mazatlan.
where they sold the grass to various purchasers. [Text] [Muevo Laredo EL
MANANA in Spanish 210 Jan 79 See A p S] 2909

ABANDONED MARIHUANA CARRIER POUND—Near Miguel Alena. individuals engaged in
drug trafficking left a tank truck which apparently had been used to ship
Isrihuana abandoned. Yesterday sorning. at a press conference, the coor-
dinator of the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic for the north-
eastern area, Alfredo Aaron Juarez Jimenez. announced the action taken by
Federal Judicial Police agents last Tuesday near Miguel Alennn. The group
headed by Co-ir Margarito Mendez Rico and Group Chief Mario Arsgon found a
tank truck with a 39.000-liter capacity abandoned. The vehicle had been left
at the side of the highvay. and is presuned to belong to some American com-
pany. The federal agents searched the tank truck and discovered a false bot-
ton in which they found numerous traces of narihuana. Hence. it is believed
that the traffickers used it for shipping narihuana from the interior of the
country to the border at Tanaulipas. The federal authorities did not provide
further information on the discovery of the tank truck, because they have
been conducting a detailed investigation in order to expose a well organized
ring of drug traffickers. lText) [Nuevo Laredo EL MARIO DE NUBVO LAREIX) in
Spanish 18 Jan 79 Sec 8 p 3] 2909

69
AMERICANS CAUGHT HIT“ MSHISII-«ﬂ'he Federal Judicial Police seized a moderate
amount or narihuans and Inashish from the Mericans Ross McPhee and Non-an
Darrnch. who. they succeeded in capturing Thursday evening, in a gap connect-
ing the River and National Highways. The two iorelgners were carrying 5
grass of hashish and 10 green oi ssrihunna in their car. Yesterday, both

of then were being closely questioned by the Federal Judicial Police in or-
der to identify and arrest the one or more individuals who supplied then with
the storeuentioned drugs. Reports from the federal Public Ministry agency
indicate that, on Thursday evening, several federal agents were making a
inspection tour of the gap in question. They proceeded to intercept a car
carrying Ross and Nor-an, who were driving toward this town. but who used
that gap as a detour in order to evade the police vigilance. 'l‘wo emll pack-
ages were found in the glove coepartuent of the vehicle, one containing Ina-
rihuana. and the other hashish. [Text] [Nuevo Laredo EL mum in Spanish 20
Jan 79 Sec B p 3] 2909

080: 5330

50
POI! OPPICIAI. US! ONLY

PERU

BRIEFS

mnmm manta—m verden and no of the gusrds of wrignncho
Prison in Line have been errested in connc ~ ion with drug trsfficking. Hor-
den lreulio Msrtines lull-s vss errestcd for eccepting s 815.000 bribe from
drug trsfficksrs tosuov then to escape fro. the prison. After the escape,
he reported the bribe end turned in 87,500. pocketing the rest of the noncy.
nesnvhile. prison gusrd Pedro Vivsnco vss srrested for serving es an inter-
nedisry betveen bends which process end sell drugs. [Lise rum in Spanish

to rm Haven. 191‘ err 11 Feb 79 PA]

mm “8' Amman-a, 6 Peb (am-mm Peruvisn lice

errested three drug sense which operated in Cuzco Dcpsrtnzzt. Anti-ding
to the report one trsfficker was srrestsd st tho mrco airport with 11 kg
of besic coceins pesto. In other psrts of Moo nspsrtnent the police
ssised products used to IIIII cocos leaves. Another water was arrested
with 1/2 h; of coceine. In e11 three cuss the persons srrested seve the
uses of their scco-plices. [Madrid m in Spsnish 0301 our 7 Feb 79 PA]

coo: $300

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
AIR FORCE ORDERED 1‘0 SIlOO‘l‘ DOHN DRUG TRAFFICKBRS' PLANES
Mid 313 in Spaniah 1702 our 28 Jan 79 PA

[1on1 oaracaa. 28 Jan (In)--Vonomoian Prooidcnt Carioc Andra Pore: today oniuvd tho
air {cm to ahcct Com any III-rind piano ﬂying car natimai torritory which dooo not
coo: onion to Martin itacit. carioa mum Pom amcmood tho dooiaion during a met.
in; with iocai novcacn in the city of son Cx-iotcoai. 700 in Iron Caracas. Tho Vcnozuoian
proaidcnt acid that tho our-polo oi‘ this dociaim ia to cnd tho contraband and drug traffic
tro- othor oomtrioa mich have turned Vcnomlu into an mumatimci bricco for an;
trai'i‘iclura. Tho procidcnt cairn 'i Mvc givan onion-a to tho Vonomaian Air romo to

ahoct Com any cirpllnc “huh in \lllcrlocd. dcoa not identity itaclr or doca not asroo to
1am at a Vmomian airport.“

Ilc ciao ammod that Vcnemlcn authoritioa, in coordination with the Coin-him comment.
havo oatabiilhoc an cporaticn ct apccini vigilance againat intornaticnai drug traffickora.
Porn indicatoc tut Vmowolc haa aiao tom opcratima with tho united states to oiiaincte
drug trafficking or at ioaat dconaoo it. “No arc cmi‘rmtins coacthina that u:- have to
tiaht with m our churn." he raid. adding that “no an facing ono of tho aoat comic-won
and aboainabio criaoc which throatona not only tho individual. but m of cocioty.‘

ho aiac aid that tho crow of a 0.8. piano thich montiy imdod in Paicm state. tic-torn
Vonoluclc. In coming voapma to ho cxohangod for dma in Colodtia.

cso: 5300

52