APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00080R000100080017-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050017-7

FOR OFHCIAL USE (MY

mas mom
a My 1919

TRANSLATIMS ON USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

J

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100050017-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports| and material enclosed .. brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times uithin items are as
given by sourCe.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the v.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSKIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED ”EREIS REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FGROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRSL
8M3y

TRANSLATIWS ON USSR POLITICAL
AND SOCIOLOGICAL AFFAIRS
(moo 6/79)
CONTENTS
mom.
Article Mu Background of SAW-II Talks

(Roan-lav Georsiyevich Mohawk”; VOPROSY 19m: ,
lo 3, 1919) ........................................

MORAL

Kurdish Population or 083! breathed
(a. A. Manon; moo! 1mm 11, 1962) .........
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm

ARTICIE MINES BACKGRWND 0F SALT-II m
Hoscow VOPROSY iS‘l‘ORll in Russian 80 3. 1979 signed to press 5 Mar 79 pp 70-86

[Article by llostislav Georgiyevich Movskiy. senior researcher. Institute
of the United States and Canada. USSR Academy of Sciences. specialist in the
field of 0.8. military policy! "Soviet-American Talks on the Limitation of
Strategic Arms.“ Passages in slantlines printed in italics]

[Text] The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) became possible only thanks
to the quarter-century struggle of the Soviet Union to strengthen its secur-
ity and that of its allies. during the strategic nuclear arms race unleased
against it by US ruling circles. The rain trend in this struggle was overcoming
the stubborn US desire to achieve decisive nuclear superiority in order to by
force solve to its advantage the fundamental contradiction of the contemporary
epoch--the contradiction between socialism and capitalism.

Hultilateral talks on disarmament within UN fraeworks preceded bilateral
Soviet-American talks. On 19 June was at the UN Atomic Cos-ission the USSR

put forth a draft international convention on caplete and unconditional pro-
hibition of the production and deployment of atomic weapons. The draft conven-
tion had as its foundation recognition of the principle of equality and equal
security of all signatories. however. during discussion of the Soviet proposal
in the Atomic Coulission. the us succeeded in diverting it and instea'. proposed
the so—called Baruch Plan. which was directed towards strengthening the American
nuclear monopoly. It did not envision any specific nuclear disarmament measures.
Its authors considerzd disarmament as a matter for the distant future. Naturally.
the "Baruch Plan" was rejected by the Soviet Union. This were noted two opposing
approaches to the proqu of nuclear disarmament! the Soviet approach directed
towards achievement of equality and equal security for all states. and the Ameri-
can approach designed to insure US military superiority. During further disarm-
ament talks the United States repeatedly put forth "initiatives." which however

invariably contained attempts to achieve unilateral military superiority to the
detrinent of the USSR.

1
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This problem attracted the close attention of Soviet scholars.1 Examined in
this article is the contemporary stage of Soviet-American talks on the limita-
tion of strategic arms.

ll. American propaganda and the realities of the arms race./ in response

to questions from the German Social Democrat Party weekly VORHAERTS. CPSU
General Secretary and chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium

l... l. Brezhnev underscored that ”the arms race developed on the principle of
'action-reaction'i the Rest put forth the challenge, the Soviet Union had to
accept it. So it was during the entire period from the first atomic bomb to
the present day. And. the beginning of each new spiral in the arms race is2
invariably accompanied by a new wave of wailim about the 'Soviet threat'."
The U.S.A. was invariably the initiator in this race. Forced to consider world
public opinion. U.S. leaders in order to justify their regular militaristic steps
invariably turned to the false thesis of the "Soviet threat." striving to shift
the responsibility for the arms race to the Soviet Union. First the USSR is
said to have ”threatening” intentions. and then the necessity is expressed to
develop am for their ”neutralization.“

Each successive round in the arms race was justified in this manner. In the
mid-1950's. to provide a "basis" for a spurt in nuclear-capable aircraft. the
U.S.A. announced that the Americans supposedly lagged behind the USSR in strategic
aviation (”the bomber gap"). For the purpose of overcoming this lag first the
DI. Truman administration and then the D. Eisenhower administration began unprec-
edented programs to build strategic bombers and accumulate nuclear and thermo-
nuclear bombs. The U.S.A. simltaneously began a broad program of construction
of air bases for strategic bombers on the territories of allied states near USSR
borders.3 The role of main striking force fell to strategic aviation. Masked
by the thesis of the ”bombez gap." in the 1950's the U.S.A. brought the number
of bombers to almost 2,000.

In the late 1950's and early 1960's Pentagon leaders. preparing a new round in
the arms race--the nuclear missile round--again put forth assertions about the
"Soviet threat.” This time they linked it with a so-called "missile gap” with
the USSR. u.s. Secretary of Defense N. HcElroy announced in 1959 that the
Soviet Union was capable in a short time of creating large intercontinental
ballistic missile forces gup to 1.500 units in 1963) and of significantly over-
taking the United States. HcElroy's successor R. HcNamara by 1962 had already
called the thesis of the ”missile gap" a myth. Nontheless. under its cover. the
J. Kennedy administration deployed the nuclear missile component of its strategic
forcesuintercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBH) and ballistic missiles on
missile-equipped submarines (Si-BU).

Nor is the modern stage in the arms race an exception. Placing a "base" beneath
the program of deploying missiles with multiple independently targetable reentry
vehicles (R6611) [MIN]. Hashington began to assert that the Soviet Union pos-
sessed the capability of conducting limited nuclear war against the U.S.A.6
because of this the task was assigned so that the U.S.A. would possess the same

capability. This. in particular. also served as a pretext for a new stage in
the arms race. 1.. I. lrezhnev in a conversation with leading American political

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

figure A. Harriman expressed the Soviet position on limited nuclear war. In-
formation on this conversation presented the American leader's words ”that

l... l. Brezhnev categorically disagreed with the theories being developed by
someone in the U.S.A. of so-called ’limited' nuclear war. The Soviet leader
emphasized Harriman, thinks that it is a big mistake to talk about the per-
missibility of ’limited' nuclear war. 9ne must add to this the exclusion

of any type of nuclear war whatsoever.”

The main goal which the U.S.A. pirsued in initiating new spirals of the arms
race was the desire by American ruling circles to achieve military-technical
and strategic superiority over the USSR.

The Soviet Union’s imperative actions in the area of creating and deploying

new strategic weapon systems undoubtedly had a reciprocal nature. 1.. I. Brezhnev
specially underscored this aspect of the problem! "These circles in the U.S.A.
and in the countries allied with it. which are against detente. strive to spur
on the arms race. and are now trying to shift the responsibility for this race
on the Soviet Union. This is a clear distortion of reality. . .Generally-known
facts show that the arms race and competition in creation of the most dangerous
types of mass destruction weapons were forced upon us. He did not initiate
creation of atomig bombs. suuarines with strategic missiles. cluster warheads.
and many others.

J. F. Dulles once wrote’ ”Such rapid assimilation by the Soviets of atomic
bomb production is truly a gigantic success for the Soviet Union and the end

of the 0.5. nuclear monopoly will exert such a far-reaching influence on the
world situation that it is now difficult to imagine. . . Ending our monopoly.
the Soviet Union in so doing radically changed the strategic situation in its
favor. The capability of the United States to drop nuclear bombs on Russia

has been neutralized to a significant degree by the latter's capability to drop
nuclear bombs on the United States and Hestern Europe."9 having lost nuclear
weapon monopoly. the U.S.A. relied upon thermonuclear weapons. However. the
Soviet Union solved this problem ahead of the U.S.A. The USSR tested the world's
first thermonuclear charge on 12 August 1953. Evaluating the military and polit-
ical consequences of this fact for the U.S.A.. the then American Secretary of
the Air Force T. Finletter wrote! "The hydrogen bomb has changed the entire
situation." ”In this instance." he continued. ”the security of our nation has
been affected in a different way than was the case with the appearance of the
atomic bomb. The atomic bomb in l9h5-l95lo was not a mortal threat for the
United States. For four years of these nine we alone possessed the atomic bomb.
During the remaining five years the Russians did not have a sufficient quantity
of these bombs to destroy the llnited States. Now in a short time the Russians
will have a sufficient number of hydrogen bombs so that a small portion will be
capable of destroying the United States."10

in the 1950's the USSR built its intercontinental bombers in response to the
sharp growth in the number of u.s. strategic bombers. Evaluating the consequences
of the Soviet response. H. Kissinger wrote in 19578 "Creation in the Soviet
Union of intercontinental bombers capable of flying enormous distances and
returning to their bases. along with the increase in the Soviet reserves of
nuclear weapons. was the cause of the fundamental change in the strategic

balance of forces in the postwar period."n

3
son omcIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The USSR responded to the nuclear missile round of the arms race initiated

in the 1960's by the U.S.A. by strengthening of its own nuclear missile
potential. In early 1963 U.S. DefenseSecretary McNamara was forced to

admit that the Soviet Union's reciprocal measures to increase its defense
capability do not give the u.s.a. the capability through a preemptive
nuclear missile strike to destroy Soviet strategic forces and escape the
corresponding response from the USSR.12 This conclusion has not lost its
significance even today. is it possible to overestimate its military-political
significancet the strategic might of the USSR deters imperialist nuclear
aggression. "Re have created strategic forces. which are a reliable means

of deterring any aggressor,“ L. I. Brezhnev pointed out. "And, we will respond
with the requisite increase in military power which guarantees our defense to
any new attempts from any quarter to insure military superiority over the USSR.
He can take no other course.“u

It is evident from the American evaluations presented above that. thanks to
the timely and decisive reciprocal measures of the Soviet Union. the U.S.A.
practically speaking has been unable to achieve nuclear superiority over
_ the USSR that would give it the capability of unleashing nuclear war without
catastrophic consequences for itself. The temporary lead in elaboration and
deployment of new strategic weapon systems only gave visibility to that superiority
which the U.S.A. has on every ocassion strived to use for the purposes of con-
ducting a ”from a position of strength” policy.

This very failure in attempts to achieve nuclear missile superiority forced
American military and political leaders to formally recognize the already long
established strategic nuclear parity of the USSR and U.S.A. President R. Nixon
in 1971 was forced to note that the Soviet Union had changed from a position of
lagging behind in the field of strategic weapons "to a position analogous to
that of the u.s.a.°°1" The parity was characterized by the following indicators:
both the USSR and U.S.A. haVe a strategic triad (ICBH. sun. and strategic
bombers). while the balance of these components within the strategic forces

of the two sides does not coincide quantitatively. Recognition by the American
side of the state of Soviet-American nuclear parity was the necessary politic.1
prerequisite for Soviet-American talks on strategic arms limitation.

/2. Soviet-American agreements on strategic arms limitation./ Soviet-American
strategic arms limitation talks began in iielsinki on 17 November 1969. No and
a half years later. 'on 26 Nay 1972. L. I. Brezhnev and R. Nixon in Moscow signed
the first Soviet-American strategic arms limitation agreements! the Treaty on
Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile (AM) Systems and the lnter‘m Agreement on
Certain Measures with Respect to the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms.

it is known that creation of nuclear missiles directed attention to develoment
of Aha. Research and development (NIOKR) in the MN area began in the U.S.A. in
the mid-1950‘s practically simltaneously with the beginning of work on Icahs.

In September 1967 McNamara announced the decision by President 1,. Johnson to
build a limited territorial ABM system named Sentinel. Its first elements were
to protect the 25 most important cities in the U.S.A. and the second to protect
up to 52 cities. The U.S.A. MN buildup created new prerequisites for a strategic
offensive arms race. The Nixon Administration which replaced the Johnson

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

government reexamined the decision about building the Sentinel system due to
its low combat effectiveness and strategic inadvisability.”

The agreement between the USSR and the U.s.A. with respect to a mtual limita-
tion on Ami systems was reflected in the Treaty on the Limitation ”Anti-Ballistic
Missile Systems in paragraph 2. Art. I. which states that "each Party undertakes
not to deploy ABM systems for a defense of the territory of its country and not
to provide a base for such a defense.” As an exception the Parties were allowed
only to have two regions each protected by an ABM system, each with a radius of
150 km! one with the ntgion's capital as the center and one in the area where
1cm: silos are located. The Parties also pledged not to modernize ABM laun-
chers for the purpose of increasing their combat effectiveness and similtaneously
undertook not to develop, test, or deploy ABM systems or components which
were sea-based. air-based. space-based. or mobile land-based. i.e.. those differing
in design from the already existing system. A very important element of the
Treaty was the agreement on national ’technical means of verification.17 It
provided assurance of compliance with the provisions of the Interim Agreement.
Pledges were made not to interfere with the national technical means of veri-
fication end not to conceal verification targets (Art. XII). The Ant! Treaty
does not have a time limit. A consultative commission consisting of representa-
tives of the Parties. which must examine progress in its implementation every
five years. was created to monitor implementation. Having signed this Treaty.
the USSR and U.s.A. ruled out an arms race in the area of strategic defensive
weapons systuus. and in so doing eliminated one of the incentives for an arms
race in the area of strategic offensive weapons systems.

The Interim Agreement on Certain Heasures Hith Respect to the Limitation of
Strategic Offensive Arms was signed for a five-year period. It placed limitations
on the missile components of the strategic forces. The Parties undertook not to
start construction of additional fixed land-based ICBH launchers after 1 July l972.
In addition. they undertook not to convert land-based launchers for light ICIlis
or for ICﬂHs of older types deployed prior to 1966. into land-based launchers

for heavy Icﬂis of types deployed after that time. As to the underwater strategic
force component, an agreement was reached to limit sun launchers and modern
ballistic submarims to the numbers operational and under construction on the
date of signature of the Interim Agreement. and in addition to launchers and
submarines constructed under procedures established by the Parties
as replacements for an equal number of ICE! launchers of older types deployed
prior to 1964 or for launchers on older submarines (Art. III). In other words.
the Parties agreed to allow each to build new ballistic missile submarines

in a specific manner for each Party. but given the condition that an equal num-
ber of old subnrine or ICBH launchers which became operational prior to 1964

is dismantled. This was a freeze of the quantitative level of ICBH launchers

and ballistic missiles on ballistic missile submarines. National technical

means of verification monitor compliance with the Interim Agreement as well as
with the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems (Art. W.“

In essence. signing of the Interim Agreement signified the recognition by the
American side of the defeat of the basic policy of the U.s.A. in the arms race

5
roe ontcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unleashed by it against the Soviet Union calculated to achieve a decisive
quantitative superiority over the USSR in the sphere of strategic delivery
vehicles. In addition. it affirmed the effectiveness of the USSR's reciprocal
measures to strengthen its defense and deter imperialist nuclear aggression.
The political significance of this victory of the Soviet Union in the arms
race unleashed against it can hardly be overevaluated.

As opposed to the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Hissile Systens.

the Interim Agreement will not contain provisions prohibiting modernization

of strategic offensive weapon systems. This circumstance is a direct result

of the desire by the American side to "combine” diametrically-opposed political
policies--continuation of the qualitative strategic arms race with negotiations
about their limitation. Soon after the start of the strategic arms limitation
talks. in March 1970. the Nixon Administration announced the decision to reequip
a large portion of the real and SLBH force with new missile systems--liinuteman-3
and Poseidon (respectively) with multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles
("18019 vice those with single warheads. Testing of the new missiles was com-
pleted in 1969. This decision was the first act in a new qualitative round of
the arms race. On its heels was the announcement concesning stepping up develop-
ment of new strategic weapon systems' the Trident SLBH 0. the 5-1 heavy super-
sonic strategic bomber. and cruise missiles.

The American military and political leadership, besides the usual references

to the “Soviet threat.“ cited that the developaent and deployment of the new
strategic weapons systems would supposedly serve the interests of ”limiting“

the arms race. Responding to questions from members of Congress relative to

the Moscow agreements of 1972. Kissinger stated‘ ”In our opinion, we must con-
tinue accomplislmlent of those strategic programs which are permitted under the
agreement. and scientific research and develop-ant in spheres which are encompassed
by the agreement. . .(having in mind the Interim Agreement--R.T.). Our experience
shows that the program beirg accomplished will not serve as an obstacle for the
agreement but. on the contrary, might speed up its achievement." And further8
"it is considered that our power, if. you will, will give them (the USSR--R.T.)

an additional incentive to conduct the talks.”21 This approach to the talks
received a special name in the U.S.A.--"bargaining chips." It is not difficult
to see that this concept contradicts the principle of equality and equal security.

All initiatives by the U.S.A. in developing new models of strategic weapons were
calculated to provide specific military and political advantages. It is natural
that the Soviet Union was forced to take the requisite reciprocal measures to
strengthen its own defense potential. The example of the deployment of

missile systems gives convincing evidence of this. The Nixon Administration's
decision in 1970 on this question was another attempt by the American side to
achieve unilateral military advantages. But. this only impeded preparation of
a new strategic arms limitation agreement. Soviet responses led to the fact that
the U.s.A. was forced in 1971s to make an agreement in Vladivostok with the USSR
on establishment of identical numerical levels for this type of system.22
Senator c. McGovern, evaluating the results of their deployment. announced at
the Senate Armed Services Committee! “In 1969 we were ahead in HIRV technology.
During that period there were proposals to delay testing and deployment of
missiles with warheads of this type until conclusion of a comprehensive agree-
ment on the limitation of strategic arms. But the Pentagon did not want to

6
roe oreIcm. use out?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hear this. We tested and deployed MlRV‘d missiles and achieved a tenporary
advantage relative to the Soviet Union. At the present time the Soviet Union
is deploying its HIRV'd missiles and apparently in a short time we will find
ourselves in a worse position as compared to that in which we would have found
ourselves if deployment of HIRV'd missile systems had been avoided by both
sides. The identical people who insisted that we unilaterally deploy HmV'd
missile systems are now complaining that the Soviet Union has a throw weight
advantage and that Soviet thV's are more dangerous to us than ours are to
them."

In 1972 Moscow agreements. like the Vladivostok agreaaents of 1974. noted the
defeat of the American strategic arms race policy. The reciprocal actions of
the USSR destroyed all attempts by the U.S.A. to achieve nuclear superiority
and to employ it in the interests of its imperialistic policy. However. due
to the fact that the military and political leadership of the U.S.A. has moved

the arms race to the qualitative sphere. these agreements had not stopped the
latter.

/3. Soviet-American talks on develoment of a second agreement on the limita-
tion of strategic offensive arms (SALT-2)./ In accordance with Art. VII of the
Interim Agreement. the USSR and the U.S.A. undertook "to continue active negotia-
tions for limitations on strategic offensive arms." Experience in talks at the
first stage and the evident contradiction in the approach by the American side to
the strategic arms limitation problem caused the necessity for preliminary develop-
ment of a coordinated decision concerning the basic principles of the talks. In
1973 during the visit of L. l. Brezhnev to the U.S.A. the Basic Principles of
Negotiations on mrther Limitation of Strategic Offensive weapons were signed.
The U.S.A. and USSR undertook to make ”serious efforts to work out the provisions
of the permanent agreement on more complete measures of limitation of strategic
offensive arms with the objective of signing it in 1971.." Here "the Parties

will be guided by the recognition of each other's equal security interests and

by the recognition that efforts to obtain unilateral advantage. directly or
indirectly, would be inconsistent with the strengthening of peaceful relations
between the USSR and the U.S.A.“ It was also pointed out that "limitations
placed on strategic offensive weapons can apply both to their quantitative
aspects as well as to their qualitative improvement." that these limitations
"must be subject to adequate verification by national technical means." and

the question of modernisation and replacement of strategic offensive weapons

must be solved i! compliance with the conditions to be formulated in agreements
to be concluded. 6 Thus. the agreement on basic principles of negotiations was
directed against possible future attempts to insure unilateral military advantages
in skirting a future strategic arms limitation agreement.

A working visit between CC CPSU General Secretary L. I. Brezhnev and 0.8. President
6. Ford was held near Vladivostok on 23-24 November 1974. During the meeting an
agreement on the main content of the SALT-2 agreement was achieved. A joint
Soviet-American announcement stated! "the new agreement. being based upon tne
principles of equality and equal security. will include the following limitations‘
a) both Parties will be entitled to have a certain agreed aggregate number

of strategic delivery vehicles! b) both Parties will be entitled to have a

certain agreed aggregate number of Icms and sum equipped with mltiple

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

independently targetanle reentry vehicles."25 Precisely, the agreement included
the following restrictions' a) each Party will have the right to have in total
within its strategic forces no more than 2.1.00 nuclear weapons delivery vehicles.
Included in this total are 1cm». sum, and strategic bombers. i.e.. envisioned
is a restriction on all three strategic force components} b) within the stated
limits each Party received the right to have 1&220 ballistic missiles with HIRVs.
ICBHs and sun. can be included in this limit.

1.. I. brezhnev and 6. Ford came to the conclusion that there were favorable
prospects to conclude the development of the new agreement in 1975.27 This
decision. as is known. was not fulfilled. The American adninistration violated
its pledges. here it employed an approach analogous to that used during deploy-
ment. of missile systems with "Wis. The 0.8. Defense Department announced an
intention to complete the develoment and then to deploy a new weapons system--
strategic cruise missiles.2

Guided by the Vladivostok agreement on limiting nuclear weapons delivery vehicles.
the Soviet Union at the SALT talks put forth a completely logical proposal--

to include strategic cruise missiles in this limit which would make it possible
even given the availability of 0.8. cruise missiles to conclude a new agreement
on strategic arms limitation. But. it was this very circumstance that did not
suit the American side. Its representatives began to assert that the limit
established in Vladivostok for nuclear weapons delivery vehicles included only
ICBHs. sum. and heavy strategic bombers. but not cruise missiles. This
approach opened a channel for a completely unrestricted arms race in a new area.
And. this contradicted both the very idea of limiting strategic arms. as well as
the principle of equality and equal security. Therefore. it was rejected by the
USSR as being unacceptable.

29

It became clear to the broad international society that the U.S.A. had violated
the Vladivostok agreement and it was their fault that developnent of a new agree-
ment was being delayed. In order to ameliorate the unpleasant impression. the
Ford Administration “modified" its position. The U.S.A. expressed the willingness
to conclude an agreement with the USSR on limitation of its cruise missiles in
exchange for a limitation on the deployment of the Soviet bomber referred to as
Backfire in the "set. But. this American proposal compared non-equivalent
weapons systems. The fact of the matter is that the point of the strategic

arms limitation talks is the limitation of strategic weapons systems. The Backfire
is not such a system (the Backfire has a flight radius of 2,200 km and therefore
cannot reach the territory of the U.S.A.).3° As concerns cruise missiles. it is
an entirely different matteri their flight range is 2.500 km: these missiles.
according to plans published in the U.S.A.. are to be placed aboard 3-52 heavy
strategic bombers. on submarines. and on the territory of U.S. allies. These
aircraft and sumsarines are capable of taking the cruise missiles to a launch
area from which they can destroy targets on the territory of the USSR. The same
thing will take place when cruise missiles are deployed on the territories of the
allies of the U.S.A. in NATO and other aggressive blocs.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l.. l. lirezhnev repeatedly explained to Ford. in particular during the meetlne.

in Helsinki. and then to President J. Carter th t the llackfirc case involves

a medium range bomber. not a strategic bomber.3 Nonetheless, the American side
continued to insist on its proposal. A loud propaganda campaign. the tone set by
members of the Congress. was unleashed in the U.S.A. in support of this position.
Congressmen demanded that Backfire be included in the nuclear weapons delivery
vehicle limit agreed to in Vladivostok. but that cruise missiles not be included
in this limit. As a result, the Ford Administration broke the Vladivostok
agreanent about concluding a second SALT agreement by 1975. sacrificing it to
the supporters of the continuation of the arms race. After defeat in the 1976
elections Ford expressed regret that he had not signed this agreement. The

same time he in fact recognized that the obstacles created by his ministration
had an artificial, premeditated nature.

U.s. Defense Secretary R. Brown and Presidential Assistant for National Security
Affairs 2. Brzezinski. with the participation of Senator H. Jackson. led the
deVeloment of the Carter Administration's position .- t the SALT talks. Proposals
which they developed were taken by Secretary of State C. Vance to Moscow at the
end of March 1977. During his talks with L. l. Brezhnev and A. A. Gromyko.

he put forth two proposals to limit strategic arms! a "comprehensive," and an
alternative "limited" proposal. At first glance the "comprehensive" proposal
went even ”farther" than the Vladivostok agreement. it proposed a reduction

in the total levels of nuclear weapon delivery systems established in Vladivostok
from 2.400 to 2.000-l,800 units. as well as a reduction in the level of MlRV'd
missiles from 1.320 to 1.2oo-i,1oo units. But'. a requirement was Put forth here
that realization of the new conditions must be accompanied in the USSR by a
reduction by a factor of two in the number a; missiles which in the U.S.A. are
called “too heavy” or 'inuch too effective."

The attention paid by the American side to the specific type of Soviet missiles
is far from accidental. These are the very ones that were the response to the
American initiative to begin a qualitative arms race. This circumstance was
emphasized in the report at the Conference of the Socialist international on
Disarmament (Helsinki. April 1978) by B. N. Ponomarev, CC CPSU Secretary and CC
CPSU Politburo candidate member. ”In the early i970's." he stated. Washington
made the decision to build HlRV'd missiles. which increased

by several times the number of American nuclear warheads. And these Soviet
missiles which are now causing a racket in the west agzin were the response to
the next spiral in the suns race caused by the U.S.A."

Consequently. beneath the externally-respectable pretext of a general reduction
in the levels of strategic forces. the new United States proposal hid an attempt
by the American side to impede the reciprocal measures by the Soviet Union to
strengthen its security and preserve for the U.S.A. the advantage in the number
of nuclear warheads guaranteed delivery to targets.

It was proposed in the "comprehensive" proposal to include in the draft agreement
prohibition against develoment of new weapons systems. However, actually it

envisioned prohibition against development of new weapons systems which, according
to American data. are supposedly being developed in the USSR and did not envision
any restrictions on such weapons systems being developed in the U.S.A. (strategic

9
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cruise missiles. the Trident SLBH. and others). According to evaluations by
several western specialists. the Carter proposals led to an almost complete
halt in the Soviet programs of strategic force modernization. leaving the
corresponding American programs untouched. Thus. the ”comprelmnsive” proposal
contradicted the principle of equality and equal security of the Parties.

Formulated in the ”limited“ proposal was the idea of signirg an agreasent on
limiting the number of ballistic missiles and strategic bombers. but the question
of cruise missiles and the backfire bomber was put aside.35 This proposal.
firstly. repeated the Ford Administration's position which refused to include
cruise missiles in the Vladivostok agreanentl secondly. it admitted the artificial
nature of the connection propounded by the Merican side between American cruise
missiles and the Soviet Backfire bomber} thirdly. it gaVe visibility to a con-
cession by the American side. which was ready not to examine this connect ion if
the USSR agreed to unlimited deployment of cruise missiles in the U.S.A. Con-
sequently. the ”limited“ proposal insured that the United States had a free hand
in the arms race due to the cruise missiles.

The unacceptability of both American proposals was evident. Therefore. they
were rejected by the Sowiet side.

One overall trait shows through the activities of the Ford and Carter administra-
tions--in a unilateral manner they revised previously-achieved agreements m
strategic arms limitation. The Ford Administration revised its pledges at the
Vladivostok agreement. and. in essence. backed away fun the basic principles

of negotiations on further limitation of strategic offensive weapons. The
Carter Administration completely conducted itself as if these agreanents did

not exist. All these activities introduced instability in Soviet-American
relations and in no way facilitated trust 814 respect for American pledges and
confidence in the viability of agreements signed by the U.S.A.

Opposite the American policy was the Soviet policy directed toward firm com-
pliance with pledges previously made. During the talks with Vance. it was pointed
out from the Soviet side that a new agreement on strategic arms limitation must

be developed on the foundation already laid at Vladivostok. A. A. Gmyko
underscored this at a 31 March 1977 press conference after the talks began‘

"He want the edifice built in Vladivostok with such difficulty and on which

so many intellectual and other resources were spent to not only be retained.

but that the matter be brought to a close and that a new reement be concluded
between the USSR and U.S.A. on strategic arms limitation.“ 6

intense efforts on the part of the USSR were required in order to move the
strategic arms limitation tale off dead center. A shift was noted only after
A. A. Gromyko met President Carter in washington on 22 September 1977. In talks
which followed thanks to the constructive approach by the Soviet delegation
agreuent was reached on a number of questions. primarily concerning strategic
cruise missiles. The Parties agreed that cruise missiles with a flight range
of 600-2.500 km would be subjected to limitation along with other strategic
weapon systems such as JCIHs. sum. and strategic bombers. Here the Parties
undertook that only 3-52 heaVy strategic bombers could be equipped in the U.S.A.
with air-ground cruise missiles. It was simultaneously agreed to equate than

10
IOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to strategic missiles with multiple independentlyotargrted reentry vehicles

and to include them in the limit established for such delivery vehicles.
Air-ground cruise missiles with a flight range in excess of 2,500 km were
completely prohibited. As concerns cruise missiles with a {light range in
excess of 600 meters intended for deployment on land and ahoard maritime vessels
and submarines. it was agreed to prohibit their testing and deployment initially
for a three-year period. The deferment "9i intended to giw the Parties addi-
tional time to work out a final solution.’ These agrements opened up pros-
pects for signing a new strategic arms limitation agreement.

However. when there was success at the talks. criticisr: was unleashed by
the ruling circles in the United States about progress in the talks and the
positions of the Parties on several problems and overall. The "information
leak” about the talks beginning in October 1977 became the source for such
criticism.

in connection with the strategic arms limitation talks the Carter Administration
had much greater cooperation with the Congress than had preuous administrations.
The Senate Foreign Affairs Comittee headed by Senator J. Sparkman and the Arms
Control Subcomittee headed by Senator R. Jackson systehatieal ly and in detail
were kept informed about progress in the talks. Thejlmsideratioh here was that
the Congress would have to ratify the new agreement.” According to American
press information, the subcommittee headed by Jackson. as well as responsible
government figures. were the source of the "information leak."

Among the many ”critical” speeches connected with the strategic arms limitation
talks. two main trends can be discerned! supporters oi tlw first hope "to adjust"
the agreement in order to provide the United States unilateral military advantages.
and the supporters of the second speculate about the "Soviet threat.” The former
especially stubbornly speak out against limitations on cruise missiles. asserting
that this is an unjustified “concession” to the Soviet L‘nion. They add for the
United States the right to place these missiles not only on the number of heavy
bombers agreed to by the participants in the talks. but also on any other air-
craft. including heavy transports.39 Such an approach would open the way to

an unlimited and practically uncontrollable increase in the number of cruise
missiles. M. the same time. it is proposed not to extend limitations on land-
based and sea-based cruise missiles. The idea here is to have the prospect of
deploying the former on submarines in maritime areas ad janent to the territory
of the USSR and the latter on the territory of countries allied with the United
States. primarily the NATO countries, also close to the Soviet borders. Also
envisioned is the capability when the three-year protocol runs out of trans-
ferring cruise missiles to shird countries in circumvention of the strategic
arms limitation agreement.“ All of these "corrections" in the final analysis
have the goal of undermining the principles of equality and equal security of
the Parties and silmltaneously complicating and destroying preparations for a
new agreement on limitation of strategic arms.

Those who support the concept of the "Soviet threat" assert that. during the talks.
the United States made too many concessions to the I'SSR. They also put forth
the thesis that the Soviet Union had violated earlier agreements on the limitation
of strategic arms. In a report at the 1x session of the 5333 Supreme Soviet

ll
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Gromyko noted with respect to similar statements! ”both in the Soviet
Union and in the United States it is recognized that both Parties are complying
with all provisions of the agreement on the limitation of both defensive and
offensive strategic arms. The standing consultative comission made up of
representatives of the USSR and the United States. convening specially to mon-
itor progress in compliance by both Parties of pledges made. found not a single
fact of violation of these agreements. . .Only unscrutulous ard irresponsible
cry babies could permit themselves to accuse the USSR of nonfulfiilment of
pledges in the agreement with the United States referred to above. And. this
is being done with a clear goal--to hinder the talks. especially on further
measures with respect to limitation on strategic arms and to inflict harm on
Soviet-Amer ican relat ions . ""1

The problem of strategic arms modernization also attracted the close attention
of SALT critics. As is known. the Soviet Union. basing itself on the principle
of equality and equal security and taking into consideration the American posi-
tion. proposed while the three-year protocol was in force the Parties undertake
to prohibit new mills and SLBHs with HlRVs. The American delegation proposed
during the life of the protocol to prohibit only all types of land-based lCBHs.
both with "We as well as without them.“2 The goal of this U.S. proposal is‘
to halt accomplisiment of the Soviet programs to modernize strategic forces and
to retain a free hand in realization of American modernization programs such as
the new Trident SUM system with Trident-l missiles. cruise missiles. and mobile
Icons. It is not difficult to see that before us is a renovated version of the
“comprehensive" variant rejected by the Soviet Union. The broad propaganda cam-
paign ”of criticism” of the strategic ans limitation agreement being developed.
in the opinion of those who are spurring the campaign on. was designed to create
an atmosphere of mistrust towards it and towards the USSR in American public
opinion. and in the Congress and. in the final analysis. to hinder or wreck

its ratification by the Senate. Supporters of ”corrections“ to the agreaeent
are attempting to use this threat to pressure the Soviet Union.

Supporters of the agreement in the United States express an entirely different
point of view. Thus. the follwing appeared in the NEH YORK TmES on l7 November
1917 in an article by military observer R. lurt' The main argument in support
of the new agreusent is that. although it may not be ideal. it is much better
than no agreement at all. in Burt's opinion "a fear of uncontrolled competition
in the field of arms and the danger of a serious breakdown in American-Soviet
relations can exert a decisive effect and tip the scales to the advantage of the
government." having insured ratification of the agreement. ii. Scoville. arms
control specialist and former scientific consultant to the 0.5. Defense Department.
CIA. and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. speaking in support of the
agreement. stdted‘ ”I submit that if it is not ratified then this will be the
greatest catastrophe for our security. as well as for our pocketbook.“"3 The
propagandistic campaign of criticizing SALT and the agreanent worked out during
the talks could not but complicate achievement of an agreement between the United
States and the USSR. Concerning information leaks about progress in the talks
and about the positions of the Parties organized by opponents of detente in the
congress. the then head of the American delegation at the talks P. warnke said
that such a leak plays into the hands of the opponents of the new agreement.“

12
I08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Agreement opponents are trying "to link" the talks and the iossibility or

their signing with other political problems that haw- no [I lation whatsoever

to them and to use this ”linkage“ as a means or pressuring the Soviet Union

(in particular. 2. Brzezinski uses this tack). out those in the United States
who realistically look at things understand the potentially dangerous conse-
quences of such an approach for SALT. For example. on 8 March 1978 a NW YORK
TIMES editorial stated' “This tactic does not provide results. but could destroy
the fragile framework of control over arms." The policy of ”linkage" undoubtedly
impedes improvement in Soviet-American relations and conclusion of a new stra-
tegic arms limitation agreement.

The broad and malicious propaganda campaign surrounding SALT is a new phenomenon
in United States political life in comparison to debates surrounding the 1972
Moscow agreements. its purpose is to exert pressure on the USSR position by
threatenim to wreck ratification of the agreement. as Hell as t. justify the
delay in the talks themselves. The organized association of opponents of the
policy of peaceful coexistence. and in particular strategic arms limitation
agreements as well. is another new phenomenon in United States political life.
The Comittee on the Present Danger. made up of a number of reactionary anti-
Soviet leaning U.S. political. military. and public figures. was set up in 1976.
The Cosmittee unleashed a broad campaign oi criticism of the strategic arms
limitation agreements being prepared. The I:oalition for Peace with Strength
appeared in 1978. It consisted of congressmen known for their conservative
View. This coalition also included such reactionaries as Senators B. Goldwater
and R. Helms. as well. as R. Reagan. R. Dole. and others. The American military
elite is widely representated in the "coalition" secretaries of the Navy and
Air Force H. Hitteldorf and T. Reed. former JCS chainnen Adm T. Moorer and

Gen 1.. Lemnitzer. former 01A director Gen Graham. formm I'liief of USAF intelli-
gence Gen Reagan. and others. Collective members making up the "coalition"
included such reactionary groups as the American Conservative Union. the American
Security Council. Association of Former Intelligence Officers. Council for the
Struggle Against Conmnist Aggression. and "Organizations" of outcasts and
traitors set up by the ciA. J. Fisher. one of the co~chairmen of the ”coalition."
described the political platform of his organization at a press conference in
the Congress‘ rejection of the principle of equality in relations with the
Soviet Union and insuring overall military and technical superiority over the
USSR. intensification of subversive activities by American special services.
rejection of any agreements on arms control if they place in jeopardy u.s.
”national security” (it goes without saying how "coalition" members define the
latter). and the struggle against comnism throughout the world/‘5

Participating in igniting the anti-Soviet propaganda campaign also are leaders
of the present U.S. administration. in his speech at Wake forest University

on 17 March 1978 Carter accused the Soviet Union of supposedly "demonstrating

an evil (I) inclination to employ its military might and to interfere in local
conflicts." The President spoke of a "important reevaluation" of United States
military strategy. It followed from his speech that the present administration
intends to shift the center of gravity in foreign policy from the previously-
announced course of insuring national security through negotiations. limiting
the arms race. and intensification of detente to a policv of threats and applying

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

pressure. The President underscored that he will not deviate from taking
measures towards full-scale deVelopnent and deployment of new strategic weapons
systems."6

The Soviet Union continues to carry on the steadfast struggle for deterring
the arms race and signing with the United States mtually-acceptable agreelnents
on the limitation of strategic offensive arms. The final months of 1978 were
marked by a number of high-level Soviet-American meetings! on 30 September 1978
A. A. Gromyko discussed the problem of preparing the SALT-2 agreement in
Uashington with J. Carter and L. I. Brezhnev received c. Vance in the Kremlin
on 23 October 1978. During this meeting the main attention was devoted to
questions concerning the signing of the SALT-2 agreement between the USSR

and the United States. The Parties noted the constructive and positive nature
of the talks which occurred in Moscow and announced their determination to
exert all efforts and bring this important matter to a close. Talks between
A. A. Gromyko and c. Vance took place in Geneva on 22-23 December l978. Main
attention in these talks was devoted to an examination of questions concerning
the limitation of strategic offensive arms on the plane of completing prepara-
tions for the new agreement in the shortest possible time. Achieved here was
agreuent or a rapprochement in the positions of the Parties on a number of
basic questions where disagreements remained. Detemination was expressed

by both Parties to come to an agreement on the remaining que-tions through nor-
mal channels between Hoscow and Washington.

The positive results of the meeting were noted in the announcement made by Vance
upon returning to Hashington. "He recognize that agreement on strategic arms
limitation without delay has important significance for peace. He however--
the 0.8. Secretary of State underscored" are not tied into any kind of dead-
line.“7 During a number of press conferences and television interviews con-
ducted by Carter in January 1979. he repeatedly expressed the conviction that

a SALT-2 agreement would soon be concluded. The European participants in the
conference held in early January 197') in Guadalupe between 0.5. President Carter.
French President V. Giscard d'Estaing. British Prime Minister J. Callaghan.

and FRO Chancellor H. Schmidt emphasized the importance of the policy of detente
and the necessity to sign a new SALT «assent. FRO Chancellor Scinidt and
British Prime Minister J. Callaghan made a direct appeal to the U.$. Senate

to ratify as rapidly as possible the Soviet-American SALT-2 agreement as soon
as it is signed. Public opinion polls in the United States show that 75-80
percent of Americans support signing the SALT-2 agreement.

However. the Carter Administration's policy continues to be contradictory‘

it attempts to combine two opposite processesuthe limitation of strategic
offensive arms and continuance of the arms race. This was clearly demonstrated
durim the 0.5. President's State of the Union speech at a joint session of the
0.5. senate and House of Representatives. Carter announced that almost all
problems at the SoViet-Amrican Stategic Arms Limitation Talks had already been
solved. but. at the same time, without foundation he asserted that achievalent
of an agreement “reliable and deserving of confidence" somehow depends upon

the USSR position."8 The President with this announcement cast a shadow on

the policy of the Soviet Union at SALT and. in essence, supported those opponents
of the agreement who assert that the USSR supposedly hardened its position

1!.
son omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the talks and seeks an excuse for postponing signing of the agreement.

The falsity of such assertions was so evident that literally three days later
at a press conference in Hashington Carter was forced to announce that "the
Soviet Union is conducting the talks conscientiously. . .The Soviet Union

has not hardened its position in the last month or two. lts position, just
like ours. is sufficiently rigid. He 85° conducting very difficult talks

and are achieving continued progress."

In the State of the Union speech mentioned above Carter called upon the
Congress to approve the draft federal budget he presented for fiscal year 1980
which calls for unheard of military expenditures-438.2 billion dollars.

It is evident from the Psesident's speech that the United States as usual
gives priority to the arms race in comparison to measures to limit it. This
is reflected in the stepped-up development of new strategic weapons systems
such as the wt ICBM, the Trident SLBH system, cruise missiles. and so on.

In addition. the Pentagon levied the requirement to deploy American Hm:

on the territories of the NATO countries in Hestern Europe. Thus. what we
have is an attempt by the United States to ”supplement" the race in the sphere
of intercontinental strategic weapons systems with a race in the sphere of
strategic regional nuclear missile systems.

The possibility of completing Soviet-American talks to deVelop the SALT-2
agreement elicited a sharp escalation in the activities of treaty opponents

in the United States. They created approximately 70 "publ ic" organizations
possessing large financial assets. These ”societies” began a broad
campaign agath the new agreement. striving to ”change the minds" of those
Americans (and they are the majority) supporting the agreement. The selection
of ”arguments" of the SALT-2 opponents does not sparkle with originality. The
first of these is the false myth concerning the ”Soviet threat" maliciously
propagandized at all political levels in the United States. The second no
less false argument was put forth by a special group in the House Armed Services
Committee. It affirms without furnishing proof in its report tha a new agree-
ment ”might provide the Soviet Union with strategic superiority." 0 The third
argument is continuing attempts to ”link” the SALT-2 agreement with other
questions that do not pertain to it. Speaking before journalists Senator

R. Schweiker announced that ”linkage" of the agreement on limitation of stra-
tegic offensive arms with other questions of USSR foreign and domestic policy
is "a key problem."51 A group of senators at a conference of members of the
Republican Party holding elected office held at the end of January 1979 proposed
"to link" the SALT-2 agreement with the condition of the United States Armed
Forces (1), with achievement of an agreement at the Vienna talks on mutual
force reductions in central Europe, with "compliance" by the Soviet Union with
the Helsinki Act. and with new guarantees of verifying compliance with the
SALT-2 agreement. Only two of the 26 senators at the conference voted against
the “linkage" policy. It follows from American press reports that a difficult
situation characterized by the intention of certain circles to torpedo the
SALT-2 agreement existed in the Senate of the United States. This presages

a difficult battle in the Senate on the question of ratification of the SALT
“remat-

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The desire by American reactionary circles to play the "China card“ against
the Soviet Union can also be used by than to build additional obstacles in
the path of concluding the SALT-2 agreement. British Foreign Minister
D. Owen pointed this out at a press conference after conclusion of talks
with U.S. Secretary of State c. Vance in early February 1979. men called
upon the United States not to build its relations with China to the detri-
ment of the Soviet Union. He noted that this could lead to a breakdown in
the SALT talks. ”In my opinion," Owen stated, "this would be absolute
stupidity. “52

Speeches by the opponents of the SALT-2 agreement forced its supporters

in the United States to apply a more organized character to their activities.
In early 1979 they created an organization called Americans for SALT. It
included influential representatives from U.S. political, religious. business.
scientific. and cultural circles. Its co-chairmen are former U.$. Defense
Secretary C. Clifford, former Senator and permanent U.S. Representative to

the UN N. c. lodge. former permanent u.s. Representative to the UN c. Yost,

and others. The organization supports strategic arms limitation. It considers
one of its main tasks to be exposing the falsehood concerning the ”Soviet threat.”
concerning the fact that a future SALT agreement would somehow give advantages
to the USSR and so forth. In the announcement on setting up the Americans for
SALT. its leaders laid down its position relative to ratification of the agree-
ment being prepared' "Ratification of the SALT-2 agreement is of primary sig-
nificance for the security and interests of the American people. It will
establish limits on the developIent of new weapons systems. Signing and
ratification of this agreement are a decisive step forward towards more com-
plete control of nuclear weapons."53

Thus. a new political phenomenon exists in the United States--organizational
demarcation of strategic arms limitation agreement proponents and opponents.
Famous American scientist and University of California professor f. Neal writes
with alarm about the ”Carter Administration's inertia in the fgge of the offen-
sive by opponents of the strategic arms limitation agreement." The adainistra-
tion not only does not speak actively in defense of the strategic arms limitation
agreement. but it also simultaneously continues to take a broad circle of
measures to build up arms. includim plans to deploy neutron weapons and MRBHs

in Western Europe and to raise the military budgets of the United States and

its NATO allies.

In a speech at a preelection meeting of the voters in the Bauman Voting District
of Moscow on 2 March 1979. L. I. Brezhnev emphasized that the new Soviet-American
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty. if it is signed, ratified, and implemented.

”is not in any way detrimental to the security of the Soviet Union--nor by the
way, to the securit of the United States. Overall it. . .will be advantageous
to both countries." 5

It is fully evident that the soonest possible conclusion and ratification by

both Parties of the SALT-2 agreement would facilitate strengthening the policy

of detente and smoothing of Soviet-American relations. This problem is fully
solvable given that 0.5. leaders possess political wisdom and attention to insuring
peace throughout the world.

16
ran orncm. use 0va
l.

2.
3.

la.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

ll.

12.

I3.
16.
15.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POOTNO‘i‘l. -

”lstoriya vneshney politiki 5558” [History of USSR Foreign Policy].

Vol 2. 1965-1975. Moscow. 1976! see also V. Khaytsmsn. "SSSR i problems
razoruzheniya” [The USSR and the Problem of Disarmament]. 1945-1959.
hoscov. 19708 1.. Ya. Cherkasov. "Strategiya lira" [Peace Strategy].
Moscow. 1972! A. Ye. Yeftonov. "Yadernoye razoruzheniye" [Nuclear Dis-
armament]. Moscow, 1976.

WRIST. 1978. "0 8, P 110

At the sue tine. ll. Kissinger writes. "He even looked upon our military
alliances nainly from the point of view of the possibility of acquiring
the air bases He needed at their expense." H. Kissinger. “Vadernoye
oruzhiye i vneshnyaya politika" [Nuclear Heapons and Foreign Policy].
Moscow. 1959.

”the Super-powers in Hultinuclear World". Toronto. 1971., pp 276-279.
'lJ.S. Congress. Senat [sic] Comittee on Armed Services and Committee
on Aeronautical and Space Joint hearings Missile and Space Activities.
86th cons"... 18!: $28.". 1959’ pp 25.26.

R. Nixon. 'iJ.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970's." April [973. p 182.
PRAVDA, 21 Sep 76.

1.. I. Brezhmv. "Leninskin kurson“ [Following Lenin's Course]. Vol 5.
Hoscow, 1976, p 81.

J. F. Dulles. "ﬂar or Peace?" New York, 1957, p 151.

T. Finletter. "Sils i politika" [Force and Politics]. Moscow, 1956,
pp 312-313.

H. Kissinger. lbid, p 158.

"Department Defense Appropriatfones [sic] for 1966. Pt 1. Subcomittee
of Connittee on Appropriationes [sic]. House of Representatives". Hash-
ington. 1963. P 31.1.

L. l. Brezhnev. ”uninskin kurson". Vol 2. Moscow, 1973, p 561.

R. Nixon. ’U.S. Foreign Policy for the 1970's" 25 Feb 71.

See ”ABM”. New York. 1969. p 255.

”Sovetsknya program; mire v deystvii" [Soviet Peace Program in Action].

Moscow, 1972, p 19. In 1971. during the Nixon visit to the Soviet Union
the Protocol to the Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Hissile

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

210.

25.
26.
27.

28.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Systems was signed. In accordance with the Protocol, the Soviet Union
undertook not to deploy ADM systems or its componentr. within an ICBH

silo area. and the United States undertook not to deploy an ADM system

in an area centered on the capital. See "Dokument i materialy tret'yey
sovetsko-amerikanskoy vstrechi na vysshem urovne" {Documents and Materials
of the Third Soviet-American Suuit Meeting]. Moscow. 1971.. pp 55-56.

They include artificial earth satellites equipped with photo and radio
technical verification systems. ground-based radar stations, and so on.

"Sovetskaya programa mire v deystvii.” pp 25-27. The Interim Agreement
placed no limitations whatever on strategic bombers.

According to 0.5. Defense Department official reports. 550 previous
Minuteman-l missiles were replaced by Minuteman-3. and Poseidon missiles
have been installed on 31 of the 61 ballistic missile submarines.
(”Annual Defense Department Report," FY 1976 and 1971‘, pp 11-32).

In accordance with data published in the American press. Trident ballistic
missile suuaarines will have a displacement of 18,700 tons (greater by a
factor of two than the contemporary American ballistic missile submarines
equipped with 16 Poseidon missiles each) and will carry 2!. Trident-l
MIRV'd missiles. ("Annual Defense Department Report". ﬂ 1975. pp 51.
52. 57).

“Hearing before the Comittee on Armed Services. United States Senate.
92 Congress. 2nd Seas." 20 Jun. . .25 Jul 1972, pp 125. 135.

"Dokumenty i materialy sovetsko-amerikanskoy vstrechi vo Vladivostoke."
[Documents and Materials of the Soviet-American ﬂeeting in Vladivostok].
Moscow. 1971., p 20. [hereafter "Vladivostok"]

”the Congressional Record. Senate.” 13 Apr 76. pp 55615, 5616.

"Visit Leonida Il'icha Breshneva v Soyedinennyye Shtaty Ameriki.“
[Visit of Leonid ll'ich Drezhnev to the United States of America].
Moscow. 1973, pp 68-1“.

"Vladivostok.” p 20.
lZVESTIYA. 1 Apr 77.
”Vladivostok,” p 20.

Cruise missile--a pilotless aircraft carrying a nuclear or conventional
warhead and equipped with an automatic control and target guidance system.
This system insures that the missiles flies according to its assigned
Program. ”detects” the target. and strikes it. based on data wblished
in the American press. the program for building cruise missiles envisions
developeent of three strategic variants-~the sea-launched Tomahawk cruise
missile intended to be placed on multipurpose nuclear submarines (the

18
P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
3b.
35.
36.

37.

38.

39.
100.
41.
1.2.

143.

IIS.
106.

67.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

missile can be launched while submerged via the torpedo tubes)! the
second--an air-launched cruise missile to be carried by 8-52 heavy
strategic bombers! and the third-ma land-based cruise missile intended
for launch from mobile launchers. The launch weight of the sea-launched
variant is l.300-l,500 kg and that of the air-launched version is 900-
1.000 kg. ("Annual Defense Department Report.” FY 1976 and 1971‘. pp 11-39).
The American press published information concerning the Pentagon's inten-
tion to deploy many thousands of cruise missiles. (see THE NEH YORK TIMES.
3 October 75).

PRAVDA. 1a Apr 77.

lbid. 1 Apr 77.

”me Congressional Record.” 28 Oct 75. p E5630.

IZVESTIYA. 1 Apr 77.

ibid. 25 Apr 78.

Ibid, 1 Apr 77.

Ibid.

See “Zadacha ogranicheniya strategicheskikh vooruzheniyl perspektiva i
problemy“ [The Task ci‘ Limiting Strategic Arms' Perspective and Problems].
PRAVDA. 11 Feb 78.

Based on a law concerning arms control and disarmament the govement under-
took to obtain the concurrence of Congress for adoption of any measures
which would limit the military potential of the United States.

PRAVDA, ll Feb 78.

Ibid.

Ibid, 7 Aug 78.

Ibid. 11 Feb 78.

WASHINGTON POST. 11 Nov 77.

PMVDA, 27 Nov 77.

IZVES‘I'IYA. 10 Aug 78.

PMVDA, 19 Mar 78.

Ibid. 26 Dec 78.

19
roe orncm. use our
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100050017-7

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

60. Ibid. 25 Jan 79.

49. Ibid. 28 Jan 79.

50. Ibid, 6 Jan 79.

$1. IZVSSTIYA. 26 Jun 79.

52. Ibid. 5 Feb 79.

53. Ibid, 22 Jun 79.

Sb. PMVDA. lo Feb 79.

55. Ibid, 3 Mn: 79.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'otvo "anda". ”Voprosy 13:01-11”. 1979.

7069
050‘ 1800

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOMOOOSOMY-T
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MIONAL

WISH Pawnee 01' 088R DBCRIIED
Moscow NARODY “WA II in Russian Vol 2, 1962 pp 602-616
ﬁrticle by Gardsnovs, um ”The Kurdsﬂ

ﬂex£76eneral Intonation

Host Kurds (Kurnandzh is their on nane for themselves) live outside the
USSR, in Turkey. Iraq, Iran and Syria. A ssall nunber of Kurds have settled
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. According to spproxinete data, the total nunber
of Kurds living in foreign countries amounts to about 8 million persons. 39

In the Soviet Union there are $9,000 Kurds (1959 census). They live in the
Arnenh (26,000). Georgisn(16.000),and Azerbaijan SSR's, as well as in the
Kazakh. Kirghiz. lurk-en and Uzbek SSR's. In the Athenian 88!! lost of the
Kurds live in thsAparanakiy. Talinakiy and Echiadzinskiy rtyons. In addition.
there are Kurdish settlensnta in the Idzhevanksiy. Sevenskiy, Basagrecharskiy.
Artikskiy. Abovyanskiy, Ashtsrskskiy. ORmberyanskiy and Vedinskiy rayons.

In the Azerbaijan 88!! the Kurds have settled in the Lachinskiy, Kel'badzharskiy.
Kubatlinskiy and Zangelanskiy reyons. In the Georgian $83 the Kurds conprise

a nainly urban population. There are nore than 63,000 Kurds living in
the Caucasus.

The Kurdish language belongs to the northwestern group of Iranian languages,
and is divided into a number of dialects. The Trans-Caucasian Kurds speak

the Kumandzhi dialect; in Arnenia they also speak Amenim, and in Georgia

they also speak Georgian: in Azerbaijan the young people speak primarily
in the Azerbaijan language. while the older generation is bilingual. Many
Kurds, especially in the cities, Imp-r Russian.

The turds of the Trans-Caucasus belonged either to the Sunni “calm '
(in Arnanis). the Shiite Hosl-s (in Azerbaijan) or the Yezids (in
Armenia and Georgia). The religious differences were reflected in the
daily life. customs and culture of these groups of the Kurdish people. At
the present tine. vhen nost Soviet Kurds have noved any from religion,

the terns Hoslen lurds and Yezid Kurds are used in an ethnographic sense.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The date of the Kurds' first appearance in the Caucasus has not been
precisely established. According to literary sources the existence here
of the Kurdish Sheddadidov dynasty was well known; the dynasty ruled
in the Caucasus in the lOth-thh centuries in the area which included
the territory between Kara and Araks. with residences in Gyandzh
and M‘s

A significant number of the Kurds settled in the Trans-Caucasian area
after leaving Kurdistan, the primary area of their habitation, after
the Trans-Caucasian area was annexed to Russia.

Those rayona of Azerbaijan which have the largest Kurdish populations
bordered on Iranian territory in the begiming of the 19th century. (the
present-day Zangelanskiy Rayon). and the Lachinskiy Rayon, which became
me of the main centers of Kurdish settlement in Azerbaijan in the 1820's.
In 1923 the Kurdistan Uyezd was formed in Azerbaijan. with its center

in Lachin. Sons clan associations of hoslem Kurds moved from Azerbaijan
to Armenia. specifically into the basargecharskiy and Artashatskiy rayons.

The territory of Eastern Arsenia was occupied mostly by Yezid Kurds, who

had moved here mainly from mrkey, where they were subjected to religious
persecution. The main wave of Kurdish imigration to Armenia took place during
the Crimean liar of 1853-1856 and the Russo-Innish War of 1877-1878. A
significant number of Kurds moved to Armenia from Turkey during the

First Horld War.

A majority of the Kurds who now live in Georgia are descended from
people who arrived here during the First world War, either directly

from ‘mrkey or from ‘mrkey to Georgia by way of Armenia. They moved
from Armenia to Georgia in search of work. settling in cities. primarily
Tbilisi.

Principal Occupations

before the Great October Socialist Revolution the Trans-Caucasian

Kurds led for the most part a suninomadic or nomadic way of life. As a
rule, every tribe had definite routes for its encampments with the herds.
In the spring they moved up to the mmmtain pastures, and with the coming
of aut-mn the herds were loved down to lower areas. They raised mainly
small cattle. cows. draught cattle and horses. In addition to their
cattle-raising, land cultivation played an important role in their economic
activities. They raised wheat. barley and other crops. The land was
worked with primitive tools: an iron or wooden spade, a wooden plow with an
iron blade and a hoe. The land parcels and the pastures belonged

either to the tsarist government or to private owners. For example, in the
settlement of Zilanla in the Zangezurskiy Uyezd. of Yelizavetpol'skaya
Gubernya, the land was the property of Gasan-beg and Ismail-beg. Kurdish

large landomers.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 1188 ONLY

After the establishment of Soviet authority. the Kurdish people were freed
fro- the exploitation of feudal lords. The land was given to the working

people for their use. The seninomadic and nomadic life rapidly gave- way
to a settled life.

The artels. or cooperative associations of peasants which were created

in the twenties for land use purposes. the credit societies, the mutual

aid conittees. groups of poor peasants. etc. all contributed to the
transition of the Kurdish peasantry to a settled way of life. Through these
agricultural organizations the working Kurds acquired seeds. draught animals,
and agricultural tools.

The oollectivization of agriculture had mormous significance in the life

of the Kurdish peasan . At present there are both Kurdish kolkhoz's

(for «ample, the Kolkhoz imeni Kalinin, the Kurdskiy Pamp Kolkhozand the
Gondahhsaz in the Aparanskiy Rayon of the Armenian 88R; the Kolkhoa imeni
Suleymanov in the Talinskiy Rayon of the Armenian $81!). as well as mixed
kolkhoz's. where the Kurds work along side representatives of other

peoples from the Trans-Caucasian republics (for example. the Kolkhoz

imeni m'gels in the Kel'badzharskiy Rayon of the Azerbaijan SSR, the Lyusaber
Kolkhoz in the Reiniadzinskiy Rayon of the Ammian SSR and others).

Great success has been achieved in the mechanization of most agricultural
work. The tractor, combine. sewer. mower, thresher and other machines

have taken hold in the Kurdish village. Modern agricultural equiment is
penetrating even into the high mountain areas of hens-Causasia. For example.
an area as remote and mountainous as the Lachinskiy Rayon in the Azerbaijan
881! is using the DT-Slo diesel tractor, threshers. etc. Kurds have been
trained as skilled machine operators. The economy of the Kurds, who

live in the Ieuntain rayons of Amia and Azerbaijan is dominated by
cattle-raising-both small and large types of cattle are bred. Agriculture
plays the primary role in the pied-out and lowland areas. These areas include
parts of the lubatlinakiy and Zangelanakiy rayonsef the Azerbaijan SSR,

where cotton- and rice-growing are the economic basis of the kolkhoz's.

The agricultural areas include the EcIniadzinskiy and Oktemberyanskiy

rayons of the Armenian 85R, where the Kurdish population is engaged

in viticulture and field-crop cultivation.

In the past, truck gardening was almost unknown to the Kurds. The growing
of vegetables was hampered by religious prohibition (for the Yezids)

and by the nomadic or seminomadic way of life led by the Kurdish population.
But now gardening plays an important role in Kurdish kolkhoz's. In the
piebont areas of Armenia and Azerbaijan. and in certain mountain collectives
of Armenia the Rurds haw started to grow potatoes.

In the past, the Kurds did not fertilize the soil. A good crop was related
to thewin of divine forces and spirits. Fertilizers are now comenly
used on the kolkhoz fields and private plots.

23
son ovrtcm. use ONLY
FOR OFHCIM. USE ONLY

In the area of animal husbandry. the transition to the raising of merinos
and pedigree cows had great significance because their productivity is
higher than that of loci species. The average annual yield from a cow
of the local breed is 1.200-2.00011tcrol a pedigree cow gives 2.500-
3.000 1 of milk per year. The fat content of the milk has also increased.
as has the amount of meat produced. before. the Trans-Caucasian Kurds
considered it a sin to process milk by machines. This superstition has
now been overcome. The kolkhoz's use separators and other equiplmt to
process the milk. The milk is turned over to dairy plants. and in exchange.
the kolkhoz'e receive cheese and butter. which are distributed to kolkhoz
members according to their work-days.

Silage is prepared to last the cattle over the winter; the silage is stored
in pits which are dug near the cowsheds. Despite the fact that the Kurds
had raised cattle for centuries. they had no notion of silage. Silage
was something new for the Kurdish village.

The kolkhoz'a also raise bees. poultry and sometimes pigs.9o For some

of the kolkhos members bee-keeping is a new occupation. For example. the
residents of the Akko settlement of the Talinskiy Rayon in the Armenian ssa
have been keeping bees only since 1950.

The best Kurdish k'olkhos members among those who raise animals as well as
those who grow crops have been awarded government prizes for excellent
work. Those honored in this way include a significant number of women.
such as V. Guseynova. who was awarded the Order of Lenin for a high
cotton yield and Ch. Casanova. who was made a hero of Socialist Labor.
and others.

Some of the Trans-Caucasian Kurds are engaged in industry. The percentage
is particularly great among the Kurds of Georgia. who live. as was already
noted. for the most part in cities.

Carpet Heaving

Carpet weaving and the production of- woolen goods are the most highly
developed of the crafts practiced by the Kurds. Carpet making has occupied
an important place in the economic life of the Kurds for a long time.
According to ancient Kurdish customs. every young girl had to master

the art of producing carpets and woolen goods before her marriage.

Kurdish carpets and carpet goods are divided into pile carpets. non-pile
carpets. felt and woolen goods with carpet designs (purses. bags. stockings.
women's woolen belts. etc.). Depending on the method of production. the quality
quality of the wool. the size and ornamentation. there are various names

for the carpets ("amani." ”dzhardshem." "zili." etc.). The desims of
traditional Kurdish carpets have. in addition to purely geometric elements.
motifs which reflect the life of the turds. their religious rites and

the elements of nature which surround them. The depiction of the sun is

2k
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

particularly characteristic of the carpets made by the Yezid Kurds. and

it is probably related to the worship of the sun: the spi-’t of land
cultivation. halake Taus. is often portrayed in the form of a bird.

The portrayal of horns. which are found on many Kurdish carpets.

obviously reflects thecattle-raising in which they have traditionally engaged.

At the present time the designs of Kurdish carpets are beginning to
contain new motifs. which reflect the socialist way or life, as well as
motifs borrowed from neighboring peoples.

Villages and Dwellings

The external appearance of the Kurdish village is changing from day to day.
New construction based on standard plans for well-built homes with all the
uenities is taking place in nearly all Kurdish villages of Trans-Caucasia.
These include many two-story buildings. The new structures can be seen in
many villages of the Lschingkiy, Kubatlinskiy. Kel'badzharskiy rayons of the
Azerbaijan 858 (Hinkend. Verkhneye hollu. Karakishish. Agdzhakend. Orudzhlu
and others). and in the Aparanshiy. ‘l'alinskiy and Basargecharskiy rayons of
the Athenian SSR (Alsgez. Dzhardzharis. ”tho. Kayabash and others). but
the old Kurdish dwellings still remain in some villages. The old Kurdish
hone. Bade of clay or stone. consists of seweral areas: the rooms in
which bread is baked. and people eat and sleep ("male tandnrekhani");

a storerooa for food products ("hilar"): a sheep-fold ("gon"); a stable
and cow-shed for cattle Chills”). “me doors of all these areas open onto

a general corridor. which is called a “sevdar." In the old Kurdish home

as found in Armenia. one of the main areas was a room for Dale guests.

the “oda.” 91 The oda was usually located next to the stable. One entire
wall separated the ode from the living quarters. and another wall. lower
than hulsan height. adjoined the stable. Along both sides of the oda
earthen plank beds about .5 n in height were built. and they were

covered with carpets.

A wooden panel door led into the house. and it served as the column
entrance for both people and cattle.

when the location of the house made it possible. the Yezid Kurds would
have the entruwe door facing East. which was clearly a westigc of the
sun cult. In the Mines of hoslcm Kurds the entrance door would face
Southwest. toward Mecca and hedina.

As a rule. the holes did not have windows. Instead of windows. openings
were Iadc in the center of the - done-shaped roof. This opening served
as both a window and a smoke outlet. The ceiling rested on both the walls
and on wooden posts which were put up inside the living portion of the
house.

25
son orncm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The houses had no furniture. During the do; the bedding was piled into a
mound on the wooden plank beds. the "ster.’ 2 which were usually located
against the wall. opposite to the entrance.

Utensils. consisting of clay and copper jugs, trays. bowls, mortars and
hand mills made of stone, were arranged on the floor. A wooden butter
churn was attached to the posts which supported the ceilings this was in
the hallway. and in the living part of the house a homemade cradle was
attached to the posts. The house was lighted by oil lamps. The family
ate and slept on the floor.

The interior of a present-day Kurdish hole presents a greatly chmged
appearance. Even in the remotest villages Kurdish homes have become
urban-type dwellings! store-bought dishes. beds. chairs. tables. radios

and electric lights-oare all part of the present-day furnishings of the
Kurdish dwelling.

when the horde led a mostly nomadic or seminomadic way of life. the most
comon type of dwelling was the tent. the ”hon" or "chadyr," Several

rows of long wooden poles driven into the ground served as the foundation
for the tent. The upper ends of the poles were fixed with ropes to the
pegs driven into the ground. Home-spur woolen material (in black, as

a rule) was stretched over the poles. covering the entire skeleton of

the tent, except for the entrance way and the lower part. at approximately
0.5 n from the level of the ground. This space was covered with rush
screens woven with bright woolen threads. The size of the tent depended
on the nutter of poles in every row. families of prosperous Kurds had
several tents. the master of the family lived in one. his family lived

in another. and the third was used to store food and other products.

a poor peasant with many children lived in a small tent. frequently sharing
it with cattle.

At present the hens-Caucasian We no longer use the tent as a
pernment dwelling. In some very hot areas the Kurds will pitch a tent
in the eraser as a temporary dwelling that is light and cool. In the
hot areas of the lubatlinskiy and Zangetanskiy rayons of Azerbaijan

the Kurds, like the Azerbaijanis, build a temporary sunner platform,
where the family spends the night.

The ancient types of dwellings are gradually disappearing. The old
dwelling. where it remains. is used for nonresidential purposes-
as a storage area. a hen house. etc.

Previously every Kurd tried to build his house near those of his relatives.
The weakenim of consanguinous ties has led to the disappearance of this
custom. In the villages the blocks of homesbelonging to members of the
same families have started to gradually disappear. The kolkhoz members
build their homes in those parts of the countryside where there are
parcels of land free and suitable for gardens.

26
70!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new Kurdish hence have a square or rectangular plan. The walls

of the houses are node prinarily of stone, and where it is scorch

adobe is used. In Armenia and Azerbaijan the roofs of Kurdish structures
are similar to those used on Arnenian and Azerbaijani ho-es. Inside,
the new hone, as a rule. consists of an entrance hall, beyond which
there are one-three large contiguous rooms.

The Kurdish settle-onto have electricity and radio service. as well as
postal and telephone communications. In the settlements nuorous
buildings have been erected for shinistrative, cultural-educational
and economic purposes: village soviets, schools. clubs. libraries.
post offices. hospitals. bath houses electric power plants, faras.
workshops. gareges, etc.

The architecture of the fraternal Caucasian peoples exerts a large
influence on the Kurdish villages of Arnenis and Azerbaijan.

Clothing

Women's clothing is the most stable element of all aspects of the aaterisl
culture of the l‘rans-Caucasim Kurds. end it is also the one which hes
been retained aoet fully up to the present time.

the national dress of the wolen consists of wide trousers (“shaval'krss”).
shirt ("has“). vest ("elak"), skirt (tn-an?"navdera”). apron ('shelek,”
”doehtuk”). oversleevo (\iav:ang”hwoolen belt (”bane peshte"), heed-dress
("kofi." ”fine" or silk heed scarves). woolen stockings (“gore”).

The ’lxhaval'kras“ are very wide. cotton trousers. gathered at the
waist and the ankles onto a knitted woolen cord. In accordance with
religious traiitions. the Yeaid Kurds were only white trousers. while
the Hoslene wore colored ones. Now the trousers are worn only by
older wow.

The "kras" is an undershirt nade of colored cotton or coarse calico.
shaped liked a mic. very wide with long, wide sleeves and a
round open collar. It is worn outside the trousers.

The ”elak” is a sleeveless Jacket ads of thick one-color waterial
(broadcloth, velvet or linen). The shoulders and front of the vest
are edged with silk braid or ribbon. Previously. the elak'was decorated

with nother-of-pearl.buttons. coins and even shells.

‘l‘he Kurdish won-I of Annie wear a velvet or broadcloth jacket ("kotvi")
with long sleeves. The jacket 10 cut low at the bustline to show

the decorations seat on the elak.” lhe Kurdish woaen of Azerbaijan

wear an ordinary cotton blouse, but with long sleeves and a closed collar.

2?
roe omcm. use any
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ”tunan” is a skirt. which is sewn frou material (cotton. satin or
silk) which is usually oulti-colored or. less frequently. a solid color;
it is a gathered skirt which is worn over the trousers. The bottow

of the skirt is trimed with braid or ribbon which is not sewn onto

the very edge of the hen. but a little bit above it. Moslea Kurdish
wonen wear the tulan.

The “navdera” skirt is typically worn by the Yeaid women. It is wade
of the seas uterisls as the man. The navdera consists of two separate
panels which are gathered into pleats. One panel is worn in front and
the other in back. They are fastened together with string either sromd
the waist or on the sides. Before. up to ten of these skirts were worn
one on top of the other. Now only- two or three are worn.

On top of the nawdera is worn an apron. which is called a ”shalek“
in Armenia and Georgia or a “doshtuk” in Azerbaijan. It consists of
three or four strips of satin or silk. which differ in color but are

identical in length and width. The apron is tied at the waist with a
knitted woolen cord.

An older Kurdish woman in Annie and Georgia wrapsawoolen scarf Chant”).
rectangular or triangular in shape. around her waist on top of the skirts
and the apron. The scarves can be either aulti-colored or solid color.
They are traditionally worn only by married m. The pesht is held

in place by a tightly tied. knitted wool bolt. the ”bane peshte.” which

is 2-2.5 m long. In contrast with the pesht. this belt is a required

part of the dress for both harried women and unmarried girls. brightly
colored belts with decorations usually totemic in nature are preferred.
Today the bane peshte is worn aainly by middle-aged and old wolsn.

Oversleeves made of light colorful laterial are worn over the sleeves

of the jacket. the kotvi. The oversleeves are fastened at the twist
with braid or lace.

The female head-dresses can be divided into the heed-dresses for

your; girls and those for women. The first category includes multi-
colored silk scarves and a felt hat like a fez. (”fine”).

The scarves are for everyday wear. and in Azerbaijan they are also
worn on holidays.

The fine was worn in Anemia and Georgia as the head-dress for festive
occasions. A silk scarf was wrapped around the forehead like a turban.
Various decorations were worn on the fine. At the present tine this
fora of head-dress is rarely mcomtered.

The 'kofi." the head-dress of married woaen is found in Georgia and
Arlcnia. It consists of a wood or plywood frame. round in shape. which

28
ms orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is decorated on the outside with brightly-colored cloth, to which coins
are attached. Scarves which are either white or colored are tied

around the head above the kofi in such a way that only the part decorated
with the coins is visible. The hoslem woeen wore a hofi with a high

crowm while the Yezid woaen were one with a low crown. At the present
time the hofi is worn only on holidays.

On their logs the woeen weer hamhade knitted stockings, the "gore.”
which are eade eostly of white wool. and which are decorated with black
or aulti-oolored designs. In the past leather shoes (store-bought or
hone-ado) without heels (“sol”) or with heels ("Itondera,u "drhue") were
worn. but this kind of footwear was accessible only to well-to-do women.
lie-en free poor families were hounds leather slippers. "oherekh."

The charehh are hardly ever seen new: store-bought city shoes are

now won: everywhere.

The national dress of the woolen generally displays a range of

the lost vivid colores red. yellow. green. blue, orange. etc. The nain
difference between the clothing worn by the hurdish women for everyday
and for dress occasions is the quality of the Iaterial.

The nunsrous decorations are a feature of the national dress of the
Mo-Guxesim Kurdish woawm. They are a required part of

certain ole-alts of the fuels costuoe (for example, the coins on the
head-dress). These decorations can be grouped according to the parts

of the body: decorations for the head. ears. nose, neck, chest. waist,
hands and legs,

The decorations for the head include the ”bardzhenik” and "hole zeta.“
The ”poleh" and "hotyh" are worn only on holidays.

The bardzhenih is a narrow ribbon or band of velvet which is worn on
the forehead and tied at the nape of the neck. Vertical rows of threads
stung with beads hung down to the chin to the right and left of the
ribbon. Every front thread is shorter than a back thread (five to seven
of the. are usually worn on each side). The brighter the color of the
ribbon and the beads. the richer md Dore valuable the decoration is
considered to be. Pomerly coins were sewn onto the ends of the beaded
threads.

The hole zera is a ribbon or band of dark-colored velvet which goes
around the entire forehead. Ancient coins are attached to the ribbon
in two or three rows in front. The hole sets is fastened to the head
by pieces of braid which are seen to the edges of the ribbon.

The polek has copper, silver or gold goine which are used to decorate
the kofi. The kotyh is a tassel ads of silk threads, and it is
some to the hofi on the right side.

All of these decorations are worn by the Kurdish woeen of Austria and Georgia.

e 29
roe omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Earrings. “gear,” are cool-only worn by all Kurdish women.

Previously the Kurdish wonen of the Trans-Caucasus wore a nose decoration,
"ksragilf' a silver or gold disc, which was put through the nostril.
This decoration has now gone out of use everywhere.

leadr-"nori." ”Ksrbar,” "erdzhan'h-are comen decorations wom around
the neck. All beads. regardless of size. color. shape and quality. .
with the «caption of coral and amber. are called nori; karber is only
for amber beeds and nrdzhan is only for coral beads. Formerly, silver
or gold discs were put on a string and worn around the neck: this was

a very center: forts of Jewelry. Now this form of decoration is

worn only on holidays {Mia and Georgia).

0f the decorations worn on the chest the nest characteristic are the
”sadaf” and ”fakht.” The first of these consists of the nother-of-pearl
buttons which are sewn onto the front of the vest. The second consists
of beautifully natched silver or gold coins and it is a form of adornnent
worn by the Kurdish wenen of Georgia and Armenia on holidays.

The hand decorations include store-bought items which are colleen everywhere.
“gostilyalt,” a ring and ”beach,” a bracelet.

The foot decoration (”khrkhal”) is a silver bracelet, worn around the

ankle. It was usually worn at night as protectim against evil spirits.
The khrkhal is not worn now.

In the category of decorations worn at the waist on-holidavs. there is the
leather belt ("heather”). triued with silver or coins; it is especially
co-aon now along the Kurdish wonen of Azerbaijan

The national dress for nan has almst completely gone out of use. and

the Kurdish an of the Trans-Caucasus wear conventional European clothing.
In the past the Kurdish dress for can consisted of a white calico shirt,
ﬁres.“ which cane dots: to the Incas: wide hone-spun wool trousers. ”ehal,”
a woolen ”arkhalehh" and "chokhi ." The Kurd were around his waist a

belt (”pest.” 'ﬁranbar”) from which hung a dagger. 0n the head they ante
either a conventional Caucasian fur cap. or several colored scarves.

wound aromd a felt cap. a "holes.” 0n the feet they wore wool and
handmade socks. ”gets,” and leather sandals. ”charekh,"

Easily and Harriage

The transition to socialist life led to the disintegration of the large
fanily. “nala men." which the Kurds maintained even during the

period inediately preceding the revolution. The large family gave
way to the call family. “nala bechuk.” But there are still fanilies
in which brothers live together with their wives and children: but the
nunber of such fanilies is gradually decreasing.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under socialism a sharp turning point occurred in the economic foundation
of the Kurdish family and in the consciousness and cultural level of its
Iembers. Proceeding rapidly is the process of elimination of the sur-
vivals of patriarchal customs. religious stagnation and family despotism.
Qualitatively new features arose in the relations among adult aembers

of the Kurdish fanily. and these features have exerted a beneficial
inﬂuence on the fornation of the younger generation.

The position of the Kurdish woman has changed fundeaentally under Soviet
authority. She has received equal rights with men in society and

in the family. A young girl now marries on the basis of her own choice.
Certain practices have been elilinated such as polygamy. marriage
between liners and the collection of “kalana.” the bride price. etc.

Also disappearing is endcgany. which at one time had very strong roots
along the lrans-caucasian Kurds. There are frequent instances of ssrriage -
between herds and Russian. Armenian and Azerbaijani woeen.

Marriage and other rites have changed substantially, and this is reflected
primarily in the dying out of customs related to religious beliefs. more

is still a for- of Iaatctlaking in use. "arekeren," (literally ”to say yes”);
formerly. the parents' consent to the daughter was given in the presence

of a sember of the clergy (a laullah or a sheikh). whose presence was
considered essential. ’and this ceremoney still takes place now. but

without a munber of clergy present. The betrothal ceremoney. "daznygari.
nishandanin." began with the sheikh joining together the thumbs of the

two fathers. Addressing the father of the bride-to-be. the sheikh

would ask: "Do you give consent for your daughter by the will of

God to carry this man?“ The father of the groos-to-be was then asked the
same question of the sheihh; The sheihh would then put the ring on the girl’s
finger and say ”ls-bank pinata.” ("Congratulationm Be happy.")

Then the feasting would begin. The remants of this rite can be seen

in acne villages even now. An mags-mt ring is put on the fourth finger .
of the girl's right hand as a sign of 'betrothal. but this is no longer
done by a lember of the clergy) it is usually some highly respected

person of the village who'prcnounces the ”Be-bare]: pirozba.”

In .LLJNInc. with the new custoe. the parents of the young can give the
hride-to-be a gold watch on the day of hetrothal, and then the lorry-
eaking begins. The health of the betrothed and their parents are
toasted. and music is made on the zourna and the drum: there is singing
and dancing. Azerbaijmi. Anmian, Georgian. Russian and other some
are sung in addition to the Kurdish ones. Between the day of betrothal
and the wedding. the dowry is prepared. the "dzhekhez." which is. as

in the past. the personal property of the bride. Among the Kurds the
mdern dowry usually consists of bed linens, blankets. expmsivs cloth.
knitted items. and furniture. in contrast with the dowry of ancient
times. which was steed on a set nunber of domestic animals: sheep.
horses and bulls. in olden times the wedding was set for five months

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

after the betrothel. This time period has now been reduced. Something
new has appeared in Soviet timos-~guests are invited to the wedding.

and i‘urmal invitations are sent out. Today the bride is dressed and
adorned for her wedding without any rites. She does not use antimony to
emphasize her eyes: her hair and nails are not dyed with henna. In the past.
the groom's chest was decorated with a triangular talisman. "nvisht."
which was drawn by a launch or sheihh. They believed that the nvisht
possessed magical power to wazd off evil spirits. A red silk scarf

was tied aromd the groom's neck. Now the groom comes to the wedding

in city dress. The bride, howeVer, is dressed in the ancient national
costune. only instead of the five-seven dresses. which were worn one on
top of each other. she wears two or three dresses.

The guests invited to the wedding from other villages stay with relatives
of the groom. The wedding is held both in the groom's home and in

a large building (most frequently the rural club). to which the entire
cos-mity of the village will be invited.

before the bride is brought to the home of the groom. her relatives.
according to tradition. show the relatives of the bride and groom and

everyone present her dowry. If people like the dowry. they say‘ ”ﬂashalls"
(wonderful. bravoi).

After the connunity inspection of the dowry. they prepare the bride to
be led out of her father's home. The groom and his father. mother. the
sponsor and relatives cone for the bride. The bride's parents. or if

she has none. her closest relatives and witnesses go to the registry
office (or to the village soviet). In some families the bride is taken to
the home of her sponsor. "sardauati." after the marriage is registered.
She remains in his home for a few hours and only then is she taken to

the groom's home. In other families the bride returns to her own home
for a while.

Previously. the bride rode from her sponsor's home to the hem of her

new husband on a horse. accompanied by a group of riders who perform
movements that give the impression of dancing on horseback, "dzhridlisten"
(literally ”a dance while galloping"). Today the newly-married bride

is taken to her husband's house by car or a wedding carriage. In accordance
with this change there has been a change in the expressions used: instead
of "buksiarksrsn." (to put the bride on a horse). a new word, ' ‘
has come into use. Mberen.” (to drive away with the bride). Another
custom which has disappearedwas based on the protection which the bride's
brothers offered here against enemies md evil spirits.

0n the wedding day a nelody is played on the zourna and the def (drum)
in front of the groou's home. The guests begin to gather at the call of
the dru. A round d ce. "govmd" is started to the accompaniment of the
music or of singing. aking hold of each other by the little finger. the
elbow. the waist or the shoulder, they form a row or a circle and dance.

32
sex omcm. use 0va
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sargovand, or leader of the dance. moves out in front. lie waves
a herohief in the air in tine to the ausic or singing. The bride and
groom also join the dancers. Previously. the groom was supposed to
hide mowhere for a while. even to leave the village. The Kurdish
people explained this custom by saying that the groom was supposedly
ashamed to sit in view of the elders during the wedding. But now the
groon does not leave the nuptial bone. The groom and bride are seated
next to each other at the wedding tune in the place of honor.

This is s new phenomenon for the Kurdish wedding. The elders are the
first to raise their glasses and drink to the health of the bride and
groom ”Ashka du gola” (To the health of two flowers). Those present
offer toasts in honor of the young people and wish them health, ahappy
life and a fruitful union ("garak be bar be"). Then they drink to the
health of the parents of the bride and groom and then in turn to ell those

present in order of age and distinction. Hith every toast there is
a suggestion to sing or dance in honor of those who are being toasted.

In former tines only the zourna and the drain were played at the wedding.
as was the custo- with all the Trans-Caucasian peoples.“ how the tanbourine
and other Caucasian musical instruments are played.

After the wedding begins the “sachu,” the call to provide the young people
with gifts. and the announcement of who is giving what. The current
custo- of the sachu differs fro. the for-er version by virtue of whet

is given. Previously. domestic anisals. prinarily sheep, were given
during the sachu. and now it is such things as a sewing machine, a

watch, lengths of material. footwear and other objects. Everything

given during the sachu belongs to the Me of the groom and is not
considered the property of the bride alone. as was true in olden tines.

Several months after the wedding tradition cells for the ceremony of
“soy.” the return of the young wife to her father's home. Having spent
about a month with her parents, she returns to her husband with the many
presents given to her at this tine. They are called ”shkart." The
smart continues to be considered the personal property of the wife.
Previously, the sitar: consisted exclusively of domestic animals, the
offspring of which were also considered to be the property of the wife.
Now it is Iainly objects which are given.

0f the prenuptial. nuptial and postnuptial customs. everything that was
related to religious belief is gradually disappearing. and the sac is
true of the custons associated with birth. Despite the vestiges of
sooe outdated custom. the practices of cradle betrothal, abduction,
escape and a check on a girl‘s chastity ("harket'en"). as well as any
others. have largely disappeared.

According to custo-ary rights nong the Trans-Caucasian Kurds. a
widow did not have the right to inherit. ller husband's property went
to his relatives through the father's line. Only the dowry was considered

33
roe OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to be her property. Today the parents. children and each of the spouses

in the Kurdish felily have identical rights of inheritance. Just as children
have the right to inherit after their parents' death. a wife has the right
to inherit her husband's property after his death. As a result of this.

a new expression has sprung up among the Kurds. “zhena eirathhor.“

wonan heir. This expression sounds very strange to old Kurdish

man. sole of when when talking about the right of a women to inherit.
nutter sceptically. "Shukhule den'yeeya" (Such are the affairs of the world).

The nunber of Soviet Kurdish people who adhere to Islam or the Yesid
religion is growing less and less. Other vestiges of religion are also re-
ceding into the past-the worship of various forces and phenomena of nature.
the custom of sacrificing a sheep at holy springs (”Rania zynzyni"). and

at places of worship during pilgrimages ("ziyarnt"). etc.

health Care

Before the establistnent of Soviet authority in Trans-Caucasia. health
care along the Kurds was in a deplorable state: there were no medical
establish-ants in the areas where the Kurds lived. Hitch doctors. mullahs.
and sheikhs served as doctors. who treated people not so much with folk
renedies. as with spells. incantations. prayers and exorcism of the evil
spirits fron the body of the patient. They resorted to various magical
news. For era-ple. after a baby was born a rifle was shot off near

the nether. If a wolan in childbirth lost consciousness. they brought

a neighing horse to her. A patient lying in a fever would be beaten
with ”divine” twigs.. All this was done to drive away the evil spirits.
which were considered the cause of the disease.

In Soviet tiles. hospitals. laternity hones. pharmacies and first aid
stations have been opened in Kurdish villages. Prophylactic neasures
are carried out systematically to codaat infectious diseases. Their
own medical personnel have been trained.

Culture

The culture of the Kurdish people has flourished in Soviet times. A Kurdish
written language was created on the basis of the Russian alphabet, and

the sylbols for those phmenes which the Russian alphabet lacks were

taken fro. the Latin alphabet. Political. artistic and scientific
literature is published in the Kurdish language. A Kurdish newspaper.

PIA TAZE (New Path) is published in Yerevan.

One of the first steps on the way to the creation of Kurdish literature
was the collection and publication of the oral poetic work of the
Kurds (“Kurdish Folklore." Yerevan. 1936). In 1937. a collection of
verse in Kurdish by huseib Aklnndov was published in baku. The Kurdish

writers Arab Shanilov. Adzhiye Mindi. Dzhasae Dshalil and others have
played an inportant role in the creation of Kurdish literature. In recent

35
roe orncm use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

years a number of new works by Kurdish prose writers and poets has been
published in the Kurdish. Russian. Armenian, Georgian and Azerbaijani

languages. A Kurdish section has been established within the Union of
writers of Armenia.

The Soviet Kurds are developing the best traditions of their many centuries
of creative work by the people. This includes oral poetry of the Kurds.
their songs and dances. Romantic tales about such Kurdish heroes as

Kama Zina. Zambil'frosh. Siaband and Khadzhezar. etc. are becosing well
known.

Kurdish folk singers perform both old and contemporary songs. Choir
singing is becoming established along with solo singing as part of the
nodern Kurdish folklore tradition. There is a song. for example. which
they sing about the Komsomol, “The Hay Song." and there are others.

Kurdish dancing. in contrast with Kurdish singing. was based mostly on
round dances or group dances with both men and women participating. Solo
dances have now joined these older traditional dance forms. Armenian.
Azerbaijani and Georgian dances are also performed. The best folk dancers
are brought together in amateur groups and enseebles. At the initiative
of the Kurdish intelligentsia a Kurdish song and dance ensemble was
created in Tibilisi in 1956: it went on to receive the diploma, secondary
grade. at the republic festival in Georgia. In 1957 an msemble to perform
Kurdish songs and dances was formed in Yerevan.

Before the revolution one could count on one‘s fingers the number of
Kurds we were literate, and there were no literate Kurdish women at all.
Only boys attended the few schools that did exist, and these were mainly
children of feudal lords and the clergy.

At the present education has become universal. In rayons which have a
predominantly Kurdish population. the Kurdish language is taught along with
other subjects. The schools employ more than 100 Kurdish teachers who have
higher and secondary education. The school childrennunder the direction
of their teachers-”organise reports and plays for the people of their
villages. The Komsomol organizations in the school are conducting an active
campaign against outdated customs and against the vestiges of superstition.
The local cultural and educational institutions (clubs. libraries, etc.)
are carrying out a great deal of work among the Kurdish population.

A Kurdish intelligentsia has been created and is growing rapidly. Kurdish
young people attend WZ's and tekhnikums in Baku. Yerevan, Tbilisi and other
cities. There are Kurdish agronomists, engineers, physicians. scientists.
etc. The Armenian 588 Academy of Sciences has established a Kurdish group
as part of the Sector for Eastern Studies. The Leningrad Department of

the Institute of Asian reoplem. which comes under the USSR Academy of
Sciences. has a Kurdish Study Center. Kurdish scholars have achieved serious

success in the study of the ' history, ethnography, culture and language
of their people.

35
For omcm. use our
89 e

90.

91 .

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

For information on foreign Kurds. see the volume "Narody Peredney
Azii” ﬁeoples of the Gateway to Asia]. Moscow, 1957.

“any Kurds do not eat pork for reasons of custos. For example, the k01-
ldoz of the Mal” Dzhanuslki village in the Aparanskiy Rayon of the
Amnim 33R raises pigs. but the peasants do not eat the neat: they
hand it over as part of their obligations to the state.

Conpare with the Armenian "ode.” It is typical that the ode was built

only by the Kurds of Armenia. The Kurds of Azerbaijan did not know
about the ode.

The Azerbaijani Kurds call these plank beds ”camels.”
The "alak" is frequently won on top of the "kotvi."

A cow was not supposed to be given as part of the dowry in order to
avoid having two females leave the hose.

Compare with the Armenian "gyond." and ”gownd.” This term serves as the
name of a type of collective folk dances. as well as of the formation
itself and of theantire chain of dancers.

The "turns" and the ”def” were Insical instruments used for
signal and oerenonial purposes.

esaa .
(30: 3144/1095 mm

36
me omcm. use can!