APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00080R000100020030-7

:
-0 - .o | "IL I .o
27 FEBRURRV 1979 (F000 2/79)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8293

27 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE

POLITICAL, SoctoLosICAL, AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

. ' -"
\.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agencv
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was

processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCURBHBH‘ 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recompended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRs publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.3. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. u.s. Government Printing Office, Hashington, n.c.
20b02.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6 Nowell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
OIIIJOGRAPMC DATA I. Din-pun No. JPRS L/8293 . :1. Reripicu'a Autumn No.

epou an

TMNSMTIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE - POLITICAL. SOCIOLOGICAL, 27 Februarv M79
AND HILITARY AFFAIRS. (pouo 2/79)

I- :eniot-ing Org-Mamet: Kept.
o.

'- l'qu-n-ma inanuauon Nana and Addie-a '0. WOICCI/Tosl/tuk Una No.
Joint rublicationa Reaearch Service
1000 North Glob. 80“! II. Comet/Gnu Na.
Arlington. Virginia 22201

I), \pn-monn. Oman-union Name and Mama IJ. Type oi lino“ I: Pond
Coveted

Aa above
l5. Suppleuauuy Nam

u. Abama II

The serial rcport contoina articles on official party and government pronounce-
nenta and writings on significant domestic political developments; intonation

on general sociological problems and developments in such areas aa demography,
nenpovor. public health and welfare, education, and mas organizations; and
articlea on nilitary and civil defense. organisation, theory. budgets, and
hardware.

ey uda -Docalent Aaalyala. «Descriptata

_ International Affaira Propaganda .

_ Albania Political Science

_ Bulgaria Sociology
Czechoalovakia Military Organization
Eaat Germany

Hungary

Yugoalavil

I78 LII-mun“ ”pea-Faded Tam!

I7¢.("§Allan/Clour SD. SK, ls

ll. Ava-lahluy Siam-nu 2|. No. ol 3Pagea
For Official Use Only. m
Limited Number of Copies Available Fran ms. W“

' °"" " ""“ """' ""' nus roau um s: asvaooucto ""°““°‘ "'" ’"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/829

27 Febrile:

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
POLITICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL, AND MILITARY AFFAIRS
(rouo 2/79)

CONTENTS

CZKIHOSIDVMCIA

Changes Improvements in Army Uniform Described
(muse: Roubal; unova mm, lo 25, 1978)

POIAND

Heat German Reportage on Election of Polish Pope
(Various sources, various dates)...

Reactions of Romns

Warsaw Reactions

Advocate of Collegiate Principle
High-level Visits

Catholicism: Polish National Tradition
Report From Krakow

Believer and Nonbeliever TV Vievere
Ilev Pope-Jew Oetpolitik

New Pope's Lite, Activities

Church-State Dialogue in Poland Revieved
(m1 Hart-am: common, Oct 78)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECNOSLOVAKIA

CHANGES, IMPROVEMENTS IN ARMY UNIFORMS DESCRIBED
Prague LIDOVA ARHADA in Ezech No 25, 1978 pp 1092-1093

[Article by Col Bag Prantisek Roubal. candidate for doctor of science:
"changes in Attire of CSLA Soldiers"]

[Text] Fulfillment of the challenging tasks of safeguarding the defensive
capacity of the CSSR and further increasing the fighting strength of the
Czechoslovak People's Army demands. among other things, that the citizens
of our state correctly understand its place and mission in the defense of
the socialist homeland and in the fight for peace, that they have all-
round confidence in it and support it in fulfilling its challenging tasks
and its responsible mission in society.

To this end, the Presidium of the CPCZ Central Committee. at its meeting
on 28 April 1978, adopted a resolution "Toward the Raising of the Level

of Military Propaganda and a More Effective Popularization of the CSLA
[Czechoslovak People's Army] in Society." Besides realizing the expressed
goals of 0902 military policy. this document follows the strengthening of
the social significance of the mission of CSLA members. especially of pro-
fessional soldiers, the evaluation of the performance of military service
as a most honorable duty and the increased appeal of a military profession.
above all for young people. Members of the CSLA influence the views of
the civilian public concerning our army first and foremost by the results
of their work, by fulfilling the tasks of combat and political training.
by disciplined conduct, :y their help to the national economy and by
active participation in public and political life. The outward appearance
of soldiers. a significant component of which is the uniform. also has its
place here.

A good standard of attire of the soldiers of the Czechoslovak People's Army
is one of the important factors which influences their moral and political
condition. affects military discipline. creates the basis for their out-
ward appearance and influences the relationship of the public to the army.

In the past our army instituted various well-founded changes in the attire
of its members. At the present time there is an apparent need to contrib-
ute to a still greater strengthening of uniform and military discipline.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OhLY

to further accentuate membership in the Czechoslovak People's Army and
the differentiation between the ranks. It also appears expedient to
make the attire of our soldiers more uniform with that of the soldiers
of the other Harsaw Pact countries. obviously while retaining national
elements and traditions.

The army command therefore decided, on the basis of an analysis in which
the special and commanding organs participated, to carry out the changes

which are set forth in RHNO [Order by the Minister of National Defense]
No 7/1978.

0n generals' uniforms. colored stripes and edging on the trousers are
being introduced (red for the land forces, blue for the air forcrl. 0n
the collars of their uniform shirt will be placed embroidered linden
sprigs instead of the presently used metal insignia. 0n the caps there

will likewise be colored edging. embroidered linden sprigs and an insig-
nia accentuated in plastic.

0n officers' and enaigns' uniforms. colored edging on the trousers and
caps (red for the land forces. blue for the air force) is being intro-
duced, as well as an insignia accentuated in plastic on the cap and new
types of chinstrsps on the caps of the service uniform (yellow for higher
officers. plain for lower officers and white, plain for ensigns). 0n the

collars of their service uniforms will be placed the appropriate differ-
entiating emblems.

Likewise. on the uniforms of the female officers and ensigns there will
be colored edging on the trousers. an insignia accentuated in plastic on

the cap or beret. and the appropriate differentiating emblems on the col—
lars of the blouses of the service uniforms.

The changes mentioned will be achieved in the manufacture of new uniforms
and by altering the current uniforms by 1 January 1980 for generals and
before 30 April l980 for professional servicemen and women in garrison in
Prague and Bratislava and for divisions and units scheduled for the Hay
review in those garrisons. For the remaining professional servicemen and
women the changes will be carried out before 31 December 1980.

In this way, implementation of the approved changes will be achieved in
the short period of one year. The first presentation en masse of members
of the Czechoslovak People‘s Army in the new uniform will occur within
the framework of the commemoration of the 35th anniversary of the libera-
tion of our homeland by the Soviet Army at the military review in Prague
and Bratislava.

besides the aforementioned changes. which concern the accentuation of uni-
forms of professional soldiers. several further special-purpose uniform
accessories are being ch1nged. The goal is a further improvement in the
provisioning of our army in peacetime and in field conditions.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

beginning 1 May 1978, trousers of an athletic cut and shirts with an
epaulet and necktle (with a fastening clasp) were introduced. At the
present time their design is being improved so that the shirt doesn't
tuck up at the waist. and a more suitable material with minimal wrink-
llng is being developed as well. At the same time, the long-range de-
sign of the summer attire is being investigated.

To further improve the professional soldiers' provisioning in winter
conditions. winter boots are being introduced into the equipment begin-
ning 1 January 1979 for generals and 1 January 1980 for officers and
ensigns. Likewise. beginning 1 January 1980 professional soldiers will
wear a service belt with a single breast strap on the service uniform.

The present dress and service uniforms for professional soldiers are com-
pletely satisfactory in their manufacture and color. A gradual improve-
ment in the quality of the fabrics in these uniforms is being achieved.
The task will be experimentally completed before the end of this year.
The service uniform of generals since June has been manufactured from
improved fabric. The dress and summer uniforms and service costs for
generals will be produced from a new fabric beginning 1 April 1979. For
offknrs and ensigns the fabric for service uniforms and coats will be
gradually introduced into production during the course of 1979. The de-
sign of the uniforms is being improved as well; for examne, a slit was
introduced and the length of the shirt and width of the trousers were
adjusted. Beginning in January 1979, shoes will be produced in two widths.
and a lengthening of the sole and heel life is being prepared.

The dress uniform for soldiers on active duty. including the dress cost,
has proven itself completely. It is well designed and the material is
properly chosen, even from the standpoint of our national economy. Only
the contemporary headgear--a forage cap or a beret (besides the traditional
red one of members of the parachute troops)«-does not fulfill all the
requirements and is often the cause of the unsatisfactory outward appear-
ance of the soldiers. Therefore. RHNO No 8/77 introduces as a component

of the dress uniform for active duty soldiers a round cap. with a deadline
for wearing it set at 1 October 1979. A white shirt has also proved it-
self as a supplement to the dress uniform. However, because it is not in-
cluded in the equipment of a soldier. soldiers on active duty until the
present time could only wear their own shirts. Therefore. RENO No 8/77

is expanding the accessories (of the first equipment of a soldier) by one
white shirt beginning I October 1979. By means of the measures adopted.
the dress uniform of soldiers on active duty will. in essence. be completed.

With the accentuation of the uniforms for professional soldiers. the in-
truduction of several new uniform accessories and the improvement of the
quality of several types of fabrics in the manufacture of uniforms, the
first stage of changes in the attire of members of the Czechoslovak
People's Army will he concluded.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
{’\ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

uncurrently. within the framework of the second stage. a new field attire
for the troops is being developed. The manufacture of the present field
uniform was initiated as far back as before 1960. Our army was one of

the first to purposefully utilize a special field uniform. After it had
been in use for some time. on the basis of comments from the troops and
our own knowledge, several adjustments were gradually made. Their aim was
to make the uniform less bulky and to increase its permeability. However.
in spite of the improvements achieved. especially in design. the field
uniform still does not meet the current and even less the long-range needs
of the troops. Among its main shortcomings is that it picks up dirt easily.
which necessitates frequent dry cleaning. and this gives rise to inconsis-
tent impregnation and great flocculation of the fabric. Furthermore. it
lacks permeability as a result of the thickness of the fabric and the im-
pregnant used. particularly pyrofix (a nonflammable trea eat). The cap
is not pleasing in appearance. the trousers pull out of ."e boots and the
jacket is heavy. The design is not suitable. especially for tank crews
and several other specialists. Not even the boots meet the current chal-
lenging requirements. Besides taking a long time to put on. their resist-
ance to wetness and insufficient thermal insulation have drawn adverse
vii-lent a .

Therefore. on the basis of a thorough analysis and legitimate suggestions.
the development of a new field attire was begun. Here we are guided by
the wealth of experience of the other friendly armies. especially by the
conclusions adopted at the first conference of the special organs of the
uniform service of the armies of the Harsaw Pact countries. held this year
in Prague.

At the present time, control tests are still being run.on the new field
uniform; mass tests will be conducted in 1979 and 1980. This second stage.
involving composite field attire and including the placing of equipment
and everything necessary for the provisioning of soldiers in the field.
should be completed before 1982.

The measures implemented in the sphere of field attire and the further
Improvement in the quality of the uniform accessories and the external
accentuatlon of the uniforms emanate both from our current and long-range
production possibilities and from the position of our army in society.

It must be expected that the realization of the approved measures in the
accuntuatlon of military uniforms will be accepted positively by the mem-
bers of the army and our public as expedient and desirable measures.

COPYRIGHT: MAGNET. 1978

0360
080: 2600

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLAND

UBST GERMAN REPORTAGE ON EL§CTION 0F POLISH POPE
Reactions of Romans
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLGEHEINE in German 18 Oct 78 p 3

[Text] The Romans are slowly regaining their composure. On this Tuesday
morning they say "all right" to their new bishop. who was still an unknown
cardinal from a foreign land the day before. "Perhaps he is a little stern."
comments the owner of a fashion store on the Via Veneto. the Roman street of
splendor which has lost some of its glitter but still remains the beloved
strolling boulevard for ltaliana and foreigners. "But a certain hardness is
also needed for this office." adds a lady customer while she looks at her new
dress in the mirror. "John Paul ll is not so 'sweet.' not so lovable as the
first.“ comments another lady. "but he looks like a shepherd. He will carry
on his office well."

Outside in the cafes. Romans and tourists sit in the sun and know of only one
topic: a foreigner on the papal seat of Rome. Young sen hold the paper in
their hands. one reading aloud something about the life of Cardinal Hojtyla.
that he earned the money for his studies as a laborer. "he knows the problems
of the poor." one points out. satisfied. But the other persists: "Rome be-
longs to an Italian!" "But"--interrupts his friend--"when our cardinals are
worthless. when none of the great lords from Torino or Milan. and primarily
from here. theCuria. could get the agreement of the others. then I think it
right that a foreigner comes here. This requires courage. All respect to

the cardinals."

The small. mundane world of Via Veneto. nevertheless open to the "world" with
its bars and hotels. finds the choice of a Pole as head of the Catholic Church
and as bishop of Rome quite in order. But naturally there are differences in
the reactions of even the worldly Romans--and who would not want to rank as
such. At the election of the last, deceased pope no one had to ask the opin-
ion of the other. It was clear. John Paul I. the patriarch of Venice. was
simply appealing. and that is all that counts at the beginning. Yet here.
with a non-Italian. first one had to ask what the friend thought, how the
neighbor found it. On this Tuesday morning the Romans bought their newspapers

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY

a bit more eagerly. read a few lines. hit the paper with their hand. looked
a the bystanders and questioned with raised eyebrows: "Hhat do you think
of it?"

The replies cane uncertainly. Last night one could still afford to rensin
silent. with neaningful gestures. The surprise was great then. One could
even lose one's speech then. According to the calculations of diligent hia-
torians. ‘56 years. 9 aontha and 7 days have passed (however. the under nay
not be absolutely correct because of the Gregorian calendar reforn at the
end of the 16th century) since a non-Italian ascended to the throne of Peter.
Perhaps nany Italians thought that after 1.50 years their nation had acquired
a right to the bishop's seat of the prince of the apostles. Peter. Yet every
tradition comes to an end. ”And it was definitely not a bad series of Ital-
ian popes. Italy gave the church sdairable historical figures." say our
Ronan friends with an anxious plea for agree-eat in their eyes.

After the unfortunate Adrian VI fron Utrecht. it is again one from the peri-
phery of the Ger-an cultural sphere: Karol Hojtyla from Krakow. No Italian
has any objection to Poles. There are no disturbing relationships. A brave
little nation. always between nighty. greedy neighbors. that was nearly torn
to pieces in war between frightful states. the liitlerite Reich and the Stalin-
in Soviet Union. that experienced the horrors of the concentration caap
directly--in Italy—these are the first associations connected with the Poles.

On Monday evening John Paul II referred to the canon bonds of faith and
christian tradition in his old and new honeland. The assses in St. Peter's
Square inediately noticed that up there. on the center balcony of the great
facade. stood a use deeply rooted in faith and in the history of his church
who sincerely scant what he said. Many were astonished at his good co-and
of the Italian language. His voice resounded beautifully and clearly over
the enornous oval of Bernini. One could barely notice that a foreign tongue
forned the sounds. llis request. that they correct hia if he node an error
in the language. aoved even the strongest Italians. Some quickly forned the
judgnent that here. finally. was a pope who would not Ierely chat with the
masses. The astonishnent. the disbelief that a non-Italian was now the prinatc

of Italy slowly began to give way to a readiness for synpathy. to satisfaction
with a daring but lucky choice.

Perhaps there was an initial disappointment among the asses of the faithful
on Monday evening in St. Peter's Square as Cardinal Deacon Pelici uttered
the dark. unknown Pol'lsh nane at 1865 hours. The second John Paul certainly
did not unleash such a storn of enthusiasts as had the first. but the pope
froo Krakow can be sure of the affection of his new flock.

On Monday the first indiscrctions ran through the Vatican and the city of Rose.
Such rumors are to be listened to with caution. Yet such speaks for the fact

that. in addition to the Holy Spirit. sonber considerations led to the election
of the new pope from Poland. Leaving the Sistine Chapel through the Belvedere

6
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Court of the Vatican Palace on Monday. after the sass and the first address
by John Paul II. the cardinals spoke neatly of the holy Spirit as having
unquestionably brought about "a historic turn in the annals of the Catholic
Church." But, after all, the purple-rohed aenbers of the Sacred College did
not only implore for heavenly guidance during the ties of preparation and
the 3 days of the conclave.

The deceased pope embodied. in an exceptional manner, the lovable shepherd of
souls. Evidently no Italian cardinal could convince the foreign eainences
that he represented something else to a sinilarly extraordinary degree. Since
the Italians no longer possess a sinority bloc-as they did in earlier elec-
tions--with which to prevent a decision in favor of a non-Italian. the road
was obviously clear for an agreeaent on a "foreigner."

Yet how the providence of God or-nore profanely—-fate pointed then to the
cardinal archbishop of Krakow. that is shrouded in systery. It is strictly
protected by severe Church penalties. yet it will probably be lifted soon at
one place or another. just as it was after the previous conclave. It does
not appear to be accidental that Karol Hojtyla belongs to the European cul-
tural circle. to a people whose foundations are built on the Catholic faith.
to a nation to which no historical antagonisae are attached, to a state to
which political objections hardly exist. what role was played in the car-
dinals' decision by Hojtyla's origin from a country under connunist rule and
his known unyielding attitude toward con-union will be deciphered only free
the actions of the new pontiff.

Warsaw Reactions
Frankfurt/Main PRANKPURTBR ALLBEHEINE in Gernan 18 Oct 78 p 3

[Text] Harsaw. l7 0ctober--The first official reaction from Harsaw, in an
interview with government press spokes-an Janiursk by the Italian press
agency ANSA which was later reproduced in the Polish news media, voiced the
expectation that, as a nenber of the nation "which went through the hell of
war." Pope John Paul nwould dedicate hiaself with particular intensity to
the promotion of peace and friendly international cooperation. The pope's
choice of the nane of his two great predecessors, who had such great nerit
in this area, was noted with attention in Poland. The hope expressed here.
as well as in an initial con-entary by the paper ZYCIB HARSZAHY. that the
new pope would continue the Vatican's Eastern policy of his predecessors
was perhaps soaewhat rhetorical. since the Polish episcopate was opposed to
this policy in a rather skeptical and subdued manner.

The election of the netropolitan of Krakow was a great surprise for the native
country of the new pontiff. Even in Polish church circles apparently no one
counted on the possibility that Hojtyls, who was the youngest bishop in P0-
land when appointed at age 38. could be elected as the first non-Italian

pope in 4 1/2 centuries. At first nany people in Poland could not grasp or
believe the news shouted to than on the street and on the phone; then unhe-
lieving bewilderaent yielded to joyful pride. One has the impression that

7
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poland's Catholics. including the intellectuals. are in a state of joyful
shock. For the present the superabundance of joy allows little time for
quiet. sober considerations concerning the impact of a Polish pope on the
future development of Poland or even concerning the possible impact of this
Polish pope on the universal church. Meanwhile. there is a proud and dis-
concerted satisfaction that this choice takes into consideration the fact
that Poland may well be the most Catholic nation in the world today. that
there is no other country in which the ratio of practicing Catholics in the
population is as overwhelmingly high and in which these Catholics display
such a seasure of solid unity.

Not only in the eyes of the world but also for many Poles, Cardinal Uojtyla
was somewhat overshadowed by the primate Cardinal Hyszynski, so that it
required some effort to fashion a truly clear picture of this pontiff who
appears to combine openness to the world with a steady adherence to prin-
ciple and who seems to be more an embodiment of the professor type. which
he was for a long time. than that of a prince of the church.

Occasional suggestion.that the cardinal of Krakow represents sort of an
opposite pole to Primate Uyseynski concerning both the concept of the church
in the world and church-state relations-~more modern in the first area, more
uny-iolding in the second—have largely been discredited through the faithful
solidarity of Hojtyla with the prinate. Hojtyla, who cooperated in a deci-
sive manner on many documents of the Second Vatican Council, could indeed

be classified as less spiritualist-traditionalist than Vyszynski, yet he
never got into definite opposition to the primate over this. In this respect
the Polish spectrum is not the spectrum of the universal church as a whole,
by whose standards the new pope could well be classified in the traditionalist
wing but definitely not at its extreme end. The cardinal of Krakow has
proved to be in everything more of a quieting and conciliatory type of per-
son than a reliable support of nonconformist intellectuals. and in his ser-
none on church-state relations in recent years he has often voiced sharper
and nore critical views than the primate. lie has stressed more sharply the
defense of free novenent for the church and human rights.

To be sure, informed observers explain this in part by the fact that he was
just not in the politically responsible position of the primete'e office.
Yet Uojtyla apparently had a somewhat different basic position on the rela-
tionship between the columnist state and the Catholic Church in Poland, one
that could be defined as less "political": to reach less far out from the
area of the church it: its narrower sense in wishes and postulates and. in
the area of individual human conscience. to let himself be involved with
the state as little as possible in terms of demands and the exploitation of
possibilities from the State in order to avoid the necessity of eventual
reciprocity and solidarity. But the place of the church and the rights of
the human individual are definitely to be defended without compromise, as
is the right to call by its name, without polish or tactics, anything that
the church considers to be impermissible manipulation or limitation.

8
son orrIan use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with regard to the election of Hojtyla as pope. the Warsaw political leader~
ship is in the awkward position that, while of course it does not exclude
itself from the proud Joy felt by the entire nation. it still cannot be very
happy about the new situation. Not only because. in the argument used by
the party and governaent about the acquired appreciation of the value of
Poles in the world, the cost apparent positive point is now on the aide of
the Polish church and not the state. but also because the scales have been
tipped in the practical political situation as well. The Warsaw leadership
now faces a strengthened opponent in the Harsaw-Vatican relationship and

in the state-church relationship in Poland. and all this totally unsuspected.
without any preparation. At the hela of the Vatican stands a sea who knows
in detail the everyday existence of the faithful under a socialist systen.
and. as the church free which the pope energcd. the Polish Church under
Cardinal Hyszynski is gaining enormously in moral strength.

Advocate of Collegiate Principle
Frankfurt/Main PRANKFURTER ALLCEHEINE in German 18 Oct 78 p 11

[Text] As the newly elected Pope John Paul [I appeared before the Romans
for the first tine on Monday evening. the Pole from Krakow said: “I cone
from a foreign land. distant and yet so close in the community of faith and
of Christian tradition." Not only to Catholics in Italy or Latin Aaerica
but also to the many Gcrnan faithful. the pope from the neighboring country
is a largely unknown man. In the ainds of a broader public, the Catholic
Church of Poland has always been identified with the person of its prinate.
Cardinal Hyszynski. A strong discipline in the hierarchy of the Polish
cpiscopatc has seen to it that the church. especially in its disagreements
with the cosnunist power. always spoke with a single voice. that of the
primate. On Monday evening Hyszynski stood on the balcony of St. Peter's
Church to the right of the pope. two steps behind him.

One can already hear opinions characterizing the primate. who has resisted
the challenges of the atheistic worldly power and preserved the powerful
position of the Catholic Church in Poland for decades, as a "pope asker.”
The Vatican rewards the loyalty of the 30 aillion Polish Catholics and the
example of their vital belief. The fact that. after more than 30 years of
communist control. a Polish cardinal can be elected pops. that the heritage
and essence of Polish Catholicisa was not squandered away. can be attributed
to Hyszynski's service. Yet in the choice of a pope this say have been one
hut certainly not the decisive factor.

In Cardinal Hojtyla the conclave decided on a man who is open toward the
currents of Catholicism outside Poland. in his own country he was considered
the "intellectual" among the ne-bers of the episcopate. The elevation of

the archbishop of Krakow to the rank of cardinal in Hay 1967 fulfilled the
hopes of all those who. for years after the death of Cardinal "land in 1968
and of Archbishop of Krakow Cardinal Sapieha in 1951. had urged the Vatican
to name a second cardinal in Poland. according to tradition. The choice

9
son orncuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the 47-year-old archbishop was no surprise at the tine. Hojtyla was
known as a nan whose prudence and wall-balanced nature wade hin different
from Hyszynski.

In the circles of young Catholic intellectuals and Catholic lay organization
which were in loyal opposition to the episcopate. the professor of theology
enjoyed great respect. With a second cardinal. responsible directly to
Rome, the party and governnent hoped to weaken the position of the conbative
and stubborn head of the Conference of Polish Bishops, Cardinal Hyszynski.
and to split the church hierarchy to their advantage. government re-
peatedly nade it clear that Hyszynski. the "leader of the antisocial oppo-
sition." could never becose their partner in a dialogue. This calculation--
to normalize the relnt-onship between Warsaw and the Vatican with the help
of vojtyla. possibly bypassing Hysrynski--did not work. The worldly powers
had to realize that the new cardinal was scrupulously loyal to the prinate.
This iron discipline. which Hojtyla naintained especially in crisis situa-
tions. approached virtual self-denial.

In 1967. when Hyszynski was denied pernission to participate in the Synod

of Catholic Bishops in Rene. Cardinal Hojtyla. together with the bishops of
Lublin and Oppeln. declined to go out of solidarity, although the necessary
travel documents had already been issued. At the Conference of Polish Bishops
wojtyln received applause. unusually loud for this circle. when he declared
that he would not travel to Rome unless the head of the conference. Hyssynski.
also received a passport. The cardinal of Krakow thus wade it known for the
second tine that he would not lend hisself as a splitting tool. It became
clear the first tine when wojtyln in Krakow. like Cardinal Hyszynaki in
Warsaw. declined to personally greet French President de Gaulle during his
visit to Poland in Septeaber 1967 when the official guest of the con-unist
govern-eat visited the cathedral on the wawel in Krakow.

The false expectatirts connected with his appointnent to cardinal also put

a deeper on the official appearances of the cardinal of Krakow. who was

moved by concern not to sow discord or to let uncertainties arise in the
Polish episcopate. The professor is not a man of quick words. of taking
impulsive stands. what at tines appears to be out-of-place nodesty is more
the manifestation of a personal shyness. he avoids aggressive confrontations.
but this should not deceive anyone about the solidity of his positions. In

spite of his pronounced spirituality. the new pope is a nan who is practi-
cally oriented in making judgnents.

Those who know his describe the netropolitan of Krakow as a good listener.

"e is no chanpion of "solitary decisions" but an advocate of the collegiality
principle. In Krakow he found tine for every priest. for every seminary
student who sought advice. He cultivated contact at the grassroots level
and did not shrink from the road to the villages around Zakopnne or to the
pilgrins in Silesian Pickary. The broad face with the soft Slavic features
could give a false ispression about the somber practicality of the new
pontiff of the Catholics; John Paul II weighs before he speaks. Hojtyla

10
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

can meditate for hours. reports Rubin. the Polish suffragan bishop with a
permanent seat in Rome. Quick decisions are not to be expected of him.

At his ascension to his office some expected to find in the second Polish
cardinal an advocate of dialogue between Christians and Marxists, a man

in the middle who adheres firmly to strong principles but, in contrast to
wyszynski. does th seek open confrontation. Perhaps in earlier years
Hojtyla gave justified cause for such speculations. Yet in the course of
development the archbishop of Krakow made his position more precisely clear.
Duringrutinterviaw with German television he commented that one cannot simul-

taneously be a believer and an unbeliever. a Catholic and a Marxist at the
same time.

In recent times he has stressed in his preachings the rights of men and of
believers as creations of God. He has defended the right of man to be free
"because God made man free". Speaking to teachers and pedagogues at the
pilgrimage site of Csestochowa this past summer. he explained that truth

also belongs among the rights of man; one cannot violate it without violating
In“.

During the celebrations of the 20th anniversary of '1he Organization of
Polish Church Life in the Hestern and Northern Regions" in 1965. the newlv
elected cardinal recalled that a professor of Krakow University. Pawel Hlodko-
wlc. proclaimed his theses on the freedom of human conscience and on the
right of the people at the Council of Constance. "In the 15th century.
Poland became the champion of the rights of the human individuality which
is expressly repeated today in the encyclical 'Histici Corporis' or by John
XXIII in his remarkable encyclicai 'Pacem in Terrie.‘ It was a Pole then
who, at the Council of Constance, declared the right of the people to life
and freedom and. above all, to spiritual independence--a right to live
according to one's own truth." Uojtyla said at the time that the bishop of
Hermie, Eneas Silvius Olesnicki, was elected pope after the death of Pius
.II and was the only Polish bishop who had occupied Peter's throne. No one
thought at the time that Karol Uojtyla would be the second.

John Paul II is no inexperienced pope from the Polish provinces. The poly-
glut scholar speaks at least five languages and is not an unknown to the car-
dinals and bishops in Rome. During the Second Vatican Council he actively
participated in drawing up the constitution on "Presence of the Church in

the Modern world." Hojtyla played a considerable role in the Roman Synod of
Bishops. In 1976 he was elected to the permanent council of the Synod of
Bishops. At the council he emphasized the necessity of cooperation between
the pope and the bishops. which should provide the certainty that he will

not manage his new office as primus inter pares.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

High-Level Visits
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLCEHBINB in Cernan 20 Oct 78 p 4

[Text] Rose. 19 0ctobcr--Prench Cardinal Jean Villot will probably rennin
as head of the papal department of state. Although the news is not yet offi—
cial. the paper which reported it. IL CIORNALB NUOVO. quoted reliable
sources. 0n the other hand. nest of the other Italian papers expressed the
hope that the "Polish pope would nane an Italian secretary of state." The
current "foreign sinister" of the Vatican. Archbishop Caaaroli. is recon-
nended as successor.

Moreover, even pressure is being exerted in this problen. "Hojtyla's elec-
tion as pope.” writes LA REPUSLICA. "has already created concern in govern-
nentel offices of the East. which as yet have given no noticeable signs of
any reaction. Casaroli'e renoval would sound like a declaration of war.“
Another reason for the proposed solution to none Cssaroli secretary of state
is that the pope would have a chance to choose as "negotiator" soneone who
would be sore in accord with his own views on the relationship with the con-
nunist countries. The predecessor of the new pope reached the decision to
retain every nenber of the Curie offices within 68 hours of his election-

a decision which did not go without criticise. Pope John Paul 11 gave his-
sclf a period of reflection until the installation nass the following Sunday.
Nevertheless. no doubt exists in Rene about the continuation of the papal
0stpolitik. Yet there is agree-eat in all circles that its nethods and style
will change. This is also confirned by Catholic circles in Harsaw who were
questioned by CORRIERB DELLA 883A. Pope Uojtyla will conduct a “less naive
and nore demanding policy“ toward the connunist nations. The new pope under-
stands the connunist language and knows what say be hidden behind certain
pronises and cajolexles. Dialogue and cooperation will undoubtedly be con-
tinued. but under the condition that the conunist states lust be ready for
concessions. It nay be part of the new nethod that the negotiations will no
longer be conducted above the heads of the episcopates involved. as was the
case previously.

The pope intends to visit Krakow on 8 May for the 900-year celebration of
Saint Stanislaus. This he personally disclosed to his previous diocese. On
his arrival in Vienna. Cardinal Roenig confirned that the pope will also visit
the Austrian capital on his trip. Kahol. the Polish minister for church-
state relations. had already announced that there is no objection to a visit
by John Paul II to his native country.

Although the Polish governncnt stresses the her-onious relationship between
state and church. nothing has changed in its policy toward religion. The two
consecrated bishops of Krakow had to protest because. precisely at this
nonent. 12 seninary students were called into nilitary service. The president
of the Polish state. Jablonski. will also participate in the "sole-n high
seas of installation of John Paul II.” However. the real event will be the
presence of the archbishop of Canterbury. Donald Coggan, which appears to
indicate that a note than niniscule ecu-enical obstacle has been renoved

by the election of a non-Italian pope.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the opinion of CORRIBRE DELLA SBRA, it was the Austrian Koenig and the
Spaniard Jubany who steered the votes of the Germans. French. East Europeans
and the Third Horld toward the metropolitan of Krakow.

Catholicism: Polish National Tradition
Frankfurt/Main PRARKFURTBR ALLGEHBINB in German 20 Oct 78 p 10

[Text] The Polish pope came to Rome by a straight road. The stretch can
be traced back through a thousand years. The Roman road. the "Itsr Romanum"
as it was called by the cultural historian Jan Bystrom, put its mark on the
cultural development of the country and on the spiritual orientation of the
population ever since the historical beginnings of Polish Christianity. 0n

the eastern border of Western Christendom. Poland retained its close spiritual
ties with Rome.

In 966 the first historically knounPolish King. Hieszko I, who was married to
the Christian Princess Dubravka of Bohemia. had himself christened according
to the Latin rites. The king's decision to join the Roman Church and not the
Byzantine Christendom of his lavic brothers in the East had far-reaching
consequences for the future fate of the country which have remained in effect
to the present. Hicszko placed his domain under the protection of Saint Peter
and thereby insured the support of the pope. In 960 the diocese of Posen was
founded and placed under the archdiocese of Hagdeburg. But in the year 1000
Boleelaw Chrobry, the son of Hieszko. obtained from Pope Sylvester II the
establishment of an independent Polish archdiocese in Gnesen with subordinate
dioceses in Kolorbseg. Hroclsw and Krakow. During a pilgrimage the German
king and Roman emperor. Otto Ill, named the later Polish king. Boleslaw l,

a confederate and "Patriarch of the Roman Empire."

The founding of monasteries. the Cistereian and Premonstratensian among them.
brought to Poland the civilization and art of antiquity and of the early Euro-
pean Middle Ages. The church played a decisive role in Polish intellectual
life. just as it did everywhere else in Europe where Christendom furnished

the base for universality. The oldest documents of the national language and
literature are dedicated to religious themes.

No European current bypassed Poland. Reformation and anti-Reformation gripped
the land, even if the forms of coercion were not as gruesome as in other
places. Hussitism had many adherents in Poland in the 15th century. although
it did not become a national movement as in Bohemia. Above all the Polish
nobility. and with them. forcibly. the bonded peasants. changed to Calvinism
together with the townspeople, a considerable number of whom were Germans.

The Reformation could not establish roots in the general population. Speci-
fic forms of tolerance developed which were without example in Europe at the
time. Anti-Reformation proclamations by the royalty. which remained Catholic

throughout. were contrasted with pro-Reformation decisions by the Polish Parlia-
ment. In 1573, in a speclal session of Parliament. the Protestant nobles

13
Po: ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

concluded the "Warsaw Convention" in which all nobles. regardless of their
creed. obligated themselves not to attack or discriminate against anyone
because of his beliefs. Before his coronation the king had to repeat an oath

on this "Par diasidentium." Stefan Bathory of Transylvania. as king of Poland.
issued an edict in 158l guaranteeing religious freedoa.

This tolerance was in the interest of the Polish nation. which. although it
often served as a "bulwark of Christianity" against the invasions of Mongols
and Turks, also expanded its control over non-Christian peoples in Lithuania.
the Ukraine and Hhite Russia in the course of the centuries. By 1650 the
Polish nobility. and with then the peasants, had been successfully brought
back into the fold of the Catholic Church within a few generations in the
course of the anti-Reformation. with the help of the Jesuits. In 1663 Par-
lianent prohibited the reestablishaant of Protestant churches; in 1668 anyone
converting from the Catholic Church to Protestant teachings was threatened
with exile and the death penalty; in 1716 the demolition of Protestant churches
erected after 1632 was decided.

The beginnings of the still-valid equation Pole-Catholic reach back to this
period; since the identification of different beliefs with the population
included: Cernan equals Lutheran. Polish equals Catholic. Among the western
neighbors the Reforaation was entrenched froa the north the Protestant Swedes
aade an inroad and in the east.1ived the Orthodox “schismatics.”

In the years of the "stern flood" which exhausted the'nation after 1668, as
the Swedes occupied Harsaw and later also Krakow. "when the aisery was at its
highest. this airacle occurred." Oskar Halecki. the historian living in Lon-
don. describes it in his "history of Poland": "Like Noah's ark amidst the
deluge. the aonastery of Czestochowa resisted the enemy. Its abbot, Kordecki.
gathered a nunber of soldiers around the picture of the 'Black Hadesna.‘ which
has been revered for centuries. and after a siege lasting 60 days the Swedes
were forced to retreat for the first tine. As this unheard-of event becaae
known and was listened to as to a legend. the entire population found new
courage...and raised itself against the strangers in an outburst of reqwakeaed
patriotisa.” In 1655 King John Kasiair aade a sole-n proaise on behalf of

the nation that the Holy Virgin Mary would be praised froo then on as ”Queen
of the Polish Crown“ and'that the Polish nation would never depart from this
promise.

Even today Czestochowa is a national shrine and place of pilgriaage for ail-
lions of people. In the Polish Catholic Church the invocation "Queen of Peace"
in the Litany of Loretta is followed by the insert "Mary, Queen of Poland--
pray for us." with the permission of the Vatican. During the tine of dissen-
berncnt in l772-l793-l995 by the three powers. Prussia. Russia and Austria.

two of which were non-Catholic. the state and its institutions disappeared.

In their fight for national survival the peoplagathered around the church.

and the picture of the "Queen of Poland" bestowed solace and hope in their
place of worship.

1h
m orncm. US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The clergy stood at the side of the people; many priests became 'hnrtyrs

of the national conviction" during the struggle between the Prussian govern-
ment and Rose. just as during the German occupation in world War II the
priests participated in the patriotic resistance. More than 2.500 of then
lost their lives in concentration camps.

From 1918 to 1939 the Catholic faith was the official state ralty an in Po-
land. although the church did not participate directly in sta . authority.
Nor did it own any considerable landed property. with a few exceptions.
since these had been largely confiscated in the 19th century. Thus. the
Catholic Church of Poland did not pose any points for attack by communist
propaganda as that alien order was forcibly imposed on the country with its
western orientation. The identification with the national interest. which
the church has practiced through the centuries. made it nearly umasssilabla.
Attempts to divide a clergy which had grown up in historical traditions or
to destroy the unity between the church and the nation were unsuccessful.

In 1963. on the 660th anniversary of the establishment of sesinaries by the
Council of Trent. the prisate of Poland. Cardinal Hysaynski. said that there
were people who wanted to turn the priests into chaplains of a party or of a
certain political orientation. or into servants of the "raison d'etat."
However. the priest must be ready to give up his life for his brothers rather
than to put himself in the service of political programs which are not always
in agreement with the spirit of the Gospel and of supernatural laws.

The fruits of this steadfastness are visible 15 years later: 85 percent of
the Polish population professes to belong to the Catholic church. It is
divided into 27 dioceses or apostolic administrations in which 17 bishops.
including the suffragan bishops. are working. There are exactly 9.000 par-
ishes which are served by 18.000 diocesan priests. 18.000 ecclesiastlcs and
30.000 nuns. Five thousand seminary students are preparing for their voca-
tion.

The teaching of religion takes place at 18.000 so-called catechetical loca-
tions outside the schools. And a few days ago the "most Catholic nation

of the world" placed Karol Hojtyla of Krakow. as supreme head of Catholic
Christendom. in the Vatican. This pope is indeed not coming in "from the
cold." as an Italian paper observed in its headline.

Report Pros Krakow
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTBR ALLCEHEINE in German 23 Oct 78 p 3

[Test] From the cathedral on the Hawel. the coronation church and mausoleum
o! the Polish kings. the largest bell in Poland. the famous ”Zygsunt."

rings in the extraordinary day on this Sunday morning. It was poured by
Johann aches of Nuremberg in 1520. its tolls. which can be heard not only
in the city but also in a wide circle around Krakcw. announce only the high
holidays of the church and extraordinary occurrences. according to tradition.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Legend has it that the tone of the bell breaks up the clouds to sake place
for the sun. On Saturday. rain nixed with the first snow fell fron the hea-
vens above Poland. 0n the cold. windy Sunday the sun broke through. although
not with its full autunnal radiance.

Zygnunt's bell tolled. yet the faithful stayed at hone. They followed the
trans-lesion of the inauguration of their archbishop. Karol Hojtyla. to pope
on their television screens. Streets er. squares were as enpty as they are
in the west during the finals of the soccer world cup coepetition. For the
first ties in the existence of the state-owned television under the control
of the Conunist Party. the screen carried pictures of a church event. Never
before had Polish Catholics seen any of their cardinals or even a casaock on
television. Host of then know St. Peter's Square in Rona only free hearsay
or free foreign pictures. The first pictures of church life on Polish tele-
vision screens were now a superlative as well: the inauguration of one of
their countrymen as pope of the universal church.

On Sunday around 10 a n the people crowd into the snall TV tone of the Hotel
Cracovia in Krakow to see the colorful pictures fron Rose. They applaud as
the pope. who still is Cardinal ﬂoatyla for then. finally appears. They

are as coepletely there as if they were standing in St. Peter's Square in
Bone. fold their hands. cross thanselves as the pope raises hia hands for
the benediction. they clap with joy at the choice of the cardinals as they
pay their hoaage. The applause is strongest for the prinate of Poland.
Cardinal Hyssynski. who is the second to kneel in front of the new pope. But
nearly as spontaneous is the applause for Cardinal Keenig. fron nearby Austria. '
who has visited Poland repeatedly—the lasting influence of the nonsrchy in
the region that once belonged to Austria. Cardinal Krol of Philadelphia.
who has already visited Poland once. is also received with applause.

Poland surely is the only country of the Eastern bloc whose TV transnitted

the network telecast fron Ross in its entirety. The Polish co-entetor ends
it clear that the broadcast fron Ilene would be relayed as long as it lasted.

It was. indeed. the first ties that the Polish TV reporter was faced with the
task of translating into Polish a speech by the pope. Yet the language of the
church presented no apparent difficulties for the co-entator of the conunist
TV. In this "seat Catholic land of the world” all are well acquainted with it.

After the beginning of the Mass. the TV rec- in the hotel Cracovia turned
into a consecrated place. No one spoke. If soseone wanted to light a cig-
arette. he was set straight. Sose had brought binoculars with then to bring
the screen nearer. Per 3 1/2 hours. religious songs echoed through the
halls of the state hotel. During this tine the scat inportant services in
the hotel were perforeed by an energency service. No one allowed hinself to
be disturbed. The viewers in front of the TV included a delegation free the
Soviet Union. however. after a half hour their leader ordered then to leave.
The Poles grinned.

16
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The room becane completely quiet as the pope greeted Poland first in his
speech to the nations. All that he would say would be pale coapared with

what he felt in his heart. said the faailiar voice from distant Rose in the
familiar language. "Stay with we in prayer"--the appeal touched chords

which can no longer be expressed by acclasation. by loud. spontaneous gestures.
Sowething is addressed here that the rest of the world does not understand
anyway. Emotion is written on the faces. section that wakes one speechless
while the request of the pope loves the soul. Something that is understood
only by the lonely sea in the Vatican and those who listen to his at home.

“The Nation will hold Pest Unto God"

The Polish Catholics seek intiaacy with their cardinal. the more so since
they must acknowledge that henceforth he belongs to the entire Catholic
world. The television broadcast was a lesson to the people of Krakow. Their
cardinal eabraces black-skinned dignitaries of the church; he turns toward
the cardinals from all parts of the world and continents. The archbishop

of Krakow whoa they all knew nay seen a little strange to thee in this un-
accustomed surrounding in which he moves so assuredly.

Then. as John Paul II speaks in several languages. a deep satisfaction appears
on the faces of the Poles in the Vatican. There is spontaneous applause as
the pope turns to the German Catholics. Are those Poles or tourists free

the GDR? Then the pope speaks again in foreign tongues which sound Slavic.
Does he speak Russian by chance? The TV reporter explains that it is Serbian.
The viewers. who were holding their breath. relax and exhale. They strain to
follow every notion. every word. when the pope from Krakow continues to
speak. even in Spanish. they shake their heads.

"We are with you. Holy Father." "The nation will hold fast unto God.”

"He sing the Te been with a full heart"--six thick books. put out by the
Krakow Curia in its building on Franciscan Street. have already been filled
with good wishes fro- the hoaeland diocese. The people stand in long lines.
write entire poeas on the white pages. put a sheet under their hands in order
not to soil the paper. The signatures are not always their names. They say
be "a happy woaan froa Krakow" or "a Catholic froa Krakow." Autuun flowers
decorate the private chapel of the pope is the building of the Curie to
which he used to retire for his seditations. Now everyone knows stories to
tell about the archbishop. The pope has hundreds of thousands of press
agents in Krakow who want to tell the world who Karol Hojtyle is. The stu-
dents in the university town are the ones lost disturbed about the departure
of the cardinal. The young generation especially turned to the open arch-
bishop. ready for dialogue. Others again will tell about the sountaineer who
got lost over the border with Czechoslovakia. was halted by the Czech border
patrol and adaitted that he was the archbishop of Krakow. to which he received
the reply that he was already the fifth to claim this.

The small town of Vadowice. the birthplace of the pope, becase the center of
world interest. The house where the pope was born, just opposite the church.
now carries a plaque: "Pope John Paul 11 lived nere.“

17
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Believer and Nonbeliever TV Viewers
Frankfurt/Main PRANKFURTBR ALLCEMEINB in German 23 Oct 78 p 3

[Text] Warsaw. 22 0ctober--This has never happened before. On a Sunday morn-
ing the churches of the Polish capital are empty. and the faithful, like the
nonbelievers. sit in front of the TV screen. with a TV program so uniquely
attractive to Poles--Catholics as well as communists--the Catholic Church of
Poland could not compete this morning. Mostly there was no Mass at all in the
churches of Warsaw. In front of St. John's Cathedral in the Old Town of Her-
saw a Pole attempted to explain to his foreign guests that this picture was
totally atypical.

It was due to this event. which never before had occurred in more than 1.000
years of Christianity in Poland. that the state-owned Polish television did
something which it never does: it transmitted a church celebration. the in-
auguration of the first pope of Polish origin. A speaker of the medium tran-
slated the Italian scrson of Pope John Paul II into the mother tongue of

the pope.

Later no translation is needed. Prom millions of Polish TV sets resound. in
Polish. from the mouth of the Holy Father. greetings and thanks to the Polish
pilgrims ”with your noble primate at the helm"; from hickiewicr' "Pan
Tadeusz"--the national epic poetry of Poland-~the invocation to the Mother

of God rings out: "Holy Virgin who protects the radiant Csestochnwa and
illuminates its rising portal." The speaker of the Polish TV furnishes an
unbiased explanation of the celebration in St. Peter's Square and, at the and.
again quotes the congratulatory telegram from the Polish political leadership
to the pope.

In the rare official utterances and sparing comments an attempt is made to
counter the impression that this election is to some extent a sign of dis-
tinction and acknowledgement to the "other” Poles, the Catholics in contrast
to the socialists. They want to view it and share in it in unity. In the
congratulatory telegram of the Polish leadership the pope is referred to as
"son of the Polish nation. a nation which builds the greatness and well-
belng of its socialist fatherland in unity and with the cooperation of all
its people." In his response the pope said that with all his heart he is
with his "beloved Poles and the fatherland of all Poles" and that, with the
help of God. he wished to do "what is also conducive to the well-being of
his beloved nation. the history of which has been united with the sission
and service of the Catholic Church for a thousand years." It is noteworthy
that the matter was not left to rest with a single printing of this reply.
An article in the paper ZYCIB HARSZAHY again quoted both texts, the congrat-
ulatory telegram and the reply, and added that these words of the pope
confirmed a feeling of the permanence of the bonds which had been firm over
the more than 50 years of the pope's life and would not be severed now.

18
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ZYCIE HARSZAHY article effireed that the conclave had selected a man
who so for had progressed through every stage of his religious career. from
his ordination to the cardinnl's purple, in the socialist world.

With the unique event of the elevation of a Polish cardinal to pope now a
reality this fact cannot be evaluated without taking into consideration the
realities within which the personality of the new pope has developed. There
is a direct connection between the changes in the Catholic Church in Poland
and the socialiatic changes in the state and nation. The church has freed
itself from its alliance with the upper stratus. and the general raising of
the cultural and educational level in Poland has also affected the church
there. This anounts to the argunent that the postwar changes in Poland

under socialise contributed to the elevation of the Catholic Church in Po-
land to a level which found acknowledge-eat in the election of the cardinal.
Also referred to is the traditional Polish tolerance, the fact that the events
of the war and the occupation welded the people of Poland so closely together
that the difference between ”believer" and "nonbeliever" can no longer read
these nutualities.

According to a connentary in the weekly journal POLITYKA, the elevation of

a Pole to the papal office is of special significance since. for the past 34
years. Poland has been a ”special example of constructive and fruitful co-
existence between nonbelievers and Catholics." One say have one's doubts
whether the new pope or the prinate of Poland would find this evaluation
valid for the entire tine since l9b4. According to POLITYKA. the nation froe
which the pope originates is today a developing socialist union. lts econo-
nic structures, its ideals and aodels ere fundanentslly different froe the
structures and values of the capitalist world but not. however. from the hunen-
itarian ideals of many Catholics. here again one can recognize the argument
that the election of Cardinal Hojtyla as pope should not be perceived as sess-
thing that is in contrast to the socialist character of Poland.

In Warsaw people discuss with astonishment how fast the pilgrims froe Poland
received their passports for the papal inauguration. however, a few individ-
uals free the circle of critical political Catholics who felt particularly
close to the pope when he was still archbishop of Krakow received no pass-
ports. Anong then were Hazowiecki, chief editor of the journal H182. and
Cywinski. for-er chief editor of the weekly ZNAK. who participated in the
hunger strike in Harsaw's St. Martin's Church last year and whose father
confessor was the archbishop of Krakow. now elevated to pope. whether this
was merely a mishap. a eistake of lower officlals who have not yet adjusted
thenselves to the new situation. or a calculated warning shot against the
critical Catholic intellectuals is as yet unclear.

19
roe orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New Pope--New 0stpolitik
Frankfurt/Main FRANKFURTER ALLOW!“ in Ger-an 26 Oct 78 p 1

[Text] After the election of Polish Archbishop wojtyla as pope. one heard
strange reassurances free the Roean Curie: John Paul II will certainly con-
tinue the 0stpolitik. If this should seen that, under the new pope as well.
through gestures. dialogues, negotiations and agreements with the cmist
states of Europe. the Vatican will attenpt to achieve aitigstions and assur-
ances for the Catholics living there. then it is a foregone conclusion. The
head of the Catholic Church has the duty to support with all his power the
church's faithful and its priests who must live under the control of state
Harries. and this requires contact with those in power. All objections that
the pope eust not deal with suppressors or lower hinself to their level are
oriented toward a aoral vacuua which overlooks the people and their fate.

Or does it .aean that John Paul II will continue unchanged the 0stpolitik of
Paul Vi? Then the announcement would be subject to doubt. No one can pre-
dict what political roads or netth toward the East Pope Hojtyla will decide
on. He is obviously not a sea of quick. iapulsive decisions but weighs care-
fully before making a decision. This is how he acted in Krakow; why should
he depart from it in Rose? “the pope presunably will appraise the continuation
of the current Ostpolitik and will also listen to the reasons that so such
and not more was achieved. But the pope surely will also include in his
considerations the criticise of the 0stpolitik of his predecessor which was
raised throughout those years by Catholics in the East and the Rest. Many of
these critical thoughts will be faailiar to his: fro. his own hoaeland. even
if he did not altogether share thee there-~there being scarce evidence of
this.

The nest important objection states that Rene mistakenly took the 00-min
regiaes as nor-a1 partners in negotiations who would be led by the eerie of
normal quid pro quo. It was noticed too late in the Vatican that the cow-
nunist governeents perceive the dealings coapletely differently. They wanted
to get something and to give their contractual partner sonathingin return
which nerely haraed it. naaely, desoralization of the church at hone.

The agreenents with Czechoslovakia and hungery are easily perceptible examples.
Here the reciprocity by the state consisted of penission to again appoint a
bishop to orphaned dioceses. However, in esny cases the co-aunist regiees
forced upon the Vatican sv-called peace clerics who enjoyed little trust on
the part of parish priests and the faithful because of their close relation-
ship with the executive power. Thus. in Olnuts the peace cleric-functionary
Vrana becaee titular bishop and apostolic administrator. Priests like his:
explain why my Catholics. especially in Czechoslovakia. don't go to church
in their hoeetewn but elsewhere. ho faithful parish priest dares to talk to
thee openly about his distress. But it suffices for the co-unist state if
Rowe installs bishops who keep quiet vis-a-vis the authorities out of fear-
surely freouently understandable-«hat they not risk thenselves for their

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Catholics. and so. finally. they fail to dare even that little bit they ought
tn. In a church appointed in such a uanner. bitterness prevails. a para-

lyzing feeling of abendonsent. Indifference and alienation are then. for
nanny. the consequence.

however, doubtful appoint-ante of bishops in Czechoslovakia and Hungary were
the result not only of a false evaluation of the couauniet partner in the
negotiations an evaluation which began to change only in recent tines. The
Vatican gave in so broadly to the will of the state as to who sust definitely
not becoss bishop and who should becose one because it held that the signifi-
cance of the hierarchy in religious life was less than absolute. In a land
with state Marxian the bishop is particularly isportant both for the believers
and for the parish priests; to when could they turn otherwise? But when the
state uses pressure to keep the children free receiving religious education.
the faithful free attending church and young people free entering the priestly
vocation. when practicing Catholics are treated as eneeiee of the state. could
it be that to have a bishop is serely a hurtfully deceiving pretense? If

this bishop is also a favorite of the authorities. then he must be condemned
to ineffectiveness as a pastor even if he has good will.

0n the one hand. Rene overestimated the positional value of an intact church
hierarchy. 0n the other hand. however. it was inclined to overlook the opin-
ions of the episcopate The Polish Cardinal Hyszynski and the cardinal of
Berlin. Bengsche. had experienced this: the Yugoslav bishops. who do not have
to live and work under East bloc conditions, also found the Curie hard of
hearing at tines. Their ardent hope is that the pope free Krakow will better
understand then and their position because he belonged ssong then for decades.

Such hopes toward John Paul II are shared by any others. Must not this pope
feel oppressed by so any expectations? It will be difficult enough for his
to lead the church even in the western world. In East Europe. however. he

has to deal with rulers who not only oppose hin with their sight but sake that
night felt by the faithful and the priests.

. New Pope's Life, Activities
Hamburg STERN in Ger-an Ito M. 26 Oct 78 pp 19-29

[Text] The reverend slides back and forth inpatiently on the hard wooden
stool. At tines he leans far forward. at tines he changes his glasses
quickly in order to see better the festive events on the colored screen of
his Sony television set. The rheunatisn which plagues his is totally for-
gotten by the 75-yesr-old prelate. Edwin Zacher. fro- the Polish town of
Hadowice in the Beskids exactly 50 Inn to the southwest of Krakow. Snell won-
der. The nan who was installed in the highest office of the Catholic Church

on Sunday sorning used to be his pupil for religion at the Hedowice high school:
Karol wojtyls. today John Paul II.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As the TV cameras focused on the new pope for the first time. the reverend
completely lost his composure: "Nan Lolek. Nae: belch-Our little Charlie.
our little Charlie," he said jubilantly. his cook, Anna Juzefowska. 6b.
crossed herself and murmured respectfully: "Nasz papiesnOur pope."

However. not only the prelate but all 15,000 inhabitants of the comaity
were awakened from their provincial slumber. St. Mary's Church on Red Army
Square became a place of pilgrimage. Above the church entry hangs a picture
of the new pope. Inside. where usually there is room for only 2,000 people,
4,000 were crowding in front of the altar last Sunday.

\

while the choice of the cardinal of Krakow created a sensation in Hadowice
and in the entire world, it was less surprising for the initiated. For Karol
Hojtyla was already among the leading candidates at the conclave which
elected John Paul 1. His friends recall today how fervently he bid then
goodbye when he left fc: the new papal election in early Octobernaa if Karol
Hojtyla feared he would not return.

The German cardinals brought the name of the archbishop of Krakow into the
discussions when the Italian candidates mutually blocked theaselves. Thereby
the 266th successor of St. Peter became a man in whose diocese lies the great-
est graveyard of the world, Auschwitz; a Pole who learned the language of the
murderers, who for many years exerted himself tirelessly to achieve a recon-
ciliation between the Polish and the German people and who can be designated
without scruple as ”friendly toward the Cernans."

Karol Hojtyla was the one who in l966—-for the first time after the end of the
war-officially received a group of Catholics from the Federal Republic. Face
to face with a delegation of the Pax Christi movement, he said at the time that
there must be a bridge over the abyss of hate. And it was Karol Hojtyla who
accompanied Cardinal Hyazynski, the prints of the Catholic Church in Poland,
on his first visit to the Federal Republic in September of this year.

In between stretched a long phase which was difficult and painful for both
sides. In 1965 the Polish bishops wrote to their Canaan brothers in office:
"Let us attempt to forget! No polemics. no further Cold "or. In this totally
Christlike and simultaneously very human spirit we stretch out our hands
toward you. He grant forgiveness and ask for forgiveness." While the German
bishops also offered reconciliation. they were not ready to acknowledge the
Oder-Reisse line as the western Polish border. The church had identified
itself too narrowly with the Christian Democratic Union, which was unwilling
to discuss this point.

Even after the signing of the Warsaw Treaty, as the Catholics of Poland waited
for a positive attitude on the part of the German bishops, the latter declared
coldly that they did not want to consent on current politics. Only in 1971.,
when Cardinal Hojtyla and Cardinal Dopfner of Munich cocelebrated a Mass in
the former Dachau concentration camp, did the relationship begin to relax.
Three years later the University of Heinz gave wojtyla an honorary doctorate.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

A few weeks ago. as the cardinal of Krakow traveled through the Federal
Republic with the Polish delegation of bishops. he kept himself modestly in
the background. as always. Yet it was striking how attentively Cardinal
Hyazynski. prisate of Poland and leading personality of Polish Catholicism.
treated his l9-years-younger colleague. This was meant not so much to im-

press the hosts but rather as a sign for the regime at home. which followed
this visit with watchful eyes.

"he is this man who until now stood second in rank in Poland and with whoa
the church is now giving itself youthful energy?

Karol wojtyle was in the Krakow Bishop’s Palace. at the edge of the medieval
Old Town. for everyone to speak with. Often not even his secretary sat in
the anteroom. Visitors who entered the study of the bishop saw him most
often sitting at his desk hunched over. supporting his head in his hands.
Always smiling a bit absently at first. he soon found contact with every
visitor. radiated sympathy and reliability.

No one was sent away from this bishop. Sose intellectuals were kept waiting
in the anteroom because Uojtyla did not want to interrupt the discussion
with an old peasant woman. He knewevery priest in his diocese personally.

Karol Hojtyla. born in 1920 as the son of a career soldier. has not lost his
simplicity during his career in the Catholic Church. He was reluctant to

change his lifestyle merely because he wore the red of the bishops and later
the purple of the cardinals instead of the black cassock of a simple priest.

”I need 300 hours of sport a year." he once told a friend. and this was no
showing off by the enthusiastic skier and canoe rider. He gave up motor-
cycling only several years efter he was elected bishop.

During vacations Uojtyla preferred to travel with a group of students through
the land and liked to take a guitar in his hands in the evening. He always
refused to leave his address with the bishop's palace. whenever he had time
the cardinal of Krakow organized discussion circles for students and pro-
fessors. At the last of these philosophical get-togethers during the current
year the debate centered around Heidegger.

will his affability. which made him such a beloved pastor and partner in dis-
logue in Krakow, frustrate him in Rome when it will be important for him to
prevail over the powerful Curie?

Those who count on it do not know that the new man in the Vatican is a realist
and belongs among those who need time and who consider for a long time before

they act. But after Hojtyla has made his decision, he is not at all reserved.
The state functionaries and the party even preferred Hyeeynski as a partner

in discussions since. with advancing age. he has been increasingly inclined to
sake peace with the communist state.

23
FOR ontcm. use our
FOR OPYICIAL 088 ONLY

The Covernsent wanted To hush Up the Archbishop

Two years ago. as the prinate. on reaching age 75. flew to Rose to offer his
resignation to the pope. Paul VI refused this request. That is. the Polish
govern-ant had previously sade known to the Vatican that it was very strongly
in favor of having the cardinal rennin in office. It knew that there was
only one successor. the archbishop of Krakow. And less than a .onth ago the
Polish govern-ant attempted to ignore the current pope in front of the public.
As the Polish delegation returned to Warsaw fros Frankfurt and the papers in

Poland reported this nesting. the state censor blacked out the name of Hojtyla
fros every report.

Then is the new nan in Rome an anticomsunist? will he give up the policy of
detente toward the East which was begun by John XXIII and energetically con-
tinued by Paul VI? To suspect this one would have to forget that the realist
in the bishop‘s seat in Krakow always guarded against narroweindedness and
thoughtless actions toward the cossunist state. wojtyla's basic conviction
that the state and church in Poland sust live together has never wavered.

No Fear of the Party and Authorities

however, when it was a question of principles the cardinal of Krakow was no
shirker. He was the author of a pastoral letter in September 1978 which was

read free every pulpit in Poland: "The state censor has always been the wee-
pon of totalitatian systems."

A further proof of his fearlessness: Por years the town officials of Krakow
forbade the faithful to lead the great procession on Corpus Christi Day through
the age-old sarket place. In one of his sernona the bishop quoted from the
edict of the authorities "that the functional develop-eat of the market speaks
against an alteration of the procession routs." Hojtyla's ironical coement:
"Last year it was announced that the dog breeders of Krakow held their pro-
cession across the main market. I mean, carrying on under the theme of func-
tional development of the age-old market of Krakow can thereby be concluded."
Then he added: "In a society which rests on the principle of equality.

equality nust also reign. The sarket of Krakow cannot be always open for one
and always closed for the other."

Cardinal of Cologne Hoffner renarked after the surprise conclave that the
election of this pope is an acknowledgement that Poland has remained stead-
fast throughout eany years of dictatorship. Indeed. Cardinal Hyszynski is
readily celebrated in the Heat as the man who put up a bold front against

the con-uniats. Yet actually the legend about the militant Polish Catholicisn
lust undergo considerable diminution if one is to adhere to historical truth.

in Catholic Poland. not fights and religious fanaticism but rather tolerance
has prevailed over the centuries.

2h
10K OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IMrinn the Middle Ages the Polish Republic of nobles was a place of refuge
for Chriatlnn ”heretics" and Jews who were threatened by the state in western
Europe. Even the Refornetion was not fought out with the sword. Protestants
of every hue had a secure hostel there.

Only after Prussia. Russia and Austria had divided the land snong themselves
at the end of the 18th century did the church become silitant. It defended
Polish culture against every attempt at germanization and rusaification.
Hhile the new lords attempted to extinguish the Polish language. the Polish

priests secretly taught the children the Lord's Prayer in the outlawed native
tongue.

Sole 150 years later. as hitler invaded the land and wanted to extirpate the
intelligentsia. the church again stood by the patriots. Polish Catholics
fought in resistance groups against the hated occupying forces. 2.500 Polish
priests died in German concentration camps.

Anang the sen who had to trenble before the Germans was Karol Hojtyla. At

the beginning of the war he was 19 years old and had Just begun his philosophy
studies in Krakow. As the Ger-ens came he quickly sought sass employnent in
order to receive a "work etasp" from the occupation forces. because whoever
did not have it could expect to be deported to a casp at any time. It happened
to thousands of students in Krakow. The entire faculty of the university was
saved to Sachsenhausen.

wojtyla worked first in a quarry and later in the "Solvay" chesical plant.
After work he acted in a theater group which he had joined in 1938 and which
had to disappear into the underground because the rulers. whose representative
Governor General hens Frank resided in the Krakow Castle. had closed all
theaters ianedistely. In spite of this. giving its progress in back rooss

the troupe had seven opening performances by the end of the war. There also
existed a seminary for priests in the underground. In 1943 Rojtyls becane
one of the five seminary students.

"is father and his lb-yesr-older brother died during the war. Hojtyla lost
his mother at the age of 9. In 1966 he was ordained priest.

After the war. when the new Polish borders were drawn. the Catholic Church
underwent an unexpected consolidation. The Orthodox Poles in the east now
belonged to the USSR. and the Catholic Poles were resettled in the deserted
areas of the west. A state was formed in which 90 percent of the population
was Catholic for the first time in Polish history.

State and Church Porn an Agreement on Goals
From the beginning. communists and Catholics show a readiness to live with

each other. while the Cold War is spreading and. in 1969. Pius XII excom-
sunicnted everyone who defends or spreads communist teaching. an agreement

25
ton onrcm. use our
FOR OPYICIAL 088 ONLY

on sutusl recognition is signed between the state and the church in Poland a
year later. The church supports Poland's clais to the Oder-Neisse border.

It prosises to follow the "Polish raison d'etat“ in all things which do not
concern questions of religious belief. In return. the «waist state guar-

antees the free practice of religion and religious education in the public
schools.

without seeking per-lesion fros Rose. the primate of Poland. Archbishop
Hyssynski. signs on behalf of the church. There is no doubt in the sind of
either of the parties in this business: a Pole-whether atheiatic or
Christian-~is nevertheless an ardent patriot.

Yet the agreenent deceives. At the height of Staliniss. Hyssynski is arrested
in 1953 and is finally interned in a nonastery. The 1956 worker uprisings
bring Hladyslaw Comlka to power and the archbishop to freedom. During the
following months Hyszynski cautions the aroused Polish population to pre-
serve peace. Free a screen in Decesber 1956: "we have had enough conflagra-
tion in our fatherland. we want peace. religious and social....Hith peaceful
work one should build a better destiny for the fatherland. a better house."
It is certainly also to his credit that no Russian tanks roll in Usrssw.

State and church sign another agree-eat on goals.

in the Tabernacle. a Piece of Noon Rock Free the Asericans

Yet neither side gave up its ideological claia. In a suburb of Krakow the
party began to build an industrial settlesent which. according to the de-
signers. was to be the first "socialist town without God." 0n the espty
center square a cos-unity house was to be erected. However. one day the
workers erected a wooden cross and demanded that a church be built. The party
did not yield. A squad was saved in to put an end to the Christian annoyance.
The result was bloody denonstrations. with the police using clubs and tear
gas. The cross remained.

The authorities were boabarded ceaselessly by petitions to build a new church.
The archbishop of Krakow died over it, and a new one -....... 1.. 1953. Karol Hojtyla.
In 1967 the state gave in and issued the building permit. In 1976 Archbishop
Hojtyla turned the first sod and laid the cornerstone. a square stone from St.
Peter's Done in Rose. A year later he could consecrate the church. In the
tabernacle is a piece of noon rock presented by the Auricans. The new

church accomdatea 5.000 people. On Sundays. 12 Masses are read. all well
attended.

But the Catholic Church is concerned not only about religious freedon. It also
demands the observance of human rights. It is also sisultaneously working to
enhance the national consciousness of the Poles for their comnist state.
When in the must of 1976 the workers protested because food prices were to
be raised. Cardinal Hyszynski rebuked the regise free the pulpit: "It is sad
that in a workers state the workers have to fight for their rights." But he
also said: "He fight neither against the regine nor against the government...
Our entire love belongs. after Cod. to the country. to Poland."

26
ran orncuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is no coincidence that a political hunger strike seeking release of the
workers who participated in the disturbances of June 1976 was held in

St. Martin‘s Church in warsaw. however. despite all its support. the church
here. too. avoided inciting the strikers against the state. This has always
been the mutual conviction of the cardinals fro- Krakow and Harsaw.

The new pope is indeed different from Uyssynski in his perception that the
church cannot answer with the old dogmas alone the challenges of the modern
world. John Paul ll will therefore press to sake the church more authentic

and sore resolved to represent the rights of the oppressed and underprivi-
leged s

The cardinal of Krakow also did not shrink from attacking the Marxist concept
of "alienation“ of man from his work. The discussion with atheistic ideology
is a challenge which theology must not evade.

Such an attitude means renunciation of covsrupe and tiaidity. it is thus to
be expected that the pope from Poland will give new inpulse to the doraant
dialogue between the Catholic Church and Marxian. For Karol wojtyla, as for
all his countrymen. this openness toward the problems of our tines goes
together effortlessly with an intensive and unaesailablefaith which. to the
west of Poland. is found only in Ireland today.

The Bishops Should Be Allowed a Stronger Voice

This faith makes John Paul II a conservative theologian. On many questions
where Catholics hope for a change--celibacy. the lack of equal rights for
woaen, birth control--tho cardinal from Krakow will not deviate from the tra-
ditional teachings of the Church. however. innovations will be made on ano-
ther iaportant point. In his first speech John Paul II announced that the
bishops will have the right to a decisive voice in the church in the future.

The Catholic Church in Poland has accomplished something unusual during the
past decades. It ventured to live together with an atheistic power without
anking bed coapromiaes and without becoming untrustworthy for its neabers.
Every Sunday it has 70 percent of all Catholics in the churches. and there
are 5.000 prospective priests in the seainaries. John Paul II. the son of
the Polish nation. brings with himself to home an experience which can only
be useful to the church at the end of the 20th century.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 STERN

2673
080: 2300

?7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
CHURCH-STATS 01AM IN POM “Vim
Stuttgart osmnooa in Ger-an No lo. Oct 78 pp 881-891

[Article by Karl hartasnn (1923), Dr. Phil.. need of the Poland Editorial
office of Deutschlandfunk, cologne; 'Oialogue Between State and Church
in Poland“!

[Text] A dialogue is under way between State and Church in Poland.

It has grown especially lively following the nesting between Cardinal
Priaate Stefan Wssynski and the first secretary of the Polish United
workers Party (PZPR), Edward Giereh. (or a talk on 29 October 1917

at the Sejs [parliament] building. at which apparently an understanding
was reached that the two sides were going to cooperate under certain
circuastances on sons problems. Cardinal ﬂyssynski has held out the
prospect of help to Gierek in those areas where the welfare of the
Polish people and the future or the country are concerned. his was
also to be inferred from the very brief comnigue which appeared

in Polish newspapers after the nesting. In this. there is talk about
the “unity of the Poles“ and the “well-being" of the country. but

not about the any or about the building or socialist (mam woo,
Jl October/l Noveaber 1977) . No one will dispute that even with this
qualification. it is still a setter of support for the present government.

the church in Poland has repeatsdly helped tize munist govermsnt.
l-eediately after his accession to power, Gierek was the beneficiary
of such support. Through its moderating and friendly attitude. the
Church gave his guite substantial help in pouring oil on the troubled
waters of the disturbances and discontent after the bloody became:
events of 1970 in the Polish coastal cities. and in directing life

in this country along peaceful paths. A good part of the standing
which Giorek and his colleagues enjoyed right at the beginning with
the Polish people they owed to the church (see It. nartnenm “State
and church After the Power Change in Poland,” in: osmnopa, 2/1972,
pp lie-l2”. But it has furnished help to cierek in order to ward of!
tron the people even worse things. and it has supported his because

he inediatsly sought an easing of the State's relations with the
church and offered to it prospects of considerable concessions. At that
I‘Uﬂ UDILUMW Wu Wu!

tile as well. a talk on a high level took place. The primate net on

3 March 1971 with the new chairman of the Council of hinisters.

l'iotr Jarossewics. may negotiated about the "noroalisation" of
relations with the Church being aised at by the State. which would
supposedly benefit both sides. The unusual thing about the seating

in October l9” was that at this meeting the top representatives of
the State and Church sat opposite one another. 'lhe last talk on such
a level took place nany years ago. between the cardinal and wladyslaw
Conuika. when the prinate had helped in 1956, like he did Gierek in
1970/7lnand also not without concessions by the state--to oaks the
necessary adjust-ants. because he wanted to prevent more dangerous
developments. above all an intervention free the outside. No wonder
that people--above all in the ﬂeet-were inclined to attach great
importance to the looting between Gierek and Cardinal Wyssynski in tons
of the future developsent of the relations between State and Church.
here there sealed to he more in the offing in the way of dialogue

and cooperation than in acne respects has been the prior practice ever
since Gierek's accession to power.

”Scolding' to State's Leaders

‘ho be sure, the two sensational pastoral letters delivered shortly
before this meeting did not yet hint at such a developnent. at least

as far as the Catholic Church is concerned. In September 1977. on the
occasion of the 'hass hedia Day." the Polish bishops very clearly

and with marked pointedness voiced their displeasure at the uses media
of their own country, from which they are extensively cut off. In this
letter, they were characterised as a tool of absolute dictatorship

for the purposes of exerting cultural pressure. the spreading of lies.
and the justifying of violations against the basic rights of the people.

The Church attacked in this pastoral letter not only the radio. television.
and press. but also the movies. theater. and the advertising oedia.

which it sees as being without exception in the service of a militant
atheist: and an ideology which is hostile to all religions. and thus

also to the Catholic church. Therefore in this pastoral letter the
Church called on the people to assure a critical attitude towards

the comnist sass sedia of the country and to protest whenever

through the. good norals are offended against and religion and the
Church are attached. The Church sees in particular a threat to

children and young people, and it therefore called on the authorities
responsible for the control of the sass media to put a stop to everything
which could offend against the religious feelings of the faithful and

the principles of Christian morality. In their pastoral letter on

“uass Media Day,” the Polish bishops expressed the request that the
church be given access to the radio and television so that the holy

Mass could be broadcast for sick and bedridden people. But since

they apparently do not believe that this request will be granted--

at least in the short rum-they recs-ended to the faithful the progress

29
m omcm. use ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Vatican in the Polish language. as a counterweight as it were
to the harnful influence of the III. needle in their own country. The
Polish bishops and cardinal Prinate Hyseynski are never squeanish when
it cones to nahing known to the organs of the State their opinion.

but in this pastoral letter it again becane especially clear how
self-assuredly and unequivocally they were able to do this.

n scant lo days later. at the end of Septenber 1977. cardinal wyssynshi
lashed out in a pastoral letter-which on 2 October was read free all
the pulpitsuat the econonic clrcunstances in Poland. In considering
the prolonged supplies crisis. he denounced the conditions prevailing
in the foodstuffs sector. There was in Poland ”no other area which
showad such a gross heaping up of debasenent and degradation.”
declared the primate. And he demanded that the State should export
food only when the needs of its own population in this sector were
satisfied. however the bishops did not confine theuelves to speaking
up for the natarial welfare of the population. In the sans pastoral
letter. they called on the people to put up a resolute resistance

if in the educational plan for the youth the national culture. its
literature and art. its christian norals. and the bonds between Poles
and the Christian Church are jeopardized. At the seas ties the
bishops energetically protested against a foreignisation of Poland.
against cultural and spiritual leports which are foreign to the nature
of Poland. “Our national dignity denande.” it reads. “that we oppose
the arrogance with which everything which is Polish is ruthlessly
renounced in favor of iaports which are alien to us.” It is not
difficult to guess that Soviet imrts are neant here. Of nuch lore
interest in this stateesnt is the fact that with this the Church in
Poland once again signifies how such it feels itself to be both the
defender and the custodian of the national and Christian culture of
Poland.

The State on the Defensive

however such this way the church has of criticizing donestic conditions
in a mist country nay asks a sensation in the west. in Poland
itself this has had a far less sensational effect. as is true also

of the sieilarly sharply fornulated criticise in the past. The party
was not particularly effected by this and steered clear of any serious
conflict with the Church. This is characteristic of the present
situation in Poland. Ihe State is on the defensive. and it puts up
with a lot so as to not forfeit the chance for support by the Church

in the difficult donestic situation. Not only does it need this aid

in view of the econoeic situation. but it would also like to be sure

of as neutral an attitude as possible on the part of the Church in
case the increasing domestic unrest and the various different civil
rights loveaentsnwhich are in no way sustained by the intellectuals
aloneo-should compel it to resort to snore ruthless neans than it wants
to eeploy. above all in view of its cultivating of its inage in the West.

30
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
avu VARAVUW WU Uﬂul

111s party knows that the Church does not hesitate to stand behind those
against when the organs of the state are proceeding with violence and
with disdain for the lost basic of civil rights, even those rights vested
in the country's Constitution. 111s Church does this above all where

it is a latter of demonstrating its solidarity with the broad losses

of the people. After the Deco-bar disturbances in 1970 for example.

it left no doubts about who in its opinion was to be regarded as
responsible for the bloodshed in the coastal cities (see It. liartnanm
”state and Church After the Power change in Poland.” in common.
2/1972. pp 121-123).

Thus it was also natural for the Church to support the workers fro.
ursus and nadon who were iqarisoned, ill-treated. and discri-inated
against because they responded by strikes to the announced price rises
for food in June 1976. -[he Polish Episcopate addressed in July a
petition to the government in which it spoke up for the affected workers.
Following that. in letters and state-ants the bishops repeatedly
demanded that those in power grant aanesty and reparations (see 0213mm:
zwxazrowv, Chicago. 30 Septeﬁer 1976). At the sane tile. they called
on the people to give naterial aid to the families of the workers who
had lost their jobs and had been ioprisoned (earmark POISKI. London.

23 Novelber 1976). with that. they effectively supported the actions
of the “workers Defense Co-ittee" (roe). although they did not
expressly identify the-selves with these actions in order to avoid

any appearance of activity directed against the State. nus is
characteristic. 1he church in Poland is anxious to steer clear of
everything which could expose it to the charge of political conitnent
directed against the govermental power.

Meanwhile. this has not prevented Cardinal Hyssynski from calling for an
understanding for the youth of Poland in his homily on Ascension Day, 1977,
at St. Ann's church in Warsaw in connection with the student demonstrations
following the lysterious death of the student Stanislaw Pyjas in May

of the seas year-«without going into the external cum-stances of

this occasion. For a youth which, as the cardinal said. is fully aware

of ham rights and which often reflects by its attitude the mood in the
country. With that, he joined together both a deaand and a piece of
advice: in its dealings with young people. the goverment ought to
cultivate other nethods and should even be ready to ease off on then.

cierek needs Successes

The nesting between party chief Glerek and Cardinal Primate Hyszynski
in October 1977. which domtless was prepared for on both sides for

a fairly long tine in advance. was not upset either by such adsonitions
or by the ”scolding" in the two pastoral letters appearing shortly
before this. ‘Ihe State had no other choice than to attempt to cone

to tom with the church. in the period of tine before this. there
was no lack of indications of how mch it was anxious to establish

3].
m OFFICIAL 183 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a good clinatenbeginning with a generous administering of the peraits
for new church buildings. and extending to the praise which the head

of the Office for Religious Questions. Kasiniers Kskol. lavished on

the Church in a talk with western journalists in the middle of July 1977.
for its loyal attitude in a dispute with the State. 0n the sane
occasion. he vouched for its sense of responsibility for what goes on

in the country. and he spoke about many problems in connection with
which the State and Church are pursuing the same objectives-dot exaeple.
in the education of a spiritually decent youth.

What is going on in this country was certainly the Iain theme of the
last talk between wyssynski and Gierek. The miserable econouic
situation. the discontent and disillusionment of the populace. which
wants to see changes ads. the civil rights noveeents within the
country under the banner of the “spirit of nelsinki'nall of this

node it see. advisable to seek aid from the Church and fro: the most
popular and esteesed nan in Poland. Cardinal Hyssynski. But there was
yet another reason why Gierek put so large a value on a talk with the
cardinal In the very near future. both of then. the party chief and
the prints. were to travel to hone in order to be received in audience
by Pope Paul VI.

There would have been nothing unusual about the trip of Ryssynskiu

he was traveling with 30 bishops to give the report due every 5 years--
if he had not had the talk with Gierek shortly before this and was
expected at the Vatican at the same time as this person. It was
different with the Polish party chief. It was to be the first reception
with the pope of a Polish coeuunist of such a high rank. Pro- this
fact alone he set great hopes in it. coming as he did from a country
such as Poland whose Catholic population has to go along if he is to
cope with the present difficulties and with that also strengthen and
secure his position. he needs such a success. Added to this was the
fact that Gierek wanted on this occasion to quite decisively advance.
if not consumate altogether. an undertaking which he had started on
very energetically right after his accession to power and whose success
scant a great deal to his. This had to do with the so-called
“normalisation' of relations between the Polish State and the Vatican--
that is. the establishment of diplonatic relations with the holy See.
Gierek knew how important that could be for his dosaestic policy and
vis-a-vis the church. since he would have preferred to establish

this connection over the heads of the Episcopste. and since certain
initial noves in that direction were visible. the Bpisoopate intervened
energetically and. as it now appears. successfully. Its aotto goes:
First normalisation-«hat is. better opportunities for activity and
development for the Catholic Church in Poland-and only after that
regular relations between Poland and the Vatican. The party chief knew
well that without the support of the primate he could accomplish nothing
at all or only very little on this matter. No doubt he sought to
secure this aid in the sensational talk with the prints. at which time

32
ms OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run VIRLDUW IND man

it was surely again made clear to his that the Polish Episcopate
considered that the time for the establishnent of intergovert-ental
relations with the Vatican had not yet cone. Nevertheless, this talk
had without a doubt ssoothed over certain rough spots for the party
chief on his way to none and in none itself.

wyssynski and sierek at the Vatican

‘l‘hie becomes clear anong other ways also free what one knows about
Giorek's reception with the pope. 'Ihe conversation apparently took
place in a relatively friendly atmosphere, 14 days after Cardinal
wyssynski. first alone and then with the Polish bishops. had been
received by the pope. What the party chief talked about at the Vatican
corresponds entirely to what he was liable to have heard any tines
before free the lips of the priute and for the sake of which the
latter has always struggled and continues to struggle in Poland.

Pope Paul VI assured the guest of his love for Poland and in the process
emphasised the will of the Polish people to preserve their national
identity (see the text on page A 640 f. of this issue).' He spoke of
the history of Poland. which was per-sated by the christian spirit.

and Poland‘s faithfulness to the holy See. me pope seems to have
considered well his wording when he stated that Poland at the present
uaintained its connection to the holy See through the Bpiscopate and
the Polish people. _At this point it was supposedly explained to the
party chief that even the contact with the Vatican desired by his

was possible only through the intervention and under advise-out of the
Polish Episcopate. As Cardinal Hyszynshi always did, Pope Paul VI
also stressed that the Catholic church in Poland always stood in the
service of the Polish nation and thus never undertook anything against
the nationusosething with which the party had not seldo- reproached

it in the past. Md it was doubtless entirely in line with the designs
of the Polish Bpiscopata when the pope said that the Church in Poland
was ready today as well to sake a positive contribution in the country's
life: Ihrough education. through stressing the principles of social and
occupational ethics. and through cooperation for the welfare of the
fatherland. And when he said that it did not expect any privileges
fro. the State, wanting only to preach the gospel and not to pursue
politics, but that it insisted on me preservation of its identity

and needed more leeway and greater freedo- than hitherto for its work.

were is no doubt that Oierek heard also in other respects little else
at the Vatican than what he had already learned in his own country

free the Polish bishops. It was confined to his on the part of the
highest authority of the Catholic Church that the Omrch in Poland is
ready for cooperation with the State on certain points and under specific
circuestauces. lie certainly also learned that the Vatican is not

'[from "000““ mm in Polish No 7, 12 Peb 7s; Stefan Ryszynski:
"rho Spirit of the Gospel in are Organisation of Socio-Professional and
Public Life in Poland'--houily preached in the Arch-Cathedral Basilica
in warsaw on 6 Jan 18]

33
Pm omcm I38 ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disinclined to “normalize" its relations with the Polish State, but

that this presupposes further concessions by the Polish State to the
Church in Poland, and thus the nonalization of their reciprocal
relations-"precisely what Cardinal ﬂyssynski again and again characterises
as a condition for this.

Nevertheless, Gierek can put down as a success for hiuself and the
party the reception with the pope. Both the party chief and the
primate net with enceuragenent for this new phase of dialogue. In
Rose. people are convinced ”at this will not lead to any conpronises
in Poland which are poor from their point of view. The best guarantor
of that is the primate hiaself. But even in view of his age--he is
77 years old--such doubts cannot arise when one considers the attitude
of the Polish Bpiscopate and of the presu-able successor to Dryssynski.
Cardinal Karol Nojtyla of Krakow.

Cardinal Hyssynski Makes Stipulations

In his homily on 8 January 1978--that is, a month after the talk with
Pope Paul VI. Cardinal Hyszynski susnarised quite precisely how and
under what prerequisites he envisages increased cooperation between
Church and State on certain matters. The Church would like above all
to work on a way of correcting the attitude of the people. The Cardinal
spoke of moral and ethical deformities. by which is sneant above all
employee corals and the fundamentally negative relations to the State
and its institutions, but also the plague of alcoholism-which he sees
as a legacy fro. the time of the Polish partitions and the wartins
occupations, as well as frets “diverse situations“ (see page A 641 of
this issue)“--and among these defornities are certainly to be
understood also the stresses of relations to the State in the post-war
period. In his hesily, the cardinal denanded that there be an
"authentic" Catholic press as well as other opportunities to publish,
which ought to help the Church fight against deep-rooted failings among
the Polish people. lle called for more freedon for the church and
requested the revival of former Catholic associations and brotherhoods.
me desand for an "authentic“ press has its special motivation. The
cardinal wanted to thereby express the opinion that the publications
of the ”progressive-catholic“ PAX Organization which enjoy the support
of the state, including the only Catholic daily paper swwo Powszacm,
cannot be looked on as such a press.

It goes without saying that such help as is here offered by the Church
must be very isportant to the State. the sore so as the cardinal also
leans by this employee morale and vocational ethics. because here the
party as well feels obliged to deplore great defects which are much
to the detriment of the national economy. But the price which is to

“[er WOODNIK Powszscm in Polish No 1, 13 Feb 78: homily preached
in the Arch-Cathedral Basilica in warsaw on 6 Jan 78 by Stefan wystynski:

"the Spirit of the Gospel in the Organization of Socio-Professional and
Public Life in Poland“)

3';
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l“\ veravuw 003 M

be paid for this help lust seen high to it. because as a prerequisite

for this aid the Church expects a considerable inrovesent of religious
life in the country. Only on the basis of the Christian and national
culture. which one seat be ready to defend, can such a job be perforned,
said the cardinal. The preaching of the gospel, concerning which now
everybody realises that even in the social-econoaic sphere and in working
life it is necessary. lust not be interfered with by politically
activated atheistic propaganda and excessive antipathy to the Church.

No Claim to Political Power

But, he said, above all this requires that young people be educated

in the spirit of national and religious ideals. In Poland, in the

area of contact of two antagonistic ideologies, it appears to the
cardinal to be the task of the Church to shape the Ioral and spiritual
countenance of the people. In doing this the Church is not striving for
political power, assured the cardinal. and it does not want to be

a state within the state. Even if the Church were to achieve the
character of a public-law institution. for which the Polish Bpiscopate
has labored for some tine, the Church does not want to be an establishment
with any political weight, declared Wyssynski. And he assured the

State that the Church would not nisuse its new status and would not
represent any danger to the existing political order in Poland.

It is difficult to iaagine that these assurances have adequately
reassured the leaders of the state. The clai- of the Church to the
shaping of the rural and spiritual attitude of the Polish people and

the education of the youth in the spirit of national and religious
ideals can scarcely be cospatible with the understanding the party has
about its role as the educator of the people. The Polish bishops

last repeated this clai- very clearly in a pastoral letter which was
read in all the churches in Hay 1978. 1hey denanded a presentation of
national culture and history in the schools and mass nedia which would be
in line with the Christian tradition of Poland, and they sequined that
this was not taking place in school program and textbooks. At the
sane tine. the Polish bishops stated that the Christian parents--thus
at least 90 percent of all parents--had the right to have their

children presented with an undistorted version of the national history and
culture-~thet is, without a disavowal of the services of the Church.

The assurance of Cardinal Ryszynski that the church was not striving

for political power. however sincerely that may be neant. cannot dispel
the doubts of the party. because the Church already represents today

a very important political factor in Poland. If that were not the

case. the State would certainly not be negotiating with it. Bvery
strengthening of the position of the Church through further concessions,
every expanding of its field of action and improvement in its role--

and the demands of the Church anount to that-must autosatically entail
an increase in its influence even on political life in this country, and
that is so-ething which the party would understandably like to prevent
to the best of its ability.

35
M OFFICIAL (BE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The answer of the party to the remarks of Cardinal Nyezynski was not
long in coming. Just as publicly as he did, it announced that it was
interested in a dialogue with the Church and in cooperation with it.
In an article entitled ”Fundamentals of cooperation and Dialogue,"

its author uieczyslsw ?. Rakowski directly referred to the homily

of the primate of 8 January 1978, which he characterised as a document

of fundamental imortance (see his remarks in particular on page
A 643 ff. of this issue).“'

National Front of State and Church

Rakowski justifies in his article the special interest of the state
in a cooperative effort with the church by the conception of Edward
Gierek on the unification of all Poles for the purpose of pursuing
positive goals--that is, the conception of a national front of the
party with the church for the purpose of achieving objectives which
seem to the state to be beneficial. 0n the wishes of the Church,
Rakowski states on behalf of the party that among the. are also those
which cannot be granted because they go against the principle of the
separation of state and Ouurch. By that is probably meant above all the
request of the church for the status of a ptblic-law institution.

But also my other demands of the diurch may fall within this,
according to whatever it is that the party sees as inconpatible with
this separation. There is another portion of the wishes and demands
of the Church which the party would like to fulfill. although that will
depend on the good behavior and the readiness of the Church for
cooperation. Rakowski declares straight out that the realization of
many of the requests of the Church will depend on how its attitude
will be toward efforts and undertakings which are of benefit to the
entire people and are directed by the State and the government (see
in this connection particularly page A 644 f. of this issue).“"

And he affirms that the party will oppose the wishes of the Church

in all areas where their compliance could render more difficult the
performing of the historical mission of the party. With that, the
limits are quite clearly traced.

According to Rakowski, the party attaches great importance to the
clearing up of one misunderstanding. He says that the Church cannot
demand that the state supervise compliance with many rules of religious

“'[from ﬂarsaw POLITYKA in Polish 25 Mar 78: article by Hiecsyslaw
P. Rakowskix “Fundamentals of Cooperation and Dialogue"!

““[fromz Warsaw POLITYKA in Polish 25 Mar 78; article by Hieczyslaw
F. Rakowski: "Fundamentals of Cooperation and Dialogue“)

36
M OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
M UIIMI'UW Ubls Uﬂhl

life and also repress atheistic propaganda. even where it spreads
positivo values of the materialistic ideology. while at the same tine
the Church itself strives to expand as such as possible its scope

for the preaching of its fundanental religious doctrines. llere. he
says. it is the State and not the Church which must insist on “tolerance.“
At this point it becomes quite clear how strongly the party feels
driven onto the defensive with its ideology. Under such prerequisites,
a positive dialogue cannot develop. states Rakowshi. Discussions and
controversial argments between Marxists and Catholics in Poland which
are conducted in the spirit of tolerance are apart from this felt by
the party to be beneficial, because-according to Rakowskiualsong other
things by scans of these. unnecessary aismﬂerstandings with respect to
the relations between a socialist State and the church are removed.

by which he doubtless neans first and forosost the basically negative
attitude of the Catholic people vis-a-vie such relations. The
miscarried atteapt to build a national Church of consequence and the
fiasco of the “social-progressive" Catholics in Poland show this quite
clearly. we also learn free the rejoinder of this prouinent Marxist
in what spheres the cooperation between Marxists and Camolics is sost
desired by the State. In this connection there are no surprises.

Ne names in first place the laterial living conditions of the populace,
by which he means the economic difficulties in the country, which the
State's leaders would like to overcome with the support of the Church.

No Capitulation to the Church

It does not cone easy to the party to conduct this dialogue with the
Church under the pressure of its demands and requests, and the party
finds it difficult to enlist its cooperation in various different areas
and to have to tolerate its authority. This was expressed by the

head of the office for Religious Questions, miller: Kakol. in a talk
with journalists and functionaries of the party in May 1976. If he
spoke of the shame which he feels when cos-unists free other countries
ask him why the churches in Poland are so packed, or when guests free:
the west cosplisent his because the Church in Poland is allowed to
develop so well. he thus makes it clear by this on the one hand what
an oppresive feeling the vitality of the Catholic Church in their country
gives to ardent and co-Iitted cos-unists in Poland. and on the other
hand also how much they are exposed for this reason to the pressure

of comnists from other countries. who often cannot or will not
understand the special situation in Poland. Kakol therefore felt
called upon to reassure the critics and doubters, who of course exist
even in the ranks of his own party. and to assure then: of the firmness
of the party leadership. He spoke of an unrelenting battle against
the Church despite outward peace, and of a normalization of relations

between State and Church in which there will be no concessions and
no capitulation.

37
FOR OFFICIAL [BE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The party does not or course contemplate any aapitulatiOn. but without
rmcessions to the church it will not achieve its objective. and it
had to lake such concessions even after Mel's speech--for example.

in 1977 it had to pernit more new church buildings than in the previous
years. l-‘ren the remarks of Kakol before journalists and functionaries
of the party. the path also becomes visible which the party wants to
take in its tight with the church. It the church cannot be destroyed,
it must by its isolation be prevented free doing dasage to the socialist
stato--that was the quintessence of the statement of his which was
quoted by the French 'Dounentation Catholique" (921mm POLSKI.
London, 25 May l976). The party is wagering that in the long run

time is on its side, even if it also admits that Poland will remain

a Catholic country for a very long tine yet.

There is little reason to doubt that in these remarks, which were not
intended for the general ptblic. Kakol has interpreted the true
attitude of the party with respect to its relationship to the Church.
It would presumably like. to the best of its ability, to isolate the
church even more and to take away its influence above all over the
young people. But it is just this isolation which the church wants to

prevent, and this is the main purpose of its present dialogue with
the State.

The efforts of the Church to obtain significant new concessions have
for the tine being still been unsuccessful. Nevertheless. the State
will continue on with the dialogue which is so praising to the Church.
so long as it corresponds to its interest. That is no particularly
solid basis. but it is center-ting to the Church to know that there is

little reason to believe that the State could very soon lose this
interest.

COPYRIGHT: Deutsche Gosellschaft fuer Osteuropakunde e.‘ v. Berlin 1978.

1211‘
C50: 2300 END

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY