APPROVED FOR RELEASE: IOOTIOIIOO: CIA-NDPOI-OOOOOROOO‘I000400304
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000400394

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8403

17 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 15/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP02-00050R0001000400394
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED EOROEFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/
17 Apri

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(F000 15/79)
Comem's
NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Horoccan-Algerinn Relations Examined
(Hamid Borrada; JEUNE AFRIQUE. 21 H8? 79)..............

IRAN

Khoaeyni'a Life. Revolution'o Background Reviewed
(Ravel Athlrl; ALPVATAN AL-'ARABI. 2-8 HI! 79).........

NOROCCO

Moroccan Socialist Leader Discusses Sahara Problem
(Abderrahin Bouabid Interview; JEUNB AIRIQUB.
28 Mar 79).............................................

TUNISIA

Opposition Leader on Potential Poat-Bourguiba Situation
(Ibrahim Tobal Interview; AFRIQUE-ASIB. 2-15 Apr 79)...
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

MOROCCAN-AMBRIAN RELATIONS WIRED
Paris JMB AFRIQUE in French 21 Mar 79 pp 21-24
[Article by Hamid Barrada. Insert by 11.2.]

[Text] The message sent to Parliament by King Hassan II on 8 March is part
of that category of co-unications which cannot be debated that the Moroccan
Constitution very classicallv anticipates. For that reason no speech has
ever been so debated. The Parliament. sitting in a special session in order
to listen to the royal message, was convoked once again on the next day in
order to answer it. Certain cpposition deputies were heard to observe that
the procedure utilized in this regard did not at all respect the stipulations
of the Constitution. But they did not hesitate over those juridical niceties.
As soon as it is a question of the Sahara. national unaninity is at stake.
Everyone agrees in judging with the King that the assent has come to revise
the policy that has been followed up to now with regard to Algeria. The
debates. which take place outside of the Parliamentary Chamber. revolve around
the same questions. To what degree has the King decided to adopt a new policy?
How will Algeria react? In one word. are we on the brink of a general war
between Algeria and Horocco?

Hassan II has multiplied his gestures to create a belief in the existence

of a "new direction" in the Sahara. he has requested his closest collab-
orator. Hr Ahmed Rada Guedira. to read the message to Parliament although it
ordinarily is the duty of Hr Bahnini. the state minister in charge of culture.
whose style is entirely different. to take charge of this task. The un-
changeable rules of protocol are de rigueur of course but the text is of an
unaccustoned clearness: "The action that we have undertaken and the one
which we are called on to undertake are so broad and at this point so deter-
mining for the future and the destiny of our country. that we have judged

it necessary to associate the entire nation in the persons of its represen-
tatives to aaloe the decisions that that action demands. Pros this point of
view, we have decided to create beside us. in parallel with our government.

a council grouping the representatives of all organized political tendencies.
which will have the job of assisting us in the determination and conduct of

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

policy in the matter of safeguarding our national territory and the security
of the state."

Nassau ll admits that the policy of "wisdom" and of "patience" that he has
carried on up to now has not borne fruit. He sees himself obliged to re-
consider the situation which has been imposed on our country and which'is
that of neither war nor peace, however with all the inconveniences and
consequences of a situation of war.

The King abstains from using the word "war" when he speaks of the new policy.
However. the paraphrasing that he uses to sketch out the anticipated decisions
do not mean anything else. The prudence of his vocabulary seems to reflect
rather the determination in his attitude. would war then be unlinent? How—
ever. the royal message has not totally dissipated the scepticism which can
be observed in Horoccan opinion. More exactly. an approximation can be
observed between the reactions of the political class and the reactions of
what we may call less specialized opinion.

A certain young industrial worker does not believe it is necessary to listen
to the royal speech. This carpenter displays the same indifference. That
writer has of course read the speech but has found nothing new in it. The
solemn warnings several times addressed to Algeria and which have had no
aftermath explained that state of mind. It has not been forgotten that the
King had announced in 1978 that Morocco would exercise the right of pursuit
Not only did that threat remain a dead letter. but the attacks of the Polisario
from Algeria became bolder. After the Tate operation in August 1973 there
was the Tan Tan operation last February. So that the warnings sent from
Rabat to Algiers came to resemble the warnings that the Chinese formerly
addressed to the Americans while taking care to number them....

The context in which the royal message was sent is no longer foreign to the
general scepticism. The King announced his new policy in the Sahara on the
day after the Ten Tan attack. but also after a movement of deep social dis-
CORKQIIC.

0n the very day before the speech, on 7 March, the health services went on
strike all over the country and demanded a pay increase. That was the first
time that that sector had ever “moved." Even during the general strike by
government employees in 1975. the hospitals had functioned normally. One
week earlier. the Khouribga (phosphate) miners had stepped work. The high-
way workers had gone on strike. The educational establishment can also be
mentioned. which underwent two three and four-day general strikes in the
month of February and then again on 13 and lb March. The movement, relayed
by the strikes called by the secondary students, according to Prime Minister
Ahmed Osman. raises fears that the academic year may be a "year in blank."

The agitation in the schools also makes the government uneasy because it is
assuming a frankly political character and thrratens to become worse.
Numerous incidents are observed. Slogans hostile to the regime recall those

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which had flourished at the time of the March 1965 riots and they are
proceeding to the point where they suggest that what happened in Teheran
could resemble what is happening in Rabat. A western diplomat is struck
"by that obsession with Iran" which he observes both in the behavior of
the government and in the behavior of its opposition.

The phenomenon is even stranger since the Moroccan kingdom in certain respects
(democratic liberties and the deep presence of Islam in institutions and
public life) seems like an anti-Iran. To tell the truth. by warmly defending
the Shah. by consigning Khomeini to hell. above all by sheltering the deposed

emperor. Hassan II has done a great deal to encourage an unflattering analogy
between Morocco and Iran in public opinion.

People are not ceasing to be astonished that a statesman whose political
skill needs no further demonstration should have committed what really must
be called a blunder. He must have adopted that attitude against the advice

of the majority of his ministers. which is at least what they proclaim
today....

it is still necessary in this extremely dangerous clieate for the government
-- in other words the King -- to do something. The speech from the throne
on 3 March would. it is thought. supply him with an occasion to get the
situation in hand again. Re preferred to skip over the problems and leave
the country expecting more in order to ensure in some way greater attention
to his message of 8 March. There were two valuable indications in the
speech from the throne. however. First. it was the majority which supports
him that the King most hestedly took to task.

Those who governed and were elected before were called "cowardly." The
opposition was also mentioned but everyone knows that they are irresponsible
by definition and they have only 16 representatives in Parliament. Then the
King clearly declared that he did not have an) intention of stopping the
democratic experiment. If the opposition dld not exist, he said in substance.
he would have invented it. After 27 Pebrusry the person who appeared as the
King's closest collaborator. Hr Ahmed Reds Guadira, on his own initiative

had met Mr Abderrehim louebid. the leader of the opposition. The conversation
had to do with social tension. The first secretary of the USP? [Socialist
Union of People‘s Forces] denounced the ineffectiveness of the government:
"We have no one to argue with." Is it necessary to believe that the accus-
ations were not unjustified in the eyes of tht King who on the following day
ordered the government to begin a dialogue on the side of the unions?

Devoted to Conflict

The research into social pacification had as its object to keep the chief of

state's initiative in the Sahara from being assimilated into an operation of
domestic politics. according to sources in the King's official family. For

that reason, the message was exclusively devoted to the conflict with Algeria.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPI"IAL USE ONLY

For their part. the opposition leaders maintain that their participation in
the National Security Council. whose creation hassan II announced on 8 March.
is not tied to any counterpart on the social plane. as far as they are con-
cerned. It is still no less certain that some overlapping was and still is
inevitable between the Sahara affair and domestic problems. and that a new
policy with regard to Algeria will inevitably have repercussions on the
social situation.

A high official, a member of the USFP. recognizes that if his party were in
power it would defend the austerity policy and would demand sacrifices from
the workers in the name of the war effort. "At most we could make taxation
moral."

A close collaborator of the King finally expresses himself in similar language:
"The situation in the Sahara requires the government and the opposition to
assume a new attitude." Lengthy speculation may be devoted to the relation-
ships between Hasssn II's initiative in the Sahara and the deterioration of
the social situation. One thing is certain. however: the speech put a

brake on the psychological deterioration.

when ﬂassan II declares in his message to Parliament that "Morocco is facing
in the south of its territory a more and more difficult situation which can-
not continue without making the country run serious risks." he expresses
accurately a general feeling. He then adds: "We know that for many. if not
for all, the situation in reaching the threshold of the intolerable."

The attack on Tan Tan marked a turning point. An officer in the Royal Army.
who unheritatingly recognizes the combativeness of the Polisario, declares
that on the strictly military level the operation had limited effects. not
related to its psychological effects.

"The enemy sprinkled the People's Bank with machine-gun fire and fired a shell
that hit an electrical transformer which nevertheless continued to function.
They had in mind to carry off 80 women whose husbands are at Tindouf, but

they could only carry away 13." "Of course," the officer continues. "if

the enemy was able to operate inside the town. that was because of a failure
in the defense system. That is a fault that calls for sanctions."

New Situation

For our informant. the strategy of the Royal Army in the Sahara. even if it
makes the Royal Army vulnerable to striLes from the Polisario is perfectly
adapted to the real enemy: the Algerian Army. "We are not weak. He have
not used our force up to now. Which is not the same thing." In his eyes.
there is no doubt at all that the message from the King creates a new situ-
ation on the military level by freeing "the initative" of the Moroccan Army.
Many facts recorded since 8 March corroborate those analyses. Parliament
unanimously voted in favor of a resolution recommending exercise of the right
of pursuit. For the moment, hasssn II seems to have made up his mind to use

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

his right of pursuit....As far as ideas are concerned. Four days after his
message to Parliament. he named Lt Col Hohannnd Abrouk. whon he had just
promoted to that grade. and who has the reputation of being a baroudeur
[translation unknown] chief of the advanced staff in the Sahara.

0n the next day the first meeting of the National Security Council was sup-
posed to be held. The principal political foraations, Istiqlal. USFP, Popular
Hove-ant and Independents. are to send two representatives each. Mr Ali

Yats will also take his seat in the name of the PPS [Party of Progress and
Socialisa], which is consunist.

Risks and Trunp Cards

The presence on the Security Council of son like Mr leuabid. who had suggested
the constitution of such a body in 1975 and who has not ceased to publicly
defend a policy of intransigence in regard to Algeria. or like Soucetta
(lstiqlsl) and Ahardan (Popular hove-ant) who. in spite of their participation
in the government, share the ease conviction at bottom, allow it to be

thought that Morocco is in the seas situation as it was at the assent of the
Green March. Hith the sane risks and the same trump cards.

As in 1975. facing the Spanish Army. the risk of a conflagratlon is real.
The chances of a peaceful solution are also safeguarded. The message of

8 March is very clear on that subject: "The object of our present nessage
is first to associate the entire nation in the various efforts that we are
eaploying and to show the nation once again more clearly the objectives of
peace that we are pursuing." A close collaborator of the sovereign insists
on this aspect: "He shall continue to give special treatment to peaceful
nssns because war is a risk." It could be thought that this is nothing but
a bluff on the part of hassan 11. That is not the case. For the good reason
that he has deliberately closed that door. You do not tell an aray which
dreaas of combat that they are immediately going to attack; you do not
mobilize parties that are in favor of it or a public opinion that wants to

get it over with and then sit with your hands folddd. That would not be

serious. Now everyone agrees, even his adversaries. that Hassan II is
serious.

Is it war, then? The ball is in the Algerian court. "In its conflict with
us." a responsible official explained to we in Rabat.'ngeria has up to now
had the best part. They claim to be defending a principle. that of self-
deternination for the Saharan people. Now no one. if he is speaking honestly,
can adait that a state has aobilised its nilitary and diploaatic apparatus
with the single purpose of defending a principle which concerns a third

party. The position of the Algerian leaders cannot be upheld just as the
position of France could not be supported if it arned, refereed and aided

a Basque liberation lovenent which would carry on guerrilla operations in
Spain."

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Peaceful Solution

Our informant continued: "He recognize that Algeria may have any position
it wants to on the decolonization of the Sahara. But we deny it the right
to help the people who come to attack us in our country." Hy informant is
nevertheless chiefly preoccupied in seeking out a peaceful arrangement. he
even disputes that the 8 March speech marked a hardening. Hhen I asked him:
"what has changed then?" he answered: "Nothing, except that up to now
Algeria was engineering causes of war which we did not consider as such.
Prom now on. a cause of war is a cause of war."

Insert: Algerian Attitude

Hill President Chadli respond to the warning addressed to Algeria by Hassan II?
Hhether it be toward a worsening or toward an easing. the conflict in the
Sahara can rapidly assume a new direction. Not only because of the King's
message, but also because for the first time since the illness of President
Boumedierue, the actors are in place on the Algerian side. The same day that

ﬂassan addressed the Moroccan Parliament, a government was finally formed in
Algiers.

More Engaged

"hat will be the attitude of Algeria on the subject of the Sahara? Do

Col Hohammed Ben Ahmed Abdelghani. the prime minister and his team. represent
the assumption of power by "hard-liners"? without any doubt it is too early
to answer that question, but the departure of Abdelaziz Bouteflika from
foreign affairs was noted. he had been at the head of Algerian diplomacy
for nearly 15 years. Must we see in this an indication of a policy of greater
engagement alongside the ?olissrio Front? The former chief of Algerian
diplomacy. in spite of his repeated statements about "decolonization" of

the western Sahara was. it is true. in private a partisan of a negotiated
solution with the Horoccans and the Hauritanians. An intimate friend and
counsellor of the deceased president, he might even have progressively won
Boumedienne over to his line of argument.

If the meeting between hassan II and Boumedienne, after long preparation.
could not take place because of Boumedienne's illness, Rabat had a right to
expect after the appointment of Chadli that contacts would be taken up again.
However, when the French secretary of state in Foreign Affairs. Hr Olivier
Stirn. announced a meeting between Chadli and Hassan. this was immediately
denied by Algiers. Too early? Or rather was it completely out of the
question?

If the Algerian leaders still choose a position of firmness. it is not sure
that the new government is looking for a clash in the conflict which has been

opposing the two neighbours since 1975. The Sahara affair seems to have had
little weight in the final balance in the changes that have taken place in
the seat of power in Algiers.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

National Defense

with two military men at the head of the country. who allocate to themselves

all of the prerogatives of President Boumedionne. it is being confirmed that

the partisans of Mr Yahiaoui. a presumed (and unlucky) candidate to the chief
magistracy. are accusing them of a retreat.

In the new distribution of portfolios. National Defense has not been officially

assigned. This puts the president of the republic in position as a candidate
for office in that post.

Competent Walis

In the same way. Colonel Ben Ahmed Abdelghani. who is assuming the duties of
prime minister. has not considered it a good idea. in the absence of any
precise definition of his new duties. to abandon the Interior Ministry which
he has led since the death of its holder. Ahmed Hedeghri, in 1976. As a
direct consequence of the proeotion of Mr Abdelghani. many walis (prefects)
have proved their competence on the ground and they have replaced some
ministers (Health. Public Works. hetional Bducntion. Justice). Hr Abdelghani
had directed an important re-shuffling of walis in 1978. as he has a certain
influence over them. The choice of these men was dictated by the double
concern of broadly renewing the personnel of the old cabinet and of putting
an end to the mandarinate exercised by certain of Boumedienne's ministers.

The question of the primacy of the single party in the state has not been
brought up. The presence of two leaders both on the state level (Chedli.
Abdelghani) and on the party level (Chadli is the titular secretary general
while Tahiaoui has just been named "coordinator" of the FL“) bears this out.
However, it is quite apparent that the balance is not weighed in favor of the
"nilitants." who are desirous of reinvigorating the party.

Delicate Mission

The designation of the first government since houmedienne puts the final

period to a long interregnum. Hr Abdelghani's cabinet has the delicate mission
of giving a satisfactory -- and urgent -- response to the worries of the
Algerian population (unemployment. housing crisis. supplies) which have been
relegated to the second for too long by the "imperatives of development."

COPYRIGRT: Jeune Afrique GRDPJIA 1979

12.116
C50: 4600

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

KHMBYNI'S LIFE, REVOLUTION'S BAWOUND REVIEWED
Paris AL-HA'EAN AL-‘ARABI in Ard>ic 2-8 Her 79 pp 36-39

[Article by Nawal Azhari: "Secrets in Khoneyni's Life; Costume Party bed to
Religious-Political Revolution and to Declaration of 1906 Constitution; Assas-
sination of moneyni's Father, Foreign Occupation and Hossdaq's Fall Behind
Call for Islamic Republic; Alliance of Religious Bstdalishnent Hith Bazaar
People Guaranteed Current Hove-ent's Success"]

[Text] Beginning this week, AHAIAN AL-'ARABI will begin publishing a
series of press reports on Iran dealing with the various aspects and with the
background of the current events. he paper will start this series with a
report on the Shi'ite religious institution, on Ayatollah lhomeyni. its main
leader. and on its struggle since the beginning of this century and until

the victory it achieved by toppling the regine of Shah Hohsaad Reta Pahlavi.

when he boarded the special French Boeing aircraft that took him fro. Paris
to Tehran at the beginning of last February. he spread a small csrpet.' per-
formed his prayers, returned quietly to his seat and surrendered his head
to a deep sleep after the plane took off for its historic trip, whereas
tension prevailed among all his cowanions who were worrying daout what evil
might face then at the airport at the hands of the pro-shah forces.

This venerable old man has been able throughout his stormy life to maintain
an inner cala which nobody, except a few ascetics and Sufis. could parallel.

He is also an ascetic hermit. But hie distinction is that he has not shun-
ned people and that he has shared in their affairs and the proble-es of their

daily life. He has even endured from then and for their sake more than
strong men can endure.

Ayatollah Ruholleh Huatafa al-Husui al-ﬂuaayni moaeyni changed none of his
habits. neither during his 15-year exile. nor since his return to the home-
land. He waited up at an early hour to rejoice and worship in a spiritual
conversatlm with his creator for hours. He then spends most of his day
dealing with his family’s end with the people's affairs and then retires to
bed at 2300.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"is food is that of ascetics: Cheese, bread. yogurt, grapes and cooked or
boiled vegetables. Perhaps this strict routine of worship and food is what
has enabled him to maintain his vigor and energy in this advan-ed age. and
what has enabled him to endure all the hardships. twists, shocks and sur-
prises in his life.

Ayatollah Khomeyni came into this world at the beginning of this century.
Bis childhood was spent in a small and modest Iranian village, Khomeyn.
His father was also a Shi'ite clergyman.

No Historic Events in Khoseyni's Life

There are two historic events which the memory of his early childhood could
not comprehend: The 1906 revolution and declaration of the constitution. and
the assassination of his father by government men. The father was firm and
never stopped attacking the oppression and tyranny of. the shshs and of the
landowners and feudalists who cooperated with them.

Let us leave the child to go to the holy city of Qom in the south. where his
religious studies began, and let us pause a little to examine that thunder-
ous revolution.

The incidents start with the clergymen's sit-in strike in the mosques to
demand expulsion of the Belgian Mr (Nuis), the customs inspector who insulted
the clergyman by attending a boisterous costume party dressed in the apparel
and turban of a clergyman. The sit-in strike developed quickly to become a
demand for the people's right and for a constitution that would put a limit
to the powers of Huraffar-el-Din Shah.

“the Ottoman Empire mediated between the shah and the clergyman. and a shehen-
shah decree was issued declaring a constitution providing for the creation
of a consultative council and judiciary courts. However, the shah procras-
tinated in its implementation, and the demonstrations were renewed. Tehran
clergyman staged a sit—in strike in one of the mosques, and a prolonged
blockade was set up around them by the government forces. The matter ended
with a permit allowing them to emigrate to the holy city of Qom.

'lhe truth is that the events were not generated by the raahness of a young
and inpudent foreigner, such as Mr (Nuis). There were deeper and more impor-
tant social and religious causes.

Oppression reached a peak under the (Fajar) dynasty: A profligste and op-
pressive shah, a corrupt government. provincial governors harsh in collect-
ing taxes. harsher tax collectors, prevalent ignorance. no schools and no
hospitals.

“me clergymen were more capable than others of understanding the public do-
sires by virtue of their direct contact with the people and by virtue of the
relative organization of the Shi'ite religious establishment itself in e

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

manner that permitted its extensive network to spread throughout the rural

and urban areas. 'lhe clergymen's anger at the shah was an extension of the
pvoplv'n wrath against him.

Ilri t 1 sh Exploit Situation

me clergymen's emigration to Qom touched off the people's feelings and

made then head singly and in groups to the British Bsbassy in Tehran. ‘lhe
British and the Russians were the two main parties involved in the interna-
tional game in this poor Islamic country.

with their cunning, the British encouraged the people to protest. The Bri-
tish were annoyed by the fact that the Rusisna had the upper hand in the
Persian court, and they exploited the opportunity to regain their influence.
They opened the doors o.‘ the eubusy to the erbassy to the demonstrators. who
staged their sit-in strike in it for days, during which the people etc.
dranlt and slept in such a very orderly manner, that the most organized
present-day popular organizations would envy then.

Muzaffar-al-Din Shah backed down and issued on 5 August 1906 another shahan-
shah decree declaring the constitution proposed by the clergymen: Constitu-
tionsl government. elected national council, the Ja'fari Shi'ite creed as the
state's official religion, approval of the principle of the separation of
powers, and affirmation of public and personal liberties. More isportant
than all this was article two which granted clargynen the veto right over any
official law which the clergymen found incompatible with the Shari'a.

The religious establishment in Iran attaches great importance to the 1906
constitution, because this constitution recomites the establishment’s poli-
tical and social role. Clergymen are the ones who control and keep record
of the vital statistics, such as marriages. divorces. births and deaths.
‘Ihey are also the ones who supervise daily trmsactions such as purchase and
sale contract: and leases, and who play the role of banks. 'lhe rich deposit
with them whatever surplus money they have and pay to them the taxes and
fees required by the Shari'a.

These taxes and fees, in addition to donations and inheritance. enabled the
Shi'ite estdalishment to own vut properties and lands. The revenues of
these holdings enabled the clergynen to rally the people behind then with
the aid and grants that the clergynen advanced to the orphans, the sick. the
uneaployed and the disabled. and with the sympathy these clergynen gave the
people when exposed to the tyranny of the rulers.

The fact is that this constant contact between the Shi'ite religious estab-
liahment and the common people in Iran always qualified. in the absence of
rulers with a sense of national responsibility toward the people. the
Shi'lte clergymen to perform their major role and provided them with un-

paralleled moral and material support in their long struggle with the
government.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIN

Muzaffar-al-Din Shah attended the opening of the Parliament 'the Council)
carried on a litter. and died ill and defeated in the year following the
declaration of the constitution.

Magnificent Democratic Experience

The democratic experience was magnificent and dazzling. The Council was an
exact replica of a teaching session at a mosque. The president sat in the
middle and the deputies surrounded him, sitting on mats spread on the floor.
They discussed and debated whatever affairs they wanted to discuss. Those
present took part in the discussion. Even the cannon people took their small
problems to the Council to present them to the deputies or to the discussion
sessions.

Mohnmad Ali Shah could not stand this unique experience, and so he sent his
imperial guard, who consisted at the time of Cossack cavalrymen, under the
command of a Russian officer cslled (l.iyakhuv) to besiege the Council. expel
the people's representatives. suspend the constitution and impose a curfew
in Tehran.

how similar is today to yesterday? The people rebelled against the shah and
defeated his forces. and the shah had no alternative but to resort to the
Tharist Russian Delegation. The clergymen dethroned Hohanad Ali Shah and
instated his son Sultan Ahmad as the new shah. The constitution was reacti-
vated and the former shah was banished to Russia. The United States had not
yet extended its fingers to this part of the world. Iran thus became one

of few countries that could be counted on the fingers who knew a constitu-
tional democratic rule early in this century.

In l92l. an ambitious and almost illiterate soldier leaps suddenly into the
heart of the events in Iran. In 1925. he dethrones the last of the (Fajar)
dynasty shahs and isposes hisself as the new shah. Reza Shah Pahlavi, the
father of the present shah, was no less oppressive and tyrannical than the

deposed dynasty.

Under the slogan of modern reforms, Reza Pahlavl, a product of the military
establishment, begins his conflict against t. .e clergynen. In the 1930's.
he strips them of their constitutionally guaranteed privileges and of the
veto over civil legislation.

With the rising star of Reza Pahlsvi in power, the star of Ruhollsh Xhoneyni.
the young mulls [low-rank clergyman], begins to rise in the religious estab-
lishment. The young nan' a maturity, awareness and studies were completed

and he began to look at the tyranny. transformation and developsent with a
stern face, knitted brews. penetrating looks and two dark and thick eyebrows
competing with his thick and dark beard. hothing has changed in this
Khomeyni at present except his beard, which has been invaded by the whiteness

of old age.

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Khameyni Facing Reza Pnhlavi

ﬁne young teacher did not confine his interest to teaching jurisprudence
alone. He proceeded to attack Reza Pahlavi and the imperial regime eloquently
and fluently. "c instigated the people to disobey the ahah's orders and told
them that such orders would be of no value if the people rejected them un-
snimously.

Then comes Horld Var II and Iran suffers widespread harm. By virtue of his
genuine fascism. the shah had Nazi inclinations. With the advances of the
Herman forces in the Middle East. the allies were afraid that the shah would
«tab them in the hack. and so the British and the Soviets hastened to march
into and occupy Iran to get control of the oil fields. Ihey banished the
whah in 1961 and appointed his son Mohamad Ross, the present shah, in his

place.

The Iranian people's tragedy was thus compounded because they had to endure
the burden of occupation and the exhaustion of their country's resources.
Khomeyni was one of the clergymen most strongly aware of the enormity of the
tragedy and most strongly pained by it. his reaction was crystallized in a
three-part slogan that he raised: Freedom, independence and fighting foreign
domination.

lhe war ended and under pressure from the people, the British withdrew after
long maneuvers and after making sure of putting the oil under the control of
their monopolist companies. The Soviets also withdrew. but only after leav-
ing Azerbaydzhan Province under the control of one of their agents. The
Iranians regained the province after long suffering.

Dr Mosadaq's Experience

Suddenly. the Iranians were able to regain their oil in the early 1950's.
thanks to Dr Mohamed Hosadaq. that old and shrewd politician who was good at
maneuvers. Hosadaq would not have succeeded had it not been for the influ-
ence of a prominent religious leader named Ayatollah Kashani. Khomeyni was
one of the prominent supporters and advisers of Kashani.

However. the people's joy with their national victory did not last long.

lhe Americans toppled Mosadaq's government. brought Shah Hohsmad Reza Pahlavi
sack from exile and replaced the British with their own influence and their
own exploitation of Iran's oil resources.

The rule of Shah Nehemad Rezs Pahlavi starts actually in 1953. Thanks to
:he support and backing of the CIA on the one hand and the division in the
tntional ranks on the other hand, the shah was able to impose his sadist and

reel rule on Iran.

ﬁne shah persecuted the national politicians and the clergymen allied with
them. Imprisoning their elders. he also liquidated physically the cream of

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mosadaq‘s supporters. youths who received their higher education abroad,
through assassination or torture in the dark prisons. He did not hesitate
to imprison a venerable old man such as Dr Hosadaq, who was more than 75
years old. The shah released Moaadaq only after he became certain that
cancer had eaten away his tongue and that he could no longer utter a single
word of criticism against him.

The end of the national experience in the spring of its life was a severe
shock for Rhomeyni. and its failure was harder on him than his imprisonment
in the shah'a cells and jails.

The clergyman retreated to study. discuss and analyze the causes of the
fsilurc. and ended up with a conclusion that became more deeply entrendied
in his mind with time, namely that there could be no salvation for Iran--
rather. there could be no salvation for all the Malena-«without the estab-
lishment of an Islamic state. to be specific, an Islamic republic totally
divorced from all the tom of Islamic government established throughout the
ages--a state in which rule is not inherited by the caliphs of a ruling dy-
nasty. as was the case in the Ouiad and Abbaside caliphates, and which does
not use religion as a curtain for its ignorance, backwardneaa. suppression
and terror, as was the case in the Ottoman Empire.

The clergyman proceeded to use his eloquence and his magical influence over
worshippers and over the faithful to call for his "vitruous" republic and to
compare what the situation would be in a state that maintains its revolu-
tionary and religious purity, as was the case in the time of Prophet liuliausd.
may God's peace and prayers be upon him, and the time of his f0urth successor
'Ali ibn Abi Talib. with the situation of the Hoslems and of Islsn in Iran
under the rule of Hohamad Reza Pahlavi. the shahanshah and eweror of em-
perora.

'lhe shah became annoyed with Khomeyni and tried first to buy him with gene-
rous gifts, as he had done with others. But Iihomeyni refused. lie was con-
tent with his nacetic life with his big family. a wife and 5 children. in
his modest home in Qom.

'ihe shah arrested Khomeyni at the beginning of 1963. After a period of time
and when the shah thought that prison had undermined Khomeyni's morale. he
sent emissaries to express his willingness to negotiate with him and to
release him from prison in return for lOIon'leyni's abandonment of his call.

nut Khomeyni told the ahah's emissaries: So. what is left for us to nego-
tiate over? The shah brought Khomeyni to trial and recounended that a

death sentence be issued against him. But the prominent uelma hastened to
hold a meeting and to give lhomeyni the title of ayatollah. 1his meant that
the shah had to stop his trial and to release him in accordance with the 1906
constitution.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Khoneyni in Exile

me shah was forced to release hill. but only on the condition that he go
into exile. Rhoneyni and his family left for exile in Turkey and then pro-
ceeded to Iraq to stay close to the holy places in al-Najaf and Karbala’.

in exile. moneyni devoted his efforts to developing his new theory on Islasic
rule, guided by the era of nl-Rashidun csliphs [the four caliphs who fol-
lowed the prophet iumediately]. he has written extensively on the issue.

mostly in the form of lectures that he delivered to the students of religioas
institutes.

Perhaps the most important of his writings are "‘lhe Rule of 'ihe Shari'a" and
"The Islaaic State." In both. moneyni says that rule in Islam is not abso-
lute, but constitutional. But it is not constitutional in the conventional
Western sense of demcratic constitutionality. Rulers in the Islamic state
are bound to a number of principles and conditions revealed in the noble
Koran and explained in the hadith and interpretation of Prophet liuha-sd.
may God's peace and prayers be upon his.

Thus. the Islamic state relies on holy laws. and its legislator is God. may
Ne be praised, in accordance with his Koranic teachings and His prophet's

interpretation, whereas the role of legislator in the western constitutional
state is performed by the people's elected representatives. Nobody has the
right to legislate or to rule without depending on these divine principles.

Khomeyni gives the ulena and the jurisprudents the right to interpretation
within the frauework of the Korsn's provisions and of the prophet's interpre-
tation without any deviation. In this, he is in harmony with the flexibi-
lity of the historical Shi'ite religious estd>lishaents and with its inns

in regard to interpretation to meet the requirements of the conditions and
at the age.

lauou-yni defends warmly the penalties stipulated in the Koran to punish cri-
minals, and denies that they are derived from the "harshness of the Arabs."
as the oriental ists claim. he asserts that these penalties seek ultisately

to stop crime. to impose the authority of law and order and to establish
security. safety and peace in the state.

Opinion of noneyni's Critics

Ihuever, many of Khomeyni's critics believe that a lot of asbiguity engulfs
the principles on which his lslesic republic is established. They are gene-
ral principles that intimate that Islam is aiddle-of-the—road between capital-
ism and columnists. that it permits personal liberties and curtails extensive
lamination by capital and that. at the same time. it is against state capi—
.nlian because it p. units sercl‘nats to engage in their trade and to earn a
legitimate profit. "Capitalism exploits the people through its aaterialism.
'Omunllﬂ enslave: the people through political oppression. whereas the

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Islamic state will wipe out corruption and guarantee political and economic
equality among all under the canopy of the Koran."-

All this remains general principles. As for the actual implementation of
these principles in the people's daily life and under conditions that are
totally different from those existing more than 1,300 years ago. momeyni has
not provided many details. Even the borders of this state are not clear to
him. Is it confined to Iran or does it include all the Moslema?

me man calls for abolishing the monarchy and sum up his goals in releasing
the detainees. arresting the corrupt. cancelling all the contracts and deals
that are not in Iran's interest. producing little oil. paying greater atten-
tion to agriculture and reducing the nudaer of the armed forces.

lauomeyni says: "1his is the first step. Our struggle will continue after we
deport the main criminal. namely the shah. Our ultimate success will be
achieved when all the foreigners leave us snd stop controlling our army."

All this is good in the view of lthomeyni's critics. But the detailed lines
continue to be ambiguous, confused and unclear, especially in regard to legis-

lation and interpretation on matters connected directly with the Shari‘a
rules.

Even the vast nudaers of his supporters don't know any noteworthy thing about
his Islamic atste, whereas his main aides range from those demanding isplemen-
tation of the Shari'a laws and establishment of the Islamic state to those
who aspire to a Hestern-atyle democratic system, even though relying generally
on Islam and its dictates.

Khoneyni'a main aides have exerted tangible efforts in an attempt to explain
the executive principles of the Islamic theory. 'Ihese sides include Hehdi
Bazargan, the present prime minister who has asserted in his numerous writ-
ings that Islam is not in conflict with science and technology. Meanwhile.
Ali Shariati. the departed poet and thinker. tried to mix the Islamic prin-
ciples with socialism.

But these attempts have been conflicting and varying between the thinking of
a liberal like Bazargan and another radical Islamic thinker deeply imbued
with the socialist principles, such as Shariati.

Khomeyni '3 Foreign Policy

The utter clarity in Khomeyni's positions and thinking appears in matters
pertaining to his foreign policy. He wants to restrict foreign influence in
Iran. including the secret role played by foreign businessmen in corrupting
the government and the bureaucratic agency.

he is fully aware of Israel's danger to the area, to the Arabs and to Islam.
Israel is "the product of the collusion and understanding of the "esters and

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Eastern imperialist countries... Its roots must be pulled out with the ef-
'orts of the mighty Islamic countries and their great peoples."

In this regard. IOromeyni is very detailed and precise. The Islamic countries
"must unite and must exert all their efforts and employ all their resources
to uproot the usurping aggressor. “they must stop aiding Israel. those who
proceed in its bandwagon and those who support it. 'me Islamic countries
not cut off all forms of material and moral aid for them. 1hey must deny
them all and must refrain from using any Israeli products."

In his books, Khomeyni draws a dark picture of Israel's and Zionism's role in
the Iran of the shehnnshah. "0n the hands of the malicious Iranian govern-
ment, Israel infiltrated into all of the country's economic. military and
political affairs. and Iran becaae a military base for Israel. or rather for
the United States. Now. Israel controls our country's affairs. runs Iran's

economy and manages the affairs of numerous Iranian factories and installs-
tions."

The prominent Iranian leader is convinced that Zionism is plotting against
lrm and Islam. lle points out in this regard its distortion of the Koran.
He is also fully conVinced that its ultimate goal is to control the world.
He even charges Zionism of plotting to kill him.

U. S. Responsibility

Khomeyni holds the United States largely responsible for what has afflicted
Iran and what is afflicting they oslesa. "llad the Islamic countries relied
on Islam instead of relying on the Eastern and Hestern camps. they would not
have fallen prey to the Zionist aggression, they would not have been terror-
ized by the Phantom planes and would not have submitted to the Soviet Union's
policy of bargaining."

Khomeyni adds: "bet the world know that all our problem emanate from America.
All our problems emanate from Israel. Israel is also a part of America."

Khomeyni then wonders: "Isn't it our right to protest the supply of Iranian
oil to a country which is in a state of war with the Hoslene and to protest
giving the Israelis a free hand to tamper with our Islamic country? Israel
Is currently in a state of war with the Hoslems and is planning to invade
and occupy the Islamic countries." Despite all this, momeyni is aware, as
.1 true "colon. of the principles of religious freedom. Re stresses that
Jews and Christians in Iran must be given freedom of worship and of prac-
ticing their religious rituals. But he is not at all tolerant toward here-
sies. such as the Baha'i movement, which has aided the shahanshah's regime.

r'ron his exile, Khomeyni instigated the lranian Army to mutiny and rebel:
The Iranian Army officers must exert serious efforts to purge the homeland's
*oil or the desecration and influence of Israel's agents. You are Hoslems.

seal your crushing blows to these agents and cut off the evil Israeli hands
It your dear homelmd."

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Khomeyni is aware of the nature of the relationship that has bound the shahan-
nhnh'e regime to all of Iran's enemies: "The Pahlavi family assumed power by
force. The present shah has destroyed the economy and our natural resources,
has reduced agricultural production so as to secure a market for 0.8. pro-
ducts, has subjugated the armed forces to foreign control and has abolished

freedom of expression and of the press, and his police forces have massacred
thousands of citizens."

Today and after the victory of lthrmeyni's revolution, Khomeyni has put into
practice what he advocated in his exile and in his struggle. He has severed
all of Iran‘s relations with Israel. has expelled the Israeli and 0.8. experts
and has declared a halt to the delivery of oil to the Zionist state and to
South Africa. To reassure the Arabs. he has declared an end to Iran's role
as the patrol policeman in the Arab Gulf. He wants thus to show that there
is no conflict in the ultimate goals between Iran and its neighbors by virtue
of the relations of history. religion and blood.

No Bargaining in Revolution

One of the main characteristics of Khomeyni'e personality and of his revolu-
tionary conduct is his ability to adopt decisive decisions. Those who have
followed in detail his latest battle with the regime can attribute his vic-
tories to his refusal to bargain at the expense of his positions and prin-
ciples.

He did not bargain with the shah md did not permit his allies (the National
Front) or his supporters to cooperate with the regime in its final days or to
accept the regime's superficial concessions. he defined his phased objec-
tive: The shah must be overthrown. "hen the shah fled the country, Khomeyni
decided to return home. Even Bazargan. his top adviser. advised him not to
return. But the revolutionary old men refused to back down and refused to
bargain with Shapur Bakhtiar, who split away from the national movement and
who accepted the shah's inducements. Rhomeyni returned, knowing well that
his return constituted a danger to his life and the life of his companions.

A revolution does not accept bargaining. It is some kind of a wager and it
may win or it may lose, but when it bargains. it starts to lose.

Khomeyni returned and toppled Bakhtiar's government in days. lie even ended
the myth of the "bogy" with whom the shah and the Americans long threatened
the people. namely the army. Hith the magic of his leadership and with his
influence, Khomeyni attracted the troops and wrenched them away from the grip
of their officers. Within a few hours of their armed confrontation with
lauomeyni. the commanders themelves found that they were alone in the arena.
In their position. their forces. their equipment. the instigation of the
shah and the advice of the Americans were of no help. They fell into
Khomeyni's hands one after the other to face the fate deserved by whoever
places himself in conflict with the people's interests and aspirations.

iiwever. Khomeyni was not quick and decisive in adopting the individual deci-
sions concerning fateful issues, such as dethroning the shah. abolishing the
monarchy, declaring the Islamic state and nationalizing the oil. Perhaps he

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFI’ICIAL USE ONLY

preferred to refer to the people's opinion on these matters. considering that
he had always affirmed that the people hold the final decision.

Conflict With Left

Perhaps Rho-eyni is in disagreement here with those allies who waged the
battle of liquidating the regime with him. What is seam here are the radical
coemunist and leftist organisations. some of which adopt the principle of vio-
lence in their political action. By virtue of their thinking and their ideo-
logical positions. these organizations do not consider that the battle in Iran
has ended. The? demand that the hand of the revolution extend to political
and military groups, and perhaps to social classes. to liquidate and pursue
them. These organizations even find themselves in an inevitable confronta-
tion with Khomeyni and with his call for an "Islamic state." what makes the
confrontation even more serious is that these groups are well-armed. espe-

cially after acquiring large quantities of weapons from the army barracks and
stores.

It is doubtful that hhouyni and the Shi'ite religious establish-ant will be
able to persuade these radical factions to agree to give up the arm and to
coexist peacefully under the canopy of an Islamic state whose opponents are
permitted a degree of freedom of criticism and of expression.

In confronting his opponents at home. moseyni depends on the overwhelming
majority of a people who have deep-rooted lslaaic traditions and on a willing-
ness for sacrifice and giving that reaches the degree of martyrdom and re-
demption for which the Shi'ites have been known throughout their' history.

This has been proven correct by the unequal confrontation in the street be-
tween these masses and a well-trained and fully-equipped am. ‘ihese mass
now put their leader in the position of holiness. In their view. he repre-

sents the sysbol of struggle, of political purity and of religious selfless-
ness.

Despite this, the ability of momeyni's revolution to maneuver is curtailed
by several factors and circumstances. his old age does not per-it him to
exert too much effort to adopt daily decisions. lle has not actually assumed
power and has left it in the hands of a group of his loyal followers. He
may adopt a decision to withdraw gradually from the arena and return to live

in Qoa. being content with the role of the theoretical leader and the
spiritual father.

The other thing that may limit the effectiveness of his role is the disagree-
nent among his supporters and allies over a certain political line and a
definite ideological position. Moreover, the leaders of the Shi'ite reli-
gious establishment itself view moneyni with some envy. He is nowhere near
then insofar as their clerical and religious position is concerned. even
though he excels over all of them with'his overwhelming popularity and his

clear. unhesitsnt and uncoepromising positions, especially toward the pre-
vious regime.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

180.000 Hullas

There are nearly 180,000 mullaa constituting the backbone of the religious
establishment that has an almost unique organization in the Islamic world.
'lhis establishment pervades the core of Iranian life and exerts its religion
and political influence through these firm relations that it has established
with the popular classes.

The middle class. represented by the bazaar merchants, has been the natural
ally of the religious establishment in its long struggle with the regime that
depended on the military establishment. The bazaar merchants often played a
strong, even though not apparent, role in tipping the scales in favor of the
clergy-en over the shahs.

In Khomeyni's revolution, there was a meeting of the interests of two victims
in opposing and defeating the regime: 'lhe clergymen and the bazaar merchants.
The shah's mistake was that he launched in the early 1960's a battle on two
fronts. He conitted what no political leader in a country with strong reli-
gious sentiments would connit when he tried to confront the religious estab-
lishment through a police establishment (the SAVAK). Through his political
decisions and the slogans of modernization and reform. the shah tried to curb
the clergymen's social influence and powers. lie confiscated the Shi'ite
religious trusts. reduced the government allocations for the clergymen. per-
secuted their leaders and insulted the religious sentiments by appointing to
the positions of power and control individuals belonging to suspect sects,
such as Baha'ism, and people whose ability and integrity were doubtful.

Hatters went too far when the shah adopted in the late 1960's the course of
"Persianization," trying to wipe out the religious feelings by reviving
nationalist feelings reminding the Iranians of the glories of the ancient
Persian state. But his call was received lukewarmly. and even left a nega-
tive iwact. 'lhis call confirmed to the religious establishment and to the
overwhelming religious majority of the people the soundness of their auspi-
cions concerning the shah and the throne.

Bazaar's Role

’Ihe bazaar markets with their narrow alleys, their closely lined up shops
and their low roofs are the heart of every Iranian city. For exmple, there
are in Tehran 60,000 shops and businesses extending over an area of 10 square
kilometers. These shops. which attract the tourists with the traditional
Iranian and oriental goods that they display. constitute, despite their
modesty. the third force in Iran's political and economic life after the
shshanshah authority and the religious establishment.

In recent years. the bazaar merchants were exposed to an organized caspaign
by the authority which overburdened them with its taxes. and with its disre-
gard for the merchanta' interests. 'lhe authority inflicted grave harm on
them through its attempt to fix prices and to hold them responsible for

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tampering with these prices. whereas the authority itself was actually respon-
sible for the inflation and for the rising cost of living through its corrup-
tion. its wasting of the country's enormous resources. and its alliance with
the big merchants and businessmen. most of whom are Jews and foreigners.

'ihe bazaar merchants felt injustice afflicted on them when they saw the poli-
tical authority entrusting foreign businessmen and their Jewish Baha'i repre-
sentatives with most of the contracts and deals. Under the slogan of re-
building ‘l'ehrsn, the authority even prepared a plat to demolish the bazaar
markets and to shatter this enormous class of merchants. In 1977 alone. the
authority referred 250.000 bazaar merchants from the various cities to trial.
A total of 8,000 of those merchants were sent to jail on the charge of tam-
pering with prices. whereas bribes to the tune of hundreds of millions of
dollary were filling the pockets of opportunists and foreigners close to the
government.

The bazaar merchants thus found in the religious establishment a natural ally
to fight the political authority. In 1977, the shah reduced the allocations
of the religious establishment from 80 million dollars to 30 million dollars.
But the bazaar merchants offered the establishment 320 million dollars to
enable it to advance the necessary aid to the poor classes.

when the troubles started at the end of 1977. the bazaar merchants and their
employees and workers were the first to proceed to the confrontation arena.
One of the bazaar leaders in Iran has said in this regard: "If the Islamic
struggle in Iran is the body. then the bazaar is its eyes and the oil industry
its heart."

The bazaar merchants financed Khomeyni's movement. Despite the strike and
the economic and commercial difficulties, they paid the religious establish-
ment millions of dollars in 1978 to enable it to meet its commitments toward
the destitute classes that were harmed by the troubles and to help the fami-
lies that lost their supporters through martyrdom or imprisonment.

‘mus. on returning to Iran, momeyni was eager to cut the strike period
:short. he and his government issued strong calls for return to work and for
reopening the shops. lie did so out of consideration for the merchants who
suffered and for their role and sacrifices in supporting his movement.

But have Iran's problems and difficulties ended with the crushing victory
scored by k'homeyni's revolution and with the great gain accomplished by the
religious establishment?

the rapid collapse of the shah'a regime has caused tens of previously sup-
pressed conflicts to rise to the surface. Perhaps some of these problem.
led by the problem of the minorities lying in wait on the remote borders,
are enough to create a number of big obstacles in the face of the stability
and survival of any central government.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ayntollah's Hen

'ihe aides and advisers of religious leader Ayatollah Khomeyni are a mixture
of clergymen with their black turbans and their green and black robes and
politicians and technocrats who graduated from Western universities. Pore-
most among them are:

Engineer Hehdi Bazsrgan. the prime minister of the interim government: His
Western education has not affected his religious enthusiasm. He has firm
relations with the bazaar merchants and strong faith in democracy. He was
director of the National Petroleum Company in Dr Hosadaq's time. He then
spent 6 years in the shah'a prisons and engaged in free enterprise after his
release. He used his business as a cover for his political activity. In
the early 1960's. he formed (Hujahidin Rhalq). the military arm of Imeeyni's
movement, which has now turned into the Islamic Guard that has temporarily
replaced the police and the army.

Bazargan has many writings in which he proves Islam's readiness to keep up
with the age and with science and technology.

l-brahia Yazdi: He studied medicine at Baylor University in Texas. His in-
clinations are democratic and liberal and he clings to religion. He was
chief of Khomeyni's staff in his Paris exile.

Hassn Nazih (56 years): He is a brilliant lawyer who is well-known for his
glorious defense of political detainees. He is a candidate for president of
the Islamic republic.

Abd-al-Hasan Bmi Sadr (32 years): He is an economics expert who studied at
the National Scientific Research Center in Paris. He has done studies on
Islamic economy.

Sadeq Qutub (ste) is lol years old and was expelled from Georgetown Univer-
sity in the United States because of his political interests and for his
failure to keep up with his studies. He is extremely concerned with his
appearance. He is a Syrian national. He has been accused of having rela-
tions with the European communist left but has denied the accusation strongly.

Shihab Ishraq (50 years): He is Khomeyni's son—in-law. He is jovial and
very religious. He works as private secretary to the prominent religious
leader.

Ahmad Khomeyni (35 years): he second son of the religious leader. He is a
religious scholar and is his father's adviser for religious affairs. 'ihis
position used to be held by his elder brother. Mustafa, who died under mys-
terious circumstances 2 years ago. Rhomeyni says that his son was a victim
of the SAVAK.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ayatollah Mahmud Tslaqani (76 years): He is the religious leader of the capi-
tal. Tehran. He spent 10 years in the shah's prisons and suffers from a
shudder which he developed as a result of the fearful torture to which he was
subjected in prison. Ila may play a major role in persuading the communists

to engage in legal opposition in the net regime. he became tied by friend-
ship to most of the comunist leadsrships during his imprisonment.

Mohamed Bashti: A clergy-an with greet political activity. He was in charge
of receiving lQnoaeyni's speeches and instructions on cassette tapes and than
distributing them to mosques in Tehran and in other parts of the country.
These recordings played a major role in kindling the citizens' enthusiasm to
oppose the regime.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI

8494
C80: 5802

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

nonoccm socnus-r LEADER mscussts sax/m norm
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUB in French 28 unis pp 16-17 m

[Interview with Moroccan Socialist Union of Popular Forces (0811’) First Sec-
retary Abderrahin Bouabid by Hamid Barrada: "They Hill Not Hear Us Down"—
date and place of interview not specified]

[Text] Jam AFRIQUB: Do you consider that the king's message to parliauent
constitutes a rapprochement between your positions and the govern-ent'a on
the Saharan affair, or at least a change of direction?

Abderrahin Bouebid: This nesaage confine. but more precisely this time. the
worsening of a situation which has become "intolerable." Our country cannot
defend its territorial integrity while remaining in a state of "neither war
nor peace."

As early as last December the USP? advocated a new defense strategy which
would enable pinpoint counterattacka to he made, so as to discourage the
assailants who for several months have been trying to harass Moroccan regular
troops and have been attacking civilian populations. The aggressors hope to
wear us down. They are mistaken.

For the time being the royal message is a call to redefine a political-mili-
tary strategy adapted to the nature of the terrain. This is the task with

which we have agreed to help.
JEUNE AFRIQUE: Are we on the eve of war with Algeria?

Abderrahin Bouabid: Our country does not intend. at least in the inediate
future. to take the initiative of a direct confrontationwith Algeria's regu-
lar troops. But it intends to make it understood that if driven to it it
would not hesitate to use all its means of defense to safeguard the nation-
al territory. We hope that the Algerian people and leaders. who are them-
selves jealous of their independence and the integrity of their territory,
will realize that the Horoccan people are in a situation of legitimate self-

defense .

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

.lliliNI-t AFKIQUH: Did you obtain guarantee" about naintaining this new policy
during your 7 Harch talks with the king?

Abderrahim Bouahid: The conversation I had with his majesty the king
dealt precisely with the deterioration of the military situation and the
consequent urgent need to deal with it more effectively and quickly.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: What are the powers. functions and operating methods of the
National Security Council (CNS)?

Abderrahim louabid: The council. which is to meet forthwith. will have to
specify its functions and discuss. under the chairmanship of the king. as
comndor-in-chiof of the Royal Armed Forces. the new strategy and the re-
sources which uust be mobilized for that purpose.

JEUNE APRIQUB: The king’s message comes at a time of great social tension.

Does your presence in the CNS not automatically entail concessions on your
pnrt?

Abderrahin Bouabid: He proclaim our total solidarity with the working class
and all the exploited social classes.

An effective defense policy is bound to involve consolidating the domestic
front by satisfying the most urgent and vital demands. The financial means
to do so exist or can be mobilized. The underprivileged classes. which have
seen their purchasing power shrink by over 70 percent, cannot be expected to
make sacrifices on their own.

.IEUNE AFRIQUE: To what extent is the war effort responsible for the deterio-
ration in the social climate?

Abderrahim Bouabid: Certainly the war effort is a heavy burden on public
funds. But ,to say that the war effort is the cause of social tension is to
give credence to the explanation given by the affluent class. which seeks
thus to evade its obligations. The dizzy rise in the cost of the most basic
cowsodities. the extreme exploitation indulged in by employers. the wage
freeze. land speculation and wastefulness are directly at the root of the
worlzers' poverty.

JEU'NE AFRIQUE: Is the CSN not in itself a disguised. "shameful" for! of
goverrssent by national union?

Ahderrahim Bouabid: On our side there is no disguised or "shaseful" parti-
cipation in a government of national union. Nor is the CNS the prelude to
such a role. The present govarment is what it is. it is faced with social
problems and with its own responsibilities.

IEUNE AFRIQUE: Is your participation in the (25" not a renunciation of your
party's resolution at the Decenber 1978 congress calling for a "transforma-
.ion of the monarchy"?

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Abderrahin Bouabid: Certainly not. We are convinced that mobilization of the
working people and the achievement of a minimum of social justice are bound

to trigger off a dialectical process which must necessarily lead to the estab-
lishment of a morocredihle. more stable democracy within the .cmew02k of a
constitutional monarchy which must turn its back on certain archaic prac-
tices.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: Following the Tan-tan attack the king. speaking to a parlia-
mentary committee, involved the Moroccnn's Army's inferiority in terms of

equipment to Justify the cautious policy he has pursued to date. How do
you think the CNS could defend this handicap?

Abderrahim Bouabid: A people who want to defend their territorial integrity.
dignity and identity act with the means at their disposal and other means
which have mobilized. "hen the Moroccan people were thrown into the battle
against colonial occupation in the fifties. their material means were derisory.
The example set by other people's fighting for their liberation confirms that
it is not material superiority which finally wins the day but motivation and
patriotic confidence.

JEUNE AFRIQUE: Does the fact that you belong to the same current of poli-
tical thought (socialism) as the Algerian regime and the National Liberation
Front not naturally select you as mediator in the conflict which has divided
the Maghreb for the past 6 years?

Abderrahim Bouabid: We are fighting for a socialist society within democracy
and by democratic means. Re are still quite prepared to open dialog with
Algeria. He are fighting for the construction of a great. peoples' Maghreb.
we made precise proposals in that connection in 1958. He renewed them in
1967. in other words before the existence of a "Saharan people" or some
Polisario or other was ever discovered in the west Sahara.

We made more suggestions still on the eve of the November 1975 Madrid agree-
ments. The Algerian leaders observed an obstinate silence. He still have
the firm intention of transforming the Saharan zones, and all the Saharan
zones. from zones of conflict and confrontation into "connecting" zones be-
tween the Magbrch peoples. The "peoples' Maghreb" cannot be built by pro-
voking war between the Maghreb peoples.

JEUNE AFRXQUE: Should all hopes of a peaceful settlement with Algeria be
abandoned?

Abderrahim Bouabid: Re are counting on making the fraternal Algerian people
aware of the situation and on our comrades in arms for the liberation of the
Maghreb peoples and to insure that the worst is avoided.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique CRDPJIA 1979
C80: 6600

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAI. USE ONLY

TUNISIA

OPPOSIle LEADER 0N POTENTIAL POST-BOURGUIBA SITUATION

l'aris APRlle-ASIE in French 2-15 Apr 79 pp 19-20 1.0

[Interview with Ibrahim 'l'obal. "Tunisian National Opposition Leader.": "To
Unite To Liquidute Bourguibisn“. date and place not given]

[Text] AFRIQUB-ASIB: As the moment approacher when a power vacuum will oc-
cur in Tunisia the country is becoming increasingly isolated. liow do you
explain this phenomenon and what consequences can it have as far as Tunisia's
domestic and foreign policies are concerned?

Ibrahim Tobal: The fact that Tunisia is isolated is a consequence of the
way in which it has been ruled since 1956. Like all authoritarian regimes.
Bourguibisa has fallen victim to its own methods. It has not escaped the
logic of terror—stifling of fundanental libert ies, invented "plots" followed
by prefabricated trials. the spread of violence and so forth. This undemo-
cratic system was bound to lose contact with the people from whom it finally
became divorced following the 26 January eventn.

This isolation has not only been caused by the fact that Bourguiba's health
has deteriorated and that the regime's barons are relentlessly fighting one
another for the succession. It is mainly a result of the fact that the
system is corrupt and that no one believes in it any longer. Even its tra-
ditional allies. who have repeatedly saved it in periods of crisis. now
hesitate to do it again. The visits undertaken by Prime Hinister liedi

Nouira to France and the.United States. by Neo-Destour [as published] Director
Sayaln and by the head of state himself to the RC and other European countries
have yielded no result.

It appears that the allies have realised that the system is completely cut
off iron the people and that they are seeking to find a way to protect the
Heat's vital interests in Tunisia. As for public opinita in the Arab world
and progressive Africa. which has been enlightened by the Tunisian national
opposition on the subject—it has opposed bourguibisn right from the begin-
ning--that is. 1955.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This means that a preinsurrectionary atmosphere prevails in Tunisia. Making
all due allowance. the present situation here is similar to that which pro-
vailed before the ahah's departure. One idea is shared by various opposi-
tion groups-~antimonarchism. hence the profound discontent among the people
which has sometimes assumed a violent form and obstructed the country's so-
cial and political life. The only solution would be to end Bourguibism so
as to insure that our country regains real independence which would make a
national revival. naturally inspired by socialism. possible. Bourguibism is
an ideal example of a neocolonialist system. obviously. France and the
United States. which installed it but which are now aware that it is weaken-
ing. will do their utmost to try to protect their economic and. espeically.
strategic interests in this part of the world. Tunisia occupies a key posi-
tiu\ between the East and Heat basins of the Mediterranean. Yes. there is

a plan. There are even three western plans for insuring Bourguibism's sur-
vival after Bourguiba's death.

The Hestiri solution--in the event of a conflict between Hedi Nouira and
Sayah as n result of which the latter would have to abandon the idea of be-
coming ”regent." hr Hestiri. leader of the Social Democrats. would become
an allegedly democratic guarantor for "Nouirist power."

If no conflict were to break out. Hestiri would be allowed to form a Social
Democratic Party which would serve the interests of bourgeois opposition

and would perhaps regroup some fractions from certain opposition groups.
However. while pretending to represent an "opposition movement." he would
make no profound change. The west believes that since repressive action

was taken against the Tunisian General Federation of Labor [UGTT]. genuine
opposition has been weak and badly organized. Therefore. it would eventual-
ly have to give in.

The Bourguiba Junion solution--This would be an ideal solution from the view-
point of Bourguiba Senior who dreams about his name being perpetuated in
history. This solution is also advocated oy tne urn and the Pentagon. how-
ever. Bourguiba would have to enthrone his son during his own lifetime. an
operation which Paris could refuse to endorse.

A solution involving a Latin American style military putsch. supported by
"A10 and France--let us remember that many high-ranking officers in the Tu-
nisian Army have been trained in either America or France and that some of
them openly advocate a putsch. Obviously. this solution would enable the
west to consolidate their strategic position in the Mediterranean most ef-
fectively. It would be consistent with the Heat's neocolonialist policy.
which. however. could lead to failure--the desire to win all along the line
could result in the loss of everyting. You cannot indefinitely overlook

a people's desires nor. a fortiori. deny their existence.

APRIQUE-ASIE: Could there be no other solution. on Ahmed Ben Salah solu-
tion?

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibrahim Tobnl: Possibly. since a certain section of the European left regard
Ahmed Hen Salah and the People's Unity Movement (MU?) of which he is the
leader. as reliable partners. However. will this weak and unstable European
left be able to impose its choice on the multinational companies and the big
banks which are operating in Tunisia? It is rather doubtful. But be that
ns it may. Ben Salnh and his movement. who have clearly expressed their
op;onltion to Bourguibism. are progressive and anti-imperialist.

AFHIQHH-ASIE: In your opinion. why does the Western press--whether right-
wing or leftwing--keep silent about the struggle waged by the Tunisian na-
tional opposition. a movement which you have represented for almost 25 years?

Ibrahim Tobnl: l have the impression that a certain section of the leftwing
press has not yet settled its differences with the national movements of the
third world. This is because it does not know then well and wrongly accuses
then of a certain chauvinism. Both our national liberaticn movement and

those of other third world countries are first and foremost anticolonialist

and progressive. Their sin is to establish socialist regimes--considsr angola.
Madagascar. Benin. Congo. Mozambique. Cuba. Vietnam and so forth. Further-
more. our movement also aims at uniting the Maghreb peoples and the entire
Arab nation.

As for the rightwing press. which is still colonialist, it is only natural
that it ignores us. just as it ignored the Iranian national movement since
the downfall of its leader Doctor Hossadeq. it is certainly mentioning it
now. just as it mentioned Tunisia for a while following the 26 Block January
events. But will we have to have another bloodbath before journalists start
mentioning the Tunisian situation objectively?

AFRIQUE-ASIB: In your view. what is the position of leftwing movements in
the third world in general and Tunisia in particular?

Ibrahim Tobal: These forces emerged during the struggle against colonialism.
To liberate their countries. movements with often very different ideologies
fought side by side. However. once independence was achieved. these differ-
ences. which were willingly overlooked during the war against the common
enemy. came again to the fore. Hence the political crises in recently liber-
ntcd third world countries which have been exploited to a great extent by
neocolonialism with a view to gaining ground there.

In Tunisia. the traditional left believed that a successful outcome of the
struggle for national independence was dependent on the left's achieving

power in France. However. the converse is true. Liquidation of colonialism
weakens capitalism and can. therefore. help progressive forces to win. whether
in France or elsewhere. Nonetheless. the disappearance of traditional colo-
nialism has also helped progressive movements.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it must be admitted that in Tunisia national liberation has solely been a
result of the national (Neo-Destour) and people's (UGTT) movement's activities.
it is regrettable that the traditional left has adopted an ambiguous atti-
tude toward the struggle waged by an overwhelming majority of the Tunisian
people against neocolonialism and. obviously. Bourguibism.

Steeped in the various ideologies prevalent in the international workers move-
ment. various factions of the traditional left haVe assessed Tunisian prob-
lems in terms of these ideologies while overlooking the specific conditions
prevailing in Tunisia. For instance. some people believe that the working
class on its own can successfully carry out a social revolution. They over-
look the fact that peasants constitute an enormous proportion of the working
masses.

Relying on an incomplete analysis of the situation and seeing that certain
so-calied socializing experiments have proved unsuccessful. some others

have reached the conclusion that it is impossible to achieve a radical trans-
formation of Tunisian society. while still others want to (as it were) "im-
port" into Tunisia conflicts involving the Soviets, the Chinese and Trot-
skiyites. And so it goes....

Roughly. this is what the position of the Tunisian left looks like. having
said this. despite their divisions. most of the factions born of the tradi-
tional left have helped to impart a positiVe content to the social struggles.

AFRIQUB—ASIE: Under the prevailing conditions. how can these forces and the
national movement which you represent unite with a view to liquidating BOur-
guibism and carrying out a real revolution?

Ibrahim Tobal: in order to answer your question i must first tell you about
the history of the national movement. First. there was Ali Baehhamba's
Tounes el-Pstat (1911). then Abdelaziz Taalbi's Destour (1922). and. finally.
the Neo-Destour (1936).

Already during the struggle for independence. a marked difference of opinion
emerged between tlmse who accepted the idea of a compromise with colonialism
and those who wanted to carry on with the armed struggle throughout the
inghreb until the entire North African region achieved real independence.

The first trend is now represented by Bourguiba's Neo-Destour Politburo and
the second by our Tunisian National Opposition Movement of which I have been
chairman since my predecessor Salah Ben Youssef's assassination in 1961. la
the struggle for national liberation and in its opposition to Bourguiba.
this second trend firmly supports the idea of a socialist revolution adapted
to Tunisian reality.

There is also the progressive and socialist MU? led by Ahmed Ben Salah.
Furthermore. among the young people belonging to the national movement there
are various trends--al-Nasirites. Ba'thists. independent democrats, nation-
alists and communists. i must also mention the Tunisian People's Revolu-
tionary Party [PRPTl which claims kinship with the radical national movement.
These are the real forces of the Tunisian opposition.

COPYRIGKT: 1979 Afrique-Asie

cso: 6600 £50
29