APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00060R0001000100.2-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010042-3

FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8235
19 January 1979

TRANSLATIMS ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010042-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information wan
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumaarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in content.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

nocumarr 0P PUBLICATIWS

JPIG publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is reco-ended that the Jens amber, title. date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPIB publications are announced in Government hearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the nonthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.3. Government Printing Office, Washington. n.c.
20402.

indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell 6 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, (lain, M691.

Correspondence pertaining to utters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
_—
He.

0. Fillet-ID. One-ind» Neat m Ann» M
Joint Publicetione Reeeerch Service

1000 North Globe Iced '

Arlington. Virginie 22201

     
   
   
      
    
      
      
   
    
 
       

.OIIMO

  

The eeriel report conteine treneletione from the world preee of erticlee
end preee cot-entery on environmental pollution end its effecte end pollution
control technoloc)’. oneniutione. end progre-e.

yore

worldwide
Pollution
lnvironaentel Control
Meteorology

uology

  

”L “aniline/Opulent fee-e

m. COM‘I’lﬂeUIGeu' A, 6. no, um

um" Steteuec
For officiel the Only.

united Nu-ber of Copies Aveileble Frol- JPRS.

  

O... I". mower "m"'.

TI. '0!!! MA? I! IIPROOUCID
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.mzs ﬁle:

19 Janna:

TRANSLATIONS 0N ENVIROWTAL QUALITY
(9000 1/79)

Coureurs
ASIA
JAPAN

Pew Place. that lots. Pollution Standards
(m JAP“ rm. 23m7a)..OODOODODOOOOOOOOOOOOOOI

Briers _
cyanide M1.- Ouh Rivera

manor:
m cm

Enron-entail. m Iran conventional, Incl“: Pour

Punt- (ta-pond
(w. Schumann; BMW-Am, lav 18)..

Chute-.1 mun, safety in m nuanced
(mum- noon; mm mm, 1!: 1m 78)...

Mast-ability of ma Gout to on sun Reported
(mm mm, 3 luv 78)
:Womu

Imu’pnnent

PO“ Ol-‘PICML USE ONLY

and “I'll” II
V gonna“.

vlu «v
preteen"!

mg hm:
mama

“I; III. may
program

comm: The Japan “Mm 1978

650:5000

1
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’I'ICIAI. USE ONLY

JAPMI

BRIEFS

CYMIDB 17001.8 OSAKA RlVERS-olharaki, 0saka--Horltere at the Kobe Steel
conpany's lharaki plant here worked desperately Tuesday trying to collect
hundreds of fish that died after a netal-platin; tad: overle and
discharged cyanide into a nearby river the previous day. According to
investigators, the runoff, later found to have been caused by a clogged
drain pipe, was discovered about 3 pm. Monday when workers noted that
the contents of a tank next to the netal-plstiu one were ahnor-ally
discolored. Plant operations were stopped after water collected fro- a
drainage outlet at the ‘l'aisho River was found to have a cyanide coat of
66 parts per nillion versus an officiel environental standard of l ppn.
large “an of fish in the Ai and lanxaki rivers downstrea of the ‘l'aisho
liver were also found floating dead in ﬁnite city and residents were

warned not to eat any fish taken fro. the rivers. [Text] l‘l’okyo mural:
mm news in English 20 Dec 18 p 12]

(:30: $000

2
m OHIO!“ US! OIL!
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REST GEM"?

ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE PRO“ CONVENTIONAL. NUCLEAR PW!!! PLANTS WARE!)
Duesseldorf AWIRTSCHm-ATOHTBCRNIK in Ger-an Nov 78. pp 525-532

[Article by H. Schikarski: "Environmental Effects of Conventional and
'Nuclear Energy Production”)

[Text] If we conpare the atsospheric pollution burden
arising fros coal and nuclear power plants, then in a
calculation of relative pollution burden based on an
annual pollution balance there results a ratio of about
1:100 in favor of nuclear energy if we use a cell nodal.
If we consider the basic substance of air pollution fro-
coal and heating oil power plants to be 802. then the
neasured inission values are 10 tines below the dosage
for i-isdon burden for which health hazards are known
to occur; but the dosage burden in the environ-eat of
nuclear power plants is 10,000 tines below this value.
Haste heat occurs for all types of energy conversion
regardless of the energy carrier. The anount of prilary
waste heat fro. power plants to the total anount of waste
heat is only about 20 percent.

1 . lntroduct ion

Even though the discussion of environmental effects of present energy
conversion processes will be discussed below, it is useful to point up
again what we mean by environaental effects. Environmental protection

is understood differently by various groups. For instance. one nay

seen protection of nature and another say seen the protection of the
landscape and yet another any menu protection of the biosphere in general.
In the following discussion. environmental protection shall be understood
to nean protection of the huan living area which will naturally include
his foodstuffs, his air. his drinking water. This is not identical with
the concepts sentioned above, there is even sonewhat of a conflict.

3
roe MICIAL 083 ML!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DIRECT cnvironncntnl effects due to energy conversion processes occur in
three basic ways:

--through pollutants which act on the husan organise through the air,
water, food etc;

-by changing physical, chenicai or biological environsental paranetera
(e.g.. waste heat);

--noise.

Let us ignore the last point here since it only plays a role in energy
conversion by the autonobile.

INDIRECT environmental effects due to energy conversion processes have
been little studied free a quantitative viewpoint. Such viewpoints are
the reduction in availability of resources. the increase in social costs.
the reduction in the quality of life which is certainly a very difficult
paraneter to quantify. Zephasis below shall be placed on the direct en-
vironmental effects of energy conversion in the P86 and a discussion of
the present status and a nediun-tarn future outlook will be discussed.

In addition to local and regional effects of pollutants and waste heat.
the global aspects shall be discussed separately if necessary. Before

the year 2000, regional environ-ental effects will be of greater signifi-
cance .

2. Pollutants froa Conventional Energy Conversion

2.1 2.15.“...

in the generation. conversion, transportation, storage and final consunp-
tion of energy carriers. enissions occur which are polluting to various
degrees. The nest inportant air-carried pollutants are:

--sulfur oxides (especially $02);
--hydrocarbons;

--nitrogen oxides;

--carbon nonexide:

--fluorine and chlorine compounds;
--dust (which can contain heavy retals).

In addition. carbon dioxide and water vapor are enitted which are insig-
nificant free a toeicological point of view, but,they do affect the thernal
balance of the stnosphere. The naned pollutants generally occur during
conbustion of the primary energy carrier: bituninous coal, brown coal.

oil and natural gas. Enissions occurring through generation (ms-ping).
transport and storage are of nediun inportance in the PRC (Table 1).
Several of these pollutant eaissions are naturally proportional to the

6
£08 OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR ()FI’ICIM. USE ONLY

0
consueption of the particular energy carrier. They have increased since
the reference year 1972 (on exnnple is gasoline transport). Other pollu-
tant eeissions have tended to diainish (for example, because of decreas-
ing production of pressed coal). He will not discuss the trends of indi-
vidual pollutants in detail; these are presented elsewhere.1 it is
important to knowthcaugnitude of eeissions for the generation. transport
end storage of fossil energy carriers.

Table l. Pollutant Enissions during Generation, Processing and Transport
of Energy Carriers

 

 

 

 

 

1sauaus a» 2 an. Ml Gnu 0°
__________________________________.___..
my» 10
“mm 31’}: 3.: am: a:
~I~nn aide - - Lear unap-
7 ==f§.~..n 9uunaoa-ou-«gew
Seem-omens . _ _ 4,“.
m
Key:
1. Pollutant 6. Refineries
2. Dust 7. Petnieullnatural gas production
3. Emissions (tons/year) and transport
6. Coke generation 8. Gasoline transport and storage
5. Pressed coal production 9. No data available
10. No data available
Table 2. Pollutant Eaissions through Fuel Consumptions
1 m ‘0: 79-0 “0. 6.0% so
we”. 1.1-0 mm u-w u-sr an-se‘
o M . . . . .
5m 3-: 3-: 3-: 3:: 3:
6t.- u-v 1100‘ 15-00 104' “4'
Key:
1. Pollutant 6. Dolestic and small consumers
2. Eeissiona (ton/year) 5. Highway traffic
3. Industry 6. Total
7. Dust

5

IOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFPICML USE ONLY

Tnblc 3. Pollutant Emissions due to Electricity Generation (Fossil Fuels)

 

 

 

law so. loan-us so. cm. on
guns-mun
_w’m mar u-w “40‘ 1am u-te'
Koy: .
l. Pollutant 3. Fossil fuel-burning power plants

2. Eaissions (tons/year) 5. Dust

Table 4. Total Pollutant hissions fro. Energy Conversion by Fossil Fuels

 

 

 

1W so. 2M no. c.u. oo
guano-sown -
W'm'uw u-w «w 2.9-». 1
Mesa ' Law u-vo‘ u-u‘ u-w‘ u-Io‘
_ . . . «r or
-,::..~'-~ 3:: a: a: 3... a...
Baud-Mums”.-
Key: _
l. Pollutant 5. Final consuption
2. Dust 6. Electricity generation
3. hissions (ton/year) - 7. Total

lo. Generation. transport; storage 8. Excluding dust eaissions
fro- industrisl processes

Table 5. Pelstivs Pollution due to'Total Pollutant hissions ,

 

 

 

lama so. 2m to. cm. oo
3mm.”-
asW 1.43 an ”I GI! 08
mum-an. .
on

Key:

1. Pollutant

2. Dust

3. Relative enuir 'aental pollution based on the aaission limits
of the '_'A1r” technical co-ittee/established in 1971.

_ 6
Ion OFFICIAL 083 m1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Atmospheric pollutant emissions arising from final consumption of solid.
liquid and gaseous fuels were clearly higher in the reference year in

the areas of- industry. households and small canal-era as well as traffic
(Table 2). Since primary energy use has changed only by a few percentage
points. we sssuau that these figures are still generally valid today-~even
with regard to the existing uncertainties.

In the area of electricity generation from fossil fuels. pollution emis-
sions were of comparable magnitude (Table 3). Since electricity consump-
tion has continued to grow, pollutant emissions have also increased. Extra-
polation of pollutant emissions from the reference year to the present does
contain certain inaccuracies. These are caused by the fact that pollutant
emissions are correlatednot only to the growth in electricity consumption
but also to the increase in specific emissions (new facilities basically
emit fewer pollutants). The figures of Table 3 are based on average speci-
f ic emissions over-a broad spectrum of old and new power generation facil-
ities. Thus, the increase in total pollutant emissions from fossil fuel
power plants can be estimated. But overall. total pollutant emissions

from electricity generation in the PRC have probably increased by only a
few percent since 1972.

If we compile the three emission groups. then there results the following
configuration (Table l») for relative pollution: Total pollutant emissions
from final consumption are approximately the sane as those from electricity
generation. Only for hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide do emissions from
final fuel consumption exceed those from electricity generation by more

than one order of magnitude. Here again, households and traffic are the
most important contributors.

Pollutant emissions alone do not constitute a direct measure of environ-
mental pollution since emission rates are not equal to pollution effect.
He can use the concept of "relative pollutant effect." This concept
assumes measured elevation distribution and residence times of atmos-
pheric pollutants, whereby a hypothetical average pollutant concentration
is calculated in a cylinder above the PRC. The relative pollution effect
results as the ratio of average pollutant concentration to a lellln
permissible emission concentration for various pollutants which was
determined in a similar manner (e.g.. based on pollutant limit values).
The concept of relative pollution as a nondimensional quantity thus per-
mits a comparison of environmental effects of different pollutants under
consideration of emission and effect. Recently. this quantity has been
called the environmental pollution index. In Table 5, we see the relative
pollutant concentration of the reference pollutant for the entire energy
conversion of the m. It is clear that the greatest contributors to

atmospheric pollution are SO2 and dust. A few supplemental cements are
in order:

7

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

$02
The reduction in 802 emission must begin with both the consumer and elec-
tricity generation. Basically the final consumer can reduce emissions

by dropping the sulfur content of light heating oil from 0.5 percent to
0.3 percent. Since final consumers enit pollutants at low enission alti-
tudes in densely populated areas. this measure should receive priority.2
A more extensive sulfur removal from light heating oil would be very
difficult to realise technically. Since heating oil consumption by the
'final consumer will continue to increase at the expense of energy carriers
of high specific emissions (like coke, pressed coal), it is assumed :hst
$02 esissions by the final consumer will decrease over the sodium term,
but will hardly fall below 1.5 million tons of SOzlyear.3

The development of 802 emissions in electricity generation is significant.
It is the expressed intention of the government to meet increasing elec-
tricity demands by coal-fired power plants. 0n the other hand. such power
plants can only be approved when their emissions can be reduced from a
present 3.75 kg SOzlh H" to 2.75 kg SOz/h NH of installed power. Further
enission reductions to 1.25 kg soz/h H" are under discussion. The extent
to which these specific emissions can be attained in practice will depend

on several factors. For example, the reduction in 802 emission in flue
gas in the PRC has still not been tested on a large scale. 0n the other
hand, the necessary 80-percent resoval of $02 in all flue gas can only be
attained if the coal used does not exceed a certain sulfur content.

A pessimistic extrapolation of the 802 esissions.fron electricity genera-
tion nust assume that for the short term. additional reduction in total
802 enisaions from power plants cannot be expected unless $02 scrubbers
are built into existing power plants (including oil-fired power plants).
Overall. so emissions can increase for the medium term as a result of
the intensified enployment of coal, and on the other hand it can decrease.
as a result of desulfurization measures on heating oil and through flue-
gas scrubbing. Regional aspects, i.e.. the question of power plant loca-
tion. will be of great importance in this regard.

Table 6. 802 Emission Concentration from Azr Sampling Stations of the
Federal Environmental Office

 

 

 

1 M "10 II" I.” um I.“ I"! I".
9eum~u a a n u 2 a
:ZE-uwﬂ ' 2 a- a 1 v 7 w
Omaha: :7 0 vs a
amen-u o s s o
W I. '0 u H H M
uneven a: m u) «I u» a) w
gtunnu-su-nnnhpgsovmh
Key:
1. Station A. Schauinsland 7. Average value
2. Haldhof S. Dusslbach 8. Total value 3
3. Brotjachlriegel 6. Hesterland 9. Annual average in pg 802/-
8

run OIPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l: Surface Pollution and $02 Baiasion Pollution Stages for North

Rhine-Hestphalia
Key:
1. Pollution stage 3. for l
2. for 11 4. Year of measurement
Dust

we should point up several aspects of dust eaission iron the coabuatioa of
fossil fuel. Dust eaiasions from the final consuner generally pass un-
iiltered into the ataosphere. Only power plants (and large industrial
boilers) use dust scrubbers (usually electric filters) which achieve re-
novel of between 99 and 99.8 percent. however. this renoval is at present
linited to coarac dust. Pine dust (aerosols) with a particle size less
than 3 pn are generally not renoved. however. this dust can be inhaled
and is thus of greater toxicological inportance than coarse dust.

Although i have already presented a relative pollution burden by dust iron
conversion of fossil fuels for the PR6. this value was related to the sale-
sion linit for harnless dusts as established by the "air" technical con-
nittee (197A). The sonetiaes highly toxic dust constituents like heavy
netala. radioactive substances. etc. were not included. Depending on the
level of these substances in the dust. such constituents can clearly in-
crease the relative pollution effect of dust to the levels of $02. This ‘
is particularly true of dust eaissiona iron bitueinous coal power plants.

But regardless of this. we lust not forget that as a result of industrial
processes other than energy conversion (we seen prinarily the industrial
areas of nining and construction as well as iron and steel) have about the
sane order of dust enissions.

in addition. these dust enissions--consisting prinarily of fine dust-~sre
naaked by secondary aerosols. Secondary aerosols consist of airborne par~
ticles which arise fro- natural and anthropogenic gaseous aaissions which
only fore aerosols in the atnosphere as a result of physical and chanical
processing. we know. for exasple. that about 70 percent of initially

9
'03 orncuu. US! Oil?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unlli'imﬂ so: in the «tamspheru in converted there into aulphatea. Global
eutlnntionu of total dust eniaaionu including secondary aerosols already
exceed 50 enisnions in total quantity. Thia leans that 802 has already
been saved out of first place as an atmospheric pollutant.

2. 2 [missions

What in the situation regarding innissions? The imission situation today
is well known in certain areas as a result of the operation of air pollu-
tion aeasuring network. Because of the ao-called background stations of
the Federal Environmental Office (Table 6). information free conjested
areas regarding SO varies. but is overall favorable. Free the siddle of
the l960's to the niddle of the 1970's. 50 isuiaaions have decreased on2
the average by a factor of two. Even in 1370 there was sore than 600 kn
in the PRC where the long-tern iuission limit value of 160 pg/n3. set by
the "air" technical couittee in 1971.. was ngt exceeded on an annual
average. Today. this area is still 187 knz. Nevertheless. wenust note
that this represents regional averages which can be exceeded locally and
which are not always based on the representative aeaaured results so that
larger errors (up to a sexiaun of 50 percent) are possible. Figure l is
much more reliable: here. the distribution of the neasured unit surfaces
for the years 1974-75 and 1976 are plotted against the individual potlu-
tion stages for the air-nonitoring network of Northrhine-Hestphalia.

Here we see the iaaniasion limit values of the "air" technical conittee
of 160 pg so [-3 (long tern) and 600 pg $02/n3 (short tern) are' exceeded
only in “all subregions of the aonitored area. On the other hand. the
total 80 pollution has risen as we can see fron the shift in distribu-
tion toward larger values.

The ease thing can be said for inaission pollution by total dust (coarse
dust and fine dust). 0n the average. this pollution increased slightly
from 1975 to 1976. however. the peak pollution has generally decreased.
Dust levelsawere not exceeded if we use the following i-ission limits
of 200 pg/n (long tern) and £00 pg/n3 (short tern) for total dust.
however. as already mentioned. the contents of particular toxic dusts
(aetnls. natal oxides. certain organic conpounda) are not included.

In this regard. the present question of the inisaion pollution caused

by individual. large bituminous coal power plants is important. Long-
tern inanission seasuresentn at aodcrn power plants are not yet available.
Such measurements night also be generally very difficult since the exist-
ing $02 prestress clearly exceeds the addition i-ission pollution at
neat locations. Using the best available (partly developed at the Karla-
ruhe nuclear research center) diffusion model. we calculate only 3 to 8
pg $02/a3. for a 700 We power plant with a discharge of 730 g sozlsec
(i.e.. without reducing the so in the flue gas) as a yearly average
(depending on location). The asst-ted tall snokestack of 250 n insures
that the diffusion of i-ission concentration has a liner maxi-m between

10
M 071161“. US! ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

3 and 8 km 3so that even atlS km range, a medium immission of about
2 pg sogea 3exists. This illuatratea the location difficulties which
n P

arise w ollutanta are modified by dilution and when a large degree
of prepollution by other emiaaionu already exists.

Another problem which has recently been illustrated by several publica-
tions, is the "emission of radioactive substances from bituminous coal
and brown coal (power plants)." This is in fact a problem attached only
to these power plants since the radioactive components of petroleum and
natural gas are several orders of aagnitude smaller. in addition, the
emissions are only relevant because the coal throughputs of power plants
are very large. The content of natural radio nuclides (like radium.
thorium. uranium. potassium-ho and others) fluctuates greatly so that
previous calculations have yielded varioua pollution results. A Russian
publication7 postulates radiation stresses of more than 100 area/year
(sum of all organ dosage») for a 1.000 HHe coal power plant. whereas
Bonka et 018 calculate about 70 mrem/yr and Kolb et al calculate about
60 mrem/yr. Certainly, these calculated immissiona would have to Be
detectable at the mentioned concentration. One study by Sennwitz1 which
attempted to determine artificial radium contamination in the environment
or a large power plant showed that in fact a minor increase in the radium
concentration of the soil occurred in the neighborhood of a coal/oil power
plant at a level of 4 to 8 percent: this would correspond to an additional
radiation stress of a few mremlyr. in order to carefully answer the
question of radiation from coal power plants. immisaion measurements of
all relevant radionuclides should be performed soon and the results cor-
related to the radioactivity content of the coal and to the emitted dust.
Such measurements would certainly provide information on aerosol behavior
of the radioactive particles in the flue-gas vane, which is presently a
generally unknown subject.

3. Pollutants from Nuclear Energy Generation

3.l [emissions from individual Plants

1n the sphere of nuclear energy generation. the notable emitted radio-
active pollutants come from nuclear power plants and reprocessing centers.
The minor emissions from other plants in the nuclear fuel cycle (fuel ele-
nent factories. waste depots) can be ignored for purposes of this study.
in nuclear power plants. we are dealing primarily with the radioactive
noble gases Xenon and (to a lesser extent) Krupton. whereby the position
differs depending on the various isotopes of these gases from one plant

to the next. Predominant isotopes are Xe-l33 and Kr-85. and their emis-
sion depends on the air flow concept of the particular power plant. In
addition. radioactive iodine 1-131 should be mentioned; it leads to
thyroid difficulties through the so-called pasture-cow-milk route.

Since nuclear power plants (in contrast to fossil-fuel power plants) are
a closed system. emissions of the named radionuclides are small. These
emissions occur only as a result of processes in connection with subpressure

ll
roe OfflCIAL US! OIL!
FOR OIVICIAL ”8! ONLY

c.0nditions in the reactor building and with coolant purification. The
official valuuu of radiation atreau in the environment of nuclear power
plants due to airborne pollutants is illustrated in Table 8.11

Note the following: usually. euch pollution data is conpared with natural
uources of radiation. As we know. we are subject to a natural radiation
which is about 110 area/yr on the average. The nueerical values shown in
Table 7 represent pessinistic calculated asxiaua vsluee which could only
occur if the affected person reeained constantly at the dangerous site in
the neighborhood of an outdoor system. In reality. the stress values are
thus clearly sealler. Only a sasller. nore realistic value would be
coepareble to the "actual" natural radiation. This is particularly true
for radiation strese due to 1-131. where in addition. pessinistic trans-
fer coefficients are included in the calculation. The figure published
by Bﬂl should thus be preceded by a "lean than synbol."

The sane thing can be said for radiation pollution frol radioactive pollu-
tants which are discharged with wastewater froa nuclear power plants
(Table 8).

The conditions of reprocessing centers are clearly different froe those
prevailing at nuclear power plants. Initially. we should point out that
airborne pollutant enissions contain quite different radionuclides. naaely.
only long-lived isotopes since the radioactivity of short-lived nuclides

in spent fuel drops to insignificant values between reaoval free the power
plant and reprocessing. Secondly. we should distinguish between snaller
centers of usually older construction and large centers at present in

the building or planning stages. whereas the radioactivity discharges
fron nuclear power plants are by no leans proportional to the power output.
for reprocessing centers. a linear connection exists between fuel input
and radioactivity enissions. This leans that large reprocessing centers
handling more than 1,000 tons of uraniun per year. require extensive
exhaust gas purification systeas. Since the design data for exhaust
systens and real values neasured in practice regarding pollutant eniasions
point up differences for nuclear power plants indicating that all values
nessured in practice are clearly smaller. then we expect the sane result
for the large reprocessing centers.

The noat imnortnnt radioactivity dischargea free a cuantity point of view
are in: radionuclidea 3-3. Kr-OS, culh and l-l29. whose enission factors
for a large reprocessing center using, 1600 tons of uraniun per year are
shown in Table 9. The radiation burden free these nuclide enissions can
be given as a function of loceti II (for a given diffusion and retention
factor.) it lies below the radiation protection regulation established
value of 30 area/yr even in the inlediate vicinity of an individual power
plant.

12
IOI OFFICIAL US! OIL!
Table 7:

'01! OPPICIM. US! ONLY

Radiation Exposure fros Nuclear Power Plants due

of Radioactive Substances with Exhaust Air (1975)

1 summ- Zﬂssnala'lwmnnmtm 3w We.

 

 

 

 

 

Inwapuuow semi-vents.
“New“
weave-sw-
mum
was
I. on. Sans-6 ass-m Ju Hos-ou- 90-00
as. M- (kn-Io law- MI
M nat- m W.
no" on Ins-u as».
even m- nah w,
cow. ass-a)
W-
ease)
10m <02 3.; <3: «a: «a: 3::
cm <0 < <00! <0
i urges <9 <05 <ﬂ <03! <02 <00)
m <0? <2 <90 <14 <00) com
Sues <03! <00) <3 <0” dﬁl dd.
W «as <0” e“ <0: <0”! <0“!
MA <0.” <0” <1 «.0 an! d”!

 

'1 mummwm

'n mummmuumtnmwm ea
Wammmnwwm
swam “seesaw-Inmate's!“

Nuclear power plant 9. 0 - 20 he
Haxisun radiation exposure 10. Kahl
(area/yr) through ingestion ll. Guuke-singen
Average gonad exposure (area/yr)12. Lingen

of the population via genes sub-13. .0brigheis
asrsion in the environsent lb. Stade

Gas-a subaersion (total body 15. Hargsssen

dosage)

Beta sub-ersion (skin dosage) l7. Calculated for the least favor-
lodine-lJl (thyroid. sasll

child)

C-lb (total body. sesll child)

0 - 3 ha

16. Biblia A

to Discharge

able field point.

18. Assuaption of 0.8 liters per

day uilk output iron 1 cov

pasturing continuously at the

least favorable field point and
assuse that all iodine is pres-

ent in the elesentacy fora.

13
ran OFFICIAL USE ()le
Table 8.

FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Radiation linpouurc tron Nuclear Power Plonta due to Diacharge

of Radioactive Subatancea with Uaata Hater (1975).

Key:
2.

 

1aumuaunn zuun

”Mun 7Wlnah~

W
mlmuhmmm m
_____._

MOI“!

 

.
um. 10m smoo. m
new new M W
euaa') M
M (M! d.“ (OM <0” (”0
«0.0! <01 4' <0] <0.”
00" (0‘! an «a! «an «I
We! (0.” <1: «I «A to,“
luau (01' m. 00.0! «an (”I
Moreen <0). <0.“ IOM <0” a.“
M A (0.0! dbl <01! (til 4“!

——-—_—.—_

um mums-w

Nuclear pover plant

Maxi-u- radiation expoaure
of the entire body (area/yr)
for an individual peraon
through

Drinking water

Piah

ounrfmw

Total

Average radiation expoaure
(area/yr) of the population
(total body). total

8.

9.
lO.
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
16.

Kahl

Gundrcaningen

Lingen

Obrigeheia

Stade

Hargaaaen

liblia A

Milk. neat and vegetable producta
Including bathing. railing

and axpoaure while on the banks

Table 9. Annual hiaaiona free a 1.500-ton ”oz/yr Reproceaaing Center

1 na- Zv. Jame-mum 6. Other Pu-iaotopea
9'" ‘ "”‘" . 5. Other trans-uraniu-
2"“ a: :1: 6 :33“. mm
' I . ary on no
1'3. 3': 2.3:. 7. Reprocaaaing center uaing
a: 3’ ’1" 1.500-t 00 [yr correaponda
NJ“ we we to a capacity of $0 an
3:: :3 {.3 light water reactor
"*”' 'iD "NF 8. Reproceaaing center eaia-
M”? ".0 aiona beaed on preaent
5”“ ”r operating practice.

6M

53’

We!“

Iaotope
Year

Annual aaiaaion with exhauet
[Ci/year] , 16

[

mane Mtwmmaumhﬂm

umuamatmummmm

retention of Kr-SS. ll-3.
1-129 etc. could be
iaproved

'0! omom. 088 OIL!
Table 10.

(UNSCBAR)

Table ll.

 

POI! OWICIM. USE ONLY

Global Dose Coneitnents f ron Various Radiation Sources.

—__—_.—.—
Me's“ I“

dens
W
M

 

”mum” an

mum-um M

Wimsmdmmu

hummus ”I

Mwmdmmnes‘

basses: unease-«Wm

mum am on

”mummy”

m 0

”mama—mum

gamma 00m to
I

Will "10
”swim-twang.“ 10

dWWs‘e-eaeswls

 

9 mwmmum-nwwmu

wmmummmwmhu

Average Doses due to Emission of Kr-85. 3-3. C-lé-l-129 (BBC)

 

ya 2% Isa-n [Oat-n-

m w m
a”: " em um can
no . m m m
an m an m

 

”QMWM
sswmvammutomm
Mm
Year 5. Average dosage for a regional population group
incorporation within a 1.0004: radius of the particular
External reprocessing center (air route). _
Total 6. Average dosage for the entire population of

the EEC due to global pollutant circulation.

In sue-ary. for large nuclear centers (nuclear power plants and reprocess-
ing centers), we can say that they add a assim- of only 1 percent (on the
average, less than 1/10 of 1 percent) to natural radiation. This is in

contrast to large coal power plants whose SO2 i-issions nearly double the
natural pollution level.

3.2 Long-tern l-issions fron Ruclear Power Plants

The justifiable question of what longer-tern environ-entel pollution
should he expected fron the continued construction of nuclear power plants
is connected with the long half-life values of several radionuclides.

15
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

namely Tritlum. Kr-OS. c-1a and 1-129. Although we can refer to the
potential sccusulation of these nuclides in the biosphere. on the other
hand. we should also point out the natural radionuclides which have
existed for millions of years in the global pollution cycles. Nine radio-
active trace substances (e.g. Ni. Pb etc) have basically "infinite" half-
life values. So if we were to use natural pollution as a reference quan-
tity. then long-half—life values of the emitted rsdionuclides is not a
basically new aspect. The consideration of global pollution cycles is

new but this is an intensively studied subject in the area of non-
nuclear environmental research.

Studies on radiation pollution through long-lived radionuclides should
therefore always be performed on a global scale. Regional or national
considerations provide only partial answers. In a report12 of the UN
Committee on Radiation (abbreviated UNSCEAR). the "global dose commitments"
of the various radiation sources are compared, whereby this quantity is
expressed as an exposure duration at the same dose commit-eat as natural
radiation (Table 10). This concept calculates the theoretical total
radiation burden due to a radiation source "k" for the particular popula-
tion for all tine periods according to the equations:

O.
S - ISM”
0
with: 's -:,q,nq
we have: h - collective dose commitment

“1-- personal dose commitsent of source "k" and group "j"
M - nusber of persons in group "1"

However. this only provides a basis of comparison of different emission
sources over long time periods. However, it is interesting that the dose
couitment for global air traffic is comparable from nucleshenergy. In
the fora of the individual dosage, Kelly, Bryant and others have calcu-
lated the expected dosage for the year 1985 or 2000 for the named nuclides
for the European community. Direct radiation and radiation due to global
cycles are considered separately (Table ll). The calculations were per-
formed using a power plant capacity of about 700 Gﬂe for the year 2000
with very low retention factors of 99 percent for 1-129. 75 percent for
Tritium and complete liberation of Kr-SS and 0-16. Nevertheless, they led
only to a radiation stress of around 0.1 percent of the natural radiation
and 0.05 percent of the limit value of the International Radiation Protec-
tion Commission for Genetic Radiation. In reality. these values would be
lower since better retention factors will be possible by that time.

16
’0I OFFICIAL 082 OIL!
‘3

FOR 0F?IC!AL US! OﬂLY

Plants

Comparison of Atmospheric Pollution due to Coal and Nuclear Power

Conparisons of atnospheric pollution arising tron coal and nuclear power

plants'csn be nade in three different ways.

First, by csleulation of the relative pollutentlioncentration based on

an annual pollutant balance using a cell aodel.

There results a ratio

of about 1:100 in favor of nuclear energy if we use the present state of
retention technology for noble gases (RP - 99 percent for 1-129. and for
flue gas scrubbing - 80 percent for 802) (Table 12).

Table 12:

Key:
10
20

3.

a.

Second. the dilution volume can be calculated.

Comparison of Coal with Nuclear Energy

 

ZillusIdiomdlunmunﬁ.mmmn‘sonulellmmumuﬁnsei

Wm
3-luueunun»

a'anwn.2n
9-t .. naqnun
unwwmswnlo

ﬁ-hl

 

1 hsunsmnznnm-an

According to the cells model 5.
Relative pollution of the entire
electricity generation of the

PRC occurred through 6.
Coal power plants with 2.75 kg
SOzlh HR (Partial sulfur renoval
from flue gas)

Or by 7.

Light water reactor power plants
(including reprocessing) exhaust
purification: 99 percent).

Total dilution volume required
to dilute the annual pollutant
emissions to permissible con-
centrations

Year

Coal power plant

Light water reactor power plant
Boiling water reactor.

This is the voluae needed

if the annual emitted pollution quantity free a standard power plant was
to be diluted with pure air to the limit value established by the "air"
technical coamittee of the Federal Inmission Protection Law or of the

Nuclear PowerLaw.

nuclear energy in this case (Table 12).

17

There results a ratio of about 1:1.000 in favor of

’0! OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Third. the ratio of immissiona from individual power plants to the natural
pollutant level or natural radiation amounts can he calculated. It turns
out that coal power plants approximately double the natural so level.
whereas nuclear power plants cause only a few percent of the natural
radiation level. He readily admit that the natural pollution level is no
measure for a health hazard so that in this comparison. the effects of the
pollutants are not considered.

Comparisons of pollution levels in water have not been performed since
fossil-fired power plants contribute no significant amounts to this pollu-
tion. Only the generation. processing and transport of fossil fuel will
cause such pollution. 0n the other hand. the pollution of surface water
due to nuclear power plants is absolute and is small relative to the pollu-
tion already existing (See Table 8).

5. Haste Heat

He mention again that waste heat (usually also called thermal waste or
thermal loss occurs independently of the energy carrier for every type of
energy conversion. The quentitites of waste heat to he disposed of occur
everywhere that primary energy (or useful energy) is converted, i.e.. not
only in power plants. In order to illustrate waste heat somewhat more
clearly. it has hecome customary to speak of primary waste heat (occurring
in the conversion sector. interpretation: power plants and refineries) and
of secondary waste heat (that occurring in the final consumption sector).
Both wastes affect the atmosphere and the surface waters to some extent.

. 7

 

Figure'z. Haste heat Balance of the PBS in 1973.

Key:
1. Components 8. Haste heat released 13. Power plants
2. Hater vapor to the atmosphere in lb. .Other
3. Convection the PRC. 1973 15. Conversion
6. high temperature 9. Soils 16. Industry
5. Low temperature 10. Surface water 17. Household and small
6. Radiation 11. Intermediate carriers consuers
7. Harm water export 12. Haste heat sources 18. Traffic

13 19. Primary energy use
’0! OPPICIAL US! ONLY in the PBS, 1973
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

’
O

In addition. enission of sone pollutnnta occuring during conversion of
fossil fuels (in particular co ) has an indirect warning effect on the
atnosphere as a result in the natural radiation balance. But let us dis-

cuss direct waste heat which is conposed of priaary and secondary waste
heat. - '

In Figure 2. we see the waste heat balance of the m for the year 1973.

“No facts should be pointed out:

1. The anount of prinary waste heats from power plants of the total

waste heat is about one-fifth. A disadvantage, however. is that this
amount of heat occurs in a concentrated area. In addition. it is generally
constant throughout the year and is difficult to reduce for a short tile.

2. The aeount of secondary waste heat from the spheres of industry.
households and traffic anounts to about 75 percent of the total waste
heat. This percentage is enitted over a large area. It fluctuates dur-

ing the year (space heating) and could be nore easily reduced by specific
neasures.

The greatest part of the total waste heat passes directly into the atlaos-
phere (and only.to a ninor extent into the ground and surface water). '
Although the amount of heat absorbed by waters is only 11 percent. pollu-
tion linits in this regard have appeared now for the first tins.

5.1 Surface Hater Pollution through Haste Heat

The thernal polludon of surface water occurs predoninantly through primary
waste heat from power plants. At the end of the 1960's. it was discovered
that there are linits. i.e.. that priaary waste heat could not be stored
in surface waters for the long tern under consideration of the growing
energy coast-prion. Scientifically established te-perature values did
not exist. but on the other hand. the were needed for future planning.

As a guideline value. we adopted A sax ' 3K and Tux ' 23.0 1'1 “It “3
water (initially for the Rhine River only. then later for other rivers
with einor variations). Initial estinations using these boundary values.
showed that the cooling ability of German surface water is at 90 G" theml
power. and that this value would probably be attained by the laid-1980's.
This interaction led to increasing demands for the use of wet cooling
towers particularly in new power plants.

In the aeantine. the question of surface water pollution by power plants
was studied in detail. Particularly in the United States it was noticed
that in clan surface waters. warning of 3'K is not an upper limit; indeed.
certain species of fish sought the wane water current at teeperatures up
to 30'6. provided sufficient refuges renained to then. In sdditon. exper-
ience was gained on Ger-an rivers where no recognizable dauge to water
fauna was noted (e.r,.. in the heat-wave period of 1976 with water tapers-
tures up to 30'c. Previous episodes of extensive fish fatality were

19
M ORIGIN. 088 OIL!
FOR OPVICIAL USB ONLY

‘always attributable to cheaicnl pollution of water. In a few cases. it
was even determined that for chemical prepollution in water, introduc-
tion of cool water resulted in a limited improvement of water quality.
since the addition is normally connected with a significant introduction
of oxygen. The questhnlof valid temperature values today for waste heat
introduction has thus become more complicated and it is hoped that a revi-
sion of older guidelines will soon occur.

The question of temperature limits in water can also be viewed against
the background of national total energy savings. For large power plants.
the transition from flowbcooling to wet-cooling towers means:

--an increase in electricity generation costs;

--a loss of useful energy (electricity) at the same consumption of primary
energy; and

--(last but not least) an increase in waste heat occurring for the same
consumption of primary energy.

in the worst case. the net efficiency of a large power plant would be
reduced by 3 percent if we had to switch from flow-cooling to wet-cooling
towers. This corresponds to a loss of about 10 percent of useful energy
for the particular system. Estimates indicate for complete conversion of
all power plants to wet-cooling-tower operation, the total necessary power
plant output would have to be increased by 7 percent. At an installed
output in the PRC of about 86 CH. this would correspond to about 6 OH or
about 5 large power plants like the Biblis A plant. In other words: a
sudden transition from flow-cooling using fresh water to wet-cooling

towers should not occur. An optimum cooling system should be implemented
on a regional basis with regard to the available surface waters and cooling
towers should only be used (primarily as run-off cooling towers) where sur-
face water conditions require.

The catchword "dynamic cooling management" is appropriate here, i.e., the
application of methods for distribution of cooling capacities for differ-
ent power plants on the same river which is more oriented toward hydro-
logical and meteorological conditions than to statistic distributions and
national boundaries. Even optimum cooling management can decrease the
amount of waste heat and thus help save energy.

5.2 Waste heat Effects on the Atmosphere

The primary waste heat burden concerns the atmosphere. The waste heat
equation presented above illustrates in particular that the amount
emitted through cooling towers is small when considered on a regional
basis. It amounts to about one-tenth of the total waste heat for the
entire PRC. The effects of individual large wet-cooling towers are15 l6
presently determined by extensive measuring models and calculation. ’
The previously feared harmful effects like increased fog formation, reduced
sunshine. heavy rainfall. bacteriological effects. etc. have proven to be
insignificant.

. 20
' ’08 OFPICIAL 088 Oil?
1'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Total Hun Hut Ellington in 1973 in the aunt: District and
in Sudan-Baden

 

ﬁgure In Run But his-1m in 1913 (Highway Trafﬁc) in tho hunt:
District and in laden-Baden.

1. Remy
2. Highway in Black tons:

v.

21
[OI orncm. 083 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation with secondary waste heat is different. In particular.

studies performed within the framework of the

waste heat project of the

upper Rhine region promoted by the Federal Environmental Office have
shown that the contribution of industry. households. and traffic can

have a significant affect on thelefalclimste

. Figures 3 and b show

typical "waste heat peaks." in "In as they occur on an annual average.

Peak values of up to 30 Wm2 are attained.

Table 13: Haste Heat Tower and Performance Density of Typical Polluter

 

1 muons ' 2 noun-nur 3

Immo- 4mm
sensuous Wm’ sunbeam

 

23"” “M”
n In»
mswns'
‘ “shrew-1mm
«annoumncnua-e
6=:::L uanmm mum new
«1me
#OMoIInah «new run» 4mm
1mm qu
unmamuuuutuu
uumMurununsmm
um. 1mem man an»
smut“!
Wm
«man: an» man an
9 unawa-
mainfr-
museum's-
memu 0M assess a
10::"*"“~‘*"ﬂnﬁ
mgwmum
um aum- new a
111mm
WMMH'UD-
mama‘s-mt. .
um :0 man u
lzIm’hm-sm
123mm. men uammn a
1 “W .0 M M
.__________________________________
Key: _
1. Emitter 8. Cement factory having an
2. Haste heat output per annum annual production of 800.000
(total)tSKB/year ' tons
3. Primary emission surface area 9. 1 km section of the upper

6. Power density of the heat
given to the air (HI-2)

5. wet-cooling tower of a nuclear 10.
power plant of 1,000 “We (cycle
operation)

6. Refinery processing systems
(with a throughput of 5-6 11.
million tons of crude oil
per year)

7. Cellulose and paper manufactur- 12.
ing of 70.000 tons.cellulose and
130,000 tons of paper products 13.
per year

22

’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rhine River for a l K warning
above equilibriun temperature
1 km freeway section with a
daily traffic load of 30.000
passenger vehicles and 7.000
trucks

1 kn main railroad line carry-
ing 200 trains per day and 95
percgnt electric engines

1 km in the center of a large
city

Single family dwelling (b-person

'household)
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although these values attain 20-30 percent of the natural solar radiation.
their influence on the weather would still be email. More accurate infor-
mation will only be available after the developmental diffusion nodele
are available on a nesoucale. This subject is being emphasized by the

upper Rhine region waste heat project jointly with the extensive aeasure-
seats perforsed by the weather service. Table l3 presented an interesting

result by comparing waste heat emitters. It shows the magnitude of waste
heat emissions from energy-intensive operations. but also for traffic.

5.3 602 and climate

in conclusion. we present a brief discussion of the "indirect waste heat"
or more accurately. the CO effect. Studies on this subject have been

going on for a long time. Even in the 1960's. larger conferences were
dedicated to this subject. what is the status today?

i. it is known that the co content of the atmosphere is constantly in-
creasing. The preindustrial level of about 292 ppm has grown today to
about 330 ppm. Continuous monitoring has been performed since 1958. The
rate of growth is at present about 1 ppm/year.

2. The question of how the atmosphere reacts to the increase in C0 . that

is. by warming up due to increased absorption of long-wave radiatiog or by

cooling due to regeneration effects with the other components of the atmos-
phere (especially aerosols and water vapor). can be considered solved

today in accordance with the status of modeling. A warning trend will
be the result.

3. The size of the postulated temperature increase is still under dis-
cussion. it is said that a doubling of the co content will cause a
global average temperature increase of about 2 K. Several authors indi-

cate even greater values. The temperature increase which has occurred
today is caluclated as 0.6 K. but this value is still in the range of
natural fluctuations in average atmospheric teaperature.

4. C02 is a constituent of the global carbon cycle. within this cycle
there are certain unknown quantities. This is important for the question
of determining the amount of C0 which will disappear over the long term
in the ocean and sediment reservoirs (Figure 5).

5. CO2 has a long residence time in the ataosphere. The decay ties for
602 concentration increases amounts to several hundred years. Liniting
the consumption rate of fossil fuels worldwide would not have an effect
for the short tern. Nevertheless. this would provide the beat opportuni-
ties for counteracting the problem. According to calculations by Zimen.17
a doubling of co concentrations over the preiadustrial level would occur
by about the year 2030 at the present growth rate in the consumption of
fossil fuels of 3.5 percent/year. However, we should note that other air

23
I0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
70R OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

 

Figure 5!

.eoaphcre

ant roeptratlon
croblol docoapoettton
notoeyntheeia

i -exchange

|gface water

.ergy generation fro-
-ee11 fuel

vroat and aotl
eruption

Figure 6: co ~Zetaaton for Poor
latee.ot Energy Conan-prion Source:

Carbon Cycle

9.
10.
ll.
l2.
l3.
1‘.
15.
l6.
17.

content of the atloaphere 2.

J.

26

Oceane

Rivera

Plante

Deep water

“near

Barth cruet
Sedimentation
Broeton

A11 figurea are expra
bllllon tone. exchan‘
1n quantity/year

 

Alternative Growth
zines at al.

Year
Year

’0‘ OFFICIAL 088 OIL!
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

coeponents like nitrogen oxides. fiuorine-chlorine-hydrocarbons. etc..
could have the some effect as co so that this doubling night occur even
earlier. in additiontolinitlng the consumption of fossil fuels world-
wide. the large area destruction of forests (particularly in the tropics)

must be stopped since considerable quantities of coz are fixed there by
photosynthesis (Figure 6).

6. Regarding the question of the effects of a temperature increase. there
are still large uncertainties: 2-1 degrees is a lot. if we consider that

n drop of 5 degrees caused the last ice age 10.000 years ago. The follow-
ing effects are discussed:

Because of the war-er surface layers of the oceans. the ocean level would
rise thus preventing deep wnter exchange. This would accelerate the 002
increase since than less co would be transferred to the sediments. In
addition. the climate zones and agricultural conditions would shift to the
north. in addition. rainfall zones would shift with attendant consequences
on drinking-water supply. The deserts would increase in size. Atone-

pheric purification processes for pollutants which are connected with water
vapor. would be regionally disturbed.

7. of course. a quantitative explanation of the co effects is still
incooplete. The question of the interaction between the co increase

and the consumption of fossil fuels and the resulting tenpersture increase
in the atmosphere should be considered to he basically clarified.

6. Conclusion

while preparing this report. l received extensive support from a number
of colleagues fro. the research center at Karlsruhe. from Bergbsuforechug.
Kraftwerk-Union. the petroleun industry which provided data and informa-
tion. 1 wish to express my sincere gratitude at this point.

FOOTNOTES

1. 6. harry. H. Schikarski. E. Thone. ”Compilation of the Environmental
Effects Arising from the Consumption and Generation of Energy in the
Federal Republic of Germany. and Legislative and Technical Measures
for their Reduction." KRK 2103 D? (1976).

2. ”Environment and Energy.” Unweltbrief Nr 9 des an: (1974).

3. H. J. Loblich. "Sulfur Dioxide. [missions in City and Comty.
Prognosis to 1980" (1977).

6. 5. Jordan. H. Schiknrski. “Evaluation of radioactive and nonradio-
nctive trnce constituents emitted from fossil-fuel and nuclear power
plants.“ Synp. ﬁnv. behavior of Radionuclides released in the Nucl.
lnd.. six-ennvrovence. France. LAEA. SH 172/20 (1973).

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
5.
6.

7|

8|

10.

11.

12.

13.

11..

15.

16.

17.

FOR OPHCIM. 082 ONLY

BCE-Seainar on "Pine Particulatea." Villech. Auatria (1977).

Lendeeanetelt fur lenieeionaechutc. Beeen. heft b1 (I-nieaioneuherva-
chuns in North Rhine-Heetphalia (1977).

L. A. ilyin. V.A. Knizhnlkov. R. h. Barkhuderov. "A Relative Riek
Setination of Exceeaive Prequency of Malignant Tuaore in Population
due to Diachargee into the Ateoephere (roe Poeail-Puel and Nuclear
Power Stationa," Int. Rad. Prot. Aee. Congreee. Perie (1977).

P. Schnidtlein. H. aonke et al. “Co-periaon of Radiation Expoeure due

to Enieeiona iron Conventional and Nuclear Plente." Reaktortagung
nannovar (1977).

Atouuirtachaft 23. K 6 U.p. 1 (March 1978).

H. sennvitc. “Radiua Contaninetion of Soil due to the lnfluencea of
Civilization." Graduate Theaie Univereity of Karleruhe (1975).

"Environ-enral Radioactivity and Radiation Burden." 1975 Annual
Report of 381.

"Sourcee and Bffecta of Ionizing Radiation." United Rationa Scientific
Coalittee on the Zitecte of Atoaic Radiation (UNSCBAR). Report 1977.

G. R. Kelly. J. A. Jonee. P. H. Bryant. P. Morley, “The Predicted
Radiation Bxpoeure of the Population of the EC reeultins iron Dia-
chargee of Kr-BS. 8-3. C-lk. 1-129 iron the Nuclear Power Induetry
to the Year 2000." Doc. VlZ676/7S. CBC (1975).

U. Schiharaki. "Hoglichkeiten und Grenren Vergleichender Hodellunter-
euchungen an leiepiel der Unveltheleetung durch Kraftverke"
[Potentiele and Liaite of Cooperative hodel Studiea Doing the axe-ple
of Environ-ental Pollution fro- Pover Plantel. in Technikiolgen-
Abechatzung (Published by h. ﬂaae), oioenourg Publiehing Co. (1975).

c. Brneet. 6. niheliue et a1. "Studiee on heturel-Convection Het-
cooling Touere." V01 Reaearch report 15. hr S (1975).

"General Haate heat Prohle-a in Thar-a1 Power Plenta." Report 76-1
of the Haete heat Connieeion (1976).

K. E. linen et al. "Source Punctione of €02 and Future co Burden
in the Atnoephere." Dehlenplonferen: “Global Cheaical Cyc ea and
their Alteretione by Han." Berlin (1976).

COPYRIGHT: ATOM”!ITSCHAPT-ATOHTICENIK, 1978

9280
080:

5000

26
'0! OFFICIAL 083 OIUY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

REST cm

CﬂlHICAL POLLUTION. SAFETY IN PR6 DISCUSSED
Frankfurt/min FRANKFURT!!! ALLGBHBINB in Cemn 16 Nov 78 p 1
[Article by Rainer Ploehl: "The Risk in Chenistry“)

[Textl Che-istry cannot be conducted without risk. whether in the labora-
tory or on an industrial scale. Along with many sore or less her-less
accidents in chesical plents there have been serious disasters again and
again. In 197‘ in Plixborough. England, a uhole plant blev apart in a
frightful explosion. In 1976 in Seveao end Hanfredonia occurred tvo acci-
dents which were unusual due to the scale of their devastating effects.
Poisonous cheaicals which entered hussn bodies during production. or later
fros the polluted environ-ant. have unleashed a series of catastrophes
which caused sensations.

The horrible events of the past have given rise to serious doubts as to
the security of che-istry and its products. These fears are not unjusti-
fied; sons risks of cheaiatry are already fully knovn to us. On the other
hand, experience has also shown that industrial cheaistry has already
reached an extraordinarily high level of safety. Serious incidents are
rare. neasured against the huge production capacities. This can be deion-
strated in the case of chlorine gas. one of the nest iaportant bases of
cheaical syntheses. Chlorine. as the adversaries of chenistry point out,
is one of the nest dangerous products. Nevertheless chlorine gas escapes
have caused no deaths in the no in the last 25 years. Coaparing the
risks of the still young nuclear technology with a chemical industry test-
ing on 100 years of practice is densgogic.

The surprisingly high relinbilty of the technology of chenical processes
in the face of the danger of chesical substances and reactions is the
result of culprehensive security aeasures. Profitability and safety are
closely linked for the cheaical industry. Only safe installations are
fully usable and therefore profitable. Finally. trade regulations and
innuaerable other legal ordinances also protect us free harnful effects
of cheaical technology. All dangerous installations require emination

27
M omcm. 082 OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

and approval of the regulatory bodies. The fact that all chenical instal-
lations rated as especially dangerous conforl to all requirenenta in the
m: was shown recently in l syste-stic exasination ordered by the North
Rhine Ueetphalisn state governeent. in the checks of 11:0 cheeical plants
no serious technical defects could be established.

Despite this on the whole favorable situation. the safety of chemical plants
can doubtless be iaproved further. The causes of accidents. which of course
can becoee catastrophes. seldoe lie in unforaecn. thus far unknown. chesical
reactions. H‘hat say occur in the transfornation of particular cospounds

is not only researched with refined experinsnts and tests in the laboratory
today. but also theoretically. with cosputers. lion and technology fail
such more often. In four out of five cases. nan is the guilty factor in

an accident in the chesicel industry. Only in one out of five cases is
chemical technology responsible. The safety of chenical plants can. there-
fore. be isproved through the thorough establishment of and adherence to
installation and operating regulations. This neans that precise work
regulations for the individual job and appropriate instruction of personnel
are imperative.

Surveillance according to the accident ordinance just now being worked out
in the Federal Interior ministry applies here. too. It concentrates on
plants in which especially poisonous substances are produced or lay develop.
A total of about 100 coopounds are to be affected by the accident ordinance.
which in addition to alarn and catastrophe plans. also provides for regula-
tions for the transportation of such cheoicals-u-at present the sost danger-
ous area of chesistry.

The greatest risks are related not to the production of. but to contract
with. toxic esterials. Many che-icala endanger us through direct contact.
while others get into the ecological cycle where they develop their poi-
sonous effect. "heroes in the past attention was paid Isinly to acutely
annifosted dalage. it is increasingly often a setter of trouble appearing
years later. or. as in the case of carcinogenic substances. even after
decades.

Awareness of this has not been without consequences. Newly synthesised
substances oust in the future be toxicologically tested and authorized on
.1 global scale. like drugs. before they get into the environeent in
larger quantities. It is nevertheless extrenely difficult to assess the
her-fol potential of a substance and to weigh da-age against utility. An
appropriate chemical law is also being prepared in the no. However
there will be considerable debate internationally over the scale of the
studies. which can cost up to 2 eillion esrks for one substance. due to
the possible distortions of coopetition.

28
m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M OVHCIAI. USE ONLY

The risks in chaistry are today assessable. soderste on the whole, and
therefore tolerable. It is s question now of not letting public discus-
sion of safety in chemistry be diverted into the irrational. Che-istry.
which Isost citizens equate with dark alchemy. could he as easily crippled
ss nuclear technology-with fatal economic consequences.

COPYRIGI‘I': P.A.Z. Rb“. Frankfurt all Main 1978

6108
650: 5000

29
POI W716!“ 033 OIL!
FOR IWPICIM. USE UNLY

"281‘ cm

WRIT! 01' no COAST 1'0 011. SPILL mom
Prenkfurtlhein mmm mum in Ger-en 3 hov 78 p 8

[Text] lrenerheven. 2 hove-her (dpe). The Peder-e1 Republic of Genny ie
not equipped for e lerse-ecele oil epill on ice coeet; e nearin- of three
reeeerch groupe ere working prinerily on the euhject of ”Oil in the eee.”
There in e lech of heckground infornetion o'n adengered regione. The nethode
even for e rough eetinete of the effect of the oil on nerine ermine ere
not perfected; there ere neny yepe in the field of hecteriology; little ie
known to dete ehout the effect of oil on the and flete. 8o eeid the heed of
the lnetitute for Herine Reeeerch in lrenerheven. Prof Seheetien Gerlech, to
the ninietere end eenetore of the four north Ger-en coeetel etetee reepon-
eihle for environ-entel protection. The ecientiet eleo edded thet there ie
e leck of effective oil renovel equip-eat which could he need in the currente
of the tidel eree. Still undecided. noreover. ie the ecientific diepute over
the queetion of whether the chedcele ueed to cachet the oil ere not perhepe
nore denseroue for feune end flore in the eee then the epilled oil.

In the opinion of Corlech internetionel cooperetion in theee queetione in poe-
eihle. lie. ee cheirnen of the working group of Ger-en nerine reeeerch in the
etudy of oil epille. pointe out thet for exeeple the United Stetee, Cenede end
Greet lritein heve elreedy eterted conpreheneive reeeerch end control opere-
tione, while oomtriee like berserk, lelgiu, or the hetherlende up to now
heve been ee rether inective ee the Pederel lepuhlic.

Greeter efforte eee- inperetive to 'the ecientiet. At the preeent tine one
reeeerch group in the mud flete of the Jede ie tekin; oil free the ground up
end etudyin; the coneequencee. Unenewered till now ie the queetion of how
deeply oil einke into the eedinent of the and flete end how long it hee en
effect there.

In Cerlech'e View, e nerine ecience coneultetive crane nuet he eppointed
which in eeereenciee could but inforn the coqetent heed ection officee
on the poeition of ecience. An intervention reeerve met eleo he creeted.
free which previouely agreed reeeerch operetione could he finenced without
deley in the ceee of en oil epill.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm "I’FICIM. "Silt ONLY

German nsrine resesrch regards the prolotion of study projects concerning
oil in the see. the biologicsl effect of counter-essures. end the expsneion
of the necessery resesrch cepecity for this as equslly inportsnt. rinslly
the cospilstion of s series of ssps of the Gen-n cosst is dessnded es en
iuediste sessure; it should give indications of sensitive eress end con-
tsin ell deteils importent to an oil spill such se hydrogrephic conditions.
bird ssnctueriee. equcultures or selt needovs.

COPYRIGRT: RAJ. ma. Frankfurt In Main 1978

6108
080: 5000 RED

3].
FOR OFFICIAL [SSE ONLY