APPRov-D FOR R.L.A..: 2013110210.: CIA-RDPDB-OODDORWO‘ICOOSOOCC-I
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100030065-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

JPRS L/8362

30 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 19/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY-

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030085-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transaissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and asterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators :uch as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iron. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infornation was
processed. there no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was suuaarized or extracted.

Unfsailiar nsaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tiles within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WISH" OP
MTERIALS “PMDWED HEREIN mum: THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
WHO
30 March 1979

' . Pedal-lag (incantation Nun aad Mama to. henn/Taai/Iatl Unit Na.
Joint Publication Raaaarch Service

1000 North claba Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

LI N-
W'JPRSL/8362 -
n . Ii

MSMTIONS 0N “STERN EUROPE. (P000 19/79)

  
     

     
    
 

       
     
  

   
   
 
   
 
   
 
     
 

l . ml ammonia-nun“... ‘3»? all. aPe’ad
1% u a I c". w u

Aa above

IS. Sonic-rue" Nona

Ah‘nacta

  

The aerial report containe political/econooic intonation on Heat European
energy. finance and trade policy uttara aa well aa dayelopnenta And tranda
, in the doctrine. prograaa and problem of the aajor co-uniat partiea.

including their relations with co-uniat partiea outside the Heat European
area. ‘

      
   
     
       
     
     
     
       
       
       
      
  
 

  

. ey I‘eMa and etc-neat Aaalyaia.

 

a. than-nan

Political Science _Intarnational Affaira _Lnxcubourg
Sociology innatria __liethar1anda
Propaganda _Balgiu _Norvay
Economica _Canada _Portugal
Energy _Cyprua _Spain
Industry __Dcnnark _8vedan

hade _Pin\and __8vit:erland
Finance Lirauce _'i'urkey

_Grc see _United Kingdoa

m. umumuoumtuu rm. Icc land Luau Gar-any

Italy

 
 
 
    

m. (cannon/rum 5c, 50, 10
It. Availability Sean-rat

For Official Uae Only.
Limited umber of Copiea Available From JPIIS.

I... IIIO'ID IISV. 0"”

 
 
  

, , as
W“

run to»: an at nrnoouceo mm“ “”""‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ans n/am
' 30 March 1

TRANSLATIONS ON HESTERN EUROPE
(moo 19/79)

Contests
AUSTRIA

Chancellor Diecuaeea Doaeetic Situation. Middle Beat
(Bruno Kreieky Interview; STERN. 16 Feb 79)..............

FRANCE

Soviet 'Hultinationale' in Heat Diecuaeed
(Francois Lebrette; VALBURS ACTUELLES. 5 Her 79).........

Shipyarde Building Subsidized veeaela for Poland
(Agnee Rebettet: L'EXPRESS. 10 Feb 79)...................

Rocerd'e Stetua in PS? weighed
(Kathleen Evin; LB WEI. OBSERVATBUR, 12 Feb 79) . . . . . . . .

"381' cm

Foreign Office Secretary Diecueeee Vorld Boone-y
(Guenther ven Hell; EUROPA ARCHIV. 10 Feb 79)............

Debta. Finance. of Major Pertiee axe-ined
(Holt Perdelvitz; STERN. 1 Feb 79).......................
PQR OWICIAL USE ONLY

AUSTRIA

CHMCBIJDR 01mm MIC SIWATIOI. MIDDLE EAST
hamburg BTW in German 16 Feb 19 pp 85-96

[Interview with 3mm Kreishy. chancellor of the Federal Republic of Aus-
tria; date and place not given]

[Text] Kreisw. Bruno; born on 22 January 1911. son of an industrial Ian-
ager. Realschule graduate; law student; graduation as doctor of laws. At
the age of 15 entered Socialist worker-Youth; at the age of 25 condemned in
the so-cslled "Socialist Trial" for high treason; in prison for 22 mntha.
after that in Sweden as a remgee from the Gestapo. As an enigrc Kreisu
organised resistance against Nazi domination in his homeland. After the war
he entered Austria's diplomatic service. In 1953 he became secretary of
state in the Office of the Federal Chancellor; foreign minister in 1959 and
in 1970 federal chancellor.

Today Kreisky. a workhorse of the Socialist Party of Austria (SPOe) is oldest
in service of the government chiefs of Europe. The chancellor of the small
republic. which is independent of the big power blocs. has great interna-
tional influence. Together with Hilly Brandt and the Swede Olof Palme he
leads the "Socialist Internationale." Kreislqr. scion of a Jewish upper aid-
dle class family. has had particular involvement in Near East politics--usu-
ally on the side of the Arabs.

In November of last year the self-aware statesman suffered a defeat in the
national plebiscite on the introduction of atomic energ into Austria:
Kreishv was for it and 51 percent of the people were against it. he vet-
eran tactician swallowed this political reverse-and had himself designated
as the "general plenipotentiary" of his party. Kreisky's latest gambit: he
shifted the national elections; originally planned for October of this year.
to an earlier date by a half year in order to exploit his present popular-
ity. 0n 6 May Kreisu wants to enter his third period of office after an
election victory: "I want to remain federal chancellor until 1983."

The STERN reporters. Juergen Petschull and Klaus biedtke, talked for all of
6 hours with the regent of the Danube republic about: socialisa a la Aus-
tria. Kreishy'a attitude toward his Jewish past. his controversial attitude

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

toward Israel, his relationship to neighboring Heat Germany and East Ger-
nany. to his son and to handaade Austrian foot gear.

he'd Like To Be Just a Little Bit Marxist

mm: Herr chancellor. you are considered to be the ”purest social Demo-
crat in Europe."...

Kreislq: ... I like this descriptionnhuc ay friends, Hilly Brand: and

Olof Palme, and many others have earned at least equal merit for their ser-
vxces to international social denocracy.

STEIN: But after 8 years of official service as chief of govern-ant of the
Austrian Republic you are also being decorated by friend and foe with ti-
tles which are not quite so appropriate to a Social Denocratubut more be-
fitting a monarch. You are called "alperor Bruno I" or ”The Sun King."

Kreislw: I consider that enormously stupid. but during av life I have had
to deal with so many stupidities that I have learned to get along with them.

STEIN: You are bothered when people call you authoritarian?

Kreislgy: Out of deepest conviction, since I have been able to think politi-
cally, I have been a Social Democrat. I want to sake social deaocrscy a re-
nlity in Iv country. which neans: to confer upon the individual citizen the
most far-reaching franchise and responsibility. This can hardly be called
authoritarian!

STEM: Though you my not be authoritarian yet you are an authority. Your
reputation as a states-an and also as a political tactician corresponds
within and outside Austria approximately to that of Adenauer in his best
time in the Federal Republic of Germany.

Kreisky: The comparison is a little lane: I cone oui 1 political camp
opposite to that of the conservative Adenauer. To be sure. it often hap-

pens-d: an very sorry to say thia--that people of the classical bourgeoisie
say: "The trouble is you are in the wrong party." But that's a completely

wrong inference. I could never have been a nenber of another party; I would
rathcr not have been a politician at all. For no my primary iapulse has always

been to change things; for me that would have been impossible in a conservap
tive party which at the best only wants to do some retouching; nor would it
have been possible among the liberals, who think that the world in which we
live is the best of all possible worlds. Maintenance of the status quo
would have offered ne no Justification for going into politics. for this
sacrifice of all private life, of leisure, this readiness to submit oneself
to everyone's public criticism, to be Judged all the tine by people who are
frequently unable to Judge anything-uthese things are not very pleasant.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a

"With Regard to Schmidt: I Am a Little Man in Comparison"

il'i‘ﬁﬂk: liow did you get into politics? What was decisive for you here.
the impulse to improve the world, altruism, a need for power?

Kreislw: I can answer that only in a historical context. I come from a
bourgeois family. In 1927 out of genuine conviction I entered the Socialist
Youth and then occupied a trusted post in the worker Youth. at that time.
for reasons of principle. we didn't want public offices for Social Demo-
crats. My strongest wish for herself was to become a Journalist in a party
newspaper and to be able to mold opinion. In the fascist period our lot was
persecution, imprisonment, emigration. Also I was in Jail'for 22 months and
Just like Hilly Brandt and other German Social Democrats I emigrated to Swe-

den. He adhered to our wsy of thinking and after the collapse of fascism.
we returned with our way of thinking.

STERN: Are you really a Social Democrat or a Socialist?

Kreisky: For me social democracy and democratic socialism are equivalent
terms. I certainly do not think of socialism the way the communists do, who
believe that they have made it a reality at the moment when they seize power.
For me democratic socialism is a political principle. a goal and not a con-
crete form of society. This involves especially that question which must be

repeatedly asked, namely. how much can and may society do for the individual
without destroying his individuality?

STERN: In other words. not total state planning and providing?

Kreisky: By no means. A Democratic Socialist may not say: I relieve man
of a maxim of responsibility for society and for his own life but rather I

confer upon him a maximum of responsibility for society and hence for his
own existence.

STERN: Mr Chancellor. we are interested in knowing the extent to which
you have translated your conviction into practical politics. blow. for al-
most 8 years you have been a part of the government. Hith what sort of bal-

ance do you mean to appear this year before the voters and what would be the
looks of a direct comparison between your politics and that of the Federal
Republic of Germany under the latter's social-liberal leadership?

Kreisigy: I'm inclined to think they cannot be compared in that way. Helmut
Schmidt has incomparably greater and more difficult problems to deal with
than I do. This is a difference corresponding roughly to the difference in
the populations; you have 62 million people and we have almost 8 million.

By comparison I am a little man....

STEIN: Modesty is an affection

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

“.91.”, here I an on the Vienna Ballhausplats. sitting in an old
house which dates "0" the W3 01' the Ionarcny. All that sort of thing is
really a little bit too much for the means at our disposal. today. 'niat's
W I often .9. ”self as someone who has inherited a gigantic castle and
whose resources are Just sufficient to furnish a single wing of the build-
ing. To the latter extent we have been quite successful.

81'3”: You have furnished your house in accordance with social demeratic
ideas. Of which of the interior appointments are you especially proud?

Kreislgy: First and foremost: it is naturally a prerequisite to the reali-
cation of social denocracy that one should have some influence in the soon-
any or upon the econow. Anyone lacking that must fail. We have such in-

fluence .

STERN: You have nationalised the econosy.

Kreisky: Partial-«LY- That heavy industry. the enery econoay and the big
banks belong to the state. to the people. is not to be entirely credited to

us. Since the war even our conservative opponents in the people‘s party
have "0,-3.4 yum us in this direction. Besides. for us "nationalised" never
gem "expropriate" because as early as the thirties Austrian capitalism had
collapled. After the war its scanty remains had become ownerless property
and were finally taken over by the state. Moreover. I do not consider a
mu muonuized econow to be the ideal form, but prefer rather a nixed
econosy; a healthy mixture of privately and nationally controlled economy.
we Social Democrats are now by no neans "leftist dreamers." He already
clearly "“1011" that a welfare state can be supported only by a Iodern
successful industrial state. We have made Austria into a nodern industrial
state. we have only about 2 percent unemployed. in other words we have full
midi/IBM and our inflation rate is now 3.5 percent. Be my confidently
present such ; record to everyone's inspection.

STERN: And in the past year. in tens of the individual worker, you have
had only 20 minutes or strikes” ..

Kreinky: I as sure that figure is exaggerated. That is much too big.
Jun ,._ ”unenr'll have somebody check that right now. (Picks up the tele-
phone. an, "name. how such lost worktine did we have last year as a re-
m“, of .trikegf Would you kindly find out?") So. they Just said that we
had legs than 1 minute. about 20 seconds, but we'll get the exact figure

right awn” (Telephone rings. Kreislry speaks with a specialist.) All
right. now I have it exactly: in 1976 the striking time of workers in Aus-
trio totaled 6.3 seconds. In 1977 we had 0.1 second of striking.

man: That seems to be the absolute world record. How do you enema.
this figure after the deciaal point?

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kremq: In 1971 in the Radio Dispatcher office for toxin in Vienna. 63 employees
stopped working for 2 hours. Converted to an annual basis and to the total
working tine or all employees this comes to 0.1 second.

STERN: And so total social peace prevails in the Republic of Austria. lies
the class struggle been done away with?

Kreisky: lIot entirely, but we have conferred upon employees not only codctenins-
tion but also coresponsibility and thereforec-and or this we are proud-we
have a functioning social partnership.

STEth How does it function?

Kreisky: He have regular contacts between the socially and economically
relevant forces in the state not only between the tariff partners.

STERN: In other words a sort or permanently concerted national-econonic ac-
tivity?

Kreisky: what we have is not in any sense institutional. The strength of
our system lies in the fact that we have strong trade unions whose strength.

however, consists in the fact that they know what they my reasonably expect
of the other side.

STERN: . .. The other side--by that you mean private and state elployersl

Kreisky: Yes. In this situation everyone considers whether in critical
situations he ought to leave the negotiating table and in almost all cases
he doesn't leave it because he knows very well that he must return to the
table. And so what is the use of needless threatening gestures? Each side
knows the other's strength. It is a situation similar to that of the super-
powers in world politics.

STERN: In other words there is no longer any class struggle in the classi-
cal sense?

Kreisky: Once, borrowing a term from psychoanalysis, I called our systen a
sublimated class struggle. It is now a matter or distribution struggles
among the aggregate of workers. in this distribution, besides wages and
salaries and entrepreneurial profits, the prices of the goods produced are
naturally Just as important; because in the end what utters is what one can
but in the market for the earnings of his labor. And we must take care that

no one shall get .‘or his money too many packages containing goods which are
inferior or small in qmntity.

STERN: A state consumer protection in other words?

Kreisky: we have passed laws protecting the consumer. That seemed to me to
be urgently necessary for although it is true that thanks to the power of

5
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the trade union the exploitation of the labor force has diminished neverthe-
less there has arisen and there is still arising a new problee which I once
went so far as to call "exploitation in the marketplace.”

STERN: Meaning that you went to slaughter the sacred cow known as ”free
market econow" in Austria piece by piece?

Kreislw: No.

STERN: Somewhat like wage and salary rates. aeong you also prices of basic
nutrients such as. for example. breed, milk and neat. are negotiated between
producers and consumers.

Kreislqr: Between representatives of producers end representatives of con-
smasrs. yes.

STEIN: A year ago you introduced a 30-percent luxury tax on isported goods.

Kreiew: lot on all goods. A 30-percent added value tax on goods of the
highest standard. which are in Austria input-ted goods such as auto-obiles.
furs. Jewelry.

STERN: What does the state do with its surplus revenues!

Kreisky: With them we try to inrove our foreig: trade balance, but espe-
cially we finance socially useful tasks such as environ-ental protection.
hospitals, drinking water supply, etc.

STERN: To use a somewhat touchy expression: Are you. in other words. on
the best road to state planning of the econow‘l

Kreisky: We plan the prosperity and the future of our country and its peo-
ple; this often necessitates state interventions and controls. In other
words we have a frenework planning econonnr which leaves the free entrepre-
neur e maxim of liberty. It is certainly the task of every govern-ant
which is conscious of its responsibilities to create hedges against threat-
ening and coming crises. You see. ever since I have been in charge I have
stood like a watchmen on a tower and have at all times been on the watch for
crisis synptons.... wherever there is a cloud in the sky. then, I called to
nu friends: "Friends. a crisis is coming. we met do something to deal with
it!” I would rather warn too Iluch than too little because if I were ever to
overlook e sywton then people would say rightly: why did you put Kreisb
up there in the tower!

STERN: But you seen in spite of your foresight to have overlooked one
thing: you wanted to put the already finished atomic power plant in Zwenten-
dorf into operation but the people have voted against it with a vote which
while barely 51 percent was nevertheless a sufficiently clear mandate.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kreisky: I have for 20 years been dealing with the question of nuclear en-
ergy. Only a few years ago I was still no friend of atomic power; but after
long thorough study of the really difficult and ponderous subJect setter.
after numerous conversations with internationally recognized specialists I
have come to the conclusion that atomic energy is the only economically ra—
tional. environmentally acceptable and reliable source of energ. It was

only after that that I supported the introduction of atomic energy into Aus-
tria.

STERN: Then why didn't you assume responsibility for it? You certainly

have a majority in parliament and you could have put through nuclear energy
without a referendum on the part of the public.

Kreislw: I have alrew said: a maximum of responsibility for sun is the
most important goal of social democratic politics.

STERN: One of the citizens to whom you have assigned this responsibility is
named Dr Peter Kreisky--your son. He has spoken at public meetings against
your nuclear energy policy. Does this represent a split in the fuily!

Kreislty: That w son has view: other than mine I can naturally not complain
about and I shall certainly not forbid him to express his opinion openly.

But there is one circumstance which certainly does not please me: when. for
example. may hundreds of people come to an antiatom demonstration in nagen-
furt not because somebody named Peter Mueller is talking there but because
Peter Kreisky is talking there! They enJoy the exciting feeling that the boy
is making an appearance against the old Kreislw. But that is more his prob-
lem than mine. That's something that he must deal with.

STERN: Isn't it simply demanding too much of the citizen to have a plebi-

scite on atomic power since certainly hardly embody has enouy: expert knowl-
edge for something like this in which even experts are not in agreement! In

other words why have the responsible politicians imposed this burden on the
citizen and not themselves decided upon a "yes" or "no?"

Kreishy: Once again I say: i have fought for atomic power and at the same
time fought for holding a popular referendum.

STERN: . .. And you suffered a defeat.

Kreisky: I certainly won't deny that. The decision went against me. Cer-
tainly that is a defeat. On the other hand I was the first in Austria to
bring about the referendum. For that I am given a high score even by those
innumerable citizens who voted against nuclear enery. For if we hadn't done
that. but had pushed such a portentous decision through simply by a bare par-
liamentary maJority. then the next election would have turned into an emo-
tionally loaded fright election centering on the question of nuclear power.
In such a case there would no longer be any voting on the issue of the fur-
ther course of our successml social democratic politics. I didn't want to

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wreck all of that with the Zwentendorf problem! And so. in accordance with
the will of the people, we are now passing a law forbidding the use of nu-
clear power. This law could be suspended only through a new national plebi-
scite. Thus the topic has been got out of the w.

STERN: But in so doing you seem to have developed a patent nethod of hold-

ing on to government power if you are going to use a national plebiscite to

eliminate prior to an election every topic which may be critical for you and
your party.

Kreislw: Tell me, what do we nean by democracy? What is the better way of
dealing democratically; to strive at all times to be in accord with the pop-
ular majority or to ignore it? It is not democracy to have uninterruptedly
a semicivil war in the country, uninterruptedly to ...ve the police amd for
warfare with tear gas and hoses against marching demonstrators. Such a
state of affairs is in In view much more dangerous for democratic government
than bowing before a national referendum One can't limit practicing democ-
racy only to democratic holidays every it years during an election.

STERN: The Aui'..rian popular vote against atomic energy has internationally
large psychological effects, perhaps even practical effects. Do you believe
that other governments of countries in which atomic energy is likewise the

subJect of dispute will follow your asshole and allow their people to make
the decision?

Kreisky: I know that any friends and colleagues outside are saying: For

God's sake. what has Kreisky been doing to us again? Yes, but allow me to
state clearly: I have no recipe for others. I am not about to get my col-
leagues' chestnuts out of the fire; it is my concern to carry out a policy
in Austria which guarantees a maximum of social tranquillity and franchise.

STERH: What are the economic effects of the prohibition of nuclear eneryi
In a couple of years will the lights go out in Austria?

Kreisky: The liylts will not go out, but it will have large economic conse-
quences naturally. In Austria we have a petroleum reserve of 30 million
tons. During the lifetime of a single nuclear power plant such as Zwenten-
dorf we would have been able to generate a quantity of energy corresponding
to this entire oil supply. Another figure: it a positive vote on our part
had served to give a start to about 50 nuclear power plants in Europe which
are now under construction or planned. then that would have saved a quantity
or oil amounting for the oil producing countries to a loss annually of 50
billion marks. From this one can draw the conclusion that there are not
only capital interests behind nuclear power, but there are at least equally
massive material interests lined up behind the prevention of nuclear power.
OPEC is not indifferent naturally to the question of whether or not we can
liberate ourselves from their enormous monopoly?

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3mm Meaning. that the hrelsky government has involuntarily rendered an
ineotimable service to the oil producing countries?

Kreishg: I would not say that. Certainly it in not only the oil producing
countries which are Very interested in the outcome of referenduas for or
against. nuclear energy. but also the western oil colpanies.

STERN: Hr Chancellor. the national referendua on the Zwentendori‘ Atoaic
Power Plant was in other wordn, to adopt your estimate of the matter. a kind
of advance partial decision for the Austrian elections of 1979. In other
words a bad omen. It was not the only such omen in recent days: your party
out a rather poor figure in the elections in Vienna and in Steierlark; the
party had trouble in connection with the Job of the commissioner of Austrian
television. the office being filled against your wishes by the conservative
Gerri Bacher. You are having trouble with your "crown prince." finance liais-

ter Androsch. because he in conducting a tax consultation business on the
aide....

Kreisay: but now you're painting everything deep black-dust like the
Austrian People's Party.

S'i'iLRii: We have Just teen reading the Vienna newspapers.

Kreinky: That's what i thought; almost all of them think it's their task to
topple the government.

S'i‘iﬁlii: but the newsp'q-crn also carry cheerml news, for emple. that you--
and this pleases all the citizens-«ant to control the bureaucracy lore rig-
idly.

Kreioky: 'i‘ne outgrolthzs of the bureaucracy! It is precisely in a young
democracy like that «:‘ Austria that functionaries and officials have a rel-
atively mrked tendency to acquire a mieteriai odor. I. don't like that
and it must be changed. Functionaries and officials are not lords over the
citizens but are obligated to provide services to the citizens. For this
reason we have, for example, created a complaints office called the "peo-
ple': attorney." Through this: oi'l‘ic': the citizens can mite couplaints when-
ever in their opinion they have beer. improperly treated by bureaucrats ei-
ther materially or Vi‘Ji respv-c‘ to procedure. The mere fact that such an
effective complain: authority exists and that all officials and function-
aries are obligated to keep that authority informed by itself has a psycho-

logically very po:itiv-.- effect upon the relationship between the bureaucracy
and the citizens.

”The Red Cat in the Sim: Eu: Ewen Dead for a Long Time"

G‘i'ERii: Are Social Democrats in Austria. like their fellow in Ger-1w. con-
tinuously being presented with political platitudes like ”Freedo- or Social-

isa"--ar. election :il'bpj'tﬂ of the CDU. which moreover was thought up by an
Austrian. by the CR? comissioner. Cerd Bacher?

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kreieky: The Austrian People's Party never was squeamish in their choice of
methods. For example. once they used an election poster which showed a So-
cialist with a backpack and in the backpack was a red cat. The cat was in-
tended to symbolize bolshevisn and the whole thing was intended to assert
that the Austrian Socialists after the election would let the bolshovist cat
out of the bag. But the voter is not quite so dusb as many like to believe--
neither your voters nor ours. The red cat. in other words. has been dead
for a long tine.

STERN: Do prejudices still exist among you such as those which continue to
be widespread amongst us. for example, the belief that Social Democrats and
Socialists want "to take our granny's little house away from her?"

Kreisky: He really do still have that sort of thing. I'm glad you men-
tioned it: since we have been in the government we have cofinanced nation-
ally more than 180.000 privately owned hoses and privately owned apart-ants.
And while the threat had been held up to the farmers that we Social Demo-
crats would drive their last cow out of the stall today the probles is pre-
cisely the opposite-u-today we have too many cows in Austrian agriculture.

STEIN: You are one of the leading international Social Democrats and are
reputed to be an expert on the Near East. You have more friends in the Arab
world than in Israel although you are of Jewish origin. You have criticised

the state of Israel no vigorously that you have even been reproached with
anti-Semitisn.

Kreisky: Before I come to speaking of the hear East problem I must at the
outset say something about my Jewish origin....

STERN: In newspapers and archives one continuously reads "Bruno
Kreisky. Austrian chancellor. Jew."

Kreisky: You know. that is the posthumous victory of Naziisn which leaves
the yellow star still hanging on an individual even up to the present day.
That is the posthumous victory of Hitler except that people no longer is-
Isediately think about annihilating the individual involved. what is the
point of the whole thing? What is the difference between the origin of my
family and the origin of any other Austrian?

STERN: Why did you leave the Jewish religious comnity?

Kreinky: Because I an an agtostic.‘ Sooe of my ancestors. paternal and as-
ternal. did the sane thing.

5 Agnosticism is based on the principle that one cannot know anything of an
absolute being or god and hence the question as to his existence asst remain
undecided.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STERN: And yet under national socialism you were persecuted as a Jew end
put in prison.

Kreislw: That is not exactly right. I was not persecuted as a Jew but es a
Socialist. For that reason as early as 1935 l was persecuted. condoned end
Incarcerated by Austrian clerico-l‘mncium which was not anti-Selitio. In

1938. inediately after the establishment of Hitler doainence in Austria. I

was Jailed by the Gestapo as an illegal Socialist. Only after loathe in
prison I was forced to leave the country.

STEM: Nevertheless. don‘t you feel yourself to be particularly bound to

the connon Jewish destiny! Certainly. new nesbers or your really were also
persecuted and killed by the Nazis.

lireieky: That was an historic catastrophe end the destructive will of tee-
eists certainly lay most heavily upon the Jews. But it also led to the ex-
ternlnation of the Polish intellectuals and many others since after all Nexi-
isn m‘ccnaurily began as a war within the populace and ended as a war be-
tween peoples. and so millions and millions of Jews end non-Jews becelse its
victims. The genocidc--nnd that seems to me to be the lost iuportent fact-
began with the Jews and ended with all those others who fell victil to the
war. But I will tell you who my executed relatives were: there was Ludwig
Kreislq. one or the moat determined defenders of Gernen education in Cseeho-
slovahie; there was Otto Kreioky. an attorney in Vienna. a tee-her of a Ger-
nan liberal student union; there was a sister of my father. Julie Schnuer-
anchor, and her husband who was a rather conservative old Austrien officer;
also executed in Berlin was a Geman Social Democrat. Arthur Kreisky. who
(..Jpcrntcd with the Czech resistance mvcncnt. Suicide ended the life of
Julius Felix. a high Judge in Vienna and w nother's brother. It is those
things which were at issue here which have made the Jews into a feted com-

nity. If one wa.'.s to overcooc this coununal fete then it is enti-Seieitisl
which Iaunt be overcome.

STERN: in other words you wish to unite clear that it is neither es 0 Benito
nor as an anti-Senite but a: a Socialist that you engage in that criticise
of isrucl'a politics which has repeatedly excited so much attention?

Krcis'ny: i neitc this criticism 0n the basis of In! general Socialist posi-
tion.

s‘i‘Eﬂll: in other worzh you will not allow yourself to be driven into e spe-
cial position of loyalty tower: isreell

Kreisny: i an an Austrian. '. have a duty only to av country-dust as w
ancestors hadnend to aw ideals.

emu: llow the state of israel exists in this country in which earlier the
Palestinians were at hone-oelready about 3 decades ago. Surely you do not
want to deny the right to existence or the state or Isl-eel?

11
FOR OFFXCML USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIM. USE ONLY

Kreislty: Quite on the contrary; there a civilizing achievement has been car-
ried out which is unique in its kind. In addition there is the fact that it
is the only asylum country for persecuted Jews which is open to them a
priori. But for me there is another problem which is also important: What
is to happen to the millions of Palestinians who also have a right to a home-
land. If the state of Israel. which is responsible for this problem. is un-
able to solve it then there exists the danger that Israel may become some-
thing like a crusade-state and can only continue to exist by being defended

with fire and sword-«until the others have acquired more fire and lore
swords . . . .

"There Might Be 0 Danger of Israel's Becoming a Crusader State"

STERN: For such expressions you have been branded by the Israelis as a
traitor.

Kreislty: By the conservative Israelis. I also have many friends in Israel.

STERN: In the Arab world you have more friends. . ..

Kreislty: especially because I have been vigorously criticised repeat-
edly in Israel for av views regarding the Near East question.

STERN: You were one of the first important statesmen to advise the Israelis
to negotiate directly with the mptisn president. Sadat.

Krcislty: Yes. But at that time I was still greeted by neorni‘ul laughter from
the Israeli newspapers. And when they made no progress some of them be-
souglt me to establish initial contacts with Sadat.

STERN: llow did you establish this contact?

Kreisky: The most inportant and most visible step was perhaps the fact that

I brought opposition leader Peres to Salzbure to a meeting with Sadat.
This mde Begin nervous because the opposition leader was the one who had

begun the conversation with Sadat. Sadat had hesitated to have any comer-
aation with Begin at all. ‘i'hat's the way it was!

STERN: In other words in the foreground of the great conversations between
Sadat and Begin and long before the meeting in Cup David you conducted Is-
raeli politics secretly?

Kreisky: I did not actually engage in Israeli politics or in Arab politics.
I have only attempted with the means at w disposal to establish contacts
and to express views. President Carter naturally has quite different capa-
bilities.

S‘i'ﬁlll: You certainly have more sympathy for President Sadat than for Begin-

you described the letter not long ago in an interview with a Dutch newspaper
as a "petty-minded person."

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF'ICIAL USE ONLY

Kreiolwz I aeant that he has reacted to a great gesture of historic iapor-
tance in the aanner of a shopkeeper or as we would say less offensively.
"Oreissler" (old aiser]. If he feels insulted by this then I apologise for
it because I didn't want to insult hia. but the characterisation I cannot
retract. The shaft has left the bow and I nay perhaps be peraitted to add
that in av opinion and on the basis of ny knowledge Begin was granted the

Nobel Prise for Peace soaewhat too early. Too bad that Bur heisaaa didn't
get it.

arms: What did Heimn achieve?

Kreishy: All that I went to say now about this latter is that someday there
will be more inforaation available about it.

STERN: Hr Chancellor. your brother. Paul Kreislq, lives in lsrael. Things

are said to be not going very well with hia. Are you actually supporting
hia‘!

Kreialty: That is a bad chapter. W brother has been used against as mder
false pretenses by people who are an] eneaies. Once he is said to have
played in a file the role of a beggar at the wailing wall. The picture of
this scene was shown throughout the world in order to declare that I allow ay
brother to go begging; and nothing was said about the fact that it was aovie
scene. People have used him against no in the least disgraceful way. It is
true that for a long tine his health has not been so good. rears ago he
suffered a head injury in a sports accident and is still suffering fro. the
aftercffects. I an supporting hill with a aonthly at: which corresponds
roughly to an Austrian income. he receives additional aaounts every quar-
ter. In addition he has a small pension froa Austria and one in Israel. An
honorary consul who is one of any friends is. so to speak, his protecting
patron in Israel. But in addition he has a grown son. I have net hia sev-
eral tines in Israel and in Austria.

man: Nut! we are coming to more personal aartcrs. He have heard that

every Austrian citizen can telephone you throw: your private amer. 37-12-
36. whenever he wants to discuss anything with you....

Kreisky: they include a very sanll number of nuts and stinhers. but
mat of the people who have telephoned ae want to discuss utters which are
personally important to then: troubles with officials. financial problem or
they aay want to discuss political things. Also. aany of then Just want to
see whether I an really at the telephone and they greet Ie in a friendly way.

mean: What telephone calls have you received in recent days?

Kreishy: After the referendun on atoaic eneny a woaan called as. for em-
ple. from a Viennese district and said that soaetiae I would have to do
something about the fact that her landlord leaves the light in the vestibule

on all night-although we're supposed to be saving as such eneru as possi-
ble.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BTW: And-«have you done anything about this?

Kreisky: I sent somebody over who exchanged a friendly word with the
lady and the landlord. Today a peasant woman called me whose household
goods are about to be auctioned off. She asked whether I could not help
her? Since I was also unsuccessml in getting her a payment respite (the
amount was over 23.000 schillings) I told the woman that I would lead her
the necessary money for a transitional period.

STERN: Your private money?

Kreislw: It is. so to speak. semiprivate. For such and other socially
especially needy cases I have set up a fund here in the chancellor's office
in which. for example. I place the honorariums which I receive as federal
chancellor for lectures and articles. The fund also includes money obtained
from newspapers which I have sued for false reporting concerning me and who
hare then been required to pay me coapensation. Taken altogether it alounts
to about 100,000 schillings (15.000 marks).

STEM: h‘hat docs Bruno Krcislw do when he isn't politicking? "hat are you
reading right now?

Kreisky: The memirs of a Russian diplomat which. as a matter of fact. I
bought in the GDR during a state visit. lie was a participant in develop-
ments during Stalin's time and he has described these developments very
graphically and with historical accuracy. Then. also. I's reading an Ameri-
can booh about space research and another about German social democracy.

STERN: Do you go in for sports?

Kreinky: I enjoy playing tennis and pits: it fairly regularly. but I'm not
especially good at it. I am a mesber of the Vienna Club. One of a part-
ners is a former criminal-court official who used to be a convinced com-
nlst.

STERN: That brings us each to donestic politics: Are you considering a
sort of radical decree in Austria which would keep extremists. in other
words commnists in particular. out of public services?

Kreisky: For heaven's sake! Sufficient for me is the trouble people have
been having with that in the Federal Republic of Germany.

STERN: And so you have no fear that comcunists as teachers will corrupt
Austria's children politically?

Kreisky: llol I'm against consumes. but I have no fear of cmists. In
Austria one must deal with them politically. not administratively.

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

STIR“: What do you thinhnin this connection-«bout Moon-uni“?

Kreishy: Not very much. I don't believe that that will be a viable nove-
nent of historic per-anencc.

am": Do you think that Mroco-unisn is a TroJan horse {non which the
rulers in Moscow will one day ensrgei

Kreislw: That I don't know. but neither can I exclude it. The Trojan horse
tcctics were recon-ended»! believeo-back in the days of the Seventh Com-
nist world Congress. That wouldn't be anything new. But here what is obvi-
ously involved is the attent or comists to behave deaccratically ibr so
long a tine mtil they shall cons to power within the tranework o! the ex-

isting constitution. Hitherto. commute in power have not been ready
democratically to yield it up again.

STERN: You once said: "It is the tragic rate or the revolutionists or the
past that in their old age they not stand around at receptions in evening
dress and wearing their decorations.”

Kreisky: State appearances are what I nost hate in the business of poli-
tics.

STEIN: So you don't like tonal evening clothes; but you're said to be a
style-conscious nan who likes to wear expensive tailor-nade suits. tailored
shirts and custon-nade shoes.

Kreisky: I an a quality-conscious consumer. I would rather buy expensive
things that last than cheap things which 1'. continually having to replace.
That sort of thing turns out to be auch more expensive in the long run.
(Kreislq leans back in his chair. lifts up both pants legs and points to his
black leather shoes.) took. these are shoes made by a gosd aaster shoe-
nnker. That is Austrian quality worn-nahip. Ry now they have been many
tines resoled. but they still look quite passableo-it was in these shoes
that I aarched into enigration in 1938 after w imprison-cut by the Gestapo.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Gruner Jahr M & Co

680: 3103

15
I08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

mm:

SOVIBT 'WLTINATIGMLS' IN 9381' DISCUSSED
Peri. VAL!!!” ACTUBLLBS in French 5 Her 79 pp 36-35
[Article by Prencois Lebrette: "The lreelin'e hultinetionel Coupenies”l

[Text] when Moscow uploye cepitelist tectics. the result in Frence is the
Co-erciel Isnk for Northern Europe. en institution scrutinized in Jesn
Honteldo'e recent book. And the result throughout the world is hundreds

of "Red nultinetionel coepenies."

”An Alericen recession would heve serious internetionel consequences not
only for the doller. but else for the credibility of the United 8tetes.
thet country's leedership, end western unity. 0n the other head. in the
congressionel elections of l Novedaer. President Certer successfully hurdled
hie eost difficult obstscle. lie cen now continue to set with euthority.
Will he do it? He cen only hope he will."

This content is teken iron en 18 Novenber l978 report prepered by the resesrch
deperteent of the Co-ercisl Isnh for Northern Europe (ecu). There would

be nothing surprising shout e benh diepleying so arch concern for ”western
unity" were it not for one cherecteristic of this perticuler esteblieheent:

it is the French brench of the Soviet Goebenk end Vneshtorabenh.

In his book "bee secrete de le benque eovietique en Frence"-published by
Albin Michel-the journelist Jeen Monteldo ett-pts to shed light on Euro-
benk'e operstions. Burobenk being the m'e other true.

He who peye, cells the shots. And the door-eatery evidence presented in
Honteldo's book shows thet the funds of the French co-uniet epperetue ere
in the hende of the Soviet henk. Yet st the sees tine. this benk steedily
continues to conduct itself like en orthodox cepitelist institution.

To such an extent thet the Soviet benk is es listahen es other Heetern

benhs in eetileting certein situetions. For eaten-ale. s Burohenk officiel
returned froe en April visit to lren reessured by whet his contects there hed
told hie. One or the letter hed informed hie thet "even if the Shsh were to
ebdicste in lo yeers. es ruors indicete he night. he is convinced the uilitery

16
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

have already Iade provisions for his succession." llsnce the situation was
favorable to active involveaent in the Iranian aarket.

This asbiguity-if it is not. indeed. duplicity-—is the lot of the enitre
banking and couercial web the Soviet Union has woven in the Usatern world.
The bank Jean liontaldo exanined in detail is but one of acne 90 Red "multi-
national" corporations. It is also one of the oldest: it was in 1925 that
Moscow bought the new from a group of "hits Russians. Previously. in 1919,
the Soviets had purchased the Moscow Narodny Bank of London. also from White
Russians. with the Russo-Tran Bank founded in Tehran in 1923. these estab-
liahaents long remained the sole points of contact between the Soviet

economy and the rest of the world. They were sufficient for an autarltist
rcgine.

Increased East-Vest trade in the 1960's proapted Hoacow to multiply its

branch banks: the Oat-Heat Handelsbank in Frankfurt in 1962. the Hatched
Handclsbank in Zurich in 1966. the Donau Bulk in Vienna in 197‘. and the United
East-Heat Bank in Luxanbourg. Meanwhile the Narodny Bank of London had
established two branches: in beirut in 1962 and Singapore in 1971.

At the sane tine. their assigned purpose underwent change. Froa purely
conercial banks they were transformed into speculative establish-eats. by
its dealings in the dollar Ioney narltet. the Eurobank gave the Eurodollsr
its nane. As for the Nsrodny of Beirut. it seens to have become specialized
in the selling of gold outside usual conercial channels. For instance. it
is reported to have discreetly transferred 5 tons of gold to the oil-rich
unirs.

writing in ITT's review PROFILS a year ago. the journalist Andrea Garrigo
consented as follows on the United East-Rest bank: "The Soviets have dis-
covered the quiet charla of the Luxembourg tax paradise. Since 1976. this
bank has been conspicuously engaged in large-scale arbitrage transactions
with short-term deposits in strong currencies."

But capitalist speculation demands skills which Soviet bankers sometimes

lack. They learned this the hard way in 1975 when the Donau Bank lost 1
million dollars placed with the Allganeine Hirtachaftsbank a few months before
it failed. That sane year. the Narodny Bank of Singapore lost 60 million
dollars in the bankruptcy of the Hosbert group of llong Kong.

The overall balance-sheet is far froa being in the red, however. Again

in 1975. the Oat-Heat Handelsbank posted profits of lo million dollars. Jean
Montaldo reports that from 1973 to 1977 the 3C!!! amassed profits of note than
170 million francs. including 35 million francs the last year.

Banking speculation and loans are not sufficient, however. to cover the

Soviet Union's foreign currency needs. The USSR also has to sell its products
in world narkets and. therefore, establish cos-ercisl firms in foreign

countries. (bvioualy the simplest thing to do is sell raw naterials such as oil.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe orncm. use om

The Soviet cil conpanies Bette-Belgium and Rafts-Great Britain did not hesi-
tate to fill the gap left in the European nerket by defaulting Arab producers
during the 1973 You Kippur war. In 1975. Nafte even operated directly against
OPBG by offering its oil at a 10 percent discount.

Little by little. Nafte has changed into a conventional Hestern oil coe-
pany. It has large storage facilities in Antwerp end a chain of service
stations in Belgiue end Great Britain. In this way. a Soviet company gets
to sell Arab oil to Hestern ootorisle. Adnittedly there is a reciprocal
situation in Finland where American service stations narket Russian oil
imported by Teboli. a Soviet firn.

Other easily sold raw nsteriels include di-onde end lunber: dieloods by

the Bussaleaz coweny in the Federal Republic of Ger-any end Belgiun. lunbsr
by Rusbois in France. Buslegno in Italy. and the Russian Hood Agency in Greet
Britain. Fish and shellfish caught by the Soviet fleet-~the world's largest--
are also processed and exported: in France by Prensov. in Belgian by Belso.
in Italy by Sovietpesca. in Spain by Pesconse. and in Sweden by Joint Trawler.

These conpanies experience little difficulty eerketing their products. The
sane is not true for those Soviet subsidiaries etteopting to sell unu-
factured goods in the West. sutonobiles for exaaple. The Anericen PORTWB
nogezine described this problee as follows in its February 1977 issue:
"Soviet consumers nay be willing to buy a car knowing that no spare parts
are available. but not Hestern consuers. After-sale service is not a Soviet
strong point.” This accounts for the difficulties eocomtered in western
markets by Avtoexport and its subsidiaries: Scsldia-Volga in Belgiun. Hatreco
Bil in Sweden. Koneia Norge Bil in Norway. and Konela in Finland. And even
in Africa where Avtoexport is the sole Bed "nultinationel coepaoy: repre-
sented in Caneroon by Gateco and in Nigeria by Haatego Lagos.

Problees are even nore critical with heavy equip-ant sales despite the fact
that Soviet prices are lower than average prices for equipnent Iade by
western competitors: as ouch as 60 percent lower for nachine tools and 20
to 50 percent for fern nachinery.

Results appear to be slightly better in the light canal-er goods nerket.
Ocean shipping is. however. the only sector in which Soviet coupetition is
really alarming. Soviet freight rates are on the average soee 20 percent
lower than international rates. primarily because of the Soviet see-en's low

pay .

Moscow currently controls 10 percent of the shipping traffic between llong Kong
and the west coast of the United States. In traffic emanating fro. the
Soviet Union this percentage rises sharply: 75 percent with the 608. 86 per-
cent with Great Britain. and 95 percent with Japan where. however. no Red

multinational conpanies are established because of the absence of a peace
treaty.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The network of shipping agencies. all Sovinflot subsidiaries. is particularly
dense. The Transvorld Maritime Agency is present in Belgium and the Nether-
lands. and Horflot in Canada and the United States where Sorfrscht also
operates. In France. the Soviet shipping agency is Saguar; in Tinland.

Salsa; in Italy, Sovitalnare and Dolphin. etc.

Karl Reins Sager. vice president of llapsg-Lloyd. explained to NM: "The
Russians set about beconing a maritime power not for the sole purpose of
obtaining foreign currency. This effort has to be judged in terns of politi-
cal and strategic interests. "hen the Soviets transport cargoes of ssnufac-
tured goods fros the Rest they can do what they want when these cargoes

are on-board."

The height of absurdity was certainly reached last year when General Dynasics,
an American fire. had P-lo fighter aircraft parts shipped to a NATO country
vie Soviet freighters.

Strategic interest. but also industrial espionage. The Soviets readily

enter into partnerships with Westerners to establish joint cospanies engaged

in those advanced technology fields in which the Soviets lack expertise. For
instance. in the electronic data processing field they for-ed partnerships

known as Elorg in the Netherlands and Blorgdata in Finland. Blorg'a Dutch
partner who owns 20 percent of the capital stock and manages the fin. explained:
"In the long run. Blorg not only opens the door for the sale of Soviet compu-
ters in the West but also enables the Soviets to develop their couputer indus-
try?

This nan no longer has any illusions: in April 1976. his senior Soviet
assistant was expelled fron the Netherlands. For espionage.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "Valeurs actualles"

8061
cso: 3100

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 OﬂLY

PRAﬂCB

SHIPYARDS BUILDING SUBSIDIZBD VBSSBLS FOR POLAND
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 10 Feb 79 p 86
[Article by Agnes Rebattet: "Shipyards: A Suicide Contract")

[Text] Pour ships. 5 million working hours: The Polish order to France
seena "providential." However, it is without enthusissa that Jesn Reyrolle.
president of the La Ciotst Shipyards. and Pierre Loygue. president of the
Atlantic Shipyards [in St Nazaire]. are negotiating with the Polish ship-
builder. Polish Ocean Lines. It is also without illusions that they are
trying to wring soae concessions from then.

In order to obtain this last-chance order, an oxygen tent for an industry
that is choking to death. the Prench Government has not shown itself par-
sinonious in its aethods. end is giving a royal present to Poland. Indeed
these ships. half freighter. half container carrier, will cost wore than

1 billion francs to build. but will be sold at half price to the Poles.
The government will pay about 350 Iillion francs. and the shipyards will
have to absorb 200 aillion in losses. It is a ruinous order: between
government subsidies. the loss to the yards and the sun of 120.000 francs
per job per year--the amount of the salaries and fringe benefits that lust
be financed.

In the case of Ls Ciotst, the two Polish ships represent 2 nillion working
hours. scarcely half of the total capacity of the yards; but for 6 sonths
4,300 workers will have jobs. It is inadequate. of course, so that the
yards are trying to diversify: to include repairs, which cause angry reac-
tions on the part of the workers of the Terrin {fire} in Marseilles.

In St Nazaire the situation is hardly less brilliant. Orders are thinning
out: three ships are to be delivered this year, three others in 1980. and
a single one in 1981. Pierre Loygue, however. hopes to obtain rapidly the
construction of a hydro-electric power station on a barge, for the
Americans. It would be s "first," and an opportunity for the Atlantic
Shipyards to put thcnselvea on the pronising Iarket of floating factories.
This is a dream that Pierre Loygue has indulged in for acne tine. but
which has never taken concrete form: "The Polish order will pernit us,
'neanwhile, to keep up the present rhythnn of 34 working hours a week:
That's enormous!"

20
FOR OPYICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFI‘ICIM. USE ONLY

A year of tight negotiations will have been necessary to snatch this
suicidal order away fron the Finns end the Spanierds. At first. Polsno
wanted 18 ships. The bill would have been too lerge for the French
government. which reduced the number of ships to four. The others will
be built partly in Polend. partly in Finland and in Spein. Polsnd wins
on all counts: She con build this kind of vessel herself. but she pre-
fers to devote her shipysrde exclusively to orders for export—which
makes it possible for her to be paid in cash. This provides her with the
foreign currency indispensable to her balance of payments. For her own
fleet. she purchases from foreign shipyards at the "Polish price." and.
better still. on credit. And whet credit! The discount peid when the
order is signed. which represents 30 percent of the value of the ship,
is refinanced by French banks st a rate below that of the serket. to be
reisbursed in 12 years. The 70 percent reneining will be peid in

7 years st the OBCD rate of 8 percent.

The Poles csn thus acquire en inexpensive fleet and conpete with Euro-
psn shipbuilders on the north Atlantic. They will be unbestnble--like
the Soviets--who are exciting the fury of western shipbuilders. By
charging freight rates fron 18 to 50 percent below prevsiling retes they
hsve slreedy normed 20 percent of the contsiner carrier trsffic of the
Third ﬂorid between Best end Rest.

COPYRIGRT: 1979 S. A. Groupe Express

9367
680: 3100

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

ROCARD'S STATUS IN PS? WICKED
z‘eris LB NOUVBL OBSERVATBUR in French 12 Feb 79 p 31
[Co-sentery by Xsthleen Evin "Michel Rocard's bile-Ia“)

[Text] Meeting Sunday 11 February in Paris in the third besemt of the Netionel
Assembly. the 131 nenbers of the erecutive co-ittee of the PSP [French
Socislist Party] were to tske in cognizance different opposing notions and

to conpsre positions in order to see if it were possible to cone to an in-
nediste sgreenent. At the close of this neeting. the notions retaining were
to he sent to each section of the party to be discussed and voted on. At

the Congress of Met: on 6, 7 end 8 of next April, the ntﬂaer of votes

which will go to these texts will deternine the power reletionship between
the different currents end. in consequence, their representation in the
leading euthorities of the party.

0n the eve of this executive connittee nesting, Michel Rocard faced e herd
dilems: either to agree to play the loner until Meta. thus manning the
risk of seeing hinself marginalized by erriving totally behind Francois
Mitterrend. Pierre usuroy end-who knows?--nsybe even CNS [Center for
Socialist Studies. Research and Education]. or else to choose synthesis
inedistely, in that csse agreeing to conclude without glory s contest which
he hinself started 10 March 1978. "At any rate," explains one of his per-
tisans. "we will not have really lost. because our ideas. those for which
Michel is f ighting. will heve been included in the foundstion. And it will
be a good while before this contest. which we have sterted. is over. "

In the aunties. this "demcrstic debate" which has egiteted the PSP for
nearly a yeer in the end will not nske it lose en inch of ground with the
electorate. at least if one believes the results of s Sofres poll published
5 Pebruery in 10 regional daily newspapers. Thirty-seven percent of trench-
Ien questioned felt that it has grown stronger. As for Michel Rocerd. for
62 percent of those questioned he is still the best cendidete for 1981.

a percentage which because 50 percent among "socialist smethizers."

If the polls replaced the Congress, then Michel Rocerd would alreedy be st
the heed of the Socialist Party, end Francois Mitterrsnd would now heve all

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 098 ONLY

the tile necessary to carry off at Latche the "Louis-Napoleon" proaised at
Cellinard nearly lo years ago. But the reality is much different. Indeed.
at each public seating. each nilitent nesting. each luncheon with the rank
and file and the local leading citirene. whether in Gard. Pyrenees-Orien-
tales. Alpes-de-Ilsutc Provence. the North. the Lorraine or the Rhone. Michel
Rocnrd has been able to say that be was. together with Prancois hitterrand.
the only socialist leader during this difficult period to be able to fill
the halls and arouse the enthusiasn of hie audience.

"One hundred fifty persons at Ales. 300 at Benyuls. 500 st Denier. and
everywhere a terrific reception...‘fens and tens of letters of support are
arriving free all party federations He's going strong!" Michel Rocsrd's
"teen." installed in their offices at 98 Rue de l'Universite. are following
the evolution of the winning side froa sonent to nonent.

And with these on the whole very encouraging results. the lost optiaistic
are hazerding eetinates. The prophesy of a close collaborator of the deputy
from Yvelines. on 7 February "The Rocard notion? Today it would receive at
least 26 percmt."

Eternal Suspicion

Nothing is less certain. The first tally aaong the PS? federations would in
fact give less than 20 percent of the votes to a notion signed by locerdians
alone. how can one explain the dieharnony along this "najority of ideas"
which seeaa to be falling apart around Michel Rocard when he is calling for
n party nore absorbed by social and econoaic realities. a less dogmatic
political language. a really original socialist plan. the expansion of the
Union of the Left to other use noveaents; and the fact that he still re-
asins strongly ninority in his party? There are essentially two reasons:

The first is evident and is explained by the profound attachment of the
najority of nilitant socialists for Francois Hitterrand. the sen who in 1971
nede a success of the union of the socialists. who signed the "Co-on Program."
who made the PS? the leading party in France. By saying on ”Cards on the
Table" on is January that the reasoning of his strategy led to the elimination
of the present first secretary. Michel Rocard. even in his partisans' opinion.
Iadc n nistslte.

The uecond reason is more hazy: despite his protestations and his record of
service to the Left. Hichel Rocard is still eternally suspected of "leaning
to the right.” His popularity with the "DP [French Democratic Union] elec-
torate and the fact that he is opposing Francois Hitterrsnd. the socialist
sylbol of the Union of the Left. do hin a disservice. Even if he is ir-
reproechable. the doubt renains.

And they work against his. even as far as such spectacular support as that
of LIIEMTION or of the director of the nagasine ESPRIT.

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ante of theee contradiction. the Iiiitent eocieliete think they have found
the eoiution: keep Mitten-end end locerduend "envoy, of coureeo-in the
petty luderehip at the use tile. the virtue. of one mounting for the
ehortcoeinge of the otheu. end vice vene. leeidee. when e11 ie eeid end
done. it ie tavetdt thie eo erdently deeired eyntheeie thet the eocieliet
laden ete loving. They will echieve it. no doubt. But in whet conditio .

comment: 1979 "1e Nowel Oheerveteur”

9380
(:80: 3100

26

FOR OFPICIM. US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

MTW

FOREIGN OFFICE SECRETARY Discusses wonw mm
Bonn canon ancmv in German lo l'eb 79 pp 65-72

[Article by Guenther van Nell. state secretary of the Foreign Hinistry.
Bonn: "Political Aspects of the Change in structure or the world sooneey')

[Text] 11m structure of the world econo-y. as it first developed after
the war. was stewed by a dualism 0n the one side the industrial
nations or the west with a dominating leading power. the United States.
and on the other side the less induvrielired ”peripheral' areas. which
cane into the picture as suppliers of raw materials and as buyers or
industrial products. Although the Soviet Union for-ed its own
gravitational field within its sphere of influence. even the council
for Econonic Mutual Assistance (cum belonged in essence to the
peripheral areas. he division which has been sade into the 'three
worlds“ was snore politically motivated: lt spren; fro- the antagonisa
between the United States and the soviet union. the antagonisa bewaen
the two systems. which the developing countries did not want to
identify with either eceneaically or politically in the long rm.

Since then auch has changed. The most inortant structural changes
can be described as follows:

«the shifting of the econoeic and political centers of gravity aaong
the western industrial countries.

--the energence oi‘ the developing countries as independent political
and econoaic factors.

--the (oration of e undue vivendi based on a policy of detente beueen
the East and west. and the increasing participation or the cam
countries in world econoeiic events.

Il'lie Structure of Cooperation of the Hestern industrial Nations

About 70 percent of the world trade is still conducted along the
Western industrial countries. This share has changed only slightly

25
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
”I omcw. W8 ONLY

eincu the beginning of the l960'e. However. thie fact conceale the
ehifte which have arieen within the group of Neatern induatrial countriee.
There ehifte can he characterired under three heedingen

"the relative decline of the weight of the United Statee.
--the developnent of the European CoIeunity (are).
"the riee of Japan.

in the year mm. the United Statee lull received a ehare of 55 percent
of the groee national product of the Neetern Norld. and in 1977 thie
figure wee juet as percent. in the eaee year. the m'e ehare wae

32 percent. 'Ihe United Statee ie etill the leading econonic power of
the Neat and thue of the world. But it ie encountering liaite to ite
econonic potentialitiee:

“in the Vietnan Her. it had to learn that a war cannot be financed
on the ride. but that it leede to inflation if the deaande on the
national product are not whittled down.

“we decline of the dollar ehowe that in the long run even the American
balance of payeente deficit cannot be financed “by the govern-ent'e

own reeourcee.‘ for the firet time. in a departure fro. ita for-er
policy the United Statee hae fallen back on ite reeervee in the
international Monetary fund (iii?) and her had to raiee foreign-currency
loane.

«The United Statee ie today inorting about half of ite oil requireaente.
Nith that. it hae becoae dependent on foreign comtriee in a key area
of ite national econocy.

--Since the oil crieie. the econouc developaent of Neat wrope hee
for the firet tine been influenced leee than for-arty by econouic
growth in the United Staten.

Under Preeidente Nixon and ford. A-erican policy already took into
account thie develop-ent: Through the etreeeing of interdependence

and the Atlantic partnerehip. through the theeie of the three centere

of North A-erica. Europe. and Japan. and through the founding of the
International anergy Agency in Parie and the political upward revaluation
of a. on.

However. the loot conepicuoue proof of the exietence of the new eituation
ie the world We eu-it neetinge. Politically. thie aignifiea

that reaponeihility can be borne only jointly by North America. lurope,
and Japan.

26
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. "SI ONLY

1110 Reshaping of the Western “Order of codetersination"

One needs only to recall the unilateral. drastic neasures taken, without
the consultation of the partners. by the Anerican President in August 1971
(the so-called Connally shock. involving the abolition of the convertibility
of the dollar. the introduction of an inert levy. and other decrees).

to realise what a great distance the United states has traveled in the
international coordinating of its economic and monetary policy up to

the time of the Bonn world econoeic emit nesting in July l978.

The first signs of an Anerican readiness to sake its own econonic

policy the subject of consultation with the western partners appeared
wiuu the visit of Federal Chancellor Schaidt to Washington in Deceaber
1974. with hie return visit to Bonn in July 1915. President Bord
declared to the press that the econoaic policy of the united States

nust for: a whole with that of the sac. In the tale theaselves Ford

had made it clear. with the spirited assistance of Kissinger. that in

the future the United States. in spite of the only snail share of its
foreign trade in the gross national product of the sec. nevertheless
wanted to coordinate its econonic. credit. and monetary policy closely
with its European partners. With that. the cornerstone was laid for

the subsequently ensuing world econoeic sue-it conferences in Mnbouillet.
Puerto Rico. tendon. and Bonn.

if it was the case that earlier-that is. before the ternination. sealed
on is August 1971. of the world nonetary systen of Bretton ﬂoods--

the functioning of the cooperative nechanisa of the western national
econoeies could be guaranteed through international organisations such
as the 111?. cm. and the OBCD. because in than the policy of the
United States was the detareining factor. then in the course of the
l97o's and increasingly so following the oil ediargo of October 1973
new structures for cooperation along the western industrial nations

had to be found which took into account the increased weight of ﬂeet

Europe and Japan. Thus the idea of trilateralisl (North Aurica.
sec. Japan) gained ground.

The reshaping of the Western 'codeterlination arrangenent' in the
econoaic sphere. which took on its initial fore: in the world eoonoeic
sue-nit neetings. found its parallel in the greater Anerican readiness
to coordinate its foreign policy and. to an increasing degree. its
security and disarnanent policies. The "MO Council has thereby been
given a welcoae shot in the are. On several occasions. Ham sessions

have taken place with the participation of national and governmental
leaders.

Although the Big Four eeeting in Guadeloupe at the beginning of 1979

was looked upon as an infernal exchange of opinions without there being
an intention to deal with institutionalization. nevertheless its
stunning aade plain how strongly the necessity is felt to coordinate
policies on a partnership basis. and it nade it clear also that above all
the President of the United States considers isportant a deepened

exchange of ideas with heat Europe even in the preliminaries to political
decisions. How the new cooperation structures between North mrica.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Nest Europe. and Japan will finally present thenselves in consolidated
forts. and whether the existing organisations will be reformed or will
be supplemented by others. cannot now be precisely foreseen as yet.
Political shifts in enphasis. the integration of new determining factors
into the international order. frequently take place only slowly and

in a dialectical process. since there are many prosoting. inhibiting,
and counteracting forces at work. however. the main trend is already
nos perceivable: in the economic and political sectors it boils down
to a greater participating of the west Europeans and Japanese in the
Western decision-making process. to a more extensive ”policy-sharing“
between north America. the BBC. and Japan.

As for West Europe. the EEC and its foreign policy conponentnthe
European political Cooperation (rm crganirationnhes by now already
developed into an organisational foundation for codeternination.
francs. Great Britain. the rue. or Italy in their respective individual-
roles do not provide the weight which legitlnires this claim to
participation. what is decisive is the fact that the EEC partners

are uniting their weight and their voices. Only jointly can the EEC
cell into play the influence of Europe. It is therefore not by chance
that the EEC-oreprcsented by its council and conission presidents--

is taking part in the world economic sum-it neetings. The core effective
the m becones. the greater will beco-e the pressure to include it

as well as an institution connected with the Western coordination of
policies. Only when this point is reached has the European-Aurican
dialogue reached that level which corresponds to the requirenents of
the world situation and of European unification. a prerequisite for
west Europe's continuing and growing role in the world econoey and
world politics is the inner develop-ant of the EEC. The European
honetary Syste- and the scheduled direct elections [for the European
Parliament] will bring substantial advancements in 1919. Increasing
prosperity in the SEC and the new sti-ulants to European integration
will also ensure greater political stability in Europe. But greater
stability will also increase the political input of the me. This is
becoelng apparent even today in its attractiveness to those countries
of Southern Europe which went to becone letters. in its relations with
the countries of the Mediterranean area. Africa, Asia. and the
Caribbean. and also in the creation of the :92. By leans of this
instrment, the BBC and its newer nations are lore and lore converting
their econosnic and political weight into jointly exerted political
influence.

The Growing lmortance of Japan

”to rise of Japan to the position of a leading industrial nation is
one of the most noteworthy events in store recent econonic history.
‘Doday. Japan's share of the world trade is 9 percent. Prod 1960 to
1970, its share in the gross national product generated in the OECD
sector rose free 5 percent to 14 percent. Japan is today the econo-ic
center of gravity of the Par last. However. the rapid econooic

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OPHCIAL "8! ONLY

developsent or Japan was not without problem tor the world eoonesy.
Since the Japanese econenic growth was borne to a significant extent
by its exports, surpluses in the current account balance areas which
created disequilibria. 'lheretore Japan is today (seed with the task
of shifting its emphasis to the advancement of its internal growth. of
purchasing sore goods. and of exporting capital.

Up to now. Japan has shied away free sexing political use or its scone-1c
strength. Only recently does it sees to have been exerting a lore
political intluence. such as in its turn towards tho new [Association
of Southeast Asian Nations] countries. in the Japanese-Chinese agree-snt.
and in its closer relations with Australia and New Zealand. his
political inﬂuence of Japan in the Par Bast will increase, especially
when Japan succeeds in establishing a better balance in its foreign
economic relations. even vie-a-vis the United States. the exchange-rate
mm of the yen to the dollar are likely to be in the direction of
strengthening the political position of Japan. This will not adversely
affect the close cooperation between the two countries. But the
influence or the yen will inert sore weight to the Japanese voice

in Washington. The triangle Aurica-aurope-Japan can only profit
from this.

no Third World as a Power rector
Along the developing countries. a unfold move-ant can be observed:
--the ecomeic advances of the developing countries as a whole. and

--the increasing difterentiation in the econo-ic develop-ant of these
countries.

After being released into a state of independence, the young nations

of Africa and Asia wanted to stand on their own feet econolically as
well. This oovesent was tinelly joined by the states of Latin A-erica
which wanted to tree the-selves iron the influence of the United States.
this being felt by then to be oppressive. Econoaic developeent was -

to cake possible political eeancipation. and independencennonalign-entu
was to promote econosic growth. Up to the beginning or the 1960's,

the developing countries sought to obtain the econo-ic aid which was
essential to this end in a bilateral manner and on the basis of their
nonaligned status. in connection with which their positional value was
seen against the background of the zest-Heat antagonism. ‘ho the extent
that the Bast-west controntation was dieinished and the process of
datente got under way. the political positional value of these countries
declined in terns of the cast-Nest constellation. The consequence was
that the developing countries were now anxious to collectively give
eti‘ect to their interests as the group or the nonaligned or the “77"
countries. They utilised the United Nations and their sajority there
as the political instruent for the pursuit or their interests.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OMCIAL 088 ONLY

Between 1950 and ms. the gross national product of the developing
countries increased sore than fourfold. Nevertheless the econenic and
thus also the political weight of the developing countries reasined
alight up to the beginning of we 1970's. This situation changed with
the oil crisis. which showed for the first tine what a deteruined action
by a group can bring about. Not till now did developing countries get
political influence. either directly as oil suppliers or indirectly

as countries affected by the oil price increase and thus as potential
allies of ﬂl. industrial oil consuers. The political triuph of the
developing countries in the oil crisis at the sane tine laid bare the
areas of interest of these countries. since then. the OPEC countries
have been clearly distinguished from the rest of the developing countries.
Besides the oil countries, those countries with intereediate inconee
which boast of the highest growth rates are also waking theaselves

felt more and more. For these countries, what is important in the
future is no longer so such development aid as it is access to the
capital markets. Especially prominent in this group are the so-called
threshold countriesncountries which along with persisting relatively
low per-capita income are in certain areas, such as in steel and
textiles. quite coepetitive. Along these are for emple brasil,

South Korea. and hexico. This developeent already took place before the
oil crisis, but it was only in the recession which emerged in the wake
of the oil crisis that it became especially clear. because the
industrial countries then began to feel their cometition such snore
strongly.

oil countries as well as threshold countries are awakening lore and
store to the responsibility which they beer for the development of the
world econo-y and thus also for political stability in the world.

The western industrial nations ought to help these countries to live up
to their responsibility. The effective way which they can help the-

in this connection is to resist protectionist measures, which prevent
these countries fro- playing an increasing role in the world scone-y
and with that also in world politics. ‘ihie should not exclude terrary
protective measures in special cases, such as for example in the

textile industry. that is ieportant is that the path to an increasingly
lore substantial participating of these countries in the world econowy
is not blocked.

What has been lacking so far is an institutionalized recognition, so to
speak. of the changed role of these countries. in initial attempt

in this direction was the North-south dialogue in Paris. Another path
is now being taken for the first tile in the once on a trial basis:
Certain developing countries are to take part in the work of the newly
established steel co-ittee. In the IMP. Saudi Arabia has been granted
the position of an executive director. on the side of the developing
countries there stands in the way of a conpreheneive solution their
worry about a possible schism and in the industrial countries the
hindrance is their concern for the workability of their own consultative
eechanisns. It would be a step forward if the basis could be broadened

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! omcm. "8! ONLY

and if in the future dialogue could be carried on more extensively
through the agency of the EEC. Following the structuring of the relationship
or the sec to the so-called m (Africa-Caribbeen-Pacific] nations in
the Convention or tone. the cooperation agreements between the sec

and its southern neighbors on the Mediterranean. the Euro-Arab dialogue.
and certain agreements between the sac and South American nations.

the last important step in this direction was the ssc-asm ministerial
nesting in Brussels in hovedaer 1918. at which a closer degree or
cooperation was agreed open. In the Heetern industrial nations there
is moreover a growing readiness to fashion, from the idea of an
Integrated llaw-naterial Progra- with a Coach fund, an inetrmsent for
sore stable raw-material relations which is econoeically sensible and
acceptable to all the participants in the economic exchanges.

Position of Soviet Union and East European Countries

The development of a more extensive participation on the part of the
Soviet Union and the East European countries in the world scone-y cannot
be separated fro- the policy of detente. ‘no be sure. even in the

tine of the Gold Her there were trade relations with Best Burope. but
these were rather insignificant in scope. Even though the differences
between the econoeic systees were above all held responsible for this
situation. nevertheless trade with the East was characterized by the
priuacy of politics: They did not want to becooe dependent on one
another. and they wanted to have the other side profit as little as
possible from their own economic resources.

The journey fro- the recognition of both superpowers that they could
elieinate each other only at the price of their own existence. up to
the awareness or a joint responsibility by the west and the Best for
world peace. took its tiles. In the course of this develop-slit. the
political obstacles to an expended economic cooperation faded into the
background. Interest in Heste rn capital, in western technology. but
also in Western wheat won thrrugh. Industry in the West considerably
increased its connitnent in last Europe. since 1910. the co-ercial
exchanges of the state-trading ~ountries with the Western industrial
countries have increased fourfold (although their share in the total
coeeaercial exchanges have changed only slightly). 'i‘his trade grew
more rapidly than the trade of the cm countries with each other.

I! economic cooperation was a precursor of detente to begin with, then
detente is unthinkable without a developoent of economic relations.
1he Soviet Union is thereby assuming a bit of the responsibility for
the ”capitalist“ world econo-y. The lost striking sign or this change
is the borrowing from euro Iarkets, which neanwhile is estilated to

anount to over $40 billion. Not only the interest rates in the

euro narkets, but also the eoono-ic factors which affect the western
capital markets thus becoos ole-ants of the econonic develop-ent o!
the state-trading countries: Price rises in the sec and the United

31
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

States. the Nesrican current-account balance deficit. the exchange rate
of the dollar-wall this can no longer leave thee indifferent. 'l'herefors
it is only logical if the west increasingly presses for a stronger
participation by the Soviet Union and the Best Buropean states in the
responsibility for the world econoaic system inclusive of developuental
aid. 'l'hus, Federal Chancellor Schnidt declared. following the Big

Seven nesting in Jasaice at the end of Decedier 1978 in which national
and govermentel leaders froa industrial and developing countries

took part. that with the approval of the other participants. he will

be supporting a participatory role of the soviet Union and the Best
Buropsan states in the Integrated Raw-materiel Prograe with the

Down Fund.

'mdey. the extent of the sconceic exchanges with the state-trading
countries is essentially li-ited by their requirements and their
financing potentialities. 1hey rssesble the threshold countries with
respect to where their interests lie. Even though trade with the Best
makes up only 5.6 percent of West Berean foreign tredeuand only

3.9 percent of the trade of the BBC-4t would nevertheless be not only
econonically but also politically a mistake to shield their markets
from competition from the state-trading countries. For the state-
treding countries of Best Burope. trade with the ﬂeet is an essential
eleesnt of their econouic develop-ant. But for the West as well,

trade with the Best retains i-portant. Here also what needs to be done
is to help the Bast European countries with their difficulties in
adapting to the requireasnts of the western markets, without sacrificing
the West's own interests. the conciliation of economic interests

will also, if it does not lose sight of the goal of the continually
greater integration of the stats-trading countries into the world
scone-y, lend a new quality to the political relations between then.
This becaee clearly perceiveble with the visit of the i wiet national
and party leader, Leonid Brezhnev, to Bonn in May 1978: an ecomaic
cooperation agreement keyed to a 25-year period was concluded. and

in the "Joint Declaration" on this the interest of each side in the
economic well-being of the people in the partner country was eephasized.
There was no longer any talk about the economic downfall of the

other, but rather about mutual interests in a fruitful and stable
economic exchange.

‘me Opening lip of china

The most recent decisions of the Chinese controlling bodies to modernise
and to decentralise the econony of this Dost-populated country on

earth, to carry out with the help of the Western industrial nations
industrialization projects of great Iagnitude. and to launch an extensive
technology transfer process, will have effects on international econo-ic
relations and on investaent and capital-sarket decisions by numerous
countries which are not as yet coqletely foreseeable. In view of the
considerable raw-material reserves of Gains, international arrangensnts

32
FOR OFFICIAL IS! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

with respect to rew-eeteriel policies will be influenced in the longer
run. 1he increesing intertwinesent of Chine's interests with the
western netionel econonies will leed to closer politicel reletions end
will heve e stabilizing effect. chine's own interests in orderly.
peeceful international conditions will grow. With e rising production
cepecity with respect to exporteble goods, Chine will Deco-e en

ilportent econoeic center of grevity in Asiensonething which will elso
heve politicel consequences.

Dong-renge Trend: here lntegretion

In the long renge, develop-snts ere tending towerd e greeter integrating
of the world economy. The key word "interdependence“ eptly cherecterires
these developeentsx 'me industriel countries need the developing
countries not only es rew usteriel suppliers but also es eeles outlets,
end the developing countries went to sell their rew nteriels end
finished goods in the industriel countries in order to be eble to
finence their econouic build-up. The stete-treding countries need
cepitel goods end technicel know-how for their eoonouic developent

in exchange for raw eateriels end finished goods. of course. ell of
this was elreedy the cese eerlier. whet is new is the intensity with
which developing countries end stete-treding countries ere teking pert
in world trede, end whet is new is the growing interest of the indmtriel
countries in these nerkets. The growing extent of these eoonosic
exchenges elso crcetes greeter erees of friction. 'merefore the
edjustnent processes heve to be cerefully directed. h more cleer
reveletion of the econoeic processes end trends. e better exchenge

of informstion. acre consultetione. e feciliteting of the direct
ectivities of the enterprises, end fecilitetion of cooperetion snong
enterprises cen ell decisively help here. The deepening end spetiel
extension of the policy of detente. the creetion of regionel structures
for promoting peece end cooperetion, end the strengthening of the
United Nations would promote the construction of e world econo-io
systee which would take more into account the requirenents of our
sodern tines end the politicel es well es the eoonouic end sociel rights

of people.

COPYRIGHT: 1919 Verleg fuer Internetionele Politih (Noll, Bonn

12114
C80: 3103

33

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WEST GERMANY

DHHTS, FINANCES OF MAJOR PARTIES EXAMINED
"auburn STERN in Ceruon 1 Feb 79 pp 106-148

IArilclv by Wolf Perdvlwitz: "In the Shadow of Impending Bankruptcy--
Pour Imndentou Parties 60 Million Marks in the Red-~Nev Tex-Exempt
Contributions To Make Their Treasuries Solvent Again"!

[Text] Host German parties in the next two years will invest 0 good 600
million marks in vote-getting. In prospect are six Londtog elections.
the Europe election. and finally the Bundestsg election. The hunt for
money in all instances precedes the hunt for voters. For no party can
pay from its savings for bottles in which neteriel is the deciding
factor. At the nonent they have only debts: the four parties of the
nundestog are in the tick to bsnks end suppliers for 60 million nerks.

The SP!) is in the leed for note tun 30 eillion. hit its cohorts cen
sleep soundly. They still leve couiderehle eesets in reel estete end
industriel invest-eats. In contrast. things look veg block for the
second lee-3e popnler petty. the one: the (:hristien Desomts ere htoke.
Since lisbilities exceed essets lay 20 sillion nth. petty chief lieleut
lohl. in strict eccondence with the lee. should ectmlly luvs filed for
henkmptqy. llor ere thing mil; sell for its sister per”. the can. It
is sitting on nnyeid hills end loene eeountins to note the 6 eillion
notice. on]: the m. for the first tile. is rid of its worst lorries.
It is Jmt under 2 eillicn nth in debt. he: yeen ego the debt use
still ll nillion.

Tintimncieldistressotthepertiesoepnteoyeerseqoendbeceee
cetestsophic in 1978. hoe 1976 to 1977 the outlicly reported incose of
the {our parties slipped dnnticelly: install of 355 Iillion mks.

only 21"] eillion in contributions. eeebsts' dues end public election-
cenpeign assistance pound into the petty nu: chests. lest Germ: citi-
eem end enterprises led become user; of contributing. And lest yser
letlnry of contribution finelly erupted. In 1976 the tow: treesurm led
still collected e little less the 100 eillion Ierlcs in chritehle gifts.
A yeer lets: it led st leest still ha NM: eillion.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The low point then see 1978. The perty treeeurere opened up their belence
eheete to me. Friedrich numm; (no): “800.000 mien" Heine
Herbert terry (m): ”A very bed yeerz' Keri-Heine Spilker (can): ’A con-
eiderehle decline in lerge contributions” Due methje. repreeentetive of
Uelther uieler Ktcp (my): “lace then 2 nillion.“

There nee reeeon for contributors to hold beck: for core tren e yeer 1?
public proeecutore' officee ecroee the republic Inve been inventipting 105
ceeee egeinet fir-e end inductrieliete. ‘l‘hq euppoeedl: in yeere before ted
ected to benefit the cm end to lur- the etete: they were cherged with ten
eveeion. The beet lumen victin of the criniml inveetiotion: likcleue
Peeolt. e Bonn tile Ienufecturer. Shortly otter the inveetipticm becene
known. he reeigned en preeident of the hderel Union of Ger-n lnduetry.

heolt Ind pleced four ordere for expert opinione. eech for 10,000 uric.
tron the ’mro n Mineee Mvieory Inetitute.’ heedenrtered in Vedue
(Liechtenstein . In the opinion of the ten euditor they uere northleee.
Molt. nonetheleee. entered the. ee ten-deductible openting eupenue in
the belenoe eheete. After deduction of carpet-en. the eonq Md been trene-
nitted tron Veduc to the our. on “Union lament mrpoution' in Bonn.
Along the 105 purer-ecu of ouch expert opinion: the Vedue were the beet
men in the Ger-en eccnow. In the opinion of the ten inventiotore.

thin operetion brought in e good 3 nillion nerlce for the m.

Since the reused public proeeoutore Inve been knocking et the executive
euitee of proninent bueineeeee. reedineee to Ieke generoue contribution
hee elu-ped ebruptly - et ell pertiu' «pence. for this ney of helping
e. perty timncielly end eeddling the tumor uith bl! the coat ee
”operetionel expendituree' Ind not been exolueively e Christian Mont
recket. Thu. in thine the Milieted 'Aeeooietion for Opening up
Underdeveloped lurkete Inc.” collected teapdeductible duee fro- labor-e.

litters uere nore direct in the ceee of the m. Bundlee of ceeh

owner right can” the teble. Albert Oeeeeld. tor-er Heeeien prise lin-
ieter. chuteccdly celled the gifte 'oteriteble loene.“ The neeeenger
cone to the house of Rudi Arndt, former neyor of Frankfurt,

with e euitceee of eoney end delivered eltogether l nillion Irlre ..
dented by the Berlin building connector ureten ningbeil. rho occe-
eionelly helped out the Union too. when Berlin cw politioien Peter
lorene wee ebducted by terror-into. the kidmpere found in his eellet e
check me ningbeil tint Ind not yet been aehed.

At the leteet. since mow. downfell end the decline in contribution:
thet it triggered. the politicdene teVe been reckim their hreine epin
over hour they cen put their orgnnieetione on e eolid timnciel beeie lith-

out et the one tine reviving the old ee- ebout the “cute ee the pertiee’
self-«nice etore.“

Pertiee today heve becone Iodern end expensive eervice operetiom. They
Inve the conetitntioml teek of eeeieting in “toning the politicel uill of

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the people.“ hence of casting light on political. events and expanding
political education. They are supposed to enlist new recruits for parlia-
sent and win over citisens for the state. They are supposed to influence
developsenta in parliasent and govern-ant and leave their iaprint on the
way the goverment does business. In conparison with these tasks there
is by law only very neager ineoae: at aost 3.50 saris per election per
vote. In addition every saber and every patron my annually deduct iron
taxes up to 600 sarks of dues and contributions.

Nevertheless. anybody who wants to contribute nore thn 20.000 mks runs
the risk of raving his naae and address published in the summons
Federal Gssette] (this is what. the m on parties in required since
96?). And resomefbl people proaptly found says of avoiding the painful
using of contributors. Sonatiaes large contributions were sisply de-
clared to be “snow-cue." Fund-raisers like "lhtioml Oitisens Associa-
tions" or the meren tax adviser lerner Rintzen acted as inter-diaries in
order to keep the actual contributor in the background. For in party
financing. ”Do good and don't talk about it“ applies.

A first attenpt to finance parties in a sounder and tidier fashion was the
proposed establisIIent of a colon hand in which all contributions should
be collected for subsequent proportionate distribution to the parties. The
plan collapsed last eutusn became the ED: wanted. by scans of a loophole.
to incorporate in the concept a belated aanesty for earlier tax offenders.

The next attenpt was the proposed increase in the tax-deductibility of
contributions. on which there was agree-ant in principle anong the martin
of the Federal Assenbly. Only the asount renained in dispute. The Union
would willingly up the previously allowed 600 urine to 10.000 nrlls. The
SPD. however. which led rather live on anll contributions. was unwilling
to exceed a linit of 3.000 saris. The treasurers will probably settle.
albeit grisly. on n.5oo aarks. SPD's inlstenberg: 'Tht doesn't help

at all. Neither Hr Karry nor lu- Kiep. hr Spilker or I accept 3.000-sark
contributions at all” .- but higher ones. of course.

Finally. a constitutional appeal fro- the land of liedersacheen aims at
total freedom Since contributions for “public. scientific or chritable
purposes” are tax-deductible alnost without restriction. the Oomtitutional
Court should consider whether the limitation on contributions to parties
accords with eqml treatnent. A decision of the Federal (bustitutionl
Court is anticipated next sue-er at the earliest. ibr tbt reason there
will be no clearing away of the financing thicket before then. Federal
Chancellor Hellut Schidt to his intinates: “Until there is a new lepl
ruling. we'll Just unit llrlsruhe out."

There is such ears to rule on at the ease tine. For parties. after all. it
is not Just 'contributiom" tint are in the twilight sons. Other incone
night not withstand too strict investigation. either.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus tho Fodox-ol Oonotitutionol (hurt on only on 1975 doomod it

oihlo for portion. on for mplo tho SPD. to dip into tho pookot oi‘ thoir
own puliuontu-y whom. may Sooiol Doooont loom oi‘ poriiuont in
Bonn oontrihutod. oonotinoo for Ioro thon ioo norko o Ionth. to tho iniiroot

govomontol timing of his pom - by oonpuloory oontributiono oni noro
or lou voluntary dduotiono m: hio onto-pin pom-dio- ollowonoo.

Thom hvo boon no noro of thou oonpuloory contribution oinoo tho lot-lo-
who dooioion. but thoro in not boon Inch obngo in tho “pol-ohm
inoono of 20 nillion norm o you: for tho four portion in tho Monl
uo-bly. Tho pulls-onto” unbor'o non contribution in now poid
“voluntarily." NV hookphonohor who would doro not to m not ho pro-
porod not to ho rononimtod in tho out olootion.

Also in tho twilight nono in tho i'imnoinl conduct of potty-offiliotod
foundntions: tho Konrod kiomuor Foundation (cw). tho Moorioh Mt
Foundation (SPD). tho Modrioh Manna hmtion (m) on! tho ham
Soidol Foundation (csu). Sinoo thq no roooaniud on non-pntit omn-
iutiona. thoy can offor lot-so oontrihutoro wht io doniod to thoir nothor
portion to: oxooption. And tht mo. For his oontrihutou no olnoot
olwo hi3 oornm who hovo to puo on ohout ill! of thoir inoolo to tho
govornnont. Thus tho ototo mo mt of our: 100.000-Iork contribution.

“The oignifioonco of {cumulon- for portion.“ writoo potty :ooouohor
Ronning von Viorouo. lioo prion-in in tho foot tilt thq ’xoooivo
50"omont nonoy which for lopl mono con no 10m con to tho

portion £1on govomoont hodgota." Moro tron 200 Iillion nth- o ya.
which in addition in not oomkod.

Thus the foundotiono an somtly holp thoir nothor portion. ‘rho "hoi-
burg Promo“ of tho m. for mplo. no printod ond diotritmtod In tho
Friedrich hmnn Mutantion. FD? Roam-or hm: “Ono Juot ho to

think doviouoly no u to ooddlo othox-o with wht ono would othoxwioo hwo
to w for onooolf.‘

oorynxcm 1979 Gmcrﬂlhr M} t m-

6%?“
com 3103

END

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY