APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007113210.: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOO‘I00010052-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010052-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8245
25 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE (XILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010062-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
{] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LABS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCID HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
I Iooaarm a a ”‘9va 1.! I ° A

«can 5 It!" - 0'.“ 'II(

' TRANSLATIONS 0N FEOPLE' S REPUBLIC OF CHINA, (FOUO 1/79) 25 January 1979

_‘~ ““"““°‘

. l’uiomia. Ouumauaa Name and Mann ‘0. _okeI/Taak/Iuk UaiI No.

Joint Publicationa Research Servica
1000 "um cub. no“
l2- 1’». 0! Input I Paid
Coveted

       
      
  
  
   
       

     

   
 
 

    
  
    
   
 

Arlington, Virginia 2220l

It. Somali“ Ouganiaauoa Nam lad Mean.

A. above

I5. Supplcmuuy Noun

5 AD’CIOCII

The report contains political, sociological, economic. government, nilitary.
scientific and technological inforaation on China.

         
     
   
   
     
 
   
 
     
   

- Key I'otda and are-cu Aaalnia.
CHINA

International Affairs
Political

Economic

Sociological

Nilitary

Propaganda
Technological Intelligence

0. continua

m. HeuukIa/Opaaoﬁdd tul-

lh.rmMTIFkUﬂkum SC. SD. 5K, 53

ll. Aunlomluy Sum-em

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

 
 

a 0-H IMO-D) Oltv. l'tle

rm: Iron an at atnooucto “"°“*°‘ "'“""
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/O

25 Jenna

TRANSLATIONS 0N PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
(P000 1/79)

CONTENTS

ECONQ‘IIC

PRC Seeks Japan's Aid in Mining Beavy Crude Cracking
Mt

(”EB Dal”! YONIURI, 13 DEC 78) 0000000000000000000000

Joint Hitachi-China Shipyard Plan Reﬂected
(wunnnu mu1x1ums,SIxc )

000000000000000000000

Big Cement Deal Made With Japan
(mm m! ms, 5 me 78) 00.000000000000000...

Briers
Golf Course Report Confined

86m NEW!

natures of Air Defense ﬂaming System mtlined
(T'ao wane-ring; m-x'm CRIB-8m, Sep 78)

mums

Japanese Cold Region aperta Invited to mm
(mm M! ms, 6 he 78) 000000000000000000000
FUR lWl’liZlM. lllil‘: UNLY

ECONOMIC

PRC SEEKS JAPAN'S AID IN BUILDING HEAVY CRUDE CRACKING PLANT
Tokyo THE DAILY YOHIURI in English 13 Dec 78 p 4 0"

[Text] china lms naked Japan's petrochemical and plant industries to extend
overall cooperation for the construction of heavy crude cracking facilities
in China. informed sources revealed Monday.

11m Japanese petrochemical industry has not been willing to expand its import
of crude oil from China because Chinese crude is rich in heavy fractions. but

the sources noted that the proposed project would pave the way for a solution
to this problem.

China plans to construct a heavy crude cracking plant capable of processing
about 20.000 barrels a day.

It has not clarified the site of construction or timetable but the sources
said that the best possible place would be in Pohai Bay and the timing
sometime after 1982 when the Sine-Japanese long-tern agreement on oil expires.

Pohai Bay is where the Joint undersea oil development project by the two
countries has been underway.

According to the sources, China plans to export to Japan such intermediary
products on gasoline. kerosene and naphtha to be produced at the plant in
order to pay for its construction and put heavy oil, which Japan does not
need so much. to its domestic use.

Japanese industries concerned intend to wholeheartedly cooperate with the
Chinese proposal because such a project will mean relatively low costs in
terms of land rent. personnel expenditure and pollution countermeasures

to make its products sufficiently competitive with their Japanese domestic
counterparts.

Au matters stand, Japan is not likely to achieve its goal of importing
l.5 million tons of Chinese crude in 1982 as provided in the Sino-Japanese

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 09PICIAL USE ONLY

long-torn agramnt nor is it likely to carry out the plan to increase the
import up to 30 nillion_tons by 1990.

China probably had this in mind in asking the latest proposal. the sources
said.

COPYRIGHT: Yoniuri Shinbunsha 1978

080: 6020

2
NB OFFICIAL USE ONLY
JOINT HITACHI-CHINA SHIPYARD PLAN REJECIED

Tokyo writcm DAILY ms in English 5 Dec 78 p 5

[Text]

ilitaehi Shipbuilding and
Engineering Co. discounted
Monday the possibility at
establishing a Joint venture
with China to construct and
querate a shipyard.

A spokesman tor Hitachi said
a visiting (‘hlnese shipbuilding
mission proposed such a joint
enterprisetobuildandoperate
a "tattoo-ton capacity shipyard.

The spokesman said his
company. like other Japanese
shipbuilders. ts sutterlng trorn a
serious slump and has no
ilnanrlal leeway whatever to
makcwchaninvestrnent.

llc said that under prev'aiilng
conditions, the plan tor a
proposed Chinese-Japanese
nongovernmental shipyard ls
tartrornpracticable.

ii the Japanese government
were to invest in such a venture.
it could materialize. the
spokesman sald. lie added.
however. that the Japanese
governmentsccmed milkclyto
makcsuchaninmtmeol. . ..

The spokesman said his
company submitted a price

estimate locum last month tor
the modernization at its Red
Flag shipyard in Kuia. north-
eastern China.

tie said the modernization
pmject calls tor construction at
a tomato-ton capacity building
berth. nhlch ts estimated to
cost 20 to 30 billion yen in Japan
currently.

ishlkawailma-ilarima ltcavy
industries Co. also presented
such ”an estimate to t‘hlna
eariicrlntheyear.

The ltitadil spokesman said
the modemlaallon and the Joint
venture project are apparently
separate.

COPYRIGHT: Halntchi. Daily News, 1978
816 cm DEAL MADE "I'm JAPAN

Tokyo mama: mm news in English 5 Dec 78 p 5

[Text]

in the largest deal in terms ot
volume ever shipped abroad.
Japan's eight cement makers
have jointly contracted to ex-

'port more than Ls million tons
ot cement to China next year.
industry sources-said Monday.

The sources said the mud
was signed nith the Peking
government late last month
when a mission oi the Japan
Cement Exporter: Auctioilon
of Tokyo visited the Chlrleae
en tat.

' contract calla tor a
shipment oi at least I: million
tons. more than 20 percent at
the 1.! million that Japan ex.

ported last year.

The sources said. however.
the industry expect; an in
crease in volume to be shipped
to around 2 million tons, noting
growing demand there In the
wake oi the Peking govern-
ment's modernization cam~
pain.

They said the price traa
reportedly tixai at $80 per ton.
tnchuting freight costs. tor
shipments in the first hall at
l9”.

Prices tor the latter halt will
be negotiated in Stay. the
sourcessaid.

The eight companies included
Onoda Cement Co.. Nihoo
Cement Co. and Mitsubishi
Mining and (meat Co., they
added.

OOPYitlcii'r: Heinlein: Daily News, 1978
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

001.? COURSE REPORT CWFIRHBD-ml’eking (KYODO)--Reports that China is plan-
ning to build a golf course were confirmed recently by a leading Chinese
official when he set with a visiting Japanese mission. He said a site
near Shihsanling in the northern outskirts of Peking was being consid-
ered at present as the most likely place for construction of the golf
course. Liao Cheng-chih, vice chairman of the Standing Committee of the
National People's Congress and president of the China-Japan Friendship
Association. had revealed that China planned to build a golf course when
he visited Japan in October with Vice Premier Tong Haiso-ping. Shihsanling
is located close to the Great Hall of China and there are 13 mausolea of
the Ming dynasty. Technicians who built the golf course which existed in
Shanghai before the birth of New China reportedly will be comissioned

to build the new course for completion in 1980. There are rumors that the
Chinese already have started surveying of land. As a result, Japanese
trading fins are reported to have started coves to sell golf inplenenta,
such as golf clubs. to China or supply knowhow for the construction pro-
ject. [Text] [Tokyo HAINICIIT DAILY NEWS in English 5 Dec 78 p 12]

080: (0020

5
FOR onrcm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TWHNOWY

FUTURES OF. AIR DEFENSE WARNING SYSTEM OUTLINE!)

Peking llANG-K'UNG Gilli-Slim [AERONAUI‘ICAL KNOWLEDGE] in Chinese No 9,
Sop 78 pp 22-24

[Article by T'no vans-p’ing [7118 2598 1627]: "lbvins Air Defense Comands
From the Ground Into the Sky")

[Text] An air defense warning system has three components. The
first component is a radar network which consists of warning re-
dars separated by several hundred kilometers: these radars are
distributed along the territorial boundaries or shore lines.

The second component is the air defense command. which receives
all the radar information about invading targets and processes
them by high—speed electronic computers. The third component is
the communication. command and control system which provides
communication links between the air defense commands. the indi-
vidual radars and the national air defense command: it allows
the commander to direct the interceptors. the missiles. or the
anti-aircraft guns to destroy the incoming targets.

One of the weak points of a ground radar is that there exists
a blind region because of the straight line propagation of
electromagnetic waves. If the hei ht of the radar antenna ha
( enerally located on high grounds§ is 100 m. and the flight
a titude of the target ht is 30 m. then the line-of-sight
range of the radar R is given by (see Fig. 1):

"ﬁ'i’mb/W” -
‘ +m)m’-
.. .. nine/1m
”Wm-«ea.
(1)
Key:
1. u.
2. meter
l-‘(M OFFICE/U. USE ONLY

A target more than 6“ km from the radar is located in the
blind region and cannot be detected; the straight line-of-
sight is blocked by the earth curvature.

To illustrate the phenomenon of radar blind regions. we shall
present two actual examples. The first example was an
incident in October 1969 when low flying Cuban MIG-17's
entered U.S. territory without being discovered. The second
example was an incident in September 1976 when a Soviet
MIG-25 defected to Japan by flying at low altitude into
Japanese air space: only one of the ground radars in northern
Japan detected the airplane at a range of 25 km. only 2 or

3 minutes before the plane landed.

Airborne Warning Radars

To reduce the blind region and to increase the line-of-

sight range of the radar. the elevation of the radar must be
increased. This can be illustrated by the visual range of
human eyes. The visual range of a person standing on the ground
is only several km. any object outside the visual range will

be below the horizon and cannot be seen. If the person stands
on a mountain, his visual range will be increased: the higher
the mountain. the larger the visual range. Currently. some
radars are installed on a radar tower to detect cruise missiles
flying at an altitude of several tens to several hundred meters.
But the limited height of a radar tower (several tens of meters)
cannot meet the elevation requirement.

Since the 60's. it has been suggested to install the warning
radars on airplanes. If the flight altitude of the airplane is
10.000 m. then using the above formula. one can calculate the
radar ran e for a target at 30 m altitude to be more than 400 km.
The practgcal ceiling of a modern early warning airplane can
often reach 12.000 m. hence the detection range of an airplane
geveral hundred meter above the earth surface may be over

00 km.

The first early warning airplane appeared during the early 50's.
But since the antenna beam of an airborne radar is always
pointing toward the ground. the signals reflected by the earth
surface and ocean surface are thousands of times stronger

than that reflected by the airplane. and the target is often
difficult to detect. Consequently. this type of airplane did
not receive a great deal of attention. By the early 70‘s.

the development of the so-called pulse doppler radar provided
an effective means for suppressing ground clutter and detecting

low-flying air lanes. Since then. earlv warning airplanes were
able to demons rate their full potentia..

7
F0? OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-Oli OFFICIAL 061-2 ONLY

Like a conventional radar. a pulse doppler radar uses a pulsed
waveform; the difference is that the reflected signal from the
moving airplane contains a doppler frequency shift which can

be detected by a filter. whereas the reflected signals from

the ground have no doppler shifts and are rejected by the
filter. A modern airborne doppler radar can detect an airplane
target from ground interference signals which are 100,000 times
stronger. The success of this type of radar depends on modern
technologies such as digital computer. digital circuits. and

a computational scheme called fast Fourier transform. In
addit on. it also requires new frequency stabilization tech-
niques and new antenna technology. -

 

Key: 1. radar antenna
2. airplane target
3. earth

Airborne Air Defense Command

The operating range of a modern airborne radar is about 800 km:
it covers an area of 300.000 square km. The operati range
of a conventional ground radar without considering bl nd
region is about 200 km; its coverage is only h0.000 square km.
Therefore. an early warning airplane can perform the same
function as ei t ground radars. A regional air defense
command contro s only ten or more radars. Hence. an esticne
have been made to move the air defense command also nto the
sky.

We know that the development of new offensive weapons poses an
increasing threat to air defense command. For example.
bombers and attack airplanes have low altitude penetration
capabilities: long range missiles can be launched from the
ground or from the air: also. nuclear explosion can inflict
severe damage to an air defense command system. In order to
improve the survivability of a command and control system. it
is necessary to move the air defense command onto an airplane.
This led to the development of the so-called "airborne early

Warning and control system”. Since this type of system is a

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY

combination of command. control. communication. and computers.
it is also called the c“ system. It should be re-emphasized
that this type of system was made possible only after the
successful development of the pulse doppler radar.

Special Features of an Airborne Tarning and Control System

An airborne warning and control system not only reduces the
radar blind region and increases the survivability of the
command and control system. but also represents a new landmark
in the modernization of air defense. The following two appli-
cations clearly demonstrate the value of such a system.

One application is a new air defense system which consists of
over-ths-horizon radars and airborne warning and control
systems(as shown in Pig. 2). The over-the~horizon radar
generally has a detect on range of #000 km. but its resolution
capability is only of the order of 100 square km. When an
invading bomber is detected by the over-the-horizon radar. it
transmits the information to the airborne warning and control
airplane. which enters into amrresponding strategic statue
and begins to search in a designated region. Upon detection
of the target. it commands the interceptors to intercept the
target. When the enemy airplane is sufficiently close. it
then commands the launch of air defense missiles and firing
of anti-aircraft guns.

The other application of an airborne warning and control

system is to increase the warning time against strategic

borbers and high speed low flying airplanes. Since the

airborne warning system can patrol at an altitude of 10.000 m
and 1000 km from its home territory. and has an operating

range against high altitude targets of #50 km. it is capable

of detecting tar eta 1050 km from the center of defense. Suppose

that the enemy a rplane approaches at a speed of Mach 3; a
ground based early warning radar can only provide 6 minutes of

warning time. but an airborne warning and control s stem can
provide nearly 30 minutes of warning time. If the nvading
airplane penetrates by flying at an altitude 100 m above the
ground. then a ground based radar with an elevation of 100 m
can only detect the target at a ra of 82 km. which does not
provide sufficient warn ng time aga nst a modern supersonic
airplane. An airborne warning and control system. however.
can detect the target 1050 km from the defended site. and can
direct long range ntercsptors to intercept the target far
away from homeland.

9
an 0HHCUU.USE(”LY
N" OFFICIAL US? ONLY

‘l'hc- rn::u|l.:'. of repeated «tnmlml. Merriam: :zhnw that an airborne
warning and control ayatem can sinultaneouely diatinguiah and
display 600 airborne targets. and can nimultaneouely direct 100
attack airplanes to intercept the targetn and then return to the
base. Ne know that a rround baoed radar complex not only has
early warning radars but also has guidance radars which can mea-
nure the range. azimuth. and elevation of a tarfet and can guide
interceptora toward the target. The early warn ng radar on an
airborne warning and control system also has the ability to mea-
sure the three coordinatee of a target: in addition. it has the
multi-function capability of acanninp its been electrically in
the elevation coordinate and operating in a track while scan
mode to dietinruinh and track several hundred targets simultan-

eouely. A conventional around baocd early warninn radar or
guidance radar does not have this capability.

Fly. 2 Operatinr range of an airborne early warning radar

 

2
). fighter interceptor
. invading enemy planes

a
5. detection range of an over-the-horizon radar
6. oVer-the-horizon radar

10
M OFFICIAL USE MY
mu Ol-‘P‘Icml. nan-z ONLY

Communication Requirements

The warning and command operations of an airborne warning
system may be disrupted ifthe enemy employs electronic counter
measures against the communication links of the system.
Therefore. this type of system requires a highly advanced
communication network which has several thousand communication

ports and uses high speed and reliable digital communication
techniques.

Multi-channel communication can be realized either by frequency
division methods or time division methods. Frequency division
method uses a device whose communication units can each
receive and transmit randomly at any one of several thousand
frequencies. Time division method uses a wide frequency band
(e.g.. L band which ranges from 962 to 1215 Mhz) which is
distributed among many communication units. and the signals

are transmitted synchronously at designated times to avoid
mutual interference. Because of the large number of channels.
two units can randomly share the same frequency: also. time

division system is used to transmit and receive signals
synchronously during specified time intervals. As a result.

the interference rejection ability of the communication system
is greatly improved.

Digital communication has the following advantages: its
transmission speed is 1000 times higher than analog signals:
it is highly reliable and has large communication capacity: it
can easily interface with the digital processing computer so
that securit measures can be easily implemented; it uses wide
band modulat on which is difficult to jam by the enemy.

Current Status in Applications and Development Abroad

At present. the Soviet Union and the United States have both
established airborne warning and control a stems which serve
as airborne command centers. They are equ pped with improved
radars which can detect low flying enemy lanes. and can
rapidly alert various defense systems to irect interceptors
or surface-to-air missiles to attack the invading targets.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has established a system
in western Europe which condsts of 18 airborne warning and
control airplanes. and was purchased from the 0.8. for 1.9
billion dollars. Great Britain. which is threatened by its

own economic crisis. developed its own airborne warning and
control system. The airplane used is a modified version of

the high speed Nitchhund patrol airplane whose radar is installed

t a nd i l. .
ﬁgpaROapgaall plagntgz oipurc ".2°3&§ §"&a§n 2g gi¥§i}i.§"3o

11
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

strengthen their air defense systems. The development of
airborne warning and control systems has become an essential
requirement in the modernization of air defense systems.

To increase our alertness and to prepare for war. we must also
estaglish a modern air defense system and demolish the invading
enem es.

3012
080: 3111/0216

12
PI? OFFICIAL USE 0MB!
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 UNLY

AGRICULTUii':

Jams cow mm» Exams INVITED T0 mm
Tokyo mmrcnr mm was in Btglish 6 Dec 75 p 5

[M27 PEKING tKyodoi-i-ziuht

Jmmumviii
heiavledtoitirial’mhuot
Chinatoteacaatiaaetaruten
cold m rice adulation

rice species m in the cold
areasoifdnlumiecttttu.

AI their w wilt he
borne by the Chinese
authoritiea. and tanning
multiples-entail»
Winﬁitbhythcuvmhe
later how by he Chm
auharitia.

This it a new loan oi
Waco-alumna
hetmhoanaaitChina

The aw was aimed
between the Japan-China
Apicultura and Pullers
mm.“ the
mwmm.

Chinese authocitiea ate
reputedly eager to learn

Janna-o ism; technology
which tm succeeded to

Mounties
ot rice inn one hectau at
mmummm
matte“. tttelhotiet-
altatiouoiiamiu

Ptovtaee Ametican-atyie

mammoth ranch (arming
technology and to Kim
Jmmstytecoidmrice

wmtm.
Greet expectation are

placed on this noted a the
initial step towards .iaua'a
technical cooneratioa in