APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOCOROOO100040022-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040022-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8386
9 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 12/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040022-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
l] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nalcs rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itema~are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT MRS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WRSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCBD RERBIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED MUFFICIAL USE ONLY.
ron orncxiu. use ONLY

JPRS L/OE
9 April 1

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN

(FOUO 12/79)

Comm

POLH'ICAL MD SOCIOWICAL

mire To Tell Carter Japan Hill Aid 'Remgee Canter' Plan
(rm 8mm, 21“”) 000.00.000.0900000000000

'ABAHI': Japan Against Tokyo Bunit Adopting Role-Sharing
Plan
(m: ammo ms, 16 na- 79)

'ABAHI' Bditor: Mda hiding Tine for (Io-aback
(Jutaro Tsuchida; awn 3mm: ms, 20 [hr 79)

Japan Selects Margy Problem To Be Discussed at Tolqo
Sumit
(HIHON xsxzu 3mm, 18 Mar 79)

300310410

Jamneae Organization Sees Danger of Inflation .
(Wren “arms, 20“”) ODOOOODOOOOOOOOOI...

Chamber of Commerce President Urges n lhrhet
(MICK! my ms, 6 M 79 000.000.000.000000000

Strategic Attitude Urged To Trade Balance Issue
(“Elem MY ms, 16 m 79) ounosoossoososoaasoo

ﬂare Power Plant Investment Planned
(mmcm mm ms, 161m 79)

Japan Industry on Upward Trend in Plant Investment
(mm Mr 83m, 12“”) sasooasooooosesooo

'MINICHI' on China's Decision To Defer Japanese Plant Inporta
(HAIRICHI SHINBUN, 18 Mar 79) ........ ..........

Japan Begins To Study Joint Aid Program for Egypt
(NIHON KEIZAI SHINBUN, 18 Mar 79) .....
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Continued)

Brie te

Mining Pact With USER

Joint Uranium Enrichment Proposal
Soviet Airline Proposal
Metralian Ore Prices

Cardboard for me

SCIENCE MID MOW!

'BUMBI W' .Diecuuee Outlook for Science and Technology

Briefs

(niroebi Takeuchi Interview; nuns: 881W“, Feb 79)..

Problems in Research, Development
future of Electronics

Steel Industry

Chemicals lhnutacture

New Trans ietor

.1)-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

20
M OHICIAL 08! OIULY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOOICAL

MIRA m TELL CARTER JAPAN um. All) 'RBI'UGBB CENTER' PLAN
Tokyo YMURI snmuu in Japanese 21 Mar 79 norning edition p 3 0"

[Text] A govern-ent source said on 20 March that Prime Minister Ohire has
decided to indicate, during his talks with 0.8. President Carter scheduled
for early Hay, Japan's readiness to extend vholehearted support, including
financial-aid and technical cooperation, for the construction of a "ts-porsry
reception center for Indochinese refugees" which has been proposed by the
Association of' Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

Ohira nede his decision on the basic of the following conclusions: 1) the
0.5. Administration end Congress have shown increasing concern over the Indo-
chinese refugees issue not only for hunanitarian reasons but also fron the
viewpoint of Southeast Asian security; 2) because of this tendency, Japan
nay be subject to harsher criticism for its negative attitude tonrd accep-
tance of refugees (for per-ansnt residence) and 3) the proposed center
stands eg good chance of being established under the ASIAN's initiative, and
Japan, which attaches i-portance to ASEAN nations in its foreign policy.
should actively deal with the plan.

The print ninister plans to convey this intention to 0.8. Government leaders
through. Foreign Minister Sonoda when he visits Usshington on 5 April. After
deternining the mount of aid as soon as details of the plan for the center
are nade available, he intends to present the Japanese aid plan himself when
he neets President Carter.

COPYRIGM': Yoniuri Shinbunshe. 1979
080: £105

1
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ion omcmusr our '

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDOICAL

mum": JAM]! AGAINST mo smear mus nom-sumuuc rum
Tokyo asm mm mm in English 16 liar 79 p 1 on

[Text] Japan will propose that the Tokyo suit of major industrial deno-
cracies in June should not follow the exanple of last year's Bonn suit by
again adopting a role-sharing for-ula in which the participating countries
set forth their targets in figures. government sources said Thursday.

-The proposal will be made at the first preparatory meeting for the Tokyo su-
mit to be held here on March 22 and 23. the sources said.

The sources also disclosed that the govern-ant will announce its intention
of playing a central role in writing the sections of a unit declaration on

energy and the north-south problem.

The goverment has already adivsed personal representatives of the foreign
leaders who will participate in the Tokyo sunit of its stand against adopt-
ing the role-sharing formla. West Ger-any and acne other countries report-
edly have expressed their approval.

But this proposal. together with a u. s. proposal for the. adjustment of the
industrial structures of the participating nations. is expected to prove
controversial.

The role-sharing fomla was adopted at the Bonn st-it with the idea that
efforts of the "three engines" of the United States, Japan and Heat Germany
would not be sufficient to put the world economy on a normal path.

West Germany promised additional budgetary measures equivalent to up to one
percent of its gross national product. France undertook to increase the
fiscal 1978 state budget deficit by an saount equivalent to about 0.5 percent
of its GNP. Japan pledged seven percent econonic growth in fiscal 1978. The
United States pronised to put into effect by the end of 1978 measures to

cut its oil imports by about 2.5 million barrels a day by 1985.

The goveruent now points out: 1) the need for the participating countries
to set forth their growth targets at the Tokyo suit has becole less urgent

2
’0! OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

as the econonies oi theaUnited States, Japan. Italy and other countries are

steadily inproving. 2) the 0.8. energy lav to nuke possible a reduction in
oil inports has been passed, and the aphasia vith reapect to energy has
switched to vorking out a canon oil conservation progran.

In View of these changes, the goverment feels that the participating lead-
ers should try to reach a consensus on nediu- and long-tern structural

changes in the world econony at the Tokyo emit. rather than spell out
their short-tern targets.

Meanwhile. the 0.8. Governnent has informally proposed the creation of a
standing consultative body. to be composed nainly of forncr governnent of-

ficials, to discuss econonic issues between Japan and the United States,
govern-eat sources revealed Thursday.

The proposed panel will explore ways of stabilizing bilateral economic rela-
tions on s nedius— and long-tern basis. whether or not econonic friction

. between the 0.8. and Japan can be resolved could deter-ins the success or
failure of the Tokyo suit.

The creation of the body will be fornlly proposed by Henry Owen, President
Jimy Carter's special representatives. who will arrive here in one or two
' days for the first preparatory neeting for the Tokyo aux-it.

COPYRIGHT: Aaahs Evening News, 1979
030: 6120

3
roe onrcm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOIDOICAL

'ASAHI' EDITOR: PUKUDA BIDRIG TIM! POR camel:
Tokyo ASAIII EVENING NM in English 20 Her 79 p 3 0'

[Article by Jutaro 'rsuchida, ussistant political news editor of the ASABI.
SBDIBUN] .

[Text] For-er Prise Minister Takeo Fukuda apparently intends to run again
for the presidency of the ruling Liberal-Desocratic Party next year if the
circumstances are favorable. although he will not say so.

. Re has regained confidence about his health, and his political activities are
hectic. lie began a full-scale natioluide stuping tour early this Ionth. He
attended last week's rally in support of the LID-Centrist gubernatorial candi-
date for Tokyo as the proxy of frine Minister Hasayoshi Ohira.

In January, Pukuda formally revived his LDP faction and set up an office ‘for
party refors within the group. He is said to be busy as when he was in power.

It is clear that he is preparing for sonething. but he will not reveal his
target. .

Muda criticised Ohira's leadership in a gathering of his faction last south,
and in a subsequent seating, he said: ”I was not defeated (in last year's
LOP presidential election). . I have not retired fro. politics.” This was
taken as hinting that he intends to run again for the top LDI’ post next year.

But he backtracked later. As he kicked off his natiomide stumping tour. he
did not say anything that night be taken as an attach on Ohira. Be has also
remarked that it is not correct to label his faction a's anti-ainstrean and
that his bond of trust with Ohira regains unchanged.

The mood within the rulmda faction is strongly critical of Ohira. ﬁre We
group and the factions headed by Yasuhiro Ramona, who also lost to Ohira
in last year's LDP presidential contest, and by forsar Prise Kinister Takeo
Niki try to rock the boat whenever an opportunity presents itself. but they
are far froa being close enough to love together against Ohira.

I;
’0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Under the circunstsnces. it l’ukuda cane out clearly agath Ohira now he
would probably iind hinself isolated.

This lashes I'ukuda so guarded in his remarks and actions that even ranking ~
Isabers of his (action coqalsin they cannot fatho- whst he has in mind.

' A drive to recruit new m where. voters in the presidential prinsries.
eust be hunched now if Mode is to get hisself elected as the party heed
next year. -

But Pukuda would not say whether he would or would not run. In the absence
of sclsrification fro- hin, the Pukuda group cannot start a recruit-cut

campaign.

A junior nsnber of the faction, worried about the situation. recently called
on Fukuda and urged his to clarify whether he would run or not. Pukuda
reportedly told hin: "It's not necessary for no to say anything. You know
what I have in nind, don't you"? It is said that the junior legislator
rushed back to hie constituency and is working hard to recruit new party
when who will vote for Pukuda.

Despite his professed bond of trust with Ohira. there is no question that
' Pukuda really has no intention of cooperating with hi. to prop up hie govern-
mt.

A non very close to Pukuda, probably echoing what the toner prenier thinks.
says: "Ohirs is gearing the running of the party entirely for hie victory
in next year's presidential election. He spends party funds in ways that
only his son benefit.. He says he consults with Fukuda on all inortant
matters, but what he actually did about the choice of the we candidates

for the governorship of Tokyo and the lower house speakership was surely

to seek Fukuda's approval of his decisions. It was not a consultation,
sorely a notification.

"Ohira also says he consulted with ma about his decision to let the fis-
cal 1979 national budget be voted down in the lower house budget co-ittee,
but no word cane fron hin. So, Pukuda has no obligation to cooperate with
Ohira."

For the tine being, Pukuda will keep a detached watch on Ohira's perfornance
in'dealing with various issues. “lying criticiss iron tine to tine. lle

- will manifest en anti-ohira stance and nake a bid for a conebeck when he
feels there are prospects for his victory in the 1980 presidential election.
This is apparently what Fukuda has in nind.

COPYRIGIIT: Asahi Evening News, 1979
cso: 6120

5
roe onrcm. use our
FOR OHICIAI. 083 010.?

POLITICAL AND 80010140610“.

JAPAN 831.3013 ENERGY P30813118 1'0 38 015008820 AT mo GMT
Tokyo 1mm KZIZAI sunnw in Japanese 18 Mar 79 norning edition p l W

[Excerpt] In connection with the forthcoming Tokyo emit conference. Japan
has been tentatively assigned the tasks of lasting preparations for the sun-
nit discussions on energy problens and drafting the portion dealing with
energy and nonth-south prohless of a joint cot-unique to be issued at the
close of the conference. In this connection goverment officials, nainly'of
the Foreign Ministry, the Hinistry of International Trede and Industry and
, the Resources and Energy Agency, have begun to select topics to be taken up

in discussions on energy problem and subjects to be included in the joint
co-unique.

According to a goveruent source, in discussion held so far these officials
have virtually agreed that in order to cope with the petroleu shortage
resulting froe the Iranian political upheaval and the rising petroleum
prices, it has becone necessary for the njor industrial nations to cooperate
still nore closely in inplensnting a joint energy strategy. 0n the basis of
this judgnent. they have decided to call for "the inlenentation of ,a coopera-
tive energy strategy". as a key issue at the eu-it conference. The Japanese
Govement has already conveyed this idea to the Uhited States and other
countries concerned. Officials of various seven-exit agencies have recent-
ly begun to discuss concrete aspects of the cooperative energy strategy to
be undertaken by these countries.

These officials will divide their discussions into two categories: i-ediate
Iessures and long-range strategy. - I-ediate measures involve the question
of how to deal with the worldwide fear of unstable petroleu supply and the
petroleun-producing countries: offensive for higher oil prices. According
to the sane govermsnt sources, there see-s to be no alternative for oil-
consueing nations but to do their best to implement the international energy
agency decision to reduce petroleun consunption by 5 percent so that they
can ward off the oil shortage and the pressure for higher oil prices.

As for long-tern strategy, Japan will stress that now is the tine for all

advanced nations to study and develop in earnest energy sources other than
petroleun. Here specifically. first. the prevailing view is that ”Japan

6
roe omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

should propose the creation of a “joint research and develop-eat organiza-
tion" to conduct research and develop-ant work on coal liquefaction and nu-
clear fusion by pooling noney and personnel in order to develop energy sour-
ces other than petroleum. This organization will be independent from the IRA.
Japan. the United States and Heat Gamay have already launched a joint coal
liquefaction project. But the new organization will be aimed at creating

a comprehensive joint energy research and developsent system in which various
countries. including France, which is not an IRA saber, will participate in
developing new energy sources including coal liquefaction.

Second, Japan plans to propose that the IRA strengthen its research and de-
velopoent function and speed up the telpo of research and developnent so
that solar heat and wind energy can be put to practical use at an early date.
At the sane tine, Japan will propose creation of a systen by which various
countries will exchange intonation on the results of their independent ener-
gy research and developsent projects so that they can indirectly assist the
IEA’s research and developnent activities.

Third, Japan and sole other countries will call for the full utilisation of
atomic energy. At present. Japan is virtually prohibited fro. building nu-
clear fuel plants for producing enriched uraniun for use in atomic power
plants and building spent nuclear fuel reprocessing plants on grounds that
the building of these plants will lead to nuclear proliferation. The INPACB
[International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation] is currently working on a
basic frsaework to overcome this bottleneck. Japan will call on other coun-
tries to cooperate in reaching an early conclusion on this issue.

No objection is expected to be raised to the Japanese Covert-cat's call for
a long-range "cooperative energy strategy,” but there is the possibility
that the Japanese short-tern proposals will be criticized as being rather
lukewarm.

COPYRIGHT: Youiuri Shinbunsha. 1979
cso: 4105

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

BCONMIC

JAPANESE ORGANIZATIN SEES DANGER 0P INHATIW
Tokyo HAINICRI DAILY NEWS in English 20 Mar 79 p 5 W

[Text] A leading economic organization, Keizai Doyukai (Japan Omittee for
Economic Development). warned Nonday or an imminent spurt of inflation and
urged businesses to increase production to forestall both runaway inflation
and the inset of a tight money policy.

Keizai Doyukai said the price issue has already become serious enough to
comand serious attention although there is still some feeling that the re-
cent price spiral is not so serious because it is a compounded results of
l) overseas inflation. 2) rebouncing of the domestic wholesale prices which
had been depressed. and 3) is a normal phenomenon in a time of economic re-
covery.

The situation is very similar to that just before the inset of runaway in-
flation of 1973. Keizai Doyukai said, in that international market prices
are zooming, the world economy is on the rise. donestic land and stock pri-
ces are rising, oil prices are rising. and money supply is increasing.

However, the massive issuance of government bonds has ,made it extremely dif-
ficult to control money supply. In this respect the situation is quite dif-
ferent from 1973.

The current inflationary trend in Japan is largely caused by zooming inter-
national market prices and the slippage of the yen. M other major infla-
tion causes are the sustained massive bond issuance and business reluctance

to boost production.

Although there is still roughly a 15 percent gap between overall supply and
demand in the manufacturing sector, the slow production boost could push up
prices as demand easily overtakes production.

According to Keizsi Doyukai that was exactly what happened in the 1973 run-
away inflation. Furthermore, at that tine there was about a 10 percent gap
between demand and supply.

8
ton onucm. use out!
m oimcw. oar om

The current upturn in wholesale prices will. with tine lag. push up the con-
suner prices and could probably inflate pay raise denands.

‘ro forestall such an inflationary chain reaction. Keisai Doyukai said the
monetary authorities should avoid a strong tight soney policy such as s
raise in the official discount rate.

The govertaaent should also delay the isplenentetion of public works proj-
ects in fiscal 1979 which begin on April 1. Public works expenditures should
be curbed to some extent.

with reduced expenditures. the big business' club acid. the govern-ant bond
issuance values should be tri-aed as such as possible.

If continued issuance of bonds is necessary. new bonds should hove a shorter
seturtiy period then the current 10 years.

At the sons :13... the sonetery authorities should eoteblish and show the tar--
get zone of honey supply. es in Europe end the 0.5.. to deepen public under-
standing of price trends. Kcizei Doyukei advocated.

The organization urged the goverment to take every seasuro to foil moves

to reap windfall profits as price rises abroad inevitably filter into douestic
prices one 'wey or another and profiteers are quick to take advantage.
COPYRIGHT: l'ainichi Daily News. 1979

080: £120

9
FOR ontcm. usr ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

BOONOHIC

CHAMBER 01’ 00.43308 P8331081?! "$38 01’8“ MARKET
Tokyo Humour DAILY anus in Englieh 6 Her 79 p 5

[Text] Japan ehould etrive to trim ite growing eurplue in the current
account by further opening up ite market-manly further liberaliretion of
agricultural product iworte and allowing foreign lenufacturere to bid for
procure-ante by governmental organieetione, urged 8higeo Negeno, preeident
of the Japan Chaﬁer of Co-erce and lnduetry, 'l‘hureday.

The Joe! preeident eaid the eurplue ieeue which hae becone a Iejor inter-
national problen could not be eolved by Japan alone. The problen al'eo
etene fro. the induetrial end trade etructuree of Jepen'e trade pertnere,
he eeid. '

Negeno eeid it ie not Japan alone that not be blamed for the current trade
frictione but eleo ite trading partnere. Ilelf of the ceueee of friction ero
nieunderetendinge end a lack of underetending of the Jepeneee economy on
the part of trade partnere, he eeid.

The .1ch preeident nade theee r-erke at the opening of the l09th general
eeeedaly of the Jepen chadur of Co-erce and lnduetry.

He eeid the whole for instance Jepeneee eocio-econouic eyeten neede to_bo
urea-lined by, for inetance, making a dreetic revieion of input controle
on egriculturel producte whole price levele ere Inch higher than the
internetional nrhet pricee.

Anticipated tight eupply of oil and price rieee dictete that the country
expedite developent of nuclear power generation eo that the uneveilebility
of oil will not inpede the international coqetitiveneee of Jepeneee producte,
he aeid. .

The econolic train ie pullim out of the prolonged receeeion tmnel and into
the open, he eaid, although the tail-end ie etill in the tunnel.

10
FOR ONICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

An upturn in teen in private coneu-ption. inveetnenta in inventoriee and
equip-ent, and output and ahiplente have begun to pick up. he laid.

Bouever, he continued, the econcq ie beeet with e major problen of
uneqlcylent. particularly that of eenior aged workera. Coupled with a
general price epiral trend, anticipated oil price narkupe, mi declining

Jepaneee exporte, he cautioned, the eituaticn uarrante no optilien for
bueineaa.

Turning to the controvereial doneetic ieeue of a general uciee tax (value-

added tax) e'cheue, the .1ch president called on the goveruent to enerciee
the utmet prudence.

The preeident of the retailera' organization eaid rectification of the
exiating unfeir taxation ayaten, “consolidation of aduinietrative nechinery,
and budget econouiring mat precede the aalea tax introduction.

Even after euch etreenlining, the introduction ehould reapect the coneeneue
opinion of the general public, he etreeeed.

[hiring the one-day aeeedaly, all the officere of the JCCI were reelected
and epecial advieere were reco-ieeioned. As a result. Nagano entered hie
eixth atraight two-year ter- of office.

COPYRIGHT: Heinichi Daily News, 1979

080: 6120

11
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

rcouomc

STRATEGIC ATI‘I'IUDB URGBD 1'0 TRADE BALANCE ISSUE
Tokyo mmlcm DAILY news in Bnalieh 16 Mar 79 p 6

(Text) Parliamentary vice niniatere aeked the govern-eat Ihuraday not 'to
yield easily and unthinkinsly to 0.8. dnande for Japaneae action to correct
the bilateral trade iabalance.

Speaking at a regular neeting of parlianentary vice ninietera. Yoahiro
Hayaahi, parlienentary vice finance niniater, aeid the seven-ant abould
deal with the 0.8. demande fro- an overall atrategic viewpoint.

The govern-ant ahould not deal with the 0.8. denande individually, he raid.

“the view wee aupported by Seiichi Kataoha, parli-entary vice agriculture,
forestry and fieheriea ninieter, and lchiro Kataoka, parlialentary vice
ninieter of international trade and induetry.

lbtoharu Ari-a, parliamentary deputy director general of the Defenae Agency.
aaid, neanwhile that the Japaneae Diet-en ahould conduct thorough .diacuaaiona
with 0.8. congreeuen on econouic probl-e between the two countriea.

But in holding auch connultationa’, ha eaid, they ahould linit topice of
diacuaaion to overall problem. *

ﬂiaaoki Kalei, parlialentary vice niniatar of poeta and teleco-unicatione.
aaid the govern-eat ehould eatablieh a coordinating nachinery to deal with
0.5. denande on an integrated baaie.

WHRIGHT: Hainichi Daily New, 1979

680: 6120

12
NR OPPICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BCOﬂOHIC

mum mum PLANT 1mm PLANNED
Tokyo MINICIII DAILY mas in Englieh 16 Her 79 p 6

[Tent] . Tho Jepencee bueineee co-mity end the ruling Liborel-Donocretic
Perry egrced lhuredey to etep up inveetnente in power plente in fiecel
1979, too, to bring bueineee recovery into full ewing.

The egreenent ce-e et e top-level bueineee-LDP neeting in Tokyo. It wee
ettended by leedere of the four nejor econonic orgeniutione. including
Toehiwo Doko, preeident of tho Federetion of Bcononic Orgenizetione
(Keidenren).

The U)? delegetee included ‘l‘oehio Konoto, cheirnn of the Policy Affeire
Reecerch Council.

Bueineee recovery wee the nein topic.

Dolto eeid bueineee ie recovering, end thet the governent'e big budget end
ective inveetnente in power plente heve eerved ee e nejor driving force.

Ile eeked the LDP leedere to further etep up inveetnente in power plente in
find 1979 ee well.

Ko-oto replied thet ective inveetnente in power plente would continue to
be nede in fiecel 1979.

Referring to the propoeed generel exciee ten. the chief w? policy-liter eeid.
"Ho hope to eeteblieh the tea in fiecel 1980, but the deteile heve not been
worked.”

Ile edded thet now ie the tine to unite every effort to put bueineee recovery
into full ewing. If recovery doee go into full ewing, corporete tear
revenu'ee would increeee, neking it unneceeeery to iepoee e high-rete
generel -:xciee tex, Konoto eeid.

13
you ontcuu. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Shigeo Nagano, president of the Japan c‘halbar of Co-erce and Induatry.

aid that there ia a atrong opinion anon; analler huaineaeaa againet the
inatitution of that tax. he called (or increaaed efforta to obtain the

cement of the people at large to the plan.

Konoto and party aecretary general Knnikichi Saito replied that the party
would tdte a cautioua atand on the latter.

COPYRIGl'r: Hainichi Daily Nova, 1919

680: 10120

1k
POI! OFPICIAI. US! OWL?
POI! OHICIAI. US! ONLY

scoumtc

JAPAN mousm 08 UPHARD TREND IN PLANT MSW
Tokyo mam IBIZA! samuu in Jepeness 12 Her 79 norning edition p 1 09

[Excerpts] A study of investnsnt plsns in the privete industrial sector in-
dicntes that the nstion's nenufscturing industry this yesr is likely to ex-
ceed its 1978 level in outlsy for plents end equipeent. A ”survey of in-
dustries' investing. tinsnciel end producing cepshilities" for 1979. hssed
on s poll “-1.393 fires in the privete se'ctor conducted by the NIHON IBIZA!
summon coweny. projects sn increese of 3.1 percent in plent-equipeent in-
vesteent over lest yeer's level. The nenufeeturing industry slone is ex-
plected to register e 3.6 percent gain in that eree.

For the first tine in S yeers the nenufecturing industry will show en upwsrd
trend in this eree; steel. chenicsl end textile industries heve rsfrsined
fron spending noney on plents end equipnent during this time. neenwhile. es
s result of s leveling off in investusnt in the electric power industry. out-
leys for plents end equipment by non-snufscturing industries will show e re-
lstively slow growth of 2.7 percent over the 1978 level.

Included slang the Iejor fectors contributing to the upwerd trend in the menu-
fecturing industry ere 7.‘ percent in steel industry. SJ percent in cheni-
cel industry. 7.2 percent in textile industry. end 5.8 percent in nonferrous
estsllurgicel industry.

On the other hend. eutoeohile end electric epplience industries. which plsyed

s lending role in this eree in recent yeere. eppeer to heve resched pletseus
. now. Otherwise. the upwsrd trend could he even nore decisive.

COPYRIGHT: ”than Keiul Shinbunshs. 1979
680: 6105

15
'0’. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONION USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

'HAINICHI' Oﬂ CHINA'S 0861810! 1‘0 08m JAPANESE PLANT IMPORTS
Tokyo‘lMINlClu :3an in Japaneee 18 Her 79 norning edition p 7 0d

[Bxcerptel Chine haa recently notified Japan of ite deciaioa to defer ful-
filleent of ite plant import contracte, which amount to 560 billion yen. In
this connection, on 17 Hatch nejor Jepaneee fir-e revealed their finding that
Chine hee node no einilar decieiona on ite .contrecte with fine in the
United Stetee and European countriee. Thie fact wee confined by the Min”-
ietry of Internetionel Trade and Induetry [NIH] on the one day.

It ie not clear why China'e decieion only involvee contracte with Jepeneee -
firea. but the prevailing view among leeding Japaneae fine in thet Chine
hea teken the atep in order to obtain favorable terse in ite difficult ne-
gotietiona with Jepan on loane.

Regarding Chine'e decieion. HIT! holde the viow that ”exceaeive enpheeie on -
heavy induetry in China hae reeulted in the lack of a balance between induatry
end other eectora. including agriculture, and to ranove thie inbalance, Chine
eeeee to have aterted to edjuet ite plent inporte frol Japen. which occupy a
coneidereble part of ite total foreign trade volune.”

however. nejor Jepaneae fir-e believe tbet China'e decieion ia eined at ee-
curing favorable term in ita talka with Japan on loane. They eey that‘thie
la clear fron a cable‘China eent notifying Japan that it ie taking the etep
"becauee the ieeue of funding cooperation between Jepan and China hae not yet
been reeolved.” 'ro back up their View. they alao point out the fact that
while China to actually receiving loane froe britain and ﬂeet Geneny, it hae
yet to negotiate with Japen for the eettlenent of the ieeue over funding co-

operation.
OOPYRchl': Heinichi Shinboneha. 1979
cso: 6105

16
roe omcw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

somatic

JAPAN nrcms To STUDY JOINT AID PROGRAM POI! EGYPT
Tokyo NIIION KBIZAI swam in Japanese 18 Her 79 earning edition p 2 00

[Text] The Pbreign Ministry began studying a possible neweconoaic aid pro-
grea for Egypt. With Egypt and Israel having agreed'to sign a treaty of
peace. President sl-Sadet disclosed a plan to ask the United States, Vest
“many and Japan for a 5-year assistance progran aaounting to $15 billion
for his country's econonic rehabilitation. The 11.3. President has already

‘ expressed his support for this plan. Thus. President sl-Sadat and President
Carter are now reportedly seeking Japan's share in the aid progran. The
Foreign Hinistry has said that "the Iinistry will study the aid issue when
a request for assistance has for-ally been received." However, linistry
leaders believe that, like it or not. Japan will have to undertake its due
share in the assistance prograa. A concrete discussion of the issue nay
possibly start between Japan and the United States when Foreign Minister
Sonoda visits ﬂashington in April. The Foreign Ministry hopes that it will
be able to finalize the fraeeworlt for Japan's share by the tine al-Ssdet
visits Japan.

Through the conclusion of a peace treaty with Israel, Egypt hopes to center
nest of its efforts on reconstructing the donestic econoay'. To realize this
hope, President sl-Sadat plans to obtain funds aaounting to $10 billion
from-thsbnite'd States and $5 billion froa Japan and West Germany. It is
said that President Carter had this al-Sadat plan in mind when he node a
statenent on scone-it assistance to Bgypt recently. A for-a1 request for
the share in the aid program is expected to he tends shortly by President Cer-
ter to Japan and Heat Gsmny. In the past. Japan has actively cooperated
with Egypt econonically through loans in yen. Japan believes it should show
an equally active response to this future aid progran when for-ally asked to
participate. Poreign Hinistry officials say that. in so doing. Japan can
deaonstrate its support for the new liideast developaent. following the
Egyptian-Israeli agreeaent to sign a peace treaty. and can also live up to
its faith in Middle East peace. However. sole officials also believe that
thoughtful consideration should equally be given the Arab nations' opposi-
tion to the signing of the peace treaty. Thus. the ninistry believes that,
in wet! ing out concrete aid nsasures. Japan should keep a close watch over
future . .nelopaents in the Mideast situation.

COPYRIGHT: Nikon Kolui Shlnbunsha, 1979
030: 6105 17

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL “8! ONLY

30080110

BRIBI’S

MINING PACT "I’m USSRuSunitono Cool Mining Co on 15 March announced plans

to soon sign a technical cooperation agree-ant with the USSR and to send the 7
first group of technicians to the Soviet Union in June. Suitono will be the
first Japanese fire to undertake such cooperation with the USSR in the coal
eining sector. Its part of cooperation will priaarily be in the technical
area of hewing in steeply inclined coal beds. [Tokyo NIMON K312“ SNIIIBUN

in Japanese 16 Her 79 earning edition p 6 ON] '

JOINT URANIUM mum PROPOSAL-Morale“ sources disclosed on 16 "March
that Japan hes received an infernal Nest Ger-an proposal for a joint uranit-
enrichnsnt project anong Japan, no and Australia. The gist of the proposal.
conveyed to Japan Atoeic Energy Co-ission by (w. Scbidt Kuester. chief for
research and developnent bureau of the Nest German Ministry ior Research and
Technology, is as follows: 1) the enrichment plant will be built in Australia
and that country will furnish the site for the plant and supply natural uran-
iue; 2) the process of enrichent will follow a ”centrifugal" nethod developed
by a joint uraniue snricbent program anong Nest Geruny, Britain and the
Netherlands; and 3) Japan will furnish construction funds and take charge

of the sale of the end product—enriched uraniun. It is possible that Japan
will respond to this proposal in View of 0.8. stand that for uraniua enrich-
Ient Japan give up its current singlehanded developnent program and instead
seek a ”multinational joint venture" iornula. [rokyo NIBON um! 33mm

in Japanese 17 Mar 79 norning edition p 6 ON] ' '

SOVIET AIRLINE PNOPOSAL--Miniater of Transport lbriyana has received a lat-
ter iron Soviet Minister of 'Civil Aviation bugaysv proposing that both Japan-
ese and Soviet airlines increase the nulber of their flights on the present
Tokyo-Moscow air route and open new routes between cseka and Leningrad and
Osaka and Kiev. The letter. delivered by Soviet Albassedor to Japan Polyan-
skiy. also calls on both the Japanese and Soviet goverments to conclude an
agree-cot on introducing charter fugitsbetween the two countries. Ac-
cording to transport niniatry sources, the niniatry has little interest in the
proposal because passengers using air services between Japan and the USSR are
not very nany and their umber is not expected to go up. In addition. Nerita
Airport would need nore fuel supply and runways to nest the Soviet proposal,
and Japan is obligated to give priority consideration to similar proposals
Iade earlier by 33 nations, the sources said. [Tokyo mow um: Slim“!!!

in Japanese 17 Mar 79 norning edition p lo an

13
POI OHICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

AUSTRALIAN on: PRICESnAuatralia and Japan have reached an accord on the pri-
ces of ferrous ores to be exported to Japan during fiscal 1979. The new pri-
ces shov an average increase oi slightly more than $1 per ton over the level
of fiscal 1978. The agreenent also calls for a review and readjustment of
export quantities every 3 nonths. Both sides also agreed to slightly in-
crease export quantititee. Australian Minister of node and Resources

Antony on 1 March called the agreement ”a satisfactory one." Tokyo mum
IBIZAI sumac in Japanese 2 Mar 79 morning edition p 5 W]

CARDBOARD M PRC-Japanese cardboard makers have concluded contracts with a
delegation of the China notional light industrial iaport-cxport corporation
for the delivery of “.300 tons of cardboard to China free April through June.
In View of China's increasing need of cardboard for packing its export light
industrial goods, Japan's paper industry expects to sign more contracts with
China at the Guangzhou trade fair scheduled to open on 15 April. Japan's
cardcoard export contracts with China amounted to “8,100 tons last year.
[Tokyo amen KBIZAI 8mm in Japanese 9 Her 79 p 7 an

680: 10105

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TEHMLOCY

'BUNEI SHUNU' DISCUSSBS ourwox FOR SCIBME AND TECHNOLOGY

Problens in Research. Developsent
Tokyo 3111581 sum in Japanese Peb 79 pp 68-156

[Article by hiroshi l‘ekeuchi, research director. Japan Long Tera Credit
Bank: _ "Is Another Revolution Possible in Japan's Technology“ Science
as s Promter of Japan's Bconoly in the 1980s"!

[Excerpt] General
Technological Advances and Position

One's interest differs according to one‘s position: a' physician would
take interest in the physiological, a literary scholar in the eeotional,
and an engineer in the nechsnical aspects of a human being. while a
philosopher would look at hunan values.

ﬂunns, from an econosic point of view, expect a naxiaun benefit froa a '
nininua of labor. Human behavior is considered only in terns of pro-

duction, consmtion and savings and investeent, to the consternation of
literary scholars and philosophers.

The sane can be said of technological advances. Physicists any highly
evaluate the existing technological level for the probe of the elemental
particle structure, while biologists and cheniste my regard the present
age as the dawn of nolecular biology.

A housewife may view the level of existing technology only in term of
new products such as a mattress drier. To a housewife caring for her
parents, the drier is a lifesaver, a product of technological advances.

Japen' s econony enjoyed a large growth because of renrkable technological
advances made from 1955 to 1970 in nest industries, including petrochemical.
textile and electronics.

20
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Stagnation of Technological Advances

‘Ihese technological advances paved the way for high economic growth through
the following aechenisn: To introduce a new technology or create a new
technological industry. Iajor industries would lake huge capital invest-
eents, create a demand for products of the netsllic or aachinery industry
"which in turn would expand its own capital invest-ant, and even establish

a new plant. with increased deund and supply, the industry would snow-
ball into a larger industry. ‘

With high econonic growth, the wage level will rise in keeping with the
supply of labor. and an increased deasnd for durable consumer goods will
stinulate capital investment and production. In addition. the construc-
tion of huge plants by the durable goods industry and less production
techniques will drive the costs down, creating an even greater desand.

And as. s labor-saving aeasure, hugs capital invest-ants will be made in
'autoastion. -

Pro- 1955 through 1970, technological advances spurred capital investaenta
and pronoted economic growth. In the sense that technological progress
enaeshed Japan's econoay and changed its character, it was indeed a
technological revolution. And Japan was able to turn out some of the
world's best industrial products.

As in natural and social phenomena, there is a cycle in huun beings from
infancy to old age.

In the econonic area. an oversupply will result in on econoaic slow-
down known as a stock cuaulative effect. For exasple, an overbuilding

of residential hoes will iapede the growth of the house construction
industry.

This is seen even in the case of technological advances. when a new
principle based on natural science is found to be promising for indus-
trial application, enterprises undertake applied research fervently.

and any success provides a clue to the direction that should be pursued
in other researches. '

Supply of New Principles Exhausted?

Any enterprise engaged in growth-oriented research should have no
trouble nustering an excellent work force. During the 1955-1965 period.
researchers in the petrocheaical, synthetic fiber, autombile and steel
industries were the target of envy. while in 1965-1975, it was these in
the counter field. Outstanding huaen resources tend to cluster around
such growth industries, thereby accelerating applied researches.

In such a banner, applied researches on principles dealing with solid
physics and synthetic cheaistry underwent a reaarkable progress in the

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

first half of the 20th century, especially in the United States. New
products appearing in the Japanese nrket were subjected to further applied
research, resulting in top quality products. Today, not even a drop of
water can be wrung out of a wet towel. Petrochenical and synthetic _
fibers industries are a typical examle. Despite huge research expendi-

tures, it has becone difficult to develop products profitable enough to
recover research expenses.

Industries, such as the heavy chedcal industry, where technological.
progress came early were caught in an intense capital invest-ant race.
resulting in surplus production capacity. Probably due to the technologi-
cal stagnation and the changing international economic environ-cut, Japan's
long-tern economic growth seems to have declined around 1970-75 from 10
percent to 5-6 percent. A drop of the economic growth rate from 10 to

5 percent would scan that the annual demand has been reduced by one-half.

Technological advances, in an economic sense, appear to be slowing down.
(Kondorachefu) spoke of a long 55 year cycle in technological progress.

Based on his theory. we would have entered a period of decline after
1965 or 1970.

Mass Production Techniques and Local Conditions

Local conditions have a strong inpact on an industry. an exa'mlehof
which is agriculture where, in Japan, rice is the principal crop.
Japan-made cars are saall, 'with a good fuel efficiency. As the Japanese
have an eye for details, the interior appointments and paints are
superior to those of foreign cars. Because Japanese houses are small,

even refrigerators, vacuu- cleaners and air conditioners are built small
and quiet.

Local conditions also affect technology. The technology in which Japan
excels involves the mass production of new products and of isproved pro-

ducts on the. basis of'knowhow acquired f-roe abroad after 1955. Tech-
nological revolution thus became a reality.-

This can be attributed to Japan's high academic standards and mique em-
ployment practices. Because of the system of lifetine enployment. the
enterprise provide constant training to esployees, rotating them to new
positions every few years to broaden their outlook. In plants and nsin
offices, decisionmaking is from the botton up, serving as an incentive
to the workers.

In mass production plants of the machinery and steel industries, there

are nany levels of work. The important point here is that fine technologi-
cal improvements are nade at each level, while maintaining a balance with
other levels. Japanese plants have many blue collar workers who are
aotivated in making iwrovements.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Original Products

Haas production techt iques begin to lose appeal whenever the market
growth slackens. than the earket becones saturated with ease produced
products and there are no other products to create a ease denand, the
alternative would be to develop varied products for varying denands.

In such cases, one aust keep abreast of the news and cone up with sons
clever idea. A case in point is the mattress drier.

Existing products can be inroved into a higher class product, and in any
fora. An euwle would be ainiaturisation, as in the case of such elec-
tronic products as desk calculators and teperecorders. liowaver, iwroved
technology would be required because of precision parts and materials.

Also, various technology can be combined. An exewle would be (ratekaee),
incorporating a radio, television and cassette recorder, or a quartz
watch conbining watch and electronic technology. Another exaaple would
be the construction of earthquake resistant high rise buildings and

ocean spans through structural calculation with large coaputers.

In such systenisation of technology, a greater sire and high quality will

deaand unusually strong asterials and fine fabrication, attainable only
with advanced technology.

New large products can also be developed, priurily by the electronics
industry. A typical examle would be facsiailes and counters for hone
use, and an autoutic burglar alerts and fire prevention systen. Al-
though large and expensive, they nay be called a snail product in that
there is no great demand for then. Today, -ny saall but expensive pro-
ducts with high perforaance are being developed.

Also, there is a conbination of hard and soft technology. An emle
would be residences, city services and plant construction industries.

IN the hone construction area, not only hard technology dealing with
euthquaks and fire, but also soft technology involving livability need
to be considered. In the city services industry, the problem of noise,
trash collection, transportation, green belt, and natural surroundings
Inst be considered, together with the price of land. In plant construc-

tion, the natural environ-ant met be protected and friction with resi-
dents aust be avoided.

There are also areas in which hard technology alone cannot fully per-
fore the tasks without the backing of an advanced soft technology, and
vice versa. An exane of this would be the pollution problem now
being licked with anti-pollution technology.

Pros these observations, technological progress cannot be interpreted
as the constant developsent of new and large products or of new

23 .
FOR OFFICIAL ”SI! ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE OKLY

manufacturing processes based on sons new principles of natural science.
Technology is moving in varied directions.

Japan‘s technological ell-ate has withstoo‘ the effects of mass produc-
tion. Even vith respect to the technology of this dark period. the
Japanese were rich in small ideas. As any Japanese tended to make a

fuss over even small deficiencies such as nicks on auto bumpers. quality
materials and workmanship became necessary. resulting in high quality
products. The dense urban population. noise and pollution and the neces-
sity to minimize social friction led to the development of soft technology.
In fact. Japan leads the world in technology on low polluting cars.

Serious Problems Face Research and Development

From a short and intermediate range, Japan's technological standards may
appear bright. but from a long range view, there are some serious problems.

As stated earlier. the technological revolution was achieved without any
technological tradition. chiefly through their introduction froa abroad.
Although the new technology had been assimilated, Japan lacks the strength
to produce more quality goods through further technological advances
because of its shallow history of research and development. No new
knowledge is available on petrochemicals. fine chemicals and coal
chemistry.

The next problem involves the capacity to develop new revolutionary
technology. The ideas of Japanese tend to be narrow and confined. For
exaaple, to provide Saudi Arabia with potable water, the Japanese idea
was to use surplus tankers to haul water from upstreams of the river
Nile, whereas the french considered towing a vinyl-wrapped glacier from
the Antarctic. This is a sharp contrast in the way of thinking.

Research and development funds are short, with enterprises. the government
and .universities unable to extend aid.

A greater problem is the yet undefined goal of research and development.
There is no consensus on what kind of nation Japan should be. And the
government is unable to make any large investments for research and
developnent. for it cannot explain just how it benefits the nation.

There will be no additional capital investments in the absence of large-
scale research and development, and Japan will not be able to extricate
itself from the long stamant economy.

And without the development of new energy techniques. the petroleum issue
will probably be around for awhile.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1979

2"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nu ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Future of Electronics

Tokyo BUNCH SIIURJU in Japanese l’eb 79 pp 155-160

[Interview by Hiroshi 'l‘ekeuchi with Shunkichi Kieaka, executive director,
Technology Division Chief, Hatsushita Electrical Industrial Co.. Ltd:

"A l-Ton Calculator Reduced in "eight to 100 Kilos: Remarkable Miniaturira-
tion of Large-Scale Technology"!

[Text] Electronics
Technology Not in Stale-ate

Takeuchi: The (Kondorachefu) theory is that a 55-year cycle exists in
technological advances. I an uncertain whether 55 years is correct, but
when basic technology blooms into applied technology at a certain stage.
any investeente in research and developaent aay prove aconoaically un-
profitable. At that point, as all efficient nanpower will have been
nuetered at the applied technology level, it will require about 20 years
to aobilize the asnpower around basic technology. co-ence the technologi-
cal revolution and shift the axis of technology. It has generally been
said that Japan, froa 1955 through 1970, possessed revolutionary large-
scele technology and use production techniques for reducing costs by
alaost one-half. But that was before. and there being no further capital
investments. a long-tern econoaic slowdown has occurred since 1970. As
we like to believe that the econo-y can be revived through technological
advances, we tend to put the blaae on the long-tern or global disorder
after 1973 on technology. That is the reason, I think. that the future
of technology is being questioned.

Kisake: Various reasons have been cited for the $5 to 100 year cycle.
however. there are two points to be considered before discussing this
matter. First, in actuality, even if a calculator weighing 1 ton were
reduced to 100 kilograas, or a pocket telephone/television developed, or
one were to run 500 kilo-stars per hour around the earth. they probably
would not be considered as technological revolution. Future projections

being node on rather solid ground these days. a sasll progress would not
attract ouch attention.

Secondly, when tracing the past history of science. we would find that
eiailar utterances have been aade repeatedly. when Newton's dynaaics

was perfected around the aid-18th century. soae claiaed that it brought
an end to physics. And around the end of the 19th century when Haawell's
electrical dynaaics was provisionally perfected, people believed there
was nothing onto that could be done with physics. however, nany die-
coveriee followed: The X-ray by Roentgen in 1895; radiation by becquerel;
radiua by Hadaae Currie in 1896. electrons by J.J. Tho-son in 1897.

and Pnnck's quantu- theory in 1900. In this way. the large buds of
electronics and nuclear power began to grow in the 20th century.

25
roe ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Around 1950. the chief of 68's research laboratory contended that since
notors. generators. electric bulbs and just about everyhting else had
all been produced and there were no new inventions. the only thing_

left was a study of their applications. And in 1964, the director of

a European research laboratory stated that the honeyaoon between semi-
conductors and science was over. In tracing the history of science in
this manner. it can be noted that whenever there has been some striking
achievement, many people. including traditionalists. begin to feel that
science has outlived its usefulness. however, as Marx would say. it is
then that paradoxes and the bud for work in the next stage reaches '
maturity. Perhaps it is a desire to recapture the sale dream, but it

is a destiny that humans must follow, like it or not. At any rate. since
a large number of the world's scientists and engineers have a stake in
their problems, it may be too bold of me to negate any revolution in
scientific technology. passing it off as mere undulations (laughter). I
feel that nature is not so small that humans can scurry about and gain
an understanding. (Laughter).

Humanity's Two Mistakes
Takeuchi: Then, for physics. it is a period of confusion, or...

Kisaka: My main field being electronics, I cannot go in deeply on other
fields. But I feel that electronics is not in a state of confusion.

I must watch how I express myself, but I often ask myself whether humanity
has not committed two mistakes (laughter).

The first is that humans struck upon atomic energy. and the other is that
they are trying to seize upon the phenomena of life and heredity. These
two things can be cospared to humanity attempting to consume the forbidden
fruit.

Swen if humanity seized upon these things. states would come into play
during the first or second generations. but after the third generation
when sciences is transformed into a universal technology. there would

be no guarantee as to how such technology would be applied. It is un-
thinkable that one would try to destroy the face of the earth by triggering
a nuclear missile. although there may be such a gesture as in the 1962
Cuban crisis. or contemplate world dominance by changing the race through
application of the genetic phenomenon. But as for the future. there is
nothing we can do, other than to have faith in the wisdom of future
humanity.

Takeuchi: It would be awful if microorganic chemistry really developed
and germs happened to escape. They would spread quickly and bring harm
to humanity.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPHCIM. US! ONLY

Kieaha: There ia euch a danger. I do not feel that electronica today

ia in a atate of confuaion. There are viewa that we are in a period of
ahift for eoee atar perforaere. Proe a bueineae point of view. the earket
eherea for We and redioa. 30 and ‘0 percent reapectively. nay gradually
change with the introduction of new producte. Thia ie poaeible.

'rraneforeation to the Nicrocoquter Age

Takeuchi: Pron a layean'e viewpoint. electronica atand for liniaturiaa-
tion. la progreea in uiniaturitation that inortant?

Kiaakax It would be coneidered not aa a love to cake enall thinga analler.
but as eating large thinge aealler. A l-ton calculator reduced in weight
to l00 kilograna would aiaplify ite operation, and a telephone which

can be carried inaide a pocket would provide more convenience. To do

thia, critical areae out be further reduced in eiae.

Taheuchi: would niniaturiration have a greater effect on coat reduction

or the ayatee‘l Do you eean that miniaturization would reault in cheaper
producta for wider uee?

Kiaaka: Beeentially. it would seen a lower price, but on the whole, _
functiona will be iwroved. neaning high pricca. The production coete of
aeniconductore. 16a, and mu have been increasing aharply frola year

to year.

Taheuchi: la miniaturization contingent on advancea in nateriale. en-
gineering or. ehall l aey. principlce?

Kieaka: we can any the abeorption of principlea into neterial advances.
or nateriel edvancee with the eupport of principlee. For eerle. we
dieplayed over 20 typea of eenaora leat fall at the Hatauahita Technologi-
cal Exhibition. Senaora now are uaed for baeic purpoaee. but in the
future. they will take the place of huan eyee. eare. noeea and eltin. The
future direction will be, I think, towarda a feedback of what ie aeen.
heard or anelled. however, unleaa a great leap ie nade in the coning
yearn, the aenaor will be unable to eerve ae the eyee and care of huan
beinge. It ia a long way off before aenaore and nicrocoquteta can
perforn the functione of hunana made up of 15 billion celle. But the

day will cone. And the day will cone when eicrocowutere and linicoqutera
will aaaue a lerger role.

Takcuchi: I an well aware that eenaore, reaenbling a nerve. will hecoee
very iqortant. To effect the diecovery of eenaore. doea electronica
or biocheeiatry have to be pureued?

Kiaalte: Beth. A few yeara, amone atated in jeet. "Director. let'e
quit our experinenta on aenaora and breed roachea and cat fiah inatead."
(laughter). he Hr ‘l'ekeuchi aeya, biocheniatry and biophyaica are halting
alow progreea.

2?
POI! ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OWICIM. US! ONLY

New Technology and huaan Senses

Takeuchii Iroa an econoaic point of view, it aeeaa that funds are the
real issue whenever there is lention of technological stagnation or about
lerge-scnle technology not eeerging (or another 10 years. Technology
until now has required a vast aaomt of ooney for equipaent, but will not
require no ouch in the future. So when one speaks of n eeaeation of
technology. it probably in in an econoaic sense.

liven from a leyaen'a viewpoint. the electronics industry has node rapid
advances. Upon observing the Hatsuehita Technological Exhibition, 1 was
deeply iapreaeed but at the sale tiue becaae concerned over whether the
elderly would be able to utiliae it.

Such progress would require a familiarization training for the public.
ultiaately changing hunan eeotiona. For exaaple. oany things can be done
with a bone coaputer. A sensor can discover a burglar breaking into a
hose and sound an alera through the counter, but a huaan voice crying
out, ”a burglar is in the house," iwarta better huaan eeotions. Also,
the way in which one says. "heat the bath water," inatts strong huaan
eootiona. If such eootions are gradually displaced, aoae future genera-
tions night becooe used to it. while some aay not. Technology finally
has reached the point of eaotiona.

Kisaka: This any be huaan destiny. linens. eepecially scientists, aeea
to possess traits both very clever and foolish. They all think they are
doing a good thing. About 30 years ago when we began our research, both
science and reeeerch were considered a sacred occupation. But when the
pollution issue arose about 10 years ago, one gained the iwreaaion that
acience and technology were involved in wrongdoings that would result in
depletion of resources. "any things need to be considered. For exaeple.
if we continue to sell nore calculators. including dealt calendars, the
hunn capacity for calculation will eventually be lost because of atrophy
of the unused organ. and 300 or 500 years hence. the brain cells nay
even undergo a structural change. At any rate, it will be a repetition
of trial and error by huanity. i feel that auch thought should be
given in evaluating a technology.

"hat is a Great invention?

Takeuchi: Does Japan's electronics technology rank the highest in the
world, with no fear of the United States and European nations catching up?

Kiaaka: l have heard contents to that effect, but thoee reearlta can be
attributed to the arrogance of Japanese. Hhen we consider satellite
rockets. nuclear energy. cooputara and semiconductors. we cannot say that
Japan takes the lead.

28
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OIVICIM. 08! ONLY

With respect to semiconductor technology. it is true that the product

is being exported to the United States because of its quality and low
cost. That involves a single level of technology which is not inferior
to that of the United States. But technology rue such deeper and wider.
Looking at semiconductor technology so a whole, we cannot say that Japan
cancels the United States. In cosparing the technology of the two nations,
many things ought to be considered. For axe-pie. in the conouaer field.
Japan-made radios had a 70 percent shore of the market in the United
States, but it is now l0 percent owing to coapetition from South Korea
and llong Kong. Cassette tapes and black and white We will eventually
suffer the same fate. A technological cowarison. including prices.
between Japan and the developing nations is in order. VTIIs are not pro-
duced in the United States. being inorted solely from Japan. The
United States is unable to produce a sinilar quality product at the pre-
vailing price. Therefore. Japan's VTR is considered the world' but.
thus creating problems because of the yen hike (laughter). The general
conclusion is that the other side leads in certain products, while

Japan also leads in certain products.

Takeuchi: Nowadays, Japanese universities cannot be counted upon for
technological advances. so enterprises are taking their place. But as
enterprises have only profits in mind. nothing spectacular can be antic-
ipated. In the United States. industrial and acadenic cooperation on
national projects is possible. but not in Japan. There is no difficulty
in proceeding fro- rodio to tape recorder to television set, but the
problem arises when it roses to a slightly larger technology.

Kisalta: That is turn. In the United States. government organs such as

its armed forces and NASA would become prine supporters. and there even
the profits of a single first would equal the production costs of a Japanese
fins. Japan's research efforts should be directed pri-rily on Japanese
motifs. The definition of largeness also needs to be clarified. For
exawle, the research on transistors can be tuned a great success. for

it created a huge narket, but it can be sold that the scale of research

at the time was not so large.

Ta':cuchi: Hy concept of largeness is where there is on i-ense field
of application for a new product and an expansion of the systen of
technology, like many twigs branching out free s tree. That is my idea
of a great technology.

Kisolta: Some researchers start out with a big goal, while others grow
as time passes. As you know. the transistor, an eagle of the theory of
effect, was preceded by a vacuus tube and a crystal detector. The ques-
tion was wether a detector having the some functions as a vacuua tube
could be produced. Even Shockley. the inventor of the transistor. ex-
perimented with this in 1939 but failed. Ue conducted another eaperi-
Ient in l9“. but with poor results. Puzzled. be reviewed his work.
wondering whether his cowutetione were correct. lie then turned his

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attention to the silicon surface, leading to the development of the tran-
sistor, a great invention when we look back now. But at the time of
discovery, it was said that it had only a limited application as it

could not be used in high frequency areas and was too small to provide
electricity. That was around 1952 or 1953.

with the discovery of the transistor, researches were cos-ended on

noise reduction. Power had to be increased, but as heat would destroy the
transistor, a larger nount was installed for heat dissipation. Thus,

the transistor was gradually improved to today's level. No one imagined
then that the application of transistor would grow as it has, leading to
even [Cs and LSls.

Takeuchi: That means that the transistor was discovered accidentally,
as in the case of nylon.

Kisakn: Yes. Bakelite, X-rays, radiation, super conduction and the
transistor were all accidentally discovered. Sometimes the views are
divided as to whether they were accidentally discovered or were inevitable.
In aone cases, it may be termed as an inevitable reality through an ac-
cident. Shockley himself states that he had a firm belief that such a
device could be developed, but if we overlook that one point. it would
becoae accidental.

Flexible Technicians

Takeuchi: In other words, a genius may cone up with an invention, but
would require help fro. others in furthering it. There is a liait to

an individual's vision and senses. This seems to be the destiny:of
technicians. Just as Edison's and Bell's later years were ill-fated,

a worthwhile invention would end upon discovery and no other ideas would
energe.

Kiosks: There are many such cases, not only in technology but among
scientists as well. Edison worked on direct current, but took an op-
posite stand on alternating current. Hstt even said that the person who
should further his work was (Torevishikku) or that Fulton should be the
one to do shipwork. There are asny Nobel Prize winners who refute new
theories. The nenory brain cells are probably being hardened with-one‘s
own concepts. Once they harden, a rejection occurs toward any deviation.
A judgment based on past menory is unable to predict the future. That
is where the dress of science and technology lies.

Takeuchi: In those circumstances, a person who becomes the chief of a
research laboratory should have less achievements to his credit and be
flexible as a slug (laughter).

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1979

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Steel Industry
Tokyo BUNGBI SBUNJU in Japanese Feb 79 pp 172-177

[Interview by hiroshi Takeuchi with Tadashi Ohtake, executive director,
Research and Development Division, Nippon Steel Corporation: "technolo-
gicalnqdvances Conserve Resources; hopes on (Amorufasu), the Dream
Natal.

[Text] Steel

80,000 Kinds of Steel Produceable

Taheuchi: The steel industry has nade remarkable progress since the end
of the war. Cost reductions were notable, but what about the quality of
steel?

Ohtake: Presently, we maintain a saster file of about 80,000 cases, which
scans that we distinguish between 80,000 kinds of steel in the production
process. Because it would be impossible for human beings to keep track,
we have installed a coaputer system.

Takeuchi: How much of 80,000 was produceable in 1955?

ohtake: Virtually none. high tensile strength steel case to be used on
naval vessels around 1953. Also, around that time, the automobile in-
dustry, professing to-be a potential growth industry, gave us a word of
encouragement. But we felt then that it was "preposterous." The
(alumikirudo) steel for automobile bodies was first produced around 1953.

Takeuchi: Take the case of the battleship Yamato, for example. have
there been advances to justify the claim that today several centimeter
thick steeel plate would equal several tens of centimeters in ability
to withstand pressure and destructive power, or that steel would be
rustproof for many days rather than for a week?

Ohtake: I do not know how deep old submarines could submerge, but modern
ones can submerge for several hundred meters. We are not trying to
develop a steel plate for a survey vessel, capable of withstanding an
ocean floor pressure of 6,000 meters.

For the 3,000 meter leve, we should cone up with soaething much sooner.
Takeuchi: Does that technology depend wholly on the strength of steel?
Ohtake: At 6,000 meters, there would be an atmospheric pressure of 600.

Takeuchi: Reverting to something more familiar to us, have there been
great advances in steel for auto bodies?

31
IOR OyPICIAL USE OﬂLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ohtake: One problea hee to do with the fuel coete of autonobilea. Care
can be nade enaller to obtain greater nileage per liter of geeoline, or
can be built lighter. We are not directly involved in naking the care
enaller. but in aaking then lighter. Preeently, ateel for auto bodiee
her a etrength of about 30kiloe per equere Iillineter. but will probably
be increeeed in the future to around ‘0 or 50 kiloe.

The change cannot be nade eooner becauee of the mechanical capacity of
preeaee aaintained by antonobile aanufacturera. Mating nechinery
cannot be replaced until depreciation. New producte are introduced when
equipaent ie changed. Ae far an we are concerned, we already have

the technological improve-ante to deliver thoee kinda of ateel.

"Steel In Not Steel"

Takeuchi: Every natal hee ite own cherecterietice. and eteel cowetee
with aluaim- and plaatic. that are the -proapecte of ateel aurpaeeing
elminm ae fer ea efficiency in concerned?

Ohtnke: Up until around 1950, we etudied the property of ateel an a
ueterial, uaing optical nicroecopee. X-reye and other phyaicel, analytical
nethode. Later, a new nethod ae adopted. ueing electronic nicroecopee to
obeerve internal friction. ‘l'hia ehed eone lidut on eteel'e dynalic
behavior. Subaequently. through a uthod known ea polar diagren. an it:-
proved vcreion of the X-ray nthod. the cryetalline poaition and the
collective etructure of ateel were clarified.

Thue, problene related to an outetanding electronagnetic aheet eteel for
tranefornere, deeply preeeable eteel plate, and their qualitiee were
cleared up.

The technology exieting at that tine wee generally applied. and in 1960.
an experimental aethod wee adopted.- For euqle, there wee the m
(X-ray nicroanalyzer) to accurately detect and identify any abnornlity
in the licron order in ateel. Another technique introduced ehowed waye
to judge eteel geonorphologically with a acenning elecrronic nicroecope.
Ae a result, nany new guidelinee were foraulated on refinery techniquee
that had been overlooked, bringing about the current changee.

A greater problen haa to do with the introduction of the ao-called aurface
analytical aethod. Thin wee after 1970. being preceded by the introduc-
tion of a very high voltage electronic ulcroecope. tron theee, varioue
phenonenu occurring within eteel were clarified.

Takeuchi: Did the eurface analytical aethod beconeepoeeible becauee of
edvencea in the electronice induatry?

Obtake: Yea, phyaically. Reeearchera in many fielde had long waited for
them. Their invention waa epurred by newa of their neede. he a reeult.

32
you omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

queationa on the neterial‘a two diaenaional (onguautoronu) order were
anaworad. In other worda, we think that a ateel ia ateel, but there
are caaee where one particle and one atonic layer or two particlea and

two atonic layera on the aurface are not neceeeerily ateel. That’a whet
wee revealed (laughter).

In other worda. ruat and aoldering ell haa to do with the aurfece. and

aa problena beconea known, there will be all aorta of aeaaurea to deal
with then.

Ia Steel ﬂaking With Atomic Energy a Poaaibility?
'l'akeuchi: Steel. then. ia atill a growth natal.

Ohtake: That in ny feeling. There are atill nany mknowna. ac to ita
propertiea.

Tekeuchi: If there in a great leap in technology. can ateel be produced
aa efficiently ea aluninun‘!

Ohtake: Pro- the atandpoint of energy, the energy required for conver-
aion of orea into a ton of ateel in about one-twentieth of that for an
equal anount of aluninun. It ia en econonic problen, after all.

Takcuchi: will nanufecturing coata be lowered further in the future?

Ohtake: There ia a way to airplify the manufacturing nathode. Under

the exiating proceea. productivity ia atreaeed at each level of operation.
The problen facing ua ia how to link then and cone up with a balanced
proceae for iqroved quality.

Although continuoua feuding ia very efficient, we unfortunately do not
poaeeea the technology to acconIodate 80.000 kinda of ateel. Special
ateel calla for cleex nethoda. The current problen ie how to deal with
‘ thia. Ita diacovery would be revolutionary.

Under the exiating proceae, energy and naterial are waated, ea heat or
cold treatnent nuat be repeated ea required. If the product ia aubjected
to heat only once. a eyatea mat be deviaed to uae the aane heat through-

out the entire operation. That ia the eaaence of a great technological
develop-eat.

Tekeuchi: That neana that ateel leaking by atouic energy or direct
ateel naking ia far off. and that there will he a gradual build to of
technological inrowenenta for awhile.

ohtehe: Yea. Our preaent weakneaa ia in coal. Nuclear energy can aolve
thia problen. but the current problen ia how to produce ateel naking
cokea under a nethod that doea not require coking coal. The uae of coking

33
m onxcm. use ONLY
'0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ovens is new controversial because of their environmental impact. As
there are means to produce metallurgical coke from ordinary coal and at
the same time conform to environsentsl requiresents, researches will be
directed toward this end.

Takeuchi: Existing steel mills have been constructed inside the bays

or on shores along the Inland Sea. Since no additional sites are avail-
able, they probably have to be located by the sea facing strong waves or
forests. wouldn't a new construction technology be required then?

Ohtake: This is a rather dimensional issue involving the rate of progress
of marine technology and civil engineering. when the Sakai and.Negoya
steel mills were built, I think that land afforestation proceeded on a
yearly basis. while at Kimieu steel mill, it was en a monthly basis.

When the Oita steel mill was constructed. a 25 meter deep quay was needed
for unloading raw aaterials from large ships docking alongside. This

quay was built according to the seaberth method, a first experience for
the steel industry. Under this method, a quay becomes unnecessary when

a berthing site is erected at the end of a long pier and materials are
hauled with proper moving equipment.

After building it by the outer sea, the question is whether some kind
of system can be developed to keep out waves to ensure a safe docking
by vessels. If this can be resolved, the day will come when water depth
at the site will no longer present a problem.

Takeuchi: when the Nippon Steel Corporation erected a steel mill in
Kisizu, it had a city construction project under consideration. The re-
location of its workers and the construction of a town and plant simul-
taneously represented a major technological progress.

Ohtake: Probably. To a nation like China, civil engineering technology
for steel mill construction advancing to other technology for town and
plant construction has a great appeal (laughter).

(Amorufasu), the Dream Metal

Takeuthi: Are there any prospects for the development of some revolutioary
kind of steel? ‘

Ohtake: It all depends on how we look at what we have now. Steel with
third dimensional or memory features has already been made, but its ap-
plication is still a long way off. (Amorufasu). a non-crystalline metal
stands out. however, Ordinarily, the atoms are aligned in a crystalline
structure. To speak in a somewhat complex language, what is known as

s (Lane's) spot is formed due to defraction of X-rsys. But when a steel
is made under a certain method. it is still steel but without (Laue's)
spot. It is a mess, but not a liquid mass (laughter). That's the

kind of steel that is for-ed.

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Takeuchi: Is it soesthing like a piece of plastic?

Ohtake: Glass is a uses, but not a crystal; it is rather an overfrosen
liquid. Thus, (Laue's) spot will never appear. Steel having this re-
senblence has already been produced. Although a very sasll group of

people free Japan, the United States and carneny are studying this steel.
not such is known.

But it is'knovn that it has a very interesting characteristic.

‘l‘ekeuchix "hat is that characteristic?

Ohtake: for exaapls. asking possible a material, very inexpensive and
sore corrosion proof than stainless steel.

The strongest steel now Isde registers 300 kilograss per square Iillineter.
.but it can only be node in the shape of wires for use in eutonobile

tires as steel cord or piano wire. Theoretically. it can be subjected to
pressure of 300 kilogra- or even three tines greater to 1,200 or 1.300.
But (enorufasu) steel has a strength of 300 kilograms vithout any special
work (laughter). This is a dress steel, indeed.

Japan Excele the United States
Takeuchi: In steel technology, does Japan excel the United States?

Ohteke: It is difficult to say, as the United States say be engaged in
such work. systenatically.

‘l'akeuchit In the case of the United Stetes. if there is a need for '
strong steel for Polaris submarines and subterranean bases. it can
develop the steel with silitsry procurenent expenditures.

Ohtake: Yes. We do not have military expenditures. It is well that we
do not, but free the standpoint of technological advances, it is a week-
ness. If there are no financial constraints. a good product can be pro-
duced, aside from the question of econonic feasibility (laughter).

Tekeuchi: Hhere technology is pursued maindful of economics, the United
States probably takes the lead.

Ohteke: It probably is ahead. Japan has a big lead in technology transfer.

Takeuchi: Uhy is it that Japanese universities and enterprises are unable
to cone up with geniuses?

Ohteke: They probably don't want to recognise anyone as a genius. Jap-
anese prefer to pull the leg of high capable individuals (laughter).

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Saving the Equivalent of One Coastal Steel Mill

Tskeuchi: Can we expect a genius from the steel industry who develops
some manufacturing method which might beat his nene, such as Suki diode?

Ohtako: No. Since the industrial revolution, there have been only two
ways. I think, of producing steel. One is the (Badoru) method eqloyed
until around 1870, when the power revolution got underway. It granu-uv
transfer-ed into the Siemens-Martin method. a so-callsd indirect process
which increased production velocity twentyfold. Using the same capacity
equipeent, production was increased 20 times. This was indeed a revolution.

Tskeuchi: Has Hr Siemens responsible for this?
Ohtake: Yes. The mderlying principle was the heat regeneration system.

The second inortant achieve-ant was. as earlier explained, the conversion

of the blast furnace/open hearth furnace into the revolving furnace eyeten.
The Chiba Steel Hill. which originally started out with 500,000 ton capacity,.
now has almost 9 million ton capacity. From the standpoint of today's
general technological level, three revolving furnaces, each with s 250 ton
refining capacity, would suffice to produce 6.5 sillion tons of steel
annually. Under the open hearth furnace system, however, 20 or even 30

of the 250 ton open hearth furnaces would be needed. In other words, with
the ease capacity equipsent, the production velocity had been increased

nearly tenfold. The same thing that had been achieved under the Industrial
Revolution had been realised.

Tskeuchi: Then, despite the talk of s descending movement of the
(Kondorachefu) cycle or stagnation of technological advances. it is not
as serious in the steel industry.

Ohtake: Looking in from the outside, I think there is e stagnation. But
I think the portion that is moving inside is ferocious.

Takeuchi: Does that seen that after the huge coastal plant, designed
with scale nerits in Iind, has been comleted and no furtheroprogrsss can
be anticipated. there will be a reversion to such basics as the non-
crystalline ate :1 mentioned earlier?

Ohtske: no, no reversion. It will be performed in parallel. Technological
advances during the 7-year period fron 1970 through 1976 resulted in con-
servation of resources. The yield rate climbed sharply from 82 to about
88.6 percent over the processes of blister steel to the finished product.

To explain in detail. Japan's 1976 production of ordinary steel was 93
nillion tons of blister steel. out of which nearly 83 million tons were

for finished products. In other words, 93 million tons of blister steel
were produced in order to produce 83 sillion tons of steel products. If
there had been no technological advances during that time, about 100

36
For orncm. use om:
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

aillion tons of blister steel would have been required in order to cone
up with the needed 83 million tons. In short, it meant a savings of 7
million tons of blister steel. Technological advances helped save an
equivalent of one large coastal steel mill.

common-r: Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1979

Chemicals Manufacture
Tokyo BUNGBI snumu in Japanese Feb 79 pp 161-166

[Interview by Hiroshi Takeuchi with Sadataka Hukoyaaa. adviser. Toray
Industries. Inc.: ”Coming Technological Revolution to Begin with Bio-
chemistry; Possibility of New Products Among Special Products"]

[Text] Chemicals

Mass Production Alone Is Not Enough

What are the chances for a new technology for synthetic fibers so that it
can stage a comeback from its current depression? Or is it a pessimistic
outlook with no new technology in sight?

Hukoyasa: .'.t is comaon knowledge among us technicians that technological
advances have become stunted. But it depends on the yardstick that we
use in discussing this stalemate. If there is a denand. even chemicals
end materials plants will pick up. If the demand for materials were sell
or there were little application. a materials manufacturer would have
.little or no interest even if there were fairly high technological
standards. For example, materials are the key element of technology, as
in the case of very large scale integration. Japan's technology is re-
markable, but the amount of materials used, in terms of their weiﬂtt,

is very small. For the uterials manufacturer, the problem is how to
makes profit on such a small quantity of special materials.

In the area of chemistry, fine chemicals are doing well, but their value
is sanll. In producing a product in small quantity and in a large variety,
these chemicals, in many cases, are measured not in tonnage but in kilograns
per year. Therefore it becones necessary to change the mode of thinking:
, not about selling products but selling information unrelated to the product.

To cite a radical exasple. (interfelon), a highly acclaimed cure-all. is
being sold on a trial basis for about 10,000 yen per million unit. A vial
of a million unit is said to contain only one-thousandth of a milligram
of the pure, effective ingredient, so a gram of pure (interfelon) is
worth about 10 billion yen. In such a case, the current thinking of the
materials manufacturer becomes outmoded.

37
ron ontcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tekeuchi: Insteed of very huge equipnent, e scele end test tube ere used
(laughter).

Hukoyeee: Our chemical industry hes given no thought to eeell production
voluno se it hes concentrated. since the edvent of petrocheeicele. on
uses production only. Per cepite investeent. therefore, is very high in
Jepen. In the use of Beyer end (liekieuto) of Gerneny. it is below one-
helf thet of Jepsn. end their profit retio hes not suffered even during
the current oil crisis. Unlike in Jepen, they heve other sources of

intone froe drugs end dyes. Jepen's cheeicel industry should elso shift
in those directions, but it would be e foreidebls teek.

I ee not seyin: thet e new technology is beyond ell hope, but depending
on new epplicetione, chences ere thet new specielty products will be con-
etently introduced. For ensple, our cerbon fibers heve e very speciel
epplicetion, end world deeend for then is expected to be eround 200 or

300 tons ennuelly. Therefore, the key is not only productibn but elso
how to broeden their spplicetion.

Tekcuchi: In e wey, Jepen'e superiority in use production technology
constitutes e drewbeck.

Hukoyene: Yes, but conversely, thet's beceuee one does not heve his own
seed. If something looked praising, they would ell flock to it. For
exemple. ell synthetic fiber coepenies would enpge in production of ini-
tetion leether, end sore than 10 fine in the production of ertificiel
kidneys. If fine chemicals or sane specielty chenicele eppeered pronising.
everybody would join in. He eust be extresely cereful to find e peth

thet the people do not treed (leughter).

We all speek ehout e stegnetion of technology, but the feet is thet there
is little technology to teke in. Repid progress wee etteined in the
postwar period beceuee nodificetions were node to the superb technology
froe sbroed. But now. there is no technology to bring in. Even if there
were, it is not so einple se Jepen is e coqetitor. Technologicel advencee
nuet be echieved'independently, but such sconscioueness end ection,sre
lecking in Jepen ee e whole. Even the coqenies, Inch less the people,

are unprepered. The: is the prilery problen.

Eerie Biochemistry

'Iekeuchi: At Dupont, nylon wee eccidentelly developed while trying to

make polyester. Aren't there eny technologicel edvencee which would
accidentally result in some new product?

Hukoyene: A clue my cone eccidentelly, but nurturing it into e product
requires conscientious reseerch. In the cese of nylon, it wee not ecci-
dentel, for reeeerch efforts were directed efter e person hed worked on
it end wee convinced thet it could leed to eonethins.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “8! ONLY

Tahauchi: Have synthetic chenicals reached the point where any further
development of applied technology cannot be expected?

Hukoysna: According to those concerned with chenicals. it appears that
there is not such left to do. What is left. however. is biocheaietry.
which is now ﬁlling great advances. For instance. recodination of genes
and studies on delineation of organic and-inorganic setters have progressed
too far. instilling a sense of fear in us.

Biochesistry say be difficult to understand for those who studied chenistry
a long tins ago. For exasple. in tissue culture. a tissue is taken free
you, and when nutrients are supplied, it grows steadily. Even after

you have died. that tissue free a part of your body continues to grow.
Drugs are injected and new nedicinsl products are nade fros those cells.
This is the procedure with (interfelon).

Takeuchi: It is eerie. It would be a shock to learn that cells taken fro-
ne would continue to grow and finally snerge as a pair of shoes (laughter).

Hukoyana: The thought of genetic recombination also shocks as, for it
would create varied living creatures. for instance, in the case of hunnns.
there could be reearkably strong soldiers or laborers. There lust be

sone controls; the technology nay be highly effective through cell re-
structuring. but it also poses n danger. The Japan Acadely of Science

has cone out with a policy to restrict any research involving genetic
recombination. '

Overwheluingly Strong Pernentation Technology

Kukoysna: Portmately. Japan is ahead in biocbclistry, particularly in
the field of fernentation where it has a tradition. For era-pie, when
penicillin was developed after the war. it was clained it would take

10 or 20 years for Japan to produce it on a large scale. but it only took
2 to 3 years. Because of its tradition of niso (soy bean paste) and
shoyu (soy sauce). Japan is exceptionally strong in the fernentation
technology. Japan is not so strong in sedicinal products. but is strong
in antibiotics produced through feraentstion.

Japan dominates the amino acid field as well. I think that is very
promising.

Takeuchi: In lacrolsolecular chenistry, is the direction of new technology
changing?

Huhoya-a: In chemistry, the lost spectacular postwar advances were in
nacronolecular chenistry. But it has subsided and there has been nothing
new. It has been cos-only recognized that there will be nothing like a
daily output of several tens of tons on use production level. For ex-
mle, even in the case of synthetic fibers or synthetic resin where a
large anount is used. production probably would not be increased beyond
the existing output. 39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' you orncm. 083 mm

Tskeuchi: Is thet beceuse globel enterprises flock to end seise on whet-
ever they cen get when s new necronoleculer cheeicel principle is born?

hukoyensx They would ell converge et once. peck on e snell portion ettcr
things had quieted down, end teke the next nove. hecronoleculee hence-
forth would eppeer es living bodies end functionel sscronolecules. Uni-
versity reseerchers heve virtuelly ebendoned the study of ordinery necro-
nolecules. Since 1955. no one st universities is studying neturel necro-
nolecules. But in the United Stetes. neturel things ere being studied
once egein. Sven Bretil. owing to e leek of oil. is trying to nelte new
things tron egriculturel products. Even elcohol is nixed with gesoline
for cers.

Despite telk of use of soler energy, plents seen to be the only hope.
ultinetely.

Hess Production end Systeeeticed Products
Tekeuchi: Are fine chenicels considered to be e serket-oriented technology?

Hukoyene: It hes to do with something thet is directly linked to denend
end cen be slightly nodified or codiined. For exelple, in the use of

e shopping beg used in supernsrkets. e thin end strong beg cen be nede by
slightly increesing the polyneritetion rete on e very thin polyethylene
file. About 100,000 tone heve been nenufectured ennuelly, end heve fi-
nsncielly benefited the petrocheeicel industry. Sons siniler products
should cone up, such es the nettress drier (leughter).

Tekeuchi: is the technology for their develop-cut feirly siqle once
the market delends ere known?

Nukeyene: nether then s coeplex reseerch. it cen he celled product-
neking through e codiinetion of existing technology. There is such
opportunity for this, but it depends on obteining intonation on the
need for e certein product eerly enough.

Tekeuchi: Cen thet be celled en ordinery technology?

Hukoyses: Being s conbinetion. it is not so originel technology but
a systenizetion using technology in e soft, wide sphere. There is much
roos tor sdvencenent in this eree.

Tekeuchi: Aren't systeutixed products unsuited for use production?

Hukoyeee: The higher the technology, the less use production. A con-
bined systenetized product would go into use production. For exenple.
in the housing industry, growth is etteineble by producing new things by
coebining the existing technology even though it eey not be new.

300
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

‘l'sheuchi: when technology stsbilires er s certein level, does the synthetic
fibers industry news upstreee to develop rew uteriels or go downstreee
to widen the end uses?

Muhoyees: Hhsn technology becones stsbilieed in the cese of eetsriels,
they ell becoee the sens. For exeeple. such chenicel products es poly-
ethelene end polypropylene do not differ so euch, so the price would be
the key fector. As excessive cowetition would leed to less profits.
sose other products will becone desireble. To overcoee these problem.
none link should be neinteined with the end uses.

‘l'ekeuchi: If technologicel edvences in the chenicel industry were to
be distinguished between e plent end process, who will sssune responsibility
for the forner?

Hukoyeeex My fire. But with the edvent of en engineering fin, it will
be Iostly responsible.

The chief concern, however, is thst en engineering fir- will sell good'
sechinery to virtuelly enyone, resulting in e loss of uniquesness to the
industry.

For eurols, upon discovery that s new Ger-en eschinery produces e good
quelity peper, everyone would ettenpt to purchese it. destroying the
uniqueness.

Synthetic fibers elso heve resched thet stege. In the old deys, it wee
not possible to buy synthetic fibers equipeent in e pecksge. ’I‘o esteblish
e plent, nnufecturers bed to design their own nechineryend'order then.
but if e nchinery Ienufectursr designs end sells the Iechinery es s
peckege. enyone with eoney cen stsrt the business, elthough the opereting
knowhow esy be costly. Keen conpetition would then occur.

Jepen's petrocheeiuls were in thet seee condition. I bed-outh the petro-
chemical industry, but it hed no money. no workers end no technology,

only guts (leughter). It seened to heve only guts. for eoney wss borrowed
free e benk, personnel were brought in Iron senewhere. technology wss
purchesed froe the outside. end the plent wee procured free en engineering
fire. Greduelly. the industry grew. so the individuel who got in eerly
wee the inner. It would be very difficult for fine cheeicels to dupli-
cete this bsceuse of the lack of technologicel buildup end tredition.

Development of New Drugs Is Costly

Tekeuchi: I wonder how thet tredition or tectnologicel buildup is
echieved. I suppose thet seens e lerge nuber of people with e sixth
sense or workers doing intricete work.

Hukoye-e: It is releted to people. At one tine, synthetic fibers wes
e highly profiteble business. Thet technology wes schieveble by e

In.
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

a cheeical fire. but in Japan a chenical fire wee not able to aaaert

iteelf on the Iarhet. "hat comted then probably were the weaving tech-
nology and market proxinity.

Takeuchit Do chemical fine, with a tradition of non-participation in
the rayon area. poaeeee a weakneea in the eynthetic fibere technology an
e whole?

Nukoyaea: Textile-related fir-e. frol botton apinning to rayon and en-
thetic fiber, are clone to the market.

when Dupont and other eynthetic fibera firea firet went into artificial -
leather. they found it very difficult to penetrate the unique leather
nerket. which differed earhadly fro. the fibera route. Cuatoee and
traditiona aleo differed. Thue, all fir-a. except Kurere, backed out.

he our fir- wae uneucceaeful in artificial leather ehoee, we changed to
euedee and re-entered the fibera route. Even though they were of arti-
ficial leather. there wee e eenee of intinecy in the fibers route and
the product eold rather eaaily. Our (ekuaenu) of artificial auade ia
our biggeet eoneynaker.

Even in the care of drugs, a cheeicel comany producing udicinal pro-
ducte on the beaia of ite technology will find it hard to eerket without
going through eetalbiehed drug etoree. For bulk aelea. the price euat
be one-tenth of the end coneuner'o price or it will not eell.

Teheuchi: len't the developunt of new druga a gaeble, ea a large in-
veatnent ie required and aucceaa it not aaaured?

Hukoyanz The profite on druga are very high. It ie expeneive and tine
conaming to introduce new druge. In the United Statea. it ia very
difficult to introduce new drugs on a private level becauae of ao'lany
reatrictione. -

Takeuchi: There in aleo the queetion of a hit or nice.
Actual Reeearch Punde Decreaee

‘l‘akeuchi: 'rorey ie conaidered a typical enterpriee which conea out with
new technology. to that due to the atrength of noney or to good eanage-
nent of reeearch and development?

Hukoyen: Manage-ent ia poor (laughter). In the aynthetic fibere in-
duetry, the amber of workere wee expended becauae it appeared pro-iaing.
In the 1955-1965 period. noet graduatee of cheniatry couraee went into

aacronoleculaa. with the eynthetic fibera fir- eqloying a fiarly large
nuaber of capable peraonnel.

'02
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Teheuchi: Better growth induatriea are able to hire people direct from
universities without lifting a finger.

Hukoyama: But conditiene have deteriorated after l965. airinge have been
euepended, end ectual reaearch funda have not been increeaed, deepite
inflation. in fact. the funde have dacreaaed. end reaeerch hea elowed

down. The United Statea fecee the aeme problem. Actual reaaerch funda
have thua been reduced.

lecauae of the growth of elactronice after 1965. many chemical workera
went to that induetry. But there ia a lack of chief reeeerchere to act
ea e nucleue. Synthetic fibere compeniee have a aurplue, ao I think they
can transfer them or their johe. but that ie a hard thing to do in Japan.

Takeuchl: It would be well if the technological cycle correeponde with

human longevity. But if the tining ehould be off. the gap would remain
forever.

hukoyane: That ia true. It wee around 1955 that the macromolecular
chemical induetry proapered. Univeraitiea eetabliahed auch couraea in

many areaa. recruited inetructora. and the faculty became firmly rooted
after 1965. But when the atudenta were ready to graduate. the macro-
molecular induatry had paaaed ite peak. The tining poaed e aerioua-problem.

Today, not too nany deeire to enter the chemical field. New chemical re-
eearchee focuaed on bilogical ecience are in progreea; in fact. aome are
being applied in certain areae of the medical field where the next
technological revolution ia predicted.

however, there are many pitfalle and probleaa before it can be developed
into-induatrial technology. If it ehould expand into general industrial
technology, the exieting ehepe of the chemical induetry. from rev me-

teriale to proceeaing and the finiehed product. ia likely to be completely
changed.

COPYRIGHT: Bungei Shunju Ltd. 1979

9097
080: 6105

'63
Iron onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Bums

N8" TRANSIS'I'ORuSendai-‘l'ohoku University here has developed a high-frequency
transistor. A new einiaturired trsneietor capable of nearly five tines and
much electrical output aa the best conventional treneiator of equal frequency
hee been experimentally developed by Prof Junichi Niahiseva. Niehiaava has -
naeed it e ”static induction (-type) transietor" or ”sit” for short. The
first co-nercial vereion of one nesahertr (one nillion hertz or cycles per
second) frequency and one kilowatt in output is already being produced by e
Jepenese conpeny for domestic urketing, stsrting next tenth. [Tokyo MAIN-
ICHI DAILY NEWS in English 20 Mar 79 p 5 an

080: 5120 END

lob
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY