APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100020014-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020014-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8269

' 5 7 February 1979

TRANSlﬁTIONS ON WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020014-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: thoae from English-language sources

are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service. Springfield, Virginia 22131. In order-
ing, it is recoammnded that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Nowell, 01d
Mansfield Road. Rooster, Ohio, 60691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
l. liq-um Nu. JPRS L, 8269 - )- llrrinienc'a Arron-an No.

TRANSIATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE. (F000 10/79)

 

  

mouooaarmc can
succr
.. (ﬁr-1717.3"

 

 

 

 

I. Anal-nth) _- Io “(downing (human-on Hep.
o.
9. l'nlumua; Ikumuunn Nam and Adder“ — '0. I’lojerI/I’aak/Iovl Umt No.
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North 61050 Road . ll. Connect/Guam No.

ailington, Virginia 2220l

I}. srﬁuoun‘ Organ-union Name and Addleoa ‘3- Type of Report a I'cliud
Coveted

As above

 

IO. Ahnarn

The serial report contains political/economic information on West European
energy. finance and trade pol icy matters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine. programs and problems of the major communist parties,

including their relations with comuniat parties outside the West European
area. '

 

. hey Mud» and Darwin Aoalyou. "o. Deon-pron

Political Science _International Affairs __Luxembour3

Sociology _Austria _Netherlanda

Propaganda _Belgiua _No way

Economics __Canada _Portu3a1

line rgy __Cyp rua LSpain

Ind as t ry _Denma rk ___Sveden

Trade ___Pin1and __Swi t zerland

Finance LPrance _‘turkey
__Greece _United Kingdom

"5. ldeNIlqu’Opeo-Endrd 1.... _Iceland Lwest Germany

_x_1 taly

m. I'thATl FkU/vap SC. 50‘ 10

It. Junialulu, \‘uu-mru . :C‘wily‘ I4“ (Thu
For Official Use Only. . "a” _<- . -. 42
Limited Number of Copies Available From .1985. mm

_ ‘Vf A“ Wu

‘ °"' """" "'"' ' "' nus roan IMY or aspuooucro ""°“‘"°‘ """"’
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J'PRS L/8269

7 February 19'.

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 10/75)

CONTENTS - F
FRANCE
Sakharov: Righte Hovenmt Cannot Be Destroyed Despite
Growing Repreaeion
(N‘d‘ol Gordey; L'Bxpms’ 27 J.“ 79) IOOOIOIOOOOOCOIIIOOOO

Economic Adjuotmenta to Multinational Interdependence
(Jvauee Delora Intorviev; LE NOUVEL OBSERVATEUR, 9 Jan 79)

ITALY

1978 Called 'cood Year' for Selenia Firm
(Jenn d. CCICl'df AIR & COSPDS, 6 J.“ 79) eaeeeeeaeeoeeeoeeo

SPA IN

Comentary Looka Into Pre-Blection Politico
(‘10.. on.t°‘ ““310 16’ 14 ‘1‘“ 78) OIIIOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOI

Speculation on 950: Election Victory Publiehod
(““310 16' 19 J.“ 79) COIOOICCIOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOODOOCOOOO

Public Opinion Poll Reaulte: Suarez Moot Popular
(“H810 16' 2‘ Dec 78) OCOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOQ0.0...’.........

REST GERMANY

Hilly Brandt Interviewed on Own, 8?!) Future
(Sum. 20 Dec 78) OO.D...0.0COO...COIOOIOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOIOQ

Nordic Countriee Divided in Reaction to Monetary Syaten
(Adan Von Werner; FIANKFURIER ALLGEHEINE, 21 Dec 78) ......
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

SAKHAROV: RIGHTS MOVEMENT CANNOT BE DESTROYED DESPITE GROWING RE?RESSION
Paris L'EXPRESS in French 27 Jan 79 p 61 L0

[Michel Gordey written interview on 25 December 1978 with Soviet dissident
Andrey Sakharov: "Replies to Michel Gordey's Hritten Questions"]

[Text] [Question] Last summer a group of dissidents now living in the Heat
published a statement claiming that the Soviet leadership has decided to
liquidate the movement for the defense of human rights both inside the coun-
try and abroad. Are you aware of such a decision?

[Answer] I know nothing of any decision of this kind. however, the years
l977~l978 brought a new wave of severe repression, chiefly in Moscow and the
capitals of certain republics (in the provinces the level of dissident re-
pression is virtually absolute). Many known activists in the struggle for
human rights were arrested and sentenced; the persecution of religious groups
not dependent on the authorities intensified.

The arrest and forthcoming trial of 83-year old Vladimir Chelkov, spiritual
leader of the Seventh Day Adventists. is a tragic example. The extremely
harsh sentences meted out to members of the Helsinki group (Orlov, Ginzburg,
Shcharanskiy. Lukyanenko. Tikhiy, Pyatkus, Rudenko. Kostava and others),

the verdicts against Ida Nude], Slepaka had begun, the persecution of people
who ask to leave the USSR. the heightened repression against Crimean Tutors--
houses bulldozed. hundreds of families reduced to a tragic situation-~sll
these things arouse deep anxiety and sorrow and call for active interven-
tion by world public opinion. The mounting repression still continues to~
day: Zissels. Kukabakiy, Buzinnikov and Ogorodnikov have been arrested,
houses have been searched in Moscow and Riga.

[Question] How do you assess your own situation at the present time?
[Answer] I see this period. which began with my being summoned by the de-
puty Soviet prosecutor in January 1977, as representing an undeniable escala-

tion in persecution. We are particularly affected by the total blockade on
telephone and postal communications with the Heat and even any personal

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

contact with our children who have been forced to go into exile in the Heat.
Letters do not arrive. and telephone conversations are interrupted at any
hour of the day or night, whoever the caller.

The secret search carried out in our home on 29 November marked a new step

in persecution. That day we left our apartment for 1 hour 30 minutes (usual-
ly we avoided all going out together at the same time). On our return we
noticed that nuaerous documents had been stolen. even though the apartment
was locked.

[Question] In conclusion. I would like to hear your opinion about the pro-
spects for the human rights defense movement in your country.

[Answer] However painful the fate of militants for the defense of human
rights in the USSR and Eastern Europe. I am convinced that the movement has
reached a degree of maturity such that the government is powerless to destroy
it and eliminate the results of its activities. which have a universal
character. No one has the power to neutralize the impartial and accurate
information about human rights violations which is today disseminated
throughout the world. No one can denigrate the ideology of defending human
rights. which is at the heart of public opinion muvemants in many countries
and also the basis of documents of major importance. No one has power over
the free choice of new combatants. who will not fail to embark on this hard
path as long as human rights violations continue.

CSO: 3100

2

F08 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENTS TO MULTINATIONAL INTBRDBPENDENCE
Paris LE NOUVBL OBSERVATEUR in French 9 Jun 79 PP 38,39

[Interview with economist Jacques Delors conducted by Alain
Jacques and Michel Bosquet, Paris, date not given]

[Text] The explanation most commonly heard for the ever~faster
worsening of the crisis besettlng the steel industry, ship-build-
ing, and textile industries is "the new international division
of labor": some very young countries, where low wages are the
rule, are in a position to handle this kind of production much
more cheaply than we can. That being the case, there is no-
thing for it but for us to shut down our plants. That was part
of a recent statement by German Finance Minister Hans Matthafer
(SDP): "Because our wages and our social costs are high, we
shall never again be a major producer of steel textiles, or
ships." Along the sane lines, L'BXPANSION wrote: l"today, Tu-
nisia makes our trousers and Japan builds out ships. Tenorrow,
Korea will be building our cars, Iran will be providing our
ethylene, and Brazil will be mining our aluminum.... The indus-
trialized nations are wearing themselves out trying to prolong
the vegetative lives of industries that have no future. Indus-
trial redeployment must be France's number-one concern." The
French gavernnent is in complete agreement with that view. But
the dying industries used to employ a lot of manpower, while
those u-borning require very little. Hence this idea from the
classical economists: the only areas in which new jobs can be
created are those which, sheltered against all foreign competi-
tion, produce exclusively for the foreign market and hence do
not weigh either upon the selling prices of exporting industries
nor on the "cost of living." Such "protected activities" are
thus primarily services and, what is more important, services
which are not of vital importance either to individuals or to
society as a whole. We asked economist Jacques Delors for his
opinion on this issue.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Question: What do you think of this analysis? 00 you see any
other way out than that of "two sectors" ~- one producing solely
for expert, the other for domestic consumption -- or, as it is
generally expressed in today's "t‘rnnglais," the "economic dnulc"?

Jacques Delors: There has always been dualism in our economics:
some enterprises exposed to international competition and others
sheltered from it; big enterprises and small ones; goods and
services sold on the market and services which are not for sale:
all these are lines of cleavage we shall continue to have with
us. The globaligation of the economy does change the dimensions
of the problem, true enough, but not enough to lead us into un-
warranted simplification. Let's not surrender, either to defeat-
ism (“we can no longer produce this or that kind of goods") or

to Malthusianism (growth is all behind us now"). There are still
so many needs to be satisfied, there are still so many possibili-
ties unexplored or unnxploited in the areas of science and tech-
nolonY, and so many social innovations yet to be born.

It is in this spirit that I should like to answer your question,
without underestimating the scope of the challenges that face us.

w» must, in fact, start thinking about still more complex eco-
numie structures. Contrary to the current philosophy of the
President and the Prime Minister, 1 don't think we have to sur-
render to the international market alone the right to make deci-
sions as to what we must produce in France. We do not have to
wipe out whole sectors of our industry on the pretext that other
countries' products are cheaper on that market than ours.

After all, traditions, study bureaus, professional skilla -- all
of these count for something, too. and are worth our while to
preserve, at least in part. The moment you start thinking in
terms of products rather than in terms of sectors, you discover
that France can perfectly well go on making and exporting cer-
tain types of shoes, textiles, leather products, etc. And that
it can even develop, within these same sectors, products of a
new kind, based on technologies very different from those used
in the past. Furthermore, the hallmark of old-style growth was
standardization of goods, maximization of profits, Taylorism,
and intensive urbanization. Today, though, we have technolo-
gies that make it possible to produce more personalized goods
and services, in small, decentralized units, with a technology
that is the opposite of Taylorism, which makes the produce bet-
ter and the job more worth the doing.

or course there will always be a concentrated sector of big fac-
tories turning out mass-produced goods. but that is not the

only possible way to go. Technology has become a sought-for
stake in politics because it opens the door to other possible
options. And we must insist on this point: it is no longer true,

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

though people evun now will go on saying it in, that centralized
mass production is in every case more profitable and more effi-
cient. Quite the contrary: in a steadily growing number of do-
mains, smull units can uchlew: just as high if not higher levels
of efficiency as can concentrated production. Small units will
in fact stand to gain by means of shared computer facilities nnd
ninicemputers; but you have to take note as well of the feet
that decentralization, in and of itself, brings with it savings
and economic advantages. It lets you adjust your products bet-
ter to local needs; it cuts down transport time and costs; it
lets you make use of local energy sources which can he most ad-
vantageous (small waterfalls, wind, sun, etc.) and which are
currently being neglected or overlooked.

Decentralization, worker management, bringing the locations of
production, consumption, and habitation closer together; set-
ting up very-high-performance enterprises in semi-urban, seni-
rural areas -- these goals are not mere flights of fancy, but
hard possibilities offered us by technological progress.

Question: You think that this might result not only in more
jobs, but also in u more even distribution of work across the
population? And also a more flexible organization of labor and

working hours, a greater diversity of jobs available to every-
one?

Jacques Delers: Yes, I do, and a major reduction in the work-
week, as well. In the old pattern of growth, progress in pro-
ductivity was distributed at the rate of 80 percent in the form
of goods and services, and only 20 percent in the form of lei—
sure time. The new growth pattern will let us change that ra-
tio little by little. Cuts in hours on the job can come about
in various ways, tailored to very different motivations: some
people will look for very rewarding work, in which they can in-
vest more of themselves; others will prefer a routine, automa-
tic job that will let them think about something else or to
talk with their neighbor; a great many would like to switch
from one kind of work to another, to work part-time, to get off
work earlier in the afternoon, to be able to take long sabbati-
cals to continue their education.

This would make us free to manage our own time, and we can de-
vise a formula which would let everyone between the ages of 18
and 05 to manage his own time -- making due allowance for the
constraints of production -- on and off the job, dividing it as
he or she likes between work time and non-work time (training
and education, other activities, leisure, rest...). On condi-
tion, of course, that ever the course of his lifetime he puts
in a given number of hours of work, he would be provided with
replacement income during periods away from work.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Under such a Hystum, evury young French citizen would have the
right, starting at age It, to 0 years of study. Some would use
it all up directly; others would got to work first and then
come back, at this or that point in their lives, to study what-
ever interested them, perhaps something that had nothing to do
with their jobs: go into music or painting, or help restore the
environment, or, if they would rather, set up their own plumb-
ing shop or start community services for their neighborhood.

The time policy implies a policy for society, and vice versa.
And it is obvious that shortening the work-day would gradually
givu rise to new needs and to a desire to live differently; to
make things, for example, which we now buy readymade; to have
access to a more extensive range of collective assets, of culn
turul opportunities, and the like. A whole new social dynamic,
leading into a dif9erent pattern of development, would thus be
set in motion.

i think that when this happens, the work/leisure dichotomy will
tend to blur, and will give way to the obligatory work/voluntary
activity/leisure and rest triad.

Question: it's those voluntary activities you mean when you re-
fer to the "third sector"?

lduqnva Delers: Not exactly. What I mean is, among other things,
activities by which people, on their own initiative, create
non—commercial goods and services to meet needs that are unful-
filled or even unknown.

Let's take first of all the example of a building in which the
families get together and decide to provide the services they
need: day nursery, pre-school, kindergarten. They will provide
those services themselves, taking turns at helping each other,
and these services will no longer be provided in exchange for
money payments. They will be recreating spaces sheltered from
the prevalence of commercialism which, in the capitalist system,
uradually destroys the domains of the gratuitous and of inter-
personal services. It is altogether possible that local commu-
nities would take an interest in such endeavors and subsidize
them to get them started.

One could also envisage -— and this is another form the third
sector might take -- five individuals' getting together to of-
ter the Families of a neighborhood or a commune day nursery,
prc-school, kindergarten, or home services for which there seems
to be a need. Insofar as this would be a semi-free service, it
might be covered by a contract between the group whose idea it
was and the local collectivity which would assure part of its
financial backing.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All the experiments we have already made go to show that a ser-
vice born of initiatiVe from below will cost less and turn out
to be rar better suited to the needs of the population than will
big institutions or burocracies. As a matter of fact, the way
the latter operate is, by its very nature, ill-adapted to indi—
vidual cases, to local circumstances, and to the specific prob-
lems stemming from poverty or from social marginality.

There would be no question, in my view, of going back to the
old ways in the areas of policy toward health, childhood, old
age, and the like. I want that to be clear. 0n the contrary,
what we must do is to complement, to round out, to uncorset and
to enrich the things the traditional agencies can do, and to

let men and women themselves have a say in handling the problems
of their lives.

This is yet another illustration of what I believe is one of

the keys for avoiding depersonalization: to respond to the long-
ing for independence and autonomy through the development of
manifold practical forms which the worker-management utopia

might take.

One more thing, though: this “third sector" is not confined to
non-commercial services. It may also extend to take in the pro-
duction of personalized goods, or such tasks as maintenance and
repairs. There will be no real chances for self-development un-
less, first of all, profound political change has made it pos-
sible to turn the very logic of the economy upside-down. Other-
wise, capitalism, with profit as its sole motivation, will leave
the third sector only crumbs. In actual fact, the underlying
rule of the dominant system is: privatize your profits, social-
ize your losses. In that context, the third sector would play
only a social welfare role, and its innovations would very quickly
be snatched away or marginalized.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 "Le Nouvel Observatenr"

6132
C50: 3100

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

1978 CALLED 'GOOD YEAR' FOR SELENIA FIRM
Paris AIR 8 COSMOS in French 6 Jan 79 p 30
[Article by Jean de Galnrd]

(Textl Throughout the year 1978 we have mentioned in the columns of AIR 6
COSMOS. whenever the occasion arose. essential facts making the activities
of the various departments of the Italian Selenia firm: radars and civil
systems. naval systems. radars and missiles. and space. whether it was a
matter of orders. project start-ups. missile firings. or launching of
satellites in whose construction the ltalian manufacturer participated.

it appears. at the time for annual statements. that the one for 1978 of
Selenia will be highly positive. This will be underscored by this review
of the year which we have formulated for the four activity sectors above
cited.

Let us recall that Selenia is one of the principal members of the STET-IRA
(Societa Pinanziaria Telefonica per Azioni--Istituto per la Ricostruzione
Industriale) group. that its capitalization of 17.5 billion lire (90 million
francs) is divided as follows: STET 70.23 percent. Finmeccunica 25.34
percent. IR! 2.5h percent. and FIAT 1.89 percent, and that its principal
centers of activity and production are in Rome. Jusaro. Pomezia. and
Ciuliano. near Naples, where a production plant was recently opened.
Selenin's exports represent 75 percent of its total activity. The company
employs 6,000 persons. of whom 2,300 are engineers.

In the domain of radars and civil systems the coapany continued its world-
wide expansion in 1978 (122 air traffic control systems installed in 23
countries) with the execution of three large contracts in particular: with
Hungary to provide. and place into operation, an ATCR-33 radar of medium
power. operating in band 5. and equipped with a 6-33 antenna of new type;
with Sweden. to modernize an ATCR -21 system previously supplied; and with
Iraq. to install a secondary surveillance radar at Baghdad where Selenia
has already built an air traffic control center.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Selenia is also participcting in the national "air navigation aids and air
traffic control" program launched under the auspices of the Italian National
Research Council. its "radars and civil systems" division is engaged in
study of a type of new generation secondary radar, the DABS (Discrete Address
Beacon System); at a more general level it is studying all the means and
procedures for improvement and greater effectiveness of the methods of con-
trolling air traffic.

For the naval systems division of Se enia the year 1978 was marked by great
success at the coamercial levels. the result of many years devoted to develop-
ment of equipment for naval armament and to prospecting in foreign markets.
The order placed by the Ecuadorean navy for six corvettes to be built by the
Cantieri Nnvoli Riuniti resulted in Selenia's supplying six RAN 108 search
radars. 12 Orion 10x tracking radars connected to the NA model 3 fire control
systems. six Albatros missile launching syetems (launcher works four tubes).
and an lPNlO Command and Control System (a vertical console and a horizontal
console for three operators).

The order by the Italian navy for six frigates of the Naeatrale class. for
Selenia meant supplying six RAN 108 search radars. six Abatros missile
launching systems with Orion 30X single impulse tracking radar, six lPNlO
command and control systems in the configuration with four vertical consoles
for a single operator. and four horizontal tactical consoles for three
operators.

Last. with the order by the Nigerian navy for a 3.500 ton frigate, Selenia
has obtained a contract for equipping the ship with an Albatros missile
launching system with eight tubes coupled with the NSA firing control center.

For the radar and missiles division the year 1978 was marked at once by con-
solidatlon of the position in the foreign market of the new Selenia RAT-315
third generation three-demensional radar (the number of units on order
exceeds 20) intended for air defense, by the completion of operational tests
by the italian air force of the Argos-lo new long range radar now being mass
produced for NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] and Italian national
defense requirements. and by mass production of Pluto radars intended for
detection of small remotely guided missiles in skimming flight.

During the year [978 the number of foreign movies which have adopted the
Albatros/Aspide system increased to four while the first Aapede missiles
Intended for foreign markets (to equip the Peruvian frigate Caravajal)
came off the assembly line.

This review would not be complete withOut mention of the important activity
or Selenia in the space sector in 1978. Mention must be made here that
Selenia furnished. for the Exosat satellite of the European Space Agency.
an on-board computer and installed a coherent transponder operating in band
5 as well. In addition. and still for the Agency, Selenia is studying and
perfecting a 20/30 gigaherte transponder combined with a high gain antenna
which should meet the requirements of space telecommunications in the 1980
decade. Furthermore Selenia has continued study and definition of the
antennas for the BCS satellite. a program for which construction of systems
9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICiAL USE ONLY

iur rerepiion and retrannmisaien or telemetry and riwume enniroi nignaln
has been anuigncd to Seleuia.

Laat year also one :he commencement of production of antennas and tele-
enmnunieatlona equipment intended for the seven intcioat V satellites which
willlu-launrMuL

Finally. a point to be emphasized: the good operating behavior of Seienio
space equipment: the Serio and Heteoaal nate]‘.tes, launched in the
second quarter nl 1977 and the OTS satellite of the European Sapce Agency.
launched laut year. were equipped with antennae and telecommunications
equipment constructed by Seienia: all are operating very well.

The participation by Selenia in the next international Aeronautics Salon

at the In Bourget airport next June. will he a very important event: an
exhibit of some 300 square meters in "all Bane. if ponsihle. demonstration
oi a full-size JD three—dimensional radar operating under aetuni conditions.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 0? COSMOS. Paris. 1979

ll.706
C80: 3l00

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

COMMENTARY LOOKS INTO sz-BLECTION POLITICS
Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish lb Jan 78 p 13
[Article by Jose Oneto: "The Million Votes"!

[Text] The two leading political forces in the country. UCD [Democratic Center
Union] and P808 [Spanish Socialist Workers Party] will participate in the 1
March elections on their own. and will not form any type of coalition with
other groups either to the right or left of them. according to reports attri-
buted to the leaders of the two majority parties.

in this regard. both the Socialists who tried at the last minute to play the
card of investiture when they realized that the general elections were inevi-
table. and the Centrists. aany of whom expressed a desire to shun the 1 March
elections. are now studying the respective electoral slates. which will cause
serious criticisa and division in both parties.

it is the governnent party itself which intends to make the largest nuaher of
changes among the candidates for the various senatorial and congressional
positions. 0f the 166 deputies which UCD had prior to the dissolution of the
Chasbers. only between 60 and 70 will retain their status as candidates. The
rest of the positions will be filled by experts in various fields. who will
attempt to replace those who confined themselves for a year and a half to
remaining silent in their seats. without asking any important contribution
either on the commissions or in the plenuas. with this arrangement. the gov-
ern-eat party is trying to for: a strong. specialized and coherent parliamen-
tary group that will prove capable of battling the opposition on the various
Congressional and Senate coaniaaioas.

This is precisely what concerns the Socialists. who will also make changes on
their tickets. but who have more internal sgreeasnt than does the govern-eat
party. among the leaders of the P808. who think that. of the 125 aesbers oi
Parliasent that the group had. nearly 100 will retain their status as candi-
dates. In other words. they think that 30 or 60 new candidates selected

iron aaong professional people and technicians who have been entering the
party's ranks will be joining the slates. There will disappear fro. the
slates a group of individuals used for padding then in the previous elections

11
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 09FICIAL USE ONLY

who. to the genuine surprise of the P505 itself. obtained their certificates
as deputies on 15 June 1977.

In any event. the chief concern of both political groups is the disenchant-
ment and apathy of the voters. which has been reflected in all the polls and
which materialized in the constitutional referendum of 6 December. If one
adds to this the fact that the election campaign is going to be held during
a month of February which the meteorologists have already predicted as rainy.
and marked by difficult weather conditions. with half of Spain covered by
snow and the other half by rain. the candidates‘ effort may be minimal.
There will be no more of those rallies with thousands upon thousands of
people which typified the 1977 election campaign; and there will also be no
opportunity for the candidates to talk personally with the largest possible
number of voters.

Hence. the election campaign will take place through the daily and weekly
press and on television in particular; and the latter will therefore have
to observe strict neutrality. more than ever before.

A little less than a week before the opening of the election campaign. both
the Centrists and the Socialists consider themselves convinced of their elec-
toral victory and of winning a majority. Although. during May. the vice-
president of the government. Fernando Abril. had notified Alfonso Guerra.

the 9508's number two man. that there would be generals if a pact similar

to the Honcloa pact of last year were not signed, the Socialists were cer-
rain that the current president would not risk everything on a single card.
with the majority in his party of an opposing view.

Nevertheless. Suarez has dared to take the great leap forward at a time when
the 9803's coffers are virtually empty. when the economic funds that were
coming from a Venezuela governed by Carlos Andres Perez. whose party was
defeated in December. have just been cut off. and when Felipe Gonzalez' stra-
tegy was aimed at winning municipal elections which have definitively con-
solidated the Socialist alternative. At any rate. the 9803. under more ad-
verse conditions. intends to work hard to obtain that million votes which

it needs in order to come to power. An attempt will be made to vie for that
same million by 060. with greater financial resources and with the power of
the government. but with a right that is right of it (Areilza-Fraga-Osorio)
which already has 1 billion pesetae for a campaign that will not be popular.
with the goal of seating between 20 and 30 deputies in the new Cortes. And
there will be no pre-electoral pacts for this. PSOE and UCD will go in
search of the lost million on their own....

COVYRICHT: INFORHACION Y PUBLICACIONES S.A., 1978

2909
680: 3110

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

SPAIN

SPECUMTION on 9302 memos vrc-ronv punusnzn
Madrid cmno 16 in Spanish 19 Jan 79 pp 16-18

[Text] Three years ago. they seized an Andalusian newspaper for publishing

the photograph of a certain "Iaidoro." 0n 1 March. "Iaidoro." the clandes-
tine name of Felipe Gonzalez. may be the next president of the government,

if Suarez should lose the elections.

Felipe Gonzalez. secretary general of the Spanish Socialist workers Party
[PSOE]. who has yet to save, so as to complete the furnishing of the apart-
ment that he has just bought in Pinar de Channrtin. is ready to pack his
bags again. to crate his books and records. to fold his seven suits and 18
ties. to bring along Carmen. his wife. and his sons Pablo and David. and
the new-born child. Csrsencita. and to take up residence in the Honcloa Pa-
lace in a setter of days.

Gonzalez has everything in readiness. in case Suarez loses. And not only
Gonzalez. but also the party's executive board and the young cadres of the
oldest party in the country. which will be exactly 100 years old this year.

If Suarez loses and the PSOE wins, something will change in Spain. 0n the
eve of the elections. with only one nonth left before the election campaign
begins. the 9503's experts are making slight changes in their party's plat-
form in order to reaove chaff. not to cause fright and to win those neces-
sary votes for coming to power. The P805 is no longer asking for national-
ization in general. but rather for minimal nationalization, so as to have
appeal. The banks will be respected. Marxian will be diluted. Taxes will,
indeed. be raised moderately. Divorce will be legalized immediately, and

an attempt will be nade to offer free schooling for everyone. The police
and the army will be provided with effective facilities for performing their
missions, and the possibility of joining NATO will be halted. The tenant-
menta to the United States will. of course, be kept. An effort will be made
to reduce unesploynent, even at the expense of a rise in inflation. The
subsidy to the state press will be withdraun, and the state sonopoly on

television will :ontinue....

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was on 2 May 1879. to be exact. In a humble bar on Tetuan Street in Madrid
a group of men were holding a "universal brotherhood" dinner. Over dessert.
they discussed politics. platforms and laws. Calderon. Vera. Iglesias. 0n-
clnn and Zubiszurre were the names of the best known table companions. who
had unanimously decided to form a political party. This is how the Spanish
Socialist workers Party came into existence.

A century later. the PSOE is preparing to fulfill a twofold requirement in
the midst of jubilation. impatience and anticipation: to celebrate the cen-
tennial of its founding. and to face the general elections that will take
place on 1 March.

The surprising decision of President Suarez to dissolve the Cortes and call
general elections has made the P808 a potential candidate for occupying Hon-
cloa. although the prognostications indicate that this is unlikely.

No one would bet on Suarez‘ downfall. and the crystal balls of the probers
are now heralding results very similar to those of 15 June 1977; but some-
times the election elves play unpredictable tricks. Note the recent defeat.
contrary to all predictions. of the Venezuelan "Ans" [Social Democrats[ at
the hands of the COPEIs [Christian Democrats].

Suarez Loses. Felipe Hins

And what if Suarez loses? Then PSOE wins. of course. And if Gonzalez reach-
es honclos to head a Socialist government. the country will have a government
group whose model society is considerably far removed not just from the Fran-
coist prototype that Spain has had for the past ‘0 years. but also from the
model proposed by UCD [Democratic Center Union]. Politics. economics. edu-
cation, public order. culture. the armed forces. groups and institutions will
all have to set their pace according to the pendulum of the Socialists. whose
leaders many consider to fluctuate between inexperience and enthusiasm. but
who are endowed with the estimable qualities of indisputable democratic cre-
dibility and a clean service record. They claim that. with the P502. Spain
will be more democratic. more just and also more merry. At the moment. the
PSOE's leaders are reacting to the request for election forecasts with the
naive assurance and innocent conviction of a super-welterweight without any
vices. "we want to win. and we shall win." And. at their next congress.

they are planning to remove the stigma of being called "Marxists." hovering
over them.

But what about the problems? The recent poll published by this magazine (see
CAHBIO 16. No 370) listed unemployment. terrorism and prices, in that order.
as the three ferocious wolves that are terrifying the sovereign people in

1979.
Attack on the Army

The Socialists have solutions for all of them. and for many others. such as
NATO. the armed forces. education. television or divorce. Enrique Hugica

14
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR "FFICIAL USE UNLY

and Javier Solana. members of the PSOE's executive board. accompanied by Hi-
guel Boyer. a Socialist expert in economic affairs. gave CANBIO 16 their

views concerning the Socialistn' first actions if they should win the forth-
coming elections.

No 370 of CANBIO 16 contained a poll prepared by Hetra Sela. in which unem-
ployment. terrorism and prices. in that order. were revealed to be the three
luau serious concerns of Spaniards for l979. However. it is possible that
the order of priority of the nation's fears has undergone a change as this
article is being written. Last Wednesday afternoon. 3 January. the military
governor of Hadrid. Div Gen Constantino Ortin Gil, was shot to death at the
door of his house in Madrid by the ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty Group].

impressed by the tragic incident. Enrique Mugica. s PSOB deputy and chairman
of the Congressional Defense Committee, told this magazine that the handling
of terrorism "requires some political measures. without which the police
measures would be inadequate and unworkable. There are minority sectors in
the Basque Country which do not accept those political measures. and those
minorities (ETA) are attempting to destabilize the situation by attacking a
sector such as the military. which have made Spanish unity a tradition and

a constant trait of their conduct. ETA does not attack individuals. but
rather uniforms. So. there is no solution other than to reduce those mi-
norities which do not accept political measures. But. in order to do so.
the political measures must be enacted to reduce and curb the sphere of action
of the terrorist groups."

However. the Socialists do not hesitate to request very forcefully the enact-
ment of severe police measures and professional personnel [or the forces of
public order.

Mugica continued: "Up until last summer. there were only 12 men in Cuipuzcoa
who were engaged in terrorism. The car radios did not reach more than a rs-
dius of 35 kilometers beyond San Sebastian. and the police had only 25 car-
tridges per year for training purposes. They had to pay for any more out of
their own wages. and the latter are not assured. Apart from this. the govern-

ment. which has been a weak government. has neglected to offer the forces of
public order the facilities for a new mentality. a mentality and a conduct.

it has not done everything possible to gear the state security corps to the
situation in the Basque Country. I think that the forces perform not because
the government has done anything. but because they have capable and respon-
sible leaders; not because the government has established guidelines or set
an example."

According to the Socialists. there is an urgent need to establish a Basque

police force. although the suppression of terrorism and crime is incumbent

on the forces of public order. According to Hugics. "The autonomous police
should see to order in the streets. but they can never be the Trojan horse

of independent orientation."

[5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

He added: "The defense of democracy lust be multi-directional also. All
those who are opposed to legality. regardless of what movement they are

in. must be brought to trial; liability must be required. The same action
should be taken against those who advocate coups as against those who engage
in armed struggle."

in any event. Hugica refers to the CANDID l6 poll in which. in answer to the
question as to which party was considered cspble of coping with terrorism.
17.6 percent mentioned the P803. while only 3.6 percent mentioned the 000.

Army. in the Same Boat

Mugica believes that the army would not be opposed to a P508 government. and
that the index of acceptance of the Socialists in the armed forces is very
high. He said: "I think that they are aware of the fact that the PSOB is
associated with a strictly Spanish historical tradition. and that at no time
during its loo-year history has it given in to foreign interference; and also
because l think that they realize that the P808 has an authentic concept of
the stat: and of authority, and sufficient strength based on the nation's
desires.

The Socialists also believe that they must convince the military family that
"we are in the same boat. that we lust defend unity and the democratic system
together; and that this is good for them and for everyone. He must convince
them that they may equal the Socialists in patriotism. but that they cannot
surpass us. Democracy will be good for the army; it will be properly provid-
ed with everything that it lacks at present. It must have sufficient mate-
rial resources. with salaries on a par with the civilian professional sala-
ries of the equivalent rank."

The Socialists likewise think that the majority of units should be operative.
and not as at present. when there are only a few special units (naval groups.
paratroopers. etc.) which are. This requires new systems and an updating of
tables of organisation.

Hugica remarks: "It will cause traumas at first, but it will be beneficial
in the long run. He Socialists will do it. seating the expectations concern-
ing rank and salaries for the current officers on active duty."

with regard to facilities. the P802 feels that there is a need for a Spanish
arms technology. and the creation of major series of manufacturer; even though
this may cause exports of arms. Hugica said: "Spain experts about $150 mil-
lionwurthof arms per year. while Israel. which has a population similar to
that of Madrid. and which is surrounded by enemies on all sides. exports 6‘00
million worth and France exports nearly $6 billion worth."

Anothcr important area to Socialists in the military field is that of train-
ing. They say that the army must be united with the people, and the military
must be formed and educated according to the guidelines in the recently ap-
proved Constitution.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "Si-I ONLY

Monica adds: "in this way. tho militn'y will he understood by the people. In
the academics. tho technical courses must he reconciled with humanistic values:
values related to freedoms. the penplv. citizenship. etc.. from a constitu-
tional standpoint."

Finally. the Socialists also have clearcut ideas regarding NATO. Nugica re-
marks: "He do not consider it either necessary nor feasible to Join NATO.
NATO was beneficial at its beginnings. at the height of the cold war. Now.
at the present tum:when there is an easing of tensions. Spain's entry into
NATO would destroy tho current balance of forces." However. there are some
means of substitution. According to the P808. Spain could contribute to the

defense of the Heat. of which it is a part. through the mutual defense treaty
with the United States.

Hugicn adds: "In 1981. when a study is made of the renewal of the treaty. the
Socialists might possibly back the signing of a new one. on a level of mutual
equality. in exchange for which the condition would have to he met that the
bases in Spain would be denuclearized. Unquestionsbly. we cannot be neutral.
because only the superpowers can be. we have a treaty with the United States
which we can use as the basis for a treaty with reciprocal equality."

U.S.A.: There Are No Problems

"hat about Hashington? How would the "protectors" of the Heat react to a
Socialist government in Spain? According to several sources queried by
CAHUIO 16 in Hashington. if Adolfo Suarez were defeated in the forthcoming
elections. those in charge of foreign policy in Hashington would receive a
shock...but they would endure it.

Both in government circles and in those of the U.S. Congress which follow
Spanish affairs. Suarez is unanimously considered a good prime sinister who
has done everything very well. and who apparently enjoys popularity and sup-
port among the citizens. Since the UCD's foreign policy almost always coin-
cides with the principles of western defense based on the "mode in U.S.A.“
style. washington has given its blessing to the continuity of Suarez.

However. if the PSOE should win it would not be too much of a shock. In
Washington. they would prefer a Socialist victory to that of Popular Alli-
ance. not to mention that of Carrillo's PCB [Spanish Communist Party]. the
Burocommunist version of which has evoked but little enthusiasm on the other

side of the Atlantic.

As Michael Leddeu. a former aide to ﬂenry Kissinger and professor at the
Georgetown University Center for Strategic Studies. told CAHBIO 16: "The
oblectives of the Carter administration insofar as Spain is concerned are
two: that democracy be consolidated, and that the Spanish commitment to
the Host continue. And there is no doubt whatever of the Socialists' atti-
tude toward those two principles."

1?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Professor Ledden added: "1 am sure that the Carter administration would pre-
fer that Suarez remain in power. but it would not be overly concerned if
Gonzalez were to replace him."

The officials of the Carter administration who were questioned by CAHBIO 16.
for their part. constantly attempted to maintain the "sacred principle" of
non-intervention. In his office at the "hits House. James Schlesinger.

a member of the National Security Council which is chaired by brzezinshi

and serves as an organ for consultation by the president on defense matters.
declared: "The only thing that we can say is that we favor the strengthening
of the democratic forces in Spain." After this. the representatives of the
Executive Branch remained silent. or remarked that. "It is the Spanish people
who must decide on the type of government that they want;" or. "The Social-
ists have behaved very responsibly when it was time for the construction of
democracy."

in the opinion of the analysts. the fact that the high-ranking officials in
the Executive branch have refused to praise the P80! is a clear indication

of their preference for Suarez. whom they do not begrudge any kind of com-
pliment; but there is significance in the fact that theyacknowledge the pos-
sibility that the Socialists may come to power: The last time that the Ita-
lian Comunist leader. Enrico belinguer. was about to come to power in Italy.
the Carter administration forgot its principle of non-intervention and declar-
ed itself definitely opposed to the idea.

Finally. the issue of NATO and the PSOE's opposition to Spain's entry into
the organization do not bother Washington either.

Ledden. former aide to Kissinger. told this magazine: "The fundamental and
immediate objective of Spanish foreign policy is not NATO, but rather Europe;
and the PSOE's European policy is not substantially different from that of
060...."

Money and Unemployment

And how does the P808 view the other two scourges which are already plaguing
Spain's 1979. namely, unemployment and inflation?

without problems. they claim.

At the moment, the Socialist Party believes that the current package of mea-
sures for fighting inflation is brutal and Draconian; and that. as usual.
the hardest and most painful part of the measures must be borne by the eco-

nomically weakest classes.

CAHBIO 16 was told by Miguel Boyer, a definite candidate for the Hinistry of
Economy: "He favor a less brutal adjustment in the battle against inflation.
so as to allow the increase in unemployment to stop and investment to in-
crease. In 1979. the government intends to reduce the GNP price index by

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7.7 percent. which is a brutal figure when one considers the fact that this
Index declined only 3 percent in 1978."

According to Boyer: "if it is intended to continue the fight against Inflation
with such harshness. this would be at odds with the attempt to stop the in-
crease in unemployment and to promote investment. If everything is attempted.
nothing will be gained; because these are opposing plans. It is impossible
to attempt a real growth in investment of 8.h percent. as the government wish-

es. That is a brutally high rate, with a restrictive monetary and credit po-
iicy in the battle against inflation.

"What do they want? Another 200.000 unemployed? To continue without invest-
ment? Inflation could be reduced in that way, but at what price? We Social-
ists think that there should be a less restrictive and harsh monetary and
credit policy which. instead of attempting a 12 percent rise in the GNP in-
dex. would make that figure 14 percent; and this would cause a greater in-
crease in internal demand. We also claim that the 8.4 investment index is
utopian and unrealistic; and that it cannot rise above 3 percent. with these
measures that we propose. the consumer price index. instead of increasing

by the 10 percent proposed by the government between December 1978 and Decem-
ber l979, would stand at 12 percent.

"In short, what we propose is to eliminate the contradictions in the govern-

ment's economic policy. and to wage a less Draconian and more gradual battle
against inflation."

According to the PSOE. the brutal 7.7 percent reduction in GNP prices during
1979 would cause an additional 100.000 unemployed during that same period.
And in Spain. there is little work, and few are employed. Only 36 percent
of Spaniards are producing and supporting with their employment the other

64 percent; and. therefore. we can presume that we have the lowest rate of
job activity in Europe, ranging between 45 and 50 percent. Boyer remarks:
"He cannot exacerbate this situation with more unemployment and more early
retirements."

without Exaggeration

"care, it is a matter of recovering investment and increasing employment. But
how can that be done? Hhat plans does the PSOE have in store. in the hypo-
thetical event that it should come to power after the elections? Boyer says
that it plans to fight inflation, but without exaggeration, as the UCD govern-
ment has done. in his opinion.

Three points will comprise the tripod backing the P502 in its economic policy
to battle unemployment and declining investment. Forcing public investment
(as in France and Brest Britain where. when private investment declined and
savings increased. the state collected funds and invested), combined with a
more realistic price policy and with forceful action to support industry.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

However. in order to force the public investment that the Socialists propose
financing must be found. how? Hith more taxes and with a larger budget de-
ficit. Nearly 70 billion pesetas more of budgetary spending than the figure
proposed by the UCD government.

or that amount. 10 percent would go to civil servants. so that their salaries
will not be so different from those of the workers in the private sector.

in exchange for this. there would be a freeze on personnel increases and

a required increase in the work productivity of the civil servants. making
them comply strictly with schedules and work standards.

And what about the taxes? Nearly 50 billion more. to be borne by Spaniards.
Boyer says: "And we don't mind saying so. although we know that it will not
benefit us in the elections to do so." Of that sum. 36 billion would be di-
rect. and 15 billion indirect. Despite everything, the tax pressure in this
country is among the slightest in Europe. in comparison with the GNP. In
Spain. taxes and social security payments total 27 percent of the GNP; where-
as in the countries of the European Economic Cmnmunity they represent be-
tween 37 and 67 percent.

And what nntionaiizations would there be? Very few; and. of course. the banks
are not included among them. At most. there would be measures to control cre-
dit. According to Boyer. limitations would be placed on the iron and steel
industry as a whole. which is on its last legs; and. in the field of energy.
on the high tension system. To those who claim that this entails an almost
"Soviet" measure. the Socialists explain that, in the Heat. in nearly all

the countries except Beigium. Japan and the United States. the aforementioned
system belongs to the state. Likewise. over the long term. the new power-
plants. and the nuclear ones in particular. should be turned over to the state.
which can guarantee better conditions for ecological protection and security
than can the private sector.

The issue of education is perhaps the one that aroused the greatest emotion
in the constitutional debates.

Javier Solana is aware of this when he observes: "The issue of education is
difficult. and the constitutional development of Article 27 is going to be

a problem. as we have already noted in the progress of the Constitution. In
any event. from the standpoint of the educational reform that we advocate.
the P508 takes two areas into consideration: one that is quantitative. and
another that is qualitative. He cannot disregard the fact that there is a
shortage of 800.000 classroom seats for preschool education and £83 [basic
general education 2]; and that. in BOP [expansion unknown). only 35 percent
of the young people of an age to receive this type of education are attend-

ing school. while in Europe the figure is 90 percent."

ue adds: "As for the qualitative area. we propose a thorough democratization
of the educational system. not only in the schools. but also in the educa-
tional planning." And what about divorce? It is imminent. according to

the P808. Solana claims that a divorce law is urgently needed. and if the
P503 is in the government. it will be enacted immediately.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

No in Private "Tele"

Finally. on the subject of state-owned television. the PSOE advocates a sta-
tute which differs from the one proposed by UCD only in minor details; while
it is flatly opposed to any possibil'ty of the establishment of privately
owned television in our country.

With regard to the state's media. the Socialists‘ position is clearly that
or a liquidating commission. In a four-point proposal devised by the party,
it calls for the economic operation of the news media through a corporation
in which the state would underwrite all the capital. and the board of admin-
istration would consist of individuals designated by Congress in proportion
In the representation gained by the various political parties. Subsequent-
ly. the operation would he turned over to the new company. which would not
have any kind of subsidy, nor economic assistance.

And so, the stirring of Socialist hopes for the almost imminent elections is
founded upon the next congress. at which there will be a recurrence of the
"Felipe bomb" which exploded last May in Barcelona: the PSOE's abandonment
of Wirxism. The problem no longer seems to be too important to the members
of the Executive Board questioned by CAHBIO 16. Hugica remarks: "To ask the
PSDE about Marxism is like asking the Christian Democrats about scholasti-
elsm. There is room for everyone in our party, from the Marxist Socialists
to the humanists of Christian or secular origin, or the Social Democrats."
Javier Soiana. for his part. adds that a party is not Marxist. just as a
factory or a store is not. "It is people who are. And in the PSOE. one

run he a Marxist or not. and nothing will happen. In political parties. it
is the platforms and their implementation that are important...."

if the Socialists Are in Command

Forget the bourgeois society. Don't mention social democracy, much less the
social dictatorship of the state. Forget all that, bec.use (let's suppose)

the PSOE has won the general elections of 1 March. and is beginning to con-

struct a new model of society.

All at once two things have happened: We have progressed from an autocratic.
dictatorial regime to a formal democracy. and from that democracy to a state
in which the supremacy belongs to the working class.

The third and final phase. socialism. that is. a classless society, is still
green. but it will ripen if the transition program devised by the 27th Con-
gress of the Spanish Socialist Workers Party remains steadfast. In other
words. that of the last congress. however. to some, 2 years have now elaps-
ed slave the date of the congress in December 1976, and today the Socialists
are smiling at the basic principles declared at the 27th Congress. Hugica
vumnunls: "Everything will change considerably at our next congress."

hut. before continuing. there are two important things that the P508 is say-
ing: Socialism can only be constructed with the backing of the majority of

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the people, and it can only be accomplished completely and definitively on
a worldwide scale.

Since you are a resident of a municipality, you are interested in learning
that. from the time when the P506 begins giving orders in this country, all

citizens will be able to participate in the regulation and planning of their
respective municipal areas.

Aunuzother things, the municipalities may intervene directly in the housing
market, particularly that of the working class. Rents will be cheap. and
the terms for obtaining ownership will be very advantageous.

Another goal is to make the land municipal; and a second one is to tax income
and property intensively and progressively.

There will also be a tendency to municipalize local services and. as a pri-
orlty. public transportation will tend to be free of charge.

You will have work. because the prime objective of the Socialist economic po-
llry ls full employment. And the work day will be reduced to 60 hours a

week. Vacations will gradually be lengthened. and there will be voluntary
retirement at age 60.

If you are a woman, the same holds true. because no one will discrimiaate
against you. And if you do laborious or monotonous work, you will work less.

There will be an adequate social security system for all citizens, to cope
with any situation.

what if you become ill? Look at what the P503 says: "health is a right which
the state must guarantee for citizens, seeing to it that everyone has access.

on equal terms. to the preventive, treatment and rehabilitation health ser-
vices."

As for education. the P305 claims that it will be democratic, free of charge.
secular (the courses in religion that are coapulaory in schools and study
plans will disappear) and public. with the gradual elisination of private
schoois.

But all this, and some other things as well. are not free. They have to be
paid for. how? Hell. with greater tax pressure. An essential goal of the
Socialist economic policy will be to raise the proportion of public revenue
to 30 percent of the GNP during the next 5 years; and to 35 percent during
the following 5 years.

If you are a banker, all the worse. The PSOE's program for private banks is
alnulat converting "the accomplishment of a series of bank nationalizations
into a realistic requirement in the process of socialism for the Spanish eco-
numy."

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since we are all consumers, we are greatly concerned with what the PSOH says
about ell-dusting the unnecessary middlemen. fostering cooperatives and in-
uurlng the presence of the producers in the marketing of their products.

And something else: The advertising of "harmful products," such as alcohol
and tobacco. will be banned. as will that of medicines; and there will be
no advertising on government television.

You will feel the P808 in every action of your life, even in the "mill."
But there you will have an advantage, if they keep their word: Military
service. which will be compulsory for everyone, will be paid for "so as to
meet the individual needs of the soldier." Social security will also meet
hiu family's needs, in the event that they exist.

And there is sore. Military service will be divided into three phases: the

first. in special camps; the second. in army units; and the third, consisting
ur a short course in the locality in which the citizen resides.

But, if you are a women, do not be upset. The P803 has thought of this, too,

because it is of the opinion "that it is essential for women to have a place
.n

in the military machine, although the program does not say anything more
specific.

COPYRIGRT: INFORHACION Y PUBLICACIONES S.A., 1978

2909
680: 3110

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE QNLY

SPAIN

muc omen POLL mum's: sum ms'r POPULAR
Hedrid comm 15 in smut. 2:. Dec 78 pp 36-38, 1.0, 1.3, 1.5, 4.7, as, so

[Text] Adolfo 8ueree "ie liked" by 49.6 percent or Speina enother
26.9 percent would vote for him tomorrow for preeident, end 41.9 percent
think thet he ie e niddle-of-the-roeder. Suerez hee revereed the drop

in hie popularity et the beginning oi‘ the yeer end nov enjoye good
political heelth.

He hee en irreeietihle populer chem, eepecielly enong voeen. Be ie fer
eheed of hie noet inediete rivel, Felipe Gonaelee. end Manuel Page

is no longer in eight. Hex-cover, Spenierde here given his peeeing
nuke in hie politicel peri'orlenoe. Hie neee ie Adolfo Sum” he ie
46 yeere 02d end hee been the preeident of the goverment einoe

5 July 197 .

Be hee been celled everything during theee 8 yeere in power. he i‘er

right hee breaded hie e trei r. hege end hie elli ere-here heve

c led hie inept. 'lhe PG Speni Co-Iniet Perty end the m3
Spenieh Sooieliet Vorhere Perty heggle vith hi.- over d-Iccreoy. end

the fer left ettecke hie pitileeely.

Re hee hed hie dovne when there vere deeerticne in hie petty or men
eeceleting terrori- hee intimidated the country. He hee chewed
einietere end endured ettuepted coupe each u "Operetion Gelezie.“ Be
hee buried Prenco'e leve end nede poeeible e ocneeneue eonetitution.

March vee tho preeldent'e low point. The expectetione of thoee who hed
voted for hill on 15 June 1977 plummeted, end uhen Metre Seie eeked
Spenierde vhether Suerez enjoyed the eeee eupport ee he did et the
beginning. 40 percent the-ﬂat thet it no leee.

Suerez vee einking. At thet tile. Hench 1978. only 16.4 percent of the
peopledered to eeeert thet the preeident hed won the tract of the
netion. vhereee in September 1916 elnoet heli‘ of the Spenieh people.
“.6 percent. were thet he hed eerned thet truet.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR “FFICYAL "5k HNLY

Many things more happened iron March until late November. on the eve of
the referendum. The rise in terrorism has become a serious concern.

which was bad for Suaroe and his administration; but amid the difficulties
the text or the constitution, the priority goal. was being drawn up.

unemployment was mwing. and crime, especially in the big cities. wae

up to its old tricks. bringing fear to the streets. These were two

other negative notes. but their psychological effects were mothed out
as Suaror and hie party. in the midst of debate on the constitution, tried
to explain again and again that the constitution was number one.

But how do Spaniards regard this ”traitor," this "inept" individual. thin
"new democrat." who buried Francoise and arranged for a constitution
that has returned sovereignty to the people?

came 16 asked Hotra Beie to do a survey on this and other question.
The most simifioant answer that unergod was this: since "arch of this
year. when the president's appeal had dropped to levels that were of

great concern to the government. Adolfo Suarez han been rebuilding his

We
Suarez on the Rise

The First COngrsse oi‘ the non [Democratic Center Union]. at which it

strives to present Spaniards with the inege of a homogeneous. progressive
party, could aloo have helped to bow Suarez.

Perhaps so did his firm stand regarding the unitary coup of "Operation
Galaxia." M military men were detained; another was arrested for
disobeying the minister of defense, and the opposition. aside M the
hesitations of Popular Alliance (AP), closed ranks around the defense of
democre/zy.

The long road to the constitution was marked by those and other
incidents that have not succeeded in destroying Suaren's popular image.

Pron March. tho low point, until Iovsmber. according to the Metre Seis
poll. his image has stabilized. with even a slidlt upward trend. Over
those 9 months Suarez's popularity not only did not decline: it even
regained ground: up 1.4 points over Harch.

A few days before the referendum Spanierds' opinion of Sears: had not
chewed in 50.7 percent of the cases. improved in 18.2 percent and gotten
worse in 16.8 percent. hr the first time since the past election. the
bottom line won a plus for the president.

But why did Suarsr's collapse on the ides of March not intensify until
it ultimately cost him his preponderance as a political leader. The

In
‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enewer from hetre Seie ie cleer: heceuee of loweniddle end lower cleee
Spenierde end thoee over 50 yeere of ego.

Supportere in Four negicne

'l'hcee two eociel cleeeee ere in the neJority in the country. end even
them they ere euppceed to be e eource of eupport for left-wins pertiee,
in thin epecific once they heve given their hecking to the current
president.

According to the poll. the regione of Outille le Viejea-Leon. cetelonie.
Andelucie end ktrenedure heve helped to holeter Sueree'e inge the root.
Nevertheloee, unenplcynent. which could be deecrihed ee the aoverment'e
"public eneev mnher one," ie hidteet in two of theee regione, indelucie
and ktreeedure.

ﬂio upswing ie eleo noet noticeeble in nunicipelitiee of between 2.000
and 50.000 inhehitente, end on fer no the ccuntry'e two Iedor citiee
are concerned. Bercelcne hecke Snorer nuch lore then Medrid. lie hee
moved up four percent in thet city but dropped 8.6 percent in ﬂedrid.

But not all Spenierde lock kindly on Sueree. end we oen point to four
eeenente of eociety none hie hereheet critice. Along the upper end
uppemniddle cleeeee he hee lcet 24.8 percent, end non; individuele
with edvanced echocline. 29.3 percent.

the other two groupe of critice involve egos he hee dropped 16.8 percent
now 18 end 19 yeer olde end 9.9 percent enong thcee 20 to 24.

Clear-Cut Approvel

Among the regione thet beck were: the leeet. the Beeque Oomti'y aid
saver-re heed the liet. were he nee dropped at.) percent, followed by
Anson with Juet e 10 percent felloff. However. ecccrdinc to the
curvey, if electione were held toocmw, Pelipe Goneeles would win
overwhelmingly in dragon.

Shappceedly. when it cene down to enewerine the Metre Seie queetion:
How do you rete the preeident'e perfornence. new Spenierde too): into
coneideretion unemployment, temrien, the ninmegeeent thet LP eccueee
hie of end the treitoroue ecte thet the fer right pine on hil.

Spenierde heve given Sueree e nerrow vote of confidence for ell thet he
hee end hee not done over the 9 nonthe from heroh to Novenber. 8e

wee given an everege merit of 5.6, which could be interpreted ee neening
thet hie perfornence hee topped e ninienn level of ecceptence by Spenierde.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘(IR nl-‘l'lCIAI. USU-z UNLY

'lhe president'n performance is rated most highly by women. who have
accorded him an average grade of 5.02. The Baaquen are his toudteet
graders. failing him roundly with a 5.87 mark. Youths ago 18 and 19
and from 20 to 24 were also very demanding and assigned his no more than
a 4.6 grade. which is failing as well.

Of course there is an enomous gap between that failing mark and the
zero rating that 5.1 percent of Spaniards gave him. 'lhis is offset.
however, by tho outstanding "cum laude" that 7.6 percent of his

fellow countrymen were kind enough to award him. Twenty percent of those
polled by Hetra Seis preferred not to sweat on the president.

The President' a Charm

Suares's chem was another thing that we wanted to find out about.
inauuch as it is one of the leitmotifs in the president's personal

references. The pollsters asked the follwing question: how do you
like the president?

The responses could not have been more ﬂattering to the 001) leader.
Without having to embroider the facts, we can assert that Suares's
personal attraction extends beyond the bounds of niddle-of-the-road
voters.

By virtue of the president's "charm," 9.8 percent of the Spanish
people like him very much; 49.6 percent like him; only 4.6 percent
do not like him. and 3.3 percent do not like him at all. Be prompts
indifference in 24.1 percent, while the remaining 8.6 percent did not
cmn‘e

An analysis of the poll leads to other conclusions. Per example,
Suarez is liked by women more than by men (11.3 percent of females like
him very much; 51.4 percent like his; only 3.7 percent do not. and Just
2.4 percent m1. at all).

Another point in the analysis is that his popularity increases in direct
relation to age. Prom 55.? percent among 18 and 19 year olds, he
rises to 68 percent among those over 50.

Suaroz's personal attraction declines, however, among the upper classes
and among individuals with advanced schooling. Il'he national average
of 5.3 percent who do not like the president rises to 7.2 percent among
those with advanced schooling and to 1.6 percent among the upper and
upper-middle classes.

in this regard, there is one geopolitical surprise: dragon. which is
dominated politically by Felipe Gonzalez. is one of the regions where
Suarez gets a significantly higher retire than the average. lie is at
the same level in Asturias and Andalucia.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the two Castiles, Leon. Catalonia. the Balearic Islands and Levante.
mares receives the average national nor): for his chant. but in Galicis
and especially in the Basque Country, things are not so good for hill.

In the latter region, only 25.5 percent like him, while those who

are indifferent Jump to 35.1 percent. and 17 percent do not like his.

Comparisons

But irresistible chars is one thing and politics is another. Since we
feel that comparisons are not odious. we wanted to Imow how Spaniards
compare Suarez with other political leaders.

He had to be astohed against the country's influential politicians. Is
Suarez much better. soastdut better, somewhat worse or much worse than
Carrillo. Frags, Felipe Gonzales, ‘l'iernc Galvan or Jose "aria de
Areilza?, the pollsters asked.

At least here Page is not nusber one. In the political race Suarez
has greatly outdistancsd the AP leader. whom he leads by 43.4 points.
‘1111s is the largest gap. because the ooaparison with the rest of the
leaders is not as advantageous.

Politically speaking, Suarez anoys good health. ideologies aside.

The president's political stature is slidxtly above that oi‘ Tisrno
GslVan, when he leads by 5.1 points. and Felipe Gonsales. over whom he
holds a 12.6 percent advantage.

The gap between him and leaders other than these two Socialists is
glaring. lie is far ahead of Carrillo. 52.1 points. and even {arther
ahead of Arsilsa, 56.4 points.

The struggle centers around Suarez, 'i'isrno and Felipe Gonzales. The
latter two are ahead of the president in some areas. lor emple,
'l'isrno tops Suarez among men. the upper and upper-suddle classes,
individuals with minimal high school level studies. persons under age

55 and , in terms or geopolitical zones and population areas, in Ashtrias.
Castilla la VieJa-Lson. Arsgcn and cities with sore than 200,000
inhabitants. except Hedi-id and Barcelona.

Asturias. however, is where Professor Tierno Galvan is farthest ahead of
Suarez, 25.8 percent. Next in according his a higher political
evaluation than the president are individuals with advanced schooling
(19.5 percent) and 18-19 year olds (17.6 percent).

Suarez in the Center

Felipe Gonzalez also outpaces Suarez among 18-19 year olds ( .2 percent),
in the Basque Country (11.7 percent). in Aragon (5.4 percent and in
cities with more than 200,000 inhabitants. except Madrid and Barcelona.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL In": ONLY

Suarcz's political image has improved. He has more popular backim.
Spaniarde approve of his performance politically. People like him, and
he is ahead or his rivals for power. But where on the spectra: is
Adolfo Suarez?

From their conclusive reply, this is a question that Spaniards have

grasped quite well. Its far as 41.9 percent of the population is concerned,
the president's position has not changed: he's in the center.

or the remaining bloc, 29.5 percent place him to the right; 8.8 percent
to the left, and 19.8 percent do not know or do not want to en.

The view that Spaniards hold of the president, straddling the
civilized right and the center, means that Suarez has a well-defined
popular image as a moderate middle-of-the-reader, an image

somewhat more leftist than that of the government as a whole or the
00!) itself, according to previous polls.

“is moderate image is quite homogeneous among all the Spaniards polled,
there being no significant differences according to sex, age, socio-
cultural level or place of residence.

The only exception was the Basque Country, which sees snares as leaning
somewhat more to the right, them still within what is called the
civilized riytt or center-right.

For President

If Spaniards were called upon tomorrow to elect a government president,
according to the Hetra Seis poll, Adolfo Suarez would win in a landslide.
No one at the moment is even close to him in this sense.

Not only that, but of all of Suarez's possible opponents in a hypothetical
election. only Felipe Gonzales and Tier-no Galvan could be regarded as
presidential material. The others, again according to the poll, would
achieve disappointing results. Nonetheless, we have to be careful in
interpreting these data because 27.3 percent of those polled did not
voice an opinion, and another 15.1 percent stated categorically that

they "wouldn't vote for any of then."

Given this reservation, Suarez would grab 26.9 percent of the votes:
Felipe Gonzalez, 12.7 percent; Tierno, 11.3 percent, with the rest far
behind: Praga, 3.1: Carrillo, 2.9. and Areilza, 0.7.

An analysis of these poll results indicates that Felipe Gonzalez would
win in dragon and that Tierno would garner more votes among individuals
with advanced schooling, wrong 18 to 24 year olds and in cities with more
than 200,000 inhabitants, excluding Madrid and Barcelona.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Suarez and Tierno would share first in Asturias, and the president,
Felipe Gonzalez and 'l'ierno Galvan would get the cane nunber of votes in
the Basque Country.

But an analysis of the results also leads to other conclusions. For
example, Manuel Press, who comnds only 3.1 percent support nationwide,
is regarded as presidential material by 10.5 percent of the upper and
upper-middle classes, 9 percent of individuals with interlediete schooling,
7.4 percent or those with advanced “Molina, 6.7 percent of Galicia

and 8.6 percent of Asturias.

Suarez likewise surpasses his national average (26.9 roent) one the
lower close (31.) percent), now those over age 3; 31.7 percent , in
Galicia (4o), Andalusia (35.5). ktrusdura (38.6 and in mioipelities
of between 2,000 and 10,000 inhabitants.

Things would not so as well for: the current president with individuals
who have taken advanced studies, only 16.4 percent at whom would vote
for him (way below his national average), with persons under age 35
(18.2 percent), in the Basque Country (10.6), in dragon (17) and in
cities with more than 200,000 inhabitants, except Madrid and Barcelona

I-‘elips Gonzalez, with his nationwide average of 12.7 percent, would
receive more election mpport in dragon, which would give him 23.2
percent of its votes; in Levante, with 18.4 percent, and in cities with
sore than 200,000 inhabitants, except Madrid, where he would take

19.5 percent, and Barcelona. 18.

But if it were up to than, he would not be elected rs'eeident by the
Galiciane, only 1.7 percent ci‘ when would select his; the Asturisns,
5.2 percent, or the residents of ktremsdura, 6.8 percent. its upper
and uppemiddls classes don‘t like his much either: only 7.1 percent
of then would vote for his.

This contrasts with ‘rierno Galvan, for whom 18 percent oi‘ the upper and
upper-middle classes would vote, thus nix-passing his national average of
11.3 percent. He was be picked by 16.4 percent of the middle class,

20.5 percent of individuals with high ediocl level studies and 18.5 Percent
of those with advanced schooling. The old professor also has a good
reputation in Galicis and Asturias.

When the pollsters asked about imediate election alternatives, whether
the snmicipal or general election elections should cone first or be held

at the ease tine, 42.6 percent of the Spanish people did not want to
hear about it, presumably because of skepticism or indifference.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Hurdcipnl Elections Firct

Among those who replied, however, the dominant answer was that the
municipal elections should be held first. This was the view of 33.8
percent of the Spanish people, compared to 17.1 percent who want the
general elections first and 6.5 percent who would prefer to have them
at the some time.

If general elections were held right now, P503 and [101) would win about
the same number of votes, the first time that such a result has emerged
from a poll since tho beginning of the year.

PSOB-UCD Neck and Neck

The Hetra Seis poll indicated that 29.3 percent would vote for the
govemsnt party and 29.8 percent for the P503. 'Ihis is seaming that

a constant 20 percent of registered voters would stay swear iron the polls
and takes into account only the residents of municipalities with more
than 2,000 inhabitants on the peninsula and in the Balearic Islands.

At this 29 percent vote level the 00]) outpaces the P838 among women,

the upper, upper-middle and lower classes, individuals with intermediate
schooling, those over 50 and in Galicis, Andalucis and thremadura, as
well as in municipalities of between 2,000 and 50,000 inhabitants.

The P503 is a clear-cut winner over the government party mong male
voters, the loweMiddle class, those under 35, in Asturias, the Basque
Country, Aragon and Levante, as well as in cities with more than 200,000
residents, except Madrid, and in Barcelona

'ihe election would be a close one between the two parties among the

middle class, persons with primary schooling, a high school level edmation,
advanced studies, individuals from 35 to 49 years of age, and in

Castilla la VieJa-Leon, Catalonia, the Balearic Islands, Castilla la

Nuevn, cities with from 50,000 to 200,000 inhabitants and in Madrid,
although in all these cases the P908 is slightly ahead.

What Is Your Opinion of President Suarez Since March of This Year?
(The same question was asked in September 1976 and March 1978)

Sep 76 Her 78 Nov 78
“as improved 59.7 11.9 18.2
Has gotten worse 6.5 28.3 16.8
The same 28.5 44.1 50.7
No answer 5.3 15.8 14.4

00 You Think That the President Has Gained or Lost Popular Support?

Sep 76 Mar 78 Nov 78
Gained 71.2 16.8 20.2
Lost gi1 40.0 25.9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020014-3

The cane
Don't know
No answer

NR OFFICIAL USli 0le

16.8 21.2
6.8 22.0

How Do You Like the President as a Pea-eon.

Very Inch

Veil enough

Do not like

Do not like at all
Indifferent

No answer

9.8
49.6
4.6
3.3
24.1
8.6

Felipe Gonzalez Ia Ahead 01‘ Suarez:

Among 18-19 year oldc «10.2

In the Basque Country +11.7

In Aragon +5.4

In cities with more than

200,000 inhabitants, except

Madrid and Barcelona +11.)

‘l‘iemo Is Ahead of Suarez:

Among men +1.3

Among the upper and upper

middle classes +3.7

Anon; 18-19 year cldc +3.7

Among 20-24 year olds +12.5

Among persons 25 to 34 +13.4

In Asturias +25.8

In Castillo la. YieJa-Leon +3.7
_ In Aragvon +9.9

In cities with more than

200,000 inhabitanta. except

Madrid and Barcelona +11.3

Ilow would You Place on the Ideological Scale?

Extreme left 0.1
Lei‘t 0.4
Moderate left 8.}
Center 41.9
Civilized ridzt 19.
Right 8.
Extreme ridzt 1.5
Don't know 12.9
No answer 6.9
32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00860R000100020014-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Election Trends (with a hypothetical 20 percent voter abstention)

Parties Mar 78 Jul 78 llov 78
AP 2.6 3.8 2.9
ucn 18.7 15.3 29.}
P808 38.5 26.8 29.8
K23 7.1 6.6 4.6
CDC [Democratic Convergence of

Catalonia] 1.3 0.6 0.8
m [Basque nationalist Part-y] 0.9 1.0 0.8
Others 4.4 2.5 6.6
No answer 26.4 43.5 25.2

Suares's Political Position (on the basis of a seven point scale as
follows: extme left. 1; left. 2; moderate 1e ‘t/center left, 3;
center. 43 civilised ridIt/center ridnt, 5; right, 6; extreme right. 7)

Sement of the Population Average Mark for Suarez Based on All
Responses
Sex
"On 404
Women 4.3
Social Class
Upper and upper-middle 4.5
Middle 4.4
LoveHlddle 4.4
‘0'.” 4e4
Schooling
Primary or less 4.4
Secondary 4.4
Teachers' school/intemediate 4.4
Advanced
Ace
18-19 4.7
20-24 4.6
25-34 4-5
35-49 4.3
50 and older 4.}
Region/nationality
Galicia 4.2
Asturias 4.5
Castilla 1a Visas-Leon 4.3
33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Buquo Country-Havana 5.0
hogan 405
Outdonla-Baloarlo Iolondo 4.6
haunt. 4.3
Andaluolo 4.3
thmndm'o 4.4
Castillo lo "nova 4.)
Locality

2.000 to 10,000 4.4
10,000 to 50.000 4.3
50.000 1'0 200.000 4.4
More than 200,000. oxcopt Huh-1d

and Bax-colon. 4.5
Madrid 4.)
Barcelona 4.6

hr Which of the Following Political London Would You Voto for President?

809mb“- 1978 lion-ho: 1978
“.83 403 301
8101le Do? 007
Sum-oz 19.9 26.9
P. Gonzalo: 14.2 12.7
Tlorno Golan 13.3 11.}
Sunny Carrillo 3.5 2.9
Nona of the obovo 15.3 15.1
Don't know/no m: 31.9 27-3

If Elections Hot-o Hold 'lboomv. Much of 'Ihooo Patios would You Von For?

AP 8013mm 1978 lion-bot 1978
AP 3.0 2.3
"CD 12.2 23.4
P508 21.4 23.8
cnc 0.5 0.6
PIN 0.8 0.7
P03 5.3 3.7
hr 11¢“. 0.1 0.1
I"! left 0.1 1.7
other: 1.8 3.2
Don't )cnov/no mm: 37.3 40.3

WWW: ammo 16, Madrid, 1978

8743
090 s 3110

3!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"EST GERMANY

HILLY BRANDT INTERVIEHBD 0N GUN. SPD FUTURE

hamburg STERN in German 20 Dec 78 pp [9-22

[Text] Five weeks after his heart infarct Hilly Brandt
snnoun:ed his wish to speak for the first time. In a STERN
interview in his sick-room, the SPD head revealed how much
trouble his illness is causing him. why his relationshin
with Egon Bahr is attained. what he thinks of the forging
ahead of hamburg Mayor Hans-Ulrich Klose. and what his
position is with regard to Karl Carstcn's candidacy for the
office of federal president.

STERN: Hr Brandt. when you were hospitalized 5 weeks ago with a heart infarct.
the public soon gained the impression that the SPD was suffering from lack of
leadership. Had no one in the top leadership thought about the fact that you
might drop out of the picture?

Brandt: The first reports about my illness were misleading. To be frank:
During the first few days things were going pretty badly with me. but then I
slowly made a coaeback. The SP0, I believe. cannot be reproached for lack of
leadership; after all. besides a chairman. it also has an ll-member presidium
under a politically strong board of directors. Every economic enterprise and
every military organization must be prepared for the possibility that someone
will drive or be driven against a tree. Business must nevertheless go on.

STERN: Some of your party friends are blaming Egon Bahr. federal business
manager of the SP0. for the fact that the organizational work is no longer
clicking very well.

Brandt: This criticism is based on a good many misunderstandings and exaggera-
tions. For almost exactly 20 years. Egon Bahr and I have not only lived
through a great deal together. but we have also achieved much. Among old
friends. as happens. a problem arises every now and then. but it is always
reauVed in time. so that the cause. to which we have both subscribed. does not
Suffer damage. STERN. too. as one sees. can slip into completely incorrect
formulations. At the end of 1976. Egon Bahr himself was not a little surprised
when i took up a suggestion made by Nelmut Schmidt and asked him to take over

35

. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

management of business at the federal level. Today, too, he will not contra-
dict if one says that he was not exactly promised a future as party secretary.

Anyway. the Hamburg party congress at the end of 1977 already honored his work
with a high number of votes.

STERN: Why don't you propose that the party call on Egon Bahr to be general
secretary? To all practical purposes he holds that position already.

Brnndt: The party would not dream of introducing the office of a general
secretary. This is not in keeping with our internal party organization.

STERN: will you be able to lead the party fully after your recovery or will
the doctors force you to take it easy?

Brandt: During the first half of next year. I will have to leave some things
undone. Hhen I go away to take a cure for 2 months at the end of December-~I
am not sure exactly where, either at Evian or a little farther south in France
--I wnnt to devote the 6 hours a day which I am allowed to work mainly to the
North-South Commission. For the report on the new orientation of development
policy is to be completed in the second half of the year. Before I collapsed
or. nmre precisely: before I was struck down, I had come to an agreement with
UN General Secretary Huldhelm that. if at all possible. the report should be

presented in October. I will maintain my usual daily contact with Bonn. so

that l'll know what's up. and if I can give advice anywhere. I will give it.

STERN: And what is the situation with regard to the election campaigns in
khelnlnnd—anlz. Berlin and Schleswig-Holstein?

Brandt: The doctor would like me to take it easy in March and April. I can
therefore not participate in the three election campaigns as I had planned.

In May I will go at it full time and speak at 60 rallies for the Europe elec-
tion--but only at two events a day.

STERN: Hill you groom a successor during next year?
Brandt: i don't understand the question.
STERN: Who would he most suited to become your successor?

nrnndt: In German soolol democracy, there has never been a crown prince, if
that Is what you mean. The successor of Brandt. if the party wants it. will
for the time being he Hilly Brandt. and if he. in a figurative sense, drives

into a tree and can't get up. there will be deputies, and as for the rest one
will have to see.

STFRN: Ibex the fact that Hamburg Mayor Hans-Ulrich Klose is suddenly getting
a lot of publicity with side trips, for example with statements on the subject
or the radicals decree. have something to do with your absence?

Brandt: The hamburg mayor already took a public stand on the question of
extremists prior to the Hessen election in 0ctober--which. for tactical

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reasons. not all regarded as the best possible time. it is quite all rinht

l’nr mo in reveal here that I. tun, told him. "I'lll. if things turn mil badly
in Henson. you may be In trouble." Nut there Is no disputing the fact that
without Klose's involvement it would have been more difficult to arriVe at a
position on the uneatlnu of extremists that is acceptable to all Social Demo-
crats. It was Nana Noochnick. however. who shouldered the main burden of work.

STERN: Can you guarantee that all SP" minister presidents and ministers will
forego the standard inquiry to the Federal Office for the Protection of the
Constitution. as demanded by the party resolution of IO December?

Brandt: i do not have at my disposal the sanction of physical punishment, but
1 proceed from the assumption that the resolution will be observed.

STERN: Does your positive evaluation of Klone also include his statements on
Stamokap [state monopoly capitalism]?

hrandt: (In you know, for our average countrymen. the utterance of the word
"Stnnukap" today is about equal to someone farting in company-~something that
in not done. Klose made the mistake of letting himself get involved in a dis-
cussion of this logogram in the first place. For what he wanted to say had
already occurred to others among us as well. As you know. we do not only have
a market economy in the Federal Republic.

STERN: And what do you think of Klose's main thesis that the state is turning
wire and more into the repair shop for capitalism?

Nrandt: Thai. too. is not without justification. But for that 1 don't need
the term Siamokap. Everyone calls after the state when things are going worse
somewhere!

STERN: dove you ewer wondered what actually might motivate Klose to confront
ticklinh topics in rapid sequence? to someone there offering himself for high-
er tasks?

hnnuh: lkri have to think about this aloud? He knew beforehand that wheels
were turning in his head. And 1 consider it proper that aoneone who has won an
rivrlluu does not simply settle down in a comfortable chair.

STERN: no you think. then. that Klose is one of those who belong to the coming
neneratlon of leaders. one of those who are good for any office?

urandl: Yes. for many important tasks. Such people exist not only in Northern
Germany. but also in the South.

STERN: whom do you have in mind there?

hrnudi: Well. i am thinking of the rejuvenated cabinet and. because of region-
al balance and one group. i will name the minister for research. Volker ﬂauff.
0r think of the advancing leadership personnel in the party's board of direc-
tors and in the hundestag fraction. 0r our new Laedner chiefs: Johannes Rae

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In huesseldori. "olger Buerner in hessen. Dietrich Stohbe in Berlin. Oskar
laiuntalne in the Suarinnd and Klaus Natthienen in Kiel. after all. are almost
veterans among the new generation of recruits. That is especially true of
Klaus von Dohnnuyi. Hans Apel. and Hans Koschnick. who. you know. is also not
yet 50. i am now running the danger of not mentioning other important names.
hut I won't let anyone come up to me and talk about the inadequate rising
generation in the leadership of the SPD.

STERN: At the first SPD party congress in which you were unable to partici-
pale. your party 2 weeks ago in Cologne demanded the 35-hour week for Europe
and the prohibition of the lock-out. ln domestic policy its formulations were
umre cautious. Are there two partiea--one for home consumption and one for
the big. wide world?

"taunt: i do not regard the reduction of working time as the main goal in the
struggle against unemployment. And with regard to the lock-out one must know
that it is not lawful in a number of European states. With the Europe Program.
which turned out to be rather long. we did perhaps to a small extent invite

the reproach: what you cannot push through in your own country. you have
written in for Europe. But there you are dealing with a long-term program.

STERN: Alter the Europe election next year. only 16 months remain until the
next nondestag election. Are you afraid that at that time Franz Josef Strauss
will enter the scene with a federation-wide 650. the fourth party?

Brandt: Hhat do you mean by being afraid? I don't believe that the fortune
and misfortune of the Federal Republic depends on whether Franz Josef Strauss
will come up with his own party. I don't want a repeat of Ueimar. but separa-
tist developments to the right of center should not be viewed as being tanta-
nuunt to the end of the world.

STERN: And separatist developments in your own party?

lirancit: Splits have neVer been good for social democracy. That is spoken by
someone who himself in 1931 as a very young man took part in one. But there.
too. i cannot speak for eternity.

STERN: Still prior to the Europe and Bundestag election. the Union is intent
upuu netting Karl Carstens' elected as president of the Federal Republic. al-
though he possibly lied before the Guillaume committee in 1976 concerning the
partivipation of the Federal Information Service [sun] in the weapons trade.

hraudt: i don't want to make a statement about this now. However. I am
Interested in making it clear that the report of the president of the END
menttoned in the press. which the latter supposedly submitted during my chan-
cellorship. was never brought to my attention--which was not required. Regard-
less of whether. in the question which you have raised. there will be reason to
reproach Mr Carstens. I stand by what I said in the spring: The parties should
agree on the re-election of Halter Scheel.

COPYRIGHT: I978 STERN

8970 38
C50: 3l03

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFIClAL USE ONLY

NEST GERMANY

NORDIC COUNTRIES DIVIDED IN REACTION TO MONETARY SYSTEH
Frankfurt nm/Hnin PRANKPURTER ALLGEHEINE in German 21 Dec 78 p ll
lArtlcle by Adam Von Werner: "Scandinavia Bides Its Time"]

[Text] The north is showing its cool side. The active efforts in particular
to create a monetary link between the BBC and the Scandinavian countries
have remained without response. The fact that the architects of the
European monetary system received rejections in their first attempts with
Norway as well as Sweden does not mean a refusal to join the new federation.
however. 0n the contrary. First. to quote Norwegian Prime Minister Nordli.
all Nordic countries have basically "positive expectations" of the system.
Second. the chances for success of the search for a more stable monetary
order are seen as being better after Italy and Ireland joined following an
initial hesitation than they were immediately after the Brussels resolution;
and third. the governments and banks in Oslo and Stockholm want to change
their minds on their present position of remaining on the sidelines at the
latest when Britain should change its position.

Nevertheless both countries belonged to the old monetary "snake"--Sweden
until one and a half years ago and Norway until a few days ago. In addition
it has been seen repeatedly that the economic effects within the BBC do not
only touch the Nordic countries tangentially but influence them directly.
But as free of political aspects as the Brussels start may be in its own
sphere. the starting positions of the individual Scandinavian countries

are very varied at the same time. Surely. they are making serious and

not unsuccessful efforts within the framework of the Nordic Council formed
by them to make full use of the present possibilities of coordinating their
economic. financial and social policies. There are limits to this
institutionalization of cooperation simply by the fact that Denmark and
Norway have closely allied themselves with the west in their foreign and

defense policies hutthat Sweden and Finland insist on a real or imagined
neutrality.

Denmark belongs both to NATO and to the rec. Although strong domestic
controversies preceded its entry into the EEC in 1973. there is now no
serious politician in this country who regrets that step or would like

to reverse it. It is freely agreed that the linkage with the EEC was a
blessing not only for the Danish agricultural sector but has been good for
the national economy as a whole. Today Denmark can be counted as one of the

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

most loyal members of the EEC. In the course of discussions about the
new monetary system the wish was expressed more clearly than ever in
Copenhagen to for: something like a hinge between western and Northern
Europe.

the fart that Norway. which is part of NATO like Denmark. was not also
able to come aboard the BBC 5 years ago was on the one hand due to the
political and tactical clumsiness of its proponents. 0n the other hand.
there was a "green front" recruited from the important group-numerically
it for no other reason-~of fishermen. But especially these people have
not seen anything to oppose their opinions. In view of a fishing policy
of the EEC that is depressing not only from their perspective, they find
the EEC as unattractiVe as before and let themselves be led readily by
those political forces which are attempting to use the question of the
monetary system again as a campaign against the EEC itself.

At any rate Social-Democratic Prime Hinister Nordli. who has only a minority
government. did not think he could risk a renewed conflict about the 886.

he had hoped at first that he would be able to use the much less controversial
membership of his country in the monetary "snake“ to direct Norway quietly
into the new federation by means of this "vehicle." But Nordli did not

not the desired help even from the Central Bank Council because the

malorlty of this board was of the opinion that as long as Great britain and
Sweden as important trade partners of Norway did not become more favorably
disposed toward the European monetary system it would be wiser to regulate

the value of their currency themselves.

This is Just what Sweden decided in august 1977 when it left the "snake"
after two depreciations totaling 18 percent, arguing that a stimulation of
exports that were then very depressed needed a stronger exchange currency
flexibility than could be offered by a European monetary regulation
dominated by the "hard o-Mark." Against the protest of the Social-Democrats
who just a year ago had to resort to the opposition bank the bourgeois
coalition government of Prime Minister Paelldin. who as the representative
of the interests of Swedish farmers was not very open to Europe, reached
for a monetary system that actually gave the country a relatively stable
currency and above all a notable export surplus. of course this was even
more the result of a savings policy that was begun simultaneously. an
austerity program which is meanwhile being practiced as decisively in
Norway.

Finland which has almost all the same economic problems as its neighboring
Scandinavian countries is an exception against its will because it has to
take the Soviet Union into consideration. As early as the early 70's

when hrlsinki reached a free-trade agreement with the BBC with great effort.
the Moscow oriented communists screamed murder. No, Pioland cannot even
consider for the present time joining the European monetary system. It

can only hope--that much was said publicly by Sorsa, tho Social-Democratic
government leadsr--that the new European monetary concept would have
indirect advantages for it.

so
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But there ls no doubt of the basic positive attitude of all Scandinavian
countries toward the European monetary system. Since. excepting Denmark.
they do not belong to the EEC they knou that they. unlike aose EEC members.
would not have direct advantages from joining the monetary federation.
Still. Norvay and Sweden calculating sharply have asked for time to think
this over vithout taking offense. as others for example. at the German

driving force. It cannot be judged as indecisiveness or opportunis-
that Oalo and Stockholm first want to see the results.

COPYRlGhT: F.A.z. Gab". Prankfurt an Main 1978

9232
080: 3103 END

bl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY