APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROP02-00080R000100010007-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010057-7

FOR OFHUAL USE ONLY

.1935 L/8250

29 January 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOLD 8/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010057-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or {Excerpt} in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is giVen, the infor-
mation was suamurized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Reggrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, £4691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service.
1000 Sorth Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I. chou No.

 
 
  

3 Rernpnrnt' s Area-nun \'-:

JPRS L/ 8250

 

OIMIOCIA'NIC OAYA
ME! I’

TWSMTIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE. (P000 8/79)

   
    
  

   
   
 

epou 'ale

29 Jenna 1979

_—
a.
. Veda-u,- Olgae-ruioa Near and Addie“ l0. Pcoicu/Tuk/loli Unit No.
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 “or“. cub. an“

Arlington. Virginia 22201
I). ‘l’ne oi Report a Period

CM."

    
  

 
        
   

     
 
 

    

12. Spooeoriag Organisation Nae and Addie-t

    
   
 
 

As above

l3. Supple-«my Notes

 
 
    
  

I6. Absusﬂs

  

The serial report contains political/economic infatuation on Rest European
energy, finance and trade policy natters as well as developments and trends
in the doctrine. prograns and probless of the najor couuuist parties,

including their relations with cos-unis: parties outside the Rest European
area.

 
 
      
    

. Key 'ads and

Ion-es: Analysis. I" Deutiptsos

      
      
     
      
        
        
         
       

     
 

    

Political Science _International Affairs _Luxesbourg

Sociology ___Austria __ Netherlands

Propaganda _Belgius _Norvay

Pconoaics _Canada _ Portugal

Energy _Cyprua _Spain

Industry _Dennark _Sveden

Trade _Pinland __Svi tzerland

Finance LPrence ___‘|'urkey

__Greece _United Kingdom

m wanna/omen“ 1’...- Iceland west Genany

  

  
   
  

m. (WTIPkU/Csm 5c, 50. 10

Avanlshlup SIIiIQCM

For official Use Only.
Limited amber of Copies Available Pros: JPRS.

  
  
 

  
  
 

2|. Ko. 0! Pages
62

 
   

cm -'093‘ M‘s. O-In T335 F0" “A? '5 IEPﬁOOUCED 93:90.0: 10".,"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/825

29 January

TRANSLATIONS 0" WESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 8/79)

CONTENTS

MOB

Air Force's 1979 Budget Outlined
(AIR 6 COSPDS. 16 Dec 78).............................

Preach llavul Air Ar- To Receive Super Etendard Aircraft
(Jean de Galard; Am & COSHOS. 16 Dec 78).............

Agave Radar of the Super Btendurd Briefly Described
(All! & OOSHJS. 16 Dec 78)

First Strategic Missile Group's Security Discussed
(Herve Plagnol: 12M. 23 Nov 78

Launcher. Satellite Construction for Brazil Proposed
(Pierre Langereux; AIR 5 OOSHOS. 23 Dec 28)...........

ITALY

Parliamentarians Predict Cover-meat Crisis Hithin 2 Months
(Iprenzo Schessi: II. ammo. 5 Jan 79).................

Public Opinion Survey on Political Situation
(Pabrizio Colsson; PANOM, 5 Dec 78)...............

Public Opinion Poll on PSI Craxi's Strategy
(rm, 12 Dec 78).................................

Discussion of Pol). Findings

Bettina Craxi Interviev, by Pasquale Homo

Split mum PSI Averted, by Pilippo Ceccarelli
and Pasquale Nonno
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm-rs (Contlnued)

Steel Her Between EEC, 'Breociani'
(Aldo Sandal; L'EUROPEO. 8 Dec 78)..................

Structure of the Industry Ministry
(Claudio romeo; 11. W00. 6 Dec 78).................

-b-

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

AIR FORCE'S 1979 BUDGET OUTLINED
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 16 Dec 78 pp 39-40

[Text] The draft of the 1979 Defense budget, as we have twice analyzed
it in our issues Nos 732 and 733, was successively passed by the National
Assembly (see AIR 8 COSMOS, No 739) and by the Senate (see page 9 of this
issue). It thus becomes a budget in force and it seems opportune to us to
restate the broad lines as far as the Air Force is concerned, dealing only
with the major programs. For the benefit of the senators Jean Prancou and
Albert Voilquin have already done that.

Air Equipment

Under the "manufacturing" heading program authorizations amount to 7.015
billion francs (+32.6 percent in comparison with the 1978 budget) and funds
for disbursement to 6.081 billion francs (+21.5 percent). The percentage
increases are greater than the average percentage increase of Chapter V.

Maintaining a fleet of 650 combat aircraft involves replacement of about
35 airplanes each year. This figure. calculated on the basis of an average
service life of 18 yearr for each airplane, was established by taking into
account retirement from service due to obsolescence of the airplanes (22 to
25 each year) and the rate of attrition by accident (10 per year). For

the first two program years the number of combat aircraft ordered was 30
in 1977 and 33 in 1978. The 1979 budget provides the funds to order 27
airplanes: four Mirage 2000 and 23 Mirage P-l.

Mirage 2000-this defense and air superiority aircraft has been given pri-
ority in both studies and construction. It will replace the Mirage III
starting in 1982. The 01 prototype flew in March 1978, the 02 in September.
The first flight of the 03. with a complete weapons system, is planned for
next spring. A two-seat aircraft. partially financed by the aanufacturer,
will take part in the development program starting in 1980. It is the first
four production airplanes (the program law had planned on an order for 20
Mirage 2000 in 1979) which will be ordered within the scope of the 1979
budget. Up to now the funds allocated to this program have been essential-
ly for studies; under the heading of construction 957 million francs were
co-itted. The question that has arisen is whether it will be possible to

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL "SF. UNLY

postpone the order for the remaining 16 aircraft to the last 3 years (1980.
1981 and 1982) of the progrnn law. The answer will be given next year when
the program law will again be broughr up to date as planned.

Along with the test program for the aircraft, SNECMA [National Company for
Study and Construction of Aircrnlt Bnginesl is continuing the development of
the MSJ-OS turbo-jet which will equip the production versions of the Mirage
2000. The 1979 budget had provided 155 a‘llion francs in program authori-
zations and 162 million francs in funds to be disbursed for this operation.
The ground tests of this motor are being supplemented by flight tests aboard
a Caravelle and a Mirage F-l.

Mirage F-l-this air defense aircraft. in operational service since 1976,
is the present equipment oi three pursuit wings. the 12th based at Chambrui
(two squadrons). the 30th based at Reins (two squadrons) and the 5th based
at Orange (two squadrons). Establishment of a third squadron at Chambrai
is now unuer study. which might signify maintaining in service, with the
10th wing based at Creit. the Mirage 1110 until the Mirage 2000 comes along
to replace them.

To the 166 Mirage P-l airplanes ordered before 1977 the program law has
added an order for 109 more to provide for the transition between the Mi-
rage IIIC and the Mirage 2000. By the end of this year 179 airplanes. nine
of them two-seat, will have been ordered (including 63 in 1977 and 1978);

23 additional. five of them two-seat, will be financed out of the 1979 bud-
get. The remaining 23 will be ordered between now and 1982. As far as
deliveries are concerned. up to now there have been 105; seven P-l airplanes
will be delivered next year. The spreading out of deliveries is due to the
fact that a certain number of airplanes are occasionally taken from the pro-
duction line in order to meet export demands.

Jaquar-0f the 200 aircraft which have been ordered prior to 1977 by the
Air Force. 158 will have been delivered by the end of this year. 176 by the
end of 1979. The remaining 26 will be delivered starting in 1980.

Alpha Jet--The program law fixed at 166 the number of airplanes of this type
to be ordered between 1977 and 1982. the ultimate objective being 200 air-
planes. At the end of 1977. 80 airplanes had been ordered, 33 within the
scope of the 1978 budget and 22 will be within the scope of the 1979 budget.
Six airplanes will have been delivered by the end of this year and 25 will
be delivered next year; the first squadron of the Tours Base School (pursuit
school) should be completely equipped with Alpha Jet airplanes by the end

of autumn 1979. For this program there are 1.050 billion francs of program
authorizations in the 1979 budget.

0-160 Transs11--Por a stated requirement of 25 aircraft, the ordering sched-
ule initially contemplated was as follows: four in 1978, 11 in 1979 and 10
in 1980. Four 0-160 airplanes were actually ordered in 1978 but the 1979

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

budget (1.159 billion francs in program authorizations) will be able to
finance only an order for eight airplanes. Delivery of the first of the
25 is planned in 1981. The conditions for financing the three Transall
airplanes which the Posts and Telecommunications ministry will pay back to
the Air Force in compensation for the four which the latter leased to the
CE?" [expansion unknown] in 1972, are still under disCussion.

Training Plane and New helicopter-~Por these two aircraft, ordering of which
was contemplated in the program law, no funds for manufacture have been pro-

vided in 1979.
Air Defense Equipment

Into this category enter the radars, ground anti-aircraft defenses (Crotale
[Rattlesnake] ground-air missiles and 20-millimeter guns) and air-air mis-
siles and munitions.

Centsur-this is a homing and landing radar intended to equip military air-
fields as replacements for the present approach radars. Six units of this
type were ordered in 1978; four others will be in 1979.

Aladin--this is a mobile low altitude surveillance radar system (also use-
able at medium altitudes) intended mainly for tactical use. The first three
radars of this type will be ordered within the scope of the 1979 budget.

Satrape--this altimetric radar with electronic elevation scanning will grad-
ually replacethtold supplementary equipment of the 23-centimeter warning
radars. A production order for four radars was placed in 1974. The first
Satrape radar was delivered and installed in 1977; the others will be be-
tween now and 1980.

Crotale--Sixteen Crotale sections (let us recall that it is an alldweather,
autonomous, and mobile system equipped with ground-sir missiles for defense
against aircraft at low altitudes) had been ordered prior to 1978; an order
for four sections is provided in the 1979 budget. By the end of 1979, 13
sections will have been delivered. Each section comprises an acquisition
unit and two firing units, each with four missiles, plus a transport ve-
hicle, an emergency repair unit, and a liaison vehicle. Bach squadron com-
prises two sections (16 missiles). Between now and 1980 eight squadrons
will have been established: one at Istres in 1977, two in 1978 (at Award
and Apt), four in 1979, and one in 1980.

Twenty-mm dual-barreled cannon-ort is a question of a short-range defense
system. Each mount comprises two cannons. The first 40 mounts were
ordered as part of the 1978 budget; the first 8 were delivered at the end
of this year. The 1979 budget (171 million francs) provided for ordering
56 mounts. The program law provided for 52. The last 56 will be ordered

beginning in 1980.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Air—air Missiles--The lag. up to 1978. in the budgetary section "Armament
and Munitions. resulted in a reduction in training for aerial launching

. and a lowered stock of combat munitions. The 1978 budget marked an upturn.
That for 1979 in part makes up for the lag (funds for disbursement increased
by 32.9 percent) but the Senate's budget analyst estimates that it falls
short of about 200 million francs in prograa authorizations; this deficiency
is going to affect. above all, the acquisition of new munitions. In the
1979 budget there are 228 million francs for ordering the Super 530 and

35 million francs for ordering the Magic. More than 1 million JO-nillimeter
shells have been ordered, 90 percent of them being training munitions.

Service Equipment and Infrastructure

In 1978 efforts were deovted to construction of equipment necessary to put
aircraft and new weapons systems into operation (electrical generating units.
and facilities for production and distribution of oxygen and nitrogen). In
1979 service equipment which has more than reached the end of its useful

life will be replaced: runway sweepers, maintenance and de-icing platforms.
and emergency runway cranes. In another area it is planned to continue the
program for acquisition of 70 81V (armored intervention vehicles) which

is to be spread out over 3 years in liaison with the VAB (forward armored
vehicles) of the ground forces. In 1979. 36 918 will be ordered. In 1980
eight will be delivered, in 1981. 33. and in 1982, 29.

The infrastructure represents, for the Air Force, a category of expense
which is becoming heavier and heavier. In addition to a "support" infra-
structure and a "living quarters" infrastructure, in this category is the
responsibility for maintaining in proper condition 66 platforms (runways,
ground lighting, parking areas, taxiwnys. and protective shelters and hang-
ars) whose replacement is cyclical (three or four runways per year). For
these expenses the 1979 budget provides 4.5 million francs in progra-
authorizationa (+7.8 percent) and 395 million francs in funds for disburse-

ment (+8.9 percent).

Next year the runways at Cognac and Strasbourg will be renovated; partial
rebuilding of other platforms will be effected. An additional 20 hangars
and shelters will be constructed.

In 1979. 23 million francs will be devoted to improvement of living condi-
tions for non-commissioned officers and enlisted man.

The transfer into its new premises of the school at Rochefort (see AIR 5
COSMOS. No 711) will be entirely accomplished in 1981. For the final seg-
ment of that operation the 1979 budget has provided 75 million francs in
program authorizations.

COPYRIGHT: AIR & COSMOS. Paris, 1978

11706
050: 3100

1.
ton orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

FRENCH NAVAL AIR ARM TO RECEIVE SUPER ETENDARD AIRCRAFT
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 16 Dec 78 pp 21-25

[Article by Jean de Galard]

[Text] Naval aviation makes an indispensable contribution to the perform-
ance of the French Navy's missions. especially those which affect the se-
curity of the oceanic strategic force. massive interventions and surveil-
lance of the frontiers. The onwboerd aircraft presently consist of
Etendard IVN [Standard lVH] for attack, Crusader for interception. Alice for
patrol. and helicopters. Progressively the Standard. daylight attack sir-
crnft, are being replaced by the Super Etendard [Super Standard]. an all-
weather attack airplane whose performance. thanks to the equipment and weep-
ons with which it is fitted. is greatly superior to that of its predecessor.
Appropriations in the 1979 budget will permit ordering the last six of a
production run which wil1 total 71. Twenty-four airplanes will be delivered
next year. During the 16 months in the shipyard just completed by the air-
craft carrier Clemenceau, a number of modifications were made to render the
ship capable of putting into operation the Super Btendard aircraft which
will carry the tactical nuclear weapon and the AM 39 air-sea missile.

The Foch also is going into the yards; it will again be operational in 1981.
The Super Standard and the aircraft carriers aboard which they will be em-
barked and from which they will be operational during the next 18 years are
very much the subject of the following pages.

AIR & COSNOS at this time desires to express its warmest thanks to those
in the French Navy who have made this possible: Rear Admiral Pstou, new
chief of the French Navy's Aeronautical Division and chief of the Central
Aeronautics Bureau. after having been commander of the aircraft carrier
group and the on-board aircraft; Captain Doniol, commander of the Foch,
and his entire crew; Captain Thireaut, commander of the Landivisian Naval
aircraft base: ‘ed Lieutenant Commander Argouse, Commander of the 11? naval
force. the first in the Prench Navy to be equipped with this new type of
airplane, which indeed appears to be the true "spearhead" of french naval
power.-Jean de Calard

5
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
Fim (WI-‘ICIAI. llSl-Z ONLY

A Very llifl'oront Airplane From the. Brendan! [VM

External 1y this is a great similarity between the Btendard WM and the
Super ﬁtemlard; one would be led to believe that the latter is a rejuvenated
version of the former. The fact of the matter is quite different although
it is mainly the pilots who are in position to appreciate the progress
which has been achieved.

The differences have to do. on the one hand, with a number of technological
improvenmts of details (greater equipment reliability and less heavy main-
tenance) and, on the other hand. with three essential points: modified
aerodynamics. a motor with lower specific fuel consumption, and highly modern
equipment.

The modifications related to the aerodynamics are all in the direction of
increasing the lift: the tips of the leading edges have been extended to
the extrcnities of the wings. the flaps have a new profile and their travel
has been extended. and the elevator has been redesigned.

In comparison with the Atar BC with which the Btendard IVH is equipped.

the new Atar 8160 of SNBCHA [National Company for Study and Construction of
Aircraft Engines]. without afterburner and with fixed nozzle, provides a
gain in thrust on the order of 500 kilograms and more brilliant performance
with lower specific consumption (about 8 to 10 percent).

Those are substantial improvements which by themselves contribute to making
the Super Standard an airplane whose performance is superior to that of; the
ﬁremen! IVH. But. in the area of equipment the aircraft has been radically
transformed, and the equip-eat installed aboard the Super Etendard vertiably
make it a figher airplane of the new generation. As a utter of fact there
are on board--to mention only the most spectacular equipment--an inertial
navigation and attack system. a radar (Agave)_which operates in air-air,
sir-surface, and telemetry modes. and a heads up display (HUD) for presen-
tation of piloting and attack data at the level of the pilot's eyes. Later
on other equipment will supplement the foregoing: a VORIILS [Visual omi-
range/instrument landing system], an automatic pilot, and an automatic
throttle. '

As for the ermnm'ent'of the Super Etendard. it is in keeping with the greatly
improved performance of the airplane: the four carrying points fixed under
the wings (two on each side) can each hold GOO-kilogram and 250-kilogram
bombs and rocket launchers. To the carrying point fixed under the fuselage
two 250-kilogram bombs or a jettisonable tank of 600 liters or a spout

for refueling in flight can be attached. For attack at sea the most ef-
fective weapon will be the Aerospatiale [National Industrial Aerospace
Company] let-39 air-sea missile whose range is greater than 60 kilometer

and which is self-guided. For aerial dogfights. especially at altitudes
below 25.000 feet. the Super Btendard equipment with two Iisgic missiles

6 .
roe oancm. use ONLY-
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in addition to its two 30-millimeter guns will be able to perform inter-
ceptions by de; and by night. Last. let us bear in mind that the Super
Btendard can carry the tactical weapon. All of these various improvements
of course provide very great advantages at the operatiOnal level; thanks

to increased lift the mass which can be catapulted, at a given speed, has
gone from 10.8 to 12 tons. which enables the charges carried and the fuel
supply to be increased. and hence the radius of action; with two suspended
tanks of 1.100 liters (instead of 600 liters in the case of the Btendsrd
IVM) the total fuel capacity is increased from 3,500 to 4,800 kilograms; the
carrying capacity for military loads (with only internal fuel capacity) goes
from 1.300 to 2,100 kilograms; the‘spproach speed at 7.8 tons goes from 133
to 122 knots. which permits landing on deck with winds on deck on the order
of 18 knots. or even to return to the deck with some military loads. Parti-
cularly in warm climates these advantages are especially significant.

As far as the motor is concerned, the fixed nozzle solution made establish-
ment of control a delicate matter. Flight certification of the Atar AKSO
for the Super Etendard was indeed issued several months ago. This does

not mean that a number of necessary modifications are not still in progress
and the first airplanes equipped with the definitive motor in the version
desired by the navy will be delivered only in the course of the year 1979.
These modifications are mainly concerned with pick-up at low altitudes.

In the meantime several utilization restrictions will be necessary when the
airplane is placed into service aboard aircraft carriers.

The Btendard IVH pilots have become virtuosi of the charts by using the
compass heading and the clock as accessories. The pilots of the Super
Btendsrd will be practically free of navigational concerns; they will only
have to exercise surveillance over it. They will therefore be able to
devote themselves to the tasks of observing the sea or the te:rsin or
surveillance of the sky. As for firing (guns. bombs. or rockets) it will
be effected with increased precision and effectiveness. which will reduce
the number of munitions to be utilized. 0n pages 26 and 27 [of source
publication] the reader will find additional information on the ensemble
of these facilities, as well as on tle method used aboard the aircraft
carriers to sline the inertial platform.

At Landivisian

The first two Super Btendard airplanes delivered to the French Navy (Nos

3 and 4 of the production run) started out in July with the Practical Evalu-
ation Commission at Istres. Along with No 2, during that month they re-
corded a total of some 60 flight hours. They then went to the base at
Landivisisn where they were assigned to the 11? naval force which, under
command of Lieutenant Commander Argouse, is the first unit of the French
Navy to be equipped with this type of aircraft. The third airplane (No 5

of the production run) came to the 11? in September, the fourth (No 6 of

the production run) in October. and the fifth (No 7 of the production run)

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on 10 Novmber. with these airplanes the pilots of the lll’ flew a total
of 100 houru in September (airplanes Non . and A), 167 hours in October
(airplanes Nos 3. A and 5) and 220 hours in November (airplanes Nos 3.

A, 5. 6 and 7). it can be believed that the total number of flying hours
effected at Landivision fron la September-the date the first two airplanes
were taken in charge-mp to 31 December 1978 by the Super Etcndard pilots
of the 11? will have cached 600. Activity in Decenber will have been
somewhat reduced because of the first trials at sea aboard the aircraft

carrier Foch performed free the 6th to he 8th and upon which to report
on subsequent pages.

The III" will have received its full romplcncnt of 12 airplanes at the end

of the month of February 1979. Next it will be the turn of the MP naval
force. also based at Landivisian, and whose first pilots will be trained

by the instructors of the 117. to receive its 12 Super Etendard aircraft

to replace its Crusader aircraft. This second force is supposed to be organ-
ized in sl‘DLUIbQI’ l979. In July 1980 the third force. the 17? based at
llyeres and up to now equipped with the Btendard 1W. will in its turn be
organized. Bach force includes 18 pilots. each of then flying an average

of 18 hours per month.

As there exists within naval aviation no equivalent to the CEAH [Hilitary
Aircraft Experinentation Center], at Hont-de-Harsan. of the Air Force it
will be the ll? naval force which for 1 year will have to be responsible
for operational experisentation with the Super Etendard. that is. it is
going to establish the procedures for elploying the aircraft.

Dori:o the early period of placing the first Super Etendard aircraft into
service at Landivisian the availability ratio was considered good--on the
order of 65 percent. Certainly. some equipsent breakdowns were encountered
but they were neither frequent nor of long duration. Uhile awaiting recep-
tion of an ATEC inspection and repair bench which AZROSPA‘I‘IALB will deliver
to Landivisian at the end of the year all defective equipeent has been re-
turned to the manufacturer.

The operating capability between overhauls of the $60 motor is 180 hours.
At Landivisian. on the occasion of our visit to the base at :he end of last
month. there were two spare motors. Aside fro. the enters. the spare parts
stock. considering the necessary long lead tines. on that occasion see-ed
to be a latter of concern for the comnder of the force.

Training oi technicians preceded that of the pilots. At the end of Noveaber
there were 10 pilots to have received their qualification with the Super
ﬁtandard: these were the ones who were. several days later. to land. for
the first tine. Super Etendard aircraft on the deck of the Foch. Practic-
ally all of the. are for-er Btandard I‘m pilots.

Technicians and pilots are asking ready to receive. next May. a aaintenance
siaulator now being cospleted at Toulouse under AEROSPATIALE supervision.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It will be placed into operation by the technical instruction section but
will also serve the pilots as a "systems" simulator. Another simulator of
this type will be installed at Hyeres in 1980.

By Roster of 1980 the ll? is supposed to have available s flight simulator
constructed by m which will make possible visual simulation of night lead-
ing.

In the coming months the No 2 airplane at lstres will be used for perform-
ance of tests of the automatic pilot. In much simplified terms its main
function will be to maintain altitude. The Super Etendard pilots will then

be able to carry out missions at very low altitudes above the sea by using
the radar.

Experimentation with the Super Standard-AH” combination will not begin be-
fore l9”; it will follow that with the Magic for which the adaptation arms
will be delivered next year at the same time as the adaptation arms for the
(coo-kilogram bombs to the exterior attaclment points.

Aboard the Foch

wan. the Clemenceau. upon conclusion of its modifications in the yards. was
continuing, since 2‘ November, its sea trials. the Foch. off the coast of
coast of Toulon. was. during lo days at sea in the beginning of this month.
effecting the first "homings" and catapult take-offs of a first group of
five Super Btendard aircraft arriving for the first tine directly from
landivisian. At the beginning of this test series it had been planned to
retrain 10 pilots for the super Etendard. all of them already qualified

for the Etendard IVH. This objective was achieved.

landing on the deck is always a delicate maneuver involving the landing of-
ficer. the pilot. the aircraft, and the aircraft carrier. The responsi-
bility of the first named is very great since it is he who ultimately de-
cider-depending upon the conditions with which he is faced: presentation of
the aircraft upon approach. motion of the platform. and force of the wind
upon the deck-whether the pilot can land under satisfactory conditions or
whether he should apply power and abort the landing. If the movements of
the platform are great he has available a manual optical instrument to take
the place of the lending mirror stabilized in pitch. During the entire
approach phase he is in radio comnication with the pilot who must strict-
ly obey his instructions.

The landing Officers School. which is at ﬂyeres and whose first col-sander
is the present "skipper" of the Foch, trains these officers. who must not
only be pilots themselves but must have been qualified with all types of
on-board aircraft in service in the naval air arm.

To be a ”qualified pilot" for any type of aircraft. there must be effected
15 to 20 sessions of simulated landings on a runway. at the rate of eight
passes per session. then. aboard aircraft carriers. two TM: (Touch and Go)

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and six CM: (Catch and Catapult). the latter consisting of a landing in-
nediately followed by a catapult take-off. A "confirmed" pilot for a given
airplane has. depending upon the degree of his training. perforned 30
landings on deck with that type of airplane and is capable of fulfilled all
nissions without recourse to a landing field.

The first test serier with the production Super Etendard aboard the Foch
proceeded satisfactorily despite 2 days of bad weather. The first results.
especiafly as far as the operations of elinenent at sea in heavy swells

of a large nuaber of aircraft. were judged satisfactory. 'bcy confined the
results which had been obtained on the ground.

The next test series will take place aboard the clenenceau in the beginning
of spring.

One of the lessons we learned in the course of this first test series is
that. according to a conpsrison dear to the heart of Adairal Patou. the
sailing ship and the aircraft carrier have this in canon: they are both
greatly subject to the wind....

The Advantages of the-Super Btendard

The nodification work carried out for 16 aonths on the aircraft carrier
Clenenceau had a three-fold purpose: to aodernize all the SCH [electronic
counter neasures] equigaaent and install the sum 2; improve living condi-
tions on board; and adapt the ship to the Super Etendard. For this adapt-
ation the workshops had to be suitably arranged (putting an me bench

into operation); likewise the nunition bunkers for storage of Ali-39 and
It‘d-52 weapons; it was also necessary to install the equip-eat and reference
systeas required for use of the inertial navigation systel installed upon
the aircraft.

In several nonths the Foch will undergo the sane series of nodifications.
which will be coapleted in 1981. '

During the nornal life of an aircraft carrier, Adairal Paton explains. the
naintenance cycle is heavy. Out of a 50 to SZ-nonth period there is aboat
3 years of availability either as an airplane or helicopter carrier. inter-
rupted by three IPER (periodic naintenance and repair inspections). one

of which is on the order of 8 aonths. the other two of duration of 3 to 6
nonths (not to neation the lack of availability due to naintenance as re-
quired on which is not regular). In aaintenance of aircraft carriers the
operations of catapult inspection play a very great role because they have
utilisation imitations and require-ants which mat be rigorously respected.
Bach catapult nust be coapletely inspected (tine in the shop: 5 soothe)
every 5,000 take-offs; in between it receives two extensive inspections
(ties in the shop: 21 days) every 2.000 take-offs. plus a 3-day inspection
every 400 take-offs. 0n the average. with two catapults 60 take-offs can
be provided for each of 100 pilots per year; as s aatter of fact it use

10
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be taken into consideration that not all of the 5.000 take—offs are uscuble
because of operational needs (calibration. empty launches. or model launches:
a loss of more than 10 percent).

Therefore anything that makes possible a savings in the use of the cata-
pult is considered an advantage; in comparison with its predecessor the
Super Etendard in this respect provides a great advantage because of its
much greater autonomy. For an equal number of catapult take-offsit is
always interesting to totalize the maximum number of flying hours. In

this respect the cycle of the Super Eteadard may be close to that of the
Crusader which is itself greater than that oftheEtendard IVM. In the mat-
ter of deck sequences (landings on deck followed by catapult take-offs) the
catapult V111 have to operate less frequently since "homings" will have to
be effected only about every 100 minutes (instead of every 70 with the
Etendard IVH). There will also result less fatigue for the personnel.

Another advantage of the Super Etendard. which Admiral Fatou emphasizes:

by virtue of its increased lift its speed of presentation upon the deck is
lower than that of the Etendard IVH. which decreases wear upon the stopping
cables and reduces the danger of breakage (in this case only the speed

need be taken into consideration; the mess does not enter).

A third advantage, and not the least. of the Super Etendard is that it will
be an excellent means of information to the comnand at sea, in long distance
detection. It will report what it sees and localize it.

For all these reasons, specifically related to the ship—aircraft combina-
tion. the admiral who before 1 December commanded the group of aircraft
carriers and the on-board aircraft did not conceal his satisfaction at
seeing the Super Etendard enter into service with the French Navy.

 

Aboard the aircraft carrier Foch on 5 Deceaber 1978 the Super Etendard No 6,
carrying a lock-up of the AH-39 aiaaile under its starboard wing, rolls toward
the catapult area. (Photographs pp 21-27 by nichel Isaac).

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

$3.50."... .2.
L3"...— 05 com: 083 up; “acummua u so: maucuauuu
nouuq zoom 05 vuwoon consume 3 vocuauou n 02

nuuucwum nonaw 0.3 .6033 Ou no» scum .uuumonao

ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE

 

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010057-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010057-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

A catapult sequence with a Super Etendnrd aboard the Poch. Underneath its
starboard wing the atrplane carries a mock-up of the AH-39 missile.

COPYRICBT: AIR 5 COSMOS, Paris, 1978

11706
C50: 3100

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

AGAVE RADAR OF The SUPER BTENRARD BRIEFLY DESCRIBED
Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 16 Dec 78 p 27

[Text] The Agave radar was developed cooperatively by Thomson-CS? and
Marcel Dassault Electronics.

It is designed for multi-purpose combat aircraft to fulfill the following
functions:

air-air--search, tracking. designation of objectives and telemetry;

air-sea-search for ships, automatic tracking. designation of objectives.
and telemetry: and

air-ground-navigation and telemetry

The Agave is a one-piece unit weighing 05 kilograms. It measures only 69
centimeters in diameter by 61 centimeters long. Its electrical power con-
sumption is 1.1 kilowatts. Thus it is very compact without, for all that.
any impairment of its performance. In the air-air mode it can detect a
light bomber 15 nautical miles away and in the air-sea mode a destroyer

at more than 60 miles. The antenna is of inverted Cassegrain type stabi-
lized in pitch and roll. The bearing segaent swept is 160 degrees. Trans-
mission is effectsd in the X band, the impulse width and repetition fre-
quency being adapted to the mission or to the conditions under which the
mission is performed. Likewise the beam width can be adjusted for a better
map picture or to improve detection in the air-air mode at medium altitudes

A self-surveillance system makes it possible forthe pilot to be informed
of the operational stateof his radar. 0n the ground this system enables
a defective part to be rapidly located. This radar is of modular design.
which facilitates maintenance.

16
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

View of cockpit of the Super Etendard. The reference numbers 1-9 indicate
the following equipment: 1) SFIH three-axis altitude indicator; 2) Thomson-
CSP V! 120 sight unit: 3) Jaeger altimeter; 6) Crouzet weapons box; 5) Socrat
V“? radio; 6) lJfT IP?; 7) Sages ETNA system control post; 8) 11ft Jacan;

and 9) Crouzct weapons box (Hichcl Issac photo)

The ThomsonvCSP vs 120 sight unit '
with which all the Super Etendsrd
aircraft are equipped. It consists

of a cathode ray sight lead, a

symbol generating computer. and a
gyroscopic sensor. It also takes over
a part of the fire control calculations.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSMOS. Paris, 1978

 

11706
CSO: 3100

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

“35'! STRATEGIC MISSILE GROUP'S SBCUPITY DISCUSSH)
Peris TAM in French 23 Nov 70 p 10

[Article by Item Plegnol: "Being e Dreftee in the let Strategic Missile
Group"]

[Text] Stroll eround the been of the let CNS (Strategic Missile Group], not
s few questions of the dreftees ebout their work end responsibilities. end
you any be sure thet in e few minutes e telephone cell will heve reported
you to the Bese Security end Defense Services (HS?) es en intruder who hes
cons to esk very insppropriete questions on s stretegic bsse.

Secrecy end security ere not enpty words on the Apt [Vsucluse Dept.) Bose.
Perhaps lore then enywhere else. the dreftees there heve their pert to pley
end their responsibilities to seem in regsrd to the strategic nucleer force.
Much hes been written end ssid to the effect thet. once our netionsl defense
was hesed on nuclear deterrence. the need for conscription would no longer
exist. Cone neke s visit to Apt with the MS? or the Technicsl Operstion end
Heintensnce Group (arm) end you will discover differently. Get the soldiers
to tell: sbout the ”disengegenent, "* end you will leern thet they do not see
it so such.

The 1000 dreftees ere co-snded by s generel, under whose direction we find
the stretsgic eissile brigede headquerters end the support services heed-
querters. The stretegic nissile hrigsde hesdqusrters amends the personnel
responsible for direct operetion of the nissiles end the techniciens respon-
sible for nsintensnce end repeir of equipnent. end for comicstions. The
support services hesdquerters is in chsrge of security end other generel ser-
vices. Kilitery service in the 1st 615 ney consist of service in these two
co-ends. So nuch for the heedquerters orgenizetion.

to see how the dreftees live end ectuslly teke pert in the operetion of the
strstegic nucleer force, we went to live enong then for severel dsys.

. Disengsgeeent: expression being currently used to designete the operetion
in progress consisting of replscenent [exchenge] of the $838 $2 nissiles
with those of the next generetion. 83's.

18
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During our brief stay, we not nainly those of the USP. the SP (Base Defense
Squadron), the 5818 (Fire Safety and Rescue Section), the SSH (Nuclear
Safety Section), the 61101, and the CICM ( Air Force Guard-Dog Training
Center).

Base Defense

0n Hedoesday evening, on entire conpany of the Defense Squadron conenced an
exercise in the area, which lasted 2!. hours. A drop by one of three Pulls
helicopters at an unfulliar point on the plateau, a reconnaissance check

of the sons. an orientation march, and return to the base in a Pun ends up
that day's exercise. Tired but content with having linbered up their legs,
they explained their mission: "In general, when the silos are operational, we
are alerted by electroaic leans if souething is wrong. In such a case, we
must be prepared to react inediately. However, when they are open and per-
sonnel are working in then, there is a permanent watch. We also screen those
entering and leaving certain zones. These are our constant responsibilities."

Do they feel lore useful here? Obviously, they do. "One does not guard 18
boobs. each having a power of '10 tines Hiroshima.‘ without feeling a greater
sense of importance than elsewhere. To be assigned to this nisaion required
7-8 weeks of training at Nines. For some, this training included paratrooper
training and qualification at Psu. In all, they will have a chance to rake at
least 10 Jups during their tour of service."

For the Albion plateau consandos, secrecy is the rule. Don't ask then how
my of then go into action. They will sinply answer...a few. Equipped
with the newest in uteriel (Sartron cameras, night-vision scopes, and soon,
araored colbat vehicles), their activities are many: defense of the instal-
lations, patrols on the base, control of the surrounding terrain, night
naneuvers, patrols, rapid interventions, and screening operation. Their
work is not always rosy. But was it aesnt to be? Often waiting, but always
on the alert, their nission requires that they provide unfailing nutual sup-
port. You will never see a lone couando. Hhether on their way to the seas.
to the lounge, or to the cinena, the berets, ranger uniform and combat boots
group together spontaneously. to ensure uninterrupted availability, the
Defense Squadron is divided into four coupanies, which are rotated succes-
sively through four defense postures: surveillance, alert, training, rest.
however, every person on the base must be capable of fulfilling his responsi-
bilities. One of the watchwords of the draftees is "operational."

Another special aspect of the work perforned by the lat CNS is their ongoing
relationship with the civilian population. It is not unusual for the military
Puss to carry hay to the ferners in winter, water in sinner, or to find
sheep that have strayed, and, above all, to fight forest fires. This is
another reason to recognise the importance of the role of the drafteas.

The 8815 is exemplary in this regard. Coeposed in great part of volunteers,
it covers the base. the silos and assistance to the civilians of the plateau.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Unlike the soldiers of the Defense Squadron. the firemen are trained on the
base itself. after oonpleting their initial period of basic military training.

Their training and equipnent are specially designed for svift action against
all forls of fire. Their "actor-ventilator equipment." for example. is an
interesting apparatus designed to suck up or blow away any toxic gases pro-
duced by a fire inside one of the silos. In a natter of ainutes. the soldiers
can cliab the enormous tube at the end of the electric pump. ready to fight
the fire. In the worst cases. their all-asbestos suits provide excellent
protection against the flames. Another piece of equipment. the VLEH (Heavy
Poss: Extinguisher Vehicle). a giant truck. pumps loads of teen for 6-6 minutes.
About 75 draftees are assigned to operate this equip-ant. under teen chiefs.
each of when is responsible for one vehicle and one team consisting of one
driver and several fire-en. Besides their initial specialist training on the
base. the personnel receive one hour daily of further refresher on-the-joh
training. Surprise exercises are frequently sprung. "At those tines. we

all crave to take part. Those who must rsaain behind envy the others. Our
mission? He derive our greatest sense of involvement free having to be there
fro. the eonsnt the silos are opened. and particularly during the 'dieengage-
“at.

One of the firemen is so passionately fond of his work that he ferns part of
a civilian fire brigade while on silitery pass or leave.

The Guard-Dog Group

Por the draftees assigned to the dog care and training group. it is equally a
labor of love. On Thursday norning. the dog named "Cent" was operated on for
a cyst on the neck by the assistant veterinarian. he anesthesia. The dog
ves siwly held by his trainer. e draftee. who controlled his by caressing
hi. to convey to his the presence of his asster. One would have to have
seen the looks exchanged hetveen then to appreciate the environment that pre-
vails here. Each one speaks of his dog. recalling the nuber of conpetitions
it has won. or ainly displaying the nedal dangling from the mind's collar.
There are reasons. The life of the dog is totally entrusted to the responsi-
bility of the soldier. As in nest services of the lat GUS.

The guard-dog group has one particularity: It is vorking on an experiaental
training nisaion. the first to be undertaken by the air force. Bach draftee
assigned to this duty is given responsibility for two animals—above all. for
grooning than and developing their fighting spirit. Only thus can they be
trained as codast dogs.

"The hardest thing.” said one draftee. "is to part with your dog. The new
master eonetialss has trouble in being accepted. During the first days. the
dog is ready to jmp all over his. The dog must be approached gradually.
talked to and caressed. ilhen one is able to enter its cage. he knows he has
been accepted." Another soldier. an electrician prior to his tour of service.
told as he has succeeded in finding a job as a dog trainer when he becomes
separated fro. the service.

20
[OR OHICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SE ONLY

The work here is especially exacting. The rounds are made on privately -
owned terrain, which requires exceptional diligence on the part of the dog's
master to avoid accidents. Training is therefore extrenely important. “hat
with asking the rounds. caring for and training the dogs. and the training
of the sen the-selves, there is certainly no lack of activity in the guard-
dog group of the lat ms.

The ”Disengsgesent" missile Exchange]

"The 'disengsgenant'? That was extreaely interesting. There we really got
close to the aissiles. And the firing controls, too. This was necessary for
the conversion to the 83 system," as it was explained to Ie by one of the 90
soldiers who had taken part in the dismantling of the silos. The "disengage-
ment" had been their affair. their mission. Fifteen days of preparation had
been required. One does not work inside the 25-1seter-deep wells without good
training as a first-aid specialist. Some have qualified for certification.
Others have had light but useful training in other technical fields: "As for
Ie, I a a tins'eith in civilian life. and I can be helpful to this job.

What needs to be done? Dis-antle the silos conpletely so that the engineers
can refit than for the 83 system."

After coapletion of their training, the work is organized: three tests of
six soldiers each. plus a cadre. per silo. "Sure, at the beginning, the
cadres showed us what had to be done. but fron then on we all did the sane
work. and that was great. A big tent was set up where everybody ate together,
regardless of rank. The general cans in to eat with us several tines."

"Of course," said another, We did not get directly involved with the missiles.
That pertained to the specialists. But we made it possible for then to work."

In all. 90 draftees from three different contingenta took part in this famous
"disengagement." The Defense team were in speci e1 dcnand: the SSIS fire-en
to extinguish the flash fires started by the nary-acetylene welding torches,
and the riflenen-eo-andos to control and guard the security of the launching
zones. In 3 nontlnnine silos and one firing control cater had been "dis-
engaged" for conversion to next generation 83 silos. The draftees are well
aware that "the new systen is sispler and lore efficient. The missiles will
also have a longer life."

"hen the first nine silos have been fully converted, a new group of draftees
will take part in the "disengage-ant" of the next nine. Those who were most
ilpressed were the ones who had worked on : firing control position. This is
a "capsule" approxilaately 8 meters by lo meters enclosed in a steel and con-
crete block weighing 45 tons. The firing control position fro: the exterior is
separated by 600 asters of rock and 1600 asters of lsbyrinthian galleries.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

Sou llove Technical Assign-onto

We were not able to loot with then at their work otationo. which were oit-
unted in tightly controlled nzcurity zones. and they were very uncouunica-
tive regarding their activitieo. Ilovever. we did learn that certain drafteeo
having well-defined technical skill. were working on the Iinoileo and are
taking part in the torhnical docuontotion of the new Iateriel tor the next

oyltel.

The foregoing lines have endeavored to convey hov being an air force drattee
can noon taking a direct part in dufenne operations to the autonion-ent

of a sedentary reporter in Paria.
001’"!!sz 1978 - “I'M" "manna deo Arlen

9399
(:80: 3100

22
'08 0971014]. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UM: ONLY

FRANCE

um, um 0016mm ”3 ’ML mm
Mill. 0mm in mm 23 DUO 78 pbj
[knob by Horn Mom]

[That] A mm m tho hum com: m- am sumo. (cm) mm

the mm» oooo honoh Mutant-u “11 co to sun on 5-9 Forum-y 1979
h pxooont tho 3mm“ gown-ac. ow: Mono pooolbuluoo {or opooo
much houoon tho m 0mm“. 1% I111 to A “We“ plantation“

on oooponuou on A follow-up to pnviouo much was for tho con-11:;
out a! 3 Joint opoo mum. (301ml Hugo do 011nm Pin, «mm of

tho mum Intuuu {or Bpoco Aotauuoo. many mama {1M
humo- authornloo hovo Just W tho lunch pmoon 13 m1».

nun to Minus-17 1|:me 1: W a 120-150 kg satellite for
Mon-o “Mellon-Menu mug, and» tom-no 1::
Wm. .uellucm-memammcumu
ﬁnd. mmm-muxmmuummnnmumm
o ”1 funny for launch“; Amt-10 who. no umn at tho WM
unmuumm.msmmummgu cm.
cm 119; M an. 5 114m mom that “go (of. AIR ICOSMOS

no. 71 .

mmumMMpm. 601ml Panama-d, rind-pouch
wtaummnmc- alumn- ouohuttuouuotorcfueh-
M: M. Inhaled munnua on! “Datum ”3110310.. A.
to: to Woz- of among 1o emotion, Color! Pan ohm cm on
“WMummkmunu-mtwu
music. In M. mu ho. M homo on Comm 1:: nonunion
for tho ”Soot to um um tuﬂltloo an o utellltc. ﬁlo Mud
snu- hoo “011.4 to “101’“.

n-ymmm (hu Inna. ouch Wyn-awn quad
In“ many 13 Km. hoaoh Gum (Bmu'o aoldzbor). m4 In! to
mm o Ionian trunnion oh1o to «you with it. nun haunt
worn-Huh”. no outward nthorthnuuo tthGECIpu-icu

m. A120 Cam. am. 1973

m 2’
cso: noc FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
Mm HFFICIAI. “5!: "Nil

UTALY

PARLIAMENTARIANS PREDICT GOVERNMENT CRfSlS HlTﬂlN 2 Nnﬂlﬂs
Milan lL HONDO in ltalian 5 Jan 79 pp 8-ll

[Article by Lorenzo Seheggi: "Giulio To Follow Giulio"; opinion survey 1rried
out between Tuesday. I: December. and Honday. l8 December. through a question-
naire consisting of six questions that was sent in all uembern of parliament
(deputies and senators). Responses were received from 218. in otherwurda.

25 percent of those questioned. broken down into 140 deputies (22.2 percent)
and 98 senators (31.1 percent). Out of the total number of responses. there-
fore. the Chamber accounted for 58.8 percent while the Senate ease up with
01.2 percent. The questionnaire called for unstructured responses. But,
analyzing and classifying the responses. those that were politically homogene-
ous were grouped together (see tables and graphs). The survey was given on
the basis of guaranteed anonymity. but some cf the deputies and senators did
sign their questionnaires. They include the following deputies: Carlo Squeri.
Massimo De Csrolis. Mario Clemente Hastella. Luigi Rossi di Hontclero.
Giuseppe Luechesi. Giacinto Urso. of the DC [Christian Democratic Party];
Hichele De Gregorio and Lucio Libertini. of the PCI; Enrico Quaranta and
Stefano Servadei. of the PSI [Italian Socialist Party). Secretary Pietro Longo
and Matteo llatteotti. of the rsm [Italian Social Democratic rartyl: liassimo
Carla. of Proletarian Desocracy. as well as senators Adolfo Sarti and Carlo
Rosei, of the ac. and "is (Italian Social Hovesentl member Giorgio Pisano.)

[Text] How Iany months has the administration left? "ho
will take Andreotti's place? And what is the ideal majority
for this legislative session? Questioned by lL H0300,
deputies and senators agreed on only one point.

After Andreotti we are going to have Andreotti again: the government crisis
is now inevitable but a new administration, similar to the present one or
with a definitely were open attitude toward the left. will eacrge from it.
including left-wing experts 'u some key sinistries and the current prime
minister will again be in charge of it. This is what emerges iron a survey
conducted by IL HONOO (see box insert) among all of the meabers of parliasent
who-ocontrary to all predictions by political experts who think that
Andreotti has had it--believo instead in the rise of the phenix. the bird
that rises fros its own ashes.

26
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l’lCl/il. "SI". ONLY

but there are no doubts as to the crisis. He find that 07.7 percent of the
responses indicate that it will certainlv come within 2 months. for example.
one month is the tine limit indicated by P80! secretary Pietro Longo in his
response. Somebody even wrote rather stonily on the questionnaire: “You can
count the days.” The moment parliament resumes its session. therefore. the
adninistration--acrording to the overwhelming najority of those questioned--
will no longer be able to hold out. It will presumably fall in connection
with the Pandolif plan. The remaining 32.’ percent are rather optimistic and
give the present cabinet several more nonths in office. They practically any
that this administration should stay in office until the European election.
but nobody looks such beyond that: no answer. as a natter of fact. expects
the administration to last nore than a year.

but what will come out of this crisis? The individuals questioned do not
think that the asauption of early elections could be sustained; only 11.6
percent as a matter of fact believe that there will be no solution to the
govern-en: crisis: 86.2 percent on the other hand expect the fornation of a
new government. In other words. a new administration within the first month
of 1979. But not an entirely new administration at that. According to 36.8
percent of the members of parliament questioned. the solution will be very
similar to the present one. The technically ftrmulated assumptions are
numerous: from single-color to two-color and on to various other combinations.
But there is only one political assunption here: a government put up by a
majority. such an the present one. in other words. including the five parties,
also once again expanded to include the Liberals who had already been in the
preceding cabinet. The chairman of the Chamber's transportation committee,
the communist Lucio Libertini. also said that ”I am afraid that the current
majority might fall under the blows of the DC right wing which wants the
crisis in order to revise its anticommunist campaign." This would have the
result that the PC! would go into the opposition. commented an anonymous
senator. and that will open the way to violence by armed groups. The per-
centage of those who foresee a more significant change however is higher.
Accorolng to 50 percent of the responses. as a matter of fact. the next
administration will include left-wing technicians. in sunmary, expressed in
plain language, half of the ncahers of ,..2:-::n: at: responded think that
the PC! will manage to strengthen its position further. guaranteeing its
position through the entry, into the government team. of persons it approves
of. especially at the head of the economic ministries. Overall. the two
assumptionao-either a rehash of the current formula or the entry of left-
wing techniciana--cover all possibilities. in other words. 86.8 percent.

The remainder of 13.2 percent is divided: 6.6 percent for the left-of-center
and 6.6 percent for the right-of-center.

lut regardless of the winning solution in terms of formulas, Andreotti has

the nest chance, compared to any other competitor. of once again getting

his desk back in Chigi Palace. The predictions of precisely one-half of those
questioned as a matter of fact are in his favor. The others follow after a
long interval: Piccoli. in second place. got 17.6 percent of the responses;
torlani. in third place. got 16.7 percent. And Iilippo “aria Pandolfi.

25
'0! OPPICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -

the minister of finance. one of the new personalities in the DC. gets about
6 percent. less than what the surviving race horse. Amintore Fanfnni. got with
6.9 percent.

So much for the predictions. But what. on the other hand. will be the solutions
and the formula for the administration and the men when the members of parlia-
ment would like to have?

The first fact that emerges is the scarcity of consensus on the assumption

that left-wing technicians will enter the government: only 11.7 percent
prognosticate such a formation (as against 50 percent who consider it probable).
in this connection, however. we have 17.7 percent who came out directly in
favor of letting communists into the government. The votes in favor of the
aseuption as to a new arbinistration similar to the present one. that is to
say. 35.2 percent. are more balanced. compared to those obtained by way of
prediction. The votes in favor of early elections are also balanced. with

ll.7 percent. Massimo De Carolis (who wrote that he was afraid of an ad-
ministration with left-wing technicians in it) and Luigi Roesi di Hontelers.
who as an alternative would accept only a left-of-center government. came

out in favor of this assumption. but Massimo Carla, of Proletnrian Demo-

cracy. also came out in favor of early elections; he predicted an electoral
administration presided over by Plaminio Piccoli. Finally. HIS member Giorio
Pisano asked for early elections; but he wants the electoral administration ,
to be headed by Amintore Panfani.

The next question ("Regarding the kind of administration you considered
opportune. who should be the prime minister?") drastically redimensions Giulio
Andreotti. Although it does as a matter of fact give him a very large number
of responses in terms of forecasts. the votes he actually got as the ideal
candidate dropped tremendously from 50 down to 20.6 percent. This drop is
essentially do to the decline in confidence among left-wing members of parlia-
ment. as demonstrated by a check on the questionnaire forms of those who came
out either in favor of letting the PC! into the administration or in favor

of letting PCT-approved technicians into the government; among those. none
voted for Andreotti. But here. Andreotti is followed by Pandolfi with 12
percent and. after a short interval. with 11.7 percent. by Arnaldo Forlani
[and] Plaminio Piccoli and then. gradually. by Fanfani. La Halfa. Francesco
Cossiga. and Antonio Giolitte. in addition to indicating the prime minister
considered most suitable. many of the responses provided detailed organiza-
tional charts for the entire administration. Very many solutions were ad-
vanced: practically one for every response. Some were absolutely devoid of
any innovative proposals whereas others instead (see box insert) contained

an abundance of innovations and unique solutions; generally speaking. there
are three tendencies.

Combination of ministries. These essentially involve the economic ministries.

The proposal that got the most votes relates to combining [the Ministry of]

Budget. Treasury. and finance under the leadership--in most cases--of Pandolfi.
Other proposals for example relate to tourism and entertainment. which should -

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be conbined with cultural assets and environment--a proposal that was linked.
among others. to the nnnes of Dnrlo Antonioezi or Susanna Agnelll or France
Fnlcucci. The alnistries of industry and of government participation. of
public works end of the South should also be conbined. One particularly
interesting proposal finallv cello for netting up a single Ministry of Services
[Utilities] vhich should include the nuthority of [the ministries] of trans-
portation. eerchant marine. post office. health. tourism, and cultural assets.
This tendency use sunnarised by an anonynnus deputy with the following slogan:
”Reduce the ninistrles. cut the undersecretories in half.”

Technicians. The overuhelalng aajority oi responaes foreseen that technicens
will be included in the administration. Roeano Prodi got the most votes;

for none people. as a setter of iact. he should switch ninistries. going over
to [the Ministry of] Governeent Partnerships. but there are other noses in
addition to his. such as the noses of Guido Carli. president of Contindustrla
[General Confvderation of ltalian industry] (proposed for govern-cot partner-
ships). Unoerto Nordlo. president of Alitalia (also for governnent partnerships).
Paolo Until, governor of the Bank oi ltaly (for the Treasury).aa well as Gen
Carlo Alberto Della Chiesa. proposed for the Hlnistry of Internal Affairs by

ac senator Carlo losei. Openly against the technicians. on the other hand.

was Clo-ante Hastella, a DC deputy. who wrote that he was not in agreeaent with
the idea of eaploying them: “They are going to be used in a stable context but
under political guidance. Their presence adds :0 the discredit oi the
institutions."

New names. Very Iany proposals were advanced here and acne of them kept coalng
up. The name of Psbrlrio Cicchitto, the 951's econoaic chief. for exaaple
appears as the ideal sinister of the budget. the regions. the South. and
finance; the nsae oi Maria sletta martini. a Christian Democrat and vice
president of the Chasber [was mentioned] for public education, health. and

in connection with nany other ninistries. The nases of for-er sinisters also
cone up again: tron Giovanni Gioia to Giovanni Halsgodi, who is dug up again
as sinister of the treasury assuming that there will be a right-of-center
adsinistration. headed by Amintore Ianfani. and Carlo Donat Cettin for the
hiniatry oi the Interior whose progras should be: "esrly and repeated elec-
tions to achieve a definite claritication." The response froa one anonynous
nc deputy finally is worth nentioning: he tilled in the box for the alnistry
of government participations only with a rather stony: "Not Bissglia.”

The ldeal Cabinet

Aleost all senbers of parlianent who responded to the questionnaire also in-
dicated the best adsinistretion to bring us up to the end of the legislative
session, The nest unique one involves a coalition govern-ant including the
no. 95:. rsor, n1 lltalian lapublicsn Party]. and left-wing independents
as technicians. supported by the PC! and set up as follows:

27
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
Vim lWFICMI. "SH "NIX

Prime Minister: Ugo La Haifa; interior: Giacomo Mancini; Foreign Afiairs:

Mauro Perri; Justice: Paolo Rossi: Public Education: Francesco De Martino;
Defense: Falco Accame: Finance. Treasury. and Budget: Filippo Maria Pandolii;
Territory and transportation (public works. transportation and merchant narine.
post office. cultural assets): Pietro Padula: Economy (agriculture and forestry.
industry, foreign trade. government partnerships, tourism and entertainment):
Amintore Fanfani; Social Hatters (labor and health):Pietro Bucaloasi: Fund for
the South: Claudio Napoleoni.

Question 1. How many months does the present administration have left?

Chamber Senate Total
2 2 2

Up to 2 months 73.2 57.2 67.7
Between 2 months and 1 year 26.8 62.8 32.3
More than 1 year _ _ _
Total 100 100 100

Question 2. How will the crisis turn out?
[Response] New administration: Chamber 84!; Senate 92.81; total -8.22.
[Response] Early elections: Chamber 161; Senate 7.22; total 11.82.

Question 3. “hat will he the formula for the new administration?

Chamber Senate Total
1 1 2

Like present one (including assump-
tions of single-color or coalition
government put up by majority of five
or six with PL! [Italian Liberal Party] 52.9 15.5 36.8
PC! will enter government _ _ _
Single-color DC or coalition with
PCT-approved technician 61.2 61.6 50
Leit-oE-center __ 15.6 6.6
Right-of-center 5.9 7.6 6.6
Total 100 100 100

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Question b. Who will be the next prime minister?

.Andreotti: Chamber 53.51; Senate 63.11.
Porlani: Chamber 15.51; Senate 16.21.
Piccoli: Chamber 10.71; Senate 28.51.
Panfani: Chamber 10.01: Senate 7.11.
Pandoifi: Chamber [only] 10.31.

Miscellaneous: [no entry].

No response: Senate: 7.11.

Question 5. what administrati-u and what majority uouid be best to conclude

the legislative session?

Like present (including assumptions as to
single-color or coalition government with
majority of five or six also including
PL!)

Early elections

PC! in government

Single-color administration or coalitiOn
with left-wing technicians

Left-of-center
Right-of-center
Other

Total

Question 6. Assuming we have the administration

be the prime minister?

Andreotti: Chamber 20.31; Senate 21.61.
forlani: Chamber 10.71; Senate 16.21.
Piccoli: Chamber 5.21; Senate 21.£1.
fanfanl: Chamber 10.11; Senate 7.61.

La Halts: Chamber 5.01: Senate 7.11.
Pandolii: Chamber 15.61: Senate 7.61.
liolitt: Chamber [only] 3.51.
COPYRIGHT: 11 "0000 1979

5050

CSO:3106 29

I01 OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Chamber Senate Total
1 1 1
36.5 35.7 35.2
9.6 16.2 11.7
10.2 28.5 17.7
15.6 7.4 11.7
10.9 7.1 8.9
13.0 __ 8.9
b.3 7.1 5.9
100 100 100

considered beat. who should

Cossiga: Chamber [only] 0.21
No response: Chamber 25.61;
Senate 21.61.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I '1'le

PUBLIC OPHI‘ION SURVEY Oil POLITICAL SlT'JuTIOﬂ
Milan PARORAMA in Italian 5 Dec 78 pp 57, 58, 61
[Report on PANOMMA-Denosknpea opinion poll by l-abrizio Caisson]

(Text! Concerned mainly over unemployment and the high
cost of living, nore than half of the Italians want a
govsment with the PCT and the PSI [Italian Socialist
Party]. But the number or those who haVe totally lost
faith is increasing in an alarming manner.

Skeptical, Very lukewarm toward the government, more concerned about
i-ediatc than social problems, but still convinced that a positive change
can come rm the parties or the left. This, in general terns, is the
political "identikit" oi‘ the Italian oi‘ today. This is the finding of an
opinion surVey conducted throughout the country (covering all social classes,
age groups, and voting trends) for PANORAHA by one of the most well-known
public opinion poll institutes, Deaoskopea.

This is a lament when the big parties are evaluating with great attention
and concern signs of new trends among the voters. The latest sound of
alan has come from Trentino and Alto Mige: the 19 November vote was not
positive for any of the major political forces.

In the present Andreotti Goverment conducting itself better or worse than
the covenants which have preceded it in recent years?

Much better 0.9
Better 15.8
lbrc or less the saae l06.7
Norse 11.2
Mich worse 3.1
Don't know 22.3

30
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

How do you Judge the conduct and the political activity of these parties
in recent months?

IX: PCI I‘Sl
Very positive 2.6 3.6 1.6
Fairly positive 21.1. 19.2 leo
So-so I06.2 l05.0 1.9.10
Rather negative 110.9 17.0 17.8
Completely negative 6.5 5.8 5.9

is this only a "local phenomenon"? A moderate ebb?" Or is it an expression
of dinnatisfaction with the present political situation? And how should the
emergence of this protest be answered? These are questions which the party
leaders are asking themselves. The fate of the Andreotti Government and the
prospects .1: the great majority will probably depend on this reflection.

what are the most important problems which the goverment should face and
resolve with the greatest urgency?

Unemployment 1.8.0
None order 39A
Pensions 15.5
Cost of living 12.h
Schools 12.3
Scone“; 8.5
llospi will: 7.0
Housing 6.?
Taxes 16.1
Agriculture 3.2
Drugs 2.0

while partial election tests give definite, unappealable results, opinion
surveys have the advantage of indicating tendencies and motivating choices
in a sore articulate way and covering the whole national territory. This
is why The Denoshopea-PAMRMA survey lay serve as a more inclusive evaluation.

without Regrets

A first fact which eaerges free the survey is that, in the event of a crisis,
the Andreotti Govemaent will not be greatly aourned. Almost half of the
persons interviewed (16.? percent) believe, in fact, that this goverment
has conducted itself ”more or less the sane" as the goverments which pre-
ceded it. A slightly or definitely negatiVe Judgaent is given by 115.3 per-
cent. It should he noted that fairly similar results were recorded in by
last year in another PANDM-Deuoskopea survey, when the government of
abstentions was still in.

31
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One fact which calls for reflection 1!: the Increased percentage of persons
interviewed who answer "don't know," (now 22.3 percent as compared to 10
percent in May 1977). It is probable that this it: due not so much to
uncertainty as to detachment. or lack of interest in political chelopmann.

The greatest approval for the Andreotti Government comes from central Italy,
from the wealthier social classes and, naturally, from DC (Christian Deso-
cratic) voters. Those most critical of the Andreotti Govermcnt are in the
south, workers or students of the left (or of the extreme right).

But on what scale of problems do people Judge the conduct of the government?
In this area, the change between the answers given a year and a half ago and
those given today is noteworthy and in many ways surprising. Leading among
the people's concerns today is the problem of unemployment, of Jobs. It
involves almost half or the persons interviewed ('18 percent) reaching higher
levels in the center-south, among young people with academic degrees (up to
65 percent). These figures might appear to be expected, but Just back in
my 1977 these problems were indicated as of the most concern by only 27.8
percent.

At that time the number 1 problem was public order. Today, from the PAMMHA-
Demoskopea survey, it appears that the percentage of those putting this problem
first has ruained constant (39.10 percent) despite the abduction and assass-
ination of Aldo bro and despite the explosion of terrorism.

The Andreotti Government is composed solely of Christian Democrats. Under
the present circunstances is this a positivo fact or not?

Yes, it is positive 19.1
No, other political forces should be present

in the goverrsnent I07.8
Don't know 33.2

what other parties should belong to the goverment?

PCI

PSI

PR] [Italian Republican Party]

PSDI [Italian Social Demcratic Party]
Pu [Italian Liberal Party]

Don't know

a

a

5355$$
~0wa c-w

In particular, would it be useful for the country if the PCI had more
direct responsibility in the government?

Among DC voters

Yer. 55-5 33-7

No 31-1 57.0

m“... know 13.7 903
32

FOR ORIGIN. USE OII'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Doug the presence of the communists in tlu. majority decisively affect the
action of the Andreotti Ooverrssent? Or does it affect it but not in any
substantial way? Or does it have almost no influence?

Among PC! voters

Dccisively 21.1 39.7
Not substantinlly 311.0 36.0
No influence 8.0 11.0
Don't know 36.3 13.2

lsnediately thereafter cone thc problems of pensions, the cost of living,
and schools. Definitely bnhimi come more general subjects such as the
economic crisis (only 8.5 percent). It appears obvious that the effects
of the crisis itself have led to an increase in concrete, imdiate, per-
sonal or family problems causing them to prevail even over pressing social
problems such as public order. These are circumstances which perhaps also
have their effect on the higher nunber of "don't know" answers to the more
political questions.

0n the Left

But how can we haVe a change for the good in the situation? The Italians,
in this sense, still have faith in the parties of the left, the PCI and the
P31. First of all, by a definite majority, (“7.8 percent against 19.1
percor‘.) they think that the goverment should not be composed of simply one
party, the so, but should include other political forces. And the parties
they would prefer to see Join the government are the PCI (56.3 percent) and
the P31 (51th percent). The fact should be pointed out that 36.1 percent of
the Dc voters believe the commist presence in the government would be use-
ful (however, 63.9 percent would prefer the socialists).

A reflection of the polmics within the left can be seen in these figures:
only 50.7 percent of the socialist voters would like to see the PC! in the
government; but the Bercentage is even less along the couunist voters with
regard to the P81: 0.6 percent. The difference, however, appears to dimin-
ish when the question is more articulate and avoids, for instance, the sus-
picion of an exclusive [xi-POI government relationship (for the socialists)
or of a return to the center-left (for the comnists). Thus 73.3 percent
of the P81 voters believe it would be "useful for the country if the consu-
nists also had more direct responsibility in the govement."

While it is true that very little enthusiasm is felt about the Andreotti
Covert-lent, and, in fact, the Judgment on it is rather severe, the big
parties are not much better off. The conduct of the 11:, PCI, and P81 in
recent months is Jacked by the majority as "So-So": '06 percent "So-So" for
the DC, '55 percent for the POI, h9.|o percent for the PSI. The negative eval-
uations are balanced then against the positive ones.

33
I0! OHICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But in this area, the met interesting data is that which indicates the
Judgssnt of the voters on their own preferred party. Among the Christian
Democrats 56.5 percent Judge the conduct of Benigno Zaceagnini's DC as
"very" or "fairly positive," but 311.2 percent describe it as "So-So."
Slightly better is the Judgment of the conmmists on the PCI: 7.1: percent
find the activity of the party very or fairly positive, but 32. percent
answers: ”So-So." The socialists are more demanding toward Bettino Craxi:
along with 109.5 percent of positive answers we find 9 percent of negative
Judgments, with 33.7 percent "So-So."

The adherence of the voters to the policies and choices of their own parties
is thus substantially confirmed, but without enthusiasm, and indeed with an
area of rceerved criticism. This may be another proof that the signals which
have come from the Trentino-Alto Adige are not solely the result of local
phenomena.

The Formula

The present system of political balances (one-party Dc government, big
majority) in general does not please or, in any case, causes increasing
uncertainty among the voters. And it is a problem which concerns mainly

the PCI. Only 21.7 percent of those interviewed in the survey believe,

in fact, that the cemunists decisively affect the activity of the govern-
ment. Some 3% percent believe that they do affect it, but not in any sub-
stantial way, while 8 percent believe that they do not affect it at all. And

Among these politicians, which one might be, considering the present situa-
tion, the best prime minister?

Zaccsgnini
Andreotti
Berlinguer
hendola
Ingrao
Craxi

De Martino
ha Mrs
Fanfani
hnnena
Ihncini
Don't kmw

:e

:l‘oﬂdemO‘mwuN

Jr
NOHNNNM 3W0)

a mu 36.3 percent answer "don't know," a figure in which the complexity

of a political system with unclear boundaries probably weighs heavily. Even
among the communist voters, as opposed to 39.7 percent who are convinced that
the PC! has a decisive influence on the government's choices, there are 36
percent who believe this influence to be meager.

34
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There ,in not, however, any nostalgia for the opposition. Only 16.9 percent
of the comunists interviewed believe, in fact, that "it would be preferable
to have the PCI in the opposition" (a year and a half ago, however, there
were far fewer who thought so, 10.7 percent). Among the overall voting
public, only 27 percent think that a nuJority without the PCI would be
preferable, while 3'! percent consider it a positive factor that, after 30
yearn, the P01 is no longer in the opposition.

As the political "identikit" of today's Italian is increasingly clearly
defined, some constants can be pointed out: the greatest percentage of
people who are dissatisfied are to be found in the South and on the islands,
among women, and naturally among the underprivileged social classes. But
theirs is a discontent which is not expressed along definite political lines
(except for some emerging points) but rather in an increase of uncertainty,
in the "don't knows," perhaps also in a certain detachment from political

develoments .

Along the persons more definitely politically oriented, on the other hand,
the turn toward the left, toward change, remains constant, but there merges
a certain intolerance of the stickiness of the general situation and the way
in which the parties are moving. The demnd, here, seems to be mainly for a
simplification, for clearer choices.

Even the images of the individual leaders have become a little obscured.
Fro... the PANORAMA-Dmoskopea poll, it appears that the best prime minister,
at the present time, is "don't know," (tho percent of the answers). All
the other percentages are very low. The greatest consensus is on Zaceagnini
(lb.2 percent), almost three points more than Andreotti.

The Leaders

As compared with the Hay 1977 survey, all of the politicians have lost
consensus points. Zac has lost 2 points, Andreotti l (and no no leader has
absorbed the 9.6 percent which then chose ﬁbre). Enrico Berlinguer also has
fallen from 1h.1 percent to 8.3 percent. All of the other leaders, from
liettino Craxi to Ugo La Malta, from Francisco De Martino to Anintore Panfani,
have lost ground in the index of approval as "best head of government."
Hence there emerges a certain attition among the leaders.

The wcsncn dcfini tely prefer Zac, while the men prefer Andreotti, who is
particularly popular among the upper middle class and businessmen.

Mona the conunist voters, beside the 39 percent which prefer Berlinguer
there are 210.3 percent who prefer Giorgio Anendola, while the most popular
with the voters of the extreme left (Proletarian Democracy, etc.) is Pietro

Ingres, with 35.3 percent.

35
FOR OPFICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Smilax-1y Painful-i, "mm-l by only $.73 )sercvui, ni‘ Hv- voters, .:. Very nuceecn-
ml (1&4 )nrrcvmi.) with thn right and ',Im "ﬁrm-w I‘M-1M. But Varco l‘nnnena
also recrrivea n 10.9 conaemsua from the right. while he must content himuelr

with 1 percent of the socialist voters.

Altogether the warning signals revealed by all the most recent election teats
Hm. I: confimntion and a proJcction in the PIGDIt’MA-Dnmnkopon poll. Thin
in another element calling for reflection among the parties which are con-
sidering the advisability of advancing tho date of political cicctionn or
which are neching at least now nvnnvmn or contact with a body of Voters who

are dianatisfied with the way things are going today.
1978 Arnaldo Mondndori Editor-e s. p. A.

COPYRIGHT:
3339
coo: 310'»

36
' ron onzcm. use ONLY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

PUBLIC OPINIOII POLL 01‘ P81 CRAXI'S SIM’H’B‘!

Milan Pmomr. in Italian 12 Dec 78 pp be, In, 1.9.52

(Article:

[Text]

Discunnion or Poll Findings

"llov Popular in Gran"!

ITALY

Up to vhet point has the "ch course” taken by
the PSI (Italian Socialist Party] influenced public
opinion? what is more ilportent for cocialiot voters,
polemica with the PC! on Leniniam or better relations
with the coununiotei A PNIORMA-Denoekopea poll answer:

these questions .

tht. In Bettina Crui'e PSI? A still tomleu nebull, an unknown quantity
with cone ambiguity, a hope. TM: in the problmtical, complex and uncertain
Judgment which energee fro. the October survey conducted by Demnkopee for

PARORMA .

Craxi': nev eecretarict in daonetreting e determination to change the

ideological end political action or the 981.

. Yes

Have you heard talk about this?

According to party preference (i)

m PCI P81 m

29 37 '09 31.
71 63 51 68.

37
re: OFFICIAL "SB 0513

PR1 DP
9301 PR To $
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

What are the moat important innovations in the I’Sl‘s new course? (This
question was put only tc mec who haw: heard talk about Craxi's change)

P3] members and

sympathizers (1.) Tot"? f
Separation from the comunists 26.5 23.3
Return to social Democratic positions 2.0 5.]
Renewal of the party 6.1 8.0
Remsal to recognize Icninism 12.2 5.!
No answer h2.9 h5.o

The uncertainty arises primarily from the excessively high, certainkl higher
than average in such polls, number of persons interviewed, who, two and a
half years after Craxi took over the secretariat and 8 months away from the
Turin congress, still cannot decide on mndamental aspects of the socialist
"new course," a matter which the mass media have, newertheless covered widely.
it in quite disconcerting, in fact that 73.1 percent of the persons inter-
viewed (and 51 percent among those who declared themselVes members of or
sympathize" with the PSI) should not have noticed that soaething has changed,
not only at the top of the party but also its way of conducting politics, in
its way of facing concrete problems, of arguing on the political and cultural
leVels (see the tables published on pages 1 and 2). hot only this: among those
who have heard of the change, hs percent (142.9 percent among the philosocial-
iota) cannot describe the direction of the change. They cannot state their
views on the argument opened with the PC! on Leninisc. Some 63 percent have
no idea, for instance, of where Craxi's policy will lead the PSI.

what can one say? In cases like thin: the temptation to blame the numbers is
great. But it is almos'. never well-founded. It can be noted however, that
the validity of these polls (which the parties themselves use) can be verified
months later, for instance, by new surveys on the same model. A new check,
hence, will come. For the time being, it is legitimate to as): somewhat dis-
turbing questions concerning the interest public opinion has in the parties
(and which recent electoral episodes have already raised). Also, with regard
to the P51, indications can be deduced which seen most significant at a time
when questions concerning the capacity for influence and penetration of the
party concern its leaders (see Bettino Craxi interview on page 7).

One fact emerges as certain: Craxi's leadership and the leadership of the
new group of leaders which emerged from the Turin congress last larch is not
under discussion. (see table on following me). Amng the philosocialists
interviewed almost 90 percent prefer his line to the line followed before,
which received approval from Just barely 6 percent. The consensus is equally
evident smong the people interviewed generally: 56.9 percent prefer the
Craxi line and only 13.10 percent is of the opposite opinion.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Do you think that the Cruxi line is to in; preferred to that of the previous
neeretortet? (The qucotlon won addressed only to those who have heard talk
about the Cruxi change).

According to the party preferred ($)
Dc m1 PSI MSI/nn m Dp/Pr Total

rm ram (i)
For the interest of the country
Cruxi line 67.9 23.5 89.8 100.0 72.7 12.5 56.9
Previoun line 1.8 I03.1 6.1 -- 9.1 25.0 13.“
Don’t know 30.!» 33.3 6.1 -- 18.2 62.5 29.8
For the interest of the PSI
Croxi 11:.- 58. 33.3 76.6 16.7 72.7 37.5 1.8.9
Previous line 5. 35.3 6.1 16.7 9.1 12.5 11.8
Don'tknow 37.5 31.1: 16.3 66.7 18.2 37.5 39.3

Cmi'u PSI has brought into discussion the lurxiet-Ieniniet tradition which
inspires the left, thun provoking an argument with the PCI. Do you believe
that this it. a positive thing which will leod to o chrii'ieotion within the
left, or do you think it in negative?

According to the perry preferred (9
00 PCI an m PM Mr:-

'61]!!! ran:
Positive 36.8 31.6 53.5 63.2 I08.0 52.9
Negative 9.3 31.6 15.8 5.3 12.0 23.5
Don'tknow 5w. 36.8 29.7 31.6 1.0.0 23.5
Aeoordim to the Duty preferred (i)
no ac: m m m 09/?!

war/m Pam
rebate 29.0 1u.o 36.6 36.8 36.0 35.3
Mreelent 25.9 68.!» 16.5 21.1 who 1.7.1
lbn'tknow 115.1 17.6 15.8 36.8 20.0 17.6

39
NR OHICIM. 08! 0E!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Overall what is your Judgment on the conduct and the political activity of
the P81 in recent months?

Total ($)

Very positive
Fairly positiVe
80-30

Either negative
Completely negative
No answer

~13»st OH
ﬂoat-50‘

with!

Galvanizing

A psychological effect (important in politics) which was anticipated, a
galvanizing effect on the rank and file and the traditional electorate can

be said to be confirmed. Hhile bearing in mind, in fact, that the poll pre-
cedes the election defeat in Trentino, a good 59.1: percent of the socialist
oylpathisers interviewed are convinced that, if a vote were called today,

the PSI would iaprove its own positions. (see table on page 6). The cautious
(who believe that the result would be ual to the previous one, that is to
say the 9.6 percent won on 20 June 1976 remain less than 30 percent. Only a
very few (6.9 percent) anticipate a decline.

The consolidation of the socialist leading groups appears to have been an
accoapliahed fact for some time now. Dissension and differences between the
secretary and the strongest component of the majority, the left, which have
recently cone to the surface are to a considerable extent in the nature of
the normal internal dialectics of a party (see article on page 10) and, in
any case, not such as to impair its compactness, at least not for the time
being. However, in order to get to the bottom of the matter in a survey of
this kind, it would have been necessary to sound out the periphery of the
parties, their internatate cadres in a detailed way. The survey which
”NORMA proposes instead is addressed to the broadest public opinion of the
nation in order to verify the political impact of the socialist "new course."

In this connection the peculiar condition in which the PSI finds itself should
be underlined: it proposes a political strategy (that of the alternative),
whose outlines are not definite. It does not expect to carry it out in a
brief period of time. The two principal premises for the application of this
strategy, on the other hand, stand out. These are marked differentiation from
the PC! and the pursuit of an election victory which will rebalance positions
within the left. ”meone has said that the socialists have placed their bet
elections.

Certainly the inane of the P31, priurily restrained in the emergency majority,
does not appear clear. Viewed from certain aspects it may give an impression
of ambiguity which the survey picks up, particularly with regard to its rela-
tions with the commnists.

‘0
P08 OI'PICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY

Arbitrary

It is significant that UN‘ Craxi line finds great appreciation along: the
Christian Demcrats (61.9). in the Republican and social democratic parties
(72.7 percent) and on the right (in which the authors of the survey rather
arbitrarily group together Liberals and members of the the Italian Social
tbvement and of the National Democratic prrty). The latter group neverthe-
less, slmws an index of indisputable approval, 100 percent. The opinion of
those sympathising with other leftist parties who were interviewed was quite
the opposite. Thus, approval from the Dhilocommuniats does not exceed 23.5
percent (103.1 percent preferred the c‘Sl before Craxi) and those who support
the DP [Proletarian Democratic Party] and the PR [Radical Party] express a
very neager index of preference: 12.5 percent.

There is no doubt that public opinion on the left looks with suspicion on
Crati's attitude, while the public opinion which follows the moderate parties
and the parties of the right sees in it the hope of driving the P01 back into

the opposition .

Preference

An ambiguity? It appears possible to say so with reference to two other
elements provided by the survey. 'ihe first (see table on page 6): among
the socialists interviewed, 73.3 percent favor bringing the cos-unists into
the government and only 19.8 percent would be glad to see them in the oppo-
sition. The second element (see table on page 3): a maJority among the
socialists “6.5 percent) would prefer to seek an agreement with the K21 on
political problems and on concrete aatters to rather than to conduct an
ideological debate, although such a debate still polls, among the socialists,
a not inconsiderable consensus, 36.6 percent.

It should be pointed out that the preference for seeking concrete agreements
rather than theoretical divisions is widespread among the left: 137.1 percent
of the Proletarian Democracy sympathizers interviewed (a Very high figure
when it is considered that in this figure the radicals are added, in a rather
spurious manner, to the parties to the left of the POI) and a good 68.14 per-
cent of the commists. This latter figure is truly significant because it
cllninates several current interpretations suggesting that the rank and file
of the let are strongly antagonistic to the P81, bearing a persistent grudge
against the socialists and tending to prefer even direct relations with the

m.

Things appear to be different, even if it is not only public opinion of the
right which has grasped in the Craxi effort the elasent of separation from
and polaics with the P61. The survey, when it proposes to the persons inter-
viewed that they indicate the mat marked characteristic of the "new course,”
finds much co.-.Nsion and dispersion of ideas, but also a majority on the term
"separation fro- the communists," 23.3 percent which rises to 26.5 percent

‘1
'03 ORIGIN. USE ONLY
among [‘31 sympathizera (see table on pan: 9). Certainly this latter element
has a positive side, the revival of socialist autonomy. This is a theme
which returns in the consideration oi‘ the debate on Leninism which does,
indeed, still find instrumental support. (63.2 percent.) of the right but
also the massive support of the P3! sympathizers (53.5 percent) and oi‘ the
extreme left area. This in beside the significant support (31.6 percent)
of the philocomunists interviewed.

With the Craxi secretariat will the PSI emerge relieved and close to the
European models (A) or will it aline itself with old social democratic and
liberal socialist positions (B)?

PSI sympathizers Total

and members (1) (f)
Answer A 55.10 21.10
Answer B 110.9 15.2
Don't know 29.? 63.“

Do you consider it useml for the country that the communists, too, should
have more direct responsibilities?

PSI sympathizers Total

and members (9 (f)
Yea 73-3 55-5
"o 19.8 31.1
Don't know 6.9 13.7

If a vote were held today, would the PSI become stronger?

PSI sympathizers Total
. and mentors (i) (1)
Yes 59.1: 26.6
“0 6.9 23.
it would remain the same 29.7 I01.0
No answer I0.0 9.3

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bettino Craxi Interview
Milan 9mm in Italian 12 Dec '18 pp '09, 50. 51

[Report by Pasquale "OIIIIO on PNSORAM interview with PSI Secretary Bettino
Craxi: "Altogether, I an pleased with it"; date and place not given]

[Text] Hhile expressing some reservations on the method
used, Craxi declares himself satisfied with the results
of the poll. lie particularly appreciates the percentage
of the connunists who approve of hin.

Bettina Craxi attacks with a criticism. Puttim his hands out, he says,
"some of the questions in the poll are presented in a peculiar way. When
the question- are vague, the answus have Very little probability of being
definite. let us, therefore, discuss the results of the poll considering
than, in some way, as relative and hypthetical values..."

llaving established this premise, Craxi consented to answer the questions put
to him by PANOMMA on the most significant results emerging from the poll
concerning his party.

[Question] Among those interviewed who were aware of the charge which has
taken place in the PSI there is broad consensus. It is very broad among

those interviewed who am party sympathizers. Do you believe at this point
that the "Craxi line" is definitely established in the PSI?

[Answer] A consensus on the new line was mlly expressed at the hirin
Congress. Thereafter later clarifications and initiatives further favored
the expansion of the area of internal consensus. To see this confirmed,
naturally, pleases me very auch. I believe it very unlikely we can turn
back.

[Question] The Craxi line is given the lowest consensus by the left: not
more than 23.5 percent among the conunists. Only 12.5 percent among the
Proletarian Democrats and the radicals.

[Answer] The figures concerning the area of the left, that is, where the
coapetition has become the most keen seem to me fairly logical. nevertheless,
the 23.5 percent among the conunists who prefer the new PSI line is already
a fine affirmation. It is a consis-;ent ainority. As for Pannella, who is so

much against everyone, such a niggardly index of approval toward us may per-
haps indicate a hidden preference.

[Question] There is, however, another important fact: the approval of the
Craxi line is very high among the Christian Democrats (67.9 percent), social
democrats and republicans (72.7 percent) and the right of all kinds, liberals,
m1, National Democracy (actually 100 percent).

‘3
POI ORIGIN. 083 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] For the social dcmerats this fact reflects political Judgments
formulated by at least the majority of their representatives. The same
cannot be said about the PM and particularly Ia hhlfa. The information
picked up, in fact, does not follow many of their expressed opinions and

the line they have followed up to now. Also from the Christian Democrats

I would have expected worse. The PM cannot be confused with the right.

The PLI and the PSI, although on different sides, maintain between themselves
relations marked by great reciprocal respect. The right, instead, sees only
the pole-tics between us and the conununists, while we see the abysmal differ-
ence, the 100 percent difference which separates us from it.

[Question] Altogether 56.9 percent of the persons interviewed prefer the
Craxi line to the previous line. But the figure is even higher in the South
(63.5 percent). Does this not appear surprising to you?

[Answer] I would not say so. The figure reflects the trend of the voters
as it has been expressed up to now in frequent partial elections.

[Question] Altogether 13.7 percent of the persons interviewed have no idea
that their secretariat is imposing a new course on the PSI (a good 51 percent
among the socialist sympathizers). There is uncertainty and conmsion about
its significance even among those who were aware of a change. What signifi-
cance do you attach to such little understanding?

[Answer] These figures appear to me very improbable. Particularly the
figure referring to P81 members and sympathizers. Evidently these are very
distant sympathizers. A national projection of the 116 Fay election returns
assigned to us lb percent of the votes. If this h.5 advance was achieved
when 73.7 percent of the voters had no idea of the change which had occurred
within the PSI, this should mean that our possibilities of expansion are
excellent. The figure, therefore, should be considered very encouraging.

[Question] The controversy over leninism appears really to have taken very
little hold...

[Answer] I tend to believe that the percentage of those who know little or
absolutely nothing about Inninism is also much higher than 59 percent. Also
a bungled question on socialist or social democratic models and experiences

could not fail to receive conmsed and bungled answers.

[Question] In any case, does an inadequate propaganda and organisational
capability on the part of the party affect these answers?

[Answer] I believe that the difficulties of transmitting political messages
may be in general (and hence not particularly within the PSI) largely under-
estimated. Thcy are much greater than is normally believed. This involves
the necessity of looking into and clarifying problems not only of propaganda
and organization, but also of language, image, and repeated and specific

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

commlication. The P31, more than the two manor parties, has to pay for
the weakness of its social installation and the inadequate peripheral and
sectorial articulation of its structures.

[Question] Can these inadequacies explain the Trentino defeat? And may not
the lack of understanding of your line indicate, perhaps, that it is not
very popular?

[Answer] The inadequacies I have indicated were not more serious in the
Trentino than elsewhere, even if the organizational fragility of the party
explains why it may be more easily exposed to erosion when slates of speci-
fically local interest or strongly and directly competitive slates are
involVed. If, despite this. He PSI has, overall, shown in recent months a
definite tendency toward electoral recovery, this means that our policy
alreaxw has a large popular audience.

[Question] The majority of those interviewed understood that the charge
consists in a break with the PCI. How do you Judge this orientation?

[Answer] I belieVe that the basic fact which we have clearly brought out,
that iso-a aore distinct sense of the autonomous role of the socialists and
of their historic and ideological indentity which is different from that of
the cmunistso-has been underlined.

[Question] Does it not appear to you that this hot nay proVe right those
who, 1* he Riccardo Iaubardi, for instance, have considered certain polemics
of you-rs with the PCI too sharp?

[Mailer] If Lombardi said this, he is mistaken. If anything ‘.'° have been
suchctcd to sharp polemies by the emists.

[Question] In answer to the question whether it is better for the PCI and
the PSI to emsge in ideological debate or to seek agreements on concrete

points, only 18.6 were in favor of the former hypothesis and 37.10 in mvor
of the latter. In favor of agreement were 16.5 percent of the socialists

(against 36.6 percent) and 68.16 percent of the counnists...

[Answer] I am of the opinion expressed by the majority of those interviewed
and I am convinced that ideological debate should not in any way preclude a

search for convergence and agremcnt with the PCI on concrete objectives. I

am not in agreement on the "qualunquistica" argument which reJects debate on
principles, considering such debate abstract and evasive. In reality, behind
every concrete solution there is always, or almost always, a choice of prin-
ciple. I am also ilpressed by other figures concerning the PCI sympathizers.

[Question] That 31.6 percent in favor of bringing Ieninist tradition under
discussion as opposed to an equal 31.6 percent against it?

[Answer] Correct. But I am also interested in the similar balance found in
another figure, still referring to the PCI, accordim to which 33.3 percent

‘5
'0! OHIO!“ USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

considers the present policy best for the PSI, while not more than 35.3
percent are reported to be opposed. if this were the case, the deductions
to be inferred would be at least two. The first: the confirmation of an
old deep rooted conviction of mine concerning the fact that the revision we
are asking of the P61 is being held up because of lack of determination or
courage on the part of its leaders and not because of imaturity or fideistic
attacIment on the part of the rank and file to traditions, as people would
now like to have us belieVe.

[Question] The second consideration?

[Answarl It is that all the attempts which are made from time to time, or
systematically at certain moments, to demonstrate that the PSI has abandoned
the straight path (has broken with its past, etc.) and is running the risk
of being precipitated into hell, when it is all added up, do not have broad
support even within the POI. So it would be as well to abandon this argument.

Split Within P81 AVerted
Milan PANORAMA in Italian 12 Dec 78 pp 51, 52

[Article by Filippo Ceccarelli and Pasquale Nonno: "Put your hand here,
Signorile"]

[Text] The split between Craxi supporters and the social-
ist left appeared inevitable. But, at the last moment, a
confidential talk between the secretary and his assistant
secretary put things back in order.

The site of the talk, prepared and held in great secrecy, was Bettino Craxi's
private office in Tomacelli street, a couple of steps away from the PSI.
Participants: the socialist secretary and his assistant secretary, Claudio
Signorile, leader of the left. In 2 hours, in a private tete-a-tete, the
morning of 29 November, they succeeded in putting together again an agreement
which scarcely a day earlier had appeared about to fall apart, threatening to
throw the PSI into chaos.

Those responsible for the worst clash, Gianni de Michelis, organizational
leader and restless representative of the left, and P81 administrator Rino
i-‘ormca, an impetuous and loyal follower of Craxi, had already been obliged
a few hours earlier to sign an armistice, if not a lasting peace.

Battle

In the preceding days, for the first time after the Turin congress, there had
been an open battle within the PSI ruling majority. The climax was reached at
the 23 and 2'. November meeting of the leadership. The clash had been mainly
political: Craxi, backed by Enrico Manes and Giacomo Mancini, had fiercely
attacked the Andreotti Government. The left, believing that their objective

‘6
POI! MICIAL USE ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was to topple it, lined up against the secretary. But there had also been

a clash over the administration of the party. Formica had accused De Hiehelis
of being responsible for the defeat in Alto Adige, declaring: "You sent 60
inept activists up there.” And De Michelle had answered acidly; "It is your
fault for denying us funds. We spent nothing compared to the money spread
around by )hrco Pannclla."

It was in fact, the election defeat which had inflamed the socialists.
"Necessarily," declared Silvano Iabriola, former protege of De Martino, now
maintaining an independent position," when there is no policy and everything
is staked on election victories, defeats hurt twice as much. For Giovanni
Hosea, former PSI assistant secretary, the compromise reached between Craxi
and the left was fatally destined to reel under the pressure of political
problems and the struggle betwun the two big peripheral groups.

Indeed, tensions had been «emanating. Even before the ‘l‘rentino elections

a meeting had been held in great secrecy at the Raphael Hotel in Rome, between
a few of the most faithful of Craxi's old guard, such as Loris Fortune,
Silvano signori, and Stefano Servadei, then Venice Hayor Kris Rigo and a few
former lhncini followers, such as Antonio landolfi and Antonio Caldoro.
"Certainly not to form a separate group,” Caldoro said, ”but only to oppose
the attupte of the left to doainate.” And following are the latest episodes.
Sardinia: Giuseppe Tocco, pro-Crud deputy, replaced in the secretariat by
Paolo Ateni. The Abruzso: all of the federations to the left. Trieste:
Secretary Gianfranco Carbene, Craxi's man, ousted and Augusto Segliene,
Signorile's nan elected. "The list would be long. The organizational manage-
ment of the left is authoritarian besides being inefficient," landolfi says,
”because it leads us to election disasters."

De Michelle answers punctiliously: "the charges in the federations have
occurred for local reasons or else they were ordered by the center: and
acting in cooperation. This is true for the Val D'Aosta, too, where we
kicked out corrupt ahinistrators. Or in Trieste, where we refused to be
associated with the local 'qualunguisti.'”

It is a fact that the broadside attacks against the left have coagulated
diverse forces around Craxi: Enrico lbnca, former Mancini supporters, young
De lhrtino supporters, such as Nicola Capria and Ihuro aeppia, and perhaps,
Salvatore huricella hilsslf, the PSI leader in Sicily.

landolfi is explicit in saturating the basic subjects on which the left
disagrees with the secretary. It does not accept the new P81 image drum

by Crsxi in his now fauna essay. It is opposed to the flexible attitude
(which the secretary is said to favor) toward the radicals and local phenom-
ena. it looks with distrust on hrrosocialism. It insists on the "concept of
an alternative which Oraxi, instead, tends to weaken.”

an. the arguents of candolfi and his group have been relegated, at least
tuporarily, to the background by other criticisas of the secretariats of

67
[OR OFFICIAL US! 061.!
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a definitely different mark. Rune deputy Nevol Querei, of the leadership,
who describes himself as tied ("but only culturally) to De Martino, main-
tains that "the image we have pnoJected abroad is that of Craxi, that is

to say, the image of a liberal democratic-inspired socialist party. We
haVe launched a hundred messages to this effect: the polemics on Leninism,
on the Hare case, eVen the conference on information. Now we haVe this bad
news from Trentino. We must realize that we cannot hide behind alleged
organizational mistakes. The truth is that this line has limi ted influence
in the country. And it does not represent all of the party. Various cul-
tural trends coexist within the PSI. A synthesis is needed."

This is a widespread demnd as also widespread is the opposition to the
prospect of creating two rigid opposing groups. "It would be deadly,"
Labriola observes. And Giacomo mncini does not think otherwise. "I am
fiercely against the formation of new groups. We have seen such things
before and we recall them with sadness." Milan Mayor Carlo Tognoli, finally,
maintains that "the process of interpenetration between the left and the
Craxi group must continue."

Pact of Steel

All of the above are considerations which surely favored the renewed
Tomacclli Street agreement which is based on a pact of steel. What does
this consist of? Its first aspect concerns the adninistration of the party.
The work sectors will be revised. Relations will be improved to avoid too
personal ministration and the leadership group will be broadened. The
first concrete sign of this: Vincenzo Balsam reconfirmed to lead the
parliamentary group in the chamber of deputies, while his assistant,
Giuseppe Di Vagno, who appeared destined, as a Craxi follower, to succeed
him, will enter the administration.

Then there is the political aspect For the months ahead, up to the European
elections, the PSI will continue its confrontation with the PCI. It will seek
an agreement with the social democrats and republicans in order to gain more

' overall weight with the Christian Democrats. It will support the government,

although it may criticize it. But the agreement does not stop here.

Craxi and Signorile also spoke about the prospects which will open up after
this spring, agreeing that the one-party Andreotti Government will not be

able to hold out until the end of the legislature. Taking into account the

Dc veto on bringing the causunists into the government, and the demand which
is being felt from the Botteghe Oscure that some step forward be taken, they
have taken into consideration, for the first time and in an organic way, the
possibility of the socialists returning to the government, but as part of an
muderatanding which would include the P01 in the majority. The most imediate
problem to «New an objective of this kind is to build, or better, to re-
build, on new buses, a closer relationship with the PCI. "Now this is possible,
Cicchitto maintains, "because we have hilly restored the image of an autonomous

P81, which does not conceal its differences and can, therefore, negotiate as
an equal."

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

STEEL "All 321‘!!!" BBC. 'BRBSCIANI'
Hilen L'MOPEO in ltalien 8 Dec 78 pp 167-153
ﬁrticle by Aldo Sentini: "Concrete-Reinforcing Red. Ring of Breeciefl'

L515] Ireecie, NovecberuOne-to-one in the score in the EEC [European
Econonic Comnitz7 wer egeinet induetrieliete who violate Cmunity lewe.

Over the pact two yeare the BBC has waged e continuoue wer ageinet the
eteel aille of Breecia. bonherding the "lorde of the reinforcing rod" with
accueetione. invertigetione. reetrictione. and fines. For 2 yeere now the
econonic newepepere have been eounding the deeth knell of this induetry
which enploye 16,000 workers. providee jobs to 7.000 lore pereone. end
hae cede lreecia one of Europe'e richest citiee: for example. "Denice of
the happy Reinforcing Rod Ere." "The Reinforcing Rod Will Be ﬂattened."
"BBC 'l'reine Cuneighte on Breecien Reinforcing Roda," "BBC Aiming To Crueh
Italian Steel Mini-Mine." "l heve Nothing Left But Eyee With Which To
Cry. Seye Luigi Lucchini."

Lucchini ia the beron of the reinforcing rod nekere. or rather their king.
lie ie being called migi 1. king of Breecie, and hie reign extende beyond
the city. He hee a nill in Pied-ont. where he enploye Jehovah'e Hitneeeee
beceuee they would die before going on strike. eince their religion pro-
hibite it. And recently he hae leid hende on e venerable. preetigioue
Tuecen industry. the Hegone.

Lucchini in teare? The Breeciani herdly think eo. "Above ell. nothing
ever goee wrong for him." they eey. "In 1969. as the bottom felle out
of the nerltet. teking reinforcing rod pioneer Carlo Antonini'e fortune
with it. he buye the mill for e song-~900 million Eir£7uand the nerket
ienediately surges upwerd. In 1974. he buye into Huehrer. which er the

tine ie undergoing e crieie beceuee of the freeze on beer pricee. and
i-edietely. the freeze ie lifted."

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Lucchini is a weather-vane of business interests. "e is in banks. insurance
cospaniea. agriculture. aniaal husbandry. hotels. lie was tho first to
diversify the iron and steel industry. specializing in structural shapes.
lie was the first to pay billions to Kansas his son. who was kidnapcd when
it bocaae known that he was the highest taxpayer in Italy. But he was also
the first to cover hinaelf with Lloyd's of london. Parsightednesa in his
greatest gift. lie is even tree of the unlucky ontracurriculor activities
of his rival. Oddinn Pietra. whose investment in his thoroughbred Sirlsd was
halved in one lost raco. Pietra has gross billings of 70 billion. and he.
55: but Pietra has 1.200 onployaes. and he. barely 700.

Lucchini now presides over the Association of Brescia lnduatrialists. which
groups about 1.000 enterprises totaling 85.000 osployeoa. the third largest
in Italy after those of Milan and Turin. And as its president ho has issued
an $08 and has contested the restrictions isposed by the EEC on the stool
hills of his province.

Lucchini la the hate noiro of the unions. he took over Erode Gnutti. the
large nonierrous notals plant and shut it down for 10 sontha. at s coat of
1 billion lire. because the union prevented him iron aanaging it. He won
that battle. but he has been unable to win the one with Viscount Etienne
Davignon. the Belgian co-issioner for industry in the RC. who in turn is
Lucchini's bate noira.

It is Davignon. in fact. who persocutes the Brescia producers of reinforcing
rods. It is Davignon who has fought to inose higher prices penitting the
Belgian. French and Ger-an nills to keep their heads above water. It is
Devianon who sees to it that lines are levied against roiniorcing rod pro-
ducers "guilty" of being too cospetitive and of lowering the ispoaed prices.

And again. it is Davignon who goes to tho extent of nit-picking of Lucchini's
rod producers. cloning that they are able to indulge in the lmry of under-
cutting tarified prices because they are outlaws. because they fail to pay
the ”levy”—that is. the first European tan-into the canon lund. because
they do not always strictly couply with existing social nor-a. because they
evade taxes. because they are in arrears in settl-ent of current accounts.
because they cheat on weights.

True. there is quite a scandalous anthology on breaches of the rules by the
lreecian rod ashore. those ”Japs oi the ac." so adventurous and clover.
aggressive and uncultured. unscrupulous. cynical. ever ready to covenant
with the devil. lt ranges iron doctoring of weights by scans of the

asrcury pup. which unbelmced the load of rod on the truck or trailer
upsetting the reading on the scale. to intlation oi shipnants tor the Aswan
do. after it becsns known that there were no scales for weighing th. at the
Soviet unloading site.

51
M omcw. 052 0.1.1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Ireaciani, obviously, minimize the water down. They point out that
the true king of the reinforcing rod ia Carlo Rumi. from Bergamo. not
Brescia, producer of 1 million tone a year with annual billings of

80 billion lire. and the one most often fined by the rec. Ilowever. they
cannot deny the two moat recently invented gin-icka for dodging the pegged
prices: the neavy ton and the penalty.

The simplest one is the heavy ton. which coneists of delivering 1,200
kilogrus at the price of 1.000 kilogram (the metric ton). The penalty
gi-aick is more elaborate. The supplier writes a contract stipulating
the lac-impoeed minimum price. but adds a clause providing for peyaent
of a stated penalty for each day of delay in delivery. he then delays

it sufficiently. by arrangement with the client. to arrive at the agreed
discount.

Eastern Conpetition

"That is the only way we can aell." aay the Brescia rod makers. "The
building crisis has ruined ue. And the competition from Third world
countries is frightful. South Korea. for instance. is selling at cut-
throat prices. But also the Soviet Union. And Davignon. with ell his
idle talk. does nothing to protect us. To aey nothing of our own Foreign
Trade Hinistry."

The Third world countriea produce an exceas of steel. are starved for hard
currency. and beleaguer the EEC. which maintains steel prices artificially
high. An island paradise for this any of aggreasora. Anyone ecandalited
by gi-icks labeled "made in Brescie" is a hypocrite.

In Italy along. 6 million tons of ateel a year enter from the East and
he last. through the Chinese container method adopted by our profiteers
who have partner organizations in Switzerland, financiers in membourg.
et cetere. "all: the domestic market now absorbs 20 million tons and.

to survive. the Italian steel industry moat produce 30 million. The
arithmetic is simple. Re are inflicting injury upon ourselves. The
importing groups are realizing legendary profits. And it ie the taxpayers
who must lake up the deficits in the public enterprises.

The lrescie eteel mills are privately owned. and if they go in the red
they are finished. Thus. the cynicism and brutality of the "lorde of the
reinforcing rod” find their justification in the need to survive. This
also explains in many cases the pragmatism of the workers who oppose the
hard labor union line. The experts say that the union becaee etrong too
late. when the heyday of the rod makera had ended. Today. the mind-boggling
profits of the 1950's and 1960's are no longer possible. It is no longer
a seller's market. The cost of electricity has zoomed skyhigh. To remain
competitive. the rod nakers have made substantial investments. They have
gone into debt with the banks. And the golden bonanza of scrap has also
come to an end.

52
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Screp steel is the god of the Brescie steel industry. The best strep
is wer scrsp. Her is the grend producer or scrsp. The rod ushers drool
over erIored vehicles. Tenh steel is in its virgin stete. unpeinted.
unconted. end needs no purification. The most luscious vehicle is the
Soviet uper-ersorsd tenh. with its fornideble nrnor-plete. csterpillsr
trnch. turret end bolt yields.

Screp Steel Gold Hines

The golden bonsnze of screp reeched ite spogee during the Vietnsn Her.
There were rod ushers who lessed entire fleets of ships end went off to
Saigon to gether up thoueends of destroyed ersored vehicles end other
scrsp. es long es it use steel. Uith the end of the Vietnsn war. the
sessive use of ernord vehicles cene to its end. The You Kippur Her wee
the lest to be exploited. Brescie's nisiortune wss its short durstion.
bebenon. if anything. brings enother kind of life-blood to this city:
dollers for the purchese of ensll eras—the beretts Docet.

Devignon speehe ol selee below cost es s disastrous spirel for the European
steel industry. But Breech replies: the disestrous spirel is the (Jo-on
Parket's regiuntetion. which is destroying our steel nills. And it
eccuses Deviance of lesding the 286's hesvy industry to ruin. One cennot
expect to protect industries thet ere decrepit end never sodomized.
sclerosed. end incepebls of keeping up with the coupstition. by setting up
high prices to be inposed on ell the producers controlled by Brussels.
while world prices ere dropping.

Such e policy brings neither new vitslity nor youth to old enterprise. lt
nerely deleys their collepse. end leede the new efficient ones to suicide
by denying the. their sole neens of coping with the Third World countries:
cospetitiweneee.

th do the lrescie steel nills sell concrete-reinforcing rods st lower
prices then the French. Ger-ens end Belgiens?

The enswer reveels the steel industry's problee. lrescie succeeds in
producing e ton of steel in é hours. for which the French need 7.5 hours.
the Ger-ens 6.37. end the rest of ltely 5.48. The Europesn everege is
never less then 6.38 hours. But one thing is obvious: The Brescien rod
ushers cerry no clout whetever sgsinst the Krupps, the Thyssene. end the
Arbsds.

As if this were not enwgh. the ltelien representatives in Brussels who
desl with Devignon ere tied with double knots to the big runs of the
ltelien steel industry who tool: such e besting et the bends of Irescin
thet they were coupelled by lrescie to ebendon the nenufecture of rein-
forcing rods.

53
'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Neck and Neck With the Germans

In an Italy considered to be the black sheep of the EEC, aided with ill
grace by widely publicized and propagandized loans. endured with glaring
insufferableness. there is at least one sector where private capital has
invested unaparingly at the proper assent to avoid niaaing the bus of
technological progress. which is the spearhead of the European steel
industry. And instead of being taken as a model. it is punished and
penalized. Punished siaply because it is able to produce better than
the Ger-en. Belgian and French "fires" and at lower cost.

After having denounced Italy because nothing ever works here, because we
have too aany strikes and too much absenteeise. because labor costs are
too high. because there is too little inclination to work. Brussels now
denounces and fines an ltalian industrial complex which functions too
well. which works with fierce deter-ination, which works too fast and is
therefore able to compete with the Japanese, the Koreans, the Soviets.
and with the South Africans who have the advantage of cheap. or almost
unpaid. labor. It is the triusph of the absurd. The Brescias. with grin

franﬁness. ask themselves; "Hhat. then, is the nature of this beast. this
BIC?

COPYIIOEIi 1978 Rizzbli letter.

9399
080: 310‘

56
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

STRUCTURE OF THE INDUSTRY MINISTRY
Milan ll. mm in ltelian 6 Dec 78 pp 23-26
LXrticle hy Claudio 'l‘orneo: "Onward, Prodif/

[fart] To conduct the coupler lot of the eectorial plane for induatry there
are barely four goveruent officiale. The innpectora charged with verifying

the epplicationa for price increme' auheitted hy enterprinea to the Inter-
ninieteriel Price Co-ittee (Cl?) nunher not lore than 20. none of vhoe have

precarious enployer-eeployae relationehipa. one-hundred meaty-five
thouaande applicationa vaiting to he exanined are pigeon-hole.) in the arch-
ivea of the patent office. For any authorization whatever. even the noat
coneonplace, induatriea nuet wait nonthe and eontha. if not yearn. On paper,
the -:u ninieter of induetry. noneno Prodi. inherita from hie predecaaaor.
Carl: Donat Cettin, a great eany povera. But in the great Paaciat atyle
palace on Via Veneto which houeee the niniatry officea. he will find precioue
little scene for exercieing then. In ehort. he in a Prodi vithout an any
Levidantly a play on the ainilarity of hie one to the Italian uord ”prode"
neaning a brave. valiant pereogT. Yor once. induatrialiata. union laadera.
and experte are in agreaent: they conaider the operation of the hinietry
of Induetry dieaetroua. "In one reepecte it in like an orchaatra coeplete
with conductor and aheet mic. but no meiciena." aaya the jurist, Sahino
Caaaeee. one of the najor acholare of govern-ant adniniatrative problem.

Although a einor einiatry until the end of the 1960‘s (ita enployeee need
to define it ironically ae ”little nore than einietry of handicrafta”). it
haa since then acquired an inpreeeive nuher of povare. ‘l'he ninieter'a
plecet deterninee the funding and credita to be granted to enterpriaea for
varioue purpoeaa (cloaely unions the General Accounting Office'a lent
report. Caeeeae diacovered that the hinietry of Induatry had granted in-
centivee even to agricultural enterprieee involved in aootechny. viticulture
and floriculture). It in the Hinietry of Induetry. through 61?. that euper-
intenda the policy on thoae pricee that are controlled (fro- ncdicine to
fertilizera. tron cenent to gaeoline). It in the liiniatry of lnduetry'e
reaponaihility to adeiniatar the energy plan. an well an the nuclear choicea
and contract ce-itnentn it enteile. and to keep vatch over mm. Lilationel
Council for loony and Labor]. the hiniatry of lnduatry alao daterninea

55
POI OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

national policy on insurance setters: from the setting of autosohile
insurance rates to the sanagensnt of the insurance companies.

And its ascendancy is still on the rise. As the law on industrial recon-
version becosee sore and sore operative. and as the new law on the financial
reconstruction of enterprises goes into effect, the Ministry of Industry
will hecons one of the nsjor national programing centers. second only to
the Ministry of the Treasury. without the industry minister's stanp of
approval, there can be no distribution of the 8,000 billion lire provided
by the law on reconyersions (this sus includes funds allocated for state
shareholdings, the investsent of which sust. however, be in accordance
with the sectorial plans): nor. without his approval. can the plans he

put into effect which have been drawn up by the banking coneortiuns for the
financial reconstruction of enterprises in crisis.

Then there is s nyriad of apparently ninor and for the nest part unknown
prerogatives and functions, which explain why in the race for sppointnsnts
hte Ministry of Industry has always held a special attraction.

Beading these is a long string of supervised entities (see chart). a sass
of collective organizations. a amber of financial sansgenents outside the
budget (this is the case. for exesple. of the gigantic electric power
sector's aettlensnta funds, whose ready assets are equal to those of the
entire sinistry). Every possible and iseginsble kind of industrial autho-
risation sust flow fros this sinistry. including standards for nethane
bottles and type-approval of Earning equipssnt.

The resources available to the ninistry to handle this sass of powers and
functions are very sodeat. Its enployees. nunbering alsost 1,500. are
uuotivated, frustrated. and, except for a linited masher of cases, devoid
of assigned responsibilities. The six general directorates and the shoot
80 divisions are entirely absorvsd in routine and thus excluded fron the
sore isportant activities of the ninistry. The sole exception is the
Directorate of Energy. but sose saliciously neintein that this fact is
explained by the presence at its head of Giuseppe Anaseeri, an especially
loyal friend of Donat Cattin.

The lack of personnel in the technical offices is especially noticeable.

The Directorate of Industrial Production. in the processing of applications
for incentive loans, has not infrequently found it necessary to recur to
officials of the very credit institution that would eventusll issue the
loan. Personnel last by run. SIP ﬁtslisn Telephone Conaan , banks. and
state-controlled enterprises are to be found in all of the related offices.
The Cl? inspectors suet often accept the validity of the infornation and
calculations subsitted by the enterprises. because they have neither the
staff nor the inetrusents necessary to conduct verifications. In the
patent office. the reorganization of which has been under discussion for

15 years, the staff has disinished fros 102 in 1969 to 56 today. (sessengere,
clerks and secretaries included). The patents bulletin published sonthly by

the sinistry has not gone beyond information and patents issued near the
and of 1969.

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l’or some tins now. the ministry has functioned only thanks to the "parallel
structure" of experts end colleborstorn which the various ministers hsve
crested. The phenonenon assumed inordinate disensions under Cirieco dc Nita
end Donat Cattin, so such so that 2 years ego the labor section of the
ninietry presented e report to the attorney general of the replublic end to
the General Accounting Office. The union leaders. who operate within the
ninistry, neintsin that the inefficiency of the achinistretive epperstus

is a direct result of the plan to transform the hinistry of Industry into
n pousr center. And for a long tile they hsve been asking the successive
ninistere in the push-button office on Vie \‘eneto for e serious effort st
reorgenixation. With Donet Cettin they got nowhere. They will reiterate
the request to Prodi st their first official nesting.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a g
giggaésgﬁ

 

A:

$8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

3.

6e

5.

6.

7.

10.

11.

12.

13.

16.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under tho Minister of Industry's ornchnir

Kinistor
Ronano Prodi

Undersecretaries
Gianfranco Aliverti—Carlo Baldi ~Gisuppe Sinesio

Office of the forner Directorate General of
llandicrafts end Snell Industries
Director: Alnsrico D'Andrsa

National Patent Office for Inventions, “Odels end Tredennrks
Director: Sebastiano Sanpero

Office of Planning and Research
Director: Giovanni Nani

legislative Office
Director: Antonio ‘i'roccoli

General Directorate of Insurance
Director: Carlo Gredi

General Directorate of Hines

General Directorate of Conserca and Industrial Goneunption
Director: Fernando Gentile

General Directorate of General Affairs
Director: Ricola Jorio

General Directorate of Industrial Production
Director: Duaenio Carbone

General Directorate of Energy Sources and Basis Industries
Director: Giuseppe Anassari

m

INA

All national and foreign enterprises operating
in the insurance sector

National insurance Dank

QOOK‘NI'DC

$9
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
Provident Insurance Fund for Athletes
Italian Reinsurance Union
Italian Actors‘ Institution

OBI-nt-bnsm

15. Chambers of Com-arcs
Autonomous Organization of Art Exhibitions of Cremona
Autonomous Organization of Depart-ent Stores of Padova
Special Corporation for the Pres Trade Zone of Gorizia
Inter-Chsnber Consortium for the Construction of
a New Customhouse in Como
Documentation Center for International Lumber Trade

16. National Agency for the Cellulose and Paper Industry
National Agency for the Silk Industry
National Institution for Cannsd Foods
National Test Laboratory for Snell Firearms

17. National Colbustion Control Association
ENEL
cuts

National Institutefor Nuclear Physics

COPYRIGHT: IL HONDO 1978