APPROVED FOR RELEME: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100030060-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030040-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/O337

15 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 625

ll.5.J()ﬂﬂﬂ'lﬂJBLJCJA11(JtlS RESEJNRC]1‘SER\/"CE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030040-3
JPRS publicatirr- :crtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. ﬁaterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are sspplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or iLxcerptl in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 6.5. Government.

CL?ERZGEI LABS AND REGIlATIOKS GOVERXIRO GENERSHIP 0F
TERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHIXATIOS
T ‘?l$ ?YBLICATIOX SE RESTRICTEDFOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
. Pedal-W“ «on.
Joint Publication leeearch Service
1000 North Globe load
Arlington, Virginia 22201

n, haw-q Gunmen” ”one and “one

A5 above

. ‘\
IS. qule-u-y Helen

' Aberna-

 

0- Peelers-u. O‘ununm lop.
l0. Herculean... 0“ I».

ll. MCI/600M M.

II» Type d Repair a Pet.“

The report contains intonation fro- Airican and specialized Heat European

publication. and radio on political. econoeic. and nociological developnentn.

I1. Icy Undo and Der-at “Inn. ‘1. Damien

Political Science

Soc iology
Rona-ice
Culture (Social
Sc iencea)
Technological

_Ana°h
_Ieni.n
_Botevana
Burundi
:Calcroon
_Cepe Verde
_Central African
lupire
x Chad
:Oonoro Inlanda
__Congo
_Djibouti
___£qoatorial Guinea
I“ “turban/“tom Tor-I _:::::Pu

_an1a

m. cosam Field/Goo 02,$D,SC.SK

ll. A-aulabol-Iy Stew-rm

FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

vow «no.» oegv. 9-)):

11" foul MAY IE IEPIWCZD

inter-African Aff .

 

_Ghana _|vanda
__Goinea _$ao Tone and
_Coinea-liuau Principe
_lvory Conn: _LSenegal
__tcnya __Seycheiles
_Lceotho _Sierra Leone
_l.iberia _So|nlia
__lladapecar _Son:h Africa
__lialavi __Svaziland
_l|ali _'l'anzania
_lburitiue _‘l’oso
Lanna-biotic _Uganda
_lalibia _0mr Volta
_lliger _Zaire
_Ii;eria _Zenbia
__leuaion

_lhodenia

2|. .\'o. 0! Page;
A. . . 39

”I‘ve-v0: ‘Oﬂl-Oll
FOR OPPICIAL 083 Nb!

JPRS L/GE
15 March

TRANSLATIWS on SUB-SAHARA)! AFRICA
9000 No. 625

Cameras

Inca-mm»: AFFAIRS

Ki-Zcrbo Quits Politics To Run 06AM
(Joseph Ki-Zerbo Interview; Jam: AFRIQUE. 31 Jan 79).

Swedish Aid to Africa deported
(JEUNE APRIQUL 31 Jan 79).

CAMEROOX

PKG Mans To Be Channeled Into Vsrious Fields
(means TROPICAUX ET mtmmuus. 5 Jan 79)........

French Loans for Alminm. Telecmications Sectors
means 1110le 21' mtm. 29 Dec 78).......

Briefs
Port 1978 Traffic Up
Nov Transport Airline
Electric (to-pony 1978 Investments
Coffee Export Quotas Set

CIMD
1979 Seen as Decisive Year After Prstricidal Struggle
(Jamar-noun. 17 Jan 79) ...... .
Briefs
Pan Captures Arado
MMIQUB

Hosanhiquc Revieved: Economic. Political Choices Hade
(Christophe Batsch; LE ma DIWTIQUE, Jan 79).....
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000300404

CONTENTS (Cootlnued)

5mm

lrlefo
PDS Nonparticlpatlon in elections

m Chalmn'l V1.1:
water's Sute-ent on Special Vanda

Agricultural Cunt.
Rains Causing Storage Problem

4»-

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100030040-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICAN AFFAIRS

Kl-ZZRBO Q0118 POLITICS 10 m OCAH
Paris JZUIIB Amt)!!! in french 31 Jan 79 pp 62-67

[Interview with Professor Joseph Ki-Zerbo. leader of the third party of
Upper Volta. the WV. Interview conducted by Siradou Diallo. with the
participation of Sophie hessis. Sory Serinde Diallo, Francoise Buhscher
end Hustsfa sty. Date and place of interview not given.)

[Text] he is big and he has a keen observing eye in a face that appears

caln. but which lights up and becones lively as the conversation turns to
the topics that are important to his. Professor Joseph Ki-Zerbo is one of
the best known In of a French-speaking African culture. Bis fon, often

clad in a wide indigo boubou. and his white cap are familiar in international
conferences where African history is debated.

An agrege in history fron the trench University. this In of sol-e fifty years
of age taught in any teaching establish-ents and universities in Africa
before returning to his native land. Upper Volta, where he did not hesitate
to leap into the political arena while he continued to teach. he is
currently the leader of the UN (Upper Volta Progressive Union), the third
party of Upper Volta. As a candidate in the presidential elections of lisy
1978. he was a worthy adversary for the president. General Sangoule missus.
Joseph Ki-Zerbo has just resigned his seat as deputy to the Upper Voltan
National Assenbly in order to devote hinself to CAKES (African and Hslagasy
Comeil on higher Education) which he founded. however. that is only an
apparent "epsrture fron the political scene.

Let us rather listen to his explanations which denonstrate solid and fault-
less reasoning.

[Question] Do you consider yourself as an intellectual or as a politican?

[Answer] I do not think there is any contradiction between the two jobs. In
any case. I consider nyself to be an intellectual and a politician at the
sane tine. That is all the are true since. when I was a student, I was
already politically engaged. I wrote in the nagazine of the African Catholic
Students. TAM-TAX, as well as in the m [federation of Black African

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh'LY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Students in France] organ. which was L'I‘NDIANT D'M'RIQIIZ NOIIE. Certain
of ay articles. such as: "Nationalists Called for" and "Pioneers or
Handarins” particularly irritated the colonial power of that tine.

[Question] You have evolved since then....

[Answer] To ay way of thinking, the concept of being an intellectual is not
sonething either static or reserved. That is why the people, according to
ac. are a collective intellectual, while I consider nyself as an organic
intellectual in the sense that the Italian philosopher Antonio Ora-cl under-
stood it. In other words. that is an individual who has decided to invest
hiaself in the leases. to participate in their daily struggles for life. to
help then and to learn fron then. having said that. I concede to you that
there is at the sane tine a certain tension between the concerns of a
politician and the sentinents of an intellectual. The calculations of the
former do not always coincide with the scruples of the latter. louver. it
is possible to overcoae that contradiction thanks to a total engage-ent in
the conbat of the popular nasaea. And that's what I do.

[Question] Is it easier or harder to be an intellectual than it was 20 years
ago?

[Answer] It was infinitely easier during the colonial period. The intellec-
tuals. at least those who wanted to he intellectuals. had a privileged place
on the condition of being indifferent to the state of the people and chiefly
not causing any trouble for the systen. Today, not only is that privileged
position less easy to cone by, but it is still nore difficult to resin in-
different when faced by the situation. h‘ithout counting the fact that there
are even nore risks in opposing power today than there were 20 years ago.

[Question] llau the intellectual African nore responsibilities than those of
the developed countries. or fewer?

[Answer] It is obvious that the African intellectual has lore responsibil-
ities than the others. In the European countries, the social structure is
more conplex, aore structured. Bach organized elenent is sufficiently arsed
for the defense of its own interests, not to say its ”territory." And then
there are lots of intellectuals. All that results in their responsibilities
being better shared. Therefore they are snaller for each one of the intellec-
tuals taken in isolation. In Africa. it's coapletely the opposite.

[Question] You were observing that the African intellectual should invest

hisself. help the peasants. Bow. and in what way? Saying it another way.
what can an intellectual do anong the peas-ts?

[Answer] Be can help then to survive in their own place. The peasants often
constitute an atonieed body, fragnented and scattered as compared to the other
social classes or strata. They are therefore weaker, easier to exploit by
those who have the resources, even by the multinationals. You know how certain

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unscrupulous businessmen exploit the peasants by buying their grain at a very
low price at the tine of the harvest in order to sell it back to them at a
very high price during the hot weather. The intellectuals can help the
peasants organize. structure the-selves for the purpose of better resisting
that type of exploitation, for better understanding the objective role that
they play in society.

[Question] Don't those formulae come from never-applied good intentions or
even from a form of demagogery?

[Answer] Absolutely not. The engaged intellectuals can and should, as true
militants. help the peasants to struggle successfully against their exploitera.
They can even help them in a very simple way even though that might only be

by teaching the? how to organize their primary needs, by teaching them to
read and write.

[Question] Are the African intellectuals of today fully assuming their
responsibilities?

[Answer] No. unfortunately. however. I would not want to throw a stone at
anyone especially since i recognize that there are individual cases. How-
ever. as a whole. 1 observe with a great deal of regret that African intellec-
tuals are running away from their historical responsibilities in order to

take their places in the existing system. Most of them are satisfied with

the status quo. Even though sone naintain that they do not engage in politics
they are not to be excused since for that very reason they contribute to the
consolidation of the dominating systen. The sad truth is that the intellec-
tuals are traveling along the road to power and to getting rich, and they are

condemning themselves to sterility. Those who fully assume their historical
responsibilities are rare.

[Question] Some intellectuals are still faithful to revolutionary ideas and

are actively militsting in favor of a radical change in the structures of our
societies.

[Answer] Yes. there are some like that. And that is very comforting. how-
ever. among those who call the-selves revolutionaries there are some who wrap
themselves up in cloudy. purely abstract theories in order to fly without ever
landing. Hhile they claim to be prophets incarnate, they are really playing
a harmful and dangerous role. Fortunately there are some of them who are
willing to play an organic role, who fight to lay the foundations of quali-
tative change. based on the socio-economic realities of our countries.

[Question] You recently resigned your seat as deputy in order to devote your-
self to the African and Malagasy Council on Bigher Education [CAHBS],
according to your own statement. Does this mean that you are abandoning
political action for the sake of a purely technical job?

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] No. not at all. I an not only not abandoning my political actiV-
ities. but I an still the leader of ny party. the Upper Volta Progressive
Union [UPV]. If I have taken up the leadership of CAKES again. it is in order
to keep it fron falling into jeopardy. I becane afraid that the activity

that I had undertaken at the head of CARES night be seriously coapronised
because. in the current state of affairs. certain people rightly or wrongly
are confident in that organization most of all because of the faith that they
have in ne. In ny absence. those people had a tendency to lose interest. Now
CAKES is nonething very inportant. not to say vital.

[Question] In your opinion. is the position of Secretary-General of CAMS

nore iaportant than the position of deputy to the National Assenbly of Upper
Volta?

[Answer] The problea is not to be expressed in those terns. As you know.
there are acne feelers going out for achieving African unity by political
action. by econonic action. by regional cooperation through custons regulations.
flow of goods. etc.

CAKES is trying to contribute to African unity by means of higher education
and research. Thus we are working with a view toward harnonising university
diplomas on the level of our different countries; we have set up an ilportant
progran for research in the donin of the African pharnacopeia; we have
created an inter-African consultative co-ittee whose role consists in con-
trolling the internal prolotion of the universities. and that within an inter—
African fralework. This is to tell you of the strategic imrtmce of CAKES
for the education of generations to cone and for African unity. For that

reason. I certainly would not be neglecting Iy political responsibilities in
the Upper Volta.

[Question] That does not rule out the fact that by giving up your seat as

deputy you are denying yourself the prerogatives that belong to that position
in your country.

[Answer] Not at all. First. the UPV is not an electoral party. And futher-
nore, the Political Bureau of the UPV has judged that I an right now more use-

ful to ly party outside the Upper Voltan National Assenbly than inside it.
And that is true both for the fornative or structuring activity and for the
extension of the party. For the rest, the conteuporary history of Upper Volta

is more often being nade outside the Rational Assenbly than within it. In any
event. for us. the Asselbly is not a goal in itself.

[Question] The pay of an Upper Voltan deputy is without a doubt lower than
that of a Secretary General of CAKES.

[Answer] I know that sons of Ily adversaries have expressed that kind of

conparison for the purpose of insinuating all hinds of things. however. if
I wanted to be better paid I would not work in Africa. I do not have great
needs and I do not run after noney. which I value lost of all for what it can

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

be used for. I can even open my books to anyone who wants to see them.
Furthermore. CARS is a stall organization which does not have a large budget.
It has very small resources compared to the resources of other international
organizations where I could have occupied key positions if I had wanted to.

[Question] Don't you feel that you may have deceived those who voted for you
and those who supported you by abandoning the position that they confided to

you?

[Answer] I have indeed sidetracked them, but they have not been deceived in
the strict sense of the tern. As for the latter points, before submitting any
resignation I went to the base. which means to my voters, to inform them about
my plans and to discuss them with then. I must confess that at the beginning
certain people were affected to the point of being shocked. However, after my
explanations. no one was slow to understand the political significance of my
act. Furthermore. in the UPV we do not want our elected members to be politi-
cians with a monopolistic ownership of seats. They must be first of all in
the service of the party and of its objectives.

[Question] At the time of the last legislative and presidential elections in
Upper Volta I was struck both by the liberty of expression and by the violence
of the opposition attacks against President Lamizsna.

[Answer] Personally. I have not nde violent attacks against Lamizana. At
any rate. I have not made personal attacks. I have always kept a moderate
attitude in regard to him. As for the liberty of expression, it is true that
it is complete in Upper Volta except for a few recent seizures of newspapers.-
Among us there is neither police repression nor arbitrary arrest and even
less is there torture. In the African context of today, we must recognize
that there is soaething very important if not alaost miraculous.... Not
entirely. since it is the result of a patient and courageous fight by the
people and by their avant-garde elements.

[Question] That doesn't keep you from fighting the regine of General Lanizana.
Hhat do you have against him?

[Answer] Our central option is radically opposed to the policy now being
followed by Lamizana'a government. The way in which he is aanaging the
country is dangerous in the long run. his laiasez-faire policy sakes us risk
a painful morning after. Chiefly on the economic level. because we are
observing a constant deterioration of the peasantry's living conditions and
living standards and those of the proletariat or the urban unemployed. Along
with Lamizana's lack of authority his power is continually giving way to the
strongest pressures. even though these might be from sharks. The regime has
no political choices, no options and not the slightest line. In this way the
state is a ship which is drifting at the mercy of the current. It's very
fine to swim in the waters of demcracy, but this Pontius Pilate policy runs
the risk in the long run of leading to impasses and explosive contradictions.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] However. it is thanks to Lasizana that the opposition in Upper
Volta can organize themselves as they say. Publish what they want and hold
public neetings. In short, they can propose and criticize with complete

liberty. In any event. without fear of being arrested or even su-noned by

the police. . . .

[Answer] That situation. which other people envy us for, was not the doing of
Lasizana. The credit for it cones back to the entire people of Volta. It is
the people who are at the same tine responsible for and the guarantors for that
liberty which Upper Volta enjoys. He must not forget that we have profited

in the past free a concatenation of particular circumstances. Contrary to what
has happened in other African countries. no party or group has been so much
more powerful than the others that it was able to smash them. The atmosphere
of liberty that Upper Volta enjoys is the result of those facts and not the
results of Lasitsna's goodwill.

[Question] That analysis is without a doubt very accurate from the theoretical
point of view. But aren' t you afraid that in the effort to oppose Lamissna
sone pretorian of another temperament than his may appear to put an end to
your denocratic experiment?

[Answer] That is not ispossible. But it's up to us to prevent it fro-
occurring. And for that reason there is only one thing to do: consolidate
the existing democratic system by reinforcing the political parties and the
unions. as well as all the desocratic and popular organizations.

[Question] Are you satisfied by the way in which the democratic experiment
is developing in Upper Volta?

[Answer] Us are relatively satisfied because we are convinced supporters of
the denocratic game. however, in order for the game to develop under good
conditions. it is important that the dice not be loaded. how in that respect
we have a few motives for worry, since some of the dispositions anticipated in
the Constitution adopted by referendus are not being respected either in the
spirit or in the letter. Thus. the Constitution expressly recognizes three
political parties. Those are the three which case out on top in the elections.
Now since those elections that isn't spoken of any lore.... "hat is worse,

a party which in not one of the three official ones has four ninisters in the
present government. Sose people are no longer hesitating about speaking of

a constitut ionsl reforl. . . .

"hat is sure is that the delocracy which wss to spread out fron the botton.
since it was anticipated that the micipallties would be denocratically
elected. well! - that denocracy has been undermined ever since the power

has seen its interests threatened. Special delegations are going to be set
up. And the elections at the base are to be put off until the next blue soon.
All of that mkes us ask ourselves whether the spirit of the Constitution is
being betrayed. That is serious and it is even very dangerous.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Does this mean that Upper Voltsn democracy is purely formal?

[Answer] Not entirely. however. we are afraid of sliding in that direction.
That is why we maintain our vigilance. because the experiment is at the mercy
of the slightest accident along the way.

[Question] H'hy do you refuse to form a government of MLIOMI union to include
all the parties?

[Answer] He have not refused! 0n the contrary. we believe that it would be a
good thing. on condition that an understanding be reached on a ninimum plat-
forn. since it is not a question for us of a pure and simple rallying to the
present government. An understanding is not impossible, but it must come out
of an agreement on a clearly defined program which could be applied within a
specified length of time. For the rest. the present government majority is
based on a misunderstanding. In fact, it is crystslized around a purely hypo-
thetical situation instead of adopting a precise program. That is to say it
is rather precarious.

[Question] The non-rehabilitation of Maurice Yameogo and his companions
continues to poison the political atmosphere of Upper Volta.

[Answer] On that score we have not changed. He have always been and we still
are in favor of the rehabilitation of eat-President Maurice Yameogo and his
five companions. Because we believe that it is not normal that those person-
alities be indefinitely considered as scabby sheep. Maurice was not alone
responsible for the errors comitted by the former regime. There are some
people who occupied important positions at that time and who. still today,
occupy high places.... We believe that the time has come to turn the page.
Not in order to start the same errors over again as before or to reedit the
past. but to act in a completely different sense.

[Question] What keeps your party, the UN, from constituting a bloc even if
it were only on the level of the National Assedly. with the National Union for

Defense of Democracy (the mo) of Mr Maurice Ysmeogo and the Refusal Front
of Hr Joseph Ouedraogo?

[Answer] We got that point in a negative way during the last electoral cam-
paign. I mean that everybody was against the cannon electoral opponent.

After which. upon the opening of the National Asseably, we presented together
the candidacy of Joseph Ouedraogo for the Presidency of the Chamber. However,
it would be difficult to go farther than that in the sense of an understanding
among us. First, because the Refusal front. which has a real base. is not
properly speaking a political party. And then, chiefly. we need to better

observe the programs of the two other groups in order to eventually envisage
a common platforn.

[Question] If you were called to power following a military coup d'etat,
what would you do?

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] You know that in countries like ours the nilitary could not con-
stitute a separate social body. That having been said. such a ailitary

coup. which nothing today peraits us to envisage. should not be the buaincss
of one single nan. It would be necessary for there to be a group in effective
control over the Amy. having a frankly progressive conitnent and political
option. It's only under those conditions. it see-s to ne. that such an
experinent would have any chance of succeeding. In any other way it would be
riaking a coup for nothing.

[Question] Do those conditions seen to you to be currently preaent in the
Upper Vcltan Any?

[Answer] It is difficult to know that. especially since the ailitary nen
have clnined for a long tine that they do not engage in politics. which is
totally false. That lyth does not stand up under analysis. ﬂow can it be
said that the people who govern a country are not engaged in politics?

That is an aberration. The proof? Lanizana. who has adapted hiaaelf to
various pressures. haphazardly puts certain of his conpanions out to pasture.

[Question] Do you think that the denocratic experiaent in Upper Volta is
capable of being traneferred to other parts of Africa?

[Answer] hot entirely. since. I repeat. we have profited in Upper Volta

froa a concatmtion of particular circuatsnces. And then our people. who
are a little set in their ways and difficult to persuade. have nevertheless
soae real qualities. The people are relatively pure and they are very well
disciplined. And they are in addition to that coapletely capable of endurance
and of ideals. Godained with the feeling of ugagclent of an intelligentsia
which is relatively united on essential points. those qualities have permitted
Upper Volta to profit fron an experiment which is unique in Africa. This

is a denocratic experiaent which is even more ’nteresting because it has

found to its mac-lent soldiers who are not ct ed away to excesses. not
carried away to brutality or to the repressiona which characterize their

opposite nuabers in other places. Frankly. I believe that those are trump
cards which can‘t be exported.

[Question] Does that nean that Africa is not coqletely ready for deaocracy‘.’

[Answer] Let us say rather that denocracy is not ready for Africa. Because
what is denocrscy for countries where the najcrity of the people are illit-
erate'.’ Is it an artificial nulti-party ayaten or a real liberty of expression?
If it is a question of the latter I will ask you to obeerve that that type

of denocracy existed in Africa even before colonization. Our pro-colonial
societies were very denocratic in the senae in which. based on the grass-

roots co-nunities founded on self-nanngenent. people enjoyed a coaplete
liberty of expression.

[Question] But we are not speaking of the past however fine it say have
been. It is a question of the Africa of today.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] If I speak of the past it is not because I would like us to return
to it. There is no question of that. however. the past nust be kept in nind.
all the sore so because there are still any people in Africa who are living
under the rule of the past. who do not know anything but the ancestral regine.

[Question] Would nulti-party rule be a handicap for national unity and for
the econosic progress of Africa?

[Answer] It is true that a nulti-party systen cannot exist without presenting
problens. since that kind of systen can easily degenerate into anarchy and
then into dictatorship. Chiefly if the political leaders are not aware of
their responsibilities. Polarization and personalization of the parties
inply serious risks of division. However. I as still convinced for ny part
that the risks that lhsve just nentioned are still not as great as those of
a single party. Unless it's a single party that hes cone out of a war or
out of a collective struggle for liberation. in which case the risks of
division among the people are reduced. Only. even in that case. it is
inportant to create sole safeguards for the sake of preventing the telptation
of a personal dictatorship.

[Question] Only the countries coning out of a struggle for liberation are to
be excused when they chose single parties?

[Answer] Yes. because in that case the party is rather a party unified by the
struggle. Elsewhere. 1 do not believe a single party is acceptable. let's
take Nkruah's Ghana. There the single party was justified because Nknnah's
party really was the struggle incarnate for the liberation of all Africa.
Only. the Ghanian leader had underesti-sted the resistance capacity of the
bourgeoisie. He would have had to neutralize it eventually. 8e did not

do so. That's what defeated him. In other words. the creation of a single
party can be carried out at a price colpatible with denocracy only when the
classes are not yet well installed and structured. low we nust cone to

an understanding on the definition of the word deaocracy.

[Question] In your opinion. which are the African regines which have
succeeded and which you would give as nodels to your nilitants. if not to
the rest of Africa?

[Answer] Re have not yet enough perspective to seriously appreciate the
experznents which are going on in Africa. h'evertheless. it seas to It

that certain ones have succeeded less badly than others. At the sale tine
that I an an advocate of socialisn. I an against the bureaucratic socialisn
which. in Africa. can engender new privileged classes Just as well as
classical capitalisn. If I lay be permitted to drean. I shall drean of a
socialist: which is prepared to give a greater place to grass-roots collective
enterprises. That's why I think that. in the current state of the experinents

under way in Africa. Tanzania and Guinea-Bissau seena to ne completely
worthy of interest.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Rould you be a shameful reactionary or a co-unist who did not
dare tell his nane‘!

[Answer] I an perhaps sonewbere between those two. if not above then. at
least there A. s little bit of each of then in ne. One never knows! how-
ever. if we nust be serious. I will tell you that I an not s co-unist in
the sense that I do not accept atheisn. since I an a believer. however. I
accept a certain nunher of things in Marxian. Thus, I readily adnit
dialectics as s tool for analysis and a neth of seizing reality. At the
sane tine. I totally adhere to the theory oi class struggle since. as a
historian. l observe that the class struggle. just like the violence which
is also taking place. is a reality. The entire question is to know in whose
service the class struggle and the violence are being used. I an not in
favor of the cult of violence.

[Quest ion] As you are a historian. are you surprised by the speed with which
the Chinese are destroying the nyth of Hao?

[Answer] I an not at all surprised by the de-liaoieation. however. I adnit
that the speed with which it is going on does surprise ne. I believe that
given the historical role of lino it was necessary. once that ”no died. that
the role he conferred on another person in order to pernit the continuation
of the forward larch of the Chinese people. Having said that. I think that
the present attitude of the Chinese can be explained to s great neasure by
the fears and the worries that their great neighbour. the Soviet Union.

inspires in then. He Inst not forget eitner the specific difficulties

inherent in the Chinese world: the vast area. the great denogrsphic
concentrations. . . .

[Question] Do you think that the French are racists?

[Answer] It is obvious that racisn has developed a great deal in Trance
during recent years. I renaber that when I arrived in l’rance to continue

Isy studies. which was at the beginning of the 50s. people looked at Africans
with a curiosity nixed with friendship. But there was generally no racist

sentinent anong the French. The nest one observed was sonetines paternalisn.
Only there weren'ta great any of us in Trance. Now. later. the order of
Africans has increased a great deal. to the point where the habitual threshold
of tolerance in the case of racial cohabitation has since been overstepped.
At present certain French people believe that all the foreigners that they
meet on the street have cone to take their jobs away fron then. But people

forget that the prohlen of i-igrants is a by-product of the contradictions of
capitalise.

[Question] Have you pert-anally been a victxa of racisn in Trance?

[Answer] Yes. two anecdotes. The first tine. a lady called ne on Rivoli
Street to tell It: ”I do not like hlacka, they are dirty and dishonest.”

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE Oh‘LY

The second tine it wss in psstry shop where. sfter en srgment thst she hsd
provoked. s lsdy fro- whon I wished to buy s coke threw st le: ”Dirty
rsce!"

[Question] Do you think thst Africen unity hss sdvsnced or retrested since
the coming of independence?

[Answer] It lust he recounted thst in sunny wsys thst notion hss rsther
retrested. At the beginning of the 60s s co-on idesl wss shsred. We hsd
s project. without sny doubt s bsdly defined project. but we hsd in spite of
thst s cos-on project whose strongest nonent wss when the 0M! wss founded
at Addis Ahsbs in 1963. Only lster foreign influences were stronger thsn
the projected unity. Fortunately. the experiences thst hsd been lived
through constitute s precious cspitsl for the future. Everything thst is
necesssry is thst sll people sccept the neceenity of s certsin nutusl toler-

stion. Thst is indispensshle if we wish to unite progress, to go fomrd with
s feeling of unity.

[Question] Are you optimistic in thst regsrd‘!

[Answer] 1 sn s reslist if I s- not optinistic. I so convinced thst we will
find our wsy. No doubt there will he sone hecksliding here end there. How-
ever. oversll. none promising forces and inpulsee sre being relessed. The
coning generstions. who hsve not been tied to the colonisl nysten. sre rsther
are trsctshle in this regsrd. The lesders of our countries should show
grester solicitude in regsrd to thst youth snd thus fully usu-e their
responsibilities. The Africsn intellectusle themselves. whether they he in
power or not, whether they live in Africa or shrosd, should psrticipste in
the “inpuleing bloc“ so desr to Ore-sci. It is only by joining their
efforts to those of :he pesssntry snd those of the other exploited socisl
strsts that they will he shle to plsy the role of s resl loco-otive of

progress. which hietory gives to then end which the African sssses expect
fros then.

comma-r: Jeune Afrique GRUPJU 1979

12.116
650: “00

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lm-AIIICAI AFFAIRS

8140138 A10 10 AFRICA mom
Paria 1m mum in trench 31 Jan 79 p 36
[Article by 5.5.0)

[Text] Swediah aid to Africa in being naintained at a high level. Sone
1.02 billion crowna (51.35 billion CPA [African financial (in-unity] franc.
and none 23.5 percent of all aid to the Third Horld) are included under
thin heading in the budget for the 1979-80 fiacal year. which begin next

1 July.

The ”frontline" will receive 36 billion CYA francn. or note than 70 percent
of the total. leading the lint. with 17.2 billion CPA franca. in Tanzania.
followed by lbranhiqoe (7 billion). Mia (5.2 billion). Angola (3.5 billion)
and lotawana (3 billion). The other countriea to receive aid belong to the
progtenaive canp (Cape Verde. minea-linaan. £thiopia. Sonalia) with the
exception of Toninia. Kenya and henotho. Prench—apeaking Africa (with the
exception of Tuniaia) doea not receive any aid fron Stockholn at thin tine.

An equally imortant effort haa been agreed to in favor of the liberation
love-cote in nouthern Africa an well an for the refugeea fron that region
and for the victina of apartheid. They will be granted 6 billion CM francn
(or 61 percent nore in relation to the 1978-79 fiacal year).

it in obaerved however that Swedinh aid to Africa in nhowing a aonewhat
-ller growth (10.2 percent an cupared to 13 percent) than the total aid
to the Third Horld (which in equally concentrated. an only 20 ntaten will
profit fron it). Swediah aid in Inept at the level of 1 percent of Sweden'a
car an in horny and in the )letherlandn.and the greater part in granted in
the torn of gifta. Mthemre. the part of the aid tied to the obligation
of the receiving countriea buying equipmt and nerchandine in Sweden will
dinininh: 32.5 billion CIA franca an oppoaed to 33.7 billion during the
fincal year which in coning to an end. Thin. according to foreign niniater
liana Blix. in "the Swediah contribution to the international debate on
thin kind of aid.”

comma: Jenne Afrique GIUPJIA 1979

12

12,116
ego: “00 FOR omcm. use can
FOR OFfZCIAL USE ONLY

0mm:

m loans 10 E CHANNELS!) INTO VARIOUS FIELDS
Paris “ARIES TIDPICAUX ET mums in French 5 Jan 79 p 33

(Article: "serum-Cameroon Cooperation 1978-1979; 115 Million “irks for
a Dozen Projects"!

[Excerpt] At the end of negotiations which took place at Yaounde from
30 October to 5 November 1978, the Federal Republic of Germany placed at
Camcroon's disposal for the period 1978-1979 the following credits:

«on 85 million as financial cooperation (repayment period: 50 years,
10 years deferred, at 0.75 percent interest);

--more than m 27.14 million as technical cooperation;

«In: 3.5 million as technological cooperation.

Financial Cooperation

The grant of DH 85 million will be allotted as follows:

1) 1M 8 million for a proJect of water canalization involving 6 centers.

2) In addition to m 20 million already allotted, the m is granting
another loan of DH 5 million for enlargaaent of the port of Douala. This
new loan will be used for the creation of a couplanentary container wharf
with a roll on-roll off installation.

3) nu ll: million are planned for the second phase of the "meat plan" to
consolidate measures undertaken during the first phase: eradication of
the tsetse fly and promotion of meat production (the m had already par-
ticipated in this first phase).

h) D)! lh million will go to the integrated develoment project of the
ziorthwert regionuchiei'ly for financing road construction. )breover,

D’. 9 million reServed during 1976 negotiations for Iowa (Rational Rural
Development fund) will be reprogrammed to: financing means of agricultural
production in the region.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

5) m 3 nillion will be marked for a study ma instituted in order to
facilitate the preparation of prodects within the framework of bilateral
cooperation or private cooperation.

6) III 101 million will be consecrated to financing the Yaounde-Momma
road and more specifically for the Bafoussan-Bafia section, the portion
reputed to be the most critical and nevertheleaa indiepenaible to insure
the profitability of the road in its entirety. Cueroon is moreover
presently engaged in other negotiations with a View to insuring total
financing of the project.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie., Paris, 1979

9330
cm: “500

1‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFPKCIAL USE ONLY

cmnoon

WC}! IDAh'S ms Willi, WICATIONS swims
Paris MARINES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRAHDJIS in French 29 Dec 78 p 3566

[Text] The (French) Central hind for Economic Developent granted Cameroon,
19 December, 7 loans totaling 2% million French francs (12.2 billion CPA
francs), distributed as follows:

um. over-thc-counter loans, one of 50 million French francs (2.5 billion
CPA francs), the other of 80 million French francs (10 billion CPA francs)

to the Cameroon Aluminum 00 (MAM), a subsidiary of Pechiney-Ugine-Kunmm,
will make it possible to increase annual production capacity at the tides plant
from “5,000 to 80,000 tons of alminm and will provide for mture extension to
165,000 tons.

nihis industrial operation was made possible by construction of the new
hydro-electric den of Song-boulou, in the financing of which the Central
hind took a lar e part last year. A new loan of 20 million francs (l bil-
lion CFA francs) to the United Caneroon Republic will make it possible to
install a lath hydro-electric complex and construct a second high tension
wire towards Edea.

"No over-the-counter loans, one of 35 million francs (1.75 billion CPA
francs), the other of 37 million francs (1.85 billion CPA francs) will

be granted Caneroon to facilitate a neat developaent of internal telecon-
nunications. The planned prograa concerns both technical installations

and the training or recycling of Caneroon maintenance personnel.

"A loan of nus million francs (725 million CPA francs) will be granted the
Cameroon Development Bank on behalf of Caneroon Textile (SDIJCAM), a subsid-
iary of the Wench group Texunion. SOLICAM is building a factory which will
manufacture, using cotton grown and spun in Cameroon, 850 tons a year of
Turkish toweling targeted for the local narket. ‘me inwesinent cost is
valued at 510 million francs (2.7 billion CPA francs). The European Invest-
ment Bank will participate in the financing along with the Central Fund.

"A loan of 7.5 million francs (375 million cm francs) to the Cuneroon
Developsent Bank will cooplete the 6 nillion francs (300 million CPA francs)

[5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which the Central ma chew granted in 1975 for the some obJect: finan-
cial. aid to sun and medium-sized Cameroon enterprises. This assistance
itoclf constitutes one or the aspects of a program aimed at creating small
and medium-sized local enterprises and supporting than both technically and
financially. It has been assumed, for the Iain part, by the ﬂorid Bank, the
UN Develoment Program and the Central Md.

COPYRIGHT: Rene Horeux et Cie., Paris, 1978

933°
080: “600

16

m OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAMEROON

BRIEFS

PORT 1978 TRAFFIC UP--The administrative council of the Cameroon National
Ports Office met at the end of December with the Minister of Transportation,
John llkengong Monie presiding. The council examined the activity report of
fiscal 1977-1978 and the certification of accounts and balance-sheet through
30 June 1978 inclusive. The result is that activity was characterized by a
pencral increase in traffic, and by good progress, in spite of several dif-
ficulties, on enlargement of the Port of Douala. Fiscal 1977-1978 shows a
nut profit of 1.2 billion CPA francs. [Text] [Paris MARCH-IS TMPICAUX ET
ulmwms in French 12 Jan 79 p 88] 9330

“EH TRNISPORT AIRLINEuThe recent creation of the canpany Air Armin-es
Afrique [Air Africa Business Line], with a capital of 70 million Fr CPAs,
specializing in on-eall transportation in Cameroon and Central Africa,

has been announced. This cowany's workshop will ensure maintenance

and inspection of planes and equipment, especially radio-commication and
navigational equipment, and will act as representatives of civil and mili-
tary aeronautical hardware. The principal base of Air Affaires Afrique is
in the light aviation zone of the Douala International Airport. [Text]
[Paris MARCHES TROPICAUX ET mlms in French 19 Jan 79 p 1163] 9330

mac'mc MANY 1978 IIWEWS--Mr Hyatt, director of 90m. [National
Electric Company in Cameroon] struck the balance of the national company
investments in a year-end meeting. From 197‘! to 1977, investments rose
from 21% to 163 billion CPA francs. By 199;, on the whole, they will rise

to more than 110 billion, to serve customers which, by that time, will have
increased by 77 percent from 197'] to 1978, and by 95 percent from 1979 to
19%. [bring this period, the turnover will have risen fraa 7.5 billion in
197'! to 13.5 billion in 1978 and will top 35 billion in 193“. Lastly,
employees numbering 1,500 in 19710 and 2,100 presently will increase to 2,500
in 19816. [Text] [Paris muss macaw: Er WW8 in French

19 Jan 79 p 11.3] 9330
com EXPORT QUOTAS SEf-J'he minister of economy and planning has Just signed
an order enforcing the presidential decreee on the consent agreement with the

national Office of hrketing of Staple Con-iodities of exporters of Robusta
coffee for the 1978-1979 season. Each exporter is thus assigned a purchase

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY

quota. 'me purchases of each exporter can neither exceed nor fall. below
the quota they have been allotted. For purchases exceeding the allotted
quota by 15 percent, a penalty of 8 CM francs per kilo will be levied on
the exporter. Vhen the exporter's purchases do not reach 85 percent of
the allotted quota, a penalty of 8 francs per kg for the quantity corre-
sponding to the percentage of purchases not node will also be levied. Any

direct or indirect quota transfer among exporters is prohibited. The ex-
porters are bound to maintain the level of activity during the entire dura-

tion of the fiscal year. An exporter who has not filled at least 60 percent
of his individual quota will sustain an i-ediate reduction which may extend
to 25 percent of the quota. The percentage thus withheld will be assigned
by the minister of economy and planning to another exporter. me purchase
price of Robusta coffee guaranteed producers in the authorised collection
centers as provided for in the decree of 3 January 1979 is uniformly fixed
at 280 CPA francs the kilo. This price mst in net be paid the planter
with no reduction. (breerptl [Paris MARINES TROPICAL}! LT umxmmms

in French 19 Jan 79 p IMO] 9330

CS): 10100

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1979 52m ‘8 was“: mm mm mmcmn mm
mmmmm 1nh~omh17un79p37
5mm by A.D.: ”mo Great mommy

gzxt homotmoudmoppoontohomnont.
m'mhrioond‘lrlponoonldhommr

mmmommntohavo-rbdthootortotmno-yurinm'd:

Pun-1o:- luoooino Hahn, unlotod by most of his mini-tors, boycottod tho
otnom oomonm ct tho prooontotion or good Inho- to Pnddont roux
mum. ‘lho latter, in ordor not toworoontho dispute nth his 1mm
pndor, no couponod to m]. o mutual looting.

WW1,mmwtunmr,mmm1,mMorm,
madame-nmmdoontxoloméo poroontorthoportd' mmmt
to unthi- wholnon, Inn fond ﬂush» toho introuhlovith tbldhynn
loodoru,mtﬂxooontbmo1r'potm.' Monutdtohopruonroin
thoSohhonglmomthofuhyo. loonoonovorothotolophoummm
wmutmmtoroin‘rﬂpon.

Aﬂorolnllofoovonlmthmoromdonotthonahtimutohomtod
vary for no. tho naming- nno hot-con noon “scum-at troops.

‘nlo momma mooourlty hooonoonoroorrootod Women, with tho explosion
dohanoudoho-hmomthootm. humdhosuntduunot
tho Mmdﬂonkwm'olon, Intnthorof othorrobol mowomtto
hommthimomntbgmtmmmtoppanmttmophoo.

mo you 1979 could ho a docuivo year, oftor o tutu-11:11:11 var hath; ovu-
12 you-n. Soothing is nooolontlng in this house, poor, W oun-
try that 11” utrldo loom whito Atria and Gaucho or uni-tot blank A1”-
rioo. For a long tho, A minority tron tho South ho control!“ am gonna!
tho county at I111, conning ooriouo {mounting in tho North. Tho Man
prohlon hoo conﬁned forloro thanlOyoorohoth u o roonlt orthohck
or wan-owning m tho port of tho govomto in Port law—which has boon

19
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rem-ed hum—and due to the dieeeneione between momm- leedere.

It wee e fine terrain for foreign intervention and interference, end 1978
eewubyen mrfece-tn-eireieeileebeim uployedinenefforttodem
French Jeane:- aircraft.

In thie axeee gene, Tripoli, epmeox- of the nbemme pert of and, play-
ing on the white eqnene, and Perle, eponeor of official and, playing on
the bleak eqnene, heve eeen thinge elternete for thee betleen hot end com,
end between manta of eetiefection m meem. A large mount? effeneive
net eyeing cheat Wt mum to ite kneee. meee dfficnltiee had
the effect of examine the etinietretion out of e certain count of torpor.
ﬂat eccmte for the invitetinn u nieeeine lebte, the ex-rebel end eun-
Jeﬂm- of he Chm”, to for. e lore politically all ethnically-helmet!
emu-ant on 29 August 1978.

that enceeee did not fail to Illa thoee etill fidatim take etock, e11 the
euro eo because eppeele iseued by Hue-em for e mtienel 1'th
without victor or unclaimed mffined the principlee 'of the eemlerity,
oneueee, and individbiliw of the (Indian pun-Int.“ Theee winciplee,
with em e110“ mum, ere thoee of the fighting oppoeition.

Afterhevingeoneverﬂieeeine nebne, reluhnoutdedtodo them
with W. mt“ eoeepereone wimpy: nabxe, the foam- which
ornammue guerrineferceeinmmchd,wombemeft~eﬂ
of eeeinghieinfiwwedi-inidx, ed...theI-1lvene.

muttereveettheireiteend. Perelmti-etbeybetmibbeﬁdiek
endthmlieeeinehbte,befoeefeningbeekmmmm, ”their'libentor
urban-tee. Tripolithouhtitbdfinﬂhfmtheunitwuldile-
eten et Wmmhnby heveedefinitive eolnﬂoutotheprohl-of
www.mtmormnmmmmwum. Butitm
mtﬂuttriponheeoneeeonbenbdmemﬂoijjmeedeveted
toﬂleinteaityofhiecomtquﬁieeeinelebxeorme. Aux-talu-
demomd peyehologicel mfmheeled to this eetbeﬁ, duet inn Mm
eeaeduthintheirm. Wheetobebmemepin. Anee
cheee one ie beginningegain in 1979, vithtwo 'oheeautex-e' installed in
Periemd‘rripoli. Butcnthieveetcheeeboexd, tie equevee ﬂatulence:-
bereepeeted. Botheideeexethreeteningtobeyeottﬁlegeuendee-tobe
inclinedtenm-e itattheirenbehelf, betaenCludiene.

comm: Jeane Afﬁne RUPJIA 1979

53116
680: 111.00

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ms

PAN cams MAM-“rho town of Arada, 100 he north of Abeche. in
eastern Chad. occupied by the FROLIMT-Volean, was attacked and

captured on 7 January by the forces of the CC!“ (toner Consnd

Comcil of the Armed Forces of the North) which was directed by

hissene Habre. the present Chadian prine ninister. According to

reports iron Ndjanena. the fighting, the balance of which is not

yet known. was particularly heavy. The Chad radio has stated that

the Arada confrontation "follows several acts of provocation

perpetrated by the FROIJNAT, including the systmtic mining of
connmicationa routes used by the PM and which led to losses in

lives and material duress. the latest of which provocations tool:

place on 6 January." "In View of the gravity of the situation,"

the radio continued, "and taking into account such repeated provocatims.
this legitinste defense position has become inevitable." [Text]

[Paris mans TROPICAUS 31‘ mm in French 12 Jan 79 p 90] 8339

(:80: 61000

21
“POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

numerous

DOZAMMQUE REVIEWED: ECWOMIC, POLITICAL CHOICES WE
Faris LE Willi DleMTlQUE in French Jan 79 pp 6-8
[Article by Christophe Batsch: "Mozambique‘s Choice")

[Excerpts] "Independence happened three years too soon!“ The saying, repeat—
ed l.000 tines, aims at having the foreign visitor understand the whole road
that has been run since 25 June IQ?!) and the Iagnitude of the difficulties
still being encountered today. It also shows to what extent practices ac-
quired during the araed struggle are still the source of inspiration and refer-
ence and the model for an independent Mozaabiquc.

h'nether a spinning mill is running at a quarter of its production capacity for
lack of isolated parts. or a fisher-art's cooperative fails to receive its

boats, or a "people's store" stops being supplied with flour. or they are ad-
dressing an undisciplined pupil or a group of peasant victims of labese floods.
the leaders tirelessly repeat the sale speech: the present difficulties are
numerous. but during the armed struggle our leans were still very weak. The
implied conclusion: we were able to conquer then, we will conquer again "by
counting on our own forces."

0" 2: .une 1975, after 12 years of arsed struggle and 10 months of "transition
government", Mon-biotic acceded to independence under the aegis of the
mum (Mozambique Liberation Front], without foreign military intervention.

The Preeainence of the Party

A major political event of recent months took place when the mum, the nat-
ional liberation move-eat. was transformed into a Marxist-Leninist party. The
decision, made on the occasion of the Third Congress, meeting in Maputo in
Febniary 1977, provided the kickoff for a recruitment caapaign called "struc-
turalizing the Party" which came to an end on ll h'ovenber I978.

Resolute followers of “scientific socialisa", determined to be at the head of
the first authentically Marxistwteninist party in power in Africa, the Hosan-
bican leaders miss no opportunity to recall that "the universality of Marxia-
Leninism is affimed in the specificity of every national process." The Par-
ty's cells were created after a severe filtering of candidacies that has less

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONICIAL USE ONLY

to do with theoretical knowledge than with "a sense of responsibility. love
of his profession. sound moral conduct" and rules out those who "do not live

exclusively for their work or who have in the past participated in counter‘
revolutionary activities.

As the country's liberator FRBLllo enjoyed an i—ense popularity. As an arled
aoveoent with not very many oedeers. ilplanted in only a few regions. its prob-
lea after independence was to transforn that popularity into an anti. 1'in to
be recognized by all. As heir to the colonial state apparatus. it undertook
to take it in hand and transforl it. running into suspicion on the part of the
civil servants but nevertheless forced by the lack of staff people to lake use
of all available skills. lithin each ministration the FRELHD pro-oted
”energizing groups". conposed of verified lilitants and charged with seeing to
it that its directives were enforced. in a first phase (1975-1977) these or-
ganizations included only minor adlinistration elenents. as FRELDD Distrusted
the high level leaders. including those it had been able to install. Today
Party cells have everywhere replaced the "energizing groups" and the mum
denands that state cadres be ﬂowers of the Party.

STATE AND PARTY STRUCTURES

tate , Party

President Chair-an

   
  

       
 

  
   
 

  

erlanent Co-ittee
-f People‘s Assenbly
(20 Delbers)

Secretariat of
Central Co-ittee

Per-anent Polit-
ical Co-ittee
(

   

       
      
   

Itinisters
(20 oelbers)

    

People's National Asselbly
(226 ae-bers)

Provincial Asse-bly
City or District Asseably

Local Assenbly

Central Co—ittee
(67 Ie-bers)

Congress
(Representing Local Party Organs)

   
 

23
'0’! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(UK Ul'l' [CIAL Ubl’; ONLY

its whole effort. in fact. is aiaed at making "the people's state the prin-
cipal instrulent for bringing Party policy into being...The Party utilizes
the state as an instruoent for realizing its policyz". These principles are
often illustrated. especially at the suit. by confusion as to which tasks
are the Party's and which the state‘s. Sanora Machel is president of one and
chainan of the other; his four chief ministers. Dos Santos. Rebelo, Chissano
and Honteiro are si-ultaneously secretaries c? the Central Co-ittee for the
field that coincides with their linisterial activitiess.

Elections giving rise to the people's asseublies took place during the last
quarter of l977, following nodalities rather resubling those of People's
China in its early days. Supervised by the secretariat in the Party organiza-
tion. they lead-~in every neighborhood and every localityo-to a long calpaign
of political agitation and a caapaign for selection of candidates. Each as-
seably appoints its own executive co-ittee which assmes basic powers; as a
latter of fact. the assemblies do not sit regularly and the sessions are short.
The National Asseably aeets occasionally to ratify the Party's important de-
cisions: revision of the constitution. approval of international treaties. etc.
Its per-anent co-ittee. with 20 Ielbers. assures the continuity of the legis-
lative work. in a people for who- the long colonial presence, illiteracy and
the diversity of languages were so any obstacles to political debate, the
electoral year has represented a rmrkable apprenticeship in deuocracy. as
testified to by the vigor and passion of the speeches about candidacies.

Revolutionary Vigilance and Morality

in the course of this national debate the question of repression has energed
aassively and repeatedly. As after any great upheaval that brings about a
change in Ianaging personnel-oone reaelbers the purge in France i-ediately
after the liberation--, the problen has quickly taken a political direction.
Punishing past injustices guarantees change. legitiniaing the new govern-ent
and affirution of national unity. Added to this in Nora-bique is the phobia
about a fifth colt-n and sabotage. which is expressed in the repeated calls
for "vigilance" extending even to the country's notto‘ and which explains the
hostility of the international environaent and the youth of the revolution.

Since it case to power the FRELIID has opened a nulber of "reeducation cups"
for three categories of persons: its political adversaries, Ieubers of the
Pine [Portuguese Political Police) or nationalist parties that revolted a-
gainst it; the innulerable prostitutes who enlivened the hot streets of
Maputo for South African tourists and whose nunber had been increased by the
presence of a colonial any; finally, people who were rounded up in the
poor sections of the cities, a nuber of "Jo and Pitas". aarginal or tine-ploy-
ed, often drug addicts in this country the urijuana was along the best in
Africa. installed in the various calps according to the category of their
origin. they joined there the political adversaries eliainated during the arled
struggle who. there as elsewhere. serve as Iodels: "new notables". excluded
by the llth mum Congress in July is“. leaders of the assassination of
Eduardo nondlane in 19695. Eight cups of this type are known. nost of the.
in the provinces of Nord. h‘iassa and ham", but the wiser of "reeducated"
is not known; the question as to what brought the: there is judged to be "of
little interest"."

2!.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the present tine the Party's distrust is directed chiefly against the
leaders and cadres uho intenediate between the Party and the state apparatus,
at the province and district level. It is difficult to treasure the lagnitude
of a phenonenon that is perceived only by vay of sanction cases reported by
the press. or not easily verifiable denunciations of "fascia" or "incoope-
tence" by sooe adainistrator. Two types of offenses are in fact vigorously
sanctioned among civil servants: thievery. aisappropriation or corruption
are the nest serious; "i-oral" sexual conduct. such as naintaining a ais-
tress. violating or abusing a woman, having a baby without being narried. is
the second. Money and sex. considend to be the gain roots of abuse of bureau-
cratic pover, vere the aajor obstacles to the building of a nev adninistration
founded on the revolutionary ethic of the ”nev an” that the mum vants to
create out o.‘ the skin of colonized an, out of the bourgeois and the feudal.

The FRELllo naturally cane to be opposed to the religions that traditionally
held the noral authority. Although the practice of cults is still authorized.
no believer can becole a number of the Party and all religious propaganda is
forbidden. The battle against "obscurantisu" is ailed first at elilinating a
nuaber of custom linked vith aniuiso: initiations. polygaay, beliefs and
dealings in aagic, etc. The confrontation vith the organized religions.
Catholicisl and lslal, is lore ideologic.

Although Mr Dos Santos. a ninister today. had been received by Pope Paul VI
in 1970. the mum sees in Catholics one of the rare forces capable of op-
posing its influence. The closing of the "Party stmcturization capaign"
vas a new opportunity for Mr Machel to condem their activity in the comtry.
The departure of hundreds of thousands of Portugese. the nationalization of
the schools and health services dealt severe blovs to the Catholic Church.

lslan is resisting better. thanks to the presence of 1,000,000 to 2,000,000
Moranbicans of lndian origin. The governoent’s te-porizing policy is ai-ed

at avoiding a strengthening of the cohesiveness of that co-Inity. all the
lore serious because the majority of its oeubers work in capitalist sectors:
trade. industry. liberal professions. These activities expose Mozambican
mslias to the constant suspicion of speculation and various kinds of traffic.
on the part of the rest of the population as well as the Party. lie-ever. their
enterprises reaain quite :odcst. while the prince waercial syste- is still
indispensable in order to assure the country's provisioning. Moreover. con-
cern for national unity prevents the mum fro. taking oeasures that vould
risk alienating the vhole mslin co-mity.

At a higher level. the presence uithin the goverment and pertinent political
co-ittee of persons of African origin as veil as lndian or European who are
known for their skills and their devotion to the political line bears witness
to a similar concern.

independent Notaabique inheritated a disastrous econoaic situation. It can be
and up in tvo words: dependence and chaos.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The government gave itself the neans for its agricultural policy by organ-
izing the recovery of abandoned land within the franework of its first
series of nationalizations of 2‘ July 1975. The neasure. which gave birth
to the state agricultural sector, was chiefly concerned with snail exploita-
tions of "colonates" and a few nediu-sized plantations. ‘l'he large export-
ing plantations were recovered by the state, one by one. in the years fol-
lowing.

Along the first affected were the i-ense properties of Jorge Jardin, which
bordero-for nearly its entire length--the road fron Beira to Chi-oio. ro-
tating the cultivation of sunflowers. cotton. sisal and corn. A Itey figure
in colonial Nozanbique, a representative type of "fat colonial". possessing
interests in all of the country's econonic sectors--especially in the CF?
[French Petroleun Conany] refineries in Mawto, which contributed to di-
recting sanctions against Rhodesian. Mr Jardin exercised an influence great-
er than that of the Portuguese governor. his offers to serve having been re-
pulsed by the 1-13le at the tine of independence, he withdrew to the vicinity
of Malawi. whence he is carrying on his fight by financing radio propaganda
and «nude incursions under cover of the Free Africa Move-cut.

State far-s. inplanted in the northern part of the country on heretofore un-
exploited land conplete the disposition of the state sector in agriculture.
its expansion was brought about largely to the detrilent of the capitalistic
private sector. which has been practically absorbed. At the very lost, scat-
tered snail islands continue to exist whose survival is tied in with special
circuastances. Thus, around Gurue, in addition to the $0 or so tea plantao
tions clustered in the heart of Enochaa. the privately-owned M021. Conpany
has been penitted to operate. The decision is part of the concern for Iain-
taining the presence of Hounbican tea on a very exclusive London narket.
where personal relations are basically what counts, as proven by stock that
reaains unsold because of the disappearance of the traditional co-ercial
networks.

Priority for the "Popular Solutions"

The transition period is bringing about econonic disorder. The old-style
sector is the one chiefly affected; the large firms are contenting the-selves
with cutting down on their activity, in a prudent wait-and-see attitude
toward the new government.

For the latter, the "production front" is beconing decisive. and it is naking
its choices: "The global strategy of our econonic and social develop-eat is
to take agriculture as a base and industry as an energizing and decisive fac-
tor ." Agriculture, then. has priority.

Agricultural policy has given rise to the first serious confrontation since in-
dependence, with the FRELllO. By excluding the minister of Agriculture after
its fourth session in August 1978. the central co-ittee was affining its
dedication to "popular solutions" over inported technologies; the priority
granted to the cooperative and faaily sector over the state sector and the
fmdanental inportance of the strides ude by the "co-Inity villages" in the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

develop-ent strategy. Indeed, Joachia de Carvalho thought he was specifi-
cally to blaae for "not considering an the determining eleaent in develop-
lent and for disaissing Ian's part in production." And, in particular, "al-
though he had been called to order on various occasions, he had persistently
refused to apply the priority laid down by the aanaging organs with respect
to the co-unity villages."

Recourse to "popular solutions"--aass nobilization at harvest tine or aniaal
transport in preference to tractors--is largely dictated by necessity. ﬂak-
ing a virtue of poverty ,the FRELIDO, again referring to practices developed
in the "liberated zones". presents it as the only way to appeal to the earl:-
ers' creativity by putting "policy at the controls.“

Facts and Figures

 

Population: 11,000,000 inhabitants
68 percent active in agriculture
12 percent active in nines and industry

Area: 801,590 square ha.
Principal llports:
lheat, aillet, rice, fish, neat, potatoes,

peanuts. dairy products; textiles, oil,
coal, aedications, fertilizer. tractors.

industrial equip-ent and ran Iaterials

Principal Exports:

Cashews. sugar. cotton, sisal, tea, beans,
wood, oil seeds. coal, shriaps. electric

energy
State Budget (1978):

The equivalent of $422,000,000

The Key Role of the (insanity Village

The influence of the state sector on Mozaabican agriculture threatened to a-
rouse soae anger along the peasants. to be seen for exaqle in the words of
this old Mopeia far-er about the tractor fleets of Zaabeze Province: "The

fleets are polygamus. they have two wivesuthe state fans and the villages--
but they prefer their first uife."

The priority now granted to fanily production aarks a turning point in the ag-
ricultural policy followed up to new. The l974-197S production crisis brought

about a catastrophic decline in export revenue and a serious food shortage in
the oomtry. Faced with that situation, only the state, thanks to its

27
70!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ'ICIM. USE ONLY

nechanized nethods and significant investnents, was capable of re-establish-
ing reproduction in a short tine. However, that strengthening of the state
sector did not solve the preblen of reorganizing agriculture and night even
take a direction opposite to the Party's directives. for which the support of
the peasants is vital.

Faaily production. for which the mum encourages the forning of coopera-
tives. renains by far the nest inportant. Since the disappearance of the
cantineiros [canteen-keepers]. such production. which provided a large part
of Mozanbican experts (cashews. copra, cotton) has sluped; no longer finding
anyone to address the-selves to in order to sell their surplus. the peasants
are new content to provide for their own needs. The 3.000-oat least--
"trading posts" that would have to be established in order to start up again
would. in the words of a Maputo governnent expert, represent an investncnt in
qualified agents that Nora-bique has not the leans to finance at the present
tine. Moreover, despite its concern for increasing agricultural exports. the
governnent does not want to relaunch trading. its preferences lie in the di-
rection of production cooperatives which. because of scattered housing. re-
quire a prelininary regrouping of the rural populations.

That double objective-~developnent of cooperatives. regrouping of dwellings--
should he attainable, thanks to the mltiplicntion of "co-unity villages."
These are villages to be created in one piece. where the population has equip-
nent for health and education and cultivates, in addition to fanily plots.
collective fields organized into cooperatives. Begun in 1975, their inportance
was enphasized by the creation a year later of a "national co-unity village
co-ission", the only interninisterial organization with the planning emis-
sion. lts chairnan. Joao Batiste Cosne. becane ninister of Public lorlts en
the occasion of the 20 October 1978 reshuffle provoked by the appointncnt of
Mario Hachungo. a nenber of the pernanent political co-ittee. as head of

Agrigulture. The co-issien was given its on budget of 100.000 contos in
1978 .

One thousand enmity villages have already been built. bringing together over
1,000,000 peasants. Five hundred others are in gestation; collective produc-
tion has begun there. the location of the village has scnetines been selected.
but it has yet to be built. The northern provinces are the nest advanced in
the novenent. Gabe-Delgado thus includes 15 percent of the country's villages.
Then cones Gaza, that is. the Liqepo Valley, with 100 villages; then Nanpula.
also 100. but for a snaller population. Regrouping the populations has been
acconplished without too mch difficulty up to new, for the goveth has been
able to take advantage of a nunber of circunstances. For exanple. the inor-
tance of the novencnt in Cabo-Delgado is explained by the fer-er presence of
the Party in the liberated zones. Moreover. the Portuguese had previously
grouped the peasants into aldenentos [villages], a kind of "strategic han-
let" neant to withdraw the population fron the influence of the guerrillas

and to supply a nass of nanpower to the "colonates". Mozanbican refugees in
Malawi or in Tanzania are also assigned. on their return. to ilplantation

areas to build a co-Inity village. Finally. natural disasters like the great
Zanbeze or Linpopo floods have encouraged the affected populations to regroup.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

So that it is rare for creation of "co-aunity villages" to follow the lin-
ear process outlined by the co-ission--collective production first, to
introduce the idea and the practice along the peasants. then selecting a
location. building the village and diversifying activities.

The villages are very different fron one region to another. as nuch in their
appearancenwood here. brick sonewhere else. according to the type of nterial
locally available-as in the "level of collective consciousness" of the inhabi-
tants. Everywhere. however. there is that central important person who is

the eienentary general-purpose agent (APE). aedical attendant. interpreter.
"all-around" leader. who evokes the ilage of the lay Iayor‘s secretary-teach-
ers of the Third Republic and who is never separated froa his bible. the
"Manual of hygiene and Elenentary Care". given to his at the end of the pro-
vincial accelerated training course. Everywhere. too. teachers and instructors
provide education for the yomg and literacy for the adults. in the Party‘s
eyes the guarantees offered in utters of education and health. together with
assurances of easier narketing of production. represent basic assets for ral-
lying those peasants who are still isolated to the "co-inity villages."

The recently reaffiraed decision to encourage econonic progress in the exist-
ing villages also depends on whether they. still in the linority, can in the
next few years seduce the aajority of a population that is pragnatic and not
greatly enthused by new foraulas.

One of the lost difficult problens to be solved is still the connection to be
established between "co-mity villages" and state fans. The latter elploy
salaried workers and. quite often. seasonal workers. in Gurue, for exaqile.

the Enocha plantations regularly eqloy 8,000 workers and recruit 24.000 ad-
ditional tenporery workers between Decenber and March. the busy part of the
season. For now. the difficulty has been sunounted by resorting to volunteer
work. as in Chohue. or by retaining. as in Gurue. the traditional and ridiculous
salary by the day. which however had doubled since 1974. going fro. 21 to

42.50 escudos. The leaders affirl that the state sector and family production
Inst be coaplenentary and not coqetitive.

Heavy Industry in the Bighties?

There is cleete agreenent. on the other hand. on basing industrial develop-
nent on planning. A Planning Co-ission and national directorates by neans of
branches have been created for that purpose. But the inadequacy of statistical
appratus does not yet allow for working out a middle- or long-ten plan. and
mum leaders have had to be content with establishing an “investnent progran"

for the two years 1978-1979. These priority objectives reflect the current
difficulties:

To iqrove the productivity of businesses. must of which are operating at
just so percent of their production capacity.

To ilprove transportation. the condition of which constitutes a heavy handi-
cap for supply and dolestic trade; as percent of the progran's resources are
devoted to railroad and road systens and purchasing equip-ent.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
x l locum munzzq

—_—
3‘? 9. mm 1010?? in}.
— — — — _ — —

um I” ”I I”.
— — — _
3000 M “O I“.

—_—_

ll." ’00 . l”. I.”

m “smug

mam

mom

 

lml‘.’

ll

Ta
_
_
FOR OWICMI. USE ONLY

To develop fishing and aining exploration

Hoza-bican industry is still doainated largely by consuable goods industries:
textiles. apparel, food. A private sector still exists in these branches when
the owners did not abandon their fir-s at the tine of independence. In cases
where the reverse was true, the state took control of then by aeans of the
"adainistrative co-issions." After the refineries, the Moatize coal lines.
electricity distribution and part of the steel industry, nationalization af-
fected the banking sector. which was reorganized early in 1978. The Bank of
llezanbique is the state's issuing institution and invest-ent instrulent; the
People's Developeent Bank is the credit organization. the partner of business
fins and cooperatives. Negotiations on indemification are in progress with
Portugal. and a privately-owned South African bank. the Standard Totta. is
still in existence.

The Maputo leaders intend to endow the country with heavy industry during the
eighties. a plan requiring preliminary developing of subsoil resources. it

is in the prospecting phase and this is being conducted by Mozaabican. East
German and Ronnian technicians, who are using advanced technology calling
upon the satellite and the conputer. For now there is no allusion to probleas
of invest-eat and transfer of technology. which would probably put to the
question again the principle of "counting on their own forces" by virtue of
which Mozalbique has heretofore refused to resort to foreign credit.

industry is still largely dependent upon South African econoaic aid. for ”Y-
curenent as much as for outlets. The Maputo governaent paid the high price 0
of its political choices by closing the border with Rhodesia, causing the
half sleep of the port of Beira and the railroad connecting it with Salisbury.
0n the other hand. the governaent showed a realistic sense of coaproaiseu
free which, definitely, there is no longer any escape for revolutionary gov-
ernaents-oin aaintaining its trade with South Africa. One of the objectives
of industrial develop-eat is nonetheless to break the Nozaabican econoay of
this dependence with the help of developing resources not yet exploited:
Cabora-Bassa electric energy, iron, copper and gold, which lie hidden in the
subsoil of the Coho-Delgado. Tete and Manica Provinces. The recent free trade
agree-cut concluded with Tanzania was written in anticipation of its reaoval.

Another. aore political objective: the appearance of a large proletariat
should strengthen the dynaaisa of a revolution directed by the worker-peasant
coalition party. whereas laborers represent only 12 percent of the active pop-
ulation (see box. page 7). in this country where laborers' organizations were
practically nonexistent, the class consciousness of the laborers is still al-
Iost nil; factory work still represents an extra teaporary activity by a fan-
ily mr who will then return to traditional agricultural work. There is
considerable absenteeisa. Although it is trying, through a fora of self-nan-
ageaent. to bring about a change of attitude. the FREle does not yet seen
able to succeed. if not with skilled workers. at least with shop fore-en or
overseers whose responsibilities have been increased by the revolution and for
when the factory has long been the principal workplace.

Fins are adainistered today by a aanagenent council including three author-
ities: l)the technical directorate, appointed by the owner privately, an

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"adainlstrative co-ission" or directorate appointed by the state publicly;
2)representatives of the "production councils" which include all shop labor-
ers; 3)the leaders of the political structure, "energizing groups" until last
Novenber. Party cells since then. Direct eaanations froa shops and produc-
tion councils occupy an essential place within this triangular disposition.
Responsible at first for outwitting econouic sabotage and today for watching
over increased productivity. they have becoee sufficiently iaportant in cer-
tain fires to iapose their ferns of labor organization on a reluctant aan-
agenent. Ulthout playing the role of labor unions. which do not exist in
lbialbique. they represent a rough outline of workers' self-nanagenent.

Finally. econolic progress is couing by seen: of literacy. The Iiddle-tern
objective is to assure the whole population fourth grade level, that is the
equivalent of a full prinry education.

The Challenges of the Outside lorld

At the heart of southern Africa, bordering the indian Ocean. Mora-bique would
like to be part of the socialist co-inity. But although with the nonaligned
countries it defends the anti-iaperialistic nature of the organization. the
consciousness of its originality and concern for its independence regain
prinordial. Joachia Chissano, ainister of Foreign Affairs, clearly outlined
the principles of this policy: "it is up to us Africans to preserve our
dignity. our personality. It is natural for any country that helps another,
no aatter in what area, to be teapted to influence it. to reproduce there its
own econonic and political Iodel. For that reason, at the last mum con-
gress, we invited progressive friends fro. the entire world. free social deno-
crats to Soviet and Chinese Co-unists. he told then we looked upon then as
our brothers, but that we had our own pattern. There is no question of our
adopting any line whatsoever. That is our point of view. If there are re-
giaes that have a vocation for subjugation, to conduct the-selves like valets
of France or the Soviet Union of China or anyone. that is their affair and
their responsibility"." For his first official trip abroad. Senora Rachel
went to China, North Korea. Outer Mongolia and Hungary.

Obliged for econoaic reasons to carry on its trade with South Africa.
Hotaabique declares itself open to any for- of foreign aid on condition that
such assistance not be furnished on the basis of any political condition.

But, although the socialist countries, the Scandinavian countries. Portugal or
ltaly aaintain fruitful relations with Hermione, the aid remains aini-al.
Nhile Zambia has just been granted $1,000,000 in credits by the lestern com-
tries, Mora-bique has not yet seen all of the $100,000,000 indemity pledged
by the m to cogensate for the losses springing free application of the
sanctions against Rhodesia.

The crucial question. the subject of deep-seated debate--constant debate--
among the Party's cadres and the Maputo intellectuals is still the ”division
in the socialist caap." its geographic situation not aaking not-bique an
essential stake in the confrontation between the two powers. the leaders have
until now been able to defer aaking any choice between China and the USSR

0

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPXCIAL USE ONLY

and hold onto the official position: to deplore divisiveness. affira the
refusal of aodels. abstain froa publicly criticizing one or the other ally.
How Iany tiles will the mum be able to avoid taking a stand and aaintain
good relations with both countries? The question is all the lore delicate
to settle because it brings the seeds of divisiveness in the leading class.
where the visit of a Bulgarian leader or a new reference to Mao ‘l‘se-tung in
a speech- by the president are passionately cemented upon.

Even though realisa urges us to think that the position of the USSR is strong-
er today. the political evolution in Rhodesia will be a basic factor. A
really independent African governaent in Salisbury would favor forlation.
around Tanzania. Mozaabique and Ziababwe. of a progressive pole in southern
Africa. which because of its econo-ic influence would be per-itted relative
freedoa of action with respect to foreign powers. 0n the other hand. pro-
longing the Rhodesian conflict aay drive each caap to seek outside support

and allies who will then have soaething to say.

Deprived of wealth. having chosen the Marxisa~Leninisa road at a tiae when
they are hastening everywhere to proclaia its bankruptcy. Mozambique might
serve as an exaqle for other states born. like herself. out of an armed
struggle. Paradoxically. that poverty constitutes an asset for this country
which, like Tanzania. can work out its future without giving too Inch weight
to the contradictory advice of "friends" who are generally aore interested in
subsoil wealth than the people's well-being.

FOOTNOTES

1. Report of the pernanent political coaaittee at the fourth session of the
FRELIMO central coa-ittee. August 1978.

2. Oscar Monteiro. secretary to the Party organization. minister of State.
in "The Party in the State". Maputo. 1978.

3. Econoay. lnforaation. Foreign Affairs. Adninistration.
4. "Unity. Labor. Vigilance."
S. First president of the mum.

6. According to testiaony gathered by Annesty international, there were about
20 cups and 100.000 "reeducated."

7. mom: a Mozaabican tea co-pany.

8. One conto is worth 1.000 escudos (l escudo is equal to approximately
13.5 centiaes of our francs).

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9. The III has estinted the indemity to be paid to Mozubique at
$100,000,000. The French shere has still not been paid.

10. APRIQUE-ASIE, 18 Septelber 1978.
CWYRIGHT: Christophe Batsch and LE KNOB DIPIDMNI‘IQIIZ

8N6
C80: 4400

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

swam.

Burrs

P08 mannczranou IN ELECTIONS-4’08 [Senegalese Denocratic Party]

has decided to refuse to participate in the nunicipal elections scheduled
for 25 February in Kebener (150 has northeast of Dakar) so long as the
election code fails to guarantee the honesty of the election lists

and the secret nature of the ballot. The prior elections in this

city (in Novenber 1976), won by the Socialist Party, have been annulled
by the Suprene Court, following a coeplaint of fraud. ms Secretary
General Abdoulaye Wade was a candidate in that locality. [Text]

[Paris W TROPIGAUX rr HEDITERRANBENS in French 12 Jan 79 p 76] 8339

m curm's vrsrruzrc chairman Roy Jenkins, who has just begun a

tour of ﬂeet Africa (Senegal, Mali, and Ghana), was received on 8 January
by President Leopold Seder Senghor and Senegalese Prime Minister Abdou
Diouf. L: $01.81]. recalls on this occasion the 17 years of cooneratim
between the we and Senegal. Thus under the first EDP [European
Development Fund], Senegal received 10,832 nillion francs, that is to
say. 15.98 percent of the total funds paid. The resources of this

first ED? vere all used to finance projects of the countries associated
with the BBC, by subsidy. Under the second ’1' Senegal received 15,956
niolion (23.56 percent of the EDP}. Under the third .1", it received
17,268 nillio (25.68 percent). Under the fourth EDP it received

16.641 million (26.56 Iﬂuent). In another connection. the BBC provided
Senegal with 6,069 million and the 331 [European Investnent Bank]
provided it with 1 billion GPA francs. Within the framework of the
fourth EDP, STABKX [Export Receipts Stabilization System] cane into
effect, thanks to which Senegal received an advance pay-ant of 5,315
million Ch. francs because of the 1977/1978 seasonal drought. [text]
[Paris MARCIBS TROPICMIX ET "Elmm in French 12 Jan 79 p 76] 8339

MMSTE'S STATEMENT 0" SPECIAL FUNDS-'During the Senegalese national
assaubly's lo January session, an opposition deputy submitted an oral
question on a very controversial subject in Senegal: the existence

of an eccamt designated as "I!" created in 1962 by the state in the
BNDS [Senegal National Developent Bank] and destined, originally, to
make up for the deficiency of the banking systee in providing assistance
for the agricultural sector. Hinister of State for Finance and Bcornonic
Affairs Oosnene Seek has clarified the role and the operation of this
account which, after several years, has advanced funds for budgetary
operations not prod” for by the Finance Lav, to be paid for under

later budgetary regularization. In 1970-1972, this account was used to
support snall and nediu enterprises under the policy of encouraging

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Senegalese businessmen. Finally, the account is used to help to establish
doctors. lawyers. etc. Hith regard to the amount of the suns distributed.
Ousnane Seck said that on 30 Septenber 1976. the account showed a debit
of 7 billion and a credit of 6 billion and that since July 1976, on
orders d the prine ninister. the account has been closed because

it could no longer cope with constantly increasing needs. However.

the deputy responsible for the oral question. brought up the difficulties
he had experienced in obteining access to sources. lie naintained

that officials. or politicians could have been beneficiaries and that
remittances had been made to some. In response. Ousmane Seck admitted
that he had linited himself to citing the principal beneficiaries

granted loans for small equipment. with regard to reimbursenent. he
indicated that a coamission had been set up to check on the beneficiaries
who had not paid their debts. Those who do not pay will be prosecuted as

the law provides. [Text] [Paris mm nonowr ET mtrmarmus
12 Jan 79 p 75] 8339

AGRICUL‘IUML GIANTS-4n response to an oral question raised ,. .ne
national assembly. Rural Development Kink ter Djibril Sene said that

the total subsidy provided by the state for the 1978-1979 season anounts
to 5.7 billion francs. In l975. the state subsidised the consuaption

of fertilizer at a coat of 5 billion francs and provided 1.8 billion

for agricultural materiel. But agriculture at that time had to recover
from a serious drought. This year. the excellent crop prospects will

not reduce public aid. farmers have been granted a 40 percent cancellation
of debts. It should also be recalled that investments in agriculture

for 1979 total 20 billion francs. “while we have had delays in the

past." Minister Djibril Sene explained. the situation has undergone

a favorable change (...) It is important to note that the interninisterial
council last August extended debt limits on big crops (millet. rice,

paddy, etc) for the last 3 years.“ lie added: "Not only do we offer

the farmers the possibility of choosing, but furthermore, the 2 percent
preferential rate set by the nuns has been reduced to 1 percent to
encourage the equipment of the rural area. The cost of urea. an
important factor in the yield of cereals. has also been reduced from

35 to 25 francs. The rural development ninister said, finally, that

the elements of the agricultural progran will bei in place by nidvllay.

[Text] [Paris W menu: 31' mzms in French 12 Jan 79 p 75]
8339

”INS causmc sromz ROBLES-40th in the Kaolack and In the hioro area,
the latest rains have jeopardized the millet and peanut harvests.

In Sine-Salon, in some places up to 30 or 60 percent of the peanut
seed or stalks have been affected by mildew. The can [Department
Development Conittee] has received 100 million francs to launch an
effective marketing campaign. Rear Kaolack the good millet and peanut
production is likely to be spoiled if measures are not taken to store
the surplus properly. Technicians are particularly concerned about
reconstituting the "seed capital“ which is also threatened by the
excessive huidity. According to a regional WAD [National Office

of Cooperation and Assistance] official, the production of edible

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

peanuts in the Sine-Salon region mount. to 108,500 tons and the
tonnage puxcluud amount. to 11.3 sultan (nun. [Text] [Puts
WES TROPICMJX ﬂ mmm in french 12 Jan 79 p 75] 8338

080: “00

37

'fOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY