APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100020034-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020034-1

I'UR UH‘lLlAL USE [MLY

JPRS L/8289

27 February 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 13/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020034-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Procesh'ng indicators sud: as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate Haw the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitereted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCEI HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
0? 11118 PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
1. Recipicm'a Accession No.

rpm s

27 Febra;

LI N.
. 3 II

“It

       

   

   
 
   
     
    
   
 
   
 
   
    
   
    
      
         

TRANSLATIONS 0" WESTERN EUROPE. (F000 13/79)

 
 

' . ”column; Danae-saline Nelle and Adana-
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

It. Sponsoring Omeaileuoa NW sad Addnaa

As above

IS. Suppkmmuy Nance

6. Ahsuecle

  

The serial report contains political/economic infatuation on West European
energy, finance and trade policy letters as veil as developments and trends
in the doctrine. programs and probleaa of the aajor co-nuniet parties.

including their relations with conuniat parties Outside the Host Buropcan
area. ‘

  

. Key ‘olda and loco-Ira! Analysis. .- Deecliptoee

    

      
   
     
    
  

Political Science _x_ International Affairs _Luxeahourg
Sociology _Auatria _Natherlands
Propaganda Lacun- _Rorvay
Econoaics _Canada _Portugal
Energy _Cyprus _x_Spain
Industry _Dennark _Svedcn
‘l‘rade _Finland _Suitzerland

Finance

we Uenul'scve/Opee-Ended 1m» 3: Heat Gemny

   
   

 

   
     

17¢.COSATI Field/Camp 50. so, 10

 
     

II. Muleluluy Stair"!!!

For Official Use Only.
Limited umber of Copies Available Fro. JPRS.

. I «my Us” (“is 2!. Ne. oi Page:
"°'-" < . 49
" rcumy i. aeei hue ‘
Pa 1
NC ‘Q s

Donna sane-n Inca. I-Iu vlcooea 96 Ian..."

""5 F0!” MAY BE REPRODUCED
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8289
27 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(moo 13/79)

CONTENTS . PAGE

MM! ORAL AFFAIRS

hunch-Dutch Negotiations on Aeronautical Cooperation
(Am‘mm, 25 HOV 78) 0.00.0.0....OQCOIOIOOIIOCOICO 1

BELGIUM

Organizational Breakdown of Air Force Described
(Am & CM, 11 NOV 78) cassseoossesssoeoeesssoosesss 3

PEARCE

Pierret Explains Reason for Break With CERES
(Christian Plerret Interview; 1.: sown mm,

30 he 78) so.sosoaasconesasoesoonsoonesesscooososssses 6
HAL!
Causes of spiraling Health Costs Detailed
(Antonio Brehna; IL sons-2h ma, various dates) 8
M's Alternative Nuclear Plan Presented to CIPB
(n. mmnsmsm,1u Dec 78) 35
Canonica d'Addz. Oil Deposit Find Hits Record Depth
(Giuliano Albani; n. comm DELLA 3m, 20 Dec 78)... 37
SPAIN
PCB Leaders Discuss Postelaction amen, Plans
(M1016, aer 79) 0.0.0.0....OIOOOOOOOIOOOOIOOOOO. “1
mom '
Bonn Continues Heavy Subsidies to Airbus
(Kurt Brena; arm, 18 Jan 79) 1.6
- a - [III - we - 150 P0001

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IM‘ERNATIONAL AFFAI R8

FRENCH-HMO“ NEGOTIATIONS 0N ABRONAUTICAL COOPERATION
Paris AIR 8: 009008 in French 25 Nov 78 p 12

[Text] last Monday, Yvon Bourges, minister of defense, and Joel 1e Theule,
minister of transportation, vent to the Hague for a meeting with the secre-
tary of state for defense, Van Eekelen and the secretary of state for the

economy, Van Aardenne. They were there to discuss French-Dutch aeronautical
cooperation.

The Netherlands plans to replace its royal navy's Neptune either with the
Atlantic so or with Iockheed's Orion. Thirteen Orions would cost some 300
florin less. As compensation for this difference, France is offering the
Netherlands an opportunity to participate in the production of the Atlantic
N0. France is also offering to buy 18 Fokker 1‘ 27's to be used on missions

in the Pacific and to replace the DC-3's now used for training in the national
navy.

lbvever, the hitch find that these canpensations are not sufficient. In
addition, they proposed a partnership in the production of a short-range
courier aircraft 1' 28 Super. The total expenditure for this program is
approximately one billion florin. The Dutch plan to assme about half the
expenses and are proposing that the French assure one fourth. The Netherlands
hopes to interact Germany in investing, perhaps through the payment of an
indemnity for the Gem-initiated separation of VIM [United Aeronautical
Works] from Fokker. The Bonn cabinet will discuss this transaction on

29 November.

Lust mnday at the llague, there did not appear to have been any discussion
of the Netherland'r. participation in the Airbus industry. There is evidently
a difference of opinion on this subject. France vents all new airliners,
including the ﬁxture P 28 Super, to be a part of the total production of
Airbus. The Netherlands seems to want Fokker to remain comercially inde-
pendent.

Prom the French point of view it might be noted that definitive plans for the
P 28 Super (previously called the Super 1” 28, then the F 29) are far from
being established and France cannot comit herself to signing a blank check.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Dutch state that they merely want France to sign a declaration of
intention to participate in the program.

It seems unlikely that these differences can be resolved in the short amount
of time France has been given by the Netherlands. The Dutch had hoped to
have a more precise annwrr from Paris yesterday, in order that this trans-
action might be discussed at the 2': November meeting of the hitch cabinet.

If France were to offer any new, significant proposals, a report for l Decem-
ber has been authorized. The Hague has from now until 1 December to choose
the aircraft which will replace the Neptune. After that, the Dutch parlia-
mcnt will have 2 weeks to discuss the choice which will become definitive in
mid-December.

At this writing, the Hague does not seem likely to choose the European craft.
The consequences would be serious for Fokker: not only will they lose an
opportunity for compensation with the Atlantic NG, and a s-gnificant amount
of orders for the F 27, they will also be unable to undertake the civilian
project on their own.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 8: 00908 Paris 1978

9161
cso: 3100

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

32mm;

ORGANIZATINAI. sumo»: (I AIR FORCE DICRIBED
Peris AIR 5 ON!“ in French ll Nov 78 pp 1.0, 56
[Article: Alphejet in Service Soon in Belgien Air Forcg7

Llex£7 The Belgien Air Force, which eoploys ebout 18,000 persons, conprises
three main units:

The Tecticsl Air Force groups ell the conbst units essigned to NATO. It
includes: en sll-weether fighter wing end e fighter-boob" wing, both
equipped with Lockheed P401. 0's; e fighter-bomber wing equipped with
Hirsge S's; s wing composed of s fighter-boober flight and e reconneis-
sence flight, both equipped with liirege 5's; two NIKE ground-to-eir Isis-
sile wings; e wing conposed of e tecticsl trensport flight equipped with
c-130 n Hercules planes end s lisison flight equipped with Boeing 727's,
IS 7106's, Pelcon 20's, end Herlins; e Westlend See King helicopter flight;
two reder control end detection stetions; e neteorologicsl wing, e tele-
cmnicetions wing, end verious support units.

The Instruction end Treining Group, responsible for treining ell personnel,
conprisest the besic flight training school, equipped with Siei-Herchetti
8P-260 H side-by-side two-seeter plenes; the edvsnced flight treining school,
equipped up to the present with Lockheed 'r-33's end Fouge Hegisters, both

of which will soon be greduelly repleced by Alphejets; the nilitery treining
school; the nilitery treining center; end e technicsl school.

Finelly, the Air Force less is responsible for ell logisticel support. It
culprises four wings for seroneuticel end electronic equipment, euxilisry
equipoent, munitions end explosives, es well es verious support units.

The Belgien Air Force is presently prepsring to receive end piece in service

the first Alphejets end the first P-16's which ere going to be delivered to
it.

3
ran onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith Alphajat, All Instruction on Two Types of Airplane

The latest issue of the magazine ALPHAJBT CONTACT, published jointly by
Dassault and Dornier, contains the text of an interview with Air Force
Lt Col A. Vanhecke, in charge of the Alphajst program for the general
staff of the Belgian Air Force. He recapitulate below the most inter-
esting passages from this interview.

The Belgian Air Force is made up of a single typo of pilot: fighter pilots
Therefore there is only one training program. Until now, it has been carried
on with the use of three types of airplane: the 89-260 (which had replaced
the Stampe 8V4), then the Pouga Hagister, and finally the T-33. I: 2 years,
with the placing in service of the Alphajet and the gradual withdrawal of

the Hagisters and the T-J3's, the complete program of instruction will be
done on only two types of airplane: the 8P-260 and the Alphajet. The en-
trance of the latter into service will make it possible to save a great many
hours of flying time. Until now, the pilot's wings were awarded to the cadets
of the FAB [Belgian Air Forcg/ only after 350 hours of flight. With the
Alphajet, this time will be reduced to 275 hours. A saving of 75 hours per
cadet--this is a lot for an Air Force which has to train some 40 pilots each
year. These 275 hours will break down as follows: 125 hours in the SP-260 M
and 150 hours in the Alphajet: that is, 90 hours in the advanced flight
training school and 60 hours in the transitional flight training school. The
four FAB instructors who last month took a changeover training course on the
Alphsjet at the Military Air Testing Center of Mont-de-Harssn will in turn
conduct the changeover and instruction of the Alphajet coaches of the Belgian
Air Force.

The pilot candidates who entered the Belgian Air Force last September with

the prospect of a fighter-pilot career will be the first to benefit from the
program with only two types of airplane. With these two types of high-perform-
ance airplane, the training should be improved and the results should be better.

The Belgian Air Force has always considered that the advanced training plane
with which the pilot-training program is completed should have very high per-
formance characteristics, for the professional quality of the pilots derives,
in the last analysis, from these high performance characteristics. The FAB
found in the Alphajet the principal performance characteristics which it de-
sired: very short takeoff time and high rate of climb, to accustom the cadet;
fast cruising speed so as to accustom the pilot to rapid reading of maps and
interpretation of landscapeao-two necessities for the ground attack missions
taken on by Belgium within the framework of NATO; considerably long range, so
that the mission can be sustained for at least an hour, and a comfortable
range so that if the young pilot makes a navigation error, for example, he
does not panic from obsession with fuel consumption; good operational train-

ing capacity and great simplicity of use; and finally, reasonable cost, both
of purchase and of operations.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The differences between the French Air Force's Alphsjet end that of the
Belgian Air Force ere minimal end relate only to certain equipment and the
ejection eeete: the French Air Force has adopted the Martin Baker MK IV
beceuse it is built in France. and the FAB has preferred the MK 10, which
offers zero-zero cepecity, simpl’fied neintenence, end greater comfort.

Questioned on the notion of seEety, Lieutenant Colonel Vanhecke replied:
"I think that Alphejet will be a very reliable eirplene in use, because it
is o twin-engine plane and because it is a very sound machine.“

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSMOS. Paris, 1978

11267
C502 3100

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

PIERRE? EXPLAINS REASON FOR BREAK WITH CERES
Paris LE NOINEL OBSERVATEUR in French 30 Dec 78 p 29
[Interview with Christian Pierrot by Franz-Olivier Gieabert]

[Text] [Question] The leadership of CERES [Center for (Socialist) Studies,
Research and Education] received the support of 95 percent of the delegates
to the Epinay conference last week. Thus, you represent allost nothing:

the ninorities within the minority.

Christian Pierret: Strictly speaking. the CERES leaders should have gotten
100 percent. since they were the ones who named the delegates to the
nesting! That is in fact what is celled bureaucratic nanipulation, worthy
of the organization of the congresses of the SPIO [French Section of the
Workers International (French Socialist Party)] under Guy Hollet. Enough
to discredit the speeches by CERES officials on self-government.

In my opinion, we represent 35 percent of the CERES. But we intend fro-
now on to address the party as a whole.

[Question] th this sudden break with Jean-Pierre Chevenement‘! Hhet was
the reason for the split finally?

Christian Pierret: For the past 2 years the CEREA leadership has been
embarked on a nationalist course. Everything began with that snall affair of
(:lu-Vcncncnt's appeal to the Csulliets in 1976, which I rejected at the
tine. Those responsible for the trend have since becoee sore and more
bogged down in a very coherent reasoning: their anti-European.nilitary
ideas have brought the- today to the defense of an autarkic line that in

a way converges with that of Michel Debra. Now. as far as I as concerned.
being a socialist leans being an internstonalistl I also believe that one
can be a European while still opposing the Europe of Giscard.

By dint of failing to look reality in the face, the CERES leadership
shrouds itself in theological language. Its thinking is iaaaobilized.
Thus. its loss of neaning. Chevenement likes to think he is living in
June 1940. he preached a "national leap." Let's drop this "Cochin-call"
type of vocabulary; socialise would have everything to gain fro. it.

6
ton onrcm. uss om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Do you agree with people who accuse CERES of "tagging along"
with the CP?

Christian Pierret: I find that after they gave up their pursuit of self-
governnent several years ago, the CERES leaders stopped criticising the
communist countries. They even refuse to call the Soviet system imperialist!

[Question] Jean-Pierre Chevenenent and his ten- predict a quick, open break
with capitalise. Aren't you to the right of them on this issue?

Christian Pierret: What has not been done in the name of a break! Rene-bet,
Guy Hollet ruled the 5710 free 1946 to 1969 on a pure, hard line. In the
government he cane to terms with the colonialist right but, as soon as he
got into the halls of congress, once there, he was on the side of a break.
After that, the French socialists should be careful, it seems to me, not

to pride themselves on words.

I an in favor of a break. obviously, but I believe it is more important to
define it in technical and econo-ic terms than to build a statue to it.

A return to Holletist scholastics is not the way to mobilize the French
nor the way one can satisfy their aspirations. Let's wake up! For the
time being, the real debate--on social planning-is going on in the

CFDT [French Desocrntic Confederation of Labor] and the COT or the C? more
than in the Socialist Party. It is tine we got away fron personal.
liturgical quarrels.

[Question] The CERES leadership denounces the "American left," which, in
its preachings of social experimentation. would play into the hands of
capitalise. Do you agree with this?

Christian Pierret: That is a publicity formula of Servan-Sehreiber. He
has not cone up with anything new since the 1950's. It should not be taken
seriously. In their discussions. socialists should not use this type of
excoenunicntion. Rather, why not talk about a "Chiraquian left" to
describe certain new types of nationalism?

[Question] Hhat is your line?

Christian Pierret: we want to relaunch the union of the left and endow
our party with real self-government.

[Question] In the final analysis, are you s Rocardian?

Christian Pierret: He disagree with Michel Rocard on the Union of the Left
because we reject the hypothesis of leaving the C? on the sidelines, and
also on the subject of nationalizations. As far as we are concerned_ the
latter is one of the decisive factors in the building of socialise. But we
believe, instead of placing a ban on him, Michel Rocard should be asked the
real questions so that he will shed his anbiguousness and join the line of
Epinay in earnest.

COPYRICRT: I979 "le Nouvel Observateur"

9268
CSO: 3200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

CAUSES OF SPIRALING HEALTH COSTS DETAILED
Milan IL SOLE-2‘ ORB in Italian 5, 10, 15. 29 Oct 78

[Seven Pnrt article by Antonio Brenna]

[5 Oct 78 p 3)
[Text] health: The Cost Burden

As health reform moves toward its final scrutiny
at Palazzo Madame, doubts are surfacing in seve-
ral quarters as to whether or not the economy can
sustain the burden of its cost. The debate, as
often happens in Italy, is based not only on
skimpy documentation, but also on scanty know-
ledge of the l'economic groundrules" that govern
the system. We believe therefore that we are
performing a useful service by providing, in a
series of articles by Antonio Brenna, director
of the Institute for Economic Research in Health,
some documentation on growing health costs and

a few observations as to the structural -- as
distinct from the institutional pose assumed by
the health delivery systeh -- causes for our in-
creased expenditures.

For a number of years now there has been increasingly insistent
talk of crisis in the welfare state (incorrectly translatable as
"state of well-being"). There are two apparently conflicting
elements which characterize this crisis: one is the heavy bur-
den of spending that must be borne to assure coverage of social
demands which are viewed nowadays as fundamental (spending which,
with its heavy and systematic impact on the budget deficit has
wound up as one of the most widespread builtin causes of infla-
tion); and, on the other, the apparently endless demand for so-
cial benefits from various population groups.

Free health services are one example typical of that contradic-
tion. The marked increase,in spending for health -- particularly

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

public expenditure financed by mandatory contributions, taxes,

or public debt -- which is usually accompanied by increasing pub-
lic dissatisfaction with the services provided, has for at least
5 years been a phenomenon observed eVerywhere in the developed
countries of the western world.

Recent empirical observations indicate the existence of a signi-
ficant correlation beteen the incidence of health spending on

the GDP and per capita incomes. The higher the latter (per ca-
pita income which, despite its lack of precision as an index, is
unanimously considered, even today, a clue to the level of wealth
or prosperity of a specific population), the higher the fraction
of resources devoted to health care. This correlation holds up
over time and space and, in this second instance, it can be

seen at both the international and infranational levels.

Let's explain that a bit. The correlation holds up over time,

in that the rate of increase of health spending is higher than
that of the GDP. As the years go by per capita income -- except
in periods of acute depression -~ rises, but so does the impact
of health costs on the GDP. If during the same year, further,
we consider several countries -- or several regions within the
same country -- we see that the impact of health care costs on
the GDP is greatest precisely where per capita income is highest.

Within the BBC, that incidence has gone from 4.7 percent in 1970
to 5.6 percent in 1973, and to 6 percent just recently. A simi-
lar trend can be found in the larger international community of
the OECD, which embraces, in addition to most West European na-
tions, the United States, Canada, and Japan. As for Italy, the
rise in the impact of [health] costs on the GDP has been extreme-
1y marked, particularly since 1969. From 3.8 percent in 1964

it has risen to 4.6 percent in 1969, and leaped to 6 percent in
1974. Conscrvvtivc estimates for last year set it very close

to 6.5 percent. It should be noted that the impact figures just
quoted refer only to spending on health services, and hence do
not cover expenditures on economic benefits (sick pay) or the
financial costs (interest on indebtedness) for the health care
system.

On the European Community level, the validity of the correlation
is shown on the graph, which indicates, alongside the positions
of each country (the arrowheads), what might be considered the
combined normal positions (interpolating vertical). Unfortunate-
ly the data upon which this graph was construction refer to 1973.
On the basis of more recent data now available, however, there
seems to be no substantial change in the positions of the indi-
vidual countries. Updating the graph would probably require

no more than a shift in the vertical and in the points around it
at the top. In 1973, as against an SEC per capita income of

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

$3,930 and an impact of health spending on the GDP of 5.6 per-
cent, we find, at one extreme point, non-ark (with a por ca-
pita income of more than $5,200 and an impact on GDP of 7.5
percent) and at the other Ireland (slightly less than $2,000 and
a 4.2 percent impact). The richest countries are thus spending
more on health care not Only in higher absolute figures ($390
per capita in Denmark vs. around $85 in Ireland), but also in

terns of the portion of resources which annually become avail-
able.

If we run the same pattern for the Italian regions, we cone up
with results that are altogether analogous. In Losbardy, for
example, whose resident enjoy per capita incomes very markedly
higher than those of the residents of Calabria, health spending
per capita is more than half again as much as that in the sou-
thern region. And if we go onandlook only at spending on hos-
pitalization, the disparity becomes even greater.

These basic findings help us, for one thing, to dissipate a very
widespread conviction -- one which is, in our view, as harmful
as it is widespread -- that holds that health delivery services
are, so to speak, basic necessities. 0n the contrary: all the
data indicate clearly that a good proportion of the services
actually available today goes to services which, if they cannot
be defined as "luxuries" or "voluntary," in the strict sense of
those terms, are nevertheless typical of affluent societies.
This being the case, one of the first arguments to fall is the
one justifying public financing for the health care delivery
systems.

Two issues automatically emerge at this point. First: to what
point will the rising trend in health costs be tolerable for the
economies of individual countries? Second: where does Italy
stand in this context on the international scene, and sore par-
ticularly within the European Community? The answers are any-
thing but pleasant. There a:e, however, a few considerations
that may help dispel some of the fog. Although to establish
limits, a priori, upon the limits of tolerance is completely
arbitrary, we can confidently assert that perpetuation of the
present trend is clearly impossible ever the medium and long
term. If we extrapolate the trends begun in the early Seventies,
health costs in the EEC would swallow, on the average, more than
10 percent of available resources in 1985, and 5 years later,

in 1990, more than 15 percent (around a sixth). Any "sponta-
neous“ levelling off of the tendency toward increased expendi-
tures looks highly unlikely from today's perspective: in the
light of the expansionary factors already at work in health costs,
that tendency is far nore likely to be accentuated. Hence the

whole gamut of cost containment measures already adopted, or
under serious study, in other countries.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

KEY TO TABLE Speu unilaria e reddilo pto-coplto

Ordinates: Impact of health
costs on GDP

Abscissa: Per capita income
(in 0.5. dollars)

Countries, left to right:
Ireland

Italy

Great Britain

BBC generally

Benelux countries

Denmark

Germany

Source: Institute for Health
Economic Research, using EEC

Modem dolls spee- suit-is M '3

  

and United Nations data. woo aooo aooo am 3000 me
We pie-um“ “one“ Du)

HEALTH COSTS AND

PER CAPITA INCOME tome: mum u: I. when. I“ acme-u-

uumu w dad Cu ad 0n

 

What about Italy? True, in this country health costs have not
yet reached the impact on GDP, much less the amount in absolute
terms, that prevail in Germany, Denmark, or France. EVen so,
there are three considerations that must caution us to extreme
prudence in forming our opinions: first, the impact of such
costs is greater in Italy than one would rightly expect on the
basis of the mean European situation, if we consider the very
modest level of our per capita income (the point indicating
Italy falls above the interpolation line); second, the public
deficit, for which health costs bear a goodly share of the re-
sponsibility, constitutes a far more serious problem here than
it does to our European partners; and third, it must not be
forgotten that, partly because of the jerrybuilt health care
delivery system we rely on, the imminent reforms to that system
have already aroused some very high expectations both among
the people in general and among those in the system and, as
recent experience has taught use yet again, these expectations
will have the net effect of boosting costs still higher.

[10 Oct 78, p 3)
[Text] th People Are Spending More on Health

The health cos; explosion constitutes a very widespread
phenomenon, involving, albeit at varying levels of intensity,
every developed nation in the Western world. At its root, logi-
cally, in addition to aleatory factors affecting particular si-
tuations, there ought to be causes universal in scope. What

are those causes? Are there solid grounds for the belief that

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

HEALTH CARE CONSUMPTION AS A FUNCTION OF AGE

(Key to Table)

mi smell! tensions dell'eta
Ordinatost Indices ' cases a n

Abscissa: Age tuna

----- Hospitalization

— Total care "0 _-- eepedelietl
Average consumption — temeleum

 

of all kinds of 30°
health care.
we
Source: Institute for health
Economic Research (data from coo
official Swedish publications)

 

reﬂex "time so: u deuce at Renee-u
eeeuula (aallzpeteacn. ankle“ evade-l)

 

 

the common factors behind rising costs in the recent past will
spontaneously start losing their effect in the years ahead?

Health costs are nothing more than the product of the quantity
of services utilized times their unit prices. It therefore be-
comes easier to single out the causes for their increase if we
draw a distinction between the factors which swell demand and
those which affect the prices of services. Well, the demand
for health services has been rising steadily almost everywhere
since the early Seventies, both by reason of phenomena involved

in the economic development process, and because of the evolu-
tion in social legislation.

Improved living conditions, higher levels of education, and in-
creasing urbanization, all of them phenomena which go hand in
hand with industrialization, bring with them a rising demand for
health services and for social services in general. This occurs
partly because of the voluntary nature of a good portion of
health service consumption (a kind of consumption which grows as
living standards rise); partly because of heightened awareness
of the state of one's own health, typical of a culturally ad-
vanced population; and, finally, because of the deterioration
in the living and working environment which is the inevitable
accompaniment of industrial development (and which has given rise
to new kinds of pathology all but unknown among rural societies).
Although there are no empirical data 01 the basis of which we

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

might quantify the impact of these phenomena on health expendi-
tures, recent research in Great Britain, France, and the United
States agree in their finding that the demand for health servi-
ces is greatestamong the more affluent classes and, given equal
income, those with more education, and among urban populations.

As for Italy, one significant piece of information in this con-
nection comes from IMAM (National Health Insurance Institute);
the cost of health care for an industrial worker living in a ca-
pital city is, on the average, almost twice that of a farm worker
living in a small country town. Note, though, that this applies
only if both workers have the same health insurance.

Another extremely common phenomenon in industrialized societies,
and one which exerts tremendous influence on health spending,

is the ageing of the population. Individual demand for health
care is also a function of physical age. While it is low in the
early years of life, it begins to rise sharply at around 30, and
reaches the mean level at around 40 to 45. From that age on,
the upward trend grows steadily steeper until death occurs.

The graph, which shows the consumption curves for health care
services as a whole, and separately for hospitalization, with
increasing age in Sweden, confirms what we have just said. Note
that psychiatric treatment is not included: if we figure that
in, the deviation from the mean is accentuated (one need only
reflect, for example, that in the United States the demand for
psychiatric beds among the population over 65 is almost five
times the average). In Italy we have no detailed research data
on this count. however, the -- very scanty -- information avail-
able would point to a very similar situation. A retiree on an
IRAN pension, for example, consumes about 95 percent more than
the mean in days of hospitalization for acute illness.

Population ageing is an extremely disquieting phenomenon, in
that, on the one hand, it involves in just about equal measure
all of the developed countries and, on the other, it appears
destined to continue far into the future. In the last quarter-
century (1950 to 1975) the over-65 population in the BBC coun-
tries rose from 8.5 percent to almost 13.5 percent of the total.
It Italy, that same population, which amounted to 8.2 percent

in 1951, had reached 12.1 percent by 1976 and, according to reli-
able predictions, should hit 12.8 percent by 1981.

The expansion of social security systems, with the introduction
of wholly or partially free services, is the other factor in the
expanding demand for health care services we mentioned at the be-
ginning. Here again, we are dealing with an extremely wide-
spread phenomenon, and one which is probably not through grow-
ing. Insofar as Italy is concerned, health insurance which in
1955 covered less than 70 percent of the population now covers

13
son omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

around 97 percent of us. With the advent of National Health
Service, coverage should, within the space of a few years, ex-
tend to the entire population.

If we are to explain the explosion in health spending, we must
look at the rise in unit costs of health services. Well, those
costs are going up for at least three reasons. The first is to
be found in the slight or nonhexistent rise in labor producti-
vity in the system, and in the particularly marked upward push
in wages, salaries, and fees. The first of these phenomena is
easy to explain. Health services are, in the main, personal
services. Scientific progress and technological innovation, as
we shall see more clearly later on, rather than replacing the man
with a machine, tend to attach that machine to a man, and thus
to broaden the reach of medicine. The fact is that not only has
the number of people employed in the delivery of health services
been rising steadily Just about everywhere; so has the level of
qualification (roughly measured in terms of years spent in medi-
cal or specialist schooling) for the average medical employee.
Hence you have increasingly numerous and increasingly expensive
staffs. On top of this, you have an increase in physicians'
earnings -- and by association in those of other categories of
people in the system -- which is measurably faster than the ave-
rage. Here again we have a phenomenon to be found everywhere in
Europe, with the sole exception of Great Britain.

The second factor in rising costs is to be found in the fact that
many of the more complex health care institutions (hospitals)

are represented by public agencies or charitable institutions
which, as such, are not overly sensitive to the reed for fruga-
lity in management.

And finally we have what has come to be commonly referred to as
the "paradox of medicine." Advances in health —- unlike what hap-
pens in other sectors -- very frequently gives rise to new need
and hence to new and more costly services. The reduction of
prenatal mortality, for example, brings with it an increase in

the number of handicapped. The lengthening of the average life-
span feeds the demand for services, hospitalization and other,
among the elderly. And so it goes. Every medical advance feeds
the hopes of new classes of patients, whose survival presumes
systematic reliance on and utilization of health services which
are often extremely expensive: organ transplants and heIOdiﬂlynT c
sis are the most typical examples, though by no means the only
ones, of this sort of thing.

This paradox constitutes a fundamental problem for the health
care systems of the future, often facing the planner with awe-
some decisions (how, for example, can one justify spending huge
uums to prolong the already precarious existence of one person,

1h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

when you haven't the money to provide acceptable hygienic condi-
tions for great masses of people?). This is not the place to

get into the merits of this set of problems. One thing, though,
we can say as of new. Merely knowing about the possibilities
opened up by medical progress and being aware of the practical
utilization of these possibilities presupposes the commitment of
tremendous resources must spur those responsible to intervene
with the utmost rigor in cutting back on the vast amount of waste
that goes on, as well as on all expenditures which go to supply
consumption whose efficacity is, to say the least, dubious.

[15 0c: 78 p 31
[Text) Health Spending Peakcd? Not Likely

Just how big has health spending grown in Italy? How
fas has it grown? What changes have occurred in the ratios be-
tween spending and the more significant macroeconomic indica-
tors? These are questions we shall try to answer, taking as our
context a period long enough to embrace all the major trends.

So as to avoid misunderstandings, always possible when it comes
to figures, we might best define, first of all, the real state

of affairs to which the expenditures we are concerned with refer.
Economically and financially speaking, the Italian health care
system is a mixed one: alongside a public sector, which includes
health services financed by local agencies and whose cost burden
rests on the collectivity as a whole, there are also an insurance
sector, kept going mainly by work-related contributions, and a
private sector. Whereas the public sector provides, in addition
to psychiatric services, mainly preventive prophylactic and hy-
gienic services, the insurance sector has to finance almost all
diagnostic and therapeutic services.

Beginning in 1975, when public hospitals were transferred to the
regions, a new financial institute known as FNAO (National Hos-
pital Care Fund) has been operating with work-related contribu-
tions and transfers of funds from the Treasury. The Fund is
unique within the Italian financial structure, in that on the one
hand, as we just said, it gets a very large share of its money
from worker contributions, which constitute an extremely and very
inequitable burden on that one segment of society; and on the
other hand it pays for uniform and extensive services not only

to workers with health insurance, but to the indigent as well as
to "voluntary contributors." This means that as of early 1974,
we have had a new economic sector in the health field in the

form of the hospitals.

It is worth noting that the financial system we now have for hos-
pital care will, with the establishment of the National Health
Service (which calls for unification of the public, insurance,

15
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Consistent with the configuration our health system has been mov-
ing toward, then, starting in 1975, hospitalization spending is
shown separately under the FNAO heading. Gross health expendi-
tures (insured plus public) at current prices, as shown on the
table, has risen from around 1,520 billion lire in 1964 to 2,690
in 1969, to 7,125 billion in 1974 and finally to last year's
11,520 billion.

The sums are smaller when gross health expenditures are purged of
economic health payments (services which obviously are not direct
health services, but rather money transferred to families in par-
tial compensation for income lost as a result of illness); of the
administrative costs of such ancillary services, and of the debt
service costs which weigh so heavily upon the entire health sec-
tor. This last item has grown increasingly weighty over the span
of years, thanks to the steady rise of indebtedness in the health
sector as a whole (particularly among the insurance carriers) by
comparison with the rest of the economy.

One need only think, in this connection, of the fact that at the
end of 1974 the insurance carriers' debt and that of the communes
to the hospitals -- and consequently that of the hospitals to the
banks and to their suppliers -- together came to more than 4,100
billion lire. Considering that net overall spending for health
in 1974 came to 6,050 billion, this one sector's deficit that
year accounted for 68 percent of all spending for the fiscal year.

Health expenditures purged of the cited burdens (compensatory pay
for illness, administrative costs for the compensation program,
and debt service), meaning the money that actually went to pay
for health services, came to the amounts shown in the last column
of the table (from around 1,300 billion in 1964 to 9,850 billion
in 1977 .

The data shown here lend themselves to three kinds of remarks.
First, the kind of spending that has grown in a way that can only
be described as pathological is insurance fund spending. Over
the 1964-1974 decade, in fact, while public spending on health
services was roughly tripling, only a little faster than the GDP,
insurance fund spending practically quintupled. Over the next
three years, the gap widened perceptibly. The phenomenon is any-
thing but insignificant.

The expenditures referred to here as public, which more than any-
thing elsc show very moderate rises over recent years, are in
fact the money that goes to finance hygienic and sanitary servi-
ces, prevention and rehabilitation -- hence precisely the kinds
pf health care delivery the reform is expected to increase.
Diagnostic and therapeutic services, which in most people's opi-
nion are riddled with abuses and consumerism, and which as such

16
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
' FOR orrrcrAL use ONLY

M
HEALTH CARE SPENDING IN ITALY - 1964-1977 (billions of 1978 lire)

—-—_———————————_—______

1964 1969 1974 1975 1976 1977
Public spending 267 414 852 965* 971* 1.067*
InsuranCe spending 1,255 2,274 6,273 4,354 59417” 5,936*
FNAO --- --— --- 3,300 3,750 4,515
Total Grass 1, 522 2, 688 7,125 8,619 10,138* 11,518*
Total Net 1,309 2,374 6,053 7,228* 8,480* 9,850

 

* Preliminary data

Source: Institute for Health Economics Research, using data from
official publications.

M

 

 

HEALTH SPENDING AND GDP Spesa sanltsﬂa a modotlo Intevno lovdo
(Key)
AbsCissa: years ......... opus mount:-
Ordinates: Indices _. .. ﬁme'r'm“
Source: cfr. Table above __ anode". m...” a...
' ' ' ' Insurance Mined mnlnuuuoo
spending
---- Public health
spending
GDP
Index numbers:
1964 ' 100

 

for": en. [sheila

 

 

hospital sectors on territorial lines) be expanded to cover the

entire health delivery systes, thus eserging as an instance of
improper financing.

The private sector of medicine, relying on the personal income
of the users of its various services, completes the circle.

Although this sector's dimensions are in actuality far larger than
one might think (it includes not only those who do not have health
insurance, but also to a considerable degree those who do in fact
have it), we shall confine our considerations here to public and
insurance spending on health services. The difficulties involved
in arriving at an estimate of private health spending are such as
to prohibit our providing reliable data on that score.

17
ton OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ought to be redimensioned, have on the contrary attracted con-
stantly increasing amounts of money.

The second observation has to do with the different pattern that
has governed overall health spending during the three periods into

Over the 5 years from 1964 to 1969 that kind of spending rose by
an annual average of 12 percent. The real leap comes in the fol-
lowing 5-year period (which coincides with the last period of full
insurance carrier management), the 5 years over which the mean
annual rate of increase rose to 21.5 percent.

Beginning in 1975, the increases consistently begin to taper off
(21 percent in 1975, 17.6 percent in 1976, and 13.6 perCent in -
1977). This levelling trend takes on greater significance when

we remember that the inflation rate was rising during those same
years. The data on expenditures for the last 3 years, however,
should be taken with more than a grain of salt, for reasons which
will be made clear later on. The graph shows the two observations
just made (note that on it PNAO is included under insurance).

In the wake of that spurt of increase -- and this is the third
observation -- the impact of gross health-connected expenditures
on all the major economic indicators (GOP,private consumption,
total consumption, etc.) has been growing even faster. Taking
GDP as a reference term, the impact of gross health-connected

1964 to 7 percent in 1974, and again to 7.5 in 1975. As of that
year, our data show that the trend is turning around. In 1976,
in fact, the impact of spending on the GDP came to 7 percent, and
last year it was down to 6.6 percent.

Have we really peaked? That conclusion is not what one would call
self-evident. At least two considerations come forcefully to mind
in this connection. First, the data shown on the table for in-
surance fund spending and public spending over the past 2 years
are preliminary, and there is every reason to assume that they
will be revised upward. Second, the data referring to hospital
care over the past 3 years do not reflect that expenditure, but
merely FNAO payments, and we all know that these payments have
shown themselves to be altogether inadequate to cover the actual
expenditures by the regions for hospital care.

We must therefore be extremely cautious in drawing optimistic con-
clusions. The impression we get, above and beyond the data, is
that the share of available resources swallowed up each year in
the maw of the Italian health care system is going to increase
still further.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29 Oct 78'p 3)
[Text] The Crabby Ibapitals: How They Got That Way

The lwepltal is the eye , of the storm of contradictions
swirling around modern health care delivery systems. On the one
hand, and for years, there has been a growing urgency in demands
that we cut down the space this institution occupies in the health
organization; and on the other we must admit that there is steady
growth in the share of blame the hospital must shoulder, although
the blame pie is growing, too, if we look at the amount of money
we spend on protecting our health.

0n the one hand, there are those who insist that teaching and re-
search activities be taken out of the hospitals and put into other
health structures, and on the other hand we must admit that the hos-
pital -- particularly the large hospital with clinical facilities
-- is in practice the only place where students can get training,

at the university and professional level, in the so-called healing
arts.

0n the one hand some say that the giant general hospital is increa-
singly hard to Justify, given its particularly high costs and the
difficulties encountered in its administration; and on the other
we see people still planning general hospitals with more than 2,000
beds. We could, of course, go on with such conflicting examples
indefinitely.

The fact remains that the hospital represents a concentration of
power, a coagulation of interests, a chance for a job, and, more
generally, a factor in local development whose weight few others
can match in everyday terms.

These contradictions stand out more sharply in Italy than elsewhere.
For at least two decades now there have been widespread calls for
"de-hospitaiization,“ for more emphasis on basic services, for
"territorializing' services (enclosing terms of questionable taste
in quotation marks is the requisite pinch of pepper in any dis-
cussion of health policy).

A posteriori, however,we cannot fail to see that while the hospi-
tal system has been undergoing spectacular expansion, at least in
quantitative terms, the basic health organizations, including the
fundamental public health services, have been steadily edged into
poverty. Furthermore, the much-talked-of health reform program
has thus far failed to come up with any measures other than those
centering on the hospital sector. The major legislation from the
institutional aspect to appear in the last decade is all to be
found under the heading of "Hospital Reform“ (PL 132'of 12 February
1968) and ancillary decrees, and in the act transferring hospital

19
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions to the regions (PL 386, 17 August 1974). Finally, it
is fairly pointless to recall - especially in the wake of the
poll-mell expansion of the sector -- that our hospitals, parti-
cularly the largest of them -- have in recent years become the
focus of massive protest,_where the period explosion of frustra-
ted expectations acts as a potent agent for social instability.

The pervasiveness of the Italian hospital in its financial aspects
is shown on the accompanying table, where the cost of hospital
care is set against the cost of health care as a whole (this means
hospital and health costs borne either by local agencies or by

the insurance carriers, not including sickpay and benefits, inte-
rest on health system indebtedness, or administrative costs).

A Complex Problem

As you can see, the impac€ 1f hospital spending on health costs

in general has risen from around 40 percent in 1964 to 44 Percent
in 1969, to around half (48.6 percent) in 1974. Since 1975, ow-
ing to the transfer of hospital care responsibilities to the re-
gions, the problem has grown more complex. The table shows, along
with the amounts actually spent by the refions to provide hospital

care, the appropriations approved by Parliament for hospital care
under the FNAO Health Fund.

These appropriations should have acted as a brake on hospital costs
themselVes, but that is not the way it turned out. Given FNAO
appropriations of 3,300 billion in 1975 and 3,750 billion for 1976,
the regions spend 3,513 billion in 1975 and 4,061 billion in 1976
(the data for last year are the combined preliminary budgets for
all the regions except Calabria, for which an estimate was made).
Anyhow, even if we take into consideration actual expenditures for
hospital care, the impact on health spending for 1975 begins to
flatten out: from 48.6 percent during the first year after the
regional takeover to 47.9 percent in 1976.

The real spending explosion thus occurred in the 5 years immediate-
ly following the 1968 "reform" (from 1969 to 1974 the annual
average increase in hospital spending was more than 24.5 percent).
Why should that be? Can any remedy really help at this point?

This is not the proper place to go into the merits of the 1968
Hospital Act. Citing it, however, is anything but idle, since it
is the symbol and epitome of a reform which, having failed to spot
the most obvious economic implications of its provisions, has had
disastrous effects. It is an example deserving of serious reflec-
tion (not to mention avoidance) right here and now, as we put the

finishing touches to another reform, that of the health system,
far greater in scope and dimension.

20 ——"”

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Specs suited. e spesn ampedaliera - Anni 19644977

I?“ I'm I174 I975 IV". 1971
—ca-L_l m-r. Val." Inn r. Val. Incr. \‘aI. lncr. \‘al. Inrr. Van. Inc}.

uwl. nmlm awnl. nmlm awol. Inn-III" auul. mull-I aw-l mnl-o nw-i. med-n
(MIMI! :mmm u-uldil .umuu "II“.IIII ammo Inuldil .umw Imuldn ammo (den .Inmm

 

 

-

 

 

 

 

 

89!» Ian“. eun-

I'Iculu nma I W — ‘63 no "-- gig; .3!!! -. ‘3 22: I'll ’n ‘ l m 1:} '- ‘ 9 I'd I02 ’ .
A. .— J ' . .' ' " _.-. In. -. ~ .I- l 1". ul. II 2.
gm mnulallrra M I I A o l m 9 HI) 6- “3“ ““- ‘5‘5 203:0

 

' Dan nmvrlsod. 4 _ . _
" 0an mm. In cw: t Inn-Ins: mm In ms“ -.-.\.v'.uI!en.\ a mu mnnu nm In \l,nll.l|mnll) nu IsAI)
Fault: BII’abomIone dﬂI'lunqu [m '4 RI. -- .u .‘u run-mum Mum-I a m dau who": da puhlnn'uuuu umuall.

 

 

TOTAL HEALTH SPENDING vs HOSPITAL SPENDING (billions of lire)

 

 

KEY TO TABLE

Reference column entries:

Total net health expenditures
Hospital expenditures
FNAO '

Headings for six double columns:

Year Yea; Year
Actual Mean annual Actual Mean annual Actual Mean annual
amount increase amount increase amount increase

* Preliminary data
** Preliminary data, not including final hospital expenditures
but including paynents into the FNAO

Source: Institute for Health Economics Research, using data from
official publications.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N

HOSPITAL sravnxnc vs TOTAL
lIBALTIl SPENDING IN ITALY 5955A OSPEDALIERAE

SPESA SANITARIA IN ITALIA

 

  
  
   
  
  

(Key)
uuud' '"_”"m"‘.'
Ordinatcs: Index at: 3mm. ' ,-'
L INA to" A '-
Abscisaa: Years 7°°J
—— Total net health ex- mumuuo

«qt-NM mu om DWI“ #5::
penditurea goo!

.. mnmomcwo
a o e o o o o 0 Hospital expendi-

 

tures 300
00000000 FNAO
Base year for index levels: ‘°°
1964 ' 100

With the 1968 Hospital Act, what happened substantially was the
introduction of four innovations-(I am referring to the greatest
innovations with reference to what we are talking about here):
first, we endowed the hospitals (operated theretofore mainly by
'public welfare and charity institutions,‘I the "Corporal works"
of blessed memory -- with complete autonomy, turning them into
functional public agencies; second, we liberalized access to then,
making it quite impossible for them to turn anybody away for any
reason, sound or otherwise; third, we set up regulations cover-
ing staff, at the very least from the point of view of standards;
and fourth, we took care, through a device as ingenious as its
consequences were catastrophic, of covering the costs of the hos-
pital agencies.

That last point is particularly important. Therefore we had best
begin with it. With the reform of public hospitals it became pos-
sible to finance the services they rendered through what was called
the "hospitalization fee" (the cost per day of staying in a hospi-
tal), that fee is reckoned simply as the ratio. between the pre-
dicted overall cost and the number of days hospitalization expec-
ted for that particular admission.

No Controls

There is no control worthy of the name over the sum of Costs: that
function -- assigned to the regional auditing boards -~ amounts
in practice to merely ascertaining the legitimacy of the various

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

items of expenditure. The insurance carriers--the principal "purchasers"
of hospital services--are thus stripped of any contractual power. and their
role is thus reduced to merely paying the bills the hospital sends them.

based on nothing but the number of days the insured spent in a hospital
bed.

The public hospitals. therefore. have found themselves in the position of
a monopoly holder. with one additional advantage: while the monopoly
lets ituholder set prices. provided he is willing to settle for whatever
demand there is at that price. when a hospital sets a high per diem rate
(high enough to cover all costs. however incurred) it does not thereby
lower demand. since the demand is guaranteed by the insurance systems
and-~alneit in for lesser measure--by local agencies.

Further: the public hospital agency. thanks to the full autonomy it now
enjoys. is suddenly operating like any private business. but without having
to stay within any budget: maximizing profits. which may be considered
to constitute the dominant aim in private hospitals. is replaced in the
public hospitals with maximizing the satisfaction--in terms of opportun-
ities for backstage maneuvering for prestige and power--of local admin-
istrators and bigwigs. The elimination of all barriers to entry. the
establishment of minimum levels of staff together with official recogni-
tion of their status. not to mention the declining efficiency of the
basic services. over ready to palm off onto the hospitals any case
involving the slightest difficulty. have largely contributed to the dis-

orderly growth of the hospital system and to the consequent inflation of
costs.

To this we must add that the only two provisions contained in the 1968 Act
designed to improve efficiency have never been put into effect. There

is reference to the powers delegated to the government to issue standards
covering hospital administration and accounting practices. and to the
planning function assigned to the regions (and. pending their institution.
to ad hoc committees. the regional committees for hospital planning).
well. the government has let those delegated powers lapse. With the
result that even now hospital administration and accounting practices

are still governed by regulations dating back to the 19th century. As

for the planning authority. it is enlightening to reflect on the fact

that as of the end of 1976 only one single region. Lombardy. had adopted
a plan and passed the enabling legislation.

This. in brief. is the history of all the things that have helped to beget
the truly precarious situation inherited by the regions in 1975. The
ahllity of the regions to apply the timeliest (and most feasible) reme-
dies in matter for another inquiry.

23
ran orrtcuu. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[0 Nov 78, p 3|

[Text] Without health reform and pending a specific

programmatic plan, Italy's hospitals are
adrift.

High costs, endemic chaos, and crises arising with maddening re~
gularity are the traits characteristic of the hospital one in
Italy, and have been for at least a decade. Why? The answer is
anything but simple. Even so, we do not feel it would be for
wide of the mark to say that, underlying the whole situation, is
the failure of the so-ealled hospital reform of 1908.

That reform was based on a wager: that we could turn our hospi-
tals from charitable-welfare institutions, relying largely on
volunteers, on low levels of skill and remuneration to staff, in-
to modern health delivery structures of high efficiency, with well
paid and well trained staff capable of providing medical care at
a high level, as well as of performing educational, teaching, and
research functions. The increased costs of the operation -- it
was thought at the time -- would be partially offset by the pee-
ple's using the hospitals less frequently. The modern hospital
for acute cases is different from the old charity institutions

in several ways, including its prerogative of picking and choos-
ing its admissions, and the relative brevity of the average pa-
tient stay.

What was missing in this plan? First of all, any provision for
controlling thedemand for hospital services. The demand for ad-
missions is measured in days of hospitalization. And hospital
days are nothing more than the number of citizens admitted each
year times the number of days each patient stayed, on the ave-
rage, in the hospital. Well, the number of days spent in every
sort of hospital by the average Italian shows no sign of declin-
ing, and the time spend only in the public general hospitals (the
ones for acute cases, which notoriously have higher unit costs)
is increasing, although not by much, in spite of the fact that

the original datum was -- quite correctly -- felt to be exces-
sively high.

More specifically, by comparison with a modest decline in the
average length of hospital stays from 13.83 days in 1969 to

13.34 in 1974 and again to 12.49 in 1976, there has been a marked
rise in the frequency of hospital admission: in 1969, 118 of
1,000 citizens were admitted to public general hospitals; in
1974, there were 133 per 1,000, and in 1976 there were 142. This
means that there is a steady upward trend in the number of pa-
tients admitted per year, while the decline in the length of stay
is slight and hence not substantial enough to offset the admis-
sions rise. Consequently the number of days the average Italian

2h
ron orncuu. use ONLY
spends in the hospital rises from 1.63 in 1909 to 1.78 in 1974.
and hits an all-time high (1.82) in 1975. The graph shows very
clearly the trend from 1964 to 1970, the latestycar for which
data are available.

A good portion of the failure we referred to at the beginning
lies in these Very figures. The transformation of our hospitals,
as a vast body of experience abroad teaches us, must come about
through a massive reduction of admissions. If you do not achieve
that goal, you might as well forget about the other one. '

Hence the hospital, if it is to he Judged on the basis of the
volume of services it delivers, is still functioning as a non-
discriminating place of shelter, and, viewed in that light, it

is not much different from the welfare and charity institutions
It was supposed to replace. The picture, though, changes when

we take a look at costs. The hospitalization fee (per diem cost)
for the "average insured patient” rises from around 5,000 lire

in 1969 to almost 25,000 in 1974, thus practically quintupling

in the space of 5 years.

The reason for this soaring spiral can be explained with a few
data. The number of hospital beds is increasing, although at

a fairly moderate pace (in the ordinary public hospitals the
increase over that 5-year period is 15 percent) without bring-
ing any noticeable reduction in the existing territorial imbalan-
ces. But what is increasing faster than anything is staff. It
has risen, as the table shows, from 194,000 in 1969 to 335,000

a mere 5 years later. The staff increases involve primarily
skilled medical personnel (trained nurses, ward supervisors,

0b nurses, and paramedics).

Two considerations are needed in this connection, though: first,
the number of professional nurses is still very low, and in any
case well below any reasonable requirement; second, there are
still legitimate doubts as to the level of training of that staff.
A good many of those now on the roster as professionally trained
nurses have become such after taking crash courses designed to
turn practical nurses into trained nurses (see PL 124 of 25 Febru-
ary 1071 .

Properly cited along with this shortage is the truly exorbitant
number of those ISTAT defines as "technicians, attendants, and
other staff," thus lumping the bioengineer along with the door-
man, the security guard, and the cleaning crews. Although no
breakdown data are available, it may be assumed that most of this
catchali category consists of people with a very low level not
only of specific skills, but also of schooling. It is noteworthy
that, if we add to this last category the administrative staff,
we come to the astonishing conclusion that about half of all
hospital employees are not doing any kind of patient-related work
at all, but are performing what might be called support functions.

25
FOR orncm. use ouu
FOR \WI’ICIM. USE ONLY

M

PER CAPITA ADMISSION DEMAND AT
PUBLIC GENERAL HOSPITALS:
Base Year 196‘ - 100.

Frequency of
admission

Per capita length
of hospital stay

0000000 Moan length of stay

AAAAAAA

Source: Institute for Health
Economics Research, using data
from ISTAT.

REGULAR PUBLIC HOSPITAL STAFF from 1969 to 1974

 

 

 

1969 1974 Increase
Physicians 31,836 46,612 46.4%
Professional medical staff 16,046 40,126 150.15
Trained aides 42,071 81,486 93.7%
Technicians, attendants,
and other staff 88,957 141,003 58.5%
Total staff 194,029 335,839 73.1%
Religious staff 9,249 [,244 - 21.7%

Source: Institute for Health Economics Research, using ISTAT
data.

26
FOR OFHCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The increase in staff, as we said, was accompanied by an increase
in wage and salary levels. The annual labor cost per staff mem-
ber rose by around 80 percent from 1969 to 1974. up from 2.9 mil-
lion to 5.2. That average, though, hides some huge disparities;
in 1974 it ranges from an annual salary of more than 18 million

According to a recent study by the National Federation of Regional
Hospital Associations (FIARO), the average 1975 earnings for me-
dical personnel, either full time or on regular hours, was 10.7
million (of which 9.4 was base pay, and the balance for additional
services including overtime), while for non-medical staff it was
3.4 million (of which a little over 3 million was base pay). It
should be noted that among these non-medical personnel there are
people who draw relatively high pay, such as administrative di-
rectors (secretaries) and administrative personnel in general.

It should also be borne in mind that the data shown here are ave-
rages, which mask situations differing from one hospital to ano-

ther: there are in fact many cases of "corporate“ contracts tied
in with the national contract.

diverse situations, both from the point of view of costs and from
that of the quality of care. Differentials in unit costs (for
example, the cost of staff per bed, the cost of medications per
day of hospitalization, the cost per meal, etC.) of as much as
100 percent from one hospital to another apparently just like it
are common. On top of findings like these, we are aghast to dis-
cover what might be called the normal tenor of hoapital activi-
ties. Apart from such periods of crisis as we are going through
now in connection with hospitals that are, in the final analysis,
simply "hanging on” -- these are mainly modest-size hospitals in
provincial cities -- there are a great many of our hospitals where
people live in a state of chronic emergency, where high absentee
rates, tardiness, insubordination, the lack of controls and the
hackwardness of the administration are everyday constants.

In a situation like this is it hard even to attempt to wrap up a
neat summary, without resorting to banalities. Two observations,
though, may confidently be ventured. The first has to do with
the illusory nature of any reform that affects only one part of
the health delivery system -- the hospital. The macroscopic lack

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or first-echelon services (we are alluding specifically to mediJ
cal attention in general) inevitably dumps a volume of demand on
the hospital which is incompatible with the costs of the present
day hospital. The second has to do with the attempt to make any
substantial change in the hospital situation in the absence of a
clearly spelled-out and articulated plan.

What we have seen as a consequence is an expansion in hospital
beds and staff stemming from fragmented decisions which were whol»
ly uncoordinated and therefore took no account of the real needs
expressed in the country. They tried to reform the hospitals by
putting a premium on quantity, forgetting that health services
depend substantially on the quality of those who deliver them.

And those who deliVer them are not all doctors and nurses: they
include planners, organizers, administrators, and managers.

The regions which, as we know, took over full responsibility for
operating the hospitals 3 years ago, have become aware of these
shortcomings. Although it would be greatly premature to venture

an opinion as to how they are doing, one gets the impression that,
apart from a few exceptions, as of right now the ability to achieve
and maintain real control over the situation still belongs in the
realm of good intentions.

[12 Nov 78 p 3]

[Text] Striking a trial balance while the debate over
health reform goes on: lots of shadows and a
few gleams of light in the rapport between the
regions and the hospitals.

The health Reform bill now before the Senate contemplates, among
other changes, vesting full authority over and responsibility for
all health services in the regions. The regions will not be
called upon to manage the services directly, but rather to regu-
late their management, which will be transferred to local agen-
cies, one to finance them, using funds from the central government.

in other words, with the institution of the National Health Ser-
vice, the authority the regions assumed for the hospitals as of
the beginning of 1975 will be expanded to take in the whole range
of health services. In fact, ever since the passage of PL 386

in 1974, the regions are responsible for providing hospital care
through the public hospitals and, should those prove insufficient,
through privately operated hospitals. The regions must finance
their hospitals out of funds they receive for the purpose from
the central government. 0n the other side of the coin, the re-
gions have considerable authority to intervene in the management
of their hospitals, since they wield final authority over their
major decisions, which are those regarding investments and staff.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIM. USE ONLY
A Mixed Picture

From the economic and management viewpoints, there is no artifi-
cial simplification of reality in asserting that the present re-
lationship between the regions and the hospital agencies will
find a parallel in the future relationships between the regions
and local health service delivery units. The only major diffe-
rence from this angle being the greater complexity and scope

of the operations the new relationship will have to embrace: to-
day it is only hospital services, but tomorrow it will be the
entire range of health services, once the reform takes effect.

The performance of the hospitals in the last few years can thus
be viewed as some indication of the regions' aptitude for coping
with health matters in general.

What criteria ought we to use in preceding with such an assess—
ment? The first one -- in our view -- cannot be any but the
demonstrated ability of the regions to take over from the point
of view of knowledgability in the field, which in turn presup-
poses gathering the more significant data available on hospital
management. Information -- regular, reliable, screened, and
timely -- is the one requisite basis for making any rational
choice.

Well, by this first criterion the picture is a spotty one indeed.
Along with those regions which have practically final data for
1977, we find a great many others which still don't know exactly
how much their outlay was 3 years ago. True enough, the state

of affairs they inherited in 1975 was not the most orderly ever
(the administrative and accounting procedures now in use by the
hospitals date back to the 19th century, and hence were never de-
signed to yield the data most essential to the management of
contemporary hospitals); but it is just as true that the regions
as yet do not have -- since they are, after all, still very new-
hatched entities -- solidly established administrative-burocra-
tic apparatus; and finally, it is true that there is a lack of
people with the specific background and training needed to do

the work of health planning and management (disciplines like
health economics, management of health services, which have long
been offered at the undergraduate and postgraduate levels in
other countries, some of them our near neighbors, attract few
scholars in Italy, and offer even fewer opportunities for teach-
ers); however, one might quite properly have expected a greater
commitment in this direction.

Specifically we find (always barring the exceptions, as rare as
they are remarkable) unbelievable slowness in setting up stable
organizational structures on the part of local health commission-
ers, who have specific specific responsibilities toward the hos-
pital sector.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Again, at least as of now, very few regions have managed to set
up data handling systems that embody any advances over those in
use; if we exclude Lombardy -- which, by law, has acquired a
new hospital accounting system -- most of the regions haVe merely
imposed standardized bookkeeping practices on their hospitals.
The task of gathering and sifting the data on the various vital
aspects of hospital activities is often left to the commissioners
-- and even more frequently to their assistants -- who are parti
cularly sensitive to such requirements. However, those few ini-
tiatives are by no means general, and often sporadic, quite out-
side of any institutional obligations.

Still another important element has to do with the relative hete-
rogeneity of the level and kind of data gathered in the various
regions. In this connection, however, it should be emphasized
that there has been a lack of direction and coordination on the
part of the central gOVernment. It is a fact that the volume,
the reliability, and the timeliness of the available data is
diminished on the way from the hospitals to the regions, and
even more on the Journey from the regions into the various mi-
nistries concerned (most particularly the Ministry of Health).

and controlled through a system of budget restrictions imposed
on the lower echelons of government by these higher up (from the
state to the regions and from the regions to the hospitals now
and to local health units in the very near future), cannot work
without regular flows of information from bottom to top and vice
versa, and consequently without administrative and burocratic
apparatus that can activate and manage such flows.

Information Flows

capacity to supervise and control the hospitals. However, in
the light of available data (which is all but complete for 1976
and altogether preliminary for last year), the following trends
seem to be emerging as the regions gain experience. First of
all, we have a decline in the nationwide average rate of increase
in hospital care spending, as compared with the preceding 5-year
period (the rate has dropped from 22 percent annually to around
16 or 17 percent); and that is an even more creditable achieve-
ment when you consider the higher rate of inflation of more re-
cent years. In the second place, the trend toward increasing
the numbers of hospital beds is tapering off. In 1976 we find
an actual drop from 1975 in the number of beds in public hospi-
tals (down 0.4 percent nationwide).

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

That bit of information, encouraging in itself, takes on greater
significance if we consider the fact that along with a consider-
able reduction in these regions with excess hospital beds we see
an increase in their numbers in those regions which even now have
not enough. A third datum is the increase in occupancy, with

a particularly significant rise in some regions. Unfortunately
we do not have data as to the distribution of new staff accord-
ing to skills or professional levels, but from the available
information meat of it apparently concerns general personnel.

One decidedly unfortunate tendency is that of increased resort to
private hospitals: from 1975 to 1976, while costs in public hos-
pitals rose by around 14 percent, the cost of a stay in a private
hospital rose by over 25 ercent (while costs in Church-run hos-
pitals rose by 30 percent?.

The discrepancy increases if you consider, in addition to costs,
the number of days per stay. One may well wonder, finally, whe-
ther or not the goal of restoring equilibrium among the regions,
to which PL 386 of 1974 attached so much importance, has ever
been pursued, and if so to what degree. But in this connection
we also find, along with the increase in numbers of hospital beds
and in rate of occupancy (and consequently of expenditures) in
the southern regions that are decidedly starting well behind the
rest, two more phenomena, to wit: a markedly lower occupancy
rate for hospital beds precisely in those less favored regions,
and a demand for admission on the part of people whose homes are
in the south to hospitals located in the central and northern
regions that is steadily rising. This would certainly indicate
that the structures for providing care are not adequate: the
quality of these structures is crucial.

Taking it all together, then, despite the woeful lack of planning
and management tools available to the regions, we must admit that
there has been some improvement in the state of the sector on a
national average, atleast if we stop to look at the raw economic
data. Two considerations arise forcefully at this point: first,
along with the resources the system soaks up, we must assess the
benefits it offers the population (though this is a question the
available data do not allow us to deal with) and, second, we

must not forget that the national averages tend to cloak situa-
tions that are extremely disparate at the regional level.

[28 Nov 78 p 3|
G.P.s Make Most health Spending Decisions

[Text] The huge and growing size of the hospital plant and the
expenses connected with it present a real risk of neglecting the
rest of the health-care delivery system. We are alluding here to

the medical practitioners patients see first, what we call rank-
and file medicine, whose importance turns out to be decisive not

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
so much because ofitsdirect cost to the colleetivity as because
of its pervasive effect on the efficiency of the whole system.

The general practitioner -- otherwise known none too flatteringly
as the "insurance company's doctor" -- is the first and biggest
link in a chain that has been lengthening out of all conscience
over the past decade. It is from him, for example, that we must
take our clues in explaining the phenomenon that goes by the
vague but significant appellation of medical consumerism.

The reason for these assertions will emerge clearly if we stop
and remember that in the health field it is not the consumer who
expresses a demand for services, but the physician, in most cases
the general practitioner. The individual‘s role is confined to
presenting himself as a candidate-patient; from then on, he must
rely on the Judgment of the physician as the interpreter par ex-
cellence of his "medical needs.” It is he who decides whether,

and to what extent, to convert the expressed need into a demand
for services.

The specialized literature clearly shows how the behavior of the
GP is influenced by a set of factors which have very little to
do with the state of health of the patient (or would-be patient).
They include such matters as the physician's level of education
and of professional experience; whether or not he is a member of
this or that (sometimes “fashionable“) school; the availability
of specialized services; the doctor's status in the system he
is part of (private practice, under contract, full-time employ-
ee), who pays his fee and -- to include only the commonest —-
how many other physicians there are (the ratio of physicians to
population): all seem to exert Considerable influence on the
channels by which the patient's expressed need is converted into
demand for services.

It has been statistically proved, for example, that the number of
referrals to specialists (including the radiologist and the labo-
ratory expert) increases as the number of specialized out-patient
clinics. The same applies to hospital services: the per capita
length of stay increases as the number of hospital beds.

Again: the number of office calls and of medical prescriptions
rises along with the numbers of physicians: as the ratio of doc-
tors to population rises, so does the number of office calls.

And finally, it is general knowledge that, in the case of physi-
cians under contract, calls and prescriptions regularly run high-
er when the doctor is paid under the "notula" system (so much a
call) than when he is paid a "quota capitaria" system (so much a
year per insured).

It is precisely the most obvious correlation that has yet to find
statistical corroboration: the correlation between the health of

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
run \lrrlhlnl. U35 ONLY

the population and recourse to available medical facilities. The
behavior of the GP, in addition to affecting the volume of demand
accumulating downstream from him, so to speak, with obvious impact
on costs, also has an effect on another social phenomenon having
very great economic impact: the phenomenon of absenteeism, parti-
cularly brief but frequent absenteeism due to illness.

From the foregoing we can divine the importanCe of front-line me-
dicine and hence the need for well-trained physicians who are aware
of the implications -- including the economic implications -- of
what they do, and for placing them in a context that will give

them an incentive to behave responsibly.

We need only go back to the most recent history of our insurance
system to see that this sector has, on the contrary, been totally
neglected. No specific preparation is required of the physician
for a contract with the insurance company (which ipso facto makes
him a GP). The spread of completely free medical services (direct
attendance is in fact rapidly replacing attendance for a fee);

the increaSe in the number of physicians; massive resort to the
”notula“ form of compensation, coupled with the complete and utter
lack of supervision over professional practices, even in contract
situations -- all are factors which have not only contributed to
the increase in the number of calls: they have provided an induce-
ment for the physician to refer his patients ever more frequently
to the more complex health services.

Competition among doctors for patients has aggravated the situa-
tion, since that competition is based not so much upon the phy-
sician's professional competence -- which the patient is in no
position to judge -- as upon his readiness to "satisfy" even

the most groundless of his patients' demands. The insurance doc-
tor has thus increasingly come to play the role of a builder of
demand for medical services. His professional services have been
downgraded to merely writing prescriptions, issuing certificates
to explain absences from work, and referring patients to radio-
logists, laboratory experts, specialists, and hospitals. Demand
generated in this way has helped to swell the volume of more com-
plex services, with obvious implications for the overall cost of
medical care.

As a consequence of all this, while the cost burden of GP or fa-
mily doctor medical care on overall medical costs has been declin-
ing over time (partly because of the low fees paid for calls paid
for by the insurance companies), the cost of services properly
rendered by front-line medicine, but shunted off onto the rest of
the system has mounted enormously.

The table, which shows the trend over time in the commonest ser-
vices offered by IMAM, is the most tangible demonstration of what
we have just been talking about. From 1964 to 1978, pharmaceu—
tical prescriptions per patient have increased by 75 percent,

33'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INCIDENCE (number of services per insured) OF SOME MEDICAL
SERVICES PROVIDED BY INA“

1964 1969 1974 1975

 

 

 

 

 

 

Calls (*) House calls 2.3 2.6 2.3 2.4
Out-patients 5.9 7.6 8. 9.0

TOTAL 8.2 10.2 10.7 11.4

Pharmaceutical prescriptions 10.5 13.4 16.3 18.4

x-ray examinations (**) 8.6 10.1 12.4 12.0

Laboratory examinations (**) 16.4 30.1 64.0 71.2

Consultations with specialists (**) 4.7 8.9 13.4 15.0

Hospitalization (***) 1.2 1.8 3.3 ——-

(*) under the 'notula” payment system

(**) per 100 insured

(***) length of stay per insured in acute-case care hospitals.

X-ray examinations by 40 percent, and laboratory examinations have
actually more than quadrupled. Recourse to the specialist and to
the hospital -- although other factors have affected this latter
case -- show quite similar patterns.

From the financial point of view, as we were saying, the cost
load of front-line medical services is declining; for all the
carriers it has gone from 158 billion lire, equal to 17 percent
of total expenditures for medical care in 1964, to 758 billion,
equal to 11 percent in 1975. The real problem though, we repeat,
lies not so much in holding down the costs of front-line medicine
as in increasing the benefits, including the economic benefits,
it would provide if it were properly delivered.

What is the outlook in this connection for the impending health
care reform law? The recent contract between the front-line phy-
sicians and the insurance carriers seems to offer some breathing-
spacc. Not only is the "quota capitaria" to be applied across
the board; so are some qualitative aspects, such for example as
continuing professional education, the possible introduction of
group practices, etc.,which will be taken into serious considera-
tion.

That, however, still leaves us with two nagging uncertainties.

The first has to do with the constant growth in the numbers of
medical school graduates, accompanied by a decline in their level
of preparation. The second directly involves the regions. The
task of implementing the contracts is theirs and -- insofar as we
know -- there are not many local governments that have started on
the long list of actions required for prompt and complete applica-
tion of the new regulations.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Bditrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.1.

6182 3"
cso: 3104 ma omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

BNBL'S ALTERNATIVE NUCLEAR PLAN PRESENTED T0 CIPE
Milan IL CORRIERE DELLA SBRA in Italian 14 Dec 78 p 11
[Article by ”Dr. F. "1

[Text] The ever-lengthening delay in the nuclear power-plant
building program in our Country has moved SNBL to work out an
emergency plan calling for construction of 65 conventional
power plants by 1987, thus enabling it to cope with mture

energy demand.

The agency's plans to build both nuclear and conventional power
plants call for enormous investments: the expenditures slated
for that plan by 1987 come to more than 23 trillion lire at

1978 prices. These are some of the data contained in a volumi-
nous document on BNBL's programs which has been sent to the
Interministerial Committee for Economic Planning (CIPB).

The BNEL document is based on electric power consumption fore-
casts for the next few years, on the basis of data from 1977:
160.4 billion kilowatt hours, which was an increase of 3.7 per-
cent over the previous year. On the basis of predicted growth
of the gross internal product, ENBL has extrapolated energy de-
mand from now until 1987.

Demand in 1980 is expected to be 193 billion kwh, with an installed
capacity' of 36.4 million kilowatts. By 1987, demand will have
grown to 330 billion kwh, with an installed capacity of 62.5 mil-
lion kilowatts.

The government and Parliament have made the nuclear choice for
the future. The new necessities, ENBL explains, were going to
he met with nuclear power plants.

The program, however, has been slow to get off the ground. The
problems still to be solved are many, not the least of them these

35
m orncm. us: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

connected with the environment. For this reason it is feared
that within the next 10 years we can count only on those nu-
clear power plants which have already been given the green light,
which would mean a total of 12,000 megawatts. The demand for
electric power, however, will be considerably greater than that.

"once the need to get started on a supplementary operating pro-
gram 0

BNBL has constructed two scenarios: one more optimistic, which
calls, in addition to bringing the already approved nuclear
plants on line, for starts on other plants of this kind. The
more pessimistic scenario, which starts with the assumption that
when 1987 rolls around we shall be sure of having only those nu-
clear plants already approved, leans putting the supplementary
plan into effect, and that, BNBL warns, will certainly have an
impact on production costs.

Under the first hypothesis (the optimistic one), BNBL talks of
power shortfalls beginning in 1984, which by 1987 would run as
high as 7.2 megawatts. To meet the needs of the years just
ahead, BNBL says it will need 640 megawatts in conventional
generating capacity.

The investnent forecasts are, as we said, disconcerting, and the
peak burden should fall on the years from 1982 to 1985. In 1984,
for example, it calls for investments of 4.22 trillion lire at

the lowest, and 4.92 trtnioa at the highest. Overall invest-
ments (some of which will carry over beyond 1987) come to 25.5
trillion lire under the low hypothesis, and 26.9 trillion under

the highest. From these figures, another 2 trillion lire

must be subtracted, since they will be spent during the current
year.

Under the lowest hypothesis, BNBL says that more than 13 tril-
lion lire must be invested in nuclear plants. Given the higher
one, the investments projected for the nuclear sector come to

17 trillion lire.
COPYRIGHT: 1978 Editorials del "Corriere della Sera" s.a.s.

6182
080: 3104

36
mm OFFICIAL use om:
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

CANONICA D'ADDA OIL DEPOSIT FIND "ITS RECORD DEPT"
Milan It CORRIERE DELLA SBRA in Italian 20 Dec 78 p 20
[Article by Giuliano Albani]

[Text] The map of the Lombardy oil fields is growing.
AGIP plans to sink another 35 billion into the
Po Valley oil hunt. The chances of finding new
fields are running around 50-50 today. The la-
test well sunk at Canonica d'Adda has broken
all EurOpean records by hitting a depth of
7,110 meters. Already depleted underground
gas pockets have been pressed into service as
storage for incoming gas imports.

It would seem that Malossa -- the richest of Italy's hydrocar-
bon deposits -- has found its twin sisten at Canonica d'Adda.
One well that has already set a European record -- 7,110 meters
-~ beat outBastGermany by only 10 meters. The previous Ita-
lian record was set at Chiari, in the province of Brescia,

with hotter than 6,800 meters, while the Malossa bits had bored
down 6,475 meters. That is a fine record, of course, achieved
with the latest and most sophisticated technology for research,
which makes it possible to reach depths unthinkable only yester-
day, and to do it at relatively low cost.

Canonica like Malossa. Why? Even though as of now there are
only "indications," the odds are about even that the now well
will yield oil too.

The map showing the Lombardy wells is growing more and more
crowded. AGIP has announced its 5-year (1979-1983) plan, which
calls for 30 to 35 billion lire in investments for exploration
in Lombardy. The plan is tied to a "fourth cycle" of research.
The first cycle covers the years 1944-1957, the second runs from
1955 to 1904, and the third dates back to 1973.

37
ton omcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       
 

      
 

7m; Arm-mm l
* MIMI"?! gm' (1.) . _.___.|
IMNN"
ammunnsmm (S) mmvm'U)
... a main" mammal»)

.__ —.-——. -—-..—.-. ——

 

KEY: (i) ERBA (2) A61? concessions (3) Fields still pro-
ducing (4) Depleted fields (5) Storage fields
(6) Undeveloped fields (7) Active pumping installa-
tions.

 

 

These four research chapters have to do with obsolescence and re-
placement of exploration techniques, and hence with the depth

at which the sought-for pools may lie. For exasple, to reach

the Caviaga “trap” (trap being understood as a natural reservoir)
they drilled only a scant 1,500 to 2,000 meters. About the mid-
dle of the Fifties the emergence of the first geophysical tech-
nology uade it possible to strike oil with lesswork and in less
time: this technology hit no fewer than 14 producing fields at
the lower depths.

in 1075 the big strike came, the one at Malossa, when the hole

went down to around 0,500 meters. And now we are hearing about
the retord Canonica d'Adda hole, whose "trap" was ferretted out
with urophyuicai soundings and very advanced geological surveys.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This fourth cycle also embraces the finds at Settala, Mcrlino,

Caleppio, Premenugo, and Agnadello, plus the exploratory wells
at Francincorta, Burago, and Roverbella.

A61? holds an exclusive prospecting concession to almost the
whole of the Po Valley. Those who want to look for oil in other
provinces such as Hergamo, Brescia, Varese, and Come, which are
not coVered by AGIP's exclusive concession, must first get pros-
pecting permits and then, should they find oil, "cultivation"
permits. And then there are sometimes bitter quarrels with lo-
cal gOVernments. Both the quarrels and the foulups are point-
less, according to Dr Oreste D'Agostino, director general for ex-
ploration. "It's a psychological thing. The fear felt by pri-
vate individuals and communities is unreasonable. We are not
hurting the ecology. All we do is probe into the earth, Just

a small :ectangle of it, for a few months at a time. Then, if

we do hit a pool, all you see on the surface is a big faucet, the
so-called Christmas tree, a couple of meters high, which doesn't
eVen take up much room.“

Engineer Glancarlc Ristori, in charge of Italian production, gave
us a peek into the secrets of underground Lombardy.

Over the past 10 years AGIP has drilled 50 wells, 13 of which
were dry, 25 are producing (cultivation wells), and 12 were

made over storage wells. The oldest well, as we pointed out ear-
lier, in the Cavagia well (1944), and after a good 30 years that
field is still producing 300,000 cubic meters of gas a day, 3he
equivalent of 46 million cubic meters every year.

To get a better grip on these figures, let's look at the records
for 1970. Lombardy consumed 6.5 billion cubic meters of gas,
which amounts to 25 percent of total Italian natural gas consump-
tion, and 23 percent of the region's total energy consumption.
Local production came to 300 million cubic meters of gas (the
equivalent of 300,000 tons of crude oil). When the latest strikes
come into regular production Lombardy can count on a fuel equi-
valent of 2.5 to 3 million tons of crude oil a year, of 15 per-
cent of all energy consumption in the region.

tembardy, where the biggest Italian reserves have been found, also
has another record: storage. AGIP has transformed depleted
holes into enormous reservoirs into which, every summer, millions
of cubic meters of imported methane gas are pumped, for safe-
keeping in the depleted wells at Ripalta, Sergnano, and Brugherio.

but let's get back to that “fourth cycle" of research that has
barely hrgnn, yet seems to have been born under a lucky star.

Statistics show that in 1977 and 1978, four of the wells drilled
in Lombardy were brought in, and four were not. Again, the same

39
ran orncm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

odds that apply to the Cnuonica d'Addn well: there will be 011
in half of them, and none in the other half.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Editoriale dol "Corrioro delln Sore" 3.0.3.

0182
6502 3104

no
FOR OF’I'ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SPAIN

PCB LEADERS DISCUSS POSTBLBCTION PROGRAM. PLANS

Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 28 Jan 79 pp 23-25 LD
[Espertz "If the Connunlsts Hin27

lExcerptsl If the PCB won the 1 March election. let nobody think of the
Soviet Union. If Spanish society ruled by the Spanish Eurocoununists
resembled any other. it would be Italian society.

The development of the right to strike and the solution for the Spanish
Radio-television systea. public enterprises and divorce would be on
Italian lines--except for details. of course. And capitalists, employers
and other well-heeled people can rest assured: The PCB program exudes

as much socialise as a speech by din-y Carter.

Sane 2‘ hours after that party's central canaittee decided on the PCB's
election prograe in a Madrid hotel. five Burocaununist heavyweights

explained in detail for CAHBIO 16 the basic principles on which they will
base their campaign.

Secretary General Santiago Carrillo. together with Ramon Tanaues. Nicolas
Sartoriua. Enrique Curiel and Ignacio Gallego of the executive coenlttec.
explained for 2.5 hours what they would do if they had to govern for the
next 4 years and what battles they will wage in parliament in the more
likely event of the ballot boxes giving then the role of his majesty‘s
loyal opposition.

In Spain there are more people unemployed than the number of votes which
the ”66 won in the 16 June 1977 election. And unemployment is. in the
communist leaders' opinion. "the No. 1 problem to be resolved in the
country." to quote Nicolas Sartorius. who states that it oust "be attacked
from dilferent angles in a sustained effort. until about 300,000 jobs per
year are being created in the public and private sectors."

Sartnriun sums up the solution in a single word--investment. "There must
be inventment in order to create jobs. And since private investment will
not be \ery brilliant this year. there must be considerable public invest-

ment. and not of a subsidiary nature. as was already agreed in the Honcloa
Pacts." h
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

let the Treasury Press Down

"The unemployment problem can only be resolved." Ramon Tamames states. "with
a public sector which will be not a mere part of monopoly state capitalism.
as is the case today. but a dynamic sector which will pull the cart of the
economy and at the same tine help formulate planning with the private or
mixed-economy sectors."

The money for these investments must come from taxes. according to the

PCS. "The tax reform must continue and even be accelerated." Tamames
advocates. "and we propose a quantitative target of tax pressure increasing
by 1 percentage point of GNP over the next a years-~that is four points of
GNP over the 6-year period. This is a perfectly feasible plan."

Industrial oligarchy

With respect to public enterprises. "we must end this business of the
national institute of industry only taking the rough and not also the
smooth. He must insure that public enterprise is where it ought to be and
not just where the industrial oligarchy. which keeps the best sectors for
itself. tells it to be."

In the opinion of this Eurocommunist--an economics expert--the solutions

to unemployment and the economic crisis in general put forward by the Union
of the Democratic Center [060] are inadequate. "Is that an economic pro-
gram? is that business about the decree law? if that is so. it is because.
in the 000's opinion. the less things change. the better. Because the aim
of that program is that virtually nothing should change and to implement an
incomes policy simply as a means of enforcing wags limits."

The PCE's economic plan also includes. among other measures, democratic
control over and regionalization of savings banks. improvement of community
employment. nondiscrimination against small and medium enterprises in

granting credit and a foreign investments policy which will defend national
interests.

"Re are in favor of foreign investment." Tamsmes said. "provided that it
helps bring in technology. create foreign markets and create jobs. He approve
of the multinationals provided that they meet these requirements."

The plan also includes an important attraction for those 2 million young
people between [8 and 21 years of age who will be voting for the first
time in the election--a census of unemployed young people. together with
experimental youth employment programs. community work and vocational
training.

Nuclear Program

For the peace of mind of supporters of the market economy. the only
nationalization proposed by the Eurocommunist Party is that of nuclear

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR GFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy. “by means of a public enterprise which will gradually astnme
control over the entire nuclear sector." so Tana-es plans.

Negotiating Achieves Nothing

Carrillo speaks slowly when commenting on his party's solutions to the
terrorist threat. "A government which has popular support is needed;
that is. a government which citizens feel to be their own. The struggle
against terrorism has still not been undertaken by the population as a
whole. and this. in our opinion. is due to the fact that the population
as a whole does not feel represented by this govern-eat."

In more specific areas. the PCB secretary general believes that "it is
necessary in the new cortes rapidly to tackle and resolve the issue of

the Basque statute and for a genuine Basque government with authority and
power to be set up which will give the Basque population the feeling that
it is governing itself and determining its own destiny. and which will thus
isolate eVen further those who basically believe that only independence
can give the Basque population that power."

All this should be accompanied. in Santiago Carrillo's opinion. by "a

change of image" of the police. "We have inherited the remnants of the
political and social brigade and large sections of the police who have
receivod no vocational training for maintaining public order in a modern

and democratic state.” ”The task confronting us from this viewpoint today."
Carrillo explained. "is that of setting up modern. efficient and well-
educated police services with proper intelligence resources.“

A first technical step toward curbing terrorism in the Basque provinces
lies. in Carrillo's opinion. in the setting up of an indigenous police
force. "we have said from the outset that an indigenous Basque police force
is vitally necessary in the antiterrorist struggle. The Basques must feel
that the Basques themselves are enforcing order there."

Carrillo emphatically and succinctly condemns negotiations. with the
ltslian experience in mind: "We believe that there should be no negotia-
tions with the terrorists. Negotiating with them achieves nothing. it

resolves nothing. There is a lengthy experience in Italy in this respect.
He believe that it is a demonstration of weakness."

In the field of foreign policy the PCB. like almost all political forces in
the country. supports Spain's joining the EEC. However. it is a different
matter as far as our Joining NATO is concerned.

"Helndievc that Spain's entry into NATO would entail for Spain increased
expenditure in our military budget which. in our opinion. would be better
used in developing the national defense industry's own potential."
Carrillo maintained. "Spain could pursue a freer and more independent
policy outside NATO. We are as opposed to our country's entry into NATO

'03
FOR orrtcm. use can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on we would be In Spain's entry into the Harsaw Poet and are in foyer of
dlusolvinn both. (hlr stance is one of promoting a policy of nonalinement
with the blues which is in keeping with the policy of neutrality which.
with vicissitudes. Spain has historically aaintained."

let Them Decide

The u.s. bases in Spain constitutes no great problem for the Eurocommunists:
"in order not to interfere in any way and thus disrupt the present balance."
the PCB leader said. "we are willing for American bases in Spain to survive
as long as other powers' ailitary bases exist in other European countries.“

And if the communists have their own way. let the voters be prepared. be-
cause it is possible that there will have to be further voting before 1983
to decide by referendum whether or not we join NATO. "The subject is almost

as important as the constitution and the people must decide on it directly.”
Santiago Carrillo said.

Weapons Industry

One of the cnsmmnists' plans is for a powerful Spanish weapons industry.
"we will insist that the armed forces are equipped with effective means

and will support the development of the military industry. which at present
Is practically nonexistent. In order to prevent our dependence and also

to encourage scientific research linked to the development of this sector.“
Enrique Curiel asserted.

Research and development to the extent of constructing nuclear bombs?
Carrillo said: "He must aim at their abolition everywhere and I would not
say that we should make nuclear weapons for the time being. But nor would

i deny once and for all the possibility of Spain one day planning to pro-
duce nuclear weapons."

Nor are the communists opposed to weapons exports: "If the whole world is
doing it. why shouldn't we." asked lgnacio College. ”of course, in weapons
exports parliament must be informed of what is happening, because there
must not he a contradiction between weapons exports and foreign policy.
Rather than supplying weapons for crushing liberation movements or trampling
human rights. a very responsible attitude must be adopted."

As for the armed forces. the communists reject a strictly professional

army and advocate greater integration between the people and those responsi-
ble for their defense. To the extent that. although this is not in its
program. the PCB is not opposed to military service for women. Some members
of its executive, such as Nicolas Sartorius. are even enthusiastically in
favor of It. although with reservations. in his view, infantry. for
instance. would not be an entirely feminine branch of the forces.

uh
ros orrrcmt use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As for military training. Santiago Carrillo proved to be in favor of
abandoning the civil war as a teaching model. "because in the brilliant
history of the Spanish army there are many other wars against foreigners
and. as far as modern wars are concerned, there are more recent examples.
such as Horld Her ll or the Vietnam Her. which are more interesting na
subjects for study from a military viewpoint." The PCE also favors the
disappearance of organizations such as the republican aviatora' or
combatants' organizations. in order to encourage the people's links with
their army.

As with all the parties. the Eurocoluunist party regards it as a preeminent
and pressing task that the parliament which results from the 1 March eiec-
tion discuss the laws which will complete the constitution and the state's
democratic reform: The fundamental law on local government. the law on
public office. the organic law on Judicial power. the autonomous govern-
ments finance law....

Out with the D'liont Law

In this field the communists will be introducing two plans to the Cortes:
1he workera‘ statute. as indicated by the constitution, following the PCE's
proposal. and a new electoral law.

According to the communist leaders. the former gives special attention to
retired people and proposes the establishment of a national institute for
the retired. to coordinate all activities imaad at resolving the problems
or retired people.

The PCB's draft electoral bill will attempt to take over from the contro-
versial D'Hont law which. according to the communists, prevents real
representativity in parliament: "He believe that proportionality and the
strengthening of democracy go hand in hand and we believe that if a party
gains 9 percent of the votes but holds only 6 percent of the seats. this
constitutes a distortion for the section of the population which that party
represents. while other parties with 25 percent of the votes holds 33 per-
cent of the seats.“

Strike law

If the DC”, or any other party. submitted a strike bill for parliamentary
debate. the communists would examine it under a microscope and it is likely
that they would vote against it: "He are not in favor of a strike law."
Snrtorius said. "or at least one that has not been negotiated. The right

to strike is a constitutional right which exists, and since strike regula-
tions almost always constitute a restriction of the right to strike. we
believe that it is unrealistic. It would be more productive not to legis-
late, but to do as the ltalians have done: To bring about self-regulation
of strikes by the trade unions themselves. as far as the public services are
concerned. In ltaly experience has imposed the law and the state has accepted
it."

COPYRIGHT: 1978. INFORHACION Y PUBk;CACIONBS. S.A.

cso: 3110 ton OFFICIAL use 0er
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NEST GERMANY

IlONN CONTINUES HEAVY SUBSIDIES T0 AIRBUS
Hamburg STERN in German 18 Jan 78 pp 128-133
[Article by Kurt Breme: "Flying Barrel Without a Bottom")

[Text] The federal government must count on the fact
that despite rising sales figures, the airbus is becoming
a losing proposition for the state treasury.

it was still a dream for the governments in Bonn and Paris 10 years ago: The
Joint development of a European commercial aircraft. The airbus A300 is today
no longer a dress, but has become a pie-in—the-sky dream for federal chancel-
lor Helmut Schmidt. For the aircraft builders get the thrust for the high
altitude jet flight for the most part from the Bonn treasury: up to now. one
billion marks in subsidies and a guarantee of over two billion. Further sub-
sidy requests are already foreseen.

The Germans and French would never have dreamed that the medium range aircraft
would one day become a bottomless subsidy barrel when they established the
"Airbus lndustrie Groupement d'lnteret 8conomique"* in 1969. The aircraft
components are manufactured in seven European locations, including Hamburg
and Bremen. and assembled in Toulouse (Prance).

1he purpose of the state supported aircraft marriage: The Europeans did not
want to reliquish the world market solely to the American aircraft super-

eompaniea of Boeing and chonnel Douglas, but wanted to build up their own
aircraft industry. which could then also supply aircraft and spare parts to

the military to a greater extent and thereby make a contribution to keeping
Europe from falling behind technologically.

After a weak start. the airbus became a sales competitor. By the end of 1978,
there were 123 confirmed orders. and 53 options (preliminary orders). From
the American Eastern Airlines to Lufthansa. up to now 20 international aviation

i besides France. Spain and Great Britain, the German partner is Deutsche
Airbus Gmbu at 17 percent. The German-Netherlands VFU-Fokker aircraft

company is a 35 percent participant in it and the Hesserschmitt-Boelkow-
-Blohm (“38) aircraft company represents 65 percent.

h6
roe orncm. us: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

companies want to fly the large capacity jet. Despite this. it is still a
poor business for Bonn. "slant housemann. economic policy spokesman of the
POP and on the budget committee of the hundestag the reporting member for
lemeimnsmwhm.fmmwhkhthcmmmylorﬂw:uﬂmsfhmm

notes "The schizophrenic aspect of the matter is that one must be pleased
with each airbus sold because of the 5,000 to 6,000 jobs it provides. though
as finance policy maker. one argues against it because we cannot bring the
thing into the profit range."

In Bonn cabinet circles, "Hith each report of an order", according to one
participant. "You hear the motto: oh Lord, oh Lord. now it gets even more
expensiVe for us." So the gentlemen of the cabinet just recently had to
boost their pledge from 1.8 to 2 billion marks in order to secure the credit
which Dentsche Airbus Gab" had to obtain from the banks. For the planned
smaller version, the A-310, the cabinet had to additionally assume guaran-
tees of 750 million marks up to 1984. Besides this. in the previous year
alone Bonn provided 57 million marks of additional production subsidies and
8b million marks of marketing assistance. The aircraft price is kept down
with this tax money. so that more contracts coma in.

here's how it goes: The airbus purchasers pay 102 of the purchase price, and
the rest is spread out in installments over the long term. but they pay in-
terest on this which is far below the normal interest level. The difference
between the low interest and the normal interest is payed by the credit
establishment for the reconstruction of the Deutsche Airbus Gib“. The credit
establishment then receives the money from the loan state treasury. Govern-
ment director Hans Eberhard Birke. who is the competent authority for the

irbus in the Bonn economic ministry. "This is our free market economy orig-
inal sin."

it would be normal if the aircraft required fewer subsidies with increasing
sales success. with the airbus, it is the other way around: in order to be
able to deliver the aircraft ordered. the production at this time of two
machines per month must be doubled by 1981. In order to meet the hoped for
additional demand. the production should be increased to six or even eight
aircraft a month by the middle of 1985. But that will be too expensive for
Bonn. Federal finance minister Hans Hatthoefer has had his competent offi-
cials calculate that then:

--Thc federal subsidies will have to be raised to 2.6 or even 3 billion marks.
and

--The production assistance for the 200 purchased airbuses increased to 528
million marks. It 360 airbuses are ordered, Bonn will have to pay 2 billion
marks primarily for the establishment of 1.500 additional jobs, because -
arcording to the reliable expert opinions of the finance ministry - "German
industry is not in a position without the assistance of the federal govern-
men! to provide for the financing of its work as well as the deliveries."

to
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR DFVICIAL USE ONLY

it is uncertain whether the bean state treasury will get back the additional
subsidies. as already stipulated in the contract, to any appreciable extent
from Deutsrhe Airbus Gmb". For the airbus builders will not get into the
profit range until 860 aircraft haVe been sold - a goal considered unreal-
istic by experts because of American competition. Up to now, only about 30
million marks from sales have found their way back into the Bonn treasury.
The competent officials in the finance ministry fear that the federal govern~
meat will one day even have to answer for the bank credit for aircraft build-

ers: "The risk of the federal government of having to make good on the sub-
sidies is still high.”

And it is not Just because of the financial risk that the Bonn gayernment
managers are indisposed. The Schmidt team has also made a considerable de-
parture from free market economic principles with airbus subsidies and thus
cunfirms the assertions of the Hamburg SPD Mayor. Hans-Ulzich Klose ("The
state is the repair plant of capitalism"). For the state must not only clean
up the "capitalist“ airbus enterprise. but it has even created the repair
plant itself. Besides the ship building industry which gobbles government
subsidied and the German builders of large computers which could not exist
without state assistance, loan has now tied itself to another project which
requires restoration. The FDP political economist ﬂaussmann sees in this
proof of the fact, "That it is difficult where the state disables the free
market economy. to again retrieve the situation."

For this reason, Bonn wants to bring the airbus out of the red as fast as
possible, in order to give free play to the forces of the merket economy.
The airbus managers and the chairman of their board of directors, Franz
Josef Strauss will keep a closer eye on things in the future. "Becuase a

bad subsidy recipient mentality" (Bundestag member usussmana) has developed.

and there are complaints about organizational deficiencies in planning and
production.

The federal cabinet has up to now not approved the future program proposed
by the company management, because in the words of economic minister Graf
hambsdorff, it does not appear "to be sufficiently thought out" (governmental
spokesman Cruenewald), and the budget committee of the Bundestag approved

two million marks for an industrial consulting firm, which now is to examine
Airbus Gmbﬂ for weak points. Furthermore, the economic ministry is pressing
for more efficient operation. Governmental director Birke: "The costs must

come down."
COPVRIGHT: 1979 Gruner + Jahr AC 5 Co

3225
CSO:3|03 END

h8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY