APPROVED FOR RELEASE: ZOOTIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOBSOROOO‘I000‘0037-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040037-6

I‘UR UI‘I'ILIAL USt IIILY

apns L/9401
16 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE

SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040037-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign '
newspapers, periodicals and beans, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
leak line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or trensliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~axe as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no any represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGNT MUS AND REGULATIONS CWERNING WNERSNIP OI"
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OPl’ICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/NOJ
16 April 19
TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Séteufmé AFFAIRS
(F000 2/79)
Couranrs F

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Hinicomputer Production in Socialist. Countries Surveyed
(Jiri Cake; AUTONATIZACE, NO 11, 1978) e e 0.. o e e e 00 e 000 e

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Problems Related to Trensfnsions Topic of Hematology Symposium
(CASOPIS mm" cmmcﬂ, 6mt 78) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
you orncm use ONLY

. INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

NINICOMPUTER PRODUCTION IN SOCIALIST COUNTRIES SURVBYBD
Prague AUTOMATIZACB in Czech No 11. 1978 pp 285-289

[Article by Jiri Cake. Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering in
Prague: "The Significance of International Cooperation of Socialist
Countries in the Joint Program of Hinicoaputara of the SHBP Series")

[Text] The natural result of successful cooperation within the framework
of the Intergovernmental Agreenent on Cooperation of Socialist Countries
concerning the Unifora System of Electronic Computers (JSBP) was that it
was necessary_to create a second branch of computer engineering--small
computers and'ndnicomputers. This joint approach was made also because
the number of the users in all participating countries was so large that
each country designed and produced its own control computer in the system
of minicomputers. This method of individual planning prior to the initia-
tion of the joint work on the SHE? [uniform series of ninicomputers] was
dissipating greatly the research and development forces and could not pro-
vide for nutual use of either their own processors or of a wide assortment
of accessories. The situation was similar in programming means.

In a joint analysis prior to the decision creating a uniform series of
minicomputers (SHBP). it was also necessary to take into consideration the
fact that in capitalist countries during recent years the nunber of dif-
ferent types of minicomputer systems and the number of their applications
in all industrial and nonindustriel areas have kept increasing very rap-
idly. because those systena resulted in high production efficiency.

In the socialist bloc countries which participated in the "agree-ant,"

it was a very appropriate time to start working on a joint uniforn series
and to create conditions for gradual elimination of minicomputers which
had already been introduced individually. while taking into consideration
the good starting base for research and production in individual countries.

At that time. individual socialist countries were manufacturing in particu-
lar the following types. and some of them are still being manufactured today:

USSR—-control computers of the ASVT-N series (“-5000, “-6000. "-7000,
N 400. “-40, and other). which were and continue to be the technical

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

base for additional automated systems, particularly for control of
technological processes;

GDR-Robotron-0000 series and other types
POLAND--HBRA--300 series and other types

BULGARIA-~IZOT-300

ﬂUNGARX--TPA-70. 191-11140 and the capability to use 50-1010
CUBA—CID-IOOO, CID-2000

RONANIA-PBLIX-32

CSSR--The base consisted of the series ADT 6000 end RPP-l6. in sddition
to certain other types.

This situation was the result of uncoordinated activities of the partici-
pating countries in the minicomputer program.

For example. the situation in the CSSR as of 31 October 1977 in the area
of control computers. smell computers. snd minicomputers was as follows:

Table 1.

Number of Manufacturer's

Coaguters Country 2222
Total
in CSSR: 356

including: 150 CSSR FPO-0; RPP-16S s RPP-IGH;

RIP 1000; AUT 4000, 4100, 4316
91 USA CDC 1700; Nova 1200; PD? 8.

83, PDP-ll-B/lo, 11/10. 11/15.
11/20. 11/34. 11/60. 11/45:
Eur-100/6b0; 660/680; 08-

PAC 6010; RP-2116 c. 2100.
2100 A, 2100 8; IBM 1800;
Inn-system 7; Varien 6201,

620/L100;
29 USSR H 6000; H 7000;
21 can 858 4000; K88 4200;
19 Federal Republic Hincsl "00; Siemens 101, 305.
of Germsny 320. 330
18 England decsr RS 70-5 90; Elliott

803A, 8033; KB? 7; Argus 600.
500; 635 2050; 201;

16 Bungery BC 1010
3 France CAB 510; T 2000;
3 lsrael Halos-100;
2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Council of Principal Constructors of Hinicomputer Systems (REX-SHE?
was created in 1974 with participation by Bulgaria. Czechoslovakia. the
Republic of Cuba. hungsry. 60R. Poland. Romania. and under the leader-
ship of the USSR.

Even though the newly created area has its special characteristics. it

was possible right from the beginning to utilize to the maximum the ex-
perience tested successfully by the joint program of the J83? series. It
is a pity that when work began in this sector. it was not based systemat-
ically on the existing technical means. particularly peripherals. (?)proc-
casing units. methodologies of joint tests, norms. and so on. Their new
handling resulted in a number of difficulties and often also caused delays.

The difference between the SHE? and JSBP is above all in the price of the
entire systems. This makes it necessary to achieve maximum simplicity and
a high degree of reliability. Another difference is that the new equip-
ment is expected to be gradually applied on a mass scale in various areas
of the national economy. In the opinion of Soviet specialists. the prices
of SHEP should vary in the future from 1,000 to 200.000 (and up to 300.000)
rubles in systems operating at a speed of 5.000 to 10.000 and in the long
run up to 1 million operations per second. with the capacity of the opera-
tional memory from 2 to L up to 256 kilowords.

One of the most important conditions of a rapid development of both sys-
tems, that is. of the SHIP and JSBP. is the creation of s new. progressive.
and inexpensive parts base. Such a base should be established within the
framework of maximal division of labor of the participating states of the
NVK [(1)1ntergovernmental commission]. because of the need for short-term
deliveries.

Hhen cooperation was established between the sum and the SEEP. organiza-
tional measures were adopted to provide for joint development. the so-
called formation of creative international organs which began immediately
to operate on the basis of experience gained earlier in the original coun-
try in the given sector of computer engineering.

The foundation for joint work was '4 by creating a complex set of SHEP-l
minicomputers.

The system of SMEPwl minicomputers is designed as a system complex of tech-
nical and programming means of computer technology. established in harmony
with adopted (or. for the time being. recommended) norms and standards.
The mutual relationship of the systems is designed in the form of uniform
joint design and a particular construction. The SHE? series is designed,
above all. for the construction of automated systems of management of
technological processes (ass-tr), for scientific-technical work centers,
including automated control of design work, and also for cooperation in

' automated management systems in nonindustrisl areas. and in some cases in
subsystems for mass data processing or primary data collection and pre-
processing of data.

3
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The technical level of the design corresponds to the present technical
state in the world, but at the same time it makes it possible to switch
gradually to a higher level. on the assumption that the systems which will

be expanded are those corresponding to the level of the applied ASR sys-
tems e

The :reation of the JSEP and SHE? systems. which as s whole supplement
each other. provides a technical base for the creation of control automa-
tion and mass data processing in all areas of the national economy of the
socialist countries. Good results in these programs depend in particular
on the following:

--complex utilization of the joint scientific, technical, and production
potential of all participating countries;

--a high level of adaptability of technical and programming means of the
SHE? for the proposed handling of the management systems;

-provisions for further development of the systems for the handling of
new tasks:

-creation of conditions for a maximum reduction of time limits applicable
to the finishing of development work and prompt starting of production
with minimal losses while introducing the SHEP;

-possibility of creating multiprocessor computer systems to increase
operational efficiency;

-application of the systems of computer technology in the ASR for design
work;

--quality improvements of the technological level of production and solv-
ing the problem of technical and programming means. together with utilisa-
tion of higher integration of the uniform base;

--lncresse of operational reliability accompanied by creation of conditions
for decreasing the costs of the systems.

All these conditions are realistic within the framework of joint work.
The system of mutual operational procedures applied in the international
division of labor and concentration of the scientific-engineering poten-
tial proved to be fully effective. International cooperation provides
for effective development of the uniform systems founded on a joint
technical-programming base.

Current programs for SHIP-l of the first design have been worked out in
terms of their development. and in certain cases the systems have been
gradually put into production and delivered to the users right after the
international tests had been carried out. The entire international col-
lective shares in the work on the entire nomenclatorial set of processors

h
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and peripherals. and that provides for gradual application to the produc-
tion process in individual socialist countries. For example, the unu-
facture of 611-1 and OH! processors started in the USSR as early as in
1977. .

The international system of small computers and niniconputsrs of the
SHEP-l series includes in nomenclature the following basic types of
processors and main groups of equipment:

1. The basic series of processors consists of four basic types of mini-
computers as follows:

Table 2.
2 ‘ 3 (lo) (5) (6)

"2- m emu-m mm «m w

... ll
.. mama...» (51m .... .... «3
— navel eytlus us 0.8
Page mu. MM ads-vex
— 1 "can“ 0 I
‘““"°"'°"""°" " " $5.3: 5::
no P!)
1: seal mans bu. 1s h I as c)
"twig-locum“ (bl-ems. ( losing“. lessens“.
Emery “amt... -
cm... "' ’ so w— ain’t...
.. wwo'mmmrﬂl— II in turns
— pm.- Has! no SMI— 1.!
Ram puma. MI”

du lulu!“ < i I
— l-rmdll "ml

- was. I that sale lat

\- was-gal vellum ’ b)!” Ilovls 2.50 "O
- I) chm matey uhl n"
01:.qu “gay“: b)!” IIoVIs (C) I“

nu' nus :
- hue-4 him». .14 ls ; I : Ilnllmc. ll
on .

— cut. a. an. M Kim. a. u (c) so as
ﬁtt;h1:-L:m pm uﬂml- ” l" x
- WI HIM-u. um' 'I ' (c) do as u

— a Immune mam. lac-duh
...: chumps. adrenal (c) 4. ms nu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. Capacity of Registers
5. Syntsm of Interruptions
6. Period of Implementation of Basic Operations

--nddition with a fixed/mobile comma
-multiplication with a fixed/mobile col-a
--control transmission
7. Channel for Direct Input in Memory
«principle of management
--maximum speed of data changes in a
monopoly regime
--speed of data changes with simultaneous
activity of the processor
8. Operational Memory:
--number of binary places
-maximum memory capacity
-operational cycle
9. Number of Attachahle Accessories:
-uith simultaneous addressing
--vith use of expanded module and
two-stage addressing
2. Measuring Unit
a. Number of Horde
b. 1,000 words per second
c. up to -
3. cs-l (ussn)
a. microprogram
b. multilevel
c. 18 (16 information places, 2 control places) to 64
b. CH-2 (USSR)
a. nicroprogrem
ha multilevel
c. up to 128
5. CH-3 (USSR)
a. microprugram
b. 32 K (4 K for addressing of P2 registers)
c. multilevel
6. CH-b
s. The highest one of the SHBP-l series, the parameters of
which are still being made more precise.

2. The nomenclature of the SMEP-l series also contains more than 70 dif-
ferent independent installations used to complete the systems. In addi-
tion, one can use certain peripherals or (?)processing units of the nomen-
clature J88? l and 2.

Classification in the main groups:

I. Processor system installations

-~system communication installations

-internal operational memories 6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11. External accessories:

--magnetic tape memories with control unit

--magnstic disc memories with control unit

“input and output equipment on perforated tape with control unit
-input scanners for punched cards

«alphabetic-digital printing machines of different designs

”graphic input and output equipment

--input and output equipment for magnetic media

--input and output equipment with a keyboard

--a1phebetic-digita1 displays. including intelligent terminals
--equipment for long-distance data transmission.

III. Preparatory equipment for data processing:

--magnetic tape

«magnetic disc

--perforated tape

--punch-card .

IV. Equipment for contact with environment:

Together with the unfinished nomenclature of the SHEP-l technical means,
it was necessary to work out also the nomenclature for the development of
programming means. It was decided that the extent of programming means
of small SHEP-l computers was determined by their production. subject to
certain limitations, the limitations being determined not only by the
technical characteristics. but also by the limited use of the memory
capacities. Efforts are being made to simplify the programming means of
small computers as compared to the JSEP series.

Also. in the case of lower models, it is usually effective to use program
selected from minicowuters which were manufactured before as national

products and which by their technical characteristics corresponded to the
nomenclatorisl types.

It has turned out that operational systems of small SHE? computers are
simpler than computers of the JSBP series used for data processing on a

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFliICIAL USE ONLY

mass scale, because they do not require broad universal applicability

and many service and control functions are handled directly by instruments.
That is why these instruments can also be used effectively to deal with
the next main assignment of the given type of small computers. namely. to
provide for multiprograaming activities within a realistic period of time.

On the other hand. it is necessary to provide for the operation of small
computers in the systems and under the required regimes (for example. real
time. data collection. dialog, divided time. and so on), which are de-
signed for purposeful and efficient creation of sets of operational sys-
cm.

It is very important to facilitate operation for users by programing
various application assignments. The plan under preparation also counts

on provisions for a system of microprogranning and on a library of fin-
ished programing modules which the user will merely supplement for the
given functions. Also in the process of development at the present time

is a design for higher efficiency in problem oriented programing languages.
including construction of corresponding translators.

"hen small computers are used for development work, there will be avail-
able. above all, programing systems means for use in operations which in-
volve quantities of data of a complex structure, and these data will make
it possible to create and maintain local intonation banks and intonation-
reaearch systems.

Considerable attention is being paid to the question of how to increase
the reliability of programing means by expanding dependent control opera-
tions and functions. which will create operational reserves.

Future work is oriented to the development of mechanization. that is,
automation of the production of programing means. including the required
volume of documentation of the programing sets.

The creation of the SHIP series provides conditions for achieving a high-
er. complex technical level of the various types of ASK systems which
pursue the following nine:

“rational combination of centralized and decentralized control functions
in technological and scientific-experimental processes, in the creation
of process control systems by means of integrated indices or nonmeasur-
able values;

--creation of an adaptive control system based on greater accuracy and
verified information. prescribed control of the parameters of a process
combined with information control;

«development of assigned dispatch functions and operational corrections.
and their functional redistribution between the ASK-1? and ASK-P by

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
separating primary information from bank information. It is expected
that this will expand the system of operational control of production in
mechanical engineering to include also the handling of assignments at the
level of production departments, such as. for example. automatic collec-
tion of information about the movement of the products and the condition
of the equipment. adaptive control by conveyor, including the feeding
mechanism and transportation of finished products. numerically programmed
control of machine tools. and so on. all done in combination with a cen-
tral computer of a higher type;

--use of SHE? in testing centers. including diagnostic complex processes.
Single-purpose systems can be used for these purposes at the level of in-
put control. continuous control. and output control. but also at the same
time as multipurpose control systems for unrelated production within the

framework of the production enterprise. The condition for these systems

is the capability to optimize assignments.

It is also expected that the SHIP system will be used both in the present
form as well as in accordance with long-range plans. particularly plans
for additional special-purpose systems. for example. for the following
areas:

--elastic control systems of nodal and grouped forming machines. includ-
ing their autonomous control;

--information gathering concerning the production process in relation to
dispatch control;

--gathering. preprocessing, and transmission of mass data;

--information-control systems. for example. in the power industry. chem-
ical industry. in mining for purposes of safety service. and so on;

--lntegrated organizational-technical management and control systems of
components of large experimental centers. including hierarchic complexes;

--manngement and control systems in laboratories. warehouses, small or-
ganizational units. including satellite-type combinations with a central

computer;

-systems for long-distance transmission of mass data coming from decen-
tralized work centers (transmission or communication networks);

-»training systems in various fields. such as. for example. in aviation.
driving, railroad transportation, and so on;

--simple and complex systems in the entire area of health services. rang-
ing from diagnostics through various types of laboratory tests and exami-
nations by instruments. with possibility of connecting the systems With a
central computer of a higher class;

9
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--eyetens and subsystems in the field of finance. including long-distance
data transmission. conversation with a computer. all the way to prepara-
tion of documentation in combination with the control computer.

The given examples are only a part of areas of the expected utilization

of the SHE? minlcomputer systems. which operate mostly in combination

with a computer of a higher type. The universal use of the given mini-
computars also provides favorable conditions for effective division of
labor. Of course. it is assumed that the participating countries will
supply systeaa which will be oriented to special purposes and will provide
an adequate amount of programing means. particularly application programs.
in such a way that the syrtema could be used at the maximum rate of effi-
ciency within the shortest period of tine after installation.

if the decision to create an international organisation for cooperation
in the area of SHBP computers within the framework of WK is evaluated
correctly. than the results of joint work achieved so for treats favorable
conditions for prepared joint prospects for action in this sector. Ac-
cording to the plane of the management organs of tho REX-SHE? and the pre-
pared coordination in the development of minicomputers. the international
collective of scientific workera. engineers. mathematicians. technicians.
and manual workers is confronted with clearly outlined creative tasks.
Professional circles have been informed partly about these joint opera-
tions by Comrade B. N. Naumov, general construction engineer of SHIP.

and by Academician V. N. Gluehkov. the chief initiators of that coopera-
tion. The joint path which has been followed and its first results are a
guarantee for further development of this area of computer engineering.

The contributory articles presented for discussion by both of these top
representatives of the international collective indicate that the main
task at present is to design a new. progressive components base including
microprocessors used as modular elements. The use of microprocessors is
universal. but for our area they have a great significance. for axe-pie.
for the control units of peripherals and terminal elements within the
framework of an entire large control systee. The component elementa are
unified according to structural needs. Their application will consider-
ably simplify the structural units and will enable a more effective way
of expanding rapidly existing future systems. In the same way. there will
be greater opportunity for. and greater reliability of. the mutual com-
petibility of domestic minicomputer systems within the SHE? series as well
as in combination with a higher central coquter.

The use of microprocessors will bring about considerable changes in the
SEEP nomenclature for peripherals and transmission equipment. At the
some time. the domestic equipment will become simpler and its reliability
will increase.

The use of the new components for basic elements. including microproces-
sors. provides good conditions for increasing the aerial production of
individual technical means of the system. The utilization of the new

10
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

elements and increased aerial production also have a favorable effect on
the prices of products. The high degree of modularisation and reliability
of the elements make it possible to compose the most effective technical
components. a so-called "computer mode to measure." The SMEP-l concen-
trated on creating a series of a minimum number of independent basic
processors (6 types). while the planned series SHEP-z creates a set of
computer systems for a maximum range of use.

The SHBP-Z classifies the proposed series of computers into several classes.
which are subdivided further into specific types of computers.

The first class consists of a group of microcoaputsra. which contains six
different types related to each other according to their function in the
system:

--logical control with limited functions. for the area with the highest
coefficient: for example. the automobile industry and consumer goods in-
dustry. and so on);

-universal control elements for peripherals:

--for functions of the program interconnection processor (for example.
channel adaptor);

--eutonomous use-uuiversal 8-bit microcomputer (for example. technolog-
ical processes. preprocessing of data. automation equipment. and so on);

--for handling of higher functions in autonomous or multiprocessor systems.

a universal 16-bit microcomputer compatible with the SHIP-l. CH-3P and
CH-AP minicomputers;

--for the larger computer systems a 16-bit microcomputer. which is not
compatible with the SHBP-l series and can also be used for ASRT?.

The second class is formed by two basic types of emulation types as
follows:

-universal emulation computer. which provides fully for the functions of
existing minicomputers in operation and in production (for example. the
Czechoslovak series AS? 5000 and RPP-lé. the Soviet series H 6000. and
so on). and must utilize fully the existing application programs;

--emulation computer used for a multilangusge structure. designed for a

transition to higher. more progressive types of SHE? microcomputers and
to new application programs.

The third class consists again of two main types: these are now repre-
sented by SHBP-Z with words of greater length. They are:

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

-esgaminicoaputer with words of greater length. operating first of all
in real tile. which provides for control at upper hierarchical levels;

-nn analogous megaminiconputer with greater efficiency and reliability
for systems of high control and operational requirements.

The fourth class consists of four basic types of larger. coeplex multi-
processor computers.

These are also based on the SHEP-Z series.

-They are to be used primarily es control systems at the level of analog
numerical regulators in numerical control systeee and for purposes of

automated regulatory and control equip-ent. They are not compatible with
SHBP-l:

-it is expected that they will be used primarily in real-tine processes
and for control of complex scientific experimental studies. Progress ob-
tained froe SURF-l will he also applicable for this type. In practice.
this applies to the multiprocessor nodal niniconputcr;

--integral multiprocessor complex based on minicomputers. with determina-
tion of the functions of a special computer;

--centra1ited multiprocessor minicoeputer for use in control processes
real time. or for deeanding scientific-technical computations. and so on.
The operational speed is expected to be two orders higher than the speed
of existing minicomputers which have similar characteristics.

The fifth and last class of miniconputers of the SHE? series contains
five basic types involving systeas oriented for special purposes. includ-
ing specialized processors.

They are as follows:

--system designed for application of algorithms for pattern identification
(for uxasple. conversational. visual pictures. and so on).

This applies basically to simple processors:

--speuialized processor for processing of videographic information:
--perallel processor with high output and speed. designed in particular
for dealing with programs in the dictionary of equivalents of nominal
spheres. and so on. It is also appropriate for vector and matrix opera-
tions for the processing and identification of pictures of various types;

-communication processor. designed for coaputer communication networks._
telecommunication exchanges. and so on.

12
3?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The survey presented above shove the degree of importance of this sector
of computer technology. but it also shove the need for broad international
cooperation. well-coordinated cooperation in relation to the number of ex-
pected types of minicomputers and the future increase of new. progressive
peripherals. (?)procsssing units. and interfaces of the entire SEEP. In
terms of international cooperation in this area and its future prospects.
the guarantee lies first of all in good coordination and control. That is
the only way to make the outlined goals realistic.

This is indicated both by the results in the JSEP sector as well as by the
first successful results of mutual cooperation in the SHIP sector. Bx-
perienca has shown that the highly complex and technically demanding work
is realistically outlined precisely in this collective international coop-
eration under Soviet leadership. and that the results are and in the future
also uill be a contribution to the Czechoslovak national economy.

In order to further inprove mutual and effective cooperation. a multi-
lateral agreement on specialization and cooperation is being prepared with-
in the framework of the Intergovernmental Commission for the entire area

of computers. This agreement will be the basis for a consistent division
of labor among all the participating countries of the HVK.

It is necessary that Czechoslovakia also continue to create favorable con-
ditions at all levels of management centers and production centers and be
an effective member of the vanguard of the large international family for
the entire area of computer engineering. the JSEP and SHEP, from research
through development and production all the vay to the application of the
computers by Czechoslovak users.

COPYRIGHT: SNTL-Nakladatelstvi Technicke Literatury. n.p. Prague, 1978

5668-n
€50: 2602

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZBGlOSLOVAKIA

mums cameo 1‘0 rwsrusmus ronc or REHA'I‘OWY svnmswn
Prague casom LBKARU casxrcn in Czech No no, 6 Oct 78. pp 1266-1267

[Text] According to the resolution of the board of Renatology Associates

of Czechoslovakia, Poland and East Germany, there are to be hold synposia
regularly every two years, i.e., alternating the countries of participants.
The first synposiun of this kind was held in Czechoslovakia in Krusberk in
1976. This year the Polish hematology Association had the task to organise
the second trilateral synposiun and it selected Polish spa Polanica in
Kladake as the location of this nesting. About 150 participants were present
at this nesting, of which about 25-30 participants were fron Czechoslovakia
and about the sane under fron asst Ger-any. The discussions took place in
three parallel sections with the following thence:

l. Acute leukenia. Hithin the franc of this these, about 65 reports were
delivered onwanong others-dune resistance in cases of scute leukenis,

on the function of granulocytea and nacrophages, on the results of cyto-
chemistry exaninations and those done by electronic nicroscope of cases of
acute leukemia, on cus (central nervous systenldisturbsnces in connection
with this disease and the problens of chenothsrapy and imnothsrapy connected
with acute leukenie.

2. Ilenopexis. About 50 reports were presented on problens of laboratory
techniques for henstologicsl exsninations, problsns of blood platelets and
of henopuis in acute leukenia and the pathogenesis and trsaensnt of thron-
bosis.

3. Blood transfusion. About 35 reports were delivered on this thene. This
reporter spent two days attending this section because of his own special-
ization, which nsde it possible for hin to report in s nore detailed my on
sone of these nore inportant lectures.

Caczkowski and associates concentrated on changes in the ultrastructure of
leukocytes preserved in plasns at 14°C. Exanination by electronic nicroscope
showed that the degenerative process starts after 68 hours of storage and
that it concerns granulocytes; the ultrastructure of nonocytes and lthocytes
did not change after 68 hours. The authors therefore conclude that the
leokoeytes in citrate plssna can be stored safely at 4°C for 216 hours.

111

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nowicki and associates studied the metabolism of erythrocytes of cadaver
blood. A number of biochemical values was closely observed, i.e., (ATP,
ADP, AMP, 23-01%, plasma K,Na, inorganic phosphate, blood albumen).

In cases of blood taken 10-6 hours after death and put into ACD conserving
solution these biochemical values are identical up to the fourteen days of
storage with the values of blood in AC!) taken frots normal blood donors.

Hith disagreement met the report of Hitczak that slightly injured individuals
or patients after surgery for hernia or acute or chronic appendicitis should
be used as blood donors, even although the author mentioned that by taking
blood from these individuals, there is not any disturbance of the healing
process or lowering of physical fitness.

Fiala evaluated in a critical way the methods of leukocytolysis of the blood.
None of the tested methods of removal of leukocytes from the stored blood

gives such results that the transfused blood could be considered as absolutely
non- i-sunogenic .

Brandstadter submitted a survey of blood production in the transfusion service
of East Germany. The nulber of blood extractions in 1976 was 636,000; the
use of erythrocyte masses increased by 45 percent; 33,000 litres of plasma
were used for fractionation. Plasnapheresis is used for preparation of
inunoglobins and of diagnostic serum.

Frick and associates examined in detail from the biochemical point of view
the platelet functions in blood extracted into a CPD-solution enriched by
adenine and guanosine. The conclusion based on the results is that from
the point of view of henostatic function of platelets it is possible to use
platelets in CPD plasma stored for maxi-us of 3 days. Preuener arrived at
similar conclusions when he examined the problems of kinetics and post-
transfusion survival of plasma platelets stabilized in CPD-A6 solution.

Lukesiak, from the Harsaw Hematology Institute, determined the activity of
glutethione, methemoglobin reductase and the level of reduced glutathiona
and methemoglobin in AC!) blood stored for 25 days at (0°C. The activity of

the traced enzymes decreases parallel to an increase in the level of methe-
moglobin and a decrease in reduced glutathion.

Strauss reported on her experiences with rutin used in an AGO-AG preserving
solution. So far 3 million blood transfusions have been performed using this
solution (50 percent mole blood, 50 percent erythrocyte). Transfusion
were made with blood stored for 21 days; with regard to high ATP values it is
possible to expect higher post-transfusion survival (85-95 percent) of
erythrocytes and better rheological characteristics of blood.

Hindorf described the method of preparation of cryoprecipitate for the use
DEMZ-Sephadex. The availability of the freshest possible plasma as a basic
material remains an organizational problem.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Daszynski presented a survey of several years experience with the "summation-
30 centrifuge in clinics. Plasmapheresis using this machine was carried out
in these instances: nyclosis, thrombocytosis, visceral forms of lupus
erythelaatosus and penphigus, osteomyelosclerosis. in case of pehphigue
(1000-1300 nilliliters of blood extracted) the neuter of antibodies decreased.
The extracted plane was replaced by thawed plasna compatible in the M0
systen ninus ARC. From the plasma of patients sick with throwocytosis
throdsocytes, were separated frozen and applied to these patients, to uses!
hemorrhaging occurred during the cytostatic therapy.

in another report, Daszynski concentrated on throwbopheresis and leukopheresis
with the “aunties-30 machine. Gaines by separation were as follows:

0,55 1: lo throeboeytes,l,? x 109 leukocytes. If hydroxyetyl-starch was
used during the separation process, then the increase of granulocytes was

2,5 times higher than in cases where dextran was used for preparation. The
examination by electronic nicroacope showed that after separation (by has-o-
netics-JO), the isolated platelets continue to have normal structure, both
the membranes and granules. Even lynphocytes after being isolated retained

a nctmal cell medarene as well as nucleus structure.

D. Jerks (East Germany) concentrated on problems of post-transfusion jaundice.
lle coordinated a collective study, which examined 3 million blood extractions.
Pathological values of 8691‘ appeared in 1 percent of the samples; the llBsAg
was positive in 0,09 percent. in cases of 50 percent of the donors with
increased SGP‘I‘ values, biopsies established either liver steatosis or in

13 percent, inflmtory changes. In HBsAg positive persons, infla-atory
changes of the liver were established in as percent, liver steatosis in only
15,5 percent.

R. Uhlig and associates followed the appearance of post-transfusion jaundice
in 108 cases of open heart surgery using a heart-lung machine. Jaundice
appeared in 4,6 percent. Prevention: decreased amount of blood used during
surgery, during the post-operative care; exuination of HBsAg donors.

Orlowski and associates took 120-400 milliliters of blood from 70 patients
before surgery (gastrectomy, strunectosly). in return, they were given an
infusion (heeatocrit must not be below 30 percent). After that, the effects
of hemodilution were observed from the biochanical and hemopexis standpoint.
Values remained within physiological norms, the patients did not show changes
in henodynamica (i.e., microcirculation), in acid-base equilibrium, in notab-
olism of electrolytes and proteins, in hemostasis or liver functions.

The next round of reports concerned inmohematological problem. Drobna

and associates opened the series of lectures on this theme. she traced
occurrence of cytotoxic antibodies in patients that underwent single massive
blood transfusion and l) iqlsntation of an artificial valve (incidence

26 percent), 2) transplant of an allogenic valve (57 percent cytotoxins),

3) transplant of venous alostep [as printed] (50 percent cytotoxins positive).
here antigens on erythrocytes were examined by reports of Busova ('N antigen),

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Dzierzkova (Cad antigen). Ilrubisko (ll-deficient erythrocytes). Dzierzkovu
and associates tried in their report to solve problems of familiar occurrence
of polyglutinsbility and of parallel hematological disturbances (pancyto-

penis) .

The report of Dobry and associates on cryo-preservation of bone marrow cells
of nice aroused interest. It concerns a project solved in collaboration with
Fedotonke (USSR); the finding on satisfactory life in the bone narrow cells
still l2 hours after thawing as long as they preserved at 2°c-Iooc are valuable.

Rennerova enriched (increased) ability to diagnose A50 hemolytic illnesses
of newborn babies by the proof of high titre lgc anti A/B while using the
separation technique with the help of the Sephadex A-SO. Vesoly comared
the advantages and disadvantages of two automatic devices for identifying
blood groups, i.e., 36-15 and 6-360.

ln suuuary. one can say that the individual sections contained a nusber of
interesting details. however, the participants did not learn of any new
discoveries. The reports by the Czechoslovak delegation were in general
distinguished by very high quality.

Hithin the framework of this symposiun was also arranged an exhibit by
pharmaceutical firms (Poland, Hungary. East Germany) which called attention
especially to aone sort of cytostasis. The Kerandeta firm (East Germany)
pulled a surprise with its exhibit of plastic transfusion and infusion
material. The Dede fire (USA) exhibited an efficient automst for serial
hemopexis examination. The l-amo firm (Austria) displayed a large number
of ia-unological devices.

The exquisitely arranged social activities contributed to the satisfaction
of the participants: a piano concert of Chopin's Isusic at the Duszniky spa
on the eve of smosiun opening and a short car trip to Vamberice and Kudowe
spa. These activities as well as the successful party at the and contributed
to strengthening of enamel cordial relationships among the individual parti-
cipants of the symposium. The discussions in hallways helped to clarify some
coonon problems and to create one more precise plans by mutual cooperation.

I am therefore convinced that all participants look forward to the next
trilateral hematology smsim, which will take place in 1980 in Chotebu:
in East Germany.

Address: J.P.. 128 20 Praha 2,U nenocnice l.
COPYRIGHT: Avicenum, 2dravotnicke Nakladatelatvi, n.p., 1978

2 l 76
CSO: 21002 END

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY