APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010059‘6

F000
D am 1979
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100595

FUR UH'ICI/II. USt UNLY

II'i-‘f; I,/8?'3?

2') .2 a.” uary 1.979

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AND
C TCUPATIOIIAL FACTORS

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010059-5
JPRS publicati - -o'i1in inf-‘rmation primarily from foreign
newspaper-4, :u r:-' Sr 1... and books, but --:.1-..' :r'v‘ m-ws ..-.-, n'.‘
transmissions and broadcasts. iaterials from fon-ier.-!:nu:-...;-.
sources are translated; those from l-inglish-lnnzmaw- sourc- -:
are transcribed or reprinted. with ('11- original :-“'.-|-f-‘- n--‘i
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editc'iai reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] art .:p.-!i\d by .IPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
-r .LchrptI in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Vnianiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses we re not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

"' ' Eli-éf 'AHS AND SEGUMTIO‘CS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
i"'.’L".5 REPRODLCED HEREIN REQUIRE IHAT DISSEMI\ATIOS
"5 "' 3'. ICATION BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
sin-v I
IGOR! DOCUMENI‘MION demon no. s. I s. ammo-r. mum «-

not was L/8252
0. VI“ Ml “M. t DOM Duo
rue CARDIOVASCULAR svsrm AND OCCUPATIONAL morons 29 J am“! 1979

 

,- We)

N. h. Konchalo a z - -
MMssluuu-smm-ss
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North clebo Road u. commuticolmmm
Arlington. Virginia 22201

umwmmm

As above

 

“WM"

SERDECHNO-SOSUDIS‘IAYA SISTDM PRI DEYSTVII PRC‘FBSSIONAL'NYKH FAK‘IOROV.
Moscow. 1976

“WC-”w“

This report contains clinical data pertaining to the state of the cardiovascular
system of individuals whose work involves exposure to such occupational and
industrial factors as noise, radio waves. ionizing radiation and chenicals.

The book offers methodological approaches and defines the diagnostic possibilities
with regard to evaluation of cardiovascular disturbances. Special attention is
devoted to the nechaain of for-nation of cardiovascular reactions under the
influence of various occupational factors. The authors singled out and described
comprehensively the clinical cardiovascular disorders that are lost frequently
encountered along workers. as related to the nature and intensity of different
occupational factors. Reco-endatioas are offered for expert detenination of
disability, rational elploylent and rehabilitation therapy of states that develop.

Cardiovascular
Occupation

‘WW

II. My W . 1!. M class m loos-v
For off total Use Only. Halted UNCLASSIFIED

"labor of c ies Aral able to. JPRS. Isms-o a mu
°" ‘ r uncuss'irf'én
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPIG 13/8252
29 January 1979

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AND
OCCUPATIONAL FACTORS

Moscow SBRDECHNO-SOSUDISTAYA SISTBMA PR1 DEYSTVII
PROFESSIONAL'NYKH PAKTOROV in Russian 1976 signed to press
6 Aug 76 pp 2-26, 46-166, 200-255

[Annotation, table of contents, foreword, chapters 1, 3-6, 8,
conclusions and bibliography for book edited by Professor
N.M. Konchalovskaya, Izdatel'scvo Heditsina, 6,000 copies
256 pages]

CONTENTS PM

mu‘rlou.....ou.ouo.u....................u..........o.....-.u.
mmmooosaoeososososssasoooossssasssoseaassasooooosoooaooaoooooson

CHAPTER 1. Pathogenesis of Cardiovascular Reactions to Various
Occupational Pactors..................................... .

CHAPTER 3. The Cardiovascular System as Related to Industrial

Poisoning................................................ 2

CHAPTER ’0. The Cardiovascular Systu as Related to Exposure to
Occupational Radiation”................................. 6

CHAPTER 5. The Cardiovascular Systel as Affected by bposure to
Microwave Radiation...................................... 8‘

CHAPTER 6. The Cardiovascular Systen as Affected by Intensive
Idu‘tr‘nl Mtge.O...0.0.000...0.0.0.0000...QOOOOOOODOOOO 10

(EASTER 8. Reactions of the Cardiovascular System to Acute
Occupational Pactors..................................... 11.

-a- [I-USSR-CPOUO]

_ FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
wucwsIoNOOOOCCOOOOOOOO..00OCCOOOOOIOOOOOCOOOOOOOOO.00......0......

BIBLIWHYIIOOIOOOOOOOOOOIO000000ooooooootooooooo-coo000.000.00.00

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010059-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PU Bl. [CAT I OR DATA

English title : THE CARDIOVASCULAF
OCCUPATIONAL PACT!

’ Russian title = SERDECHNO-SOSUDIS'I
DEYSTVII PROFESSIG
Moscow. 1976
Author (s) :
' Editor (s) : N. H. Konchalovakn

Publishing House

Izdntcl'stvo "Hedi

Place of Publication = Moscow
- Date of Publication : 1976
" Signed to press 3 ' 6 Aug 76
Copies 3 6000
COPYRIGHT 3 Izdatel'stvo "Hedi:

Hoskvs, 1976

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100010059-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANNOTATION

[Text] This publication has been approved and recommended
for publication by the Scientific Publication Council of
the Presidiua of the USSR Acadesy of Medical Sciences.

This sonograph summarises clinical data pertaining to the state of the cardio-
vascular system of individuals whose work involves exposure to such occupation-
al and industrial factors as noise. radio waves, ionizing radiation and
chemicals. The book offers nethodological approaches and defines the diag-
nostic possibilities vith regard to evaluation of cardiovascular disturbances.
Special attention is devoted to the sechsnism of formation of cardiovascular
reactions under the influence of various occupational factors. The authors
singled out and described comprehensively the clinical cardiovascular dis-
orders that are most frequently encountered among workers, as related to

the nature and intensity of different occupational factors. Recommendations
are offered for expert determination of disability, rational employment and
rehabilitation therapy of states that develop.

This book is intended for physicians specialising in occupational pathology.

The book includes 15 figures, 15 tables, and the bibliography lists 257 items.

IOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PORIIURD

[Text] The planning and organizing of different public health services is
based largely on information about the incidence of different diseases,
their share of the morbidity and mortality structure, as well as the main,
so-called clinical, patterns inherent in these forms. The increasing re-
lative incidence of cardiovascular diseases and their role in changing
general health of the public in the future are quite obvious to all highly

developed countries. At the sane tine, the role of different occupational
factors among causes that induce or alter the incidence and course of

cardiovascular diseases is still far from clear.

An enorlous amount of naterial has been accumulated, referable to the many
years of observations of workers in different branches of industry, who

were exposed to diverse toxic, allergenic, physical and dust factors varying
in intensity. In these individuals, changes in cardiac and vascular function
occupy a certain place, sonetimes a significant one, in the clinical findings,
and this requires definition of questions of syndrome diagnostics and expert
evaluation of such states, as well as making substantiated decisions as to
optimum job placement. At the same time, the special role of the circula-
tory system in the overall system of adaptation of the body to exogenous

and endogenous factors, due to the constitutional distinctions and condition-
ing distinctions, the high incidence of influences known to be pathogenic

for the cardiovascular system of a nuaber of nonoccupational factors.

as well as the nonspecific nature of changes, make it difficult both to
differentiate between physiological and pathological deviations, and to
establish the role of different factors in appearance thereof.

There have been substantial changes in the nature of work in the last few
years. The comprehensive reduction of levels of occupational factors has
extended the period of active work fitness and raised the mean age of
workers with the corresponding change in general status, including that
of the cardiovascular system as a prenorbid background, against which
changes of an occupational nature appear. The rare instances of possibly

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

severe effects on the circulatory system are presently set against the
more common influence of factors with relatively low intensity, with a
large contribution of intensive, complex mental labor. hypokinesia,
processing of extensive information combined with the need to make
responsible current decisions. Such is the work, for example, on control
consoles, aircraft engine testing, adjustnent of guidance [sighting]
devices, etc. Unquestionably, overall reactivity of the body has also
changed in view of the set of diverse toxic and allergenic influences.

In view of all of the foregoing, it was deemed expedient to shed light,
in this monograph, on the basis of analysis of the literature and our

own data, on the main pathogenetic mechanisms of action of the principal
work-related factors on the condition of the heart and vessels, as well
as methodology of studying the reactions thereof in different occupational
groups; to systematics inforaation about the condition of the heart and
hemodynanics in individuals exposed to physical, toxic and dust factors;
to determine the main variants of clinical syndromes, semeiotica, course
and prognosis thereof; to define the possible place of different occupa-
tional factors in the overall structure of cardiovascular pathology and
prediction of morbidity and mortality due to diseases in this group. As
a result, it is planned to substantiate reasonable job place-eat,
aethods of treatment and prevention of long-term sequelae of the effects
of uorkiag conditions on the cardiovascular system.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1. PATHOGEHESIS OP CARDIOVASCULAR REACTIONS T0 VARIOUS OCCUPATIONAL
FACTORS

IText] Chief Mechanisms of Develop-ant of Cardiovascular Reactions

Many years of observations have shown that diverse changes in the cardio-
vascular system are observed in individuals engaged in the most varied
occupations. Hypotheses have been expounded concerning a consistent link
between the nature and incidence of some of them, on the one hand, and
effects of working conditions, on the other. It is assumed that both the
direct influence of some factors on the heart and vessels and an indirect
influence, mediated by changes in neuroendocrine regulation of circulation,
are involved. It is also unquestionable that, in the case of occupational
poisoning (carbon monoxide, nitricoxide and others) and acute radiation
sickness due to exposure to high doses of radiation, the cardiovascular
changes occupy a prominent place in the symptomatology and largely deter-
mine the prognosis.

Let us consider successively the possible nechanisms of formation of reac-
tions as a result of the direct effects of some occupational factors on

the cardiovascular system. Thus, in the case of exposure to toxic agents
with anozemic action (carbon monoxide, cyanide compounds, amido and nitro
derivatives of benzene, hydrogen arsenide, nitrogen oxides, phosgene),

there is a reduction in blood oxygen capacity as a result of changes in
structure, number and properties of erythrocytes and hemoglobin. In some
cases, inadequate oxygenation of blood is related to involvement of the
lungs (capillary-alveolar block of diverse genesis). There is also the
possibility of direct injury to the neuromuscular system of the heart,
vessels and their regulatory centers by high doses of radiation, intense
heat, etc. In such cases, the symptoms of involvement of the cardiovascular
system appear at an early stage and are prominent in the clinical manifesta-
tions of disease.

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WVICIAI. USE ONLY
_ r-

In the case of hypoxomic hypoxia, changes occur in cell metabolism of differ-
ent body tissues and, first of all, in structures that are the most sensitive
to hypoxia, which include the myocardium. c. F. sang combined the disturb-
ances referable to a complicated set of biochemical, physicochemical and
bioenergetic processes in use myocardium in the concept of "myocardial
dystrophy." There are grounds to assume that analogous pathogenetic mechan-
isms are involved in development of disturbances in carbohydrate-phosphorus,
protein and mineral metabolism under the influence on the myocardium of a
number of occupational factors, which were mentioned above. Some mechanisms
have been discovered in special experimental studies of the effects of
radiation on the heart (Ye. 1. Vorob'yev et a1., 1971, 1973), while others
have yet to be submitted to clinical and experimental investigation.

Evidently, similar pathogenetic mechanisms are at the basis of changes in
the cardiovascular system, in the presence of so-cnlled foundry fever.
However. here it is not so much the direct toxic effect on the myocardium

as the unique sensitize effects of metal aerosols and compounds that play
the leading role, and they lead to development of acute allergic myocarditis.
The syndrome is polyetiological and occurs under the influence of certain
infectious agents. toxic agents and drugs. The lesion is characterized

by acutely developing morphological signs in one of three typical (according
to Ya. L. Rapoport) variants: hypertrophy of muscle fibers alternating with
fields of myolysis, perivascular lymphoid and plasma cell infiltration and

plasmorrhagia. The main pathogenetic mechanisms are nonspecific, for which
reason there are many features in common in the clinical signs of myocarditia.

regardless of its etiology: acute onset, enlargement of the heart, dull
sounds, persistent tachycardia, dysproteinemia with increase in share of
coarsely dispersed proteins and a1- and y-globulin fractions, eosinophilia.
The electrocardographic changes are not notable for stability. The previously
held view of mandatory malignant course with mainly postmortem disgnostication
has recently been shaken. Forms have been isolated that have a chronic,
recurrent and occasionally more benign course (N. H. Konchalovskaya et a1.,
1965; H. I. Teodori, 1972; Gvosdijak, 1973).

A similar mechanisms is apparently involved with exposure to radiation in
doses that elicit extensive destructive processes in tissues that are more
radiosensitive than the myocardium. The toxemic form of radiation sickness
has also been singled out (A. K. Gua'kova and G. D. Baysogolov, 1971). In
this case, toxic and allergic influences are also expressed in the myo-
cardium. and they can be the immediate cause of death, by analogy to the
reaction of the heart at the toxic stage of burn injuries (N. S. Holchanov,

1973) or extensive traumatic crushing with the compression syndrome (Ye. V.
Cembitskiy, 1973).

Another mechanism of direct effects on cardiovascular metabolism is
expressed via neurohormones and the system of peripheral chemical mediation
(epinephrine. norepinephrine, acetylcholine and others).

The effects of organophosphorus compounds and certain other toxic factors
(lead and its ethylated derivatives) on the cardiovascular system are based

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR U".'I!.n.‘.!. .2; ". “Nil.

on structural and metabolic changes in the vascular wall and myocardiun.
synaptic activity of peripheral receptors of different classes, along with
other symptoms of a myoneura] block. Syndromes resembling acute nngiitis
with regional impairment of hemodyuumics, crises with sudden circulatory
insufficiency to the extent of coma, occupy a place in the symptomatology
of poisoning by such subsa aces. This is the topic covered by re. A.
Lushnikov (1964) in his studies of patients with Lhiophos poisoning.
Efforts at pathogenetic therapy of such states are related to such concep-
tions; they are directed toward reactivation of cholinesterases, normaliza-
tion of catecholamine metabolism and ndrencrcic receptors (S. N. Golikov,
1971; A. L. Myasnikov, 1965, and others).

Not infrequently, in poisoning cases, there is development of atherosclerotic
processes with the corresposling clinical manifestations as a result thereof.
There is animated discussion in the literature (a. K. Gus'kova, V. P.
Hedvedev, 1973. and others) of the question of effects of some factors
(radiation, lead. electromagnetic fields) on the higher incidence and earlier
detection of atherosclerosis.

Vascular disturbances are based on local or general traumatization to vessels
under the influence of vibration, overcooling and appearance of distinctive
coagulopathy. The role of other mechanisms is also unquestionable; in
particular, pathological afferentation from receptors (local irradiation,
vibration, high-intensity radio waves).

Changes in the cardiovascular systen occurring in connection with severe
involuement of the lungs and associated with development of cor pulmonale
occupy a special place in the symptomatology of occupational diseases. At
first, there are compensatory changes in the cardiovascular system, directed
toward elinination of hypoxia, then a set of successively and differently
(depending on the nature of the main lesion) developing changes. which are
indicative not only of involvement of various adaptive mechanisms, but

signs of insufficiency of different elements of the circulatory system.

Under the influence of occupational toxic agents (carbon tetrachloride.

polonium and others) with selective tropism for organs of the hepatolienal
system and kidneys, signs of autotoxic myocardial lesions are added later on

to the vascular component. However, the features of the primary effect of
these toxic agents on the hepatic parenchyma persist and dominate in the

clinical signs of the lesion. For this reason, it would be more correct
to refer to secondary involvement of the cardiovascular system in the
presence of the acute, toxic hepatorenal syndrome.

The period of active fitness for work and mean age of employed individuals
increase in the case of a mild, but long-acting set of occupational factors.

In some occupations, there is increasingly distinct prevalence of mental and
emotional tension over physical loads, and an increase in share of monotonous,

stereotypic operations with minimal exercise. At the same time, the role
of individual responsibility and need to process an enormous amount of

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

information are increasin“, with reduction in active exercise (working on
control consoles, production linen. etc.).

The possibility of intense and extreme factors will still or present in the
immediate future for a small group of workers, with a significant contri-
bution of mental and emotional stress (astronauts, individuals engaged in
important overhaul work, seamen exposed to adverse climate. etc.).

Under such circumstances the role of other influences increases sharply:
man's environment, working and living conditions. unreasonable nutrition.
bad habits (smoking. alcohol abuse), hypokinesia. unwarranted extensive
use of various drugs and use of chemistry in everyday life.

The cardiovascular system is highly reactive, it is functionally intimately
related to the nervous and endocrine systems. For this reason. considerable
difficulties arise in determining the etiological role of some occupational

factor. In some cases, it is even impossible to single out the prime sig-
nificance of a particular factor.

The main variants of neuroendocrine and nonspecific reactions consist. first
of all, of diverse changes in the main indices of cardiac function and
hemodynamics, that are within the ranges of rather broad physiological fluc-
tuations. These reactions reflect, first of all. the congenital and
hereditary constitutional distinctions cf morphofunctional organization of
regulation of circulation, which undergo specific changes in the course of
ontogenesis and are substantially altered by conditioning. physical and
psychological training. upbringing, living conditions. as well as, of course,
prior diseases and consistency with the occapationnl work load. Cong1nital
distinctions of the cardiovascular system undergo a certain evolution at
different stages of life, and this does not occur smoothly; rather. tney

are intermittent. differing in males and females, with periodic changes
inherent in different phases of sexual activity (menstrual cycle. pregnancy,
involution of reproductive glands, etc.).

Of course, in view of the importance of the cardiovascular system to adapta-
tion of the body to changing environmental conditions, including occupational

factors, one should expect that, in the course of work. there would first
be development of orienting reactions that are adaptive in direc“ion.

Many of the functional changes in arterial pressure, pulse rate, tones of
the vascular wall, cardiac stroke volume and certain other parameters up to
a certain limit should be interpreted as compensatory and adaptational,
rather than pathological. Evidently, one could try to distinguish between

some unique nonspecific reactions of the cardiovascular system inherent in
the effects of specific occupational factors varying in mechanism of action

on the basis of time of onset. appearance of certain associations of
changes and fullness of effect reached with them.

'Pirst. let us touch upon some general nonspecific patterns of regulatory
mechanisms that are significant to formation of reactions to any exogenous

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
“I! --L- l' J.) u- 3» um y

factors. All researchers validly nltrlhulr a large tofu to the lrﬁuldfhlf
influence of the central nervous system. :.:tlcularly some of its branches
(hypothalamic and cortical regions ml the vascular center); there condi-
tion is largely determined by the IeVVl of blund supply, whiie dlhtnrbunrcn
of these elements lead to functional changes in the cardiovascular system.
Thus. changes in phyuiolrg'ral activity and reactivity of median brain
structures are record'J quite often witu exposure to carbon disultide.
radio waves, ionizing radiation. etc. (D. A. Ginsburg et al.). Various
changes are observed in bioelectric activity of the brain (periods and
bursts of synchronized, high-amplitude oscillations of biupotentials at

a frequency of 3-6/s). These changes are occasionally associated with
clinical syndromes of diencephalic disorders and autonomic crises des-
cribed by H. N. Ruahkova, K. V. Glotova, A. h. Honayenkova and others.

The incidence and severity r! the vascular component are quite varied.

The impression is gained that. under the influence ofcarbon disulfide and
certain other toxic agents. vascular disorders are observed more often
than manlfescations of hypothalamic insufficiency, but the severity of
both is similar. A. H. Honayenkova observed myocardial changes reliably
more often in individuals with symptons of impaired regulation of hypotha-
lamic centers. The hyperdynamic type of vascular disorders denonstrated
signs of neurogenic genesis thereof, as confirmed by the correlation between
changes in indices of isometric contraction of the myocardium and signs of
hyperactivity of the sympathoadrenal system (changes in catecholamine
metabolism). Analogous correlations were observed by K. V. Glotova and

c. c. Lysina (1972) under the influence of high-intensity, superhigh frequency
electromagnetic fields.

Ye. 3. Denisova et al. (1975). H. N. Sadchikova et al. (1972), Ye. V.
Gembitskiy (1969) and others observed a different type of reaction. mainly
in the vagotonic direction (bradycardia. arterial hypotension) under the
influence of low doses of ionizing radiation and different intensities of
radio waves. These hemodynamic changes were related to signs of altered
peripheral afforestation and disturbances in the systems of such mediators
as acetylcholine and cholinesterase. There was secondary appearance of
changes in the catscholamine system and central regulation of hormone
synthesis in the adrenal cortex (1. A. Kogan. h. l. Gorbarenko. 1971. and
others).

There are data indicative of a considerable incidence of hypothalamic st.tes
among hot shop workers. Along with reflexly occurring changes in autonomic
regulation of circulation. some place belongs to fluid-electrolyte balance
disturbances in the pathogenesis of such states. The blood ph changes. and
this affects the extracellular and intracellular concentrations of potassium
and sodium ions and, consequently, the electrolyte gradient between the
liquid phase and structural components of tissues. There may be changes in
heart rate. frequency of cardiac contractions. widening of heart boundaries.
dull sounds, arterial hypotenaion and electrocardiographic signs of
weakened contractility of the myocardium, as well as symptoms of circulatory
insufficiency of cardiac genesis.

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pathological afferentatiua from the periphery, primarily from vascular
haroreceptors in the parts of the body sublect to traumatization, plays a
part in the pnlhuuenvniu nf fnnvilundl rhnnuvu .r the nervous system associ-
utrd with lurul vlbrutlun. Thin lu Innlnwed by development of Vascular
disorders due to impaired regulatory influence of the central nervous system
on regional circulation. Such changes may also he obserVed under the effect
of other factors (trauma, static pressure, cold, etc.) and, consequently,
they cannot be viewed as the specific reaction only to the vibration factor.
Changes can also occur under the influence of vibration on other innervation
levels of vegetovascular regulation (spinal ganglia, autonomic centers
located in the lateral cornua of the spinal cord). But disturbances in
function of the reticular formation of the stem, in the region of the
vestibular analyzer and diencephalic parts of the brain play a leading part.

The increased activity of thalanohypothalanic structures under the influence
of general vibration is associated with attenuation of cortical activity.
Synchronization of high-aaplitude waves are recorded on the EEG, with
appearance of slow waves and bursts, which characterize develop-eat of the
diencephalohypothalaoic syndroae. According to electromyographic findings.
we can assuae that there is a change in the usual correlations between
excitability of aegsental and suprasegoental parts of the spinal cord, excita-
tion of the actor analyzer and increased exhaustion of notoneurons (L. G.
Okhnyanskaya). Thus, in the case of both local and general vibration,
couples intersetion is demonstrable between different branches of the nervous
systea involved in heaodynasic regulation. Several concomitant influences
are also of soae significance: cold, trauma, static and ousculsr tension.
noise and others, and this explains the uniqueness of the observed disturb-
ances. Both cospensatory reactions and disturbances related to the pre-
sence of static overatisulated foci,and changes in neurohuaoral aediation
are observed under the influence of vibration on extensive receptor fields
of the central nervous system that regulate circulation. This leads to
clinical syaptoss of regional and systemic vascular circulatory disorders.

Predoainantly cortical disturbances of heaodynaaic regulation, prevalence

of dysfunctionand dystonyof the hypertensive type are inherent in the patho-
genesis of changes in cardiovascular organs under the influence of inter-
aittent high-intensity noise in individuals whose work is not rhythaic,

but very eaotionsl and tense in nature (radio wave transaitter adjusters.
individuals who asseable aircraft engines, adainistrative workers, etc.).
Finally, there are in the sylptoaatology of occupational diseases extensive
regional changes in circulation that are not associated with consistent
changes in systesic hesodynasics and cardiac function. Regional syndroaes
occur under the influence of factors that are not uniform with regard to
distribution of energy in different parts of the body (local irradiation,
local vibration, tension of individual suscle groups. overcooling or over-
heating of specific parts of the body, static stress of the lisbs, etc.).

A pathogenetic link is observed here between the regional vascular disorders
and changes in sag-ented innervation (vegetosensory sononeuritis and poly-
neuritis, ganglionitis and local circulatory disorders-—acrosngiospssa,
trophic disorders occurring under the influence of carbon disulfide,

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()FFILIAI. "5H ONLY

unsaturated hydrocarbons, with overcoeling, electric trauma, local radiation
lesion, local vibration). On the whole. it ahould also be stressed for
this group that there is a pathogenetir link between regional and systemic
hemodynamic disturbances, with predominant change in a giVen level of
innervation and neurohumorai regulation. with a consistent sequence of
changes, ranging from tran lent local to systemic hemooynamic ones. He can
track the transition 'rum predominantly adaptive vsgal changes to sympathe-
tonic ones, to the extent of development of circumscribed hypertensive
crises, persistent arterial hypertension. i.c.. more serious pathological
circulatory conditions. At some stages, the brain and heart are affected
secondarily, also via nonspecific mechanisms inherent in essential hyper~
tension and ischemia, regardless of their etiology.

Aggravation has been obscrvcl in the course of existing cardiovascular dis-
eases under the influence of occupational factors. however, we also know

of serious diseases of the cardiovascular system that are unrelated to any
particular occupation. At the same time, there is a consistent decline in
number of diseases directly related to adverse working conditions, so that
it is difficult to detect the link between some rather common, general dis-
eases of the cardiovascular system and man's work. L. K. Khotsyanov (l960)
and others indicate that there are substantial contradictions in the quanti-
tative indices of cardiovascular morbidity among individuals in the same
branches of industry and occupations, in different economic and geographic

regions. This could be due both to the decisive influence of distinctions
referable to local living conditions, diet, lifestyle and, unquestionably,

to differences in diagnostic approaches to evaluation of the observed devia-
tion:. 0n the other hand, the significant change in work processes at the
present time, increasing emotional and mental stress. and hypokinesia

occupy a certain place in the genesis of cardiovascular pathology. They
already demand the close scrutiny of general practitioners. occupational
pathologists and industrial physiologists.

Development of the methodological bases for studying the effects of occupa-
tional factors on the cardiovascular system, strict unification of diagnos-
tic and rating criteria, and choice of demonstrative groups. especially for
detection of early stages of the above pathological states. are very
important for obtaining reliable information on this score. Studies should
be conducted in close contact with a number of specialists, both within
one country and various international organisations that implement broad
programs dealing with cardiovascular pathology in different countries of
the world.

Several authors have indicated (and this has been confirmed by the data
obtained iron the dynamic observations of Ye. A. Denisova of individuals
exposed to radiation) that sees types of cardiovascular reactions are

largely related to the initial type of regulation. Thus, arterial hyper-
tension, pressory type vascular reactions and angina pectoris were inherent
in only a limited group of people, and they were unrelated to the radiation
dosage. At the same time, hypotensive reactions. particularly transient
ones, were related to a greater extent to the effect of the occupational

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

factor at a specific intensity, and they are inherent in a considerahle
number of working people (to 2/3-6/5 of the individuals exposed to radia-
tion in a dosage of 50-70 rem.

The significance of the background of neuroendOtrine changes at particular
stages of life should be assessed analogously with regard to development of
hypertension. episodes of vascular disorders, especially in women, and
ischemic patholgoy in men. These patterns are demonstrable at the late
observation stages. including the period after contact with such factors as
ionizing radiation. carbon disulfide. lead and others. Sex has some in-
fluence on the uniqueness of clinical variants of vascular pathology under
the influence of other occupational factors as well. He were impressed by
the high incidence of coronary and limb vascular lesions in men and signs
of diencephalohypophyseal disorders and cerebrovascular disturbances in

men (H. N. Ryzhkova, V. A. Soldatova and others).

Adaptation to pre-existing vascular disturbances among individuals in any
professional group depends largely on the original background of regulation.
Unquestionably. there is a number of adverse factors (overfatigue, inter-
current infection, pregnancy and lactation, menopause) involved in develop-
ment of decompensation or appearance of new clinical symptoms in the pre-
sence of cardiovascular diseases in different occupational groups. In some
cases, the demonstrated nonspecific symptoms are unjustifiably taken for

the onset of an occupational disease.

At the lamobservstion stages. different variants have been observed in
involvement of the occupational factor in the genesis of the polyetiological
cardiovascular syndrome: a) continued exposure to the occupational factor
(deposition of long-lived rsdionuclides in the body, other toxic agents or
metabolites thereof) or continuous progression of previously started patho-
logical processes in the heart and vessels: b) the effect of the occupational
factor is temporary; there is relatively complete repair of lesions with
typical clinical signs of occupational disease in the past; other non-
occupational influences continue to affect the body. inducing some patholo-
gical hemodynamic states or other (atherosclerosis, essential hypertension).
The clinical syndrome may be similar under the effect of a number of factors
(impaired cerebral circulation, ischemia); however. the role of the occupa-
tional factor should be then assessed as being quite negligible or insig-
nificant in general.

Statistics should be taken into consideration to substantiate the role of

an occupational factor in each specific case. It is expedient to use the
following criteria as the basis for such evaluation: pathogenetic link be-
tween the effect of the occupational factor and ciinical syndrome, and
example of which is development of hypertensive reactions and essential
hypertension among telephone operators working under great emotional and
mental stress. under the influence of intensive noise; an increase in number
of states suspected of being of occupatinnal genesis in the group under
study. as compared to a control group of individuals; uniqueness of the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NU

polyetiological syndrome among individuals in the oceupation1' group under
study. with respect to time of onset. severi'y and predominant localization.

in the presence of the above conditions. it is logical to assume that an
occupational factor plays some role in the origin of the clinical syndrome.

To return to the effor' to single out. along with general features. some
typical ones of the effects of a given factor on reactions of the cardio-
vascular system. one must take into consideration the distinctive features
of the occupational factor. It has heen noted that a direct deleterious
effect on tissular structures of the cardiovascular system is inherent in
only a very limited number of occupational agents (and they must be of a high
intensity). This applies to the effrcts of nassive doses (of the order of
several kilorad) of ionizing radiation (A. K. Gus'kova. c. D. bayaogolov.
i971; Ye. I. Vorob'yev; Shippman. l960, and others). extreme overheating and
overcooling. electrotrauma. Even the classical "vascular toxic agents"
(carbon disuliide, carbon monoxide, cyanide. phosgene and others) should

be classified, according to mechanism of action. in the category of neuro-
vuscuiar or systemic toxic. anoxemia-inducing agents.

Thus, most occupational factors do not selectively affect the circulatory
system and regulation thereof; rather. they have tropism for other organs

and tissues. and there is secondary or concurrent involvement of the cardio-
vascular system in the process (”anemic heart" under the influence of

benzene and ionizing radiation in acutely injuring doses. "cor pulmonale" in
the case of dust-related pathology. radiation and toxic involvement of the
bronchspulmonary system. central circulatory disorders under the influence

of narcotics and neurotropic toxic agents). The changes in the cardiovascular
system are a complex neurohumoral reflex of hemodynamics and cardiac function
in response to stimulation from receptor fields. varying in size and localiza-
tion. in which the primary interaction of the deleterious agent with the

body occurs (superhigh frequency current. radiation. vibration. overheating.

some toxic agents).

Depending on whether there is combined or isolated manifestation of the two

chief mechanisms, there are some distinctions in the formation and subsequent
course of cardiovascular disorders. as well as their outcome. In occupational

situations. when nervous elements are stricken early (exposure to thiuram.
narcotics and certain other toxic agents). the vascular.disturbances are

generalized; subsequently they are notable for considerable severity and
stability. even if no changes develop in cardiac and vascular structure. Con-

versely. when the factor is localized on a narrow receptor field. on which
the chief injury is expressed. apart from the most important reflexogenic
regions (only the hand with local vibration or local radiation). for a long
time there may be no systemic hemodynamic disorders.

A satisfactory condition of the heart. vessels and regulatory mechanisms of
systemic temodynamics is observed with exposure to a number of low—intensity

factors. such as radiation. benzene. lead and many others.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Successive and prompt triggering of different compensatory mechanisms, and
implementation of satisfactory resultant circulatory function also occur
differently under the influence of different factors. This depends on the
integrity of the different elements of neurohumoral regulation, systems of
oxygen uptake and transport, nature of metabolic disturbances and integrity
of the cardiovascular system itself under the influencc of a specific agent.
By comparing these mechanisms and relations between them at different

stages of the pathological process. we can try to detect some specific
features in the effects of different occupational factors on the circulatory
system. Examples of such comparisons and def! ition of some pathogenetic
distinctions will be supp;ied in the relevant sections of this monograph.

Classification and Brief Description of the Main Syndromes of Cardiovascular
Disturbances Under the Influence of Various Occupational Factors

Uhile we recognize that a number of pathogenetic mechanisms of development
of cardiovascular reactions to diverse occupational factors are very complex
and general, it is expedient to try to group them according to the prime

features and to single out the most commonly encountered and circumscribed
clinical syndromes (see Chart).

In view of the fact that a chart has some limitations, we should supply some
explanations. First of all, a distinction is made between two main cate-
gories of factors that affect the cardiovascular system: a) primary or

early selective; b) secondary. Physical factors (ionizing radiation,
electromagnetic field radio waves, some toxic agents. as well as toxic and
allergenic, emotiogenic influences) are typical in class "a." Their effects.
in the case of low intensities or selective action, can be limited only to
changes in regulation of the cardiovascular system or, in the case of

massive or localized exposure (direct radiation, electric trauma, overheating
and others), have a direct effect on the myocardium and vessels of different
regions. The class "b“ factors, which are not selectively tropic for the
cardiovascular system, lead to secondary changes as a result of already
existing pathology of organs and systems that are, consequently, more sensi-
tive to occupational factors (lungs, bone marrow, liver and other systems

and tissues that determine energy and metabolic processes in the body). This
is how one should interpret the mechanism of development of changes in

human cardiovascular function in the presence of occupational diseases of
respiratory organs, toxic impairment of hemopoiesis, effects of systemic
toxic agents that disrupt energy and metabolic processes.

Hhile there is some phenomenological similarity of the main pathogenetic
mechanisms of reactions, through which the cardiovascular system becomes
involved in the pathological process in response to an occupational factor,
there are substantial differences.

Primary neuroendocrine mechanisms of physiological regulation of cardiac
function and circulation play a part in the genesis of early changes in the
cardiovascular system. One may observe selective injury by toxic agents or
physical factors to the myocardium and vessels, and impairment of physiological

13

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

functions. The latter is associated with development of dysmetabolic, dys-
hemic and neurodystrophic changes due to the direct effect of the dele-
terious factor.

The main routes of the other mechanism, secondary involvement of the cardio-
vascular system in the process, are compensatory and adaptive changes in
its activity arising in response to respiratory insufficiency and hypoxia
of diverse genesis. This is observed in the presence of diseases of respi-
ratory organs, system of tissular transport and uptake of oxygen, acute
circulatory insufficiency with impairment of systemic metabolism and
energetic processes under the influence of extreme exogenous factors. It
is logical that the adaptive and compensatory nature of the changes is

lost at some stage, with regard to cardiovascular function. Clinical and
physiological signs of insufficiency appear, and various syndromes of
systemic and local circulatory insufficiency develop.

Concomitant or prior nonoccupational factors are very significant to both
mechanisms of pathogenesis and variants of reactions. However. the nature
and significance thereof vary. Thus, in the category of functional cardio-
vascular reactions that are primary with regard to mechanism, sex, age.
endocrine and metabolic constitution play a large wart. Prior and inter-
current diseases involving these organs, as well as the functional state of
other organs that are the primary target of the patl.ological process (lungs,

bone marrow and others), distinctions of biochemical and immunobiological
changes, and level of general reactivity are instrumental in development

of a primary occupational lesion to the heart and vetsels.

It should be borne in mind that the reactions arising directly in the
period of exposure to the most intensive occupational factor, usually in
young people. cannot be confused with all the subsequent transformations
that they undergo under the influence of diverse exogenous and physiological
factors.

For this reason, we singled out on the Chart the reactions and syndromes
inherent in the period of formation of disease, which are related to the
occupational factors and are largely adaptive in nature. They change upon
discontinuation or radical reduction in intensity of the occupational
factor, when distinct compensatory and recovery processes develop. There-

contribution of the occupational factor, which is appreciably complicated
and neutralized by many other causes.

It is expedient to single out the following clinical syndromes during the
period of formation of cardiovascular reactions to an occupational factor.

1. Neurocirculatory dystonia of the hypotensive and hypertensive types,

and symptomatic hypotension and hypertension. In such cases, functional

changes in cardiac function or only peripheral local circulation move to

the fore in clinical semeiotics; a combination of symptoms of cardiac and
vascular dysfunction.

14

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Group of factors with prlnary effect on the
cardlovasculnr system:

Typical factors:
radiation, noise,

vibration. toxico-
allergenic.
eaotiosenic

on regulatory on state of on state of
processes myocardiun vessels

   

i i
CHIEF MECHANISMS

  
   
 

     
  
     
       
    
   
   

Impaired neurovasculn
6 endocrine-vascular
regulatten

Diseases
of heart,

Predisposing
factors.

Hetaholic a dye-
hemic (primary)
myocardial and
vascular wall

disturbances

   
 

Sex. age,
constitution

vessels,
other
or ans

   

  
   
 

      
 
  

   
   
 

     

    
 

Toxic 6 toxico
allergic
myocardial
dystrophy

Neurocir
oulatory
dystonia

Dysnetabolic 6 toxico-

allergic disturb. 0f
peripheral vessels

(sngiitis type)

Hypotensive type
with local heao-
dynaaic disturb.

       
    
     
       

  

Hypertensive
type

  

Synptoastic
hypertension

 

Essentially
healthy

Atherosclerosis with
syateaic and local
circulatory
insufficiency

Essential
hypertensio

 
    
   

 

  

Ischenda

Chart. Grouping of reactions of the cardiovascular system to occupational
factors (continued on the next page).

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Group of factors of secondary involvement of the cardio-
vascular aystan, related to:

Typical factors:
dust. C0.

       

lesion to specific general toxic effect, effects on 02 benzene, etc.

organs (lungs), histotoxie type transport
circulatory hypoxi systea,
type hypoxenia type

      
  

   
       
   
  
 

   
  
  
  
  
   
 

   
  
 

Prior diseases
of heart, ves-

COIpensatory adaptations
changes in cardiac func-
tion and hsaodynanics

Circulatory insufficiency
of cardiac and peripheral

type

sels 6 other
organs, age

 

    
  

   
   
   

   
  
 

Hypoxenic hypoxia
syndrone with cir-
culatory disorders

(cardiac hypoxia)

ﬂistotoxic hypoxia syndroae
with heaodynanic
disturbances

Cor pulnonale and
syndroae of acute

circulatory hypoxia
(collapse)

      
 
 

  

   

_;
..___.___._________________.__..__.1
Main types of outcoae and syndromes

of polyetiological origin at the

long tern l

Diverse variants of Circulatory insuffi-
local disturbances ciency. coapsnsated to
of peripheral varying degrees, with

Myocardiofibroaia:
a) without circulatory
insufficiency

circulation possibility of
essential clinical

recovery and lethal
outcoae

b) circulatory insuf-
ficiency of cardiac

type
c) essential recovery

   

Chart (continued).

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. Toxicoallergic and metabolic-dyshemic (related to microcirculatory dis-
orders) changes in the myocardium of the dystrophy type (C. F. Lang, 1958).
The terms, "allergic myocarditis" (Pidler), "myocardosis" (V. Ionosh, 1968),
"myocarditis" (Ye. M. Tareyev, 1965) and many others for this group of
syndromes are synonyms in our opinion. However, we prefer the term
"myocardiodystrophy," as defined by G. F. Lang.

2. Dysmetabolic and toxicoallergic disturbances of peripheral vessels,
of an exogenous nature, angiitistypg and regional dystony due to primary
structural disturbances of the vascular wall, its microcirculation and
local innervation system. There can be diverse variants of involvement of

arteries of different caliber, veins and lymphatic vessels.

The following polyetiological syndromes may arise as the long-term sequelae
of these states. with consideration of the concurrent and, occasionally,
prime effects of other nonoccupational exogenous and endogenous factors:

1) hypotensivc and hypertensive states that acquire features, at a certain
stage, that bring them close to essential hypertension and ischemia;

2) myocardiofibrosis as the outcome of a toxicoallergic and dysmetabolic
process in the myocardium, with varying degrees of circulatory insufficiency
of the cardiac type; 3) atheromatous lesions to the heart, coronary, cerebral
and great vessels of the limbs, with clinical signs of atherosclerotic
cardioscleroais and atherosclerosis of peripheral vessels, and local circu-
latory disturbances.

Among the reactions with secondary involvement of the cardiovascular system,
we should make a distinction between the following syndromes during the
period of formation of the process:

1. Cardiopulmonary syndrome developing as a result of diffuse pneumofibrosis,
mainly of the restrictive type, and progressive chronic pulmonary insuffici-
ency; bronchitis, bronchiolospasm and emphysema, with chronic respiratory
insufficiency of the obstructive type and periodic acute respiratory dis-
orders; toxic involvement of the alveolocapillary membrane with diffuse type
of pulmonary insufficiency and acute, subacute or chronic course.

2. Acute circulatory disorders of the circulatory collapse type, related

to poisoning by agents with systemic toxic action (carbon monoxide, cyanates,
organophosphorus compounds and others) that the vital metabolic and ener-
getic systems of the body" The main pathogenetic factor is histotoxic
hypoxia.

3. "Anemic heart" (in the broad interpretation of the term): Development
of this syndrome is attributable to toxic anemia, and it can also occur
in cases of poisoning by agents that selectively strike the oxygen trans-

port systems withoat involving erythropoiesis (carboxyhemoglobin and met-
hemoglcbin producers, and others); the pathogenesis is similar to that of

hypoxemic and histotoxic circulatory disturbances.

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H‘R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The significance of the occupational [actor to [bu outcome 0! the above
syndromes is obvious; however. the initia' Jtﬂfuu and intercurrent

general somatic diseases also have n detlnitc influence. This largely
determines the course of an occupational disease, extent of involvement of
the cardiovascular system and completeness of compensation at the long
term.

In view of tne fact that the authors of the next special chapters use the
terminology we have cited, while the definitions are arbitrary to some
extent, we consider it useful to briefly describe the chief elements of
the syndromes that have been singled out.

1. Neurocirculatory dystnnia occurs in one of two types:

a. hypotensive type, with the following main etiological factors: radiation,
radio wave emission. hypokinesia, emotional stress, toxic agents with neuro-
tropic and mainly vascular action, overheating and others. The preclinical
stage say last for a very long time. It is related to the prise patho-
geaetic mechanism, the change in regulation and reflex change mainly in
local hemodynamics. Energy is adequately supplied to the body and the
functions of vital organs and systems are also adequate for a long time.

The main clinicophysiological manifestations required to make the syndromal
diagnosis are: arterial hypotension, mainly vagoinsular type of regulation
with corresponding signs of impairment (with loads) of segmental regional
circulation, hypotension and dystonia of arteries and veins in different
parts of the body. The changes constitute a set of adaptational and
compensatory shifts of reflex origin, or they occur as a result of primary
changes in central hesodynamic regulation. In most cases, the prognosis

is good and there is no development of circulatory deficiency in vital
organs. The main therapeutic and preventive measures amount to improvement
of mechanisms of circulatory regulation and, when indicated, reduction of
intensity of or discontinuation of exposure to the etiological factor.

b. Hypertensive type: The main etiological factors are emotionally intense
work, exposure to noise, physical overloads, emissions from electromagnetic
fields and radio waves, intensive heat. The following serve as substantia-
tion of the clinical syndrome: hyperkinetic and spastic type of hesodynaic
disorders with elevated or normal systemic arterial pressure. At a certain
stage. this leads to appearance of signs of insufficiency of circulation,

at first local and then system, combined with changes of a compensatory nature.

2. Myocardial dystrophy: The main etiological factors are: exposure
of the cardiac region to massive doses of ionizing radiation, intake of
organic metal compounds which are potential allergens in a specific state,
extreme effects of excessively intense factors (overheating, electric
trauma, barotrauma, toxic agents with sympathomimetic action). The
clinical symptoms usually develop acutely. and they are characterized by
signs of rapidly appearing circulatory insufficiency: tachycardia, drop of
arterial pressure. change in electrocardiographic indices. indicative of
diffuse involvement of the myocardium and cardiac innervation (blocked
impulse conduction, arrhythmia, etc.).

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Peripheral vascular syndromes (dysmetabolic and toxicoallergic
local circulatory disturbances): The chief etiological factors are: some
radioactive substances (polonium, plutonium), local vibration, overcooling
and excessive strain of individual muscles. toxic agents with selective
tropism for vessels (hydrogen sulfide, lead and others).

The preclinical stage may be protracted, and it is related primarily to
innervation and dystonicdisturbances (in the presence of signs of com-
pensated regional circulation). Subsequently. there is usually also pro-
gression of anatomical structural and circulatory disorders in the arterial,
venous and lymphatic systems.

The following serve as grounds for the clinical diagnosis of a full-fledged
syndrome: clinical and physiological indices of altered tonus of peripheral
vessels varying in nature, and insufficiency of regional and systemic cir-

culation. The latter occur in the form of local and systemic crises, more

often with hypertensive reactions. The clinical variants depend on the

predominant localisation of the process (veins, arteries, lymphatic vessels
and capillaries in specific parts of the body).

The prognosis is determined, to a significant extent, by the localization
and severity of morphological changes in the vascular wall, as well as
lability of general regulatory systems of hemodynamics, hemocoagulation,
metabolic constitution and age.

Ganglioblocking agents, products that improve trophies and microcirculation,

regional hemodynamics, hypotensive and deaensitiziag agents, and anticoagu-
lants are used for treatment.

lo. Cor pulmonale: The following are causes of developnent of cor
pulmonale:

a. Diffuse pneumofibrosis. Chief etiological factors are diverse types of
dust, local irradiation of respiratory organs, intake via ’nhalation of
some toxic agents. In typical cases, there is a lengthy preclinical
stage.of roentgenological and morphological changes. The prime clinical
symptoms that substantiate the diagnosis are: roentgenological signs of
diffuse fibrosis of lung tissue, moderate and slowly progressing respira-
tory insufficiency, mainly of the restrictive type, and regulatory disturb-
ances of dynamics and structure of the respiratory act. In uncomplicated
cases, the prognosis is relatively good. The main therapeutic and pre-
ventive measures should be directed toward arresting progression of
fibrosis and collagen formation, with due consideration of all factors
contributing to development of these mechanisms (polyvinylpyridine-N
oxide, hormones. treatment of infections) and normalization of regulation
of respiration.

b. Bronchitis, bronchiolospasm and emphysema. The main etiological factors

are: irritant and allergenic substances, dust, some acutely toxic agents

19
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FOR ‘lFl-‘liflM. I'bvli ONLY

in the heptyl and phenylhydrazine group. The infectious component plays a
substantial role in the cllnlcal course o{ sh" syndrome. The clinical ding-
noais is backed up by typical symptoms of bronchitis, emphysema of the

lungs and bronchiolospasm, early development of ventilation disorders,
mainly of the obstructive type, signs of hypertension in the pulmonary
circulation and, in acute cases, marked respiratory disturbances. The
prognosis ranges from relative good, in the case of a chronic course, to
extremely poor. with development of marked cardiopulmonary insufficiency

and possibility of acute respiratory disturbances. The therapeutic measures
should be directed, first of all, toward improving and normalizing bronchial
patatcy and hemodynamics in the pulmonary circulation, as well as prevention
and treatment of infectious complications.

c. Toxic or toxicoallergir involvement of the capillary-alveolar membrane.
The chief etiological factors are: toxic agents with acute toxic effect on
the bronchopulmonary system (phosgene, nitric oxide, chemical warfare
agents, beryllium and some radioactive substances when the route of intake
is by inhalation, which are very soluble and have a high specific activity--
polonium and plutonium). In acute cases, the clinical course has distinctly
circumscribed phases related to the main stages of pathogenesis: blocked
transport of blood oxygen through the alveolar membrane, reflex change

in hemodynamdcs, first in pulmonary and then systemic circulation,

hypoxia and relatively rapidly developing circulatory insufficiency. The
syndrome is established on the basis of conventional diagnostic criteria

for pulmonary edema. This also governs the main directions of therapeutic
measures, as well as prognosis.

In chronic cases (for example, berylliosis), the diagnosis is based on the
presence of clinical signs of progressive respiratory deficiency, with dis-
tinct and early development of diffusion disturbances, against the background
of clinical and roentgenological manifestations of diffuse granulomatosis

or interstitial lesion to lung tissue. The prognosis depends on prompt
discontinuation of contact with the toxic factor, early detection of the
syndrome and its structure, with appropriate pathogenetic therapy directed
toward normalizing the immunological status of the organism, eliminating

or attenuating hypoxic disturbances and improving hemodynamics.

5. Acute circulatory disorders: Acute circulatory disorders develop
under the influence of systemic toxic factors of an occupational nature
(carbon monoxide, cyanates. etc.). These states do not require special
identification; the chief clinical signs correspond to well-known syndromes

of collapse, cardiogenie shock, vascular crisis, etc.

6. hypoxic heart: The Iain etiological factors are: carboxyhemoglobin
and methemoglobin producers, many nitro derivatives of benzene and other
toxic agents with hemolytic and erythropoiesis-depressing action. Endo-
genous and exogenous factors of a nonoccupational nature play a large role.
Hith respect to condition of the heart, the preclinical stage is related
to the rate of development and severity of hypoxemis (anemia) and tissular

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Ftlk (lFl’l‘TlM. ll:2l'. UNLY

hypoxia. Clinirul unhutantiation oi the dinnnonla and methoda of treatment
are the name at. for well-known almll-Ir dim-mm: --r any other etiology
("anemic heart").

in thin aertion. we have than made an attempt to elanaliy ayndromen only
oi cardiovaacular disordera aa aiiected by varioua orcnpational iactoru.
The implication is that they constitute a complicated clinical aymptom
complex of occupational diaeaae of diverse etiology. in the diagnosis.
formulation of the syndrome in accordance with lta nlxntiicance to the
clinical course and prognoals are indicated. as well as link with a
specific occupational situation.

The strict subdivision of syndromes in arbitrary; there any he transitional.
combined variants of reaction». and this dependa on the extent of involve-
ment in the process of other organs and systems. as well an the general
correlationa eatablished in the patient's organism. Depending on the
concrete syndrome. its role at a giVen moment in the clinical iindinga

and prognosis. as well an thanatogenesis. thiu part may vary as to the
place it will hold in a comprehensive formulation of the diagnosis of

an occupational disease.

21

FOR OFFlClAL 03$ IMHI
[Text] Ore oi the most Important anrrcﬁn of control r! diurnucs oi ﬂu
heart and vessels is identification 0! th- etiology and pnlhﬂﬁvncﬂlh nl
such diseases. industrial :onl- «n.1' .r. 1) u of gyvmt ‘nturcav in
this regard. it is particularly important :n study the condition of the
cardiovascular systen in the font of caroui; expooure to such tonne"
industrial toxic agenta as lead, carbon dinuliidc and bcnvene.

Soviet scientists have node a significant contribution to the study or the
effects at carbon disuliide and benzene on the body (8. A. Dtegichins. l9L0,
1968; H. A. Kasakevich. i95h-l963; A. H. Knahcvksaya, 1968; L. G. Okhnynnskayn,
1968; L. A. Zorina. 1965. 197], and others). There in Information in the
literature about changes in the circulatorv system in cases of lead poison-

ing (H. A. Kovnatskiy, 1961, 196‘; V. A. Vssil'yeva. i966. 1967; Toppich.

1963; Hinden. l963. and others). carbon disuliide poisoning (6. Ya. Bakeyevn.
1963, 1969; Vigliani. 1956, 1957, and others) and benzene poisoning (P.

Nytnik. 1931; L. h. Khishnyakova. 196‘; Koelsch. 1935, and others). Most
vorks dealing with the condition of the circulatory system are usually

based on investigation of only some hesndynsnie indices and on a small
aaount of asterisl. for this resnon. there in no agreement an to the

nature of changes in the cardiovascular systeo under the influence of
the above toxic agents. Nor are there data on the course and outcone oi

deannstrated circulatory disturbances. Yet. not only a correct conception
of the essence of the pathological process of poisoning, but note effectiVa
treatnent and proper answers to expert questione depend on solving these

prohiens.

in addition to a coaprehensive general clinical work-up on patients. a
set of lethods can he used (occh32.unrdiography. piethysmozraphy. electro-

cardiography and polycardiography). which determine the main henodynaaic

22

[0| OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R ilFl'lClM. "till ONLY

parameters (all forms of arterial pressure. cardiac output, peripheral
resistance. tonun of peripheral and cerebral vessels. hioelcctric activity
and contractile function of the myocardium). for in-depth studies of the
functional state of the cardiovascular system.

The combined use of the above methods makes it ponslble to describe at one
time the changes in various elements of henodynanicn and correlations be-
tween them. which permits detection of early disturbances in the circula-
tory system. more accurate description of clinical syndromes of cardiovas-
cular disorders and mechanisms of their development.

Clinical Characteristics and State of Cardiovascular System in the Presence
of Chronic Carbon Disulfide Poisoning

Carbon disulfide poisoning is known for over a century as an occupational
disease. it is found primarily among workers in the viscose fiber industry.
A radical change in the technological praceas in the viscose industry,
which was made in the last few years. resulted in a significant decline

in level of air pollution by carbon disulfide. Nevertheless. in virtually
all countries of the world. carbon disulfide poisoning holds a prominent
place among occupational diseases.

Carbon disulfide, which is a poison that strikes primarily the nervous sys-
tem. causes acute. subacute and chronic poisoning. Numerous experimental
and clinical studies dealing with its toxic effects are concerned mainly
with changes in the nervous system (B. A. Drogichina. 1950; A. A. Hodel'.
1957; Ye. Ts. Andreysva-Gaianina, 1958; H. A. Katakevich. 1962; 2h. 1.
Abra-ova et a1., 1967; N. a. Aadreyeva. 1969; Pogorzelski. 1956: Strauss.
1961; Gobbato. 196k; Hinden, i967: Dorezak. 1968; Ferrero. 1969). in the
case of acute poisoning. carbon disulfide has mainly a narcotic action.
Acute and subacute poisoning can lead to persistent organic lesion to the
certral nervous system of the encephalomyelitis type. with loss of mental
faculties (A. A. vaorkyan. 1955. and others). in the foreign literature
(Attinger. 19‘s, 1952; Rechenberg, 1957; Heist. 1957; Vigliani, 1957, 1962;
Navarro Martinez, Farina. 1969). there are descriptions mainly of severe
chronic carbon disulfide poisoning associated with diverse forms of organic
lesions to the central nervous system with development of signs of the
estrapyramidal syndrome. pseudobuibar paralysis. hemiparesis. mental dis-
orders with delirium or schizoid elements and, not infrequently, ending
with feeble-mindedness. There are indications of severe lesions to the
peripheral nervous system as well. in the form of polyneuritis with mus-
cular atrophy.

in the Soviet Union. the broad implementation of sanitary and hygienic
measures has aided in lowering significantly the concentration of carbon
disuifide in air and virtually total disappearance of severe forms of
poisoning. Clinical and physiological studies of individuals exposed to

low concentrations of carbon disuliide (L. N. Cratsisnskays. C. Ye.
losentsvit. 1950; H. A. Kasakevich. 1956, 1963; 0. D. Chepik, 1957; L. H.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"'\ uFFu'IM ”til. ()fil'n'

Rankin. 1900; H. A. llrngiu'liina, I008; l.. Ye. Milkov. h'. K. llynl‘nu. 190').
and others) and experimental data (Ye. v. Lyndovn, 195]; H. A. Kazakevich.
H. s. Tolgskaya. 1900. and others) broadened the theoretical and clinical
conception of the toxic ptu"esu in chronic poisoning. It was noted that.
under such conditions. the toxic process develops insidioualy nnd nay
present few sysptons for certain tine (compcnuallun).

it was established that. even at the earliest stages of exponure to carbon
diaulfide. there is development of disturbances of cortical processes.
characterised by prevalence of inhibitory ?llccascs vith concurrent inn
crease in exhaustibility thereof. Clinically, the early stages of chronic
poisoning are associated with functional disorders of the central and periu
pheral nervous systea in the form oi neurosthenia. autonomic and endocrine

disturbances. signs of sen; :y polyneuritis. with continued contact with
carbon disulfide. there may be progression of signs of poisoning. with n
turn to the stage >i organic changes. when diffuse involveaent oi the
central nervous systea occurs. on the order of encephalopolyneuritis or
encephalonyelopolyneuritis.

in the last few years, clinicians have been concerned with the increasing
nuaber of patients suffering iron diverse and, not infrequently, severe
forms of diencephalitis ["diencephalosis"], with which no symptoms are
deaonstrabls that are inherent in severe forms of chronic carbon disulfide
poisoning (c. S. Rozentsvit. 1959; B. A. Drogichina. H. N. kyzhkovs. 1967;
h. N. Ryshkova. 1969; A. A. Model' et al., 1969. and others).

Litt'a attention is given in the literature to the toxic effects of carbon
disulfide on the circulatory systea. Yet long-tern observation of patients
has shown that cardiovascular disturbances play a significant role in the
sylptoaatology of chronic carbon disulfide poisoning.

In our experience (llO wonen and Al sen, sainly up to 60 years of age-alz.
alployed in spinning sills of a cheaical fiber conbine, who were exposed to

relatively low concentrations of carbon disulfide for a long period of tine).
clinical signs of chronic poisoning usually appearad after 5-7 years of
wetting in contact with carbon disuiride. and they were characterized by
changes in the peripheral and central nervous system. In soot cases (822)
they were functional in nature. in the for- of vegetovsscular dysfunction
(32.51) and aathenovsgetative syndroae (662). often coabined with signs of
vegetosensory polyneuritis and the polyneuritis syndroae (5.51). Organic
changes in the forn of encephalopolyneuritis were seldon seen (182). In
addition, regardless of the functional or organic nature of nervous system
disordar, 602 of the patients presented signs of involvenent in the patho-
logical procesa of the hypothalanodiencephalic region. and 35.61 of then
periodically developed vegatovascular crises characterized by sudden wor-
sening of wsllbsing. appearance of severe headaches, chills, fever. nonb-
ness of the extreaities. choking sensation. palpitations. cardiac pain and,
not infrequently. elevation of arterial pressure. The sysptonatology

of the subjects. with regard to nature of cosplaints (headaches. vertigo.

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ill'l-‘lCl/il. USE ONLY

increased irritability. sleep disorders, impaired memory. pain in the limbs
and numbness) and changes in the nervous system (polymorphous symptoms in-
herent in a process localized in the mesencephaion, mild symptoms of reflex
and sensory disorders. autonomic and emotional disturbances), was similar
to that usually obserVed in poisoning cases (H. A. Kazakevich. 1962. 1963;
h. N. Ryzhkova, 1971. and others). At the same time, in addition to neuro-
logical complaints. there were rather prominent complaints of cardiac

pain varying in nature and intensity (861). dyspnea (372). palpitations

and intermittent heart beats (341). In patients with signs of hypothalamic
involvement. cardiac pain was observed more often and it was more marked.
In some cases. the cardiac symptoms were the chief ones in the clinical

syndrome (angina pectoris, myocardial infarction). However. quite often
complaints of heart pain were not associated with myocardial changes. Evi-

dently. in some cases they are the result of marked neurastnenia, which is
inherent in such patients.

Studies of the functional state of the cardiovascular system show that.
along with changes in the nervous system. cardiovascular disorders are
equally typical clinical signs of poisoning; they are characterized by
changes in the main hamodynsmic indices: arterial pressure. cardiac output.
bioelectrical activity and contractility of the myocardium. Sewersl authors
(6. G. Lysina. 1958; G. Ye. Bakeyeva, 1969. and others) report a relttively
high incidence of arterial pressure drop (23 to 592). N. A. Vigdorchik
(1938), Vigliani. Gobbato et a1. (1957). Rechenberg (1957) and others
classify carbon disulfide with toxic agents that elevate arterial pressure.
Ye. N. Artem'yev and T. S. Konovslova, s. F. Shirokaya et sl. (1963) indi-
cate that unstable arterial pressure is observed with chronic exposure to
carbon disulfide.

Studies involving tachyoscillographic recording from the right and left
arm revealed a statistically reliable elevation of all forms of arterial
pressure (as compared to a control group; p<0.00l): end or maximum H,
(in 391 of the patients), lateral or true systolic N" (#81). mean dynamic
(661) and diastolic H" in 602 of the patients. Table 1 lists data
rtaining to the main hemodynamic indices of patients and individuals in
the control group.

Concurrent elevation of all types of arterial pressure was observed in 381
of the patients. while 62. with normal levels of “x and “n' presented
elevation of My alone or combined with N".

isolated elevation of mean or true pressure, as well as brief elevation
and lability of pressure. are interpreted by many researchers as an early
precursor of essential hypertension (Ye. M. Tareyev. 1968; V. c. Pleyshler.
1953: l. A. Ryvkin, l97l; Alam, Smirk. 1938, and others).

It is known that arterial pressure level depends on many circumstances. but
it is determined chiefly by two factors: amount of blood pumped by the heart
in the arterial system per unit time. i.e.. minute blood volume (NV). and
peripheral resistance (resistance blood encounters hivessels and especially
in the precapillary region).

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

 

.oﬁIéﬁ. _ I _- m.......lo..u 86".}... 0.83.8 2.39.... 931...... 8.39.: «an
{8.73: . l i _3..nl8a e638... 8978.. oﬁuozn 8848. aegis .3. 3:33.
. . I . . . . . I.» an
5.21.... _ I I 5.78.. 8.38.... 2.79. 3...... u 2. ”IS. 838... 5.89.: mum—HM
9.1... 6.1.1.... 85".... 3.79.... 363.... 3.1.... 8.39... 3.72... 36.6... on)
3. .Io.. 3.. .1... . 3...” 8.. P218... 8.3 5.. 8.78.. 3.3 3.. 85].... 8.38.. ooxao
82182. _83I8$ 0.8383 Bloc: 0.8322. . .725 .2292. 8.31.8 1083?... 13.32.63:
.8..I8.... .8212...” c.8189. :«TSQ ﬂange .3728 .838... 8a.. .2382 .05 «.032.
_ own: a
. .uo 5». .ua no
. «o 3.308
_ 3.50084
.5780 ace—Iran wig"... ou...lcn... 0.3«30 nan—I30 .6382 82l§ v.2“..8. unanno- uOOu
no aha»:
AQIHOVIACHSCN
Bowlom. 3:4... 1.9398 08.1.8 “Anus 821x! 45:2. 82.18“ 3.3:... .0333 sumo:
.32... an.
. .. nan—.0.
31.3 . Solon. n.«..u....o Solos 3.838 821.8 3.12. 8.78... «.648. .00. 3.32.
37mm.— omwﬂm.‘ an
0v no.3 . I . I . . I . a >
Aﬂlmo. . mn.|8. o..I..o.. _ 3.1.6 m...«o.v.. 8.l8. o .4... .n. 8.I8. v To 8. 3.51..
318 H 8.1.. 9.3... _ 278 «1.3.8. 878 33.2. 2.18 2.3.... .33..
8g 9. 8.1.8 3.3.8 2.1.. 8.3a... 8.1.. 1.3.8 22!... 200.8. :3-
o a
nova: _ SIS 8..."...«1. slow .o.o«n.8 8.I3 o.°«n.8 2.13. 0.04 od- Isaac“!

. .0: I.
nan-on.- .0332

 

In: 09.3 _ out
.033.

o a .
03:93.. .383 ”Enos...

3003.5 no 9.05 «03.30 .33 canon»!— uo :03...“ can»; 31. a» 039.8: 33 .H 0.3....

 

6
2

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010059-5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    

    

99

:3

l4

1.

V22 0
9399 E33
onom add:
:JI'H“ “NH"
9?;E $833
28 3 53":

     

________________
' 3999

In

1.2148.”
230 0

5.
5
3
¢

2 52—13 8
2-
I .6—
$—
4.

     
  

(respectively), determined by orbital

. h ) tonus of intracranial arteries and veins

nlethvmornnhv

O
3
A 3
3 '3'
g >
E o. 5 i
0 H5. «H at. o
8 m; 3%?”9“: “a? 3
3.& ”a“ czosuanq u a
o a D I. A ° °
.4 u - " 'GI
.-. 98: gas" gas § e
on.»
g 3:00 egg: an: r g“
h 1.5% 850a 83:

 

27
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100010059-5
FUR ill‘l’liﬁM. ”5F. "NIX

Studies have shown that the mechanism of elevation of arterial pressure in
the presence of carbon disulfide poisoning, like that of essential hyper-
tension. is based on disturbances of nurmal correlations between peripheral
resistance and cardiac output. Increased peripheral resistance plays the

leading role in elevation of arterial pressure. The findings of studies
of the correlation between minute volume (NV) of blood and specific peripheral
resistance (SPR) conducted on léb patients are listed in Table 2.

Table 2. Correlation between NV and SPR in patients suffering froa carbon
disulfide poisoning (156 patients examined)

 

 

    
  
     

Below At due Above due
"V 4“ leVel levels
loves {b
s" \ 15402)}, (3101) (by 15-702)

Below due levels (by 15-30:) " 7‘
At due levels (1101) - 38
Above due levels (by 15-1422) 21 6

In 65 (312) of 64 patients (441) with elevated lean dynanic pressure, the
rise was due to decreased patency of the precapillnry systes. i.e., spastic
condition of precapillaries. andinonlyl9 cases (131) was it due to an
increase in “V.

Repeated readings of arterial pressure by the nethod of Korotokov revealed
unstable indicss Hp (ranging from 25 to 70 II Hg) and "n (fluctuations up
to ‘0 an Hg) in 662 of the patients. with a tendency toward hypotensive
(22.5‘) or hypertensive (63.71) reactions.

The denonstrated instability of arterial pressure, combined with clinical
data, is evaluated as neurocirculatory dystonia of the hypotensive and hyper-
tensive types. And while the percentage of hypotenaive reactions did not
present any appreciable differences as related to different forms of poison-

ing and was unrelated to the condition of higher autonoaic centers. the
hypertensive reactions were observed sore than twice as often (57!) in

patients with signs of hypothalanic involvement than those without then (23%).

He failed to deconstrate a clearcut link between arterial pressure indices

and ophthalnoscopic findings. however, changes in vessels of the fundus
were the nest Iarked (angiopathy) with elevation of arterial pressure.

'He nest concur with N. N. Savitskiy. that the tern "neurocirculatory dystonia"
characterizes not so such the tonus of vessels as it does ispairnent of
tonus of the central“aysten that regulates circulatory functions, a disturbance
inherent in a nornal level of vital function of higher branches of the central

nervous systes.
28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In viewof the [act that the highest incidence of elevation of all forms of
arterial pressure and hypertensive form of the neurocirculatory syndrome
was observed in patients with signs of hypothalamic pathology, a link is
suggested between these changes and disturbances of the hypothalamic

region which. as we know, implements adaptational and regulatory functions
in the body (N. l. Grashchenkov, 1963).

At the present time, one can consider it the most likely that the neuro-
circulatory syndrome is an expression of neurosis cf higher autonomic
centers in the hypothalamic region. with this syndrome. increased excita-
bility and concurrent instability of higher vegetative centers are observed.

In view of the wide lability of arterial pressure, with a tendency toward
hypertensive reactions and elevation of all types thereof in a considerable
number of patients with chronic carbon disulfide poisoning. it can be con-
cluded that the latter is associated with a tendency toward development of
essential hypertension. This is also confirmed by the results of a dynamic
study of patients with carbon disulfide poisoning over a period of several
years, which indicated development of more persistent hypertension, with

a turn to essential hypertension, in the case of stable and progressive
course of intoxication.

0n the basis of current data. which are indicative of impairment of cortical
processes and injury to deep parts of the brain (hypothalamic region) under
the influence of carbon disulfide (E. A. Drogichina, L. c. Okhnyanskays et
al., 1954; H. A. Kazakevich, 1963; A. A. Model' et al., 1969; H. N.
Ryzhkova, 1971) and current conceptions of the pathogenesis of essential
hypertension. it is justified to assume that development of the neurocir-
culatory syndrome and essential hypertension in cases of carbon disulfide
poisoning depends on impairment of neuroreflex mechanisms of regulation

of cardiovascular function as a result of exposure to carbon disulfide.

One must also take into consideration the sequence of development of the

clinical symptoms and prime role of the so-called specific sylptom complex
referable to the nervous system. which is inherent in poisoning.

The demonstrated incidence of increased tonne of the aorta and. particularly.
of peripheral arteries of different caliber with asymmetry and different
direction of changes in arterial tones in different segments of the blood
stream is also a result of impaired neurovascular regulation and one of the
manifestations of the syndrome of neurocirculatory regulation, as well as
one of the manifestations of the syndrome of neurocirculatory dystonia.

Thus, the pulse wave propagation velocity (PHPV) in vessels of the elastic
type (0.) in the carotid-femoral artery (accozding to aorta) segment was
above normal in one-third of the patients (373).

An increase in PHPV in vessels of the muscular type ( ) was observed much
more often: in 792 of the patients in the brachial-rad al artery segment
(arm) and 68!, in the femoral artery-dorsal artery of the foot segment.

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l‘uli "FFICIM. I'M: ONLY

The elasticity moduluu. expressed as the velocity of propagation of the pulse
wave. which more accurately describes elasticity of the vascular wall.

was elevated in vessels of the elastic type (Be) in 482 and in vessels of
the muscular type (En) in 75%.

The demonstrated elevation 4‘ ratio between velocities (Cm/Cc) and elasticity
moduli (En/8°) of Vessels of the muscular and elastic type (over 1.é) found
in 701 of the patients indicates that the elasticity properties of the

walls of muscular arteries are greater in these patients than those of
elastic arteries.

The incidence of elevated PHPV, high C /C, and tin/Ee was reliably higher
among patients with signs of functionaT disturbances of the hypothalamic
region than in patients with‘ut such signs.

According to volumetric pulse cu digital plethysmogrnms. tonus of peripheral
arteries with small caliber was accentuated in the fingers of most patients
(60.72) and toes of a considerable number of cases (43.62).

A comparison of indices of pulse wave velocity and plethysmogrophic findings
to such clinical signs as complaints of pain in the limbs. coldness and numb-
ness thereof. revealed that pain of the extremities was associated with
signs of vegetosensory polyneuritis, which are often seen in patients with
normal and accentuated tonus of arteries of the limbs. Complaints of

cold and numb limbs were clearly associated with elevated pulse wave indices.
The higher incidence of increased tonus of peripheral arteries in patients
with signs of hypothalamic involvement and increased sensations of cold and
numbness in patients with signs of hypothalamic pathology at times of
vegetative crises are indicate of a link between hypertonia of peripheral
arteries and involvement of the hypothalamic region, which apparently
includes structures that participated in regulation of vascular tonus.

In spite of the established opinion that tonus of cerebral arteries is
increased in the presence of carbon disulfide poisoning, studies of cerebral
circulation by thesethod of orbital and temporal plethysmography. using a
cuff to occlude the cervical veins. indicate that a decrease in tonus of

intracerebral arteries (62!) and veins (52!) is the most frequent cause of
cerebral hemodynamic disorders, which are often dominant in the clinical

syndrome of intoxication. V. P. thurkin observed analogous changes in
cerebral hemodynamics in the presence of essential hypertension.

Virtually all of the patients (952) complained of headache. However, it

was attributable to hypertension of cerebral arteries in only 162, and

a different mechanism of hypertension (neuralgia, migraine) was involved

in 201. In most cases (592). headache was due to inadequate tonus of cerebral
veins. 0f the 591 cases with typical dull or excruciating headaches of
occipital or frontal localization. which became worse when the body was

inclined and often associated with vegetative disorders. 50: presented
rather marked hypotonia of cerebral vessels (hop>86 mm’). and in 252 of the

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Filli (WI-'ICMI. IL'lI-I ONLY

cases it was associated with a decrease in tonus of cerebral arteries.
causing difficult efflux of blood from the cranial cavity. In 91 of the
patients. tonue of cerebral veins was normal, but a low arterial tonus
(a°P>15 un’)* caused excessive influx (Table l).

The role of hypotonia of cerebral veins in the genesis of headache was
confirmed with particular distinction in pharmacological tests. Hellbeing
of patients improved under the influence of a vasoactive agent (no-shpa
[6, 7. 3',6’-tetraethoxy-l-benzal-l.2,3,é-tetrahydroisoquinolone hydro-
chloride!) along with increase in tonua of cerebral veins.

in the light of the foregoing. from the standpoint of therapy it is important
to know which vascular disturbance (arterial or venous) is prominent in
the clinical signs of poisoning.

The functional state of the myocardium is particularly significant in develop-
ment of hemodynamic changes.

According to the data of most clinicians (G. G. Lyslna, 1956; V. G. Belikov.
G. c. Zekharov et al.. 1965; 6. Ya. Bakeyeva. 1969; Heist. 1957. and others).
in the case of chronic exposure to carbon disulfide, contacts often present
complaints and changes referable to the heart (unpleasant sensations,

sharp or compressive pain, palpitations, dyspnea. dull sounds and systolic
murmur over the heart). These symptoms and complaints progressed with
increase in work tenure involving contact with carbon disulfide (Ye. N.
Artam'yev. T. K. Konovalova, 1962, and others).

A. A. Model' and 8. S. Navrotskaya (1958), who made an electrocardiographic
study of 66 patients with early signs of chronic carbon disulfidc poisoning.
discovered changes in T wave, 5-? interval and low voltage of the QRS
complex. which they evaluated as a sign of functional weakness of the myo-

cardium occurring as a result of impaired corticosubcortical regulation:
these signs were present in addition to rhythm disturbances (bradycardia or.

more often, tachycardia).

6. Ya. Bakeyeva (1963, 1969) found changes in the terinsl part of the
ventricular complex (shifting of S-T interval, decline or inversion of T
wave) and signs of diminished myocardial contractility. indicative of

hypodynamia of the mycoardium, along with functional disorders of the
nervous system, in over one-third of the patients she examined. The

physiological electrocardiographic, ballistocardiographic and polycardio-
graphic changes she demonstrated, combined with the complaints and clinical

manifestations of intoxication. were evaluated as myocardial dystrophy.
V. A. Vasil'yeva et a1. (1966) describe analogous changes and interpreta-

tion.

‘Hop and sop--tonus of cerebral veins and arteries, respectively, deter-
mined by orbital plethysmography.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘Hl; OFFICIAL llb'l'l UNLY

Pathoanntomicul and pathohistologlenl data on animal organs in the presence
of experimental chronic carbon disulfide poisoning (G. G. Lysine. 1956; H. A.
Kazakevich and H. S. Tolgnkaya. 1962) are also indicative of onset of dys-
trophic changes. not only in neurons of the central nervous system, but in
other organs, including the myocardium.

Unlike the above-mentioned researchers, Gobbatu et al. (l96h), Lilia et al.
(1965) and others attribute the decline of EKG waves with change in terminal
part of the ventricular complex (in patients with chronic carbon diuulfide
poisoning) to atherosclerotic lesion to the heart and development of
coronary insufficiency. Navarro Martinez and Farina (1969) ohserVed signs
of sclerosis of coronary vessels with development of of myocardial infarc-
tion (6.61) in 15.61 of the patients with signs of severe, chronic carbon
disulfide poisoning associated with atherosclerotic changes in cerebral and
renal vessels. Ambrosio (1957) reported development of myocardial infarction
in some patients with severe carbon disulfide poisoning, but he believes
that coronary vessel involvement is rarely encountered under the influence
of carbon disulfide.

Our elactrocardiogrsphic studies (Table 3) revealed disorders referable to
cardiac rhythm (bradycardia in 16.7% of the patients and tachycardia in
20.82) and changes in bioelectrical activity of the myocardium (decline.
flattening or inversion of T wave), which were diffuse in most patients.

The signs of impairment of processes of myocardial repolarization in 36.2!
of the patients, with due consideration of the entire symptomntology of
the disease (cardiac pain, dull sounds, systolic murmur and others) can be
evalueted as dystrophy of the myocardium.

The diffuse and dystrophic myocardia changes. as well as vascular dysfunction.
are persistent and closely related to the severity of disturbances in the
nervous system. and primarily in its superior vegetative centers.

Myocardial changes are observed more than twice as often (67!) among
patients with signs of hypothalamic involvement as in patients without such
signs (20:), and they are more marked.

Investigation of contractile function of the heart. which is the main re-
sultant function of cardiac activity, made it possible to demonstrate the
hyperdynamia and hypodynsmia syndrome.

The phasic hyperdynamia syndrome, which was observed in 302 of the patients.
was characterized by an increase in indices of efficiency of systole (intra-
aystolic index) to 91-97:. mainly as a result of shortening of the period of

isometric contraction, i.e.. the period of cardiac preparation for ejection
of blood into the great vessels (0.01-0.02 s). These changes can be

attributed to neurogenic intensification of cardiac function due to some
tension of the sympathosdrenal system.

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I ONLY

:IM. [ISI-

l-‘OR OFF"

 
   
 

’06.. In Ir..."— aaé no.0 Arndnv .Ihéwv

Ill

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a _ ﬂ _ 2 . n . — n 8 a a 9. 3 «N «33
com an. Atom. AI»:
2 _ 3. _ o _ _ _ _ a a. _ _ an as on. 9.25.“ w Ouch—oval
A8 3:: 7.: 3.3.
w _ a. _ v _ u _ .u u o. _ _ a .a h» an“:
anon—an
Iullllllhumllllllll
_ 9 . : _ _ . v v n n a o «q 8.
5.8 7;. “£68 3:: 33
z. _ h _ 2 . a _ n I .3 n a a 8 a: . ~33
r3 3.5.2.. Alﬁe
.. _ _ v. w _ _ . _ I q l _ h o 8 306033241501»...
i . O a 5
2 A a. 3%. a: new-830w: nowuwm:
8 _ o _ 2 _ _ _ u I 2 n _ w... 2 S 0232;“ we 3. a u
v «gnaw ago

  

   

   

 

nun-30. a: 0 'A1 I
«mum—m.“ umwn .n ... .I 9.3332. no 532.:
v 7518. u van .3395 noun-h

     

«3:032— onouuon va- cuum 33:59:.
.3950 0.2.0.50 5.3 3.8.33 «0 302:: 03353338330 3 coma-no 3305.6 .n 0.38.
i-‘dk ”FFHHM. lL‘ZH ”NLY

The syndrome of cardiac hypodynamin, which was demonstrated in 362 of the
patients, was characterized by a decline of indices of systolic efficiency
(intrasystolic index constitutes 80-862) and longer phase of pressure
increment (0.04-0.06 s). It is attributable both to increase in peripheral
resistance of the vascular system, which makes cardiac function difficult
in the absence of myocard‘11 pathology, and dystrophy of the myocardium,
which induces very objective. though mild and compensated. decrease in
contractile function of the heart.

The mechanism of development of the observed changes in the heart is quite
complex in the presence of carbon disulfldc poisoning. In view of the dis-
orders of the nervous system and some parallel between them and the myocnr~
dial changes, it may be assumed that they are attributable to disturbances
of metabolic trephic processes in the myocardium as a result of impaired
central regulation. However, in view of the properties of carbon disulfide
as a toxic agent fox cells, we cannot rule out its immediate effect, as
well as that of its metabolic products circulating in blood, on neural
elements of the myocardium and muscle cells.

The results of studies of functional state of the cardiovascular system of
patients with chronic carbon disulfide poisoning do not allow us to concur
with the data of some foreign authors (Legge, Goodby, 1921; Richenberg,
1957; Vigliani, 1957, and others) who believe that carbon disulfide is not
so much a toxic agent for nerves as it is for vessels, and they attribute
the pathological changes that occur with intoxication. including encephalo-
pathy, to sclerotic lesions to the arteries of the brain and other vascular

regitus.

The authors arrive at such conclusions solely on the basis of clinical
examinations or studies of lipid metabolism.

Many authors have reported changes in lipid metabolism in the case of chronic
exposure to carbon disulfide (M. A. Kazakevich, c. S. Konnikova, 1962; Refer
et a1., 1966; Velvart, Ballog, 1961; Oleniczi, Plamioniak, 1963. and others).
As a rule, these disturbances consist of increase in blood serum cholesterol,
decreased bond between cholesterol and protein, reduced quantity of phospho-
lipids and change in correlation between a- and B—lipoproteins, in the
direction of an increase in the B-fraction.

In the opinion of most researchers, the changes in lipid metabolism with
chronic exposure to carbon disulfide may be one of the factors involved in

development of atherosclerosis.

At the same time, Prerovska et al. (1963, 1968) believe that one should pro-
ceed very cautiously in assessing the effect of carbon disulfide on develop-
ment of atherosclerosis on the basis of the results of biochemical tests.

In a group of young workers exposed for a long time to carbon disulfide,
whom they had under dynamic observation, they found that, in spite of the
higher levels of cholesterol and B-lipoproteins in the blood of these indi-
viduals (as compared to a control group), they did not present clinical

34

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

signs or venue Ir sclerunis, either at (he iirut examination or later
(after 6 years).

it in known that, although impairment of «holeutevol and lipid metabolinm

in general plays a large part in the pathogenesin oi otheroscleronis.

this factor cannot be the primary cause. Enough facts have been accumulated
to indicate that atheroncleruoin cannot be viewed nolely an the direct
result of impaired lipid metabolism or exceunIVe intake oi cholesterol.
Clinical observationo. epidemiological ntudieu and experimental data have
led to recognition of the prime role of the neurogenic {actor in develop-
ment of atheroscleroaia (P. Ye. Lukomskiy. 1963; A. L. Hyasnikov, I965. and
others).

The cholesterol elevation and impairment of other typen or metabolism (pro-
tein, carbohydrate. mediator), as well as blogenouu amines (epinephrine and
norepinephrine). which we observed in half the patients we examined, are
apparently related to the toxic lesion and dinturbances oi central regula-
tory mechanisms, in particular, changes in functional state oi higher
vegetative centers.

Hsny years of patient follow-up indicate that the courne of chronic carbon
disulfide poisoning is adverse, involving prolonged stable or progressive
symptoms, not only referable to the nervous system. but cardiovascular
system, and that there is a correlation between circulatory changes and
nervous system disorders.

The data obtained from dynamic studies warrant the belief that the changes
in the cardiovascular system are not the only pathogenetic factors deter-
mining the clinical sysptom complex of intoxication; on the contrary. they
develop as a result of changes in the central and peripheral nervous system
occurring under the influence of carbon diaulfide.

We deem it opportune to illustrate this thesis with some examples that
characterize the clinical findings and condition of the cardiovascular
system.

Patient 6., 28 years old. has been working since 1961 as a
mechanic servicing equipment and spinning machines at a
chemical fiber plant: he comes in contact with carbon di-
sulfide in concentrations up to 8 times higher than the
maximum permissible levels. he was at the institute clinic
due to chronic carbon disuliide poisoning, with the diagnosis
of marked vegetovascular dysfunction with vegetative crises.
asthenic state. "in health was good in the past. in 1965.
he had a mildly acute case of carbon disuliide poisoning.
after which he began to have periodic headaches, complained
of fatigability. irritability and sleep disorders. he
became a poor traveler. In 1968, his condition worsened:
more intensive attacks of headache associated with general

weakness, compressing pain in the heart with irradiation

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
"M Ul')!ll1:\l. “‘11 ')l.'1 '-"

to the neck and left aim. unld thliT’l1cﬁ. pulvnlinn and
tremor of the entire body. hn ean hnupitnlized twice with
such attacku. with the dianuouin of angina pectoriu and
suspected ayocard 1| infarction. bnch nttarku (with eleva-
tion of arterial preunure and tachycardia) were again ohnerved
while the rntici van in the clinic.

Objective findingn when examined at the clinic: temperature
36.0-37.2'0. somewhat undernovrished, pale integunent.
Aathenia. Irritable and quick-t‘npered. Positive Horner'u
sylpton on the left. rine trcLur of the extended fingers.
Lively tendon reflexes. N-peuthenia on the left of the
segnented type. Tenderness of vegetative cervical elements.
Pale pink deraoutapnian. The hands and feet are cold and
cyanotic. Poor pnln1tion on dorsal arteries of the feet.
Arterial pieauurr in tha- range of 100/70 to 160/100 Isa llg.
Pulse 75-100 per min. Heart boundaricn are in the normal
range. Sounds are loud and clear. No pathology of reapi-
ratory and digestive organs. Examination of fundus of the
eye showed no change in retinal vessels. Blood test:
heaoglobin 162 3/1 (1.62 g1); erythrocytes 3.8-10‘Iut
(6,800,000); color index 0.89; leukocytes 8.7-10’lnl
(8700); lylphocytes 202: nonocytes 52; cosinophiln 62;
basophils ll; stab 22; segmented 672; please cells 12;
erythrocyte sedinentation rate 7 anlh. In blood serua:
free carbon diaulfide 0.00016 3/2 (0.016 ngl), bound
0.0002 3/2 (0.02 ng); cholesterol 1.9 all (190 ngl);

sugar 0.85 glt (85 ng!). acetylcholine and scetylcholine-
like substances 127 ug/ai. cholinesteraae activity 0.6 false
and 1.26 true. Subliaate test 2.1. for-01 test negative.

Epinephrine excretion in urine 16.6 ug/s and norepinephrine,
39.7 ug/s.

Tachyoscillographic exanination of arterial pressure (In Hg):
Dir-06. lir-106. tar-118. Dir-132, Ap--32, heaodynssic beat
(h8)--l6. PHPV in aorta 680 coin, in segnent of brachial-
radial artery 1220 (on the right) and 1200 cn/s (on the
left). segaent of feIoral-dorsal artery of feet 1150 (right)
and 1160 ca/s (left). 83V [systolic blood volume] 77.2 a 1
actual "V is 562 greater than the proper level. The actual
SP8 is 162 less than due and 30! greater than the working
level. sole. 0.66. No pathological changes on the EKG.
Sinus rhytha. 7S beats/sin. The electric axis of the

heart is in nor-a1 location. Cardiac contractility is
characterised by longer duration of pressure build-up
(ic-0.05 s). Tension phase 0.09 and ejection phase 0.25 s
(961 of proper level). K3 [expansion unknown] 3.2. intra-
systolic index (151) 83. After treataent with tranquilizers,

36

FOR OFFICIAL ”5! ONLY
FOR in’liilM. IISI'. "NLY

sedatives and vitamins (ueduxen. Leunorus, devinkan,
corvalol. vitamins c. n. and n‘). the patient was discharged
in improved condition and transferred to work not involving
contact with carbon disulfide and other toxic agents. The
above treatment was continued under poiyclinic [outpatient]
conditions.

"hen readmitted to the clinic 1 year later, there was sig-
nificant improvement of both subjectiVe and objective signs.
The patient was stronger and calmer. Temperature was nor-
malized. There was reduction of vegetovascular dysfunc-
tion and virtual disappearance of Vegetative crises. Me

is rarely troubled by pain in the heart and headache. and
they occur mainly when he is overtired. Only some general
weakness, pain in the arms and paresthesia of the limbs

are reported.

Objective examination shows tenderness of muscles of the
shoulder girdle. The hands and feet are warm. Heart sounds
are clear. Arterial pressure 110/70-120/80 an Hg. Examina-
tion of the cardiovascular system revealed normalization of
its parameters.

Tachyoscillography revealed the following arterial pressure
levels (mm ﬂg): H n"7‘- N y--98, N --108, H --120. PHPV in
aorta 630 cm/s. in nbrachisl-radiaY artery 350 (on the

right) and 900 cmls (on the left). femoral-dorsal artery of
foot 870 (right) and 1000 cmls (left). 53V 71.0 m , HV

is 611 above proper level. Actual SP8 is l8! less than
proper and 251 more than working. The EKG is normal.

Phase structure of systole is normalized (ic 0.02 s, 181 93).

in this case, a young man who had worked for a long time in contact with
carbon disulfide. after actue poisoning, gradually developed symptoms of
chronic carbon disulfide poisoning associated with marked vegetovascular
disturbances and vegetative crises. The cardiovascular disorders were
manifested by changes in arterial pressure with a tendency toward hyper-
tensive reactions. increased tonus of peripheral arteries, impairment of
normal correlations between peripheral resistance and cardiac output.
decreased efficiency of systole.

After treatment and discontinuation of contact with carbon disulfide. along
with considerable improvement of his condition and attenuation of changes
referable to the nervous system. there was also normalization of parameters
characterizing the state of the circulatory system. This case is interest-
ing in that the patient presented a combination of involvement of central
and peripheral vegetative elements. Harked irritation of the inferior
cervical sympathetic ganglion simulated attacks of angina.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3-H. HFFK'MS. USE ONLY

Patient 2h.. 35 yearn old. has worked ior 9 years in contact
with carbon dinulfide in concentrations that were 1-5 tines
above the maximum permissible leVeIn. In 1964. she was at
the institute clinic due to chronic carbon disulfide poison-
int, with the diaennsin of vegetovnncular dysfunction with
signs of hypothn anic insufficiency, hypertensive reoctlonu
and myocardial dystrophy. No burdens in history. For the
last 2 years she has had headachus. pain in the hands and
feed. coldness and numbness of the latter, sharp pain in the
cardiac region and intermittent heart beat. She developed
Eatigability. irritability and sleep disorders. This was
followed by attacks of headache associated with the feeling
of "shortage" of air, rush of heat to the face. pressure pain

in the heart. chills and tremor of the entire body. poly-
uria at the end of the attacks.

Objective examination revealed: normal body teapernture. none-
what overnourished. pale integunent. Enotionally excitable.
Pupils are regular in shape, good reaction to light and con-
vergence. Tendon reflexes unliornly active. Hilc hypesthesia
on the left, of the henltype. Accentuated dernographisn.
persistent. red. Hands and feet are cold, cyanotic. Arterial
pressure is unstable, with periodic elevations. 120/80-
150/100 In ﬁg. Pulse rate 70-80/nin. heart sounds are dull.
systolic apical nurnur. Roentgenoscopy of the heart re-
vealed sone enlargesent of the left ventricle, no change in
the aorta. No pathology of the lungs, digestive and re-
productive organs.

Ens-ination of the eye grounds revealed severe constriction
of retinal arteries.

Blood test: hemoglobin 130 g/l (13 g1), erythrocytes 6.55-10‘1
ut (4.550.000), color index 0.85, leukocytes b.8010’lul
(£800). 1ylphocytea 431. nonocytes 62. eosinophils 31.

stab 52. segnented 522: erythrocyte sedimentation rate

15 allh. Blood serum: cholesterol 1.9 g/t (190 ngZ). sugar
0.91 g/l (91 agl). lipoid phosphorus 0.06 gll (6 ngl).
zpinephrine excretion 10.5 ugls, norepinephrine 12 ugls.
Hassernan negative.

Arterial pressure recorded by tachyoscillograph} (In ﬁg):
Hn-98. -112, s.-.142, Hx-oloo, Ap-&6, us 18. PHPV

in aorta 60 cola. brachial-radial artery 1250 cnls. (cantal-
dorsal artery of foot 1090 ca/s.

83V 50 n . Actual NV is 11: lower than proper level. SPR

582 above preper level and 601 above working level.
zolw 0.55. On the arc. sinus rhythn. 73/nin, P-Q - 0.16 s.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(IRS I 0.07 N, QKST " U. 35 (normal 0.30 9). RI ' RII’KIII.
RV, slightly notched Sv). STII. avf, V5_6 slightly low.
T111 mildly negative. TavL nvf low, TV, ilattened, TV._‘
low. Normal position of electric axis of the heart.
Moderate myocardial changes. mainly in left ventricle.

Phase structure of systole: Q--first sound-~0.0& s, sphygmic

pariod 0.26 s (1062 of due level). phase of pressure build-up
0.06 a. tension phase 0.08 s; KB 3.6. 181 87.

After treatment (belloid. Leonorus, vitamins B. and B‘.
dimedrol, calcium chloride). the patient's condition im-
proved appreciably; she became calmer, sleep was normalized.
there were fewer headaches and cardiac pain. She returned

to her former job (contact with carbon disulfide), but

soon headaches and irritability recurred. There was a signi-
ficant deterioration in 1968. Upon readmission to the clinic
5 years later she reports worsening of her condition: the
headaches became persistent. dull or intensive, mainly in

the frontal and occipital regions, often accompanied by
nausea. There was intensification of cardiac pain with
irradiation to the left hand, and the above-described

attacks occurred more often. Arterial pressure also rose

more often. Memory was impaired. She developed fear of
darkness.

Objective findings: she has gained weight, subfebrile tempera-
ture. The tongue is slightly deviated to the right. Hild
flattening of the right nasolabial fold. Tender supraorbitsl,
occipital and temporal points on the left. Hild hypesthesia
of the left half of the head and face. Abdominal reflexes are
diminished, and plantar ones absent. Arterial pressure is in
the range of 165/85-150/100 to 170/105 mm Hg. There is in-
tensification of the second sound over the aorta. Roentgeno-
scopy: unfolded type aorta. Examination of eye grounds:
moderate constriction of retinal arteries and dilation of
veins (angiopathy).

Tschyoscillographic recording of arterial pressure (ms Hg):
Hn--106. -126. Nv--162, Hx-160, p--38. us 18, PHPV
1090 rule a aorta. 1280 cm/s in brachial-radial artery
segment. 1160 cm/s in femoral artery-dorsal artery of foot.
SBV 48.8 mi. actual "V is 52 above proper level. Actual SP3
is 371 above due level and #61 above working level. Eolw
0.57. No significant dynamics on EKG.

The changes in phase structure of systole were also persistent:
Q-first sound 0.06 s, sphygmic phase 0.27 s (1081 of due level),
pressure phase 0.06 a. tension phase 0.10 s, KB 3.0. 181 87.

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
uni lll-'l'i"l’.: lul‘. ("-1.7

in this case. a young women who had worked [or a long time in contact with
carbon disulfide and had never been sick in the past developed signs of
chronic intoxication in the lant 2 years, characterized by vegetovoscular
dysfunction with signs of hypothalanic involvement and cardiovascular dis-
turbances (hypertensive reactions. increased arterial tonus and peripheral
resistance, altered bloelxctrical and contractile functions of the eye-
cardiun). in spite .r significant improvement after treatncnt. when she
continued to work in contact with carbon disulfidc her condition worsened
and there was progression of poisoning symptoms (increased signs of vege-
tative dysfunction. setabollr disorders. psychoaensory phenomena). Along
with progression of changes in the nervous systen. there were also dis-
turbances of the cardiovascular system. The periodic elevation of arterial
pressure. in the fora of hypertensive reactions, became more marked and
persistent in the natureei g;nde 113 essential hypertension, which un-
doubtedly aggravates the course of intoxication.

Patient 0., 60 years old, worked for 12 years as an instrument
control nan at s chemical fiber plant, which involved contact
with carbon disulfide in concentrations 3 or sore times higher
than permissible levels. He was at the institute clinic

fro- 26 October to 6 Decesber 1967 due to chronic carbon
disulfide poisoning (marked asthenovegetative syndrome with
signs of hypothalasic insufficiency. polyneuritis and
ayspathetic inflaslstion of the truncus [truncitis]).

he considers hinself to have been sick for about 3 years.
No prior illnesses. He cosplains of persistent headache.

pain in the arse and legs, coldness and numbness thereof,
sharp or pressure pain in the cardiac region, sleep dis-
orders. loss of senory. In the last year. he developed
attacks of pressure pain in the region of the heart. asso-
ciated with weakness and tresor of the body. He could no
longer tolerate wine. heat or traveling. Vertigo and
cloudiness of the eyes appear when he changes the position

of his body.

Objective examination: tenperaturc 36-37.2'c, subcutaneous
fatty layer is satisfactorily developed, integunent is
sosewhat pale. Esotional instability (he cries). Asthenic.
Corneal and conjunctival reflexes absent. Pupils dilated.
d>s. Tender supraorbital and occipital points, Erb's point,
neurovascular bundles on the forearss, legs, paravertebral
points of the cervical and thoracic spine (0,-07). Lively
tendon and perinatal reflexes, d -s; plantar: dininished on
the left, absent on the right. Rocking in Rosberg's position.

Mild tresor of extended fingers. hypersthesia of distal
parts of the arse (Co-DI) and lower third of the thighs.

hands and feet are cold. with snrbly skin. Pink dersographian
appearing within 7-8 s and lasting over 6 sin. Pulse 76/sin.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arterial pressure is in the range of 110/70 to 140/90 mm Hg.
Heart boundaries are within normal range. Sounds are sig-
nificantly dulled. No pathology of lungs and digestive
organs. Examination of eye grounds revealed moderate di-
latation of retinal veins.

Blood test: hemoglobin lhh g/l (lb.6 gZ), erythrocytes
a.soio‘/ui (6,800,000), color index 0.9. leukocytes
7.5'10’lul (7500). lymphocytes 31!. monocytes 62.
eosinophils 21. basophils 21. stab 51. segmented 5&1:
erythrocyte sedimentation rate 2 mm/h. Blood serum: free
carbon disulfide 0.03 mgl. hound 0.026 ng. cholesterol

2.85 g/l (24$ mgX). sugar 0.9‘ gll (9h ng). acetylcholine
and acetylcholine-like substances 12 Uglml, pseudocholines-
terase activity 0.b, cholinesterase 0.96. Sublimate test

1.91. foruol negative. Hassermannnegative. Epinephrine
excretion in urine 1.65 ug/s, norepinephrine 6.7 um/s.

Tachyoscillographic recording of arterial pressure:

H --90. n -112, N -124. u --160. Ap--3a, us 36. Purv

770 cm/s in aorta, 1280 cn/s in brachial~radial artery.

1200 cs/s femorslartery-dorsal artery of food. 58V 60 mi.
actual NV 61 above due level; actual SPR 252 above due

level and 262 above working level; EKG: sinus rhythm. 76/min.
R - R >R , R >8 . 0R8 small, T low, T

flattelud. “horizon“ .elecgic axis oflghe heart‘.WLSystolic
phase structure: Q--first sound 0.06 s, sphygmic phase 6
0.23 s (922 of due level). isometric contraction 0.05 s,
tension phase 0.11 s; KB 2.6. 181 82.

After treatment (glutanic acid. belloid, ATP, glucose with
vitamins C and 8;. papaverine, adonisid. galvanic baths with
naphthalane emulsion). the patient reported improvement. But
very soon, in spite of discontinuing contact with carbon di-
sulfide, his condition worsened. when admitted to the
institute clinic 1 year later. there was no improvement of
wellbeing and objective condition. Hemodynaaic parameters
presented no significant dynasics. Tachyoseillogrsphie
recording of arterial pressure (mm ﬂg): un--9a. H --110, Nu-o
122, ":‘132- Ap-oZB, an 10. V

Pulse wave propagation in aorta 770 cm/s. in brachial-radial
artery 1280 cm/a, femoral artery-dorsal artery of food 1060;
58V 65 m 3 actual NV equals proper level; actual SP8 is 302
above due level and 101 above working level. No dynamics
demonstrable on EKG (with the exception of isolated supra-
ventricular extrasystoles): the phase structure of the systole
also remained stably altered: Q-first sound 0.0‘, sphygnic
phase 0.25 s (951 of proper level), isosetric contraction
0.05 a, tension phase 0.09 s; Kn 2.8; 151 82.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
HM i‘i'l ICIM. USE ONLY

In this case. a patient whose work [or [2 ycnrs involvud contact with

carbon disulfidc. there was gradual dovv'upment or symptoms of chronic poi-
soning, indicative ol involvement of the central and peripheral nervous sys-
tem (marked asthenovegetatlve syndrome with signs of hypnthalnnic involve-
aent. signs of polyneuritiu and sympathetic truncitis). In spite of
treatment and discontinucﬁ contact with carbon disulfide. the changes in thc
nerVous system are stuble. Cardiovascular disturbances (hypertension, in-
creased tonus of Vessels and peripheral resistance. decreased systolic
efficiency) are also persistent. and they aggravate the course of poisoning.

Patient 0., 37 years old, has worked for l7 years as a spinner
at a chemical fiber plant. has been in contact for the last few
years with carbon dirulfide in concentrations 6 times higher
than permissible ‘rvels.

She was ndmit'cd tn the institute clinic with complaints of
headache and vertigo, pain in the arms and legs, coldness and
numbness thereof, cramps of the legs. sharp pain in the cardiac
region and palpitations, dyspnea upon physical exercise,
irritability, poor memory. poor sleep with frightening dreams.
tremor of right extremities.

For the first 2 years on the job (period when the shop was
started up), the patient had several mild bouts of acute
carbon disulfide poisoning; after working for 5 years. she
developed headaches associated with nausea. vomiting and
weakness. In 1957, she developed pain in the arms and legs,
then numbness and cramps of the legs. her condition
worsened significantly in the last 3 years. with more frequent
attacks of headache. which began to be associated with
vertigo; appearance of tremor of the limbs. deterioration of
memory; she began to tolerate poorly heat. odors and travel-
ing (associated with headache). She has a history of eczema
of the hands and cholecystitis.

Objective examination: temperature 36-37.2'c. well-developed
subcutaneous fatty layer. Tremor of right extremities, deterio-
ration of memory. Emotional instability, tearfulness and she

is shaking throughout the examination. Pupils s - d, with
attenuated reaction to light and convergence. The right corner
of the mouth is descended. the tongue deviates to the right.
Palatine and pharyngeal reflexes absent. Total hypesthesia

of superficial sensibility. more marked on the limbs, better
(but not normal) on the soles, around the oral and anal region.

Hild retropulsation. Tones of the legs increased. of the
extrapyramidal type. Periosteal and tendon reflexes altered

on the arms: d somewhat more than a. Knee reflexes (s - d)
lively, abdominal (s - d) present but very transient. plantar
diminished. There are elements of bradykinesia (slew performance

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of tests). Rhythmic pulse A8-52/nin. Arterial pressure in
the range of 170/110 to 110/80 mm Hg, elevation first demon-
strated and normalized a days after admission. Dull heart
sounds over the apex; stronger second sound ovor aorta.
Roentgeuoscopy of the heart showed some enlargement of the
left ventricle, no change in sorta. No change in vessels
of the eye grounds.

Blood test: hemoglobin 128 g/l (12.8 31), erythrocytes
6.1.10'Iul (6,100,000), color index 0.94. leukocytes
4.1010’Iul (4100), lyaphncytes 322. nonocytes 61, eosino-
phils ll, basophils 1!. stab 42. segmented 572; erythrocyte
sedimentation rate 11 aa/h. Blood serum: 0.020 mg: free carbon
disulfide. no bound carbon disulfide, cholesterol 2.7 g/l

(V70 agl). sugar 0.9 g/l (90 agZ), lipold phosphorus 0.073 all
(7.3 agX). acetylcholine and acetylcholine-like substances

189 Ug/al. Pseudocholinesterase activity 0.320, cholines-

tcrase 1.06. No epinephrine or norepinephrine in urine.
Negative Nasser-sun. Analysis of duodenal contents negative.

Tachyoscillographic exaainstion of arterial pressure (an R3):
Hn--76, H{--90, Nu--1-8, Hx-118, Ap--32, Hs-10. PHPV

670 ca/s n aorta, 1220 ca/s (on the right) and 1150 cals
(left) in brachial-radial artery, 700 ca/s (right) and

1300 ca/s (left) in feaoral-dorsal artery of foot; 58V 68.2 ml.
Actual NV 151 less than proper level. SPR 281 above proper
level. EKG: sinus rhythm. Sl-Sb/ain PQ 0.16 s, QRS 0.08 s,
QRST 0.50 I (noraal 0.63 8). RI>RII>RIII. RV5>SV50 s 11,111,8Vf
accentuated. T11 mildly positive, T111 av avl flattened,

TV, low, TV.-; negative, TV; aildly negative. Sinus brady-
cardia. Electric axis of the heart deflected to the left.
Marked myocardial changes. After therapy (tropacin, novocain,
papaverine, dibazol) there was no appreciable change in the
patient's condition (soae decrease in headaches). Nor were
there substantial changes in condition of the cardiovascular
ayatea. Auscultation shows that arterial pressure indices

are in the range of noraal fluctuations (110/80-130/90 an fig).
but tachyoscillography revealed elevation of mean and lateral
pressure.

Arterial pressure indices after 3 seeks (an 11g): ~42.
Hy-106, N.-126, H,-l32, Ap--34, RB-6. PHPV 7 cala in
aorta, 1630 cals (on the right) and 1530 ca/s (left) in
brachial-radial artery, 1130 ca/s (right) and 1200 ca/s (left)
in feaoral artery-dorsal artery of foot. 88V 7.6 at. Actual
HV 5: below proper level. Actual $98 282 higher than due and
242 higher than working level. EKG: aild positive dynaaics.
Sinus rhytha, bb-Solain, 11.11.11; is no aildly positive, TV
aildly biphasic. Tvz.g positive, Tv.-s less negative. ‘

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I‘M i‘-l'FlClM. URI-2 ONL'I‘

In this case, a woman, with [7-year tenure on a job involving contact with
carbon disulfide, who began to work when the mill was started, when there

was significant gas level, and who suffered repeated hours of mild

acute carbon disulfide poisoning, developed signs of chronic poisoning within
5 years. Thereafter. with continued contact with carbon disulfide, her
illness gradually prouresued and, at the tine of our examination. was
consistent with the symptom complex of toxic encephalopolyueuritia with

signs of extrapyramidaland hypothalnmic involvement. Marked changes in the
nervous system were combined with cardiovascular disorders (hypertensive
reactions, increased tonus of peripheral arteries. inpaired hioelcctric and

contractile functions of the myocardium), which persisted even after treat-
mant.

Even of the changes in the cardiovascular system. as well as nervous system.
do not lead to cardiac or coronary Insufficiency. they still play a signifi-
cant part in some cases in the symptomatology of intoxication. For this
reason, the set of therapeutic measures should include, along with therapy
directed toward restoration of nervous system function, agents that are
directed toward elimination or attenuation of cardiovascular disorders.

of course. when making expert determination of patient fitness for work.
one must take into consideration, in each specific case. the nature and
severity of functional disturbances of the cardiovascular system.

Individuals, in whom poisoning is associated with neurocirculatory disorders
(with great lability of arterial pressure, persistent hypotension or hyper-
tension) and diffuse dystrophic changes in the myocardium, should be trans-
ferred to jobs involving no contact with carbon disulfide or other toxic
agents. Individuals presenting cardiovascular disorders that are not
occupational in nature, in whom carbon disulfide could aggravate the
course of these disorders, should also be transferred to work unrelated

to exposure to carbon disulfide.

In the light of the above material, and in view of the influence of carbon di-
sulfide onthacirculstory system with possibility of development of the neuro-
circulatory syndrome. essential hypertension and syndrome of myocardial dys-
trophy in the case of chronic exposure, it should be noted that, in iden-
tifying chronic carbon disulfide poisoning, the demonstrated changes in

the cardiovascular system (neurocirculatory dyatonia with hypotensive or
hypertensive reactions, essential hypertension, myocardial dystrophy) should
be included in interpretation of the diagnosis.

Clinical Characteristics and Condition of Cardiovascular System in the
Presence of Lead Poisoning

Lead poisoning, which is the most common occupational disease, has been the

subject of numerous clinical and experimental studies since ancient times.
Host researchers and clinicians (l. C. Gel'msn. 1928; L. A. Zorina. 1965;

A. T. Aldanazarov, 1968; A. H. Rashevskaya, L. A. Zorina, 1968; N. S. Sorkina,
44

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1971; Schmidt. 1929: Knelach. I935; lower. 1955; Ambrosio, Secchi. 1968.
and others) believe that lead I» n pulylrnplv pnlnnn with. however. pre-
domlunnl effect on the hlnhd, nervous ayutvm, dlnesthr organs and por-
phyrin metabolism.

in the opinion of many researchers. typical blood changes are among the

early manifestations of lead poisoning: decreased hemoalobin and erythro-
cytes. increased reticulocytes and erythrocytes with basophil granulation.

According to the clinicophysiological studies of E. A. Drogiehina. L. A.
Okhnyanskaya et al. (1952), functional changes in higher branches of the
central nervous system are early symptoms of lead poisoning, clinically
manifested by attenuation of cortical activity with development of the
asthenic syndrome and disturbances of the autonomic nervous system. In
the Soviet Union, because of improvement of working conditions. serious
organic disorders of the nervous system (lead paralysis. encephalopathy)
are no longer observed in the presence of such poisoning. Severe lead
colic has also become a very rare form of intoxication.

Clinical and laboratory studies of recent years have shown that impairment
of porphyrin metabolism is the earliest sign of the effects of lead on the
body (Yu. P. Yevlashko. 1965; N. S. Sorkina, 1971).

In the patients we examined (10 women and 92 men mainly up to 40 years of
age. working in the most hazardous occupations--furnace operators, stokers.
battery chargers and lead sheet coaters, who are exposed to lead fumes and
dust for long periods of time),the clinical findings referable to the chief
complaints (painful extremities, general weakness and fatigsbility, head-
ache. more or less intense abdominal pain. etc.), changes in the blood.
porphyrin metabolism. nervous system, gastrointestinal tract and other

organs are consistent with the typical, commonly described clinical symptoms
of lead poisoning. Out of 102 patients, 63 were mild poisoning cases,

32 were moderate and 7 were severe.

Unlike the patients with carbon disulfide poisoning. the patients with lead
poisoning presented considerably fewer complaints referable to the nervous
system, in the presence of inhibition and low lability of autonomic reac-
tions. The changes in the nervous system were characterized by mild signs
of the asthenovcgetative syndrome (212). asthenis (121), vegetovascular dys-
function (122) and some mild symptoms of vegetosensory polyneuritis (312).
Although many patients (552) complained of pain in the cardiac region, this
was not the prime element of symptomatology, and in most cases (511) was
manifested in the form of periodically occurring unpleasant sensations.
sharp or boring pain.

0n the whole, lead poisoning differs from chronic carbon disulfide poisoning
in that the course is more favorable, with a tendency toward significant re-
duction and disappearance of signs of intoxication after treatment and dis-
continuing contact with lead.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H‘I' I)I'FI"|:\I. UH: UNLY

It has been long known, on the basin of exnerinenrnl and cliniCol studies,
that lead has a apas'ie action. K. Kharchenku (1929). B. A. Atchabarov
([960), Hinden (1963), holstein (196%) and others interpret spasm of the
cutaneous vessels as one of the cardinal synptoas of poisoning, "lend
coloring" (distinctive pale earth color of the lntcguaent). Such a marked
ayndrone of intoxication as lead colic is a crisis with abrupt ouuel nano-
ciated with excitation of the autonomic nervous system and spastic-atonlc
state of the intestine (B. A. Drogichina, 1952, and others). The per-
sistent headaches, transient anblyopis and convulsive seizures, which are
observed at the height of a lead colic attack, are related by researchers

to cerebrovascular spass. Disinished diuresis in the presence of lead

colic is also attributed to spasm of renal vessels (hinden, 196]. and others).

The spastic effect of lead can extend to the coronary vessels as well. Thus,
A. H. Breytburg observed uevere spasm of coron1ry Vessels under the in-
fluence of lead in experiments on aninals. Spuhler (1900) demonstrated dis-
tinct coronary changes on the EKG of a 44-year-old patient with lead colic,
whose earlier EKG presented no pathological changes or rapid normalization
after disappearance of signs of acute poisoning.

A. I. Knopov (1958), N. M. Konchalovskaya et al. (1965), H. H. Abayeva (1967),
Salvini (1953) and others have observed aarked cardiovascular crises asso-
ciated with EKG changes (appearance of coronary T waves) in the presence of
severe lead colic. Hith disappearance of signs of lead colic, these

changes regressed and even reverted back to nornal.

In one case, a patient 26 years of age, we observed considerable diffuse
lowering of 1 wave during a aarked attack of lead colic associated with
elevation of arterial pressure, increased peripheral resistance and
tonus of arteries of the extreaities, and the former disappeared 2 days
after the attack. These very transient changes, along with cosplaints of

pressure pain in the heart, can apparently b a related to ispaired coronary
circulation due to cardiovascular spass.

Observation of patients suffering Eros lead poisoning revealed that the nsin
cardiovascular changes (Table l) are quite siailar to those associated with
carbon disulfide poisoning. In a considerable number of cases, there was a
statistically reliable (p<0.001) elevation of all for-s of arterial pressure:

“x in 382, NH in 561, in 65: and “x in 291 of the patients. Concurrent
elevation of all paras: era of arterial pressure was noted in 292, whereas

isolated (31) elevation of lean pressure, or in conbination with elevation
of “we was dasonstrated in 161 of the patients with nornal “x and "a indices.

In the patients exasined. no clearcut correlation was deannstrated between
arterial pressure indices and age, or severity of poisoning, with the ex-

ception of the patients with lead colic, in the presence of which elevation
of all paraseters of arterial pressure was observed.

06

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although elevation of arterial pressure is observed quite often in the pre-
sence of lead poisoning. unlike the cases of carlun disulfide poisoning.
this elevation is characterized by a benign rourse in most cases: minor
elevation of arterial pressure without a tendency toward progressing and
vorsening of general condition.

At the same time, in the course of prolonged dynamic observation. even in
lead poisoning cases. we observed patients in when previously demonstrated
hypertension progressed and changed to essential hypertension against a
background of persistent or residual signs of poisoning.

Observations revealed that the mechanisn of elevation of arterial pressure
in the presence of lead poisoning. as was the case in chronic carbon disulfide

poisoning and essential hypertension. is based on inpairment of normal correla-
tions between peripheral resistance and cardiac output. As in the case of

carbon disulfide poisoning. peripheral resistance plays the main role in
elevation of arterial pressure.

Out of 45 patients, only 15 presented elevation of mean dynamic arterial
pressure due to high HV and the other 30, due to increased patency of pre-
capillaries.

Teble 4 lists data on studies of (100 subjects) and correlation between
"V and SPR levels.

Table 4. Correlation between NV and SPR in patients with lead poisoning
(100 patients examined)

 
 
  

    
     
     
  

 

Below
'ue leve

(by
12-35%)

At due Abo e
level due evel

(310:) 120’"

SPR -SOZ)

         
     

Bel d l
lg2352§ evels (by
At due level (:10!)

*‘iﬁdﬁﬁ‘Vﬂ' a»

while elevation of arterial pressure in the presence of lead colic is not
questioned (A. l. Xaopov. 1952; c. z. Zakirov. 1961; G. I. Tsrsbayevs, 1961;
G. R. Gsmke, 1966; Teleky. 1937; Toppich. 1961; Gobbato, Chiesura, 1968, and
others), there is substantial disagreement as to the state of arterial
pressure in the presence of chronic lead poisoning. N. A. Vigdorchik (1934.
1938) demonstrated on extensive material that lengthy tenure on jobs in-

volving contact with lead is instrumental in development of hypertension.
Other researchers have also reported elevation of arterial pressure in

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pat. .;s suffering from lead poisoning in other than periods of colic (S. A.
Kipioni, 1956; Barbnuo, 1950; Crepet ct al., 1956, and others).

6. F. Lang (1950), R. N. Vul'fovsknya et al. (1968, 1970) have also men-
tioned the role of lead poisoning in the etiology of essential hypertension.
I. G. Gel‘man (1925), V. n. Shtriter (1950), Ts. G. Masevieh (1936) and
others adhere to the opposite view; they demonstrated more a tendency toward
lowering of arterial pressure with chronic exposure to lead.

In the presence of lead poisoning, as is the case with carbon disulfide
poisoning, the effect of these agents on onset of the neurocirculatory syn-
drome and essential hypertension should be interpreted as a triggering
mechanism, and the subsequent pathological process develops in the presence
of some predisposing or secondlty mechanisms.

In the opinion of some authors (Schmidt, 1929; Cunings, 1959; Morgan et al.,
1966, and others), the primary targetsof lead are vessels, mainly of small
and medium caliber, as well as capillaries. After reaching the blood stream,
lead has a direct effect on the tunica intima of vessels, inducing proli-
ferative changes. In a number of cases, endothelial hyperplasia led to
significant constriction of vascular lumen and impaired circulation in
tissues and organs.

N. I. Grashchenkov (1933) in experiments on animals, Ye. Freyfel'd (1933).
s. A. Peysakh and Kh. H. Kadyrbayeva (1960), who made pathouorphological
studies of victims of lead encephalopathy and lead colic, observed in addi-
tion to proliferation of endothelium hypertrophy of the muscular tunic of
vessels, spasm thereof and proliferation of connective tissue around the
vessel with invasion of the media and calcification. Host researchers con-
sider endarteritis and atherosclerosis of small and medium arteries to be
typical signs of lead poisoning. These changes, in the presence of lead
poisoning, are observed mainly in vessels of the central nervous system,
heart and kidneys.

Determination of pulse wave propagation velocity and modulus of elasticity
of elastic and muscular vessels is indicative of statistically reliable
enhancement of elastoviscous state (tones) of arterial vessels. PHPV

in elastic vessels (Ce) in the segment of the carotid-femoral artery (aorta)
was above normal in one-third of the patients (341). No clearcut correla-
tion was observed between the increase in PHIV in the aorta, severity of
poisoning and age of patients. A comparison of the findings to roentgeno-
logical examination of the aorta and parameters of mean dynamic arterial
pressure revealed that the increased tonne of the aorta was most often

due to high arterial pressure, rather than stherosclerotic changes in the
vascular wall.

PHPV hivessels of the musclar type, both in the segment of the brachial-
radial artery and segment of femoral artery-dorsal artery of the food,
was increased in most patients (70 and 622, respectively).

‘8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN HFFICIAL USE UNLY

A study of u-nrrelntlon between velorlty and elasticity mmlnlnn uf muscular
and elnntir venneln reruled elevation ni Cm/Gp Z 7lZ at the canes and

of bulb” In 592. In noaw canes. the elasticity modulus of walls of elastic
type arteries was higher than for muscular oneu, whirh wax lhv nuauun tor a
dt:line of Em/Ee (under I) In 101 of the patients.

The results of digital plethynmography are indicative of increased tones
of peripheral arteries of the fingers (In 332) and toes (26.51).

In half the cases. the Indices of specific perlpheral resistance (SPR) were
II5Z higher than proper levels. which In indicative of decreased pa:¢ncy

of the precapillary system of these patients. A 7&2 higher actual SPR.

as compared to the working level, In indicative of the fact that the
decrease In precapillary potency in inconsistent with the minute volume.

The demonstrated increase In arterial tones In the extremities, an in the
case of carbon disulflde poisoning, was not of substantial significance to
genesis of pain. The pain In the limbs of patients with lead poisoning
was also closely related to signs of vegetative polyneunitlu. which were
observed just as often In patients with increased (332) and normal (301)
tonus of extremital arteries.

As for endartoritis obliterano. development of which with lead poisoning was
reported by a number of authors (I. G. Gel'man, S. B. Braun, 0. N. Chel'tsova.
N. l. Kukin, 1937; A. A. Khavtasi. I961; Boron. 1956, and others), of all

the Individuals we examined, only one presented clinical signs of endsrteritis
obliterans or thrombangiitis of the lower limbs (pain In the legs with
Intermittent lameness. absence of pulse on dorsal arteries and weak pulse

on the posterior tibial arteries).

Some Investigators make a distinction. among obliterative (occlusive) dis-

eases of peripheral arteries, between two independent diseases: 1) endarter-
ItIs obliterans (or thrombanglitis); 2) obliterative atherosclerosis; and

they believe that these are different diseases in etiology and pathogenesis
(R. F. Akulova, 1955; N. I. Krakovskiy, P. N. Hazaycv. R. M.
Akhrem—Akhremovlch. 1970. and others). In the opinion of these authors,

an allergic state is Important in the pathogenesis of thrombangiitis ob-
literans, along with Impairment of regulatory functions of the central ner-
vous system and Its autonomic branch. This refers to changes In reactivity
of the Vascular system In response to various nonspecific stimuli (frost-

bite. cooling. infection. etc.).

Other researchers (V. D. Tsinzerling. l958, and othrrs) reject the existence
of endarterltls as an independent noaological form, and they believe that
atheroscleroais. the development of which Is preceded by anbioneurosia. is

the basis of all obliterative arterial pathology. At any rate, these two
diseases are clinically similar and it is difficult to make a differential

diagnosis.

69

FOR ‘IFFICMI. l'.‘LE.' ONLY
In the light of the unhnillu-cl «laid and li'urrvml I‘hangm. u. Inulentn with
lead poisoning. nuunrlated with hypnrvu.l:;niy ni peripheral Veasals (1. A.
Hasich. 1970) and intrcanrd (onus 0| ni;erles of the limbs, it can appu-
rently he assumed that, in the prunnnrv u! lead poisoning, there are lac—
tors for development of ubilfvraiivu dinenneu or peripheral arteries.

The spastic effect at i«na in runnela, undrr Jprrnprlitv cucdiilnnu. can
apparently lead to organic changen also. it is known that vasonpasms.
which alter the physicochemlcal state of arieiral wvl‘u, are inatrumental in
degeneration and sclerosis (A. L. Myaunikuv. 1965: V. n. ll‘inskiy, 197D,
and others).

There were already indications of development of atherosclercwis with lead
poisoning in the last cenr-;’ (Frank. [875. and other»). H. A. Knvnntnkiy
et al. (i96k), Mneshlin (1953) and others have reported appearance of
atherosclerotic (l.”“C‘ in ‘irsm-lu ni l|='- brain, i-idncyn, hearl, and peri-
pheral vessels under the influence of lead.

Comings (1959) attributes development of encephalopathy with lead poise-lag
to stherosclerotic involvement of cerebral arteries.

Studies have shown that. as in the case of carbon disulfide poisoning, the
most frequent cause of cerebral hemodynamic disorders in patients with
lead poisoning is hypotonia of cerebral arteries (631) and especially
veins (662), which is more marked during the period of lead colic. Such a

symptom of impaired cerebral circulation as headache is related to changes

in tcﬁus of cerebral vessels; however, unlike the cases of carbon diaulfide
poiscning, headaches are usually rare and mild. with no dominant role in

the clinical symptoms of poisoning, with the exception of the patients

with lead colic. in some cases. however, in the presence of plethysmographit
indications of some decrease in tones of cerebral arteries and veins, the
clinical sign of inadequate tones, i.e.. headache, was absent in individuals
with mild poisoning and some cases of aoderate poisoning. Evidently, the
changes in tones of cerebral arteries and veins in these patients were com-
pensated and were not clinically manifested in any way.

Histomorphological studies are also indicative of the effects of lead. not
only on arterial but venous vessels. Ye. Preyfel'd (1933) observed venous
stasis in a patient who had suffered from lead encephalopathy and colic.
S. A. Paysakh and Rh. H. Kadyrbayeva (1960) reported on postmortem venous
stasis in cerebral vessels in a patient who had expired during a bout of
lead colic.

Complex clinicophysiological and biocheuicsl stuides of workers exposed to
lead for a long period of time and patients with lead poisoning, which were
pursued by H. A. Kovnatskiy et al. (1961. 1964) and V. A. Vasil'yeva et al.
(1966, 1967) revealed changes in the terminal part of the ventricular com-
plex (displacement of 5-1 interval, lowering or inversion of T wave) and
impaired contractility of the myocardium, which were closely related to

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

severity of poisoning. The demonstrated EKG and 8K6 lballlntocurdiographic]
changes. along with clinical data. were evaluated by the authors in most
cases as myocardial dystrophy. but in some cases. the nature of EKG changes
and corresponding clinical manifestations were also indicative of impaired
coronary circulation. The changes in the cardiovascular system were combined.
in a considerable number of cases. with impaired cholesterol metabolism (ele-
vated total cholesterol, unbound and loosely bound with proteins. and
decline of phospholipid to cholesterol ratio). In view of the results of
clinicophysiological and biochemical studies (6. S. Konikova. 1961), as well
as data (L. K. Chcrednichenko, 1962: G. N. Kuz'minskaya. 1964) indicative

of the significant influence of lead on development of stherosclerotic pro-

cesses in the aorta, vessels of the heart and kidneys in experimental
cholesterol atherosclerosis. the authors believe that lead may be instru-
mental in development of atherosclerosis. in the patients with lead poison-
ing, like those with chronic carbon disulfide poisoning, we failed to de-
monstrate a clearcut link between blood cholesterol content, hemodynamic
changes and state of the myocardium. Elevation of blood cholesterol level
was observed equally often among patients with normal and high parameters
of arterial pressure. peripheral resistance and PHPV. There is no agree-
ment either as to the state of the myocardium when the body is exposed to
lead. A. H. Rashevsksya and s. V. Levine (1952), vho made an EKG study of
a considerable group of workers exposed to lead for a long time, observed
rather often sinus bradycsrdia (252). changes in P wave, QRS complex, 8-?
interval and T wave. however, the observed changes (diffuse lowering of

T waves) were evaluated as myocardial dystrophy in only 82 of the cases.
The authors considered these EKG changes to be secondary. appearing as a
result of the effect of lead on the autonomic nervous system. This is con-
firmed by data obtained in the oculocardiac test on patients with lead
poisoning. in these cases, the authors observed a severe vagal effect.

manifested by slowing of heart rate (by lZ-SZ/min) to the extent of cardiac
arrest (1 to 6 s) and first grade atrioventricular block.

Other researchers (A. A. Orlova, 1955; A. N. Akhmedshin, 1964; H. H. Abayevs
et al., 1968; Kosmider. Petelenz. 1961; Hyerson, Eisenhauer, 196k, and others)
also obtained analogous EKG changes in individuals exposed to lead for a

long time and patients with lead poisoning; they believe that the EKG

changes under the influence of lead are mainly functional and attributable
to changes in the autonomic nervous system.

Other authors (Read, Hilliams, 1952; Kline, 1960) interpret analogous
changes (transient changes in rhythm, conduction and T wave), in patients
with lead poisoning, as ”lead myocarditis" and relate it to the direct
effect of lead on the myocardium.

in an eiectrocardiographic examination (see Table 3) we observed a tendency
toward sinus bradvcardia in 621 of the patients, and its incidence was
not distinctly related to severity of poisoning. Some patients presented

periodic ventricular extrasystoly. slow atrioventricular conduction
(0.21-0.23 s) and longer electric ventricular systole. There were mild

changes in bioelectric activity of the myocardium. A decline or. much less

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ill-FICIM. l'SiZ ONLY

often,flattening of the T wave was observed in 252 of the patients, but only
15% presented disturbances which were evaluated, in conjunction with the
clinical data. as myocardial dystrophy. Disturbances of rhythm and procrssea
of myocardial repolarizatlon were closely linked with such signs of poison-
ing as anemia and autonomic nervous system disturbances. and they did not
aggravate appreciably the clinical course of intoxication. In most cases.
these changes were transient and regressed or disappeared under the in-
fluence of treatment. with regression of .igns of poisoning and improvement
of general condition.

The above changes in the heart were never associated with signs of circula-
tory insufficiency. Decreased efficiency of systole, observed in 38: of

the patients. was closely related to such henodynamic disturbances as eleva-
tion of arterial pressure and increased peripheral resistance.

The findings of observations pursued over many years indicate that the
changes hithecireulatory system of patients with lead poisoning were usually
transient and reversible. and they progressed less often to development of
essential hypertension. unlike the patients with carbon disulfide poisoning.
The most marked henodynamic disorders associat.d with lead poisoning are
observed during periods of lead colic which, as we know, is a sort of
autonomic crisis.

The results of our studies warrant the belief that all of the observed
cardiovascular changes in patients with lead poisoning are due to disturbances
of neurovascular regulation as a result of involvement of the autonomic ner-
vous system in the pathological process. and that they are related to develop-
ment of anemia only in a few cases. Normalization of parameters of the
functional state of the circulatory system after treatment serves as more
evidence of the thesis that the changes in the cardiovascular system are

among the symptoms of the chief complaint.

As an illustration of the foregoing. a discussion of the following case
history is of considerable interest:

Patient K., 26 years old, is employed at a battery plant.
Since 1963, he worked as a mechanic-tinsmith for industrial
ventilation and came in contact with lead periodically. For
the last 3 months he worked as a lead sheet center and was
in constant contact with high concentrations of lead (up to
0.3-0.8 mg/m’).

He was brought to the clinic with an attack of lead colic.
when admitted he complained of severe. paroxysmal pain in the
abdomen associated with nausea, vomiting and constipation for
5 days. weakness. pain in the extremities and heart. He
became sick 3 days ago, when boring pain, paroxysmal at times.
appeared in the abdomen, with nausea and vomiting (he had

had some vodka the previous day). Gradually the pain became
worse, then continuous. and pain also appeared in the limbs

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-I UNIX

and pressure pain in the heart. He was referred to the surgical
department because of severe abdominal pain, where lead colic

was suspected. it was learned from his uistory that he had

been troubled periodically with abdominal pain, general weak-
ness heavy feeling in the chest and dyspnea upon walking for

the last several months. In the past, he had had scarlet

fever. dysentery and exudative pleurisy on the right. 0b-
jactive examination: temperature 36.6-37.4'0, undernourished,
pale, there is lead bandon the gums. He is restless because

of the severe abdominal pain. Asthenic. Pulse 86/min. Arterial
pressure 150/90 mm hg. Heart sounds are loud. systolic apical

murmur. The tongue is coated (white). The abdomen is distended,
tender in all regions, no symptoms of peritoneal irritation.

31m test: hemoglobin 82 3/1 (8.2 3:), erythrocytes 2.aao1o‘/ut

(2,880,000), color index 0.89, reticulocytes 861, basophilic

granular erythrocytes 350/1o,ooo. leukocytes 11c1o’luz (11.000).

lymphocytes 91. monocytes 72, juvenile 12, stab 611, segmented

622: erythrocyte sedimentation rate 11 mm/h. The urine is red,

coproporphyrin content +++++ according to Reznlk-Fedorov,

lead in urine 18.0 mall. Direct blood serum bilirubin 0.38 mgl.

Protoporphyrin 660 .32. Plaaaa iron 1.67 ugli, total iron

200 ug/l. ln urine GALK [expansion unknown] 63 ug/s creatinine,

porphobilinogen 6.9 ug/g, coproporphyrin 1706 ug/l. Tachy-

oscillographic study of arterial pressure (mm Hg): Hn-10£,
-126. --140, H‘-156, Ap--36. HB-o16. PH?V 610 cm/s

i aorta, 800 sale in segment of brachial-radial artery,

1560 cm/s in feaoral artery-dorsal artery of food. 88V 08.3 m’,

actual NV 62 higher than due level. Actual SPR 341 higher than

due and 571 higher than working level. Plethyamography: sop

29.1. u’. no, 131.3 an’, at, 6.5 an)! an, 39.6 m’. a”,

3.20 n’. 1. p, 39.0 m’. .99.. 1.21 m , h n 25.62 -’

[see Table 1 for key]. Venous pressure 1% sea water. Blood

flow 16 s.

The EKG (Figure 1) shows sinus rhythm, 82-96lmin, Ra - 0.12.
035 - 0.07 s, QRST 0.32 a (normal 0.30 s). Rl>nlllv RV >5V,o
s'Tll av? slightly dropped with concavity up, 5-12-; ardhed
upward and changing to a sharp biphasie 1T. Normal location

of electric axis of the heart. Diffuse myocardial changes.
Systolic phase structure: 0 - first sound 0.06 s, sphygmic

phase 0.21 a (92: of proper level), pressure build-up phase
0.01 a, tension phase 0.07 s; KB 3.7; 181 95.

Complexon therapy (intravenous infusion of 101 Caﬂaz EDTA
solution, 20 m1 . 1 course, and 52 pentacin solution, 20 ml

2 courses), administration of iron, vitamins (31. c. 312)
rapidly led to attenuation and, after 4 days, cessation of
abdominal pain, and then to significant improvement of well-
being. The patient regained strength. gained 5 kg, dyspnea
disappeared. arterial pressure reverted to normal (120/70 In ﬁg),

53

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
ll'K -‘l H "Ill. l|\l2 IlNI '.'

there was attenuation of changes iv peripheral blood and
porphyrin octaholiam. Blood text after treatment: hemoglobin
no 3/: (11.8 g2), erythrocyte-9| 5.75-10‘qu (3.750.000).
color index 0.96. Ref [rulocytea 1’02. bnnopllll granular
erythrocytea 23/!0.000 erythrocyten. Conroporphyrin 55l ug/l.
Examination 0! the cardiovascular nyatem shoved normalization
of its changes also: arterial preauure (an 83): Hn--70. H,--
96. n,--110. H7--126. Ap--40. HB-«lb. PHPV 520 cn/a in

aorta. 1150 c- a in brachial-rndinl artery. 980 tale in
femoral-doraal artery of food. SBV 60.6 at. actual NV 182
above due level. Actual SPR is ut due level. There was

alao normalization of the 8L6 (Figure l).

Iaav zany ' an!

'Ll . //.JLJULLUH

    

.[mummmﬂ .44,
eMHTM“ "‘ihu ”th
JW‘HH”. 1.: '14 l .4. W

Pigurc l. EKG of patient K. Explanation is given in text.
56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this case. a young nan who had relatively short tenure in work involving
contact with lead developed severe lead poisoning with marked lead colic,
anemic syndrome, impairment of porphyrln metabolism and changes in the
cardiovascular system. The latter were characterized by arterial and venous
hypertension, distinct increase in tonus of peripheral arteries with large
and small caliber. arterioles and precapillaries (of the hands and feet),
marked decrease in tones of cerebral veins and arteries, diffuse changes in
the myocardium. The rapid disappearance of the latter warrants relating
them to disturbances of coronary circulation, apparently also due to

spasm of cardiac vessels. with treatment, along with improvement in the
patient's condition and regression of signs of intoxiation, there was also
gradual normalization of changes in the circulatory system.

Patient 3., 35 years old. Horked as furnace operator for 8
years at a nonferrous scrap metal plant; he came in contact
with lead fumes and dust. Hhen examined at the institute
clinic, mild symptoms of lead poisoning were demonstrated
(some elevation of reticulocytes to 272 and basophil granular
erythrocytes to 62 per 10,000 erythrocytes), although the
patient presented no complaints and did not consider himself
sick. After 6 years. he began to notice fatigability, general
weakness. pain in the hands and feet, unpleasant sensations
in the epigastric region, tingling in the heart and palpita-
tions.

When admitted to the clinic he was found to be undernourished,
integument was pale. heart seeds were dull, mild systolic
murmor over apex of the heart. Roentgenoscopy of the chest:
some enlargement of the left ventricle and excited pulsation
of the heart. Arterial pressure 130/80-120/70 mm Hg. No
roentgenological signs of changes in respiratory organs and
gastrointestinal tract. Eyegrounds: severe constriction of
retinal arteries and veins. Blood test: hemoglobin 100 g]!
(10 g2). erythrocytes 3.73010‘lug (3,730,000), color index
0.81, reticulocytes 282, baaophilic granule erythrocytes
109/10,000 erythrocytes; leukocytes b.3-10’lug (6300), lympho-
cytes 372, monocytes 61, eosinophils 1x, segmented 551;
erythrocyte sedimentation rate 5 mm/h. Blood serum direct
bilirubin 0.5 mgl, total 0.75 mgl, cholesterol 225 mg!,

lipoid phosphorus 6.5 mg}. Coproporphyrin in urine 50 ug/l.
Results of examination of cardiovascular system: arterial
pressure (I. lig): Mum-82, Ply-96, Nun-110, Pix-428, p--28,
HB-18. PHPV 650 cm/s in aorta, 1150 cm/s on the right and
1060 em/a on the left in brachial-radial artery, 1020 cm/s

an the right and 1030 cm/s on the left in femoral-dorsal

artery of foot. SBV 67.6 ml. Actual HV 301 less than due
level; actual SP8 642 higher than proper level and 121

higher than working level. No EKG changes demonstrated.
Sinus rhythm, 53-56/min. Normal position of electric axis.

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
H‘u' Hl‘l’H'lI‘I. I'Iil‘. UNI Y

Phase structure of systole; Q—-tlrut nound 0.06 s. aphygmic

phase 0.25, pressure build-up ph.uu 0.0a a, tension phase
0.10 s; KB 2.); 181 861.

Rapid improvement of his condition and normalization of hemato-
logical indircw L.ter complexou therapy (3 cuurucu of intra»
venous inturaun of 102 CaNaz EDTA. 20 ml each) made it possible
to diagnose mild lead poisoning. associated with changes in the
blood and vascular disturbances (increased tonus of muscular
type arteries and changes in retinal vessels).

The patient returned to his furner Job, but felt well only for
a few months. He was noon troubled again by headaches. abdo-
minal pain sssocinvcd with constipation. intensification of

pain in the hands and feet, general weakness and irritability.

“hen admitted to the clinic we observed pallor of the integument.
Heart sounds were dull. Arterial pressure 105/60-135/80 mm hg.
Tenderness in the epigastric region and along the course of the
intestine. Roentgenoacopy of the gastrointestinal tract revealed
nonuniform houstration of the colon. Red, persistent dermogrnph-
ism. Hypesthesia of fingers and toes. Hands and feet are cold.
weak pulsation of dorsal arteries of the feet. Blood test:
hemoglobin 9:. 3/2 (9.1. 3:), erythrocytes 3.6-10‘lul (3.600.000).
color index 0.78. reticulocytes 66X. basophil granular erythro-
cytes ZOO/10,000 erythrocytes. Blood protoporphyrin $12.mgz.
urine coproporphyrin 3&6 mg/dsy, lead content 0.6 .g/z. Re-
examination of the cardiovascular system showed progression of
changes. Arterial pressure (II hg): Hn-80. Hy-106. N'-llb.
H3-l30, Ap-36, HB-l6. PHPV 710 cm/s in aorta. 1300 cm/s on

the right and 1350 cm/s on the left in brachial-radial artery.
1100 emls in femoral-dorsal artery of food. 53V 53.1 ml;

actual NV 191 less than proper level; SPR 521 above due level
and 251 above working level.

This time. the demonstrated changes were evaluated as moderate
lead poisoning associated with the anemic syndrome, impairment
of prophyrin metabolism. mild signs of vegetative polyneuritis
and vegetovascular (neurocirculetory) disorders. The latter
were characterized by elevation of mean arterial pressure,
increased tones of muscular type arteries and impairment of
normal correlations between peripheral resistance and cardiac
output. long-term treatment (3 courses of tetaksatsin and

2 courses of pentacin, iron products. vitamins Be and 31;)

led to attenuation of symptoms of poisoning. The patient was
transferred to a job not involving contact with lead, but

his condition did not improve. he continued to complain of
pain, coldness and numbness of the hands and feet, headache.

sharp pain in the heart. when readmitted to the clinic,

$6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disturbances of porphyrin metabolism (blood coproporphyrin
37.6 032, protoporphyrlne 2l2.2 ng, urlne 6ALK 6.01 mg/g
creatlnlne) and mild signs of vegetative polyueuritia were
still present. Only a slight increase in hssophil granular
erythrocytes (72/10.000 erythrocytes) was found in the blood:
there was progression of cardiovascular disorders. Arterial
pressure in the range of 120/80 to 150/80 mm Hg. Results of
tachyoscillography (mm Hg): Mn--9h, Hy-ll2, N"--136, Hx--146,
Ap-62, us--a, PHPV 920 cm/s in sorta, 1730 cm/s on the right
and 1700 cm/s on the left in radial-brachial artery, 1180 cm/s
on the right and 1120 cm/s on the left in femoral-dorsal artery
of foot; SBV 56.0 ml; actual NV 26: below due level; actual
SPR 77: above proper level and 311 above working level.
Plethyamography: sop-~20.0 mm’, hop-260.0 mm’, agp--7.20 mm',
h:P-72.0 .- . a ”—8.0 .9, hp r«80.0 n’. n n«1.93 .3.
hp n"9-9 mm’. census pressure 10 mm water. Blood flow

ra e 16 s. EKG: sinus rhythm, 60-66/min. RI<RII>RI 1'
RV.>SV,, S'TIII interval slightly dropped; 1111 av? low,

T.V1 mildly biphasic, 7V1-, high, with sharp spices. Systolic
phase structure: Q-first sound 0.07 s, pressure build-up
phase 0.05 a, tension phase 0.12 s, sphygmic phase 0.22 s:

KB 2.4, 151 81.

Hark involving contact with lead was contraindicated due to
progression of changes in the cardiovascular system (elevation
of all parameters of arterial pressure, increased tonus of
muscular and elastic types of arteries, decreased tonus of
cerebral arteries and veins, significant decline of intra-
systolic index-ISI). In spite of the lack of contact with
lead, the patient's condition did not improve. 0n the con-
trary, there was intensification of headaches and sharp pain

in the heart, appearance of dyspnea. Hhen next admitted to
the clinic after 3 years, no changes in the blood were
demonstrated, and vegetovascular disorders were prominent.
Arterial pressure was in the range of 125/80 to 160/105 mm Hg,
and it was elevated more often. Examination of eyegrounds
ravealed constricted retinal arteries. nonuniform caliber,
wide veins (retinal angiopathy). Tachyoscillogrsphy of
arterial pressure: hn-96, Hy--120, Nu-lbé, Hx-l$8,
Ap-50, ﬂB-16. PHPV 880 cm/s in aorta, 1320 and 1250 cm/s
in brachial-radial artery, 1160 and 1120 cm/s in femoral-
dorsal artery of food; 83V 93.0 mi; actual NV 27: above

due level; 893 121 above proper level and 621 above working
level.

In this case. after 5 years of working in contact with lead and feeling
well, the patient first presented mild signs of lead poisoning (changes in

blood) that disappeared rapidly after treatment. Five to six years later,
intoxication symptoms recurred, with changes in blood. porphyrin metabolism

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
(1 'w '||’|’|'.'4\l. 'hl. ”NM

and liner vcgetovascnlnr disturbances that reverted to normal after treat-
ment; but after renewing contact with lc1u they rapidly reappeared. and after
1 year progressed with develupnvni ol the anemic syndrome and progression

of vogetovascular disturbanrcs. In subsequent veers. in spite of the lack
of contact with lead and sienlficnnt reduction of blood changes, prosinent

in the clinical signs ». intoxication wele Vcnvtnvanculnr disorders. the
onset of which coinriucd with the period of thv nest marked hcaatoiogicsl
changes. Finally, as n result of prolongel vcgctovnsculnr disturbances.
there was develop-ant of essential hypertension which determined the sub-
sequent course of illness.

In view of the possibility of development at essential hypertension. ques-
tions of expert certification a! fitness of patients with lead poisoning
should be answered on an individual basis. with due consideration of the
nature end severity of cardioVuscular disturbances. Patients, in when
poisoning is associated with vegetovesculsr disturbances and persistent
hypertension. regardless of severity of poisoning. should be transferred
to work that does not involve contact with lead. In the case of lead
poisoning. as is also the case in carbon disulfide poisoning. the demon-
strated cardiovascular disorders nust be included in interpretation of the
diagnosis.

The differences in functional state of the cardiovascular system that one
delonstretes in the presence of carbon disulfide and lead poisoning are

apparently a manifestation of distinctions in the course of nervous pro-
cesses in the presence of this pathology.

It should be noted that we failed to obtain data fro. comprehensive clinical
and physiological examinations indicative of clinical signs of atherosclerosis
of vessels of the brain. heart or other regions. either in the presence of
lead poisoning or carbon disulfide poisoning. Nevertheless. the nature of

the de-onstreted changes is indicative of a very likely possibility of
development of atherosclerosis in such poisoning cases. It is a known fact

that such changes as hypertension, increased arterial tense and ispeirnent
of lipid ectabolise are "risk" factors instrueental in development of
atherosclerosis (A. L. Hyasnikov. 1965; b. V. Il'inskiy. 1970; I. A. Ryvkin.
1971. and others). While we admit there is a possibility of development of
stherosclerotic vascular lesions in the presence of lead and carbon disulfide
poisoning. we do not believe that any atherosclerotic process. or essential
hypertension. in individuals working with lead or carbon disulfide should
necessarily be tied in with the effects of these agents. One must take

into consideration the clinical course. order of development of pathological
processes and. of course, the leading role of the "specific" synptoe coaplex
inherent in a given type of poisoning.

Clinical Characteristics and State of the Cardiovascular System in the
Presence of Chronic benzene Poisoning

There are easy works dealing with the effects of benzene on the body (P.
Hytnik. 1936; S. H. Cusasn. 1952; L. n. Omel'yenenko. 1953; L. A. Zorina,

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1958. 1971; l. S. Gusev. 1966; Penntik Viglinni. 1938; Holstein, 1953;
Market, 1962; Richard. DeGowin. 1963. and others). Host researchers

believe that benzene, which is an agent with systemic polytropic toxic action.
strikes mainly the henspoietic and nervous systems. Acute benzene poisoning
is characterized by a narcotic effect with prevalence in the clinical signs
of changes in the central nervous system. Changes related to involve-eat

of hemopoietic function of bone marrow are the main and decisive clinical
signs of chronic benzene poisoning. Benzene. which is toxic to hemopoietic
tissue, can have a depressive and irritant effect on henopoietic tissue.
depending on dosage and individual distinctions of the organism as a whole
and the hemopoietic aystes in particular. This could cause develop-eat of
splastic anemia or leukeaia. In addition to changes in henopoietic organs.
in cases of chronic benzene poisoning one observes functional disturbances
of the nervous system, in the nature of asthenic, asthenovegetative or
asthenoneurotic reactions and vegetosensory polyneuritis.

There are very sparse data in the literature concerning the state of the
cardiovascular system as related to chronic exposure to benzene. There

are only a few experiaental and clinical observations referable to changes
in the heart and arterial pressure.

In the patients surveyed (258 women-862 and 62 men--lbz, up to 60 years of
age-55! and older-451), the principal symptoms of chronic benzene poison-
ing were hematological changes (leukopanie, thrombocytopenia and anemia).
Along with blood changes, there were rather frequent functional disorders

of the nervous system in the for- of the asthenovegetative syndrome and
asthenia. The course was qualified as nild poisoning in 133 cases, moderate
in 117 and severe in 50 (which included the 22 cases of leukemia). There
was prevalence, in the clinical signs. of complaints of headache (not in-
frequently associated with vertigo), general weakness. bleeding (nosebleeds,

bleeding guns, appearance of spontaneous bruises on the skin. longer
menstrual cycle) which progressed with progression of intoxication. Although

pain in the cardiac region was observed rather often (33:). it was not'
intense and usually in the nature of tingling or aching. Complaints of
dyspnea (221) and palpitations (182) were closely related to severity of
poisoning. Objectively, dull heart sounds and a systolic murmur were
ausculted in a rather large number of cases (492). and this was encountered
equally often in different age groups, but most marked and most frequent

in cases of severe poisoning. A venous hum was present in severe poisoning
cases. The functional disturbances of the cardiovascular system of patients
with benzene poisoning (Table l) differed from the changes observed with

lead and carbon disulfide poisoning. Opinions vary as to arterial pressure
level in the presence of chronic benzene poisoning. Host researchers (P.

Hytnik, 1934: H. 8. Bfendiyev, c. I. Aniroslanova, 1961; P. S. Kozlov,

Yu. R. Tedder, 1965; Lands, and others) report a tendency toward decline
thereof. V. A. Shtriter (1954). who analyzed arterial pressure indices

in a large group of workers exposed to various occupational factors,
reports that the incidence of hypotension is somewhat higher in individuals

coming in contact with benzene than in a control group (10.8! and 9,92.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
respectively). However. in the group of individuals with sign" of chronic
benzene poisoning, the lncidenro or hyva-nuiun rises to 30.52. According
to another point of View, chronic cxnnnurc to henzcne dean not affect ar-
terial pressure (8. H. Volovik. A. G. lvanova and l. L. Hiropol'nkaya, 1957).
The proponents of a third point of view beticvv that there in 1 tendency
toward elevation of nrtv.,ai pressure with chronic exposurr to benzene

(2. B. Grigor'yev. ltuo: Helm ct al.. 1924, and others).

Other investigations indicate that the parameters oi all forms of arterial
pressure fluctuate within the normal range In most patients. H, was low

in 20.61 of the patients and H“, in 32.]1. The incidence of decline of
arterial pressure indices is distinctly related. with statistical reliability
(p<0.001) to severity of poisoning and heaatological disturbances. Thus.

such arterial pressure parameters are found in 7.51 for ﬁx and 21.8% for N“
in wild poisoning canoz, 26.4 Ind 38.h2, respectivel» in moderate cases,

40 and 682 of the patients in severe cases. Thorn was reliably more frequent
drop of arterial pressure in the presence of leukemia ("x and H“ in 502)

and marked anemia (ﬁx-~312, Hn-éll). than in patients with moderate signs
of anemia and without it (H -lb.52, H -29%). Some elevation of some forms
of arterial pressure is observed in isolated cases. usually in patients over
65-50 years of age or those who had been given hormone therapy.

In view of the close link between arterial pressure parameters and blood
changes. and first of all signs of anemia, as also confirmed by the results
of dynamic observations indicative of normalization of arterial pressure

with reduction and disappearance of signs of anemia. the hypotension
associated with benzene poisoning should apparently be considered symptomatic.

Unlike the cases of lead and carbon disulfide poisoning. in the presence of
benzene poisoning there is usually no change in tonus of elastic and muscular
arterial vessels. Tonus of intracranial arteries was normal in only 252 of
the subjects, in some cases it was increased, and in over half the patients
(602) it was decreased with statistical significance (p<0.001). Hhile the
incidence of arterial hypotoaia in the brain does not present a clearcut
relationship to severity of poisoning, in the group of patients with

moderate and severe forms of poisoning it reaches higher levels and is closely
linked to severity of anemia. Evidently, decreased tonus of cerebral ar-
teries in the presence of anemia should not be considered solely a patholo-
gical phenomenon. In the presence of anemia, cerebral artery hypotoaia may
be also evaluated as a commensatory reaction. a "physiological defense
measure," that prevents hypoxia of cerebral tissues. Increased tonus of
external cranial arteries, observed in half the cases. can probably also

be interpreted as an adaptive reaction to increase circulation in the system
of the internal carotid.

A high level of influx of blood to the brain should also be associated with

increased efflux. which could be provided by a higher tonus of cerebral
veins. However, it was found to be low in most cases (67.81). hypotonia
of cerebral veins is observed equally often with all grades of poisoning. but

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it was the most marked (hop 160 to 280 mm ) with severe and moderate poisoning.
Evidently, the decreased tonus of cerebral vein: and arteries is the chief
cause of beaches with elements of venous stasis, so often observed among

the surveyed patients (751).

The distinctive feature of the circulatory system in the presence of benzene
poisoning is a tendency toward increased cardiac output (SBV and NV). SBV
was high in 252 of the cases and NV was above proper levels (by 15-902) in
762. Naximum increase (over 301) was observed in cases of severe and
moderate poisoning. Cardiac output is determined by the body's oxygen
requirement. For this reason, depending on conditions of vital functions,
cardiac output changes over a wide range. The changes in cardiac output
are adaptive and provide for the different requirements as to access of
blood to all organs and tissues. This requirement is determined by many
factors and, first of all, the condition of circulation. It is known that,
in the presence of anemic states, the decreased transport function of blood
is compensated by an increase in NV. According to the data of Stead et al.
(1948), NV begins to increase when hemoglobin drops below 75 g/1 (7.5 32);
according to the data of V. I. Kuznetsov (1952), this happens when it drops
below 122 g]! (12.2 g1). However, there is no direct correlation between
NV increment and degree of decrease in oxygenation of blood. Our data
revealed that, in the vast majority of cases (552), concurrently with in-
crease of NV there was a decrease in peripheral resistance, i.e., increased
potency of the precapillary system, which apparently is instrumental in
increasing the percentage of oxygen uptake by tissues. The increase in NV
in patients with benzene poisoning is a manifestation of intensified cardiac
function in response to decreased oxygenation of blood, since it is believed
that NV is the main regulated parameter in the body that characterizes the
repose of the circulatory system to oxygen demand.

He believe that such changes in the circulatory system as increase in NV,
increased patency of the precapillary system, faster blood flow, are
compensatory in nature, since they are instrumental in supplying oxygen to
tissues.

In the opinion of a number of researchers, the cardiac changes in the presence
of chronic benzene poisoning are characterized by rather frequent complaints
of diverse types of pain in the heart, palpitation and dyspnea, physical
deviations in the form of widening of boundaries of the heart, dull sounds
and presence of systolic murmur (P. Nytnik, 1936; N. S. Shubina, P. I.
Nidtsev, 1939; N. B. Bfendiyev, G. I. Amiraslanova, 1961, and others). 8. D.
Reyzel'man (1935) found muffled and dull heart sounds in 65.22 of the

cases in a routine examination of workers in the coal-tar chemical industry.
These findings are evaluated as diseases of the myocardium (myocarditis,
myocardiopathy, cardiosclerosis) and related to exposure to benzene. Electro-
cardiographic and roentgenokymographic studies of 57 patients with chronic
benzene poisoning led L.N.Khizhnyakova (1962, 1964) to demonstrate slowing

of atrioventricular and ventricular conduction shift of S-T interval, drop

of T wave and changes in roentgenokymograms of the heart (pulsation and
attenuation type changes) indicative of functional impairment of the

61
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
W‘l‘ UFFHJM. Ilf'l’ ONLY

myocardium. These electrocardiographic and lmentgenokymographic changes,
with consideration of complaints and clinical manifestations, were evalu-
ated as myocardial dystrophy in 39.6% of the cases. The author attributes
the latter to the toxic effect of benzene on the myocardium. Cacurri (1968)
relates the bradycardia. cvrrasystole and electrocardiographic changes in
animal experiments to the direct effect of benzene on the myocardium and
only partially to its effect on the autonomic nervous system. Other authors.

however, believe that functional cardiac d.aiurhances with marked EKG
changes in the presence of chronic benzene poisoning are the secondary
effects of development of anemia and panmyelophlhisis (Buchner. 1939;
Koelsch, 1936; h. Otto, 1953). In such roses, pathoanntomical examination

revealed effusions of blood, fatty degeneration and embolisms in the
myocardium.

In our EKG studies (are Table 3). most patients presented changes in T
wave (drop, flattening, inversion). This myocardial changes, along with the

clinical data, were consistent with the concept of myocardial dystrophy in
£5.52 of the cases. The latter was unrelated to the patients' age (‘51

up to ‘0 years old and 501 over 40), but was reliable related to severity

of intoxication and, primarily, of anemia. Hith moderate and severe poison-
ing, myocardial dystrophy was demonstrated in 60: of the patients and

with mild poisoning. in 25.61. While myocardial dystrophy associated with
carbon diaulfide and lead poisoning is related chiefly to disturbances of
regulatory function of the autonomic nervous system, in the case of benzene
poisoning its development is due to inadequate delivery of blood to the

heart as a result of hypoxia. The observed decrease in efficiency of
systole (331) in most cases could be attributed to some impairment of myo-

cardial contractility.

The results of many years of observations are indicative of the benign course
of benzene poisoning. After treatment and discontinuation of contact with
benzene, not only regression of signs of poisoning.but total recovery are

possible.

The link between changes in bioelectric activity of the myocardium and
anemia was also confirmed by the results of long-term observations. It was

observed that, along with attenuation and disappearance of signs of intoxi-
cation (with high hemoglobin level), there was attenuation and disappearance
of EKG signs of myocardial dystrophy. In cases of severe poisoning, pro-
gressive diffuse changes in the myocardium were noted with progression of
anemia. The development of myocardial dystrophy in the presence of anemic
states is related to metabolic disturbances in the myocardium resulting
from hypoxia (6. P. Lang. 195b, and others).

There is information in the literature to the effect that attacks of angina

pectoris and EKG signs of coronary insufficiency may be observed in the
presence of severe anemia, as a result of severely marked myocardial

hypoxia (6. s. Ayzen, 1962; Iuchner, 1939, and others). Among the patients
we examined. with chronic benzene poisoning, one patient with severe

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

poisoning presented anginnl pain in the heart. along with decline of
hemoglobin to 60-28 g/i (6-2.8 g2) and worsening of EKG.

As an illustration of the foregoing thesis. we can submit the EKG of a

patient who won under observation at the institute clinic due to chronic
benzene poisoning.

Patient 9.. 68 years old, worked in contact with benzene and
other solvents for 7 years. After 5 years she began to notice
gentral weakness, rapid fatigability. headaches. dyspnea when
walking. sharp pain in the heart. After l year, in a routine
physical. blood changes were found for the first time (anemia,
leukopenia and thronbocytopenia). Examination at the institute
clinic revealed severe pallor of the intcgument and mucous
membranes, and positive "pinch" symptom. Heart margins are

in the normal range, sounds are clear. somewhat muffled,
arterial pressure 120/60 mm Hg. Pancytopenis was found in
peripheral blood. hemoglobin lOl g/i (10.1 g1), erythrocytes
2. 83 10 Int (2. 830 .000). reticulocytes 192, leukocytes

3. 6 10 ’lui (3600). lymphocytes 532, monocytes 111, ensino-
phils 0, stab 112, segmented 252i erythrocyte sedimentation
rate 22 mm/h. Throabocytes 8 10 In: (80,000), bleeding time
10 min. EKG (Figure 2) without particular changes. Sinus
rhythm. 66/min. Horizontal electric axis.

Moderate grade of benzene poisoning was diagnosed. Therapy
did not improve the hematological parameters and the patient'e
condition remained unchanged for the next 3-6 years. Three
years later, when the patient was hospitalized. she reported
more marked general weakness. dyspnea and cardiac pain. There
was some widening of heart boundaries and a systolic murmur

at all points. Arterial pressure 100/60 mm Hg. Blood test:
hemoglobin 96 g/l (9. 6 g2), erythrocytes 2. 6 10‘ Int (2, 600 .000).
reticulocytes 131, thrombocytes 7. 6 10 In! (76 .000), leuko-
cytes 3°10, Int (3000), lymphocytes 582, monocytes 112, eosino-
phils l2, stab 12, segmented 26%. EKG (Figure 2) showed
faster rhythm (8S/min) and appearance of moderate myocardial
changes with predominant localization in the left chest leads
(lowering of T1 11.V,,.,,.‘). The patient developed a hemo-
lytic crisis soon after overcooling.

Thereafter, there were rather frequent hemolytic crises due to

various factors (cooling, drugs) and they led to progressive
hematological changes [periodic drop of hemoglobin to 28 3/1

(2. 8 g1), erythrocytes to 1. 05°10 Int (1, 050 H000) leukocytes
to 1.15 10' In: (1150), with marked granulocytopenis (182)

and l.ymphocytosis (762). thrombocytes to 6. 6 lo‘lui (66, 000)]
and deterioration of the pntient's wellbeing and condition
(severe weakness. vertigo, dyspnea. pressure pain in the heart).
There was worsening of EKG indices with progression of illness

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i". . In r In.“ -:'2.-, 'llil.

and nae-1n. when the patient var raadmlrtcd to the clinic
the hmgvm lndlcca Herr low: ncmuglobtn 62 3/1. (4.2 21).
erythrocytes 1.08'l0“!.Il I‘ ,‘Iﬂﬂ 000). th:ombocytcu 9. 9h6 H
(99 .600). rctlculvuytm 1.51. leukocytal. 7 lO’Iul (1.700).
lymphocyte" 681. unnuIHVtcn l2 .bnnnphiln 32. stub 62, ans-
noticed 251; I'Ivyuumcytu “India-and. hm ran: 55 ml: I.

[mum-WWII!“
g'f I‘L'IILLIIJILIIIIIII
“Mllwﬂulp
II'IIIIIIHII ”II. I ll
WIWH”

i

 

Figure 2. m: of patient 1'.

a) u Itlt‘t of tllneu b) 2 years later c) 6 years later

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

0n the EKG there was a sharp drop of T wave in standard and
right chest lends, while V,_‘ became negatiVe in the left
chest leads.

In view of the (act that the circulatory system is one of the chief sechnnisss
of cospensation of hypoxia in the presence of anemic states, it must be con-

ceded that diseases of the cardiovascular systea are also a contraindication
for work involving contact with benzene as well an a deterrent to continuing
work with such contact.

Thus, the clinicophysiologicnl studies of functional state of the cardio-
vascular systes in the presence of three different occupational diseases
are indicative of circulatory disturbances, which are, on the whole, in the
nature of vegetovascular dysfunction (neurocirculatory syndrome) and myo-
cardial dystrophy. They are not specific for any particular type of
poisoning, since analogous cardiovascular changes are observed under the
influence of other occupational factors, for example, with exposure to
industrial noise and vibration, ionizing radiation, as sell as other sub-
stances. At the sale tile, with each of the intoxications studied, we
detect sole distinctive features and uniqueness of changes in the circula-
tory systel. the nature and severity of which are related to severity of the
chief pathological process, determined by the predominant area of applica-
tion of the deleterious factor and initial condition of the organise.
Cardiovascular disturbances, which appear at the early stages of poisoning
referable to sole toxic agent or other, sooetioes become the prime synptoss
that deter-ins the clinical course of intoxication.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
m: OFFICIAI litil" UNIX

CHAPTER 4. THE CARDIOVASCUhtk SYSTEM AS RELATED TO EXPOSURE TO OCCUPATIONAL
RADIATION

 

[Text] The reactionsof the cardiovascular system are an inseparable part

of the body's general response to radiation as one of many environmental
stimuli. and they can also reflect the direct effects of injuries to struc-
tures that constitute the anstonical substrate of the cardiovascular system.
There are a number of works dealing with investigation of the cardiovascular
system with exposure to ionizing radiation; they summarize numerous inves—
tigations on animals in acute and chronic experiments, information about
reactions of the cardiovascular system in the course of radiation therapy

of various parts of the body, data on the state of cardiovascular function
in individuals exposed to large doses of radiation and suffering from acute
radiation sickness. There are relatively few works dealing with the cardio-
vascular system as related to long-term exposure to low doses of occupational

radiation.

The biological effects of radiation on organs and tissues depend. first of
all. on the magnitude of absorbed energy, its distribution in the body and
time. A distinction is made of the more specific effect of radiation on
the body. its direct deleterious effect on cell reproduction, associated
with a change in the process of DNA synthesis. The nonspecific reaction

to radiation is another biological mechanism, a response to an adequate
stinulus of several systems with the property of excitability, reactivity.
Interaction between these two classes of reactions is determined both by
the characteristics of absorbed energy and distinctions referable to struc-

ture and radiosensitivity of tissues or organs.

The cardiovascular system is morphologically and functionally heterogeneous,
and this also applies to the effects on it of ioaising radiation. As shown

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
r'iili HI’I’HCIM. l'hli ”iii."

in numerouu utudien, mu- should ”innin- out the reactions: oi the nyocardium,
great venneln, neuroreuoiatory anudnnnlnna of ra-w“.n- Function. capillaries,
vascular endothclium and nynirmic hcumdynamlcs. luv myocardium in more
radioreuintnnt that capillaries or vascular undolhollum which are hinh'y
sensitive to radialion. Myocardial changes also occur secondarily, as a
result of disturbances In vessels that nourish the myurardinm.

in addition to radiation done (which could have a deleterious effect or
elicit only functional stimulation with suhmicroscopir changes). the area
exposed to radiation is important to reactions of the cardiovascular wyuiem
to ionizing radiation. A distinction is nude between total—body radiation
and local exposure of a specific region: the innediate region of the heart,
great vessels and reflexogenic vascular regions.

Numerous experimental studies have demonntrated the correlation between
dosage and nature of radiation. Studies were made on different animal spe—
cies of the condition of the heart, cardiac function systemic hemodynamics
and local circulation, as well as reactivity of the cardiovascular system.
Morphological changes in the heart were the most marked at the early stage
following total-body and local exposure to radiation in doses exceeding
1000 rem. They consisted of appearance of stromal edema, perivasculur in-
filtration, plethora, dystrophic and degenerative changes in the myocardium,
as well as in nerve ganglia and fibers of the conduction systea (N. A.
Krayevskiy, 1956; 0. V. Hikhaylova, 1964; B. N. Ariel', 1965; Ye. I.
Vorob'yev, 1965-1973; Ye. F. Lushnikov et al., 1970, and others). At the
late term, animals developed marked sclerotic changes in coronary vessels
and the heart, leading to a reduction in weight of the heart. Somewhat less
severe changes were present after exposure to doses of 500-600 rem, but their
nature and outcome were the same. Along with vascular changes, dystrophy,
fibrosis, hyalin and fatty degeneration of muscle fibers with necrosis
thereof, signs of focal infarction, degeneration of nervous plexi and
vascular receptors were observed (P. D. Gorizontov, 1960; 0. V. Hikhaylova,
1966; L. L. Aver'yanova, 1967; i. A. Oyvin et al., 1971, 1972, and others).
Most authors believe that lesions to blood vessels are the first to appear

under the influence of radiation; they lead to dystrophlc changes in
szcle fibers, innervation system of the heart. autonomic neural pathways

and conduction system of the heart. Myocardial circulatory disorders pre-
cede the changea in muscle fibers.

Along wirh structural changes in the heart, functional disturbances of the
heart, systemic and local hemodynamics have been described with exposure
both to total-body and local radiation of the cardiac region in high doses.
It was demonstrated that there are phaslc changes in arterial pressure and
' pulse rate corresponding to the phases of the acute radiation syndrome:
tachycardia followed L; hradyvardia, transient hypertension followed by
hypotenaion with drop of both diastolic and systolic pressure, decreased
vascular tonne, slower blood flow and elevation of venous pressure (Ye. I.
Vorob'yev, l968; L. A. Yakovleva, 1972, and others).

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The EKG changes are characterized by pcfclslrn! Jrrlluv at wuvu voltage,
shifting of S-T Inter'al and "(CWthHJI nn--raur: u' alriuventrlrular bin-h.
The EKG changes are more tutu-:2 'vllll lu-‘Al i.l:u|i.n.lun vi LII? . Welz'r :'- .10“
than with exposure of other parts nl thu hodv. Increased vasvular permea-
bility has also been noted. Phanxvs in lnrnl r"rnl1t|0u have hrvv dun-
cribed at the early anuuu: sleniflcnul ui‘n:uu|np ul nerve-”re drier‘.n.
plethora of vessels in the parsonary circuﬁ.tion c! dfﬁiwulu (kernel. phash
changes in cerebral vessels. impairment at ucr‘pheral cifculutlun in cutaneous
vessels. dilatation. dystonla of vessel- «1 tr: hands.

Investigation of sensitivity to various ngnin (chemitai drurn. epinephrine,
scetylchoiine. low doses of radiant: Ie substances and others) revealed that
there were changes in cardiova;cuiur reactions in some cases, and this was
attributed to trophic changes in the myocardium and in the system of intero-
ceptive analyzers (S. a. baniyurev. 1937; N. '. Fnruhaxnv, F. H. Kirryev.
1963. 1968: Sh. 5. Hciik-israyelyun, 39v“, dud u;nets). The experimental
studies are corroborated by clinical findings.

The first inforlation about acute radiation alvkness in man appeared after
19b5, when atomic bombs were dropped on the Japanese cities of niroshima

and Nagasaki. Hith explosion of an atom boob. there are other deleterious
factors involved. in addition to radiation: shock wave which induces

numerous traumatic lesions and luminous radiation that induces burns, i.e.,
there are combined lesions in a number of cases, and they have not been
adequately followed up at that. More accurate ideas about changes in the
cardiovascular systea with exposure to acute radiation were obtained from
studies of accidents. In the literature. there is a description of about
100 cases, including 26 in the USSR (N. A. Kurshskov et al.. 1966; A. K.
Gus'kovs, G. D. Baysogolov, 1955-1971; A. l. Vorob'yev et al., 1973-1975;

1. S. Glazunov et al., 1976; L. Geapei‘man. G. Lisko. D. Gofaan, 1956;
Andrews, Salish, Edwards et al., 1969, and others). The dose levels

ranged from a few dozen roentgena, which was not associated with formation
of acute radiation sickness, to several hundred rocutgens with severe lesions
ending with death. Cardiovascular changes appeared early in the case of
radiation doses of the order of 300-1000 rem. They consisted of tachycardia,

drop of arterial pressure. appearance of apical systolic murmur, muffled
heart sounds. As early as the 2d day of illness, the EKG presented signs

of diffuse myocardial changes with slow intraventricular conduction,
reduction of S-T interval, T wave and voltage in all leads. There were
circulatory disturbances in the system of cerebral vessels, with appearance
of transient focal neurological symptoms, decreased vascular tonus and
oscillatory index. More marked cardiac changes were observed in the case

of nonuniform radiation with a maximum dosage delivered to the region of
the heart.

A. K. Gus'kova and G. D. Baysogolov (1971), in a summary of their clinical
findings, described systemic heaodynamics in the presence of acute radiation
sickness as follows: Already at the early stage of acute radiation sickness,
there was appearance of changes in cardiovascular function related to im-
pairment of neurovascular regulation. They are manifested by lability of

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lﬂlk OFFICIAL USE ONIN

the pulse, eaperlally when subject to loads, changes in arterial pressure
with a tendency toward hypotennion, labllity oI nutaneous vasomutern with
excessive noistness of palms and feet, appearance of dynpnea, diminished
vascular tones and peripheral circulatory disorders.

Hith moderate and especially severe grade of sickness, hemorrhagic manifesta-
tions are observed, which reach a maximum in the 3d-Ath week of illness.
Changes appear on the EKG, which are first indicative of disorders referable

to regulation of cardiac function and, later on, of signs of dystrophic
myocardial changes with impaired conduction and contractility.

Early changes in cardiac function and vessels of a functional nature are
due to impaired regulation, as proved by the reversibility of these changes,
good restoration upon recovering from acute radiation sickness. A. V.
larabanova and A. K. Gus'kova (1964) describe one case, patient H., seen

10 years after he suffered acute radiation sickness as a result of an
accident on the job. It was estimated that he was exposed to about 300 rem

total-body gamma and neutron radiation. The clinical signs were typical
for moderate grade of acute radiation sickness. The patient was essentially

healthy and (it for work for all 10 subsequent years. A comprehensive
clinical and physiological examination revealed only mild functional changes
in the cardiovascular system in the form of asymmetric arterial pressure,
lability and asymmetry of the oscillatory index, tendency toward tachycardia.
No deviations from normal were demonstrable on the EKG, BKG [ballistocardio-
gram} and PKG [phonocardlograml. In this case, the outcome of acute radia-
tion sickness was a clinical recovery. Such a possibility is also confirmed

by other authors (N. A. Kurshakov et al., 1966, and others). It is ob-

served that the recovery period may end by the end of the first postradiation
year, although some regulatory changes may persist for a longer time, depend-
ing on the radiation dose and severity of acute radiation sickness. In view
of the direct deleterious effect of radiation, which induces changes in

other organs and systems, basal metabolism and trophic disorders, clinical
symptoms may also be present at a later time, and they are indicative of

prior myocardial hypoxia with incomplete restoration. The initial state

of organs and systems, including the heart and vessels, is significant

to degree of recovery.

The numerous publications pertaining to the state of the cardiovascular sys-
tem of patients exposed to radiation therapy for different diseases are
quite contradictory. Aside from differences in dosage, this is also due
to the area exposed to radiation, general condition and age of patients,
nature of chief complain and initial state of the cardiovascular system.
Changes in the cardiovascular system were observed in most cases, and they
consisted of appearance 0f functional or morphological changes. In most
cases, drop of arterial pressure, unstable pulse, appearance of changes on
the EKG (rhythm disturbances, reduced voltage, changes in T wave and S-T
interval, elevation of systolic index and others) were observed at the
early postradiation stages. Impaired vascular permeability and capillary
resistance were observed less often (A. V. Kozlova et al., 1968; Takaoka,

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.i, i-i'l' u‘ l,.l 4‘2; |"-.'.

1968. and others). The change» occurred uvvnv” with exposure of the head to
smaller doses and thvv were more marked :nnn with irradiation of other part"
of the bady. Hith expo urc of the ChI-i an“ immediate region 01 .he hvnrt.
changes were demonstrated in arterial pressure in the direction vi a drop.
and with exposure of the abdominal cavity, in the direction at elevation.

in some cases. changen wene detected |L th later stage (lute or more

years after exposure) in the nature of ucluiutic changes (myocardinsnlorauin)
and their link to irradiation was questionable (S. Rh. Sidorovich. I969;

A. V. Koslova, 1969; Bompiani, Falcetti, i961; inkaoka, Knnedu et al.. 1965;
Biron, 1969; Palmer. 1970; Giald, 1970; Hair. 1972, and others).

On the basis of the aggregate of da*a in the literature, one can contlulu that
there is early appearance of zurdiovsscular changes following both total-body
and local exposure to high doses of radiation. They consist of appearance

of compensated functional and norpholngicrl changes in the myocardinn.
vessels. capillaries, vascular nervous Uthqu and receptors at first,

then functional disturbances of the heart. systemic and local hemodyuamics,
and reactivity.

The mechanism of onset of the observed changes is complex. in the opinion
of most authors, the functional disturbances of the cardiovascular system
under the influence of total-body and local radiation to the heart in high
doses are determined by a disorder of regulatory mechanisms leading to
changes in neuroviscersl regulation of the cardiovascular system and impair-
ment of main functions of the heart. systemic and local hemodynamics, as
well as changes in the structure proper of the heart. There are more marked

changes in cardiac vessels when the region of the heart is exposed to local
radiation. The direct deleterious effect of radiation is referable. first

of all, to vessels, then the myocardium.

There are considerably fewer works dealing with investigation of the circula-
tory system as related to chronic exposure of animals to low doses of
radiation.

The conditions of chronic experiments varied with regard to nature of
exposure (external irradiation or intake of radioactive isotopes), radiation
dosage and follow-up time, as well as methods of evaluating reactions

(studying arterial pressure. pulse EKG. pulse wave propagation velocity,
vascular permeability, blood flow, roentgenokymogrsms. metabolites, reactivity

and morphological changes).

however. in spite of the existing differences. the same direction of changes
in cardiovascular function was demonstrated in most cases. With exposure to
15-20 rem radiation. changes were demonstrated in arterial pressure, as

well as lability thereof, unstable pulse, change in pulse wave propagation
velocity [PHPV] and on the EKG, impaired rhythm, excitability. appearance
of brsdycardia, change in intrsatrial and intraventrical conduction, drop
of T wave, flattening or two phases thereof, change in reaction of arterial
pressurssndpulse to functional loads. The changes were more marked with

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high doses of radiation (A. S. Amosov. 1966; V. G. Simavonyau, 1968, and
others).

V. K. Sei'tser at al. (I970) report that no changes were demonstrated in

EKG and PKG findings after exposing the rat heart to rumulntlve doses of up
to 100 rem over a long period of time, and the saint group of animals did

not differ from the control. N. A. Zapol'skaya at al. (1968) found an
increase in levels of biologically act1Ve metabolites-~histamine, acetyl-
:holine and others-~in blood of rats exposed to 9°Sr for 2 years in doses of
bth'2 uCi/kg. Therewcretu pathological deviations in rats given strontium
in doses of 1‘10" u i/kg. Ye. i. Vorob'yev (1967. 1973) examined the

heart of rabbits exposed daily to gamma radiation in doses of lo rem to a
cumulative dosage of 600, 1500 and 2600 rem. Changes in muscle fibers of

the heart, plethora of capillaries and veins, hemorrhages, edema of inter-
stitial and perivascular connective tissue and dystrophy of muscle fibers

were noted after 30 days. with local or diffuse myofibrosis and sclerosis
of the vascular well after 3-6 months. 6. A. Poddubskiy (1966). L. N.
Burykina (1976), V. K. Sel'tser and N. V. loseva (1971) and others report
changes in the cardiovascular system at the long term following chronic
exposure to radiation. The authors observe functional disturbances of
the heart, most often demonstrable after functional tests, and they
stress the greater significance of functional changes in the adrenals at

the late postradiation term. In an interesting work conducted under the
supervision of Yu. G. Grigor'yev (1972), a study was made of the chronic

effects of external gamma radiation on the cardiovascular system, higher
nervous activity, hemopoiesis. endocrine system and metabolic processes in
dogs, with consideration of the animals' general condition. Several series
of experiments were performed involving chronic irradiation of dogs at
different dose levels (0.06-0.17-0.36 rem/day) as well as a combination

of chronic and periodic single irradiation doses (18-42 rem); the cumulative
dose over a 5-year period constituted 205, 315, 625 rem in the chronic

experiments and 600. 960 rem in the combination of exposure. As shown
by their studies, chronic irradiation did not elicit substantial disturb-

ances of vital functions of dogs, although compensatory and adaptive
capabilities were diminished. There was stabilization on a new functional
level; however. there was inadequate adaptation of animals exposed to the
highest dosage, as demonstrated by the functional tests. Histological
studies of the heart and vessels were indicative of gradual development

of signs similar to early age-related changes. These effects were related
to dose rate and duration of exposure. Several parameters were restored

after radiation was discontinued. but this occurred slower than after
acute radiation.

In the case of chronic exposure to radiation, marked changes were noted

in the cardiovascular system at the late stages. with poorer restoration of
function and slower regeneration than after acute exposure (Ye. I. Vorob'yev,
A. I. Stcpanov, I968; B. a. Harkelov, I972. and others).

Some interesting data were obtained by c. I. Lisenkova (1973). She demon-
strated a stronger relation between the effect and radiation dose rate

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
than cumulative dosage. and this should ulnn be taken into ruudidnrnLion
when analyzing clinical findings. Thus. Ju.hdrh dcuunutrntcd changes

in cardiovascular activirv (morphnlnn:.:u and funitiennli undqi lhc cl crt

of chronic exposure to relativ0ly low dunes of ionizing radiation, ihu
severity and duration of these rhnngea were related to dose rate and
cumulative dosage. The curly reactiunu in ‘hlnnlu nudist-nu tr.u qu“nl!r|Iy
due to neuroreflex regulatory changcn in thv curdLoVuvtnlur -yn!cm Sandra"

to changes in systeaic and local hemodynuml:s (A. 0. Suytnnov, 1905; S. A.
Keyzer. 1966; 9. G. Grigor'yev et a1.. lv/2. and othcis). Suhnuquvnlly.

as chronic radiation sickness develops. .he f-nvtinnnl disturbances oi

other organs and systems. as well as basal metabolism. rhﬂnnvﬁ in the cirvn
lstory system. are maintianed by neurnrellcx influences along Uith endocrlne-
hormonal and humoral changes.

Some authors consider it possible tor cardiovascular chdugum tn also occur
as a result of the immediate effect of {delviivn lu myonvuia‘ -lrmcntn Hi
the heart and vessels. At the long term. along with changes in reactivity,
morphological changes are also observed in the cardiovascular system (C. l.
Liaenkova, 1973; Ye. I. Vorob‘yev et al.. 1971, and others). As a rule.
the cardiovascular changes are adequately compensated, and they arr demen-
strable only with loads (A. 6. lzerglna, 1972; V. l. Korchcmkin. [973, and
others).

The results obtained on animals cannot be entirely extrapolated to man,
although they can offer a general idea about the nature and direction of
reactions to chronic radiation. when making extrapolations. one must take
into n:nsideration the species-specific distinctions of reactions. Thus,
different reactions have been found in animals, depending on species and age.
Rats were found to be more resistant than rabbits. Young animals are more
sensitive and present stronger reactions.

Many difficulties are involved in identifying and properly evaluating
changes in health status and. in particular. in the cardiovascular system

of individuals whose work involves exposure to ionizing radiation. Numerous
experimental and clinical studies show that the changes developing in
individuals who have been exposed to low doses of radiation for long periods
of time do not present strictly specific features. Several factors must be
taken into consideration to demonstrate their link to radiation. In addition
to comprehensive sanitary and hygienic characteristics with evaluation of all

factors of working conditions. one needs to have information about the nature.
incidence and severity of analogous deviations among properly selected con-

trol groups and be guided by the general theses on epidemiology of diseases
of this class at a given time.

in view of improved working conditions. marked forms of chronic radiation
sickness are virtually unseen in clinical practice of recent years. Inves-

tigation of the health status of individuals whose work involves exposure to
low doses of ionizing radiation, doses close to the maximum permissible

levels. as well as long-term sequelae of prior chronic radiation sickness

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Iu acquiring much Importance. because of inadequate lnfurmudnvun of clini-
clans with regard to the main thesvu of vlinlra rndlnhinlupv, complexity

of the phenomena that occurred and occasional lack of cienrcui quantitative
characteriaticn of the relationship between dosage and hmn~diatp somatic
manifestations, at the early utngcn all changes damnuurated in health
status of individuals. who had minimal contact with auurcva of ionizing radi~
ation in some cases, regardless of dose levels, were attributed to signs

of chronic radiation nicknuas. This also applies fully to evaluation of
reactions of the cardiovascular system.

The first works were mainly descriptive. supplying the findings of single
outpatient screening of some occupational groups. often very small ones.

or else inpatient studies of deliberately selected individuals with some
deviations or other in health status. There were usually no descriptions
of sanitary and hygienic aspects of working conditions or information about
individual radiation dose»; nor were there data about the incidence and
nature of dynamic changes. as compared to the initial results of screening
essentially healthy people in a so-cniicd control group. All this made it
difficult to correctly evaluate the observed deviations as related to the
effects of ionizing radiation.

Information about people working with sources of ionizing radiation is

given in several works by H. N. Fateyeva et a1. (1955, 1960), N. I. Shcherbakov
(1966), G. G. Lysina (1962, 1968), Yo. I. Vorob'yev et a1. (1965-1973) and
others. Host authors observe changes in the cardiovascular system. manifes-
ted by auffled heart sounds, appearance of apical systolic murmur. enlarge-
ment of the left ventricle and changes in arterial pressure, mainly in the
direction of decline. Thus. according to the data of V. I. Kuznetsov and

G. A. Luk'yanov (1957) a decline of arterial pressure was observed in 611

of those examined and elevation, in 6.72. There were also unstable pulse
(tachycardia or bradycardia), changes in EKG indires (decreased wave voltage,
changes in intraatriai and intraventricular conduction. decline of T wave,

S-T interval and extension of Q-T). There was appearance of labile pulse
with functional tests, changes in capillary circulation, attenuation of

vascular reflexes in piethysaographic studies. inadequate and static reac-
tions to cold and heat. The clinical changes were most often defined in
terms of "asthenovegetative syndrome" or "vascular dystrophy." Along with
signs of the astheoovegetative syndrome, some changes were noted in oxygena-
tion. with development of hypoxia, occasionally demonstrable after functional
tests (H. A. Kurshakov, P. H. Kireyev, 1963; G. c. Lysina, i963. 1972).

which authors related to impaired coordination between delivery of blood and
aeration in the lungs.

According to Ye. I. Vorob'yev (1971), oxyhenometric and spirometric studies
revealed the same incidence of deviations from normal in oxygenation of

blood and external respiration function in individuals of the main (gamma
flaw detectors) and control group. Blood flow in the pulmonary circulation.
determined by the oxyhemonetric method. was increased in 5.22 of the main
group and 6.31 of the control. and decreased in 11.2 and 91, respectively.

73

FOR 0??!CIAL USE OSLY
Decreased vascular tonus was often denonntrnrvd on the basis of the results
of aeasuring PHPV in vessels of the nianti- and muscular types.

There have also been reports of changes in permeability of (Insular membrane»
(hyaluronidase-hyaluronic acid system) and vessels (H. l. Sminnuva. ?o. A.
Dcnisova, 1969). The changes in histamine content werr lriuhlﬂul, 4rd
cholinesterase activity was not infrequvuzly Sun.

In the early years of using sources of ‘onizing radiation in industry.
changes in the cardiovascular system were -iJn found more often because
they were based on findings referable mainly to sick individuals who uftcr
sought medical aid. According to werkJ of recent years, n romparlﬁou of
findings on the main and central groups often fails to demonstrate apprecl-
able changes in health staLJu and condition of the cardiovascular nystea
(A. K. Arnautov et al.. 1966-1968; V. K. Sel'tser et al., I066-l973, and
others).

Soae authors stress the exceptional sensitivity of the cardiovascular system
to even low levels of radiation, without evaluating the effects of other
factors. Thus, V. V. Volkovitskaya et n}. (1966) found some physiological
changes in individuals exposed to ionizing radiation in the form of brief
episodes of doses in excess of the permissible level (during repair work

on different elements of charged particle accelerators, when the radiation
doses could reach 3 rem in 3-7 days). These changes were transient and did

not exceed the range of the physiological norm, but they differed from
base findings. In our opinion. it would be more correct to evaluate them as

variants of nor-a1 physiological reactions to a set of occupational factors
(excessive fatigue while doing repair and inspection work).

The most coaprehensive data referable to dynamic observation of individuals
working in contact with sources of ionizing radiation in the Iain branches

of industry are contained in works of the last decade (A. K. Gus'kovs, Ye. A.
Denisova, V. A. Soldatova, N. I. Gorbarenko, R. A. Solodova, G. l. Kirsanova.

E. N. L'vovskaya. A. V. Barebanova et al., 1963-1975, and others). A

complete, rather than sampling, dynamic screening was made of individuals
coaing in contact with radiation while working with charged particle acce-
lerators and atomic reactors used in scientific research, as well as medical
roentgenologiats and radiologists. industrial roentgenologists and flaw
detectors. nine workers. individuals employed in scientific research institu-
tionaandthoae using radioactive isotopes in producing fluorescent substancesof

continuous action based on radium and mesothorium. and others. In all.
there were 6000 people examined in the main group and about 500 in the
control; they were under observation dynamically for 10-15 years, at 1-2-
year intervals.

in view of the mildness, transience and reversibility of the observed changes

in the cardiovascular and nervous systems, special investigative methods
were used for early detection of deviations. The following techniques jus-

tified themselves the most: electrocardiography, rheography. sphygmography,
deteruination of systolic and ainute blood volumes, general peripheral

7h

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’ilk ill-'FiiIlM. IISIV ”NLY

resistance, autonomic reflexes (Anchnur-anninl oeniocnrdinc reflex, ocula-
stailc, postural reflexes, orilnntith~nndi linun:- Iv), dvirfmiuﬂilﬂﬂlﬂ skin
temperature and perspiration, threshold luvvln of different lurms of
sensibility. All studies were conducted at real and riier functional
loads, and this made it possible to demonstrate the reserve capabilities

of the tested systems, as well as possible range of fluctuations in each
individual case and the group as a whole.

The studies showed the chosen methods to be adequate for detection of early
functional changes under the influence of radiation, and they made it
possible to assess the health status of examined individuals as a whole.

The medical findings were compared at different times, with consideration

of cumulative radiation dose and its distribution in time. The results of
clinical tests were processed in the direction of evaluating health status,
and clinicophysiological characteristics of the cardiovascular system at
different observation times, as related to radiation dose levoi; thus, a
study was made of the stages of [creation of reactions to chronic radiation
in low doses, in the course of accretion of the dose load and as compared to
findings for control groups examined at the same times. Concurrent examina-
tion of a control group yielded information about the incidence and direc-
tion, nature of changes in the cardiovascular system of essentially healthy
individuals, made it possible to investigate the dynamics of their develop-
ment at different ages, to assess their stability, direction, severity and
to obtain information about the incidence of disease among essentially
healthy people. The obtained facts were submitted to statistical processing.
0n the basis of the comprehensive work-up, a conclusion was made for each
individual, with distinction of the following main categories: in good
health (lack of complaints or objective deviations, even after special
clinicophysiological tests); essentially healthy (history of compensated
disease in the past or deviations in parameters of physiological functions
that do not affect wellbeing and fitness of the subject and do not form

a circumscribed syndrome of functional deficiency of any system); circum-
scribed syndromes of cardiovascular reaction: syndrome of vegetovascular dys-
function, vascular dystonia of the hypotensive or hypertensive type, occa-
sionally combined with general asthenla (asthenovegetstive syndrome); they
are described in Chapter 1. In some cases, a general (nonoccupational) or
occupational disease (chronic radiation sickness) was diagnosed at the

time of the examination.

There was prevalence of men among those working with accelerators, atomic
reactors and industrial roentgenologists, and more women among medical
roentgenologists and radiologists. The mean age of those screened in
the former group was under 40 years and in the latter, slightly over 60
years. Control groups were formed to correspond with the main groups,
with regard to differences in sex, age and nature of work, as well as
similarity of residences in specific economic and geographic regions.

The results of this study revealed that the first reactions to the entire
set of occupational factors appeared in 802 of the subjects upon reaching

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a cumulative radiation dose of 25-50 rum in %«9 years. The incidence of
deviations of some autonomic and hemodvn.ulr lndices rose appreciably. as
compared to base data and results obtained in control groups. Thorn were
more individuals with complaints of on uathenoneurotlc nature (increased
fatigability, headaches, heaviness of the head, sleep disorders, irrita-
bility, quick temper, excessive perspiration). At the some time, no rhnngeu
were demonstrated in viscera, the nervous system, eyes or blood of most
subjects. Objective examination revealed muffled heart sounds (20; of the
cases, versus LA! at the first examination). systolic apical murmur (172,
vsrsus 62) and rhythm disorders (31 and 161, respectively). Onset of these
deviations was apparently due to changes in regulatory influences of the
autonomic nervous system on the myocardium. All of the deviations were
moderate, and their incidence was lower than usually cited in the literature
for individuals exposed to radiation under occupational conditions. Thus,

V. I. Kuznetsov and G. A. Luk'yanov (1957) feund dull hourr sounds and appear-
ance of systolic murmur in 582 of the cases and L. M. Omel'yancnkn 11957),

in 571, and she considers these symptoms to be signs of dystrophic myocardial
changes.

EKG examinations revealed a higher incidence of rhythm and excitability
disorders of the myocardium (56 and 292, respectively), and a more frequent
tendency toward elevation of systolic index (26 and 112, respectively).
There was more marked tachycardia after a measured physical load. These
deviations are also typical of disturbances of autonomic innervation, with
changes in bioelectrical processes in the myocardium.

Many authors have reported changes in cardiac function, according to EKG
findings, among individuals working with ionizing radiation, and most of
them demonstrated changes in rhythm of heart function, negligible decline
of wave voltage, flattening of P and T waves, extension of Q-T, evaluating
them as manifestations of disturbances in tonus of the sympathetic and

parasympathetic nervous system, with trophic changes in the myocardium,
hypoxic and regulatory disturbances of biochemical processes in the myo—

cardium (P. D. Gorizontov, B. B. Horoz, 1962; N. A. Kurshakov, 1963; Ye. I.
Vorob'yev, 1973, and others). Upon reaching the above mentioned doses,
increase in systolic andminute blood volumes, instability of total peri—
pheral resistance with moderate decrease or, less often, increase thereof
were observed more often in the main group. There were also more marked
fluctuations of these parameters with the use of standard physiological
loads. Although arterial pressure was consistent with the age norm in

most subjects, more distinct fluctuations were observed in the course of
the dynamic study, as compared to control groups: at the early stages,

with radiation doses of 25-30 rem, arterial hypertension was found almost

3 times more often and hypotension less often; thereafter, with increase

in radiation dosage there was an appreciable increase in incidence of hypo-
tension, whereas in the control group the fluctuations of arterial pressure
were insignificant throughout the observation period. The differences were
statistically reliable, with regard to mean maximum arterial pressure in
the main group at different times (118-106 mm Hg, t - 3.0). In the control
group, there were negligible fluctuations of mean systolic arterial

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
_ _ . ., ....'... .
l‘u'flVIH. I'Ihi'. .II.'| I-linl ). In l|.|- .Hi" 3""'"I’-

ill l-I‘dc'l’ II-'I--'-. PHI-up. 'E.‘-: 15.51!“ - I'

[U LII" :mllu- [Inn-L, '41- .ll“! "hurl-[ml .i -..,-.-~, n.
Imam", than u--: :I H-n-II-m / Hum-ml 1-1! hy .n-Ila
'Hu' (lulu In [In IIII'I'JIJIII nu lhln -.--m-- .n-.- I"
and ‘5. A. Luk'ynunv (I'I‘J). :i. I.. Itulni..un--.- (l'l
brme-z-nr-Hu; I.. ll. 'hnu-i'ymn-ulm --:, --I. Hun/I.
Lauhynnrdln Innrl' "ILL'II. Mon-J -l'llllln':. a. ,..-- .-
urturI-cl [HIP—Jill!" (.‘I. N. l-':||,u--n-v:| 1-! .u'., I'M-U;
Yu. I. VoInh'yn-v ul :nl.. l'l'nn. am! ..|'.. r.). ..-A
In nllrlbuluhlu: In dIIIt-r--nn-:. In -;-.min-n- i=-n I

 

Huuuunsma-nl nf pu-n-surc- In Llu- rumml 1- l in..l

I'J'I5. I972) rcvunlt‘d :I «Im-Ilm- mun "Him In III
(In all .15.: uroupn), a-salu-anl l3: ullvr ﬂ-lz yo.”
ZIZ In tlu- runtrul). le drnp 0! premium In Ill
cnInu-Idml, In Inml (‘;|.';L':;, will: :;y:;u-I:nlv' ln-mudyu
observed Doro: ufluu In It‘llIVldu-Iln ullll nrru-rln

SIJIdItw oI ant-Hal pros-a-Iun- in uycmu-lJ'iu-al v.u:
and lower texlr-cmltluu lr/ Inn-mus m mu-Iiluurnphy
of asymutrlc-ul nrlurlul er-uur‘.‘ In clu- nnIn r.
veuuclu M Lin.- arms (up In 252 "I” (In: U‘SIIEL'h).
maymctry u! Ilu- mn-IlL-Imry Iullt-x In Ll-I- rmIn
vcruuv. “'1. In H." conlrnl).

Inc-reused lublllly of :nru'tlul prmmun- and ,mi
[uncllunul ta-szlu. luhllily m' ant-rial prn-z'nn-u
urLIumlalltz InmllIon :mrl liIbIIILy of pnl:.--. .I.
physlcul luml, [In-n.- wvrv mun: -;lgn:"h;.xn:. Il-.r
prczluun- and pulse Hum .It llu- initial u-x..-..in.1'
uI’ Inrrmmud a MIL-min” «,f Ilu- ant-mumh: m .--

Y0. l. Vufuh'l- .' Pl .1! . (I'I'I'H III-:Iull'.|l:lltr'5 -- -l
of .an-I '.I [u ".hul‘u' .nul [ml u: wlliv :uzn : lulu-i
prv'ml- -- nf pannynquntm-I.i. want-m- :md mar
In Uw ro-ruhral t-nrmx.

Sphyunumrswhlu: ‘leI'H-~'. «.I lh-- l.l.l'l!I.|.' ,.-.ll (clo-
plopugallnn VI.'lm'll'/- .‘".'-----I' '.:u-:- .|.ur :ull! n-lu
tlu- lemon“, rmllul .uu-n -u .qu .mxlu) rum-nil.-
n..1Inlv in tuner-II .- :.','|n- Va-‘i'3l-I'.' m-ra- lihsl-er-ll
In llu: mil. gruup ol Indleduul'. llmn In :lw w:
parLICulnxly "(Mfr-bloc :II. [III- mlrly 514,-“. in
artcrlnl !)ll"i.'.llf‘f and .1 [vault-m7 (twat-I --!--'.'.'urI
less frequent changes in PHPV In vvsnvla nf -}r nlrxllt Iypv. A nnrm1'
Correlation between 9va ill muscular -"' a I --.l i-‘ L79 .3; of vr-um 1;: 2:1,: "2.-
served in 502 of the subject". In 4!! Cameo, the chunﬁv was an. 'c -
change in PHPV in vessels of the nnvrular type. In the control Hr"up, the

correlation between PNPV In vessels of lhr mnernlar and clr"vuc vene-
(C., Ce) was norm] in most «1.131915, :IHII "Iu'rr -.- .n- my! “ctr-Ir rl-.- ,v- III
the coefficient up"n re-exauiwatinn. A nnrir' "urrnl:'-on was In: na.-rted

between Cu. and mean dynamic arterial pre-sure. Cm we” accelerated in 60-515
of the individuals with high mean urtu‘lni p:vnuuri nnd slowing of th~ lo'n-
was observed in h8-681 of the individuals hIIL law arterial pressurr

The data we obtained may be indicative of sane instability oi indI-cn of
vascular tonua. mainly in arirr.es of the muscular tyne, and ph15ir nature
of changes in tonus of [ulna arteries. At the early stages, there was more
often a tendency toward increased munruiar Iun|1 of the VﬂnVHIJr :«ll 1rd

at the later stages, with higher doses of rainh::tn, thvrr 14¢ mu-e of an
slower propagation of the pulse wave, indicative of decreased vascular tonns
ol arteries of the muscular type. The changes in «can» were also referable
to smaller vessels (arteries, arterioles, Veins). an indiunted by rheo-
graphic studies that made it possible to evaluatr both vascular Lﬂndﬁ (nver~
all) and blood supply to diiierent vascular regions. The studies reVeﬂled
that there were no gross disturbances, but decreased tonus of cerebral
vessels with signs of venous stasis in some vascular regiors were observed
at the late stages. N. 1. Shchcrbakov (1960, 1966), Ye. l. Vorob'yev et al.
(1968) and others reported on decreased vascular tonus on the basis of
oscillographic studies (drOp of mean arterial pressure, flattening of oscillo-
grnynic curve. asymmetry of parameters of oscillogrsm curve. some elevation
of oscillatory index); N. A. Kurshaknv. 0. H. Kireyev (1963) and others
reported the same on the basis of data indicating slower PUPV in vessels of

the muscular type.

Determination of systolic and minute blood volumes. as well as total peri-
pheral resistance, made it possible to evaluate more fully the state of
hemodynamics. The changes were related to observation period. At the early
stages, with radiation doses of about 25-50 rem, one-third of the subjects
in the main group presented above normal (62 ml) systolic volume. This
could be indicative both of increased diastole and increased contractility
of the myocardium as a result of the positive inotropic vagal cffcct (N. N.
Savitskiy, 1970).

inthe control group, the systolic volume was about the same at all examina-
tion times and there was a low incidence of deviations from normal. The
difference between the main and control groups, with respect to incidence

of deviations from normal systolic volume, was statistically significant

at the early stages (t - 2.75). Minute volume was somewhat higher in the

main group, as compared to the first examination, whereas there were virtually
no differences in the control group. This was also reported by Ye. V.
Cembitskiy (1967), N. S. Holchanov (1962) and others.
The correlation between avian: and pluper mluulv volume la the screened

llldlvldual-I rt-vn-aIn-d lhai' lln- .n‘t'lml lu- 'I'l u.|-. . - .iien :Iluwt- the rim,-
level in I:- uain nrnup, ewpeclalle at the erIy niazlu, and the differences
from the I'-I|Il rol Ml‘mlr were Ieli-Ilvle (I -'- l. l).

Total peripheral rvnintaurv wan nuluul in mnbi Iudlvldualh n: the "min gloup
and the control. A campurionn ui actual and proper inlal purlphelal reuintanre
revealed that deviatlnna In the direction of lower and hlxhrr actual resintaaee
were encountered equally often in the groupa examined, hui at the laat exami»
nation there were more frequent drviatinnu in the direction nl higher actual
peripheral resistance in the control nrnup.

Along with changea in cardiac function and hemodyulmirs, thure were also
vegctoaomatic uervoua disorders, an indicated by skin temperature changes
and diatorhanceu on cutaneouu thermotopography, perapiratinu, changes

in reflex background of tendon reilexes with inconsialrnl anvmmetry thereof,
appearance of negativn and distorted reactioua to the Aschnerwnannini tent
and demonstration of orthoatatic and ciinostatie rcflerrn, coordination
disorders, changes in discrimination and vibration xena!hility, lowered
threshold of sensibility to pain and faster adaptation to pain. 1he incid-
ence of theue deviation» constituted 20-102. More often, changes in the
cardiovascular and autonomic nervous system were found in the same subjects;
they warranted the diagnosis of the syndrome of functional instability of
regulation of the cardiovascular syatcm, vegetovaacnlar dy:toaia, apparently
related to increased excitability of the autonomic branchea of the nervous
system. According to the data of A. B. Markizova and E. N. Nukhina (1968),
V. K. Kamenetskiy (1968) and others, changes in autonomic reactions and
reactivity were observed in about 30% of the cases, i.e., the incidence and
time of appearance of these deviations were close to the figures we obtained.

It should be noted that the subjects often felt well and presented no com-
plaints about their health status in the presence of objective changes in
the autonomic nervous system or hemodynamics. Occasionally, changes were

demonstrable only after a load, indicating increased reactivity of the
autonomic nervous system.

All reactions to exposure in this range of radiation deces were moderate,
they presented aw strict specificity and it would have been difficult to
detect and consider these deviations if we did not have the base data and
results vi dynamic observation, as well as data on the control group. It

is only by means of dynaaic comparison that we could relate them, not only

to the effects of ionizing radiation, but the net of other Industrial factors.
According to our data, functions of vital organs are not affected, and

they prenent variants of actual with some expansion of the range of

vascular reactions, as also te.JrLed by other authors (N. S. Molchanov, 1962;
Ye. V. Cembitskiy. l969; A. K. Cus'kova et al., 1970. 1973; V. K. Scl'tser
et al., 1973, and others). According to the data of A. K. Gus'kova. Ye. A.
Denisova, V. K. Sel'tser and others, the above-described initial reaction
lasted an average of 1-2 years; thereafter, in spite of continuing on the

79
Fm: nr‘F'tZHL -. ..2 will.

same Job. the deviations leveled off. rhe -qurnlhlully o. -hdnuc- ul;oum
subjects, their good general condition an' vc;llgihle leVelu of duviutluun

confirm the formed impression of "(UFO -:iux mv-haninm er uh:'- .npaznuu

We are justified in Interpreting the "huerved changes an an adartni.on1l
reaction to altered environmental conditions, including exposure to ionizing
radiation. Occasionally ’17-207. of the Car—w". 121-. 2-4.3." 'I-! 'h" u!i...I;-.u-.‘.l
or even progressed somewhat, and with :urlhe: la-uvusw In 2-.aa ;L~.- -.g

development of the clinical syndrome of nenrnr rvulnrory dyurnnln ml the
hypotensive tyre, indicative of some deficient-y mainly in region-Ii circula-
tion. The syndrome of neurncirculatory dyslhuln Uhucrvud in this ylﬂup of
subjects was characterized by several ciénical diniinrtlund. The pellvnln
complained of headache (mainly long-lasting. almost constant, locallzci in
the region of the forehead, temples and oceiput). insomnia, increased
fatigability, general weakn~cJ, vertigo, especially in the mornings. Their
integument was pale. Dull heart sounds and an apical systolic murmur were
found in half the subjects. There was artelial hypntennlon (00:) le
bradycardia (31X). Vascular tonus was decreased (slow PHPV in Vessels of
the muscular type. slower propagation of the rheographic wave, change in
type and quantitative parameters of rheograms) in peripheral and cerebral
vessels, particularly veins. with signs of stasis. An increase or tendency
toward increase was demonstrated in systolic and minute blood volumes, as
well as decrease in total peripheral resistance. Analogous changes were
also observed by Ye. V. Gelbitskiy (1968) and many other authors.

Instability of vascular tonus and changes in reactivity were also demonstrated
with the oscillographic. rheographic and plethysmographic methods. and
capillaroscopy. More often there was diminished tonus of both large and

small vessels, with spastic and atonic capillaries. Vascular tonus was not
the same in different regions, and there was more frequent decrease in

tonus of vessels of the head. Decreased tonus of cerebral veins was often
demonstrated by means of rheography, orbital plethysmography, occlusion
plethysmography and examination of vessels of the eyegrounds (V. P. Zhnurkin
et al., 1965; G. I. Kirsanova, 1968, and others). Slower resorption of
radioactive iodine from the intracutaneous reservoir was also indicative of
changes in peripheral circulation (H. I. Smirnova, Ye. A. Denisova, 1969).

The fluctuations of arterial pressure and pulse rate with functional tests
(orthostatic, clinoststic, physical load) were more marked than in essentially
healthy individuals, and this is consistent with the data of Ye. V. Gembitskiy
(1968) and others. Changes of a regular nature were demonstrated on the EKG
of almost half the subjects (63.5%) and changes in bioelectrical processes

in one-quarter (28.52). indicative of diffuse changes in the myocardium of

a dystrophic nature. They consisted of lowering of wave voltage, flattening,
crenation of P wave, HRS complex and T wave, which could be indicative of
slower conduction of exeitatory impulses and slower contractions of specific
muscles of the ventricles. Slowing of atrioventrical conduction and

increase of the systolic index were observed less often. These changes could
be indicative of the prevalent influence of the parasympathetic nervous
system.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Evidently, along with regulatory ch1ngva in anlonumlc innervation, more
profound changes are nine obuerved. whirh Irﬂd :n a vhanuv In myocardial
metabolism. it in difficult to rule out the pathological lnlluence of the
vagus on onset thereof. They could be interpreted an dyunuw:dnﬂie, dyn-
trophic. Thin Concept in connlnlent with the change in levels of mvrahuIinm
in the myocardium (A. V. lvanov, N. N. Knrnhakuvn, IQhZ; Yv. F. Lnuhnikov,
1969, and others). At this stage of observation. these deviations do not
weaken myocardial contractility, as indicated by hvmndynamics and rraultu

of measurement of systolic and minute volumes.

Autonomic disturbances and a tendency toward lowering of skin temperalure

in distal parts of the limbs, asymetry of skin temperature and perspiration,
changes in sensitivity to pain in the distal parts (hypesthcsia) were demon-
strated in patients with neurocirrnlutery dystonia, which is indicative of
disorders of receptor systems of a primary nature, as well as those related
to circulatory disturbsnces. Postural reflexes (orthostatie, rlinostatic),
Aschner-Dsgnini oculocardiac reflex, physical load tests were indicative

of increased reactivity of the nervous system with considerable involvement
of its parasympathetic branch.

Examination of biochemical indices failed to demonstrate appreciable dia-
turbanccs, but there were changes inherent usually in older age groups
(moderate increase in alpha-2 and gamma globulins, increase in beta lipo-
proteins, etc.), as also indicated by Ye. V. Cembitskiy (1969), V. N.
Kozlovskiy (1972) and others. According to the data of G. c. Lysina (1975).
maximum oxygen tension was also higher in the same individuals than in the
control, while the index of tissular oxygen uptake was higher than the
index of oxygen transport. After an oxygen load, there was less increment
of oxygen than in the control, and this is probably attributable to the
higher "initial level" of oxygen tension before the load. The overall
indices of redox processes (oxygen disapperance rate in blood and urine)
did not differ from data for the control group and corresponded to the
lower range of normal. There was an increase in external respiration (in-
creased minute volume of respiration and oxygen absorbed per minute),
indicative of an increased oxygen requirement. The authors related the
observed disturbances to disturbances of gas exchange regulation, and they
considered them to be adaptational.

Not all subjects developed the syndrome of neurocirculatory dystonia. In
most cases, there was only an initial reaction to radiation, apparently of
an adaptive nature to adjust the body to new conditions.

In addition to ionizing radiation, individual discinctions of the body
(extent of adaptability to environmental changes, level of development of
functional systems, regulatory oystcm), as well as the effects of other

factors (psychoemotional loads, mental tension, trauma, prior diseases,
bad habits, etc.), are probably of some significance, and they could create

a certain background of increased sensitivity to exogenous factors.

81

FOR OFFICIAL ESE OSLY
l"|)|'. OFFICIAL l':'.2 ‘'M Y

Hith increase in cumulative rudintion douvn rn 200-400 rem, chunurs may
appear_in other organs and systems, inc'wdlng the blood, gastroiutustlnal
tractggrespiratory organs, and some individuals develop chronlc radiar.on
sicncss. In such cases, there is also secondary involvement in the process
of the cardiovascular system due to injury to more radiosensltlve organs
and systems. This was observed in patients “if“ chronic radiation nirknL-u.
for example, medical rocntgenologists with long work tenure exposed to
cumulative radiation of the order of iSO-LOO rem (v. A. Soidatnva. 1967—
1973), as well as individuals working with radian (k. A. Solodovs. 1967).

Thus, with exposure to up to 100 rem there are no overt signs of radiation
sickness, but there is impairment of ueurovascular regulation and appearance
of moderate changes in systemic and local (mainly) circulation. The initial
reaction is adaptive in nature, and there is no substantial involvement of
circulation in vital regions (brain, heart). This is assorlnrcd tirh a

good general condition and fitness of aubjrcts. As a rule. the hcucdyunaic
changes are compensatory in nature (drop of arterial pressure is associated
with increase in systolic and minute volume; slowing of pulse and blood

flow is combined with increased tissular oxygen uptake), i.e., the changes
in some functioas are compensated by others to provide the integral para-
meters inherent in normal circulation.

The transient nature of the reaction to continued expOSure to radiation is
indicative of its adaptiezand physiological nature. The neurocirculatory
dystonia syndrome, which develops in some people under the effect of the
some radiation doses, may be indicative of aggravation of neuroregulatory
disorders and changes in central and peripheral circulation inherent, to
some extent, in these individuals previously. In such cases, the changes
are functional and no profound disturbances of cardiac activity develop.

Progression of cardiovascular pathology may be observed with development of
chronic radiation sickness.

In addition to changes in general hemodynamics and cardiac function, local
disturbances of peripheral circulation (in the skin, limbs, brain) combined

with drop of arterial pressure, venous stasis and venous hypotonia are
inherent in chronic radiation sickness. The local circulatory disorders

are aggravated under the influence of some provoking factors, they induce
subjective disorders (headache. pain in the extremities, increased sensation
of cold, general weakness and others) that may be the prime elements of

the clinical syndrome. Transient focal neurological symptoms may appear.
which are attributable to regional insufficiency of cerebral circulation

and transient hypoxia of some parts of the brain. Objective examination
reveals mild involvement of nerve trunks in the reaction. Some tenderness

of the periosteum, vessels and, less often, muscles is demonstrable.
Muscle tone is somewhat decreased in the limbs. Distal reduction of
pain and vibration sensibility is often demonstrated. In-depth studies
reveal the nature of asthenic disorders. The sensation of pain may be
very long-lasting, and it is confirmed by means of adaptoeetry and other

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (ll’l’liilAl. USE ONLY

elevtrophyaiulogieai tout" (A. K. Gua'kuvn. l. K. lnrlonuva, i001). Signs
of impaired peripheral circulation arr also rnunl- cvnnunln, cold rxtremln
tics. changes in oscillation curves, rheovasograma and vaplllary blood flow.

Inadequacy of cerebral circulation under the influence of radialiou may be
manifested in the form of predominant decrease or increaSe in Loans at
cerebral arteries and veins (0. l. Kirsanova, 1968. I971). Dull hemdache,
occurring in the morning and becoming more intense at the end of the day.
after spending time in a stuffy room. when overtired or after phyaicnl
stress, is more typical of individuals with predominant decrease in arterial
and venous tonus. Vertigo is rare, clinical signs of vestibular disorders
are limited to vegetative manifestations and mild nystagmus, mild shakiness
when walking and in Romberg's position: there is diffuse and mild decrease
of muscle tone; tendon and periosteal reflexesare lnconaistently asymmetrical.
At the time of a headache, the severity of symptoms increases. Arterial
pressure is low, including that of the central retinal artery; the veins

of the eyegrounds are dilated and arteries are occasionally moderately con-
stricted. The rheoencephalogram shows rapid ascent to the peak of the
curve. marked additional waves on the descending leg, slower propagation

of the rheographic wave, which is typical of decreased tones of arteries
and veins.

Constant and especially sporadic headaches related to diverse physical and
emotional stress, changes in temperature, barometric pressure and other

meteorological factors are more often present in individuals with increased
tones of cerebral arteries.

Arterial pressure is normal or moderately elevated. There is mild constric-
tion of arteries of the optical fundus. Neurologicaily, there is prevalence
of transient focal symptoms of the order of mild pyramidal insufficiency.
The headaches are more often localized in the occipital region. During an
access of headache, there is appearance of nystagmus and tenderness with
extreme diversion of the eyeballs, with attenuation of the general back-

ground of reflexes and muscle tone, and reflex asymmetry. Rheoencephalograms
show signs of increased arterial toaua and vascular asymmetry. These symptoms

are more often observed in individuals over 60 years of age. There is pre-
valence of women among individuals with decreased vascular tones.

The data in the literature (A. F. Bibikova, 1960; R. H. Lyubimova, 1962)
are indicative of involvement of spinal fluid synthesizing structures and
fluid-containing pathways in the reaction to radiation. Our observations
reveal that. in the case of chronic exposure to radiation in the dose range
of [50-600 rem, marked disturbances referable to spinal fluid dynamics are
observed only when exposure to radiation is associated with a history of
infection or trauma of the nervous system. They are more consistent in the
case of local irradiation of the brain in doses reaching several thousand
roentgens, and the direct effects of injury to the glisl stroma are in-
volved in onset thereof.

83

FOR tl'r'l-‘ICIAL. l'Sl-I ONLY
The changes in cardiac activity in the presence of chronic lndlniiou sickness
are characterized as changes that are main-y regulatory in nature. tn well
as disturbances of a metabolic nature nn ihr mynrnrdluu rrnpul. u; the LYO"
cardiodystrophy type. Complaints appear of pain in the region or the heart.
palpitations and dyspnca. Hidening of boundaries of the heart, dull heart
sounds and apical systolic murmur are demonstrable. 0n the [LC there in

a decrease in voltage, flattening of T wave and decrease of S-T intc.vai.
widening of QRS complex. elevation of systolic index and moderate increase
in ventricular electrical systole. The Icndency toward intensified.
inadequate and longer reactions to physical loads persists. it should ho
noted that all of the changes are more marked in the older individual".

There nay be structural changes in the heart and vessels with exposure to
large cumulative doses of rauiation, and they subsequently become quite
persistent. Appearance of corresponding physical symptoms (dull sounds.
wider boundaries, change in vascular tonns) is indicative ol then: changes.

Other variants of the syndrome of neurocircuiatory dystonia (normotonic type
with cardiac signs and hypertonic type) are not inherent in chronic exposure
to radiation. Their incidence in the main groups does not differ from the
control, and they are identical to analogous syndromes of nonradiation
genesis with respect to clinical and physiological characteristics.

Investigation of morbidity among individuals in the main group revealed that
the incidence of such diseases as vascular atherosclerosis and cardiac
ischemia became somewhat higher at the end of the observation period than
at the first examination. however, one must also take into consideration
the corresponding advance by 12-15 years in mean age of the subjects and

an analogous increase in incidence of these diseases in the control groups.

Analysis of diseases of the cardiovascular system as a function of working
conditions and occupation (Table 5) indicates that there is a higher incidence
of functional disorders along workers dealing with accelerators, medical
radiologists and industrial radiographers, as well as those who work with
radioactive isotopes at scientific research institutions. We were impressed
by the somewhat higher incidence of essential hypertension and vascular
atherosclerosis among medical roentgenologists and radiologists. The ob-
served differences in morbidity structure of the main group are attributable
to differences in age and sex composition of these groups. Moreover, the
distinctive elements of their work. poor scheduling of work and rest.
somatic burden and, in a number of cases, bad habits are apparently also
significant. A comparison to a adequate control data may confirm this
impression.

Analysis of observations, with consideration of the age of the subjects,
enabled us to determine that hypotonic reactions are encountered more
often in the main group and older subjects, whereas hypertonic reactions
correspond to the control. In view of the fact that, at the present tine,

the age of most workers dealing with reactors, accelerators and industrial
radiographers under 40 years, we deemed it necessary to continue the study.

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 5. incidence of cardiovascular syndromes amour, individuals in
different ocenpntiuna] groups

_‘ ._. _. __.___,___,..__- —--———.

 

_incldence ul cardiovnar.':yndrnmrn, x

-——..

mrketn medical "

 

 

 
  
    
   
  
 
     

 

 

 

 

 

 

___1 I
I; a I: I

l I —-u3.um

3s: i! 3 I: 2 '3232' - -
Clinical syndromes u as o a «0'0 ' om mntml

C 0 -- ml 3—4 Mum Front.

0" 'U W ‘01) HO '

so so so omu

kc hH Hh awn
Veggggtivc dyafunc- .n no.0 o 3 3.2 19.7 I "3.0 «.0. a;

Neurocirculntory
dystonia:

ypotonic type

hypertonic type
Essential hyperten- 52 «an 82
sion
Vascular athero- GJI manila

sclerosis

*SRI-scientific research institutions.

The studies thus revealed that there are reliable differences from the
control only in incidence of the syndrome of functional instability of
cardiovascular regulation. Clinically, these reactions are not specific;
they are analogous to those observed under the influence of other industrial
factors, as well as in control groups, and they may be attributable to
various causes (I. K. Shkhvatsahaya et a1., 1976).

A study of some concomitant factors in some individuals. for example, bad
habits (excessive smoking and drinking), revealed that their incidence is
the same in both the main and control groups. In both groups. diseases were
more often encountered among individuals who smoked or drank excessively.
The differences between the main and control groups were significant only
with regard to the syndrome of vegetovascular dystonia. which is encountered
reliably more often in the main group.

However, bad habits may play an appreciable adverse role in the body's
reactions to working conditions.

The earliest reactions to low doses of ionizing radiation are changes of a
neuroreflex nature leading to functional changes in cardiovascular activity.
Ionizing radiation acts like a nonspecific stimulus of the nervous system.
At first. the reactions do not present a strict direction, and they are
characterized hy greater than normal lability, instability of the main

hemodynanic parameters, as well as wider range of responses to functional
tests. It has been denonstrated that some endocrine glands and related

humoral mediatory systems (thyroid, adrenal cortex, hypophyseodiencephalic
region, reproductive glands, catecholamines) are involved in formation of

the changes. These changes can be evaluated as the syndrome of

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vegutovascuiar dysfunction. which is adaptive at the early uln'rn In the
effects of ionizing radiation. Thereafter Ihu functional deviations
acquire more direction. the changes bernuv nmre worked and stable, ﬁnmr

signs appear of local circulatory diuorderu, changes in cardiac function,
autonomic nervous system and endocrine glands. with impaired equilibrium

of mediator systems and lability thereof. The chnnnns In one phnau are
consistent with the syndrome of neuiocirruinrory dyaiunin ut the hypﬁ‘onic
type (mainly). and it is also part of the clinical signs of chronic radiation
sickness.

The question of significance of occupational radiation ih“d68es c‘onc to

the adopted maximum permissible levels with respect to onset or complication
of circumscribed cardiovascular syndromes is debatable, and it should be
further investigated. At this point in our observation period, it is

valid to state that there is no reliable information indicative of a

higher incidence or aggravation of essential hypertension. 0n the contrary.
there is some delay in age-related transformation of arterial preseurn in
the direction of elevation and a tendency toward moderate arterial hypotension
among individuals exposed to the maximum cumulative dose of radiation. This
variant of vascular disorders does not consistently present visible dis-
turbances of vascularisation of the vital organs (brain, heart). He also
failed to demonstrate conclusive changes from neurocirculatory dystonia of
the hypotonic type to atherosclerosis, with signs of systemic and 10ca1
circulatory insufficiency. however, the somewhat higher incidence and
earlier demonstration of some signs of age-related involution with the
highest radiation doses, according to the results of laboratory and instru-
ment tests on individuals in the main groups (biochemical changes. changes
in the lens), make it imperative to conduct a close epidemiological study

of these groups.

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 5. 183 CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AS AFFECTED BY EXPOSURE TO HICROUAVE
RADIAIION

[Text] Natural electromagnetic fields are a constant component of the
environment of man. Changes in their intensity and frequency are related to
fluctuations in solar activity. The fluctuations in intensity of natural
electromagnetic fields also depend on electric conductivity of earth's atmos-
phere which, in turn, is related to humidity, temperature, rate of movement

of air layers and other meteorological factors. Thus, in the course of evolu-
tion, animals and man had to adapt to natural electromagnetic fields and the
significant fluctuations of their parameters.

At the present time, in view of development of electronics and use, in different
branches of the national economy, of equipment that emits electromagnetic

fields in the radiowave range, there are local changes in the natural electro-
magnetic background affecting limited groups of people.

In view of the urgency of the problem, many studies have been pursued in the
last decades of the biological effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF). More
comprehensive investigation has been made of the thermal effects of amicro-
waves at a flux density (incident energy) of the order of 10 mH/cma or more.
On this energy level, the biophysical mechanism is related to transformation
of electromagnetic energy into thermal energy when absorbed by tissues. De-
pending on the wavelength and properties of tissues, primary heating may
occur at different depths from the surface of the body; deeper tissues are
heated with exposure to decimater waves, while exposure to centimeter and
millimeter waves induces heating of superficial tissues, just like infrared
and direct solar radiation. Poorly vascularized tissues are subject to

lore intensive heating. The change in tissue temperature leads to intensifi—
cation of metabolic processes, irritation of excitable cells and injury to

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

‘

tissular structures. The biophysical mechanisms have not been studied at

a lower intensity of radiation, which is the case in modern industry (the
energy levels are lower than those that cause a temperature change). It is
believed that they are due to development of reactions on the molecular and
cellular levels. This includes the effect of dielectric saturation (Schwan,
1958), the phenomenon of molecular resonance (Vngelman. 1968), the phenomenon
of nonthermal denaturation of protein and change in membrane potential related
to the change in permeability of the cell membrane (V. I. Shtemler, 1973:
Portela, Vaccari, 1973, and others). There me, also be impairment of electro-
magnetic regulation of functions in the integral organism (A. S. Presman, 1968).

The main mechanisms of these phenomena may he relaxation oscillations of ions
and dipole molecules in the aqueous phase. rotation thereof and reorientation
in space under the influence of the energy of electromagnetic radiation (Yu.
A. Sebrant, 1969; Illinger, 1969). With specific parameters of radiation,
not only redirection of side chains of large molecules, but separation thereof
are possible. This effect becomes possible in the case of resonance absorp-
tion of electromagnetic energy by naturally oscillating molecules on the
interface of media (Vogelman, 1968). The difficulcyin-studylng the early
physiological changes are attributable to the complexity of conducting an
experiment, which includes electrophysiological studies. the difficulty in
determining absorbed energy and its distribution in organs, tissues, physio-
logical and submicroscopic structures. Research on the effects of electro-
magnetic wnves on the integral organism is represented the most extensively
in the literature, this applies to a lesser extent to different organs and
cells, and very seldom to relatively sliple subcellular models.

The hemodynamics related to microwave irradiation were investigated in
experiments on the basis of pulse and arterial pressure of different animal
species.

A comparison of studies conducted on large and small laboratory animals shows
that microwaves lead to a significant change in pulse and arterial pressure
of rats, rabbits, mice and pigeons (Z. V. Gordon, 1965; I. H. Yakovleva, 1973,
and others), with negligible fluctuations of these parameters in dogs (Ye. V.
Gembitakiy, D. Ye. Gavrilova, 1968; N. V. Tyagin, 1971; V. P. Svetlova, N. I.
Chubsrova, 1973). Brief exposure to a thermal mode leads to acceleration

of heart rate, while exposure in the nonthermal mode induces persistent

drop of arterial pressure and slowing of heart rate after a brief rise of
arterial pressure or short latent phase. This led Z. V. Gordon to the con-
clusion that the hypotensive effect is a typical reaction to this factor.

A. s. Freeman (1966) believes that the effect depends largely on the localiza-
tion and mode of exposure. N. A. stitina (1966) and V. V. Markov (1973)
established that intermittent irradiation elicits a more marked effect

than continuous exposure.

The experiments of HcAfee (1969) and others, involving anesthetization of the
skin, warrant the belief that the changes in the cardiovascular system with
exposure to microwaves depend largely on the direct effect of radiation on

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0

on superficial reilexogenic .vnes :nd reflex change in hemudynamira. which
is consistent with the usual conceptions of physiology ui.ucrvous regulation
of the cardiovascular system.

Studies of ecological and species specificity of regulation a! cardiac anti
vity under the influence of superhigh-frequency (SHF) magnetic fields

revealed that, in the course of ontogenesis, there is a decrease in extent

of acceleration of cardiac contractions in response to microwaves. l.c..
ecological and species specificity of function of the cardiovascular system
has a substantial influence on the nature of animal reactivity. The change

in cardiac function with exposure to microwaves reflects the general patterns
of regulation of this system, formed in the course of evolutionary development
of the animal kingdom (H. I. Yokovleva, 1973).

Hemodynamic reactions are an integral response of the cardiovascular system
to a given factor, and they may be identical in the presence of different
routes of expression and primary mechanisms of effects on the organlsm. For
this reason, it is important to investigate primary and intermediate mechan-
isms to assess reactions to microwaves: to study structure and function of
tissues that are the first to perceive radiation, their enzymatic activity.
exchange of gases, electrolyte balance, microcirculation, ecc.. investiga-
tion of balance of humeral regulatory systems. in particular, the sympatho-
adrenal system, investigation of distinctions of reflex regulation of the

circulatory system during exposure to microwaves and clinical manifestations
of adaptation to this factor.

Many researchers have studied the morphological changes occurring under the
influence of microwaves. Histochemical studies (6. K. Gerasmiya, 1963) of

the heart of rats exposed to SR? electromagnetic waves of thermal intensity
(density flux of 150-250 mH/cm’) showed that there were marked vascular dis-
orders end dystrophic changes in muscle fibers, to the extent of fonmation

of areas of granular and clumped breakdown. A sharp decrease in glycogen con-
tent of the myocardium was observed in animals exposed to SHF radiation. as
compared to control animals. The author interprets this as the result of

stimulation of anaerobic glycoiysis. which emerges as a process of functional
compensation in this instance.

H. S. Tolgskaya and 2. V. Gordon (1971), who exposed animals to electromagnetic
waves in the millimeter, centimeter and decimeter ranges at thermal intensity
(160-100 mH/cmz), found significant vascular disorders in the form of severe
plethora, phrivascular and percellular edema ano multiple small hemorrhages

in the myocardium. Exposure to all ranges of waves resulted in irregular
staining and fragmentation of myocardial muscle fleets.

Morphological examination of animals exposed to low intensities (1—10 mH/cm2
for 5-9 months) failed to demonstrate vascular disorders and dystrophic
changes. H. S. Tolgskaya. Z. V. Gordon et a1. (1973), who made a morpholo-
gical study of the hypothalamic region, hypophysis, adrenals and thyroid
during intermittent and continuous exposure to microwaves approximating

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WI-"LIN. llfll'. “NIX

\

industrial conditions, demonstrated phasic changes in functional activity,
which were reversible. . .

In a study of regulation of autonomic funCtlons. H. I. Yakovlcvn (1973)
demonstrated that changes may develop in the autonomic system under the
influence of microwave energy as a result of impairment of function of

higher autonomic centers, as well as changes in afferent and efferent elements
of the autonomic nervous system. . 7

Authors who investigated the effects of SH? on the central nervous system

by means of electrograms observed that the hypothalamus and cortex (in. A.
Kholodov, 1966, and others), stem regions and reticular formation (Hickey.
1963; H. S. Bychkov, 1973) and liable structures of the brain (K. V. Sudakov,
G. D. Antimoniy, 1973) are the most sensitive to this factor.

Experiments involving parallel recording of biopotcntidls of the cortex,
mesencephalic reticular formation and posterior hypothalamus (exposure to
a flux density of 100 nil/cm2 for 30 min) revealed that changes occur in the
cortex in the 5th-10th min after exposure. Changes were demonstrable,
virtually simultaneously, in the hypothalamus and mesencephalic reticular
formation 10 or more minutes after exposure to SHF fields (I. S. Dronov et
a1.. 1973).

Analysis of electrographic data after exposing rabbits to a flux density of
50 uH/anrevealed that the posterior hypothalamic region was more sensitive.
The changes in background activity in the hypothalamic region either
diminishes or remained at the former level 1-2 weeks after exposure. With
this level of radiation, the authors failed to detect a cumulative effect;
however, in their opinion, such a prolonged altered functional state of the
diencephalic systems is a tension reaction close to stress. The observed
electrographic changes in function of diencephalic systems are considered
by the authors as direct proof of the hypothesis of diencephalic genesis of
the main clinical syndromes in individuals exposed to low-intensity micro-
waves.

It was experimentally established that EMF have a selective effect on limbic
structures-of the brain (K. V. Sudakov, c. D. Antimoniy, 1973). These authors
attribute to this the change in behavioral reactions, conditioned reflex
activity in animals and mental disorders in man under the influence of EMF,
since we know from numerous investigations that limbic structures have a
direct bearing on formation of emotions, motivations and memory.

In assessing the findings of studies dealing with the effects of microwaves
on the central nervous system and changes associated with this in the cardio-
vascular system, we must mention the significance of ecological factors,
which influence experimental animals.

Another series of studies dealt with humeral regulation, electrolyte balance,
exchange of gases and activity of other systems of the organism under the

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000100010089-8

a
' PM
29 am 1979
influt‘lln- ('l l‘u' [I’Vc'l'ﬁ ' . 5"" ‘nl l i" llli' (ll'.‘.‘|lll-{l‘.ll 'l o h- -'_l '. '.l|u;ir| lg-
intcnm‘tc-u. on i..-' one imml, :.'. Htu H-iru'lim‘nt'c‘ Hi I: -- .-li'l’.o'-i|i '-I'l i.u «l
changer. ill Hu- t'I‘n: I.-| twlvvus 'W'. -':1 mm ll-. - . , :-.I. l-lulu‘hgt .||.I7. on (In-
otho'r lun‘ " ""' lmaslhlr “null -I 20.4: ﬁrm-ea... '. -.--I.rvini‘. "I ti.-
realtmn u! .-.Ixil..ma u'untpt in" .,| ”WW”.

5. 5. Nlh'nfﬁb’ﬂll (19(5) -'-:': '\'. -‘t. b)"ll'y',.|';0 .'.a.|-..o (“It“) -'.--t.-m'.l|..'-~II Uh;

Atop Ol hlnod and mum rlmllnrma 1.1-» in "bunrznl in .-:-..—..|-. with - r"-"'I"'
to microwave:. This warrauln fhr rnnuuplton than lhnlv .a an In-rennn .n
acetylcholine routent. tn WM- h the hvputrnnmr in‘,‘.l',|\,'l‘ rhr -n--H--vlr vf~
fect observed by other authors m-y he tvlattd, i4 wu-v rv'ont.

It is known that the crmnitlo-- oi the 3.0."! and annual:- i-; -lusel; related to
oxygenation of iinnues and level at redo; pxntn-‘m-t. Studic- oi I'Xlﬁi...|nb;(' nl
gaaca after exposure oi animal» to mirrovaven rLVVled that, at intennitien
under the level of the thermal effect. there in an invrvnun in tinnular

oxygen fo'llll'vm-ni, in artI-rlv.vvnrmnr. dit'lurmuc- in! '-).'.';'_"I-. '13!" l-- Ian-tr
intenaive utilization oi oxygen hy tlunuv: 5L. A. rhnahaznrnva. I906, and
othero). whereas at thermal int ‘nities there is a d- rnase in tinnular oxygen
uptake, apparently due to chemico thermorcuulation t\. i. lentenko, Ya. l.
Serkiz, 1968).

Reaearch on activity of oxidative and reduction Pnlynuu nunplcmcuts. to some
extent. the studies of gas exchange; these luvcstlunliunu established that
exposure to nonthermogenic intensities increases activity of nnucinate
dehydraSe and cytochromoxidasc, while thermal radiation depronscu their
activity. in the opinion of V. A. Syngaycvskaya. these processes depend on
the intensity and duration of exposure. wavelength and initial state of the
animal.

When studying the cardiovascular systes, it in important to know the state of
electrolyte balance. with exposure of rabbits to microwaves for l0 and 20 min
at a flux density of 100 nH/cm'. tht potaasluz .nn content of blood serum
dropped irom 2320.92 to 2020.92, that of sodgun ions rose from 25228.0 to
27636.8 and that of calcium fons dropped from 13:0.60 to 8.2:0.$ (V. A.
Syngayevakaya, l970).

A chronic elpuri~'nt, involving exposure of rats to decincter waves at 50 tall/cmz
(V. V. Mulelola, l966), failed to demonstrate changeu in sodium and potassium
ions ertttr in blood plasma or urine, while the calcium level rose substan-
tially. :lrat in plasma, then in urine.

in the experiments of N. R. Chepilova ti163) on raobits and dogs. with contact
exposurc of the region or IE hear° and remote exposure of the ventral aspect
of the body (A . lZ.‘ .m. f:.. density 0.1-0.3 ulcmz). the changes in blood
and myocardial p”'Jtslun ion content were phasic and in opposite directions.

He can comprehend the causes of impaired electrolyte balance by studying the
works dealing with the state of cell membranes under the influence of

91

FOR CFFlCIAL USE ONLY
of microwave energy. v.1. Shtcnler (197?) and E. Sh. lsmai.ov ’IVI5I. 1n

investigated the effects of decimeter waves on pcrutahillt; 1 hvmlu v.vtPr~~
cytcs (flux density of 65 mH/cm’) In vitro "Lectvd n higuificauf intranet in
ovorull flow at pnlnuuium ions thruugh t‘w n-ll :a--lnhr..:w . .a .-.-..‘ -I-..: -0

sodium imm. within. Tlu- umlmru lu‘liuw- Hus! (lulu s‘t‘d'l' In «in. in .I mange
In membrane permeability as a result of changes in prupvrilvu nl hydlnlrd fluid
in the Cell membrane under the influence 0! dcclut30' HAVIn TVVicu'lv.
changes in ion content on either side of the cell urnbzavu hunt changt Its
electrical potentia‘. The results of these studies arc quite comparable to

the experiments of N. R. Chepikova. The decrease in notassiun ion content of
the myocardiun, which she denanstrated. is arparcntly related to a thauy? in
membrane potential. which is related to the change in n3mbrane permeability
and impairment of depolarization processes.

At the present time. some signiiicance is attributed to autoimmune reactions
in pathology of the cardiovascular system (P. N. Yurenev. 1970; I. S. 60106
et al.. 1973. and others).

Experimental investigation of the effect of microwaves on immunological acti-
vity of the organism revealed that microwave energy of thermal intensity. in
the case of total body exposure. depresses production of antibodies to foreign
allergen and, at the same time, has a sensitizing effect, inducing production
of autoantibodies in the irradiated organisr (C. i. Vinogradov. I. h.
larandakova. Ye. M. Hakarenko. 1972). Thus. we cannot rule out the possibility
that autoimmune reactions. with fixation under specific conditions of
"antigen-~antibody" complexes on the vascular walls. which could probably

lead to a change in vascular tonus and other undesirable reactions. also play
some rcle in the complex mechanism of changes in cardiovascular system func-
tion under the influence of microwaves.

As we conclude this survey of the experimental data. we should dwell specially
on the experiments of A. G. Subbota (1972), who established the deadaptstional
and decompensating effects of microwaves on the nervous and cardiovascular
systems. with respect to developing resistance to diverse environmental fac-
tors (noise. high ambient temperature. physical load). In addition. this
author demonstrated that one can develop adaptation in animals of their
cardiovascular system to microwave energy of thermal and nonthermal inten-
sities. It is manifested by hemodynamic stability. and it is related to
involvement of the nervous system. The author evaluates progression of
changes in these functions under the influence of microwave energy and appear-
ance of symptoms of functional impairment of an organ or system as a manifesta-
tion of the cumulative effect of microwaves. A. c. Subbota interprets the
signs of adaptation and accumulation. as well as reliability of adaptational
mechanisms referable to microwaves as the main criteria for determination

of radiosensitivty and radiovulnerability referable to microwaves.

To sum up the results of experimental studies, it can be assumed that the

effect of microwaves on the cardiovascular system reflects several pathogenetic
mechanisms:

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNLY

\

1) direct effect of nictewave energy on the central nervous system:
2) changes in the nystcm of peripheral reception with ahuorption of energy:
3) reflex reactions of the heart and Vessels in 'vspnnne to stimulation
of exte;nvcntors and interoueptors that absorb radiation energy;
‘) direct effect of radiation on the myocardiun. Vnﬁﬁclﬁ and n rve
centers of cardiovascular regulation (at the appropriate wave lengths).

All these nechanisms undergo substantial modificatibn. depending on the eco-

logical and species specificity. and the original functional state of the
nervous and cardiovascular systems.

In view of the similarity of action of primary biophysical mechanisms of micro-
wave radiation on animals and non, let us discuss some or the clinical facts.
First of all. it must be noted that. in the opinion of some authors, "cardiac"
sylptons only appear when the changes in the nervous system reach a suffi-
cient degree (V. H. Halyshev. F. A. Kulesnik, 1968). The nature and extent

of functional changes in the nervous system depend on the intensity and

duration of exposure, individual sensitivity of the organism and prenorbid
state.

Our studies and the data in the literature (N. V. Tyagin. 1962-1968; I. C.
lessen-Yevdokimov, V. A. Sorokin. 1970; Klimkova-Deutschova. 1963. and others)
enable us to single out three typical syndrones due to radiowaves: acthenic,
which is observed at the early stages of illness; asthenovegetative. with
vascular dysfunction. and hypothalanic. Efforts have been made to single out
an independent nosological form of occupational disease. radiowave sickness,
on the basis of investigation of the distinctions of development and order

of fornation of these clinical syndromes.

Studies of the cardiovascular system of individuals exposed to 5“? radiation
delonstrated objectivoiylabilityofthe pulse and changes in arterial pressure
(hypotension and hypertension). Tables 6 and 7 list data on the incidence of
hypotension and hypertension. and they show that the highest percentage of
cases of arterial hypotension was observed by authors who pursued their studies
in 1968-1961, and the highest percentage of cases of hypertension, by those
who worked in 1960-1973. we cannot rule out the possibility that this could
be related to the general increase in incidence of arterial hypertension in

the last few years, as well as the fact that the average age of workers is
older.

The results of studies of peripheral circulation, according to findings from
capillaroscopy and plethysmography, are quite contradictory and indicate

both the presence of spans and atania of capillaries and arterioles (H. T.
Sverdlina. 1968. and others).

Us failed to demonstrate pathology of the circulatory system in a rheographic
study of the hands and feet of 59 patients with radiowave sickness.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICUJ. US“: .7.\'|.‘n'

Table 6. Incidence Of arterial hypotcnsion among individuals o-xpoaod for
long periods of tine to 5111’ fields (according to the data or
different authors)

Nuaher of Incidchc of

Author and year Subjects' occupation swggimeilgg‘l
A. A. Kevork'yan. 1948 Blue-collar worker -' 87 38
Yu. A. Osipov, 1952 " " " 108 22.2
V. A. Shipkova, 1959 Radar specialist 110 About 20
A. A. Orlova, 1960 Blue-collar worker 525 26-33
N. V. uspenskaye. 1961 ” " " 100 30
I. ll. Vo1'tovakaya et a1.,

1961 " “ " 101 27-45
Ye. 1. Snurova at n1.. 1962 " ” ' " 56 53.7
1.. ‘1'. trolova. 1963 " ” " 172 25.6
F. I. marov, 1.. V. Zakharov.

2. A. Koloenik, 1963 " " " 53 22.6
Ye. V. Geubitakiy, 1966 Radar specialist 210 16
H. “a SIdChIROVI. K. Va 31“.. and "hits-

hikonova, 1971 collar workers 100 7-3

 

 

 

-C“mm---.—

Table 7. Incidence of arterial hypertension under the chronic effect of
$1117 fields

Number of Incidence of

Author and year Subjects' occupation sub1ects hzatension, Z

1.. G. Prolova. 1963 Blue-collar worker 172 5.8
A. H. Kapitanenko. 1964 Operator 66 7.6
l. A. Drogichina et a1..

1966 Blue-collar worker 100 17
G. G. Lysine, H. B.

uppoport. 1969 ” " " ‘85 15
3. Ya. D'yachenko, 197C Operator 62 29
H. N. Sadchikova. K. V.

Nikonova. 1971 Blue-collar worker 215 16-23
V. I. Huratov. A. 1’.

Turayeva. 1972 Operator 25 28
V. P. ﬂedvedev, 1973 Henta1 labor _ 222 12.6

 

-“uM-“#“-O mmﬁ-ﬂm—ﬂ—m-

A study of central he-odynaaica of healthy young people vith short vork tenure,
as well as individuals with neurocirculatory dystonin of the hypotensive

type. conducted by nsny authors. revealed increased blood einute volume

and decreased peripheral resistance. In individuals with lengthy tenure,
which of course leans that they are older. as well as in those with neuro-
circulatory dystonia of the hypertensive type, the opposite findings were

node (or these para-eters. any have reported increased tonus of arteries

of the uuscular type. 9"

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son OFFICIAL um: unu-

Authors who studied circulation believe that changes in parameters thereof
develop primarily as a result of inpnlrweu: oi ntr ’Lu'u and function of
systems involved in maintaining homeostasis. namely the central nervous
system. endocrine and neurohumoral systems.

Various authors stuoied exchange of gases in tissues and blood, as well as
electrolyte balance of individuals subject to exposure to microwaves in order
to investigate the pathogenetic mechanisms of hemodynamic disorders (1. V.
ravlova. E. a. Droglchina. N. N. Sadchikova, l. A. Cel'fon. l968; G. c.

Lysina. 1972). According to their findings, there is some decrease in oxygena-
tion of blood and greater tissular capacity to absorb oxygen in individuals
exposed to microwave radiation. The change in electrolyte balance consists

of a drop in blood serum potassium and chlorides and elevation of sodium and
chlorides in erythrocytes.

According to our data. hypereholesterolemla was demonstrated in over 502 of

the cases of radiowave sickness. V. P. ﬂadvedev (1971) observed hypercholes-
tarolemia and alteration of blood lipid content, the mean indices of which
differed appreciably from the corresponding age-related control. in essentially
healthy individuals engaged'in mental work related to sources of SN? radia-
tion. This fact. along with the increased number of cases of essential hyper-
tension and cardiac ischemia in the group engaged in mental labor. which
currently or previously had contact with microwaves, led to the conclusion

that contact with microwave radiation may be considered a substantial risk
factor in development of essential hypertension and cardiac ischemia.

The results of observations of over 1500 individuals whose work involved
exposure to an: of high (Hf) ultrahigh (03F) and superhigh (Sh?) frequencies
enabled us to determine that deviations in function of the nervous and cardio-
vascular systems are observed primarily amoq; workers involved with regula-
ting. adjusting and testing the equipment of radar stations in the final
completion shop of radio industry enterprises. The main clinical syndromes
of cardiovascular disorders with exposure to SHF fields developed against

the background of progressive asthenia (neurasthenia). more often after work-
ing for 5-10 years on jobs involving exposure to SR? EH? (flux density of

up to several mH/cm’). The clinical distinctions of the observed syndromes
consisted of the following: .

l. Asthenic (neurasthenic) syndrome, with vegetovascular dysfunction of the
hypotensive type. Typically. there are complaints or headaches (heaviness

of the head), increased fatigability. irritability, sleep disorders and -
periodic pain in the region of the heart. So organic rathology of the car-
diovascular system was observed. half the subjects presented periodic.
moderate hypotension (systolic arterial pressure 90-95 mm Hg). Diastolic and
pulse pressure were in the normal range. in some cases. arterial hypotension
was associated with sznus bradycardia (pulse rate up to S9lmin). The latter
was observed less often in seated position (1&2 patients) and more often

in supine position (222 people), which was indicative of lability of the

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
F0“ Ol‘l’iCIM. USE DULY

pulse when counted in orthostatic position. There was no substantial

change in general condition on the days that low arterial pressure was
recorded. and only a few people presentCa more complaints of an asthcnic
nature. Electrocardiography failed to demonstrate pathology. gu annuid
only mantion that. in the presence of brsdycardia. there was appearance of

a high. sharp-peaked T wave, mainly in the chest leads and this. in view

of the clinical data. is interpreted as a manifestation or vogetntivv dys—
function. As srulc. stroke and minute volumes. all forms of arterial pres»
sure and peripheral resistance remained normal. Only a few individuals prr-
canted a minor drop of mean dynamic arterial pressure and increase in minute
blood volume. Peripheral resistance was lower than it should be. but cor-
responded to the working. i.e.. actual minute blood volume.

Thus. the increased minute volume in such patients could be considered an
adequate reactiOn to decreased peirpheral resistance. Studies of cerebral
circulation by the method of rheoencephaiography failed to reveal disturbanco'
with regard to pulse filling and tones of intracranial and extracraniai
vessels. Consequently. the hypotensive reactions observed were mild. and they
had no adverse effect on the condition of the heart and indices of systemic
and local hemodynsmics.

2. nathenic (neurastheniclsyndroma with vegetovsaculsr dysfunction of the
hypertensive type proceeded. in some cases. with attacks of a sympatho-
adrenal nature and marked neurasthenic symptoms. The patients were
excitable. emotionally labile, suffered from sleep disorders. diminished
memory. sporadic headaches associated with nausea. Over one-third of the
patients compalined of vertigo. brief fainting spells. noise in the head

and obscured vision. Hyperhidrosis. bright red. diffuse and persistent
dermographism. cooling and marbling of the integument of the limbs. pal-
pebral and digital tremor. with the hands extended, were observed. In
several cases. several years later. against such a background there was
development of marked vegetovascular dysfunction of the hypertensive type.
with periodic cerebral crises of the sympathoadrenal type. During an
attack of severe headache. there was trembling. pallor or reddening of

the face. generalized hyperhidrosis. marked emotional disorders and faint-
ing spells. The patients reported compression pain in the region of the
heart. the sensation of difficult breathing, "shortage of air"; 2s a rule.
there was moderate elevation of arterial pressure, particularly diastolic
(110 to 110 mm Kg) followed by severe weakness and normalization of arterial
pressure. A typical finding was a change in sugar curves (diabetic and
double). impairment of correlation between excretion of epinephrine and nor-
epinephrine. especially during an attack. Between the paroxysmal attacks,
administration of epinephrine (0.3 ml 0.11 solution) elicited marked vegeto-
waacular reactions and a marked change in physiological dynamics of care-
cholamine excretion. Subiebrile temperature was not uncommon in patients
with vegetovaacular dysfunction. The chief complain was pain in the region
of the heart. which was encountered in almost 70% of the cases. in 231. the
pains were of a compressing nature, with irradiation into the left hand and
scapula. As a rule, the cardiac pain appeared against a marked neurasthenic
background. with vivid emotional coloration; it was persistent and responded

96
FOR OFFZCIAL USS OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USL ONLY

poorly to treatment with vanadilnrlng agents. Some patients reported periodic
palpitations and arrhythmia in the region of the heart and dyspnea upon
exercising. There was marked lability of the pulse when moving from horizon-
tal to vertical position (tendency toward bradycardia in horizontal posi-
tion in 222 of the cases and in seated position, in 72; tachycardia in

mphe position in 202 and in seated position. in 361). Arterial pressure
was unstable, and it was elevated in almost 502 of the patients. individuals
with normal arterial pressure not infrequently presented a pathological
reaction to a physical load, with elevation of systolic and, particularly,
diastolic pressure. Constriction of retinal arteries was observed. Tachy-
oecillography revealed a tendency toward elevation of all forms of arterial
pressure and an increase in peripheral resistance. if we consider that the
rate of propagation of the pulse wave in musclar vessels was higher. which
was also associated with an increase in correlations between modulus of
elasticity of vessels of the musclar and elastic type. it may be assumed

that the increase in resilient properties of vessels of the muscular type
was due to angiospsstic reactions.

More often, with elevation of arterial pressure blood minute volume decreased.
and this was evaluated as an adequate reaction to increased peripheral re-
sistance, which was above the proper level (by 20-30:), and in some cases
working level. i.e., corresponding to a given minute volume. Thus. in this
group of subjects. hypertension was spastic in nature.

In some patients with marked vegetovaacular disturbances, we observed an
increase in minute blood.volume combined with elevation of all fonts of
arterial pressure and high indices of peripheral resistance. This was indi- -
cative of marked impairment of mechanisms that regulate the correlation
between peripheral and central hemodynamics. and this was also consistent
with the clinical findings. According to rheoencephalography. there was a
decrease in intensity of pulsed filling. with predominant increase in tonus
of intracranial and extracraaial vessels (70:). The changes were functional
in nature, as confirmed by the reaction to nitroglycerin. Some patients
presented some extension of the margin of the heart to the left. due to
hypertrophy of the left ventricle; heart tones were dull in almost half

the cases, and in some of them there was a systolic murmur. Electrocardio-
graphy revealed a decline. smoothing or inversion of T wave, most often in
the two standard or left chest leads, combined with a shift of the 5-1
segment in 322 of the patients with predominantly hypertensive reactions
and especially vegetovaacular attacks. These changes usually occurred
during an attack; not infrequently. they were associated with persistent
pain in the region of the heart. Vasodilating agents often failed to

give relief (including nitroglycerin). In some cases. during the period of
an attack, ventricular extrasystole was recorded, and one patient had
attacks of pa oxismal fibrillation. in most cases. the EKG changes were
transient and rapidly regressed after an attack. Not infrequently. it was
difficult to differentiate between the diagnosis of coronary insufficiency
and metabolic disturbances, occurring as a result of vegetative dysfunction
with output of catecholamines. in the presence of a persistent pain syndrome
and lack of response to vasodilating agents. Dynamic observation of the
patients acquired special importance to settle this question.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us subnit two typical cases:
1. Patient 8., began to work at the age of 27 years as a controller
involving contact with microwave sources. There is no hereditary or
prior historyburden. AfterSyearsledeveloped increased fatigability.
irritability, poor sleep. persistent headaches and pain in the
region of the heart. which did not respond to vasodilating agents.
No pathological changes were found in the cardiovascular system;
arterial pressure 110/39 mm Hg. After 7 years he began to have
attacks of severe general weakness with vertigo. sensation of
”shortage of air." perspiration and brief elevation of arterial
pressure (140-150/100 mm Hg). The 3K0, taken during an attack.
periodically showed vetricular extrasystole and decline of the T
wave in the left chest leads (TV _ ). After the attack. the EKG
reverted to normal relatively rapidly. Examination of the eye
grounds revealed constriction of retinal arteries.

According to the results of mechanocardiography. recorded in a
period free from attacks. when the patient had normal arterial
pressure (120/70 mm Hg). there was a significant increase in
peripheral resistance, 68: higher than it should be, there was a
corresponding 30: decrease in minute blood volume. There was an
increase in rate of propagation of the pulse wave. mainly in vessels
of the muscular type. with increase in relationship between elasti-
city moduli (EH/EB 1.76). Thus, a patient, who had worked for a
long time with radiowave sources in the sat range, subsequently ‘
developed asthenonsurotic reactions, then attacks of the dience-
pbalie type with elevation of arterial pressure and extrasystole.
The clinical findings and results of instrument tests were indica-
tive of the spastic nature of the hypertensive reactions.

2. Patient K., began to work as a controller at the age of 25 years
and came in contact with microwave sources. There is no hereditary
or prior history burden. After 5 years there was development of
aeuraathenlc manifestations in the form of headache. increased
fetigability, irritability and poor sleep. Arterial pressure was
in the range of 120/70-130I80 mm ﬁg. Eight years after he started
on that job, when he was 33 years old. he began to have frequent
cerebral attacks: severe headache. trembling. reddening of the

face, generalised hyperhidrosis, occasional, brief fainting spells;
arterial pressure remained normal. After one of the attacks, marked
changes were found on the EKG: S-TVP~ interval is elevated in an
arch and changes into a negative TV _ wave with biphasic iTv .
After 1.5 h, the SIS indices improved 1‘1“,“~ wave became less 3
negative) and reverted to normal after 1 month. The patient did
not work with microwave sources for 1 year. The attacks stopped
and arterial pressure was normal. The patient became calmer,

but pain in the region of the heart persisted and was curbed only

after intake of nitroglycerin.

9s
roe omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

Thus. a patient with no burden in his history (no history of head trauma, in-
fections processes. hereditary predisposition for essential hypertensnon and
cardiac ischomia. as well as no bad habits) developed marked vunetovasculnr
dysfunction with signs of hypothalamic insufficiency, hypertensive reac-
tiOns and angina pectoris after working for 13 years an a job involving
exposure to EMF in the 5"? range.

Observations reVealed that the hypertensive reactions are gradually added

to vegetative attacks. Such changes, with subsequent development of chronic
coronary insufficiency, were diagnosed in 73 of the cases. in a of the
individuals who had worked under adverse conditions for over IO years, there
was development of myocardial infarction, which was preceded by a long period
of asthenoneurotic reactions and marked vegetovascular dysfunction. in iso-
lated cases. there was dynamic impairment of cerebral circulation. At the
long term. we observed development of essential hype:tension (cerebral or
cerebrocsrdiac form). Investigation of the order in which different symptoms
develop, with due consideration of the nature of work, intensity of exposure
and occupational tenure, is of special importance to determination of the
etiological link between the above-mentioned nonspecific cardiovascular
syndromes and effects of microwaves.

In order to define the distinctions of development of cardiovascular dis-
orders, a dynamic study was made of a group of workers in the final shops
for a period of 3-6 years, and in some cases 9-12 years.

Analysis of the data revealed that there were 3 groups, depending on the
arterial pressure at the first examination: the first group of workers

(17 people). with periodically recorded arterial hypotension (systolic
pressure 90-100 mm Hg); second group (17) with noroal arterial pressure;
third group (9) with hypertensive reactions (arterial pressure of 165/90 mm
Hg or higher). The mean age and work tenure of individuals in these groups
were about the same (31 to 32 years of age; tenure of 7, 6 and 8 years.
respectively).

Host of the 17 workers with a tendency toward arterial hypotension were in
good health when first examined (asthenic syndrome in 9 cases and mild
vegetovascular dysfunction in 3). Only 6 workers presented mild hyperten-
sive reactions 3-6 and 9-12 years later. No pathology referable to the
heart and vessels was found in any of the first group of patients. The
first examination of the second and.third groups of workers. with normal or
high arterial pressure, revealed that only 5 out of 26 were in good health.
asthenia with vegetovasculsr dysfunction was diagnosed in 11. After 3-5
years, 16 of the 26 workers in the second and third groups presented marked
vegetovascular dysfunction with attacks of the diencephalic type, associ-
ated with elevation of systolic and, particularly, diastolic pressure to

105-110 mm Hg. Chronic coronary insufficiency developed in 7 workers and
essential hypertension, in 3.

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL lit-‘2 Olu'LY

Thus, several years of observations revealed that,.in controllers, reactions
referable to the cardiovascular system follow changes in the nervous uystvn.
particularly its higher autonomic branches, while the nature and severity
thereof depend on individual distinctions of the organism: in some cases.

only mild asthsnic reactions. with sinus bradycurdin and arterial hypotenninn.
without signs of systemic and local hemodynamic disorders, may he observed
for a long time; in others (in whom hypotensive reactions were never observed).
there is development of vegetovascular dysiunction of the hypertensive typeI
with signs of hypothalamic insufficiency and angiospastic reactions. which
lead to impairment of cerebral and coronary circulation in a number of cases.
P. H. Hedvedev (1968). G. G. Lysine. .. B. Rappoport (1968) and others have
also observed analogous changes in individuals working uith SK? field
sources.

the presence of hypotensive reactions with relatively benign course and
hypertensive reactions with unfavorable course raises a number of questions.
with respect to the role of the original state of pressor and depressor
mechanisms in formation of adaptational and pathological reactions of the
cardiovascular ysstem to SR? fields. Vegetovascular dysfunction with hyper-
tensive reactions is of greatest clinical significance.

in order to form a prognosis. treat and make an expert determination of
disability of such patients, it is quite inportant to evaluate the pathogenesis
of the hypertensive syndrome. to pinpoint the role of disturbances in central
and peripheral hemodynamics in development thereof. Depending on the dis-
tincticne of hemodynamic disturbances, two main forms of hypertension are
identified: spastic. due to peripheral sngiospasm. and hyperkinetic, which

is due essentially to an increase in minute blood volume. The two forms are
interrelated; the hyperkinetic one not uncommonly precedes the spastic (i. K.
Shkhvatsabaya. 1972; Ye. M. Tareyev, A. V. Sumarokov, 1972; Richard. 1969.

and others). Differential diagnostics of these forms of hypertension is

of much practical significance. main for the choice of rational therapy. The
angiospestic form of hypertension. with considerable increase in peripheral
resistance. was present in virtually all of the patients under our observation.

s

The measured exercise test is of some value in detecting early vascular
reactions. In a mass screening of essentially health individuals with long
work tenure presenting normal arterial pressure at rest, not infrequently
we observed elevation not only of systolic, but diastolic pressure after

the physical load (60 hope in 30 s). which is indicative of impaired regula-
tion of vascular tonus with a tendency toward angioapastic reactions. This
conclusion is confirmed in the latest works of T. A. Sorokina (1972) and

I. P. Kalyuahnays (1972). who demonstrated that significant activation of the
sympathoadrenal system is observed in individuals ﬁith hypertension of any
etiology. when submitted to the exercise test. In the patients we screened.
a high output of catecholamines was observed during the attack periods. The
submitted data confirm the nonspecificity of vegetovascular dysfunction in
individuals whose work involves exposure to SR? EMF.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FDR OFFKCIAL “SE ONLY

The changes referable to .he heart are not specific either. rain in the
cardiac region. lability of pulse. extrasystole. not intrrquent decline or
rise of T wave on the resting EKG or after a IOJU ﬁly be observed in the
presence of vegetovascular dystonia of any etiology. Experimental and clinical
observations warrant the assumption that the cardiac pain in most such cases
is due primarily to lowering of the threshold of nociceptive sensitivty.
impairment of central nervous regulation and. during sympathoadrennl attacks,
to the effect of catecholamines. These factors-may induce myocardial dys~
trophy. with impairment of its bloelectricsl activity (I. 8. Gordon. M. P.
Stepanov. 1970; S. V. Rutsay. l972; B. Yu. Dobrin. 1972. and others).

Coronary insufficiency. with the typical pain syndrome and EKG changes, may
be related to exposure to 83F fields in some cases. with gradually developing
and long-lasting vegetovascuiar dysfunction. These data are confirmed in
experiments on animals and clinical observations (0. h. Gorbachev. 1965;

Ye. F. Lobkova, H. Kh. Pluzhnikova. 1966. and others).

The lack of specificity of some symptoms and clinical syndromes of cardio-
vascular pathology. with reference to SR? fields, makes it necessary to

take into consideration the set of all factors characterizing individual dis-
tinctions of the body (heredity. age. constitution. prior illnesses. bad
habits) and working conditions (density flux. radiowave range. tenure of

work under specific conditions. as well as other deleterious work-related
factors. such as microclimate. intensity of physical and mental load. etc.)
in order to determine the etiology of the disease.

Recognition of the leading role of SR! fields as a risk factor in development

.of illness. also makes it necessary for there to be a specific order of
development of symptoms. with functional changes in the nervous system play-
img the leading role: long-term aschenic background with neurasthenic mani-
festations. marked emotional instability. then vegetovascular dysfunction.

' which often proceeds with periodic attacks and signs of hypothalamic insuf-
ficiency. The differential diagnosis must also be made, first of all. with
reference to diencephalic syndromes of infectious and traumatic etiology, as
well as essential hypertension. Essential hypertension. like cardiac is-
chemia. may be interpreted in some cases as the outcome of an occupational
disease induced by microwaves. it is imperative to take into consideration
other etiological causes (endocrine dysfunction due to thyrotoxicosia.
menopause, etc.) in determining the role of SR? fields in development of
vegetovascular dysfunction. .

There is no specificity or independent diagnostic significance to cardiac
changes demonstrable on the EKG, to which prime significance is sometimes
attributed in determining the link between illness and SHE\fields. Such
symptoms as bradycardia. tachycardia, decline or elevation of T wave. are
usually due to a change in autonomic regulation. The presence of persistent
rhythm disturbances (blocking of the bundle of his limbs, fibrillation.
persistent extrasystole) and considerable myocardial dystrophy with stasis
rules out. rather than confirms a link between cardiac pathology and the

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLi

effects of SR? fields. Thus. comprehensive analysis of each specific case.
with due consideration of the aggregate of industrial. domestic and clinical
data. is required to determine the etiol-aglcal role of electromagnetli

waves at radio frequencies in development of vegetatovnsculnr dysfunrtl;n.
hypertension and cardiac ischemia.

Treatment of vegetovascular dysfunction in individuals whose work involves
exposure to SRF fields should be administered with consideration of the etio-
logy of the disease. individual distinctirws of the organism and type of
vegetative reactions with development of a given syndrome. 1: is imperative
to remove patients from work involving contact with 8"? fields for the
duration of treatment (issuing a disability certificate for 1-2 months).

For patients with the asthenic syndrome. it is sufficient to prescribe
general fortifying therapy and sedatives (bromides, Leonorus, vslerian root.
hawthorn. corvalol). Cholinolytics (atropine. amizil) and products with cc:-
hined action (belloid, bellaspon) are recommended when there is prevalence
of vegetOVascular disorders. Occasionally. intravenous infusion of glucose
preceded by administration of low doses of insulin elicits a good response.
The therapy includes therapeutic exercise. hydrotherapy and psychotherapy.

In addition to general fortifying therapy. minor tranquiliziers. such as
saduxen, elenium. trioxszine and antihistamines that potentiate their

action (dimedrol, pipolphen. suprastin). as well as vesodilating agents

are indicated for patients with vegetovascular dysfunction of the hypertensive
type. especially if their are attacks of a sympathoadrenal nature. Of the
wide assortment of modern hypotensive agents. it is preferable to prescribe
magnesium sulfate, which has a sedative effect, combined with reserpine.

which is a tranquilizer. If necessary. agents that have a direct effect

on the vascular wall (papaverine. no-shpa [6. 7, 3'.b'-tetraethoxy-l-hensal-
l.2.3.k-tetrahydroisoouinolone hydrochloride] and others) are prescribed.

In the presence of lschemic heart disease. agents are required that improve
coronary circulation (nitroglycerin, sustac) and metabolic processes in the
myocardium (falicor, intensain and others). ATP and group B vitamins elicit
a good therapeutic response. In view of the high sensitivity of patients.
'the choice of drugs requires a strict and individual approach. One should
be particularly cautious in prescribing narcotics. In the presence of
attacks (of the sympathoadrenal type). one can recommended low doses of
aminasin. propasin. and occasionally pipolphen combined with injectshle
vaaodilating agents is sufficient.

With proper organisation of dispensary supervision and treatment of patients
with the asthenic syndrome and negligible vegetovascular dysfunction. without
hypertensive reactions. they can continue to work.

The results of many years of observations indicate that patients with marked

vegetovascular dysfunction and hypertensive reactions. particularly with
attacks, require rational counseling with regard to employment. One can

102

m orrrcrat use on?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aspect recovery or stabilization of a pathological process only with prompt
transfer of such patients to another job, unrelated to.suF radiation.

The data in the literature and our own investigations enable us to summarise
some of the psthogenetic mechanisms of biological effects of microwaves.

to voice some general comments on clinical diagnostics of radioveve effects
and outline the prospects of research on primary mechanisms, as well as
detection of early preclinical signs of the effects of microwave energy on
the cardiovascular system. ‘

Experimental and clinical studies have shown that the cardiovascular system
presents nonspecific reactions to microwaves; the changes in individuals vhose
work involves contact with such radiation are characterized by the syndrome
of neurocirculatory dystonia. This syndrome probably develops as a result

of the effects of microwave energy on peripheral reception and aicrocircula-
tion, the myocardium, great vessels and interoceptors of internal organs

(in the presence of the appropriate wavelengths), as well as various branches
of the central nervous system related to regulation of cardiac function.

Expression of the reflex mechanism apparently begins with a change in pro-
perties of excitable cell'membranes, which leads to an increased influx of
afferent impulsation to specific branches of the central nervous system.
Concurrently, there may also be a change in efferent impulsstion. in view of
the selective effect of radiation on radiosensitive structures: cortex,
hypothalamus, reticular formation of the brain stem and limbic structures.
Summation of these mechanisms evidently leads to impairment of normal
neuroregulation in the organism, aggravating metabolic processes, already
altered after the first contact with radiation, in tissues. thus closing

a vicious circle..

The above-described pathogenetic mechanism is clinically manifested by labi-
lity of the pulse and arterial pressure, inadequate reactions of the cardio-
vascular system to physiological loads, as well as dosorders referable to
correlations between central and peripheral hemodynamics.

The severity of cardiovascular disorders depends, as shown by several
authors, on individual distinctions, ecological and species specificity of
the nervous and cardiovascular systems.

Since the syndrome of neurocirculatory dystonia is not specific to the
effects of microwaves and numerous other etiological factors play a signi-
ficant role in its development, while the quantitative characteristics of
radiation are unknown, it is difficult to determine the prime factor in
the origin of illness and there areseveral important problems to solve

for demonstration of reliable early signs of the reaction to microvaves

in individuals engaged in different professions. It is interesting to
investigate the role of pressor and depressor mechanisms in formation of
adaptive and pathological reactions of the cardiovascular system to
electromagnetic fields. The question of the role of microwave radiation

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
" - _' IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

in-developnent of essentiel hypertension end cardiac ischeeiu. which is
presently debuted in the literature, requires further investigation. Re-
liable results on this score cen only be obteined ‘by conducting epidemiologi-
cel studies of large groups of people. using stenderd criterie for
identifying these stetes.

oomuca'r: lsdetel'etvo "Mediums", Hoskve, 1976
I

10,657
680: 1870

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

:3:§EER 6. THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM AS AFFECTED BY lNTEﬁSlVE INDUSTRIAL

[Text] in the last few years there has been considerable interest in the
matter of inadequate effects of noise on the human body and, first of all.
its effect on the nervous and cardiovascular systems. It is known that

noise elicits functional disturbances of the nervous system. which proceed

in the nature of hypersthenic or hypasthenic neurosis conbined with other
neurosis-like manifestations, including local vascular disturbances. The
nerve centers can influence the cardiovascular system directly through extra-
cardiac nerves, which play a substantial role in regulation of circulation.
For this reason, the changes that occur in the nervous system under the

influence of a sonic (noise) stimulus can, of course, affect the functional
state of the cardiovascular system.

According to data in the literature, noise can influence general and. in
particular, cardiovascular morbidity. L. N. Vlasov, T. c. lsanina, R. G.
Levina and V. A. Polyanskiy (1959) developed outpatient charts on individuals
living in the vicinity of engine testing stations and residents of a
"quiet" part of the city; essential hypertension and vascular hypotonia
were observed 1.5 times more often among the former. I. S. lvatsevich
(1963) found essential thertension and heart disease much more often among
workers in the textile industry exposed to inten~e noise, than in workers

in the radio engineering industry and instrument ouilding. where there was
virtually no noise. According to the observations of A. T. Rusinova (l973),
essential hypertension, coronary cardioscierosis, angina pectoris and myo-
cardial infarction are encountered relatively often among individuals whose
work involved exposure to intensive noise far—s long period of time.

Graff, Bockmuhl and Tietre (€969) discovered that essential hypertension

and other circulatory diseases are encountered considerably more often
among boiler maker: exposed to noise at a level of 95-110 dB, as compared

105

FOR OFFICTAL USE 03L?
FOR OFFICIAL U‘ZE UNIA’

to individuals whose work did not involvo exposure to £0550. Tnl higheuv
incidence of hypertension was obuerved ourug individuals 23-33 vruru of age.
In the authors' opinion, onset of cusentinl hyportenuiun with -JVULWFO :-
noise nay be attributed to inpairaent of cerebroviaceral correlatieu-.

Numerous observations of workers in "noisy" shops indicate ti‘t, in "(6.12
to specific conplainta of inpaired hearing. they often renoat~d cavdlac rib“
palpitations and intermittent beats (H. Ye. Khaynovich, 1961: B. A.
Krivoglaz, V. r. Boykn, L. A. Zsretskaya. D. P. Kachuley. 1966. and nthetn)
In these individuals, cardiac conplaintstb not occur with phyuicnl :ordu.
but at rest and in the presence of nervou! and emotional tension.

The data concerning the effects of intense noise on the cardiovascular system
are quite contradictory. c. !. Vopilkina (I959), Grandjeen (1999) observed

a faster pulse, while T. A. Orlove (1965) and Lehmann (1956) discuased the
reverse. L. Ye. hilkov (1963), who aade a study of the puine rate 9! indi-
viduals working with exposure to intense wide-band noise, found a tendency
tonard bradycardia before the start of the shift in alnost oneothird of the
subjects. During the work day, however. their pulse changed both in the
direction of becoadng faster and slower.

In our observations of aarked lability of the pulse under the influence of
intense noise, we deaonstrated tenporary changes in rate thereof in the
course of the work day and sore constant changes with increase in work
tenure with exposure to noise. and they were in the sane direction. in

the direction of slowing.

There are rather contradictory data concerning arterial pressure. There
are indications of both the hypotensive and hypertensive effects of noise,
which are usually related to its parameters-ointensity and spectral
conposition.

A. I. Vorhzhova, I. A. Sapov (1960). A. A. Andryukin (1961), T. A. Oriova
(I965), Holstein (I958), Steinnann. Teddi. Hindner (1955) and others, who
exaained essentially healthy individuals exposed to noise on their jobs.
found their arterial pressure to be elevated. 0n the basis of a survey
of a large group of workers in different shops at a ballbearing plant,

A. A. Andryukin deaonstrated a high incidence of essential hypertension
aaong individuals exposed to noise. It was established that there was an

increase in hyperreactive individuals with increase in work tenure under
noisy conditions. Different results were obtained by c. I. Vopilkina

(1959). A. A. Arkad'yevskiy (1963), Bugsrd (I958). Bode (1960) and others.
According to their observations. arterial pressure drops under the influence

of noise.

Of interest are data on arterial pressure in different occupational groups.

with different characteristics of industrial noise, depending on work
tenure under noisy conditions, as well as fluctuations of arterial pressure

in the course of a work shift.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. H. Volkov and T. L. Sosnova (1963) made a study. under laboratory condi-
tions. of the effects of high-frequency noise or healthy individuals 20-25
years of age. the nature of whone usual work was unrelated to exposure to
noise. After 5 minutes in noisy sheps, the subjects presented a consistent
elevation of arterial pressure corresponding to the increase in intensity
of noise. But if the intensity of noise was not increased, individuals with
signs of increased excitability of the cerebral cortex presented elevation
of systolic pressure to 180 mm "3 after exposure for 5~10 min to 90 dB
noise. whereas after repeated subsequent exposure the arterial pressure
dropped critically (by 50-60 as ng) to the base level. The authors expound
the hypothesis that intense noise is instrumental in the hypotensive state.

According to the data of l. A. Benyusov (1963). changes in arterial pressure
depend on the functional state of the nervous system, work tenure, intensity
and spectral cosposition of noise among individuals whose work involves
exposure to noise. The author observes that hypotension is encountered with
short work tenure and hypertens'an, among workers with long tenure.

G. l. Vopilkina (1959), who measured arterial pressure of women employed

in the weaving and spinning industry every hour in the course of the work day.
reported a consistent moderate decline for the first a h of work. After

a ZO-Iin rest. it rose, but was again low at the end of the shift.

8. N. Krylova (1958) screened women working in two shops at a knitwear
factory. where the noise was of the order of 80 d3. of high frequency in

one shop (‘?00-6800 Hz) and low frequency in the other (100-150 Hz). The
author observed more marked changes in arterial pressure with exposure to
high-frequency noise than lowufrequency noise of the same volume; moreover.
work tenure with exposure to noise was a factor. More often. changes
appeared in individuals with less than 10 years of tenure. Dynamic measure-
ment of arterial pressure during the shift revealed that a maximum elevation
(by 20-30 II ﬂg) is observed with high-frequency noise after working for 2 h.
By the end of the shift, although pressure did drop it did not exceed the
base level. Hith exposure to low-frequency noise, soae elevation of
arterial pressure wee demonstrable by the end of the first hour of work;
thereafter it slowly rose toward the end of the work day (by 10-15 mm Hg

as coapared to the base level). A study of the effects of high-frequency
noise of the same voluae on subjects revealed reactions in different direc-
tions: arterial pressure rose in sose subjects and dropped somewhat in
others (N. N. Krylova, 1958).

B. A. Krivoglsz. V. c. Boyko. L. A. Zaretskaya and D. P. Kachanay (1966)

observed arterial hypotenslon combined with signs of ayocardial dystrophy
in workers of the doubler and weaving industry. 1. I. Galakhov and A. l.

Kachevskaya (1956). who studied the cardiovascular system of 600 workers in
lathe, autoaatic and cigaret-saking shops. where the volume of noise was

in excessive of the permissible norms, demonstrated elevation of arterial
pressure (by 10-20:) more often than along workers in other occupations.

The arterial pressure rose in accordance with increase in work tenure.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

6. ‘1'. Chukluasova (1957) studied changes in arterial pressure in workers of
a nail-asking shop (the noise level at the work places was in the range

of 99-110 dB) and shoe factory (noise of 90-116 dB) in the cournc of th(
work day. She found that arterial pressure taken before the work shift.
taken as the base level. was somewhat above normal values for the age of

the subjects and directly related to work tenure. In the course of working,
nos: subjects presented a 12-142 drop of arterial pressure by the end 01

the shift. as conpsred to the base level.

A study conducted by V. l. Shah (1963) revealed that arterial pressure nay
rise or drop in the course of the work day among workers in a nail-asking
shop. where the noise level was in the range of 95-105 dB. Elevation of
arterial pressure was observed more often along older individuals than
younger ones toward the end of the shift.

V. F. Rudenko (1963) screened two groups of diesel engine testers. The "O‘BL
level at .he work places of both groups was in the range of 110-120 dB and
110-115 dB; there was prevalence of noderate frequencies (320, 600, 500 Hz)
in the noise spectrus of one group and high frequencies (naxinun energy in

the band of 2500 n: or higher) of the other. The systolic arterial
pressure was in the hypertensive range (160 an Hg or higher) in the group
exposed to aoderate-frequency noise and 15.61 of those exposed to high-
frequency noise. Dyna-1c studies of arterial pressure of engine testers
in the course of the work shift (4-6 days) and after work were indicative
of lability within the range of 35-190 an 11g.

The above author singles out three types of reactions of systolic pressure
by the end of the shift with exposure to noise: hyperdynasic (60 In Kg

elevation of systolic arterial pressure), hypodynasic (up to ‘0 as ﬂg drop)
and noraodynaaic (fluctuations in the range of :10 as ﬁg).

There are indications in several works of changes in different parameters of
arterial pressure under the influence of noise. A. H. Volkov (1958), V. F.
Rudenko (1959) and others believe that noise induces sainly elevation of
systolic pressure.

Toddi and Hindaer (1955) found elevation of diastolic pressure. According
to the data of A. T. Rusinova (1963), L. Ya. Bassaygina (1966) and others,
unstable arterial pressure is observed with exposure to noise.

The studies we conducted revealed that lability of arterial pressure is
desonstrable quite soon after regular exposure to intense noise. Along with
hypertensive reactions. vascular hypotonia say also be observed in individuals
with relatively short tenure of work involving exposure to noise. Tachy-
oscillography sade it possible to desonstrate that not only systolic and
diastolic pressure, but seas dynasic pressure, which is the seat constant
para-star, changes under the influence of intense noise. Dyna-dc observa-
tions are also indicative of unstable arterial pressure on different days

and in the course of a shift. in the seas individuals. however. it can be

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NIX

noted that systolic pressure more often rises while diastolic drops toward
the end of the work shift. Evidently. the contnedictory opinions concerning

the hypotensive and hypertensive effects of noise can be attributed, to some
extent, to instability of arterial pressure.

Since arterial pressure level depends largely on tonus of the vascular walls,
peripheral circulation and function of the heart proper, it is of definite
interest to study these hemodynamic parameters in individuals exposed to
intense noise on their jobs. There is mention in the literature of changes
in vascular tonus under the influence of noise; however. the authors did not
pursue special studies to determine vascular tones and included arterial
pressure in this concept. By determining the pulse wave propagation velocity
and modulus of elasticity of vascular walla, we established that there is
increase in tonne of arterial vessels of the muscular type and. to a

lesser extent. of the elastic type under the influence of intensive wide-
bend noise.

Some researchers measured arterial pressure, not only in brachial vessels

but other regions: temporal artery and central retinal artery. L. Ye. Nilkov
(1963) failed to demonstrate substantial changes in pressure of the temporal
artery or temporobrachisl coefficient in individuals exposed to intensive
noise (103 db). At the same time. I. A. Benyumov (1963) found a change

in temporobrschial coefficient in 33.42 of the workers in the doubler and
weaving industry. exposed to high-frequency noise of 95-101 do: it was

low in 10.31 of the cases and high in 23.12. There was prevalence of

change in the temporobrachial coefficient among individuals with functional

disturbances of the nervous system. According to the data of E. N.
L'vovakaya (1966), elevation of diastolic pressure in the central retinal

artery is often observed with noise of 85-122 dB. The results of cspillaro-
scopy, tissuiar blood flow, plethysmography-end peripheral resistance studies
are indicative of changes in peripheral circulation under the influence of
noise.

Data are submitted in the work of B. M. Shasardin (1976) that indicate imp
paired vascular tonus in the microcirculatory system. This author detected
spastic and spestic-atonic states of fine vessels in different parts of the
body (hands, legs, conjunctiva) among workers exposed to noise. L. Ye.
Hilkov often demonstrated capillary spasm of the nail bed and slow circula-
tion in the hands of workers exposed to noise. N. N. Krylova (1958)

found a direct correlation between the angiospastic reaction and noise

volume under the influence of high-frequency noise at the level of 50-115 dB.
on the basis of plethysmography. and this was confirmed in the studies of
Oppliger and Grandjesn (1959). According to the data of Rossi, Oppliger and
Grandjean (1959), intermittent noise of the same level elicits even more
marked vasoconstrictive effects.

Strsneo and Seghizs (1962) investigated the reactions of workers whose occu-

pation involved exposu:2 to noise by the method of digital plethysmogrsphy
in response to a pure tone of 3000 he and noise on the level of 87 dB.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to their observations, a pure tone did not elicit chuugco in
blood-filling volume, whereas it diminished with exposure to noiuc.

The works of Lahmann. Team (1956) and Lehmann (1962). who studied peripheral
vascular resistance. merit attention. A change in vascular tnnus. parti-
cularly in the capillary system, increased resistance of ancriaL iluw

and decreased systolic volume were noted in individuals exposed to high-
and low-frequency noise. In another experiment. Lehmann (1962) observed
constriction of precapillaries of the skin throughout the period of exposure
to medium-frequency noise in 90-952 of the cases. With increase in peri-
pheral resistance there was a corresponding decrease in volume of the

heart beat. 0n the basis of these findings, the author believes that the
demonstrated changes are not only a reaction of the precapillary region of
the vascular system, but chiefly the result of increased resistance in

most vessels of the entire circulatory system.

In order to determine the state of peripheral circulation in individuals
regularly exposed to intense noise on their jobs. we measured specific peri-
pheral reaistance,‘ which gives an idea about the potency of the precspillary
system and constitutes the overall resistance in the system of peripheral
resistance as a function of body surface area. The obtained data indicate
that the resistance in the system of peripheral vessels was more often
increased. and in some individuals it was significantly higher than the
proper level.

A comparison of actual specific peripheral resistance to working specific

resistance. which is inherent in increased function of the circulatory
system, revealed that in most subjects the actual specific peripheral

resistance was also above the working resistance. i.e., the patency of
their precspillaries is less than the corresponding level of minute volume
of circulation.

There are works indicative of the possibility of development of coronary

and cerebral circulatory disturbances under the influence of noise. In
his studies. Koeppen (195$) attributed much importance to regular exposure

to noise which, in his opinion, by inducing functional cardiovascular
disturbances leads to development of coronary spasms. G. N. Aronova and
T. A. Hayeva (1958). who studied coronary circulation in animals exposed
to an intensive sonic (noise)stimulus, observed decreased circulation in
vessels of the heart due to constriction of their lumen.

In the opinion of V. Ye. Lyubomudrovs, h. N. Onopko and L. Ya. Basamygina
(1968), in some cases noise can elicit coronary insufficiency with signs
of anginal pectoria, as well as myocardial infarction.

:Actual. proper :33 working specific peripheral resistance was measured
and calculated by a method proposed by h. h. Ssvitskiy (1963).

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vascular disturbances in the central nervous syst- in response to sonic
sti-uli are also reported by L. V. Krushinskiy. L. N. Holodkins. 1.. P.
Pushkerskaye (1953) and c. L. Tokhedae (1956). who arrived at the conclusion.
on the basis of experimental data on animals. that the ia-ediate cause of
their death following sonic trauma is ispeiraent of cerebral circulation
associated with effusion of blood in the brain and signs of neuronal hypoxia.
This is usually preceded by a severe cosatose state in the aninnls, with
Iarhed attenuation of reflexes. decreased suscle tone, ispaired cardiac
function end change in arterial pressure.

The studies of local circulation,conducted by I. B. Yevdokinova (1970) in
individuals regularly exposed to varying intensities of noise on their
Jobs. are interesting. Using the rheogrephic sethod. she denonstrated
changes in tonic tension and intensity of delivery of blood to vessels of
the are and brain. Changes in cerebral vessels were noted nore often when
in vessels of the extrenities. At the sane tine, sose distinctions were
found in these changes as a function of intensity of noise. A noise of 85 dB
induced mainly an increase in tonic pressure of vessels, with decline in
blood supply to vessels of the linbs end increase to those of the brain.
Tonic pressure end filling of extrenitel vessels increase, while the seas
parameters of cerebral vessels decrease under the influence of noise at
105-108 d3.

As for cardiac activity and condition of the eyocardius with exposure to
noise, the chief neth of studying thee were determination of heart rate
at rest. with a physical load, during orthostatic and clinostatic tests.
oculocardiac reflex, determination of ninute blood volume. electrocardio-
graphy. phonocardiogrsphy and ballistocardiography.

A. l. Voshahova end 1. A. Sapov, who tested Aschner's oculocsrdiac reflex
and the orthostatic reflex, denonstrated attenuation of parasynpathetic
influence on the heart and enhancement of the effects of eynpethetic inner-
vation. 1.. is. liilkov discovered a tendency toward attenuation of the
oculocerdiec reflex in different groups of workers exposed to noise at
levels of 95. 103 and 120 dB; the decline of reactivity progressed with
increase in intensity of noise. Testing of the ortho-clinostetic reflex
failed to reveal substantial changes. There was soee tendency toward a
stronger vascular reaction in the course of the work day.

According to no data, changes indicative of functional inpairtsent of the

eyocardiun, neinly referable to rhythe and conduction. are sooetiles ob-
served under the influence of noise. Ye. 'rs. Andreyeve-calanins et s1.
(1968) demonstrated bradycsrdia, sinus arrhythmia, inpaired electric con-

duction of the heart, reduced voltage, especially of the 1' wave, enong
those eeployed in the ”noisy" professions.

The no studies conducted by A. A. Arkad'yevskiy (1961) and others on
individuals exposed to noise on their jobs were indicative of changes in

negnitude and shape of the ‘1' wave, longer diastole and decline of systolic
index. According to the date of 1.. Ya. Base-ygina (1966). slowing of

111

FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR ()l-‘I-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

strioventricular conduction and arrhythmia are observed nore often with

exposure to noise. H. L. Khaynovich and w. H. Basiashvili (1966) reported
rhythm and conduction disturbances.

The ECG changes under the influence of noise are corroborated by experilental
data. A. V. Kadyskin (1966). who tested the effect of stable noise on
eaperinental nninals (rabbits), demonstrated an increase in P4} interval,
diminished electrical systole and reduction of systolic index. A. h.
Strakhov (1963) observed ispsirnent of heart rhythn and elevation of systolic
index in enperinental aninals after prolonged exposure to high-frequency
stable noise.

A survey of workers exposed to intensive wide-bend noise often revealed
changes on the EKG, in the has of sinus bradycardia and bradyarrhythnia.

a tendency toward slower atrioventriculer and intraventricular conduction.
Since conduction is very rapidly restored after physical functional tests
(running in one spot). it lust be assuned that these disturbances are
functional. Studies conducted in the course of a work day revealed a ten-
dency toward slower rhytha toward the end of the shift and, in sons cases.
decline of 1' wave appearing concurrently with worsening of halliatocardio-
graphic indices. According to the results of phase analysis of nechsnical
systole of ventricles. contractile function of the nyocardiun was not in-
paired in cost subjects. The denonstrated changes are indicative of inpair-
cent of neurorsflax regulation. Their incidence increased with increase in
work tenure involving exposure to noise and increase in its intensity.

0n tP-c basis of the subaitted data. it can be concluded that the changes
referable to the cardiovascular syste- due to exposure to intensive noise
are indicative of develop-ant of the syndrone of neurocirculatory dysfunc- .
tion, in the synptonetology of which there is proninence of generalised
vascular disturbances with hypertensive reactions and a tendency toward
turning to essential hypertension.

mnestiona pertaining to the distinctions of the effects of noise on the
cardiovascular systen, when conhined with other factors of the industrial

environ-ant. nerit attention. Ye. “fa. Andreyeva-Galanina. s. V. Aleksayev.
G. A. Suvorov and A. V. Kadyskin (1972) indicate that the diversity of
clinical nanifeetations with exposure to noise is attributable to the
intensity of the noise, its spectral cowosition, concoaitant deleterious
environmental factors. as well as reactivity of the organist. According to
the existing observations. intensive noise with prevalence of high fre-
quency in its spectrun has the nest deleterious effect on the body. in par-
ticular the cardiovascular systen. lie have indicated above sons of the dif-
ferences in affects of noise on the cardiovascular system as a function of
its intensity. ‘l'ansen (196‘) and others believe that the severity of
functbnal changes in the cardiovascular system is directly related to the
width of the noise spectrua. In the opinion of authors, a pure tone does
not induce clearcut changes. while wide-band noise elicits statistically
reliable ones. In recent tines, mch attention is being devoted to the
study of pulsed noise. Our observations and the data of other authors

112 .

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Ye. To. Andreyevn-Culnnlnu, I908, and others) indicate that pulsed noise
and noise associated with nervous and emotional tension have n more
deleterious effect on the body than stable noise and noise that is not
associated with nervous and emotional tension.

He still do not haveclcarcut data on the correlation between changes referable
to the acoustic analyzer and the cardiovascular system. On the basis of

a dynamic study of workers exposed to noise of 90-110 dB, Ye. Ts. Andreyeva-
Galanina and V. G. Artamonova (1968) observe that appearance of vascular
disturbances is not necessarily associated sith a change in functional state
of the auditory analyzer. Observations show that hemadynamic changes. in
particular, in arterial pressure, under the influence of noise may precede
development of persistent disturbances of the auditory analyzer, i.e., they
appear prior to demonstration of clinical signs of cochlear neuritis. All
this indicates that the changes in the cardiovascular system may also be one
of the early syndromes of exposure to noise. As already indicated at the
beginning of this section, some researchers believe that noise affects the
incidence of cardiovascular diseases, particularly essential hypertension and
myocardial infarction. He cannot totally rule out the role of the noise
factor in development of some cardiovascular diseases--cssentia1 hypertension,
myocardial infarction and angina pectoris. however, continued observations
and studios are required to answer this question definitively.

These data indicate that intensive noise is one of the deleterious industrial
factors that induce a number of functional disorders referable to the cardio-
vascular system of the order of neurocirculatory dysfunction. There is
reason to believe that, under specific conditions, neurocirculatory dys-
function may be considered one of the syndromes inherent in the affects of
noise.

With exposure to noise, hemodynamic disturbances not infrequently precede

development of persistant changes in the acoustic analyzer. Cardiovascular
disorders under the influence of noise are based on disturbances of neuro-

reflex regulation of the circulatory system. Evidently, the functional
disorders referable to hemodynasic regulation that arise initially under

the influence of noise can, in time, lead to more persistent changes in
vascular tonus. This is most likely the explanation for the high incidence
of hypertensive states among individuals whose jobs involve exposure to
intensive noise, especially when it is associated with nervous and emotional
tension.

Differential diagnostics of neurocirculatory dysfunction due to noise often
present great difficulties, especially in the absence of signs of occupational
cochlear neuritis. For this reason, when establishing the diagnosis, one
must rule out other etiological factors that are instrumental in onset of
neurocirculatory dysfunction (psychological and emotional factors, organic
disease of the nervous and cardiovascular systems, etc.). Horeover, in each
individual case, one must take into consideration the entire diversity of
factors involved in working conditions, work tenure with exposure to noise,

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFLCIAL USE ONLY

health status before starting to work, time of development 0; neurocircuiu-

tory dysfunction, presence and nature or changes referable to the nervous
system and hearing.

Since neurocirculatory dysfunction associated with exposure to noise is due
primarily to functional impairment of higher nervous activity and autonoaic
centers, the therapeutic measures in such cases should be directed toward
regulating the nervous system and normalizing reflex reactions at the cardio-
vascular eyctea. The following can be recommended in the set of therapeutic
measures: general fortifying agents, sedatives and vitamins. Beneficial
results are observed with the use of bromide and caffeine. Spasnolytic
agents and ganglion—blocking agents are indicated for marked angiospsana.
Gradual conditioning of the heart and vessels is very important, and this

can be achieved by therapeutic exercise, vhich aids in regulating and coordi-
nating all elements of the circulatory system, and also expands its reserve
capabilities.

Fitness for uork is usually unimpaired at the mild stages of neurocirculatory
dysfunction. Proper adherence to a work shcedule and reasonable activity

at leisure is the main recoammndation in such cases for the restoratioa of
impaired functions.

At the more marked stages, particularly when there are constant, disturbing
subjective sensations, severe instability of pulse and arterial pressure,
angiospastic signs, the question can be raised of transferring the subject

to a job that does not involve exposure to intense noise. In finding
jobs for such individuals, it must be borne in mind that, in addition to
noise, tease work related to emotional factors is also contraindicated.

"hen settling expert questions of fitness and job placement, in addition

to the condition of the cardiovascular system, one must definitely bear
in mind the presence and severity of changes referable to other organs,

in particular, the nervous system and ear.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

::£:;:§ 8. REACTIONS OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM TO ACUTE OCCUPATIONAL

[Text] There are only a few reports in the literature concerning acute
injury to the cardiovascular systea by physical factors (ionizing radiation,
electric trauma, superhigh-frequency waves) and chemicals (carbon monoxide,
chlorine, cyanides and others).

The old opinion of "hit (1921). subsequently confirmed by Koelsch (1959).
to the effect that there are no factors in industry that induce cardiovas-
cular diseases is presently being questioned. If we agree that a

cardiac poison refers to a substance, under the influence of which death
occurs as a result of cardiac. rather than respiratory, arrest, several
alkaloids can be classified as such substances: strophanthus, nicotine.
colchicine. quinine, aconitine, fluorides, barium salts. snake venom,

toad akin venom and others.

Regardless of whether the agent that induces poisoning is a selective poison
for the nervous, hemopoietic system or parenchylatous organs. there are
always disturbances in activity of the cardiovascular system. Moreover,
changes referable to the cardiovascular system become the principal ones

at a certain stage of aany forms of occupational poisoning, and they
determine the clinical course. outcome and prognosis.

As can be seen from the classification of factors and syndronea (Table 15),
hypoxic states play a substantial role in cardiovascular disturbances.
Thus. hypoxaaic hypoxia. due to inadequate oxidation of blood in the lungs,

is observed in cases of chlorine. phosgene and nitric oxide poisoning (acute
pulmonary edema, acute cor pulaonale). Anemia hypoxia occupies an inportant

place; it develops as a result of carbon monoxide poisoning (formation of
carboxyhenoglobin), poisoning due to saidobenrene and nitrobensene conpounds.

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

phenylhydrazina (production of methemoglohin), hydrogen arsenidc (hemoiyuis
of erythrocytes), etc. Some agents (cyaniues, hydrogen sulfide. insecti-
cides and fungicides) induce tiasular hypoxia (histotoxic hypoxia) An A
result of primary impairment of cellular respiration (respiistory tntymc
block). The cardiac changes are not inflammatory in nature, they ure
reversible in most cases and referred to in the Soviet litc::turr L, the
term "myocardial dystrophy," which was proposed by G. F. Lang (1936). This
term is specific. it has an etiological. pathogenetic and clinical basin,
and in our observations it better defines the essence of processes occurring
in the heart than the collective and vague term "myocardiopathy."

Industrial factors have both a direct and indirect effect on the cardiovasculnr
system. Various industrial factors often induce the some deviations and, on
the contrary, there may be different cardiovascular disturbances under the
effect of the same fsctor. Systemic reactions of the allergic type. often

in the nature of an autonomic "storm" (spelter's fever), often occur under
the influence of some metals (copper, zinc, magnesium and others) in vapor
(aerosol) form and certain other substances (tellurium, beryllium). Sons
substances (antibiotics, vitamins, ursol [p-phenylenediamine], methylchloride
and others), which have allergenic action, occasionally induce marked reac-
tions of the antigen-antibody type, and they often lead to involvement of

the cardiovascular system. Agents with systemic toxic action affect the
cardiovascular system in a more complex way: directly on tissue and organ
calls, as wall as via the central, autonomic nervous and endocrine systems.
Local exposure to large doses of radiation induces local tissue lesions.
High-tension electricity, set, our and electromagnetic fields of other
range. have mainly an indirect effect on the cardiovascular system. high
ambient temperature, low and high atmospheric pressure have the same effect.
A low oxygen content in inhaled air elicits cerebral hypoxia. Gas embolisns
in vessels of various organs, which appear with a change from high to

normal or low atmospheric pressure, may lead to serious complications.

With expsoure to various etiological factors, one must also bear in mind
primary nonspecific neurohumoral affects (stress) and their important psycho-
emotional component, inducing early general reactions in the nervous system.

At the present tine. the significance of hormonal changes to pathogenesis of
cardiovascular disturbances has been proven. Considerable access of catecho-
laminae in blood (epinephrine. norepinephrine) increases oxygen requirement
of the myocardium and, when there are limited opportunities for delivery
thereof (in the presence of lesion to cardiac vessels), this could land to
anoxia, myocardial dystrophy and necrohiosis. Impairment of electrolyte
balance also plays a certain role (V. Bash, 1959: H. Sel'ye, 1960).

Changes in the Cardiovascular System Under the Effect of Some Metals and
Aerosols thereof

Copper, zinc, cobalt. magnesium oxide and tellurium are virtually
nontoxic in solid or powder form. In melted and vapor state, they can

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL lISl-I ONLY

induce ao-called spelter's fever (nonspecific allergic syndrome) associated

with tachycardia, elevation of arterial pressure, chills (body temperature

up to 38-39° ), headache, aching of extremities and myocardial dystrophy
(decline or inversion of 1' wave on the EKG).

The pathogenesis of this fever is attributable to destruction of cells of
the alveolar endothelium and absorption of products of their decomposition,
as a result of the active effects of metal aerosols.

As an example, let us describe the cardiovascular changes in the presence of
”spelter' s fever" induced by inhalation of tellurium fumes.

Patient V., 21 years old, observed development of cough after
working for a few minutes with melted tellurium,* which became
worse toward the end of the work day; there were vertigo,
general weakness and tremor of the extremities. when admitted
to the clinic she complained of severe weakness, pressure
under the sternum, cough and headache. Vertigo and repeated
vomiting of food occurred when body position was changed.
Objective findings: hyperemic face, cyanosis of lipids, naso-
pharyngeal mucosa and tongue are dark green. Strong putrid
odor in the mouth. Respirations 32/min. Body temperature
38.2'0. Scattered dry rales ausculted over pulmonary fields.
Pulse lZO/min, rhythmic. Arterial pressure 130/90 II fig. No
change in heart boundaries. Marked vegetovascular reaction:
tachycardia, marked perspiration and diffuse dermographism.
The following morning the patient felt considerably better.
Pulse 76/min, rhythmic. Respiration Zlo/min. Arterial pressure
110l80. lieart sounds somewhat dull. No more rales in lungs.
The EKG (Figure 6) shows sinus rhythm, 80/min. P-Q 0.17 s;
(RS 0. 08 s, Q-‘l‘ 0. 60 a (normal 0.37 s). Horizontal electric
axis. 8-13-24 slightly elevated, 1114, wave almost isoelectric,
TV,-2_3 negative, “ﬁn-V. biphasic. EKG changes were indicative
of significant diffuse changes in bioelectric activity of myo-
cardium. her condition imporved significantly in the next few
days; no complaints. Isolated dry rales heard in lungs.

Pulse 70-80/min, rhythmic; arterial pressure 110/60 an Hg.
Heart normal in size, but 8K6 remains changed. Complete nor-
malization of EKG was observed only after 5 months.

Thus, tellurium fume poisoning was acute in this patient, of
the order of the nonspecific allergic syndrome associated with
chills, fever, tales in lungs, headache, general severe weak-
ness, marked vegetovascular reaction and changes in myocardial
bioelectric processes. The clinical and EKG findings enable us
to attribute myocardial dystrophy to metabolic disturbances in
the body and myocardium.

 

When tellurium compounds reach cells, they block several enzymatic systems:
muscular oxidases, dehydrogenases and others (N. V. Laurev, 1971).

117

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«loo .onmuunou

nun-doc

280

350
.oducoinan you

uwoououoo

uaavuquo»!
.Ilou auguuunu
:5 3389?
.95939 and

       

08350 0.3.3.0."

      

        

Anon—.6 .33 ca ”.05

£75 maﬁuuduanﬂ

unusuau>3 undo

on!»

3030

:- 5 38 :75

.33.:

o UBI>OdQuUO

. 65¢th 6.12509;

Anus ﬁnd 5" 905
39:8 .375
.392: .uoupouvuﬂo

35:5qu .33.
:5" 32333338

. 69.60%». 826395

     

   

ago .33 a 005
«3-38 “Sand

. uuaﬂu

 

.8a83uqu

                
         

.ouo .oauouuqo .oauuoo«:.n«nvbeHOAno oconxsuo
.oovuouuuau .oovuouuooocu

.Aozooaa Hanna!
.nuuuuuoa no.
3.333 .0550
non—35.2. .uoouoﬁ
.naou a eunuch-
.ovuunsawv conuou
.ovuuousocuuou
nonuau .moouonu
Iaaaloc a hunches
.33 ﬂange-ﬂea .o

350 .0553;
633223 .n

Alan “—273

.30 .333 .002.
Inns!- £38231-
.oﬂnu .53333
$238 .33 .c

                

        

nos-3"» w 239.0

3 H08 3350: can
.hnaouuuhv .3300»!
.525. .8383
C3393 a anon-ad!
60.52:: .guuogunho
naoapouowo> .893»
IE? 023309885
I: Quinn—323.05

            
   

3003 E23
roach—«nous
ooaoououa ouu
nan.“ pad-.300
.23qu 3.3:.
LES—bun.— .suuao
2632. canon
:33 a 1.5500

      

          

   

        

unmouuahv .332»: 08am

unsung}!

3933.1 .5395
lob. .3305! Jo»:
3.332: .038 3S

    

          
         

as

uuuuozu «a 2—36
loco..- owning..."

       

  

  

    

  

 
       

 

     

33.30.50: .30 .033:- no»
.hnaouuohv How—vulva»: 52—h: ulna-0.3. Ion—:3 .3333 .n
Enough—v an .30 £3530
lunoonI “anaconda uoo 63“.. 0.75.3 .oaco
ousuu nave has?” 3"on canon»: Icon.— .ouwmodﬁ .N
2:32—03 282—3
anon-o." 03!. 1nd 952.
pad-03> «noun-no .0383. snow—i.—
.nlwvunoohl 108 ion»: 332! .ovwnoaol gonna 2"
“233%.. 13.38»: .3596 .u

«a no you: .3303 unawuoaoqum
no .mowuhnaoauum

ﬂu.»- uni-3.23930

  

Maui-338.353

 
 

any 5 noun-no ”Shadobuv 3330. «0515 as» 8—3qu Madonna-Goo mo coauaamnuodmo .3 0.38.

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nun c« ouuozu .v

             

Aoonnu nun an uoav
Cut: .332: 68>

o«oo«30uuoc o
uuuouuoc macaw

           

        

neuvuoo ..uoc:unhv .azaouunav
quou .omaaggou nauauon>0uono> oaqm savvy-coax acouuso uquuuuum .n
couuunauunv nuaauaauuq ouuoaauoa we. “cauuau
umaauaou uuuauuq>0uouo> .hnnouuosv Hauvunuoax ocuuuovcoouaoz auuoavouuasuua .u

anon-o «a. nu nouv
273 393833.: 2.83 no 333
nanauqd>0uuuuu nouooc van announce undo: cu cannon cauueyvou

«nou .omnuuaoo ..u:§u¢av .ua¢>0u0u0> .annouuuav anuvunooux dawn-«vac _ «eunucOu .u

mach—bad Smut: .uu

        

 

gong ounumnom

    

nuaouv a as»: cum ouquunaao

aaunaquccogu-m .

anon—~02... u
no .uouoagaoguam

uncuucu ~60u enouuw

  

22.2.38 .2 oz:
FOR OFFiCIAL USﬁ GNLY

2
§

I” up

.

§§

‘3
-

e3

§§:§§§§—

Iigure 6.
no of patient V.; explained in text

Poisoning Due to Sum (:iwvdmh
With General Toxic Action

Agents Hlth Anoxenic AVfivn

hydrogen nultido: In un~ a“

of acute poinoni .. the 1.»: Mr and
cardiovascular systems are chiefly
stricken. There in inhibition of
intracellular tissuiar teepirntina
(inpsirnent of redox proccsnca and
their catalysts). For this reasnu
the cell is incapable of utilizing
blood oxygen. There in onset of
hypoxia of tissues. organs and. what
is particularly inporrant, "rain
centers. Occasionally. death nay
occur innediately when there is a
high concentration of hydrogen sul-
fide ("instantaneous form") as a
result of cardiac paralysis; nure
often, death occurs due to develop"
nent of asphyxia and coastose state.
Patients conplain of headache. pain
in the region of the heart of a
conpressing type. sensation of
internitten pulse and general unsk-
ness. Clinically there are labiiity
of pulse. tachycardia, nild elevation
of arterial pressure follouad by a
decline, widening of heart borders
and dull sounds. Not infrequently.

there is develop-eat of toxic puisonary edens associated with very narked
dyspnea. cyanosis, noist ralss in the lungs. 0n the 2K6 there is a decline
of P and T waves. elongation of electrical systole of the ventricles. signs
of syocardial hypoxia. “coronary" changes or focal lesions to the syocsrdiun
(2. P. Kalushnihova. 19‘9; Schran. 1957. and others).

He suhnit a case history on a patient with acute hydrogen sulfide poisoning

and ”apoplectic" fora of heart lesion:

Patient 0.. 2‘ years old, a laboratory technician. was ad-
nitted to the rayon hospital on 21 Dace-her in serious condi-
tion due to acute hydrogen sulfide poisoning associated uith

conatose state and toxic edeaa of the lungs.

She use un-

conscious for 10 h; there was cyaaosis of the lips, pallor of
the intagunent, gurgling respiration, tachycardia. dull heart

sounds.
noist rales in the lungs.

Arterial pressure not denoastrable.
Repeated voaiting of bile.

Diffuse dry and
After

appropriate therapy the condition iaproved and arterial pressure

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
FDR UFNCIM. USI'. ONLY

rose to 90/80 mm Hg. There was attenuation of tachycardia
and signs of pulaonary edema.

Prom the very first days of hospitalization. the patient was
troubled with squeezing pain in the heart. On the 40th day
of illness (31 January) she was transferred to the institute
clinic in satisfactory condition. She complained of dyspncn
during physical exercise, periodic boring pain in the cardiac
region (irradiating to the left scapula). soderate cough with
production of sputua, headache. pain in the lumbar region,
loser and upper extreaities. marked weakness. The integuaent
is pale pink. labial aucosa is slightly cyanotic and sclera
are subicteric. Pulmonary sound in the lungs. vesicular.
soaevhat weak respiration. Pulse 70/ain. rhythmic. good
filling. Left margin of the heart shifted 1 cm laterally
tron the Iediastinal-clavicular line. Heart sounds are
soaewhat dull. Systolic aurnur at the apex and point V.
Accented second tone in pulaonary artery. Arterial pressure

120/75 aa ﬂg. Venous pressure 00 on water. blood flow rate
(loheline test) 19 s. EKG (Figure 7) taken on 5th day of
illness (a): correct sinus rhytha. 63/nin; 9-0 0.15 a; QRS
coaplex 0.08 s; o—r 0.68 (nor-a1 0.38 s). Electrical ventri-
cular systole 0.1 s longer; P _ _ accentuated; RI<R1113
R998“; 8-11-",v.“ slightly" mm“ in the fore of a
convex arch and changes into negative, "coronary" type of

T wave. Thus. the EKG was indicative of severe ayocardial
hypoxia and diffuse (dystrophic) changesgninly in the
region of the apex and lateral part of the left ventricle.
Phonocardiograa shoved gross systolic auraur throughout the
systole.

Unquestionably, the ayocardial lesion was due to severe hypoxia.
which apparently developed as a result of oxidative eneyle block
(production of Pes cosplex). This cardiac lesion should be
classified. according to c. F. Lang. in the category of toxic
ayocardial dystrophiea.

blood test (2 February): hemoglobin 126 g/i (12.6 g1). erythro-
cytcs 3.0-10‘lul (3.300.000). leukocytes 5.3°lo’lvl (saoo),
ly-phocytes 311, aonocytes 32, eosinophils $2. stab 61. seg-
mented 55:. Blood prothroabin 1002, total serua protein

77.8 g/i. throabocytss 24.7.10'lul (247,000), 38R [erythrocyte
sediaentation rate] 3 us/h (7.78 g!) (fractions unchanged).
Urinalysis shoved no deviations from noraal. Thyroid function
("'1 test) normal. Roentgenoscopy of the chest: heart in
usual position, waistline flattened due to elongation of arch
of pulmonary artery cones, left ventricle soaewhat enlarged.
Deep pulsation. rhythaic. adequate in force. Nor-a1 Iyocardial
tonus. No change in aorta.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE 081.?
l-‘OR OfPlCIAl. USE ONLY

«In MI: 1'." m nflcréyenru
I "1-' (Mm Hi...“ -:I um 3131-11 31-4-11; r31
n'u-‘Jv-pd [M I: "ll "'

'"F'Lq'l .. . |. null-us;
. "77"7 "Hf: 'u'": 4" u '_- g'll: “h...“II
" éﬁf-pfcn'w‘_' ;,
e-k-"v “‘f‘T'mM...‘ ' _‘ M
'.'._'. ﬂan/3‘ :l'”!‘ 'r

M**%

       

    

    

    
       

4.. . ‘31. '_
c'J-t". 4w“ !ﬂ”,£|:!f‘&
“*" 4““ MN: m:

'l .. . .. ..

n b c d e
Figure 7. m: of patient 0. Explanation given in the text.

   

By the and of a nonth. there van none attenuation of general
weakness and cardiac pain. Suhfehrile tenperature, dyspnee
and tachycardia disappeared. The patient conplained of
general weakness. fatigability. headsche, pain in the lisbe
and sons cough. Dyepnea and palpitations appeared with

nild physical exercise. Heart sounds hecaae clear. am

on 20 January (h) still showed signs of nyocerdial changes
(negative 1'1-“ v - veve). In the 2d nonth after poisoning.
pain disappeared fto‘ the cardiac region, there was less dyspnee
during exercise and fever changes on the EKG. The rm hecsse
nor-Isl after 2 nonths (c. d): the patient received general
terrifying therapy. cardiovascular agents and sedatives; she
was discharged fro: the clitf- '9. ‘P 9.2929: (3.5 nonthe after
the poisoning) in satisfactory condition. There were no
visible deviations in her health status. In the last emine-
tion on 11 Pehruary, 8K6 date (e) were nor-a1.

Carbon nonoxide: Clinical signs of such poisoning are characterised by
inpaired function of the cardiovascular and nervous eyetene due to hypoxenia,
vhich resulted tron production of carhoxyhenoglo'ein. According to clinical
end electrocardiographic dynenic observations, as uell as date in the litera-
ture (1. Ya. Sosnovik, 1955; ii. A. Kovnatekiy. l96l. and others), changes
are often encountered in the cardiovascular systen in the presence of acute

carbon monoxide poisoning. At the early stage or acute and severe poisoning.
the patients present general weakness, cardiac pain and tachycardia, videning

ot nargins and dullness of heart sounds. occasionally rhythe disturbances
and elevation of arterial pressure. Hhen there is progression of functional

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

disorders of the heart and respiration. death may occur due to respiratory
arrest. As shown by the EKG findings, there are nften signs of diffuse.
less often focal. myocardial lesion (5. Z. Kostyukova. 1941; s. I. Ashbel'
et al., 1962. and others). in cases of mild and moderate poisoning, the
8K0 changes are transient and unstable in most cases: however. they say
reappear during functional tests (physical load, orthostatic test. etc.).
It should be stressed that there is no direct correlation between severity
of poisoning and 8&6 changes. heart lesions do not necessarily appear
immediately. but within a few days and weeks (2-3 weeks). and they may

vary in severity. ranging from mild diffuse changes to coronary-like and
focal lesions.

Patient N., 38 years old, a plumber. was delivered to the
clinic in an unconscious state. He lost consciusness in

a well while repairing water pipes. "has admitted. there was
severe rigidity of muscles of the upper and lower extremities,
dilation of pupils, no reaction to light, bilateral Babinskiy
symptom: visible mucosa and integunent are pink, respiration

rate 28/ain; left ear in of the heart is 1 cm lateral from

the mediastinoclavicugar line, heart sounds are sonorous.

Pulse lOO/min. arterial pressure 120/65 mm Hg. EKG (Figure 8):
tachycardia (100 contractions/min); R-R 0.60 s, P-Q 0.16 e.

QRS 0.10 a, Q-T 0.32 (normal 0.28). ’11 moderately accentuated.
R >R , R >sv , s-r - and especially 8-1 are
lgw.11*1-1¥’is low. Tg'tt’ v:-2 is low and biphxsiczs°ihe
EKG data were indicativezof'my3é3rdial infarction, mainly of
the left ventricle. Blood test: hemoglobin 150 all, leuko-
cytes é.6°10‘lu£. eosinophils 22. basophils 0.52, stab ll.
segmented 632, lymphocytes 27:. monocytes 6.52, 88R 18 nm/h.
Oxygen in arterial blood 66:, coefficient of tissular oxygen
uptake 0.16. 001 tension in arterial blood 36 mm hg. lactic
acid content 68.3 mgz. The patient regained consciousness
after 14 h. his condition improved rapidly on the following
days. He was discharged after 7 days in satisfactory condition.
The EKG and blood findings were back to normal.

Thus, in a patient with acute and severe carbon monoxide poisoning. we ob-
served involvement of the central nervous system and diffuse hypoxia (dys-
trophy) of the myocardium of a moderate grade. which were eliminated within
a few days. Recovery may take several months and. in some cases, lead to
chronic heart disease (myocardial sclerosis). A comparison of clinical and
postmortem findings warrants the belief that in essence these changes con-
slot of development of micronecrosis, often even without involvement of
coronary vessels.

Roentgenological findings are also indicative of diffuse myocardial changes
at the early stage of carbon monoxide poisoning; they show total widening

of the heart and pulmonary artery within the first few days after poisoning.
and in some victims (502 of the cases) dilatation of the superior vena cava.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SD-2 ONLY

There changee reforehle to the heart and vessels usually luel on In a tow
deye (3-7) end. eccordlng to EKG tlndlnge, are followed mainly by focal
leelone. At the ecute stage. when the changes are null nnlnly dlftusv.
there 1e e drop or erterlel preeeure (nlnly noon and dleetollc) and, in
none ceeee. fine effusion: of blood.

',. w W m
W '

 

" 523% W

 

*WT‘Lx ”Inn y, ..
mm W M e
.-:.I|.h..l I: i ,

    
 

Plgute 8. EKG of petient K. Explenetlon given 1n the text.
125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NLY

ln serious cases there may be subarachnoidal effusion of blood. effusions
along the optic nerve and in other important parts or the central nervous
system; toxic pneumonia is observed (A. M. Rashevahaya. 1948). A few days
after poisoning, there remain only mild dullness of sounds and hypotenslon,
which persists for a long time. Hhilc the patient feels well and his
temperature is normal, with no changes in blood, for a long time (3-5 weeks)
the EKG shows marked focal changes, often resembling the changes observed
in the presence of coronary insufficiency and pinpoint necrosis of the myo-

cardium. These discrepancies between the minor clinical manifestations of
poisoning and severity of 3K6 changes are Very typical of heart disease
following acute carbon monoxide poisoning. The genesis myocardial lesions
is complex. It is based on dystrophic changes due to metabolic disturbances
that are related to acute onset of myocardial hypoxia.

According to the EKG findings. diffuse myocardial changes persist in the
vast najority of cases for a long time after disappearance of poisoning
symptoms.

Thus, there are often marked changes in the myocardium and vascular system
in the presence of acute carbon monoxide poisoning. It may be considered
that the changes in the myocardium and hypotension are among the frequent
long-term sequelae of acute (especially serious) carbon monoxide poisoning,
and they are apparently attributable to a change in condition of autonomic
centers.

Cyanides: Potassium, sodium. elm-onia, hydrogen and other cyanides,

even in small amounts, depress cellular respiration (they block oxidative
enzymes) as a result of which there is development of organic and tissular
hypoxia. The nerve centers are particularly sensitive to hypoxia and are
the first to be involved. Death often occurs instantaneously due to para-
lysis of the respiratory center and reflex cardiac arrest. In the case of
poisoning with small doses, there are complaints of weakness, headache,
nausea, cheat and heart pain, dyspnea and palpitations. with high concentra-
tions, there are respiratory rhythm disturbances, severe dyspnea, fear,
stunned state and then loss of consciousness. This say be followed by death.
The EKG shows signs of hypoxic changes or "coronary-like" diffuse changes;
occasionally there is extension of conduction (atrioventriculsr and ventri-
cular). Koelsch (1959) reports lability of the pulse and arrhythnia at the
long term after acute poisoning. Autopsies revealed light red, thin blood,
fine effusions of blood in the lungs and pleura, pericardium, myocardium,

as well as myocardial dystrophy and sites of softening of the brain.

He submit the following case history as an example of mild acute poisoning:

Patient H., 31 years old, whose job involves manufacture

of silver parts using silver cyanide and copper cyanide.

while working she felt general weakness, vertigo, headache,
sharp pain in the region of the heart. That day, the

exhaust ventilation system had broken down. After working for
6-5 h she developed a feeling of pressure in the chest, shortage

’ 125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

of air. ecratchy throat. intensification of pain in the region

of the heart. with appearnnCe of severe generul wenkneun and
dizziness. She vaa delivered to the clinic at 2100 hours.

Exaaination revealed bright pink integunent. Pulse 60/nin.
arterial pressure 130/80 II Hg. Heart aargine are in the normal
range. sounds somewhat dull, systolic murmur over all poluta of
the heart. 8K0 (Figure 9) shove eerked diffuse (hypoxia)
myocardial changea--eyocardia1 dystrophy. Blood presented
sodorata neutrophil laukocytoeﬁs with left shift to 10% staff
nuclears. General weakness, vertigo and stabbing pain in the
region of the heart persisted for the next fev days. Heart
aounde gradually becaae clearer; leukocyte count reverted to
noraal and positive EKG dyna-ics were observed.

”I” 16/11 2/”

~

5

1/!

\

.5

3

e: e
I z

3

2
u

‘G

e‘

IIIIIIIIIII

*6

Figure 9.

I)”

Q Q
§ 3 n

o
R

'0‘

5”

03 0‘5 #3

IIIIIIIII. l
Iiiilllilﬂ

eF

Figure 10.

are or patient H., explained in text. 3:6 of patient Ye.. explained in text.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Organochlorine compounds: Hexnchlornne, dichlorodiphenyl trichloro-
ethane, hexachlorocyclohexane, benzene hexnchlorlde and others can induce
systemic poisoning in acute cases: weakness, nausea. vomiting,gastric pain,
headache, nose bleeds, as well as retroaternal pressure pain In the region
of the heart, drop of arterial pressure. slowing of pulse and toxic lesion
to the myocardium of the diffuse myocardial dystrophy type. In more serious
cases one observes unconsciousness, cardiac weakness, occasionally pulmonary
edema, collapse and encephalopathy syndrome (L. I. Medved', 1968).

He shall submit an example of acute poisoning by orgnnochlorine compounds:

Patient Ye., 32 years old, laboratory technician, worked for
several hours with organochlorine compounds. Toward the end
of the work day, she experienced severe headache. dizziness,
general weakness, heaviness of the head, aching in the

region of the heart, abdominal pain and nausea. There was
repeated vomiting. When admitted to the clinic her condition
was satisfactory: pulse 76lmin, rhythmic. adequate filling.

Arterial pressure 110/70 mm hg. heart boandsries in normal
range; apical systolic murmur. Tongue is coated, abdomen

soft, there is tenderness to palpation of the epigastric

region and right subcoetal space. The margin of the liver is
palpable. Blood test is normal. The EKG (Figure 10) shows
diffuse myocardial changes (flattened T111 V3,. waves, biphaaic
:¥&.3 and low TVs,e)° Gradually her condition improved.

dynamics were positive (Figure 10): increase in T -IIv;-s-.
and decreased biphasic nature of T wave in the V2 lea .

The clinical and electrocardiographic findings made it possible to interpret
these changes as myocardial dystrophy due to organochlorine poisoning. Per-
haps the latter was due to increased sensitivity of the myocardium to epi-
nephrine, elevation of which is observed in blood and tissues in the presence
of such poisoning (N. V. Lararev, 1971).

Changes in the Cardiovascular System Related to Poisoning by Agents
Affecting Mainly the Central Nervous System

Acute poisoning may be observed under industrial conditions by agents with
marked toxic properties (chlorohydrins, dichlorohydrins, ethylene chloro-
hydrins and others). Changes are observed in the nervous system and other
organs (cardiovascular system, respiratory organs, kidneys, liver and
others); there is development of severe collapse. coma. hemorrhagic syndrome;
there may be edema of the lungs, lesion to the myocardium and parenchymstous

organs. N. V. Lazsrav (1971) describes a case of fatal ethylene chlorohydrin
poisoning on the job. He submit our case:

Patient Sh., 26 years old. was brought to the clinic at

2200 hours with suspected industrial poisoning. He worked

in contact with ethylene chlorohydrin, a small amount of which
(about 20 ml) was ingested by accident at 0600 hours. At

127
FOR OFFXCIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1900 hours he conplaiued of nausea and vomiting. A gastric
lavage was perforeed at the nedioai aid station and he was
given "stomach“ tablets. After this he returned to the "hop.
However, his condition worsened and he became weak; at

1900 hours he was sent hone. 0n the way hone he vonited

Iany tiles and had frequent loose stool. The energcnc)

center physician found the patient at hone in a collnptoid
state (arterial pressure 50/0 me Hg). In spite of adninis-
tration of tonics, his condition did not ieprove, and he

was taken to the clinic. Upon adnission: his condition

is serious, clear conciousness, inhibited, responds to
questions correctly and clearly. he reports general weakness.
drowsiness and chills. lntegunent is pale with a grayish
cast. The tip of the nose and ears are cyanotic. Respiration
26-30/nin: vesicular respiration eusculted. Heart boundaries
are nornal, dull sounds, arterial pressure 80/60 no Hg.

Pulse lOO/ein, threedy, rhythmic. Tongue is dryish with
a whitish-yellow coat. The abdoeen is soft, tender to pal-

pation in the iliac region. Liver and spleen are not pal-
pable. Pasternatskiy eyepton nildly positive. Tonic and

cardiac egents‘were given. At night, the patient was
restless, thrashed about in bed, coeplained of pressure in
the chest and had difficulty answering questions. 0n the
2d day, cyanosis of the lips, ear lobes and integunent

over the chest was sore marked; shallow respiration. til-in;

week pulse, llO/ein, barely palpable; heart sounds are dull.
Arterial pressure 60/40 II ug. Muscle tonus low. The
patient does not have cosplete lateral novenent of eyeballs.
transient, nonrhythnic nystageoid twitching of a horizontal
nature appears when he fixes his glance. Periostesl and
tendon reflexes of the hands very low; knee reflexes absent,
Achilles reflexes low; no pathological reflexes. There was
no spontaneous urination and no bowel noveeent. EKG (Pigure
11)L sinus tachycardia, vertical position of electric axis
of the heart. Minor changes in the eyocardiue, nainly the
left ventricle (spices and lateral part of the heart). Chest
x-ray showed no changes. Byegrounde: hyperesic optic nerve
disks, barely differing in color free the retinal background,
boundaries vague, veins wide and somewhat tortuous. Blood
test: leukocytosis-23.75°10‘lul (23, 750) and stab nuclear
shift (15%), narked elevation of trensaeinasee (ATS 260 units,
ALT 204 units). aldolese--36.2 units and residual nitrogen-

300 I32.

Urinalysis: albunin 6.6 g/i (0.662), leukocytes 20/field,
erythrocytes 203/field. altered renal epithelial cells in
eoderats eeount. his condition was unchanged in the daytiee.

0n the 3d day, his condition becane extra-sly serious. The
patient is stunned. Marked general cyanosie and acrocyanoeie.
Rapid respiration (60-681Iin), shallow, intereittent. Vesicular

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
POM nFVICIAL USE ONLY

breathing. Pulse loo-loalnin. deficient. Arterial pressure
100/80-120/90 II Hg. Heart sounds dUli. nericnrdiel friction
surnur in a circumscribed area (near the apex). Pupils
constricted. no resction to light. Tendon reflexes absent.

No pathological reflexes. In this tine (2 days) urine out-

put only 200 st. EKG taken on 3d day (Figure ll): "inforctoid"
changes appeared. indicative of ssrhed hypoxis snd inpsirnent
of setnbelic processes (electrolyte gradient) in the syocardius.
dystrophy and. perhaps. noncoronarogenic syocsrdial lesion
(nainly to the posterior wall of the left ventricle): consider-
able increase in electrical systole of the ventricles.

in view of worsening of his condition. the patient was trans-
ferred to the Institute iseni N. V. Sklifosovskiy where, in
spite of intensive therapy and repented peritoneal dialysis.
he expired.

Anatonical findings: acute ethylene chlorohydiin poisoning
(according to clinical date); nuserous petechiel and striate

hemorrhages, nonunifors filling with blood of the nyocerdius.
henorrheges in the region of the anterior and posterolsterai
walls of the left ventricle (under the epicardiun and near
the superoposterior papillary nuscle); isolated atherosatoue
plaques (which do not constrict lumen) in anterior and des-
cending branches of the left coronsry ertsry: dystrophy of
the nyocardius. kidneys (excretory nephrosis) and liver:
severe edema of the brain and lungs; venous plethora of
organs. thin blood.

Microscopy of nyocardius: nsrked dystrophy and edess of the
syocsrdius with areas of necrobiosis (Figure ll, c. d); fine

droplet sdiposity of hepatocytes of the liver; very severe
dystrophy and autolysis of tubular epithelius of kidneys.

Thus. as a result of acute ethylene chlorohydrin poisoning. changes in the

central nervous system caused ispairnsnt of respiration and organic hypoxia.
appearance of severe collapse and inpairsent of renal excretory function

(uresia). The occurring setsbolic changes (protein, electrolyte. fluid-elec-
trolyte. easy-s netabolisn), as well as ispsirssnt of acid-base equilibriul.
against the background of nsrksd hypoxia, caused appearance of dystrophic
and necrobiotic (noncoronsrogenic) changes in the heart. involve-sot of the
liver and kidneys.

Under industrial conditions. there are also cases of poisoning by substances

with ninissl toxic properties. In such cases. the acute states are apparently
due to the large dosage of a substance or increased sensitivity of the body.

or else both factors together. The reaction is associated with nsrtsd as-
citation of the sylpethetic nervous systes of the order of a stress reaction.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with incrsnss in blood cstocholuino content. which could csuss injury to

ths Iyocsrdius snd vessels.

”In ' NI”

mm
mm

.J-MLLLH-rw
:WHHM/FH
MW

W
, WWW
WW

3 ID

i

’u‘lf. 11s
Acuts sthylsns chlorohydrin
who'll-II:
s) m: tshsn on 2d dsy oi
illnsss
b) no tshn on 3d dsy of
illnsss

Pstisnt 'l‘.. 60 yssrs old, instrunont con-
trol son at s phsmcsuticsl plsnt (tenure
of 8 yssrs), wss brought to tho clinic st
1‘00 hours. No hsd worked for s long
tiso on synthesis of sodium hensonsts.

In the out week he hsd to go down for
15-30 sin, ssvorsl tiuos s day. to

ths desiccsting deport-ant. whore thsre
was s lsrgo mount of csffsine powder.
Mtsr this, he obssrvsd trsnsisnt pslpits-
tions. During ths night shift. ho clsnnsd
out tho drying dspsrtnsnt, where there was
shout 300 kg of sodius bonsonstc of
csfisino. Ils worked without s rsspirstor.
lls dsvslopsd s ssnsstion of shortsgs of
sir. fsvsr snd gsnsrsl wsknsss sitsr
working for 1-1.5 h. Osnsrsl sslsiss.
pslpitstions incrssssd sitsr 2-3 h, with
sppssrsncs of sild vertigo. nsusss snd
trsnor of ths body. At the sod of his
shift. on his wsy hose. thors wss intsn-
sificstion of dyspnss snd nsusss. a.
wositsd ones. At hons, thsrs wss sppssr-
sncs of ssnsstion of pulsstion in ths
tssplss. crssps in tho lsgs snd susclss
ot ths uppsr sbdossn. with intsnsiiics-
tion of pslpitstions snd vorssning oi
gsnsrsl condition. Ths usrgsncy csntsr
physicist: rsndsrsd first sid snd por-
fonsd gsstric lswsgs, sftsr which ths
pstisnt wss tslxsn to tho clinic.

Upon sdsission: clssr consciousnsss. hypsr-
ssic tscs sad chsst: rspid spssch. sons-
what slurrsd, body traor, gsosrsl suits-
tion. sotor rostlsssnsss. suphotis snd dys-
pnss (26 rsspirotions psr sinuts); sons-
whst hsrd hrssthing; diiiuss spicsl bsst.
sccsntustsd sounds. hssrt bomdsriss in
nor-s1 rugs; :pulss llO/nio. cordy, rhythic;
srtsrisl prsssurs 160/00 - lg; shdossn
so!t.sons sonstsndsmss upon pslpstion of
mclss in ths uppsr hslt: crsnisl nsrvss
show no chsngss; tssting of plsntsr rs-
flsxss showsd tonic ssisursn oi gsstroc-
nsnius: BO tsksn on dsy of mission

130

70! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ”FFICMI. USE ONLY

(Figure 120): ditfuae myocardial changes; sinus tachycardia
llO-lOS/nin; normal position of oIectric axis; 9-0 0.13 a,

0R8 0.10 a. Q-T 0.30 a (normal 0.27 a). 5“TII-IIII V3,“,5
slightly inclined. TI flattened, TII,III, Va 6 1°", hiphnaic.
I

 

Figure 11. (continued) Acute ethylene chlorohydrin poieoning;
histological preparation of nyocerdiun: marked edema

and dystrophy of nyocardiun (c[top]); necrobiotic
region. (dIbotto-l)

131

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After intramusuclar injection of
. 1c at 252 magnesium sulfate. 1 mi
12/7 :1]! 2.52 auinazine with novocein, the
patient slept for about 2 h. Upon
I WW awakening, he rePOrted some inprove-
_ eent, but marked facial hyperemia,
tremor of the entire body and hands
I W
W!

persisted. Respiration rate 20/min,
arterial pressure 1‘0/80 :- Hg.

There were brief and recurrent
cramps in the gastrocnemius. After

intake of 20 m 21 chloral hydrate

mew
W4
mm
WW he fell asleep. In the morning he
W
H+

W‘a.‘

was lore mobile and euphoric.

Marked hypersais of all integument
persisted, especially on the face,
neck. back and chest. Respiration

rate 20/min. Pine treaor of the
body and hands, nild hypereethesia

of the feet. Tendon reflexes
:W lively, abdoeinal sﬁd. Tenderness
of gastrocneeius upon palpation.

6W W Luv-l. EKG taken on 2d day (Figure 12b):

lore marked changes in the myocardium;

”W We tachycardia up to lSO/nin; electric
ventricular systole up to 0.06 s.

No changes demonstrable in blood and

urine. 0n the next 2 days his con-

Pigure 12. dition improved appreciably. Pain

36 of patient 1‘. Explained in text in muscles of the legs and upper
half of abdonen persisted. There
was regression of cutaneous hyper-

smia; mild eotor excitement, restlessness and elements of euphoria were

observed. Roentgsnoscopy of the chest failed to demonstrate deviations from
the physiological non. 0n the following days there was dyspnea upon

exercise and rapid walking, increased perspiration and some tenderness in the
right gastrocnelius. £16 on the 12th day of illness (Figure 12c) still

showed changes in the Iyocardiua (low 1‘1. 11. v. ‘), against the background
of generally positive dynamics.

Mechanical studies on the 7th-10th days of hospitalization showed elevation
of aspartic transaninase to 82 units (nor-s1 60 units). According to the
results of electromyography (Figure 13) performed on the 5th day, there
were deviations in bioelectricel activity of skeletal auecles. The changes
in structure of the M were indicative of the stimulating effects of large
doses of caffeine on the motor system.

lie was discharged after 13 days in satisfactory condition, with the recon-enda-
tion not to work in contact with chenicals for the next few months. "hen

, 132

.1.

son oi‘rtcw. use om:
I'Ok (WPICIAI. USE ONLY

exnnined J nonths later. no deviations referable to the
internal organs were demonstrated.

 

Piugrs 13. Blectronyogran of skeletal nuscles of patient 1'.
Explained in the text.

Thus. there were distinct clinical signs of excitation of the sdrenergic

systa- in the synptonstology of poisoning. This was apparently the chief
cause of netabolic disturbances, deviations on the m: and BIG indicative
of dystrophic changes and fine necrotic foci in the nyocsrdiun. The EKG

dynanics and elevation of sspartic (nuscular) trenseninase in blood seru-
could also be indicative of the letter.

In this case. the slow develop-ant of poisoning synptons is apparently re-

lated to slower absorption of caffeine free the respiratory tract after
inhalation, as conned to absorption fro- the gastrointestinal tract

after intake by noutb.

Agents Inducing Acute Llergic States and Lesions in the Cardiovascular
System

The data in the literature (1e. H. Severova, l962; Rh. 1. bronshteyn. L. Ye.
ltkin, 1965; 8. A. Aahbel', 1969) and our findings enable us to single out

133

m orncm. use osu
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

allergic myocarditis and allergic myocardial dystrophy occurring under the

influence of various industrial agents (antibiotics. vitamins. trace
aleaenta and others).

Ilyocarditis and ayocardial dystrophy of allergic genesis were observed
chiefly nong young and middle-aged women working in the above industries.
The disease was characterized by acute. recurrent or chronic course. in
most patients. along with allergic manifestations (urticaria. Quincke type
edema. etc.). there were varying degrees of pain in the cardiac region. as
wall as change in rapolariaation of the terminal part of the ventricular
coaplsx on the no. chiefly diffuse in nature.

He subait one of our case histories:

Patient 0.. 68 years old. had worked for 22 years as a too--
tachnician and prepared feed for cattle (she was in constant
contact with group B vitamins. choline chloride, trace

elements and antibiotics). One month before she becaae sick.
she began to observe edema on different parts of the body.

mainly the left half of the face and neck. urticaria. first on
the hands and legs. than all over the body. Eruptions and
edema were associated with marked weakness. headache and nild
pain in the region of the heart. At night. she developed
excruciating pressure pain in the cardiac region irradiating
to the left er- and left scapula. associated with a collap-
toid state. Concurrently. there was develop-eat of exten-
sive edema of the face and neck. She was hospitalised with
the diagnosis of myocardial infarction. Peripheral blood
revealed aosinophilia (101) and mum“. mo‘Iut (zooo).

Injections of vita-in a were prescribed. The first injec-
tion was associated with a severe allergic reaction and
development of collaptoid state. with appearance of negative
m: dynamics. hormone and desensitiaing therapy iaprovad her
condition. In order to confirm the diagnosis and determine
whether there was a link between her illness and occupation.
she was transferred to the clinic. Upon admission she com-
plained of weakness and periodic pain in the region of the
heart. associated with edema of the face and neck. Objective
examination revealed widening of the heart in both directions.
dull heart sounds and tachycardia. Pulse 90-100/ain. full.
Arterial pressure lee/so and 165/95 n lig. nu: (figure 14)
showed change in repolarization of ventricles (convex s-r
segment and negative tII.III.v,- wave). Blood test:
eosinophilia (lo-12:). hyperga-‘globulinemia (30:) sublilate,
test down to 1.69. On the basis of the clinical and no
findings the diagnosis of toxic allergy was made (Quincke
edema. urticaria). as well as acute allergic ayocarditia.

liar condition improved rapidly in response to hormone therapy.
and there was normalization of 86.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OPPIUAI. USE ONLY

E
s

‘

3%

~8

8

1%

Iigure 1‘. .
EKG of patient 0.
explained in text

In the described case. there was deaonatra-
tion of sinilarity of nonspecific reactions
to diVerse industrial (occupational) and
nonoccupationsl etiological factors in the
presence of allergic heart disease.

Acute Effects of Physical Factors

Ionizing Radiation

The possibility of single exposure or
delivery of large divided doses of radiation
under occupational conditions exists only
in exceptional (energency) situations.
There is even less possibility of selective

exposure of the heart to a dose of radiation
that would induce an acute lesion. Such

lesions were observed in Los Alaaos in
connection with an accident (12.000 red

to the chest). the accident at bokkart
(1200-1500 red to the head and neck.

in one case 36.000 red to the chest), and
an accident described by N. A. Kurshakov
et a1. (800-1200 red to the region of the
heart). A. K. Gue'kova and 0. D. Bayeogolov,
N. A. Kurshakov observed only transient
changes in the no and sons clinical para-
nters with doses of several hundred rad.
This clinical findings coincide with data
in the literature concerning expariaental
studies, which were smeriud by Ya. I.
Vorob'yev (1971). In the last few years,
soae additional intonation was obtained
about patients exposed to aassive radiation
to the chest for therapeutic purposes.

As an illustration, we subait the following ample:

Patient 5.. 31 years of age. was brought to the clinic on
31 August 1972 due to acute local radiation lesion to the
anterior chest wall and fingers of both hands. lie worked
as a flaw detector for 3 years. About 2 soothe ago, he

had a vial or "’c. in his shirt pocket for about 2 h
("’Ca activity 2.5 to 5.3 g-equiv Ila). Tentative esti-

aate of dosage: 30,000-38,000 R on the surface near the
source, 16.5 to 22°10’ red at a depth of 1 ca, 1600-2000

red at the level of the Iyocardiua with aaxisua at the

apex and 300-600 red to other parts of the auecle. with
contact radiation. the ‘81.]. dose was distributed in a
narrow bean, with considerable decrease toward the periphery;

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL 083 0341.?

as
. a:

li l.\\\l u|l.

~
—‘

--
.—-~

.-
~_ .-
v-—
..— _
.——-§

.—
_——
...-

~
.-
‘
-
—

_—_.

_——~

-—
——-—.
-——
.—
'—

a
3.

.a—
.——

§
§

iiii
‘%
E;

-
—
.—
.—
_.
g
-
u.
__
.— -
_ -~.
—-— —
_, .—
—_
—.~

“

-
‘
-a
——_
_——
'—
.—
’ -
.— -

s3

e3

iii
E§%%u

Pigure 15.

are of patient 8.. «plained in tent

however. when the source is away fron
the skin. there could also he o differ-
ent dose distribution with scatter

iron the bean along the surface.

The first signs of lesion appeared
on the 3d day in the tors of ery-
thesa under the left papilla. with
subsequent fornation of a necrotic
site. Changes begun to develop. on
the fingers of the right hand after
2 weeks, then on the left hand.

with appearance of nausea and wait-

ing. The patient was hospitalised
at the Institute of Henstology and

Blood Transfusions, where a conpre-
hensive examination (including
trephine biopsy of both iliac bones)
failed to denonetrste serious
changes inherent in acute radiation
sickness.

It was known from his history that
the patient had had a brain con-
cussion in 1966 (fell in a nine).

he was treated by a neuropsychiatrist
because of depression. Hhen ednitted
his condition was satisfactory;
consicouaness clear. the inteth
over the anterior wall of the chest,
iron the level of the throat to the
siphoid process of the sternu and

to the left up to the edge of the
costel arch is hyperpignented and
scaly in nany areas. The necrotic
focus (2.5X3 cs) is surrounded by

a tone of erosion with foci of
epitheliution totaling 6.5 c- in
dis-eter in the region of the heart.
Ulcerative necrotic changes in the
fingers of the right hand (11-111)

involve the terminal and niddle phalanges and the main phalanx of the
second finger. Percussion reveals a 'clear sound over the pulnonsry fields
and auscultation, vesicular respiration. The heart boundaries .(percussed)
could not be exactly defined due to a lesion in this region. Heart sounds
are slightly dull. Arterial pressure 115/70 II llg. Pulse Sol-in, rhythmic,
full. Abdonen is soft, no tenderness, liver and spleen are not enlarged.
hornsl stool and urination. Neurologicslly: narlrsd neurotic syndrone.
Boentgenologically: no change in configuration and size of heart. EKG
(ligure 15) showed no changes. 6

' 13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Duirng the observation period there were positive dynanics with regard to
state of involved areas. The ulcer on the chest diminished in size and
there was cpithelisation of the eroded surface around it. Partial epitheli-
ration occurred in the sites of digital lesions on the right hnnd; only
necrotic changes remained on the terminal phalanges of the second and third
fingers of the right hand. Roentganologically: osteoporosis of digital and
metacarpal bones of the right hand.

The patient complained periodically of dull, sonetimea stabbing pain of

vague localisation (sternum, coatal border, apigsstric region. less often

in the region of the ulcer) lasting a few ninutes to a few hours. he was
active when he had such pain. Clinically, no devistione referable to the
heart were daaonstrable. His pulse was 60-801ein and arterial pressure
90/60-115/70 mm hg. Dynamic comparisons failed to show pathological changes
on the EKG. Blinical and rosntgenological studies also failed to demonstrate
changes in the lungs and pleura. Blood test, urinalysis and biochemical
tests were normal. Total blood protein 76-81.9 gll (7.6-8.19 31). Normal
proportion of protein fractions. Residual nitrogen 3.9 mg!, potassium 18 ngl.
sodiue 312.5 lg! in plasma, normal proportions. Sugar (8S egl), cholesterol
(200 mgX) end ensyne levels also failed to demonstrate deviations. Blood
aaylsse 131 units, cholinesterasa 65 units. creatine kinase 10.3 units.
alkaline phosphatase 1.5 units; the following were slightly diminished:

GAS? [glutaaic-aspartic transaeinasefl 2.5 units, GALT [glutamic-nlanine
tranaaminaae?].b.5 units, thymol test 2.5 units. Bone marrow taken free

the sternum at the end of the 6th postradiation nonth was deficient in
cells. The leuko-crythroblast ratio is altered due to reduction of
erythroblasts.

The patient was treated with antibiotics, vitamins, antihistamines. mild

tranquilizers, ganglion-blocking agents and physiotherapy; an intracutaneous
and peravertebral Tx-T. novocain block was produced once.

The patient's condition was quite satisfactory. however. there was sudden
occurrence of death. This outcome could be attributed to cardiac arrest.
due to functional and organic changes in the heart, focal and diffusely
dyatrophic in nature. as a result of local exposure to radiation.

Pathoanetoeical findings: acute, severe local radiation trauma to the left
half of the chest with irradiation of the heart, left lung. sternum. and
marked morphological changes in the shin. muscles. esophagus and serosa.

Deep radiation ulcer at the stage of pyonecrotic changes in the skin. sub-
cutaneous fatty tissue snd muscles in the region of the sixth-seventh ribs

along the left midclavicular line. Residual signs of radiation dermatitis
on the left chest. Extensive, large-focus sclerosis on the anterioposterior

wall of the pericardium and parietal pleura in the left pleural cavity.
atrophy with cicatrired ulcers of the mucosa, sclerosis and thickening of
the wall of the lower half of the esophagus. Radiation nyocarditis with

moderate cardiosclerosis. Venous plethora and edema of the lungs. Throm-
bosis of fine vessels of the lungs, mainly on the left. Small sites of

pnauaonia and infarction in the lower lobe of the left lung. Mild reticular
137

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPi’ICML USE ONLY

pneuaosclerosis. asinly of the left lung. Radiation lesion
to the second and third digits of the right hand, in the

for- of sarked atrophy of the skin in the region of the
aiddle and distal phalanges and dry necrosis of soft
tissues of the distal phalanx corresponding to the level
of the nail plate. phalangeal osteoporosis. Residual signs
of lesion to the second finger of the left hand. in the
fore of partial atrophy of soft tissues of the distal
phalanx.

liorpbological signs are indicative of death of the asphyxia
type: severe plethora of internal organs, subpleural
ecchynosis. thin dark blood in heart cavities and vessels.

Death was due to cardiac arrest as a result of severe radia-
tion trausa to the left half of the chest and cardiac lesion.

A comparison of this case to data referable to other patients exposed to
predoninant irradiation of the cardiac region (N. A. Kurshaltov et el.. 1965;
A. K. Gue’hova. c. D. Geysogolov. 1971, and others) indicates that it is
unusual: relatively stall dose of local radiation to part of the heart,
rapid onset of death (within ’0 aonths), suddenness of the latter, unique

pathogenetic nechsniou that could not be totally explained on the basis
of histological signs of cardiac lesion.

lt say be assuned that there is a reflex eechanisa involved in sudden

functional disturbances of the heart as a result of pathological afforesta-
tion froa periocardial involved regions of the heart and chest. this patho-
logical reflex was expressed through activity of the heart. in circulscribed

regions of which there were also postradiation and, perhaps, i-unoallergic
in genesis, soderate changes of the order of interstitial syocarditie and

dystrophy of luscle fibers.
lffacts of Atsoepheric Pressure Changes

high pressure: The work of divers or caisson workers say be associated
with functional disturbances of the cardiovascular systea as a result of
rapid transition iron deep water to the surface. Deconpression with
excessively rapid lowering of ataospheric pressure could cause accumulation
of gas (nitrogen) bubbles in blood, with the gas dissolved in body tissues.
Not having had tine to be eliminated through the lungs. they can induce
aboli in the vessels of various organs and system (lungs. brain. heart
and others) and cause the corresponding clinical syndrones of caisson
disease (A. P. Brestkin, 1952). Occlusion of branches of the pulmonary
arteries could cause an acute strain of the right ventricle, with the cor-
responding EKG signs of cor pulmonale. Coronary vessel esboli induce
transient attacks of angina pectoris or the syndrons of acute ventricular

eaystole, occasionally with edela of the lungs, focal lesions to the syn-
cardiu and ultisately death. Such patients complain of general weakness,

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pain in the bones, joints and muscles. They present tachycardia and
occasional elevation of arterial pressure. The EKG shows diffuse hypoxic
changes. coronary changes or infarct-like deviations. This could land to

nyocardisl sclerosis.

Low pressure: When flying at high altitudes or working at a high altitude
(in the nountains), lowering of ataospheric pressure and partial oxygen
pressure could lead to decreased oxygenation of blood. There is an in-
crease in dissociation of oxygen and hemoglobin in erythrocytes. followed
by hypoxia and functional disorders of the cardiovascular and nervous sys-
tens. This any be particularly aarked in individuals with vascular athero-
sclerosis (V. b. Kalkin, V. l. Plakhstnyuk. 1976). The condition is asso-
ciatad with appearance of severe nuscular weakness. drowsiness. ispairad
senory, slow responses to various stinuli. deeper and faster respiration.
faster heart rate, drop of arterial pressure, with possible fainting or
collapse. sinus tachycardia; there is appearance of signs of diffuse nyo-
cardial dystrophy on the Kc; in the presence of atherosclerosis of coronary
vessels there are focal changes in the nyocsrdiun.

Effects of high Tenperature and Thermal Radiation

Overheating of the body and iapairad heat regulation can be clinically leani-
fested by synptone varying in severity. In nild cases, faster pulse. dull
heart sounds and hypertension are observed, against-the background of
general weakness, busting in the head and ears, thirst, occasionally nausea,
voaiting and fast respiration (B. A. Krivoglas. 1957; A. Yu. nlis. P.
Solo-k0. 1968). .

In severe cases, the above syndroae nay be the prodroeal period, prior to
develop-eat of heat (or sun) stroke. Then the respiration is fast. shallow.

heart sounds becone dull. pulse is fast (loo-200mm). thresdy, and
arterial pressure drops. ‘l‘he EKG shows extrsaystole, transient block of
the right branch of the atrieventriculsr bundle, increase of Pn-In.
decline of 8-1“ and 1' wave. Systolic and minute blood volunes diminish
(A. N. Ashayev, N. A. upshina, 1971). Occasionally. there are epilepti-

forn seizures, convulsions, aental disorders; later on there may be collapse
and coins ending with death.

Effects of Electricity

"hen alternating current of 100 IA to SA passes through the region of the
heart. cardiac arrest nay occur inediately (apparently as a result of

ventricular fibrillation). In other cases, victims present automic
disorders, pain in the cardiac region and transient rhythm disturbances.

Occasionally, a few days after the accident there nay be signs of diffuse
or. less often, focal changes in the ayocardiua. as found on the EKG,

which are indicative of injury to the nyocardiun.

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WWCIM. "SI! "NLY

Acute Effects of deiofrequency (Short. Ultrashort. Superhigh)
Electrolagnetic Haves

The data in the literature (A. A. Orlovn, 1960; E. A. Drogichinn. H. A.
Sadthikova, 1965; 2. V. Gordon. 1966; V. N. halyshev. F. A. Kolesnik, 1968)
indicate that eloctronegnetic fields in various frequency ranges influence
the cardiovascular syoten.

In aninal exparinsnts, rhyths disturbances, vascular dilatation. longer
phase of cardiac contraction, as well as acute onset of EKG and morphological
changes of the syocardial dystrophy type were observed. Several authors

(N. V. Uspenskaya. l963; N. N. holehanov, Ye. V. Gesibitskiy, 1973, and
others) denonstrated changes in hesodyneaic perenetere and nonspecific
changes on the BIB in chronic and acute experinents involving exposure to
electrosagnetic fields in different frequency ranges end of different in-
tensity.

The sachanies of these changes has not yet been adequately investigated.
T. A. Kolodub and G. Ye. Yevtushenho (1972) believe that they are based
on changes in carbohydrate and nitrogen netsbolisn in nyocerdiel cells.

Isolated cases of acute "wave sickness" have been described in nan; it can
occur under the influence of high-poser generators. gross infraction of
safety practices or an accident (V. H. Hslyehev. P. A. Kolesnik. 1968. and
others). The clinical signs and state of the cardiovascular systen associated
with this condition have not been sufficiently investigated. Uith exposure
of the head. diencephalic syaptons are prominent in the clinical signs.

with hypertensive reactions, tachycardia, attacks of paroxisnsl tachycardia,

ataxia and autonoaic eyndrosss (profuse perspiration and others). Death
nay occur due to collapse and acute overheating. McLaughlin (1957) and

Groi (l958) described a case of fatal outcone after erpoaure of a ‘Z-year
III: to 8”.

Sons Questions of Etiology. Pathogenesis and Therapy of Acute Cardiovascular
Syndroees of Occupational Etiology

There are several distinctions to the clinical syndrones referable to the
cardiovascular systen in the presence of acute states due to the effects of
various occupational factors, although they retain the nsin patterns of

nonspecific sechanisns, as well as clinical nanifestations. One often
observes signs of excitation of the central and autononic nervous systess

(vegetovescular dysfunction), adrenohypophyseal reactions (stress), redis-
tributional leukocytosis. as well as changes in hioelectric processes (phases
of repolarixation of the Iyocardiul) of the heart.

Sole deviations or other are observed in the cardiovascular system, depending

on the nature of the factor, its physicocheaical properties, tine and place
of application, concentration of a toxic agent, type of energy and its

distribution in tissues, condition of the nervous systen, individual

190

FOR OFfICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reactivity of the body and severity of the overall pathological process.

The severity of changes ranges from mild rhythm disturbances, fluctuations
of arterial pressure and negligible dystrophic changes in the myocardium

to development of hemorrhages, necrobiosis and necrosis of the myocardium,
acute cardiovascular insufficiency, collapse and instantaneous death (in
cases of poisoning by tetreethyl lead, ethylene chlorohydrin, methyl alcohol,
gas embolism of coronary vessels and under the influence of certain other
factors.

Sudden_cerdiac arrest may be the result of acute cyanide. hydrogen sulfide,
barium salts, ethyl bromide, phenol, chlorinated hydrocarbon (methane) and
other poisoning. In such cases. autopsies usually fail to demonstrate
changes in the heart. If death did not occur immediately, post aortems
often demonstrate fatty or protein dystrophy of the myocardiun, necrobiosis
and hemorrhages, edema of the tunics of the heart and parenchyma, change in
vascular walls and other changes. The EKG shows significant changes in
myocardial repolarieetion phase (lowering or inversion of T wave), mainly
of an extensive nature. in both the left and right leads. The clinical and
and 2R6 findings do‘not always permit attribution of these changes to

vertical position of the heart, coronary insufficiency or acutely developed
stress of the right ventricle. The demonstrated deviations are essentially

consistent with the syndrome of diffuse myocardial dystrophy.

The pathogenesis of such functional disturbances of the heart is rather
complex. In the first few minutes after exposure to occupational factors.
it is due to specific and neuroemotional excitation, development of the

hypothalamohypophyseoadrenal reaction that is common with any stress.

According to the date of B. Selye (1963) and Raab (1968), excessive accumula-
tion of catscholamines in the heart is observed in the presence of stress

states. This is associated with increase in heart function (contractions,
stroke and minute volumes) and significant increase in myocardial oxygen
uptake. The increased oxygen uptake is not always consistent with intake
thereof, even in the presence of healthy coronary vessels, but especially
with changes in the-latter. As a result, there is onset of hypoxia. with
impairment of metabolism (attenuation of processes of phosphorylation and
glycolysis) and accumulation of incompletely oxidized products (lactic
acid and others). Neurosndocrine and metabolic changes also occur as a
result of the direct effect of the factor on the heart, and they induce

disturbances in microetructuree of myocardial cells. Evidently, the

final and main result of such deviations is progressive hypoxia, which
elicits changes in the heart in the nature of diffuse myocardial dystrophy,
occasionally associated with necrobiosis or necrosis of the myocardium,
involvement of the vascular wall and deviation of bioelectrical processes

(Raise, 1956).

0. I. Lang uses the term ”myocardial dystrophy" to refer to functional
changes, that are quite reversible at the early stages, related to some

biochemical deviations or other (impairment of enzymatic systems, carbo-
hydrate-phosphorus. protein, electrolyte or other forms of metabolism), as

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

well as impairment of redox processes in the nyocnrdium. Thanks to the
development of electron microscopy. the substrate of nyocardial dystrophy
is clearer. One observes enlargement of nuscle cell nuclei. redistribution
of nuclear substance, mitochondrial swelling. clearing of the matrix. des-
truction of septa and focal breakdown thereof. In the call. there is a
reduction in number of ribosomes: one observes dilatation of sarcoplasmic
reticulum tubules. intracellular edema. disappearance of glycogen granuleu.
appearance of fat droplets and other deviations. These changes are con-
sistent with protein and fatty dystrophy observed under an ordinary nicro-
scope. The observed changes are not specific or stereotypic (D. 8.
Serkieov. e. V. Vtyurin. 1971). The ultrastructural changes in myocardial
cells are the same. regardless of their cause (toxic agents. hypoxia.
increased load. circulatory disturbance. etc.). On the basis of clinical
and experimental data. it was established that dystrophic myocardial changes
are essentially reversible. After elimination of the pathogenic factor.

the ultrastructures gradually revert to normal as a result of intracellulur
recovery processes (without increase in number of cellular elements). Des-

truction of muscle cells is compensated by hyperplastic processes (increased
mess of specific ultrestructures) in remaining cells. This is associated
with enlargement. hypertrophy. of cells. Thus. significant changes in
myocardial function and dystrophy thereof are associated with structural
changes on the suhcelluler level (D. 8. Serkisov. s. V. Vtyurin. 197l).

Myocardial dystrophy can be induced by various exogenous and endogenous
factors.

Neu.utrophic (dystrophic) changes in the ventricular myocardium were found
by many researchers upon stimulation of peirpherel and central branches of
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. Experimental stimulation
of peripheral nerves produced so-called reflex myocardial dystrophy (A. Yu.
Hel'kov. 1966; 2. 1. Vedeneyevs. 1967; M. D. Vakar. 1969. and others).

Some authors also observed flattening or inversion of the T wave on the are
(8. H. Hints at al.. 1970. and others).

Centrogenic myocardial dystrophy developed upon stimulation of hypothalamic
nerve centers (1. K. Shkhvatsabaya. 1967; V. H. Tsinamegvarshvili et a1..
1971. and others). Changes were also demonstrated on the EKG, indicative
of hypoxia. dystrophy and necrosis of the myocardium. There was also
histological demonstration of necrosis and infarction-like changes in the
cardiac muscle. These changes were largely due to intensification of the
influence of the sympathoadrenal system on the order of Selye's stress
reaction (H. c. leyshine et al.. 1966).

Experimental dystrophic changes were induced in the heart with injection of
epinephrine (D. S. Sarkisov. D. V. Vtyurin and others). In such cases. the
are showed some inversion of T weve and depression of 8-1 segment. Micro-
scopic examdnetion revealed fatty degeneration and areas of atrophy of
muscle cells. After administration of epinephrine. lowering of T wave

and enlargement of 0 wave are observed on the 316. The experimental data

162

$70!! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTIMAL USE ONLY

of A. V. Trubetskoy (1966). who detected myocardial dystrophy that developed
as a result of brief cerebral ischenis. During surgery of the nervous
systen (Ye. z. Ustinova. Ye. P. Drigo. 1963; 3. P. Astrakhontseva. 1969;
lurch. Catath. 195‘). patients presented high excretion of epinephrine in
urine: onthe 8K6. the change in T wave; the change in St segnent should

be considered an indication of considerable metabolic disorders in the
myocardiua. which perhaps alter the function of the potassiua-sodium ”pump"
(l. l. lsakov). The cardiac lesions induced by large doses of cstechola-
mines (norepinephrine. epinephrine) may be prevented with adrennlytic agents.
Alpha adrenalytic agents prevent injury induced by norepinephrine and

beta adrenslytic agents. the deleterious effects of isoproterenol (z. I.
Vadeneyeva. 1967). The similarity of neurogenic dystrophy to lesions induced
by large doses of catecholsnines is also indicative of the possible patho-
genetic action of the latter. The influence of the synpathetic nervous
systen on development of neurodystrophy is confirned by depletion of the

norepinephrine reserves of the nyocardiua following a strong stiaulus. s. v.
Anichhov (l97l) believes that the decline of norcpinephrine content in eye-
cardial cells is one of the sale nechanisns of neurogenic dystrophy that
develops with strong and prolonged stiaulation of the nervous system.
nesearchers have reported a decrease in blood epinephrine in the presence of
cardiac insufficiency. In the light of the submitted date, we can under-
stand appearance of signs of syocardial dystrophy in patients with neuro-

circudatory dystonia. hypothalanic disorders. various naloses. autonomic
dysfunction and nanifestationa of the diencephslocardiec syndroae. The

presence of con-on collectors of autonoeic and eaotional nfferentation in
the hypothalanic region suggested the nechanisn of appearance of dystrophic

changes in the heart in the presence of sons emotional states (P. V. Sinonov.
1969). Dystrophic myocardial lesions can occur even with nornal stiaulation

of the heart and, especially, in the presence of coronary sclerosis or other
changes in the heart. Under such conditions, even an ordinary factor could
cause heart disease. In the last decade. there has been considerable expan-

sion of the teaching on nyocardial dystrophies; however. not enough studies
are being pursued of nyocardisl dystrophy as related to various occupational
(especially acute) factors.

The clinical and etc changes referable to the cardiovascular systen with
acute exposure to various factors. particularly occupational ones. are not

specific.
Main Principles of Organization of Medical Care

The course and outcone of acute poisoning and lesions depend on the sophis-
tication of organising and proper use of a set nedical and therapeutic
measures adainistared at different stages of treating victims. It is ilp

perstive to sake the utsost use of the advances in modern resuscitation
practice. as sell as of the most adequate ways and means of coaplex and

intensive therapy.

Treatment is adainistered on a full scale and aodern level; various patho~
genetic agents are used: blood substitutes. extracorporeal henodialysis.

1‘3

FOR OFFICtAL "SE OSLY
FOR OPPICIAL 088 ONLY

prolonged oxygen therapy in e prereure chamber. cardiac deiibrilletinn, adni-
nietration of aalt end protein Iixturee, nanotic diuretics and specific anti-
dotee. General prectitionere, eurgeona. reeuecitetion npccieliete, neuro-
pathologiete and other apecieliete participate in adeiniatering therapy.

Care of victieo coneiete of rendering ineediate nedicel nid at the rite of

the accident or in the neareet nedical inetitution, with subsequent trenefer
to apacial (occupational, reauacitation. etc.) nedicel institutions.

In caeee of aerioue injuriea end poieoning. repid delivery of the victin
(by oer or aircraft) to epecialieed inatitutione end early initiation of
coupler therapy increaae eignificantly the incidence of favorable outconee.
The following therepautic eeeauree euat be inpleeented: l) repid renoval of
toxic agent fro- the victin'o body by arena of vell-hnovn nethoda (inducing
vooiting. geetric lavege. edeiniatretion of appropriate antidotea).
eeintenance of cerdiac and reapiratory function: 2) eyateeatic use of vayo
and teen. of reeuecitetion therapy directed toward reatoring functione of

vital organa (centrel nervoua eyeten, circulatory end reapiretory organa);
renoval or neutralization of poieon reeaining in the organiee (antidote
therepy. levaso of gaatrointeetinal tract). Oxygen therapy, controlled
reepiration Inchina, artificial kidney, forced oaeotic diureeia. infueion

of blood and fluid are adlinietered. with conetent nonitoring of fluid-elec-
trolyte balance and noteboliee.

Metabolic dieturbencee ere corrected. and the poaeible eecondery coeplica-
tiona ere everted in the light of the conceptione of eechaniee of action

of the deleterioue factor et different ategee of develop-eat of the procure.

1“

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSIGI

[Text] This sonograph has subsitted data describing the distinctive reac-
tions of the hussn cardiovascular system to the nost diverse occupational
factors. The mat co.» and. to sose extent, circunscribed clinical syn-
drosee. concoaitant with different occupational diseases, have been des-
cribed; their role is far fros unequivocal. In sose cases, they serely
accospany the sain clinical eynpton cosplex that is directly related to

the occupational factor (hasodynasic changes in the presence of radiation
hypoplasia of hesopoiesis, cardiac sysptos cosplex in the presence of anesia
caused by banana): in other cases. these syndroses are a typical element
of the overall clinical nsnifestations of an occupational disease. although
their appearance is secondary (cor pulsonale in the presence of silicosis.
toxic pnemosclerosis. barylliosis). In none cases, the cardiovascular
changes detersine the sysptosstology, course and outcose of disease. and
they also affect the extent of disability (for exaeple, with exposure to
carbon disulfide. sicrovsves. etc.).

There are eagles in the sonograph of the direct deleterious effects of high-
intensity occupational factors on the heart and vessels (overradiation.
cooling. vibration and toxic effects).

All of the foregoing is indicative of the isportance of the prohles. Cos-
prehensive details and identification of the cardiovascular cosponent are

needed to evaluate the health status of virtually all groups of workers and
to sake the diagnosis of an occupational disease. It is imperative to

determine the extent of cardiovascular changes in the presence of certain
other functional disturbances in the body that restrict occupational

activity. The latter is closely linked with questions of expert certifica-
tion of disability and sedical rehabilitation.

1/05

POR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In assessing the many years of experience in occupational medicine and data
in the literature concerning cardiovascular pathology as a whole, it can be
stated that we now have some rather comprehensive intonation that makes it
possible not only to demonstrate a number of cardiovascular disturbances,

but to classify them. Such systematization makes it possible to investigate
the etiology and pathogenesis of occupational diseases, as well as clinical

diversity of reactions that depend on the intensity and nature of factor
involved and time of formation of pathological changes. It must be conceded
that this work is far from completed, in view of the diversity of terms

used by different authors, prevalence of special descriptions over general
publications in which the different aspects of this complex problem would

be analyzed. Distinctions are made of the more circumscribed form and
states: syndromes of neurocirculatory dystonia, myocardial dystrophy, involve-
ment of pa rlpheral vessels, systemic hemodynamic disturbances with circulatory
insufficiency.

In view of the absence of results of properly organised epidemiological

studies, the question remains debatable as to the role of some occupational
factors in development of such forms of cardiovascular pathology as

essential hypertension and cardiac ischemia.

'l'eets have not yet been fully refined for objective determination of the
degree of limitation of fitness for general and specialized work in relation
to changes in the cardiovascular system associated with various forms of
occupational activity.

The expert decisions that presently being made, examples of which have been
cited in this monograph, are indicative of the inadequacy of methodological
capabilities and relative nature of decisions that are largely determined
by a researcher's individual experience with a given factor.

In spite of the many reports on the fate of victims of occupational diseases,
including patients with cardiovascular changes (workers in hot shops, indi-

viduals suffering from silicosis, those working with sources of rsdiowave
radiation, carbon disulfide and others), we were unable to find in the

available literature any specific studies dealing with analysis of the sub-
sequent couree of some cardiovascular syndromes as related to the decision

made with regard to employment (with due consideration of age and other
factors).

Diagnostics of cardiovascular pathology in the symptomatology of occupational
diseases is based on the use of many modern and refined methods of examina-
tion. however, proper evaluation has not yet been made of the informative-
ness of different methods, and s set of procedures is only at the

formative stage, with respect to adequate evaluation of the condition of

the heart and vessels with exposure to a given occupational factor. In

our opinion, some sort of general minimum level should be defined for
exposure to all factors, which would make it possible to compare reactions
to different factors according to severity and clinical importance.

1106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Analysis of all the material submitted in this monograph shows a distinct

prevalence of nonspeclflc reflex reactions of tLe heart and vessels to
occupational factors. for this reason. identification, evaluation and
interpretation thereof must be made by mean: of objective sethods reflect-
ing the extent of generalization and stability of reflex hemodynaaic
changes. The radioactive tracer method. with appropriate functional loads
and electrocardiography are used for this purpose.

Hicrocirculation and oxygenation of different organs with exposure to occu-
pational factors have been studied very little. Nor can we consider ade-
quata the inforsatlon at hand concerning pathological anatosy of the heart
and vessels. especially in the case of chronic exposure to iowhincensity
occupational factors. Specialized experimental pathomorphological studies,
as well as investigation of all available material about the condition of
the heart and vessels in cases of incidental death of individuals who

have worked for long periods of time uith various occupational factors.
are needed.

Of course. all these studies should be pursued in relation to the-results

of studies of control groups, that are adequate with respect to sex. age
and living conditions. and they should be backed up by general knowhow in

pathological anatomy of cardiovascular diseases.

It should be noted that. in view of the general physiological role of the
cardiovascular system in the organise, the search for strict specificity

of its reactions to different occupational factors is not considered too
promising. There are more grounds to believe that these reactions may
merely undergo some quantitative transformation and change in time of
appearance and relation to other symptoms. And this leads to onset of
other than strictly specific manifestations of cardiovascular disorders in
response to exposure to an occupational factor. The possibility of
development of ordinary and uidespread cardiovascular diseases among
individuals engaged in various occupations and having contact with the most
diverse factors also plays a certain role. This gives even more importance
to epidemiological investigation of the most common diseases of the heart

and vessels. which is being done extensively at the present time.

A comparison of material referable to clinical observations related to dif-
ferent occupational factors shoes that the most obvious changes in the
cardiovascular system are those due to such occupational factors as massive
radiation to the cardiac and vascular region. acute poisoning, toxic and
allergenic agents. etc. The incidence of such cases is low; houavar. their
occupational genesis is unquestionable. Equally unquestionable is the role
of occupational factors in the origin of pulsanary and vascular pathology
related to exposure to dust and toxic agents. however, in such cases.
involvement of the heart in the process follows the laws of general pathology
and does not present any strictly specific features.

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-2 ONLY

The seat cannon and. at the sane tine, difficult to interpret signs are
neurocirculatory dystonia and slid dystropnic changes in the syocerdiun of
individuals exposed to sicrowaves and ionizing radiation of low inienoity.
carbon disulfide. lead, unsaturated hydrocarbons and other toxic agents

or sired occupational factors (cosbination of noise and emotional stress.
vibration and suscular tension). Success can be achieved in the study and

evaluation of these diseases only after accusulation of extensive clinical
statistical data that would indicate the possible link between clinical nani-
fastations and dosage of occupational factor (with due consideration of

known risk factors: hypokinesia, obesity. heredity and bad habits).

Future in-depth clinical studies could be pursued in the direction of estab-
lishing the correlations between different functional changes in the cardio-

vascular systes and those present under physiological conditions. Hare
accusulation of special characteristics on the basis of different manifesta-

tions and ssthodological approaches will not add clarity to thin complex
question. Attention should be concentrated on an overallevaluation of
health status and generalized indices defining the adequacy of circulation.
To define the effect of an occupational factor, the deucription of special
but nonspecific cardiovascular reactions should be supplesented with a
search of changes in systens and structures that are the most directly
related to the sechaniss of action of a given factor. It is only after

detecting changes in these reflexogenic regions and detersining the possible
routes of involve-ent of heaodynanics in the reflex that one can suspect

their causativalink with an occupational factor. But even in such cases one
seat bear in sind the aggregate of all other influences on the heart and

veascla, which is indicative of the nulti-etiological nature of these
syndrulea.

Appearance of such disorders in various worker groups usually requires
careful dispensary observation with adsinistration of general fortifying

and health-inproving seasures, after vhich an appreciable isprovesent is
observed. At the sans tine. the syndroses that are related sore to the

effects of other factors, that are difficult to take into consideration
(poorly organised lifestyle, bad habits. overeating. hypokinesia, conflict
situations) do not present such beneficial dynasics and lead to developsent
of various diseases (neurosis, cardiac ischesia, essential hypertension).
The increase in lean age, occurring as the observation period is extended.
affects the dynamics of sylptoes in these individuals. It is very diffi-
cult. both clinically and etiologically, to evaluate full-fledged for-s of

cardiovascular pathology against a background of prior circulatory dys-
function, and this is vell illustrated in the sections dealing vith sicro-

waves and toxic agents.
The accusalated experience enables us to offer sose diagnostic criteria

and terns defining the nest cos-on changes in cardiovascular function under
the influence of occupational factors.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are few cases of toxic and allergic myocarditis, marked hemodynanic
disturbances related to acute poisoning and massive radiation that could

be of independent significance in determining disability related to an
occupational factor. In aone cases, determination of the nogree of dis-
ability is made only on the basis of the aggregate of data on other clinical

eanifestetions of occupational and concomitant diseases. Examples of
diegnostication in all these cases are given in the relevant chapters.

Therapeutic and preventive eeasures to prevent and attenuate cardiovascular
disorders, in addition to inprovement of special working conditions and use
of the usual agents for synptonatic and pathogenetic therapy. should

include as a very important elenent some general neasuree referable to
organising livingtconditions, the uork process. physical and nental
conditioning and reasonable diet. Implementation of such eeasures in
various uorker groups would improve the health status of society as a whole.
this is attributable to the large nunber of groups screened and realistic
organisational structure to inplesent the neaaurea. For this reason,
preliminary and regular physical examinations may becoee the first stage

of couplets dispensary care of the public with respect to cardiovascular
aspects.

1‘9

FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

31 BLIOGMPIIY

1.

3.

6.

5.

6.

Abayeva. H. “.3 Adyrkhayev, A. 6.; and Alferova. V. V. "Condition of
the Heart of Individuale Hhoae Work Involvea Contact Hith Lead.” in
”‘reeiay dokl. l-y Reapublikenek. neuchn. konferentaii profpatologov
'radehiltietana" [Sn-ariea of Papere Delivered at the Piret Tedehik
Iepublic Scientific Conference of Occupational Patho1ogieta of

Tedehiklltanl', Dushanbe, 1968, pp 132-13‘.

Adler, A. u. ”Oxyhcoutry and lienodynalic Indiceo of Patience Hith
Acute Cor Pullonale.” candidatorial diaeertation, Hoacov. 1966.

Azhayev, A. m. and Lapahina, N. A. “functional State of the noun
Zody Rhea Overneated," GIG. TRUDA [Indultrial Hygiene]. No 6, 1971.
pp 6-11.

Aldenaaarov, A. ‘1'. "Chensea in the Blood Syete- in the Preeence of
Lead Poiaonins." doctoral diaeertation, Aha-Ate, 1970.

Alterova. V. V.. and Kuenetaova, 1.. V. ”Condition of Peripheral
Veaaela of Cyclotron Uorkera,” HID. RAD. (Medical Radiology], No 12,
1962, pp 32-37.

Andreyeva. N. 3. "Early Detection of Carbon Diaulfide Poieoning,"
author abatrect of cendidatorial dieeertation, Leningrad. 1969.’

Andryuhin, A. A. "Arterial Preaaure Level and Incidence of Beeential
lypartanaion Anon; Individuals Horking in Noiey Shape," GIG. TRUDA.

150

roe OHICIAI. US! MY
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Anichkov, S. V. "Pharmacological Analysis of Neurogenic Cardiac
Dystrophies,” in "Distrofiya niokarde" [Myocardial Dystrophy],
Leningrad, 1971, pp 48-56.

Arten'yav, Ye. N.. and Konovalova, T. K. “Synptonatology of Chronic
Carbon Disulfide Poisoning," 18R. ARAB. [Therapeutic Archives]. No 11,
1962, pp 08-96.

Akhnedshin, A. N. ”Condition of Cardiovascular System of Individuals
in Contact with Lead," in "Haterisly Otchetnoy nnuchn. konferentsii
Kazakh. nauchno-iesled. in-ts krayevoy patologii" [Proceedings of
Report-Back Scientific Conference of the Kazakh Scientific Research
Institute of legional Pathology], Alla-Ate, 1966, pp 95-96.

Akhran-Akhraaovich, R. H., and Lakshine, L. K. "Clinical Characteristics

of Obliterative Diseases of Peripheral Arteries," KLIN. H20. [Clinical
Medicine]. No 11, 1970. pp 46-68.

lakeyeva, 6. Ya. ”The Question of Cardiac Function with Long-Tera
Exposure to Low Concentrations of Carbon Disulfide," author abstract
of candidatorial dissertation, Kalinin. 1969.

lasa-ygina, 1. Ya. "The Cardiovascular Syndrome in the Presence of
Vibration and Noise Sickness," in "Heterialy 3-y Nsuchno-praktich.
konferantaii, posvyashch. vibratsionnoy, shunovoy boleznya- i ikh
profilaktike" [Proceedings of 3d Scientific and Practical Conference
on Vibration and Noise Sickness, and Prevention Thereof], Donetsk,
1966, pp 12-15.

Senyuaov, I. A. "Arterial Pressure Changes in workers Exposed to
noise in the Doubler and Heaving Industry," vaaca. 0310 [Medical Record],
lo 6, 1963. pp 120-120.

lespalova, L. A. ”Morphological and Electron Microscopic Changes in
the Hyocardiun of Dogs lxposed to Long-Tern Chronic Calls Radiation,"
KOSHICHISKAYA 3101. [Space Biology], N0 3, 1973, pp 26-30.

Bongard. B. “.3 Ostrovskaya, R. 8.; and Podrez, z. 0. ”Analysis of
Acute Industrial Poisoning According to Data Proa the Clinic of Ufa
Scientific Research Institute of Hygiene and Occupational Diseases

Covering 1938-1960." in "Cigiyena truda i okhrana adorov'ys rabochikh
v neftyanoy i neftekhiaicheskoy pronyshlennosti" [Industrial Bygiene

and Health Care of workers in the Petroleua and Petrochemical Industry],
Uta, vol 6. 1968, pp 140-163.

Breathin. A. P. "Etiology of Caisson Disease," 016. I SA”. [Hygiene
and Sanitation], No 12, 1952, pp 26-36.

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lronshteyn, Kb. 1., end ltkin. 1.. Ye. "Myocardial Lesion in Ursol
Allet‘ay (Allergic Ureol Hyocsrditiu),” ZDMVOOKBRMENIYE (Kishinev)
[Public lleslth]. No l, 1965, pp 46-69.

Bystrovs, Yu. A.. and Ksleshnikov, B. P. "Spec Date on Retinal Vessels
of lndividusls Exposed to Occupstionsl Redistlon." in ’mterisly

Yubileynoy nsuchn. seseii, poevysshch. SO-letiyu Tsantrel'n. nsuchno-

' issled. rentseno-rediologicheskogo in-ts” [Proceedings of Jubilee

Scientific Session Connesorstiug the 50th Anniversary of the Central
Scientific lesesrch Institute of Roentgenology end Radiology].
Leningrsd. 1968. pp 376-377.

Bychkov. H. 8.. end Dronov. I. 8. "Bleetrocerdiogtsphic nets on the

Effects of Very Low Doses of nicrmves on the Level of the Hessncephslic
lleticulsr Ponstionullypothelsmewerebrsl Cortex System," in "0

biologicheskon deystvii elektrousgnitnykh poley rsdiochestot" [Biologi-
cel affects of Rediofrequency Electrousnetic Fields], Noscov. 1973.

pp 38-65.

Vsyl', 8. 8. "Punctionsl Morphology of Punctionsl Csrdiec Disturbences."
Leningrsd, Hedsie, 1960.

Vesil’yevs. V. A.; Velikson, I. “.3 end Konikove, G. s. "(imperative
nets on the Effects of Sole Meals (teed, Csrhon Disulfids. Benzene.
Pluorides) on Develop-est of Atherosclerosis." in ”Professionel'nyye
intoksikstsiv" (Occupstionsl Poisoning], beniursd. 1966, pp 22-32.

Vigdorchik. N. A. "Blood Pressure Cheeses in the Presence of Son
Chronic lndustriel Poisoning," men. DBLO [Hedicsl Record]. No 11-12.

1938. PP 991-998.

Petrov, Prof 1. R. (editor) "lffects of 881' lsdistion on Ken end
Minis," uningrsd, Heditsins, 1970.

Volkov, r. IL. end Sosnovs, 1'. 1.. "Blood Pressure Chooses in Individusls
Exposed to Different Intensities of Noise Under storetory Conditions,"
in Mtodicbeskiye voprosy irucheniye deystviys shuns ne orgsnias"
methodological Aspects of Studying the Bffects of Noise on the Body].

ﬂostov, 1963. pp 62-63.

Volovik. I. 3.; lvsnovs, A. 6.: end Hiropol'sksys. I. 1.. ”Investigstion
of liorbidity hon; Horkere in the Chenicel Industry,” in Msterisly po
voproey :igiyeny truds i klinilti professionsl'nykh bolezney" [nets on
industrial lysiene end SyIptosstolosy of Occupstionsl Disessee]. ﬂoscov.

Vyp 7. 1957, pp 233-236.

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

I 35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vol'fovsknye, R. N.. end Hekulovs. l. D. "Analysis of Cases of Acute
Industrial Poisoning in Leningrad Over a 10-chr Period (According to

Institute Date),“ in "Heteriely Neuchn. sessi. posvysahch. loo-letiyu
nauchno-issled. in-ta gigiyeny truda i professionel'nykh ssboleveniy
g. Leningrada" [Proceedings of Scientific Session Comenoroting the
60th Anniversary of the Leningrad Scientific Research Institute of
Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Diseases], Leningrad. 1961..

pp 100-101.

Vol'foveksya, R. 11., end Hekulovs. l. D. "On the Effects of Lead on
Davalopssnt or Hypertensive States." 616. TRUDA, No 9. 1968, pp 47-69.

Voroh'yav, Ye. 1. "Radiation Cardiology," Moscow, Atonisdst. 1971.

Vorob'yev, Ye. 1.. end Stepsnov, R. P. "Condition of Rabbit Myocardiel
Cells After Local Exposure of the Cardiac Region to Radiation."
Mnxouomcm [Radiobiology], No 6. 1973, pp 866-869.

Votchsl. 3. Ya. "Pethogenesia. Prevention end Trestnent of Cor Pulmonale."
in "Trudy lS-go Vsesoyuzn. s”yerda terapevtov" [Proceedings of 15th
All-Union'Congraes of General Practitioners], Moscow, 1966, pp 189-191.

Cenbitskiy. Ye. V. ”Synptonscic (Secondary) Bypotension," 1‘23. Am”
No l. 1969. pp 28-35.

Cede. 6. R. "Arterial Pressure of Individuals working Uith bead,"
me. no 7, 1966, pp 26-32.

Getter. A. I. "Pnamoconiosie and the 'Right Ventricular Angins'
Syndrona," in "Prudy 15-go Vaesoyuxn. s"yesds terapevtov." lioacov.
1966. pp 666-668.

Corbarankon 1|. 1. "Pumtionsl State of the Adrenals With Chronic
Exposure to Radiation," in Wperinental'nsya i klinichesksys
radiologiya" [Experinental and Clinical Radiology], Kiev. Vyp 7, 1971.
pp 169-156.

Gorbachev, 0. H. ”Anglos Pectors of Diancaphalohypothslanic Origin,"

in "Piriologiya i patologiya gipotalsnuss" [Physiology and Pathology
of Bypothalanus], Moscow, 1965. pp 76-76.

Cordon. z. V. "Problem or Industrial Bygiene and Biological Effects
of 881' Blactrousgnatic Fields," Leningrad. Heditsins, 1966.

Gordon. 1. 3.. and Stepsnova, H. P. "Pain in the Cardiac Region and
an; Changes Hith Physical Leads in Patients Hith Vegetovascular Porn
of the Bypotension Syndrome." m. m.. No 8. 1970, pp 60-62.

Corimtov, P. 0. ”Reactivity of Irradiated Orgsnisae," in "Radistsiya
i organist" [deiation and the Organisn], Obninsk, Pt 1, 1967, pp 5-9.

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
60.

61.

42.

63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

68.

69.

50.

$1.

52.

NR OFFICIAL "SH ONLY

Graehchenkov. N. I. "Physiology and Pathology of the Dlunccphallc
Region of the Brain," Moscow, Izd-vo All [Acadeay of Sciences] SSSR.
1963.

Origor'yev. z. 3. "Occupational Diseases of Pointers Under the
Cochinad Effect of Lead and Organic Solvents,” in "Profcasionel’nye

intokeikateii" [Occupational Poisoning]. Leningrad. 1966, pp 65-73.

Grigor'yev, Yu. 6. "Radiation unions and Compensation of Impaired
Iunctions,” Moscow, Atonizdat. 1963.

Guaev, I. 8. "Cooperative Toxicity and Hygienic Evaluation of Low

concentrations of Benzene. Toluene and Xylene," candidatorial disserta-
tion, Leningrad, 1966.

Gus-an. 8. ll. "Data on the Study of Chronic Benzene Poisoning." in
"Shomilt trudov Azerbaydzhanek. in-ta ueovershenetvovaniys vrachey"
[Collected Horke of the Azerbaydzhen Institute for Advanced Training
of Physicians], Baku. Vyp 5. 1962, pp 115-121.

Gus'ltova, A. K.. and Bayeogolov. G. D. "Evaluation of health Status
and Principles of hploynent for Individuals Exposed to Ionizing
mt.t1m.” we wzoloe’ M 5. 1968, pp 3"9e

Idea, ”Radiation Sickness in Han." Moscow, Hediteina, 1971.

Saniyarov, 8. B. ”Maptationel Reactions of the Cardiovascular
Syeten to Bxpoeure to Ionizing Radiation,” in "Trudy Kirgizslt. ned.
in-ta" [Berks of Kirgiz Radical Inetitute]. Vyp l, 1963. pp 121-129.

Dzhandzhagava, K. H. "Polycardiographic Studies of Rabbit lleart
Punction Under Nor-a1 Conditions and with Exposure to Ionizing
Radiation," author abstract of candidatorisl disaertation. Tbilisi,
1973.

Dohrin, B. Yu. "EKG Changes in Patients With Vegetative Peroxyana of
Cerebral Genesis.” m. m., No 9. 1972, pp 67-50.

Drogichina. B. A. "Occupational Dismea of the Nervous Synta.”
Hoecov, Mediteina, 1968.

Drogichina. B. I... and Ryzhkova. H. N. ”Smtoastology and Diagnostics
of Diencephalic Pathology in the Presence of Occupational Poisoning,"
cm. mm. No 2. 1967, pp 20-26.

Drogichina. B. A.. and Sadchiltova, H. N. "Clinical Syndrome Anae-

ciated Hith Exposure to Different Radiofro'quency Ranges," Ihid,
No 1, 1965. pp 17-21.

154

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
53.

$9.

55.

56.

$7.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

66.

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-t ONLY

Yevdokinovs. 1. B. "Distinctions of Functional Changes in Local
Circulation and Auditory Sensibility Hith Exposure to Intensive

Industrial Noise," author abstract of candidstorisl dissertation,
Moscow, 1970.

stlashko. Yu. P. "Inpniraent of Porphyrin Metabolism and Its Signi-

ficance to Pathogenesis of Deed Ans-is." condidstorisl dissertation.
Moscow. 1965.

Zaytsev. c. P. "Endsrterioeis (Endsrteritis)." KLIN. NED., No 3. 1969.
pp 1.5-1.9.

Zakirov. 6. z. ”Arterial Vssculsr Crises in the Presence of Lead
Colic." in "Trudy Orenburgsk. ohlsstn. otdeleniys Vserossiysk. nsuchn.
ob-vs tsrapevtov" [works of the Orenhurgsksys Oblnst Departnent of the

All-Russian Scientific Society of General Practitioners], Orenburg.
Vyp 2, 1961. pp 82-89.

Zaslavskaya. k. H. "Pharascologicnl Effects on Pulaonsry Circulation."
Moscow. Haditaina, 1976.

Zakhsrov, V. H. "Changes in Arterial Pressure Under the Influence of
Low Doses of Internal Radiation Pros Radioactive Sodiua," in "neaktsiye
organizes na deyatviye nslykh doz ioniziruyuahchey rsdistsii" [Reaction
of the Body to the Effects of Low Doses of Ionizing Radiation], Moscow.
1962. pp 68-97.

Zorina. L. A. "Symptoaatology, Diagnostics. Trestnent and Prevention
of Lead Poisoning," Moscow, Heditaina, 196$.

Idea. "Chronic Benzene Poisoning (Clinical snd Experimental Study),"
doctoral dissertation, Moscow, 1971.

Ivanov, A. Ye. ”Pathoanstoaical Diagnostics of Radiation Sickness."
Moscow. Hedgiz, I960.

Ivanov, Yu. V. "Vascular Endatheliun in the Presence of Acute Radiation
Pathology (Hechanisa of Developeent of the neaorrhagic Syndrome),"
author sbstract of candidatorial dissertstion, Hoscov. 1970.

Iolgakaya, ﬂ. 8.; Gordon. 2. V.; Markov, V. V.; end Vorontsov, R. 8.
”Changes in Secretory Activity of the Bypothalanus and Sons of the
Endocrine Glands Vith Exposure to Interaittent and Continuous Radiation,"
in "0 biologicheskoa deystvii elektroaagnitnykh poley radiocheatot"
[Biological Effects of deiofrequency Bleetroaagnetic Fields], Moscow,
1973. pp 87-90.

Il'inahiy, B. V. "Probleas of Vascular Pathology," Leningrad. 1970.

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

7‘.

75.

76.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ll'inskiy. D. A.; Kusnetsov. V. 1.: end Hozshukhin. A. 8. "Changes In
Vasculsr Tonus in the Presence of Acute Radiation Sickness." in
"Patoganes. eksperinentel'nayn profilektiks i terepiyn luchcvykh

porasheniy" (Pathogenesis, taperinentel Prevention and Therapy of
Radiation Lesions]. Moscow. 1966, pp 70-78.

Pavlova. I. V.; Drogichinn. B. A.; Sadchikovs. N. N.; and Cul'fon. 1. A.
"rhe Role of Soon Biochenicsl Disturbances in the Pathogenesis of
Rbdiouavo Sickness." 010. rauos. No 3. 1970. pp 20-23.

Kssaksvich. H. A. “Sons Results of Clinicophysiological Studies of
Chronic Carbon Disulfids Poisoning." lbid, No 7. 1963. pp 20-22.

Kasakevich, H. A.. and rolasksys. H. s. ”Bxperinentel Study of Long-
Tern Sequelse of Chronic Carbon Disulfide Poisoning." in "Toksikologiyn
novykh pronyshlennykh khinicheskikh veshchestv" [Toxicology of New
Industrial Che-deals]. Moscow, Vyp 4. 1962, pp 117-125.

Kashin. L. H. "affects on the Body of Low Concentrations of Carbon
Disulfide," author abstract of candidetorial dissertation. Kiev. 1966.

Kirsanovs, C. 1.. and Sosnovsksys, P. H. ”Clinicophysiological
Characteristics of Venous Disturbances of Cerebral Circulation Hith

Exposure to Radiation.” MED. RADIOL.. No l, 1972. pp 16-22.

Kitsovskaye, l. A., and Polukhina. E. 1. "Investigation of Punctionsl
State of the Hypothalasus-aypophysis-Adrenal Cortex System Under the
Influence of lnternittsnt and Continuous Radiation." in "0 biologicheskoe

deystvii elcktronssnitnykh poley radiochastot.” Hoscou, 1973, pp 76-79.

Knopov. A. l. "A Case of Lead Poisoning with Marked Cardiovascular
Disturbances of Toxic Etiology,” TBS. ARKH., No 3, 1950, pp 55-50.

Koslov. L. A.; lvanov. 1. 6.; and L'vovsksye, I. N. ”Pathogenesis of
Occupational Deafness," CIC. TSUDA. No 3. 1966, pp 36-30.

Koslov. P. 8.. and redder. Yu. P. ”Co-plan Effects on the Body of

Densene and Unsaturated aydrocarbons." in ”Haterisly Z-y 0b"ysdinennoy
nsuchn. sessii, posvyashch. voprosan okhrany truda i professional'nykh
bolernsy i trsvnatirna" [Proceedings of 2d Joint Scientific Session
Dealing with Labor Safety Practices. Occupational Diseases and
Traunatlee], Cor'kiy. 1965, pp 23b-237.

Koslovs. A. V., and Lopetnikova, Z. P. ”Radiation Therapy of Carcino-a
of the Esophagus." HID. RADIOL., No 9, 1967. pp 17-23.

loslovskiy, V. N.. and Denisova, Ye. A. ”Lipoid and Protein Metabolis-
Hitb Chtﬁnic Exposure to ladietion Under Occupetional Conditions."
lbid. No 6, 1972, pp 63-67.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
77.

70.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

85.

86.

07.

89.

FOR OFVICIAL USN ONLY

Rolodub, P. A.. and Yevtuahenko. 6. I. ”letaholic biaturhancee of the

Heart Nith Bxpoaure to Low Frequency Pulsed Electromagnetic Fielda."
KARDIOLOOIYA [Cardiology]. No 7. 1972, pp 101-102.

Konikova, c. 8. "Choleaterol Metabolic. in lndividuala Bxpoaed to
Lead for Long Perioda of Tile.“ 188. ARKN.. No 7. 1961. pp 100-109.

Konchalovakaya. N. ".3 Seytenov. A. 0.: and Sortina. N. 8. "0n the
Queation or Allergic Nyocarditia.“ lbid. No 9. 1965. pp 22-25.

Koetyukova. 8. D. "Blectrocardiographic Pindinge in Cocoa of Acute
Carbon Monoxide Poiaoning,“ KLIN. HED.. No 2. 1951. pp 56-58.

Kruglikov. R. 1. "Data on the affecte of SN? Electroeagnetic Pielda
on Higher Branchea of the Central Nervoue Syatee," author ahatract of
doctoral diaeertation, Noacou. 1968.

Kua'ainakaya. O. N. "Experilental Atheroacleroaio Againat the Back-
ground of Lead Poiaoning." ARIN. PAT. [Archives of Pathology]. No 9.

196‘, pp 21-24.

Kuhin. N. N. "Bffecta of Lead on Develop-eat and Courae of Endarteritia
Obliterana." KNINBROIYA [Surgery]. No 2. 1937. pp 90-100.

Kurahakov. N. A.. and Kireyev. P. N. ”Myocardial Hypoxia Nith Acute
and Chronic Bxpoaure to Radiation." KARDIOLOGIYA, No 2. 1963. pp 3-9.

Kuahelevakiy. I. P” and Zialin, D. N. ”Syndroaal Cleeeification of
Cardiopulaonary Ineutficiency.” in “Trudy 15-go Vaeaoyurn. a"yetda
terepevtov," Noacov, 1966, pp 266-251.

Kuahnev. A. I. ”Viaceral Pathology in the Preaence of Chronic Carbon
Diaulfide Poiaoning." in ”Trudy Kalininak. led. in-ta” [Norka of

lalinin Nadical Inatitute]. Kalinin, Vol 11. 1965. pp 53-57.

Lang, 6. 2. "Pathology of the Circulatory Syatel.” Noacov. Nedgia.
2d edition. 1957.

Lodentaev, Yu. K. “Lipid Metabolic. Nith Expoaure to Low Taoperature
and Ionizing Radiation.“ in "Haterialy 30-y Godichn. nauchn. oeaaii
Sverdlovek. led. in-ta” [Proceedinga of 30th Annual Scientific Seaaion
of Sverdlovak Hedical Inatitute]. Sverdlovak, 1968. p 608.

Lobkova, Ye. P.. and Plurhnihoya. N. Kh. ”So-e Diatinctiona of Circula-
tory Diaordera in the Preaence of Chronic Leaiona to the Diencephalic
Region," in "labolevaniya aerdachno-aoaudiatoy, nervnoy aiateay i
boleroi obaena veahcheatv" [Pathology of the Cardiovaacular and Nervous
Syetcu, and Metabolic Diaeaaea], Noacov, 1966. pp 179-186.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
90.

91.

92.

93.
9‘.
95.

96.

97.

90.

99.

100.

FOR OFFICIAL 086 ONLY

Lushnikov. Ye. P.. and Lushnikov. G. A. "Role of Connective Tissue
in Pathogenesis of Radiation Lesion. to the Heart," in "Rol'
soysdinitel'noy thani i sisteny krovi pri luchevoy pstologii" [Rule
of Connective Tissue and Blood in Radiation Pathology]. Hoscou. 1970.
pp 132-135.

Lysine. c. 6. ”Condition of Internal Organs in the Presence of Chronic
Carbon Disuliide Poisoning." GIG. TRUDA. No 6. 1958. pp 56-56.

Idea. ”Oxygenation of the Body in Individuals working Vith Sources of
Ionizing Radiation for Long Periods of Tina." VRACH. D860. No 6. 1968.

pp 100-103.

Idea. ”Clinicophysioiogical Changes Vith Exposure to Occupational
Radiation and Iadiouaves." Ibid. No ll. 1975. pp 50-55.

Lyuhoaudrov. V. Ye.; Onopko. D. 8.; and Isaanygina. L. Ya. "Vibration
and Voiee Sickness.” Kiev. ldorov'ya. 1968.

ﬂakel'ekiy. V. V. “Heaodynaaic Distinctions in Patients Hith lnphysesn
of the Lungs." moromctra. No 7. 1967. pp 124-129.

Halkin. V. 3.. and Plekhatnyuk. V. I. "Blectrocsrdiographic Changes
in the Presence of Acute Hypoxia. and their Significance.”
IOSHICBISIAYA DIOL.. No 2. 1976. pp 56-61.

Halyshev. V. H.. and Koleenik. P. A. ”Superhigh-Prequency Electro-
aagnetic Haves and their Effects on Man." leningrad. Neditsina. 196B.

Markiaova. A. 3.. and Hukhina. 8. N. "State of Sone Vegetative
Vascular Reactions and Cutaneous Capillaries of Individuals Vetting

Hith Sources of Ionizing Radiation." in ”Haterisly Yubileynoy nauchn.
sessii. posvyashch. SD-letiyu reentral'n. nauchno-issled. rentgeno-

rediologicheekogo in-ts.” Leningrad. 1968. pp 375-376.

Hasich. T. A. ”Clinicophysiological Characteristics of the Vascular
Cysts. of Patients With Chronic Lead and Carbon Disultide Poisoning."
author abstract of candidatorial dissertation. Noscov. 1970.

Kovnatskiy. V. A.; Vesil'ysvs. V. A.: Kur'ainskaya. c. N.; and
Chsrednichanko. L. K. ”Characteristics of States of the Cardiovascular
Systen Hith Prolonged Exposure to load." in ”Haterialy Nauchn. ssssii
Nauchno-issled. in-ta gigiyeny truda i professional'nykh zabolevsniy
Leningrada. posvyashch. itogan raboty in-ta za 1959-1960 gody” [Pro-
ceedings of Scientific Session of the Scientific Research Institute

or Industrial hygiene and Occupational Diseases of Leningrad. Dealing
Vith Achieve-ants of the Institute in 1959-1960]. Leningrad. 1961.

pp 31-32e

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.
108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Vasil'yeva, V. A.3 Velikson, I. “.3 Kognn, A. 6.; Konikovo, c. 8.3
Kut’ainekaye, O. ".3 and Cherednichenko, L. K. "Data on the Effects

of Lead on Development of the Atherosclerotic Process," GIG. TRUDA,

Nedvedev, V. P. "Cardiovascular Pathology in Individuals With Prior
Exposure to Sit? Electromagnetic Fields," Ibid, No 3, 1973, pp 6-8.

Hilkov, L. Ye. "Effects of Intensive Industrial Noise on Nervous

’ nggel Function," author abstract of candidatorial dissertation, Moscow,
1 .

Hikhnev. A. I... end Khoeezyuk, A. I. "Pathogenesis of Hypertension

in the Puleonery Circulation in the Presence of Chronic Lung Disease,"
in ”Trudy lS-go Veeeoyuzn. s"yeade terepevtov,” Moscow, 1964, pp 239-260.

Hodel', A. A., and Nevrotskeya, B. S. "Blectrocerdiographic Changes
in the Presence of Chronic Carbon Disult'ide Poisoning,‘.' men. DBLO,
No 7, 1958, pp 755-756.

Holchanov, ll. 8., end Geeoitskiy, Ye. V. "Problems of Names, Etiology
end Pathogenesis of llypotensive States," ICLIN. “20., No 6, 1967, pp 6-13.

Hukharlyeaov, N. H. "Cor Pulmonale," Hoscow, Heditsina, 1973.

Hytnik, P. K. "SyIptonatology, Early Detection, Therapy and Prevention
of Chronic Benzene Poisoning," in ”Proeyshlennaya toksikologiya"
[Industrial Toxicology], Moscou—-Leningrad, 1934, pp 85-101.

Hyasnikov, A. L. "Essential Hypertension and Atherosclerosis," Moscow,
Mediteina, 196$.

Nadereyehvili, K. 8h. "Effects of Ionizing Radiation on the Cardio-
vascular System," Tbilisi, Hetsniyerebe, 1966.

Vol'fovekeye, R. 8.3 Aeenove, T. P.3 Zenkevich, Ye. 8.3 Hakulova, I. 0.3

and Seaenovekaye, h. A. "Neurocirculetory Disturbances in the Presence
of Sale Chronic Occupational Diseases," in ”Iesisy dokladov Leningradek.

nauchno-ieeled. in-te gigiyeny truda i profzeboleveniy" [Sun-arias of
Papers Delivered at the Leningrad Scientific Research Institute of

Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Diseases], Leningrad, 1970, pp 38-60.

Gus'kova, A. [.3 Poniaovskaya, A. 1.3 Dcnisove, Ye. A.3 L'vovskaya,
B. “.3 Kotove, E. 8.3 end Gribove, I. A. "Some Findings of Clinico-
physiological Observations of Individuals working on Accelerators,”

in "liologicheskoye deyetviye protonov vyeokikh energiy” [Biological
Effects of High-Energy Protons], Moscow, 1967, pp 67-84.

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118 .

119.

120.

121 .

122.

123.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Drogichina, E. A.; Konchalovakaya, N. 11.; Glotova, K. V.; Sadchikovs.

H. 11.; and Snegova, G. V. "Vegetative and Cardiovascular Disturbances
with Chronic Exposure to SUP Electroaagnetic Fields," GIG. TRUDA. No 7.

1966, pp 13-17.

Il'inskiy, B. V.; Dorisova, L. 1.; Klbeva, S. K.; and Hedvcdev, V. P.
"The Role of Hereditary and Sons Industrial Factors in Developasnt
of Cardiac Iachenia," in "Tesisy dokl. Z-go Vsesoyusn. s"yesda

kardiologov" [Smarias of Papers Delivered at the 2d All-Union
Congress of Cardiologists], Moscow, 1973, pp 36-36.

Dasha, G. A.; Dibner, R. D.; Teslenko, 2h. A.; and Proektor, H. L.
"Left Ventricular Stress' Syndrome in Healthy Individuals,”
KARDIOLOCIYA, No 3, 1962, pp 70-73.

Orlovs, A. A. "Changes in Cardiac Function in Patients with Lead and
Hercury Poisoning (According to EKG Findings)," candidatorial
dissertation, Moscow, 1953.

Clssunov, I. 8.; Blagoveahchenskaya, V. V.; Ivanov, V. V.; and Halakhova,
1‘. "Acute Radiation Sickness Induced by Exposure to Cams and Neutron
Radiation," KLIN. 1131)., No.6, 1976, pp 55-61.

Peysakh, s. A., and Kadyrbayeva, Kh. K. "A Case of Death Due to
Lead Poisoning," in "Trudy in-ta krayevoy patologii AN Kazakhsk. SSE"
[Works of the Institute of Regional Pathology of the Kazakh Acade-y
of Sciences}, Alisa-Ate, Vol 8, 1960, pp 227-236.

Poddubskiy, G. A. "Cardiac Function at the Long Postradiation Tarn,"
author abstract of candidatorial dissertation, Leningrad, 1966.

Pokrovskiy, N. 1|. "Effects of Industrial Noise on Blood Pressure
of Workers in Machine-Building Plants," GIG. TRUDA, No 12, 1966,
pp 106-66.

Rashevskaya, A. H.,- and Levina, s. V. "Synptonatology of. Changes
in Internal Organs in the Presence of Lead Poisoning," RUDY ANN SSS]!

[Horus of the USSR Acadeay of Hedical Sciences], Moscow, Vol 16,
1952, pp 78-92.

Rashevakaya, A. 11.; Holokanov, K. P.; and Orlova, A. A. "Berylliosis
(Synptonatology, Diagnostics and Therapy). Expert Certification of
Disability," Moscow, Haditsina, 1965.

Levin, Yu. 11.; Nikitina, D. 8.; Hartsev, D. 8.; and Kopnovs, H. L.
"Local Circulation and Hicrocirculation in the Systemic and Pulmonary

Circulatory Syste-s in the Presence of Certain Radiation Lesions," in
”Radistsiya i organism,” Obninslr, Pt 1, 1967, pp 103-106.

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
126.

125.

126.

127.

128.

129.

130.

131.

132.

133.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rozentsvit, C. 8. "Occupational Paroxysmal Autonomic Syndroaes and
Treatment Thereof,” in "Trudy Nauchn. ueanii Leningradsk. nauchno-issled.
in-ta gigiyeny truda i professional'nykh zabolevaniy za 1957 god"
(Proceedings of Scientific Session of Leningrad Scientific Research

institute of Industrial Hygiene and Occupational Diseases in 1957].
Leningrad, 1959, pp 121-126.

Rusinovs. A. P. "Manifestations of Noise Sickness in Vorkeru Engaged
in Steel Cable Production." in "Kratkiye tezisy dokl. k Vserossiyok.
konferentsii na tenu 'Shun i shuaovaya bolczn'. Voprosy profilaktiki'"
[Brief Sun-arise of Papers Delivered at All-Russian Conference on

"Noise and Noise Sickness. Probleas of Prevention"]. Leningrad. 1973,
pp 136-136.

Rutaay. S. V. "Electrolyte Content of Rabbit heart Tissues in the
Presence of Hypothalanic Trauns," KARDIOLOGIYA, No 6, 1972, pp lZé-lZS.

Savitskiy, N. N. "Biophysical Bases of Circulation and Clinical
Methods of Studying Naaodynanics," Leningrad, Heditsinn, 1976.

Sadchikova, N. N.; Osipova, V. F.; and Ourneva. z. N. "Soae Data on
Cerebral and Peripheral Circulation in the Presence of Radiousve
Sickness, According to Rheographic Bindings,“ GIG. TRUDA, No 9. 1972.
pp 12-15.

Saytanov, A. 0. "Functional State of the Heart With Chronic Exposure
to Ionizing Radiation," KLIN. H20.. No 6. 1969, pp 22-28.

Sarkisov. 0. 8., and Vtyurin, B. V. "Myocardial Dystrophy, Its
Reversibility and Means of Prevention in Ultrastructural Aspect,"
in "Diatrofiya aiokarda" [Myocardial Dystrophy], Leningrad, 1971,
pp 69-79.

Svistunov, N. I. "Effects of Electric Machine Noise on Functional

State of Cardiovascular Systea of Testers." in "Haterialy Nsuchn. sessii
po problene 'Sovreaennoye aostoyaniye ucheniya o proizvodetvennoa shu-e
i ul'trazvuka. ikh vliyanii na organise i profilaktike vrednogo
deystviya'" [Proceedings of Scientific Session Dealing Hith the Problea

"Present Status of Teaching on Industrial Noise and Ultrasound, Their
Effects on the Body and Prevention of Deleterious Bffects]"l, Leningrad.

1968, pp 118-119.

Sel'tser. V. K. "Phase Structure of Caruisc Contraction in Irradiated
Rabbits During Functional Tests," RADIOBIOLOCIYA. No 3. 1970, p ‘69.

Sinavonyan, V. G. "Roentgenological Changes in Hacaca Nonkeys Hith
prosure to Radiation,” in “Haterialy Yubileynoy sessii, posvyashchennoy

so-letiyu Tseatral'n. nauchno—issled. rentgeno-radiologicheskogo in-ta.”
Leningrad. 1968, pp 59-50.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
136.

135.

136.

137.

133.

139.

140.

191.

1‘2.

163.

16‘.

165.

166.

167.

FOR OI’PICIM. USE ONLY

Singins. V. A. "Condition of External Respiration and Circulation in
Patients Hith Chronic Nonspecific Lung Disease at Different Stages of
Illness." in "Trudy Oronburgslt. ned. in-ta." Vyp 9. 1966. pp 169-177.

Slessrev. V. V. "Peripheral Circulation of Blood and Lymph with
Exposure to Ionizing Radiation." NED. RADIOL.. No l. 1966. pp 59-06.

Snirnova. N. P. "Significance of Disturbances of Central Nervous

Regulation to Involvement of Cardiovascular System With Exposure to
Ionizing Radiation." RADIODIOLOGIYA. No l, 1962, p 228.

Soldatova. V. A. "llealth Status and Clinical Distinctions of Rauc-
tion to Occupational Radiation in Nedical Roentgenologists." author
abstract of candidatorisl dissertation. Moscow. 1968.

Sorkins. N. 8. "Early Detection and Problena of Instant of Chronic
Lead Poisoning." candidstorial dissertation. Moscow. 1971.

Soanovskaya. P. N. "Characteristics of Bioelectrical Activity of the
Brain of Individuals Occupationally Exposed to Ionizing Radiation,"
author abstract of candidatorial dissertatin. Noscov. 1973.

Subtota. A. C. 'Diechanisn of Nonthernal Effects of liicrovaves on
Benodynanics." in "Cigiyena trade 1 biologiclneskoye doystviye

elektronegnitnykh voln radiochaetot." Moscow. 1968. pp 168-150.

Sudakov. K. V.. and Anti-only. G. D. ”Central Nechanisn of Action
of Electromagnetic Pields." USPBKNI PIZIOLOCICB. NAUK [Advances in

Physiological Sciences]. Vol lo. No 2. 1973. pp 101-135.

Teodori. N. 1.. and Hirochitsltiy. s. N. "Key Issues in the Probles
of Nyocarditis." KLIN. NED" No 10, 1976, pp 6-16.

Teplov. s. 1.: Sverdlov. V. 8.; and Korovkin. D. P. ”Myocardial
Lesion in the Presence of Radiation Sickness and Hith Local Exposure
of Cardiac Region to X-nays.” NED. RADIUM. No 3. 1959. pp 27-33.

‘i'ilthonov. K. 3. "Condition of Halls of Large Blood Vessels in the
Presence of Acute Radiation Sickness," Ibid. No 6. 1965, pp 62-65.

Tolgskaya. H. 8.. and Gordon. 2. V. Morphological Changes Under the
Influence of Radio-Frequency Blectronagnetic waves." Leningrad.
Neditsina. 1971.

Tyagin. N. V. "Clinical Aspects of SN? Radiation." Leningrad. Neditsina.
1971.

Pogel'aon. L. 1. ”Correlation Between Diseases of the Cardiovascular
Systen and Condition of Central Nervous Systen." KLIN. NEIL. No 7.
1966. pp 124-130.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
168.

1‘9.

150.

151.
152.

153.

15‘.

155.

156.
157.
158.
159.

160.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prayfel'd. Ye. K. ”Pathological Anatomy of Lead Poisoning," in “Trudy
2-go Vaesoyusn. s'yexda po professional'noy gigiyene i tekhniko
bezopaanosti" [Proceedings of 2d All-Union Congress on Occupational
hygiene and Labor Safety Practices], Moscow. 1930, pp 202-206.

Khanina. s. 8.. and Shirinakays, ,0. 1. "Functional Cardiopathy,“
lbscov. haditsina. 1971.

Khishnyakove. L. N. "Effects of Benzene. lts lioaologues and Their
Nitrouido Derivatives on the Cardiovascular Systee." in "Gigiyena"
[hygiene]. Kiev, 1965, pp 277-281.

Khovteai. A. A. "Concerning Lead-Induced Bndarteritis Obliterans.“
010. TRUDA. No 5, 1961, pp 57-58.

Tsigel'nik, A. Ya. "Problems of Modern Pneumology," KLIN. HED., no lo,
1962, pp 6-9.

'rsinssrling, V. D. "Horphological Changes in Lower Liob Arteries in

the Presence of General Atherosclerosis, Essential hypertension and
Angioneurosis." is "Trudy lb-go Vsesoyusn. s"yezda terapevtov.” Moscov.

1958. pp 69-58.

Cherednichenko. L. K. ”Effect of Lead Poisoning on Developeent of
hperiaestal Atherosclerosis.” 016. I SA”. [hygiene and Sanitation).

no 3, 1962. pp 18-21.

She-erdin, D. N. "State of Hicrocirculation and Tonus of Peripheral

Vessels in Workers in the Slate Industry as Related to Some Pores of
Occupational Pathology," author abstract of doctoral dissertation.
Term, 1976.

Shershevakiy, D. 1!. ”Chronic Cor Pulmonale (Pathogenesis, Diagnostics
and Therapy)," KLIN. 1120., No 5, 1968, pp 17-25.

Shtriter, V. A. "Blood Pressure Levels in Different Occupational
Groups.” 183. ARKH.. No 2, 1956. pp 50-55.

Andreyeva-Galanino, Ye. 1's. (editor) "Noise and Noise Sickness."
Leningrad, Heditsins. 1972.

Shkhvatsabaya, I. K. ”Sole Problems of Pathogenesis of Essential
Hypertension," KARDIOLOCIYA. No 8. 1972. pp 5-13.

Shcherbakov, N. 1. "Some Heoodynaoic Changes in Individuals zxpoeed
for Long Periods of Tine to Lov Doses of Ionizing Radiation," author
abstract of candidatorial dissertation, Leningrad, 1960.

163

FOR OPPXCIAL USE ONLY
161 .

162.

163.

164.

165 .

166 .

167 .

168.

169 .

170.

171 .

172.

173.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ore-ova. Ya. A.; Lebedeve. L. N.; Tkuchenko, K. N.; and Fedotuva. 0. N.

“Experisental Analysis of Functional and Metabolic Chonges in the
hurt in the Presence of Hypothslslic Lesions," KARDIOLOGIYA. No ’0,

1972. pp 33-88.

Ryvkin, I. A. (editor) ”Bpidesiology of Arterial Hypertension and
Coronary Atherosclerosis." Moscow. Heditsinn. 1969.

Bfendiyav. H. 3., and Aeiroslenova. G. 1. "Chronic Effect of Benzene
on the “neon Body,” in ”Trudy Vyyerdnoy sessii ANN 888R v Baku"
(Proceedings of Visiting Session of the USSR Acsdeny of Radical
Sciences in Baku], Moscow. 1961. pp 28-36.

Yurenav. P. N.. and Scaucnovich. N. 1. "Symptonatology and Therapy of
Allergic Pathology of the Heart end Vessels," Moscow, hediteins. 1972.

Yakwlev. V. V. "Condition of Peripheral Vessels end ﬂuodynanice in
the Presence of Acute Radiation Sickness," HBO. RADIO]... no 4. 1966.
pp 73-79.

Yakovleva. 1.. A. "lisaodyna-ics as Related to Experieental Local
Irradiation of the Cardiac Region," KARDIOIDGIYA. No 6. 1972. pp 106-109.

Yakovleva. H. 1. ”Physiological heckenisus of Action of Electronasnetic
Pields." Leningrad, Heditaina. 1973.

Ambrosio, l... and Secchi. c. c. ”The Central and Peripheral nervous
Systel ae Related to Lead Poisoning," m. D. LAVORO. Vol 59. 1968,

pp 265-280.

Ambrosio. 1...; Harsico, P.; end Piccoli. P. "Occupational Carbon
Disalfide Poisoning (Clinical Contribution to Intonation About

Vascular Pathology Related to Cerbon Diaulfide)," POLIA HID. (Naples),
Vol 40, 1957. pp 556-569.

Andrew. 0. A. "Radiation Accidente and Their Hanagcneot." RADIAL
238.. Vol 7, 1967, pp 390-397.

Attinger. 8. "Chronic Carbon Dieulfide Poisoning. Pathogeneaia.
Early Detection and Prevention," scalmz. um. um“ Vol 31, 1954,
pp 912-913.

Beldi. 0.. and Giubileo. K. "Le Asoteaia dei Saturnini e Degli
Operel Eapoati ad Assorbineto di Pie-ho,” m. D. LAVORO, Vol ‘6, 1953.
pp 62-428.

Botticelli, H. ”L'lntosaicerione Ssturnina nei Deaoliteri di
Accumlatori," lbid. Vol 66, 1955, pp 35-39.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
176.

175.

176.

177.

178.

179.

180.

181.
182.

183.

18k.

185.

186.

187.

l-‘Oli “PVICIM. USE ONLY

Eiran. 5.; Hochaann. A.; and Stern, 8. "Therapeutic Irradiation of
the Chest and Electrocardiographic Changes," CLIN. RADIOI... Vol 20,
1969, pp 633-939.

Bolt. 0.. and Zorn. 0. "Intracardinc Pressure in the Presence of
Silicosis.” BEITR. KLIN. TUDERK., Vol 105, 1951. pp 100-107.

Boron. P. "Zachowanie sie Cisnienin Tstnicsego Krui i Uskasnika

Eacylosstrycsnage u Robotnikou na Razonych na Davalanie Oloviu,"
ma PM“, 7. 1956, pp ‘7‘50e

Cannon. E. K. “Atoaic Boob Casualty Commission: the First Fifteen
Years.” BULL. ATOMIC 861.. Vol 19, 1963. pp hS-SO.

Harvey. E. “.3 Enaon. Y.; Cournand, A.; and Ferret. M. 1. "Cardiac
Output in Cor Pulmonale." ARCH. KREISL.-O. F088Cﬂ., Vol 66. 1965.
pp 7-16.

Chapman, P. 8.. and Young, R. J. "Effect of Cobalt 60 Gama irradiation
on Blood Pressure and Cerebral Blood Flow in the Masses Hulatta,”
RADIAT. l28., Vol 35. 1968, pp 78-85.

Crepst, IL; cobbato, P.; and Scansetti, 6. "Cardiovascular Changes
in Individuals Working Hith bead,” MINERVA MED" Vol 93. 1956,

pp 1910-1918.
Cumings, J. ”lieavy Metals and the Brain,“ Oxford, 1959.

Darmody. w. 8.; Tho-as, L. 8.; and Gurdjama. E. s. "Postirradiation

Vascular Insufficiency syndrome (Case Report)," NEUROLOGY (Minneapolis).
Vol 17, 1967, pp 1190-1192.

Wu. 8. L. "Benzene Exposure and Aplastic Anemia Followed by
Leukemia 15 Years Later,“ J.A.ﬂ.A., Vol 185, 1963, pp 748-751.

Dencker, 11., and Bolmdahl, It. 1!. 'Meaenteric Angiography in Patients
Hith Radiation Injury of the Bowel After Pelvic Irradiation,” AM. J.
WWI... Vol 114, 1972, pp 476-681.

Dinischioty, 6.; Radulescu, 1.; and Huica, N. ”Bemodynamic Studies
of Industrial Lead Poisoning.” ARCH. GENERBEPATH. GEHEEBEHYG.. Vol l7,
1959, pp 168-167.

Dodge, C. a. ”clinical and ﬂygienic Aspects of Exposure to Electro-
magnetic Fields." in "Symposium on Biological Effects and Health
Implications of Microwave Radiation." Richmond, 1969, pp 160-l69.

Dorezak, U. “Ocena Csynnosei Hatroby u Pracounikow Rarazonych na
Savadova Stycenoae s Msiarcskeim Hegls Na Podstavie Niektorych Testou

Eneymatycsnych." MID. PRACY, Vol 19, 1968, pp 252-262.
165

FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY
188.

189.

190.

191.

192.

193.

196.
195.

196.

197.

198.

199.

200.

201.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Jerona. M.: Vaeth. M. D.; Lawrence. 2.; Feigenbaun. M. 0.; Malcolm. 0.;
and Mertill, M. D. "Effect of Radiation on the Heart," RADIOLOGY.
Vol 76. 1961. pp 80-86.

Takaoka. A.; Kandea. H.; Urano. M.; and Rikkawa, s. "Electrocardio-
graphic Study of Cardiac Danage Secondary to Radiotherapy of Malignant

Intrathoracic Tumors." RADIOL. CLIH. (Easel), Vol 37, 1968. pp 1-l2.

Epstein..P. H.. and Ostrander. L. D. "Detection of Individual
Susceptibility Towarda Coronary Dieease." PRCCR. CARDIOVASC. 018..
Vol 13. 1971. pp 324-362.

Ranger. H.. and Luahhaugh. C. C. "Radiation Death Pro- Cardiovascular

Shock Following a Criticality Accident. Report of a Second Death Prom
a Newly Defined Huaan Radiation Syndroea." ARCH. PATH.. Vol 83, 1967,
pp 446-460.

Eerrero. C. P. "Incidence of Diabetes Mallitua Anong Barkers Exposed
to Carbon Disulfide." MED. D. LAVORD. V01 60, 1969. pp 38-42.

Perri. 0.; Zacchi. 0.; and Calaavara. R. "Histological and Histochenical
Findings in the Heart Exposed to Ionizing Radiation," RADIOL. MED.
(Tbrino). Vol 52. 1966, pp 728-729.

Elint. P. "Cor Pulsonale." LAHCET. Vol 267, pp 51-58 [no date].

Prey. A. M. "Effects of Microwave and Radio Frequency Energy on the
Centra1 Nervous Systea," in "Synposiun on Biological Effecte and

Health Implications of Microwave Radiation." Richmond, 1969. pp 134-139.

Fulton. R. ”The Heart in Chronic Pulaoaale Disease." QUART. J. MBD..
Vol 22. 1953. pp 63-67.

Gierd. P. "Cardiopathy Related to Radiotherapy." J. SCI. MED. LILLE.
Vol so. 1970. pp 459-459.

Gohhato, P., and Chiesura, P. "Lead Rephropathy," MINERVA NEPROL.,
V01 15. 1968. pp 12-26.

Gohhato. P.; Sequi. 0.; and Turchetto, P. "Clinicostatistical Data
on Vascu1ar Changes in the Presence of Chronic Occupational Carbon
Disulfide Poisoning.” MINERVA MED.. Vol 55. 1964. pp 4018-4021.
Creenfie1d. 1.. and Gray I. "Lead Poisoning. IX: The Fei1ure of
Lead Poisoning to Affect the Heart and Blood Vessels." AM. HEART H..
Vol 39. 1950. pp 630435.

evozdjak. J. ”Honcoronary Myocardiopathy." Bratislava, 1973.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
202.

203.

206.
205.

206.

207.

208.

209.

210.

211.

212.

213.

216.

215.

216.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hassler, 0. "Microangiographic Studies of Changes in the Cerebral

Vessels After Irradiation. I: Proton Benn Lesions in the Rat,"
ACTA RADIOL. (Stockholm). Vol 6, 1966, pp 396-600.

Heepeleann. L.; Lisco. ".3 and Hoff-an, J. "Acute Radiation Syndrome,"
translated fro- Bnglish, Moscow, Isd-vo inoetr. lit-ry [Foreign
Literature Press], 1956.

Boletain, B. "Outline of Occupational Medicine,“ Leipzig, 1966.

Huff. ﬂ., and Sanders, B. H. "Coronary Artery Occlusion After Radia-
tion,” new rant. J. unn.. Vol 286. 1972. p 780.

James, 0. R., and Thomas, A. J. "Right Ventricular Hypertrophy and the
Sane in Snell Pulmonary Arteries in Chronic Lung Disease," BRIT. HEART J.,

Vol 25, 1963, pp 583-588.

Jensen. 6. "Effect of Noise on Physical Labor," INT. 2. ANGER. PKYSIOL..
Vol 20. 1966, pp 233-239.

Kennel, H. 3.; Castelli, H. P.; and Hells-are, P. M. "The Coronary
Profile. Twelve-Year Following-Up in the Praninghae Study." J. OCCUP.
HBD., Vol 9, 1967, pp 611-619.

Kleinert, H.; Kurtis, 8.: and Hieland. C. "Electrocardiographic
Studies During Cobalt 60 Teletherapy of the Cardiac Region,"
STRAHLENTHERAPIB, Vol 136, 1967, pp 339-369.

Kline, T. S. ”Myocardial Changes in Lead Poisoning," AM. J. DIS. CBILD.,
Vol 99, 1960, pp 68-56.

Koaeider, 8., and Petelenz, T. "Badania Elektrokardiografieane v
Przypadkach Przevlekeych Zetruc Zauodouych Olouiee," POL ARCH. MED.
HINHET, Vol 31, 1961, pp 1369-1357.

Bonpieni, C.; Pelcetti, 3.; Metronola, V.; et al. "Systelic Arterial
Pressure in Patients with Tumors At the Early Stages of Exposure to
Ionizing Radiation," HUNT. RADIOL., Vol 32, 1967, pp 711-712.

Lauer, D. J. "Clinical Lead Intoxication Prom Dress Foundry Operations,"

Lee, G. "Physiology and Heeodynanics," in "Clinical Disorders of the
Puleonary Circulation," Iondon, 1960, pp 7-33.

Lassa. T., and Coadby. K. "Lead Poisoning and Lead Absorption.“
Berlin, 1921.

Lehmann, 6. Effects of noise," LANDARZT, Vol 38, 1962, pp 336-339.
167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
217.

218.

219.

220.

221.

222.

223.

226.

225.

226.

227.

228.

229.

230.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Luahbaugh, c. 6.; Cones, P.; and Hofstra, R. "Clinical Studies of

Radiation Effects in Man." in "Space Radiation Biology," New York,
1967. pp 398-605.

McAfee, R. D. '“rhe Neural and Mornonal Reapense to Microwave Stimulation
of Peripheral Nerves,” in "Symposium on Biological Effects and Realth
ilplications of Microwave Radiation,” Richmond, 1969. pp 150-153.

Merker. a. "Benzene and Early Detection of Its Effects on Blood,"
HBO. KLIN., V01 57, 1962. pp 1256-1262.

Michaelson, 8. M. "Biological Effects of Microwave Exposure," in
"Synpoaiua on Biological Effects and Realth Implications of Microwave
Radiation,” Rich-and, 1969, pp 35-38.

Mickey, G. R. "Blectronagnetien and Its Effects on Organiens,"
N.Y. ST. J. MBD., Vol 63, 1963, pp 1935-1962.

Minden, 8.; Gohlke, R.; and Rothe, R. "Report on Pathogenesis of
Chronic Carbon Dieulfide Poisoning," z. 638. MYG.. Vol 13, 1967,
pp 815-822.

Morgan, J.; Bartley, M.; and Miller, R. "Nephropathy in Chronic Lead
Poisoning," ARON. INTERN. MED., Vol 118, 1966. pp 17-29.

Myeraon, R. M., and Biaenhauer, J. M. "Atrioveatricular Conduction
Defects in Lead Poisoning," AM. J. CARDIOL.. Vol II, 1963, pp 609-612.

Navarro Martinez, N., and Farina. G. "Clinicostatiatical Contribution
to the Study of Vascular Pathology Due to Carbon Disulfide: Analysis
of 75 Caaes," MED. D. LAVORO, Vol 60, 1969, pp 11-20.

Oleaiacz, 9., and Plaaieniek, A. "Zeburzoaia Gospedarki Tluazcowej w

Przevleklya Ztruciu Dwuziarczkien Uegla." POL. ARCH. MED. HENNBT.,
Vol 33, 1963, pp 1179-1182.

Oppliger, 6., and Grandjeaa, E. "Vasonotor Skin Reaction to Noise,"
831V. PMYSIOL. PHARMACOL. ACTA, Vol 17, 1959, pp 275-287.

Pal-er, R. M.; Cocking, J. 3.; and Elnanuel, J. c. "Irradiation
Induced Conatrictive Pericarditis in Inteatinal Lynphaagiectasie."
BRIT. MED. J., Vol 6, 1970, pp 783-786.

Pierson, M. 8., and Dachofer, c. s. "Alterations in Muscle Activity
During Ganna Irradiation." RADIAT. RES., Vol 26, 1965, pp 603-612.

Prerovaka, J., and Roth, 2. 2. "sledovani Zaneatancu z Rizika
Sirouhliku Zaaerennia na Roavoj Arterioskelrozy," PRACOV. LBR., Vol 20,
1968, pp 6-10.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
231.

232.

233.

234.
235.
236.

237.

238.
239.
2‘0.

241.

242.
243.

244.

245.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Runb, H. "Myocardial Hetabollc Vulnerability--Key Problem in
Pluricnusnl 'Coronary' Heart Diseases," CARDIOLOGIA (Basal), Vol 52.
1968. PP 305-317.

Read, J. L., and Hilliaas, J. P. "Lead Hyocarditia: Report of a Case,"
AH. HEART J., Vol 44, 1952, pp 797-802.

Rschenberg. J. K. "Carbon Disulfide Poisoning and Long-Term
Carbon Diaulfide Vascular Syndro-ea," ARCH. GENERBBPATH. GENERBEHYG.,
Vol 15. 1957. pp 483-530.

Rossi, L.; Oppliger, 6.; and Grandjean, E. "Neurovegetative Effects
on Han of Noises," MED. D. LAVORO, Vol 50, 1959, pp 332-337.

Salvini, H. "Lead Colic and Acute Coronary Insufficiency," FOLIA MED.
(Naples), Vol 36, 1953, pp 423-439.

Idea, "Contribution to the Study of Cardiopsthy Associated Hith Lead
Poisoning," Ibid, pp 337-371.

Schuen, H. P. "Interaction of Microwave and Radio Frequency Radiation
With Biological Systems," in "Symposium on Biological Effects and
Health Implications of Microwave Radiation," Richmond, 1969, pp 13-33.

Simborg, D. H. "The Status of Risk Factors and Coronary Heart
Disease." J. CHRON. 018., Vol 22, 1970, pp 515-552.

Steimann, 8.; Jaggi, H.; and Nidmer, L. "Effects of Noise on Human
Blood Pressure," CARDIOLOCIA (Basel), Vol 27, 1955, pp 223-229.

Sterner, 6., and Eisenbud, H. "Epidemiology of Beryllium Intoxication,"
ARCH.INDUSTR. HYG., Vol 4, 1951, pp 123-151.

Stewart, J. R., and Bajardo, L. P. "Radiation Induced Heart Disease.
Clinical and Experimental Aspects," RADIOL. CLIN. N. AHER., Vol 9,
1971, pp 511-531.

Straneo, 6., and Caffi, H. "Contribution to Information about Carbon
Disulfide Poisoning," POLIA MED. (Naples), Vol 44, 1961, pp 917-940.

Straneo, 6., and Seghizz, P. "Effects of Noise on the Peripheral
Vascular System," Ibid, Vol 45, 1962, pp 6, 572-577.

Teleky, L. "Lead Poisoning,“ in "Handbuch der Sozialen Hygiene und
Gesundheitsfursorgc" [Handbook of Social Hygiene and Health Care],
Berlin, 1926, pp 246-290.

Thomas, A. J. "Chronic Pulmonary Heart Disease," BRIT. HEART J., Vol 34,
1972, pp 653-657.

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
266.

247.

268.

249.

250.

251.

252.

253.

256.

255.

256.

257.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

roueeaint. 6.: Novac. J.: and Ceieer-Toueeeint, H. "Reeodynemic
Chensee Ae a Result of Pneunoconioeie of Cool Miners." REV. NED. LIECE.

Toppieh. 8. “Deeonetrotion of Coronary Lesion end Myocardial Pathology
in Land Poieoning," in "Aktuelle Thenen euf den Gebiot der Berufek

Berufekrankheiten" [Current Problems in the Area of Occupational
Dieeeeee], Berlin. 1963. pp 63-69.

Uraki. 2. "tnveetisetion of Long-Tore Sequelae of Eupoeure to the
Atoa Boob in Hiroshiea." in "Investigation of Sequelee of Nuclear

Bxploeione,” Hoecou. 1966, pp 76-75.

Velvert. J., and Dallas, 0. ”Vplyw Circuhliee ne Roevoj Ateroekleroey,"
PRACOV. LRK.. Vol 13. 1961, pp 181-184.

Vidillki, 0. "Chronic Cor Pulaonele," CARDIOLOGIYA, N0 6, 1963,
PP 31-36 a

Vigliani. E. 8. ”Carbon Dieulfide Poieoning in Viecoee Rayon Factories,"
BRIT. Jo Mme “30., V01 11. 195‘. pp 235-2“e

Viglieni, B. C.. and Pernie. B. "Atherosclerotic Encephalopathy
Related to Chronic Carbon Dieulfide Poieoning," in "Berufe Brkrank
Dutch Loeenit,” Leipzig, 1957, pp 57-58.

Vogelean, J. R. "Phyeical Characterietice of Microwave and Other Radio
Frequency Radiation," in "Syepoeiun on Biological Effecte and Realth
Ieplicetione of Microwave Radiation," Rich-0nd. 1969, pp 7-20.

Heist. a. J. "Toxic Parkinaonieu Hith Querelli Syndrome and Cardio-

vaeeular Damage Following Chronic Carbon Dieulfide Poieoning."
ARCH. CEHBRBBPATB.'CEHBRRERYC., Vol 15. 1957. pp 562-552.

Hhitaker, H. "Puleonery Hyperteneion in Conseetive Heart Reilure
Coeplicatins Chronic Lung Dieeaee.” QUART. J. HED., Vol 23, 1956,
pp 57-73.

Hood. P. "Pulmonary Hypertension Hith Special Reference to the Vaeo-
conetrictive Factor," BRIT. HEART J., Vol 20. 1958, pp 557-562.

Nofer. J.; Chojnoveeki. J.; Kaueeka, H.; et a1. ”leyv Zauedouego
Norazenia na Duueiarczek Hegla na Pouetevanic Hiazdzycy,” HID. PRACY.
Vol 12. 1961, pp 101-118.

COPYRIGHT: ledetel'etvo "Hediteina", Hoecov, 1976

10.657

080: 8144/0285 IND

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY