APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOOI00020036-0
I'UR OH‘ILIAL USI’. UNLY

JPRS L/BZQO
27 February 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
FOU0 No. Q53

 

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tines within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GOVERRING WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020035-0

anauoonu-mc can I. I0." No. 3,
ms Wm -

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS,

FOUO No. 453

 

. . «sols. Ousaisacioo Nous sad Address l0

Joint Publications Rosesrch Service

1000 North Globe Road
..a;Arlis§tgn_. Virginia 22201

I1. Spusuia. Oasis-Eden Hans and Address

   

   

As above u

IS. Supple-rots" Nous

‘. aunt“

The serial report contains information primarily from French as
and pertinent specialized journsls on French nuclear, missile,

research and development.

. sy sss‘ lee—rat A-lysis. .- - seliprots

France

Weapons
Aeronautics

Nissi les

Nuclear Technology

175. “(milieu/Opera“ Tuna

m. emulsion/amp mo, m. 19!. 22;

3|» Avaihbiluy State-ass .- Scrum, Class
For Official Use Only. I'M) .
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS. " P 1““- u

M ,
M ”non no!"

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPSZ-00850R000100020035-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/BZS

27 Februar

FRANCE: NUCLEAR. MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
9000 No. 453

Coursurs

Mlle 2 laser Nicolle Guldonce Pod To Be "nu Produced
(Pierre Langereux; AIR 8 COSMOS. 14 Nov 78)

ooooooooo-oooo-ooooo

Nuclear Energy Progrnu Costa, Developent Debated
(Bruno Bethe-as; LB HONDE, 10 Jan 79)

ooooooeoooooooouocooooooo

Inltlol Arlane Launching Delayed Until Nave-her
(LB MNDE, 19 Jan 79)

oooo000000.000...o-oooooooooooooooooooooo

Briefs
linden Hustle Announced
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ATLIS 2 LASER MISSILE GUIDANCE POD TO BE MASS PRODUCED
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 4 Nov 78 p 61
[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The French Air Force is undoubtedly going to be the world's first
able to equip its single-seat aircraft with a pod for fire control and auto-
matic objective designation by laser bean, in this instance the Thomson-
CSF [Thomson-General Radio Company] Atlis 2 pod. As a matter or fact the
air force has just authorized sass production of the Atlis 2 pod in order to
equip the single-seat Jaguar and Mirage 2000. These airplanes will be able
to use the French Atlis 2 pod for launching various laser guided missiles
(utilizing the Ariel laser self-guidance of Thonson-CSP) such as the AS 30
Laser air-ground aissile of AEROSPATIALB [National Industrial Aerospace
Company] (with range of 10 to 12 kilomters) and the lOO-nilliaetar rocket

of Thomson-brandt (with range of l to 6 kilometers) which has already under-
gone 100 test firings fron Mirage 3 and Mirage Pl airplanes. as well as the
HATlA-SAHP boo-kilogram bomb in the project phase (with a laser head de-
rived frontheAriel).

Operational evaluation of the Atlis 2 pad. which took place from October

1976 to January 1978 at the Cazaux Flight Test Center with a Jaguar was high-
ly satisfactory. It proved that an experienced pilot could effectively
operate the pod after only two training flights. The tests nade it possible
to verify the compatibility of the pod with the aircraft and the A3 30 laser
missile; it even showed it was possible to spot objectives through a small
cloud or fog bank. which had not been expected.

The Atlis 2 pod. developed cooperatively by Thonson-CSP of France and Martin
Marietta of the United States. will be nassed produced for the French air
force with Thomson-08F as general contractor. The initial phase of the mass
production comprises an evaluation (in progress)of the second prototype

pod conforning to the production specifications (weight reduced to 125 kilo-
grams. extended range of utilization. interchangeability, self-testing, inter-
face with aodern aircraft. and con-on logistics) as well as a qualification
phase (mechanical tests. thernal tests. and so forth) with another pod, and
fabrication of production tooling.

FOB OPVICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Martin Marietta is participating in thedefinition of the production pod in
order that it be compatible with the American P 16 airplane with a viowtoward
joint French and American production of the Atlia 2. Martin Marietta in par-
llvulnr has with its own Funds financed fabrication of a complete pod for
flight tests aboard the P 16 which took place in July-August 1978 in the
desert area of China lake, California. The compatibility of this pod with
the F 16 was demonstrated: likewise the performance of the system: stability
of laser illumination from the airplane as good as that from the ground. and
precision of guidance to various targets (tanks, mobile guns. and so forth).
The tests also showed the feasibility of changing a missile's objective after
launching and of attacking a group of from three to six tanks in a single
pass (by successive designation of targets to the missiles after the first
acquisition). An anecdote illustrates the performance level of the Atlis
pod: the American pilots were amazed at being able to "track" a rabbit at
distance of 3 kilometers from an F 16 flying ‘t 150-200 meters altitude.

The 0.5. Air Force is very much interested in the Atlis pod. which is the
only one now existing in the United States for single—seat airplanes; the
other existing American pods (Northrop's LATAR and Hestinghouse's Dave
Penny) are designed solely for two-seat aircraft. The Atlis 2 pod is also
of interest to NATO countries which have the P 16. It was recently shown to
the British chief of staff as a pod associated with Sabre light laser guided
air-ground missiles. The Luftwaffe is also interested for equipping its
Phantom and Tornado aircraft. For its part the German Dornier firm is to
study the feasibility of installing the pod upon the Alpha-Jet.

Fig. 1.

 

Pig. 1. A Jaguar armed with AS 30 Laser missiles in associa-
tion with the Atlis 2 pod

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP’PICIAI. USE ONLY

-W—-..—~-~.-........ . ..
F ,. . -. x
' - -

\ - ‘—
\\ .I

-»,o-o~..-....

Fig. 2

 

Fig. 3

Fig. 2. The Atlis 2 laser pod weights 125 kg and is 2.48 meters long
by 0.3 meter in diameter: it consumes 1.600 watts in tracking.
plus the laser; the field of vision is 320 degrees.

Fig. 3. The Ariel self-guidance of the AS 30L missile and loo-milli-
meter rocket.

COPYRIGBT: AIR 6 COSMOS 1978

11706
080: 3100

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR ENERGY PROGRAM COSTS. DEVELOPMENT DEBATBD
Paris LB HONDE in French 10 Jan 79 pp 1. 40
[zrticle by Bruno Dethonas: "The Cost Overrun in the French Nuclear Programﬁ7

Ljeatl Despite some delays, the French nuclear
program is following its course in a normal way.
The two Pessenhein reactors produced more than
ll billion kilowatt-hours in 1978. which is con-
siderably more than the forecasts. Nevertheless,
relations between one of the principal builders
of reactors; the Prematone Company. and Electricite
de France lﬁDEI are especially tense at present.
A dispute has arisen about the cost overrun for
this program. caused by the increased security
measures as well as by the construction delays.
The matter is an important one. since more than
one billion francs is involved.

Hho Is Going to Pay?

Civilian atomic energy seems to be proceeding well. In 1978. the proportion

of electricity of nuclear origin went over the 10-percent threshold for the
first tine. reaching 13 percent of the electricity supplied by EDP. And the
first two reactors of the pressurized-water reactor (PHR) 900-megawstt series,
Fessenheis l and 2. had an average in-service rate of 70 percent and 78 percent.
which‘is far above the SO—percent rate postulated in the coasission's studies
for production of electricity of nuclear origin (PEON) for the first year

of industrial service.

Since five additional reactors are to be coupled to the network in 1979 and
six more in 1980, those responsible for the progras do not lack reasons for
rejoicing--sll the more so in that the construction times are improving.
“Look at Tricastin." declares Hr Hug. director of equipment in EDP; "the
first cubic meter of concrete was poured in December 1976. and the reactor
will be placed in service during 1979. less than 5 years later."

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless, rarely have EDF's relations with Framatome, the builder of the
boilers--the main part of the power plant--been so tense. Is it a mere quarrel
among engineers, as was the ease between EDP and the Atomic Energy Co-ission
in the heyday of graphite-gas? Is it a Hanichaean diatribe by a "good" public
enterprise against a "bad" private company? A gloomy story of dollars and
cents? A little of all three, doubtlessly, but the third one edaitters the
other two.

when Frametome, at the beginning of the 1970's. contracted to build the
boilers for Pessenheim and Bugey, the company did not know what it was in for.
Provided with a Hestinghouse license. it simply want to work to copy the
American "reference" power plant of Beaver Valley.

At that time, there was no question of quality control--instituted by a decree
of 26 February 1971., with retroactive effect on the orders previous to that
date--and the cowany was not at all like what it has happily become today.
Hencefcrth, with the new rules, it takes 68 months to build a boiler--"a
reasonable period, shorter than those in the United States or even "eat Germany,"
it is said in the Creusot-Loire subsidiary.

But as for the parts sent back to the subcontractors to make them conform to
the new norms, and the delays which have resulted from this--Framatome does
not intend to bear these alone. and it has presented its customer EDP with
an additional bill considered a bit excessive by the ministry as well as by
Rue de Honceau.’ Only a few percent of the contract is involved, of course,
but this represents more than one billion francs.

It is therefore an important matter to know who will bear the penalities of
the delay. when the cost revision will be ordered, and who will pay for the
program planning upheaval which has obliged Pramstome to hire more personnel
than had been anticipated.1 Hill it be the boiler builder, 20?, or the
Ministry of Finance in the name of an administration responsible-knowingly--
for a part of this delay?

The dispute is embittered by the private and monopolistic character of the
Creusot-Doire subsidiary. Any rise in prices-~even if justified—is inediately
translated, in the strongly unionized EDP, into: "They're giving money to
Baron Bmpain." Hr Hug, though, pays tribute to Franmtome when he admits that
"neither its construction times nor its prices are equalled anywhere in the
world." But how are certain price add-ens to be presented to the board of
directors, on which the trade unionists sit? If it did not take so long to
present a case against a public establishmmt, it is not certain that a

"fair trial" would not clam everyone down. Some of EDP's managers may dream

of being able to take shelter behind a decision in the courts to determine
"who should pay whom."

l. Framatome enloys 6,200 persons, as against 600 in 1972.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The 1.300-Hegawatt Adventure

Another current angiety for the French nuclear program the passage to the
1.300-negawatt ﬁg] level. The 900-!” reactors are now known; 22 reactors
(perhaps 30) of this type will be installed. The benefit of this standard-
ization should be felt in the costs. construction tines and reliability.

ﬂhy. then. begin a series of 1.30049 reactors, which are unexplored territory?
As was the case with the 900-!!! reactors. Pro-atone has bought a license

from the American group Westinghouse. for a certain nueber of millions; but
Hestinghouse has got so far behind in construction of the first reactor of

this type. in southern Texas. that the first French nodal. located at Paluel
in Seine-Maritime. will be coupled to IP's network long before the American
power plant is placed in service.

fbreover, building a 1.30040! reactor poses a technical problem. It is not
a latter of siwly extrapolating free the 900-“! Iodel. The latter has
three cooling loops. The addition of a fourth loop (which comprises a pump.

a actor. a steam generator and a pressurizer) identical with the other three
would pose no construction problea.

The case is not the sane as regards the 1.3004“. The reactor's calandris

is bigger. and this increased size has an effect on the areas generators

as well as on the design of the control circuits. Therefore one does not
benefit free the standardization of the parts of the 900-!!! reactors. The
truth of this is illustrated by the fact that whereas in 1976 the PBON
couission justified the passage to 1.300 m by an econoaic gain (the so-called
economies of scale). ED? is obliged today to acknowledge that Paluel is--

per kilowatt installed--" at least as expensive" as the 900-!!! reactors.

Hug continues to think that these new reactors will benefit from the "reservoir
of innovations perfected by BDP's researchers in recent years" and that their

greater margin of power will rapidly sake it possible to improve their economic
efficiency by at least 7 percent.

But hasn't EDP quite simply let itself follow its tendency to build bigger and
bigger ternal power plants (125 m between 1951 and 1960. 250 IN between

1956 and 1970, 600 to 700 HI from 1964 to 1973, 900 fro. 1970 to 1978. 1.300
Ill starting in 1978). without taking account of possible "diseconoaies of
scale" which some American researchers now put. nevertheless. at well below
1.000 W? Or has it seen advantages in the face of the "difficulty of finding
nuclear sites and the desire not to multiply then. both for reasons of

safety and for their mainly psychological iqact on the environment," as an
official in the equipment depart-ent. Hr Durr. has written in the REV!!!
TBQNIQUE DB L'ENBRGIB?

whatever the case nay be. the national enterprise. which loves to be aistress
of technology and decision. has launched its engineersathe only equipment
department in the picture besides Fra-toae—into the adventure, even though
several French officials in the nuclear sector consider this bet econoaically
ruinous and industrially uncertain.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Despite the silence of the ecologists. dispersed by a severe setback in the
legislative elections of March 1978, and despite the governnent's deliberate
circusopection and the good health of the present program. nuclear energy-
on one seer-has not finished making people talk about it.

11267
050: 3100

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INITIAL ARIN MUNCHING ELAYSD UNTIL NOVEMBER
Paris 1.8 was in French 19 Jan 79 p 24
[Article by H.A.]

[Text] The first firing of the Ariane European launch vehicle will not take
place before the beginning of Novewer 1979. This decision has just been
made in the European Space Agency by the council in charge of the Ariana
progran. This launching had been scheduled provisionally for 15 June 1979,
but it had already been admitted that it would not take place until the

end of July or in September.

The postponeoent to next Novewer results fro- the explosion that occurred
on 28 Noveinr 1978, at the tins of a test of the third stage of the lunch
vehicle. Although the inquiry has not been coupleted, it seen to be es-
tablished that this accident is due to nalfunctioning of a device on the
testbed and not to the stage itself. whose design is thus not subject to
question. m engine of this third stage, supplied by a mixture of hydro-
gen and liquid oxygen, is designed to operate in a vacuun. Now, testing

is omducted on the ground, therefore at atmospheric pressure. A special
firing device is used that did not operate exactly at the scheduled instant.
'mis caused an explosion of the hydrogen accumulated in the piping systen,
damaging the engine and the facilities somewhat.

A New Engine

he need for installing a new engine and tor resuming the test sequence
has thus led to a postponement of the initial launching and, consequently.
of the next two. The tour flights in the development program are now
scheduled as follows: m1, at the beginning of Noveﬂnr 1979 (instead of
June); L02. at the beginning of Hard: 1980 (instesd of December 1979);

1.03. in J1me 1980 (instead of hay). m4 is still scheduled for October
1980.

Therefore. the delay should not have any repercussion on oouercial launch-
ings of Arlene that should start in April 1981 with the placing in orbit

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Mat scientific satslllts (European x-ray astronomy satalllto). un-
less the Inumatlonal Intelsat Communion Organization requests priorlty
for launching an Intelsat-S satcllltsmhlchwould than nplacc moat.

l0.042
GO: 3100

9

FOR OFFICIAL. USE OSLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BRIEFS

HADES MISSILE Ammu'lhe French general etaff plene to replace the
Pluton Iiuile with ranjet-powered nieailee. rather than powder-powered
once, so aa to increaee their accuracy. Their range will be lore than
200 kiloaetere, which will enable the nuclear veepon'a firing reap to
be set up outside the coabet zone. 'lhie euperniuile will probably

be called the "linden" after the Greek god of the netherworld. [Text]
[Paria PARIS HATCH in French 9 Feb 79 p 65]

080: 3100 m

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY