APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020036-9

I I
SOVIET HRH? 31R FORCE COHHBND 6ND STRFF
27 W 1979 IN THE GRERT PﬁTRIOTIC "RR 1941-1943 1 OF 3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020036-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8291
27 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 6/79)

SOVIET ARMY AIR FORCE COMMAND AND STAFF

IN THE GREAT PATRIOTIC HAR 19111-1945

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100020036-9
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items~axe as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT MUS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
01" THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAI. USE ONLY.
3. RONPIQM.‘ Acton-on No.

' "as l./ 9291

BIBLIOGRAPNIC DATA
9!!! 1’

 
   

   

open an

27 Febma 1979

    
  

  

Q. I‘m-Mann; annual!” Nun and “Jun
Joint Publication. luau-ch Sonic.

1000 North Glob. Rood
Arlington. Virginia 2220l

12. mum. nap-mama Nun nod Mduu I: guess low a Pound

 
   
   

A: above

l5. \uppleumuy Now:

KOHANDOVANIYB I SHTAB VVS SOVETSKOY ARHII V VBLIKOY 0TBCRESTVENNOY VOYNE 1961-190
M. Atmm u

The report contains intonation on the Soviet military and civil defense

establishments. leadership, doctrine. policy. planning. political affairs.
organization. and equipment.

7. my rIIJI “J aunt-c holy-in. o. butane“

USSR

Military Organizations
Military Facilities
Military Personnel

In. M. nulwl\l(lp- min-dd 1'".-
I

   

|]¢. l INA“ In LIA-luv]! 15c

 

   

II. \\ Jlldhl'lI' Nance-u

Fun UFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
(:upima Available From JPRS

1L ‘0. oi Fun

253

m

""'" " "" " ' 'rms roan mu 3: nanoouceo ""°"‘*°‘ "”"'"
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
JPRS L/

27 Feb:

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS

(9000 6/79)
SOVIET ARMY AIR FORcE Comma AND STAFF

IN THE GREAT PATRIOTIC HAR Bill-1945

Moscow ROMANDOVANIYE I SH'I‘AB WS SOVBTSKOY ARMII V VE
OTBCHBSTVENNOY VOYNB 1941-1945 99 in Russian 1978 Big
press 5 Jul 77 pp 1-281

[Book by M.N. Kozhevnikov, Izdetei'etvo Nauka, 70,000

CONTENTS

Annotation

Introduction

Chapter I. At the Eve of the Great Patriotic Her

Chapter II. Soviet Arty Air Force Col-and and Staff at the
gaming of the war and in the Suuer-Fali Operations of

Chapter III. Further Reinforcement of the Soviet Army Air
Force

Chapter IV. The Fight for Strategic Air Superiority in Spring
and Sun-her 1963

Chapter V. Soviet Arty Air Force Col-end and Staff in the
Battle of Kurak

Chapter VI. The Soviet Army Air Force in Operations of the
Concluding Period of the "or .

Chapter VII. In the Far Beet

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/07J08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020036-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
- Air Force Personnel of the Grout Potriotic "or
Conclusion

Appondix. Soviet Army Air Force Eucutivee in the Grout
Patriotic "or. 19101-1965

- W

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100020030-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotation

This book is devoted to the activities of the contend and staff of the
Soviet Arey Air Force and representatives of the Hq Sllc (Headquarters.
Supra-a High Co-and) ut the fronts of the Great Patriotic Her. The
nctivities of the co-and and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force, of
any generals and officers of the central adninietration, of strategic
aviation. of the air ethics, of frontal aviation. and of many combined
units and units are denonatrnted on the background of the pest war'e
greatest operations. All actions of the air force comand and staff are
examined in close association with the activities of the General Staff.

Introduction

The Great Patriotic Hnr of the Soviet Union against fascist Germany and
its allies in Europe and Asia was the greatest armed collision between
socialise and the attnclt forces of inerialisn. the hardest and crueleat
of all were ever survived by our Iotherland. Under the guidance of the
Comnist Party the Soviet people and their armed forces annihilated
Hitler's Ger-any and its satellites, defended the liberty and independ-
ence of the socialist fatherland, cospleted their great mission of lib-
eration, and honorably cowleted their international duty. "The victory
won in the engagements of the Great Patriotic war," L. I. Brezhnev noted.
"was a victory of our heroic working class. the kolkhoz peasantry, and
our intelligentsia. a victory of all the nultinational Soviet people.

This was a victory of the glorious Soviet Arny. an ar-y created by the
revolution. nurtured by the party. and inseparable from the people. This
was a vlctory of Soviet Iilitary science, of the cadet proficiency of all
arm and services. of the art of Soviet troop co-aandera with their origins
anong the col-on people."

The Soviet Air Force played a significant role in the defeat of fascist
German troops. Interacting closely with ground troops and the navy, it
participated nest actively in all frontal and all of the largest strategic
operations of the groups of fronts. and it conducted independent air

*Breahnev. L. 1.. I'0 vneshney politika KPSS i Sovetskogo goeudarstva,

Rechi i stet'i" (The Foreign Policy of the CPSU and the Soviet State.
Speeches and Articles). Hosea. 1975, pp 834-835.
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations. Concentration and massed action of the air force on the most
important axes increased the scope and decisiveness of operations, being
one of the most important factors inarting a maneuverable nature to the
war. In a long and stubborn fight, by sumer 19’13 the Soviet Air Force
achieved strategic sir suprenacy in all of the nest iwortant sectors,
thus creating favorable conditions for the ground troops to conduct major
offensive operations. By its actions aviation cleared the way for infan-
try and tanks, assisted than in penetrating defenses nore quickly and
pursuing the enemy swiftly, encircling and annihilating his groupings,
crossing rivers, and seizing and holding important beachhssds, and it
failed the plans and intentions of the Fascist German Conand.

The nissions of the Soviet Aray Air Force comnder end his staff were to
organize the fight for strategic sir superiority, achieve interaction
among the branches of aviation (frontal, long-range bomber, air defense
fighter aviation), coordinate their efforts in strategic operations con-
ducted by groups of fronts and in independent air operations, direct
nansgeaent of the cowat activities of long-range bonber aviation (DEA)
at the beginning of the war, generalization of the air force's combat
experience, and development of proposals concerning its operational
application. The air force co-end was responsible for training air
reserves, for supplying aircraft and squipnent to units and formations,
for developing the technical specifications on new types of airplanes

and armament, for writing airfield construction and reconstruction plans,
and for training and retraining aircrews and technicians. Its functions
included generalizing the best experience in application of different air
force eras and services in conbat and operations, and introducing it into
the units and formations.

Air liaison officers with the liq sac coordinated the actions of frontal
aviation in all strategic operations. These officers were senior avia-
tion chiefs in charge of the air force—the cor-sander, the Military
Council member, and the deputy comander of the Soviet Army Air Force.
Initially they were given the sponsibility of organizing massed air
attacks in behalf of just one iront. Beginning with 19102 the air
liaison officers with the liq sac coordinated the efforts of aviation in
several fronts with the assistance of DBA (ADD)* forces. Jointly with
frontal consenders and frontal air force co-enders, liq representatives
wrote the operation plans, nonitored execution of the missions of avia-
tion, handled its efforts in the course of an operation, distributed air
reserves arriving at the front, and provided air-technical and airfield
support to air forces participating in the given operation. Coordinating
the actions of air forces in from one to three fronts in his position as
Ilq sac liaison officer, the air force couander maintained constant

operational co—unication with the General Staff and Air force head-
quarters, he was always aware of events occurring in all other operating
*In March 1962 long-range bomber aviation was renamed strategic (long-
rangel aviation (ADD).

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fronts. and he issued the necessary instructions through his operational
group or through Air Force Headquarters.

The objective of the author of this work is to demonstrate the activities
or the Soviet Army Air Force Command, the work of the staff, and the con-
tribution made by liaison officers with the Supreme high Command Head-

quarters to coordinating the actions of the aviation of several fronts
and strategic aviation.

This chronologically organized work embraces the period from September
1939 to September 1945-.that is, from the beginning of World War II to
the Soviet Army's victory in the Far East--defeat of the Kwantung Army
and total surrender of imperialist Japan. The book describes the combat
activities of western capitalist air forces preceding fascist Gerunnr's
attack on the USSR, and it examines the work of the air force common

and staff at the eve and in the initial period of the Great Patriotic Her,
in operations of the summer-fall campaign of 19b1, in the great battles
of Moscow, Stalingrad. the Northern Caucasus, and Kursk, and in the con-
cluding offensive operations of the Great Patriotic Var of 1961—1965.

The work describes the structure of the air force staff, its principal
directorates and sections, the directions of their activities. the mutual
relationships of the air force command and the staff with the General
Staff and with the com-Ind and staff of the fronts and air arnies, and
the role and place of the air force in defeat of fascist Germany and
militarist Japan by the Soviet Armed Forces.

In writing this book the author made use of archival and published mate-
rials, his own experience as a participant of the described events. and
numerous discussions held during and after the war with Chief Marshal of
Aviation A. A. Novikov, who headed the Soviet Air Force during the Great
Patriotic Her. his deputy General A. V. Nikitin, Air Force Military Coun-
cil members Generals P. S. Stepsnov and N. S. Shisanov. and many war
veterans.

The author expresses his sincere gratefulness to Generals V. I. Senenchikov
and c. A. Pshenyanik, and Colonels Yu. V. Plotnikov. V. Ye. Sokolov, V. S.

Shunikhin, F. P. Shesterin, N. Ye. Platonov. and N. N. Azovtsev for their
kind advice.

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER 1. AT THE EVE OF THE GREAT PATRIOTIC UAR
The Actions of Capitalist Air Forces in the Heat

0n 1 Septedaer 1939 Hitler's Germany attacked Poland. At OMS hours
fascist Ger-an aviation Iade aassed attacks against the airfields, trans-
portation junctions. and economic and administrative centers of Poland.
The Hehrascht's ground forces crossed the border and invaded Polish
territory from the north out of Eastern Prussia, froa the west out of
East Germany, and from the south out of Slovakia. world "or II began.

The forces of the sides were rather unequal on the ground and in the air.
llitler's Gemny launched about 2,000 warplanes against Poland (1.000-
l,100 bonbers. 600-650 fighters, and 200-250 reconnaissance airplanes).
The Polish Air Force had only 826 warplanes. most of which were obsolete.1

Polish air defenses were also very weak, having a strength of only about
600 nadiun and small caliber sntisircraft guns. Nevertheless Polish
pilots courageously entered into battle with enemy aviation. knocking
down lb German airplanes on the first day and 130 in subsequent actions.2
Being nunerically and qualitatively superior to Polish aviation, the
German Air Force easily achieved air superiority and pronoted advance

of the German ground troops.

The governnents of England and France. which had signed treaties with
Poland. were forced to declare war on Germany. 0n 3 September at 1100
hours the government of England and. 6 hours later, the government of
France declared war on Garlany. Following England, the British Cot-on-
wealth declared war on Geruny. The USA and South European countries
declared their neutrality. England and France declared war on Hitler's
Germany not to help Poland but in the interests of their own far-reaching
plans. The isperialist circles of England and France held to the hope
that after seizing Poland Germany would go to war against the Soviet
Union. Capitalizing on the connivancee of England and France the fascist
German troops swiftly defeated the Polish Armed Forces. and in the first

days of October 1939 they nopped up the last centers of resistance of
regular Polish units. The Hehrmacht's Polish canpaign cane to an end.

The tremendous combat capabilities of aviation and tank troops were

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

revealed in the German-Polish war. Massed use of aviation and wchanized
troops in narrow sectors rude it possible to quickly collapse enemy
defenses throughout their entire depth. commit nobile foraations to the
breakthrough, and exploit rhe breakthrough swiftly. The increased sig-
nificance of air superiority to actions of the ground troops made itself
obvious.

After the defeat of Poland fascist Germany began concentrating troops and
aviation on its western borders with the objective of attacking the armies
of the Anglo-French alliance. In the period from 3 September 1939 to

9 April 1910 neither side engaged in active combat operations. During
this time the governnents of England and France incited fascist Geruny
to war against the USSR. This explains the slow deployment of Anglo-
French troops and the passiveness of their actions on the ground and in
the air. English aviation conducted air reconnaissance on the ports and
roadsteads of the German Navy, while French aviation scouted groupings of
German troops deployed along the French border. Fascist German aviation
conducted sir reconnaissance above northern France, England. Belgium, and
the Netherlands. German boﬁers were active only sporadically against
troops and industrial facilities. On 9 April 1950 fascist Germany occu-
pied Denmsrk and made a surprise attack on Norway without a declaration of
war. In its attack on Non-ray Germany co-itted, in addition to ground
formations. up to 1,300 warplanes (1,000 bombers and 300 fighters).3 The
Norwegian Air Force possessed only 180 obsolete airplanes.“ The Norwegian
capital of Oslo was captured by a German airborne assault party. landed
right at Oslo Airport and consisting of 1.500 enlisted men and officers
and armed with automatic rifles. machineguns, and light guns. Abandoned
by their allies (French units had abandoned their positions on 5 June.
being followed 2 days later by the English). the Norwegian troops were
forced to surrender on 10 June 1960.

The capture of Denmark and Norway by Nitler's troops improved Germany's
strategic position. placing all countries of Northern Europe under its
control. The Nestern powers were unable to organize and conduct active
cou-termessures against fascist aggression in Norway. English aviation
was found to be incapable of preventing the landing of fascist German
troops in Norway. supporting and covering the actions of its own and
Norwegian troops. or providing air cover to Norwegian shipping. Enjoying
air supremacy. German aviation provided effective support to German
ground troops and once again demonstrated the growing significance of
initial surprise massed strikes on troops, sirfields, and ports.

Fascist Germany's aggression against Denmark and Norway did not interrupt
the Hehrmacht’s preparations for a Western offensive with the objective
of defeating Belgian, Dutch, and Anglo-French troops. The plans of the
German Comand foresaw a thrust by a strong grouping of ground trwps
into the center of the disposition of allied armies. fracture of the
allied front, isolation of the northern enemy grouping at the English
Channel, and its annihilation. The core of the strike grouping was to

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

consist of tank and motorised for-nations, the actions of which were to
be supported by major forces in the air. In accordance with the plan
three army groups consisting of eight armies were deployed (136 divisions
in all, including 10 tank and 7 notarized divisions), the actions of
which were to be supported by two German air fleets (the 2d and the 3d)
with a strength of 3,821. warplanes.5

The command of the 2d and 3d air fleets was given the missions of achiev-
ing air superiority, disorganizing enemy troop comand and control, and
providing direct support to advancing troops. Twenty minutes prior to
the offensive of the ground troops, l,200—l,l000 airplanes were to strike
Allied a'irfielde, headquarters, cos-mication centers, and transportation
junctions in the combat zone in the Netherlands, Belgium, and France. At
the beginning of the offensive all of the efforts of aviation were

directed at supporting the ground troops, mainly the tank formations.

France and England had NO divisions on the Northeastern Front. In this
area the French possessed 2,789 tanks (of these, 2,285 were modern) and
11,200 guns with calibera of 75 Ill and above. The British Expeditionary
Forces possessed 310 tanks and about 1,350 field guns. The French Air
Force had 1,648 warplanes in its first line, to include 966 fighters and
219 bombers. In May 1960 British aviation possessed 1,837 airplanes in
the first line, to include more than 800 fighters and Slob bombers. About
500 English airplanes were based on French airfields. The Belgian Air
Force possessed 186 airplanes, while the Dutch Air Force had 120.6

The German offensive caught Allied troops and aviation unawares. It began
with an air attack against airfields, col-and posts, military supply
depots, and the most inortant war industry facilities of the Netherlands,
Belgium. and France. In term of design and methods of action, the actions
of the Luftwaffe differed in no way from its actions during the invasion
of Poland. At 0330 hours on 10 Hay 1950 a powerful strike was made from
the air against about 100 airfields in the Netherlands, Belgium, and
northern France to a depth of up to (000 km. The first groups of German
parstroopers were dropped in the rear of Dutch and Belgian troops at

0530 hours. At 0535 hours the Hehrmacht's ground troops began their
invasion of the Netherlands, Belgiu, and Luxembourg. The massed sur-
prise attack on the sir-fields by German aviation played a major role in
seizure of the initiative and air superiority. Working on its mission

to attain air superiority in the Heat, owing to its agents and air recon-
naissance the main command of fascist Germany possessed exhaustive data
on the composition, basing, and the state of readiness of the enemy's
aviation and air defense forces. The sudden massed raids on the air-
fields by German aviation inflicted great losses in airplanes and person-
nel on the air forces of the Netherlands, Belgium, and France. During
the advance of the ground troops fascist German aviation easily attained
stratetic air supremacy on all of the most important axes. French and
English aviation did not render adequate opposition to the air attack

of the Luftwaffe.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Dutch Armed Forces were almost totally inactive. The Belgian Army
surrendered on 28 May. The attempts of the French Supreme Command to
organize active countermeasures against the enemy by ground troops were
not graced with success. Fascist Italy entered the war against England
and France on 10 June. The French Navy did not engage in active opera-
tions at sea, and prior to 20 June 1940 it did not suffer large losses.
Fetain's French government hastened in its decision to surrender, signing
the surrender document at l832 hours on 22 June 1960. On the day of
France's surrender English aviation based at French airfieids returned to
its own airfields in England. On 26 June 1940 the French Government
signed a truce with Italy, after which all military actions by the French

Armed Forces were halted. The Anglo-French Alliance once again suffered
disaster.

what were the most typical features of the actions of fascist Germany's
air force? They were: Concentration of large air forces for powerful
preemptive strikes against the principal airbases with the objective of
seizing the initiative in the air; broad use of transport aviation to
drop numerous sabotage groups of paratroopers in the Netherlands, Belgius,
and northern France; redirection of the air force's efforts following
suppression of enemy aviation to support and cover advancing tank and
motorized troops, together with concurrent intensified air reconnaissance.

Following France's surrender Hitler's leadership sought ways, including
military, for hastening the signing of a compromise peace with England,
to Germany's advantage, and turning to the East. "Our principal atten—
tion is toward the East.... He will probably have to demonstrate our
force against England once again before it halts its struggle and frees
our hands for the East."7

Hitler hoped that English ruling circles, considering the swift defeat
of France, would be ready for peace talks with Germany and for sizable
concessions. But although the reactionary ruling circles of England
were prepared to negotiate with fascist Germany, they could not take
this step due to the antifascist mood of the broad masses, fearing uni-
versal embarrassment. Without waiting for peace proposals, the fascist
command decided to act on England with its air force. Hitler's command
assigned the air offensive to the 2d and 3d air fleets, which had a
strength of l,b80 bombers, 760 single-engine fighters, 220 two-engine
fighters, and 140 reconnaissance airplanes.8

The 2-month breathing spell enjoyed by England following Dunkirk (the
defeat and evacuation of Allied troops from the Dunkirk beachhcad-from
28 May to 3 June 1950) permitted the British Command to strengthen its
air force. Hhile on 4 June 1940 English fighter aviation consisted of
446 combat ready fighters, on ll August the number already reached 70%.
The reserve fleet of the RAF grew in size. The Air Defense Command had
at its disposal about 2.000 antisircraft guns of various calibers.9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Germany also augmented its air power. Beginning in July 19b0 the Luftwaffe
began massed raids on England. The raids were performed in daytime by
large groups of bombers accompanied by fighters. Airfields, ports,
petroleum dumps. supply depots, plants. marine shipping, and city resi~
deutiai districts were struck. English fighters offered stubborn
resistance. Combat was continuous in the air. By 18 August l9h0 fascist
German aviation lost 375 airplanes, while English aviation lost 213.
Beginning with 5 September 1960 ﬂitler's command concentrated all air
strikes on London. The city was subjected to strikes almost every night
from 2100 to 0600. As an example, on the night of 15 September 1960
London was subjected to a massed raid by 1,000 airplanes. Repelling this
air raid. English fighters and antisircraft artillery knocked down 60
German airplanes, losing 26.10 Periodic night air raids on English cities
continued until the second half of february. The Luftwaffe performed its
final mass raids on London in the second half of April and the beginning
of May 1961. After this the main forces of the Luftwaffe began to be
transferred East. German aviation was unable to inflict considerable harm
on British industry. The hope of the German Command 1) break English
resistance through the actions of its air force turned out to be false.
During the raids, just from July to November l9b0 fascist German aviation
lost 1,733 airplanes while the m lost 915.11

The combat activities of the Luftwaffe were not sufficiently purposeful;
for a long time it subjected too large a number of diverse facilities to
periodic attacks, and damage to or annihilation of these facilities did

not have a significant influence on the output of war industry.

Nor did English bosbers operate purposefully. Strikes were made against
German objectives by small forces. mainly at night and at rather long
intervals. Such bombing operations could not do serious harm to the

economy of fascist Germany or hinder its preparations for an attack on
the USSR.

The italians. who had seized Albania in 1939, invaded Greece in October
1960, but they were unable to defeat the Grecian Army. At the beginning
of April 1961 fascist Germany attacked Yugoslavia and occupied its terri-
tories. Striking airfields and cities with its bombers, in April 1941
Germany occupied Greece with tank and motorized formations of the ground
troops.

Having occupied Yugoslavia and Greece. in May 1941 the Germans undertook

an airborne assault operation to seize the island of Crete. Encountering
no active countermeasures on the part of England and the USA, the fascist
commanders continued their preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union.

The greater combat capabilities of the air force and its great role in
support of the missions of the ground troops revealed themselves clearly

in the military activities in the West. The Soviet Command studied the
actions of capitalist aviation in Western Europe. The Communist Party

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Soviet Government arrived at specific conclusions and took efficient
steps to strengthen the air force.

1he Luftwaffe Prior to the Attack on the Soviet Union

By the moment of the attack on the Soviet Union the Luftwaffe had grown
quantitatively and qualitatively in conpsrison with the situation in fall
1939. In June 1951 the Luftwaffe had s strength of 10,000 warplanes, to
include reserve airplanes and trainers, Italy had 2,416, Finland had 307,
Romania had 699, ﬂungary had 269. and the total strength of states in the
fascist bloc was 13,690 sirplanes.12 Organizationally the Luftwaffe was
subdivided into the air forces of the Main Command (sir fleets), troop
aviation (army and corps), and naval air forces. The composition of the
air force included air defense forces and airborne assault troops. The
air force rear was organizationally separate from the flying units.
Commander in Chief Reichsmarschall H. Goering commanded the Luftwaffe,
and General (0. Yeshounek) was chief of general staff of the Luftwaffe.

The air fleet was the highest major air formation of the air force. In
all by June 1941 there were five sir fleets. Each of them had a strength
from 800 to 1,600 warplanes The air fleet consisted of air corps (one
or two). an antinircrnft corps, and a separate air squadron. The air
corps was the highest tactical formation. and it usually included two or
three bomber squadrons. one or two fighter squadrons, from one to three
reconnaissance groups. and one or two airlift groups. The air squadron,
the principal tactical air formation, contained two or three air groups.
The air group had a strength of 39-67 airplanes, including the airplanes
of reserve and organic subunits. Fascist German aviation was araed with
airplanes of fully up-to-date design with relatively high tactical-
technical data, as can be seen from Table 1.

Preparing for its attack on the Soviet Union, the German leadership built
and reequipped airfields at an accelerated pace. Prom summer l9h0 to May
l9bl more than 250 airfields and 160 landing strips were erected on German
territory. During this time 100 airfields and 50 landing strips were
built and restored on Polish territory. Airfields were built in Romania
and Hungary. The well developed airfield net permitted dispersed basing
and freedom of maneuver in all directions to the Luftwaffe. The strate-
gic plan for the war against the USSR (Operation Barbarossa) foresaw a
surprise attack consisting of several powerful strikes by large air forces
and tank and motorized troops with the objective of isolating, encircling,
and annihilating the main forces of the Soviet Army in the western Soviet
Union, followed by a swift advance deep into the country to a line extend-
ing from Arkhangel'sk to Astrakhan'. The German Command allocated 190
divisions including 19 tank and lb motorized divisions to Operation
Barbarossa; these forces also included the armed forces of German allies.
The fascist German grouping had a strength of 5.5 million men, about

6,300 tanks, more than 47,000 guns and aortars, 6,980 warplanes, and 192
warships. Four out of the five air fleets were targeted for th: USSR.

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020036-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

d F A; CCC C CFF “VB 0

 

 

a.“ n
o.oN N con.ou ooN.N cum N N oo~.o
o.N N ooo.~
o.ON N on<.o~ on 5: ohm N N non.N
cam.N o.n N
on an o.nN N oom.~ oNo.N ooe N N onN.e
o.N n
o.n~ N
: o.nN N ooo.o ooc.N com «um N coo.»
oooN «.5 o
looon o.oN N cow.» coo.N mm» m N oon.~N
coon a.~ a
noooa o.na N coo.o on..N odm «um N ooN.N
.IJmMI as :Immmull Ilfuouua as Unumm n¢0dwmﬂ ”madam" umll

.‘uon .uon and «as» .wadauoo .owuau .voono .nbuu an .02 .uano:
anon .xNN-u nocanuua Nauauuuum Nuauoz aaawxax uuooxua
mo .02

 

 

uncalau<

HUQﬂh OUOCNIJU U ﬂHh

«Nov unuocoo

anon

anon

anon

onan
«nan
onod

n¢N_|AmAM~
"museum

A=uuaasun
unconozzv
«um canto:
9.3.35.
Iuoaaox=v
Hum media:
“3353
Con-.2. 3%
o-uu‘xgﬁcuv
To 3-..

A:k.ﬂegoov
NIH thlon
n=uoxa«o::v
on: audio:
n:nuoxnsh:v

q< main

"chanson

.dmNm dmmHNMNo

nonvoun
no use»

 

Ho «Naa

«ncou Museum no a. wouwuuuu< Hanuunuum m.>aunhoo mo and: nuuuczoouunaouuunu .n cunnh

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00850R000100020030-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 29 Hay 1961 the operational formations of the Luftwaffe and troop avia-
tion intended for action against the Soviet Union consisted of 306 combat
squadrons. to include 127 boaber and 89 fighter squadrons. The reserve
contained about 600 airplanes.13 Bombers made up the bulk of the Luft-
waffe. They contributed 57.8 percent to the entire airplane fleet. The
proportions were 31.2 percent for fighters and 11 percent for reconnais-
sance airplanes. Hitler's strategists believed that as had been the case
in Poland and France. they would be able to annihilate Soviet aviation
within the first days of the war with bomber strikes on sirfields. This
is why they turned a great deal of attention to developing bomber aviation.

The main thrusts were to be made against Leningrad. Moscow. and Kiev.

The forces and equipment of three strategic groups were deployed on these
axes. Aray Group North on the Leningrad axis. consisting of 29 divisions.
was to destroy Soviet troops in the Baltic states and capture Leningrad
and Kronshtadt. The army group was supported from the air by the lat Air
Fleet. which had a strength of 760 airplanes.

In central Poland the strongest troop grouping--Army Group Center con-
sisting of 50 divisions and 2 brigades-prepared for the offensive. with
the support of the 2d Air Fleet (1.670 airplanes) it was to fracture the
strategic defensive front. encircle and annihilate Soviet Army troops in
Belorussia. and exploit the offensive in the direction of Moscow.

Army Group South consisting of three German and two Romanian armies. a
tank group. and a Hungarian aobile corps. S7 divisions and 13 brigades
in all. had the mission of annihilating Soviet troops in the Right-Bank
Ukraine, reaching the Dniapr. and developing the offensive eastward with
the support of the 6th Air Fleet and Roeanian aviation (1.600 airplanes).

The German Norway Army and two Finnish armies-~21 divisions and 3 brigades
in all-~were deployed on Norwegian territory and in Finland. With the
support of the Sth Air Fleet and the Finnish Air Force (5&7 airplanes in
all). these forces were to capture Murmansk and Polyarnyy and assist Army
Group North in capturing Leningrad. The main command of the ground troops
had 26 divisions in reserve.

Table 2. Number of Harplanes Possessed by Countries of the Fascist
Hilitsrist Bloc That Here To Participate in the Attack
Against the USSR.

Germany Italy Finland Romania Hungary Total
about 70“ 307 623 68 4.980
b.000

 

*"Isteria vtoroy eirovoy voyny 1939-1945." Vol 3. pp 328. 338.
“At the end of June 1961 ltaly sent 70 warplanes against the USSR as an
"expeditionary" corps.

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The German Command posed the following missions to the Luftwaffe: Attain-
ing airusupsriority and paralyzing the actions of Soviet aviation; dis-
rupting;the work of the lines of communication and preventing the reserves
from maneuvering; supporting the swift advance of ground troops.

Thus fascist Germany made comprehensive preparations for war against the
Soviet Union, and it possessed sizable armed forces. including an air
force outfitted with all forms of combat equipment.

The Status of the Soviet Air Force at the Eve of the Her

The Communist Party and Soviet Government were aware that an armed colli-
sion with the forces of imperialism could occur, and in the years of peace-
ful socialist construction they took the necessary steps to strengthen the
country's defense capabilities. Much attention was devoted to strengthen-
ing and developing the Soviet Air Force. In September 1939 the Politburo
of the CC VKP(b) [Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party (of
Bolshevika)] adopted Chi decree ”0n Reconstruction of Existing Airplane
Plants and Construction of New Plants." The plan was to build 9 new
plants and reconstruct 9 old plants in l9b0-l9bl. By as early as 1940

the Soviet Union's aircraft plants were producing 19 percent more war-
planes than in 1939.1“15

In January 1960 the Politburo of the CC VKP(b) discussed the work of the
People's Commissariat of Aviation Industry. CC VKP(b) member A. I.
Shakhurin was appointed people's commissar of aviation industry. and
aircraft designer A. S. Yakovlev was appointed his assistant for experi-
mental construction. By the end of 1950 significant organizational
changes had been made in aviation industry. Independent designer teams
led by V. N. Pctlyakov. A. A. Arkhangel'skiy, P. 0. Sukhoy, and V. H.
Hyasishchev were separated from the experimental design office headed by
A. N. Tupolev. New aircraft design offices were created with A. I.
Hikoyan. H. I. Gursvich. S. A. Lavochhin. N. I. Gudkov, and V. P. Gorbunov

in charge. Existing engine design offices were expanded, and new ones
were established.

The technical flight characteristics of the new Soviet warplanes satis-
fied modern requirements. For example, the MIG-3's combat characteristics
were superior to those of English. American, and German fighters of the
some class. The Pe-Z was better than German bombers of the same class.
the 1-87 and the J-88. Capitalist air forces did not possess ground
attack airplanes of the [1-2 class. In 1939 and 1960 the Soviet Union
produced more airplanes than Germany. but German aircraft industry was
producing new types of airplanes, while our aircraft industry was only
just beginning to assimilate production of new airplanes. Owing to this
the western frontier military districts still had many obsolete airplanes
as of 22 June 1961; as an example they possessed 1,762 1-16 fighters and
1.559 1-153 fighters.“

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Number of New Types of Airplanes Produced by Aircraft Industry
at the Beginning of the Great Patriotic Her.

Type of airplane 19 0 961 rior to 22 June 135;;
YeK-l 66 335 399
MIG-3 20 1,239 1.309
Lacs-3 -- 322 322
Pe-2 2 658 660
11-2 - 269 269

Total 86 2.653 2.739

*racasa. [Central State Archives of the Soviet Army], f. 130. op. 25.
d. 199. 11. 6-5.

On 25 February 1961 the CC VKP(b) and the USSR SNK [Council of People's
Conmdssars] adopted a special decree "0n Reorganization of the Red Army
Air force" approving the plan proposed by the People's Commiassriat of
Defense (or development of the air force. The plans called for increas-
ing the strength of aviation in frontier military districts, improving
the training of aviation personnel. reorganizing the air force rear. and
implementing far-reaching measures to reconstruct and expand the airfield
net so that it could support the basing and combat use of new types of
airplanes. By as early as spring 1961, in comparison with the beginning
of 1939 the number of airplanes in the air force sore than doubled, and
the number of air regiments increased by 80 percent.17 Formation of 106
new air regiments began in the airports at the start of 1961; of these,
only 19 were formed by the beginning of the war, to include 13 long-range
bomber regiments.18

Rerquipping the air force and improving its organization, the Communist
Party did a great deal of work to develop high moral-combat qualities in
the personnel. Sixty percent of the personnel in the air force were
coasmnists and Komsomol ncsbera who played a leading role in combat and
political training and in the fight for higher battleworthiness and
combat readiness of their air units and formations.19

The battleworthinees and combat readiness of air units and formations and
the effectiveness with which coabet equipment was employed were directly
dependent on the morale. skills, and creative initiative of the airmen.
The high morale of Soviet pilots. being one of the nest important factors
of the air force's power. was a product of our socialist social and state
structure. the sociopolitical and ideological unity of the Soviet people,
and the tremendous anount of work done by the Comnuniat Party in ideologi-
cal theory. organization. and agitation and propaganda.

Much was also done to train personnel. A new principle was adopted in
December 1960 for selecting cadets for air force schools: Candidates were
selected from routine drafts of young people for military service. A decree

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
thnical Specifications of the Princlpel Types of Airplanes 1n the Soviet Art

 

 

 

 

Summer 1961
Genera1 data Flight chaggcterlsgtci Axln
A1:-
p1ane Maxi- Prac- Land-
lt of takeoff nun tieal in; Hachine- (
:ept- weight, No. of speed, Range, ce111n3, speed, guns and h
:e kg engines Crew kn/ht kn meters km 3395 _
[935 6.500 2 3 665 1,000 9.000 130 6
[961 7,700 2 3 560 1.100 9,000 165 6
L937 8,000 2 3 660 2,700 6.960 125 3
l931 19,200 6 8 288 6,000 6.960 116 8
L960 27,000 6 o 663 6,700 10,300 116 6
3 1
2 2
L961 5,360 1 1 612 510 7,500 160 2 2
2
8 PC
.935 1.650 1 1 367 770 9,000 100 6
.936 1,878 1 1 662 625 10,800 112 6
.938 1,858 1 1 627 690 10.700 105 6
961 2.917 1 1 572 700 10,500 160 1 2
2
961 3.380 1 1 569 556 9.600 160 1 2
1 1
2
960 3,299 1 1 620 1,000 12,000 160 1 1
2
931 3,630 1 2 230 600 6.600 105 3
"m“: "tame”: “safer.asexeszeva23232-i922." Vol 3. v m:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the CC VKP(b) and the USSR SNK dated 25 February 1961 established a new
system for training pilots. aircraft engineers. and technicians. Three
types of military aviation schools offering compressed training courses
were introduced: Basic training schools offering a 4-month course in
peacetime and a 3-month course in wartime; military I let schools with a
9-month training course in peacetime and a 6-month ct..se in wartime;
aviation schools with a peacetime training course of 2 years and a war-
time training course of 1 year.

Steps were taken to expand the training of aviation commanders with a
higher military education. For many years this training was conducted

only at the Air Force Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovakiy and at the Aviation
Department of the Military Academy imeni M. V. Prunes. In March 1960 the
following schools were created by order of the USSR people‘s commisaar

of defense at the Air Force Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy (chief--
Division Commander z. M. Pomerantsev. military commisser--Brigade Commissar
M. l. Izotov): Columnd, operational, correspondence command. navigator.
and advanced training courses for air force commanders; these schools were
reorganized into an independent academy which later came to be called the
Red Army Air Force Military Academy of Command and Navigator Personnel.

The last graduating class of the command school at the Air Force Academy
lneni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy in l9b0 included P. I. Ivashutin, S. N. Grechko.

s. A. Pestov. V. A. Novikov, A. I. Podol'skiy. N. N. Ostroumov, G. A.
Pahenyanik. 6. K. Prussakev. A. C. Kravchenko, A. A. Keryagin, N. P.
Kuz'min. N. N. Kozhevnikov. P. N. Aasyev. M. V. Afanas'yev. A. V. Zhat'kov.
A. V. Khramchenkov, A. P. lsupov. A. s. Dolotnikov, M. I. Maksimov. A. F.
Matisov. M. M. Orkin, A. Ya. 01'shvanger. G. M. Sokolov. A. r. Shevcheake.
and others. During the Great Patriotic Her. graduates of the command
school of the Air Force Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy worked at command
and staff posts with great energy, displaying high theoretical training.
good organizational capabi‘itiss, the ability to commend troops, and limit-
less devotion to the people and the Commist Party. The acedemy's execu-
tives included command school chief Colonel M. D. Smirnov. school coamdssar
Regimental Commissar A. T. Chumakov. navigator school chief Hero of the
Soviet Union Brigade Commander I. T. Spirin, officer instructors N. A.
Zhuravlev, A. S. Pleshakov. A. l. Chugunov. N. P. Kudryavtsev. M. D.
Tikhonov. c. D. Ban'kovskiy. V. P. Kanokotim. T. M. Artemenko. and V. S.
Pyshnov. and many others.

In March 1941 the Air Force Engineering Academy was established in Lenin-
grad, and subsequently named after A. P. Mozhayskiy. In all by the begin-
nlng of the war three air force academies were operating. training person-
nel with a higher military education specifically for the Soviet Air force.
The Air Force Military Command and Navigator Personnel Academy became the
principal source of trained commanders and staff officers. Political
officers were trained for air force units and formations by the Military
Political Academy imenl V. I. Lenin.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
f' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Extensive measures were implemented to prepare the theater of war. Con-
struction. expansion. and reconstruction of the landing strips of more
than 250 airfields assumed broad scope in spring l9b1. A significant
proportion of the airfielda were built in the new frontier zone formed

as a result of the annexation of western Belorussian and Ukrainian
regions and admission of new republics-~Lstvia. Lithuania. and Estonia--
into 33¢ USSR. Some 166 airfields were built between 8 April end 15 July
1961.

There were plans to have three airfields (main, standby, field) for every
air regiment to insure high combat readiness and permit maneuvering of
aviation. One hundred airfield construction battalions were formed with
the purpose of accelerating the construction of previously started air-
fields. in addition 25.000 laborers were transferred at the end of

March from railroad construction projects to complete construction of
airfields.21 In western frontier military districts at many existing
airfields. where new types of airplanes were to be based. the landing
strips were lengthened and given a concrete surface. and fuel and ammuni-
tion dumps and airfield control posts were built. Owing to this the new
types of airplanes could not operate from these airfields temporarily,
while use of obsolete airplanes was restricted.

A decision adopted by the CC VKP(b) and the USSR SNK on 10 April 1961
reorganized the air force rear services.22 Prior to this decree. air
force rear units were within the composition of air formations. Combat
practice. especially in the Soviet-Finnish Her, showed that this struc-
ture reduces saneuversbility of air units and rear units. To correct
these shortcomings the air force rear was taken out of the air forma-
tions and organized on r territorial basis.

The entire territory of the western frontier military districts was
divided into 36 airbase regions (RAB). The airbase region became the
principal air force rear organ of the combined arms army and the mili-
tary district (front), and it was intended to provide logistical. sir-
field. and medical support to three or four air divisions. Each region
contained an airbase for every division. The airbase was directly sub-
ordinated to the region chief and, in operational respects, to the air
division commander. The base had three or four airfield service bat-
talions (BAD). The airfield service battalion was a separate rear unit,
and it was intended to provide direct support to one air regiment armed
with two-engine airplanes, or to two air regiments armed with single-
engine airplanes. In operational respects the battalion commander was
subordinated to the air regiment commander. This rear structure relieved
the air units of cumbersome rear services. made all forms of rear support
more consistent. and heightened the possibilities for maneuvering air
regiments and divisions. The plans called for completing reorganization
of the air force rear by 1 August 1961.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Measures were planned to disperse and camouflage airplanes at airfields.
0n 16-19 June 1941 the USSR people's commisssr of defense ordered the
command of the frontier military districts to deploy the frontal admin-
istrations in field commend posts between 21 and 25 June. Orders were
published on 19 June to camouflage airfields. military units. and impor-
tant facilities. to paint tanks and vehicles protective colors, and to
disperse aviation.23

But the treacherous surprise attack of fascist Germany disrupted most of
the measures aimed at achieving fundamental reorganization and rearmament
of the Soviet Air Force. It was precisely for this reason that aviation
found itself in an extremely difficult situation at the start of the war
in the western frontier military districts. Construction of many air-
fields was not completed. the possibilities for maneuvering aviation were
limited, and the air force rear had not been fully reorganized into the
new system of services.2‘ Because the air force command sent new types
of airplanes coming from the plants right to the airfields in the western
frontier military districts, a large number of obsolete airplanes accumu-
lated at airfields located not far from the state border.

There were up to 100 and more airplanes at some airfields of the western
and Kiev special military districts. During the retraining period a sig-
nificant proportion of the obsolete airplanes at these airfields were
left without crews. For this reason the airplanes could not take off

at the moment of the enemy's attack. being left defenseless against
German aviation. All of this dramatically limited the combat capabili-
ties of the Soviet Air Force.

The mission of repelling the aggressor'a attack from the west was
assigned by the Soviet Supreme Migh Command to troops of the Leningrad
Military District, the Baltic Special Military District. the Western and
Kiev special military districts. the Odessa Military District, the air
force, and three fleets--Northern. Rad Banner Baltic, and Black Sea.

Formations and units of the national air defense forces. combined into
five air defense tones--Northern. Northwestern, western, Kiev. and
Southern. were to protect rear facilities from air strikes in the western
frontier zone. Forty air fighter regiments possessing about 1.500 air—
planes were allocated from the air force by special order for air
defense.25

There were 170 divisions \103 rifle, ao tank. 20 motorized, 7 cavalry)
and two brigades in the western frontier military districts. This group-
ing had a strength of 2,680,000 men. 37,500 guns and mortars, 1.675 tanks
of new types (RV and T-36). l 560 warplanes of new types, and a large
number of obsolete warplanes.i

At the beginning of the war the Soviet Army Air Force was composed of
aviation of the Main Command (long-range bomber aviation), frontal

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aviation (the air services of the military districts). army aviation (the
air services of the combined arms armies). and troop aviation (corps air
squadrons). 0f the total air force strength, 13.5 percent was with the
Main Command while 86.5 percent was with the ground troops (frontal avia-
tion-~40.S percent. army aviation-63.7 percent. troop aviation-~2.3
percent).

The ratio of aviation arms in the air services of the western military
districts was 50 percent fighters. 31 percent bombers. 4.5 percent ground
attack airplanes, and 5.5 percent reconnaissance airplanes. 7

Air services in the frontier military districts were headed by: Lenin-
grad--commander, Major General of Aviation A. A. Novikov. chief of staff.
Major General A. P. Mekraaov; Baltic Special-comnander, Major General of
Aviation A. P. Ionov. chief of staff. Major General of Aviation 5. P.
Sinyakov; western Special-correspondingly Major General of Aviation

1. I. Konets and Colonel s. A. Khudyakov; Kiev Special-~Lieutenant Gen-
eral of Aviation Ye. s. Ptukhin and Major General of Aviation M. A. Laskin;
0dessa--Major General of Aviation P. G. Michugin and Major General of
Aviation A. Z. Ustinov. The air force commanders and chiefs of staff of
the frontier military districts were experienced. and in operational
respects they were well trained military leaders.

The air services of internal military districts located behind the
frontier military districts were headed by: Moscow-commandrr, Colonel
M. A. Sbytov, chief of staff, Colonel A. M. Burtsev; 0rel--*orrespond-
ingly Colonel M. P. Maumenka and Colonel A. F. Vanyushin; Khar'kav--
Major General of Aviation 8. K. Coryunov and Colonel M. A. Belishev;
Morth Caucasus--Major General of Aviation Ye. M. Nikolayenko and Colonel
N. V. Korneyev; Transcaucasus--Lieutenant General of Aviation S. P.
Denisov and Brigade Commander S. P. Lavrik.

in the Far East at the eve of the war there was the Far Eastern Front,28
in which the air force commander was Lieutenant General of Aviation

K. M. Guaev and the chief of staff was Major General of Aviation Ya. S.
Shkurin.

The air services of the internal military districts were composed of
several air formations and units outfitted with obsolete aviation equip-

ment, and a large number of aviation schools. Air regiments. divisions.
and groups were formed on the territory of the internal military dis-

tricts and sent to the front at the beginning of the war.

Long-range bomber aviation experienced major organizational alterations
at the eve of the war. In order to improve command and control and
eliminate a lengthy chain of command, the three special-purpose air

armies (ADM) of the Main Command, which were created back in 1936-1938.
were reorganized into bomber air corps with two two-regiment air divi-
sions each. In all five air corps and three separate air divisions were

18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the Air Forces of Hesterm Frontier Military

 

Air divisions Air r
bet Fighter Mixed Bomber Fighter
2L_ gran} gsnnz Tote; (BAP) (rap:

3 2* a a 9/1 13/4
1 a 5 8/1 8/3
1 3‘ 3 6 13/2 12/5
2 5 10 11/1 17/5
- 4‘ 3 3 7/2 7/4

$11 $583" (50 Year. of the USSR Armed Forces
regiments; denominator-those retraining for
so IAD.

ere undergoing formation.

mg formation.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

created. Formation of one long-range escort fighter air division was
started in each air corps at the beginning of the war.

Pour air corps and one separate air division were deployed in the vicinity
of Novgorod, Smolensk, Kursh, Zaporozh'yc. and Skomorokha; this was a
total of nine divisions (29 air regiments) with a strength of 1,366 sir-
planes and 931 combat crews.29 Eighty-six percent of the long-range
boabers were DB-J's, and 14 percent were TB-3's. There were only 11 of
the latest airplanes-~the TB—7 (Pa-8)-in the line units.3° At the eve
of the war the air corps were commanded by: I Bomber Air Corps-Genera1
V. I. Isotov, II Bomber Air Corps-Colone1 K. N. Snirnov, III Bomber Air
Corps--COIone1 N. s. Skripko, IV Bomber Air Corps--Colone1 V. A. Sudets.
and 18th Separate Boeber Air Division-Colonel A. H. Duboshin. The V Air
Corps was undergoing foraation in the Far Best. A special air are of the
air force, long-range bomber aviation. was headed by a specially created
aviation directorate of the main command. Hero of the Soviet Union,
Lieutenant General of Aviation I. I. Proskurov, a veteran of the war in
Spain, served as the chief of the directorate until April 1961, after
which he was replaced by Colonel L. A. Gorbateevich.

At the eve of the war the Soviet Air Force was directed by the Air Force
Main Directorate. The chief of the Air Force Main Directorate was Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation P. F. Zhigarev, who had replaced Lieutenant
General of Aviation P. V. Rychegov on 12 April 1961.

Pavel Fedorovich Zhigarev was transferred to aviation from the cavalry.
In 1927 he graduated from a ailitary pilot school, and in 1932 he grad-
uated from the Air Force Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy. Be commanded
air squadrons, an air brigade, and the air forces of the 2d Separate Red
Banner Army in the Far East. In December 1960 he was appointed to the
poet of deputy chief of the Soviet Army Air Force Main Directorate.

Corps Coumussar P. s. Stepenov was appointed to the eat of Air Force
Main Directorate deputy chief for political affairs. 1 Organizationally
the Air Force Main Directorate consisted of the air force headquarters
(chief of staff, General D. N. Nikishev and, as of May 1941, General

P. S. Volodin). directorates, and independent sections. The long-range
bosber directorate and a number of other directorates were subordinated
to the chic! of the Air Force Main Directorate. The central administra-
tion or the air force did not have an independent reserve at the begin—
ning of the war. Directives concerning the work of the rear services

of military district (frontal) air services came directly from the Soviet
Army Air Force Headquarters. These functions were perforued by the head-
quarters rear services section, the chief of which was General P. V.
Korotayev.

At this time the Soviet Aray Air Force Headquarters consisted of several
lndependent sections. Section One being the principal one. General B. L.

Teplinskiy, one of the well known Soviet military theoreticians, was
chief of Section One; he was concurrently air force deputy chief of staff.32

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE'ONLY

The Air Force Headquarters was undergoing reorganization. and new officers
were assigned to the principal sections. Section and department chiefs
included General D. D. Grendal', Colonels V. V. Stororhenko and A. I.
Bogdanov, and Majors N. F. Andrianov and D. K. Karpcvich.

Highly skilled officers who in their time had flown warplanes and, for
the most part graduated from the cwmnend or navigator school of the air
force academy. worked in the headquarters: I. P. Potapov, V. I.
Artem'yev, V. P. Posekhontsev, A. Ya. 01'shvanger, I. h. Kuz'min, Ye. S.
Chalik, A. H. Vlasov. and V. A. Dmitriyev. The work of the headquarters
was structured in accordance with operational axes, with one or two offi-
cers working with each of them. They maintained maps of the operational
situation of the air services of several military districts, they studied
the probable enemy. they computed and analyzed his combat composition and
the airfield net, they maintained constant communications with the air
services headquarters of the military districts, they prepared draft
instructions and orders to the troops and reports to the General Staff,
they monitored the work of reorganizing and rearming the air force. and
they inspected air units.

After fascist invaders occupied Poland and France the situation on our
western borders became more and more tense. The Germans began to violate
our motherland's air borders with increasing frequency. Performing recon-
naissnnce, between 1 January and 22 June 1951 the Fascist German Command
violated the USSR air border and penetrated up to 300-350 kn into our
territory in some cases. A number of times Soviet fighters intercepted
Ger-an reconnaissance airplanes and forced them to land. Our fighters
were prohibited at that time by the Soviet Command from using machinegun
fire against the violating airplanes. Explosions often occurred auto-
natically in the cockpits of German airplanes following a forced landing.
This happened. as an example, on 15 April 1961 in the vicinity of Rovno,
when a Soviet fighter intercepted a J-86 reconnaissance airplane and
forced it to land. Two explosions occurred after the German pilots
abandoned the airplane. The airplane caught fire. but the fire was
extinguished. Three cameras were discovered aboard the airplane. of
which only one survived. Its film bore images of rail junctions in the
Kiev-Korosten' rail section.33

Sometimes German airplanes violating our airspace opened fire at fighter—
interceptors demanding them to land, and then left our territory. This
was observed especially often at the eve of fascist Germany's attack on
the USSR, in May and June 1961.

The intensity of violations of the 0888's western air border by German
airplanes increased significantly in May-June 1961.

"Concurrently with developing Operation Barbarosea," the history of the
Conmuniat Party of the Soviet Union reads, "in summer 1940 the Fascist
German Commend began deploying troops on the borders of the Soviet Union.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Saboteurs and spies began to be sent into USSR territory much sore fre-
quently. and the frequency of reconnaissance flights increased drawe-
ticelly: Just in the first half of 1961 alone there were 326 documented
cases of fascist airplanes violating the USSR air herder."3‘

The Air Force General headquarters and Command took steps to increase the
number of patrolling fighters at the airfields of all five western
frontier districts. As an exasple the following numbers of fighter
flights were placed on duty every day in summer 1961 in the Western
Special nilitary District: 5 flights of 1-153 and 1-16 airplanes,

3 flights of the new MIG-3‘s, and 8 flights held in ambush. for a total
of 16 flights.35 A somewhat smaller number of fighters patrolled in
other frontier nilitary districts. Patrolling fighters played a major
role in the first assent of repelling the treacherous surprise attack of
fascist German aviation at dawn on 22 June 1941. Together with frontier
troops the Soviet pilots were the first to enter into the unequal battle
with the aggressor. and they offered stubborn resistance to superior

enemy forces.

in the central air force administration. the principal directorates and
the main sections of the Air Force headquarters were hastily nanned by
officer pilots. navigators, and engineers who had graduated free aili-
tary academies. The Air Force headquarters and its operational section
wrote directives and orders to the troops concerning operational and
combat training. Preparation of all aviation manuals and regulations as
well as the draft 1956 Field Service Manual was also completed with the
participation of the Air Force Headquarters. we know that as long ago as
in January 19‘0. field manuals had been introduced into bomber (BUBA-hO)
and figmter aviation (aura-40) by order of the USSR people's coenissar

of defense, and the troops used them as their guidelines. In that same
year an order free the chief of the Soviet Army Air Force Hain Directorate
defined the list of individual theoretical topics to be worked on the com-
manders of military district air services. In February 1951 the Air Force
Headquarters developed a list of operational and tactical subjects to be
included in the training of officers for the headquarters of military
district air services and air divisions. On 28 February 1961 the chief

of the Air Force Nain Directorate published an order in which he stated
that work on an individual topic was one of the most important measures

by which to heighten the operational and tactical preparedness of higher
and senior commanders in aviation.36 These topics corresponded completely
to the requirements of waging war against a strong enemy. and they were
sufficiently well defined and concrete. Here is the list of topics:
Actions of the air force in attaining sir supremacy in a frontal offen-
sive operation: actions of a frontal air force in interdicting enemy
shipments and concentration; actions of a frontal air force to prevent
advance of strategic enemy reserves to the place of a breakthrough;
actions of a frontal air force in an encounter engage-eat of a mechanized
cavalry group; actions of a frontal air force in annihilating major enemy
mechanized formations penetrating deep into our disposition, in supporting

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

an airborne landing operation. and in repelling an eneny marine assault
landing.37 The coansnders of the frontier military district air services
had to submit abstracts of their reports on the assigned topics to the
Air Force headquarters by 1 April 1961. but because of the growing ten-
sion in the international situation and the aeaaures being conducted in
the troops to reorganize and raarm air units and formations of frontier
military district air services the deadline for their submission was
postponed to June 1961.

The Soviet Aray Air Force Headquarters also resolved the problems of
organising and aaintaining interaction among the aviation arms and
between aviation and the ground troops. As early as in October 1950

the cos-and ordered the air services of the four military districts
(Uestern Special. Leningrad. Transcaucasus. and Far East) to write draft

instructions on organizing interaction of aviation with ground troops.
and the fundamental praaises of this draft were utilized in the begin-
ning of the war.

in January 1951 the USSR people's commissar of defense ordered the mili-
tary district commands and the chief of the Air Force Main Directorate to
attach the staffs of air formations (including the staffs of long-range
bomber aviation air corps) to the appropriate aray directorates. and some
of the staffs to the silitary district staffs with the goals of heighten-
ing the training level of air formation staffs and deepening the skills
of higher coauanders in the use of large air services in operations.38

The Air Force General Headquarters and the cos-and conducted many air
exercises of various sorts. More than 130 regiaental. divisional. and
district exercises were conducted in 1940 with air force air formations
and units participating.39

The theory behind operational application of the air force in the future
war was also sufficiently well developed at the eve of the war. Soviet
military science took account of the fact that aviation was to play a
major role in the fight for air superiority and in support to ground
troops and the navy in their offensive and defensive operations. The
draft RKKA [workers and Peasants Red Army] Field Manual (1939) stated:
"Aviation possesses powerful araament. it is swift. and it has a great
effective range. It is a powerful weapon against enemy manpower and
equipment; it can annihilate his aviation and destroy iaportant objec-
tives. Aviation provides strategic and tactical support to ground
troops. it performs independent air operations against objectives deep

in the eneuy rear. and it fights enemy aviation. striving for air
superiority.""o The air force con-and and staff devoted special atten-
tion to resolving the issues concerning participation of aviation in
offensive operations. prinarily in operations in death. According to the
theory of the offensive operation in depth. the advance of the troops
lust "have the nature of suppression of the entire defensive zone fol-
lowed by penetration. encirclcaent. and annihilation of the enemy."u it

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

was believed that a simltaneous. powerful thrust by infantry. tanks,
artillery. and aviation would break enemy defenses throughout their
entire tactical depth, and that subsequent couitment of mobile forma-
tions (mechanized and cavalry) to the breakthrough with active support
by aviation from the air in combination with decisive actions by air-
borne troops in the enemy rear would insure oncirclement and annihila-
tion o'f'the enelay.‘2 It was believed that the air force would perform
the following missions in these operations: Attainment of air supremacy.
support to ground troops in penetration of enemy tactical defenses.
protection of troops and rear facilities from air strikes. performance
of strikes against operational and strategic reserves and objectives in
the enemy rear. support to co-itment of an exploitation echelon to a
breakthrough. support of the latter‘s cosbat activities at strategic
depth in enemy defenses. support to airborne troops. supply of friendly
forces by air. and air reconnaissance.“3

Attaining air superiority was believed to be one of the most important
missions of the air force. It could be achieved on strategic and opera-
tional scales. Air superiority was attained on the axes of the main
thrusts by ground troops through the joint efforts of the air services
of two or several contiguous fronts. by aviation of the Main Col-sand. and
by ground-based air defense resources.

It was reconsendcd that enemy aviation be fought in two ways: Through
annihilation of enemy aviation at airfields coupled with a concurrent
strike against rear services--frontal bases. repair services. field and
amnition dumps. and annihilation of enemy aviation in air battles.

The air force's independent air operations were subdivided into strategic
and operational in accordance with prewar viewpoints. The former included
air operations conducted by the Supreme liigh Conand in the interests of
the war as a whole. They were directed against the enemy's most impor-
tant military. economic. and political centers. and their objective was to
undermine his war economy. disorganize the work of the rear. disrupt state
administration and co-unication. and suppress the morale of the popula-
tion and the army.

Operational air operations were to be conducted in behalf of ground
troops and the navy. Their principal objectives were: Defeat of oppos-
ing aviation groupings; prevention of the maneuvering (concentration) of
enemy troops; destruction of the enemy's strategic reserves; weakening
of the navy and destruction of large enemy marine assault landing
parties. Professor. Brigade Couander A. N. Lapchinskiy. the author of
a number of scientific works including the famous work on military theory
"Vozdushnaya armiya" (The Air Army). made a significant contribution to
the theory of independent sir operations. his basic premises were uti-
lized in the practical activities of the co-and and staff of the Soviet
Army Air Force at the eve and in the course of the Great Patriotic War.
In part iculsr he wrote the following about the main mission facing the

26

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OhPlCIAL USE ONLY

air force: "in the end, no natter what Iiaaion aviation perforns in rela-
tion to the ground war. it is always faced by the problem of attaining air
superiority."

“Aviation has cone into ita own in warfare as a new powerful offensive
factor. Hence follows the logical conclusion that land and air forces
nest act together to achieve a canon goal." "Aviation cannot set the
atage for a triuaphsnt procession of advancing eassed arnios. nor will
it be able to perforn triunphant flights. In all subsequent operations
the fight between the air forces will be stubborn and savage. Aviation
will help the land front to the extent that it offers it greater possi-
bilities for offensive actione in coeperison to the enemy by conducting
a number of its own successive independent operations.

"when a eassive offensive arny is obviously present, the Iain nission of
an air arny is to support the forward aoveeent of this army, for which
purpose all efforts must be concentrated. Once the war is seen to be
maneuvorable. we must win air-land engage-onto starting in the air and
ending on the ground; this would require concentration of all air
forcea."“

Problees concerning the conbat uses of the air force in various operations
and in the war as a whole were studied to sufficient depth in the prewar
years in a nuaber of major scientific works by Soviet ailitary leaders

and scholars.‘5

The conbat applications of aviation in the initial period of war were
developed. The following were treated as the air force's aain nissions
at the beginning of a war in the works of Corps Con-ander V. V. Khripin
and Colonel P. l. Halinovskiy written as long ago as 1936:"6 Suppression
of the airborne enemy throughout the entire depth of his disposition with
the goal of attaining air supremacy; prevention of the concentration of
eneny sreies; support to the conbat activities of the forward army of the
ground troops by a part of the air force. Actions against the eneny's
economic and political centers were not excluded in this case. These
works also pointed out that to preserve aviation in the initial period

of a war. it would be suitable to withdraw air units froa permanent air-
fields to field airfield» in tine. The firet operations of ﬂorid War II
pernitted the Soviet Con-and to elaborate upon the principlea of the
initial period of war and deter-ine its aignificance to the course and
outcome of the arned conflict. The initial period was interpreted as the
time interval froe the beginning of nilitery actions to the cement that
both of the araed forces entered the engegenent.‘7

The problem. of utilizing nll branchee of the creed forces in war. includ-
ing the air force, were discussed in detail at a conference of higher
con-andera held in Decenber 1940 by Marshal of the Soviet Union 5. K.
Tineshenho on order of the CC VKP(b). General P. V. Rychegov. chief of
the Air Force Hain Directorate. gave the report "The Air Force in the
Offensive Operation and In the fight for Air Superiority.“a

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The report pointed out that only air superiority would make it possible
to dependably prepare a front's offensive. provide air cover to troops
being brought up to the front. especially cavalry and mechanized forma-
tions. quickly and systematically penetrate an enemy fortified zone. and
exploit a success in depth. “Attainment of air superiority." the report
read. "requires annihilation of the enemy's aviation and his airfields
coupled with a simultaneoun strike against the air force rear (frontal
bases. repair services. field and ammunition dumps) and annihilation of
enemy aviation in the air above the battlefield.“‘9

But executives were unable to arrive at a common point of view concerning
a number of issues in operational use of the air force in war, especially
the problens of attaining air superiority. Bxaggerating the highly
linited combat experience of the war in Spain and their own personal
experience, sons of the conference participants understated the contri-
butlon made by the Luftwaffe to the swift defeat of Polish and French
aviation. which was attained mainly through massed surprise strikes
against airfields. Summarizing the results of the conference 5. K.
Timoshenko approved the basic premises stated in the conference reports.
though he did address a few critical remarks to some of these premises.
In particular. he said the following concerning the use of the air force:
"He have accumulated a large amount of experience in using the air force
in operations. but this experience has not been generalized, and it has
not been studied yet. Moreover this situation can harbor especially
dangerous consequences. Our air force command has been unable to arrive
at common viewpoints concerning issues such as organizing and planning
operations. assessing the enemy. the methods for conducting an air war
and imposing one's will on the enemy. target selection, and so on."50

Differences in interpretation of the problems concerning operational
application of the air force in war also had a certain effect on the

air force's organizational structure. It was concluded that aviation
had to be subdivided into army aviation intended specifically for inter-
action with army troops. and frontal aviation operating in accordance
with a front‘s plans. but the Great fatriotic "or did not support this
conclusion. It was made on the basis of combat experience acquired in
combat at the Khalhhin-col River (hay-September 1939) and in the Finnish
conflict ()0 November l939 to 13 March 1960). Subdivision of aviation
into army and frontal aviation was fully justified in minor were such as
these. But in a large war against a strong enemy, where massing of
efforts and centralized control over all aviation participating in an
operation were required, this organizational structure was inaccsptable.
Thus in the prewar years Soviet strategy offered a basically correct
interpretation of operational use of the air force in offensive and
defensive operations. Many premises of the theory of air force strategy
were tested in major exercises and maneuvers conducted in the prewar
years. But there also were poorly developed aspects in our military
theory. hot enough work had been done on the problems of repelling an
enemy surprise attack. conducting joint actions with the air force and

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ground troops in strategic defense. and bringing the troops and aviation
to a higher state of readiness and full coabat readiness.

At the eve of the war the cos-and and staff of the Soviet Arny Air Force
devoted sufficient attention to inproving the coabet and political train-
ing of units and foraations in frontal and long-range bosber aviation.
New require-eats on the conbat and political training of the troops were
set by the USSR people's connissar of defense in Order No 30 dated

29 January 1941. and in the directive of the Soviet Arsy Main Directorate
of Political Propaganda "0n Reorganizing Party-Political work" published
in August 19‘0. Troop training was based on the principle: "Teach the
troops only that which they will need in war. and only the nethods used
in war.“ The air force vas given the aission of working out interaction
with ground troops and the navy. conducting active cosbat operations with
large forces. and devoting sore attention to flight training in poor
weather and at night. One air squadron was singled out free every air
regisent for a night flying coarse.

The coabat and political training of air units and foreations was syste-
aatically inspected by the Soviet Aray Air Force cos-and at the eve of

the war. This can be seen free the following exaeple. in April 1961

an inspection was conducted of the 12th Ioabar Air Division of the Western
Special Military District Air Service. which was lagging considerably in
retraining to new types of airplanes. The group of air force officers
detailed for the inspection was headed by General A. V. Nikitin. chief of
the Air force Organization and Manning Directorate.

Aleksey Vasil'yevich Mikitin threw his lot in with aviation as long ago
as in 1921. enrolling in the nilitary observer pilot school in Petrograd.
he joined the Red Arly in May 1919. Me becals a lesber of the Col-unist
Party in 1925. In his aviation career he served as an observer pilot.
flight coasandsr. coenander of an air detachment. and coasander of an air
squadron. Being chief of staff of the pilot school in Lugansk. he con-
currently graduated froe this school and acquired the specialty of a
ailitary pilot. Later he assuaad the post of air force chie’ of staff
of the Transcaucssus Military District and air force chief of staff of
the Transbaykel Military District. He began working in the central
adsinistration of the air force in 1939.

The inspection confirmed that 106 of the division's crews were still
retraining. The division coe-and's fear of flying accidents was the
reason for this. In view of this the personnel were assigned sore of the
easier sortiea in the coebat training plan than the training level of the
pilots would require. Naturally. this delayed the progress of the conbat
training. in the inspection critique General A. V. Mikitin pointed out
the iapcrnissibility of such a faulty retraining sethod and the air
division cosnand's lack of responsibility for the state of conbat train-
ing. The division was ordered to accelerate personnel retraining and
ianediately begin on the applied coabst training problees. During the

27

IOR OIPICIAL OS! ONLY
FOR OPPICIN. USE ONLY

inspection the air force inspectors certified 20 of the division's pilots
who had distinguished themselves in the inspection for solo flight

aboard the new types of airplane. and flight crew executives of the air
regiment! and squadrons began working on the combat training problems.

The inspection gave a solid push to aircrew combat training. having the
positive effect of increasing the division's fighting efficiency. In
the first days of the war the 12th Bomber Division distinguished itself

in combat and was mentioned in an order of the Heatern Front Military
Council. 51

Long-range beaber aviation units and formations underwent highly intense
combat training at the eve of the war. Just in the first half of June
19£l the crews flew 8.616 hours to include 1.032 hours at night. and
679 hours were spent in high-altitude training. During this time l.bOO
planned sorties were flown. there were 1.839 bombing runs over practice
ranges. and there were 1.560 air gunnery practices. 2 Long-range bomber
aviation had also acquired some combat experience in the Soviet-finnish
conflict. in January-March 1940 it completed 2.129 combat sorties
against rail terminals. stations. war plants. and ports.53

At the eve of the war the Communist Party. the Soviet Government. and the
Main Command did a great deal of work to strengthen the Soviet Araed
Forces.

The initiation of World Her 11 elicited a need to define the viewpoints
on combat use of the air force more closely. Attention was turned to the
massing of aviation on the axis of the main thrust of the ground troops.
and to the exceptional importance of attaining air superiority at the
beginning of military actions. It was recognized that attainment of air
superiority eight require independent air operations having the objective

of destroying the enemy's aviation groupings.

The German-Polish war and the campaign in Western Europe confirmed that

as a branch of the armed forces. the air force can perform major strategic
missions.

FOOTNOTES

1. "lstoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny 1939-19b5" (History of world war II
1939-1955). Vol 3. Hoacow. 1976. p 20.

2. ibid.. p 22.

1. "lutoriya Voyenno-Voxdushnykh Sil Sovetskoy Armii" (history of the
Soviet Army Air force). Moscow. 1955. p 399.

6. "istoriys vtoroy mirovoy voyay 1939-1965." Vol 3. p 71.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5.
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
18.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
26.
25.
26.

"lotoriya vtoroy lirovoy voyny 1939-1965." Vol 3. p 81.
lbld.. pp 86-87. 39.

Gal'dor. F.. "Voycnnyy dnevnik" ("or Diary). translated fro. the
Ger-In. Vol 1. Moscow. 1968. p #95.

"letoriye vtoroy uirovoy voyny 1939-19b5." Vol 3. p 132.

Ibid.. p 133.

"letoriye vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965." Vol 3. p 13‘.

lbid.. p 135.

"letoriye vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1945." Vol 6, p 13.

"letoriye vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965." V01 3. pp 326, 328.
"Iotoriyn Vel1koy Otecheetvennoy voyny Sovetekogo Soyuze 1961-1965
as." (ﬂietory of the Great Patriotic "er of the Soviet Union 1951~
1905). Vol 1. Hoocou. 1961. p ‘16.

"Iotoriye Velikoy Otecheotvonnoy voyny Sovetekogo Soyuz. 1961-1965
33.." Vol 1. Hoocou. 1961. p 616.

VOYENNO¢ISTORICRESKIY ZRURNAL. No 7. 197‘. p 88.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR [088! Ministry of Defense Archivee], f. 35. op. 28b01.
d. 22, 1.36.

Arkhiv $0 SSSR. f. 19. op. 11282. d. 17. 1. 256.

"Sovetetiye Voyenno-Vozduehnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33." (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic Her
1961-1965). Moscow. 1968. p 23.

Arkh1v MO 8858. f. 35. op. 28737. d. 1. 11. 7.33.116.

"lotoriye vtoroy oirovoy voyny 1939-1985," Vol 3, p 623.

Arkhiv HD 5883. f. 35. op. 30807. d. 23. 11. 15-23.

"Iotoriye vtoroy lirovoy voyny 1939-1965," Vol 3. p #61.

lbid.. Vol 4. p 27.

"letoriye vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965." Vol 3. p 625.

1816.. Vol 6. p 25.

29
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
27.

28.

29.

31.

32.

lol.

42.
‘3‘
(.10.

"Sovoteltiyc Voyenno-Voaduahnyye Sily v Volikoy Otecheetvennoy voyno
1961-1965," p 13.

The Field Directorate of the Far Futorn Front was established on
21 June 1940.

Arkhfv no sssn. r. as. op. 107559. a. s. 11. 169-170.

“1111.. op. 11282. d. 20. 1. 262.

Arkhlv no SSSR. f. 35. op. 11235. d. lo. 1. 67.

General B. L. Toplinahiy waa reaponaible for the writing and publica-
tion of the following acientific works: "Aviateiye v hoyu nazomykh
voyek" (Aviation in Support of Coabet of the Ground 'l'roope), Koecow,

1960; "Oanovy obehchey taktiki W8.” (Fundooentole of General Air
Force Tactica). Hoacow, 1960.

Arkhlv no 8583. f. 35. op. 11285. d. 118. 11. 70-73.

”letoriya Ko-unieticheekoy partii Sowetokoso Soyuza" (history of
the Conanniet Party of the Soviet Union). Vol 5. Book 1. p 161.

Arkhiv m SSSR. f. 35. op. 11285, d. 26. l. l.
Arkhiv no 5588, f. 35. op. 11285. d. l, l. 50.
lhid.. 11. 2845.
Arkhiv m SSSR, f. 35. op. 11285, d. l. l. 88.
lhid.. ll. 6. 7.

"Folcvoy uetov ERICA (PU-39). Froyekt" (RKKA Field Manual (PU-39).
Draft). Moscow, 1939. pp 23-2‘.

"Polcvoy uetav Krunoy Arlii. Proyeltt" (Red Arty Field Manual. Draft).
Hoacow. 19101. p 136.

Ilnid.. p 11.0.
Arkhiv no 8588, f. 35, op. 29601. d. 10, l. 79.

Lapchinekiy. A. N.. "Vozduahnaya arniye" (The Air Amy). Moscow.
1919. pp 98. 119. 117. 146.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65.

1.6.
’07.
58.
49.

51.

52.

53.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hezhcninov, s. A., "Vozduohnyyo oily v voyno i oporctoii" (The Air
Force in Hat and in the Operation), ﬂoocou, 1927; Algozin, A. S.,
"Obupochoniyo vozduohnykh opontoiy" (Support to Air Operations),
Moscow. 1928: Sorgoycv, A. V., "Stuccgiyn i toktikc Krunogo
Vozduahnogo Plato" (Strccogy and Tactics of the Red Air Forco).
Moscow, 1935; lonov, P. 9., "Obohchoyo tnktilu Voycnno-Vozduohnykh
Sil" (General Air Force Tactics), Hoocov, 1936.

Arkhiv K) SSSR, f. 35, op. 23373, d. 2, 11. 5-7.

"Iotoriyo vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965," Vol 3, p A11.

“316., p ‘09.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 35, 0p. 29373, d. 2, 11. 5-7.
"Zoklyuchitol'noyo roch' norodnoso 1:0.“qu oborony Soyuza SSR,
Manhole Sovotokogo Soyuu S. K. Timohonko 31 dokcbryo 19100 3."
(Concluding Speech of USSR People's Contour of Defence, Martha].
of tho Soviet Union 8. K. Tinoohonko on 31 Decenbcr 1960), Moscow,
1961, p 35.

"Aviotoiya i koononcvtiko SSS!" (USSR Aviation and Coommucico).
Moscow, 1968, p 92.

Arkhiv m SSSR, f. 35, op. 11290, d. 34, 11. 12.
Arkhiv I0 SSSR, I. 35, op. 11600, d. 380, l. 2.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER II. SOVIET ARMY AIR FORCE COMMAND AND STAFF AT THE BEGINNING OF
THE WAR AND IN THE SUMMER-FALL OPERATIONS OF 1961

The Nature of Actions of the Aviation of the Belligerents in the First
Days of the "or

Violating the Nonaggrsssion Pact. treacherously. without declaring war,
at dawn on 22 June 1961 fascist Germany attacked the Soviet Union with
armed forces prepared and concentrated at the borders of the USSR earlier.
Between 0330 and 0600 hours fascist Carmen aviation made massed raids on
our airfields. rail junctions. naval bases. troop groupings. and the
cities of Murmansk, Kaunas. Minsk. Kiev. Odessa, and Sevsstopol'. Con-
currently artillery opened hurricane fire on defensive fortifications

and troop deployment areas. Following powerful artillery and air prepa-
ration the enemy's tank and motorized divisions went over to the offen-
sive on a front froa the Baltic to the Carpathians. Battles also began
south of the Carpathians, along the Romanian border doun to the Black See.
Fascist Germany was joined by Hungary, Italy, Romania. and Finland in its
var against the USSR. Savage engagements developed, distinguished by
great scope, high dynamism. and dramatic changes in the situation. The
Great Patriotic “er of the Soviet Union against fascist Germany and its
European allies began.

The Communist Party and the Soviet Government appealed to the Soviet
people to repel the aggressor and expressed firm confidence in victory
over the enemy. United by inviolable friendship, the peoples of the USSR
all rose up as one for the holy war for liberty and independence of their
motherland.

Hitler's command committed up to 50 percent of its aviation concentrated
at our borders to annihilation of Soviet aviation. Air raids were made
on 66 airfields at uhich 65 percent of the aviation of the Western
frontier districts was based. to include 26 airfields of the Hestern,

23 of the Kiev, and 11 of the Baltic special military districts and 6
airfields of the Odessa Military listrict. As a result in the first day
of the war the Soviet Air Force lost about 1,200 airplanes, 800 of which
were parked on airfields.1

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The air services of the western and Kiev special military districts. in
which the Luftwaffe managed to annihilate and damage 1,015 airplanes in
the first day of the war. suffered an especially great loss. Out of 409
airplanes present at the beginning of the war. the 9th Mixed Air Division
of the Hestern Special Military District's air service lost 347. the

10th Mixed Air Division lost 180 airplanes out of 231. and the llth Mixed
Air Division lost 127 airplanes out of 199. On the second day of the war
these three air divisions. which were in the first echelon. were rendered
unfit for action and sent back to reform. In air bottles fighters of the
Heste:n Special Military District's air service knocked down more than
100 fascist airplanes and dispersed large German bomber groups. but they
were unable to halt their raids or at least restrict the actions of enemy
aviation. In one day the enemy annihilated 387 fighters and 351 bombers.2

The air services of the frontier military districts suffered great losses
in their airplane fleet for the following reasons. A telegram from the
USSR people's commissar of defense warning the con-ands of the nilitary
districts of the time of a possible attack by fascist Gernany and con-
taining instructions to make the troops combat ready and disperse avia-
tion at field landing strips was not transmitted to the frontier military
districts until just 6 hours before the enemy's invasion.3 Because many
of the sirfields were undergoing construction and reconstruction the
extent to which air units and for-ations of the air services of frontier
military districts could be maneuvered was limited. The degree to which
the airfields were camouflaged and the cover provided to them by anti-
aircreft resources were inadequate. Some air commanders inexperienced

in repelling massed surprise raids were unable to protect their units
from the strikes and organize decisive opposition to fascist aviation.
Soviet pilots had to fight in unequal conditions. for the most part they
were forced to fight in obsolete fighters against a numerically superior
enemy armed with modern airplanes.

Despite the difficulty and complexity of the resulting situation Soviet
pilots acted boldly and selflessly on all area. astounding the world with
their unprecedented steadfastnees and unwavering courage and bravery.

As an example during the first day an air squadron of the Special Mili-
tary District‘s 127th Fighter Air Regiment commanded by Senior Lieutenant
i. I. Drozdov took to the air four times to repel enemy bomber raids in
the vicinity of Brest, knocking down five fascist airplanes.

0n the southwestern axis at 0625 hours Senior Lieutenant I. I. Ivanov,
{light commander in the 66th Fighter Air Regiment. rammed and knocked
down an enemy bomber after using up all of his eamunition in aerial
combat.‘ Pilots of the 91st and 252d fighter air regiments also dia-
tinguished themselves here. Pilots of the 67th and 55th fighter air
regiments honorably performed their duty to the motherland in the
southernmost sector of the Soviet-German front. Major B. A. Rudakov,
commander of the 67th Fighter Air Regiment. launched his first group of
fighters against enemy bombers on receiving a report of their approach.

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Several enemy craft were knocked down in aerial combat. That day the
regimnt's pilots repelled raids four tines. They completed 117 combat
sorties. foiled the bombing runs of the fascist German bombers. and
knocked down 13 airplanes. Lieutenant Colonel V. P. Ivanov. couander
of the 55th Fighter Air Regiment. displayed resourcefulness and decisive-
nesa. Receiving a report of the approach of 20 German bombers and 18
fighters. he launched his duty air squadron with its new MIG-3 fighters.
ordering it to attack the enemy. while the regiment's other fighters
assisted in dispersing the German boaters and forcing them to turn back.5

Combat activities began on the Leningrad axis at dawn on 22 June. At
0320 hourp. while the people of Leningrad were still sleeping. the first
aerial engagement occurred at the far approaches to Leningrad. Fighter
pilots Shavrov and Boyko engaged an Me-llo flight in combat.6

In the first day of the war Soviet pilots I. I. Ivanov, L. G. Butelin.
S. M. Gudimov. A. s. Danilov. D. V. Kokorev. A. l. Hoklyak. Ye. ﬂ.
Pantilov. and P. S. Ryabtsev repeated the immortal deed of their com-
patriot. pilot P. N. Nesterov. who back on 26 August 1914 rammed and
knocked down an enemy airplane for the first time in the world. Later.
many comrades in arms followed the example of the hero pilots. when
they ran out of amunition but the enemy continued to advance. they
rat-ed the enemy airplanes. knocking them down.

At 0715 hours on 22 June 1941 the people's container of defense assigned
the mission of a retaliatory strike at the enemy to the troop contenders
of the frontier military districts. The directive stated:

“1. The troops are to attack enemy forces with all available forces and
resources and annihilate the former wherever they have violated the Soviet
border. Ground troops are not to cross the border prior to receiving
special instructions.

"2. Reconnaissance and combat aviation is to establish the places of
concentration of enemy aviation and ground troop groupings. Aviation
on enemy airfields is to be annihilated with powerful strikes by bomber
and ground attack aviation, and the main groupings of the enemy's ground
troops are to be destroyed by bombing. Air strikes are to be made to

a depth of 100-150 km into German territory; Keenigsberg and Hamel are
to be destroyed by bombing...."7

But in view of the evolved conditions the contends of the Baltic.
Western. and Kiev special military districts were unable to organize
a powerful retaliatory strike.

On 22 June 1901 Soviet pilots completed about 0.000 combat sorties and

annihilated more than 200 German airplanes."-

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in highly difficult conditions our country transformed itself into a
single military camp under the guidance of the Communist Party and the
Soviet Government within the very first days of the war. The national
economy was placed on a war footing. and the Soviet Armed Forces. includ-
ing the air force. were strengthened and reorganized.

0n 22-25 June 1961 frontal air services were created out of aviation
belonging to frontier military districts. The following were appointed
commanders of the frontal air services: Northern-Genera1 A. A. Novikov;
Northwestern-~General A. P. lonov (General T. F. Kutsevalov as of 1 July
1961); Hestern--General A. I. Tsyurskiy (Colonel N. F. Naumenko as of

2 July 1941); Southwestern--Gensra1 Ye. S. Ptukhin (General P. A.
Astahhov as of 1 July l9bl); Southsrn--General P. G. Hichugin (General
P. S. Shslukhin as of 27 June 1951). The great losses suffered by avia-
tion in the frontier military districts and mainly the qualitative
superiority of the bulk of German airplanes allowed the Luftwaffe to
seize the initiative on the decisive axes. This significantly complicated
the actions of ground troops in the frontier zone as they attempted to
repel the developing enemy offensive. Nevertheless the Soviet Air Force
remained battleworthy. The German Command's attempts at annihilating
Soviet aviation by raids on airfields were not successful everywhere.
Soviet aviation lost a large number of airplanes only in the western
frontier military districts. Air formations of the Northern and
Southern fronts and of the internal military districts, and long-range
bomber aviation suffered almost no losses. Pilots in the air services
of the frontier military districts that had lost their airpianes were
reassigned to newly formed air regiments and divisions.

A few days prior to the war the command of the Odessa Military District
inspected the combat readiness of its troops and aviation in the southern
sector of the front. The air units had been redeployed at field air-
fields. where the airplanes were dispersed and camouflaged. The person-
nel were in a higher state of readiness. The military district's air
force headquarters (chief of staff General A. Z. Ustinov) was transferred
from Odessa to Tiraspol'. These measures made it possible to successfully
repel the aerial attack. The enemy put 6 of our airplanes out of action.
but he himself lost 30.

At the eve end in the beginning of the Great Patriotic Her the Soviet Army
Air Force Main Directorate had among its command functions management of
the combat activities of long-range bomber aviation subordinated directly
to it. Frontal, army, and troop aviation was not subordinated to it in
this respect. which had an unfavorable impact on the effectiveness with
which different arms of aviation were used in combat. The chief of the
Air Force Main Directorate and the staff were responsible for the combat
training of air units and formations. the operational training of the
frontal and long-range bomber aviation staff. the training and employment
of airmen, deve10pment of the technical specifications on aviation equip-
ment. timely supply of men and airplanes to the air units and formations,
logistical and medical support. and airfield preparation.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

The commands of the air services of the frontier military districts were
subordinated to the chief of the Soviet Army Air Force Hain Directorate
only in a special respect--that is. in relation to the problems of com-
bat training, retraining. manning. and logistics. but not in relation to
the combat use of aviation. This is why the Soviet Army Air Force Com-
mand could influence the combat activities of frontal aviation at the
beginning of the war only through instructions to the air force commands
of the military districts (fronts) concerning concentration of aviation.
its reinforcement. retraining of personnel, and supply of airplanes,
aircrews, and technicians. Thus it is no accident that the first instruc-
tions sent to the air force commanders of the frontier districts by the
command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force at the beginning of the
war concerned not the combat application of frontal aviation but rather
for the most part its reinforcement.

As an example on the morning of 22 June 1961 the command of the Western
Special Military District's air service was instructed under General

P. F. Zhigarev's signature to receive, at the Orsha airfield. 99 MiG-3
airplanes for the air force units and formations of this district.

In subsequent days the General Staff gaVe permission to the Soviet Army
Air Force Command to instruct frontal air cosmmnders to redeploy air
divisions and regiments from internal military districts to frontal air-
fields. to establish flight corridors for friendly airplanes. to utilize
civilian wire communication resources, to submit daily combat reports to
the Air Force headquarters, to plan combat use of frontal aviation for
the following day. and to submit daily reports on the combat composition
and meaning of air force units and formations.

The order to make long-range bomber units and formations combat ready
was transmitted by the Soviet ArIy Air Force Command to air corps on the
morning of 22 June 1961. at osaa hours. Long-range bomber aviation
initiated its combat missions on 23 June 1951. The day before it was
given the following missions: l Bomber Air Corps--dsstroy military
objectives in the vicinity of Keenigsberg and Danzig and, in one sortie
flown by the entire corps, support the counterattack of troops of the
Northwestern Front against the flank and rear of the enemy's Suwslki
grouping; ll Bomber Air Corps--destroy objectives in the vicinities of
Lublin and Katowice and, in one sortie, support troops of the South-
western Front attacking the enomy's Lublin grouping; ill Bomber Air
Corps-~destroy military objectives in the vicinity of Harsaw and. in one
sortie, support troops of the western front attacking the enemy's
Suwniki grouping. The [V Bomber Air Corps was left at the disposal of
the he snc. ready to assist the main troop grouping of the Southwestern
Front and. in part. the Black Sea Fleet. The 18th Separate Bomber Air
Division was given the mission of destroying objectives in the vicinity
of Cracow, and it was placed within the composition of the Southwestern
Front.9 Naval aviation had the mission of striking enemy naval bases and
ports and destroying military objectives of Romania's petroleum industry.

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Actions by Soviet aviation against objectives in the enemy rear had great
political significance. They proved wrong the fabrications of German
propaganda that Soviet aviation had been totally annihilated in the first
2 days of the war.

On 26 June 1961. at 1530 hours. the Headquarters of the Supreme High
Command ordered the commanders of the III and l long-range bomber air
corps to annihilate enemy tanks advancing from Minsk on Orsha and

Hogilcv. Entire regiments were to simultaneously attack day and night.
making their bombing runs at low altitude (600 meters).10

Executing their combat missions. the long-range bombers struck the enemy’s
aoving tanks and mechanized columns at crossings over the following rivers--
Hastern Dvina, Heman. Berezina, Drut'. Prut. Dnestr, and they attacked
troops on the road. On 26 June 1951 enemy tanks were subjected to strikes
by 58 crews west and north of Minsk. by 5b crews in the vicinity of Rava-
Russkaya. by 60 crews in the vicinity of Lutsk, by 65 crews in the

vicinity of Sokol'. and by 15 crews in a region southwest of Dvinsk.11

Long-range bomber aviation performed its missions persistently and with
high effectiveness, but it did suffer considerable losses. For example
41 crews flyin DB-Jf airplanes failed to return from their mission on

26 June 1951.1 The reasons for the losses included insufficient thought
to the organization of day combat sorties on the part of the air force
cos-mad. weak combat support by fighter escorts. and too low an altitude
for day bombing, considering the high density of antiaircraft resources
possessed by enemy mechanized units. This is why the Supreme High Command
Headquarters published an order on 3 July 1961 limiting the actions of
long-range bomber aviation to high altitude night flying. Use of long-
range bomber aviation at moderate altitudes in daytime was permitted on
the condition that a fighter escort was present and enemy antiaircraft
artillery was suppressed.13

in the period from 2) June to 19 July 1951 long-range bomber aviation
flew 2.112 combat sorties against enesw tanks and motorized columns.1‘

1he German troops suffered losses due to the actions of Soviet aviation.
In a number of cases attacks by large enemy forces were foiled owing to
effective strikes by our bombers and ground attack aircraft. 0n the
whole. however, the actions of Soviet aviation against enemy troops did
not haVe a noticeable influence on the success of the defensive actions
of ground troops in the initial period of the war. The efforts of the
air force were often dispersed. airplanes were not massed adequately on
the main axes. the weapons selection and the lethods and altitude of
bomb strikes were not always appropriate. and the tactics of bombers
and ground attack airplanes did not fit the situation.

The situation was also aggravated by the fact that extensive construction
of new airfields and reconstruction of existing ones. especially in the

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

western Ukraine. in western Belorussia. in Latvia. Lithuania, and Estonia.
where the airfield not was poorly developed. severely restricted maneuver
of frontal aviation. Moreover exercises held prior to the war and plans
written at that time foresaw maneuver of frontal aviation only in a for-
ward direction and to the flanks. Air stations were not earmarked for
aviation in the rear in the event of a withdrawal by ground troops. In
view of these reasons a number of the air units and formations of the
frontier military districts were forced to take to the air under their
own responsibility and redeploy at the nearest airfields in the rear when
fascist German tank or notarized columns approached our airfields in the
first 2 or 3 days. Because communications were interrupted. the efforts
of the frontal air force commands and the staff of the Soviet Army Air
Force in the first days of the war to organize maneuvers and timely
redeployment of air formations in the first echelon of frontal aviation
to back-up airfields did not always produce positive results. This is why
the commanders of air formations had to make their own decisions in a num-
ber of cases. Credit should be given to our remarkable air formation and
unit commanders and to all flight crews and technicians who made the cor-
rect decisions in such extremely difficult conditions and continued to
fight enemy aviation hard. making strikes of tangible proportions against
enemy troops in some sectors.

Analyzing the evolved situation. on the third day of the war the Soviet
Army Air Force Headquarters reported its ideas on how to make more effec-
tiVe use of frontal aviation to the General Staff. The report pointed
out the serious shortcomings in the way aviation was interacting with
ground troops. and the fact that aviation was dispersed into small groups
devoid of unified. centralized leadership on the part of the frontal air
force command. The suggestion was to conduct a number of massed strikes
against enemy airfieids with the participation of frontal aviation and
long-range bombers. The idea of using the aviation of neighboring fronts
for this purpose was boldly proposed. Ideas were ventured concerning the
need for organizing interaction between aviation and the troops more
efficiently and the need for assigning air liaison officers to the staffs
of combined arms armies with their own communication resources. The air
force proposals were accepted by the General Staff and brought to the
awareness of frontal commands and staffs in the appropriate directives.

In the first days of the war the Soviet Army Air Force Command organized
the fight for strategic air superiority on order of the General Staff.
The initiative in the air was to be taken away from the enemy at all
costs. Hithout this. it would have been impossible for ground troops to
be successful or for the country's transportation and industry to work
normally. The Germans tried to annihilate our aviation mainly at the
airfieids. At the beginning of the war the Soviet Command selected
another form of combat. in which massed raids of the Luftwaffe were

opposed by active offensive air battles fought by fighters within the
limits of each front. alternating with periodic strikes against air-
flolds. In these air battles. not only were airplanes annihilated but

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also the most experienced fascist pilots were killed. in some sectors
where the situation was favorable. Soviet pilots engaged in active air
battles simultaneously made powerful strikes against enemy airfields.
This was the situation that evolved in the first days of the war in the
northern sector of the Soviet-German front. where fascist German troops
did not go over to the offensive until 29 June 1961. In order to weaken
the enemy's air grouping on this axis and halt the preparations for a
raid on Leningrad. the Ne suc ordered the air force to prepare for and
conduct massed strikes against airfields in Finland and northern Norway.
where sir units of the German 5th Air Fleet and Finnish aviation were
based.

A plan to annihilate enemy airplanes at sirfields on the northwestern
axis was written by the air force command of the Northern front (com-
mander--ceneral A. A. Novikov. deputy commander for political affairs--
Brigade Commissar F. l. Usatyy. chief of staff--Genersl A. P. Nekrasov)
jointly with the air service of the Red banner Baltic fleet (commander--
General V. V. Yermachenkov) and the air service of the Northern Fleet
(commander--ceneral A. A. Kuznetsov). and on 20 June it was approved by
the Military Council of the Northern Front. in all, 5&0 airplanes were
committed to the operation.

£arly in the morning on 25 June, 236 bombers and 226 fighters made the
first massed strike against 19 airfields. The enemy did not expect such

a strike; he was in fact caught by surprise. and he was unable to organize
any countermeasures. As a result Soviet pilots successfully bombed parked
airplanes and fuel and ammunition dumps. They annihilated 61 enemy air-
planes at the airfields. Our aviation suffered no losses. in the next

5 days a few more effective strikes were made against the same airfielda
and new ones discovered by air reconnaissance. According to film taken
by nose cameras Soviet pilots attacking a total of 39 airfield: completed
about 1.000 aorties. annihilating and crippling 130 enemy airplanes.ls
The command of the fascist German troops in Finland and northern Norway
was forced to withdraw its aviation to airfields in the deep rear and
abandon plans for raiding Leningrad in the near future. This was the
first air operation of the Soviet Air Force. It had important military
significance. and it confirmed that Soviet frontal aviation was still
battleworthy.

0n 8 July lvél the he SNC organized a massed attack on enemy airfields
along almost the entire Soviet-German front.

An hq snc directive addressed to frontal commanders and the Soviet Army
Air Force commander on 7 July reported that the Luftwaffe might raid our
airfields on the morning of 8 July 1941. The air force was ordered to
initiate combat activities at 0300 hours on 8 July with a strike against
enemy airfields. and to subsequently transfer its efforts to the battle-
field and assist in defeating German mechanized troops.16

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At dawn on-B July long-range bomber formations attacked lb airfields
while the air services of the Northern. Northwestern. and Southwestern
fronts attacked 28 airfields. In all. ‘29 combat aorties were flown.
Nany airplanes were annihilated on enemy airfields. to include 5%
German airplanes put out of action by the Western Front's air ssrvice.17

In the period from 22 June to lo July l9bl the Soviet Air Force annihi-
lated more than a thousand enemy airplanes at airfields and in the air.18

Former fascist generals and officers who had written the book “World War
1939-1965" were forced to recognize the great losses German aviation
suffered in the first days of the war on the Soviet-German front: "...tho
losses of German aviation were not as insignificant as some had believed.
in the first 16 days of battle. more airplanes were lost than in any sub-
sequent sinilar intervals of time. In the period from 22 June to 5 July
1961 the Luftwaffe lost 807 airplanes of all types. and in the period

from 6 to 19 July it lost 677. These losses imply that despite the
Germans the Russians managed to find the time and strength for decisive
opposition."19

in contrast to the first months of world Har II. when after achieving air
supremacy in actions against Poland. France. and other countries of Europe
fascist German aviation encountered no countermeasures whatsoever in the
air. it met stubborn resistance on the Soviet-German front.

Supporting the ground troops. the air force directed its main efforts at
annihilating the enemy's troops and equipment. The swift advance of the
enemy's strike groupings on the most important strategic axes forced the
frontal commanders to use the bulk of aviation against German mechanized
columns and to support friendly defending troops. in the first 18 days
of the war Soviet aviation flew 45.000 combat sorties to repel the enemy
attack and support ground troops (about 10,000 by the Northern Front's
air service. more than 8.000 by the Northwestern Front's air service.
about 7,000 by the western Pront's air service. more than 10,000 by the
Southwestern Front's air service. more than 5.000 by the Southern Front's
air service. and more than 2,000 sorties by long-range bomber aviation).20

Many air units and formations distinzuished themselves in these battles.
receiving praise from the military councils of the combined arms cruise
and the fronts: in the Northern Front--the 2d Nixed Air Division (com-
nander--Colonel r. P. Arkhangel'skly). in the Northwestern Pront--S7th
Mixed Air Division (commander--Colonel K. A. Katichev), in the Western
Front--12th. 13th. and 66th bomber air divisions (commanders--Colonal

V. I. Aladinskiy. General F. P. Polynin. and Colonel D. R. Pisarskiy).
in the Southwestern Pront--62d Bomber Air Division (commander--Colonel
V. V. Smirnov). and in the Southern Front--2lst nixed Air Division
(commander--Coloncl D. P. Galunov).21

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many pilots defending the socialist fatherland died in savage engage-
ments. displaying unprecedented bravery and heroism. On 26 June 1961
Captain N. P. Gastello. commander of an air squadron in the 207th Air
Regiment, 62d Bomber Division. and the crew members of his bomber--
Lieutenants A. A. Burdenyuk and 6. h. Skorobogatyy and Senior Sergeant
A. A. Kalinin--committed an act of heroism in the sky above Belorussia
of unparalleled bravery and selflessness. when the bomber caught fire
in the air after being struck by an antiaircraft shell. rather than
abandoning the aircraft by parachute all of the crew members aimed the
burning craft at an accumulation of German troops.

The 601st fighter Air Regiment commanded by hero of the Soviet Union
Lieutenant Colonel S. P. Suprin fouﬂtt fascist German aviation success-
fully in Mic-3 airplanes. 0n 5 July 1941 s. P. Suprin died in an air
battle against superior enemy forces. He was awarded his second "Gold
Star" medal posthumously for his bravery and heroien. This was the first
twice-awarded Hero of the Soviet Union in the Great Patriotic Her; the

first to be awarded the lofty Hero of the Soviet Union title at the start
of the war were fighter pilots N. P. Zhukov, S. I. Zdorovtsev. and P. T.
Kharitonov.

In a critical time for the Soviet Union the Communist Party and the Soviet
Government implemented extraordinary measures to mobilize all of the coun-
try's resources to repel the aggression. and to fundamentally restructure
the country's life and activity on a war footing. On 29 June 1961 a
directive of the USSR SNK and the cc VKP(b) to party and soviet organi-
zations in the combat zones presented a program for organizing the

enemy's expulsion. Its basic premises were later presented and elabo-
rated upon hy l. V. Stalin in a radio broadcast on 3 July, and spelled

out more concretely in a number of subsequent decisions of the party and
government. The Soviet Armed Forces were given the mission of wearing
down and exhausting "itler’s troops, defeating and expelling them from
Soviet land. and helping the peoples of Europe to cast off the fascist
yoke. Established on JO June 1961. the State Defense Committee headed

by I. V. Stalin became the organ in which all of the country's power was
concentrated.

Organizational Reinforcement of the Soviet Air Force

The headquarters of the Main Command was created on 23 June 1961 with

S. K. Timoshenko at its head to provide strategic direction to the Soviet
Armed Forces. On 10 July it was reorganized as the Supreme Command Head-
quarters hesded by I. V. Stalin. On 19 July I. V. Stalin became the
people's commissar of defense. and on 8 August he assumed the title
supreme commander in chief of the USSR Armed Forces. From that time on
the Headquarters began to be called the Supreme High Command headquarters
("q SHC).

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An order of the Main Command Headquarters dated 29 June 1961 instituted
the post of Soviet Army Air Force commander and created the Air Force
Military Council. General P. F. Zhigarov was appointed air force com-
mander. and Corps Commissar P. 8. Stepanov was appointed member of the
Military Council. The Air force Main Directorate and Headquarters were
subordinated directly to the air force commander.

Introduction of the post of air force commander and creation of the mili-
tary council significantly broadened the command functions of the air
force command and staff. which improved management of the air force.
especially in relation to its strategic application. heightened the com-
bat readiness of newly formed air units and formations, and improved
their operational and logistical support. The Soviet Army Air Force
commander and his staff were assigned organization of the fight for
strategic air superiority. maintenance of interaction between the arms
of aviation. coordination of their effort in the strategic operations of
groups of fronts and the independent air operations of the air force.
management of the combat activities of long-range bomber aviation, gen-
eralization of air force combat experience, and development of proposals
on strategic use of the air force. Moreover the air force command
retained the functions of training air reserves and managing aviation-
technical supply, developing proposals on creation of new types of air-

planes and armament. managing construction of airfields. training and
retraining flight crews and technicians. generalizing air force combat

experience and introducing it into the units and formations. These com-
mand functions differed significantly from the functions assigned to the
chief of the Air Force Main Directorate at the eve of the war.22

The Soviet Army Air Force Military Council was composed of the air force
commander and his deputies, the directors of the aviation sections of the
CC VKP(b). the people's commissar of aviation industry. the chief of the
Directorate of the Air Engineering Service. the chief of the Air Force
Orders Directorate. and other executives. The military council was
headed by the air force commander who. as council chairman. coordinated
and directed the work of all other military council members jointly with
another military council relieved of other duties. The military council
discussed and resolved many issues concerning the activities of aviation.
The existing organizational structure of frontal air services would still
not permit adequate massing of aviation and its centralized control on
the main axes. Frontal aviation continued to be dispersed among combined
arms armies, and its actions were often uncoordinated.

The problem of massing and achieving centralized control of aviation was
aoIVed in part by creation of main commands for three axes--northwestern.
western. and southwestern--and establishment of air force commands on
these axes on 10 July 1961. The air force commanders of the appropriate
fronts were appointed air force commanders of these axes: northwestern--
General A. A. Novikov. western--Colonel N. F. Naumenko, southwestern--
General F. Ya. Falaleyev. Such unification was advantageous to the air

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

force. For example the air services of the Northern and Northwestern
fronts. the air service of the Red Banner Baltic Fleet. and part of the
forces of the VII Fighter Air Corps of the Leningrad Antiaircraft
District were combined on the northwestern axis under the leadership

of the air force commander of the northwestern axis. A single plan of
the combat activities of all Leningrad aviation was developed and adopted
for implementation. It not only made it possible to unite the efforts of
aviation but also permitted more economical and efficient use of forces
with the best results. At the and of July 1961. in 22 days of battle on
the far approaches to Leningrad the combined forces of aviation flew
16,567 sorties. inflicting significant losses on the enemy.23 Unifica-
tion of the efforts of aviation under the sole leadership of the senior
air chief on the strategic axis laid the basis for a new form of air
force command and control. The aviation of the western and southwestern
axes engaged in active combat operation.

Control of aviation by the command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force
also improved somewhat. 0n 7 July 1961 the Air Force Military Council
summarized and analyzed the losses our aviation suffered at the sirfields
in the first 16 days of the war. and it published a directive to frontal
air force commanders concerning mandatory camouflaging of airfields and
measures for reducing losses of airplanes due to strikes against air-
fields by enemy nviation.2‘ Implementation of this directive played a
major role in reducing losses of airplanes caused by enemy air strikes.

The first days of the war also revealed imperfections in the organiza-
tional structure of a number of units within the Soviet Army Air Force
Headquarters. There were not enough officers in Air Force Headquarters
for 24-hour operation. For practical purposes some sections were still

just beginning to form at this time.

The work of Air Force Headquarters was extremely intense. As compared to
the peacetime work volume. that of all sections of Air force Headquarters
increased by several orders of magnitude. Section One needed at least
three or four officers working in two shifts for every operating axis.
and there were five such axes on which combat activities were proceed-
ing--northern. northwestern. western. southwestern. and southern. More-
over there had to be two permanent officers to keep records on the combat
strength of the entire air force, two officers were needed to prepare
combat reports and operational summaries submitted three times a day to
the General Staff. two officers were needed to maintain the maps of the
general ground and air situation, and several officers were needed to
handle the operational documents pertaining to air services in all the
rest of the frontier and internal military districts. 0n the third day
of the war Colonel I. H. Ruthie. who had just been assigned to the post
of air force deputy chief of staff. became acting air force chief of
staff. New officers were appointed deputy chiefs of staff--Colonel H. l.
Krolenko from the staff of a long-range bomber corps and Colonel B. A.
Ageyev from a military academy. New officers. to include several under

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the command of Colonel H. V. Shcherbekov from the instructor staff of
the Air Force Military Academy of Command and Naval Personnel joined the
staff to reinforce the principal sections. Colonels V. V. Storozhenko
and M. V. Shcherbakov began to direct the operations of Air Force head-
quarter'a main section in shifts. These replacements and transfers of
the first days of the war had an unfavorable effect on the rhythmicity
of the air force staff's work. since the new officers were totally
unfamiliar with the position of the troops. their disposition. or the
situation at the front.

Organizational measures were implemented in air force units and formations
in July-August. The reason for these measures lay in the fact that our
air formations. corpn. multiragiment divisions. and air regiments. which
possessed 60 airplanes. were found to be heavy and cumbersome. making
maneuverablc combat difficult. and in the fact that the cumbersomcness

of these formations hindered dispersal of airplanes at sirfields and made
it easier for the elemy to destroy them on the ground. The air force's
combat experience in the first weeks of the war demonstrated that air
regiments with a strength of 30 airplanes. divisions containing two air
regiments. and no corps formations was the best form of organization in
terms of both facility of command and control and the possibilities for
maneuvering in response to an enemy attack. This is why the "q SHC
decided to gradually reorganize air regiments with a strength of 32 air-
planes and air divisions consisting of two regiments.

The General Staff sent the appropriate directives to the frontal and
air force commands in compliance with the State Defense Committee's

7 August 1961 decision. The Soviet Army Air Force commander published
an order on [0 August 1961.

in accordance with this order tactical bomber regiments in frontal avia-
tion were now organized with a composition of three squadrons and a
strength of 32 airplanes (two bomber and one fighter air squadrons with
a strength of 10 airplanes each. and two bombers assigned to the regi-
mental command). Ground attack air regiments also assumed the same
organization. but the number of airplanes in each regiment was 33.

Creation of mixed sir regiments corresponded to the situation of the
first months of the war. but subsequently they failed to justify their
existence. Uniform regiments were created. A 20 August 1961 order of
the USSR NKO [People's Commissariat of Defense] reorganized all air
regiments receiving new airplanes--ll-2. Pe-Z. Yak-l--into uniform
regiments with a composition of two squadrons having nine airplanes each.
with two alrplanes in the regiment. Hays were also sought to create air
reserves in frontal aviation. The experience of the first months of the
war showed that if aviation were to be concentrated on the main axes of
the ground troops, if strikes by the Luftwaffe were to be parried. if air
groups were to be created on new axes. and if other problems were to be
solved, the Supreme high Command would have to possess large, powerful.
highly maneuverable air reserves.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The aviation of internal districts was an air reserve to some extent at
the beginning of the war. For exasple two nixed air divisions were
transferred in June 1961 fros the air service of the Moscow Military
District to the western and Southwestern fronts. and one fighter and one

nixed air division were transferred from the Transbaykal and from the Far
Elat.25‘26

An order of the USSR NRO dated 21 July 1961 laid the basis for creating
six organic reserve air groups (RAG) subordinated to ﬂq sac and used for
independent missions and for assistance to frontal air services. In all
by the end of 1961 six organic reserve air groups were formed, each
possessing 60-100 warplanes. Reserve air groups were utilized success-
fully as follows: 1st and 6th in the Brysnsk and Southwestern fronts.
the 2d and 3d in the Leningrad and Volkhov fronts. the 6th in the South-
western Pront. and the 5th in the Southern Front.

In addition to organic reserve air groups, tesporsry (nonorgsnic) air
reserve groups were created in fall 1961 out of frontal air units and

newly formed air regiaents commanded by Generals I. F. Petrov and G. P.
Kravchenko.

A hard struggle evolved against fascist German troops on the left wing
of the Hestern Front in July 1961 in the region between the Dniepr and
Berezina rivers. The Central Front. composed of the 13th and 21st armies
and frontal aviation (frontal aviation connander, General G. A.
Vorozheykin). was foraed on this axis on 26 July 1961 by decision of
the Headquarters of the Supreme High Counsnd. In order to strengthen
the position and create deeper defenses on the western axis. a head-
quarters order published on 30 July formed the Reserve Front consisting
of six combined ares armies and frontal aviation (frontal aviation cos-
sandor. General B. A. Pogrebov and, as of 1 August. General Ye. M.
Nikolayenko). The Bryansk Front (frontal aviation commander, General
?. P. Polynin) was created on 16 August to cover the Bryansk axis. The
nission of the Bryansk Front was to perfora two counterstrikes-one
against the flank of the 2d Tank Group in the vicinity of Starodub and
another in the vicinity of Roslavl' in interaction with troops of the
Reserve Pront--and to delay the enemy's offensive. The Central Front
was disbanded by decision of the Headquarters on 25 August 1961. Its

troops were transferred to the Bryansk Front.

To aid the front's troops in their mission, on 27 August "q ShC ordered
the commander of the Soviet Army Air Force to prepare an air operation
with the objective of defeating Guderisn's tank group in the vicinity of
Pochep. Starodub. and Shostha and to halt his advance on bryansk. and to
conduct this operation in the period from 29 August to 6 September 1961
with the combined efforts of the aviation of three neighboring fronts.
The 1st Reserve Air Group, and part of the forces of long-range bomber
aviation.27 The plan for the operation was written by officers of Air
Force headquarters. The Bryansk Front's air service contributed 95

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

warplanes. the air service of the former Central Front contributed 56. the
frontal air services of the reserve armies contributed 120. the 1st Reserve
Air Group contributed 95. and long-range bomber aviation contributed 100
bombers. for a total of 465 warplanes (230 bombers. 55 ground attack air-
planes. and 179 fighters). The plan was reviewed by the Air Force Mili-
tary Council and signed by Air force Deputy Commander General I. F. Petrov.
Military Council Member Corps Commissar P. S. Stepanov. and Acting Air
Force Chief of Staff Colonel I. N. Rukhle.

In its approval of the plan for the air operation dated 27 August 1961.
the supreme high commander wrote: "The enesw columns must be battled
constantly. wave after wave. all day from morning til night to keep the
enemy from enjoying a breathing spell or regaining his senses in gen-
eral."28 Air Force Headquarters brought these directives of the supreme
high commander to the awareness of the appropriate frontal aviation com-
manders. General I. F. Petrov. who was in charge of aviation. contributed
to the operation. implemented the directives of the supreme high commander
concretely through daily orders prepared by his operational group of air
force staff officers. The air operation lasted 6 days. Beginning on

29 August bombers and ground attack airplanes made constant strikes
against enemy tank columns. Thus on 30 and 31 August our pilots flew two
sorties per night aboard heavy four-engine TB-J bombers. three or four per
day in SD. Pe-Z. and 11-2 airplanes. and six or seven sorties per day in
fighters. During the entire time of the operation Soviet aviation flow
more than 4.000 sorties.29

Recalling the actions of aviation. Marshal of the Soviet Union A. I.
Yeremenko wrote: "Thus on 30 and 31 August...as many as about 1.500
sorties were flown, 6.500 bombs of various types were dropped. more than
100 tanks. over 800 motor vehicles. 180-290 wagons, 20 armored vehicles,
and a fuel dump were annihilated. 60 fires were started in enemy columns.
and SS airplanes were knocked down and destroyed."30 (Our losses were

62 airplanes.)

Cuderian, commander of the German 2d Tank Group. wrote in his memoirs:
"On 29 August large enemy forces initiated an offensive against the
XXIV Tank Corps from the south and west with the support of aviation.
The corps was compelled to halt the advance of the 3d Tank Division and
the 10th Motorized Division."300

The supreme high commander was interested in the progress of the air
operation aimed at halting the offensive of the enemy's 2d Tank Group.

0n 6 September 1941 he sent the following telegram: "Bryansk. To Petrov
via Yeremenko. Aviation is operating well, but it could operate better
If reconnaissance airplanes would call in the bombers quickly by radio.
rather than upon returning to their landing points. Stay with the
Bryansk Front until the end of the operation to defeat Guderian. I wish
you sucCess. Regards to all pilots. I. Stalin."31

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a result of the strong counterstrikea by our troops and the active
operations of aviation. the enemy's tank strike grouping suffered sig-
nificant losses and its rate of advance was sharply reduced. But

despite heroic resistance and powerful strikes by our aviation. the
front's troops could not halt the enemy. The enemy's tank formations
broke through the left flank of the Brysnsk Front beyond the Deana River
and reached the Konotop-Chernigov line on 10 September.32 At the same
Lien savage battles were going on south of Smolensk. where troops of the
Western and Reserve fronts were holding back enemy troops with air sup-
port. Although Smolensk had been abandoned by our troops as long ago as
on 16 July. fighting went on east of the city for another month. Long-
range bomber corps were brought in to organize powerful strikes against
the advancing enemy and assist frontal troops in destroying his Smolensk-
Yartsevo Grouping. Thus on 26-28 July 1941. 100 airplanes were reassigned
from i Bomber Corps. and 100 bombers and 150 fighters were contributed by
the Reserve Front for this purpose. As a result of the strikes of these
forces the enemy suffered great losses of men and equipment. The actions
of Soviet aviation were also highly effective in other sectors of the
western Front. An order of Marshal of the Soviet Union 3. K. Timoshenko.
the front troOp cosmander. stated the following concerning the actions

of our aviation: "On 21 and 22 August the enemy attempted to halt the
movement of our troops; he committed large tank forces and mechanized
troops, presumptuously attacking our units. But the days of easy vic-
tories for the enemy were in the past.... The glorious 6bth and 50th
rifle divisions and the valorous 67th Air Division (61st and 215th
Ground Attack and 129th Fighter air regiscnts) destroyed the fascist
tanks and compelled the Germans to retreat in disorder. The enemy lost
up to 130 tanks. more than 100 motor vehicles, many guns. much ammuni-
tion. and 1.000 killed and wounded."33

During the time of the Smolensk operation. which lasted 2 months. the
Soviet Air Force flew about 20.000 sorties. The air services of the
western and other neighboring fronts and long-range bomber aviation
annihilated 700 enemy airplanes in air battles and at airfields.3“

The front line changed with every day. Enemy troops moved deeper and
deeper into our country. The enemy began flying bombing raids on Moscow
and Leningrad. The mission of the Germans was to destroy Moscow from

the air. The first raid on the capital was made on the night of 22 July
1961. with 250 enesy airplanes participating.35 The raid continued for

5 hours. The beams of dozens of searchlights crisscrossed the night sky.
Antieircraft artillery waged intense defensive fire. and fighters
attacked enemy bombers in their assigned zones. In this night our fight-
ers knocked down 12 fascist German airplanes while antiaircraft artillery
destroyed 10. Only occasional enemy bombers penetrated to Moscow. and
although they did manage to unload their bombs they did not cause sig-
nificant damage. A few homes and structures in the city center and on
its outskirts were destroyed. And yet serious shortcomings were revealed
in repulsion of the enemy rsid.

47

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Emergency measures implemented by the General Staff and the Soviet Army
Air Force Command to correct the revealed shortcomings made it possible

to repel subsequent enemy air raids on Moscow with greater organization
and effectiveness.

German airplanes could penetrate the screens of antiaircraft fire and
patrolling fighters and reach Moscow with decreasing frequency. Between
22 July and 15 August 1961 the enemy flew 18 night raids on Moscow. From
100 to 120 bombers participated in each of eight of them and from 50 to

80 airplanes participated in each of the rest. The greater share of the
enemy bombers were unable to penetrate to the city. Out of 1.700 air-
planes participating in the raids, only about 70 made it to the capital.36

Because the Luftwaffe was making systematic raids on Moscow and Leningrad

the Soviet Supreme High Command decided to make retaliatory raids on the
capital of fascist Germany--Berlin. This mission was given to an air

group of the lat Mine-Torpedo Regiment of the Red Banner Baltic Fleet‘s

air service under the command of Regimental Commander Ye. M. Preobrozhenskiy;
this group of DB-3 airplanes made its first raid on Berlin on the night of

8 August 1961 from an airfield on Ezel' lsland.37

In addition to aviation of the Red Banner Baltic Fleet, the 81st Air
Division of long-range bomber aviation bombed Berlin under the command

of Brigade Commander M. V. Vodop'yanov (Colonel A. Ye. Golovanov as of

17 August).38 Jointly with the air force's Fifth Directorate the Soviet
Army Air Force staff wrote out the combat assignments of the 81st Air
Division and insured safe passage through the front line for the bombers.
In all orior to 4 September l9bl Soviet pilots made 10 raids on Berlin

in small groups of heavy bombers. Several hundred heavy high-explosive
bombs were dropped on military objectives in Berlin.

In the period from 10 July to 30 September l9bl long-range bomber aviation
and bombers of the Red Banner Baltic and the Red Banner Black Sea fleets
struck the enemy's industrial facilities in Koenigsberg. Danzig. Helsinki.
Harsaw. Constanta, Plocsti. Bucharest, Sulina, and in other cities.
Between 10 and 30 July just pilots of the IV Bomber Air Corps made eight
raids on petroleum industry enterprises in Ploesti, Constanta, and
Bucharest. As a result of the raids the productive capacity of the
Romanian petroleum industry dropped by 30 percent.39

A 13 August 1961 ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet
awarded the hero of the Soviet Union title to 10 airmen. Of these. five
were naval pilots--Colonel Ye. M. Preobrazhenakiy and Captains V. A.
Grcchishnikov, A. Ya. Yefremov, M. N. Plotkin. and P. I. Khokhlov, and

five were valorous airmen in long-range aviation-Majors V. I. Shchelkunov
and V. l. Malygin. Captains V. G. Tikhonov and N. V. Kryukov. and
Lieutenant V. l. Lalthonin.“o

08

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aviation of the fronts, the Red Banner Baltic Fleet, the VII Leningrad
Air Defense Corps, and long-range bomber aviation played a great role
In defensive engagements of troops on the far and near approaches to
Leningrad. It actively supported and covered the ground troops, fought
fascist German aviation in the air, annihilated enemy airplanes at air-
fields, and struck enemy facilities in the strategic rear. Between the
start of the war and 30 September 1941 Soviet pilots flew about 60,000
combat sortiee on the Leningrad axis."1

General Grigoriy Alekseyevich Vorozheykin was appointed to the post of
Soviet Army Air Force chief of staff in August 1941. He began army
service as a private back in 1915, volunteered for the Red Army in 1918,
participated in the Civil War, and he became a Communist Party member in
1927; at the end of 1932 Vorozheykin was transferred to aviation from
his post as commander of the 16th Rifle Division, Leningrad Military
District."2 In 1933 he graduated from the operations school of the Air
Force Academy imeni Zhukovskiy and was appointed commander of the 200th
Light Bomber Air Brigade. Soon G. A. Vorozheykin was appointed assistant
to the commander of the Special Rad Banner Far Eastern Army. At the eve
of the Great Patriotic War he was serving as air force commander of the
Volga Military District; when the war began he was given command of the
air services of the 21st Army, and then the air services of the Central
Front. It was from this post that G. A. Vorozheykin transferred to the
Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters. The work of the Air Force Head-
quarters was made more efficient.

The post of air force chief of rear services was established on 19 August
by order of the USSR NKD. The post was filled by General N. N. Sokolov-
Sokolenok. The directorates of rear organization, airfield construction,
and intendance and the field supply section were within his administra-
tion. Creation of a central air force rear services agency played a
positive role in reinforcing and improving the overall system of rear
support to air units and formations. As before, the problems of supply-
ing aircraft, equipment, and ammunition remained within the responsibil-

ity of the Air Force Directorate of Orders and Technical Supply, subordi-
nated to the commander of the Soviet Army Air Force.

The Senior Air Chiefs of the Air Force on the Fronts of the War

Fall was approaching. The enemy moved deeper and deeper into our country.
The enemy's thrusts grew very strong. The situation was becoming criti-
cal at Moscow, at Leningrad, and in the Ukraine.

By the end of September 1941 the overall strategic situation was not to
our advantage. German troops had reached Leningrad, captured Vitebsk
and Smolensk, and reached the Helitopol'-Zaporozh'ye-Krasnograd line
in the south. 0n the western axis the enemy concentrated new forces in
the vicinities of Dukhovshchina, Yartsevo, Smolensk, Roslavl', Shostka.
and Glukhov, preparing for a new offensive on Moscow. On 30 September

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

the enemy began a new major offensive with a thrust by the 2d Tank Group
against the troops of the Bryansk Front from the vicinity of Shostka and
Glukhov in the direction of Sevsk, and on 2 October the main forces of
Army Group Center attacked positions of the Western Front. The great
battle of Moscow began.

As early as on the first day of the offensch the German 2d Tank Group"3
penetrated our defenses and reached the rear of the 13th Army. 0n the
next day the Germans also broke through into the zone of the 50th Army.“‘
Troops of the Bryansk Front found themselves in a difficult situation.
The no She took emergency steps to bring in the main forces of long-range
bomber aviation for strikes against the enemy's advancing tank grouping.
0n the night of 2 October 1951 the General Staff sent an order to the
commander of the Soviet Army Air Force to immediately assign destruction
of the enemy tank grouping that had broken through in the vicinity of
Glukhov and Sevsk to the AOth. 62d. 51st. and 52d bomber air divisions

of long-range bomber aviation (the division commanders were. correspond-
ingly. Colonels V. Ye. Baturin and M. Kh. Borisenko. Lieutenant Colonel
Ye. F. Loginov. and Colonel A. H. Duboshin). and to the 81st Special
Purpose Air Division (commander, Colonel A. Ye. Golovanov). The command
of this group of air forces was assigned to Air Force Deputy Chief of
Staff Colonel l. N. Rukhle. who was ordered to place himself at the dis-
posal of the troop commander of the Bryansk Front on 2 October. Fighter
cover to the bombers was assigned to General F. P. Polynin, air force
commander of the Bryansk Front."S

On that some night Air Force headquarters formed a small operational
group which left by air for the Bryensk Front under the command of
Colonel l. N. Rukhle. A preliminary order from Air Force headquarters
assigned the mission of striking the enemy tank grouping to the bomber
air divisions listed above. and details concerning place and time were
later added by the command post of the Bryansk Front troop commander.
The hryansk Front aviation. the composition of which included the just-
formed 6th Reserve Air Group (commander. General A. A. Dcmidov) struck
enemy tank columns on roads and airplanes st airfields during the day,
and the bomber divisions of long-range bomber aviation conducted their
operations at night. Fighters were also brought in for this mission.
Aviation's active. continuous operations day and night created bottle-
necks on the roads, reduced the enemy's rate of advance, and won time
for the he ShC reserves to regroup and occupy defensive lines. General
Cuderian. former German commander of the 2d Tank Group, wrote the fol-
lowing In his book "Memoirs of a Soldier" in his description of the
events of A October 1941: "l was rather impressed by the activities of
Russian aviation. A raid by Russian aviation occurred immediately after
I landed at Sevck Airfield.... Then enemy aviation bombed the head-
quarters huilding.... Then I set off for the road on which the 3d Tank
Division was advancing. Once again we were subjected to several bomb
strikes by Russian hoabers."‘° Despite the activeness of our aviation,
troops of the hryansk Front could not hold the enemy back. Troop command

50

FOR OFFICIAL USd ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and control on the part of the frontal command was seriously disturbed.
The events developed swiftly. Attempts of "q SWO to help the front with
their operations did not produce the desired result.

The command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force attentively followed
the operation to repel the enemy offensive. Great shortcomings could be
felt in organization of interaction between aviation and troops. 0n

0 October 1951 a directive calling for improVement of interaction between
aviation and troops was sent to the air force commanders of the fronts
and the separate combined arms armies. and to the commanders of the
reserve air groups. The directiVe stated the need for the commanders
directing the air divisions personally or their deputies to visit the
command posts of combined arms chiefs together with operational groups;
coded maps. procedure charts. and set signals were to be in commas with
those of the troops; checkpoints containing air communication posts
intended for transmission of commands to airplanes in the air to attack
ground targets or to halt an attack had to be organized in the vicinity
of the combined arms commander's command post.‘7

A difficult situation also evolved on the main axis of the Western Front.
The enemy managed to penetrate the defenses of our troops. The enemy's
strike groupings advanced swiftly, enveloping the entire Vyaz’ma grouping
from the south and north. The enemy achieved a breakthrough at the
boundary between the Western Front's 30th and 19th armies. On 6 October
his mobile formations reached Vyar'ma from the north. Simultaneously

the Germans broke through along the Warsaw highway within the zone of the
Reserve Frost's de Army. On 6-5 October they captured the area of Spas-
Dcmensk and Yukhnov. having enveloped the Vyaz'mn grouping of Soviet
troops from the south. By 7 October the Western Front's 19th and 20th
armies and the Reserve Frost's 25th and 32d armies were encircled west
and northwest of Vyaz'ma. Encircled troops continued to offer stubborn
resistance. pinning down 28 enemy divisions in this area. On 3 October
the Germans captured Orel and raced toward Tula. 0n 6 October the enemy
occupied Karachev and Bryansk. On 7 October 1951 at 0540 hours the chief
of General Staff issued orders in the name of the "q SHC to the troop
commander of the Western Front. the chief of staff. and the Soviet Army
Air Force member of the Military Council obliging Corps Commisssr P. S.
Stepanov to place himself at the disposal of Western Front Commander

l. S. Konev and organize massed air strikes against enemy troops
operating against the Western Front.

All of the Western Frost's aviation was subordinated to him for these
purposes for the time of the mission. and in addition the "q ShC reserve
contributed four air regiments (one regiment of ground attack airplanes.
two regiments of rocket carrying MIG-3's, and one regiment of Pe-Z bamb-
ers).‘ Permission was given to call in some of the aviation of the
Moscow Military District and long-range bomber aviation. Our aviation
completed its missions in difficult conditions. In 9 days it completed
2.850 sortie: and inflicted losses on the fascist German troops. but it
could not stop their advance.

51

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The enemy continued to reign supreme in the air. In the first 9 days of
the October offensive about 4.000 overflights by German aviation were
registered within the zone of the Hestern Front."9 Stubborn engagements
and battles went on on land and in the air. The enemy's strike groupings
wedged themselves deeply into the dafs'ses of Soviet troops on some axes.
0n 5 October the State Defense Comai'. 9 adopted a special decision on
Moscow's defense. The Mozhaysk line of defense. which passed from
Volokolamsk to Kaluga. was set as the main line of resistance of the
western Front's troops. 0a 10 October the western and Reserve fronts
were combined into the single Hastern Front under the coummnd of Army
General 6. K. Zhudov by decision of the General headquarters. Frontal
aviation was combined correspondingly. The no sac and the air force com-
mand took emergency steps to strengthen the Soviet aviation operating on
the western axis. Two long-range bomber air divisions were transferred
from the Transceucasian Front. and newly formed air units arrived from
the country's rear.

The Moscow Military District's air services were used as the basis to
create on air group under the command of N. A. Sbytov; this group was
reinforced by the 46th high-Speed Bomber Regiment armed with Pe-Z air-
planes. the 65th and 263d ground attack regiments armed with 11-2 air-
planes. snd a squadron armed with Po-Z airplanes. The group provided
tangible air supgort to troops of the 5th Army covering the Mozhaysk
line of defense. 0

On order of the "q sue the air services of the neighboring Northwestern
Front and some of the forces of the VI Fighter Air Defense Corps (com-
mander, Colonel A. I. Mitenkov) were called in to cover troops of the
Western Front and make raids on enemy troops and airfields. A4 of

10 October 1961 the V1 Fighter Air Defense Corps had one bomber and 17
fighter air regiments. 366 serviceable warplanes. and £16 pilots of whom
118 were able to fly night missions in complex weather mnditions.51

Night-flying air regiments armed with PO-Z. R-5, and R-Z airplanes began
to be formed in this difficult period of the war out of military school
instructors and pilots who had graduated from the Osoaviakhim [Society
for Assistance to the Defense. Aviation. and Chemical Construction of the
USSR] schools. Between October and December 1941, 71 air regiments armed
with PO-Z's. 27 air regiments armed with R-S's. and 5 air regiments armed
with u—Z’s were formed in the air force. By decision of the he sac the
Kalinin Front and a frontal air service consisting of five air regiments
(frontal air force commander. Major General of Aviation N. K. Trifonov)
were formed on 17 October out of armies on the right wing of the western
Front with the purpose of combining the troops covering Moscow from the
nrrthwest. The command did everything to alter the balance of power in
the air in our favor and. through air strikes. make a maximum impact on
fascist German troops attempting to break through to Moscow.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

At the beginning of October 19é1 the no SHC became aware of preparations
being made for a mass air attack by German aviation.

On 19 October 1961 the he snc issued a directive to the Soviet Army Air
Force commander stating that according to espionage data the enemy was

to make a massed air raid on industrial and air centers. rail terminals.
bridges. crossings. headquarters. supply stations. and troop combat for-
mations along the entire western front with a force of l,000-l.500 air-
planes on 12-13 October 19‘1. The air force commander was ordered to
organize. in the night of 11-12 October and in the morning and day of

12 October. decisive annihilation of enemy aviation at airfields on the
northwestern, western, and southwestern axes; to take steps to disperse
friendly airplanes at airfields; to heighten the readiness of air defense
resources for repelling enemy air raids.$2 The directive was used by the
command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force to develop a plan for the
air force's actions to annihilate enemy airplanes at airfields in the
period fron 11 to 18 October. Long-range bomber air foreations and the
air services of the Northwestern. western, Bryansk. Southwestern. and
Seuthcrn fronts were called in for this mission. The plan of the air
force command was submitted to the “q SHC through the General Staff.

After its approval by the command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force
combat orders were issued to the appropriate air force cosmmnders of the
fronts and to commanders of long-range bomber air formations. In terms
of scope. the forces called in. and the attained results. the air force's
actions against the airfields were in essence an air force air operation.
conducted on a broad front. within a short time. and with decisive goals.
its results weze extremely high. The air force commander reported to the
he snc: "In the period from 11 to 18 October 1941 the Red Army Air Force
made a number of bomb strikes against enemy airfields on the northwestern.
western. and southern axes. In just 2 days (11 and 12 October) and in the
night of 13 October 166 airplanes were annihilated at the airfields of
Vitebsk. Smolensk, Orel, Orshe. Sivarsk. N. Dugin, and other cities. And
according to incomplete data not less than $00 enemy airplanes were annihi-

lated at airfields between 11 and 18 October.... The strikes against the
airfields caused significant losses in enemy aviation, as a result of which

the enemy's plan for a mass attack was failed."53

The Luftwaffe weakened its strikes against the combat formations of our
troops. but the front continued to approach Moscow. Another line of
defense was created at the immediate approaches to Moscow by a decision
of the State Defense Committee published 12 October. The city's and
oblast's laborers took an active part in its construction. Responding

to a party appeal. 550,000 persons. wonen for the most part. participated
in construction of the defensive structures on the approaches to Moscow
and within the city ltself. Enterprises providing weapons and ammunition
to the capital's defenders worked in three shifts.53ﬂ

Party-political work acquired special significance in those days. Its
content was defined by decisions of the party Central Cosmittec. The

53

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following slogans were publicised: “We Are Defending Our Capitsll."
“Defeat of the Fascist German Invaders Must Begin at Moscow!"53b

All of the actlvlties of the capital's party organization were subordi-
nated to the Interests «I Moscow's defense. within several days 25
separate communist and workers companies and battalions 75 percent manned
by communists and Konsomol members were formed in Moscow. Just within
the first half of October Moscow gave the front 50.000 soldiers.53c

In mid-October 1941 the personnel of the General Staff and Air force Head-
quarters were divided into two echelons in compliance with a decision of
the "q SMC having the goal of insuring dependable troop command and con-
trol. The first echelon remained in Moscow while the second was evacuated
eastward. to the vicinity of Kuybyshev.

The first (field) echelon of the headquarters of the standing army's air
force consisted at that time of Air Force Commander General P. P. Zhigarev,
Military Council Member Army Commissar 2d Rank P. S. Stepanov. Air Force
Chief of Staff General 6. A. Vorozheykin. Military Staff Commissar

Brigade Commissar A. V. Calichev, and Deputy chief of Staff Colonel A. P.
Belyayev.

The following generals and officers were the chiefs of directoratcs and
sections. their deputies. and principal officers of the air force's field
staff: M. V. Shcherbakov, V. V. Stororhenko. V. I. Artem‘yev, A. M.
Vlasov. M. M. Kozhevnikov. I. M. Kuz'min. P. N. Poluektov. V. P.
Poshekhontssv, V. M. Pikulin. S. V. Sychev, Yu. A. Veliko-Ivanenko.

c. T. Korol‘kov, N. A. Strclkov. V. l. Lugovoy, D. D. Grendal‘, A. I.
Sokoloverov, c. K. Dvozdkov, D. K. Karpovich, F. G. Pedorov, V. I.
Al'tovskiy. A. G. Prokudin, V. G. Tairov. A. G. Doroshenko. A. V. Nikitin.
A. S. Shapkiy. D. s. Pilatov, A. V. Vinokurov, M. P. Konstantinov, L. A.
Corbatsevich. P. P. Belichenko, N. N. Ishchenko, and V. B. Shemborakiy.

All of the rest of the officers and employees of the air force staff and
directorate were evacuated to Kuybyshev on 15 October 1961 under the com-
mand of Brigade Engineer Ya. L. Bibikov, Division Commissar L. G. Rudenko,
and Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff Colonel B. A. Ageyev.

After the bulk of the officers and the absolute majority of employees of
the air force staff and directorate left. the generals and officers of the
Air Force Field Headquarters had to work around the clock. This was
elicited by the complexity of the evolved situation on the Moscow axis

and the larger volume of work. An operational group of the Air Force
Field Headquarters commanded all aviation concentrated on the western
axis. collected data on the ground and aerial situations in other fronts.
maintained maps of the operational situation. developed the plans for
strategic use of aviation and combat instructions. and prepared daily

air force operational summaries and special reports to the supreme high
commander.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Things became sterner in Moscow as well in those days. The city and its
contiguous regions were placed on a seige status as of 20 October by a
decree of the State Defense Committee dated 19 October 1961. This was
necessary so that the troop rear could be strengthened and the subversive
activities of enemy agents could be halted. The Communist Party appealed
to the capital's public to be calm. to comply with law and order, and to
render all possible cooperation to troop units. Defense of lines 100-120
km west of Moscow was given over to the commander of the western Front,
General 6. K. Zhukov. while command of the city's immediate vicinity was
given to the Soviet Army Air Force commander. General P. F. Zhigsrev.

The Politburo of the CG CTSU. the State Defense Committee, Hq sac. and
the operational group of the General Staff were located in Moscow.
Leadership of the entire country and the combat activities at the fronts

was exercised from here. and it was here that the main problems of the war
were solved.

At the end of October Hitler's troops were halted on a line extending from
Volzhskoye Reservoir east of Volokelamsk along the Mars and Oka rivers as
far as Aleksin. Soviet aviation actively helped the troops repel enemy
attacks. During the defensive engagement, between 30 September and

31 October 19b1, the air force flew 26,000 combat sorties, of which 80
percent were intended for support and cover of the troops.5‘ Soviet
pilots fighting fascist German aviation displayed extreme bravery and
heroism. On 29 October Junior Lieutenant B. I. Kovzan. a pilot of the
185th Fighter Air Regiment, rammed and knocked down a German airplane in
the vicinity of Zaraysk after using up all of his ammunition.55

The advance of the fascist German troops was finally halted within the
zone of the Bryansk Front in the second half of October. The Bryanek
Front's 3d and 13th armies fought hard battles in the enemy rear for

3 weeks. containing the main forces of the German 2d field and 2d Tank
armies. By 23 October they extricated themselves from the eneirclement.
reaching a line extending from Belyayev to Mtsensk to Ponyri to L'gov.
Considering their state, he sac ordered the front's troops to withdraw
to a line east of Dubny, Plavsk, Verkhov'ye, Livny, Ksstornoye. concen-
trating the main efforts in the vicinity of Tula and on the Yelete axis.
0a 30 October formations of the German 2d Tank Army reached Tula. where
they met organized resistance from troops of the 50th Army and the Tuln
workers Regiment. Soviet aviation flew 3.750 sorties in 20 days in
behalf of troops of the Bryansk Front.56 Destroying enemy troops and
equipment, the Soviet Air Force also stubbornly fought enemy aviation.
The main burden of the fight against enemy aviation in the air was
placed on the shoulders of fighters in the frontal air services, espe-
cislly the Vi Fighter Air Defense Corps.

in October the Luftwaffe flew 31 raids on Moscow. About 2,000 airplanes
participated in them. but only 72 were able to break through to their

bombing targets.57 Some 278 airplanes were knocked down in air battles
and by antisircraft fire during repulsion of the raids.58 In the first

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

days of November the enemy's offensiVe on Moscow was halted on almost
all axes.

Failing to reach its goal in October. the German Command prepared a new
offensive for the middle of November. the goal of which was to make two
simultaneous enveloping thrusts on Moscow with mobile groupings from the
north and south. with air support from aviation oi the 2d Air Fleet. In
all. the Fascist German Coammnd allocated 51 divisions Ior the capture
of Moscow, to include 13 tank and 7 motorized divisions.59

Troops of the Kslinin. Western. and the right wing of the Southwestern
fronts occupied lines of defense at the near approaches to Moscow.
Despite the fact that the Western Front had been reinforced. in November
the Fascist German Army still had overall numerical superiority in man-
power and combat equipment at Moscow. Soviet aviation operating on the
Moscow axis was reinforced, and in sum total the number of friendly air-
planes surpassed enemy aviatioa by a factor of 1.5.60

Considering this. and attaching great significance to achieving strategic
superiority in the air, the Mq SMC ordered the Soviet Army Air Force
commander to conduct an air operation between 5 and 8 November to annihi-
late German aviation nt sirfields. The command and staff of the air
force. which had gained experience in organizing such air operations.
developed a plan requiring 32 airplanes from the air service of the
Kalinin Front, #6 from the air service of the Western Front. 56 from the
air service of the Bryansk Front. 32 from aviation of the Moscow Defense
Zone, 80 from long-range bomber aviation, and SA airplanes from the
Supreme High Command's 81st Separate Bomber Division-300 warplanes in

all to make a simultaneous strike on 19 airfields.51 The plan was approved
by Air Force Commander General P. F. Zhigarev and Air Force Military Coun-
cil Member Army Commissar 2d Rank P. S. Stepanov. and it was signed by
Air Force Chief of Staff General 6. A. Vorozheykin. Instructions to the
troop coammnders of these fronts pertaining to the actions of aviation
were written by Air Force Headquarters. signed by the General Staff, and
issued to the troops. Concurrently instructions were given by the Soviet
Army Air Force Command to frontal air force commanders on the means for
making the airfield strikes.

Thirteen enemy airfields were raided on 5 November, 15 were raided on

6 and 7 November. and on 12 and 15 November strikes were made repeatedly
against 19 airfields. As a result more than 100 airplanes were annihi-
lated and damaged, and 61 airplanes were knocked down in aerial combat.62
The two air operations conducted by the Soviet Air Force in October and
November 1961 to destroy fascist German aviation at the airfields had,

in the future, a positive influence on attaining strategic air supremacy
by the beginning of December 1961 on the Moscow axis.

After a 2-week pause fascist German troops resumed their offensive on
Moscow. At the price of high losses they managed to reach the near

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approaches to Moscow at the end of November. Soviet troops offered stub-
born resistance, making strong counterstrikee with the active support of
aviation. After Klin and Solnechnogorsk were captured the enemy attempted
to exploit hie gains northwest of Moscow. 0n the night of 28 November he
managed to cross email forces to the east bank of the hoskva-Volga Canal
in the vicinity of Yekhroma. north of lksha.

The Ha SNC. the command of the western Front, and the command of the
Soviet Army Air Force took emergency steps to eliminate the resulting
danger. Reserve formations and troops from neighboring sectors were
transferred to the vicinity of Kryukova. Khlebnlkovo. and Yakhroma. An
air group commanded by Soviet Army Air Force Deputy Commander General

I. P. Petrov (chief of staff, Colonel N. P. Dagayev) was operating on
this axis. It had a strength of 160 warplanes. Operating against enemy
troops in the vicinity of Yakhroma. Kiln. and Solnechnogorsk. the air
group flew 150-180 combat sorties daily. General I. F. Petrov's air
group played an extremely great role in cooperating with troops of the
lat Strike Army, the forward units of which countersttacked and repelled
enemy troops penetrating in the vicinity of Ynkhroma to the canal's
western hank. With its active cooperation, at the end of November and
the beginning of December the lat Strike Army and the newly formed 20th
Army made a number of counterstrikes against fascist German troops. and
together with the 30th and 16th armies they finally stopped their advance.
The threat of an enemy breakthrough to Moscow from the northwest and
north was eliminated.

0n l8 November the enemy broke through defenses on the left wing of the
Hestern Front southeast of Tula. and in 17 days he reached Venev and
Keshlr. The Soviet Army Air Force Command quickly formed an air group
commanded by Colonel H. V. Shcherbakov with the mission of supporting the
50th Army in the vicinity of Tula. An air group commanded by twice-
awarded Hero of the Soviet Union General 6. P. Krevchenko and long-range
bomber air units were brought in to reinforce units operating against the
enemy. Supported by the front's tanks and aviation, one long-range
bomber division, and a part of the forces of the VI Fighter Air Corps.

on 27 November the I Guards Cavalry Corps counterattacked enemy troops
breaking through to Kashir. forcing them to retreat in haste. As a result
of the active Operations of troops and aviation on the left wing of the
western Front. the enemy's offensive was halted forever. On 6-5 December
1941 the defeneive period of the battle of Moscow ended.

Long-range bomber aviation operated against objectives on the battlefield.
interdicted enemy railroad activity, and bombed enemy trains in Vyaz'ma.
Sukhinichi, Mtsensk, and Zmiyevka and airplanes at airfields in the
vicinitiee of Vyaz'me. Vitebsk, Smolensk, and Sukhinichi. All actions

of frontal, long-range bomber. and air defense aviation as well as of

air groups was coordinated by the air force command. it was planned,
sufficiently purposeful. and highly effective. In the entire period of
the defense of Moscow the Soviet Air Force flew 51.300 combat settles--

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

86 percent in behalf or the troops and lb percent to cover Moscow. anni-
hilatod up to 1.500 enemy airplanes. and by the beginning of December

1941 it had attained sound strategic air superiority on the Moscow axis.63
It was attained through systematic destruction of enemy aviation at air-
fields and in active offensive air battles fought by our fighters. Attain-
ment of strategic air superiority on the Moscow axis was on the whole a
great victory for the Soviet Air Force and the armed forces. The Supreme
High Gomﬂhnd could now regroup its troops and concentrate reserves with-
out significant interference from enemy airplanes.

The situation changed dramaticallv on the entire Soviet-German front at
the beginning of December 1961. The first victories at Moscow. Tikhvin.
and Rostov set the stage for assumption of a counteroffensive by the
Soviet Army on the main axis--the Moscow axis. The ﬂeadquarters' design
foresaw making the main thrust in a westerly direction with the goal of
destroying the main forces of Army Group Center and decisively improving
the position of Soviet troops. Troops of the Kalinin. Western. and the
right wing of the Southwestern fronts. aviation from the Moscow Defense
Zone, V1 Fighter Air Defense Corps. two snc reserve air groups. and the
main forces of long-range bomber aviation were committed to the counter-
offensive. All air services committed were combined under Soviet Army
Air Force Commander General P. P. zhigsrev and his field staff.

The greater share of the mission of destroying the enemy at Moscow was
assigned to the Western Front under the command of General G. K. Zhukov.
Eighty percent of all aviation concentrated in the vicinity of Moscow

was given missions within the western Front's sector. In the counter-
offensive the air force was to support ground troops through active
operations. maintain the air supremacy it had achieved earlier. cover
Moscow against enemy raids. interdict the enemy's rail shipments. and
perform air reconnaissance. Preparations were made in the course of

the defensive engagement. which permitted the Soviet Command to concen-
trate sufficient men and material. But the strength of troops committed
to the counteroffensive was lower than that of the enemy--by 1.5 times

in relation to personnel. by 1.4 times in relation to artillery. and by
1.6 times in relation to tanks. He were superior only in relation to
aviation. The strength of Soviet aviation was about 1,200 warplanes.
while that of the enemy was up to 700 craft.6a In moral-political
regards the Soviet soldiers were highly superior to fascist German troops.
Limitless love for the motherland and an unshakable will for victory were
the decisive force which compelled the Germans to flee from Moscow.

At dawn on 5 December 1951 the left wing of the Kalinin Front went over
to the counteroffensive. and on 6 December it was joined by strike groups
of the Western and Southwestern fronts. They struck the enemy within a
sector from Kalinin to Yelets, which was about 1,000 km long. The Soviet
Air Force Command used about 1.000 warplanes in concentrated strikes
against the enemy grouping north and northwest of Moscow and only 200
airplanes against troops on the left flank.6s

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith the active support of our aviation, the troops penetrated the tacti-
cal zone of the enemy defenses and began to exploit the offensive suc-
cessfully on all axes.

0n 9 December 1961 air reconnaissance established the fact of a massive
withdrawal of the enemy on the Klin--Teryaycva Sloboda highway. This
permitted the Supreme high Command and the air force command to direct
the efforts of our aviation at annihilating the retreating enemy columns.
To cut off the route of withdrawal of the German troops the Soviet Command
dropped a tactical airborne assault party consisting of 415 enlisted men
and officers on the night of 15 December in an area west of Teryayeva
Sloboda. The airborne troops were highly successful in their mission,
cutting off the enemy's route of withdrawal on the roads and thus making
it possible for our aviation to strike the great accumulation of enemy
motor vehicles and equipment on the roads. The airborne assault party
joined troops of the 30th Army at the end of December.

here is what Marshal of the Soviet Union a. K. Zhukov writes about this
in his memoirs: "The counteroffensive actions of the Western Front's
right wing continued constantly. Its actions were supported actively by
frontal aviation, by air defense aviation, and by long-range aviation
commanded by General A. Ye. Colovanov. Aviation made powerful strikes
against artillery cmplacemants. tank units. and command posts. and when
hitler's troops began to withdraw it attacked and bombed infantry,
armored. and motor transport columns. As a result following the retreat
of the enemy troops all westward roads were congested by the enemy's
combat equipment and motor vehicles."66

In the course of the enemy's pursuit General I. F. Petrov's air group
operated actively on the Klin axis, and General Ye. M. Nikolayenko's
air group was active on the Kaluga and Sukhinichi axes.

Until 7 December long~range bomber aviation operated against enemy troops.
Later its efforts were turned to strikes against rail terminals, trains,
and sidings with the goal of blocking deliveries of troops and equipment
to enemy troops at the front. It was pointed out at that time in a report
of the Soviet Army Air Force Military Council to Supreme High Commander

I. V. Stalin on 22 December 1961 that beginning with 7 December the mis-
sion of the Main Command's aviation was to destroy rail terminals and
trains with the objective of interdicting deliveries of ammunition and
enemy troops to the front. From 8 to 18 December the air divisions flew
251 sorties and dropped 156 tons of bombs in difficult meteorological
conditions (poor visibility. snowfall, fog. icing of the airplanes). As
a result of the bombing 32 rail stations, 85 ammunition and troop trains,
and up to 83 tanks and vehicles were destroyed and damaged. A proposal
was also made to subsequently utilize long-range bomber aviation against
large objectives in the enemy rear.67

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The counteroffensive of troops of all three fronts on the Moscow axis
lasted 33 days. In extremely complex winter weather conditions the
Soviet Air Force flew 16,000 combat sorties. 50 percent of them with
the mission of annihilating enemy troops and combat equipment.68 In
the counteroffensive the actions of aviation were massed on the main
axes.

Seventy percent of all sorties flown by frontal aviation had the goal of
destroying the northern enemy grouping. Messing of aviation on the main
axis and actions of frontal and long-range bomber aviation against
centers of resistance. the enemy's withdrawing groupings and his control
posts, rear services. and lines of communication created favorable con-
ditions for accelerating the pace of the offensive.

As a result of the joint actions of frontal troops and aviation enemy
strike groupings threatening Moscow from the north and south were
destroyed by the end of December 1961. The direct threat to the capital
was eliminated. The battle of Moscow revealed the high combat capabili-
ties of the Soviet Air Force which. given centralized control of the
combined forces of aviation. played an extremely great role in the
enemy's defeat. The experience of utilizing the air force in combat,
accumulated in the course of the counteroffensive, was subsequently
utilized extensively by the Soviet Command to improve control of the

combined efforts of aviation in offensive operations conducted by groups
of fronts.

The Communist Party and the Soviet Government gave a high assessment to
the air force's actions. 0n 6 December 1951 six air regiments were
reorganized as Guards rcgimsnts--the 29th. 129th, 155th, and 526th fighter
regiments (commanders. Majors A. P. Yudakov, Yu. M. Berkal'. A. F. Shpak.
and N. P. Metelkin). the 215th Ground Attack Air Regiment (commander,
Major L. D. Reyao). and the 31st Bomber Air Regiment (commander, Lieutenant
Colonel F. I. Dobysh). Thousands of airmen were awarded orders and
medals.69 Fifty-two valoroua pilots were awarded the hero of the Soviet
Union title, to include V. A. Shishov. S. G. Get'man. A. P. Loktionov.

A. I. Molodchiy. A. G. Rogov. F. M. Patkulin, A. N. Katrich. Ye. M.
GorbaLyuk, V. Ye. Kovalev, V. V. Talalikhin. and others.70 During the
battle of Muscow pilot V. V. Talalikhin rammed an enemy airplane at night
for the first time in the war, and pilot A. M. Katrich rammed an enemy
airplane at high altitude for the first time.

It is difficult and perhaps even impossible to overstate the great sig-
nificance of our victory over fascist German troops and the vaunted
Luftwaffe at the battle of Moscow. This was a historic victory that

entered the unfading pages of not only the chronicle of the Great
Patriotic War but also world history. Defeat of German troops at Moscow
strengthened the faith the Soviet people and their armed forces had in a
final victory and raised the fighting spirit of peoples in countries of
Europe occupied by the fascists. The people of the world now saw that
Mitler's army could be and would be defeated.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Victory was achieved at Moscow owing to the advantages of the socialist
social and state structure. the selfless labor of our people. and the
unparalleled acts of heroism and bravery of soldiers of the Soviet Army
led by the Leninist Communist Party. "The historic victory at Moscow."
noted L. 1. Brezhnev. "inspired the Soviet people to new acts of heroism
and strengthened their confidence that the enemy would invariably be
defeated."71

The experience of the air force's combat activities in the battle of
Moscow confirmed the need for seeking and utilizing a new form of avia-
tion command and control-combination of committed aviation under the
cormmnd of the senior air chief. A need was revealed for improving the
organizational structure of units and formations of frontal and long-
range bomber aviation. and of the staff and directorstes of the Soviet
Army Air Force. and for creating large highly maneuverable SHC air
reserves. Life demanded generalization of the combat experiences of all
-aviation arms and services. and the fastest possible dissemination of
this information among the troops. academies. and scientific institutions.
The organization of interaction of aviation with major formations and
formations of the ground troops required further improvement. The enemy
still held the technical edge in aviation equipment and armament. Solu-
tion of these major problems required great efforts on the part of the
CC CPS" and the government. the General Staff. the command. the Military
Council. and Air Force headquarters. Most of the solutions were worked
out by as early as the b2ginning of 1962, they were submitted to the

Supreme High Cor-and Gen3ral Headquarters. and they were implemented in
1952.

FOOTNOTES
1. "Sovetskiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Veiikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
19bl-l9h5 gg." (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic war 19a1-
1965). Moscow. 1968. p 29.

2. ”Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika SSSR" (USSR Aviation and Cosmonautics).
Moscow. 1968, p 89.

3. The directive of People's Commissar of Defense 8. K. Timosheako and
Chief of General Staff 6. K. Zhukov was transmitted to all frontier
military districts on the night of 20 June l9b1 at 0030 hours.

A. "Sovotahiye Voyenno-vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyae
1961-1945 gg." Moscow. 1968, p 34.

s. lbid.. p 35.

6. Novikov. A. A.. "V nebe Leningrsda" (In the Sky of Leningrad), Moscow.
1970, p 45.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7'

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
16.

15'

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

26.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Iatoriya Velikoy Otecheotvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuzn 1941-1945
33." (History of the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union 19M.-
1965), V01 2, Moscow, 1961, pp 17-18.
"Aviutuiyo i koooonavtilu 88811," p 87.

Arkhiv N0 8388 [USSR Ministry of Defense Archives], f. 35, op. 11285,
d. 16, 11. 63-66.

Arkhiv no sssa, f. 96-A, op. 1711, d. 1. 1. 11.
Arkhiv no sssn, r. 35. op. 11285, a. 11s. 11. 3-5.
1616., 11. 3-5.

Arklniv m sssn. 1. 48-1, op. 1551.. a. 19, 1. 136.
Arkhiv no sssa. r. as. op. 7879, a. 6, 11. 1-36.

VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 6, 1972, p 21; "Sovetakiye Voyenno-
Vozdushnyyc Sily v Vclikoy Otecheatvennoy voyne 1941-1965 33.." p 37.

Atkhiv M0 SSSR, f. 68-A, op. 1554, d. 9, 1. 213.
Arkhiv M0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 11285, d. 173, 11. 110-111.
VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 3, 1972, p 25.

"Mirovaya voyna 1939-1965" (The World War of 1939-1945), translated
from German, Moscow, 1957, p 672.

"Sovetskiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.," pp 30-39.

"Avlntliyn 1 kosnonnvtikn 8558," p 92.
VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 2, 1976, p 31.

"Sovetakiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1945 33.," p 66.

Arkh1v H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 30802, d. 10, 11. 1-3.

25-26. Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 73940, d. 2, 11. 1-10.

27.

28.

"Iatoriyn vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965" (History of Horld Hot 11
1939-1965). Vol 5. Moscow. 1974, p 79.

Arkhiv H0 5858, f. 132-A, op. 2624, d. 41, 11. 40. 42.

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
29.

30s.

31.
32.
33.
36.
35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

50.

61.
62.

63.

64.

65.

46.

"Sovotokiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyyo Sily v Vslikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1945 33.." pp 52, 53.

Yercnenko, A. 1., "No Zspsdnon nsprsvleuii" (0n the Vestern Axis),
Moscow. 1959, p 90.

Coderisn. 6.. "Vospo-insniys soldste" (He-cits of a Soldier). trans-
lated from Gsrlsn. Moscow. 1956. p 198.

Arkhiv H0 8883, f. 202, op. 3996, d. 2, 1. 38.
"Istoriys vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965," V01 4. p 79.
Arkhiv'HO 8883, f. 209, op. 19013. d. 1. 1. 6.

Ibid.. 11. 16—16.

"Sovetskiye Voyenno-Vordushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvcnnoy voyns
1961-1955 33.," p 56.

"Sovetskiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.." pp 54-55.

Arkhiv m sssn, r. 35. op. 78125. d. 3, 1. 120.
Ibid., op. 11250, d. 8. 1. 70.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 7879. d. t [sic], 11. 35, 73.

Tsykin, A. D.. "0t '11'i Hurontoa' do rsketonostss" (Prom "Il'ys
Moro-eta" to the Rocket Carrier), Moscow 1975. p 69.

"Istoriys vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965," Vol 4, p 69.

"Krylstyye syny Rodlny" (Hinged Sons of the Motherland), Moscow,
1967. pp 192-195.

At the beginning of October 1941 the German 1st and 2d tank groups
were reorganized into tank armies.

"Veliksyn Otecheotvennsyo voyns Sovetskogo Soyuzs 1961-1955. Krst-
keys Istoriya" (The Great Pstriotic War of the Soviet Union 1961-
1945. A Short History). Moscow, 1970, p 116.

Arkhiv H0 8558, f. 68-A, op. 1556, d. 91, 1. 308.

Cuderisn. c., "Vosponinsniys soldsta." p 222.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
67.

68.

49.

50.
51.
52.
53.

53a.

53b.
53c.

56.

55.
56.
S7.
58.
59.
60.
61.

62.

63.

06.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Sovutakiyc VVS v Vulikoy Otochoatvonnoy voyne 1961-1965 as. Shornik
dokumontov" (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic Hat 1961-
1965. Collection of Documents), No 1, Moscow, 1957, p 67.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR. E. 68-A. op. 1556, d. 91. 1. 359.

"govoCokiye Voyenno-Vozduahnyyo Sily v Velikoy Otecheatvennoy voyno
1961-1965 33.," p 68.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR. f. 6316, op. 11153. d. 88, 11. 306-307.
Arkhlv H0 SSSR. f. 35. op. 1282. d. 29. 11. 139, 160.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 208, op. 2677, d. 31, 1. 67.

Arkhlv H0 SSSR. f. 35. op. 30802. d. 8. 11. 1-2.

"lstoriya vtoroy mlrovoy voyny 1939-1965," V01 6, Moscow, 1975,
pp 96-97.

lbid., p 97.
[b1d.

"Sovccsklyc Voycnno-Vozdushnyyc Sily v Vclikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1941-1945 g8. ." P 71-

1hid., p 72.

Arkhlv H0 8588. f. 202, op. 38, d. 12, 1. 102.

Arklliv no sssn, r. 208, op. 198982, d. 13, 1. as.

"Avincsiyn 1 koenonovtika SSSR," p 108.

")storiya vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965," V01 6, p 103.

"Vcllkaya Otcchcstvennaya voyna Sovecokogo Soyuza 1961-1965," p 126.
Arkhlv HO SSSR, f. 35, op. 30802, d. 61, 11. 85-86.

Arkhlv HO SSSR. f. 35. op. 11285, d. 74, 11. 85-86; VOYENNO-
lSTORlCMESKIY ZﬂURNAL, No 6, 1972, p 21.

"Sovetskiyc Voycnno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Vclikoy Otecheatvcnnoy voyne
1961-1965 gg.," p 77.

"lstorlyn vtotoy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965," Vol 6, p 286; “Sovetskiye

Voycnnoy-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne 1961-1965
gg.," pp 78-79.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
65.
66.

67.
68.

69.
70.

71.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arkhlv HO 888R. f. 208, op. 162690, d. 3. 1. 39; d. 2. 11. 19-22.

Zhukov. c. K.. "Vooponlnnntya 1 raznynhleniya" (Recollections and
Renocuona). Vol 2. “ocean, 1974, p Ios.

Arkh1v H0 SSSR. f. 35. op. 11290. d. 13, 1. 196.

"Sovetokiyc Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheotvennoy voyne
1941-19‘5 880 .10 p 870

"Aunts!” 1 koomonavtlka SSSR." pp 111. 112.

"Sovetsktyc Voyenno-Vozduuhnyye Sily v Vollkoy Otochescvcnnoy voyno
1961-1945 33.," p 78.

Brezhnev. L. 1.. "Velikaya pobedo oovetokogo nnroda" (The Great
Vlctory of the Sovtet People). Moscow. 1965. p 12.

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER III. FURTRER REINFORCEMENT OF THE SOVIET ARMY AIR FORCE

The Situation at the Fronts as of Spring 1962

The victory of the Soviet Armed Forces at Moscow in winter l9hl-l962 was
the outstanding military-political event of the first year of the Great
Patriotic Her. As a result of the counteroffensive and the general
offensive Soviet troops subjected the armed forces of fascist Germany to
their first major defeat in the course of all of world War II. The eneay
was pushed back several hundred kilometers. The Soviet Army seized the
initiative on the main strategic axis and retained it for almost half a
year. The historic victory of the Soviet Arsed Forces at Moscow marked

the beginning of the fundanental turning point in the course of the Great
Patriotic Her.

ﬂue victory of Soviet troops at Moscow raised the international authority
of the Soviet Union even higher and promoted unification of the states
and peoples of the anti-Hitler alliance for the struggle against fascist
aggression. 0n 1 January 1962. 26 states to include the USSR. USA and
England signed a declaration uniting the military and economic resources
of the countries for the defeat of the fascist bloc.

The bulk of the troops of fascist Germany and its satellites remained at
the Soviet-German front as before. Some 176 divisions of the German
ground troops (including 21 tank and lb motorized) and 9 brigades, 14
Finnish divisions and 8 brigades. 7 Romanian divisions and 7 brigades.

3 Hungarian divisions and 2 brigades. and 3 Italian, 2 Slovak, and 1
Spanish divisions were operating on this front as of 1 April 1962.1

0n 1 May 1962 the strength of fascist bloc armies on the Soviet-German
front was 6.198.000 men, 56,961 guns and mortars (not including SO-mm
mortars). 3.229 tanks and assault guns. and 3.395 warplanes (2,815
German. 295 Finnish, 164 Romanian. 50 Hungarian. and 70 Italian).2

in May 1962 the operating army of the Soviet Armed Forces had a strength
of 5.5 million persons, 63,663 guns and mortars, 1.220 rocket launchers,
4,065 tanks. and 3.160 warplanes (not counting 320 obsolete reconnais-
sance airplanes and 375 "-2 night light bombers).3

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The situation became stabilized on the Soviet-German front by spring
1962. The front line passed from Leningrad along the Volkhov River east
of Staraya Russo. skirted about the Demyanak area on the east and west.
then it proceeded along a line east of Kholm. Velikiye Luki. Velizh.
Demidov. and Belyy, north of Yartsevo. formed the thev-Vyaz'ma salient.
embraced terrain west of Yukhnov and Kirov. then followed a line east of
Lyudinovo. Zhitdra. and Bolkhov. west of Verkhov'ye. Tim. and Volchaask.
protruded as a westward salient in the vicinity of Balakleya. Lozovaya.

and Barvenkovo. fell short of Kraenyy Liman. Debal'tsevo. and Kuybyshevo.
and then followed the Hius River.

The Soviet Command harbored no doubts that fascist German troops would
resume active offensive actions at the beginning of the summer.

The forthcoming intense struggle demanded an end to the process of
rebuilding the country's national economy. an increase in war production.
and further development of all branches of the Soviet Armed Forces.

Organizational Changes in the Central Administration, Operational Major
Formations. and Formations of the Soviet Army Air Force

The increased scope of the Great Patriotic Her. continuous quantitative
and qualitative growth of the Soviet Air Force. and the ever-increasing
scale of its operations on the fronts of the war required improveaents
in the organizational structure of the air force's central administra-
tion, the major air formations. and the formations and units. The Com-
munist Party Central Cosmdttee perpetually kept all problems associated
with strengthening and building the Soviet Air Force within its field of
vision. Selection and placement of airmen in the top and senior cate-
gories was managed by the Aviation Section of the CC VKP(b) headed by
General N. S. Shimanov.

The CC VKP(b) granted a major role to the Air Force Military Council in
solving all major problems of the life and combat activities of aviation.
Combining the functions of military and political leadership. it bore
the entire responsibility for combat training. the political-moral state
of the troops, the selection. training. and placement of air force com-
mand and staff personnel, flight crews. and technicians. and for logis-
tical support to aviation.

Under the guidance of the Military Council in the first half of 1962 the
central air force administration developed and implemented major measures
to improve the resources and methods of aviation command and control.

and to improve the organizational structure of the central administra-
tion, operational major air formations. formations. and units of the air
force. The Air Force Military Council displayed constant concern for
political indoctrination of airmen and for heightening the level of
party-political work. Much work was done to strengthen discipline and
elevate the political-moral level of air force personnel. The Military

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Council was perpetually informed of party-political work going on in
frontal and army air services. in frontal formations and units. and in
long-range bomber aviation. making its impression upon it. Various
issues concerning the availability of equipment in the air force were
also discussed at meetings of the Military Council. Thus on 31 March
1942 the Military Council examined the progress made in repairing air-
planes and engines. on 2 April it examined glider production and use.
and on 19 April it reviewed the status of spare parts for airplanes and
engines.‘ Military Council members penetrated deeply into the work of
the staff and all administrative agencies of the air force, the air force
rear, the directorates. and services of the central administration.

In February 1942 General Aleksandr Aleksandrovich Novikov, a participant
of the Civil Her and a CPSU member since 1920, was appointed to the post
of Soviet Army Air Force first deputy commander.5 He graduated from the
Military Academy imeni M. V. Frunze in 1930. A. A. Novikov was trans-
ferred to aviation from the headquarters of the X1 Rifle Corps, Belo-
russian Military District. Aircraft construction developed swiftly and
aviation equipment production increased significantly during the First
Five-Year Plan. The number of air units and formations increased. Avia-
tion needed experienced personnel. Many experienced combined arms cem-
manders. including A. A. Novikov. were transferred to the air force in
the early 1930's. Serving as chief of staff of an air brigade. in 1933
A. A. Novikov passed an extramural observer pilot examination, in 1935

he became squadron commander, and in March 1936 he was awarded the rank
of colonel. in June 1938 A. A. Movikov was appointed to the post of air
force chief of staff of the Leningrad Military District, and in July 1950.
following the military conflict with Finland, he became the air force
commander of this district. and it was while serving in this capacity
that the Great Patriotic Var began.

After A. A. Novikov was appointed deputy commander of the Soviet Army Air
Force the Me SHC immediately sent him to the fronts to render assistance
in combining the forces of aviation and massing these forces on the main
axis of operations of the ground troops.

in the second half of February 1962 A. A. Movikov represented the air
force in the writing of the plan for the air force operation on the
western axis. At the beginning of March 1962 the Hq SHC seat A. A.
Novikov to the Volkhov Front. 0n 8 March 1962 the Mg SMC published a
directive ordering the troop commanders of the Volkhov and Leningrad
fronts and the Soviet Army Air Force deputy commander to organize and
perform. from 10 to 20 March. massed air strikes against combat forms-
tions and defensive fortifications of the enemy troops on the forward
edge and deep within the zones of advance of the 4th. 59th, and 2d strike
armies of the Volkhov Pront and the Skth Army of the Leningrad Front, as
well as against enemy lines of communication.

68

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Organization and perforaance of the air strikes was assigned to Soviet

Arny Air Force Deputy Commander A. A. Novikov and to his subordinate
Major Caneral of Aviation A. Ye. Colovanev, the strategic aviation coa-
lander.

The decision of the Ho sec to commit combined air forces for massed
strikes against eneny troops was spurred on by the need for annihilating
the enemy's Lyubsn' grouping as soon as possible.7 by the end of

February 1942 the situation evolved in the following way on this axis.
Back at the beginning of January the Volkhov Pront's 4th and 59th armies
vent over to the offensive in the direction of Lyuban' and Toano. Arriving
formations of the 2d Strike Army were also committed to the engage-ant.

By the end of January the 2d Strike Army advanced 75 ka, cut the Novgorod-
Leningrad railroad, and reached the approaches of Lyuban‘. Offensive
actions of the Volkhov Front's other armies were unsuccessful. The Lenin-
grad Pront'e Shth Army. which attacked toward Lyuban‘ out of the Pogost'ya
area. advanced slowly. The 2d Strike Army's attempts at widening the
breach and seizing Lyuban' were unsuccessful. Powerful air support was
required. To complete this mission A. A. Novikav was permitted to commit
eight air regiments of the Hq SHC reserve, some of the forces of strategic
aviation. and the air forces of the indicated fronts. To the extent
necessary, use of the air services of combined eras armies was also per-
mitted. The Leningrad Front possessed 12 air regiments in the frontal

and combined arms arny air services. to include eight fighter regiments.
one ground attack regiment. and three bomber regiments. The air service
of the Volkhov Front possessed 23 separate air regiments; of these 13

were combined into two reserve air groups-~the 2d and 3d, which inter-

acted correspondingly with the front's 59th and 6th combined arms armies.

A. A. Novikov wrote the plan for the actions of all aviation with the
help of the coamand and staff of the Volkhov Front's air service (air
force commander, General I. P. Zhuravlev), General S. I. Rudenko
accompanying bin, and his operational group consisting of three Air Force
Headquarters officers. The plan was written, coordinated upon, and sub-
mitted to the frontal troop commanders. Considering the situation and
the absence of a divisional level in the frontal air services, a decision
was made to create a teaporsry air group (coannnder. General 5. I. Rudenko,
chief of staff. Major H. N. Koahevnikov) out of eight air regiments
intended for operations mainly on the right flank within the 54th Army's
sector.

The actions of our aviation rendered significant assistance to troops of
the Leningrad and Volkhov fronts. For the first tine in the war the
actions of aviation were coordinated by the senior air chief with the
interests of the trOOps of not just one but two fronts. This was a new
phenomenon in strategic interaction between the Soviet Air Force and the
ground troops.

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A decree of the USSR Council of People's Commissars dated 11 April l9b2
appointed General A. A. Novikov commander of the Soviet Army Air Force

and. goncurrently, USSR deputy people's commissar of defense for avia-
tion.

immediately on assuming the post of Soviet Army Air Force commander,

A. A. Novikov devoted a great deal of attention to improving the organi-
zational structure of the air force's central administration. the air
major formations, formations, and units of the fronts, and long-range
bomber aviation. Staff proposals on altering the organizational struc-
ture of air force sections and directorates were examined at meetings

of the Air Force Military Council.

Section One was elevated to the status of an Air Force headquarters
directorate in April 1942 in response to a directive of the General Staff.
Colonel N. A. Zhuravlev was appointed chief of the directorate, and as of
27 Hay 1942 Regimental Commissar A. I. Kozlov was appointed military
commissar.

This directorate of the Air Force headquarters consisted of several sec-
tions headed by Colonels K. T. Burak, Ye. C. Hoiseyev, and V. V.
Storozhenko.

Creation of the War Experience Analysis and Generalization Section in the
Air Force Headquarters had extremely great significance to the air force.
Its mission was to study and generalize the combat experience of the
troops, and to write instructions, directives, and information bulletins
with the goal of rendering practical assistance to units, formations,
academics, and military educational institutions. Its functions also
included revealing the weak and strong points of the use of our aviation
and enemy aviation and of the application of aviation equipment and
weapons. and writing proposals on introducing new tactics and procedures
for units, subunits, and individual airplanes. Officers A. A. Vasil'yev
(section chief as of the beginning of 1963), A. C. Drozdov, N. D. Tikhonov,
N. N. Ostroumov, I. V. Boldyrev, A. S. Kravchenko, I. V. Pimenox, and
others worked in the section with extremely great efficiency throughcit

the entire war. The work of the War Experience Analysis and Generaliza-
tion Section was extremely useful, and it had a direct influence, heighten-
ing the efficiency of our aviation's actions. Discussing the need for
generalizing and disseminating the war experience, PRAVDA wrote in 19b2:
"The accumulated war experience and the skill of warfare are precious
treasures belonging to all of our army, to all of our people."9

This was the organizational structure of the Soviet Army Air Force Head-
quarters until 1944. Only the section chiefs, their deputies, and a small
proportion of the officers were replaced. In particular, in 1962 Colonel
N. P. Dagayev was appointed air force chief of staff of the Kalinin Front,
Colonel V. V. Storozhenko was appointed air force chief of staff of the
Northwestern Front, and Colonel H. V. Shcherbakov was appointed commander

70

FOR OFFICIAL ”SB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the reserve air group. New officers joined Section One: Colonels

P. P. Korotkov and n. V. Vinogradov. Majors V. B. Shemborskiy and A. S.
Bolotnikov. Captains F. Ya. Panyushkin. V. I. Izvalov, and c. I. Clarunov.
and Senior Lieutenants A. l. Popkov and 1. Yo. Savkin; new officers in
other sections included Colonel P. V. Ratanov. Lieutenant Colonels M. N.
Karpuk and V. M. Bogdan. Captain C. I. Kopylov. and others.

In April 1942 General Sergey Aleksandrovich Khudyakov was appointed chief
of staff of the Soviet Army Air Force. Hhile serving as chief of staff

of the 8th Cavalry Regisent, in 1931 S. A. Khudyakov was transferred to
the command school of the Air Force Academy imeni N. Ye. Zhukovskiy. In
November 1932 he passed the flight tests and was awarded the rank of
observer pilot. and after graduating from the academy he was appointed
chief of a department of the headquarters of the 5th Heavy Bomber Air
Brigade. Serving as chief of rear services of the Air Services Directo-
rate. Belorussian Military District. in 1939 he retrained as a pilot with-
out leave from his principal work. and in February 1950 he was appointed
air force chief of staff of the Belorussian Military District; this was
followed by his appointment as the front's air force commander in February
1942. It was while serving at this post that S. A. Khudyakov was trans-
ferred to the Soviet Arny Air Force Headquarters. But he was not to work
for very long in the headquarters. In July 1962, on request of the
Western Front Military Council. he was appointed commander of this front's
1st Air Army.

General 6. A. Vorozheykin. who held the post of air force chief of staff.
was appointed first deputy commander of the air force in April 1962.

Air force rear services also underwent reorganization. The rear services
included the rear organization, airfield construction, and technical supply
directorates, the special motor transport and mechanization resource opera-
tion, field supply. and combined arms supply sections, and central air
supply depots. General L. c. Rudenko was appointed chief of rear services.

The party organization of the Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters was
strengthened. Major 0. M. Shnyrev was elected secretary at-lsrge of the
party bureau of the Air Force Headquarters party organization.

Organizational changes in the central air force administration made on

decision of the Supreme high Com-and elevated the level of leadership in
the air force.

Concurrently long-range bomber and frontal aviation underwent major
organizational changes. The cosbat experience of aviation in the summer-
fall canpsign of l9b1 and especially in the battle of Moscow demonstrated
the need for creating large sir reserves and major operational air forma-
tions in frontal aviation which would permit massed use of aviation on
the most important axes of operations of the ground troops, and their
extensive maneuvering not only within the front but also between fronts.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\
I

"One of 5“” decisive conditions for a successful air war," PRAVDA stated
in 1942, "is competent maneuvering of air forces. The ability to quickly
concendrate a strong fist for a powerful surprise attack. to direct it at
the most vulnerable point or. on the other hand. to regroup one’s forces
with lightning speed to repel an enemy strike, and on another occasion to
disperse them at the blink of an eye: That is what warfare requires
today."10

A 5 March 1942 decree of the State Defense Committee reorganized the'units
and formations of long-range bomber aviation into strategic aviation (ADD)
subordinated directly to the Hq SHC. Major General of Aviation A. Ye.
Colovanov was appointed ADD commander. Divisional Commissar G. C. Cur'yanov
was appointed Military Council member. and Lieutenant General of Aviation
M. l. Shovelev was appointed chief of staff.

Aleksandr Yevgen'yevich Colovsnov's fate in the Great Patriotic War was
quite noteworthy. He began his fighting career in 1941 as commander of
the 212th Special Purpose Long-Range Bomber Air Regiment intended for
action against objectives deep in the enemy rear, in complex meteorologi-
cal conditions and at night.

The 212th Air Regiment began the war with combat assignments directly
from the Supreme High Command Headquarters, against the enemy's deep

objectives. The regiment proved itself capable of successfully completing
complex missions. It was for this reason that in August 1961 A. Ye.
Golovanov was appointed to the post of commander of the separate 81st
Special Purpose Long-Range Bomber Air Division subordinated directly to
the Hq sac, and in March 1942 he was appointed ADD commander.

Generals and officers who had distinguished themselves the most in
organizing the combat missions of air formations served in the command
and staff of strategic aviation during the war. These included Deputy
Commander General N. S. Skripko, Section Chief N. G. Khmelevakiy, Section
Chief I. M. Talanin. navigators I. I. Petukhov. V. I. Sokolov, and S. F.
Ushakov, Senior Engineer I. V. Markov, and others.

The Main Directorate of the Civil Air Fleet (GVF) (chief, General F. A.
Astakhov) was subordinated to the commander of the Soviet Army Air Force
by n 26 April 1962 decree of the 6K0 [State Defense Committee]. The CV?
was given the mission of transporting cargo to the front, evacuating '
casualties from the front, and maintaining air communication with parti-
san detachments in the enemy rear.

The rights of the Soviet Army Air Force Command and of the air force com-
manders of the fronts and combined arms armies steadily expanded. On
order of the Hq SHC. beginning in January 1952 the Soviet Army Air Force
Command was permitted to use national air defense aviation located near
the front to cover the front's forward units as necessary. Air force
commanders of the fronts and armies were given the posts of deputy

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

frontal and army commanders for aviation, as well as members of the
frontal and army military councils, while still retaining the rights and
responsibilities of frontal and army air force commanders. Concurrently
the army air force commanders were given responsibility for timely
redeployment of fighters at airfielda abandoned by the enemy and making
them ready to serve as bases. It was for this purpose that the air
service of the combined arms army was instructed to maintain two or three
reserve airfield maintenance battalions (BAD) reinforced with ssppers

from the ground troops.11 Concurrently the General Staff and the Soviet
Army Air Force Command sought ways to improve the organizational structure
of frontal aviation. Its dispersal among combined arms armies prevented
unification of all of the front's air forces and their massed use on the
main axis of operations of the ground troops. Combined arms army com-
manders felt an acute need for the help of aviation on the battlefield.
and they could not release any forces at all from subordinate air units

to perform missions in behalf of a neighbor or the front as a whole. This
led to dispersal of aviation and constriction of its combat capabilities.
which had an unfavorable effect on the effectiveness of its strikes. In
March [9&2 the Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters wrote and the Air Force
Military Council examined proposals for improving the organizational
structure of frontal aviation. The air force commander submitted the
proposals to the State Defense Committee. The proposals suggested that
our aviation lacked the organizational unity and the unity of command
required for successful battle with the enemy. With aviation dispersed

as it was, it could strike anywhere but all of the strikes were weak.

The suggestion was to combine aviation into large formations.12 The
State Defense Committee approved the idea of creating large air formations.

In March 1962 a decision was made to form 10 air strike groups (UAG) with
a mixed composition. each containing six to eight air regiments; the mis-
sion of these groups was to reinforce the air services of fronts that had
begun the general offensive in the first half of 1942. The air strike
groups were formed in accordance with directives of the General Staff.

on the basis of which the Air Force Headquarters prepared the appropriate
orders and instructions.

Orders of the Soviet Army Air Force commander published 16 and 17 March
1962 created the first four air strike groups, the other six being
created later. Their couposition varied--f:om three to eight air regi-
ments. As an example the first group was formed with a composition of
two bomber air regiments flying Pe-Z airplanes. two ground attack sir
regiments armed with 11-2 airplanes, two fighter air regiments flying
Yak-l and Lace-3 airplanes. and two heavy bomber air regiments flying
DB-Jf airplanes.13 All 10 air strike groups were created by May 1942
and assigned to the following fronts: Volkhov-lst and 6th, Northwestern--
2d, Southern-«M, western—10th and 5th, Bryansk—7th, Southwestern--8th.
Crimean--lSth, and North Caucasian Front-l6th. They were committed to
battle as the air regiments were made ready. The idea of creating air
strike groups was basically correct. But the altered situation, which

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

required unification of all of the front's air forces. required a change
in viewpoints on organization of reserves as well. Air strike groups
existed until the beginning of June l9b2. A new, more sensible organiza-
tional structure of air reserves was sought.

By spring 1962 the material conditions for a new structure of frontal
aviation were created. The number of airplanes in the operating army
increased constantly. While in December 1941 the operating army possessed
2,495 airplanes, in May l9h2 the figure had climbed to 3,166. Aviation
industry increased the growth rate of aircraft production. In December
1961 the industry provided 693 airplanes, it provided 976 in January 1962,
822 in February, 1,532 in March, and 1,432 airplanes in April 19h2.

By this time our aviation industry was producing airplanes of predomi-
nantly new design--LaCG-3, YaK-l. Yak-7b. Production of new Tu-2 bombers
and YaK-9 fighters was started. New Pe-2, Yak-1, Yak-7b, and [1-2 air-
planes made up more than 50 percent of the strength of line units. In
1941 USSR aviation industry produced 15.735 airplanes, to include 12,377
warplanes. It produced 3,301 warplanes in the first quarter of 1942,
b,967 in the second, 6,219 in the third, and 7 126 in the fourth, for a
total of 21,681 airplanes produced in 1952.14'i5

Considering all of this as well as the combat experience of frontal avia-
tion, in April 1952 the Soviet Army Air Force Military Council examined
the problem of a new organizational structure for frontal aviation. and

it decided to create air armies to replace the previously existing frontal
air services and army air services. These air armies were major opera-
tional air formations permitting the massing of frontal aviation on the
main axes of operations of the troops, and they insured centralized con-
trol and effective air strikes. These proposals were submitted to the
air force command and to the ﬂq sac, which approved them and ordered the
General Staff and the air force command to implement them.

The first air army was created by order of the USSR NKO on 5 Hay 1962.
The order read: "For the purposes of heightening the striking power of
aviation and permitting successful application of massed air strikes,
combine the air forces of the Heatern Front into a single air army.

naming it the 1st Air Army."16

Initially the 1st Air Army's composition included: two fighter air divi-
sions. each containing four fighter air regiments; two nixed air divisions,
each containing two fighter, two ground attack, and one bomber air regi-
ments: a training air regiment, a long-range air reconnaissance squadron,

a liaison squadron, and a night air regiment armed with 0-2 airplanes.

Each combined arms army of the front was left with one mixed air regiment
subordinated in operational respects to the army commander and, in rela-
tion to special and aviation support, to the air army commander.17 All
other air services of the operating fronts were reorganized into air
armies during 1942. The lst, 2d, 3d. 4th, and 8th air armies were formed

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in May, the 5th and 6th were formed in June. the lhth and 15th were
formed In July. the 16th was formed in August, and the 7th. 13th. and
17th air armies were formed in November. By November 1952 all combat
aviation had been taken out of the combined arms armies. They were left
with one mixed air regiment each for air reconnaissance and liaison mis-
sions. It would be difficult to overstate the extreme importance of this
measure to the Soviet Air Force. The air armies turned out to be the
most successful organizational structure of frontal aviation.

Hhile introducing the new structure for frontal aviation. the Supreme High
Command and the Air Force Military Council continued to seek the most
convenient organization for powerful air reserves. A USSR NKO decree
dated 1 July 1962 initiated the formation of two fighter air armies
(commanders. Generals Ye. M. Beletskiy and V. G. Ryazanov) and one bomber
air army (coammnder, General V. A. Sudets). The plan was for each of
these armies to contain three to five air divisions with a strength of
200-300 airplanes each.18 But in reality only the 1st Fighter Air Army.
based in the vicinity of Yelets, formed and took part in battles. It was
formed hastily and it was not fully prepared for combat activities, but
in view of the difficult conditions of July 1962 it was committed to the
engagement at Voronezh, where it fought savage battles on the ground and
in the air in interaction with the 5th Tank Army, covering the troops
against enemy air strikes and striking ground objectives in individual
groups. The following report by General Ye. M. Beletskiy, commander of
the Soviet Army Air Force, sent on 12 July 1962 attests to the intensity
of its combat activities: "In 7 days the army's fighters fought in 106
air battles and knocked down 91 enemy airplanes. Out of 231 airplanes
received by the army. 93 failed to return from their combat assignments
and 23 made forced landings on friendly territory following battle.
Forty-nine are down for repairs. and as of the end of 12 July 1942. 66
airplanes are serviceable."19 Combat use of the 1st Fighter Air Army
revealed serious shortcomings in its organizational structure. It was
found to be cumbersome and insufficiently maneuverable. and because the
air army was within the composition of the front it was extremely diffi-
cult to manage its formations.

Only part of the forces of the lat Bomber Air Army were committed to
battle with the mission of interdicting rail shipments and halting enemy
reserves on the western axis.20 At the beginning of August 1962 two
bomber air divisions were removed from its composition and subordinated
in operational respects to the commander of the 1st Air Army for actions
against enemy troops in the vicinity of Yartsevo and Vgaz‘ma, and one
bomber division was transferred to strategic aviation. 1

During its formation the 2d Fighter Air Army was divided into two groups
of two air divisions each, which were transferred to the 1st and 3d air

armies as reinforcements on 27 July 1942.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The combat experience demonstrated the unfeasibility of having a frontal
air army and air force air army within a single front. when two armies
were present without a single senior air chief. many difficulties arose
in organizing interaction between them and the front's troops. The Soviet
Army Air Force commander concluded that the snc air reserves must be of
less powerful composition then the frontal air armies. but in terms of
organizational structure they should be more mobile and maneuverable.

and on joining a front they should freely enter into the organization of

the frontal air army and. after completing their missions they should be
easily detached.

The air corps was found to be the required form of snc air reserve
organization. The no SHC decided to create SHC reserve air corps and
separate sir divisions out of formed frontal air armies, the reserve air
groups. and the air strike groups.

Formation of SHC reserve air corps was started under the guidance of the
Air Force Military Council in response to a USSR NKO order dated 26 August
1962. The first four fighter air corps were formed by the end of 1952:
The l Fighter Air Corps under the command of General Ye. M. Beletskiy,

it under the command of General A. S. Blagoveshchenskiy. III under the
command of General Ye. Ya. Savitskiy. and the 1V Fighter Air Corps under
the command of General I. D. Podgornyy.

The air corps participated in two-sided tactical sir exercises between
5 and 15 October 1962 under the command of the Soviet Army Air Force
commander with the goal of demonstrating the tactics employed by large
groups of airplanes above the battlefield and developing the fundamental
principles of their use in operations.22

In all by the end of 1962, 13 air corps were formed. to include four
fighter, three ground attack, three bomber. and three mixed. Nine sac
reserve air corps were sent to the front during that year. The air corps
were formed and manned under the direct control of the CC VKP(b). Vort-
ers of the Central Committee's aviation section. the General Staff. and
the air force command systematically reported to Commmnist Party execu-
tives, to members of the State Defense Committee. and to the Hq SHC con-
cerning formation and training of reserve air corps. and they always
received assistance quickly from the latter. The air corps consisted of
two and more divisions. and they had a strength of from 120 to 270 air-
planes. At first they were created as both homogeneous (fighter. ground
attack, or bomber) and mixed formations. but later the mixed air corps
failed to justify their existence. and they were replaced by homogeneous
formations. Concurrently the mixed air divisions and air regiments were
reorganized into homogeneous formations. SHC reserve air corps were
armed with new types of airplanes. They were used to reinforce frontal
aviation and to create powerful sir groupings on the most important
strategic axes.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Responding to instructions from the Ho SHC, the Soviet Army Air Force
commander concentrated SHC reserve air corps on the indicated axes within
a short time in accordance with the intent of strategic defense or

offense. and after the operation was completed the corps were transferred
to other axes.

Being a powerful reserve of the Supreme High Command, air corps permitted

extensive maneuvering of aviation and dramatic alteration of the ratio
of forces in the air in our favor.

To the Soviet Air Force. 1942 became a year of organization reinforcement,
qualitative and quantitative growth of the airplane fleet, improvement of
the personnel's combat skills. and maturation of commanders and staffs at
all levels of troop command and control.

Coordination of Air Force Activities by Air Liaison Officers of the SHC
in the 1942 Summer-Fall Operations

The Headquarters of the Supreme High Command provided strategic direction
to the air force. It determined and posed missions to the air force in
accordance with the objectives and intent of the strategic operations

of groups of fronts and air operations, it distributed its efforts among
different axes, it organized interaction with other branches of the armed
forces. and it directed the activities of aviation through the General
Staff. the air force command, and its own liaison officers.

The functions of Hq SHC air liaison officers at the front were not docu-
mented. In each individual case they were indicated by Headquarters
directives and orders. Hq SHC liaison officers located themselves right
in the areas of combat activities, and guiding themselves by decisions

of the Supreme High Command they assumed direct responsibility for
organizing and achieving interaction between the air force and the
ground troops. They coordinated the activities of the fronts and tempo-
rarily assigned aviation in relation to targets, place, and time, they
concentrated the principal efforts on the main axis. and they determined
the flying sectors of frontal aviation and strategic aviation.

1n the operations of 1942 the functions of Hq SHC sir liaison officers
were broadened. By the end of the first period of the war they were
coordinating the efforts of aviation in behalf of two, three, and more
fronts. The Hq SHC air liaison officer was assisted by his own opera-
tional group from Air Force Headquarters consisting of three to five
officers. This group maintained the situation maps. wrote draft instruc-
tions to air army commanders. elaborated upon the missions of strategic
aviation. coordinating them with the ADD commander's operational group,
maintained control over the performance of air missions, and wrote the
drafts of daily reports to the supreme high commander on the results of
actions performed by air force formations assisting in operations.

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.1 won OFFICIAL use ONLY

Much work was done in spring 1952 by the central administration of the
Soviet Army Air Force to direct the combat activities of the air force.
Members of the Air Force Military Council visited the fronts with small
groups of staff and directorate officers to render assistance to the
command in forming air armies. air corps. and separate air divisions of
the sac reserve. The Air Force Headquarters helped to write the plans
for regrouping air forces on the southern axis. It also provided help
locally in organizing interaction with the ground troops and maintained
control ov." airfield construction and accumulation and delivery of
bombs. shells. and fuel to the fronts.

in March—June 1962 the Soviet Army Air Force Command published a number
of directives addressed to frontal aviation and air army commanders.

In March 1962 the shortcomings in interaction of aviation with frontal
and army troops were pointed out to all frontal air force commanders.
These directives were prepared by Section One of the Air Force Head-
quarters. They pointed out the need for concentrating the efforts of
aviation within strictly delimited sectors and on only the most impor-
tant missions. It was recommended that the combat activities of aviation
be planned as a maximum effort only when ground troops were engaged in
active operations. The activities of aviation interacting with the
troops were to be assessed on the basis of the successes of the ground
troops and the effectiveness of the air force's activities on the ground
and in the air. as confirmed by photographs or control flights.23 These
directives played a positive role in improving interaction of aviation
with the troops and in bettering the results of this interaction.

un 27 March 1962 new proposals for intensified use of radio communication
to control aviation on land and in the air were submitted on order of the
Soviet Army Air Force commander.

in May 1942 the Air Force Headquarters published a directive requiring
correction of shortcomings in the organization and exercise of control
over fighter aviation in the course of air battles. The directive was
written on the basis of an analysis of serious shortcomings in the
Southwestern Front's air service. it emphasized that control of the
fighters meant not only providing the necessary manpower and equipment

in time and monitoring the takeoffs. but mainly commitaent of additional
forces to the battle at the proper time. thus having an influence on the
course and outcome of the battle. The directive also pointed out the
need for organizing surveillance over the air situation above the battle-

field from forward control posts, and for guiding the fighters from the
ground.25

At the beginning of June 1942 the Air Force headquarters prepared a
directive concerning the appearance of the new German He-109f airplane

at the front and sent it under the signature of the Soviet Army Air Force
commander to the air army commanders of the frontal and combined arms

78

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USl ONLY

army air services. It gave the tactical flight characteristics of the
Pie-ION.”

it was believed that the Yak-l fighter. which was faster at an altitude
of 3.000 meters. had the same rate of climb. and maneuvered horizontally
better. was the nest suited for battle against the He-109f. Thus con-
sidering these qualities pilots flying Yak-1's could successfully fight
the He—109f. Concrete recommendations tested out by the Air Force Scien-
tific Research Institute on the means of successful air battle with the
new type of enemy fighter were given--that is. the directive had great
significance.

A directive to the commanders of air armies and the frontal and combined
arms army air services published in July 1962 by the commander of the
Soviet Army Air Force stated that the principle of concentration of
forces was still not being employed as the foundation for the use of
fighter aviation. The artfulness of a commander using and controlling
the actions of fighters lay precisely in his ability to achieve numerical
superiority at the needed time and in the needed place even with small
forces, since the fullest success could be achieved through a combination
of the skill of the warriors and the commander's ability to command.

A USSR NKD order prepared in June 1962 by the Soviet Army Air Force Head-
quarters and concerning the use of 11-2 airplanes as day bombers had great
significance to the air force.

The order stated that we possessed 11-2 ground attack airplanes, which
were the most effective short-range day bombers against enemy tanks and
personnel. No other army possessed such short-range day bombers.... He
could and should increase the frequency of our day bombing strikes
against the enemy significantly, but to do so we would have to immedi-
ately do away with the harmful practice of understating 11-2 airplanes
as day bombers and see that not a single 11-2 would take off for battle
without a full bomb lead.

A plan for the activities of the Soviet Armed Forces in the summer and
fall of 1942 was examined and approved at the end of March 1962 at a
joint meeting of the State Defense Committee and the Hq SHC. Consider-
ing the enemy's superiority of forces and absence of ready reserves, the
Headquarters of the Supreme High Command decided to foil enemy strikes
through active defensive operations at prepared lines, inflict losses on
the enemy. and create favorable conditions for a subsequent transition to
the offensive by the Soviet Army. Concurrently with the transition to
strategic defense. offensive operations were to be conducted on the
central axis. at Leningrad, in the vicinity of Demyansk, on the Khar'kov
axis, and in the Crimea. During this time the air force continued its
air reconnaissance. it covered the troops against air strikes. it improved
its combat readiness, and it waged a stubborn fight in the air.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the henlnnlng or Hay 1942 both sides initiated a struggle for the
strategic lnitintivu on the Soviet-German front. The battle went on for
almost 2 months. Enemy aviation intensified its strikes against troops
and objectives in the rear. In May 1942, 48,180 enemy sorties are known
to have been [liNﬂI on the Soviet-German front, while in June the fi ure
climbed to 83,9h9--that Is, 12 times more than in December 1941.26' 3

Between 30 Hay and 9 June 1942 the air armies made a number of effective
strikes against enem; airfields in a broad sector from Pskov to the
Crimea with the mission of reducing the activity of the Luftwaffe.29
in general, however, events were proceeding unfavorably for the Soviet
Army. Troops of the Crimean Front suffered defeat in May. This front
was formed at the beginning of 1962 with the mission of liberating the
Crimea. and in May it was defending the narrowest part of the Kerch'
Peninsula, at the so-called Ak-Honaisk positions. On 12 Hay l9h2 the
"q suc issued an order temporarily subordinating the Crimean Front's
aviation and strategic aviation oBerating on this axis to ADD Deputy
Commander General N. S. Skripko.3

The Crimean Front's attempts at conducting the offensive were unsuccessful.
In 8 May [942 the enemy went over to the offensive with the intention of
pushing Soviet troops off the Kereh' Peninsula and then with all of his
forces attacking Sevastopol', which was defending itself heroically.

On 15 May the enemy occupied Kerch'. The loss of the Kerch' Peninsula
dramatically worsened the position of Sevastopol"s defenders. The heroic
defense of the hero-city went on for 250 days and nights. But the forces
were unmatched. On A July 1942 Soviet troops abandoned Sevastopol' with
the permission of the he ShC.

The Southwestern Front's Khar'kov offensive operation began on 12 May
I962. It developed successfully for the first 3 days. The Soviet Com-
mand placed its main hope on anticipatory strikes. In 3 days the Soviet
troops advanced 25 km in the vicinity of Volchansk and 50 km southeast

of Khar'kov with active air support. Favorable conditions for exploiting
the success at the Barvenkovo salient were created on 15 Hay.

Howevur, on 17 May a German strike grouping concentrated in the vicinity
of Kramatorsk made a hard northward strike against the flank of the
advancing Soviet troop grouping and advanced 10 km in the directicn of
harvenkovo. The situation in the Southwestern Front worsened dramatically.
There were no strong reserves to parry the enemy's strike. In the second
half of 19 May the commander in chief of troops on the southwestern axis
ordered his troops to go over to the defensive along the entire Barvenkovo
sallent, repel the enemy strike, and recover the initial position. But
this decision turned out to be late. Troops of the Southwestern Front

and of the Southern Pront's right wing suffered large losses. The offen-
sive operation of the Soviet troops in the vicinity of Khar'kov ended in
failure.

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 26 June 1962 General A. H. Vasilevskiy was appointed chief of General
Staff. He had arrived at the Southwestern Front together with Soviet
Army Air Force Deputy Commander General 6. A. Vorozheykin to provide
practical assistance to the frontal command.

Savage battles were being waged at Leningrad and in the vicinity of
Demyansk in May-June, concurrently with the engagement on the Khar'kov
axis and in the Crimea. The offensive initiated on 3 May by troops of

the Northwestern Front with the mission of destroying the enemy's Demyansk
grouping ended without results. her were troops of the Leningrad and
Volkhov fronts able to penetrate the Leningrad blockade in a joint opera-
tion. The situation on the Soviet-German front changed in favor of the
enemy as a result of the failure of operations conducted by Soviet troops
in May-June 1962.

In the second half of June l9b2 the Fascist German Command concentrated

and deployed strike groupings in areas northeast of Kursk and northeast
of Khar'kov.

On 28 June enemy troops went over to the offensive from the region east
of Kursk. penetrated defenses at the boundary between the 13th and bOth
armies of the Bryansk Front. and in 2 days they penetrated 60 km. The

no sac reinforced the Bryansk Front with three tank corps. A tank corps
from the frontal reserve was brought into the breakthrough sector. Army
Commissnr 2d Rank P. s. Stepanov was sent to the Bryansk Front from the
air force as an no sac liaison officer together with an operational group
from the Air Force Headquarters to organise massed strikes against the
penetrating enemy grouping. He was permitted to use all frontal aviation
and 100 bombers belonging to strategic aviation for this purpose. The

Hq SRC indicated the principal missions of aviation to P. s. Stepanov in
a directive dated 29 June: "The main mission of frontal aviation is to
achieve air supremacy. to create our overwhelming superiority and to
force German aviation, especially bombers to leave the battlefield.

"The second mission is to utilize all of our ground attack and bomber
aviation to destroy the enemy's tank and motorized colums. annihilate
his manpower, and thus support our troops.

"The third mission is to use our fighter aviation not only to cover our
troops but also to bomb enemy manpower to the extent possible."31

In this same directive the supreme high commander demanded that he and

A. A. Novikov receive reports on the actions of our aviation and enemy
aviation twice a day. Jointly with the frontal air service command

P. s. Stepanov took all of the necessary steps to complete these missions.
Our pilots fought courageously. displaying unprecedented heroism.

Strikes against advancing enemy troops were made by groups of ground
attack airplanes and bombers. The enemy suffered losses in personnel

81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and equipment, but in view of his great superiority of forces on the
ground anilin the air he continued to advance. Moreover the three tank
corps given to the front by the Nq snc were committed to battle by the
frontal command in part, and moreover, not so much to make a simultaneous
counterattack on the penetrating enemy as to close the breach. In view
of this even though it did operate at high intensity. frontal aviation
could not make major massed strikes against enemy troops, as had been
demanded in the headquarters directive. Maintaining the offensive, by
the end of 2 July the enemy had advanced 80 km. On the morning of

30 June fascist German troops of the 6th Army struck formarions on the
right wing of the Southwestern Front out of Volchansk. As a result a
breach formed at the boundary between the Bryansk and Southwestern
fronts.32 By the end of 15 July the Germans managed to penetrate
defenses between the Don and the Northern Don in a sector up to 170 km
wide. and reached the great bend of the Don. 0n the night of 12 July
the enemy penetrated to the edges of Stalingrad Oblast. The German
strike groupings rushed toward the Caucasus and Stalingrad. There was
also a threat of an air attack on Stalingrad.

The No SNC ordered P. S. Stepanov to leave for Stalingrad immediately.
his mission was to reveal the local possibilities for basing and provid-
ing logistical support to arriving air units and formations. and to

determine our capabilities for withstanding an air attack by the enemy
at Stalingrad.

P. S. Stepsnov's operational group included the following officers from
Soviet Army Air Fbrce Headquarters: H. N. Korhevnikov, I. I. Osipov,
A. N. Hal'tsev, N. N. Karpuk, I. P. Selivanov, S. A. Tyurev, and P. G.
Grigor'yev.33

Stalingrad was leading a productive life, all too peaceful a life it
seemed. The plants. enterprises. and institutions were operating. All
of the city's movie houses were open, children played in the squares and
on the boulevards, and the loudspeakers blared music and at certain times
summaries from the front. The city was brim full of citizens from vari-
ous regions of the country‘s south. All had found housing and settled in.
The public food supply was good. None of Stalingrad'a residents believed
at that time that a terrible threat was already hanging over the city.
that the hardest battles of the war against fascist German troops were

to begin at Stalingrad within a short time. It was clear to the Soviet
Command, however, that the enemy was breaking through to the Volga, to
the Stalingrad area. The Communist Party and Soviet Government took
emergency defensive steps. On 15 July Stalingrad Oblast was placed in

a war posture by a 1‘ July ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme
Soviet. itnstruction of three defense perimeters about Stalingrad,

which had been started in fall 1961, was resumed at the end of June and
in the beginning of July in the sector between the Volga and the Don.

A decision was made to build a fourth (city) perimeter on 15 July. 0n

ll July the Stalingrad Oblast Party Committee and the Stalingrad Oblast

82

FOR 0?PICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Executive Committee adopted a decree creating a people's militia. 0n
l5 July the oblast party committee ordered all rayon committees to
lsmediately create partisan detachments and make them combat ready.
Hospitals and children's institutions were evacuated from the city.

”Everything for the defense of Stalingrad!“ This was the motto under

which party, state, and military agencies implemented their measures in
the July and August days of 1962.

The Stalingrad Front was created out of the administration of the South-
western Front in compliance with s 12 July 1962 decision of the Supreme
High Command Headquarters. The 62d, 63d, and 66th reserve armies were
moved quickly to the great bend of the Don. In addition to these armies,
the 21st Combined Arms Army and the 8th Air Army of the former South-
western Front were placed within the composition of the Stalingrad Front.
in the second half of July the 28th, 38th, and 57th armies, which had
retreated into the Stalingrad Front's sector, were also attached to it.
The Volga Naval Flotilla was operationally subordinated to the front.

The created front had the mission of halting the enemy's advance, pre-
venting him from reaching the Volga, and firmly defending a line passing
along the Don River from Pavlovsk to Kletskaya and then to Surovikino,
Suvorovskiy, and Verkhnekurmoyarskaya.3‘

The enemy advanced with the forces of 16 divisions in the German 6th Army
(about 270,000 men, 3,000 guns and mortars, and about 500 tanks). They
were supported by aviation of the 6th Air Fleet, which had a strength of
up to 1,200 warplanes. On 30 July the German Columnd also sent the 4th
Tank Army, which began its advance on the Caucasus back on 12 July, in
the direction of Stalingrad. The fascist German troops surpassed Soviet
troops by 1.7 times in personnel, by 1.3 times in artillery and tanks,
and by more than 2 times in airplanes.35 The complexity of the situa-
tion faced by the Soviet troops lay in the fact that to create a new
defensive front, formations arriving from deep within the rear had to
immediately occupy positions in areas devoid of prepared lines of defense.
Enemy sir activity was high. The forward detachments of the 62d and 64th
combined arms armies were the first to encounter the advancing enemy.
They began to retreat in battle to the main zone of defense.

0n arriving in Stalingrad P. S. Stepanov's group surveyed the airfields
by air and established communication with the command of the Stalingrad
Air Defense Corps and the commander of the 102d Fighter Air Division of
the National Air Defense Forces, which was covering Stalingrad against
air strikes. After studying and assessing the situation and all con-
tingencies, P. S. Stepanov sent a report containing his conclusions and
suggestions to the supreme high commander and the commander of the Soviet
Army Air Force. The report stated that the city's air cover was weak.
The 102d Fighter Division of the National Air Defense Forces possessed
80 airplanes. mostly of obsolete types (I-16, I-leis, 1-153), and an
insignificant number of Yak-l fighters. The far approaches to the city

83

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were not covered by fighters. At least one good fighter regiment armed
with new types of airplanes was needed initially. A thorough report was
also given on the state of the airfield net and its readiness to receive
air units of the air force.

These conclusions and suggestions were not left unheeded. In a few days
a fighter air regiment subordinated at that time directly to the Soviet
Army Air Force commander and manned by the best pilots flying Yak-l air-
planes arrived at Stalingrad from Moscow. The regiment was given the
mission of defending Stalingrad from the air at the far approaches.

P. S. Stepsnov's operational group remained in Stalingrad to manage the
combat activities of fighter aviation in the area and to make prepara-
tions to receive new air formations and units scheduled to arrive.

With the participation of one of the directorates of the Soviet Army Air
Force Headquarters the General Staff developed measures to reinforce the
troops and aviation of the Stalingrad Front. The Hq SHC brought in 10
air regiments to reinforce the 8th Air Army; 75 percent of the airplanes
in these regiments were new--YaK-l, Yak-7b. Il-Z, and Pe-Z.36 ADD air
divisions were brought in to make strikes against advancing enemy troops.

In July 1942 Major General of Aviation Peder Yakovlevich Falaleyev was
appointed chief of staff of the Soviet Army Air Force. He began his
service in the air force in 1932 as an air brigade inspector. Under-
standing that if he was to perform the diverse functions of an air chief
he had to be an expert in his affairs. and a good air specialist, he
enrolled in the Kacha Military Flight School, from which he graduated
successfully in December 1933. after which he soon graduated from the
operations school of the Air Force Academy imeni H. Ye. Zhukovskiy. His
arrival at Air Force Headquarters resulted in many innovations in the
work of the staff. He focused his main attention on deeply analyzing the
combat activities of our aviation and on the efficiency and coordination
exhibited by all air force directorates and services. In July 1962 under
Palaieyev's guidance the air force staff published a directive addressed
to the commanders of the air armies and frontal aviation. The directive
pointed out that the use of frontal aviation in the offensive operation
must be based on the most decisive concentration of aviation in the
direction of the main thrust of the troops, and that it must be used to
perform a limited number of combat missions. Operations rare to be con-
ducted on secondary axes and in support of secondary troop missions only
to the extent permitted by the availability of unemployed air forces and
resources.

The directive noted further that such support would be possible only
through centrali ed control of all aviation, which should not be taken
to an extreme, becoming an end in itself. The tendency some senior com-
manders exhibited for taking charge of the operations of all units even
down to individual flights and airplanes, to fully exclude initiative

on the part of junior commanders could in no way be justified. It was

84

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

recommended to alr army commanders that the combat activities of aviation
he supported by extensive air reconnaissance and observation over the
battlefield; it was also recommended that when planning combat activities,
the commander should designate an air reserve which would be committed to
battle at the decisive moment. The great significance of operational
superiority in the air to the success of an operation was indicated. and
recommendations on how to achieve and maintain it were given.37

The work of the Air Force Headquarters underwent improvement. Samples of
combat reports and operational summaries were written on the basis of
combat experience on order of F. Ya. Palaleyev under the guidance of
General H. A. Zhuravlev. and in July l9b2 they were sent to air army and
frontal air service staffs.38

In order to correct shortcomings in the work of air service staffs. in
July 1942 the Air Force Headquarters recommended that air army and
frontal aviation commanders reinforce the aviation staff, prohibited
transfer of staff workers without the permission of higher authorities,
and initiated short courses at the Air Force Academy for inadequately
trained staff officers. It was pointed out that the principal mission
of the staffs was to monitor execution of the commander's orders and
instructions. The chiefs of staff were ordered to see that reports were
submitted precisely on schedule.

Close ties were established between the Air Force Headquarters on one
hand and the staffs of ADD, the National Air Defense Forces, and the
Naval Air Service on the other. On order of the General Staff. begin-
ning with July 1942 reports concerning the activities of strategic avia-
tion began to be submitted to both the supreme high commander and the air
force commander.

Daily briefs on the results of the activities of the Soviet Air Force
were prepared for the supreme high commander by the main directorate of
the Air Force Headquarters. They usually indicated the principal mis-
sions of the air force in the previous day. the focus of its principal
efforts, the fronts with which it had interacted, the number of sorties
flown during the day. the number of air battles, and the number of enemy
airplanes knocked down; the distribution of air battles among the prin-
cipal axes of operations of the air force and the ground troops; out
losses in the air and at airfields, and the reasons for them. The
actions of our air force and enemy aviation on the axes of the main
strikes by ground troops. and their effectiveness were reported in terse
form. Changes in the enemy's air groupings and appearance of new types
of airplanes and weapons were indicated. These briefs were usually pre-
pared by two air force staff officers singled out for this job; during
the day they studied and accumulated reports from the troops and inter-

acting staffs. and they kept special records on the results of the
actions and the losses. General N. A. Zhuravlev. who had the ability
to say a great deal in little space. usually wrote the final version of

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these briefs. Officers V. H. Pikulin. F. Ya. Panyushkin. P. F. Korotkov
successfully prepared the drafts of the operational summaries and the
combat reports of the Air Force Headquarters during the war. Officers
0. V. Vindgradov and A. s. Bolotnikov handled their work in an outstand-
ing manner.

The Soviet Army Air Force command and staff welded its main attention to
Stalingrad in July-August 1942. The defensive engagement at the far
approaches to Stalingrad ended on 10 August.

The plan of Hitler's command-~breaking through to Stalingrad with one
swift strike on the move--was foiled by the stubborn resistance of the

troops and the actions of aviation. In 3 weeks of the offensive enemy
troops were able to advance only 60-80 km.

The 8th Air Army and strategic aviation provided great assistance to the
ground troops. Possessing 150-200 serviceable warplanes, each day the
8th Air Army flew 400-500 sorties. Pilots of the 635th Fighter Air Regi-
ment. which was under the command of Major 1. I. Kleshchev, fought in 144
air battles and knocked down 36 enemy airplanes in 18 days.

The 150th Bonber Air Regiment armed with Pe-Z dive bombers also distin-
guished itself. This regiment was headed by Lieutenant Colonel I. S.
Polbin, a master of sniper attacks. In just 4 daﬁs the regiment's pilots
annihilated 40 enemy tanks and 50 motor vehicles. 9

The heroic struggle of the Soviet troops and Soviet aviation at the far
approaches to the city blocked the enemy's way and earned time for the
command to organize defenses at the near approaches to Stalingrad and
within the city itself. The great length of the Stalingrad Front (up to
800 km) forced the Supreme High Command to subdivide it into two fronts.
0n 5 August the Stalingrad and Southeastern fronts were formed within
new boundaries. The 8th Air Army was placed within the composition of
the Southeastern Front. and the 16th Air Army (commander. General P. S.
Stepanov and, as of 28 September. General 8. I. Rudenko) was formed for
the Stalingrad Front.

On 12 August c. H. Malenkov, a member of the State Defense Connittee and
secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee. arrived in Stalingrad
together with Chief of General Staff General A. M. Vasilevskiy serving

as Hq SHC liaison officer and. to coordinate the actions of frontal avia-
tion and whatever strategic aviation called in, Hq SHC Air Liaison Officer,
Air Force Coamnnder General A. A. Hoviltov.“o

The Headquarters of the Supreme High Command reinforced the Stalingrad
axis with aviation. Between 20 July and 17 August 23 air regiments, or

a total of about ‘50 airplanes, were transferred to the 8th Air Army."1

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Five strategic aviation air divisions were redeployed closer to Stalin-
grad from Moscow by 20 August. Strategic Aviation Connander General

A. Ye. Golovanov was in charge of the combat activities of these divi-
sions, and after hie departure for Moscow he was replaced by his deputy.
General M. S. Skripko, who together with an operational group of staff
officers ironed out the problems of interaction locally, gave the divi—
sions missions coordinated upon with the Soviet Army Air Force commander,
and participated directly in the writing of joint battle plans of avia-
tion and the troops.

Concurrently, from 19 August to 16 September 1942, on decision of the

"q SMC part of the forces of strategic aviation struck the capitals of
fascist Germany and its satellites--Hungary and Romania. Raids were made
on Berlin on 27 and 30 August and 10 September. and 212 sorties were
flown. Two raids were made on Budapest on 5 and 10 September with 122
sorties flown; one raid was made on Bucharest on 14 September, in which
46 sorties were flown. Moreover three raids were made on Danaig and on
war industry objectives in Warsaw, Koenigsberg Stettin, Tilsit,
Fursetenwalde, Treptow, Ploesti, and (Galats).&2'53

On 17 August fascist German troops began crossing the Don in the vicinity
of Vertyach'iy and Peskovatka. This became immediately known to Generals
A. M. Vasilevskiy and A. A. Novikov on their arrival at the front. A
decision was made to transfer the efforts of the 8th Air Army to annihi-
lating the enemy's crossings. Soviet Army Air Force Commander A. A.
Novikov demanded that all forces of aviatioa--ground attack, fighter,

an! bomber--direct their efforts at annihilating the enemy and preventing
him from crossing the Don. Groups of 10-30 Pe-Z bombers and 11-2 ground
attack warplanes were organized. Each group was covered by 10-15 Yak-l

and La-S fighters. In those hot days of battle Soviet fighters and
ground attack airplanes flew up to three sorties per day while bombers
flew up to two sorties. From 18 to 22 August our pilots flew about
1,000 sorties against the crossings. The actions of our aviation slowed
down the crossing of enemy troops. But our strength was too low.
Despite heroic resistance of the troops and aviation, the enemy managed
to concentrate at a beachhead in the vicinity of Peskovatka as a sizable
force (6 divisions, about 250-300 tanks), and with strong air support he
broke through to the Volga on 23 August south of Stalingrad. These were
the most critical days. Our aviation operated at maximum intensity.
covering the cities against enemy raids and engaging in air battles at
the near approaches to Stalingrad.

Capitalizing on his air superiority: in the second half of 23 August the
enemy made a very powerful massed strike against Stalingrad with about
400 airplanes. The German airplanes traveled in several waves, and a
person looking up from the ground could gain an impression of the diffi-
culty of repelling this raid. The roar of our fighters could already be
heard in the air, and a large quantity of fish appeared in front of the
assault echelon of German airplanes. Disabled German airplanes fell to

87

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'1'.’ son orncw. use ONLY

the ground but the enemy continued to approach the city without changing
course. the roar of the airplanes increasing constantly in intensity.

As soon as the enemy's assault echelon dropped its high-explosive and
incendiary bombs a major fire began in the city. Enemy aviation flew up
to 2.000 sorties against Stalingrad before darkness. Hundreds of build-
ings were destroyed. and thousands of defenseless women. children, and
wounded soldiers undergoing therapy in the hospitals and failing to be
evacuated from the city in time were killed. Destruction of the city and
its peaceful population of thousands was barbaric. Repelling the raid.
our fighters engaged in 25 air battles above the city. knocking down 90
airplanes and. together with antiaircraft artillery. 120 fascist sir-
planes.4‘ Late at night on the same day the headquarters of the 8th Air
Army and the command post of the air force commander were transferred
outside the city. The Stalingrad Front command took the necessary steps
to oppose enemy troops penetrating to the Volga. Troops on the front's
left wing made a number of counterattacks between 23 and 28 August with
active air support. 0n the night of 28 August the enemy was halted at
the northwestern approaches to Stalingrad.

By mid-September enemy troops reached the city's defense perimeter, wedged
themselves into the defenses at the boundary between the 626 and 66th
armies, captured a number of important hills, and approached to within

3-6 km of the city center. In this situation the headquarters of the
Supreme high Command gave the Stalingrad and Southeastern fronts the
mission of stubbornly deferding the city. exhausting the enemy with
counterattacks from the north and south. holding on to a beachhead on

the right bank of the Don, and accumulating forces for a subsequent
transition to a decisive counteroffensive. 5

Aviation was given the missions of supporting the troops making the
counterattack and providing direct air support to units and formations

of the 62d and 64th armies fighting right within Stalingrad for every
block, street, and house. This required extremely meticulous organiza-
tion of the interaction between aviation and the troops. General I. I.
Khryukin's aviation in the 8th Air Army and strategic aviation annihi-
lated enemy troops breaking into the city. Bombers struck troops, artil-
lery at gun positions, and the enemy's rear facilities 2-3 km from the
front line.

The air strikes were successively aimed at one region of the city after
another. On 23 September frontal aviation and strategic aviation struck
fascist German troops in the center of the city, and on 24 September it
was already operating in the southern part of the city. Air officers
guided our airplanes. especially ground attack aircraft. to point targets
frrm the command posts of rifle divisions and regiments using rockets,
smoke signals. and tracer shells.

Operational groups and air liaison officers were sent from the air army
staff to combined arms armies operating northwest of Stalingrad. Thus

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on operational group was sent to the let Guards Army for the frontal
counterstrike northwest of Stalingrad, and air liaison officers were sent
to the 26th and 66th armies operating on the flanks. Possessing their

own radio resources, they quickly transmitted the requests of combined
arms commanders for air action against newly discovered targets to the

air army commander, and when the groups of airplanes arrived at the battle-
field they guided them to their objectives. Soviet aviation rendered con-
siderable assistance to ground troops in their counteretrikes against the
enemy. hers is how Marshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov evaluated
these actions: "We must give credit to soldiers of the 26th, lst Guards
and 66th armies of the Stalingrad Front, and to pilots of the 16th Air
Army and strategic aviation who. fearing no danger, provided invaluable
assistance to the Southeastern Frost's 62d and 64th armies in holding
Stalingrad...."‘6

The Soviet Army Air Force Command took steps to heighten the effective-
ness of fighter aviation. In September l9b2 the air force commander
ordered the commanders of the air armies to see that "fighter-hunter"
groups would be created in each fighter air division and that "fighter-
hunger" tactics would be practiced. The "fighter-hunters" were to be
volunteers from among the best pilots. These had to be not only valorous
pilots but also men that had perfect mastery of piloting techniques, were
excellent aerial marksman, cold blooded, calculated, and confident in
themselves, in their airplane, and in their weapons.“7

The intense nature of the battle of Stalingrad. the great length of the
frontal defense zones, the larger number of armies in each of them, and
the preparations for a counteroffensive started in mid-September made

it necessary to subordinate the fronts directly to the hq SHC. On

28 September the Stalingrad Front was reorganized as the Don Front while

the Southeastern Front was renamed the Stalingrad Front. Soviet avia—
tion operated continuously against enemy troops. Between 27 September
and 8 October the 8th Air Army flew about 4,000 sorties.

Air actions against the enemy did not cease at night in Stalingrad. On
22 October 1962"8 the Soviet Army Air Force commander ordered the com-
manders of the air armies to significantly intensify the night activities
of bomber aviation and to train five crews in each ground attack and
fighter air regiment for actions at night and in complex meteorological
conditions. This mission was completed successfully. During the defen-
sive period 11-2 airplanes flew 406 night sorties. They attacked indi-
vidual centers of resistance, troop accumulations, and enemy equipment

in the city.

An experimental ground radio net intended to guide fighters to their
aerial targets was organized and tested by the Don Front's 16th Air Army
during the defensive engagement on order of the air force commander.
Hhile serving as frontal air force commander in Leningrad, A. A. Sovikov
and his assistants made the first attempt at guiding fighters to serial

89

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

targets by means of ground-based radio stations. General V. N. Zhdanov,
the deputy commander of the 13th Air Army. Leningrad Front and Soviet
Army Air Force Headquarters Signal Directorate Chief General 6. K.
Gvozdkov, accompanied by a group of officers, were sent to the 16th Air
Army to organize the effort and share their experience; these officers
helped the command of the 16th Air Army to write draft instructions on
controlling, informing, and guiding fighters by radio and submitted them
to the Soviet Army Air Force commander.

Fighter guidance radio stations were dispersed along the front line

2-3 km from the forward edge at a spacing of 8-10 km; these stations
maintained radio communication with pilots in the air and at airfields,
and with the contend posts of the air army. Twenty-five commanders and
deputy commanders of reserve fighter air regiments (brigades) were called
up and sent to the front by the air force command to guide fighters to
aerial targets with ground-breed radio stations. Their mission was to
set up and check out this new system. acquire combat experience, and
subsequently implement the system to train flight crews. The radio sta-
tion guidance net was subdivided into command and information stations.
In addition to providing information on the aerial situation, guiding
fighters to enemy airplanes. and controlling air battles from the ground.

they also began to be used to guide ground attack airplanes to ground
targets.

The experiment was used by Air Force Headquarters to develop and intro-
duce the first Soviet Army Air Force instructions on guiding frontal
fighters to aerial targets from ground-based control posts-~"Instructions

to the Air Force on Controlling, Informing, and Guiding Airplanes by
Radio."

The fight for air superiority occupied a special place in the Stalingrad
defensive Operation. It reached its peak after fascist German troops
reached the outskirts of Stalingrad. Air battles were the principal
means of fighting the Luftwaffe. During the time of the defensive opera-
tion our fighters participated in 1,792 air battles and knocked down
1.636 enemy airplanes. Strikes were made against airfields concurrently.
Thus for example between 31 October and 2 November the air army made a
number of successive raids on airfields. destroying and damaging 31 enemy
n1rplanes.“9-5° All of the necessary measures were implemented to weaken
the enemy's air grouping. A special air operation was conducted from

27 to 29 October by forces of the 8th Air Army and three ADD divisions
(24th, 53d, and 62d; commanders-Lieutenant Colonel B. V. Bitskiy, and
Colonels l. V. Georgiyev and c. N. Tupikov). Some 173 frontal airplanes
and 141 ADD airplanes-participated in it. for a total of more than 300
airplanes. Thirteen airfields were attacked. Some 502 sorties were
flown. The operation was successful: Several dozen enemy airplanes

were put out of action.51

90

FOR OFFICIAL USE OP‘Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1n the defensive operation at Stalingrad Soviet aviation flew 45 percent
of all of its sorties in its fight for air superiority. Between 17 July
and 18 November l9b2 enemy aviation lost more than 2,100 airplanes at
Stalingrad.52

The Hq SHC prepared for a powerful counteroffensive during the defensive
engagement at Stalingrad. The basic decision for a counteroffensive was
made by Headquarters as early as on 13 Septenber 1942. The frontal com-
mand was ordered to begin the actual work of planning the counter-
offenaive in the first days of October. On 9 October the frontal command
submitted its initial ideas to Headquarters.

Air Force Commander General A. A. Novikov, his deputy General G. A.
Vorozheykin, and Strategic Aviation Commander General A. Ye. Golovanov
headed the work on problems of strategic use of the air force in the
counteroffensive at Stalingrad. The Supreme High Coamand Headquarters

played the principal role in planning and supporting this operation. The
air force was given the missions of continuing the fight for strategic
air superiority and supporting the strike groupings of the fronts in the
offensive. By November l9b2 the Soviet Air Force had grown considerably:
Its strength in the fighting army was 6,545 warplanes, while that of the
enemy was 3,500.53 Ten SHC reserve air corps had been formed by this
time. New nanning tables were written for frontal air regiments, which
now consisted of three rather than two air squadrons. A transition from
the three airplane flight to a flight consisting of two pairs of air-
planes was completed in fighter aviation.

Preparations of aviation called in for the counteroffensive were intense.
There were delays, however, in concentrating aviation at airfields in the
vicinity of Stalingrad. There were problems in accumulating aviation
fuel and ammunition.

General A. A. Novikov reported to Marshal of the Soviet Union G. K.
Zhukov, who was in the vicinity of Stalingrad, that aviation was not yet
ready for the counteroffenaive. There were only two rations of fuel
avallable and ammunition was short. Air units intended as reinforcements
had not finished concentrating. The marshal reported this to the supreme
high commander. The response from Headquarters, which was received on

12 November, read as follows: "If air preparation for the operation is
unsatisfactory at Yeremenko and Vatutin, the operation will end in
failure. The experience of fighting the Germans shows that we can win

an operation against the Germans only in the event that we are unchal-
lenged in the air. In this regard our aviation must complete three tasks:

"The first--concentrate the actions of our aviation in the «res of advance
of our strike units, suppress German aviation, and provide solid cover to
our troops;

91

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100020036-9

I
SOVIE? RRIW 81R FORCE COHHRND 8ND STRFF
27 FEBRUBRV 1979 IN TEE GRERT PRTRIOTIC IlﬂR 1941-1945 2 OF 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Th:- second--blnze a trail for our advancing units through systematic
bombing o'f enemy troops opposing us;

"The thi‘i'd--pursue retreating enesy troops with systematic bombing and
ground attacks so as to fully confuse them and prevent them from digging
in at their nearest lines of defense.

"If Novikov believes that our aviation is not in a position to complete
these tasks now. then it would be better to postpone the operation for a
certain amount of time and accumulate more aviation.

"Speak to Novikov and Vorozheykin. explain this to them. and inform me
of your general opinion."5‘

The response of the supreme high commander not only contained concrete
directions as to how to organize the actions of the air force in the

counteroffensive at Stalingrad but also presented the fundamental prin-
ciples of Soviet art of war, based on the experience of the first year

of the war. These principles were laid at the basis of subsequent use
of aviation in all [rental and strategic offensive operations of the
Sovlet Armed Forces.

The 125-dny defensive battle at Stalingrad ended on 18 Novewer. with it
ended the most difficult first period of the Great Patriotic Her. The
Soviet Air Force played an extremely important role here. Assisting the
troops and fighting a continuous battle for air superiority, it flew
77.000 combat sorties. dropped 23.000 bombs on the enemy, launched 38.000
rockets, fired up to 1.2 million gunshells and about lo million rifle
rounds, and inflicted tremendous losses on the enemy.55

The acts of heroism of Soviet pilots filled yet another brilliant page of
the chronicle of the Great Patriotic war. Our heroes rammed enemy air-
planes 16 times. The names of V. V. Zemlyanskiy. i. P. Zszulinskiy, A. A.
Rogel'skiy. H. A. Presnyakov, I. P. Vedenin, and L. Obukhovskiy, who
repeated the imortal deed of Captain N. F. Costello. will remain in the
memory of the people forever.

The bettle of Stalingrad also brought glory to I. S. Polbin, I. I.
Kleshchev. H. D. Barsnov. V. H. Golubav, V. D. Lavrinenltov, L. L.
Shestakov. A. V. Alelyulthin. I. N. Stepsnenlv, V. S. Yefremov. S. D.
Logansltiy, Amer-Khan Sultan, P. Ya. Colovachev. B. H. Gomolko, I. P.
Motornyy. V. N. Makarov, Z. V. Semsnyuk, and many others.”

The plan for the counteroffensive at Stalingrad was conclusively approved
by the liq SEC on 13 November 1942. According to the plan the main thrust
was to be made by troops of the Southwestern and Stalingrad fronts. The
Southwestern Front was to penetrate enemy defenses from beachheads in the
vicinity of Serafimovich and Kletsltaya and swiftly advance in the direc-
tion of Kalach and Sovetskiy. Troops of the Stalingrad Front had to

92

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attack from the region of the Serpinekiye Lakes and also advance in the
direction of Sovetukiy and Kalaeh. The forces of the 6th Any and the
lath Tank Arny were to be encircled in the area between the Volga and the
Don by means of powerful converging thrusts. The Don Front nade two
thrusts: one from the vicinity of Kletekeys to the southeast and another
tron the vicinity of Kachalinskaya along the left bank of the Don to the
south.

Air force foreationa celled in to participate in the counteroffensive
included: The 17th Air Any, Southwestern Front (cot-sander. General

5. A. Krasovskiy, deputy contender for political affairs. Brigade
Comissar V. N. Tolnachev. chief of staff. Colonel K. I. Tel'nov); 2d Air
Are-y. Voronezh Front (connender, General K. N. Swirnov. deputy couender
for political affairs. Brigade Cos-linear 8. N. Roaazanov. chief of staff.
Colonel N. 1.. Stepanov). which was subordinated in operational respects
to the co-ander of the Southwestern Front: the 16th Air Arly. Don Front
(comnder, General 5. l. Rudenluo. deputy cot-lander for political affairs.
Regieental Co-issar A. s. Vinogradov, chief of staff . General fi. h.
Kosykh) end the Bth Air Any of the Stalingrad Front (cos-ander. General
T. T. Khryukin, deputy conendar for political affairs. Brigade Cousissar
A. f. Vikhorev, chief of staff, Colonel N. G. Seleznev).

Seven separate air divisions and two nixed sir corps were sent to the
front fron liq sac reserves to reinforce the air arnies. The I Mixed Air
Corps (couander, General V. I. Shevchenko) was placed within the compo-
sition of the 17th Air Aruy. and the I! Corps (con-sander, General I. T.
Yerenenko) was placed within the Bth Air Arty. In the second half of
Novenber 1962 the 16th Air Amy was reinforced by the II Boﬁer Air Corps
(coriander. General I. L. Turkel'). and the 8th Air Army was reinforced
by the III Mixed Air Corps (comnder. General V. I. Aledinskiy). As
before, Stalingrad was covered free the air by the 102d Air Defense
Fighter Division (couander, I. G. Puntus).

In sum total our aviation had a strength of 1,616 airplanes, to include
026 that were obsolete (Po-2. R-S. SB). On this axis the eneny possessed
1.216 airplanes.57 In addition five ADD divisions were couitted.

The missions of Soviet aviation in the counteroffensive were spelled out
in a telegree sent by the supreme high coucnder on 12 Novenber 19102.

Before the beginning of coebat activities. aviation had to cover the
strike groupings of the fronts in the regions of their concentration.

and when the troops went over to the offensive aviation's nission was to
assist the troops to penetrate eneuy defenses. support couitnent of tank
and cavalry corps to the breakthrough. and support their actions at
strategic depth. Much significance was devoted to fighting eneey
reserves.

93

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Strategic avlation was to be used within the sector of the Southwestern
Front. It was given important missions-fighting operational ship-eats
and reserves. and annihilating enemy airplanes at airfielda.

Being the "q SNC air liaison officer. A. A. Novikov participated in the
development of the plans for the counteroffensive of the fronts, deter-
mined the intensity of air force combat activities. distributed air
reservedhon order of the “q SNC. and involved himself a great deal with
the problems of organizing interaction Uetween aviation and the troops,
and of logistical support to the combat activities of aviation.

All of the work of the air force commander was conducted in close inter-
action with representatives of the Nq suc--e. K. Zhukov, A. M. Vasilsvskiy.
and N. N. Voronov. as well as with the frontal troop commanders and
directly with the commanders of the air armies and the commanders of
strategic aviation. here is what Marshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov
writes about this: "From 1 to 6 November we examined and corrected the
plans of the Southwestern Front. and then we examined and coordinated the
battle plans of the 21st Army and the 5th Tank Army in all details.

"In addition to me. other Headquarters representatives attended the writ-
ing of the battle plan at the Southwestern Pront's headquarters: Artil-
lery problems-ceneral N. N. Voronev, aviation-Generals A. A. Novikov
and A. Ye. Colovsnov. armored troops--Geaeral Ya. N. Fedorenko; these
officers were helpful in achieving a fuller understanding of the problems
of the application and interaction of the most important arms and
services."58 This afforded a possibility to correctly plan the use of
aviation in the counteroffensive of the frontal troops, to react effi-
ciently in the course of the counteroffensive to changes in the situation,
to retarget reserve air corps and Ann formations on the necessary axes,
and thus have an influence on the success of the troop offensive.

Typically the actions of aviation in the 8th Air Army were planned in the
form of an air offensive. the definition of which was spelled out in the
Red Army Infantry Field Manual approved by the USSR people's comaisssr of
defense on 9 Novesber 1962. It discussed continuous support of infantry
by massed, efficient fire by artillery. mortars. and aviation throughout
the entire period of the troop offensive.59 The Red Army Field Manual

of that same year indicated that "the actions of aviation in the offen-
sive battle essentially take the form of an air offensive, which consists
of two periods--preparation for the attack. and support of the attack and
action of infantry and tanks deep within enemy defenses."6° The principle
of meaning air power on the axes of the main thrusts by frontal troops was
placed at the basis of planning the combat activities of all air armies;
for example all air power of the 17th Air Army was given the mission of
covering and supporting the 5th Tank Army and the let Army. which
advanced on the main axis. formations of the 2d Air Army were to be

used within the zone of advance of the 1st Guards Army. while the 16th
Air Army concentrated its efforts on the breakthrough sector of the 65th

9‘

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Army. Up to 75 percent of the airplanes of the 8th Air Army were given
the sission of supporting the 50th Army. Continuous aviation support to
penetration of enemy defenses by frontal troops and to exploitation of
the offensiVe in depth was foreseen. Air cover and support of tank and
smchnnized corps intundvd to exploit the breakthrough were meticulously
planned.

The Soviet Army Air Force coemander visited alnost all airfields at which
units were preparing for battle. he talked with pilots, gave instructions
to coasanders as to how to best solve one probles or another, and ordered
his operational group to insure cospliance with his instructions. he had
a phenoesnal memory, he could recognise almost all air division commanders.
he remembered the first and last nase of each of then. and he was aware of
their shortcomings and their good sides. he remembered eany of the com-
manders of air regiments and squadrons. All instructions and copies of
orders issued by the Soviet Army Air Force commander to the front were
concurrently transmitted to Moscow, to Air Force Headquarters. Thus
members of the Military Council and Air Force Headquarters were always
aware of all instructions issued by the air force commander and by his
operational group. This made it possible to coordinate the actions of

the staff and the appropriate air force directorates with decisions
concerning the use of aviation on other fronts.

During the counteroffeneive of our troops. which began on the morning of
l9 November 1962 within the zone of the Southwestern and Don fronts and.
on 20 November, within the zone of the Stalingrad Front, the Soviet Arey
Air Force commander remained at the forward cosnund post together with
A. H. Vseilevskiy, to when headquarters assigned the sission of coordi-
nating the actions of all three fronts. and periodically at the forward
control posts of the 17th and 16th air armies. from which he directed
the actions of aviation.

On 23 November the IV Tank Corps. Southwestern Front joined units of the
[V Hechanized Corps, Stalingrad Front in the vicinity of Sovetskiy. thus
encircling a 330,000 strong enemy grouping. Frontal air services played
a great role in the swift advance of our troops. actively covering and
supporting the troops from the air. In 7 days (free 26 to 30 November)
the 17th. 16th, and 8th air armies flew 5,760 combat sorties. which was
5 tines sore than the number of enemy sorties flown in the same tile
interval. As a result of this and the losses the enemy suffered. the
activity of his aviation decreased dramatically.

The Fascist German Command began transferring reserves on an emergency
basis from other sectors and from western Europe to the Stalingrad axis.
Troops of Army Group Don went over to the offensive on 12 December with
the goal of penetrating the ring of encirclement. The eneny made it
more than halfway to the encircled grouping. but he was halted on the
Hyshhovka River by the 51st Aray. which was joined by the 2d Guards Arey
from the "q snc reserve. The 8th Air Army provided active assistance to

95

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these armies. During the battle of Hyshkovka River it flew more than

750 aortiea and helped our troops halt the enemy by striking enemy
columns.

Prom 26 to 29 December the 8th Air Army flaw 1,358 combat sorties in the
offensive operation undertaken by frontal troops to defeat the enemy's
Kotel'nikovs grouping.61

In order to weaken the enemy air grouping during the offensive of the
Southwestern Front and the 6th Army of the Voroneth Front, from
3 to 15 December the 2d and 17th air armies made a number of concentrated

strikes against enemy airfields. destroying 160 fascist airplanes on the
ground and in the air.62

The fight for air superiority continued to be intense during the opera-
tion. Strikes were made against Morozovskiy. Tatsinskaya. Starobel'sk
and Voroshilovgrad airfields. where up to 65 airplanes were destroyed.53

The tank troops assisted the Soviet Air Force to destroy fascist aviation
on this axis. On 26 December the XXIV Tank Corps. commanded by General
V. H. Bogdanov, captured the airfields at Tatainskaya following a 240-km
raid on the move. The tank crews destroyed and captured a large number
of German airplanes. During the operation, which ended on 31 December
with the defeat of the Italian 8th Army and the left flank of Army Group
Don. the 2d and 17th air armies flow 4 177 combat sorties, 80 percent of
them in behalf of the frontal troops.6&

At the same time our aviation found itself faced by an entirely new
missioa--conducting an active struggle against enemy air transportation
attempting to supply the encircled Stalingrad grouping by air. In the
first few days the enemy used up to 600 J-Sz, PH-ZOO, and other air-
planes to carry the cargo. Later. due to high losses the enemy was
forced to use He-lll and J-58 bombers for this purpose.

On 30 November 1962 A. A. Novikov ordered General 5. I. Rudenko. commander
of the 16th Air Army. to detach one fighter and one ground attack air
regiment specifically for the fight against enemy air transportation. The
order spelled out the mission of annihilating the enemy transport air-
planes at their landing strips and in the air. and blockading the most
important airflelds from the sir-Bol'shsya Rossoshka and Podsobnoye
Khozyaystvo.6s

On A December 1942 the Soviet Army Air Force commander ordered the com-
manders of the 8th and 16th air armies to organize operations against
enemy air transportation in the vicinity of Stalingrad. The order stated
that the mission of interdicting air transportation was the air force’s
most important one. Concrete directives on cutting special orders to
assign fighters and ground attack airplanes specifically for this purpose
were issued, the boundary lines and zones of operations of the air armies

96

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were established, and the specific missions of blockading and photograph-
ing airfields within the ring of encirclement were set. In the conclu-
sion the directives demanded i-ediate decoration of distinguished pilots
with government awards and inediate telephone reports to the conned
post of the air force co-sader concerning air transportation that had

been knocked down and destroyed; detailed reports were to be telegraphed
in by 2200 hours.“

Creation of a network of radio broadcasting and guidance stations around
the ring of encirclemant and use of the radio resources of air liaison
officers in the troops 'or these purposes played a major role. As an
exaqle on the morning of ll December 18 fighters of the 3d and 9th
Guards fighter air regiments took off under the comesnd of Colonel I. D.
Podgornyy. contender of the 235th Fighter Division, in response to a sig-
nal from a guidance radio station. In the vicinity of Bol'ahiye
Chepurniki they attacked l6 J-52'a and Ile-lll's carrying cargo in the

direction of Stalingrad under the cover of four fie-109 fighters. As a
result 15 enemy transport airplanes were knocked down.

Suffering high losses. in mid-December the enemy switched to night sorties
and flight in complex meteorological conditions. On order of the Soviet
Army Air Force cos-ander these actions were counteracted by night-flying
fighters of a special-purpose regiment in the 102d Fighter Air Defense
Division, and by high activity on the part of our light night bombers,
which shut down all enemy airfielda with their attacks.

Concurrently the Soviet Army Air Force commander spelled out the missions
of the 17th Air Army. the 102d Fighter Air Division of the Rational Air
Defense Forces. and air formations of the ADD in fighting enemy air
transportation. Co—unicatioa was established and interaction was
organised with antisircraft artillery units, and the work of the VNOS
[Aircraft warning System] system was put in order. A map showing the
zones in which air transportation was being fought was located at the
co-snd post of the air force co-ender and the commanders of the fronts
and air armies. It was compiled and coordinated with frontal troop com-
manders on the basis of directives of liaison officers from the liq $116.

The 17th Air Army and ADD formations operated within the first zone.
behind the external front of the encirclement; at the end of December
l9b2 these formations were joined by the 8th Air Army. Our aviation

made a considerable impact on enemy airfields at Hororovskiy. 'rstsinskaya.
Sal’sk. Novocherkassk. and nostov.

The strike made by frontal aviation against the airfield at Sal'sk on

9 January was the most typical. The strike was made by seven 11-2 air-
planes co—ended by i. P. Bakhtin. escorted by one squadron of Yak-l
fighters under the command of Senior Lieutenant Delousov. According to
air reconnaissance data more than 300 enemy transport airplanes and war-
planes had accumulsted at the Sal'slt airfield. The first attack by our

97

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
~ “' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'u
airplanes was unexpected, bold, and extremely competent. Our pilots com-
pletcd the next five passes extremely successfully as well, with every
airplane hitting the target proassigned to it. As a result of the strike

72 German transport airplanes were destroyed at the airfield and three
enemy fighters were knocked down in the air. we lost four airplanes.67

The second zone was a ring zone. It was located between the outer and
inner fronts, and it was subdivided into five sectors with one fighter
division of the 16th and 8th air armies and the 102d Fighter Air Division
of the National Air Defense Forces operating in each of them. Two belts
of radio guidance stations were created around the encircled region;
liaison officers from the commands of the fighter divisions were located
at the main stations. They kept the fighters informed about the flights
of enemy transport airplanes and helped the fighter pilots to seek out
and destroy aerial targets.

The third zone encompassed the entire encircled region, and it had a
breadth from 16 to 20 km toward the southwest and up to 30 km toward

the south. In this area the enemy's transport airplanes were destroyed
by sntiaircraft artillery fire. As of 20 December 1942 this zone con-
tained 232 medium and low caliber entiaircraft guns and 2&1 antiaircraft
machineguns belonging to the combined arms armies and the Stalingrad
Corps Air Defense Region.68

The fourth zone included the entire encircled region. Operations were
conducted within it by the 16th and 8th air armies and a specially
assigned night air regiment of the 102d Fighter Air Division of the
National Air Defense Forces. The enemy airfields were blockaded in day-
time by fighters and at night by Po—Z airplanes. Whenever the enemy
turned on the night landing lights on the airfields our aerial guards--
light Po-2 bosbera--iamndintely dropped bombs on these airfielda. Po-2
night bombers put 15 J-52's out of action at the airfields and on the
landing strips on 30 November 1962, 13 on 1 December, 31 on 10 December,
and 58 on 11 December. In all during the time of the air blockade, 250
enemy airplanes were annihilated and put out of action at the airfields
and on the landing strips of the fourth zone.69

This air blockade of the encircled enemy grouping at Stalingrad, which
was maintained by the combined forces of aviation and antiaircraft artil-
lery, operated extremely effectively. In terms of the content of the
activities of our air force, the quantity of forces committed, and the
results, this was for practical purposes an air force air operation.
conducted by the combined efforts of three air armies in frontal aviation
and ADD formations. The results of this operation were extremely great.
About 1,200 enemy airplanes, of which 80 percent were transsorters and
bombers, were annihilated at the airfields and in the air.’

The German command's attempts at supplying the grouping encircled at
Stalingrad by an "air bridge” were unsuccessful. "Every day the 6th Army

98

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

received an average of 50-80 tons of cargo, rather than the 300 tons
promised to it."7

In all during the counteroffensive, between 19 November 1942 and
2 February 1963, the Soviet Air Force flew 35 920 sorties. Enemy avia-
tion was credited with about 18,500 sortiea.7i

Having attained strategic air superiority at the beginning of the counter-
offensive. our air force provided effective assistance to ground troops

in encircling a large enemy grouping, repelling strong enemy counter-
attacks. and destroying enemy troops in the ring of encirclenent. The
Soviet Air Force achieved air superiority by means of a stubborn struggle.

During the counteroffensive the number of sorties flown against enemy
airfields was increased in comparison with the number of sorties flown
during the defensive period, making about 33 percent of all sortiee flown
directly for the purposes of attaining air superiority. The number of
enemy airplanes destroyed increased from 23.8 percent during the defensive
period to 55.9 percent during the counteroffensive.73 The enemy's best

air units were defeated in air battles and at airfields. General (G. Derr),
a German commander who had participated in the battle of Stalingrad, was
forced to recognize that in this operation the Luftwaffe suffered the
greatest losses since the air offensive on England. "Not only the ground
troops." he wrote, "but also aviation lost an entire army at Stalingrad."7‘

The Soviet Air Force was able to successfully complete three highly impor-
tant missions-sttaining strategic sir superiority, providing active air
support to ground troops. and maintaining an air blockade over encircled
fascist Ger-an troops-because of the combined efforts of the 2d, 8th,
16th, and 17th air armies and strategic aviation under the sole cen-
tralized command of Hq SNC Air Liaison Officer General A. A. Novikov,

the competent leadership of the formations and units by air army com-
manders Generals s. A. Krssovskiy, S. l. Rudenko, G. c. Khryukin. and

K. N. Smirnov, and by Generals A. Ye. Golovenov and N. S. Skripko com-
manding strategic aviation, and because of the acts of heroism of com-
manders, political workers, and all flight crews and technicians. For the
first time in the war four air armies and five ADD air divisions inter-
acted in organized fashion on a large scale, and for the first time we
witnessed a new form of strategic use of the air force--the air offensive;
the air blockade was organized and conducted extremely successfully, and
the problems of organization and control were solved in an entirely new
"a, e

"in the battle of Stalingrad our air force destroyed the better part of
the best German squadrons, and then it brilliantly maintained an air
blockade on German armies encircled in Stalingrad."75

The heroic deeds of the airmen were highly assessed by the Communist Party
and the Soviet Government: Nine air divisions were reorganized as Guards

99

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

divisions, 17 pilots earned the lofty Hero of the Soviet Union title,
and 1.000 were awarded orders and medals.

The German Command was forced to recognize its total defeat not only on
land but also in the air. "The Luftwaffe suffered high losses at Stalin-
grad. From 19 November 1942 to 31 December 1962 the Germans lost about
3,000 airplanes. This figure includes not only airplanes that had been
knocked down but also those captured by the Russians at sirfields. An
enormous amount of ammunition as well as much equipment and other
property was lost."76

The victory enjoyed by the Soviet Armed Forces at Stalingrad fundamentally
altered the situation on land and in the air. "when we recall the deci-
sive events of the Great Patriotic Her," said L. I. Brezhnev at a solemn
meeting dedicated to the 20th anniversary of the Soviet people's victory
in the Great Patriotic Her on 8 May 1965, "we remember the famous battle
of Stalingrad, that bloody battle of summer and fall 1942. In this
battle the Red Army displayed heroism and military proficiency that had
never known equals in the history of war, and it won a brilliant victory.
This laid the basis for the fundamental turning point in the entire world
war."77 A fundamental turning point clearly took shape in the fight for
strategic air superiority along the entire Soviet-German front. The
battle of Stalingrad, and especially its second period, contributed a
great deal to development of air force strategy and organizational struc-
ture. 0n arriving in Moscow Soviet Army Air Force Commander A. A. Novikov
gave specific instructions to General N. A. Zhuravlev on what to write in
a report to the supreme high commander concerning the results of and con-
clusions on air force actions at Stalingrad. 0n 3 February 1963 the air
force commander submitted the summary report to I. V. Stalin. It pre-
sented the fundamental principles of air force actions at the time of the
enemy's penetration of our defenses. It was suggested that during the
time of artillery preparation, aviation should be released from actions
on the forward edge and given the mission of destroying headquarters and
communication centers with the goal of disrupting command and control.
when ground troops begin their attack, aviation should direct its forces
at destroying artillery and mortars. To fight reserves, the air army
commander should have at his disposal an air reserve forming up to one-
fourth cf all forces. Colmdtment of mobile groups (mechanized and tank
corps) to a breakthrough should be supported by ground attack air forma-
tions and units attached directly to the corpu, which should have air
liaison officers present with their own communication for calling out

and guiding aviation. The report suggested that we abandon patrolling

as the means of covering troops on the battlefield, resorting to it only
in exceptional cases, and that we adopt fighters on alert at forward
airiields, to be called out as necessary by radio, as the principal
method. It was concluded that fighter and ground attack aviation was the
best resource to be used against transport aviation. It was suggested
that special formations and units be assigned to the fight against trans-
port aviation, freeing them from all other missions.

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Presence of a nixed air regieent in each combined arms army means dis-
persal of the forces of aviation: thus it was suggested that these air
regiments be disbanded and replaced by liaison air squadrons areed with
12 Po-Z's. A number of proposals were made on improving air force
organization and on designing a new frontal bomber to replace the Pe-2
with its limited effective radius (‘50 km maximum). A bomber division
armed with Pe-2 airplanes should consist of two regiments of 32 air-
planes each. as opposed to three with 20 airplanes each. It was pointed
out that when it was necessary to coordinate the actions of aviation
belonging to two or three fronts, because of their short range we could
not use bombers based in one front to strike objectives in a neighboring
front.

It was suitable to have mixed air corps consisting of two fighter and one
ground attack or bomber divisions. In this case one fighter air div: ion
could interact with the ground attack or bomber air division while the
second could be used in the fight for air superiority.

Moreover the actions of our aviation in the battle of Stalingrad were
generalized by the "or Experience Analysis Section and broadly publi-
cized in informative collections published by the Soviet Army Air Force
Ihadquartere which were sent to commands and staffs at all levels. These
collections placed special emphasis on the air offensive as a new form of
strategic use of frontal aviation in the offensive operations of frontal
troops. It was noted that for the first time aviation was used jointly
with tank and mechanized corps to exploit an offensive in depth. The
system employed at Stalingrad for organizing interaction of aviation
with ground troops was recommended for use in all air armies. Recommen-
dations were also made on asking broader use of ground-based radio sta-
tions to guide fighters to serial targets.

After the battle of Stalingrad the Soviet Army initiated an offensive

in other sectors of the front. from Leningrad to the Caucasus. 0a

18 January 1943 troops of the Leningrad and Volkhov fronts broke the
blockade of Leningrad with the active support of the 13th Air Army
(coamsnder. General 3. D. Rybal'chenko) and the 16th Air Army (commander,
General 1. P. Zhuravlev). The Hero-City once again had direct land coop
eunicarion with the country. The victory of Leningrad, which was beseiged
by the fascist invaders for 16 months. created favorable conditions for
destroying the enemy's beechhead in the vicinity of Demyanak. On

15 February troops of the Northwestern Front went over to the offensive
in interaction with the 6th Air Army (commander, General F. P. Polynin).
Fearing destruction of its partially encircled grouping. the Fascist
German Cos-end withdrew it to the east bank of the Lovat' River. The
Demyannk beachhead. which the Germans had held for almost a year and a
half, was eliminated.

Great credit belongs to our aviation for this. In addition to conducting
active operations against the enemy grouping it maintained an air blockade.

101

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

causing the enemy to suffer significant losses in air transportation.
German historians report that the losses of transport aviation were about
265 craft.78 The actions of aviation were coordinated on this axis by
General 6. A. Vororheykin and, in February, by General A. A. Novikov.
who on 17 March 1963 was the country's first to be awarded the rank of
marshal of aviation.

Pursuing the enemy with active support from the 3d Air Army (comander.
General H. H. Gronov) and the let Air Arny (comnder, General S. A.
Khudyakov), troops of the Kalinin and Western fronts liberated thev

on 3 March 19103 and. 3 days later. Gzhatek; on 12 March they liberated
Vyaz'ma, and en 1 April they reached a line east of the citzes of
Dukhovehehina and Spas-Demyansk.

Offensive actions by Soviet troops in the Northern Caucasus continued to
mid-February with the support of the loth and 5th air arnies (commanders,
Generals N. F. Naunenlto and S. K. Goryunov). By this time the troops had
moved 160-600 kn forward and liberated the greater part of the Northern
Caucasus and Rostovsltaya Oblast.

Concurrently with this. strikes were made on the upper Don in the vicini-
ties of Ostrogozhsk. Rossosh'. and Voronezh. By 27 January 1963. 15
fascist divisions had been totally destroyed and 6 had suffered large
losses. More than 86.000 enemy enlisted men and officers were captured. 79
Interacting with the left wing of Bryansk Front and enjoying active sup-
port of frontal aviation (2d Air Army col-sander, General K. N. Smirnov.
15th Air Ar-y couander, General I. G. Pyatykhin). at the end of January
1943 the Voronezh Front penetrated the defenses of fascist German troops
and began an offensive on the Kursk axis while making simultaneous
strikes in the direction of Kastornoye. As a result of the Voronezh-
Kestornoye operation the enemy grouping was destroyed and the greater
part of Voronezhsksya and Kurskaya oblasts was liberated. Continuing
their offensive. troops of the Voronezh Front liberated Kursk, Belgorod,
and Khar'kov, and in the first days of March 1943 they reached the Sony
line, 30 kn west of Akhtyrka and Okhocheye. Here our troops were halted
by large enemy forces.

The situation did not evolve favorably for us in the Donets Basin and at
Khar'kov. Hith the support of the 17th Air Army (commander, General S. A.
Krssovskiy), troops of the Southwestern Front went over to the offensive
back on 29 January 19103. In the first half of February they liberated
the northern part of the Donate Basin and mobile formations reached the
vicinity of Krasnoarneyskoye; actively supported by the 8th Air Army (com-
mander, General 1. 1'. Khryukin), troops of the Southern Front went over
to the offensive on 5 February. broke eneny resistance at the lower
reaches of the Don and the Northern Donate. and on l7 February 1963 they
reached the river Hius. On 19 February large enemy forces made two strikes
f ron areas northwest of Krasnograd and south of Krasnoarneyskoye against
the right wing of the Southwestern Front. As a result in March 1963

102

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

troops of the right wing of the Southwestern Front were forced to withdraw
from the Northern Donets where the enemy's advance had been halted. 0n

4 March a strong grouping of fascist Gernsn troops southwest of Khsr'kov
went over to the offensive against troops of the Voronezh Front. Inferior
to the enemy in forces, troops of the Voronezh Front abandoned Khnr'kov on
15 March. and lelgorod 3 days later. By the end of March 1963 the front's
troops had withdrawn and dug in on a lino from Krasnopol‘ye north of
Belgorod down along the left bank of the Northern Donets. Thus for-ed

the southern face of the so-called Kursk salient, fated to play such a
great role in subsequent actions of the Soviet Arned Forces.

FOOTNOTES

1. "Istoriyn vtoroy mirovoy voyny 1939-l9b5" (History of Horld War II
1939-1945), Vol 5, Moscow. 1976, p 25.

2. lbid., p 121.

3. "Velikaya Otechestvennayn voynn Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1965 gg.
Krstksya istoriya" (The Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union
1961-1955. A Short history). Moscow, 1970, p 155.

6. Arkhiv M0 SSSR [USSR Ministry of Defense Archives]. f. 35, op. 11250,
d. 91, 11. 7-18.

5. "Dvezhdy Ceroi Sovetskogo Soyuza" (Twice Heroes of the Soviet Union),
Moscow, 1973, p 146.

6. VOYENNO-ISTORICRESKIY ZHURNAL, No 2, 1976, pp 33—34.

7. "Istoriys vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1945," Vol 6, p 215.

8. "Bol'shnya sovetakaya entsiklopediya" (Great Soviet Encyclopedia),
3d edition, Vol 18, Moscow, 1975. p 64; "Dvazhdy Geroi Sovetskogo
Soyuzn," p 166.

9. PRAVDA, 28 September 1952.

10. FRAVDA, 25 July 1962.

11. Arkhiv MD SSSR, f. 132-A, op. 2642, d. 12, 11. 166-167.
12. Arkhiv M0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 30809, d. 50, 11. 4-6.

13. Ibid., op. 11285, d. 519, 11. 28-35.

10-15. "Istoriye vtoroy sirovoy voyny 1939-1945," Vol 5, p as.

103

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
26.

25.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arkhtv H0 SSSR, t. 290, op. 517179, d. 7. 1. 27.
VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL. No 9, 1972, p 69.
Ibid., No 5, 1976, p 55.

Arkﬂuv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 11285, d. 555, 11. 2-6.
1616., d. 567, 1. 1.

Ib1d., 11. 1-6.

Arkhlv no SSSR, f. 1, op. 517116, d. 1, 1. 11.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, E. 319, op. 826, d. 37, 1. 36.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, E. 366, op. 52133, d. 3. 11. 167-168.
Arkhlv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 30802, d. 56, 11. 11-20.

26-28. Tlnokhovlch, I. V., "Operativnoyo inkusatvo Sovetsk1kh VVS v

29.
30.
31.

32.

33.
36.
35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

60.

Ve11koy Otechostvennoy voyne" (Soviet Air Force Strategy in the
Great Patrlot1c Hat). Moscow, 1976, p 33.

Arkhiv MD SSSR, f. 132-A. op. 2662, d. 61, 11. 153
Ibid., 1. 139.
Arkhiv MD SSSR, f. 132-A. 0p. 2662, d. 12, 11. 253-256.

"Velikoya Otechestvennayo voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1965. Kratkaya
tutoriya," p 166.

Arkhlv no 5358, f. 35, op. 11285. d. 566, 1. 113.
"Istorlya vtoroy nurovoy voyny 1939-1965," V01 5, p 157.
Ibld., p 158.

"Veliknya Otechestvcnnayn voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1965. Kratkaya
lstotlyo," p 168.

Arkhiv HO SSSR, f. 319, op. 8026, d. 37, 11. 161-166.
Arkhlv H0 8888, f. 35, op. 11285, d. 516, 11. 28-37.
"Istor1ya vtoroy nitovoy voyny 1939-1965," Vol 5, p 165.
1b1d., pp 168, 169.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
61.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Iatoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny 1939-1945,“ Vol 5, pp 168, 169.

42-53. Arkhiv PD SSSR, f. 35, op. 11519, d. 270, 11. 19-20, 27-28.

lob.

as.

1:6.

67.

1.8.

Arkhiv m sssn, f. 35, op. 11519, d. 270, 1. 1b; "Istoriya vtoroy
nirovoy voyny 1939-1955," Vol 5, p 174.

"Iatoriya vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1965." Vol 5, p 179.

Zhukov, c. K., "Voapouinaniye i raznyahlaniya" (Reconectioua and
Reflections), Vol 2, Moscow, 1976, pp 89-90.

Arkhiv no SSSR, f. 366, op. 21852, d. 1, 1. 87.

Arkhiv no 5588. f. 368, op. 14985, d. 2, 1. 39.

109-50. Arkhiv HO SSSR, f. 368, op. 61076, d. 10, 11. 114, 115.

51.

52.

53.
56.

SS.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

"Sovetakiye W5 v Velikoy Otecheatvennoy voyne 1941-1955 33. Sbornilt
dokulentov" (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic Her 1951-
l9loS. Collection of Docunenta), No l, p 310.

Timokhovich, I. V., "Operativnoye iakuaatvo Sovetakikh W8 v Velikoy
Otecheatvennoy voyne," p 35.

"Iatoriya vtoroy mirovoy voyny 1939-19‘5,“ Vol 6. p 20.
Zhukov, G. K., "Voaponinaniye i razuyahleniya," Vol 2, pp 109-110.

"Sovetekiye Voyenno-Vozd'tahnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne"
(The Soviet Air Force and the Great Patriotic Her 1941-1965), p 116.

VOYENNO-ISTORICIIESKIY ZHUIINAL, No 7, 1972, p 33.

"Sovetakiye Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Sily v Velikoy 0techeatvennoy voyne
1961-1945 33.," p 136.

Zhukov, c. K., "Voaponinaniya i razuyehleniya," Vol 2, p 107.

"Boyevoy ustav pekhoty Kraanoy Arlii" (Red Army Infantry Field ﬂannel),
Part 1, Moscow, 1942, p 8.

"Polevoy uatav Krasnoy Arnii. 191.2. Proyckt" (Red A my Field Hanual.
1962. Draft), Moscow, 1962, p 12.

Arkhiv m SSSR, i'. 228, op. 505. d. 2, 11. 506-531.

mum no sssn, f. 379. op. 11.2207, .1. 1, 1. 10.

ms

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
63

6“

65‘

66.
67.

68.

696

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

7s.

76.

77.

78.

79.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ibidu. 110 15-164

“Sovctokiye Voycnno-Vozduohnyyo Sily v Velikoy Otocheotvennoy voyno
1941-1945 33.,“ p 154.

Arkhlv ND SSSR, f. 368, op. 21852, d. 3. 1. 91.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 368. op. 21852, d. 3. 11. 91. 93-96.
Arkhiv M0 SSSR, f. 346, op. 118618. d. 10. 11. 8-9.

"Voyaka protivovozdushnoy oborony atrany. Iatoricheakiy ocherk"

(National Air Defense Troops. A historical Outline). Moscow. 1968,
p 206.

"Intorlyo Velikoy Otocheatvonnoy voyny Snvetakogo Soyuza 1941-1945
g3." (Nlatory of the Grant Patriotic War of the Soviet Union 1941-
1945). Vol 3, Moscow. 1964, p 383.

"Sovetskiyc Voycnno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otcchcstvcnnoy voyne
1941-1945 35.," p 147.

"Mirovnya voyna 1939-1965 33." (The World War of 1939-1945). trans-
lated from German. Moscow, 1957. p 480.

"Sovetskiyc Voyenno-Vozduohnyye Sily v Volikoy Otecheatvennoy voyne
[941-1945 3g.." 9 151.

Korets, L.. "Sovetakiyc VVS v bitve pod Stulingrndon" (The Soviet
Alr Force in the Battle of Stalingrad). Moscow, 1959, p 262.

Derr. 6.. "Pokhod no Stalingrad" (The Stalingrad Campaign), trans-
lated from German. Moscow. 1967, p 118.

PRAVDA, 20 August 1964.

"Hirovaya voynn 1939-1945 33. Sbornik otatey" (The World "or of
1939-1945. Collection of Articles). p 481.

Brezhnev, L. 1.. "Leninakin hurnou" (Following Lenin's Course).
Vol 1. Moscow, 1970, p 126.

"Hirovaya voynn 1939-1945 33.." p 476.

“Vclikaya Otechcstvonnayo voyna Sovotokogo Soyuzo 1941-1965 33.
Krntknyn istoriya," p 228.

106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER IV. THE FIGHT FOR STRATEGIC AIR SUPERIORITY IN SPRING AND
SUMMER 1963

During the winter campaign of 1942-1963 the Soviet Air Force achieved
significant successes in the fight for strategic air superiority. Enemy
aviation suffered serious losses. more than b.300 airplanes being
destroyed.1 The Luftwaffe lost its strategic air superiority on the
Stalingrad axis. The Luftwaffe command could not accept the situation.
and it perpetually increased the forces of aviation in the east. From

15 March to 1 July 1963. 13 air groups were transferred from Germany.
France. and Norway to reinforce the 6th and bth air fleets. The comaand
intended to recapture the lost initiative on the front‘s southern wing
and retain strategic air superiority from the Barents Sea to the Black
Sea. There were 2,630 German airplanes (1.710 bombers. 555 fighters.

and 355 reconnaissance airplanes) on the Soviet-German front in spring
1953. not counting reserve units. Horeover 350 airplanes of the finnish.
Romanian, and Hungarian air forces were operating in this area. In all
the Soviet Air Force was opposed by about 3.000 enemy warplanes. Hitler's
command tried to compensate for the shortage of airplanes and flight crews
by introduction of a new airplane. the Fokker-Holf-l90a.2 The Khenshel'-
129 began to be used as a ground attack airplane over the battlefield.3
But the new airplanes could not significantly influence the change in the
balance of power in the air. which was constantly turning in favor of the
Soviet Air Force. The Soviet Air Force greeted the spring of 1963 with
much higher strength. The air armies created in 1942 turned out to be
the most successful form for organizing major operational air formations
in frontal aviation. By April 19b3, 13 air armies were operating within
the composition of the fronts. By this time 19 SHC renerve air corps had
also been formed (four fighter. nine mixed. three ground attack. and
three bomber). with a total strength of more than 2,600 warplanes.‘ As

a rule the sac reserve air corps were attached to frontal nir armies for
the timexof operations by the ground troops and air operations. and thus
they enlarged the frontal airplane fleet. While at the end of l9h2 the
average strength of the air armies was not more than 350-600 airplanes.
by summer 1963 the air corps increased the combat strength of the air

armies by two times and that of air armies operating on the main axis by
three times.

107

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Strategic aviation experienced quantitative and qualitative growth as
well. On 30 April 19A) the State Defense Committee adopted a decision
organizing eight air corps to replace the existing 11 separate ADD air
divisions. The total number of airplanes within the composition of ADD
increased to 700. The following wc'e appointed corps commanders:
l--Ceneral D. P. Yukhanov. lI--ceneral Ye. F. Loginov. lll--General N. A.
Volkov. lV--Colonel 3. P. Kovalev. V--Ceneral l. V. Georgiyev, VI--General
c. N. Tupikov. VII--ceneral V. Ye. Nestertsev. and VIII Air Corps--Genersl
N. N. Buyanskiy. Soviet Air Force commanders acquired the experience of
controlling major air formations, formations. and units in modern warfare.

Preparing new strategic offensive operations in spring 1963, the Hq SNC
ordered the air force to perform a decisive attack on enemy aviation and
achieve strategic air superiority forever. Attainment of strategic air
superiority was one of the most important prerequisites for a fundamental

turning point in the Great Patriotic Nar. All of the necessary conditions
for this mission existed.

The operating army's Soviet Air Force possessed more than 5.500 warplanes
in spring 19‘), surpassing enemy aviation by 1.8 times.5 The command and
staff of the Soviet Army Air Force acquired a great deal of experience in
organizing the fight against enemy aviation, both in terms of daily com-
bat activities pertaining to defensive and offensive operations. and in
regard to the conduct of special air operations.

The first signs of a turning point in the fight for strategic air
superiority at Leningrad enjoyed further development in air engagements

in the Kuban' and in the spring-summer air operations of the Soviet Air
Force. and the turning point was completed in summer 1943 at Kursk.

Air Engagements in the Kuban'

Air engagements in the Kuban' in spring l9h3 entered history as one of
the most important stages in the Soviet Air Force‘s fight for strategic
sir superiority on the entire Soviet-German front.6 They were most
intimately associated with operations of the ground troops. and they
developed in the unique situation which evolved in response to military-
political and physicogeographic factors.

The Northern Caucasian Front had to complete the destruction of fascist
German troops in the Caucasus and liberate the Taman' Peninsula. in turn
the Fascist German Command pursued the goal of retaining occupied posi-
tions at all costs and wiping out the beachhead southwest of Novorossiysk.
where back on 4 February 1943 an assault landing party of seamen under the
command of Major Ts. L. Kunikov landed in the vicinity of the fishing

village of Stanichka. The assault landing troops. who were subsequently
reinforced by troops of the 18th Army. held firmly to their beachhead

with active air support from the Northern Caucasian Front and the Black
Sea Fleet.

108

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The German 17th Army. which had a strength of 15 divisions. was defend-
ing itself at the lower raaches of the Kuban‘ River and on the Tanan'
Peninsula. lt occupied a line east of Krymskaya. consisting mainly of
strongpeints and pockets of resistance in population centers and on hills.
Krysakaya Station was the enemy's nest important center of defense. since
the main lines of communication to Novoroasiysk. Anapu. Taman'. and
Tenryuk,passed through it. The German Supreme Command reinforced the

17th Arsy.with two German infantry divisions and one Romanian cavalry
division.

Troops of the Northern Caucasian Front were superior to the enemy in
infantry and tanks by a factor of 1.5. and in artillery by a somewhat
lower amount.

Feeling the shortage of troops. the enemy laid his hopes on halting the
preparationu for the Soviet offensive and destroying our assault landing
group at Nyekhako with the assistance of aviation. It was with this
goal that up to 1.000 warplanes of the 6th Air Fleet (510 bombers. 250
fighters. 60 reconnaissance airplanes, and 170 transport airplanes) were
concentrated at the airfields of Crimea and Tanan' in mid-April.7 In
addition the enemy brought in 200 bonbers based in the Donets Basin and
In the southern Ukraine for strikes against troops of the Northern
Caucasian Front. The enemy's air grouping on this axis consisted of the
best Luftwaffe units--the (Udet) Fighter Squadron and the 5th (Nel'ders)
Fighter Squadron. outfitted with experienced flight crews and new He-lO9
and FH-l90a airplanes.

Prior to 23 April 1963 the air services of the Northern Caucasian Front
included the 6th Air Army possessing 250 airplanes (ceaaander. General

N. F. Naunenko) and the 5th Air Aray with a strength of 200 airplanes
(commander. General 5. K. Coryunov). in addition the troops of the
Northern Caucasian Front were assisted by 70 airplanes from the Black Sea
Fleet's air service (commander. General V. V. Yereachenkov) and one
strategic aviation division with a strength of 60 airplanes.3 The
Northern Caucasian Pront's air service was headed by General K. A.
Vershinin.9 The previously started offensive of the Northern Caucasian
Front's troops was resumed on A April. The design of the operation
foresaw bypassing Kryaskaya on the north and south. capturing it, and
exploiting the offensive with troops of the right wing and center toward
Varenikovskaya. and with troops on the west wing toward Verkhne-Bakanskiy
and Anapu. destroying the main eaeay grouping on Tasan' Peninsula in
parts. Fierce battles raged in the vicinities of Kryaskaya and Nyskhako
throughout April.

In response to a directive of the supreme high coamander published
18 April 1963 Headquarters liaison officers--Narshal of the Soviet Union
6. K. Zhukov and Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov-—caae to Taaan'.

109

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR GFFICIAL USE ONLY

"1 was ordered." vrote Marshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov in his
nenoire. "to depart by air for the Northern Caucasian Front on 18 April.
The troops of this front were fighting hard battles with the objective
of destroying the enemy's Taasn' grouping. consisting for the nest part
of the well-equipped German 11th Aray.

“Destroying the enemy on the Tanan' Peninsula had great importance to
the Soviet Cos-and. In addition to destroying a large eneny grouping--
lb-l6 divisions or about 180,000-200,000 men were operating in this
area--as a result of the operation ve liberated Novorossiysk. Here on

1 snail beechhead a heroic detachment of soldiers free the 18th Army and
Black Sen Fleet seaaen fought in the first half of February.

"I arrived together with Naval People's Conedssar N. G. Kuznetsov. Air
Force Cosnander A. A. Novikov. end General s. N. Shtenenko free the
cent-m smr at General x. N. Leselidze‘a 18:}. Army."10

The air force coarmnder'e operational army included Colonels N. F.

Andrianov and A. N. Nal'tsev and Lieutenant Colonel N. N. Kozhevnikov.
There was also a snail operational group of several officers from the
General Staff. The Soviet Aray Air Force Headquarters worked out the

neasures for concentrating air formations of the No SHC Reserve on the
southern axis back in the beginning of April.

By 20 April the air service of the Northern Caucasian Front was reinforced
by the Headquarters reserve'a II Bomber Air Corps (co-aander. General

V. A. Ushakov). III Fighter Air Corps (coauander, General Ye. Ya.
Savitskiy), ll Mixed Air Corps (comnsnder. General I. T. Yeremenko . and
the 282d Fighter Air Division (coaeunder. Colonel S. P. Danilov).1
Strategic aviation sent the 50th Air Division (co-lander. Colonel S. S.
Labedev). The 62d Air Division (cos-ender. Colonel G. N. Tupikov) also
arrived in April. The strategic aviation forces were brought in under
the cosnand of General N. S. Skripko. Including the arriving air forea-
tions and the air service of the Black Sea Fleet. our air grouping now
consisted of 900 warplanes. to include 800 airplanes in frontal aviation
(270 fighters. 170 ground attack airplanes. 165 day boabers. and 195
night bombers).12

Thus when we include airplanes brought in fro. the air services of neigh-
boring fronts, the balance of power in the air was spproxinately equal.
Overall leadership and coordination of the air force's activities was
the responsibility of Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov.13 The battle-
worthinesa of our aviation was extreaely high. There were many well
trained air foraations and units in the air service of the Northern
Caucasian Front. The proportion of new types of airplanes in bomber
aviation was 65 percent. Fighter aviation had been al-ost totally
rear-ed with new airplanea--Yah-l. Yak-7b. and La-S. In all. ll percent
were American- and English-produced airplanes--B-20 and 3-3 boabers. and
Aerocobra and Spitfire fighters. in regard to the ratio of forces. we

110

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

had the advantage in fighters. and the enesy was superior to us in bomber

aviation and enjoyed better basing and a larger quantity of airfields for
naneuvering.

The following eissions were assigned to the air force on the Northern
Caucasian axis: Attain air superiority. dependably cover ground troops.
support the offensive of the 56th Arey, and stubbornly defend our assault
landing units southwest of Novoroseiysk.

Utilizing the rich experience of employing aviation at Stalingrad, the
plan of an air offensive was written in full volume for the first time;

it was signed by the Northern Caucasian Front's troop coanander, General
l. I. Maslennikov, by the front's Military Council member. General A. Ya.
Poninykh. and by the front's air force commander, General K. A. Vershinin.
0a 20 April 1963 the plan for the air offensive of the Northern Caucasian
Front'a air service and aviation contributed by the "q SHC reserve to
destroy the enemy grouping on the Tenan’ Peninsula was approved by Marshal
oi the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov and Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov.

The plan foresaw: Attaining air superiority; destroying enemy manpower
and artillery by bomber and ground attack strikes to support the defenses
of our assault landing units southwest of Novorossiysk and the advance of
the 56th Army; perforeing air reconnaissance in behalf of the front's
troops and aviation.

The following were called in for these missions: 733 airplanes from the
air service of the Northern Caucasian Front. 79 free the air service of
the Black Sea Fleet, 36 free the air service of the Southern Front. and
200 airplanes free strategic aviation--i.008 airplanes in all (508 bombers.
170 ground attack airplanes, and 370 fighters). A portion of the South-
western Front's aviation was called in as weil.1‘ in the event that the
enemy were to be especially active on the ground and in the air against

the assault lending group southwest of Novorossiysk. all aviation was to
be retargeted for its support.

During preparations for and conduct of the operation the coaunnd devoted
a great deal of attention to organizing and achieving interaction between
the area and services of aviation and the ground troops. interaction
between frontal aviation and the air service of the Black Sea Fleet was

to Involve distribution of areas of responsibility and tines of action.
and transfer of some of the fighters of the 5th Air Army to the coanander
of the black Sea fieat's air service in operational respects. The front's
air service deployed an auxiliary control post together with the front's
forward coenand post in the vicinity of Abinskaya Station to control all
aviation above the battlefield. The auxiliary control posts of the 4th
and 5th air armies were deployed and moved to the front line. Air liaison
officers were designated in the rifle divisions.

lll

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Five radio stations were deployed at the front line to control fighters
above the battlefield: three of them were in the sector of the 56th Army.
Including one main control radio station.15 A. A. Novikev. K. A.
Vershinin. 216th Fighter Air Division Commander General A. V. Boruan

(in charge of fighter guidance). and a group of officers from the 6th
Air Army were present in the main control radio station for the time of
the air engagements.

The first air engagement began on 17 April when the enemy attempted to
destroy assault landing units on the beachhead near Hyskhako. At 0630
hours. following intense artillery and air preparation, the enemy went
over to the offensive. The enemy launched 650 bombers and about 200
fighters against troops of the 18th Army defending a beachhead with a
total area of 30 kmi. To oppose the enemy offensive in the vicinity of
Nyskheko. the Soviet Command launched 500 airplanes. including 100 bombers.
On that day German bombers flew more than 1.000 sorties against Hyskhako.
Soviet fighters opposed them actively.16 On 20 April the enemy once
again undertook a powerful offensive against the defenders of the "Little
Land." About 30 minutes before the beginning of the enemy's offensive
frontal aviation made an effective strike with a force of 60 bombers and
30 fighters against enemy troops preparing for the attack. After a small
interval of time the offensive of the enemy troops was halted for prac-
tical purposes by a second strike made by a group of 100 airplanes.
General K. N. Leselidze. commander of the 18th Army. wrote the following
in this regard: "The massed strikes of our aviation against the enemy.
who was trying to destroy the assault landing units in the vicinity of
Hyskhsko. foiled his plans. Personnel of the assault landing group
gained confidence in their strength."17

The high morale of the defenders of the "Little Land." their steadfast-
ness. and their bravery were constantly maintained by party-political
work conducted intensively by the political department of the 18th Army,
which was headed by Colonel Leonid ll'ich Brezhnev.

0n subsequent days the power of our air strikes against the enemy grew
continuously due to commitment of sac reserve air corps arriving at the
front. The enemy launched large fighter forces against our bombers and
ground attack airplanes. and he continued making bomb runs against the
defenders of the "Little Land." Fierce air battles went on continuously
in the air. On 20 April Soviet fighters knocked down 50 German airplanes.
Having lost 182 airplanes (152 knocked down by fighters and 30 by anti-
uircraft artillery) in 8 days of bottle (from 17 to 24 April). the

fascist German squadrons were compelled to abandon the battlefield to

our aviation.18 A turning point occurred in the air situation. The

activity of fascist German aviation declined noticeably. The Germans
were forced to halt the offensive started on 17 April and withdraw to
their starting position. and the Luftwaffe went over to defensive opera-
tions.

112

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

"Our avietion played an important role in repelling all enemy attacks at
Hyakhnko." wrote Marshal of the Soviet Union A. A. Grechko in his memoirs.
"By its massed actions. it contained the enemy offensive and forced enemy
aviation to reduce its activity. The commander of the 17th Army was

forced to report to the headquarters of Ann: Group A: 'Today's air offen-
sive of the Russians initiated against Novo. Isiysk from the landing area
of the assault landing party. and the strong attack by the Russian Air
Force on the airfields demonstrated the great potential of Russian avia-
tion.’ The first air engagements on the Novorossiysk axis were won by
our aviation."19

Our pilots displayed great courage and heroism. On 21 April pilot N. V.
Rykhlin of the 805th Ground Attack Air Regiment was attacking ground
targets in his 11-2. Suddenly four German fighters ambushed him. In

the unequal air battle above the battlefield pilot N. V. Rykhlin and
gunner I. S. Yefremov knocked down two enemy fighters. The 11-2 had been
struck many times, but the pilot managed to return the crippled airplane
to his territory and land successfully at a frontline field airfield.
Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov witnessed the entire battle from the
forward command post. The pilot and gunner were ordered to appear at

the forward post. and the two men were awarded an irregular promotion

for bravery and valor by an order signed right there on the spot. Junior
Lieutenant N. V. Rykhlin was promoted to senior lieutenant and Senior
Sergeant l. S. Yefremov was promoted to junior lieutenant.2°

The glory of outstanding aces resounded over the Kuban' in those days--
A. l. Pokryshkin, the brothers D. B. Glinka and B. B. clinka. V. I.
Fadeyev, V. c. Semenishin, G. A. Rechkalov. and others. After the
enemy's offensive in the vicinity of Novorossiysk was halted, the
Northern Caucasian Front's aviation was reassigned to support troops of
the 56th Army in their offensive in the vicinity of Krymskaya Station.
Concurrently. on order of the He sac the Soviet Air Force made syste-
matic strikes against enemy airfields on the Taman' Peninsula, in the
Crimea. and in the southern Ukraine between 17 and 29 April. These
actions evolved into an air operation. The goal of the latter was to
weaken enemy aviation in the southern sector of the Soviet-German front
and thus promote attainment of air supremacy.

In addition to the 4th Air Army. the participants of the operation
included formations of the 8th Air Army of the Southern Front, the 17th
Air Army of the Southwestern Front, the air service of the Black Sea
Fleet. and strategic aviation. Airfields at Saki, Sarsbuz. Kerch',
Teman'. and Anspa were subjected to massed attacks. Strategic aviation
destroyed 170 airplanes just at the Saki and Ssrabuz airfields alone.
in all. between 17 and 29 April Soviet pilots put 260 airplanes out of
action at enemy airfields.2

The savage battles on the "Little Land" were followed by a lull on the
entire Northern Caucasian Front. lasting until 29 April. On that day at

113

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0760 hours, following artillery preparation and with active air support,
troops of 56th Army resumed their offensive with the objective of split-
ting the enemy grouping on the Tamsn' Peninsula with a strike on
Krymskaya Station and Anapa and then annihilating it. The 56th Army's
offensive was preceded by air preparation. which later transformed into
air support. Just during the first 3 hours alone. 16b of our bombers.
82 ground attack airplanes, and 26S fighters fought over the battle-
field. Enemy bombers tried to halt the 56th Army's offensive. Battles
lasting hours on end went on in the air. Forty-two group air battles,
in which Soviet fighters knocked down 75 enemy airplanes, occurred on
that day. During the day our aviation flew 1.268 sorties.22

By attacking north and south of Krynskeya Station. troops of the 56th
Army threatened the enemy's Crimean grouping with encirclement. forcing
it to withdraw its troops from this area. Krymskaya Station was lib-
eratud on 6 May. Exhausted, the 56th Army had to abandon any further
offensive action. Battles on the ground gradually died down, while the
fight in the air flared up with new. improbable force. In a relatively
narrow sector of the front (25-30 km) up to 60 group air battles occurred
in a single day. with 50-80 airplanes from both sides participating in
each of them. The intensity of the air struggle persisted into the
future.

In all between 29 April and 10 Hey the bth Air Army of the Black Sea
?leet's air service and strategic aviation flew about 10,000 sorties.
50 percent of them against enemy troops and equipment on the battle-
field. In this period 368 of the enemy's airplanes--that is. more than
one-third of his initial grouping--were destroyed. The losses of the
Northern Caucasian Front's aviation were 70 airplanes.23

After liberation of Krymskeya Station troops of the Northern Caucasian
Front began preparing for s new offensive operation with the goal of
penetrating the enemy's "Blue Line," defeating the German 17th Army. and
liberating all of Taman' Peninsula. 0n the morning of 26 Hay, following
powerful artillery and air preparation, troops of the 56th and 67th
armies went over to the offensive on an axis between the settlements of
Kiyevskoye and Holdavanskoye. Air preparation consisted of one massed
attack by 338 airplanes (ab bombers. lOb ground attack airplanes, and
150 fighters).2‘

The enemy resisted savagely. especially in the air. concentrating up to
1.600 airplanes in a radius of up to 500 km from Krasnodar25--thet is,
within range of Kiyevskoye and Holdsvanskoye--sgainst troops of the
Northern Caucasian Front; this required him to transfer bombers in from
the Ukraine. in the first 3 hours of the offensive enemy aviation flew
more than 1.500 sorties. He managed to seize the initiative in the air
temporarily, and in the second half of the day he was able to make a
strong attack against our troops with about 600 airplanes.26 A major
engagement once again took form in the air. Our fighter pilots fought

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

enemy aviation heroically. The command of the 6th Air Army took steps

to heighten the effectiveness of fighter aviation. Enemy bombers began
to be intercepted by fighters at the far approaches, and the "independent
hunting” tactic came into broader use. The number of night strikes
against enemy airtields was increased. between 26 Hay and 7 June 845
aorties were flown against eneav airfields.

The steps taken made it possible for our aviation to recover the initia-
tive in the air within a relatively short period of time. In the first
days of June enemy air activity began to show signs of a decline. Soviet
fighters once again >ecaae the masters of the Kuban' skies. The third
major air engagement at the Kuban' was once again won by our aviation.
Stubborn battles continued on the ground and in the air until 7 June.

But troops of the Northern Caucasian Front were unable to penetrate the

entire depth of enemy defenses, and on order of the Hq sue the offensive
actions were halted.

Air battles lasted more than 2 months over the Kuban'. In the period of
active operations by the ground troops they took the form of three major
air engagements. These were the largest of the war thus far in relation
to the number of air battles and the number of airplanes participating
within them in a narrow sector of the front. During the air engagements
our aviation flew about 35,000 sorties, to include 77 percent by frontal
aviation, 9 percent by strategic aviation, and 16 percent by aviation of
the Black Sea Fleet. The enemy lost 1,100 airplanes, to include more
than 800 airplanes destroyed in the air.27

Air battles and engagements over the Kuban' demonstrated the greater
skills of flight crews and air commanders. Extensive use was made of
vertical maneuvering, disposition of combat formations in altitude,
commdtment of reserves to the engagement, and control of a group air
battle from terrestrial control posts. The fighter warning and guidance
system was well organized, and the strategy of intensifying air activity
in the course of an air engagement was broadly employed. Fighters were
often employed in the "independent hunting" strategy, and they often
blockaded nirfields. Bombers were intercepted by strong maneuvering
groups of fighters at the far approaches to the front line. After
fighters were furnished with radio sets, they were able to abandon dense,
closed combat formations. Hhile formerly a commander could control his
subunit in the air only through evolutions performed with his own air-
plane or through personal example, which required visual communication,
in the battle of Stalingrad and especially here at the Kuban' he exer-
cised control only by radio. Owing to this the fighter combat formations
could be disposed in altitude and front; this came to be called the
"Kuban' formation."

in the Kubsn' battles Soviet pilots displayed bravery, boldness, inven-
tiveness, and extreme devotion to their people and their Communist Party.
Fifty-two pilots were awarded the hero of the Soviet Union title. The

115

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

names of those who distinguished themselves in air engagements over the
Kubnn'--A. l. Pokryshkin, who knocked down 20 enemy airplanes over the
Kuban'. G. G. Colubev. A. F. Klubov, N. F. Smirnov, V. c. Semeniahin.
V. I. Fadeyef. B. B. Glinka, D. B. Glinka, G. A. Rechkalov. and many

others-~have been inscribed on a glorious page in the history of the
Soviet Armed Forces.

The victory over the Kuban' was a new. important stage in the Soviet Air
Force‘s fight for strategic air superiority along the entire front of
armed conflict. The outcome of the air engagements over the Knban'
altered the subsequent course of the fight for air superiority in favor
of the Soviet Air Force.

Speaking at a conference of air division and corps commanders and execu-
tives of the 4th Air Army, Northern Caucasian Front held 11 May 1963 at
Pashkovskayn Station, near Krasnodar. Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov
praised the actions of our aviation in the vicinity of Hyskhako and
within the 56th Army's sector of advance. He also dwelled on three of
the most important problems in the theory and practice of air operations.
as revualed in the battles at Stalingrad and here at the Kubsn'--air
superiority, the air offensive, and organization of aviation's radio
control. In his statements he defined strategic air superiority and the
air offensive. Summarizing the two air engagements that had occurred
over the Kuban' between 17 April and 10 May, A. A. Novikov pointed out
that the 6th Air Army enjoyed all tne conditions for retaining the
strategic air superiority it had won over the Kuban'. and tar success-
fully conducting a powerful air offensive in behalf of the front's troops.
He noted that the fight for air superiority is the most important mission
of frontal aviation. successful completion of which would deprive enemy
bombers of the possibility for flying bomb runs against combat formations
of our troops and insure completion of the missions of our bombers and
ground attack airplanes. In such a case fighter aviation could destroy
enemy bombers with less interference and force them to dump their bomb
loads on their own troops. He once again confirmed that the air offen-
sive concept includes the entire complex of missions performed by an air
army in an offensive operation of frontal troops. He devoted special
attention to organizing and exercising control of aviation by responsible
air commanders guiding their airplanes from radio stations located at
forward control posts next to the front lina--wherever ground troops are
engaged in active operations. wherever they are making the main strike.2

A. A. Novlkov's speech at the commander's conference was subsequently
published in an informative collection by the Soviet Army Air Force Head-
quarters and brought to the awareness of executives in all ai: armies.
The actions of aviation over the Kuban' demonstrated that the air force

command and the commanders of the air units and formations had increased
their skill in controlling the formations and units.

116

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Air Operations of the Soviet Air Force To Destroy Enemy Air Groupings in
Summer 1943

By summer 1963 the center of gravity of the fight for strategic air
superiority shifted to the central sector of the Soviet-German front.
Preparing the country's armed forces for the summer-fall engagements,
the hq snc attached extremely great significance to completing the fight

for strategic air superiority and disorganiaing concentration of German
troops on the Kursk axis. The conditions favored large air operations by

the air force along a broad front. Being a combination of single or suc-
cessive massed strikes and air battles (engagements) following a single
design and plan, the air force air operation seriously weakened opposing
enemy air groupings and improved the air situation.

in May and June 1943 the Headquarters decided to conduct two large air
operations with the goal of destroying the enemy's main air groupings.

It was concurrently decided to fight enemy rail and motor transportation
in the front's central sector. The decision to conduct the first opera-
tion was made by the Headquarters at the beginning of May. On order of
the "q SHC, on A May 1903 Chief of General Staff A. H. Vasilevskiy
ordered the military councils of the Western, Bryansk, Central, Voronezh,
Southwestern, and Southern fronts to organize destruction of enemy air-
planes at airfields and in the air, to interdict rail shipments, and to
disorganize motor traffic on highways and dirt roads. The plan was to
contain the actions of the Luftwaffe through simultaneous surprise attacks
on nirfields along a broad front 1,200 km long from Smolensk to the shore
of the Sea of Azov and defeat the enemy groupings near Seshchs, Bryansk,
Orel, Khar'kov. and Staiino. The time for the first nassed attack
against the airfieids was set at from 0630 to 0500 hours for the 1st,
15th, 16th, 2d, 17th, and 8th sir armies; these attacks were to be fol-
lowed by actions against these airfields for a period of 3 days. After
a 2-day break, the enemy airfields were to be struck once again by the
Soviet Air Force for 3 days. Actions against rail facilities, highways,
and dirt roads were to continue for 10 days.29

Air reconnaissance was given an important role in the air operation. Its
purpose was to determine the locations of airplanes at airfields, the
disposition of air defense resources, and the locations of ammunition
and fuel dumps, and to determine the most concealed routes to and from
the airfields for our ground attack airplanes and bombers. Beginning
with the start of May, the enemy's principal airfields were subjected

to air reconnaissance three times a day-in the morning. in the after-
noon, aud at twilight-without disturbing the established pattern of
reconnaissance. Lengthy surveillance revealed all of the airplane park-
ing pads, the disposition of antieircraft resources, and the times when
all enemy airplanes and personnel were present at most of the airfields.

The plan developed for the air operation by the General Staff foresaw
active participation by the air force command and staff. In a directive

117

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dated 5 May 191.3 the air force coumander issued specific instructions to
the comnders of frontal air armies on the tactics they were to employ
in their missions. The directive stated: "Fulfilling the order of the
Headquarters, you must simultaneously attack all of the enemy's principal
airfields at which airplanes are accumulated. The bulk of the enemy's
aviation must be suppressed in the first day. Thus the enemy airfields
must be. subjected to repeated attacks on the same day, and night bombers
must operate against them at night. In the next 2 days. without reducing
the stubbornness and persistence of the actions, continue to strike enemy
aviation both at the principal airfields and at new ones discovered by
air reconnaissance.... Strike the airfields in large groups, allocating
enough aircraft out of their composition to suppress enemy air defenses."3°

In accordance with directives of the liq SHC and the Soviet Army Air Force
con-sander. the air armies were to operate against the following numbers
of airfields: 1st Air Army--six, 15th--two, Nth—five. 2d--eight, 17th—-
two. and 8th Air Army--three airfields.

To complete these missions. the air armies were to fly the following num-
ber of sorties in 10 days: 1st Air Army—-2,800, 15th—650, 16th-1.050,
2d--1,900, Nth—2.300. and 8th—1,600, for a total of 10,300.31

The covertness and csrefulness of the preparations for the air operation
insured full surprise and high effectiveness for the first massed strike.
Some 63h airplanes participated in it. simultaneously attacking 17 enemy
airfields. Caught unawares. the enemy was unable to offer organized
resistance and lost 194 airplanes at the airfields and 21 in air battles.
Soviet aviation lost 21 airplanes.32 0n the average one enemy airplane
was destroyed in two of our sorties. A second strike was made on 6 May
at 1500 hours by 372 airplanes against 20 airfields. The enemy offered
significant resistance in the second strike. He had all of his air
defenses at full readiness. Fighters were patrolling in the air, and
antiaircraft artillery covered the airfields with defensive fire. The
Soviet Command had expected this. Additional resources were assigned to
fight the enemy's air defenses and blockade airfields at which fighters
were based. Surmounting savage resistance, Soviet pilots destroyed and
damaged 136 airplanes at airfields and knocked 24 German fighters, losing
46 of their own craft.

In the third massed attack, which was made on the morning of 7 May. (005
Soviet airplanes attacked 22 airfields and put 122 enemy airplanes out
of action, to include 2‘) in air battles. Our losses were 106 airplanes.

The command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force continually monitored
the actions of the air armies in support of the operation. 0n 8 May 1963
the air force commander published a directive stating: "Our attack on
enemy airfields on 6 May 19103 was successful owing to surprise. The
situation was different on 7 Hay 1963. Enemy fighters were on alert, at
higher combat readiness, closer to the front line.... In such a situation

118

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the actions should be directed only at well reconnoitered airfields, and
the number of fighters covering the strike groups should be increased.
Ground attack groups must be constantly strong so that they could not
only strike airplanes at airfields but also dependably suppress air
defenses.... The tactics of the raid should now be based on strength
and cunning. since we can no longer count on surprise."33

0n 8 May the Soviet Air Force made a fourth strike with 181 airplanes.
But this strike produced the poorest results. Our aviation destroyed
only six enemy airplanes. The initial surprise was lost, and the H2 sac
ordered a temporary cessation of activities against the sirfields.3 On
13 Hay 1963 the Soviet Army Air Force comnander reported the following
summary data to the supra-e high cos-ander concerning the actions of our
aviation in the air operation of 6, 7 and 8 Hay 1963. "In 3 days our air
force flew 1,392 sorties, destroyed 373 enemy airplanes at airfields.
damaged Sl, knocked down 67 in air battles, and damaged 10 in the air.

In sum total the enemy lost 501 airplanes. These data are based on pilot
debriefings, information from partisans, and photographs. Our losses
were 122 airplanes. to include 21 in air battles and 8 knocked down by
enemy antiaircraft artillery; 93 airplanes failed to return from their
missions."35 The report stated that an analysis of the results of the
Soviet Air Force's actions would demonstrate the high effectiveness of a
simultaneous massed attack against enemy airfields situated along a broad
front.

in the first massed attack two sorties were flown for every enemy air-
plane destroyed, 2.6 were flown in the second, as many as 3.2 were flown
in the third, and 30.2 were flown in the fourth attack. This means that
the enemy's opposition increased. In the first massed attack one Soviet
airplane was lost in every 21.7 sorties, one was lost in every 8.1 sorties
in the second attack. and one was lost in every 8.5 sorties in the third.
The fourth attack, which was made on 8 May, turned out to be totally
ineffective.36 Thus it was correctly concluded that simultaneous sur-
prise attacks against enumy airfields by large numbers of our airplanes
were the most suitable. The report analyzed the reasons for the lower
effectiveness of the subsequent strikes-the higher combat readiness of
enemy aviation, especially fighter aviation, and rebasing of enemy avia-
tion to standby airfields. which were extremely difficult to attack
without preliminary detection and reconnaissance. This is why the report
suggested simultaneous surprise strikes by large forces as the strategy
to be used against enemy airfields with the objective of destroying his
aviation.

The results of the air operation improved the air situation for the
Soviet Armed Forces in the central and southern sectors of the front.
But the power of the Luftwaffe had not been broken yet. It supported

its troops and raided important rail terminals and industrial centers
in our country, and our airfields.

119

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ill-'PICIM. USE ONLY

by decision of the he suc on 8-10 June 19103 the Soviet Air Force conducted
another very large air operation to destroy ens-y aviation at airfielda.
lts objective was to strike bomber aviation asking night raids on impor-
tant industrial regions in our country-~Gor'kiy. Saratov. and Yaroslavl'.
The lst. 15th. and 2d air armies and strategic aviation formations parti-
cipated. First 15. and later another 13 airfields were struck. The main
attention was turned to destroying airplanes at the airfields of Seahcha.
Bryansk. Karachev. Oral. olsuf'yevo. Khar'kov. Stalino. and Zaporosh'ye.
where air reconnaissance revealed the greatest accuulation of one-y
bombers. There were unique features to the planning and preparation of
this air operation. The cot-sand and staff of the Soviet Array Air Force
possessed data indicating that the Fascist German Co-and had given con-
sideratlon to the shortcomings of air defenses against our airfield
strikes in May. and that it had significantly strengthened airfield cover.
This is why in his directives the air force co-ander ordered the air army
consanders to comit larger forces to the support wave intended for sup-
pression of antiaircraft resources. Fighters were given the eission of
containing enemy fighters in the air by battle and blockading forward
airfields. Up to 160 airplanes participated in strikes against individual
airfield... half of them operating as fighter escorts. As a result of the
messed strikes by frontal and strategic aviation 161 many airplanes were
destroyed and damaged on 8 June; the figures were 92 airplanes for 9 June
and 16 German airplanes for 10 June. In all during the air operation the
Luftwaffe lost 168 airplanes at airfields and 81 in air battles.37

in all three air operations conducted in spring and at the beginning of
super l9“ the Soviet Air Force destroyed a total of sore than 1.000
airplanes. which significantly accelerated our attainment of strategic
air superiority in sinner 19103.

in Hay-June the Luftwaffe attewted a nueber of retaliatory strikes
against our airfields. About 300 raids were made against Soviet air-
fields. with more than 1,200 airplanes participating. But owing to dis-
persal and meticulous camouflage of airplanes at the parking pads. crea-
tion of duassy airfields. and strong sir defenses. their effectiveness was
low. Here is what the air force co-ander reported to the supreae high
commander on 22 July 1963 in this regard: "He are eaploying due-y air-
fields with great success as one of the eessures of airfield sntiaircraft
defense. For example the enemy dropped 2,214 bombs weighing 66.755 kg on
duuay airfields of the 8th Air Arey. Southern Front in the last month and
.1 half, dropped 61 bombs weighing 2,750 kg on real airfields during this
tine." The enemy struck dumy airfields. the report went on. supplied
with good models which could not be distinguished from real airplanes on
photographs. It was requested in this connection to have the People's
Conisssriat of Aviation industr‘ build 100 du-y Pe-Z's. 300 du-y
11-2'9, and 500 du-y fighters.3 '

Thus the air operations conducted with the objective of destroying the
enemy's air groupings were distinguished by great scope. decisiveness of

120

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the goals. and high effectiveness. They were conducted in periods of
relative calm on the front, when the ground troops were asking prepara-
tions for forthcoming engagements. Consequently the aviation of the air
armies was not busy supporting troops of the fronts and arsies. This
permitted the air force to concentrate its efforts on independent mis-
sions. Nevertheless the air operations were conducted mainly in behal'
of forthcoming strategic offensive operations by groups of fronts.

During the air operations enemy aviation was simultaneously suppressed
along a broad front and to a great depth; close interaction was achieved
between the frontal air armies and strategic aviation formations. During
the operations the enemy was deprived of the possibility of maneuvering
his aviation. concentrating his efforts on the axis of the main strikes
made by our air force. and making retaliatory strikes on a broad front.
All of this permitted the command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force
to reach the correct conclusion that air operations were an effective
form for attaining strategic air superiority.

As a result of the fierce battle for strategic air superiority in spring
and the beginning of summer 1953 the power of the Luftwaffe was sapped
away. It lost about 3.700 airplanes on the Soviet-German front between
April and June 1953.39 The enemy was already losing the strategic
initiative in the air, but he continued to try to maintain his grasp on
it with all of his forces. The struggle was resumed with new force at
the beginning of July 19¢). when the Germans went over to the offensive
on the Kursk axis.

Actions of the Soviet Air Force To Interdict Rail Shipments and Disorganire
Enemy Motor Traffic

The moat important mission of the Soviet Air Force was to fight the
enemy's rail shipments and disorganite his motor traffic on highways and
dirt roads. It acquired especially great significance during preparations
for the decisive summer engagements of 1963. An order written by People's
Commissar of Defense 1. V. Stalin on 5 Hay 1953 stated: ”Strikes against
railroad trains and attacks on motor columns are to be the most important
missions of our air force.“0

The air armies of seven fronts and strategic aviation were committed to
these missions. A directive published on b May by the Ho SNC assigned
the mission of interdicting rail shipments and disorganizing motor
traffic to the frontal air armies; the table below shows the sectors
assigned.

121

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

Air 5331 Rail Shipments Motor shipments

3d. Kalinin Front On the line: Sehezh. Novo- East of the line:
Sohol'niki. Polotsk-Nevel'. Pastoahka. Nevel'.

Vitahsk-ﬂevel' Gorodok
1st. western Front Best of the line: Vitebsk, East of the line:
Hatislevl'. Poehep Saolenek. Roslavl'.
Bryansk
15th. Bryansh Front Prom lrysnsk to Oral and on East of the line:
to the front line Karachev, Daitrovsh-
Orlovskiy

16th. Central Front Fran Unech to Hikhaylovskiy East of the line:
and iron Konotop to Vorozhba Trubaehevsk. Konotop

2d, Voronezh Front Fran Polteva to Khar'kov East of the line:
Belopol‘ye. Akhtyrke,
Nov. Vodolsga

17th. Southwestern On the lines: Novo-Hoakovsk. East of the line:

Front Herafa. Krasnograd. Slavyansk. Krasnograd. Krasno-
Pavlograd, Herefa araeyshoye

8th, Southern Front 0n the lines: Chaplino. East of the line:
Krasnoaraoyshoye. Gorlovha. Krasnoarneyskoye.
Dehal'tsevo; north of the Hariupol'

lines Oorlovha. Debal'tsevo.
ﬂariupol', Stalino. Gorlovka.
Taganrog

The objectives of frontal aviation included locoaotives, railroad trains.
and actor vehicles. Ono ground attach and one fighter air regiment were
allocated froa each air aray for destruction of these objectives on order
of the col-ander of the Soviet Aray Air Force. Operating in saall groups
using the Independent "hunting" strategy. these reginents effectively
destroyed their assigned targets. A pernanent group of "hunters“ was
assigned to each rail route. Owing to this. within a short tine the
pilots aanaged to deteraine the traffic pattern of enemy trains. the
terrain, and the air defenses along each road section. and to success-
fully fight one-y ship-eats. Pilots of the 16th and 2d air araies flew
about 2.000 sorties for this purpooe. destroying six railroad trains. up
to 260 loaded cars. seven loco-otives, and aore than 120 uotor vehicles.‘1

Strategic aviation operated systeuatically to interdict one-y rail ship-
Ients in spring 19‘). In coaplience with directives of the He SHC it

conducted n special eir operation in March with the goal of disrupting
eneay ship-onto in the deep rear.

122

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Later it struck rail junctions. stations. and trains at sidings for 3
months. The depth of strategic aviation's operations attained 650-600 '
km. and'lhe breadth of the sector within which it made its strikes was
sso-Aoo‘kn.

The following rail terminals were subjected to intense night raids during
this period: Bryansk--2.852 sorties. 0rel--2.325. Gomel'--l.bbl. Unecha--
762. 8molensk--523. 0rsha--b03. Vyat'ma--427. and Novoaybkov--&00 sorties.
Certain rail terminals were subjected to several strikes. As an example
the rail terminal in bryanak was struck ll times in April. 7 times in Hay.
and A times in June; the Oral terminal was struck 19. l and 2 times cor-
respondingly; Gomel' was struck J. 4. and 1 times; and Unecha was struck
3. l. and 2 times. in all strategic aviation flew 9.500 sorties in
April. May. and June l9la3.‘2

The effectiveness of air force operations was high. working together
with partisans. on 6 March 1963 the air force put the Unecha-Bryanek
rail section out of action for several days. and in April it halted
traffic in the Roslavl'-Bryansk section. As a result of a raid on the
rail terminal in Gomel' l7 loaded fuel tank cars and 25 food cars were
burned. and 28 ammunition cars were demolished."3

The enemy suffered significant losses and his lines of communication
were systematically interdicted through the joint actions of frontal
aviation and strategic aviation. Concurrently. strategic aviation
struck the centers of government and war industry deep in the enemy
rear.

In April the city of Koenigsherg was subjected to five air strikes.
Danzig was subjected to tvo. lnsterburg was struck once. and Tilsit was
struck three times. In all during this month strategic aviation flew
920 aorties against these cities. dropping about 700 tons of bombs."‘
0n the night of 29 April a S-ton bomb (FAB-$000) was dropped for the
first time on facilities in Koenigsberg. while strikes by strategic
aviation against industrial and administrative centers deep in the
enemy rear did not cauuc significant material losses. they did force
the Fascist German Command to keep air defense forces combat ready. and
they did have a certain influence on the enemy's morale.

The actions of the Soviet Air Force to interdict rail shipments and dis-
organize motor traffic delayed the concentration of enemy troops on the
Kurek axis. hindered their maneuver. and in the and had their influence
on the fact that the enemy had to postpone the offensive from June to
July 1943.

123

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l.

2.

J.

‘a

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.

12.
l).
l‘.

IS.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

"latoriyn vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-1955" (History of world Her I!
1939-1965). Vol 6. p 160.

A multipurpose fighter having I aaxiaun epeed of over 600 kI/hr at
6.000 aetera; areanent--four guns and two nachinegune.

A two-engine aingie-aeat airplane poaaeeaing poverfui gun end
aachinagen area-ant.

"letoriya vtoroy nirovoy voyny 1939-19‘5." Vol 7. “ocean. 1976.
p 1010

Tinokhovich. I. 9.. "Operativnoye iekuaatvo Sovetakikh VVS v Velikoy

Otccheatvennoy voynu“ (Soviet Air Force Stretegy in the Great Patriotic
Her). Hoecov. 1976. p 41.

Air engage-onto occurred iron 17 to 2‘ April, free 29 April to 10 Hay,
and Iron 26 Key to I June.

Grechko. A. A.. "Bitve za Kevkez" (The Battle of the Caucasus).
macov. 1913, p 362.

"Sovetakiye VVS v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne 1961-1955 33." (The
Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic Her 19‘1-1965). p lSS.

1n reeponac to a directive of the he sac, on 2‘ April 1963 the adain-
istration of the 5th Air Ar-y tranaferred ita air (creations to the

5th Air Ar-y and withdrew to lurek. placing iteelf at the disposal

of the con-mud of the Steppe Dietrict (Front). General K. A.
Verehinin aeauaed col-and of the 6th Air Arly. The air force etaff
of the Northern Caucaeian Front vaa diebanded.

Zhukov. G. K.. ”Voapoainaniya i rat-yahleniya” (Recollectiona and
Reflections). Vol 2. hoecov, 1976. p 169.

Arkhiv M0 SSSR [USSR Mini-try of Defenee Archives]. 5. 319. op. 6798,
d. 70. l. 9.

Grechko, A. A.. "Ditva :a Kevkaz.” p 372.
lhid.. p 363.
Arkhiv M0 sssn. f. 226. op. 21b836. d. 5. 11. 105-107.

"Sovctekiye Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1955 33.." Hoacov. 1968. p 158.

126

FOR OFFICIAL ”SE ONLY
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

2b.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arkhiv K) 8851!, i’. 6598. op. 12475. d. 1100. 1. 136.

Arkhiv no 888R. 0’. 371. op. 13995. d. 2. 1. 180.

"lotoriya Vellkoy Otechootvonnoy voyny Sovotokogo Soyuz. 1961-1905
33." (History of the Gun: Patriotic "or of the Soviet Union 191.1-
1945). V01 3. MIC”. 196‘. p 3880

Crochko. A. A.. “nicva II Knvkox." p 367.

"Sovutlkiye Voyenno-Vozduohnyye Si1y v Volikoy Otecheuvennoy voyne
19‘1-1955 33.." pp 161-162.

"lotoriya Volikoy Omheuvcnnoy voyny Sovetakogo Soyuz: 1951-1955
33.." Vol 3. p 388.

Crochlm. A. A.. "Mum 2a Knvkaz," p 376.

"Iatoriya Vclikoy Olechentvonnoy voyny Sovotakogo Soyuzn 1961-19105
33.." Vol 3, p 388.

Arkhiv no SSSR. f. 319. Op. 1.798. d. ’07. 1. 73.
lb1d.. 1. M.

1818.

16111.. 1. 81.

Arkhiv m SSSR. f. 35. op. 11280, d. 88. 11. 27-62.

Arkhiv no SSSR. t. ba-A. co. 2, d. 8, 11. 103-106.

Atkhiv m SSSR. f. 290. op. 3280. d. 50, 1. 58.

Including 2.500 nortiu ﬂown by night light bower aviation.

"Sovctokiyc Voyenno-Voxduohnyye Sily v Velikoy Otcchutvonnoy voyno
19101-19105 35.." p 175.

Timkhovich. i. V.. “Operativnoyo ilkuuvo Sovcukikh WS v Velikoy
Occchcntvonnoy voyno.“ p 80.

A'khlv m 5553. ‘0 ‘B‘A' op. 2. do 8. 10 ‘36.
Al’khlv m SSSR, f. 35, op. 226133. d. 1. l. 99.

1b1d., 1. 99.

125

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
37.

38.
39.
1.0.
61.

52.

(.3.
lab.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tlmkhovlch. I. V.. "Oponttvnoyc tokuauvo Sowtnkikh WS v V011koy
OtechcntVennoy voyno." p 83.

Arka no 888R. f. 35. op. 11285. d. 807. 11. 89-90.
Arkhlv It) 88811. f. 35. 0|). 22614. d. 8. 1. 166.
VOYENﬂO-IS‘I‘ORICHBSKIY ZHUIINAL. No 1. 1975. p 78.

"Sovetlklye Voyenno-Voxduohuyyo Slly v Veltkoy Otocheatvennoy voync
1951-1955 33.." p 177.

Arkhlv no 88811. f. 35. op. 283235. d. 96. 1. lo.
Arkluv no 888R. 1. 39. op. 11‘95. d. 13. 1. 33.
“31¢. op. 11519. d. 669. 11. 52-62.

126

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER V. SOVIET ARMY AIR FORCE COMMAND AND STAFF IN THE BATTLE OF KURSK
The Strategic Situation on the Kursk Axis in July 1903

By summer 1943 the center of gravity of the armed conflict shifted to the
central sector of the Soviet-German front.

The victory of the Soviet Armed Forces in winter and spring 1903 shook

the foundation of the fascist bloc. By this time Germany's general sit-
uation worsened considerably. Displeasure with the war intensified in
satellite countries. The prestige of Germany fell in the eyes of its
allies. italy was on the verge of quitting the war. But despite the
undeniable facts Hitler's politicians and strategists ielt that the war
was not yet lost. The Fascist German Command decided to conduct a major
summer offensive on the Soviet-German front with the goals of improving
the army's morale, preventing disintegration of the fascist bloc, and
recovering prestige. The Fascist German Army was still a large force in
summer 1963. There were about 4.8 million men on the Soviet-German front,
which was about 72 percent of all forces of the operating army. In addi-
tion there were 525,000 men here in satellite armies. In all, countries
of the German bloc had 5,325,000 men in the Soviet-German front.1 But the
ratio of forces was not in favor of Nitler's troops. As of July 1963 the
Soviet operating army had a strength of 6,662,000 men. He surpassed the
enemy by 1.2 times in manpower. The superiority of the Soviet Armed
Forces was even greater in relation to equipment: We had 98,790 guns

and mortars as opposed to 56.300 enemy weapons, 9,580 tanks and self-
propelied guns as opposed to the enemy's 5,850. and 8,290 warplanes as
opposed to the enemy's 2,980.2 The front line extended from the Barents
Sea to Lake Ladoga. then along the Svir' River to Leningrad, and from
there south. At Velikiye Luki it turned southeast, forming a huge salient
in the vicinity of Kursk, deep into the disposition of the German troops.
Next from the vicinity of Belgorod the front line passed east of Khar'kov,
after which it followed the Northern Donets and Mius rivers to the east
shore of the Sea of Azov. 0n the Taman' Peninsula the front line passed
east of Temryuk and Novorossiysk.

Preparing for his offensive on the Kursk axis, the enemy concentrated

about 50 of the most battleworthy divisions--up to 900,000 men, about

[0,000 guns and mortars. and 2,700 tanks and self-propelled guns.3
127

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By striking toward Kursk on converging axes. the Ger-an Command planned
to encircle and destroy Soviet troops at the Kursk salient. crush our

strategic reserves on the Livny. Novyy Oskol line. and regain the
strategic initiative.

The German Command placed high hopes on massed use of heavy Tiger and
Panther tanks and Ferdinand self-propelled guns, which had sound arlor
protection and powerful armament. and on its air force.

The Fascist German Command created two powerful air groupings to support
troops iron the air in the vicinity of the Kurak salient. The 6th Air
Fleet was to support the strike grouping in the area south of Oral.
Between 15 March and 1 July the fleet was reinforced by five air groups
transferred from Germany. France. and Norway.

The 4th Air Fleet supported the strike grouping north of Khar'kov. At
the beginning of the offensive the fleet was reinforced by five bomber

groups and one fighter group and by two groups of dive bombers, each
containing 30 airplanes.

In all the enemy air grouping st Kursk had a strength of 2,050 airplanes
(1,200 bombers. 108 KhSh-l29 ground attack airplanes. 600 fighters, and
150 reconnaissance airplanes“).

The lines of defense of the Kursk salient were occupied by troops of the
Central and Voronezh fronts. Their strength was more than 1.3 million
men, 19.300 guns and mortars, and sore than 3,300 tanks and SP6.5 The
Steppe Front, which including aviation had a strength of 573.000 sen.
3.397 guns. 4.006 mortars. and 1.550 tanks and SP6.6 was concentrated

in the second strategic echelon.

The air grouping consisted of the Central Front's 16th Air Army, the
Voronezh Front's 2d Air Arsy, and the Southwestern Front's 17th Air Army
(commanded respectively by Generals S. I. Rudenko, S. A. Kraaovskiy, and

V. A. Sudets), and the main forces of strategic aviation. The composition
of the Steppe Front included the 5th Air Army (commander, General 5. K.
Coryunov). The air armies were reinforced by air corps of the SEC reserve.
The l6th Air Army contained three sir corps and six separate air divisions
with a total strength of 1.000 airplanes; the 2d Air Army had two fighter,
one ground attack, and one bonber sir corps and two separate air divisions,
for a total of 880 airplanes; the 17th Air Army had three nixed air corps
and two separate air divisions, for a total strength of 73S airplanes.

In sun total our air grouping possessed 2.900 airplanes (1,060 fighters,
960 ground attack airplanes, 500 day boabers, and #00 night bombers).

and if we consider strategic aviation. our strength was 1.4 times greater
than that of the enemy air force.7

128

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Army Air Force Command and Staff During Preparations for the
Battle of Kursk

The Soviet Supreme High Command discovered the enemy's plans for a sulmnr
offensive in time. To defeat the enemy with the lowest losses to our-
selves, as long ago as on 12 April 1942 a preliminary decision was made

to first Wear out the German strike groupings with an active defense and
then go over to a decisive counteroffensive ending in their final destruc-
tion. It was with this in mind that all arms and services of the Soviet
Armed Forces were prepared. 0n receiving the basic instructions from the
General Staff the command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force began
major preparations for air operations. These preparations consisted
mainly of creating a strong air grouping. preparing the airfield net.
manning the units and formations. and creating the necessary logistical
reserves. Concurrently the air force command and staff carefully studied
the enemy and the combat capabilities of the air forces of the belligerents,
and took steps to insure more effective use of aviation committed to the
operation.

The constantly increasing deliveries of new types of airplanes. radio
stations. and material and technical maintenance resources from industry
made this possible. In 1943 the average monthly output of warplanes
increased from 2,100 in 1942 to 2,900 in 19a3. The airplane fleet of the
Soviet Air Force underwent fundamental renovation. By the beginning of
the battle of Kursk basically only night bomber air units still had
obsolete airplanes. Especially great changes occurred in the fighter
fleet. Several modifications of the new La-Sfm and Yak-9 airplanes
assumed dominance in 1963.8 By July 1963 all regiments in ground attack
aviation were armed with ll-2's. and the overwhelming majority of them
were two-seat ground attack airplanes. The bomber fleet was almost com-
pletely replaced with the Pe-Z. By 1963 fighters in frontal aviation
were armed with H. Ye. Berezin's large caliber machineguns (12.7 mm),
which replaced the ShKAs machineguns. In addition to large caliber
machineguns, 20-mn caliber guns designed by B. G. Shpital'nyy and S. V.
Vladimirov (ShVAK) were installed aboard all airplanes. Beginning with
spring 1963 the 37-mm gun designed by A. E. Nudel'man and A. S. Suranov
(NS-37) were being installed aboard Yak-9 airplanes. The Germans did not
possess an aircraft gun as powerful as this.

Invention of the PTAB-2.5—1.5 hollow-charge antitank bomb by engineer

1. A. Larionov in l9b3 had extremely great significance to heightening
the effectiveness of ground attack aviation. This bomb was highly
destructive, it was characterized by low weight and small size, and it
was not expensive to manufacture. By decision of the USSR 6K0. trans-
ceiving radio sets began to be installed in one out of every two fighters
as of October 1942.9 In 1943 every new airplane was outfitted with a
radio set. The 205 [ground aids to navigation] service enjoyed extensive
development. The number of radio communication stations within it
increased fron 180 in 1962 to 620 in l9b3. Redut and Pegmatit radar
devices were adopted in frontal aviation.

129

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the first half of 1953 the administration of the Soviet Army Air Force
commander underwent further improvements in its organizational structure
and in the methods of troop command and control. Many sections were
enlarged into directorates (the Navigator Service Directorate and others).
An air defense service, a rear service. a directorate of air gunnery
service. and a Rein Directorate of Frontal Aviation Combat Training were
created. Tue directorates were created within the Air Force Main Directo-
rate of Air Engineering Service-~the Field Repair Directorate and the
Overhaul and Recovery Directorate. The Air Force Main Organizing Directo-
rate was renamed the Air Force Main Organizing and Training Directorate.1°

The Soviet Army Air Force Military Council was made stronger. General
Nikolay Sergeyevich shimanov was appointed full-time member of the Air
Force Military Council in March l9h3; he concurrently performed the

duties of director of the CC VNP(b)'s Aviation Section. N. S. Shimanov
remained at these posts for the rest of the war. During the war the
membership of the Air Force Military Council included P. P. ZhigereV.

A. A. Novikov. P. s. Stepanov. L. c. Rudenko, N. S. Shimanov, G. A.
Vorozheykin. F. :a. Falaleyev, A. V. Nikitin. A. I. Shakhurin. A. K. Repin.
S. A. Khudyakov. and other troop commanders.

The Air Force Military Council discussed and resolved the most important
issues concerning the life and combat activities of the Soviet Air Force.
All fundamental issues pertaining to development of the Air Force were
discussed as a rule at meetings of the Military Council. and decisions
made by the air force commander were reported to the General Staff. the
uq SHC, or the State Defense Committee.

In its practical activity the Air force Military Council relied on com-
manders. political agencies. party-political staffs. and the party organi-
zations of air units and formations and training institutions.

In May 1943 General 8. A. Khudyakov was reappointed to the post of air
force chief of staff. General P. Ya. Palaleyev was appointed full-time

deputy commander of the Soviet Army Air Force.

The air force command and its military council did an extremely great deal
of work to organize reserve air regiments. Creation of reserve air regi-
ments began back in the first days of the war in compliance with an order
of the USSR NKO dated ll July 1961. The most important task of the
reserve air regiments was to learn to operate new airplanes. 0n sugges-
tion of the air force command on 7 May 1943 the USSR 0K0 adopted a decree
calling a halt to the practice of withdrawing air units from the front to
serve as reserve air regiments and air brigades for the time required to
bring these units up to strength. Replenishments were now sent to the air
units at the front from air squadrons. flights. and individual crews
trained in reserve regiments. As a result of this measure the number of
air units temporarily assigned to reserve regiments in 1943 decreased by
four times as compared to 1942. This put an end to hasty training of
flight personnel, which was often the case in previous years.

130

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

The air force command attached great significance to correct use of the
air corps of the SHC reserve. On 29 March 1943 the Soviet Army Air Force
commander instructed the commanders of the air armies and commanders of
the air corps that suc reserve air corps attached to air armies were to
be used only on the axes of the main strikes. and that in no way were
they to be dispersed for simultaneous strikes on a large number of objec-
tives or for performance of many missions.

Discussing the results of air activities at the Kuban'. the Air Force
hilitary Council devoted much attention to making broader use of radio

and keeping the air army staffs mutually informed on the operational
situation. The Soviet Army Air Force commander published an order on

20 April 1963 requesting the air army commanders to make broader use of
radio resources to control aviation on the ground and in the air. Another
order of the air force commander dated 11 Hay 19b3 obligated the air army
staffs to inform each other about the operational situation on the front
every day. These orders had a positive influence. improving control over
aviation and promoting better work by staffs. The results of fulfilling
these orders had an effect in the battle of Kursk, in which "q sac liaison
officers had to organize and coordinate the air activities of several
fronts and strategic aviation.

As with frontal troops, the Soviet Air Force capitalized on the 3-month
pause in active operations of the ground troops preceding the battle of
Kursk by making preparations for the forthcoming engagement.

At the end of June the hq sac ordered A. H. Vasilevskiy to put all of his
efforts into preparing troops of the Voronezh Front, and G. K. Zhukov to
coordinate the actions of the Central. Bryansk. and Western fronts.
Soviet Army Air Force Commander A. A. Novikov and his deputies. Generals
c. A. Vorozheykin and S. A. Khudyakov, who were present in the frontal
air armies together with small operational groups of air force head-
quarters and rear services officers, were ordered to prepare aviation

and coordinate its actions.

Preparations had perhaps never been so methodical, so systematic, and of
such a great scale in any previous operation. In compliance with n deci-
sion of the “q SHC, air corps and separate sir divisions of the SEC
reserve were rebased. 0n 1 Hay 1943 the command and an operational group
from the headquarters of the 5th Air Army arrived from the Caucasus in
the vicinity of the city of Usmam'. By that time formations of the

[I Fighter, IV Ground Attack. and VII and IX mixed air corps were com-
pleting their redeployment to airfields of the Steppe lt‘ront.11"12 Air
corps and separate divisions of the sac reserve were taken out of the
headquarters reserve and from other sectors of the front and concen-
trated on the Kursk axis. The plans for combat use of the aviation of

the [6th and 2d air armies and strategic aviation were written right in
the troops.

131

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The plans for combat use of aviation were written in accordance with the
plans of the frontal troops. in four contingencies taking account of the
probable axes of the enemy's main strikes against the northern and
southern faces of the Kurslt salient. Much attention was devoted to
organizing interaction. In order that aviation could be used effectively.
plans were written for interaction between the 16th and 2d and between the
2d and 17th air armies. The plan for interaction between the 2d and 17th
sir armies in the defensive operation of the Voronezh and Southwestern
fronts was signed by General 6. A. Vorozheykin and the commanders of these
armies. Generals s. A. Krasavskiy and V. A. Sudets. The plan foresaw
mutual assistance among the air armies. The 17th Air Army contributed

180 airplanes to operate with an intensity of 990 sorties in the first

3 days. The 2d Air Army contributed 170 airplanes to help the South-
western front. these airplanes flying 900 sorties in the first 3 days.

The plan also foresaw maneuver of aviation utilizing the airfields of
neighboring air armies for these purposes.13

Air reconnaissance was intense. As long ago as on 14 Hay 1963 A. A.
ﬂovikov reported to the Supreme High Command Headquarters that photo-
graphic air reconnaissance conducted by the lath Reconnaissance Air Regi-
ment established a large accumulation of enemy tanks and motor vehicles
in the vicinity of Orel and Kroma at the end of No May. The report con-
tained the conclusion that the enemy was obviously preparing for a
powerful offensive by tank and mechanized formations. and that he was
creating a strong air grouping at airfields of the Kursk axis.“

Air reconnaissance revealed the concentration areas of the enemy's main
troop groupings. the locations of enemy air bases and the composition of
the Luftwaffe. the airfield air defense system. the nature of defensive
fortifications. and the locations of strongpoints. artillery positions,
and enemy reserves. All of this helped the Soviet Comand to reveal the
enemy's design better. to take steps to organize a stubborn defense in
time. and to prepare for the forthcoming offensive more purposefully.

The efforts of air and combined am major formations and formations were
coordinated upon in place and in time during the preparations.

0n the most highly threatened axes. operational air groups were organized
in combined am armies and air liaison officers were appointed in rifle
corps.

On order of the air army co-andsrs. the air corps and division col-sanders
traveled to the forward edge of defense with the goal of reconnoitering
the terrain. defining the objectives of their strikes, and coordinating
with the ground troops on the signals to be used for mutual identifica-
tion and target indication.

An extremely great deal of work was done by air force political agencies
and by party and Kouomol organizations. which directed their activities

132

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mainly at heightening the battleworthiness of the air units and forma-
tions, and at strengthening friendship between airmen and personnel of
the combined arms and tank armies.

Air army rear services and their attached engineering battalions worked
intensively to prepare the airfield net and accumulate reserves of muni-
tions and materiel. With the active assistance of the public. 156 air-
fields were built within the zones of operation of the 16th and 2d air
armies; in addition they built 50 dummy airfields.15 To permit maneuver
of aviation, reserve airfield maintenance battalions were created in the
air armies. Logistical reserves supporting 10-15 days of active combat
operations by aviation were created.

Aviation of the air armies did not halt its combat activities during the
preparations for the forthcoming engagement. It covered the movements of
the concentrating troops, repelled enemy raids on rail junctions and air-
fields with the help of fighters and antiaircraft artillery, periodically
struck enemy reserves. and maintained purposeful air surveillance over
all enemy troop movements.

During preparations for the summer offensive the Luftwaffe intensified
its activities against rail junctions. stations, bridges, and sidings in
the vicinity of the Kursk salient, attempting to paralyze the communica-
tions of the Soviet troops. The Kursk rail terminal was the principal
objective of enemy aviation. The first massed raid on Kursk was under-
taken by enemy aviation on 22 Hay. About 170 bombers participated in
this raid. The raid was opposed by fighters of the lJth and 2d sir
armies as well as the 101st Fighter Air Division of the national air
defense forces. Most of the bomber groups were dispersed by fighter
attacks at the approaches to the city.

The Luftwaffe made its largest raids on the Kursk rail terminal during
the day on 2 June and in the night of 3 June. More than 500 airplanes
participated in the day raid. to include 624 bombers. Some 280 fighters
of the 16th and 2d air armies, forces of the 106th and lolst fighter
divisions of the air defense forces, and antiaircraft artillery of the
Kursk Air Defense Group were called in to repel the raid.

The assault echelon of enemy aviation, consisting of more than 150 air-
planes (137 bombers and 30 fighters) and flying from the direction of
Oral over Patezh, was intercepted by fighters of the 16th Air Army, which
boldly attacked the enemy and knocked down 58 craft. Only occasional
enemy bombers penetrated to the city. There were 175 airplanes (120
bombers and 55 fighters) in the second and third echelons traveling from
the same direction. Eighty-six Soviet fighters were raised into the air
to repel the raid by these two echelons. The Soviet fighters attacked

the enemy airplane columns continually, knocking down 34 craft. Up to
55 airplanes managed to penetrate to the city as scattered groups.

133

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fourth and fifth echelons contained more than 180 eneny airplanes
(167 bosbere and 1!. fighters). they traveled from a new direction. from
oboynn', at an altitude of 6.000-7,000 seters.

’lhe Soviet Cos-and called in major fighter forces--about 205 craft--to
repel the enemy raid. but they were unable to intercept all bosber groups.
About 100 enesy airplanes struck the Kursk rail terminal and put it out
of action for 12 hours. The enemy's air losses were tresendous in the
raid of 2 June. The enemy lost 165 airplanes. to include 10b knocked
down by fighters and Al brought down by antiaircraft artillery fire.
Soviet aviation lost 27 fighters.)-6

Thc sssaed air raid on Kursk was the Great Patriotic war's last major day
raid by fascist aviation against rear facilities. Hitler's contend was
forced to subsequently abandon activities against rear facilities during
daytime. and to lilit the actions of its bomber aviation to nighttime.

Thus the llq She and the consand of the Soviet Army Air Force did a great
deal of purposeful work to prepare troops and aviation for forthcoming
engage-onto in the central sector of the Soviet-German front. During the
3 nonths of preparations the 16th and 2d air armies and strategic avia-
tion flew more than 62.000 cosbat sorties. cowleting all missions.l7

Actions of Soviet Aviation in the Battle of Kursk

0n 5 July 191.3 powerful groupings of the fascist German troops went over
to the offensive on the northern and southern faces of the Kursk salient.
It was not a surprise to our ground troops and aviation. 0n 2 July the
he Sllc warned troop cor-sanders of the Central and Voroneth fronts that
the enemy might go over to the offensive in the next few days. Thus the
troops and aviation wen- combat ready.

Interrogation of prisoners captured by our scouts revealed not only the
day but also the hour of the attack--5 July. 0300 hours. At dawn on

5 July powerful artillery counterpreparation was initiated on order of
Marshal of the Soviet Union 0. K. Zhukov. Simultaneously, 617 ground
attack airplanes and firhters of the air formations of the 2d and 17th
air armies made a massed strike against seven of the most isportant air-
fields (Kikoyanovka, Sokol'niki. Poserki. Osnova, Rogan', Barvenkovo.
Kramatorskaya) with the objective of weakening the snowy air grouping

and disorganizing his activities. destroying 60 enemy craft at these
nirfields. German forces were weakened by the artillery counterprepsra-
tion and the strikes against the airfields. The surprise the fascist
cot-sand had counted upon failed to materialize. Fascist German troops
had to postpone the beginning of the offensive from 0300 hours to 0530
hours. The offensive of the enemy troops began with the support of major
air forces. Under the cover of fighters. fascist bonbera flying in groups
of 100-150 airplanes attacked the positions of the Soviet troops. They
were set initially by pilots of the Vi fighter Air Corps (co-sander.

134

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General Ye. Ye. Yerlykin) and the lat Guards Fighter Air Division (com-

mander. Lieutenant Colonel I. V. Krupenin) of the 16th Air Army. as well
an pilots oi the Iv and V fighter air corps (con-sanders. Generals I. D.

Podgornyy and D. P. Galunov) of the 2d Air Army.

An air engagement took place over the positions of the troops. in the
first half of 5 July Soviet fighters knocked down 79 fascist airplanes.18
Concurrently pilots of the ill Bomber Air Corps (commander, General A. 2.
Karavatakiy) and the Vi Mixed Air Corps (commander. General 1. D.
Antoshkin). and of the 2d Guards (coramnder. Colonel C. I. Komarov) and
the 299th Ground Attack Air Divisions (co-nander, Colonel i. V. Krupskiy)
attacked enemy tanks and infantry on the battlefield and near Yasnaya
Polyana. 02erki, and Arkhangel'sk in groups of six to eight airplanes.
This was the first day our ground attack airplanes used the new PTAB-2.5-i.5
antitank bombs. They were able to penetrate the armor of fascist Tiger
and Panther tanks. Just pilots of the 29lst Ground Attack Air Division
(commander. Colonel A. N. Vitruk) annihilated 10 enemy tanks with these
bombs in 1 day at Voroneth.19 General (F. Hellentin). former chief of
staff of the German XLVlii Tank Corps. later wrote: "Many tanks became

the sacrifice of Soviet aviation. and Russian pilots were extremely
bold."20

During 5 July our aviation actively helped troops on the Central and
Voronezh fronts to repel savage attacks by enemy infantry and tanks.
interacting with the 2d Air Army. Voronezh Front. the 17th Air Army.
Southwestern Front struck enemy tanks and infantry crossing the Northern
Donets in the vicinity of Solomino and Bezlyudovka, while units of the
15th Air Army. Bryansk Front helped the 16th Air Army. Central Front to
repel raids on our troops by bomber aviation.

within the zone of the Central Front, at particular moments there were
simultaneously up to 300 German bombers and not less than 100 fighters
over the battlefield on 5 July. On this day pilots of the 16th Air Army
flew [.232 combat sorties. fought in 76 group air battles. and knocked
down 106 enemy airplanes. in all, the four air armies of frontal avia-
tion flew 3.385 sorties on this day. Enemy aviation made 6.526 over-
flinhts. to include 108 within the zone of the Bryansk Front, 1,737
within the zone of the Central Front. 2,561 within the zone of the
Voronezh Front. and 120 in the zone of the Southwestern Front.

During 5 July Soviet pilots knocked down 260 enemy airplanes in air
battles and destroyed 60 airplanes at airfields.2 Our losses were 176
airplanes.

As a result of the opposition of our fighters and the losses suffered by
the enemy. the activity of enemy aviation declined somewhat in the
Central Front in the second half of 5 July. while in the Voronezh Front
the enemy was totally unable to surmount the resistance of our fighters.
However. not everything went so smoothly. Shortcomings were revealed in

135

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the actions of our fighters. They were lured into battles with fighters,
sometimes leaving enemy bombers untouched. The system for signalling the
approach of German bombers was not organized sufficiently well. Actions
by small groups of our ground attack airplanes and bombers against enemy
troops preVented effective action against the enemy's antiaircraft artil-
lcry, and large numbers of fighters had to be assigned to cover these
small air groups.

Considering all of this. on the following day the air force canmand and
the air army commanders changed the forms and methods of actions by our
aviation. switching to massed strikes against advancing enemy troops.
Utilizing detailed air reconnaissance data. on 6 July aviation of the
16th Air Army made a massed strike against enemy tanks and motorized
infantry in the vicinity of Podolyan and Soborovks; 650 airplanes of
the VI nixed Corps and the 2d and 299th ground attack air divisions par-
ticipated in the attack. This strike insured the success of the counter-
strike made by the front’s troops. On that day the 16th Air Army per-
formed another two massed strikes. As a result of the counterstrikea of
our troops and the massed actions of aviation the enemy suffered serious
losses in manpower and equipment. The offensive spirit of the enemy
troops declined noticeably. Strikes by the 2d and 11th air armies were
no less successful on that day on the Belgorod-Kursk axis.

Concurrently. major adjustments were also made in the organisation of the
combat activities of fighters. The commanders of fighter air formations
traveled to forward control posts. from which they controlled their units
directly. fighter patrol zones were extended into enemy territory. The
fighters now began to be guided to enemy airplanes. mainly to bombers.

by radio. Competent guidance and increase of force in the air battle.
presence of air fighter foraation commanders at the control posts. and
the pilota' familiarity with the voices of their commanders in the radio
network had their influence. dramatically altering the air situation.

German aviation drastically reduced its activity as a result of the large
losses. While 4.298 sorties were recorded on 5 July in the Central and
Voroneah fronts, only 2,100 were documented on 6 July.22

In the Central and Voronerh fronts Soviet pilots flew 2,800 combat sortiea.
they knocked down 217 enemy craft in air battles. and our losses were 171
airplanes.

0n 7 July 1963 the enemy concentrated the main efforts of his aviation
against troops of the Central Front. here the enemy operated in groups
of 80-120 airplanes, but once again he was unable to achieve air
superiority. Operating together with the 15th Air Army. the 16th Air
Army flew 1.370 sorties. while the enemy flew a little more than 1,000.

On the Voroneeh Front the 2d Air Army. supported by some of the forces
of the 17th Air Army. flew 1.100 aorties, while the enemy flew 560. The

notions of the I Cround Attack Air Corps (commander. General V. C. Ryazanov)

136

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were especially effective. with two powerful strikes the corps failed

the attack of major eneay tank forces and infantry in the vicinity of
Syrtsevo and Yakovlevo.

0n the sane day 233 enemy airplanes were knocked down and 12 were

destroyed at airfields of the Central and Voronezh fronts. Our losses
were 122 airplanes.23

Beginning with this day Soviet fighters soundly held the initiative in
the air. Host eneny boabers were intercepted and annihilated by our
fighters at the approaches to the object they were covering. The activ-
ity of the Luftwaffe declined with every day.

On 8 July aviation of the 16th Air Aray flew 1.070 sorties, it knocked
down 88 enemy airplanes in 40 air battles. and it lost 43 airplanes. At
the Voronezh Front German aviation flew only 118 sorties by 1300 hours.
Soviet pilots flew l 210 sorties, knocked down 78 eneay airplanes in air
battles. losing 55.25

A massed strike nade by the 16th Air Army on 9 July was typical of the
actions of aviation. Under fighter cover, 150 ground attack airplanes
and bombers struck the enemy's 9th Tank Division in the vicinity of
Soborovki: the strike was so successful that it halted the eneny's

advance. and after it the eneny exhibited no activity whatsoever through-
out the entire day.

Thus the giant battle that had taken shape on the ground and in the air
began to gradually abate. The activity of enemy aviation declined with

every day. By 10 July the offensive capabilities of fascist German
troops on the Orel-Kurak axis were exhausted. Suffering tremendous

losses, the Germans went over to defense. never again to recapture the
initiative.

The battle went on for another few days on the Belgorod-Kursk axis.

After the enemy's plan for breaking through to Kursk in the shortest way
from the south through Oboyan' failed completely. he began seeking vul-
nerable places in the defenses in other sectors. and he concentrated his
nnln efforts in the direction of Prokhorovka. Attempting to foil the
eneay's plan. with the approval of the ﬂq sac the command of the Voronezh
Front decided on 12 July to make a powerful counterstrike with forces of
the 6th Guards and 1st Tank ernies, which were advancing from a line
north of Helovoye and Kruglik in the direction of Yakovlevo. General

P. A. notnistrov's 5th Guards Tank Army and part of the forces of General
A. S. Zhadov's 5th Guards Aray made the principal thrust from the vicinity
of Prokhorovka in the direction of Yakovlevo. Three rifle divisions of
the 7th Guards Army went over to the offensive east of Belgorod.

For 2 nights just before the offensive, ADD formations and the night
boabers of the air nrnies constantly boabed enemy troops on the

137

FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

battlefield and destroyed railroad sidinga. Air preparation began an hour
before the counterattack of our troops. The I Bomber Air Corps (commander.
Colonel l. S. Polbin). the 1 Ground Attack Air Corps (commander. General
V. G. Ryasanov). and the 291st Ground Attack Air Division took part in it.
striking accumulations of enemy tanks end artillery at gun positions.
following 15 minutes of artillery preparation, at 1830 hours on 12 July
formations of the 5th Guards and 5th Guards tank armies went over to the
offensive. About 1,200 tanks of both sides took part in the engagement

at Prokhorovka. Stubborn battles took shape in the air during this time.
lasting throughout the entire day. Ground attack airplanes and bombers

of the 2d Air Army actively supported the tanks. As a result of the joint
actions of ground troops and aviation the German armored wave was halted.
The egg-y lost more than 350 tanks and over 10,000 enlisted men and offi-
core.

The enemy's last attempt at breaking through to Kursk was foiled by the
efforts of our ground troops and aviation. By 23 July troops of the
Voronezh Front had recovered the position they had occupied before 5 July.
The defensive period of the great battle came to an end.

In the defensive period the Soviet Air Force flew more than 28,000 sorties.
providing considerable assistance to ground troops in repelling this power-
ful enemy offensive. In the air. Soviet aviation fought about 1.000 sir
battles. in which it knocked down more than 1,600 enemy airplanes. to
include 517 on the Oral-Kursk axis and 899 on the Belgorod-Kursk axis.

The defeat of the advancing enemy groupings created favorable conditions
for the counteroffensive of the Soviet troops. The plan for this counter-
offensive was developed and approved by the supreme high commander back

in May. after which it was discussed many times at Headquarters and
adjusted by the General Staff. Two groups of fronts were to participate
in the operation. The enemy‘s Orel grouping was to be destroyed by troops
of the left wing of the western Front and by the main forces of the
Bryansk and Central fronts, while the Belgorod-Khar'kov grouping was to

be destroyed by troops of the Voronezh and Steppe fronts. Strong German
troop groupings were operating forward of the Soviet fronts. Despite the
tremendous losses they suffered during their offensive, the total strength
of their armies in this sector was 900,000 men at the beginning of our
counteroffenaive. The troops possessed about 10,000 guns and mortars,

up to 1,800 tanks and assault guns. and 2.100 warplanes. Such concentra-
tion of forces was attained by transferring new divisions to this area
and replenishing the divisions present on foot. The strength of the
Soviet troops was 2.226.500 men. over 33 000 guns and mortars. 6.800

tanks and SPG, and over 6,300 warplanes}6 The Soviet Air Force was

given the following missions: Maintaining air superiority and dependably
covering the strike groupings; supporting ground troops in their penetra-
tion of enemy defenses; preventing fascist German troops from occupying
defensive positions on intermediate lines; (oiling the enemy's attenpts

nt maneuvering his reserves; disrupting troop command and control. This
was to be an air offensive in the full sense of the term. Strategic

138

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aviation was called in to participate in air preparation and to strike
rail junctions and other objectives in the enemy rear. Fighter air
formations of the National Air Defense Forces were called in to cover
troops and objectives in the frontal rear.

The counteroffenslvo of the troops of the Western and Bryansk fronts on
the Orel axis began with active air support on 12 July. Troops of the
Central Front went over to the offensive on 15 July.

In addition to three frontal air armies, long-range bombers of the 1, II.
and Ill Guards air corps (commanders, Generals D. P. Yukhanov, Ye. F.
Loginov. N. A. Volkov), the V and VII air corps (commanders. Generals

I. V. Georgiyev. V. Ye. Nestertsav). and the 45th Air Division (commander.
Colonel V. I. Lebedev) took an active part on the Orel axis.

Fifteen minutes prior to the attack 70 Po-Z bombers and 68 11-2 ground
attack airplanes of the 1st Air Army made a concentrated strike against
enemy artillery and strongpoints in the breakthrough sector within the
zone of advance of the 11th Guards Army. Western Front. ADD formations
and the 1st Air Army's 213th Night Bomber Air Division also operated in
this area during the night. Air preparation was conducted at night in
the breakthrough sector of the 61st Army, Bryansk Front by strategic
aviation and the 15th Air Army's 313th Night Bomber Air Division. As a
result of the air and artillery preparation enemy defenses were signifi-
cantly weakened in the breakthrough sectors of both fronts. Frontal
troops exploited the offensive during the day with the support of avia-
tion. On 12 July our aviation flew 2,174 sorties, and in 72 air battles
it knocked down 86 enemy airplanes. losing 59 of its own.27

The fascist German troops offered stubborn resistance. In 8 days troops
of the western Front advanced 70 km. while the Bryansk Front troops
advanced 20 km. Between 18 and 25 July the XXV Tank Corps, the 11th

Army. the bth Tank Army. and the II Guards Cavalry Corps were committed
to the engagement. Their commitment to the engagement and their opera-
tions deep in enemy defenses were supported by all forces of the 1st and
15th air armies. The enemy's Bolkhovo grouping was destroyed by 29 July.
Concurrently the troops advanced on the Orel and Kromy axes. Some 120
ground attack airplanes. 112 bombers, and 200 fighters of the 15th Air
Army supported the 3d Guards Tank Army on the Orel axis, fulfilling
their missions of covering and supporting the tank army quite success-
fully. The fighter pilots of the French Normandy Air Squadron fought
valorously together with Soviet pilots on this axis. Arriving at the
front on 25 March 19b3 and joining the 1st Air Army, the French volun-
teers displayed their high skill and courage in the very first battles
with the enemy. 0n 2 July 19h) a ukase of the Presidium of the USSR
Supreme Soviet awarded Soviet orders to the first five French pilots
(Zh. Tyulyan. A. Litol'f. A. Dyuran. N. Lefevr, L. Dyupra) for exemplary
completion of their combat assignments and the bravery and valor they
displayed. By the end of July 1943 the French pilots were credited with

139

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

knocking down lore than 30 ens-y airplanea.28 0n 5 July 1953 the French
air squadron was reorganized as the righting French Normandy let Separate
Fighter Air Regiment (regiment coriander. Major P'yer Puyyad).

During the offensive troops of the Central Front recovered their 5 July
positions. and on 6 August they liberated the city of Kromy. The 16th
Air Army provided effective support to the troops during the offensive.
flying 1.000 and more sorties every day. On 5 August troops of the
Bryansk Front liberated the city of Orel with the support of troops of
the western and Central fronts on the flanks. Subsequently taking
lolkhove and Kromy. troops of these fronte organized the pursuit of
enemy troops with the support of aviation. and by 18 August they reached
the line Zhizdra. Karachev, Deitrovsk-Orlovskiy.

Troops of the Voronezh and Steppe fronts went over to the counteroffenaive
on the Belgored-Khar'kov axis on 3 August. 0n the night prior to the
offensive. strategic aviation formations and the 2d Air Arny‘a 208th

Night Bomber Air Division operated intensively against enemy defensive
structures and troops in the breakthrough sector. They flew 370 sorties.
Ground attack airplanes and bombers were committed to the battle 2 hours
prior to the attack of the troops. Enany troops and strongpoints within
the zones of the Voronesh Pront's 6th Guards and 5th Guards armies were
suppressed and partially destroyed by powerful artillery fire and air
strikes. The troops of these armies captured the main defense zone in

the first half of the day. In the second half of 3 August the let and

5th Guards tank areies were committed to the engagement within the zone

of operations of the 5th Guards Army. They were supported by the Iain
forces of the 2d Air Army. Our aviation flew 2.670 sorties on that day.29

By 11 August the tank armies reached the vicinity of Vysokopol'ye and
Kovlyegi. By this tine troops of the Steppe Front had liberated
Belgorod. reached the outer Khar'kov periaeter, and began the fight to
penetrate it.

0n 5 August 1963 our notherland's capita1-hoscow--gave the first salute
in honor of a major victory-1iberation of the cities of Orel and
Belgorod. An order of the suprene high ce-ander dated 5 August 1943
stated: "Today on 5 August. troops of the Bryansk Front took the city
of Orel following savage battles in which troops of the Western and
Central fronts provided support on the flanks. Today also, troops of
the Steppe and Voronezh fronts broke enemy resistance and captured the
city of Belgorod. Today. on 5 August, at 1500 hours our motherland'e
capital. Hoscow, will salute our valorous troops who have liberated Orel
and Belgorod with 12 artillery selves by 12 guns...."

In the period free 11 to 17 August 1943 troops of the Voronezh Front
repelled a counteroffensive in the vicinity of bogedukhov with active

air support from the 2d Air Army. and between 18 and 20 August they
repelled a ceunteroffenslve in the vicinity of Akhtyrka. Suffering

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tremendous losses and failing to achieve his objective, the enemy was

forced to withdraw. On 23 August Soviet troops liberated the city of

Khar'kov from the fascist German invaders. By 23 August the operation
to defeat the Belgorod-Khar'kov grouping was completed.

During the Belgorod-Khsr'kov operation Soviet aviation flew 28,265 combat
sortiesso The enemy lost 800 airplanes in savage air battles and at air-
fields.

For the Soviet Air Force, the battle of Kursk was a time of further
improvement of strategy and tactics.

An air offensive was conducted in its entirety by the air army commanders
in the course of the counteroffensive on all fronts of the Kursk axis;
the actions were coordinated by ﬂq suc air liaison officers Generals

C. A. Vorozheykin and S. A. Khudyakov. After air preparation, ground
attack and bomber aviation immediately switched to support of the
advancing troops throughout the entire depth of the operation.

The efforts of our aviation were concentrated on narrow sectors of the
front against the most important objectives, mainly enemy tanks and
artillery. Through continuous pressure on enemy troops, frontal aviation
reduced their capability for resistance, inflicted large losses on them,
and thus promoted the success of penetration of enemy defenses by our
troops. General 2. Z. ngoznyy, commander of the XLVIII Rifle Corps.
Steppe Front, wrote in a report dated 3 August that ground units were
able to advance successfully only owing to well organized interaction
and the massed strikes of ground attack pilots.31 when tank major forma-
tions and formations were committed to the engagement, the air armies
directed their efforts at suppressing enemy antitank defenses, at pre-
venting reserves from reaching the battlefield, and at providing air cover
to tank and mechanized corps. Prom 50 to 80 percent of the forces of the
air armies were eosmdtted to supporting and covering these corps and to
fighting antitank resources. For example the let and 5th Guards tank
armies were supported by the V Ground Attack (commander, General R. P.
Kamanln) and the X Fighter Air Corps (commander, General H. H. Golovnya).
as well as by the 202d Bomber Air Division (commander, General 5. I.
Nichlporenko) and the 291st Ground Attack Air Division (commander,
Colonel A. N. Vitruk).

Soviet aviation took the most active part in pursuit of the withdrawing
enemy troops. During the counteroffensive our aviation successfully
completed its mission of interdicting enemy rail and motor shipments.
When the fascist command began transferring tank and motorized divisions
from the Donets Basin and other sectors to the vicinity of Bogodukhov
and Akhtyrka on an emergency basis, the 8th Air Army, Southern front was
committed to action first by order of the Soviet Army Air Force com-
mander. As the reserves moved along the front line, the 17th, 5th, and
2d air armies entered into battle with them, destroying enemy trains at

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the rail stations of Gorlovka. Slavyansk. Barvenkovo. and Pavlograd. and
annihilating motor columns on the roads. In this some period aviation
of the 1V and VI ADD air corps operated against rail junctions and sta-
tions at Poltava. Lyubolin. Krasnoarmsyskoye. Krasnogrsd. and Herefs.
Between A and 12 August our aviation flew more than 7.100 sorties to
interdict the enemy's rail transfers. Just sir formations of the 8th
and 17th air arsies alone burned 16 trains and destroyed 20 tanks and
about 30 motor vehicles on the roads.32 As a result of the combined
actions of frontal aviation and strategic aviation. transfer of enemy
troops was retarded and entailed great losses. During the counter-
offensive st Kursk Soviet aviation flew more than 90.000 sorties. In
1.700 air battles it destroyed 2.100 enemy airplanes; in addition. 165
were destroyed and damaged at airfields. and 780 were knocked down by
antiaircrsft artillery. 3

The great battle of Kursk ended with the brilliant victory of the Soviet
Armed Forces over the Fascist German Army. "The giant battle on the
Oral-Kursk salient in summer 1963." said L. I. Brezhnev. “broke the back-
bone of Hitler‘s Germany and brought its armored troops to ashes. Our
army's superiority in combat skills, in armament. and in strategic leader-
ship became clear to all the world."3‘ The battle of Kursk had tremendous
significance to subsequent development of events on the Soviet-German
front. It created favorable conditions for a general offensive by the
Soviet Army to liberate the left-bank Ukraine. the Donate Basin. western
oblssts of the RSPSR. and eastern regions of Belorussis; the Dniepr was
crossed, beachheads were captured on its right bank. and on 6 November

the capital of the Ukraine-Kiev-wss liberated. This was the period of
the fundamental turning point. which was marked by outstanding vic-

tories of the Soviet people and their army and which dramatically altered
the military-political situation in the international arena.

For the Soviet Air Force the battle of Kursk was an intense struggle for
strategic air superiority in the concluding stage. Up to 35 percent of
all sorties were flown in behalf of this mission. This fight. which went
on for almost a month and a half. culminated with defeat of the main
enemy air forces and attainment of strategic air superiority by the
Soviet Air Force.

Soviet pilots displayed msse heroism and high combat skill in the battles.
0n 6 July 1953 pilot Communist A. K. Gorovete performed an immortal act
of heroism. Ne knocked down nine enemy bombers in a single air battle.
This was the only time such a thing ever happened in the world. A. K.
Uoroveta was awarded the hero of the Soviet Union title posthumously.
The citation accompanying his award read: "In this air battle Comrade
Corovets displayed exceptional flying skill. valor, and heroism. he
personally knocked down nine enemy airplanes, and he himself died the
death of the brave."35 Pilots S. D. Luganskiy. H. S. Tokarev, V. I.
Andrianov. A. P. Hares'yev. A. N. Yefimov. N. D. Gulysyev, A. V.
Dobrodetskiy. and many others fought selflessly. Junior Lieutenant

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I. N. Kozhedub. who subsequently went on to earn the Hero of the Soviet
Union title three times. experienced his baptism of battle here.

The battle of Kursk demonstrated that the tactics the air arns employed
in the actions of our air force had improved. The tactics of ground
attack aviation flying in large groups enjoyed further development.
Bomber aviation accumulated much experience in dive bonbing and in
making concentrated attacks in units of up to division strength inclu-
sively. Fighter aviation displayed greater skill in group air battles
and air engagements.

On the whole many new premises were added to air force strategy and to
the tactics of the air arms at the battle of Kursk. rising yet another
notch in their development.

The Soviet Army Air Force Command and the commanders. staff. and political
agencies of the frontal air armies broadly utilized the lessons learned
by aviation in the battle of Kursk on other area. Measures were imple-
mented to improve the organization of air units. to generalize and dis-
seminate the combat experience. and to heighten the level of logistical
support. In October 1963 new leaning tables were spelled out for fighter
and ground attack sir regiments by decision of the Air Force Military
Council. Enlargement of the air regiments satisfied the growing require-
manta of air force tactics and strategy.

In December 1963 the Air Force Military Council held a meeting of the
military district air force commanders. commanders of reserve air
brigades, and representatives from the operating sir armies devoted to
upgrading the quality of pilot training in reserve air regiments. The
proceedings of the conference were utilized to develop new combat train-
ing courses for fighter. ground attack. and bomber aviation. to be
introduced in 1944.

Forms for improving the combat skills of flight crews such as practical
flying conferences enjoyed extensive support in many air armies. In
December 1953. during preparations of troops of the 3d Ukrainian Front

to liberate the right-bank Ukraine. a conference was held in the IX Mixed
Air Corps. 17th Air Army. It was attended by the commanders of air
divisions. regiments. air squadrons. and flights. by pilots. by chiefs

of staff. and by party-political workers. Us 886 liaison officers Marshal
of the Soviet Union A. H. Vssilevskiy and General P. Ya. Palaleyev. the
front's troop commander General R. Ya. Halinovskiy, and General V. A.
Sudets. commander of the 17th Air Army. took an active part in the con-
ference proceedings. The conferencs played a positive role in preparing
commanders and flight crews for the offensive operations.36

Commanders, political agencies, and the party and Komsomol organizations
of units and formations in the operating air force utilized the intervals
between battles to train the personnel. Recalling this, Chief Marshal of

1‘3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aviation Pavel Stepanovich Kutakhov, an active participant of air battles
in the North. wrote the following in the newspaper KWAYA ZVBZDA: "The
battles were stubborn. It would have appeared that we were too exhausted
to train in the short intervals between them. Nevertheless we managed

to fight and to train.... A bunker containing a smoky heater made from
a spent shell casing served as the classroom. and the auditorium in which
we took our exeninatione was the air. the battle. The bunker in which

we underwent theoretical training had a magnetic pull on us. He often
studied in it at the expense of sleep and rest."3

Air force political agencies reorganized the primary party organizations
in June 1943 in accordance with a directive of the mom Main Political
Directorate dated Io June 1963. “On the Structure of Red Army Party
0rganirstions."33 Some 237 new primary organizations were created in the
air force. Their nuder was increased by 13 percent. A11 flying sub-
units had their own party organizations. Enlargement of the number of
party organizations. growth of party membership. and encouragement of
fresh party forces to lead and participate in party life resulted in
greater activeness of party-political work. It became even more effi-
cient and more closely associated with conbat missions.

Generals and officers of the Main Directorate of Combat Training for
Frontal Aviation headed by General 0. P. Kondrstyuk did an extremely
great amount of fruitful work to improve the codat qualities of the
personnel of air force units and formations operating in the fronts.

This directorate was created by decision of the State Defense Cos-ittee
back in January 19103. 1n 1 year it held more than 2,000 lectures. mili-
tary games, group exercises, and various lessons in the units and forms-
tions of the air armies. More than 4,500 demonstration and training
flights were flown with the purpose of teaching the tactics of single

and group air battles and demonstrating the cosbst formations used by

new types of airplanes; different methods of attacking small mobile
ground targets and guiding airplanes by radio to enemy air and terrestrial
objectives were tested out.39

FOOTNOTES
1. "Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1945 gg.
Kratkaya istoriyn" (The Great Patriotic tier of the Soviet Union 19101-
1965. A Short llistory). Hoscw. 1970. p 237.

2. Ibid.

3. "Istoriya Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 1941-1965
gg." (History of the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union 1941-
1955). Vol 3, Moscow. 1966. p 21.1.

146

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

IV

0. FOR OPFICIM. USE ONLY

"Sovetehiye Voyenno-Vozduehnyye Sily V Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1965 as." (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic Her
1961-1965). Hoecov. 1968. p 176.

"Veliluye Otecheetvenneye voyne Sovetekogo Soyuzn 1961-1965 33.
Kretkeye ietoriye." p 239.

Arkhiv no SSSR [USSR Hinietry of Defcnee Archivee]. f. 13-A. op. 506,
d. 310. 11. 6-160.

"Sovotekiye Voyenno-Vozduehnyye 811y v Velihoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.," p 176.

At en altitude of LOGO-6.000 netere the Le-an had e horizontel
velocity 60-80 km greater then that: of the Ger-en “4-190. end it
woe lore mneuvereblc.

Arkhiv no 53811. 1‘. 35, op. 11250. d. 67. 1. 52.

Arhhiv no 58311, f. 35, op. 11285. d. 5, 1. 33.

11-12. Arkhiv no 88811. f. 35. op. 11268, d. 5, 1. 33.

13.
16.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

Arhhlv no 88811, f. 302. op. 6196. d. 26, 11. 67-70.
Arkhiv no 55811. f. 35. op. 92815. d. 59. 11. 22-23.

Arkhlv N 58511. f. 368, op. 11538. d. 3. 1. 116; f. 302. op. 20739,
d. 16. 11. 39, 117.

"Sovetehiye Voyenno-Vozduehnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.." p 177; "Ieteriye Velikoy Otecheetvcnnoy voyny
Sovotehogo Soyuze 1961-1965 33.." Vol 3. p 395.

Arhhiv no 88811. f. 368. op. 11588. d. 3, 1. 216.

"Avieteiye i hoe-onevtike 88811" (088]! Aviation end Coenoneutice).
Hoecov. 1968. p 155.

15”., p 137.

Hellontin. E‘.. "Tenkovyye erezheniye 1939-1965 33." (The Tank
Engage-ante of 1939-1965). abridged. treneleted Em Englieh. Hoecou.
1957. p 192.

"Avioteiyn i koenonevtike SSSR," pp 155, 157.

Arkhlv K) SSSR. f. 35. op. 11285. d. 322. 1. 36.

165

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
23.
210.
25.

26.

27.

28.
29.

31.
32.

33.

39.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ib1d.. 1. ’07.
113111.. 1. 58.

"Iotodyo Venkoy Otochootvonnoy voyny Sovotokogo Soyuza 1941-
19105 33.." Vol 3. p 2710.

"Vollkoya Otoohootvonnoyo voyno Sovetokogo Soyuu 1961-1955 gs.
Krotkoyo totortyo." p 250.

"Sovotoklye Voyonno-Vozduohnyyo S11y v Voukoy Otochootvonnoy voyno
1961-1945 33. ." pp 188-189.

"Avlotuyo t koonooovtlko 8588." p 162.

"Sovotoluye Voyonno-Vozduohnyyo Stly v Venkoy Otochootvcnnoy voyne
19.14945 33.." p 195.

Ibtd” p 197.
Arkhtv m 5888. f. 327, op. 48736. d. 1. l. 110.
Arkhtv ID SSSR, f. 35. op. 28366. d. 12, 11. 60-63.

"Iotortyo Veltkoy Otocheotvonooy voyny Sovetokogo Soyuzo 1901-
1965 33.," Vol 3. p 603.

Brezhnev, L. 1., "Voltkoyo pobodo sovotokogo notodo" (The Great
Victory of the Soviet People), Hoocov, 1965. p 13.

Arkhiv m 888%, f. 33, op. 793756, d. 11. 1. 268.

Arkhtv H0 SSSR, f. 370, op. 6568, d. 38. 11. 102. 103.

KRASNAYA ZVBZDA, 25 Hay 1968.

"'KPSS o Vooruzhennykl Silokh Sovetokogo Soyuzo' Sb. doku-entov
(1917-1968)" ("The CPS" on the Armed Forces of tho Soviet Union."
Collection of Docunento (1917-1968)). Moscow, 1969. pp 323-326.

Arkhtv no 58511. f. 35. op. 11291. d. 8, 11. 6-7; d. 63. 11. 1-7.

1106

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER VI. TBE SOVIET ARMY AIR FORCE IN OPERATIONS 01’ THE CONCLUDING
PERIOD OF THE UAR

The Situation at the Fronts at the Beginning of 19“

Measures of the Soviet Arty Air Force Cot-and and Staff To Improve
Hanageuaent of Aviation

No and a half years of hard battles and engagements had passed. The
year of the fundanentel turning point had gone by. By the beginning of
1966 the situation on the front was leaning in favor of the USSR. The
great victories of the Soviet Army in 19102-1943 demonstrated to all the
world the greater battle power of the socialist state and its armed
forces. It became obvious that the Soviet Union was capable of con-
ducting the war to a victorious conclusion with its own forces. This
resulted in further growth of the USSR's authority. The war economy
grew even stronger. Soviet industry continued to supply top-class com-
bat equipment to the armed forces in ever-increasing proportions. The
Soviet Army's fighting strength was 6,165,000 men, 88,900 guns and mortars,
2,167 rocket launchers, about 4,900 tanks and self-propelled guns, and
8,500 airplanes. Although the German Armed Forces had suffered consid-
erable losses on the Soviet-German front and experienced a certain reduc-
tion in strength, nevertheless they were powerful. 0n the Eastern front
the enemy had 6,906,000 nan, over 56,000 guns and mortars, 5,400 tanks
and assault guns, and 3,000 eirplanes.1

The strategic initiative was in the hands of the Soviet Comsnd. The liq
She made plans for an offensive along the entire front consisting of a
number of powerful, successive strategic operations in separate highly
important sectors of the Soviet-German front. The main thrust was to
occur on the southwestern axis with the objective of destroying the
largest enemy groupings and liberating the right-bank Ukraine and the
Crimea. The mission on the northwestern axis was to destroy the enemy
grouping, relieve blockaded Leningrad, and reach the outskirts of the
Soviet Baltic republics. 0n the western axis, Army Group Center was to
be defeated and the enemy was to be cleared from a significant part of
Belorussin. As before, the German Col-land considered the Eastern front
to be the main front. It planned to concentrate its troops in those

147

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sectors where thrusts by the Soviet Arsy were expected and. maneuvering
its reserves and aviation. to halt the advance of Soviet troops. In

the Heat. fascist Ger-any lads preparations to repel the assault landing
in Northern France. to seize the initiative. and to achieve victory in
the war. The idea of seizing the initiative and achieving victory in
war was adventuriatic; it did not correspond to the real situation that
had evolved on the Soviet-German front as of the beginning of 1946.

The Soviet Air Force began the third and final period of the Great
Patriotic Her outfitted with the latest equipment and with a tremendous
amount of combat experience accumulated. It had mastered new forms of
strategic use of large air foraations and methods of action for all air
arms and services both in independent air operations and in actions
jointly with the ground troops. The Soviet Air Force fir-1y held the
strategic initiative and air superiority along the entire Soviet-German
front. Our aviation industry produced 35.000 warplanes in 1963. As of
1 January [9&6 the demand of Soviet Army Air Force air units and mili-
tary educational institutions for airplanes was satisfied by sore than
100 percent. As of 1 January 1956. 86.7 percent of the airplanes in
fighter aviation. 100 percent in ground attack aviation. and 75.3 percent
in bomber aviation were new.2

Air divisions of the frontal air services were reorganized froa a two-
reginant to a three- and four-regiment cosposition. and $0 ground attack
and 36 fighter air regiments were reorganized with a strength of 60 air-
planes.3

The greater power and the superiority of Soviet weapons and Soviet mili-
tary science were denonstrated most clearly in operations of the final
period of the Great Patriotic Her. conducted on the central and southern
wings of the Soviet-German front. Typical features of the actions of the
Soviet Air Force in this period of the war included concentration of
large air forces on the main axes of operations of the ground troops.
nasaing of the efforts of aviation within a narrow sector to complete
its main edssions. extensive naneuvering of $86 reserve air corps and
divisions. coanitaent of significant strategic aviation forces to nia-
sions in direct support of frontal troops. coordination of the actions
of several air arniea in the frontal air services and strategic aviation
under the sole leadership of the senior sir chief.

New typical characteristics in the actions of Soviet aviation revealed
the-selves nost clearly in major offensive operations such as the Korsun‘-
Shevchenkovskiy. Belorussian. Vistula-Oder. Eastern Prussian. and Berlin
operations. The command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force took a
most active part in these operations. Creation of new aviation equip-
ment. its rapid assimilation by flight crews. and its correct utilization
on the fronts of the war were the daily concerns of the coanander and all
members of the Air Force Military Council. At the beginning of January
i9é6 the Air Force Military Council revic-ed the availability of new

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

types of airplanes in frontal aviation and concluded that rearnamenr of
aviation in the Far East. which had been started earlier. had to be con-
tinued..n

A report addressed to the supreme high commander stated: “...He have
accumulated a reserve of fighter airplanes insuring replenishment of
losses and full reequlpment of units placed into the reserve and newly
formed units. Considering those favorable conditions. we believe it
possible to continue rearmsment of the fighter aviation of the Far
Eastern and Transbnykal fronts. the air units of which are armed with
the obsolete l-lb, 1-153. and I-leis."‘ in response the Supreme High
Command ordered rearmament of aviation in the Far East with new types
of airplanes.

0n 7 February 1940 the Air Force Military Council discussed the progress
of designing new aviation equipment and made a decision to submit a plan
for experimental construction of airplanes and armament in 1960-1965 to
the USSR People's Commissarist of Defense. The problems of upgrading the
quality of airplanes and armament produced by industry were discussed
many times as well.5

in February l9kb the Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters held a confer-
once of the air force executives of military districts and military
training institutions. At this conference the Air Force Military Council
demanded that its participants take efficient steps to eliminate the
preconditions for flying accidents. to strengthen military discipline.
and to intensify party-political work. viewing these as the most impor-
tant prerequisites for high-quality training of cadets in flight schools.6
in March the Air Force Military Council held a conference of the chiefs
of technical schools. advanced training courses. and air mechanic and
junior specialist schools; a decision was sade at this conference to
improve technician training with a consideration for the war experience.7
The Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters insured continuity of command and
control of the air armies. it participated in the writing of plans. it
generalized the experience of sviation's combat activities, and it
brought it to the awareness of the troops.

in the first half or 1966 the generals and officers of Air Force Head-
quarters wrote and submitted. to the Soviet Army Air Force command. a
number of directives addressed to air army commanders and aimed at
improving control of aviation and achieving greater effectiveness in its
combat application. On 16 April 1964 the air force commander published
a directive concerning the fight against enemy air reconnaissance. It
stated that single German air scouts had recently been penetrating deeply
into our rear and maintaining surveillance over our movements. All air
army commanders were ordered to develop special measures to fight enemy
air reconnaissance; to assign particular zones to air fighter corps and
divisions for actions against enemy reconnaissance airplanes; to organize
fighter ambushes on probable routes of enemy scouts and to make bread

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

use of radio guidance: fighters taking to the air were ordered to pursue
and annihilate the eneny airplanoa.3

On 15 Hay l9éb the air fort -ommand published a directive demanding the
air army commanders to abandon the practice of assigning combat missions
to sue reserve air corps and divisions as single sorties; instead, they
were to assign missions for a particular period of time, for the day of
an operation as a minimum. Missions could be assigned as single sorties
to air corps and divisions only in exceptional cases.9 In l9bk specific
air force staff officers were appointed to write summaries on the air
situation on the Soviet-German front every 10 days. to be reported to
the commander and members of the Air Force Hilitary Council. This summary
indicated the composition of the air groupings of the belligerenta, and
their quantitative and qualitative changes; concentration of aviation on
strategic axes and use of new tactics; the number of aorties flown end
the intensity of combat activities of individual air arms and services;
the total number of air battles. and new tactics employed in them. The

summaries ended with conclusions and proposals concerning more effective
use of the air force.10

in addition air force staff workers prepared monthly reports for the
General Staff on the actions of the air force. A general large-scale

map of the strategic situation was constantly maintained by two highly
qualified officers. the senior of whom was Colonel I. M. Kuz'min.

Usually by 2200-2300 hours the work of plotting the data on the situation
map and writing draft reports to the supreme high commander and the opera-
tional summary on the result of air force actions in the previous day was
completed. At this time the commander and members of the Air Force Mili-
tary Council usually came to a large room in one of the directorates where
all of the summary data were brought together; there. the directorate
chief reported the strategic situation. the changes that had occurred in
the balance of power in the air, and the preliminary data on the results
of air force actions in the previous day. Decisions were often made here
in regard to a number of problems associated with heightening the effec-
tiveness of the actions of different air arms and services, and these
decisions were documented on the spot by Air Force Headquarters officers.
A new section for staff operational training was created at Air Force
Headquarters. General H. D. Smirnov was appointed chief of the section.
and his deputy was Colonel N. A. Sokolov. Favorable conditions were
created for more purposeful and integrated solution of many problems
concerning the strategic use of the air force.

The command and staff of the Soviet Army Air Force raised the level of
management of major operational air formations at the fronts of the war
in 1966. and they acquired a great deal of experience in maneuvering sir
reserves and concentrating the efforts of aviation on the most important
sectors of operations of the ground troops. at providing all-out support
to combat operations.

150

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Thu Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy Operation

In compliance with the overall intent of the supreme high commander troops
of the four Ukrainian frontsll initiated an offensive on the southern wing
of the Soviet-German front at the end of December l9é3 and the beginning
of January 1966. Headquarters liaison officers coordinated the actions

of the fronts-~Mnrshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov in the 1st and

2d Ukrainian fronts, and Marshal of the Soviet Union A. M. Vasilevskiy in
the 3d and 4th Ukrainian fronts. The actions of aviation were coordinated
by Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov. Troops of the let Ukrainian Front
were the first to begin combat activities at the end of December 1943,
with the active support of aviation of the 2d Air Army (commander, General
8. A. Krasovskiy). By 14 January they had almost completely liberated
Kiev and Zhitomirskaya oblaats and many rayons of Vlnnitskaya and
Rovenskaya oblasts. The 2d Ukrainian Front, the troops of which were
supported and covered by the 5th Air Army (commander, General 3. K.
Goryunov). went over to the offensive on 5 January 1946. The front's
troops liberated Kirovograd by mid-January. The right flank of the enemy
grouping in the vicinity of Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy was threatened.

The 3d and bth Ukrainian fronts undertook an offensive on 10-11 January
1966 with the objective of destroying the enemy at the Nikopol' beachhead
and in the vicinity of Mikopol'. The fronts were covered and supported
from the air by the 17th Air Army (commander, General V. A. Sudets) and
the 8th Air Army (commander. General T. T. Khryukin) respectively. The
offensive actions of the troops of the let and 2d Ukrainian fronts
resulted in envelopment of both flanks of the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy
grouping. The Headquarters ordered the commanders of these fronts,
Generals N. P. Vatutin and I. S. Konev, to encircle and annihilate the
enemy's Korsun'-shevchenkovskiy grouping. Troops of the strike grouping
of the 2d Ukrainian Front began combat activities at Korsun'-
Shevchenkovskiy on 26-25 January, and on 26 January the strike grouping
of the 1st Ukrainian Front attacked on a converging axis. The troops of
the fronts were supported by the 5th and 2d air armies. The latter pos-
sessed 768 warplanes, being inferior in numbers to the enemy, who concen-
trated about 1,000 airplanes on this axis.12 The strike groupings of both
fronts attacked on converging axis and met in the vicinity of Zvenigo-
rodkn. Ten of the enemy's divisions and one of his brigades were
encircled. by 3 February Soviet troops had created an inner and outer
front of encirclement. The actions of our aviation proceeded in extremely
complex meteorological conditions. Moreover a thaw set in at the end of
January and in the beginning of February 1956, meaning that dirt landing
strips could no longer be used. By this time the air armies had only

two or three operable airfields left for practical purposes, with 50-100
of our airplanes based at each of them. But even despite these condi-
tions the ground troops received considerable assistance from the air.
Between 29 January and 3 February 1944 our aviation flew 3,800 combat
sorties in the vicinity of the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy grouping, while
enemy aviation flew twice fewer.13

151

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On order of A. A. Novikov, who before leaving Moscow had reported his
uuggestions to the supreme high commander concerning the use of aviation
to destroy the enemy's Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy grouping. extensive use
was made of high-explosive bombs by 11-2 ground attack airplanes, and
Po-2 night light bombers were put into broad use. They were especially
helpful in repelling enemy counterstrikes on the outer front of encircle-
ment in the vicinity of Tolmach and Lisyanka. 0n 4 February, when enemy
tanks wedged themselves into the defenses of the 53d Army. 2d Ukrainian
Front, the enemy's attempt at penetrating into the encircled area was
foiled by the efforts of ground attack aircraft and artillery. Ground
attack aviation of the 2d Air Army made two powerful strikes against
enemy tank groupings attempting to relieve the encircled grouping.
German divisions managed to penetrate to the vicinity of Lisyanka at

the cost of high losses. while the encircled troops pushed toward the
latter. reaching shenderovka. The two formations were separated by a
strip only 12 km wide. But they were unable to cross it.

After the hope for assistance from without was lost, encircled fascist
German troops attempted to break out of the encirclement independently.
0n the night of 17 February l9bb the enemy troops formed into columns
and began marching southwest from Shenderovka. Crews of the 312th Light
Bomber Air Division headed by Colonel V. P. Chanpalov constantly bombed
the German columns; fleeing the air strikes, they fell under intense
rocket artillery fire. Host of them were annihilated. and only a small
group of tanks and armored transporters was able to break out of the
encirclement during the intense fire storm. The air blockade of the
encircled enemy grouping was organized and maintained well, and there
was much to be learned from it. Following the experience of Stalingrad,
jointly with the 2d Air Army commander, General 8. A. Krasovskiy. and
General L. G. Rybkin, commander of the X Fighter Corps of the National
Air Defense Forces, A. A. Novikov created four zones for annihilation

of enemy transport aviation attempting to supply encircled troops by air.
German aviation was destroyed in the four zones by fire from the 2d Air
Army and the X Fighter Air Corps. Beyond the outer front of encircle-
ment, airfields at Uman'. Vinnitss. and Novo-Ukrainka were struck. Enemy
airfields and landing strips were struck simultaneously. The 5th Air
Army provided support to troops destroying the encircled enemy.

Between 31 January and 15 February our aviation knocked down 257 enemy
airplanes. to include 31 transporters, during the air blockade. and in
the entire period of the destruction of the encircled grouping 657
fascist German airplanes were annihilated in air battles and at air-
fields.1“ As a result of the air blockade, the encircled grouping was
isolated and deprived of external assistance, which went a long way to
facilitate its final destruction.

Forty-nine tons of gasoline, 65 tons of ammunition. and 525 rockets were
delivered between 8 and 16 February to forward units of the 2d and 6th

Tank armies by the 326th Night Bomber Air Division. This was invaluable

152

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assistance to the troops in the thaw conditions, when stuck Vehicles
cluttered the roads and tractors were not always able to travel. The
Koraun‘JShovchenkovskly operation ended. Some 55,000 German enlisted

men and-officers were killed and wounded, and more than 18,000 were

taken prisoner.15 The Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy operation entered the
history of the Great Patriotic Her as a remarkable example of encircle-
ment and annihilation of a large enemy grouping. Once again the Soviet
Army demonstrated its ability to conduct an encircling operation, which
is one of the most complex forms of combat activities. Soviet aviation
demonstrated its total superiority over enemy aviation, isolating the
encircled grouping from external assistance by air. In winter and spring
1966 troops of the 1st, 2d, 3d, and 6th Ukrainian fronts inflicted a
major defeat upon the enemy with active air support. The right-bank
Ukraine was totally liberated. The Soviet Armed Forces entered the terri-
tory of Romania. In the first 3 months of 1966 the Soviet Air Force flew
more than 70,000 sorties and dropped thousands of tons of bombs on enemy
objectives. It annihilated 1,667 enemy airplanes in air battles and at
air-fields. 16

On 21 February 1966 a ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet
awarded the highest rank in aviation--chief marshal of aviation -to
Aleksandr Aieksandrovich Novikov for his exemplary military service to
the Communist Party and our socialist motherland.

The Belorussian Operation

In winter and spring 1966 the Soviet Armed Forces subjected the enemy to
serious defeat and reached the eastern regions of the Baltic, Boloruasia,
the western oblasts of the Ukraine, and Northeastern Romania. In the
second half of April 1966 the Soviet Army halted its offensive on order
of the uq SﬂC. Troops of the let Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian fronts
went over to defense on 17 April, troops of the 2d Baltic Front went over
to defense on 18 April, and troops of the Leningrad, 3d Baltic, and 3d and
2d Belorussian fronts went over to defense on 19 April. An order was
published on 22 April to strengthen defenses within the sector of the

lat Baltic Front, and on 6 Hey the 2d and 3d Ukrainian fronts went over

to defense. Intense preparations began for the summer strategic offensive
operations. in winter and spring 1966 the Soviet Union constantly in-
creased its fighting power. In the first half of the year about 16,000
medium and heavy tanks and self-propelled guns, 26,000 guns with calibers
of 76 mm and higher, and more than 90,000,000 artillery shells, bombs and
mortar shells were produced. In the first half of 1966 aviation industry
produced 16,000 airplanes, which replenished the losses and made it poe-
sibie to form new air force units and formstions.17 In the first 5 months
of 1966 the number of airplanes in the operating army increased by 25
percent.18 Hultimiiiion armies continued to oppose each other on a front
6,650 km long, from the Barents to the Black Sea. The operating Soviet
Army had a strength of about 6,500,000 men, 83,200 guns and mortars,

about 8,000 tanks and self-propelled guns, and 11,800 warplanes. Troops

153

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the fascist bloe on the Eastern front had 4.000.000 men. about 49.000
guns and mortars. over 5,200 tanks and assault guns. and about 2,800 war-
pianos.19 Despite the landing of American and English troops in Northern
France on 6 June 1965, the Soviet-German front continued to be the deci-
sive front of the war. Fifty-six percent of all of the Hehraacht's ground
forces were operating here. and if we include satellite troops the figure
climbs to 63 percent.20

[a summer 1966 the Communist Party and the Soviet Government posed the
following mission to the arsed forces--clear the invaders from all Soviet
land. and begin the liberation of the peoples of Poland. Czechoslovakia.
Bulgaria. and other European countries from fascist enslavement.

The Belorussian operation occupies a special place among the offensive
operations of the second half of l9bh. Preparations for it began in
spring l"&6. lts objective was the destruction of the Geraan Army Group
Center and liberation of the Belorussian SSR and its capital. Minsk. The
plan of the Belorussian offensive operation was written by the General
Staff and discussed in the “q SNC on 22 and 23 Hay. Participants of the
discussion included G. K. Zhukov. A. H. Vasilevskiy. l. Kh. Dagramyan.

K. K. Rokossovskiy. A. A. Novikov. N. N. Voronov. N. D. Yakovlev, A. V.
Khrulev. H. P. Vorob'yev, [. T. Peresypkin. and A. i. Antonov.21 0n the
1.100 km front from Lake Nesherdo to Verba. the fascist German grouping
in Belorussia was opposed by four Soviet fronts-the lst Baltic and the
3d. 2d. and lat Belorussian. as well as the Dniepr Naval Flotilla;
Belorussian partisans were active in the eneay rear. The main idea of
the operation was to penetrate enemy defenses on six axes by frontal
strikes. encircle and annihilate the enemy's flank groupings at Vitebak
and Dobruysk. destroy enemy troops in the vicinities of Orsha and Nogilev
and. by a swift maneuver of troops of the 3d and let Belorussian fronts
in the general direction of Minsk. encircle and annihilate the German 6th
Army. Partisan activity was to be coordinated with the powerful strikes
of the four fronts from the east.

The Soviet Supreme High Command concentrated the main air force grouping
of flve alr armies in the central sector of the front: the 3d Air Army
(commander. General N. P. Papivin). the 1st Air Army (commander. General
T. T. Khryukln). the 6th Alr Army (commander. General K. A. Vershinin).
and the lhth Air Army (commander, General 5. I. Rudenko).

The 6th Air Army under the command of General F. P. Polynin operated in
the second phase of the operation on the left wing of the lat Belorussian
Front; back in April this army was within the composition of the front
(the 3d Guards Ground Attack Air Division. the 262d Night Bomber Air
Division. and two separate air regiments). In all. these five air armies
possessed about 6.000 airplanes. to include more than 1,100 day and night

bombers and 2.000 ground attack airplanes.22 In addition eight ADD corps
were brought in--about 1.000 bombers.

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fascist German troops of Army Group Center were supported by air forma-
tions of the 6th Alr fleet, which possessed 1,342 warplanes.23 Its air
squadrons were based at airfield complexes at Minsk. Baranovichi, and
Bobruysk. Bringing aviation closer to the center of the Belorussian
salient. the Fascist German Command intended to use it as the most mobile
reserve in any sector of the front from Vitebsk to Kovel'.

Thus the air situation evolved favorably for our air force at the begin-
ning of the Belorussian operation. The air force had the possibility for
successfully making powerful strikes against the enemy and actively sup-
porting the offensive of the ground troops. The Soviet Army Air Force
commander sent a directive to all air armies at the beginning of June 1945
concerning the results of air force activities in winter-spring 1966 and
the missions of the summer. The directive made a detailed analysis of
shortcomings. it explained their causes. and it provided concrete instruc- '
tions on how to correct them. Flight crews were ordered to constantly
study their targets. and air staffs were encouraged to work more care-
fully on the planning tables of interaction of aviation with tank and
mechanized formations. especially at the time of the latter‘s commitment

to the engagement and in actions at strategic depth. In July 1964 all
fighter division commanders. their deputies, the chiefs of staff. and
executives of air armies staffs were ordered to acquaint themselves with
the work of the command posts of the fighter air corps (divisions) and
gain the practical skills of controlling aviation in the air by radio.

it was recommended that ground attack aviation be controlled over the
battlefield in accordance with the principle of fighter aviation control.
Air army commanders were categorically prohibited from controlling the
sorties and actions of individual groups of airplanes; instead. it was
recommended that they pose concrete missions only to air corps and divi-
sions, leaving them the right of managing the lower levels; the chiefs
of staff of the air armies and air corps were obligated to visit their
subordinate staffs systematically and provide concrete assistance to them
in planning and control.

A fighter air corps or division was to be assigned by special order in
each air army to fight enemy aviation, and radio resources were to be
provided; the fight was not to be limited to air battles: Strikes against
airflelds were to be organized mandatorily.24

in compliance with a decision of the "q SHC. headquarters liaison offi-
cers traveled to the front to coordinate the efforts of frontal troops
and aviation in the operation: 0n 5 June, Marshal of the Soviet Union
6. K. Zhukov to coordinate the actions of the lst and 2d Belorussian
fronts. and somewhat later, Chief Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov.
Marshal of the Soviet Union A. H. Vasilevskiy and the Headquarters air
liaison officer General F. Ya. Falsleyev reached the lst Baltic and 3d
Belorussian fronts on 4 June. The hard work of preparing for the opera-
tion went on for 22 days in all air units and formations. Ten air corps
and eight air divisions arrived in the first half of June to reinforce

155

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the air armies. Their deployment required the construction of 70 air-
fields. They werr built by airfield engineering units of the air force
rear services under the coamand of air army chiefs of rear services--
Generals I. H. Giller. V. N. Uspenskiy. P. V. Korotayev, A. S. Kirillov,
and I. I. Semenov.

The lot Air Army. 3d Belorussian Front and the 16th Army, lat Belorussian
Front received the largest numbers of replenishments. For example in
Hay-June the let Guards and the 273d Fighter air divisions returned to
the composition of the 16th Air Army after being brought back up to
strength. New units included the VIII Fighter Air Corps (commander,
General A. S. Osipenko). the IV Ground Attack Air Corps (commander,
General 6. P. Bnydukov). the 132d Bomber Air Division (commander, General
I. L. Fedorov), the 300th Ground Attack Air Division (commander, Colonel
T. Ye. Kovalav). and the 19th Separate Fighter Air Regiment (commander.
Colonel P. F. Chupikov); all of them were subordinated directly to the
Soviet Army Air Force commander. The air regiment was manned by top-
class aces and outfitted with the latest fires.25 Seventy percent of

all airplanes and all day bombers (three air corps and two separate air
divisions) were within the composition of the 1st and 16th air armies.
Such massing of forces was in keeping with the design of the Belorussian
operation.

The political agencies and party organizations of the air armies and air
formations and units did a great deal of fruitful work. Prior to the
offensive a conference of unit executives and active party and Komsomol
members was held. All indoctrination was conducted in the spirit of
selfless devotion to the socialist fatherlaad and hatred of the fascist
German invaders. Much attention was devoted to increasing Commmnist
Party membership. Communists had the leading role in preparing the units
and formations. and they cemented the ranks of the airmen.

A group of generals and officers from Air Force Headquarters, to include
Generals I. L. Turkel'. P. P. Ionov. G. K. Gvotdkov. and B. V. Sterligov,
was sent to the 16th Air Army by order of the air force commander to
render assistance in basing the formations, organizing command and con-
trol. and putting logistical support in order. During preparations for
the operation. in several days of actual flying the organization of massed
strikes by bomber air corps was worked out at airfields in the rear.

This work was headed jointly by Army General S. I. Rudenko, commander of
the 16th Air Army, and General B. V. Sterligov, Soviet Army Air Force
senior navigator. This was the first experience in bringing together

and forming entire bomber corps in the air. After detailed analysis of
all the positive and negative aspects of this measure, it was decided
that it would be more advantageous to make a massed strike against ground
objectives by the forces of divisions and air regiments.

Plans were written for a powerful air offensive of considerable propor-
tions during the operation. Enemy fortifications in the breakthrough

156

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sectors were to be razed on the night prior to the offensive by bomber
strikes. and at the beginning of the attack the enemy's gun positions

on the battlefield and his artillery and reserves were to be annihilated
in interaction with the ground troops in place and in time. Significant
forces were assigned to maintain air superiority. During the prepara-
tions for the operation aviation had the important mission of conducting
air reconnaissance. Dependable data had to be acquired on the composi-
tion and grouping of fascist troops. on the nature of their defensive
structures, and on the locations of gun positions. Long before the
beginning of the operation from 30 to 50 percent of all sorties were
flown with this goal. Photography of terrain in the breakthrough sectors
permitted combined arms culmanders to study all details of the disposi-
tion of enemy defenses beforehand.

The air armies provided a great deal of assistance to partisan detach-
ments and formations by delivering armament. ammunition, and food to them
and evacuating casualties. Aviation provided fire support to partisans
in their battles against punitive detachments in the vicinity of Ushache.
Lepel'. ﬂorisov. and Begoml'.

By 20 June 1946 the bulk of the work of planning the powerful air offen-
sive and preparing the units and formations for the operation was com-
pleted. Frontal aviation and strategic aviation were given the following
missions: Soundly maintaining air superiority; supporting frontal troops
in their penetration of enemy defenses, encirclement and destruction of
the Vitebsk and Bobruysk groupings, and encirclement and annihilation of
the main forces of Army Group Center east of Minsk; preventing the
approach of enemy reserves to the battlefield and disorganizing westward
retreat of enemy troops; constantly conducting air reconneisssnce.

Because the let Belorussian Front was to make two strikes simultaneously

(on the Regschev-Bobruysk and Parichi axes). the forces of the 16th Air
Army were divided into two groups. Thirteen air divisions were placed

in the northern group and seven air divisions were placed in the southern.26
Formations of the lat Air Army. 3d Belorussian Front were also subdivided
into two groups. Six sir divisions were to operate on the Boguahevsk axis.
and 11 were to operate on the Orshs sxis.27

in the 3d and 6th air armies. all aviation was to be used on the axes of
the main strikes of the 1st Baltic and 2d Belorussian fronts. The time
for the 1st Belorussian Front to go over to the offensive was postponed

1 day by decision of the Hq $86 so that the efforts of strategic aviation
could be concentrated successively in support of the advance of the four
fronts. Thus all ADD forces could be concentrated initially to support
the lat Baltic and the 3d and 2d Belorussian fronts, and then they could
be transferred to the zone of operations of troops of the 1st Belorussian
Front. He can see from this that the Hq SHC attached great significance
to the actions of our aviation.

157

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFflClAL USE ONLY

"Together with A. A. Novikov. A. Ye. Golovsnov, S. I. Rudenko. and K. A.
Verehinin." writes Marshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov in his
memoirs. "I thoroughly discussed the situation. the goals, objectives.
and plans for using air armies and their interaction with strategic
aviation. the strikes of which were aimed at headquarters, the communi-
cation centers of major operational formations, reserves. and other
highly important targets. In addition we examined the groblems of
maneuvering frontal aviation in the interests of all."2

On A. A. Novikov's suggestion and with the approval of Marshal of the
Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov. 10 days before the start of the operation
strategic aviation conducted an air operation lasting 6 nights with the
objective of annihilating enemy airplanes at the airfields. Between

13 and 18 June seven enemy airfields-Breet. Bialystok, Orsha. Minsk,
Baranovichi, Bobruysk, and Luninsts. at which up to 60 percent of the
6th Air Pleet's airplanes were based, were struck. heavy bombers flew
1,472 sorties in behalf of this mission.29

The problems of utilizing strategic aviation in the Belorussian offensive
operation itself were discussed by A. Ye. Golovanov with the commanders
and staffs of the fronts.

On 15 and 15 June 1946 the troop commander of the let Belorussian Front
had the 65th and 28th arnies rehearse the forthcoming operation in the
presence of c. K. Zhukov. A miniature reproduction of the sector of
the front in which the operation was to proceed was prepared in the
forest. away from the roads; the front line, boundaries between combined
arms armies and divisions. and all objects and pockets and resources of
resistance were shown. Army. division. and regiment commanders demon-
strated their decisions right there on the terrain and answered 6. K.
Zhukov's questions. This allowed the command to "play out" the planned
operation with cossnanders of all levels and work out interaction in all
of its details in a situation as close to real as possible.

Air preparation for the offensive began on the night of 23 June in the
breakthrough sectors of the lat Baltic and the 3d and 2d Belorussian
fronts. Some 147 long-range bambere operated within the breakthrough
sectors of the 3d Belorussian Front. and 258 operated within the break-
through sectors of the 2d Belorussian Front.30 In addition pilots of
the 66th Guards Taman' Night Bomber Regiment, commanded by Major Ye. D.
Bershanskaya, operated successfully in the 2d Belorussian Front.

Prior to the infantry attack on the Oreha axis. 162 bombers made a con-
centrated strike against enemy pockets of resistance.31

The bomber strikes were followed by continuous actions by ground attack
airplanes. which annihilated gun positions hindering the advance of our

infantrymen and tanks and destroyed enemy reserves. In the first day
pilots of the three air armies flew more than 6,500 combat sorties,

158

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fought in 62 air battles. and knocked down 19 enemy airplanes.32 General
F. Ya. Falalsyev. the Hq snc air liaison officer to the 1st Baltic and
3d Belorussian fronts. coordinated the actions of air formations of the
3d and 1st air armies. During the time that an enemy grouping encircled
west of Vitebsk was being mepped up, on his orders the efforts of the

3d Air Army were concentrated on the outer front of encirclement while
part of‘the forces of the 1st Air Army assisted in the fastest possible
destruction of the enemy grouping with air strikes. When it became
necessary at the beginning of July to intensify air support to troops

of the 1st Baltic Front, “q liaison officers Marshal of the Soviet Union
A. H. Vasilevskiy and General P. Ya. Palaleyev decided to transfer a few
air formations from the 1st Air Army to the 3d; these formations played
a major role in making the offensive of the front'a troops successful.33

On 26 June. when troops of the 1st Belorussian Front went over to the
offensive. the scope of air force actions increased even more. Some 303
long-range bombers participated in the night air preparation,35 and 250
sorties were flown by two night bomber air divisions of the 16th Air Araw.
During the day of 26 June. at 1200 and 1700 hours, bomber and ground
attack aviation of the 16th Air Army made two massed attacks on defensive
strongpoints in the vicinity of Bol'shaya Krushinovka and Tikhinichi.

The massed bomber strikes. combined with actions in depth by ground
attack airplanes. had a strong impact on fascist German troops. causing
significant losses and reducing the stability of enemy defenses. Tacti-
cal lines of defense were broken on all fronts on 25 and 26 June. and
mobile groups were committed to the breakthrough; supporting and covering
these groups became the main mission of our aviation. One bomber, one
ground attack, and two fighter air corps interacted with the 5th Guards
Tank Army, 3d Belorussian Front. Air corps coammnder General V. A.
Ushakov was present at the forward command post with an operational group
of corps staff officers. with air support troops of the 5th Guards Tank
Army achieved firm control of the Moscow-Minsk highway and railroad and
began a swift pursuit of the enemy on the Borisovo axis. In the let
Belorussian Front, two air corps--ground attack and fighter--interacted
with a mechanized cavalry group. and one ground attack and one fighter
division interacted with tank corps.

Bomber corps were utilized as a powerful fire reserve intended for strikes
against the soot important objectives within the zone of advance of the
front's troops. Ground attack air formations struck enemy troops and
equipment in groups of 9-12 airplanes at the request of air liaison
officers at forward control posts within the combat formations of tank

and mechanized corps. General B. S. Bskhirev. commander of the Ix Tank
Corps, wrote the following in a telegram to the commander of the 16th

Air Army on 26 June: "Please extend my gratefulness to Colonel N. S.
Vinogradov. commander of the 199th Ground Attack Air Division, and to

all personnel of his division for their outstanding support to the IX
Tank Corps."35

159

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Beginning on 26 June the fascist German troops began to withdraw along
the entire front. Successfully exploiting the offensive at strategic
depth. tank and mechanized formations encircled the German troops. By
27 June troops of the lat Belorussian Front encircled troops of the
German XXXV Army Corps in an area southeast of Bobruysk; according to
air intelligence the corps had been preparing for a breakthrough. con-
centrating tanks, artillery, and motor vehicles on the Zhlobin-Titovka

road with the hope of quickly reaming through the hastily occupied
defenses of the XI Tank Corps. G. K. Zhukov and A. A. Novikov were
present at General K. K. Rokossovskiy's forward coamnnd post. Discussing
the situation. A. A. Novikav suggested making a massed air strike to foil
the enely's plans. G. K. Zhukov agreed with this suggestion and ordered
its immediate implementation. Here is how Marshal of Aviation 8. I.
Rudenko describes this episode: "At 1700 hours Colonel M. N. Kozhevnikov,
who was accompanying the air force conmander, telephoned the headquarters
of the 16th Air Army and reported that G. K. Zhukov. A. A. Novikov and

K. K. Kokossovskiy were aware of the critical situation in the vicinity
of Titovka. and that they intended to order aviation to destroy the

enemy column. "36

Together with General P. I. Brayko. the army chief of staff. General S. I.
Kudenko immediately issued instructions to the commanders of the air corps
and divisions. Some 523 airplanes were raised into the air. The massed
strike went on for an hour ari a half. More than 160 tons of bombs were
dropped. and tens of thousands of shells were fired. Our air strike was
extremely successful. Some 150 tanks, 6, 000 motor vehicles, and much
artillery were annihilated and put out of action7 in the area of the
encircled enemy grouping southeast of Bobruysk.37

Marshal of the Soviet Union G. K. Zhukov wrote the following in this
regard. "I did not have the opportunity of observing the destruction

of the enemy at Bobruysk, but I was able to witness the defeat of Germans
southeast of the city. Interacting with the 48th Army, hundreds of
bombers of S. I. Rudenko's 16th Army made strike after strike against
the enemy grouping. Fires arose on the battlefield: dozens of motor
vehicles and tanks and POL were burning. The entire battlefield was
enwreathed in the sinister flames. Orienting themselves by the light,
more and more echelons of our bombers continued to approach, dropping
bombs of different cslibers on the enemy. German soldiers were scatter-
ing in all directions like madmen, and those who refused to be taken
prisoner died on the spot. Hundreds and thousands of German soldiers,
deceived by ﬂitler who had promised a lightning victory against the
Soviet Union. died."38

A. A. Novikov sent the following telegram to the flight crews of the
16th Air Army: "As a result of the offensive southeast of Bobruysk our

troops encircled a large enemy grouping.... In order to crush the enemy
and force him to surrender, on 27 June 1966 in the period from 1815 to
2100 hours aviation of the 16th Air Army, 523 airplanes strong, made a

160

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-‘.. rot OFFICIAL USE ONLY

massed bomber and ground strike against the enemy grouping encircled
southeast of Bobruysk. As a result of the successful air strike the
encircled enemy grouping was fragmented, and what was left of it on the
night of 28 June was annihilated and captured by the ground troops. A
large quantity of damaged enemy equipment and masses of corpses of German
enlisted men and officers remained on the battlefield in the area aub-
jocted to the air strike. Thus air units completed their mission in an
outstanding manner, for which I extend my gratefulness to all personnel
who had taken part in the massed strike--pilots, navigators, and radio
operator-gunners. This telegram is to be brought to the awareness of
all personnel of air units of the 16th Air Army."39

The massed air strike against the encircled grouping was a clear demon-
stration of the greater combat capabilities of our air force and compe-
tent leadership by the air force commander, the commander of the 16th Air
Army. and the commanders of the air corps, divisions, and regiments.
Troops of the 1st Belorussian Front captured Bobruysk on 29 June with
active air support.

Air formations of the 1st and 4th air armies participated together with
the front's troops in the destruction of an enemy grouping encircled in

a forest southeast of Minsk. Reconnaissance airplanes flew at low alti-
tude, and revealed the dispositions of the enemy faultlessly, and they
immediately radioed their intelligence data to air control posts. 0n the
basis of the information provided by the air scouts, groups of ground
attack airplanes and bombers took off and struck enemy troops.

Belorussian SSR Communist Party Central Committee Secretary P. K.
Ponomarenko reported the following to Marshal of the Soviet Union A. M.
Vasilevskiy on 12 September 1944: "Last week we discovered and recon-
noitered a huge reinforced German camp southeast of Minsk that had been
completely destroyed by our ground attack aviation. The scale of the
destruction and the signs of the power of our air fleet that could be
seen in this area make a sobering impression. On being informed that
Minsk had been taken, one of the German groups built a fortified region,
in which more than 11,000 Germans, several hundred tanks, many guns and
more than 5,000 armored vehicles dug in. Our 14th Ground Attack Stalin-
grad Red Banner Division discovered and destroyed this grouping. There
were 5,000 corpses of German enlisted men and officers and more than
5,000 burned-out vehicles, and a large quantity of destroyed ammunition
in the camp within the area inspected.... We request that the 16th
Ground Attack Stalingrad Red Banner Division, its commanders, and its
flight crews be decorated appropriately.""'0 The Soviet Government
awarded orders to many of this division's commanders and pilots.

The actions of our aviation to destroy the encircled enemy grouping in
the area southeast of Bobruysk were analyzed, generalized, and subse-

quently studied in all air armies with the goal of making practical use
of thin experience.

161

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OF?!C!AL USE ONLY

By this time the Vitebsk, Orsha, and Mogilev enemy groupings were totally
destroyed. Tank formations of the 3d and let Belorussian fronts began

to advance quickly toward Minsk. The new mission of our aviation was

to covar and support the advancing troops and pursue the enemy. In the
vicinity of Berezino the withdrawing fascist German troops were sub-
jected to massed strikes by the 4th and 16th air armies. Between

28 and 30 June they flew more than 3,000 sorties."l Bereziaa River
crossings were systematically destroyed by our aviation, and our ground
attack airplanes made effective strikes against German troops pinned down
on the river's east bank. Between 29 June and 3 July the 6th and 16th
air armies flew more than 4,000 sorties against withdrawing enemy
troops.‘2 Preventing rapid withdrawal of fascist German troops beyond
the Berezina, our aviation thus promoted their encirclemeat east of Minsk.
0n 3 July 1965 Soviet troops liberated Minsk. The Belorussian offensive
operation was successful due to the coordinated actions of three main
forces--tank formations encircling a large grouping of German troops east
of Minsk from the north and south and reaching the grouping's rear; rifle
formations operating from the front; frontal aviation and strategic avia-
tion blocking the route of retreat of the German 4th Army to Minsk.

After the liberation of Minsk the offensive of the Soviet troops, which
was being supported actively by our aviation, unfolded along a broad front
and progressed at a high pace in the directions of Vilna, Bialystok, and
Brest. Troops of the 2d Belorussian Front destroyed enemy groupings
encircled east of Minsk.

By mid-July 1945 Soviet troops had traveled far west. The Belorussian
salient was cut off. Pilots of Polish air units formed with the assistance
of the Soviet Union fought with Soviet pilots in the concluding stage of
the Belorussian operation and later in battles for the complete liberation
of Poland. 0n lb August the 1st Harsaw Fighter Air Regiment, flying
Yak-1‘s, and the 2d Cracow Night Bomber Air Regiment, flying Po-Z's,
joined the front/‘3 The Polish an. Mixed Air Division (commander, Colonel
c. P. Turykin) was formed at the end of 1906. It consisted of three air
regiments--the lst Fighter, the 2d Light Bomber, and the 3d Ground Attack.
The I Mixed Air Corps (commander. General F. A. Agal'tsov) consisting of
the Polish lst Bomber Air Division. the Polish 2d Ground Attack Air Divi-
sion, and the Polish 3d Fighter Air Division, was formed in the beginning
of 1965. The Polish Air Force flew more than 6,000 sorties on the Soviet-

Cerm22 front between the second half of August 19b6 and the end of the
961’.

The Belorussian operation ended on 29 August. Hith air support, in the
Belorussian operation Soviet troops soundly defeated Army Group Center,
moved west 550-600 km, and liberated the Belorussian SSR, a large part
of the Lithuanian SSR, part of the Latvian SSR, and eastern Poland. The
following cities were liberated: Orsha on 27 June, Bobruysk on 29 June,
Borisov on 1 July. Minsk on 3 July, Vil'nyus on 13 July, Lublin on

26 July, Bialystok on 27 July, Brest on 28 July, Kaunas on 1 August, and
others.

162

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Air Force pounded encircled enemy groupings with annihilatory
air strikes at Vitebsk. Bobruysk. Minsk. Kaunas, Vil'nyus, and other
places. With active support free ground attack aviation. troops of the
fronts quickly crossed s number of large water ebstacles--Vistula, Neman.
Nerew, nnd ﬂurezine. Soviet pilots firmly maintained air superiority,
preventing enemy aviation from striking the troops and objectives in the
rear. During the time of the operation frontal aviation and strategic
aviation flew 153.505 sorties. while aviation of the National Air Defense
Forces flew 3,166 sertiea.‘5 Never had the combat activities of the
Soviet Air Force achieved such great scope in previous operations. The
thousand fascist German airplanes were destroyed in air battles and at
nirfields.

Statements made by captured German officers concerning the actions of our
aviation in the Belorussian operation are interesting. Officers of the
General Staff of the 260th Infantry Division. captured on 11 July 1964,
stated the following in their interrogation: "Between 26 June and 4 July
1946 the columns with which we were traveling were subjected to frequent
air raids on the entire route to Minsk; traveling troops and transporta-
tion suffered a great deal from this. When airplanes appeared. the
soldiers scattered off the roads into the forests and fields. the

columns ran into one another and became confused. and intense panic
aroseI which aggravated our situation even more and facilitated the
actions of aviation. The perpetual raids recurred every half hour to

1 hour, hindering the actions of the troops...."‘5

The military councils of the fronts and armies gave a high assessment to
the actions of our air corps and divisions. Here. for example. is the
evaluation given to the actions of the VIII Bobruysk Red Banner Fighter
Air Corps by the Military Council of the 65th Army (commander-Colonel
General P. I. Batev. Military Council member-General N. A. Radetskiy,
chief of staff--Army General M. V. Bobkov): "Fighter aviation of the
VIII Fighter Air Corps covered operational concentration of the troops
by its active operations during preparations for penetration of enemy
defenses. During the Bobruysk operation units of the VIII Fighter Air
Corps wupported the 65th Army as it penetrated enemy defenses, exploited
the offensive in depth. and encircled and annihilated the enemy in the
vicinity of Bobruyak....

"General A. S. Osipenko. commander of the VIII Fighter Air Corps. was
personally present at the command post in direct proximity to the com-
mand post of the 65th Army. thus insuring that airplanes would be sent
to the battlefield efficiently and control of the airplanes would be
reliable. The boldness and decisiveness of the action of personnel of
the VIII Fighter Air Corps insured the success of the ground troops.

The Military Council of the 65th Army expresses gratefulness to all
personnel for the bravery and heroism they displayed.""7 The motherland
evaluated the silitary deeds of the Soviet airmen highly: The Hero of
the Soviet Union title was awarded to 53 pilots and navigator. of the

163

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ist. 3d, kth, 6th, and 16th air armies by a ukase of the Presidium of the
USSR Supreme Soviet.

The actions of the Soviet Alr Puree in the Belorussian operation intru-
dueed many new concepts into air force strategy and tuctirn. The
experience of concentrating the main air grouping on the central sector
of the Soviet-German front was highly instructive. Of special interest
are the measures implemented by the command to covertly move air units
and formations first to airfields significant distances from the front
line and then to airfields in the combat zone just prior to the begin-
ning of combat activity. There were many interesting things in the
organization of interaction between air armies as well as between frontal
aviation and strategic aviation. This interaction was organized by “q
snc air liaison officers. It was distinguished by flexibility in the
maneuvering of aviation along the front, which was accomplished through
the transfer of air formations from one air army to another, and through
switching of air force efforts from one axis to another without changing

bases. in this case decisions on maneuvering air power were made on the
spot by "q suc liaison officers.

The problem of providing air support to and covering tank, mechanized.
and cavalry formations was solved somewhat differently. Several air
corps and separate air divisions operated in behalf of the tank army as
it was committed to the breakthrough and as it exploited the break-
through in depth; control of these major air formations was concentrated
within the hands of one of the air corps commanders. Centralized control
of aviation made it possible to reassign air formations quickly to newly
arising combat missions. Fighter aviation typically employed the inde-
pendent "hunting" strategy with the mission of not only annihilating
enemy airplanes in the air but also destroying motor vehicles. railroad
trains, and other aaall targets. Ground attack aviation was used exten-
sively and continuously in support of penetration of enemy defenses and
in other critical phases of the offensive. Continuity was achieved by
actions of groups of ground attack airplanes in accordance with a previ-
ously written schedule in short intervals of 10-20 minutes, as well as
with patrolling airplanes at the airfields. As our swift offensive
developed in the central sector. the Soviet Army struck the enemy hard
on the southern wing of the Soviet-German front and in the Baltic with
the active support of aviation. In the period from July to November
l96b the Soviet Army cleared the invaders from the Moldavian SSR and its
capital. Kishinev, and captured the major industrial region of Ploesti
and Romania's capital Bucharest. and in September it entered Bulgaria.
completed the liberation of Romania. Bulgaria. and almost all of the
Baltic republics, reached the Vistula. and captured three beachheads on
its left bank.

Pilots in Czechoslovak and Romanian units and formations formed and armed
with the assistance of the Soviet Union fought valorously together with

Soviet aviation within the composition of the 2d, 8th, and 17th air armies.

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Czechoslovak lat Fighter Regiment began its battle history as part of
the 2d Air Army in July 1966. In September 1966 Czechoslovak pilots were
redeployed to the vicinity of 2volen. There. in the enemy rear, they
remained for more then s month. actively supporting Slovak rebels. Later
the Czechoslovak lst Mixed Air Division was created. armed. and trained
in the Soviet Union. Fighting together with Soviet airmen, Czechoslovak
pilots flew more than 1,600 sortiea and destroyed about 50 fascist air-
planes before the end of the war."8

Pilots of the Romanian Air Force took part in completing the defeat of
enemy troops and liberating Romania. In interaction with troops of the
2d Ukrainian Front. the Romanian I Air Corps flew 2.500 combat aorties
and knocked down 100 fascist airplanes in air battles between 26 August
and 25 October 1966 at Bucharest and in ‘l‘ransylvania."°9

To support the People's Liberation Army of Yugoslavia, the Yugoslav lat
Fighter Regiment and the 2d Ground Attack Air Regiment were formed in
1965, after which they left for Yugoslavia. Prior to this, in accordance
with an agreement signed 15 November 1966 the Soviet Union placed a Soviet
air group commanded by General A. N. Vitruk at the disposal of the com-
mand of the People's Liberation Army of Yugoslavia for an indefinite
period of time. Its composition included the 10th Guards Ground Attack
Air Division and the 236th Fighter Air Division and. to support them.

the 9th Air Base Area together with all of its materiel, armament, and
technical and administrative support resources. The Soviet air group
provided considerable assistance to the People's Liberation Army of
Yugoslavia in its fight against fascist German troops.50

The Normandy Separate Fighter Air Regiment of the Fighting French took
an active part in the battles of Belorussia. In October 1966 the regi-
ment received the honorary Roman title for its successful combat activi-
ties while supporting and covering troops crossing the Neman River. and
it was renamed the lat Normandy-Neman Separate French Fighter Air Regi-
ment. 0n 5 July 1963 the French air squadron was reorganized as the lat
Normandy Separate Fighter Air Regiment of the Fighting French (regiment
commander--Hajor P'er Puyyad and, as of 28 October 1966, Major Luy
Del'fino). Representatives of the Soviet Air Force in the regiment
included Captain I. V. Shurakhov at the post of chief of staff and
Engineer-Captain S. D. Agavelyan at the post of the senior engineer.
The reason for these assignments was that French aircraft mechanics had
been called to North Africa in August 1963. and so the engineers, tech-
nicians, and staff had to be replaced by Soviet servicemen. The French
regiment was armed with the newest YaK-9 fighters, which had better
technical flight characteristics than the YaK-l (higher rate of climb,
better maneuverability, and a speed of about 600 km per hour). In
summer and fall 1966 the air regiment's pilots fought in 78 air battles
and knocked down 129 enemy airplanes.51 The regiment's personnel were
awarded many Soviet orders for exemplary fulfillment of the Soviet Com-
mand's combat assignments in the fight against the fascist German
invaders and for the valor and bravery displayed.

165

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 8 September 19b4, when troops of the 3d Ukrainian Front entered
Bulgaria with the active support of the 17th Air Army. Bulgarian pilots
joined the fight against fascist invaders as well. Between Scpteabsr
and November 1966 they flew 6.600 combat sorties.52

During the operation the Soviet Air Force provided significant support
to ground troops in their missions. The Communist Party and Soviet
Government gave a high assessment to the activities of the command and
staff of the Soviet Army Air Force. On 19 August 1946 a ukase of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet awarded the rank of marshal of
aviation to air force deputy commanders G. A. Vorozheykin. F. Ya.
Falalcyev, and S. A. Khudysdov. A. V. Nikitin was promoted to colonel
general of aviation, and N. I. Krolenko and N. A. Zhuravlev were awarded
the rank of lieutenant general of aviation. This ukase also awarded the
top rank of chief marshal of aviation to A. Ye. Golovanov. the ADD com-
mander. and the rank of marshal of aviation to his assistant, N. S.

Skripko.

In summer l9éh American aviation conducted ”shuttle" air operations from
Soviet airfields in accordance with a treaty signed by the governments

of the USA and the Soviet Union. As we know. the American 8th and 15th
air armies and British strategic aviation were operating in Europe as

of the beginning of 1966. American aviation was based at English and
Italian sirfislds, and it operated with fighter escort against objec-
tives in Germany and allied countries, basically during the day. The

RAF operated at night. Because of the limited range of the fighter
escorts. American aviation could not reach objectives in East Germany

and in countries of Eastern Europe. Thus representatives of the American
delegation to the conference of ministers of foreign affairs held in

fall 1953 in Moscow asked the Soviet Government to provide airfields for
American aviation on the territory of the USSR. The Soviet Government
responded favorably to this request. The Soviet Army Air Force commander
received instructions from the supreme high commander to prepare the bases
and provide air engineering and logistical support to the American air
group in the USSR. For this purpose. as well as to resolve issues asso-
ciated with combat activities initiated from Soviet territory by air units
of Poland, France. and Czechoslovakia, a special section and later an air
force directorate (directorate chief, General 5. D. Levsndovich) was
created in the Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters and subordinated
directly to General A. V. Nikitin. the Soviet Army Air Force deputy com-
mander.

0n 4 February 1946 the State Defense Committee published instructions to
the air force command providing basic direction on the order for housing
and feeding American pilots and supplying fuel and bombs to the air
bases.53 It was assumed that up to 360 3-17 (Flying Fortress) and 8-25
(Liberator) bombers would participate in the "shuttle" operations, as
well as up to 150-200 escort fighters. The Polteva airfield complex,
which consisted of the airfields at Poltavs. Hirgorod, and Piryatin, was

166

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

allocated to American aviation. The 169th Special Air Base was formed to
maintain them. General A. R. Perminov was appointed its commander,
Lieutenant Colonel I. I. Kolesnikov was appointed its deputy commander
for political affairs. General S. K. Kovalev was appointed its chief of
staff. Major K. F. Shchepankov was appointed chief of the operations
section. and Engineer-Major K. A. Stroganov was appointed chief of the
airfield complex. The Poltsva airfield complex was covered from the air
by the 240th Fighter Air Division of the National Air Defense Forces
(commander. Colonel A. T. Kostenko) and by an antiaircraft unit of the

VI Corps of the National Air Defense Forces. With the permission of the
Soviet Government General F. Anderson. 0.5. Air Force deputy commander in
the European theater. came to Poltava on 15 May with a group of persons
including Captain Elliot Roosevelt, the son of U.S. President F. Roosevelt.

General Anderson gave a positive evaluation to the preparations made of
the air base.54

At the end of May 1966 preparations of the air base for receiving the
American pilots were completed. In accordance with the treaty the first
"shuttle" air operation by American aviation was scheduled for 2 June
l9bh; the Americans were to take off from Italian airfields, strike enemy
objectives in Southeastern Europe. and then land at the Poltava airfield
complex. Early in the morning of 2 June up to 750 airplanes of the
American 15th Air Army took off from airfields in Italy and struck their
assigned enemy targets. Some of them returned to their own bases, and
128 3-17 bombers escorted by 6b P-Sl fighters (Mustangs) landed at the
Soviet airfields with Lieutenant General (K. Bkker), commander of the
15th Air Army. in charge. As General A. V. Nikitin recalls, an extremely
warm welcome was organized for the American pilots at the airfields.
Logistical, special, and medical support to arriving Allied aviation was
organized at a high level. Later, "shuttle" air operations were con-
ducted on 6 June in interaction with Soviet aviation against objectives
in the vicinity of Galati. after which the airplanes landed at Italian
airfields. On 11 July more than 1,000 airplanes struck military objec-
tives in Romania and Yugoslavia, some of them landing at airfields near
Poltavn after their mission. The American 8th Air Army performed a
"shuttle" air operation from English airfields against industrial facil-
ities in Berlin on 21 June 1946. Out of the 2,500 American airplanes
participating in the operation, 137 bombers escorted by 62 fighters
landed at the Poltava airfield complex.

The Luftwaffe intensified its air reconnaissance whenever American avia-
tion landed at our nirfields. 0n the night of 22 June 1966 it struck the
Poltava and Kirgorod airfields and. despite intense antiaircraft fire

and the actions of night fighters covering these airfields. it destroyed
and incapacitated 44 American and 15 Soviet airplanes at the airfields.
It should be noted that on order of the Soviet Command General A. R.
Perminov had suggested on that day to the American command to redeploy
the airplanes at other airfields before dark. This suggestion was
rejected. however. By evening, on the insistence of the Soviet Command,

167

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the American airplanes were dispersed along the edges of their airfields,
and most of the flight crews were quartered away from the airfields. All
antiaircraft resources were made combat ready. Althouﬂ\ these measures
did decrease the losses of American airplanes resulting from strikes by
enemy aviation, they could not halt them completely. In the second half
of July snail groups and single American airplanes landed at the Poltava
airfield complex. On 27 July, after striking enemy objectives. 38 P-38
(Lightning) fighter-bombers and 38 P-51 (Mustang) fighters landed at
these airfields.

In Septelber 1954 American aviation performed three "shuttle" sir opera-
tions (11, 13, and 18 September) from the Poltava airfield complex.
Later, because the front line had changed dramatically and bombers and
fighters of the American 8th and 15th air armies could now reach all
enemy objectives and return to their own bases, "shuttle" air operations
were no longer necessary. But the actions of American aviation partici-
pating in these "shuttle" operations did not have a direct effect on
events on the Soviet-German front.

The year 1966, a year of great victories for the Soviet people and their
valorous armed forces, was coming to an end. The years of war strength-
ened the inviolable moral-political unity of the Soviet people. The power
of the Soviet state grew iamnasurably. The air force also matured quanti-
tatively, qualitatively. and organizationally. In 1944 aviation industry
gave the front 17,872 fighters, 10,719 ground attack airplanes, and A,039
frontal and long-range bombers. Including cargo and trainer craft, more
than 60,000 airplanes were produced. As compared to the previous year,
airplane production increased by 15.6 percent in 1945.55 By the begin-
ning of 1945 there were as many as 16,500 new combat craft in the operating
air force.56 Air force units were armed with new, more sophisticated
YaK-J and La-7 fighters and 11-10 ground attack airplanes. They were
superior to enemy airplanes of the same kinds in relation to speed.
maneuverability, and armament. Our aviation received new resources and

a significant number of radar sets. A decree of the 6K0 dated 6 December
1944 reorganized strategic aviation into the 18th Air Army, consisting of
five bomber air corps (1 Guards Smolensk commanded by General 6. N.
Tupikov, II Guards Bryansk commanded by General Ye. F. Loginov. III Guards
Stalingrad commanded by General V. Ye. Nestertsev, IV Gomel' contended by
General 6. s. Schetchikov, and XIX Bomber commanded by Colonel H. N.
Kslinushkin) and four air divisions (65th Heavy Bomber commanded by
Colonel V. I. Lebedev, 56th Fighter coammnded by Colonel A. D. Babenko,
73d Auxiliary. and 27th Training), and it was subordinated directly to the
Soviet Army Air Force commander. The reasons for this lay in the need

for making broader use of strategic bombers in support of ground troops
during the Soviet Army's major offensive on all of the Soviet-German
front. The mobility and maneuverability of the Soviet Air Force in-
creased as a result. Organization of command and control and the condi-
tions for interaction of strategic aviation with air armies in frontal
aviation and of the ground troops were improved.

168

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet Army Air Force headquarters. which attached great significance
to generalizing the experience of the combat activities of aviation. held
a meeting of the staff officers of the air armies, air corps, and mili-
tary district air services responsible for studying and utilizing the
experience of the Great Patriotic War on 18-20 November 1946. Back on

29 April 1953 the air force command published an order on studying and
introducing the experience of the Great Patriotic Har into the units of
the Red Army Air Force; the order required commanders and staffs at all
levels to generalize everything that was best about the combat activities
of aviation.57

Airmen in air force units and formations deeply studied the combat
experience and developed new tactics and methods of combat activity born
in battle. Combat experience was publicized by various bulletins and
memo sheets published by the air divisions. The Soviet Army Air Force
Headquarters systematically published "Information Bulletins" and sent
them to the troops. The journal VBSTNIK VOZDUSHNOGO FLOTA and air army

newspapers played a certain role in disseminating combat experience and
heightening the skills of air force fliers and technicians.

During the meeting the air army staff officers suggested many new and
interesting ideas pertaining to the combat use of air units and forma-
tions in various forms of operations and battle; they suggested new ideas
regarding the organization and maintenance of interaction between avia-
tion and the troops. and management of aviation using radio resources and
forward command posts.

In his concluding statement. General N. A. Zhuravlev formulated the three
main tasks: "The first--work efficiently. The experience of warfare
must be extracted daily from the colbat activities of the air force, and
it must be processed and quickly submitted to subordinate air units; the
second-~study the actions of aviation within a short interval of time or
during one typical operation, and on this basis make conclusions and
bring them to the awareness of the units; the third--accumulate and
preserve materials for future history.“ The results of the meeting and
the principal tasks were spelled out in a directive of the Soviet Army
Air Force Headquarters.58

The new regulations on the combat activities of ground attack (NShA-éé).
bomber (MBA-46), fighter (MIA-£5), and reconnaissance aviation (NRA—46),
which generalized the highly rich war experience and the experience of
flying new aviation equipment, and which were written under the guidance
of the Military Council in l96b by military academies jointly with the
Air Force Headquarters, reflected the war experience quite fully. A
directive of the Soviet Army Air Force chief of staff dated 19 December
l9bb ordered air army. military district air service, and air corps
cmmmanders to stud; the new regulations and utilize them in practical
combat activities. 9

169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During this time fascist Germany was undergoing a deep military-political
crisis which marked the approach of a catastrophe. During the summer-fall
campaign of l9b4 the Soviet Army annihilated or captured 96 fascist divi-
sions and 24 brigades. In addition it ruined 219 divisions and 22 bri-
gades, which lost from 50 to 75 percent of their composition. In sum
total the losses suffered by hitler's Germany on the Soviet-German front
during this tine totaled 1.600.000 man, 6 700 tanks, 2,800 guns and
mortars. and more than 12,000 airplanes.66

The Vistula-Oder Operation

The victories of the Soviet Ar-ed Forces in 1966 produced outstanding
political and military results. The fascist German invaders were com-
pletely expelled from Soviet territory (with the exception of the north-
western part of the Latvian SSR), and the state border was restored from
the Barents to the Black Sea. Fascist Germany was abandoned by all of
its allies in Europe, and it found itself in a situation of total polit-
ical isolation. The front had moved to its borders, and in Eastern
Prussia it had overstepped them. Our air force enjoyed strategic sir
superiority along the entire Soviet-German front. In 1966 the He SHC
posed the nission of completing the defeat of the armed forces of fascist
Germany and providing help to countries of Central and Southeastern Europe
in liberating them from fascist oppression and, jointly with the Allies,
forcing fascist Germany to accept unconditional surrender. According to
the plan of the Supreme High Command, our troops were to make annihi-
latory strikes along the entire front and destroy enemy groupings in
Eastern Prussia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Austria. The main
efforts were to be focused on the warssw-Berlin axis. Next the Soviet
Army was to occupy Berlin, liberate Prague, and bring the war to a vic-
torious conclusion.

The design of the Vistula-Oder operation was as follows: Powerful simul-
taneous strikes were to be made against the enemy on the Poznan and
Breslau axes, Army Group A defending on Polish territory was to be
destroyed, the Oder was to be reached, and advantageous conditions for

a final strike on Berlin were to be insured. The beginning of the
offensive was planned for 20 January 1965, but fascist German troops
placed Anglo-American troops in the Ardennes in a difficult position.

On request of the government of Great Britain the Hq SHC decided to
hasten the beginning of the offensive of the Soviet troops. In the
January offensive Soviet troops had to destroy the enemy in Poland and
complete liberation of the Polish people from hitler's tyranny. The task
of destroying fascist German invaders in Poland was assigned by Head-
quarters to troops of the let Belorussian and let Ukrainian fronts.
Troops on the left wing of the 2d Belorussian Front were to advance on
the right flank, while troops on the right wing of the 6th Ukrainian
Front were to advance on the left flank. Troops of the lat Belorussian
Front were covered and supported from the air by the 16th Air Army (com-
mandsr-oceneral s. I. Rudenko. deputy commander for political affairs--

170

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General A. I. Vinogrudov. chief of staff--General P. I. Brayko). while
troops of the 1st Ukrainian Front were supported by the 2d Air Army (com-
amnder-Cenerai S. A. Krasovskiy. deputy commander for political affairs--
General B. N. Romazanov. chief of staff-General A. S. Pronin). There
were 4.770 warplanes in the combat composition of the two air armies of
frontal aviation. Enemy aviation was significantly inferior to ours in
quantitative and qualitative respects: Enemy troops were covered and
supported by units of the 6th Air Fleet.61 Troops of the 1st Belorussian
Front were faced by up to 550 airplanes. This was no longer the enemy
that we had fought in the first years of the war. Soviet aviation was
now superior to him in all respects. Although the Germans did try to use
new jet airplanes for the first time in the Vistula arcs, these acts did
not have any significant influence on the situation in the air.6

Air units and formations of the air armies made meticulous preparations
for the [orthcoaing operation. Special attention was turned to studying
the enemy, working new pilots in, and practicing dive bombing against
small targets. Much was done to insure covertness of the preparations
and surprise in the use of aviation. The arrival of new air formations.
of which there were many. was kept a secret. Traveling to the forward
edge to study their objectives on the battlefield, commanders and air
group leaders were clothed in jackets without shoulder boards and rank
lnsignias. The Soviet Air Force had to maintain strategic air superiority
and support the ground troops and the navy in their missions by concen-
trated attacks on the enemy. The 16th Air Army was joined by the III
Fighter Air Corps (commander. General Ye. Ya. Savitskiy), the IX Ground
Attack Air Corps (commander, General I. V. Krupskiy), the 183d Bomber
Air Division (commander, Colonel H. A. Sitkin), the 262d Night Bomber
Air Division (commander, Colonel P. A. Kalinin), and the lat Guards
Fighter Air Division (commander. Colonel V. V. Sukhoryabov) from the
Headquarters reserve.63 Dummy airfields were built. Model airplanes
were set up at these airfields. and movements of airfield and combat
equipment were simulated. As an example 818 models of airplanes and
specialized vehicles were set up at SS dummy airfields within the zone
of the 16th Air Army. Host of the dummy airfields "operated" around the
clock and looked so plausible that the enemy had no doubts as to their
authenticity. Prior to the offensive the enemy bombed than five times
during the day and 19 times at night. dropping 660 heavy caliber bombs.6‘
The real airfields. meanwhile. were meticulously camouflaged, and they
were subjected to almost no air strikes during this period. Beyond the
Vistula air reconnaissance revealed seven prepared enemy lines of defense
disposed to a depth of 500 km and six antitank ditches from "0 to 60 km
long. and it discovered the areas of concentration of reserves and enemy
artillery groupings. All crossings across the Vistula and the Pilica
rivers were photographed. and the airfield net and the aviation based at
these airfields were discovered. Air reconnaissance data permitted the
Supreme High Command and the frontal command to plan the offensive opera-
tion more correctly. In addition to conducting air reconnaissance, during
the preparations for the operation Soviet aviation fought enemy

171

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reconnaissance airplanes, covered friendly troops against air strikes, and
prevented the enemy from regrouping his troops by making individual strikes
against the troops and equipment. These missions required 3,500 sorties.6s

The offensive was initiated on 12 January by the strike grouping of the
let Ukrainian Front and on 16 January by the strike grouping of the lat
Belorussian Front. lsuediately after the fronts went over to the offen-
sive, aviation (more than 85 percent of all forces) concentrated its
main efforts on supporting the fronts' strike groupings. The 6th and 3d
Guards tank armies and two tank corps (XXX! and IV Guards) of the lat
Ukrainian Front, which were co—itted to action in the second half of the
first day. were actively supported from the air by aviation of the 2d Air
Army. About 600 ground attack airplanes and bombers of the air army. fly-
ing continuously in small groups. struck enemy reserves advancing to the
area in which our tank armies were being committed to the engagement.
Aviation disrupted the plans of the enemy. who was attempting to make a
strong counterstrike. Just on 16 and 17 January the 2d Air Army flew
about lo 000 combat sorties in behalf of the advancing tank armies and
corps.66 Closely interacting with the combined arms and tank armies.
ground attack and bomber aviation disorganized the withdrawal of enemy
columns retreating to intermediate lines of defense, thus helping the
frontal troops to destroy the main forces of the Ger-an 5th Tank Army
and operational reserves opposing our troops and operating from the
Sandotaierz beachhead. Soviet aviation actively helped the troops to
cross the "yes, Pilica, and "arts rivers on the move. it supported
advance of their forward detachments to the line Radomsko. Crestochowa.
Tarnow.

Concentrating its efforts on covering and supporting the 1st and 2d Guards
tank armies and the tank and cavalry corps, beginning on 16 January the
16th Air Army actively helped them to complete their missions. The V1
Ground Attack Air Corps. which flew 272 aissions in a single day, inter-
acted with the 2d Guards Tank Army, while the lat Guards Tank Army was
supported by the 2d and 11th Guards Ground Attack Air Divisions. That
day they flew 3&5 sorties.67 In the vicinity of Opoczno ground attack
airplanes destroyed the enemy's 10th Mechanized Division. More than
3,000 motor vehicles and armored transporters and several dozen tanks
were destroyed by aviatiun and abandoned on the roads. Bombers of the
III Bomber Air Corps (co-under, General A. Z. Karavatskiy) and the 183d
and 221st Bomber Air Divisions made several powerful strikes against the
enemy's rail facilities during the day. In all during the third day of
the offensive the 16th Air Army flew 3,3101 sorties.6a Aviation of the
16th Air Army played a great role. helping the troops to liberate Warsaw.
The Polish 1st Army, which went over to the offensive on the night of

17 January and broke into Warsaw on that same day. took part in the
liberation of Harsaw together with Soviet troops. Still at the beginning
of the operation the 16th Air Army airlifted a significant quantity of
aortars, antitank rifles, automatic weapons, almaunition, food. and
medicines to patriots of the Warsaw underground organization. During the

172

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4 days of battle by the front's troops in the liberation of Warsaw, the
16th Air Army [low 6,693 combat sorties. In addition the Polish bth
Mixed Air‘Division flew about 600 combat sorties.69

By the end of 17 January the eneau's main forces had been destroyed
through the efforts of the troops of the two fronts and aviation. Poland's
capita1--Harsaw-was liberated from the German invaders.

During the subsequent advance of the troops of the fronts to the Oder,
despite poor weather our aviation continued to support the ground troops
in their pursuit of the retreating enemy. However, the conditions under
which Soviet aviation had to operate became more complex as the troops
moved west. An unexpected warming spell caused a major thaw. Field air-
fields were put out of action. Aviation lagged behind the ground troops
due to the poor basing conditions. At the same time favorable conditions
were created for enemy aviation: The weather was good at enemy bases.

and well prepared paved airfield. were present. The Luftwaffe capitalized
upon this, and in the first third of February it flew about 14.000 sorties
within the zone of advance of the lat Belorussian Front, while the 16th
Air Army flew only 626.70 The Soviet Command took emergency steps.
Freeways were used to base fighters. The first experiment with this sort
of unusual airfield was sade by Hero of the Soviet Union Colonel A. I.
Pokryshkin, commander of the 9th Guards Fighter Air Division. The entire
air division was based on the freeway by evening. The 22d Guards Fighter
Air Division (commander, Lieutenant Colonel L. I. Coreglyad) did the same.
in addition, each combined arms army built one airfield within its zone
out of special metallic planks. This is how the problem of basing our
aviation during this operation was solved. By their bold and decisive
actions. Soviet fighters broke enemy resistance in the air. Hhile during
the second third of February enemy aviation flew more than 3,000 sorties.
in the last third they flew only 670. During the same time just the 16th
Air Army alone flew more than 10,000 sorties.71

Supporting combat missions during the pursuit. between 18 January and

1 February the 16th and 2d air armies flew more than 42,000 sorties. The
lit, VI, and XIII Fighter Air Corps of the SHC reserve, commanded by
Generals Ye. Ya. Savitskly, I. N. Dzusov, and B. A. Sidnev, distinguished
themselves especially. The formations they led dependably covered the
ground troops against air strikes and boldly attacked the enemy on the
ground. In support of the lat Ukrainian and 1st Belorussian fronts, the
18th Strategic Aviation Air Army disrupted enemy rail shipments and
prevented concentration of reserves through night actions. Between

17 and 26 January it flew more than 600 combat sorties.

Soviet aviation once again demonstrated in the Vistula-Oder operation that
it was capable of supporting and covering advancing troops continuously
and effectively throughout the entire operation in difficult meteorologi-
cal conditions. During Ihe offensive operation from the Vistula to the
Oder, units of fighter air formations were redeployed seven times, while

173

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ground attack units were redeployed six times. Pilots of the two air
armies flew 56.000 conbat sissions. Our fighters fought in 1,150 air
battles and destroyed 908 one-y airplanes.7

The Eastern Prussian Operation

Concurrently with the strong push from the Vistula to the Oder, the
Soviet Armed Forces initiated offensive actions in Eastern Prussia and
northern Poland. Planning the Eastern Prussian operation, the liq SEC
assigned the following missions to the Soviet troops--cutting off Army
Group Center from other forces of the Fascist German Army, pushing it
against the sea. dividing it, and annihilating it in parts. 3 This
nission was given to troops of the 3d and 2d Belorussian fronts. which
were to cooperate with the air force and the Red Banner Baltic Fleet.

The Soviet air grouping consisted of the 1st Air Army of the 3d Belo-
russian Front (co-sanderu-Genersl T. T. Khryukin, deputy couander for
political affairs--ceneral I. c. Litvinenko and. as of March. General
I. 'i‘. Chernyshov. chief of staff--Genera1 I. H. Below) and the loth Air
Army of the 2d Belorussian Front (contender-General K. A. Vershinin,
deputy comender for political affairs-~General F. F. Verov, chief of
staffuceneral A. N. Alekseyev). In all the two air armies. reinforced
by air reserves of the Supreme high Comand. possessed more than 3,000
airplanes.“ In addition sons of the forces of the 3d Air Army, lat
Baltic Front and the 18th Air Army were called in. Actions of the air
armies in the operation were coordinated by liq sac air liaison officer
Marshal of Aviation F. Ya. Falsleyev. The German Army Group Center was
supported by the 6th Air Army. which possessed 775 airplanes.75 The liq
SEC and the frontal troop co—anders gave aviation a sajor role in the
forthcoming offensive operation.

To achieve surprise in the actions of troops and aviation, false prepara-
tions for defense were made on the main axis in the 3d Belorussian Front.
on its left wing. Between 1 and 10 January the lat Air Army covered
false concentration of troops in the vicinity of Suwslki. Dually air-
fields were created on this axis. and nodels of 100 ground attack air-
planes and 60 fighters were set up at then. Radio stations simlating
the work of the headquarters of an air arny. a ground attack air corps,
and three bomber divisions were operated in the vicinity of the dummy
airfields. Canouflage and deception were also employed in other air
armies. 0n the morning of 13 January 1965 troops of the 3d Belorussian
Front went over to the offensive. followed by troops of the 2d Belo-
russian Front on 110 January. During the night prior to the offensive
aviation of the lat Air Army conducted powerful air preparation, flying
740 sortiea.

During the day on 1!. January aviation helped the troops of the 5th Army
repel strong enemy counterattacks. On 15 January 1,320 airplanes of the

lat and 3d air arniea struck the enemy's principal centers of resistance
in several powerful successive strikes, as a result of which the front's

174

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.i For orncm. use ONLY

troops advanced up to 10 km and penetrated the main line of defense. On
the fourth day of the operation 362 bombers of the 1st and 3d air armies
made a massed strike against strongpoints on the enemy's second line of
defense in the sector within which the II Guards Tank Corps was committed
to the engagement. A second strike by 286 bombers occurred 3 hours after
the first against objectives on the third line of defense.

Air support to the combat actions of the tank corps was provided by five
bomber air divisions, three ground attack divisions, and one fighter air
division. In all on 16 January aviation of the two air armies flew more
than 2,800 sorties.76 By the end of 18 January troops of the 3d Belo-
russian Front broke enemy defenses along a broad front with active air
support. The 1st and 3d air armies flew 10,350 sorties in support of

the front's troops.77 In the zone of advance of the 2d Belorussian Front,
the 4th Air Army actively supported commitment of two tank corps on

15 January and one mechanized corps on 16 January, and on the following
day it supported commitment of the 5th Guards Tank Army to the engagement.

Aviation played a major role in annihilating an enemy grouping encircled
in the fortress city of Torun. On 31 January troops of the 70th Army
began an assault on the surrounded fortress. The enemy attempted a
strong counterattack, as a result of which 5,000 of his troOps broke out
of the cncirclement. Ground attack aviation was given the mission of
annihilating them. By its strike it blocked the movement of the coluans
and in its subsequent actions it inflicted heavy losses on them. Later,
capitalizing upon a temporary improvement in the weather, Soviet pilots
struck troops and pockets of resistance in the Heilsberg fortified area
and fought the Luftwaffe. Between 19 January and 9 February the Ath Air
Army flew 8,130 sorties, while the let Air Army flew 9.740 sorties.78
Troops of the fronts captured a significant part of the Zenland Penin-
sula, bypassed Konigsberg on three sides, and reached the Heilsberg
fortified area. The Eastern Prussian grouping suffered heavy losses and
was divided into three parts. The second stage of the combat activities
of troops in Eastern Prussia--annihilation of the isolated enemy group-
ings--began on 10 February. This mission was assigned to troops of the
3d Belorussian and let Baltic fronts. On 18 February 1905 Army General
I. D. Chernyakhovskiy, commander of the 3d Belorussian Front, was mortally
wounded in the vicinity of Mel'zak. Marshal of the Soviet Union A. ..
Vasilcvskiy was appointed troop commander of the 3d Belorussian Front

by order of the Hq SHC on 18 February 1955. Vasilevskiy arrived at the
front'a headquarters on 20 February. On 23 February the Hq SHC ordered
the Soviet Army Air Force commander. Chief Marshal of Aviation A. A.
Novikov to travel to the 3d Belorussian Front in Eastern Prussia to
coordinate the actions of the participating air forces. On 20 February
A. A. Novikov and an operational group from the Soviet Army Air Force
Headquarters took off for the 3d Belorussian Front aboard a military

transporter. The airplane was piloted by General V. G. Grachev, com-
mander of an air transport air division. On 21 February the Hq SHC
decided to transfer troops operating in Eastern Prussia to the 3d

175

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

bolorussian Front, making the latter responsible for the annihilation of
all of the isolated army groupings. In compliance with this decision

the 1st Baltic Front was disbanded as of 2600 hours on 2h February 1965,
and its troops. which were renamed the Zemland Group, were placed within
the 3d Belorussian Front. The 3d Air Army was also placed within the
composition of the combined 3d Belorussian Front. meaning that the front
now had two air armies. Operating during the spring thaw and in the
presence of dense fog, in the second half of March the front's troops
divided and defeated Germans occupying the heilsberg fortified area.

The defeat of the enemy's Konigsberg grouping was placed on the agenda.
The plan for defeating the Konigsberg grouping consisted of the following:
The gerrison's forces were to be divided by powerful converging strikes
from the north and south with active air support, and then the city was

to be captured by an assault. An auxiliary strike was to be made from

the vicinity of Konigsberg in a westerly direction toward Pillau
(Bultiysk) to contain the enemy's Zemland grouping. Actions by artillery
and aviation, which were to accompany the troops and totally demoralize
the defending enemy. were given a special role in the assault on the city.
Two combined arms armies--the 43a and SOth--were to strike from the north.
and the llth Guards Army was to strike from the south, while the 39th Army
was to cut the fortress off from the enemy's Zemland grouping.

For the first time in the Great Patriotic “or three of the air force's
air armies (lat. 3d. and 18th), the air service of the Red Banner Baltic
Fleet (commander, General M. I. Samokhin), and two bomber air corps--
the V Bomber Air Corps (commander, General H. Kh. Borisenko) from the
4th Air Army and the V Guards Air Corps (commander. General V. A. Ushakov)
from the 15th Air Army-~were called in to support a single front. In all
by the beginning of the Konigsberg operation this grouping possessed
2,466 warplanes, to include 1,126 bombers (500 heavy long-range, 432
close-range, and 192 light night bombers). 470 ground attack airplanes,
830 fighters, and 20 torpedo carriers.8° All airplanes with the excep-
tion of 150 in the fleet's air service, which were given the mission of
interdicting the enemy's marine shipments, were intended for actions on
the land front. During the war the Soviet Command accumulated a great
deal of experience in controlling large masses of aviation in strategic
operations conducted by groups of fronts and in independent air opera-
tlons. Before. however, the actions of aviation were always dispersed
on a broad front. In this case more than 2,000 warplanes of five major
operational air formations had to be committed to the engagement within
a very narrow sector of the front, since the main goal of the operation
was to destroy the Kenigsberg grouping and capture the city and fortress
of Konlgaberg.

The enemy attached not only military but also political significance to
Konigsherg. One of the most important areas of Germany's war industry
and the center of Eastern Prussia. it was also the center of Prussian
military power. To defend the city, the enemy called in about 130,000
men, up to 6.000 guns and mortars. and more than 100 tanks and assault

176

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

guns. Some 170 warplanes were based at airfields on the Zemland Penin-
sula ((Cros-Dirshkaym), (Cros-Khubniken). and (Noytif)).81 The Germans
created four zones of defense within and around Konigsberg. The first
(outer perineter) consisted of a system of trenches, antitank ditches.
lines of dragon's teeth, personnel obstacles, and minefields. The second
(the inner perimeter) included earth-and-wood pillboxes, concrete pill-
boxes. and 15 strong ancient fdkts containing sizable garrisons; the
third was on the outskirts of the city. and it consisted of a complex of
reinforced concrete gun emplacements and structures prepared for defense;
the fourth encircled the central part of the city, and it consisted of
bastions. turrets. and strong buildings. Konigsberg was covered against
air strikes by 56 antiaircraft batteries (about 450 barrels). There were
large underground fuel and food dumps in the city.

Clearly the defeat of such a grouping and the capture of Konigsberg
demanded considerable. meticulous preparations. Jointly with the front's
heavy artillery. aviation was to play the main role here. This was under-
stood quite well by A. H. Vasilevskiy and A. A. Novikov. The headquarters
were ordered to coordinate carefully and develop detailed plans for inter-
action among all arms and services. The plans for aviation were written
at the headquarters of the lat Air Army with the direct participation of
an operational group representing the Soviet Army Air Force commander.
Receiving instructions from A. M. Vasilevskiy. A. A. Novikov spelled out
the missions to the commanders of the 18th Air Army and aviation of the
Red Banner Baltic Fleet. and to the commanders of the two bomber air
corps of the 6th and 15th air armies. Some refinements were made in the
plans for the combat activities of the lat and 3d air armies.

After this. Section One of the headquarters of the lat Air Army, headed
by Colonel N. P. Zhii'tsov, worked out the final plan under the guidance
of Chief of Staff General I. H. Belov with the participation of officers
in the operanional group of the Soviet Army Air Force commander; then
this plan was coordinated with the plans of the front and the combined
arms armies. The battle plan of frontal aviation in the 1 April opera-
tion was approved by the front's Military Council.

The plan foresaw preliminary air preparation for 2 days with the goal of
razing the forts at key strongpoints within the zones of advance of the
63d and 11th Guards armies. annihilating enemy airplanes, and putting
landing strips out of action. Destruction of fascist aviation was to

be completed by powerful sLnikes by air formations. There were plans to
fly 5,316 sorties and drop 2,620 tons of bombs in the first 2 days.

On the first day of the operation the front's troops were to make a massed
strike against objectives on the battlefield with the support of a total
of 539 airplanes (£06 Tu-Z's and Pe-Z's and 133 fighters armed with bombs).
After this attack. enemy ground attack airplanes were to escort infantry
and tanks. A second bomber attack was planned for 6-5 hours after the
flrst. The 129th, 260th, and 330th fighter air divisions and some forces

177

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the Xi Fighter Air Corps were intended to cover the bombers and ground
attach airplanes, while the remaining fighter formations were given the
mission of fighting enemy aviation in the air. in all during the first
day of the operation more than 6,100 sorties were to be flown. In sub-
sequent days of the operation frontal aviation was to act in accordance
with instructions from the conmanders of the 1st and 3d air armies--
Generals T. T. Khryukin and N. P. Papivin. During the planning, special
attention was turned to actions by ground attack air divisions and the
troops. In addition to a powerful bomber air strike group, a strong
ground attack group was created. It contained six ground attack divi-
sions--Colonel s. D. Prutkov's lst Guards. General V. I. Shevchenko's
182d, Colonel F. s. Khatminskiy's 277th. Colonel P. H. Kuchma's 211th.

Lieuteggnt Colonel K. P. Zeklepa's 311th. and General 8. S. Aleksandrov's
335th.

Fighter aviation was also given ground attack sissions. Two hundred air-
planes of the XI Fighter Air Corps under the coeeand of General 6. A.
lvanov were prepared specifically for bomb strikes against point targets
requiring dive bomber tactics. Colonel F. I. Shinkarenko's entire 130th
Fighter Air Division. which was armed with new YaK-9 airplanes having
special internal compartments that could hold up to 600 kg of bombs,
operated as a ground attack formation. The schedules indicating the
times ground attack airplanes took off for coebat lissions and returned
to the airfields were written in the air armies. Flying zones were
delimited for every air formation. All air divisions had their own
corridors and specific altitudes at which they flew to their targets and
back. In order that the pilots could orient the-selves more precisely

in night operations. our troops were to light signal fires along the
forward edge. and the center of Konigsberg was to be marked by inter-
secting searchlight beans. Three days before the beginning of the opera-
tion the commanders of the air corps and air divisions received photo-
mosaics of the city of Konigsberg, and large scale maps and diagrams with
the targets numbered and marked in relation to the actions to be taken by
aviation.

0n the eve of the operation air officers were sent with portable radio
sets to ground troop formations to guide our airplanes to enemy targets
within the zone of visibility. Operational groups and air liaison offi-
cers were sent to the conmand posts of the combined arms armies to
interact with and control ground attack airplanes interacting directly
with the advancing troops.

The extent of the role given to aviation in the capture of the city and
fortress of Konigsberg can be seen from the fact that A. H. Vasilevskiy
postponed the beginning of the assault from 5 April to the 6th due to
the poor weather predicted. A. A. Novikov ordered General V. I.
Al'tovskiy, chief of the meteorological service of the Soviet Army Air
Force. to convene meteorological experts in hoscow and report. by 1600
hours on 6 April. an updated weather forecast for the vicinity of

178

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Konigeburg [or 5 and 6 April. According to the prediction of the air
force's meteorological service in Moscow, the weather was to be satis-
factorwaor air activity on 6 April; in fact. however, it did not become
suitable for flying until the morning of 7 April. Air Force Military
Council members Generals N. S. Shimancv and A. V. Nikltin joined A. A.
Novikov at the front during the preparations for the operation, carrying
reports on a number of air force problems. These generals were put to
work in the air force operational group. and they provided practical
assistance in preparing air formations for the operation.

At dawn on 6 April A. A. Novikov was accompanied by A. V. Nikitin and

H. N. Koahevnikov to the command post of General A. P. Beloborodov's

63d Army. The command post was in the vicinity of (Fukheberg) on the
slope of a gentle hill about 1.5-2 km from the forward slope; bunkers
outfitted with stereoscopic viewers and two towers had been built. The
forward command post of the 1st Air Army, headed by Colonel N. P.
Zhil'tsov. was deployed in one of the towers in the trees. Personnel
trenches were dug next to the towers, and the air army's radio stations
and motor vehicles were concealed in previously dug shelters. The tower
commanded a good view of the battlefield and the city of Konigsberg. At
about 0900 hours guns of the 11th Guards Army began to thunder south of
Konigsberg. and about an hour later the guns of all the other armies went
into action. Artillery action against enemy defenses lasted more than

2 hours. The saivos of the high-powered guns literally shook the ground.

On that day the weather prevented full implementation of the battle plan
of the air force. By 1400 hours only 300 eorties were flown. In all on
6 April 1.052 of the planned 4.000 sortiee were flown. The weather
improved dramatically on 7 April. A. A. Novikov assigned new missions
to almost all bomber aviation, which was to operate against the main
centers of resistance immediately ahead of the advancing troops. On
this day 266 Tu-Z's and Pe-Z's made three powerful successive strikes
against enemy troops west of Konigsberg. Troops continuously escorted
by ground attack airplanes broke through the enemy's third defensive zone
and penetrated directly to the city in the second half of the day. This
was the moment when the enemy had to be struck hard from the air; heavy
bombers of the 18th Air Army were to make a massed strike against defen-
sive structures within Konigsberg itself. It was not a simple matter to
commit the main strike forces of aviation to the engagement. since this
was the first time the 18th Air Army was used in daytime. Prior to this
it had been utilized primarily at night. General A. I. Antonov of the
General Staff gave permission for its combat application. The beginning
of the massed strike of the 18th Air Army was planned for 1310 hours on
7 April.

Frontal aviation contributed 126 fighters to provide direct cover to the
heavy bombers, while 108 fighters patrolled constantly above the city for
the entire time that the bombers were passing over Konigsberg.

179

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

in addition, 20 minutes before the approach of the 18th Air Army's air-
planes to the city, 118 Il-2 ground attack airplanes and Pe-2 bombers
struck the enemy's fighter sirfields. The approach of the 18th Air
Army's airplanes could be seen well from the command post in the tower.

A powerful massed strike was made by 516 heavy bombers against strong—
points and forts in Konigsberg. The troops had never before witnessed
such a powerful strike by our aviation in daytime, in good sunny weather.
The thunder of heavy caliber bombs continued in Konigsberg for about an
hour. A total of 3,763 bombs weighing 550 tons were dropped on the
enemy.33 The entire city was engulfed in smoke. The strongpoints and
forts were destroyed. Following such a strike, enemy resistance decreased
drastically, and our troops began to advance quickly toward the center of
the city. Not a single enemy fighter was able to penetrate to our bombers,
and ground attack airplanes put antiaircraft artillery out of action.
Heavy bombers of the 18th Air Army returned to their own bases unharmed
after the strike. Great credit for preparing the air formations for

the strike and conducting the massed strike itself belongs to the command
of the 18th Air Army, led by Chief Marshal of Aviation A. Ye. Golovanov.
This strike was followed by successful actions on the part of frontal
bombers and ground attack airplanes commanded by Generals V. A. Ushakov
and H. Kh. Borisenko. During 7 April Soviet aviation flew about 5,000
sorties; on the night of 8 April it flew 2,000 combat sorties. Our air
force had never flown such a large number of sorties in a single day in
support of the offensive troops of a single front.

The assault on the fortress from the air continued on 8 April. Up to
2,000 airplanes made two massed strikes on that day against a Ger-an
tank grouping west of Konigsberg. By the end of the third day the
activities of aviation and artillery resulted in the destruction of a
large number of fortifications and serious losses to enemy troops. 0n

9 April the heroic troops of the 3d Belorussian Front captured the city
and fortress of Konigsberg with active air support. The remnants of the
enemy garrison surrendered.

ln 6 days Soviet aviation flew more than 16,000 sorties and dropped
6,660 tons of bombs on the enemy.

Prisoners of war confirmed the great effectiveness of the strikes made by
our aviation. Thus one of the senior officers present in the fortress

as air liaison officer from the German Supreme High Command testified
that "aviation was one of the causes which forced General (Lyash) to con-
clude that any further resistance was senseless." The Konigsberg opera-
tion was very short. But in terms of its nature, the quantity of air
power col-titted, its massed application, and the results of the actions,
it was in a sense a dress rehearsal of the assault on Berlin, the last
stronghold of fascist Germany in its aggressive war.

The actions of aviation in the Konigsberg operation were generalized, and

a report containing the results and analysis was published in an informa-
tion collection of the Soviet Army Air Force.

180

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Communist Party and Soviet Government gave a high assessment to the
deeds of Soviet pilots. After the operation the ranks of our airmen

were enlarged by another four twice-awarded Heroes of the Soviet Union--
General T. T. Khryukin and pilot-commanders Ye. M. Kungurtsev, G. M.
Hyl'nikov, and G. M. Parshin. Chief Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikov
and pilots V. A. Alekseyenko, A. I. Karim, A. N. Prokhorov, and N. l.
Semeyko were awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union titie.84 Pilots of

the French Normsndy-Heman Fighter Air Regiment participated in the opera-

tion together with Soviet pilots. Just in January 1965 alone the regi-
ment flew more than 500 combat sorties and annihilated about 60 enemy
airplanes in the air and at airfields. Twenty-four of the air regiment's
officers were awarded orders of the Soviet Union. In the period from

23 March 1963 to 2 May 1965 the French Normandy-Heman Regiment traveled
a battle road from Kslugn to Konigsberg. The pilots flew 5,062 combat
sorties, fought in 869 air battles, and knocked down 266 German air-
planea. Eighty pilots were awarded orders of the Soviet Union, and four
of them-~H. Al'ber, R. de la Puap, H. Lefevr. and 2h. Andre--were awarded
the Hero of the Soviet Union title. The air regiment was noted seven
times in orders of the Soviet Supreme High Command, and it was awarded
the Soviet orders of the Red Banner and Aleksandr Hevskiy, the French

Order of the Legion of Honor, the "Liberation" military cross, and a war
medal.”

The defeat of fascist German troops in Eastern Prussia had great military-
political significance. Soviet troops occupied all of Eastern Prussia
together with its capital, Konigsberg, and liberated some of the northern
regions of Poland. The Eastern Prussian operation was a clear example of
successful interaction among several air armies of frontal aviation,
strategic aviation, and the fleet under the guidance of the senior air
chief. The air force was one of the decisive factors in the operation
leading to swift defeat of a large enemy grouping occupying a highly
reinforced area of Eastern Prussia.

The Berlin Operation

Having defeated large enemy groupings in Eastern Prussia, Poland, Eastern
Pomerania. and Silesia in January-April 1965, the Soviet Armed Forces
reached the Oder and Niesse on a broad front and made preparations for
the decisive battle of Berlin. Soviet troops on the south wing of the

Soviet-German front completed the destruction of the enemy's Budapest
grouping and liberated Hungary, part of Czechoslovakia, and the eastern
regions of Austria. Germany found itself under the innediate threat of
strikes by Soviet troops from the east and south.

By the beginning of the Berlin operation the German command still had
significant ground and air forces. Troops intended to cover the
approaches to Berlin and the city itself had a strength of 1 million men,
10,600 guns and mortars, 1,500 tanks and assault guns, and 3,300 war-
planes. A garrison of more than 270,000 persons was concentrated in

181

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Berlin. The reserve of the main command of the ground forces contained
elght divisions.86 Preparing for repulsion of the Soviet offensive, the
Fascist German Command created powerful defenses in the country's east.
utilizing the masonry structures of cities and villages. rivers, canals,
and lakes for this purpose. The forward edge of defense was along the
Oder and the Niesse. Berlin's defenses were deep, and the troop concen-
tratlon was high. Strong centers of resistance were created in Stottin
(Szczecin), (Gartts), Schwedt. Frankfurt-on-Oder, Gubin, Forst, Cottbus,
and Spremberg. The defenses were strongest opposite the Kostrezyn beach-
head occupied by Soviet troops. There were #00 permanent reinforced
concrete structures just in Berlin alone. The Luftwaffe, the forces of
which were up to 70 percent fighters, including up to 120 He-263 jets
and cruise missiles, prepared itself for stubborn resistance.37

The Soviet Supreme High Cos-and concentrated a strong grouping of troops
and aviation on the Berlin axis. Soviet troops were superior to the
enemy in manpower by a factor of 2.5, in artillery by a factor of 4, in
tanks and self- ropelled guns by a factor of 6.1, and in aviation by a
factor of 2.3.8 The strategic design of the operation was to make
powerful strikes by troops of the 2d and lst Belorussian and lat
Ukrainian fronts with the support of the air force in a zone from Stettin
to (Pentaikh). destroy enemy defenses on a number of axes, divide the
Berlin grouping into several isolated parts by swift strikes made by
strong groupings, and subsequently encircle and destroy this grouping.
After capturing Berlin, on the thh—lSth days of the operation the
advancing troops were to reach the Elbe on a broad front, where they
were to join up with Anglo-American troops, force Germany to surrender,
and end the war in Europe.39

0n 9 April 1945 the Soviet Army Air Force commander, who was still with
the 3d Belorussian Front. received an order from the Headquarters of the
Supreme High Command to leave for the 1st Belorussian Front to partici-
pate in the preparation for and coordination of the combat activities
of all air power called in for the Berlin operation. The operational
group of the air force cosmnmder consisted of General N. F. Andrianov,
Colonel H. N. Koshevnikov, Majors L. H. Smirnov and P. A. Kolesnikov,
and, from the Section for Analysis of the "or Experience of the Air
Force headquarters Operational Directorate, Colonel F. S. Luchkin. The
Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters concentrated air reserves on the
Berlin axis, and jointly with the command and staff of strategic avia-
tion it worked out the problems of using the 18th Air Army in combat.
On order of the ﬁg SHC, air formations of the sac reserve were trans-
ferred to the Berlin axis. Thus the VI Bomber Air Corps (commander,
General I. P. Skok), the l Guards Fighter Air Corps (commander, General

Ye. M. Beletskiy), the 113th and 138th bomber divisions, and the 2b0th
Fighter Air Division (commanders, Colonel H. S. Finogeaov, Hero of the

Soviet Union Colonel A. I. Pushkin, and General 6. V. Zimin). The Soviet
air grouping consisted of three air armies of frontal aviation (4th, 16th,
and 2d) commanded by Generals K. A. Vershlnin, s. I. Rudenko, and S. A.

182

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Krasovskiy, and the 18th Strategic Aviation Air Army commanded by chief
Marshal of Aviation A. Ye. Golovanov. The 2d and 16th air armies con-
tained 50 air formations, 32 of them from the sac reserve. The 4th Air
Army contained 15 air formations, to include six from the sac reserve.
By the beginning of the operation the lat Belorussian Front's 16th Air
Army contained 28 air divisions and seven separate air regiments. The
armies possessed 3,033 serviceable warplanes (533 day and 151 night bomb-
ers, 687 ground attack airplanes, 1,548 fighters, and 116 reconnaissance
airplanes and spotter airplanes). By the beginning of the Berlin opera-
tion the 16th Air Army was the largest in our air force in terms of
composition.90

The Polish I Mixed Air Corps and Polish 4th Mixed Air Division partici-
pated in the operation together with troops of the Polish 1st and 2d
armies. The total strength of our and Polish aviation was 7,500 war-
planes, including 297 Polish airplanes.91

The average density of aviation per kilometer of front line was extremely
high considering the total width of the zone of advance--up to 30 air-
planes. it was more than 100 airplanes on the axis of the main strikes.
and within the zone of advance of the 5th Strike Army and 8th Guards Army
of the 1st Belorussian Front the density attained 170 airplanes. In order
to support such a quantity of aviation, engineering units of the air
armies restored and built 290 airfielda with the active help of the

ground troops, and a dependable reserve of fuel, ammunition, and other
forms of logistical support to aviation was created in 10-12 days.

No offensive operation conducted by ground troops in the Great Patriotic
Har had ever involved such a large number of air formations and airplanes
in three fronts. In order that all air power could be used purposefully
and effectively in the operation, the efforts of the air forces had to
be coordinated, the time and sequence of massed strikes had to be agreed
. upon, the zones of operation had to be defined, and the airfields to be
used by air units following combat missions in the zones of adjacent
fronts had to be specified. All of these problems were solved oy the

air force commander, acting as air liaison officer of the Hq SHC, jointly
with the troop commanders of the fronts and air army cczmanders right
within the area of combat activities. Frontal aviation was assigned the
following missions: Firmly maintaining strategic air superiority;
dependably covering troops and rear objectives of the front from enemy
air strikes; conducting air preparation and supporting ground troops
during penetration of the tactical zone of enemy defenses; supporting
troops of the 2d Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian fronts crossing the Oder,
Niesse, and Spree rivers; supporting commitment of tank armies to the
engagement; annihilating enemy reserves; conducting air reconnaissance
and maintaining surveillance over the battlefield.

The plans for combat use of the air armies in the operation were written
with extreme carefulness. Special attention was turned to organizing

183

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interaction between aviation and the troops. to supporting commitment of
tank armies and separate tank and mechanized corps to the engagement,
and toward their air escort throughout the entire depth of the operation.

The 1st Belorussian Front's lot and 2d Guards tank armies (commanders,
Generals H. Ye. Katukov and S. l. Bogdanov) were to advance on Berlin
from the north and northeast, while the let Ukrainian Pront's 3d and
6th Guards tank armies (commanders. Generals P. S. Rybalko and D. D.
Lelyushenko) were to turn toward Berlin as well. in the event that they
were able to advance beyond (Lyubben). The armored waves of the two
interacting fronts were to break through to Berlin with active air sup-
port. encircle the city. and cut off the westward route of withdrawal

of the Berlin grouping's main forces. The plans foresaw commitment of
75 percent of the aviation of the l6th and 2d air armies to support of
the tank armies. The main forces of the air army. totaling 2.653 air-
planes. were to support two combined arms and two tank armies on the
axis of the main strike of troops of the lat Belorussian Front. who were
to attack from a beachhead on the Oder River west of Kostrzyn; meanwhile
the northern and southern auxiliary groupings were to be supported from
the air by only one air division each.

The plan for combat use of the Zd Air Army foresaw four massed attacks
against the enemy on 16 April, the first day of the operation, by 800,
570, 520, and 370 airplanes, and small groups of airplanes representing
all aviation arms were to operate in the intervals between these
strikes.92

There were also unique features to the organization of the combat activ-
ities of the 6th Air Army. Because the 2d Belorussian Pront's artillery
was located on the east bank of the Oder, aviation was given the mission
of suppressing and destroying objectives deep in the enemy defenses; this
mission was to be conducted mainly by ground attack airplanes, since the
6th Air Army's bomber group was not strong enough. The plan called for
more than 6,000 sorties during the first day of the offensive.

The 18th Air Army also prepared carefully for the operation; just prior
to the offensive. at night, it was to make the first massed strike
against the principal strongpoints in the second line of defense on the
axis of the main strike by troops of the lat Belorussian Front. and then
it was to make another series of powerful air strikes in the course of

the offensive.

Jointly with the frontal command, the Soviet Army Air Force commander
devoted a great deal of attention to organizing interaction between avia-
tion and the troops. The commanders and staffs of the air armies were
ordered to thoroughly work out the plans of interaction with each rank
and combined arms army. During the preparations the air army and the

air formation commanders gave reports several times, and corrections and
amendments were made. The attention of the commanders was turned to the

184

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possibility of strong opposition by the enemy in the air. It was known
that the enemy nir grouping supporting Army Group Vistula and, in part,
Army Group Center included formations of the 6th Air Fleet and the Reich
Air Fleet, the latter consisting mainly of air defense aviation in the
Berlin zone. At Berlin's airfielda the Germans also had He-262 jet air-
planes and (Mistel') cruise missiles.93

Enemy troops were covered by about 200 aatiaircraft batteries, and 600
antiaircraft guns were concentrated specifically for defense of Berlin.94

The imminent end of the war, which all flight crews sensed, and our over-
all considerable air superiority might have engendered laxity and self-
assurance. This is why all personnel had to attend briefings mobilizing
them for outstanding completion of their missions. Political workers of
the air armies and the party and Romsomol organizations completed this
task with great success. They made every pilot. navigator, radio
operator, technician, engineer, and rear and staff officer aware of the
great tasks that were to be completed in the forthcoming battle with an
enemy that was still strong, resisting in a frenzy of desperation, an
enemy who had brought so many tears and so much pain to the Soviet people
and peoples of oppressed countries.

0n the night of 16 April A. A. Novikov went to the observation post of
the 8th Guards Army, the location of the frontal cot-land, which was
headed by Marshal of the Soviet Union G. K. Zhukov and Military Council
member General K. P. Telegin, and of the command of this army, headed by
General V. l. Ghuykov.

On 16 April at 1300 hours (Berlin time) powerful artillery preparation of
unprecedented force began. Thousands of explosions from gun and mortar
shells shook the air. The light from the firing guns produced the
appearance of daytime. More than 150 night bombers of the 16th and 6th
air armies began to bomb headquarters and communication centers on the
enemy's first and second lines of defense almost simultaneously. Before
the attack by infantry and tank was started, 160 antiaircraft search-
lights were turned on in response to a single signal in the sector of the
main strike grouping of the lat Belorussian Front. blinding the enemy with
the light. Artillery moved its fire to the second line of defense. The
troops rushed into the attack. Before this, 756 heavy night bombers of
the 18th Air Army made a powerful massed strike against the principal
strongpoints at the second line of defense. This was an unforgettable
picture. A sea of fire raged above the Oder Valley and the (Zeyelov)
hills. The artillery cannonade, the roar of the airplanes, the explo-
sions of heavy caliber bombs, the grinding of the tracks of advancing
tanks, anu automatic weapon fire rolled along the entire Oder. At dawn
the 16th Air Army was committed to the engagement. A low morning fog
necessitated corrections in its battle plan. Between dawn and 0800 hours
only ground attack airplanes operated in groups of six to nine airplanes;
Pe-Z dive bombers began their strikes against enemy objectives after

185

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0800 hours. But the main forces of the 16th Air Away were used only in
the second half of the day. after Marshal of the Soviet Union 6. K. Zhukov
decided to commit the lat and 2d Guards tank armies to the engagement.

At 1500 hours there were 6‘7 warplanes in the air. This was a strong
air screen for the tank armies. dependably covering them fron the air
and effectively suppressing enemy artillery fire. At the same tine

eneny aviation became extremely active. The enemy tried to penetrate

to the combat formations of our advancing tank armies in groups of 20-60
craft. Savage air battles began, lasting until the end of the day.
Fighters of the 16th Air Army operated decisively along the entire front,
both above the battlefield and at the approaches to it. in most cases
the air battles were fought at the approaches to our troops. This was
possible due to an excellently operating net of radar stations, which
promptly detected enemy aviation and provided the data permitting the
naneuver of fighter aviation and augmentation of its efforts on the most
threatened area.

On this day our aviation concentrated its efforts on suppressing enemy
defenses on the Zeyelov hills and on supporting the tank arnies; two-
thirds of all sorties were flown with this mission.

in the first day of the operation the 16th Air Army flew 5.300 combat
sorties. including 3,200 against enemy artillery batteries, tank group-
ings, and pockets of resistance. Concentration of the main forces within
the zones of advance of thr 5th Strike. 2d Guards Tank. 8th Guards, and
lat Guards Tank armies, operating on the main axis, was typical of its
actions. In all, eight air corps and seven separate air divisions were
operating within the zones of advance of these armies. During the day
General 8. I. Rudenko's pilots fought lSl air battles and knocked down
131 enemy airplanes. Our losses were also high-87 airplanes.95

The offensive developed successfully on the 1st Ukrainian Front. By the
end of 16 April Marshal of the Soviet Union I. s. Konev's troops had
penetrated the first line of defense rather quickly with air support and
began fighting the second. The water obstacle afforded by the Niesse
did not help the Germans either. By 1000 hours the river was crossed
along the entire front of advance.

Under the command of General S. A. Krasovakiy. on the first day the 2d
Air Army supported the main grouping of the lat Ukrainian Front as it
penetrated the defenses and crossed the Niesse River. In the interests
of the advancing troops and with the support of 250 fighters, 418 bombers
and ground attack aircraft annihilated the principal strongpoints and
fire positions on the first line of defense for more than 2 hours in

a row, making a very effective concentrated strike against objectives

in the vicinity of Forst. Later. groups of 6-12 ground attack airplanes
continually struck enemy artillery, troops. and strongpoints right before
the front of the combined arms formations of the ground troops, escorting
them in the course of the offensive. Concurrently troops and defensive

186

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structures in the vicinity of Cottbus and Spremberg were destroyed by
several concentrated bomber strikes. Supporting frontal troops, during
the day the 2d Air Arny flew 3.566 combat sorties. to include 2,380 on
the axis of the main strike. On that day 33 air battles were fought and
40 fascist German airplanes were knocked down. A. A. Novikov gave a high
assessment to the actions of the 2d Air Army. Units of the I and II
Guards Ground Attack Air Corps (commanders, Generals V. G. Ryazanov end
S. V. Slyusarev) fought especially well. with their powerful strikes
they forced the enemy guns to remain silent before the advancing troops.
and thus they helped the troops capture enemy defenses on the first line.

In all during the first day the Soviet Air Force flew more than 10.500
combat sorties in behalf of troops of the 1st Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian
fronts. 0n the night of 17 April the main forces of the 18th Air Army
continued to bomb eneuy objectives on the Zeyelov Hills. It flew 7S9
aorties and dropped 931 tons of bombs.96 Later during the operation the
18th Air Army made several massed night attacks closely coordinated with
actions of the tank armies of the let Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian
fronts. It made its third attack on the night of 18 April with 214 air-
planes against reserves snd strongpoints northeast and east of Berlin;
the fourth attack was made on the night of 21 April with 529 bombers
against troops and objectives in Berlin; the fifth attack was made on the
night of 25 April against Berlin's strongpoints by 111 airplanes, and the
sixth attack was made on the night of 26 April with 563 airplanes.97 On
17 April the supreme high commander ordered I. S. Konev, commander of

the 1st Ukrainian Front. to turn the 3d and 4th Guards tank armies north-
west so that they could strike Berlin from the south. These directives
were implemented.

The Headquarters ordered the 2d Belorussian Front to go over to the
offensive on 20 April and to make a thrust toward Schonebeck with its

main forces not later than 22 April. bypassing Berlin on the north.98

After brief artillery preparation, on the morning of 18 April troops of
the 1st Belorussian Front resumed their offensive, and by 19 April they
finally broke through the third zone of the Oder line of defense; then
by the end of 21 April they penetrated enemy defenses throughout their
entire depth, to Berlin inclusively.

The frontal air armies actively supported the advancing troops in all
days of the operation through powerful strikes by day bombers and con-
stant actions by ground attack airplanes. Because interaction of air
corps and separate air divisions with tank and combined arms armies was
clearly organized beforehand and because operational groups from the air
armies and air liaison officers from air formations were constantly
present in the tank and combined arms armies together with their own
communication resources, bombers and ground attack airplanes could be
launched promptly against enemy objectives, precisely at the times
specified by the combined arms commanders. As an example on 18 April

187

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dive bombers of the 16th Air Aray dispensed with approaching Ger-an
reserves quite effectively in the vicinity of (Bidsdorf) and Muncheberg.
The lat Belorussian Front's 16th Air Arny provided air support to troops
penetrating through the Oder line of defense between 16 and 19 April. and
it firmly maintained sir superiority. In 6 days of the operation it flew
16.880 combat sorties.

The lot Ukrainian Front's 2:! Air Army flew 7,517 sorties between

16 and 18 April in support of troops penetrating the line of defense
along the Niasse River. Just on 17 April alone this army's pilots
knocked down 108 one-y airplanes in air battles. Pilots of the VI Guards
Plghter Corps (cos-under. General A. V. Utin), who provided cover to
General D. D. Lelyushenko's 6th Guards Tank Arny. fought especially well
in air battles. On 17 and 18 April they fought in 50 air battles and
destroyed 56 fascist German airplanes. In the next period of the offen-
sive of the two fronts' troops. the 16th Air Arty flew 15,337 sortiss
between 20 and 2) April. the 2d Air Arny flew 10.285 combat sorties
between 19 and 25 April. and between 20 and 25 April the loth Air Army
flew more than 15,000 sorties in support of the front‘s troops, covering
then from the air and conducting air reconnaissance.99 Pilots of the
Polish Air Force fought closely with Soviet pilots. During the operation
they successfully completed 865 conbat sorties and knocked down 17 fascist
Ger-an airplanes in air battles.1°°

At the beginning of the assault on the central districts of Berlin, avia-
tion switched to actions disposed in depth, flying as small groups of
airplanes. Soviet fighters blockaded encircled Berlin from the air and
dependably covered friendly troops. Tank formations of the let Belo-
russian Front captured several enemy airfields, to which fighters of the
16th Air Array immediately redeployed. On 28 April the 367th Fighter Air
Regiment, 193d Fighter Air Division redeployed to the Tenpelhof Airport.
Fighting was still going on around the airport. Lieutenant Colonel P. B.
Dankevich. the regiment commander, was the first to arrive at the airport
with his subordinates. Descending to ground-level flight, the command
pair of airplanes landed at the airport. Soviet gunners suppressed the
eneny's antiaircraft artillery and mortar fire, permitting the rest of
the airplanes to land. 0n the some day the 515th and 518th fighter air
regiments of the sane division began combat operations from Berlin's
Schonefeld Airport. On 24 April troops of the 1st Belorussian and let
Ukrainian fronts completed encirclenent of the enemy's Prankfurt-Guben
grouping southeast of Berlin, and on 25 April in interaction with troops
of the 2d Belorussian Front they encircled the enemy’s Berlin grouping.
Aviation assisted in this highly important mission. and its actions
against eneay colums and crossings created bottlenecks on the roads.
hindering the westward movement of the encircled Frankfurt-Guben group-
ing. On 25 April troops of the 5th Guards Arty net forward units of the
Anerican lst Army in the vicinity of Torgau on the Elbe River. As a
result the front of the fascist German troops west of Berlin was cut

into northern and southern parts.

188

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

u:

between 26 April and 1 May the efforts of the air force were aimed at
helping the troops to annihilate the Frankfurt-Guben and Berlin group-
ings. The encircled Frankfurt-Guben grouping had a strength of up to
200,000 men. Three combined arms armies (3d, 69th, and 33d) of the lat
Belorussian Front and two combined arms armies (2d and 3d Guards) of the
lat Ukrainian Front, and about 1,000 airplanes of the 16th and 2d air
armies participated in its liquidation.

Forces of the 2d and 16th air armies flew 7,246 sortiss to annihilate
this grouping in the interests of the fronts. Constant observation of
tho surrounded enemy from the air permitted the frontal command to rein-
force weak points on the inner front of encirclement in time, and to
perform concentrated attacks with our bombers and ground attack aircraft.
Fighters were called in to destroy the encircled grouping. Aviation
played a great role in support of troops operating on the outer front

of encirclement. Ground attack aviation actively opposed the advance

of the German 12th Army, which was attempting to join the Frankfurt-Cuban
grouping from the west. The enemy's attempts at penetrating out of the
encirclement suffered failure. The last group of Germans was liquidated
on 1 May in the vicinity of (Belitss).

The encircled Berlin grouping consisted of the remnants of six divisions
of the German 9th Army and a large number of special formations with an
overall strength of 200,000 men. 01 The assault on Berlin began with
massed strikes by bomber aviation of the 16th, 2d, and 18th air armies,
after which, on 26 April, the frontal troops began their offensive from
all directions toward the center of the city. Some 13,000 sorties were
flown through the combined efforts of the air armies. Fighter aviation,
which not only provided cover to the ground troops against the airborne
enemy but also successfully blockaded the city from the air, played an
important role in the annihilation of the Berlin grouping. In the battles
for the city, aviation suppressed and annihilated gun positions concealed
in masonry buildings.

During the Berlin operation the air armies of the three fronts and the
18th Air Army flew more than 91,000 combat sorties, to include 39,559

in support of the lat Belorussian Front, 25,090 in support of the let
Ukrainian Front, and 26,335 in support of the 2d Belorussian Front. The
16th Air Army flew 59 percent of all combat sorties in the operation with
the specific purpose of striking enemy troops and equipment on the battle-
field and at strategic depth. The second most important mission, which
required concentration of the efforts of the air force in the concluding
stage of the war, was maintenance of air superiority and dependable pro-
tection of the troops against air strikes. During the time of the Berlin
operation our aviation fought 1,317 air battles, knocked down 1,132 enemy
airplanes, and destroyed 100 at airfields.102 Our aviation's victory was
not an easy one. it lost 527 airplanes in air battles and due to anti-
aircraft artillery fire.103 It is obvious from this that the actions of
aviation were quite intense. Soviet aviation had the total initiative

189

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100020036-9

a
SOVIET HRH? 81R FORCE COHHRND 8ND STBFF
27 FEW 1979 IN THE ORERT PHTRIOTIC HRR 1941-1945 3 OF 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the air. and it dapendabiy covered the troops and rear objectives of
the three i’ronts. Interacting closely with the ground troops. the air
force helped them to conclusively destroy the armed forces of fascist
Germany in the battle of Berlin.

"The war culminated with the great Berlin engagement," said L. l. Brezhnev
at a solem meeting dedicated to the 20th anniversary of the Soviet peo-
ple‘s victory in the Great Patriotic Var. "Ii ring of fire literally
strangled whnt remained of the once powerful army of the Third Reich.

The Germans resisted with the desperation of madmen. But the enemy was
crushed and annihilated.... The Soviet flag, the red banner of victory,
was planted above the lair of fascism."1°'3

Early in the morning on 1 May the Banner of Victory was unfurled above
the Reichstag. 0n 1 May pilots of the 2d Air Army made an unusual flight
oVer Berlin. On order of the command the Guards fighter pilots prepared
two red cloths. One of them bore the inscription "Victory" on one side
and "Glory to Soviet Soldiers Who had Hoisted the Banner of Victory Above
lierlin." and the other road "Long Live 1 Hey." During the day. escorted
by l6 fighters comanded by twice-awarded Hero of the Soviet Union Colonel
A. V. Voroaheykin and flown by llerces of the Soviet Union V. N. Buyanov.
l. P. Laveykin, P. l. Peskov. and other famous pilots, the valorous pilots
Guards Captain V. K. Novoselov and Major N. A. Halinovsltiy appeared over
the Reichstag and dropped the red cloths by parachute. These cloths.
which could be seen at a great distance from the ground, in a sense
heralded the total victory of the Soviet Armed forces on the ground. at
sea. and in the air. By the end of 2 May Berlin was completely occupied
by Soviet troops. The troops of the 2d Belorussian Front struck Rostok.
destroyed the German 3d Tank Army. reached the coast of the Baltic Sea,
and came into contact with the English 2d Army on the line Vismar,
Schwerin, Elbe River. 0n B May 19105 the document of unconditional sur-
render of fascist Germany was signed in the Berlin suburb of Karlshorst.
The fall of Berlin and the subsequent unconditional surrender of fascist
Germany were the most important results of the Berlin operation.

Soviet aviation once again demonstrated its invincibilitv in the Berlin
operation. The flight crews passed their examination of combat aaturity
brilliantly. and the Soviet Army Air Force Comm-.d, the eomnanders of
the air armies. and the col-sanders of the formations and units demon-
strated their ability for organizing and controlling aviation in cowlex
conditions.

The Commist Party and Soviet Government gave a high assessmnt to the
combat activities of personnel in the air armies. ‘i'he honorary Berlin
and Brandenburg titles were awarded to 65 air units and formations.
Thousands of pilots. navigators. aerial gunners. technicians, political
workers. staff officers. and rear workers received orders and medals.
Thou- who distinguished theuelves in battle the most were awarded the
lofty Hero of the Soviet Union title. Major 1. N. Kozhedub, a participant

190

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hi the herlln npvrulloﬂ. was awarded his third Gold Star or the hero of
the Soviet Union.

Order No 359 or the Supreme high Commander dated 2 May 1945 calcerning

the final destruction of the Berlin grouping and capture of Germany's
capital. Berlin. by troops of the let Belorussian and 1st Ukrainian

fronts made mention of "...pilota Chief Marshal of Aviation A. A. Novikev,
Chief Marshal of Aviation A. Ye. Golovanov. Generals s. I. Rudenko. S. A.
Krasovskiy. Ye. Ya. Sevitakiy. Ye. M. Beletskiy. G. N. Tupikov. Ye. F.
Loginov. G. S. Schatchiksv. V. Ye. Nestertsev. V. G. Ryazanov, A. V. Utin.
B. K. Tokarov. I. V. Krupskiy. A. z. Karavatskiy. I. P. Skok. B. A. Sidnev.
l. M. Dzusov. S. V. Slyusarev. V. H. Zabaluyav. P. P. Arkhangel'skiy. and
c. l. Komarov. and Colonels V. l. Stalin. D. T. Nikishin. A. l. Pokryshkin.
and V. i. Aleksandrovieh."1°s

In the concluding stage of the war against fascist Germany the Soviet Air
Force provided invaluable assistance to the ground troops in the destruc-
tion and capture of major enemy groupings during the liberation of Poland.
Czechoslovakia. ﬂungary. the eastern part of Germany. and a significant
part of Austria. in the concluding operations of l94b-l9bs the Soviet
Air Force flew 1.570.000 combat sorties. dropped 18,332,000 bombs on the
enemy. and inflicted significant losses in manpower and equipment. In
the air and at airfielda. Soviet aviation and antiaircraft artillery
annihilated more than 21.000 enemy airplanes.106 The Supreme high Com-
mand attached extremely important significance to the actions of Soviet
aviation. concentrating its major groupings on the axes of the main
strikes of the ground troops. This was achieved by calling air reserves
of the Supreme High Command in and combining the efforts of aviation in
several neighboring fronts under the sole leadership of the senior air
chief. The fascist German army groups North. Center, Northern Ukraine,
and Southern Ukraine were destroyed in 1954 with the most active support
from Soviet pilots. The enemy's strategic groupings operating on the
Soviet-German front in the offensive operations of 1965 were subjected to
even harder air strikes. During the operations the Soviet Air Force
firmly held the strategic initiative in the air. possessed greet striking
power and tremendous reserves. and surpassed the enemy in its ability to
maneuver major formations and formations and to control them. and in the
skill and moral qualities of the personnel. The victories on the fronts
of the var raised the sense of pride of the soldiers in their great
fatherland. strengthened their faith in the poser of our combat equip-
ment, and inspired them to new acts of heroism. Steadfastnesa. bravery.
and love for the motherland were nurtured in battles and engagements.

The command. political agencies. and party and Komsomol organizations
continually heightened the level of their party-political work. tempered
the fighting spirit of the airmen. infused them with a deep faith in s
victorious outcome to the war. and inspired devotion to the socialist
motherland and intolerance of the enemy. in the third period of the
Great Patriotic war against fascist Germany the Soviet Air Force success-
fully completed all of its assigned missions in close interaction with
other branches of the armed forces.

191

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The war in Europe cane to an end. 9 May became Victory Day. The peoples
of Europe were given the opportunity for peaceful deaocratic development.
The victorious conclusion of the war in Europe created the necessary
conditions for quick defeat of iaperialist Japan and for the end of

World War II.

1.

2.

8.
9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

1b.

FOOTNOTES
"Velikaya Otechestvennaya voyna Sovstskogo Soyuza 1961-1965 gg.
Kratkaya iatoriya" (The Great Patriotic Her of the Soviet Union
1961-1955. A Short History), Moscow, 1970, p 318.

Arkhiv MD SSSR [USSR Ministry of Defense Archives], f. 35, op. 11282,
d. 262, l. 35; d. 502. 11. 165-167.

Ibid., op. 11321, d. 93, 1. 39.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 11250, d. 101, 1. 1; op. 73889, d. 1, 1. 1.
lbid., d. 91, 11. 7-186; f. 92, op. 78122, d. 7, 11. 4-66.

Arkhiv HO SSSR, f. 35, op. 11284, d. 1169, 11. 57-102.

Ibid., op. 11250, d. 100, 11. 128, 182; d. 91, 1. 195.

lbid., op. 11285, d. 956, 11. 30-31.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 35, op. 11285, d. 95‘, 11. 33-37.

Ibid., op. 11275, d. 1221, 11. 1-8.

By decision of the 6K0. on 20 October 1963 the naaes of the fronts
were changed as follows: Central changed to Belorussian, Kalinin
changed to 1st Baltic, Baltic changed to 2d Baltic, Voronarh changed

to 1st Ukrainian, Steppe changed to 2d Ukrainian, Southwestern
changed to 3d Ukrainian, and Southern changed to 6th Ukrainian.

The numbers of the air armies within the couposition of these fronts
re-ained an before.

"Aviatsiya i kosnonavtika SSSR" (USSR Aviation and Cosmonautics).
Hoecow, 1968, p 177.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 302, op. 6196, d. 63, 1. 58.

"Istoriya Volikoy Otecheatvennoy voyny Sovetskogo Soyusa 1941-1965
gg." (History of the Great Patriotic "er of the Soviet Union 1961-
1965), Vol 6, p 66.

192

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
15'

10.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

26.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

31.
32.
33.
3b.

"Vollknya Otocheotvonnnya voyna Sovetokogo Soyuza 19bl-1965 33.
Kratkoyn tutorlyn," p 330.

"Avlntalyn l kosnonavtlko SSSR." p 180.

"Vellknyu Otcchcstvennnyn voynn Sovetskogo Soyuzn 19b1-1965 gs.
Krntkaya lstorlya," p 3&1.

"Aviatolya 1 koononavclka SSSR," pp 185. 186.

"Vollkayn Otocheotvennoya voyna Sovotokogo Soyuza 1961-1965 33.."
p 343.

"Iatoriyo Vellkoy OtechQOCVanoy voyny Sovetokogo Soyuzn 1941-1945
3g.," Vol 6, p 125.

Shtennnko. S. H., "General'nyy shrub v gody voyny" (The General
Staff in the Hot Years), Moscow, 1968, p 239.

"Sovetsklye Voyonno-Vozduohnyye Slly v Vellkoy Otecheotvennoy voyne
1941-1965 33." (The Sovlec Air Force in the Great Patriotic War
1941-1965). Moscow. 1968. p 291.

Ibld.
Arkhlv no sssn. f. 35, op. 11285. d. 951., 11.‘ 55-64.
"lb-ya vozduohnnyn arnlya" (The 16th Air Army). pp 141, 162.

Arkhlv H0 SSSR. f. 368. op. 162206. 6. 69. l. 9; op. 20551. d. 213.
l. 11.

Ibid.. f. 290, op. 162208. d. 55. 11. 13-17.

Zhukov. c. K., "Voopoulnonlya 1 razuyohlenlya" (Recollections and
Reflections). Vol 2, Moscow, 1974, p 252.

Arkhlv H0 SSSR. f. 39, op. 11519. d. 1080, 1. 7.

Arkhlv ND SSSR. f. 290. op. 12953, d. 17, l. 503; f. 319. op. 16296,
d. 22, 1. b6.

[b1d., f. 290, op. 142208. d. ‘6. 1. 33.

lbld.

Arkhiv no sssn. f. 290, op. 12943. d. a, 11. 226, 251, 283.
1b1d.. r. 35, op. 283368. a. 6. 1. 58.

193

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

35. Arkhtv H) SSSR, f. 368, op. 15054, d. 11, 1. 581.

36. VOYBNNO-ISTORIMESKIY ZHURNAL, “0 2, 1971, p 26.

37. Arkhiv l0 SSSR, f. 368, op. 162296, d. 1.9, 1. 1.1.

38. Zhukov, c. K., "Volponlnoniyo 1 rozuyohleniya," Vol 2, p 256.
39. Arkhlv FD SSSR, f. 368, op. 162206, (I. 29, 11. 1-69.

60. Arkhlv no sssa. s. 35. op. 11250. d. 124. 11. 60-61.

61. Arkhlv PO 83811, f. 368, op. 162206, (I. ’09, 11. “-50; f. 319, op.
152196, (1. J1, 11. 85-100.

42. Arkhtv m SSSR, f. 319, op. 152196, (I. 22, 1. 160; f. 368, op.
162206, (I. 69, 1. 66.

63. Arkhiv no 5881!, f. 363, op. 16708, d. 6, 1. 258.
M. "Aviatotyn 1 koo-onovuko 8853," p 192.

55. Arkhlv 10 SSSR, f. 216, op. 392279, d. 10, 11. 2“, 294.
’06. Arkhlv m SSSR, f. 35, op. 11250, d. 126, 1. 36.
’07. 16M” 1. 6.

68. "Avutalyo 1 koalomvuko 588).," p 200.

59. lbld., p 203.

50. Arkhiv DD 8551!, f. 35, op. 11275, d. 93. 1. 22.
51. "Aviataiya 1 koa-onovuka SSSR," p 163.

52. 1514.. p 204.

53. VOYBNNO-ISTORICIIBSKIY mum, No 11, 1975, p ’02.
$6. VOYENNO-IS'IORICRBSKIY ZHURNAL. No 11, 1975, p ’03.
55. VOYENNO-ISTORICIIBSKIY ZIIURNM... No 7, 1975, p 710.

36. "Veuluya Otecheotvennoya voyno Sovotokogo Soyuu 1941-1965 as.
Krotluyo iatorlyo," p 579.

57. Arkhiv no SSSR, f. 35, op. 11250, d. 68, 11. 3-6.

1910

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
58.
59.
60.

61.

62.
63.
66.
65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

76.

75.
76.

77.

78.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Arkhiv no sssa, s. as. op. 11285, a. 751., 11. 1-2.
1111., 1. 117.

"Volikaya Otecheatvcnnaya voyna Sovecakogo Soyuzn 1961-1965 33.
Kratkaya iatoriya," p 659.

The 6th Air Fleet possessed 1,050 warplanes. of which about 65 per-
cent were flying missions in Eastern Prussia.

Arkhiv N0 SSSR, f. 368, op. 6676, d. 557, 1. 269.
"lb-ya vozduahnayn arniya." pp 265-266.
Arkhiv H0 SSSR, f. 368. op. 6676, d. 557, 1. 265.

"Sovetskiyc Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechestvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.," p 367.

Ibid., p 370.

"16-yn vozdnshnaya orniya." p 269.

1b1d.. p 27c.

"16-yn vozdushnaya arliya." p 276.

"Aviataiya i kosnonavtika SSSR," p 209.
"Avintaiya i koauonnvtika SSSR," pp 209, 210.

"Sovetakiye Voycnno-Vozdulhnyyo Sily v Vclikoy Otecheotvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.," pp 386-387.

"Velikayn Otcchestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1965 33.
Krntkaya istoriya." p 671.

"Sovctakiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheatvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.." p 350.

Ibld.. p 350.

"Sovetokiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otechostvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.." p 353.

Ibid.

Ibld.. pp 355. 356.

195

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
79.

81.
82.

83.

85.

86.

87.

89.
90.

91.

92.
93.
96.
95.
96.
97.
98.

Vooilovekiy. A. 11.. "Dole vooy zhizni" (The Business of All Our
Lives). Moscow. 1973. p 687.

“9 uyo 1965 god." (9 May 1965), Moscow. 1970. p 276.
Arkhiv to 388k. f. 261, op. 2593. d. 988. 11. 202-207.

VOYBNNo-IS'I'ORICHESKIY ZIIURNAL. NO 9. 1968. p 73; "9 nay. 1995 soda."
P 2770

"9 my. 1965 gods," p 288.

"9 my. 1965 gods," p 292.

"Aviatoiyn i kouonavtika 5551!," p 163; "Sovotokiyo Voyenno-
Vozduohnyyc Sily v Volikoy Otochootvonnoy voyne 1961-1965 as. ."
p 366.

"Velikayo Otecheotvennoya voyno Sovotokogo Soyuz. 1961-1965 33.
Kntlmyo iatoriya." p 691.

"Sovetokiye Voyenno-Vozduohnyyo Sily v Volikoy Otochestvennoy voyoo
1961-1965 as. ," p 388.

"Oovoboditel'naya niuiyo Soveukikh Vooruzhennykh Si]. vo vtoroy'
nirovoy voyno" (The Minion of Liberation of. the Soviet Anod Forces
in World Hu- II), Hoocov, 1976. p 368.

man pp 366-367.

"16-ya vozduohnaya orliyo." p 322.

"Sovotokiye Voyonno-Vozduohnyyo Sily v Velikoy Otecheowonnoy voyno
1961-1965 33.," p 389.

"9 says 1965 soda," 9 297.

"9 says 1965 soda." 9 299.

Arkhiv K) SSSR, f. 368. op. 21863, d. 13. 1. 2.

“9 may. 1965 soda." p 311.

“9 My. 1965 soda." p 311.

“Aviotoiyo i koo-onnvtilu SSSR." p 217.

“Oovoboditel'nnya niuiyn Sovocokikh Vooruzhennykh Sil vo vtoroy

nirovoy voyne." p 313.

196

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
99.
100.

101.

102.

103.

106.

105.

106.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISTORIYA SSSR, No 3, 1975. p 63.
"lo-ya vozduuhnnye orniyo." p 381.

"Oevoboditel'naya mieeiye Sovetekikh Vooruzhennykh Sil vo vtoroy
nirpvoy voyne," p 380.

"SoQotekiye Voyenno-Vozduehnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1961-1965 33.," p 512.

"Ietoriye Velikoy Otecheotvonnoy voyny Sovetekogo Soyuze 1941-1965
33.." Vol 5. p 290.

Brezhnev, L. 1., "Leninekil kureOI. Rechi 1 etet'y“ (Following
Lenin's Course. Speeches and Articles), Vol 1, Moscow, 1970,
p 127.

"Prikazy Verkhovnogo Clevnokonenduyuehchego v period Velikoy
Otocheetvennoy voyny Sovetekogo Soyuza" (Orders of the Supreme
High Commander in the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet Union).
Moscow. 1975, pp 494-696.

"Sovetakiye Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1941-1965 33.," p 415.

197

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHAPTER Vii. IN THE FAR EAST
The Situation in Summer 1945

Pence set in following surrender of fascist Germany in Europe. But in the
Far East Uorld War Ii was sti11 going on. Rejecting the surrender ultima-
tum of the USA, England. and China on 29 July 1965, imperialist Japan
continued its military actions, counting on evading a total defeat and
achieving an advantageous conpronise peace. The Soviet Union could not
rennin indifferent to military events occurring near its Far Eastern
borders. For many decades Japanese imperialism was a constant source of
aggression in Asia. it was an ally of Hitler's Germany. and it was the
arch enemy of our motherland. In 1940 the government of Japan signed

the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy; this pact was aimed directly
against the USSR. Japanese iaperialists concentrated their large Kwang-
tung Army in Hanchuria. and for 3 years they waited for the assent for
attack. And it was only the heroic struggle of the Soviet people and
their arned forces against the fascist invaders and their aajo: victories
in the battles of Hoscow. Stalingrad, and Kursk that cooled the ailitary
fervor of the Japanese militarists and kept them from attacking our
motherland. Nevertheless during these times of difficulties for the USSR
the Kwangtung Aray contained sore than 40 Soviet ground divisions and
major air and naval forces in the Far East, forces so nuch needed by the
Soviet Armed Forces, in the war against fascist Germany.

Faithful to its duty to the Allies, in compliance with decisions nade in
February 1945 at the Yalra Conference, on 5 April the Soviet Union
denounced its treaty of neutrality with Japan. This was a serious warn-
ing to Japan, but it did not heed it. its rulers, who possessed a ground
nrny almost 5 millior strong and Isjor air forces and naval forces,
counted on protracting the war, splitting the antifascist alliance by
diplomatic tricks, avoiding total defeat, and achieving an advantageous
cospronise treaty.

"He had nothing left to do," writes ArIy General 3. H. Shtemenko in his
aemoirs, "but to activate our preparations for satisfaction of obliga-
tions to the Allies."1

198

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIALFUSB ONLY

The armed forces in the Far East. including the air force. began major
preparations. A plan for regrouping air formations from the west to the
Far East was written in April by the co—snd and staff of the air force
in response to a directive of the General Staff. The following ferns-
tlons were airlifted: The V1 Bodaer Air Corps (co-sander. General I. P.
Skok) consisting of the 326th and 334th bomber air divisions; the VII
Uonber Air Corps (eeamander. General V. A. Ushakov) consisting of the
113th and 179th bomber air divisions; the 190th Separate Fighter Air
Division. without its airplanes (conmander. Colonel V. V. Fokin); the
55th Transport and 21st Guards Transport air divisions (col-anders.
Generals V. A. Shchelkin and I. M. Gorskiy). The Soviet Army Air Force
commander published his directives ordering the regrouping of air forma-
tions from the west to the Far East on 2‘ June 1965. Groups of spe-
cialized officers were appointed from the Air Force Headouarters and air
force directorates to nonitor the airlift operations an: provide assistance
to the air formations. The Soviet Army Air Force Headquarters managed the
transfer of the air formations. Twice a day the headquarters' First
Directorate reported to the Air Force Military Council and submitted
reports to the General Staff. In the period between 25 June and 10 July
1945 the command and staff of the air force implenented measures to man
new air units and formations for air araies in the Far East and to pro-
vide new airplanes to then. At the end of June 1965 the Headquarters of
the Supreme high Conand sent its liaison officer. Marshal of the Soviet
Union A. M. Vasilevskiy. and Soviet Army Air Force Coamander Chief Marshal
of Aviation A. A. Novikov to the Far East. On 30 July 1955 the Hq She
decided to create a special supreme organ of command and control in the
Far £sst--the nain command of Soviet troops in the Far East.2 Marshal of
the Soviet Union A. M. Vasilevskiy was appointed commander in chief.
General I. V. Shikin was appointed Military Council member, and General
S. P. Ivanov was appointed chief of staff. Coordination of the actions
of the Pacific Fleet and the Red Banner Amur Naval Flotilla with troops
of the fronts was assigned to Fleet Adairal N. G. Kuanetaov. while coor-
dination of the actions of all air power called in and interaction with
ground troOps and the navy were assigned to Chief Marshal of Aviation

A. A. Novikov. The field headquarters of the Soviet Arny Air Force co:-
nander was staffed by the following generals and officers from the con-
nand and staff of the air force--M. 3. Dagayev, B. V. Sterligov, V. N.
Uspenskiy, N. F. Andrianov, M. M. Kozhevnikov, P. F. Korotkov, I. l.
Zhdanov, P. A. Kolesnikov. L. I. Smirnov. and others. On 5 August 1955
the Ho suc changed the name of the Maritime Group of Forces to the lat

Far Eastern Front. and the name of the Far Eastern Front to the 2d Far
Eastern Front.3

The Japanese Cos-and maintained significant ground and air forces against
the Soviet Union on the territory of Manchuria and Korea. on Southern
Sakhalin. and on the Kuril Islands. The Kwangtung Army. which consisted
of the 1st (Eastern Manchurian) Front, the 3d (Hestern Manchurian) Front,
the 6th Separate Army, the 2d Air Army, and the Sungari River Msval
Flotilla, was located in Manchuria.“ As soon as military operations

199

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

began, the Jloth Army of the 17th (Korean) Front and the 5th Air Army were
added tomthe composition of the Kwnngtung Army. In all, the Kwangtung
Army possessed 26 infantry divisions, 8 infantry brigades, and 1 special-
purpose X ikaze) brigade, for a total of “3,000 enlisted men and offi-
cers, l,l' 5 tanks, 5,360 guns, 25 warships, and 1,800 airplanes.5 In
addition, the army of (Kan'chzhou-Go). the forces of Inner Mongolia, and
the (Suyyuan') Army Group (13 infantry and cavalry divisions. llo infantry
and cavalry brigades, and 4 separate cavalry regiments, with a strength
of 280,000 men) were subordinated to the wander in chief of the Kwang-
tung Army. Three infantry divisions, an infantry brigade, a separate
infantry regiment, and a separate tank regiment with a total strength of
100,000 men were deployed on Southern Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.
These troops were within the composition of the 5th Front, which was
subordinated directly to the Japanese Imperial Headquarters. In all,

the Soviet Armed Forces were opposed in the area of forthcoming combat
activities by troops of four fronts, one separate army of the Japanese
ground forces, one naval flotilla, and two air armies. Taking account

or the Han'chzhou-Co Army, the forces of Inner Hongolia, and the Suyyan‘
Army Group, the enemy troops had a strength of 871,000 men, 1,215 tanks,
6,700 guns and mortars, 25 ships, and 1,907 airplanes. Strategic
reserves (more than two field armies—six to eight divisions) were
deployed in the vicinity of Peking.6 Along the Soviet border the
Japanese nilitarists created a system of permanent fortifications 100 km
long, to include 17 fortified areas (8,000 pillboxes and other rein-5

' forced concrete structures). The Maritime-Manchurian operational axis,
which contained seven fortified areas, was covered the most strongly.
There were 20 air bases, 133 airfields, and over 200 landing strips in
Hanchuria and Korea capable of supporting up to 6,000 airplanes.7

The main forces of the Kwangtung Army were concentrated on the Manchurian
Plain. About one-third of the army troops were in fortified areas within
the frontier zone. The Japanese Command intended to halt Soviet troops
through counterstrikes by its main forces and force them to go over to
defense, after which it planned to conduct an extensive counteroffensive
with the objective of invading the Soviet Far East. Planning military
activities in the Far East, the headquarters of the Soviet Supreme High
Command conitted the forces of the Transbaykal, lst Far Eastern and 2d
Far Eastern fronts. the Pacific Naval Fleet, and the Amur River Naval
Flotilla to achieve the goals of the campaign. In order to reinforce
troops of the Far East, two frontal directorates and the 5th, 39th and
53d combined arms and the 6th Guards Tank armies were transferred by

rail from the west between 6 May and the start of July; this was a total
of 27 divisions, 12 brigades, a number of aegarate formations and special
units. and a great deal of combat equipment. By the beginning of mili-
tary activities the three fronts possessed 11 combined arms, one tank,
and three air armies; this includes the troop groupings contributed by
the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Army. Their total strength was 80
divisions (including six cavalry, two tank, and two motorized rifle),
four tank and mechanized corps, air rifle brigades, and 60 tank and

200

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aechanized brigades. The grouping had a strength of 1,578,000 non and
euro than 26,000 guns and nortare. The Pacific Naval Fleet possessed #27
warships. The Anur River Naval Flotilla possessed 83 ships. Three air
defense armies provided air cover to the troop concentrations. Soviet-
Mongolian troops were superior to eneny troops in personnel by a factor
of 2, in guns by a factor of b, in tanks and self-propelled guns by a
factor of lo, and in airplanes by a factor of 2.5.9’10 The Soviet Air
Force grouping in the Far East included the 12th Air Artsy of the Trans-
bayltal front (co-sanderuﬂarshal of Aviation 8. A. Khudyakov, deputy
conunder for political affairs--Geusral s. A. Pal'yanov, chief of staff--
General N. G. Seleznev), the 9th Air Any of the 1st Par Eastern Front
(coriander-General I. u. Sokolov, deputy co-ander for political affairs--
General P. N. Khorobrykh, chief of staff-Genere1 A. V. Stepanov), the
10th Air Arny of the 2d Par Eastern Front («meander—General P. P.
Zhigarev, deputy co-ander for political affairs-Colonel S. K. Pedorov,
chief of staff-General S. A. Lavrik), the XIX Bomber Air Corps of the
18th Air Arny (co-sander. General N. A. Volkov), and the air service of
the Pacific Naval Fleet (comnder, General P. H. Leaeshko).

Table 6. Coaposition of the Soviet Air Force in the Far East at the
Beginning of Combat Activities“

Air divisions

Ground Trans-
Boaber attack Fighter Mixed port Sepa-
air air air air air rate
Air divi- divi- divi- divi- divi- regi- Har-
m Air corps lions siona siona siona siona Total nents planes
9th 1 Bosber
air corps“ 3 2 3 - - 8 6 1,137
10th 1 Mixed
air corps 1 2 3 2 - 8 2 1,260
12th 2 Bomber
air corps 6 2 3 - 2 13 2 1,326
Total 10 6 9 2 2 29 8 3.721

 

*VOYENIIO-ISTORICIIESKIY ZRURNAL, No 8, 1975, p 66.

“The 19th ADD Bonber Air Corps was operationally subordinated to the 9th
Air Arley. Aviation of the Pacific Fleet had a strength of nore than 1,500
airplanes. "Velilzays Otechestvennaya voyna Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-1965 gg.
Kratkaya istoriya" (The Great Patriotic Var of the Soviet Union 1961-1945.
A Short history), p 5“.

Preparations for Conbat Activity in the Far East

Planning the Far Eastern caspaign, the liq SEC assigned the following ais-
sions to arsed forces in the Far East: Destroy the Kwangtung Arty, vhich
was the Iain strike force of iaperialist Japan, force the Japanese

201

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Government to surrender. and thus eliminate the center of aggression in
the Far East. The design of the Soviet Conmand was as follows: The
forces of"thrsa fronts were to break through the enemy's system of
fortified areas in several sectors; then. exploiting the offensive on
axes converging toward Harbin. Changchun. and Hukden. encircle the
eneny's main forces. separate them. and destroy them in parts. In
accordance with this design the Transbsykal Front was given the mission
of making the main strike with the forces of the 17th. 39th. and 53d com-
bined erms armies and the 6th Guards Tank Aray in the general direction
of Changchun. defeating the opposing enemy. crossing the Great Khingan
Range and. joining forces with the 1st Far Eastern Front, cutting off the
route of withdrawal of Japanese troops out of Hanchuria. The 36th Army
made a subsidiary attack toward Hailar. and a cavalry-mechanized group of
the Soviet-Mongolian forces made a subsidiary attack toward Kalgan-
Dolonnor. The mission of the let Far Eastern Front was to advance on
Kirin. Chungchun. and Harbin with forces of the 1st Red Banner. 5th, and
25th armies and the X Mechanized Corps. defeat opposing enemy troops.
joining forces with the Transbsykal Front. and encircle the Kwangtung
Army. Subsidiary attacks were made by the 35th Army toward Poli and by
the 25th Army toward Hahnsien. The mission of the 2d Far Eastern Front
was to advance on Harbin with the forces of the 15th Army and the V Rifle
Corps. attack Tsitsihar with part of its forces. and maintain defensive
positions along the Amur River. on Sakhalin. and on the coast of Tater
Strait.

The Pacific Fleet was to interdict the enemy's marine lines of communi-
cation. land assault landing parties. capture parts of North Korea in
interaction with troops of the 1st Far Eastern Front. and support
friendly marine lines of conmunication in the Sea of Japan and Tatar
Strait.

The air force in the Far East was given the following missions: Achieving
air superiority and dependably covering the main troops groupings of the
fronts against air strikes; preventing the enemy from maneuvering his
reserves by striking rsil facilities. trains. at aotor vehicle colunns;
assisting ground troops in their penetration of the system of fortified
areas. and in their exploitation of the offensive in depth; disturbing
troop command and control by actions against headquarters and communica-
tion centers; conducting air reconnaissance systematically.

The combat activities of the air srndes were planned as an air offensive.
with a consideration for the specific conditions in which the ground
troops were to execute their combat missions. Ninety-five percent of all
forces of the 12th Air Army were intended for support and cover of troops
of the Transbaykal Front advancing on the main axis. Two ground attack
air divisiona--the 258th and the 316th (commanders. Colonels l. B.
Savel'yev and A. A. Yerokhin)--and the 245th Fighter Air Division (coa-
mander, Colonel c. P. Pleshchenko) were given the sole mission of sup-
porting the 6th Guards Tank Army. which was in the first operational

202

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

echelon of the front's troops and which was to advance swiftly in the
direction of Changchun. The missions of formations of bombers in the
12th Air Army were to demoralize the enemy rear in the first days of the
operation. disrupt the lines of conunicetion. and is: ‘.ate the'area of
the engagement fron reserves.ll 'i‘wo bomber. two ground attack. and one
fighter divisions were assigned to actions against airfields in the first
day of the operationJ-2

in the 9th Air Army bomber and ground attack aviation directed their main
efforts at rating defensive structures and suppressing troops on the
battlefield. The plan celled for powerful air preparation taking the
fore of weed bomber strikes, and for continuous support and cover of
advancing troops penetrating the Mishan. Pogranisheskiy, Dunnin and
Dunsinchzhenskiy fortified areas.”

The efforts of the 10th Air Army were concentrated on supporting frontal
troops crossing the Amur River and advancing in the direction of the
Sungari.

The Soviet Army Air Force comnder and the generals and officers

accospanying him made a great deal of preparations in the air armies.
air formations. and units, and at the airfields. They were not only

interested in the progrens of preparations for battle, but they also took
an interest in the lives and personal affairs of the personnel and shared.
in talks with commanders and flight crews, the combat experience of our
aviation in the fight against the fascist German invaders.

Air formations permanently deployed in the Far East made their prepara-
tions for 3 nonths. while those arriving from the European territory had
from 15 to 30 days. In this time the air armies were replenished with
new airplanes, flight crews, and technicians, and they took steps to
ca-ouflage the airfields and control posts; this played an important
role in successful destruction of the Kwangtung Army.

Jointly with the headquarters of the fronts and the combined arms and
tank arnies and with the participation of the field headquarters of the
Soviet Army Air Force. the air army staff prepared detailed interaction
plans and uniform encoded maps, radio signals, procedure tables, and
troop and aviation interaction signals. Operational groups consisting
of air army staff officers and intended for assignment of targets to
aviation and its control on the battlefield. for coordination with the
combined arms col-and on problems concerning interaction during the
operation. and for provision of information to the air army consnder
and staff concerning the situation on the 530004 and in the air above
the army's disposition were assigned to tank and combined arms armies
that were to advance on the main axes. Air support controllers were
sent from air formations to rifle and tank divisions.

203

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Personnel arriving from the west intensively studied the theater of war
with maps and from the air; this theater was distinguished by highly
complex terrain and climate. and difficult orientation from the air. In
order to facilitate navigation at the fronts. with the help of the
ground troops the air armies created a network of checkpoint and identi-
fication signs along the state border and on large roads; use was also
made of numerous ground aids to navigation (radio direction finders,
light beacons, homing radio stations. and so on). which were moved to
forward airfields at the eve of combat activities.

The Soviet Army Air Force commander reinforced the air armies with air
engineering formations and units arriving from the west. Frontal troop
commanders provided a great deal of assistance to aviation by supplying
troop subunits and engineering equipment for construction of new air-
fields in the course of combat activities. To permit maneuvering of
uirfields. the air army commanders kept air engineering battalions in
reserve to provide airfield services behind the advancing troops: these
battalions were concentrated at the state border at tb~ beginning of
August. As a result of the hard work. units of the air force rear were
well prepared for this strategic operation. They created a 15-20 day
reserve of combat resources and materiel. and they prepared the required
airfield network. A. A. Novikuv and his assistants visited most of the
airfielda and personally checked the readiness of our air units and
formations. A. N. Vasilevskiy and S. P. lvanov always displayed concern
for the preparedness of the air armies.

At the eve of the operation the air armies underwent regrouping. Their
formations and units were redeployed to forward airfields. from which
they began their combat activities. To conceal the redeployment, the
airplanes were flown to their new airfields in small groups at low alti-
tude, with radio communication strictly limited. All airplanes were
dispersed and camouflaged at the new airfields. In addition to the
operating airfields. an extensive network of dummy airfields was created;
models of aviation equipment were set up at these sirfields. and combat
preparations of an air regiment were simulated. Air engineering forms-
tions and units and four motor transport battalions were allocated from
reserves to the 9th and 12th air armies.

Party-political work was active in the preparatory period. The command.
the political agencies. and the party and Komsomol organizations nurtured
a hatred of the Japanese invaders in the airmen, studied the combat
experiences of the Soviet Army at Lake Khasan and the Khslkhin-Gol River,

and they mobilized the personnel of the air units to make better prepa-
rations for combat activities.

Combat Activities of the Soviet Air force

The ground troops went over to the offensive on the night of 8-9 August
1965. To achieve surprise, artillery and air preparation were not

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conducted before the attack. The forward detachments of frontal troops
covertly penetrated enemy territory at night, bypassed and blockadsd the
most important defensive fortifications. and began battling the Japanese
garrisons. Many of the enemy's border fortifications were captured by
dawn on 9 August.

On that same night 76 crews of the XIX Heavy Bomber Corps struck the rail
stations of Harbin and Changchun aboard ll-b's. During the day of

9 August frontal aviation initiated combat activities against enemy troops
and equipment on the battlefield and in the enemy's areas of concentra-
tion. as well as against the rail stations and strongpoints of Hailar.
Solun. (Khayahuytan), (Uchagou), and (Khutou). shipping on the Sungsri
River, and enemy nirfislds at ﬂailsr and Solun.

Intense air reconnaissance vas conducted with the very first day of the
operation. It was conducted not only by reconnaissance units and sub-
units but also by up to 30 percent of the bomber and ground attack forces.
Air reconnaissance was conducted on the axes and in areas (zones) by
visual observation and photography. The intelligence data were immedi-
ately transmitted from the airplane by radio. permitting the Soviet Com-
mand to react quickly to all changes in the situation. Air reconnaissance
was intense because many objectives for which the Soviet Command had no
data in peacetime had to be revealed. Pilots of the 253d Ground Attack
Air Division (commander. Lieutenant Colonel K. T. Taedrik) operated
especirlly successfully on the first day. They attacked and sunk a
steamship. a barge, three sailboats. and three armored launches. Pilots
of the 254th Fighter Air Division (commander. Colonel N. A. Silayev).

who employed the "independent hunting" tactic, burned a ship in the
vicinity of (Sinchunzhin') and annihilated several boats carrying
Japanese soldiers.

Despite unfavorable meteorological conditions. the three air armies flew
about 2,000 combat sorties in the first day of combat activities.

"hen the main forces of the ground troops were committed to the engage-
ment. in addition to striking military objectives at industrial centers
at strategic depth. the air armies continued to operate at tactical
depth--over the battlefield and against fortified regions, centers of
resistance. and Japanese troops and equipment. supporting our advancing
troops.

In these days bomber aviation made a number of strikes against enemy rail
Junctions-~Hailsr. harbin, Changchun, and Mutankisng, against the Nailar
and Khutou fortified areas, and against shipping on the Sungari River.

Flying as pairs of "hunters" and as groups of 4-12 ll-Z's, ground attack
aircraft hit enemy troops and equipment on the battlefield with echeloned

strikes. mainly in the breakthrough sectors on the Sungari, Solun, Hailar.
and Mutankiang axes--that is, on the principal axes of the ground troops.

205

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Fighter aviation provided direct cover to advancing troops on the battle-
field and in their areas of concentration. Moreover fighters were also
used for-ground attack and reconnaissance missions. They operated in
small groups and in pairs against enemy troops on highways and dirt roads
and against trains at stations and sidings, mainly on the axes of active
troop operations near ﬂaiier. Solun, (Sunu), Mutankiang, Khutou,
(Tszyamusy), and (Mulin), and they performed tactical reconnaissance.

As a rule 60-70 bombers were assigned to strikes against rail Junctions,
fortified areas, and accumulations of troops; these bombers made concen-
trated attacks against these objectives. As an example on 11 August air
reconnaissance discovered a large accumulation of enemy troops in the
vicinity of Hulin. More than 60 Pe-Z's were given the mission of making
a concentrated strike against these troops. Despite the poor weather
they reached the target and attacked it successfully, dropping their bomb

loads precisely on target. As a result the enemy suffered significant
losses.

The day before, Pe-Z's of the 34th Bomber Air Division flying as small
groups (commanded by General M. N. Kalinushkin) flew 120 sorties against
the Khutou fortified area, making concentrated strikes. Enjoying air
support. troops of the 35th Army broke Japanese resistance and broke into
the city of Khutou on that same day.15 Ground attack aviation operated
effectively. On 12 Auguut our troops advancing on the Tsitsihar axis
were halted in the vicinity of (Sun'u) by intense artillery fire and
counterattacks by enemy troops. Pilots of the 96th Ground Attack Air
Division (commander, Lieutenant Colonel l. A. Kochergin) came to their
rescue. They made several dives at the target, and the Japanese hoisted
white flags, expressing their readiness to surrender. Performing their
assignments, the flight crew displayed valor, bravery, and heroism.

Major 8. A. Chernykh, commander of the 75th Ground Attack Air Regiment,
discovered an enemy armored train while flyi. 3 an "independent hunting"
mission with Lieutenant Yurchenko at his wing. The lead airplane was

hit by antiaircraft fire while Attacking the target, and the pilot made

a forced landing on enemy territory. Landing next to him, Yurchenko

took his commander aboard his own airplane and returned to the airfield.15

Providing direct support to ground troops in difficult meteorological
conditions. in the first 3 days of the operation aviation inflicted
serious losses on the enemy in manpower and equipment. By its actions
it helped our advancing troops to successfully penetrate enemy defenses
and surmount and capture fortified areas, particularly the Msnchouli-
Chalainor, ﬂailar, Khutou, and Dunnin fortified areas, and it supported
troops from the air as they advanced deep into enemy territory. As a
result of coordinated strikes from the ground and from the air, in the
first day of the offensive Soviet troops advanced from 50 to 1‘0 km on
the Transbaykal Front, and from 5 to 20 km on the 1st and 2d far Eastern
fronts. In subsequent days the pace of the advance of ground troops was
even higher. Stunned by these strikes, the Japanese began to withdraw

206

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

their troops deep into Henchuria, offering resistance mainly in fortified
areas and in individual pockets of resistance. The Soviet Army Air Force
commander was at the forward control posts of the 12th and 9th air araiea
together with e snall operational group from field headquarters. and he
directly influenced the combat activities of aviation. In the second
phase of the operation. because enemy defenses had been penetrated suc-
cessfully and fortifications had been suraounted throughout the entire
tactical depth. the ground troops continued their fight with the goal of
conclusively crushing the anesy's pockets of resistance and pursuing him.
In this period aviation continued to make bomber and ground attack
strikes against individual'pockats of resistance. strongpoints, and

rail junctions. preventing the eneny froa occupying intermediate lines
of defense.

The 6th Guards Tank Army advanced swiftly. Its activities were continu-
ously supported by aviation of the 248th and 316th ground attack air
divisions (cosnandera, Colonels I. B. Savel‘yev and A. A. Yerokhin) and
the ZbSth Fighter Air Division (commander, Colonel c. P. Pleshchenko).

Air liaison officers and forward units of the air rear services moved
within the tank combat formations. swiftly preparing airfields at which
to base aviation intended for cover and support. Such organization of
strategic and tactical interaction permitted aviation to render fast and
timely assistance to the tank formations by striking the enemy wherever
the situation required.

As the 6th Guards Tank Army was crossing the Great Khingan Range, to
clear the way for the tanks aviation lads a nuaber of concentrated strikes
against centers of resistance in the foothills of this range and bombed
large strongpoints and rail stations at (Vanemyao). The tank crews
competently exploited the results of these strikes and, sweeping enemy
troops from their way. they continued to advance quickly to join mobile
units of the 1st Far Eastern Front. 0n the fourth day of the operation
the 6th Guards Tank Army crossed the Great Khingan Range and entered the
Central Manchurian Plain, having traveled $50 kn in battle. By 1‘ August
troops of the 39th Army captured Vanemyao and Solun. and the 17th Army

and a mechanized cavalry group crushed opposing enemy troops and reached
the approaches of Kalgan. Aviation also helped the tank crews by deliver-
lng fuel to them across the Great Khingan Range, since the tank divisions
were traveling significantly ahead of their supply bases in the swift
offensive. Transport aviation cane to the rescue. delivering about 2,000
tons of fuel and 186 tons of aamunition to then by air. 0n the average
90-100 Li-Z transporters were used to deliver cargo to units and forms-
tions of the 6th Guards Tank Army.l6

Our infantry also enjoyed active air support. Within the sector of the

lot Far Eastern Front the eneny concentrated significant forces in the
vicinity of Hutsnkiang in his attempt to prevent our troops from cutting

the route of withdrawal of his troops fron (Baotsin) and (Tszyamusy);

207

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

these forces offered stubborn resistance, counterattacking several times.
Aviation of all arms of the 9th Air Army was launched to crush this
resistance. During the day large groups of bombers and ground attack
airplanes made concentrated strikes against enemy troops in this area

and in the city. The flight crows displayed exceptional brewery and an
ability to operate in complex conditions. As an example a group of Pe-Z
bombers (group commander--Lieutenant Colonel Plotnikov, commander of the
59th Bomber Air Regiment) took off on a bomb run against enemy troops

at the station and in the city of Hutankiang. 0n the way to their tar-
gets the airplanes flew into bad weather. The cloud ceiling was not more
than 100 meters. The group commander decided to detour the bad weather
front on the north and complete the combat mission at all costs. Descend-
ing to 50 meters. the group traveled about 100 km in complex meteorologi-
cal conditions and reached an area of good weather. Successfully com-
pleting its assignment and inflicting significant losses on the enemy.
the group returned safely to its airfield. The battle of Hutankiang
lasted 5 days. The 16th of August was the hardest day for our troops of
the lat Red Banner and 5th armies. Concentrating significant infantry
and tank forces. the enemy made strong counterettacka. The 252d Cround
Attack Air Division (commander. Lieutenant Colonel V. Kh. Makarov) was
ordered to repel the counterattack; by continuous echeloned actions
against enemy artillery, tanks, and infantry, it provided decisive
assistance to the troops in repelling the counterattack. The enemy's
attempts at concentrating troops near Hutsnkiang, hailun. and (Ningut)
for a counterattack were also foiled by concentrated strikes by ground
attack airplanes and bombers from the 9th Air Army. The enemy was
totally defeated in the vicinity of Mutankiang through the joint efforts
of ground troops and aviation. A massed strike made by 108 bombers of
the XIX Heavy Bomber Air Corps against centers of resistance in the
Dunnin fortified area was highly effective. An inspection of the terrain
following its occupation by our troops established that four concrete
pillboxes. two wood-and-earth pillboxes, an ammunition dump, two trenches,
and two underground passageways had been destroyed by direct bomb hits.
After this strike the fortified area was taken by our troops, and the
Japanese garrison surrendered. Soviet pilots displayed resourcefulness
and heroism in the performance of their mission.

0n lb August a pair of Il-Z's (with Lieutenant Garanin in the lead air-
plane) was flying a sortie with the mission of seeking and attacking

small scattered enemy groups remaining in our rear and making systematic
raids on the Dunnin airfield, hindering the work of the airfield engineer-
ing battalion, which was preparing the airfield for reception of air units.
Unable to find the enemy. Lieutenant Caranin decided to land at this air-
field and clarify the situation. He ordered his wingman to patrol the

air against possible attempts by the Japanese to capture his airplane
while it was on the ground. and he landed under enemy fire. without
shutting down his engine Garanin got in touch with the battalion com-
mander, who clarified the situation; on learning the whereabouts of the
targets. he took off. Spotting three houses from which the Japanese were

208

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

shelling the airfield with the greatest intensity. together with his wing-
man he attacked them with bombs and nachinegun fire. As a result the
three houses were partially destroyed and burned. Sane of the Japanese
were killed. and the rest scattered. Owing to the initiative, boldness.

and decisive actions of Lieutenant Geranin the combat mission was com-
pleted.

As a result of the joint actions of ground troops and aviation. enemy
resistance was broken both in the vicinity of Hutankiang and at other
points. particularly at Kalgan. Sunu. and (Boll). Suffering high losses.
the Japanese were forced to abandon all of these points.

In the second phase of the operation aviation had to surmount extremely
unfavorable meteorological conditions which dramatically restricted its
combat activities. Despite this. aviation continued to support the
ground troops as they moved forward.

Successfully completing the first and second phases of the offensive,
Soviet troops continued to pursue the enemy relentlessly deep into
Hanchuria and on the islands. On 18 August the Japanese began abandoning
organized resistance and surrendering. Only in individual sectors did
they continue to offer resistance in small isolated groups.

Because of the swift advance of the ground troops, the long lines of
communication. and the lack and poor passability of highways and dirt
roads. the problem of supplying asmunition, fuel. and food to the troops.
including air units. became very acute. At the same time our troops had
to capture the most important administrative-political and industrial
centers of the enemy as quickly as possible, which required extensive
assault landing operations. All of this imposed new missions on the
Soviet Air Force in the third phase of the offensive. A large quantity
of asmmnition, food, and fuel had to be airlifted in support of the
activities of ground troops deep in the enemy rear; small airborne assault
parties had to he landed, and their actions had to receive cosbat and
logistical support.

Broad use was made primarily of aviation of the 54th Transport and 21st
Guards Transport Air divisions on order of the Soviet Army Air Force
commander to complete these missions. While combat aviation continued
to support frontal troops by annihilating individual enemy pockets of
resistance, under fighter cover transport aviation did a great deal of
work to transfer cargo and land airborne assault parties. Airborne
assault groups were landed at sirfislds and in the vicinities of harbin.
Kirin. (Yantszy). (Vonsan) ((Genzan)). (Khamkhyn) ((Kanko)). (then'yaa)
((Kheydzio)), Changchun, Shenyang (Hukden), Talien (Dairen). and Lushun
(Port Arthur). Additional airborne assault groups were landed several
times to reinforce the main assault landing forces at these places. the
airborne assault parties were accompanied by specially assigned air
liaison officers who maintained interaction between aviation and the

209

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

assault landing parties. The landing of the airborne assault groups was
supported by actions of combat aviation of the 12th and 9th sir armies,
and by special air reconnaissance of the landing areas. Our fighters and
bombers patrolled above the airfields at which they landed, ready to
render support to the assault landing parties from the air at any moment.
Capture of important administrative-political and industrial centers in
Hanchuria by airborne assault parties totally disorganized command and
control of enemy troops and reserves. Becoming persuaded of the useless-
noss of further resistance. the Japanese halted combat activities almost
everywhere.

As a result of the defeat of the Kwangtung Army imperialist Japan had no
more realistic forces and possibilities for continuing the war. and on

2 September 1965 Japan signed the pact of unconditional surrender. As
soon as Japan's surrender became known-~and the troops usually learn of
such unforgettable moments before the orders announcing them are cut--
countless words of joy and congratulations were expressed and salutes
were fired from guns. machineguns. rifles. and pistols. That should

amaze no one. since not only the Great Patriotic war but also world War II
had come to a victorious conclusion. It was with a feeling of sincere

gratefulneas to the Soviet Union and its armed forces that the peoples of
all the world were witness to peace on earth, which they longed for with
all their souls for 6 long years.

Despite the high uniqueness of the theater of war and the complexity of
the missions. capitalizing on the rich experience of the war against
fascist Germany the air force in the Far East managed to provide effec-
tive assistance to ground troops in the destruction of the Kwangtung
Army. It flew more than 22,000 sorties. In the hands of the Soviet Com-
mand, our air force was a powerful and highly msaeuverable resource of
armed conflict. By its strikes against pillboxes and accumulations of
equipment and troops. it helped the ground troops to quickly penetrate
fortified zones. disrupted the work of the lines of communication.
paralyzed maneuver of enemy reserves. and played a major role in repelling
enemy counterattacks and counterstrikes. The Soviet Air Force was the
main agent of reconnaissance and an important resource for landing and
transporting troops and cargo. During the operation 16,500 enlisted men
and officers. about 2,780 tons of fuel. 563 tons of ammunition. and 1,496
tons of various cargo were transported by sir.17

A ukasc of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet dated 8 September 1965
awarded a second "Gold Star" medal to A. A. Novikov. Many of his assistants
from the air force field headquarters, air army commanders, air formation.
unit and subunit commanders, flight crews and technicians. and workers of
headquarters, political agencies. and services were also awarded battle
orders of the Soviet Union.

The most important result of the campaign conducted by the Soviet Armed
Forces in the Far East was the destruction of the almost million-strong

210

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Kwangtung Army, unconditional surrender of Japan, and elimination of a
center of aggression in the East. Our victory in the Far East upset the
hopes of the Japanese imperialists for an advantageous end to the war in
the Pacific and foiled the plane of aggressive circles in the USA trying
to gain a foothold on the Asian continent. The victory of the Soviet
Armed Forces provided a powerfv impetus to the national liberation move-
ments in the countries of Asia and created the groundwork for the victory
of the people's revolution in China. North Korea. and Vietnam. The forces
of democracy and progress grew strong on the entire Asian continent. and
the positions of imperialism and reaction weakened. All springboards and
military bases created by the Japanese imperialists for an attack on the
USSR were eliminated, and the security of our Far Eastern borders was
insured. The Soviet Army honorably completed its mission of liberation
in the Far East. In the campaign to defeat the Kwangtuag Army the Soviet
Air Force obtained valuable experience in organizing and maintaining
strategic and tactical interaction with ground troops in the difficult
conditions of a theater of war.

The considerable separation of the axes on which the troops of the three
fronts operated. the unstable weather. and the absence of good reference
points (taiga, desert. mountains) made navigation difficult and necessi-
tated extremely careful preparation by the personnel and implementation
of many ground support measures; the latter were implemented promptly,
and they insured accurate hits on the targets assigned to aviation.
Unification of the efforts of all three frontal air armies and a separate
ADD bomber air corps under the sole leadership of the senior air chief--
the cos-under of the Soviet Army Air Force-was a typical feature of the
actions of Soviet aviation; the commander was present at the command post
together with the commander in chief of troops in the Far East. and at
the forward control posts of the air armies; he promptly solved specific
problems in the combat application of aviation, and through the air army
commanders he assigned air missions as required by the ground troops.

The combat activities of Soviet aviation began with massed, concentrated
strikes against airfields. administrative-political centers. ports. and
other highly important enemy facilities in the rear. In the first days
considerable bomber and ground attack forces were assigned the mission of
disorganizing rail and motor shipments, which resulted in isolation of the
area of the engagement from enemy reserves. Another unique feature in
the actions of aviation was the use of a significant quantity of forces
for air reconnaissance (33 percent of all sorties in the 12th Army. 27
percent in the 10th. and 21 percent in the 9th Air Army).

On the whole the experiences of the Soviet Air Force in the Far East had

their influence on subsequent development of air force strategy and
tactics. They are still significant today in relation to a number of
problems concerning the combat use of different aviation arms and
services.

211

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3s
‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOOTNOTES

Shtemenko. S. M., "Generel'nyy shteb v gody voyny“ (The General
Stuff in the Her Years). Moscow. 1968, p 337.

Arkhiv HG SSSR [USSR Ministry of Defense Archives], f. 132-e. op.
26¢2. d. 39, 1. 155.

Ibid., 1. 161.

"Oevoboditel'nnyn mieeiye Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh Sil vo vtoroy
uirovoy voyne" (The Mission of Liberation of the Soviet Armed Forces
in Horld Her 11), Moscow. 1974, p 616.

Ibid.. p 615.

Ibid.

VOYBNNO-ISTORICHBSKIY ZBURNAL. No 8. 1975, p 67.

"Velikaye Otecheetvenneye voyns Sovetekogo Soyuzn 1941-1965 33.

Kretksye istoriyn" (The Greet Patriotic "st of the Soviet Union
1961-1955. A Short History). Moscow. 1970. p 543.

9-10. "Osvoboditel'nsys niseiyn Sovetskikh Vooruzhennykh $11 vo vtoroy

11.
12.
13.
16.
15.
lb.

17.

nirovoy voyne." p 422.

Arkhiv H0 SSSR. f. 360, op. 515277, d. 1, 11. 16-18.
Ibid., 1. 23.

Arkhlv HO SSSR. f. 349, op. 1‘2201, d. 2, 1. 27.
Arkhlv H0 SSSR, f. 349. op. 5753, d. 2, 1. 28.
KRYL'YA RODINY, N6 8, 1975, p 6.

Arkhiv no sssa. f. 360, op. 515277, «1. 1, 1. s9.

Arkhlv H0 SSSR, f. 369. op. 5753, d. 2, 1. 67; f. 360, op. 6136,
d. 35. 1. 37.

212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AIR FORCE PBRSORNBL OF THE GREAT PATRIOTIC WAR

During the Great Patriotic "or the Conunist Party constantly devoted
attention to training, correctly placing, and indoctrinating command,
political, engineering, flying, and technical personnel. The Communist
Party, the Supreme High Command, the General Staff, and the Air Force
Military Council understood that the battlevorthiness of all air arms

and services depends on presence of a sufficient number of mature, well
trained executives devoted to the ideals of communism. The party Central
Cosmdttee constantly kept an eye on the selection and placement of air
force personnel in the top and senior ranks. All appointments of com-
manders at the levels of air division and above made by the command and
Military Council of the Soviet Army Air Force were approved by the CC
VKP(b). Military skill. organizational capabilities, selfless devotion
to the socialist motherland and the Communist Party, and high moral-
combat qualities were the principal criteria with which the individual
was evaluated in the difficult war years. Members and candidates of the
VKP(b) held almost all executive posts in the Soviet Air Force by the end
of the war. The Air Force Military Council played an important role in
selecting and placing middle-grade personnel. In its meetings it often
examined the problesn of training airmen, and it planned concrete, effi-
cient measures.

Dnrlng the Great Patriotic Mar the Communist Party raised and educated

a remarkable detachment of air commanders who competently managed the
combat activities of aviation at the fronts, constantly improved the
organization of the units, formations, and major formations, applied new.
more effective forms and methods of air activities, and did a great deal
to develop the air force further. Among them were Air Force Commander
Chief Marshal of Aviation A. A. Nevikov, Long Range Aviation Commander
Chief Marshal of Aviation A. Ye. Colovanov, Soviet Army Air Force and
long-range aviation deputy commanders Marshals of Aviation 6. A.
Vorozheykin, P. Ya. Palaleyev, S. A. Khudyakov, and N. S. Skripko and
Colonel General of Aviation A. V. Nikitin; air army commanders Chief
Marshal of Aviation K. A. Vershinin, Marshals of Aviation S. A. Krasovskiy,
S. I. Rudenko, and V. A. Sudets, and Generals S. K. Goryunov, M. M. Gromov,
V. N. Zhdanov, I. P. Zhuravlev, N. P. Naumenko, P. P. Polynin, N. F.
napalm. s. a. Rybal'chenko, 1. u. Sokolov, and r. r. Khryukin.1‘2

213

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The biographies of the air army commanders were all different, and they
attained executive poets in the air force's major operational formations
during the Great Patriotic War following different roads. Many of them
had even participated in the Civil Her and fought the interventioniets.
and they had served in the ground troops previously. But they were all
attracted by aviation, in which they envisioned much that was new,
interesting, and promising, and they understood its ever-increasing role
in the defense of the socialist fatherlend quite well. One general trait
was typical of all of them-~limitless love for the motherland and devo-
tion to the Communist Party, which raised and educated them, and to the
Soviet people.

Konstantin Andreyevich Vershinin assumed the post of air force commander
of the Southern Front as a colonel in September 1941, and in Hay 1942 he
took charge of the 4th Air Army. During the war the 4th Air Army flew
340,000 combat sorties, destroying and crippling 5,000 enemy airplanes
in air battles and at airfields. The air army's combat activities were
assessed highly by the Communist Party and the Soviet Government. The
supreme high commander declared his gratefulness to its formations for
their successful combat activities 42 times; 227 soldiers were awarded

the hero of the Soviet Union title, 17 air units and formations were
reorganized as Guards units, 46 were awarded honorary titles, and 76

earned orders.3

In the postwar years Hero of the Soviet nnion K. A. Verehinin held
responsible posts in the National Air Deiense Forces and in the air
force. For many years, until 1968, K. A. Vershinin headed the Soviet
Air Force. K. A. Vershinin was awarded the rank of chief marshal of

eviction -n Hay 1959.

Stepen Akimovich Krasovskiy began the war with the rank of major general
of aviation at the post of air force commander of the 56th Army. In
January 1942 he became air force commander of the Bryansk Front, and

4 months later he became commander of the 2d Air Army. Between October
1942 and March 1943 S. A. Krasovekiy headed the 17th Air Army, after
which he assumed command of the 2d Air Army until the end of the war.
Pilots of the 2d Air Army flew about 348,000 combat sorties, fought in

6,000 air battles and destroyed 7,000 fascist German airplanes during
the war, and the army's military deeds were mentioned 37 times in orders
of the supreme high commander. Sixty-five air regiments, divisions,
and corps of the army were reorganized as Guards units, 125 units and
formations received honorary titles in honor of liberated cities, and
more than 200 of the army's fliers were awarded the Hero of the Soviet
Union title; 13 persons were awarded this lofty title twice.‘ In the
postwar years Hero of the Soviet Union S. A. Kraaovskiy served for a
long time as chief of the Air Force Academy imeni Yu. A. Gagarin, and
he trained hundreds of officers and generals with a higher military
education for the Soviet Air Force.

214

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Serguy Ignat'yevlch Rudenko began the war on 15 July 1961 as commander of
the 31st Mixed Air Division. On 28 September 1942 General S. I. Rudenko
became commander of the 16th Air Army. During the war the 16th Air Army
flew 280,000 combat aorties. This army's pilots destroyed about 6.000
fascist German airplanes in air battles and at airfields. Two hundred
pilots and navigators were awarded the Nero of the Soviet Union title
for exemplary completion of command assignments at the front in the
struggle against the fascist German invaders, and for the valor and
heroism displayed. Distinguished formations and units of the 16th Air
Army were mentioned 1.7 times in orders of the supreme high commander.
here than 27.000 airmen were awarded orders and medals for combat dis-
tinction. many formations and units were reorganized into Guards units.
and 6b were awarded honorary titles.5 In the postwar years Hero of the
Soviet Union 5. I. Rudenko was chief of general staff of the Soviet Air
Force, first deputy commander in chief of the air force, and chief of
the Air Force Academy imeni Yu. A. Gagarin.

Vladimir Aleksandrovich Sudets began the war at the post of commander of
the Nain Command's IV Long-Range Bomber Air Corps, and later he commanded
the air service of the Volga Military District and the I Bomber Air Corps;
from March 1963 until the end of the war he co-Ianded the 17th Air Army.
During the war the 17th Air Army flew more than 200,000 combat sorties
and produced famous aces such as twice-awarded Heroes of the Soviet Union
V. A. Zaytsev. H. V. Kuznetsov. A. I. Koldunov, N. M. Skomorokhov, G. F.
Sivkov. and others. The army was mentioned 3‘ times in orders of the
supreme high commander.6 I\ the postwar years Hero of the Soviet Union

V. A. Sudets occupied important posts in the air force and in the National
Air Defense Forces, and he served as air force chief of general staff and
commander in chief of the National Air Defense Forces.7

General P. P. Zhigarev commanded the 10th Air Army during the war against
imperialist Japan. In April 1946 Pavel Pedorovich Zhigsrev was appointed
to the post of first deputy commander in chief of the air force; later he
assumed command of strategic aviation, and from September 1969 to January
1957 he headed the Soviet Air Force.8

ﬂue commanders were given invaluable assistance in managing the troops by
the staffs of the air armies under the supervision of Generals N. P.
Abramov. A. N. Alekseyev. I. H. Belov, P. I. Brayko, N. P. Dsgayev,

N. H. Korsakov, P. I. Kachev. N. V. Perminov. A. S. Pronin, A. A. Sakovnin,
n. P. Sveshinhov. N. G. Seleznev, S. P. Sinyakov, V. V. Storozhenko. K. I.
Tcl'nov, A. 2. Ustinov, A. V. Stepanov, S. A. Lavrik, V. I. Izotov, and

N. L. Stepanov.9

After the war Nikolay Pavlovich Dagayev, Petr Ignat'yevich Brayko, Sergey

anlovich Sinyskov. and Aleksandr Zakharovich Ustinov occupied executive

posts in the Main Headquarters of the Soviet Army Air Force and did a
great deal to develop the strategy of the Soviet Air Force.

215

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Victory against enemy troops and aviation depended in many ways on the
morale of air force personnel and on purposeful party-political work.

It was confidently organized by the unit deputy comanders for political
affairs and by the chiefs of the political sections of the air armies
and party and Siomsoool organizations. The following individuals served
as chiefs of the political. sections of air armies—A. I. Asulenko. N. A.
Butkovskiy. V. I. Vikhrov. Ya. I. Draychult, P. I. Dukhnovskiy, F. I.
Zhsulev, ‘N. H. Noekalev. '1‘. I. Muratltin, N. N. Protsenko, V. G. Tochilov.
G. A. mudyakov, s. I. Chernausov. D. G. Shanshsshvili, N. N. Shcherbina.
and others.

111a following air army deputy comnders for political affairs did an
extremely great deal of work to indoctrinate personnel of air force units,
formations. and major formations under the guidance of Soviet Army Air
Force Military Council members Generals P. S. Stepanov, L. G. Rudenko,
and N. S. Shimanov: V. I. Alekaeyev, N. P. Babsk, P. F. Verov, A. I.
Vikhorev. A. s. Vinogradov. A. F. Vyvolokin, A. P. Grubich, G. G.
Gur'yanov, A. A. Ivanov. I. G. Litvinenko, S. N. Remazanov. A. G. Rytov.
V. I. Smirnov, I. I. Sergeyev, H. I. Sulimov, N. N. Sukhachev, V. N.
Tolmsehew, F. N. Khorobrykh, S. K. Fedorov, S. A. Pal'yanov, and M. I.
Si-cpovalov.

In cooperation with commanders and staffs at all levels. the broadly
branched party-political machinery of the air force worked every day

to indoctrinate the personnel in the spirit of Soviet patriotism and
proletarian internationalism. and to nurture high moral-combat qualities
and selfless devotion to the Columnist Party. The historically unprece-
dented heroism of the Soviet people in the war is a unifestation of
these qualities. The highest fern of heroism and the highest expression
of high moral qualities was the ram tactic. During the war 606 Soviet
fighter pilots, 18 ground attack airplane crews, and 6 bomber crews
routed airborne enemy targetsﬁlo Soviet pilots destroyed about 500 enemy
airplanes in air battles with the ram tactic. Seventeen airmen used the
ram tactic twice, A. Khlobystov and N. Terekhin used it three times, and
B. Kovzan used it (our times. Among those who ramped enemy craft was
the world's only female pilot--Komsomol newer Ye. Zelenko.11 Among the
winged warriors who ran-ed enemy airplanes, 95 percent were commists
and Komaomol members.

During the war the commanders of SEC reserve air corps included F. A.
Agal'tsov. V. I. Aladinskiy, P. P. Arkhangel'skiy, Ye. M. Beletskiy,

A. S. Blagoveshchenskiy, G. P. Baydukov. H. 101. Borisenko. N. I.
Gotlachenko. H. H. Golovnya, S. P. Danilov. F. F. Zherebchenlto, G. A.
lvanov. A. 2. Karavatskiy, N. P. Ksmsnin. I. D. Klimov, I. V. Krupskiy,
Ye. F. Loginov. N. G. Nachin, V. V. Naneyshvili. I. S. Polbin, V. Ye.
Nestertsev. O. V. Tolstikov, B. K. Tokarev, I. L. Turkel', I. D. Podgornyy.
Ye. Ya. Savitskiy, V. c. Ryazanov, I. P. Skok, B. A. Sidnev, S. V.
Slyusarev. V. V. Stepichsv, A. V. Utin, V. A. Ushakov, A. B. Yumashev,

and others.

216

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Among these, Ye. Ya. Savitskiy, V. G. Ryaranov, and I. 8. Polbin were
awarded the hero of the Soviet Union title twice. Yevgeniy Yakovlevich
Savitakiy came to the front from the Far East in winter 1941 as a
lieutenant colonel. He eomndsd an air regiment, and later a division.
At the end of 191.3 he was awarded the rank of major general of aviation
and appointed comander of the III Fighter Air Corps. During the war he
personally flew 216 combat sorties and knocked down 22 German airplanes,
and under his command pilots of the corps flew 28,860 combat sorties

and annihilated 1,653 enemy airplanea.1

The motherland gave a high assessment to the bravery and heroism of this
valorous sir couander and to his competent management of the corps. 0n
ll Hay 1946 he was awarded the lofty title of Hero of the Soviet Union,
and on 2 June 1965 he was awarded this title a second time. In 2 years
of the war (from April 19103 to May 1945) 32 airmen in the corps earned
the Hero of the Soviet Union title.13 Presently Ye. Ya. Savitskiy is

a marshal of aviation.

During the Great Patriotic War Vasiliy Georgiyevich Ryasanov cosmanded
the I Guards Gromd Attack Air Corps. The corps became famous during
the war for its accurate, powerful bombing and ground strikes against
the enemy. The corpa' pilots flew 58,270 combat aorties during the war.
V. G. Ryazanov was one of the first to organize control of the combat
activities of ground attach aviation from the forward commend posts of
a combined arms and a tank army-wthat is. he enployed a new method of
control of ground attack aviation above the battlefield. Ninety-four
airmen in the corps were awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union title,
and seven of them were awarded the title twice. For outstanding battle
service to the motherland General P. G. Ryazanov was awarded the Hero
of the Soviet Union title on 22 February 19“, and on 18 June 1965 he
was awarded the second "Gold Star" medal.“

Ivan Semenovich Polbin, couander of the VI Guards Bounber Air Corps (the
II Guards until 19“), was a talented leader, an innovator, and a fear-
less pilot. In March 1943 Colonel I. S. Polbin, who was promoted to
major general of aviation on 20 October, was appointed comander of an
air corps. Various innovations in the use of the Pe-Z dive bomber are
associated with his activities at the front. 1. S. Polbin was the first
in bomber aviation to employ sniper dive bomb strikes against small
targets. and he taught this method to his subordinated regiments and
divisions. On 23 November 1942 this valorous pilot and famous cousnder

was awarded the lofty Hero of the Soviet Union title. 0n 6 April 1945
he was awarded his second "Gold Star" posthumously.”

Among division counsndera who had begun their war career as flight,
squadron. and regiment comsnders we can name V. I. Davidkov, N. P. Noga.

S. I. Nichiporenko, V. A. Sandalov. P. I. Kryukov, F. P. Kotlyar, A. I.
i’okryshkin, and many others. Air division comanders K. A. Katiehev,

217

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. Smirnov, V. V. Zelentsov, I. D. Antoahkin. P. I. Dobysh. and many
others proved themselves to be mature managers of combat activities.

The air regiment commanders were the leading figures in the air force.
The success of all combat missions depended on their organizational
capabilities. flying skills, bravery. high exactingness, and fatherly
concern for subordinates.

P. s. Kutakhov. i. i. Pstygo. P. P. Chupikov. L. 1.. Shestakov. l. I.
chahchev. P. A. Pokryshev. H. 8. Tokarev. l. P. Motornyy. A. P. Horozov.
B. N. Yeremin, S. D. Luganakiy, Ye. D. Bershanskaya, and many others
proved themselves to be remarkable sir regiment contenders.

in the postwar years many of then continued to serve in the Soviet Army.
through their experience and knowledge promoting development and grouth

in the power of armed forces.

During the Great Patriotic "er of ”fol-191.5 llsro of the Soviet Union
Pavel Stepanovich Kutakhov comnded an air squadron and a fighter regi-
ment. in the difficult weather and terrain of the North he personally

r low 367 combat aorties. fought in 79 air battles. and knocked down 15
enemy airplanes; he knocked down 28 in group battles. Under his command
the 20th Fighter Air Regiment effectively completed many combat missions
while covering troops and objectives in the frontal rear. flew many
thousands of combat aorties, and knocked down many enemy airplanes.
After the war P. S. Kutakhov graduated from the Academy of the General
Staff and continuously held command assignmts. in March 1969 he took
charge of the Soviet Air Force. and in Novedaer 1972 he was awarded a
high rankuehief marshal of aviation.

During the war Ivan Ivanovich Pstygo commanded a flight and an air
squadron, and between December 1963 and the end of the war he commanded
the 893d Ground Attack Air Regiment. lie flew 95 combat sorties. In
April 1975 he was awarded a high rank--marshal of aviation. and he is
presently deputy consander in chief of the Soviet Army Air Force.

llero of the Soviet Union Pavel Pedorovich Chupikov commanded the 19th
Fighter Air Regiment during the war, which participated in almost all
of the largest operations of the third period of the war; it was
reorganized as the 167th Guards Regiment and awarded the Order of
Aleksandr Nevskiy. During the war the regisent'e pilots flew about
9.000 combat sorties. fought in 750 air battles. and annihilated U05
enemy airplanes. P. P. Chupikov himself flew about 600 combat sortiee,
and he knocked down 60 enemy airplanes in 77 serial duels and 6 air-
planes in group air battles. Presently P. f. Chupikov is a colonel
general of aviation.

hero of the Soviet Union I. I. Kleshchev contended the 636th Fighter
Regiment. which distinguished itself in the battle of Stalingrad. In

218

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the period from June to August 1942 the regiaent destroyed 90 airplanes
in air battles. and fro- llo September to 2 October 1962 the regilent's
pilots (law 611 coebat sorties. participated in ‘8 air battles, and
knocked down 82 enemy airplanes. in late fall 1942 Hajor l. l. Kloshchev
died tragical'.y while flying in coupler meteorological conditions.

Air squadron and flight comnders were the lost nunsrous detachment of
con-end pernonnel in the air force. They were the direct educators of

the pilots. technicians. and mechanics, and they always led their sub-
ordinates into battle.

Hero of the Soviet Union Ivan Mikhaylovich More: served as deputy coa-
under for political affairs of an air squadron and an air regiment.

and in the war he served as chief of the political section of an air
division; he is presently a colonel general of aviation, a nember of the

Military Council. and chief of the Political Directorate of the Soviet
Ar-y Air Force.

llero of the Soviet Union Aleksandr Petrovich Silant'yev, who was a flight
cos-antler and a deputy cos-ander in a fighter air squadron during the
first year of the Great Patriotic Her. fought heroically against the
one-y, proved himself in my battles, and flew 3S9 conbst sorties.

In February 1976 he was awarded the high rank of aarshsl of aviation.

and today he is at the head of the Air Force General Staff.

llero of the Soviet Union Vasiliy Vasil'yevich Reshetnikov comandad an
air squadron of the 19th ADD Guards Air Ragiaent in 1943. During the
war he flew 307 coabat surtiea in the 11-1.. Presently V. V. Reshetnikov
is s colonel general of aviation. and he is in charge of a powerful air
arr-strategic reissue-carrying aviation.16

Along squadron co-snders who had earned false in the war we can include
thrice-awarded Hero of the Soviet Union I. N. Kozhedub and twice-awarded
"are of the Soviet Union N. H. Skonorokhov. A. N. Yefinov, A. Ya. Brandia.
and I. F. Pavlov. During the war fighter pilot lven Nikitovich Kozhedub
flew 326 col-bat sorties. participated in 120 air battles. and personally
knocked down 62 eneuy airplanes. 7 Presently l. N. Kozhedub is a colonel
general of aviation. N. H. Skoeorokhov flew 60$ conbat sorties. fought
in 130 air battles, and knocked down 66 fascist airplanes.1a Today he

is a colonel general of aviation.

(:round attack pilot Aleksandr Nikolayevich Yefiaov joined a ground attack
air regiment of the Hestern Front in August 1962 after graduating free a
nilitary pilots school. A. N. Yefilov took off for his first combat
sortie fro. one of Moscow's suburban airfields. and in 1963 he becaae
faces at the Kursk salient as a fee less ground attack pilot and an

outstanding asater of ground attack tactics against eneny troops. he
flew his 1a.: combat sortie. the 222d, on 8 Hay 1945.19 In 1975 he was

awarded the high rank of earshal of aviation. and he is presently first
deputy contender in chief of the Soviet Aray Air Force.

219
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
v- FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

‘
l

Prompt add successful completion of combat assignments depends on the
selfless labor of the air force's engineers and technicians. This
titanic work was done under the guidance of Air Force Senior Engineer

A. K. Repin and air army engineers A. V. Ageyev. I. I. Bondarenko, A. V.
Vinokurov, z. A. Ioffe. V. N. Koblikov. K. P. Hoieeyev, I. V. Markov,

l‘. A. Nevinnyy. N. 1. Plotaihov. l. P. Osipenko. P. V. Rodimov, A. G.
lhidenlto. V. l. Rebrov. A. V. Shepeleva. and others.20

An enormous amount of work was done during the war by personnel of air
force rear units and services co-ended by Generals N. A. Sokolov—
Sokelenok. N. P. Konstantinov. P. I. Zharov. 1.. c. Rudenko, N. G. Lovtsov.
V. N. Uspenskiy. P. V. Korotayev. I. Kh. Lyubimov. P. P. Voronov. V. N.
Vlasov. A. S. Kirillov. P. G. Kezskov. A. I. Nesintsev. P. P. Nel'teev.
N. N. Stepanov. P. N. Stupin. P. N. Taranenko, s. N. Gnipenko, V. I.
Rynbtsev. and others.“ Under the guidance of Generals L. G. Ratgauz

and A. l'. Popov, and the chiefs of the air artsy nedical services, medi-
cal personnel of the Soviet Air Force saved the lives of thousands of
pilots. navigators. radio operators. and technicians. The motherland
gave a high assessment to the military services of its airborne sons and
daughters. More than 200,000 of them were awarded orders and medals.

The llero of the Soviet Union title was awarded to 2.1.20. Sixty-five
pilots were awarded this lofty title twice; this included six famous
pliots in strategic aviation- ’ I. Nolodchiy. V. N. Osipov, P. A. Taran.
Ye. P. l-‘edorov. V. V. Sen'ko. .nd S. l. Kretov. Air warriors A. l.
Pokryshkin and I. N. Koshedub, known throughout the world. earned the
title three times. This high award-«the Nero of the Soviet Union title--
was awarded to 29 Soviet female military pilots. to include A. 1.. Zubkova.
Ye. A. Nikuline, Ye. I. Nosel'. Ye. N. Nudneva, 0. A. Sanfirova. N. N.
Pedutenko. and H. P. Chechneva.

During the war 288 air formations. units, and subunits in frontal avia-
tion and strategic aviation were reorganized as Guards units. 897 were
awarded combat orders, and 708 were given honorary titles. Those air

force formations and units which had distinguished themselves in battle

the most were mentioned 319 times in orders of the supreme high com-
launder.22

FOOTNOTES
[-2. lSTORlYA SSSR. No 3. 1975, p ’06.

‘J. "b-ya vozdushneya srmiya v Velikoy Otechcstvenaoy voyne" (The 6th Air
Army in the Great Patriotic Var). Moscow, 1968, p 9.

lo. "Z-yn vozdushnsys ermiya v boyehh u Rodiny" (The 2d Air Army in
Battles for the Motherland). Noscow. 1965. p 29; S. A. Krasovsltiy
was promoted to marshal of aviation in 1959.

220

FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY
5.

o.
7.

9.
10.
11.

12.

[3.

16.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

FOR OFFICIAL 081-: ONLY

"16-yn vozduehnnye“ (The 16th Air Aray). Moscow. 1973. pp 5. 391;
s. I. Rudenko vee pro-oted to Iarehal of aviation in 1955.

VOYENNo-ISTORICHBSKIY ZHURNAL. No 9. 1972. p 71.

V. A. Sudete was promoted to aarehel of aviation in 1955.
VOYENNO-ISTORICRBSKIY ZHUBNAL. No 12. 1970. p #6; P. F. Zhigarev
vaa pronoted to aarehel of aviation in 1953. and to chief Iarahal
of avietion in 1955.

ISTORIYA sssn. No 3. p #4.

PRAVDA. 29 October 1975.

KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 20 January 1976.

"Dvnzhdy Geroi Sovetokogo Soyuza" (Twice ﬂeroee of the Soviet Union).
Hoecou. 1973. p 18‘.

"Lyudi beau-crtnogo podviga" (Iauortal ﬂeroea). Book 2. Hoecou.
1965, p 256.

"Dvazhdy Goroi Sovetakogo Soyuza." p 182.

1514.. p 164.

KMSNAYA SVEZDA. 20 March 1976.

VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZRUMAL. No 5. 1975. p 116.

"Dvazhdy Geroi Sovetokoso Soyuxa." p 196.

"Dvazhdy Geroi Sovctakogo Soyuza." p 78.

"Sovetekiyc Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Sily v Veiikoy Otechcetvennoy voyne
1961-1955 33." (The Soviet Air Force in the Great Patriotic War of
1951-1945). Moscow. 1968, p 421.

VOYDINO-ISTORICIIESKIY ZHUINAL, No 5. 1973. p 35.

"Sovctakiye Voyenno-Vozduahnyya Si1y v VelikoyOtecheetvennoy voyno

1961-1965 113.." pp 667-668; ”Aviataiye i koo-onnvtilm SSSR" (USSR
Aviation and Coo-onautice). Moscow. 1968. pp 229-230.

221

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSION

The Great Patriotic Her ended with the Soviet Union's historic victory.
It was achieved by the Soviet people and their armed forces under the
guidance of the Communist Party. "Our glorious Communist Party was the
great leader. organizer. end military commander of the Soviet people in
this war. Our party directed all of its organizational genius. the
entire power of the strong alliance of the peoples of the USSR. all of
the public energy accumulated over the years, persistence, endurance.
and powerful will at a single goal-the defeat of fascism."1

The war demonstrated the advantages of the economic and political organi-
zation of socialist society. and of its ideology.

The Soviet Union was able to withstand an attack by euperior enemy forces.
switch its economy to a war footing in very difficult conditions, and
create a material base insuring a subsequent victory. During the war our
army was supplied the latest equipment. superior to the enemy's equipment
in relation to many indices. Evidence of this can be found in the arma-
ment production indices for the USSR and Germany pertaining to all types
of armament. in regard to aviation equipment, in the period from 1 July
1961 to 30 June 1965 Soviet war industry produced 108,028 warplanes.
while in 1961-1966 Germany produced 78,900.2

New types of airplanes--the MIG-2. Yak-3. Yak-9. La-S, and La-7 fighters,
the 11-2 and [1-10 ground attack airplanes. and the Tu-Z. Pe-Z. and Pe-8
bombers--were created by labor collectives headed by outstanding Soviet
aircraft designers--A. N. Tupolev. N. N. Polikarpov, S. V. Il'yushin,

A. S. Yakovlev, S. A. Lavochklin. V. H. Petlyahov. A. I. Hikoyan. P. 0.
Suhhoy. A. A. Hikulin. A. D. Shvetsov, V. Ya. Klimov, and others. Most
of these airplanes were not just not inferior in combat qualities to the
best airplanes of German aviation; they even surpassed them in relation
to some indices. Beginning in 1962 and until the end of the war the
power of the Soviet Air Force grew continuously. While there were 1.560
airplanes of the new types in the composition of the operating army at
the beginning of war. there were 2.695 of them in December 1961. 3.160

In May 1962. 3.088 in November 1962, 8.220 in July 1963, 8,500 in January
1966. 11.800 in June 1966, and 16,500 warplanes in January 1965.3 At

222

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

the ease tins the forces of the Luftwaffe decreased continuously follow-
ing the battle of Stalingrad. In Nova-bar 1962 the Screens had 3. 500 new
warplanes on the Soviet-Cerean front. in July 1953 they had 2. 980. in
June l9". they had 2 .800. and in January 1955 they had 1.960 airplanes.“

Concurrently with quantitative growth in the Soviet Air Force. the ratio
between old and new types of airplanes changed. By as early as l Nova-her
1942 only one-third of the airplanes in the air force were of the old
types. They were sainly in strategic aviation. night boaber aviation.
nonoperating fronts. and training units. In 1963 the Soviet Air Force
received the sodomized La-S fighters equipped with the sore powerful
ASh-82 m engines; in relation to speed and rate of clieb they were
superior to all the Ger-an fighters. even the latest Pia-190. In that
sees year. I953. series production of new Yak-9 fighters with a range of
l.500 Iua was started. ll-2 ground attack airplanes began to be produced
by aviation industry with two cockpita-one for the pilot and one for the
gunner. which isproved this craft's capability for defending itself
against attacks by eneqy fighters. All Il-2 airplanes were arsed with
23-eaa and 37- guns. New. sore powerful H-lOS PP engines and additional
fuel tenlts were installed on the Pe-Z frontal bosber. and the 7.62-
nnchineguns were replaced by 12.7- high caliber nachineguns. In 19“
air unite and fornations of our operating any were arsed with new Yak-3
and Le-7 fighters and an isproved Yak-9. Il-lO ground attack airplanes.
and the modernised Yer-2 long-range bosber. All of the new airplanes
were outfitted with on-board RSI-6 and RSI-6 radio stations in fighter
and ground attack aviation. with Bil-3 bis radio stations in boober
aviation. and with Bil-2 bis radio stations in reconnaissance aviation.

lie-be underwent inrovesent. New NAB-2.54.5 hollow-charge antitank
bombs were put into production in spring 1963 and used for the first tile
in the battle of Kurak. Iiigh explosive bodes weighing 1.000. 2.000. and
5.000 kg were designed. put into series production. and used successfully
to destroy fortified objectives.

Redut and Pegeatit radar devices were produced for the air force in
increasing quantities. Pro- year to year the quality of MP. MI“. and
R88 ground radio stations isproved and their production increased.

By January 19“ the Soviet Air Porce had accueulated a reserve of fighters
capable of replenishing losses and fully supplying new air units and
(creations and those taken out of the reserves. In this connection a
possibility arose for rearsing fighter aviation of the Far Eastern and
Transbeyltal fronts. the air units of which continued to possess obsolete
airplanes.s The availability of new equip-eat in the air force in the
Par East increased drastically in 1956-1965.

During the war the horizontal flight speed of Soviet airplanes increased
by 3540 percent. the naneuvering qualities of fighters isproved signifi-
cantly. nachinsgun and gun arusent was made nore powerful. and the bolb

223

FOR OWICIAI. USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

load. flying altitude. and range of bombers increased. Owing to intro-
duction of heavy caliber machineguns and aircraft guns. the weight of a
i-second salvo from a Soviet fighter increased by 2.1 times, while that
from a ground attack airplane increased by 3.1 times. Quantitative and
qualitative growth of aviation equipment and the combat experience
acquired permitted the Soviet Co-and to fundamentally alter the organi-
zational structure of frontal aviation and strategic aviation. in May-
November 19b2, 13 frontal air armies were created on the Soviet-German
front to replace the air services of the fronts and combined arms armies.
in 1942 another four air armies were formed in the Far East. Creation
of air armies--msjor operational air formations--was a new direction in
development of the Soviet Air Force. The frontal command now had the
possibility for massing the efforts of all aviation on the main axes of
operations of the ground troops. and the “q SHC and the command of the
Soviet Army Air Force could use the forces of several air armies in
adjacent fronts to support major operational missions on a single strate-
gic axis. and to place them under the control of a single senior air
chief.

Swift development of aircraft construction solved the problem of creating
major air reserves--air corps and separate air divisions of the SEC
reserves. By the end of 19‘) there were 18 air corps operating at the
fronts. and the "q suc reserve contained two air corps. [n all during
the war 30 homogeneous sir corps and 27 separate air divisions were
formed in the sac reserves.6 suc reserve air corps and divisions were

a powerful resource in the hands of the headquarters with which to rein-
force frontal air armies. The number of warplanes available changed
dramatically whenever sir corps were called in for reinforcement. During
major operations the airplanes contributed by SEC reserve air corps and
divisions made up from 50 to 55 percent of all frontal aviation. In
March l9b2 long-range bomber aviation was reorganized as strategic avia-
tion and subordinated to the He SHC. la Hay-July 1943 the corps level of
strategic aviation was reinstated. Bight air corps of two divisions each
were created out of separate sir divisions. In December 1966 strategic
aviation was reorganized as the single 18th Air Army directly subordi-
nated to the cousnder of the Soviet Army Air Force. The evolved organi-
zational structure of frontal aviation and strategic aviation justified
itself completely during the war. demonstrated its viability. and afforded
the possibilities for increasing the maneuverability of formations and
units. massing forces on the most important axes, and maintaining effi-
cient interaction with the troops and stable centralized control over
aviation in all of the most important operations.

Management of the air force improved during the war. At the strategic
level the air force was directed by the Ho SHC through the General Staff
and the command of the Soviet Army Air Force. The actions of air armies

and strategic aviation in the strategic operations of groups of fronts
were coordinated by "a sac air liaison officers. They insured the neces-
sary centralization of control. concentration of aviation's efforts on

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY

the most important missions. prompt maneuver of air formations. and their
high effectiveness in the course of operations. The command. the Mili-
tary Council. and the staff of the Soviet Army Air Force did an extremely
great amount of work in the Great Patriotic Her to manage the combat
activities of the air force. to improve the organizational structure of
operational major air formations. formations. and units. to maintain
interaction uith ground troops and the navy, to train air reserves. to
insure prompt supply of aviation equipment. to manage construction of
airfielde. to train and retrain flight crews and technicians, and to
generalize the combat experience of all air arms and services and intro-
duce it into practice.

During the Great Patriotic "er the Soviet Air Force flew about 6 million
sortiee. The supreme high commander gave a high assessment to the actions
of the air force in Order No 51 dated 19 August 1945: "Our aviation
honorably completed its duty to the motherland in the Great Patriotic war
of the Soviet people against fascist Germany. The glorious falcons of our
fetherlsnd destroyed the lauded Luftwaffe in savage air engagements. thus
permitting the Red Army freedom of action and sparing the people of our
country from enemy bombing. Together with all of the Red Army they
inflicted annihilatory blows on the enemy. destroying his manpower and
equipment. The competent actions of our valorous air force constantly
promoted the success of ground troops and helped us to achieve final
destruction of the enemy."7

Hhat instructive lessons that have not lost their significance today

does the experience of the Soviet Air Force in operations of the Great
Patriotic Her give?

Chief Marshal of Aviation P. s. Kutakhov, the air force commander in
chief. said the following in this regard at a scientific conference dedi-
cated to the 25th anniversary of the victory over fascist Germany: "It is
with natural pride that we survey the path we have taken and the great
achievements of the Soviet Air Ports. The rich experience of strategic
use of the air force in the Great Patriotic Her has not lost its value
today. especially the experience of achieving air superiority to support
strategic operations in the theaters of var and in the war as a whole.
Extensive maneuvering of air groupings and the massing of aviation
efforts on the most important axes of the ground troops, as veil as in
independent mdsaions continues to be the most important principle of the
operational and strategic use of all air arms and services."8

First. the Great Patriotic Her subjected our theoretical vievpoints on
strategic use of the air force in different forms of operations of the
ground troops and the navy and in independent air operations to a herd.
merciless test. And Soviet military science and Soviet art of var passed
this test with honor. True. not all premises were faultless at the begin-
ning of the var. especially those pertaining to the organizational struc-
ture of the frontal aviation. to creation of large air reserves, and to

225

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
EN son omcm. use ONLY

.0'

organization of the control of combined air forces on the main axes of the
ground troops. Nevertheless for the most part the predictions and funda-
aental premises of the Soviet art of war regarding the use of the air
force were confirmed in the war. Evidence of this can be found in the
remarkable victories of the Soviet Air Force in the air over fascist
German aviation in the battles of Moscow and Stalingrad. at the Kuban'.
and at the Kurak salient. and in the strategic air superiority the air
force achieved along the entire Soviet-German front in summer 1943.

And no matter how bourgeois falsifiers of history try to belittle the
role of the Soviet Air Force in the defeat of German aviation. they will
never be able to deny the fact that out of all airplanes lost by the
Luftwaffe and Germany's satellites in the entire war. three-fourths were
destroyed on the Soviet-German front. and 57.000 of them were knocked out
of the air and burned on the ground by Soviet pilots.9

Attainment of strategic air superiority by the Soviet Air Force created
favorable conditions for major strategic offensive operations by groups
of fronts simultaneously on several axes, and it meant that the air

force could new mass its forces more decisively and engage in continuous
offensive actions. On the other hand enemy aviation went over to defen-
sive actions. no longer able to have a serious influence on the opera-
tions of German ground troops until the end of the war. The Luftwaffe's
loss of strategic air superiority and its switch to defensive actions
also had a direct influence. changing the ratio of its air arms, increas-
ing the airplane losses, and reducing the number of sorties flown in
1966-1965. While at the beginning of the war bombers made up 57.8 per-
cent of the Luftwaffe and fighters made up 31.2 percent, at the end of
1946 the proportion of German bombers decreased by a factor of b while
that of fighters more than doubled, reaching 68 percent.10 The losses
suffered by enemy aviation increased. while those of Soviet aviation
decreased. 0n the average for every airplane we lost, 32 sorties were
flown in 1961, 72 were flown in 1963, and 165 sorties were flown in 1945.
For every airplane lost, the enemy flew 25.5 sorties in 1962, 22.5 in
1943, and only 11 sorties in 1945. Prom year to year the Soviet Air
Force increased its monthly average of sorties. while that of the
Luftwaffe decreased. while in 1962 Hitler's aviation flew about 41.000
settles on the Soviet-German front on a monthly average, in 1943 it flew
39,300, and in 1965 it flew a little more than 15.500--that is, 2.6 times
fewer sorties.11 The war also fully confirmed the fundamental premise

of prewar Soviet art of war that there were two forms of struggle for air
superiority-~the daily fight against fascist German aviation in frontal
defensive and offensive operations of the ground troops, and air force
air operations intended to destroy enemy air groupings. In this case the
air force conducted air operations in support of the entire armed con-
flict (at the Kuban' in April 19k3 and in the central sector of the
Soviet-German front between 6 and 8 Hay and from 8 to 10 June 1963). and
the air services of one to three adjacent fronts flew in support of just
one front (strategic aria) as was the case, for example. in June 1961 in

226

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

actions against airfields in Finland and northern Norway, in October and
November 1941 on the Moscow axis, and in October 1962 on the Stalingrad
axis. 0n the whole the air operations of the air force were an effective
way to achieve strategic air superiority. 0n the average three to five
uorties were flown in an operation for every enemy airplane destroyed.

in this case the greatest success was enjoyed in the first massed sur-
prise strikss simultaneously against many airfields on a broad front.
Subsequent strikes were less effective: Enemy losses decreased, while
the losses of our air force grew. During the war a close relationship
and mutual dependence was revealed between strategic and operational air
superiority. Phase-by-phase attainment of operational air superiority

on the most important area of the ground troops led to victory on a
strategic scale along the entire Soviet-German front. In turn, presence
of strategic air superiority made it easier to achieve and maintain opera-
tional air superiority. At the same time strategic air superiority was
no guarantee that the eneny would not achieve operational air superiority
for a short interval of time, as was the case for example in the Bolo-
russian and L'vov-Sandoniert operations. Thus after strategic air
superiority is attained, the air force faces the mission of maintaining
this superiority and, on individual axes. fighting a savage battle for
operational air superiority. Thus the fight for air superiority in the
Great Patriotic Har of 1961-1945 was one of the most important missions
of the Soviet Air Force, and its attainment was the most important factor
promoting success of the entire armed conflict. It was an objective
ngcessity from the moment that military activities began to the last days
0 the war.

Second, many premises of our prewar manuals. regulations, and theoretical
viewpoints on joint actions of the Soviet Air Force and the ground troops
found their practical reflection in the Great Patriotic war, and con-
currently new improved forms and methods of action arose in different air
arms and services. The Soviet Air Force flew 66.5 percent of its combat
sorties in support of ground troops in offensive and defensive opera-
tions.12 Aviation cleared the way for infantry and tanks and assisted
them in quickly penetrating defenses, swiftly pursuing the enemy,
encircling and annihilating his groupings, crossing rivers. and seizing
and holding important beachheads. During the war Soviet Air Force
strategy was enriched by a new (ore of combat application of frontal
aviation in cooperation with ground troops; this came to be called the
"air offensive." It was born in 1962 in connection with the need for
providing a continuous sir escort to advancing troops. In the first air
offensive aviation limited itself to supporting penetration of the main
defense zone by the frontal troops. Beginning with summer l963--that is
after the Soviet Air Force attained strategic sir superiority, the air
offensive began to be waged throughout the entire depth of the frontal
offensive operation, and in terms of its scale and the size of the forces
called in it acquired an operational nature. In terms of the missions,
the air offensive broke down into air preparation for the attack and air
support (escort) of frontal troops.

227

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The air offensive enjoyed further development in the third period of the
war, and it was reflected in the Instructions on Penetration of Static
Defenses and the Instructions on Penetrating Fortified Areas published
in l9éb. In this case the extent to which the efforts of aviation were
massed in relation to its most important missions increased. While in
the offensive operations of the second period of the war 70-75 percent
of all of the forces of the air armies were concentrated on the axes of
the main strikes, in the third period of the war the figure climbed to
90-95 percent--that is, l,500-2,500 Soviet airplanes on each axis
(L'vev-Sandomierz, Viatula-Oder. and Berlin operations).13

This success was promoted in many ways by the brilliant decision of the
Soviet Command to create a large air reserve taking the form of air corps
and separate air divisions. Haneuvering them. the "q sac and the air
force command created a superiority of forces. which altered the situa-
tion in the air to our favor within a short time. Some 1,200 of our air-
planes participated in the counteroffensive at Moscow, l,h00 fought at
Stalingrad. 5,300 participated in the counteroffensive at Kursk, more
than 6,000 participated in the Belorussian operation, and 7,500 war-
planes fought in the Berlin operation.

During the war methods were found for using frontal aviation in support
of commitment of mechanized cavalry groups and tank armies to an engage-
ment (a breakthrough), and of their actions at strategic depth. Commit-
ment of mechanized cavalry groups and tank armies to the engagement was
supported by the main forces of frontal aviation (the air army), while
one or two ground attack air divisions and sometimes a ground attack air
corps were given the mission of providing direct support to these forma-
tions during their actions in depth. In a number of cases commitment of
a tank army to an engagement was preceded by short but powerful air
preparation having the goal of suppressing and annihilating pockets of
resistance, strongpointa, and antitank defenses (the Orel, Belorussian,
and L'vov-Sandomierz operations). Ground attack aviation began escorting
the tank army from the moment it was committed to the engagement, and it
stayed with it until the army completed its mission. when the tank army
reached operational depth, the air army concentrated its efforts against
approaching enemy reserves and. when the enemy was withdrawing, against
retreating troops.

The tank army was covered from the air during the time of its commitment
to the engagement in accordance with the overall plan for covering the
frontal troops; when the tank army was operating apart from the combined
arms armies. specially assigned fighter air divisions provided air cover.
0n the average up to two fighter air divisions were used to cover a tank
army. Cover was provided by groups of fighters patrolling above the
area of actions of the tank army and at the immediate approaches to this
area.

228

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Special attention should be turned to the actions of aviation in encircle-
sent operations of the ground troops. In the counteroffensive at Stalin-
grad and in the Korsun'-Shevchenkovskiy. Yassi-Kishinev. Belorussian.
Berlin. and other operations the Soviet Air Force acquired experience

in organizing and conducting aultizonai ring air blockades. in flexibly
maneuvering the forces of major air formations and formations to repel
enemy counterattncks on the outer and inner fronts of encirclesent. and
in massed use of aviation to destroy surrounded groupings. isolation of
large encircled enemy groupings from the air sea a new form of opera-
tionai application of the air force. The war experience persuasively
demonstrated that the encirclenent operation cannot be thought of as
completed if the enemy is able to supply his troops by air with every-
thing necessary and thus promote maintenance of a sound ring defense and
support penetration of the ring of encirclement. The air blockade, seen-
while. deprived the enemy of this possibility and created favorable con-
ditions for our ground troops. who could swiftly destroy the surrounded
grouping.

Successful performance of an air blockade depended on the following basic
conditions: Presence of operational air superiority in the given sector
of the front: assignment of the necessary quantity of forces from dif-
ferent air arms and services and from air defense resources to fight
transport aviation; organization of efficient. continuous interaction
between the major formations. fornations. and units of different air
arms and services on one hand and different branches of the arsed forces
on the other (ground troops. air force. National Air Defense Forces);
creation of a single aircraft warning service; centralization of command
and control of all forces involved in the air blockade.

The air force also successfully completed its mission of air reconnais-
sance. using special air reconnaissance reginents and all air arms.

By revealing enemy troop groupings. ships. and aviation. his system of
defenses. the movement of reserves. and the locations of headquarters
and control posts. air reconnaissance provided invaluable assistance to
the Soviet Cos-and in determining the enemy's intent and achieving more-
purposeful use of troops and aviation to defeat him. Frontal aviation
flew more than ll percent of its total settles in the performance of this
mission. During the var an area equal to 6.5 million square kilo-stars
was photographed; this was 1 million square kilometers sore than the
area of the European USSR.1‘

Third. relying on acquired experience. Soviet art of war flexibly and
purposefully solved the problem of using strategic aviation in the war.
in the first period of the war long-range bosber (strategic aviation)
formations and naval aviation made only isolated strikes against the
centers of Romania's petroleum industry and against military objectives
in Berlin. Konigaberg. Danzig. Tilsit. and other German cities. But
after strategic aviation was improved quantitatively and qualitatively.
independent air operations began to be conducted (for exaap'e against

229

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

military objectives in Budapest in September 1966, or against the enemy‘s
strategic shipping in 1963 and 1956). These operations were conducted
under the guidance of the "q sac and they were characterized by rela-
tively large scope. Strategic bombers made massed and concentrated
strikes at night, while the air operation itself lasted several days

(3 or 4). Strategic aviation directed its aain efforts. meanwhile. at
destroying groupings of fascist German troops in the offensive and
defensive operations of the ground troops; this satisfied the requirements
of the situation and the nature of the armed conflict. During the war
strategic air formations flew 60.& percent of their sorties with the goal
of annihilating troops and combat equipment on the battlefield, 9.6 per-
cent against airfields. and 30.6 percent against railroad facilities and
reserves in the frontal rear.15 Strategic aviation was also used suc-
cessfully to support partisans in the enemy rear. During the war frontal
strategic aviation and units of the Civil Air Fleet flew more than
109,000 sorties in the enemy rear. Strategic aviation and units of the
Civil Air Fleet carried 17,000 tons of ammunition. armament. food. and
medicines. They furnished round trips to more than 83,000 persons fight-
ing in partisan detachments.16

Fourth. the problems of interaction had a special place in the offensive
and defensive operations of one front and a group of fronts. In terms
of its scale and nature. it can be broken down into strategic. opera-
tional, and tactical. Strategic interaction meant coordination of the
efforts of the air force and the ground troops in the interests of
achieving success in the strategic operations of groups of fronts and
campaigns. Strategic offensive operations conducted by groups of fronts
were the principal and decisive form of actions of our armed forces on
strategic axes. Strategic interaction was organized during the war by
the Headquarters of the Supreme High Command. The latter defined and
posed the missions to the fronts and the air force on different axes in
such a way as to achieve maximum strategic results.

Operational interaction of major air force formations with major ground
troop formations and the navy entailed coordination of their efforts in
place, time. and missions with the goal of achieving the highest results
in jointly conducted operations. Interaction of aviation with troops of
the combined arms (tank) armies was organized by the frontal troop com-
mander. He set the general missions for aviation, determined the forces
required. spelled out the order for supporting and covering troops in
different phases of the operation, set missions for combined arms (tank)
armies to capture (hold, restore. and repair) enemy airfields and indi-
cated the basic directions and objectives of air reconnaissance to the
air army. Tactical interaction of aviation with units and formations
of the fronts (army) was expressed as coordination of actions in place.
goals. and time. It was attained through meticulous planning. deploy-
ment of the control posts of air commanders and the control posts of
combined arms cosmmnders close together, organization of the work of
aircraft guidance radio stations located near the front line. and prompt

230

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and legible demarcation of the front line. Solution of the problems of
tactical interaction of aviation with units and formations of the ground

troops was the great achievenent of Soviet art of war.

Fifth. the problem of controlling eviation was solved successfully in the
Great Patriotic War of l961-l9b5. Air armies--major operational forma-
tions including within their composition several dozen air formations and
separate units-were created in the fronts and were found to be viable.
They permitted the commander to control all aviation at his disposal
centrally. and they fully satisfied the requirements of close interaction
with operational major formations and formations of the ground troops.

The air army had a branched control system consisting of command, forward.
and auxiliary control posts. operational groups. and air liaison officers
in the major formations and formations of the ground troops.

In strategic operations conducted by groups of fronts. interaction between
frontal air armies and strategic air formations was successfully achieved
by the Soviet Army Air Force commander or his deputies, who traveled to
the operating army as Hq SHC liaison officers together with small opera-
tional air force staff groups. This method for managing the air force's
operational major formations and formations during military activities
Justified itself completely. It had to be developed and improved with

a consideration for the significance of the time factor in control in
regard to posing missions. monitoring their execution, and collecting
information. all of which required extensive automation and mechaniza-
tion of the main elements of control. "The most typical features of the
strategic use of the air force in the concluding period of the war." said
Chief Marshal of Aviation P. s. Kutakhov. "were rigid centralization of
control of major air formations. close interaction with advancing troops.
naval forces. and air defense troops and concentration of aviation's
efforts on the most important axes."i7

The combat experience gained by the Soviet Air Force in the Great
Patriotic war has not been fully studied yet. It must be studied further.
and it must be accounted for in modern conditions, especially in regard

to organizing and conducting the battle for strategic air superiority,
massing the efforts of aviation on the main axes of the ground troops.
organizing interaction of the air force with the ground troops and the
navy. and controlling several major operational formations of the air
force with the senior air chief in charge.

Marshal of the Soviet Union A. A. Grechko pointed out the following in
his concluding remarks at a scientific conference dedicated to the 30th

anniversary of the victory of the Soviet people and their armed forces
in the Great Patriotic Her of 1951-1945: "To the Soviet Armed Forces,

the war was the greatest school of combat experience. experience that
has become our priceless possession. and a national wealth. This
experience was gained with the blood of Soviet soldiers and through the

231

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efforts of all the people, and we do not have the right to lose it or
forget it. It remains significant even today in many ways; it is a
dependable foundation for developing military theory and improving troop
combat and political training. Creative assimilation of the experience
of the Crest Patriotic War with a consideration for the present material-
technical base of the Soviet Armed forces and their qualitative growth
makes it possible to develop military affairs better and more quickly.

to predict the nature of future ware. and to heighten the battle power
of the army and navy."18

The hard years of the Great Patriotic Hnr fully confirmed V. I. Lenin's
brilliant conclusions concerning the decisive role of the Communist
Party's leadership in achieving victory both in the rear and at the
front. The Central Committee was the party's battle headquarters. At
the fronts and in the rear, and on territory temporarily occupied by the
enemy the Communist Party played the role of a single fighting. mobi-
lizing. and guiding force. Through personal example and with words of
Inspiration, communists strengthened the morale of all Soviet people and
led them to acts of heroism in battle and in labor. In the postwar era.
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is persistently following Lenin's

COUPUL‘ o

"All of these years," said CPSU Central Committee General Secretary L. l.
Brezhnev at the 25th CPSU Congress, "the party has devoted proper atten-
tion to strengthening our country's defense capabilities and improving
the armed forces. we can now report to the congress that we have done a
great deal in this area. The armed forces have more modern weapons and
combat equipment. and the quality of combat training and the ideological
maturity of the personnel have risen. In general. comrades, the Soviet
people can be assured that the fruits of their creative labor are being
protected reliably. Nor should anyone doubt that our party will not do
everything to see that the glorious Armed Forces of the Soviet Union
will continue to have all of the resources they need for their important
mission--guarding the peaceful labor of the Soviet people and serving

as the bulwark of universal peace."19

CPSU Central Committee Politburo member, USSR Minister of Defense Marshal
ol the Soviet Union D. F. Ustinov gave the following assessment to Soviet
airmen and modern military aviation in Order No 172 dated 15 August 1976,
dedicated to celebration of USSR Air force Day: "...The USSR Air Force
has traveled a great heroic path. In the several years of military
trials. courageous airmen displayed unshahable steadfastness and high
skill. bravery. and valor in battles for the liberty and independence

of the socialist fatherland. Owing to constant concern of the Communist
Party and the Soviet Government, aviation of the armed forces is
presently outfitted with sophisticated combat equipment and weapons,

and it is manned by well trained personnel educated in the spirit of
selfless devotion to communism. As with all soldiers of the armed forces.
military airmen are persistently working on the tasks posed to them by

232

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the 25th CPSU Congreee. they unanimously approve and wholly and con-
pletoly support the Cow-mint Party'e Lenlnlat forelgn and domatlc
po11oy. and they olertly and dopandahly protect the great achievenenta
of eoclallen...."20

l.

2.

3.

be

5.

6.

7.

9.

10.

ll.
12.
13.

14.

15.

FOOTNOTES

Brezhnev. L. 1.. "Lenlnekll kuraon. Rechl 1 etat'l" (Folloulns
Lentn'e Course. Speeches and Artlclce). Vol 1. Moscow. 1970. p 129.

"Vellkayo Otecheetvennaye voyne Sovetekogo Soyuze 1941-1965 3;.
Kretkeyo letorlya" (The Great Patrlotlc "or of tho Sovlet Unlon
1941-1945. A Short ﬂletory). p 571.

"Vellkayo Otecheetvennaya voyna Sovetakogo Soyuza 1941-1945 33.
Krotkaya letorlya." p 579.

lhld., p 579.

Arkhlv H0 SSSR [USSR Hlnletry of Defense Archives], f. 35. op. 11250,
d. 101. l. 1.

VOYENNO-ISTORICHESKIY ZHURNAL, No 10, 1976, p 32.

Stalin. I. V., "O Velikoy Otecheetvennoy voyne Sovetekogo Soyuza"
(The Great Patriotic Her of the Soviet Unlon). Moscow, 1953, p 202.

"Veonlrno-letorlcheekaya poheda eovetakogo naroda 1941-1945 33."
(The Horld-ﬂletorlc Vlctory of the Sovlet People 1n 1961-1945),
Moscow. 1971, p 69.

"Vaonlrno-letorlcheekoye poboda eovetekogo naroda 1941-1965 33.,"
Moscow. 1971. p 45.

"Sovetsklyc Voyenno-Vozduahnyye Slly v Vellkoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1941-1965 33." (The Soviet Air Force to the Great Patrlotlc War
1941-1965), Moscow. 1968. pp 26. 440.

lbld.. p 440.

VOYENNO-ISTORICIIBSKIY ZNURNAL, No 11, 1969. p 20.
VOYBCNO-ISTORICIIBSKIY ZRURNAL. No 11, 1971. pp 17-18.

”Soveteklye Voyenno-Vozduohnyye Slly v Vellkoy Otecheetvennoy voyne
1941-1945 33.." p 463.

VOYIiﬂNO-IS‘I‘ORICEIESKIY ZHURNAL, No 11, 1971. p 20.

233

708 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Sovotsklyc Voyenno-Vozdushnyye Sily v Vellkoy Otcchcstvennoy voyne
1951-1965 33.," p 6&6.

"Velikayn pobcds eovetskogo nerods 1941-1965 33." (The Greet V1ctory
of the Soviet People in 1961-1965), Moscow. 1976, 266 pp.

KRASNAYA ZVBZDA. 19 Apr11 1975.

Brezhnev. L. 1., "Otchet Tsentrsl'nogo Kondtets KPSS 1 ocherednyye
zndnchl perttl v oblssti vnutrenney 1 vneshney politiki. Doklsd
XXV s’yezdu KPSS 26 fovrslys 1976 3." (Report of the CPS" Central
Committee and the Party‘s Current Tasks 1n Donestlc and Foreign
Policy. Report to the 25th CPSU Congress. 20 February 1976),
Moscow, 1976, p 100.

KMSNAYA ZVBZDA, 15 August 1976.

236

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Colonel General of Avia-
tion. as of 17 March
1943 Marahal of Aviation.

no of 21 February 1966
Chief Marshal of Aviatlon

Novlkov, A. A.

Corpa Con-laaar, an of
October 1951 Aray Con-
nlaaar 2d Rank. Stapanov.
P. So

Lieutenant General of
Aviation, an of

6 February 1945 Colonel
General of Aviation.
Shlnanov. M. S.

Major General of Avia-
tlon Vo1odln. P. S.

Major General of Avla-
tlon Vorozhoykln. c. A.

11 April 19b2-
end of war

29 June 1941-
8 Auguat 1962

17 March 1943-e
of var

22 June 1951-
29 June 1941

Auguat 1961-
Aprll 1962
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Major General of Aviation
Khudyakov. s. A.

Colonel General of Aviation
Falaleyev, F. Ya.

Colonel General of Aviation.
as of 19 August 1944 Marshal
of Aviation Khudyekov, s. A.

Major General of Aviation.
ae of 1942 Lieutenant
General of Aviation. as
of 1943 Colonel General
of Aviation. then Marehal
of Aviation. an of

19 Auguet 1944 chief
Marahal of Aviation
Golovanov. A. Ye.

Divieional Coenieear, as
of 6 December 1942 Major
General of Aviation. ae
of 18 September 1943
Lieutenant General of
Aviation. ae of 19 August
1944 Colonel General of
Aviation Gur'yanov. G. G.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Shevelev. M. 1.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Perninov, N. V.

AIR ARMY COMMAND

April 1942-July
1942

July 1942-Mny 1943

May 1943-end of
ear

5 March 1942-
6 December 1944

21 March 1942-
6 December 1944

5 March 1942-
June 1944

July 1944-
6 December 1944
V08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Colonel General of Aviation
Khryukin. T. T.

Brigade Con-laser. no of
20 Deco-her l9‘2 Colonel.
aa of 9 April 1953 Major
General of Aviation
Litvlnenko. l. G.

Major General of Aviation
Chernyehav. I. T.

Colonel. an of March 1963
Major General of Aviation
Pronin. A. s.

Major General of Aviation
Belov. I. M.

2 July l9b6-and of
war

5 May 1962-
23 March 1945

23 March 1965-
end of war

5 May 1952-
9 August 1966

12 February 1965-
end of var
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Major General of Aviation
Tel'nov. K. 1.

Major General of Aviation
Prenin, A. 9.

Major General of Aviation
Grolov. M. M.

Major General of Aviation,
an of 28 September 1963
Lieutenant General of
Aviation, aa of 19 August
1966 Colonel General of
Aviation Papivin. N. F.

Reginental Goaniaeer. as of
20 Dace-her 1962 Colonel,
aa of 23 Nova-her 1963
Major General of Aviation
Babak. N. P.

Major General of Aviation.
as of August 1966 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Dagayev. N. P.

Major General of Aviation
Verahinin. K. A.

Major General of Aviation
Mauaenko. R. F.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation. as of 26 October

1963 Colonel General of
Aviation Verahinin. K. A.

Divisional Con-laser. as
of 20 December 1962 Major
General of Aviation
Alekaeyev, V. 1.

Major General of Aviation.
as of 19 August 1966 Lieu-

tenant Generel of Aviation
Verov, P. F.

238
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Major General of Aviation
Uatinov. A. 2.

Major General of Aviation
Alekaeyev, A. N.

Lieutenant General of

Aviation. er of 25 March
1966 Colonel General of
Aviation Goryunov. S. K.

Brigade Goa-iaaar, aa of
5 Deceaber 19b! Colonel
Grubich. A. P.

Major General of Aviation
Alekaeyev, V. I.

Colonel. as of 20 April
1964 Major General of

Aviation Smirnov. V. 1.

Major General of Aviation
Sinyakov. S. P.

Major General of Aviation,
as of 13 September 1966
Lieutenant General of
Aviation Saleznev. M. G.

Major General of Aviation
Kondratyuk. D. F.

Major General of Aviation,
an of 28 May 1963 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Polynin, P. P.

Brigade Coeniaear. as of
S Decenber 1942 Colonel
Maahnin, I. V.

Brigade Goa-inner, as of
12 May 1962. Colonel. as
of 29 May 1966 Major
General of Aviation
Vyvolokin. A. P.

239
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
nouoaop. so on n zoconvon
Hop» :buon oaaonuu on
><nonpo= mouno«o<. u. H.

newosow ua~o<. n. x.
nauoaou m<ooranro<. w. m.
2990" canons» o» ><uonnoa

unwoc. u. :.

:buo~ oonanuw o» ><»an»oa
39.2. 952.3 on >333:
wags—65 >. m.

3&2. 02.3.... on >335:
icon-.305 <. >.

9.6.5» 0252: on >39-
33 werewoc. n. :.

wagon gun-=2. nag-o: .

to on 3 6.3.23 53
55—3-49. KD—D!:.I75fnrbﬁ'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Colonel. es of 8 September
l9h5 Major General of
Avlotlon Sloboxhen. D. Yo.

Colonel General of Aviation
Zhlgorev. P. F.

Rest-onto). Couleur, no of
20 Deco-her 1952 Colonel
Hel'nlk. M. V.

Colonel Pedorov. s. K.

16 September 19“»
19 May 19“

19 Hay 1945-
end of war

27 July 191.2-
16 Dace-bar 19M.

16 Dene-her 1966-
end of var
5232.25 023:— 0» 2:.-
«noa. .- on 3 2251.2.
35 9:5.» 9:26.. 0».
>333: anon—.3938. m. a.

wan-no coll-non. .- on
o 9332. 35 3&9.
993.3 on >333:
73:2: >. >.

nous—ow 9.3.3. 3. u.
Major General of Aviation
Pyatykhin. I. G.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Naunenko. N. F.

Regimental Couiaaer. as
of 5 December 1952 colonel.
as of 19 January 1946 Major
General of Aviation
Sukhachev. M. N.

Colonel Senenov. I. 3.

Major General of Aviation
Sakovnin. A. A.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Stepanov, P. 5.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation. a of Hay 1956
Colonel General of Aviation
Rudenko. S. I.

Regimental Couiaaar. as
of S Decedaer 1962 Colonel.
an of 1 January 1963 Major
General of Aviation
Vinogradov. A. s.

22 July 1942-
Mny 1963

May 1943-
end of war

17 July 1962-
end of war

22 July 1962-
23 August 1942

24 August 1942-
end of war

8 August 1942-
28 September 1952

28 Septeober 1942-
end of war

17 Septenber 1962-
end of war
Major General of Aviation.
no of 20 Decoder 1962
Lieutenant General of
Aviation Krneovakiy. S. A.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation, no of March 1966

Colonel General of Aviation
Sudete, V. A.

Brigade Co-inaer. es of
5 Decednr 1962 Colonel.
as of 1 May 1963 Major
General of Aviation
Toluchev, V. N.

Colonel Tel'nov. K. I.

15 Novednr 196
26 March 1963

26 March 1963-
end of war

25 Novedaer 196
end of var

November 1962-
Pebruery 1963
Clliei‘ of Staff

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Perninov. M. V.

..; SHC RESERVE AIR CORPS COMMANDERS

ill Fighter Air Corpa,

Reorganized an of

18 February 19‘) an
t Guarda Fighter
Gorpe

11 Fighter Air Corps

Ill Fighter Air Corps

IV Fighter Air Corpa.
Reorganized 2 July
1966 as III Guarde
Fighter Corpe

V Fighter Air Corpa

VI Fighter Air Corps

Fighter Air Gorpe

Major General of Aviation,
an of 17 March 1963 Lieu-
tenant Gcnerel of Aviation
Beletakiy, Ye. M.

Major General of Aviation,
as of 30 April 1963 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Blagoveehchenakiy, A. S.

Major General of Aviation
Zabaluyev, V. M.

Major General of Aviation.
aa of 11 May 194‘ Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Savitakiy. Ya. Ya.

Major General of Aviation,
as of 13 Septeaber 1966
Lieutenant General of
Aviation Podgornyy, l. D.

Major General of Aviation
Kliaov, l. D.

Major General of Aviation
Galunov. D. P.

Colonel. an of 20 April
1905 Major General of
Aviation Machin. M. G.

Major General of Aviation
Yunaehev. A. 8.

Major General of Aviation
Yerlykin, Ye. Ye.

Major General of Aviation
Dzueov. I. M.
VII Fighter Air Corps.
Reorganized 27 October
l9b6 as VI Guards
Fighter Corps

VIII Fighter Air Corps

X Fighter Air Corps

XI Fighter Air Corps

XIII Fighter Air
Corps

XIV Fighter Air Corps

I Mixed Air Corps.
Reorganized

28 September 1966
as IX Ground
Attach Corps

II Mixed Air Corps,
Reorganized 13 July
1963 as X Fighter
Corps

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020036-9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONtY

Major General of Aviation
Utin, A. V.

Major General of Aviation
Zherebehenko. F. F.

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Osipenko, A. 8.

Colonel. es of 7 August
1943 Major General of
Aviation Golovnye, M. M.

Major General of Aviation
Ivanov, G. A.

Major General of Aviation
Sidnev, B. A.

Major General of Aviation
Danilov. S. P.

Mixed Air Corps

Major General of Aviation
Shevchenko, V. I.

Major General of Aviation
zletotsvetov, A. Ye.

Major General of Aviation
Rebanov, S. U.

Colonel Ivolgin, V. 1.

Major General of Aviation
Vinogradov, V. A.

Major General of Aviation
Krupskiy, I. V.

Major General of Aviation
Yereaenko. I. I.

267

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROP82-00850R000100020030-9
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

Colonel. aa of lo November
1952 Major General of

Aviation. ae of lo February
19“ Lieutenant General of
Aviation Aladinakiy, V. 1.

Lieutenant General of Avia-
tion Zletotavetov. A. Ye.

Major General of Aviation
Slyuaarev, S. V.

Major General. of Aviation
Ivanov. A. A.

Major General of Aviation
Slyuaarev. s. V.

Major General of Aviation
Zherebchenko. P. F.

Major General of Aviation
Slyuaarev, S. V.

Major General of Aviation
Antoehkin, I. D.

Colonel, aa of 19 August
19“ Major General of
Aviation Borieanko, M. Rh.

Colonel. aa of 17 March
1963 Major General of
Aviation Arkhangel'ekiy.
P. P.

Major General of Aviation
Kananin. N. P.

Major General of Aviation.
ae of 2 Auguat 19106 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
'rolatikov. 0. V.
Colon“. at of 17 March
1963 Major General of
Aviation. no of 11 May 19“
Lieutenant Ganeral of Avie-
tion Stapichav, V. V.

Colonel. aa of 17 March
1943 Major General of
Aviation Goriachanko. M. 1.

Major Genera1 of Aviation,
as of 19 August 1966 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Baydukov, G. F.

Major Ganeral of Aviation.
an of 20 April 19105 Lieu-
tenant Genara1 of Aviation
Kananin. N. 1’.

Major General of Aviation
Tokarev. B. K.

Major General of Aviation.
aa of 16 May 19“ Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Pilin, V. M.

10 October 1962-
end of war

6 Decaaber 1952-
end of var

1 January 19“-
and of var

21 July 1963-
end of war

30 December 1953-
end of war

21 July 19b3-
end of var
.POR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

Major General of Aviation.
an of ll May l9b4 Lieu-
tenant General of Aviation
Maneyehvili. V. V.

Major General of Aviation
Kotel'nikov, M. V.

Major General of Aviation
Rubanov. S. U.

Lieutenant General of Avia-
tion Maneyahvili. V. V.

Major General of Aviation
Krupakiy. l. V.

Lieutenant General of Amie-
tion Tolatikov. 0. V.

Boaber Air Corpe

Lieutenant General of
Aviation Sudete. V. A.

Colonel, an of 20 October
1943 Major General of
Aviation Polbin, l. 3.

Major General of Aviation
Machev. P. l.

Colonel Mikiehin. D. T.

15 April l9A6-
6 January 1945

7 January 1965-
3 April 1965

4 April 1965-
29 April 1945

30 April 1965-
end of wer

28 September 1944-
end of war

29 Septelber 1965-
end of Her

10 Septeaber 1962-
13 March 1963

1 April 1943-
11 February 1965
12 February 196$-
13 March 19‘s

lb March 1965-
end of var
V Bonbar Air Corpa

V1 Ioabar Mr Corps

VII Bonbar Mr Corpa

FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

Major Ganaral of Aviation
Boriaanko. a. Rh.

Major Moral of Mutton.
an of 13 March 191an Lian-
tonant Canaral of Avtauon
Tupikov. c. N.

Colonal. aa of 20 April
1965 Hajor Ganaral of
Aviation Skok. I. P.

Ltaucanant Canaral of
Aviation Uahakov. V. A.

OOPYRIGHT: Izdatal'atvo "MUM". 1978