APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00880R000100020003-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/BZGO
2 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 4/79)
CIVIL DEFENSE AT AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION FACILITIES

IL S.J(>ﬂ41’PlﬂﬂJ(JAIACﬂ4$ RESEJAR(31 SERA/ﬂUE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items.are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, vieus or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OP
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROPPICIAL USE ONLY.
'i'l‘auoonnnc oan '- M-m Nu- . J. ammmu Am“... u...
9.“, ma. .mso _—

II r .nITJZiT-"_ Open all
TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS. (P000 4/79) 2 Pabrua 1979

.. o.
ivil Defense attfhgricultural Production Facilitie

9. Praia-m; Omanuoiion Nose and AJdl-OII
Joint Publications Munch Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I). ‘oouamm ago-nation Nuns and Minus 1: Type ai Report & Paid
Coveted
As above

is. Supple-ulna" Notes

  

6. Manse“

The report contains intonation on the Soviet military and civil defense

establishments, leadership, doctrine. policy, planning, political affairs,
organization. and equipment.

. Kay Vat-la nu Dora-mu Main“. 0. Deutiwm

USSR

Military Organizations
Military Facilities
Military Personnel

UL ”t'ﬂtlwls ’0': n-I'ner Tell!

in. I «Mil [mull-cm..- 15(;

II. Judd-slay Vain-rm

Fun ui-‘FIIHM. list-2 ONLY. Liaited Number of
(topics Available From JPRS

    

- nun ~Il‘ 9‘ Ion s. t 'l-

‘mo row um at ncpaoouao “" °“'°‘ "”"m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/826
2 February

"TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(F000 4/79)
CIVIL Deseuse AT AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION FACILITIES

Conn-ms

Excerpts From Book on Civll Defense at. Agricultural Installations
(n. I. Anmov, v. a. mm; mm 0308mm m
OB'YRKHUQiSEL'SKOKHOZIAYSTVEHNGM)FROEMKMXHWA, 1978)....”

- a - [III - USSR -

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BXCERPTS FROM BOOK ON CIVIL DEFENSE AT AGRICULTURAL INSTALLATIORS

Moscow GRAZHDANSKAYA OBORORA NA OB'YEKTIKH SBL'SKOKHOZYAYSTVBNNOGO
PROIZVODSTVA in Russian 1978 pp 1-6, 12-19. 81-85. 100.110. 322-325.
328-335

[Book by N. I. Akiaov and V. c. Il'in]
[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: GRAZﬂDARSKAXA OBORONA NA OB'YBKTAKH SBL'-
SKOKHOZYAYSTVENNOGO PROIZVODSTVA (Civil Defense
at Agricultural Production Facilities) (Second
Revised and Expanded Edition)

Publisher: Izdetel'stvo "Kolos"

Place and year of publication: Moscow. 1978

signed to Press Date: 13 October 1977

Nuaber of Copies Published: 200.000

Rulber of Pages: 335

Infornation on Authors:

V. c. Il’in wrote chapters 2. 7 (except for the factor. influencing
vnrk stability at facilities and the basic measures for increasing
work stability at facilities), 8, 9 and 11 of this book: A. H.
Antropov and V. G. Kharin wrote chapter 12; N. I. Akinov wrote the
rest.

Brief Description:

this textbook exauines: CD tasks and organization at agricultural

facilities; chemical. biological and radiation detectors and dosimeters;

the facility CD plan; organizing and conducting rescue and eaergency
restoration work within the territory of an agricultural facility and
also at a contaainated urban facility; and other issues.

1
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Introduction . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 1.

Civil Defense‘nmks and Organizational Stnmture

secessasasssaeoaaso

for an Agricultural Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.
2'

3.
6.

The Capitalist States' Weapons of Mass Destruction
and a Ericl Description'if Them . . . . . . . . . . .
The Foreign States' Means for Dtlivering Weapons of
Mass Destruction to Objectives (Targets) . . . . . .
Civilvefense‘l‘neks.................
Civil Defense Organizational Structure . . . . . . .

Chapter 2. The Effect of "2430“. of Mass Destruction on
Agricultural Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l.

12.

Nuclear weapons Effects on Agricultural Facilities .
Radioactive Pollution (Contamination) of the Terrsin
The Effect of the Products of a Nuclear Explosion on
People and Animals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Effect of the Products of a Nuclear Explosion on
Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contamination of Fish Life by Radioactive Substances
Contamination of Food. Feed and Water by Radioactive
Substances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chemical weapons Effects on People and Animals . . .
Contamination of Terrain. Buildings, Food. Feed and

Hater by Poisonous Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chemical Agents Designed to Destroy Agricultural Crops

Biological Warfare Agents Effects on People and Animals

Contamination of Food, Feed and Hater by Disease-
Carrying Microorganisms and Toxins . . . . . . . . .
Biological warfare Agents Effects on Plants . . . . .

Chapter 3. Radiation and Chemical Detectors and Devices for
Honitoring Radioactive Contamination and Irradiation . .

1.
2.
3.

Types of Radioactive Radiation . . . . . . . . . . .
Units of Measurement for Radioactive Radiation . . .
Purpose. Operating Principle and Design of Dosineters

Purpose and Basic Perforaance Data for the DP-SB and

the DP-SA Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Purpose and Basic Performance Data for Individual Dosi-

seter Kits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chemical Reconnaissance Kits . . . . . . . . . . . .
Devices for Detecting Rust Spores and Phytophthora
Spores in the Atmosphere and on Crops . . . . . . . .
Storing Kits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 6. Protecting the Population Against weapons of Hess
Destruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.

Protective Civil Defense Structures . . . . . . . . .

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE OFLY

e

0

one.

12
18

22
22
2B

30
36
40
61

L7
48
52

SS
55

60
60
62
66

66

70
73

78
79

81
81
2.
3.

‘0
5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Shelter! a a s c a o a o s t a a a a a a n a a n s 0
Radiation Shelters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rules for Using Civil Defense Protective Structures . .
Dispersal and Evacuation of the Population . . . . . .
Reception and Lodging of People Involved in Dispersal
and Evacuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Individual Means of Protection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Procedures for Using the Individual First Aid Kit and the
Individual Antigas Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 5. Actions of the Population Under the Threat of an Enemy
Attack and in Response to Civil Defense Alerts . . . . . . .

l.

2.

Actions of the Population Under the Threat of an Enemy
At tack I O I O O I O I 0 O I C O O O O I O O O I O C 0
Civil Defense Alerts and Actions of the Population . .

Chapter 6. Adapting and Using Agricultural Equipment for Civil
Defense Purposes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.

So

Using Agricultural Machinery and Tools to Decontaminate
the Terrain, Buildings. Structures, Facilities and
Equipment and to Protect Plant Life . . . . . . . . . .
Employing Agricultural Aircraft to Protect Plant Life . .
Equipment Employed to Protect Livestock . . . . . . . . .
Adapting and Using Tractors. Excavators. Land Reclamation
Machinery and Load-Handling Equipment to Mechanize Rescue
and Emergency Restoration Fork . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Safety Measures when Using Agricultural and Specialized
Equipment for Decontamination Purposes . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 7. work Stability of Agricultural Facilities in Wartime .

1.
2.
30

Factors Influencing work Stability at Facilities . . . .

Basic Measures for Increasing Hork Stability at Facilities

Protecting Animals Against Weapons of Mass Destruction .
CD Measures to Eliminate the Aftereffects of the
Enemy's Employment of weapons of Mass Destruction on
Livestock Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Measures in Zones of Radioactive Contamination . . . .
Measures in a Center of Chemical Contamination . . . .
Basic Measures to Eliminate a Center of Biological
Contamination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Veterinary Treatment of Animals . . . . . . . . . . . .
Decontaminating Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Decontaminating the Territory of Livestock Farms and
Livestock Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rendering Medical Assistance and Preventive Medical
Assistance to Contaminated Animals . . . . . . . . . .
Procedures for Slaughtering and Conducting a Veterinary
Medical Examination of the Meat of Animals Subjected to
the Effects of weapons of Mass Destruction . . . . . .

3
FOR OFFICIAL use 0qu

.mm.

81
8b
98
100

107
110

122

125
125
131
137

137
159
152

155
156
159
159

160
166

172
173
175
176
178
18k
185

188

189
A.

S.

6.

7.

Chapter 8.
l.
2.
3.
‘0

5.

Chapter 9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Protecting Plants Against weapons of Mass Destruction . . .
CD Measures when Plants are Contaminated by herbicides . .
CD Measures Hhen Plants are Contaainated by Biological
Agentﬂ I I l O O O O l O O O O _ D I O O O I O I U l O O O I
CD Measures when Plants are Contaainsted by Radioactive
Subbtnnc9° e a o p a a a a a a a a a a a s a a a a s a a a
CD Measures for Reducing Crop Losses and Surface
Contamination of Agricultura‘ Products by Radioactive
Subltlncee o a a o a a a o s a a a e a a a s a o a a a s a

Conducting Agricultural Production on Land with an Increased

Strontiua-9O Content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Basic Measures for Reducing the Entry of Strontium-90
into Plants (row the Soil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peed Production on Land vith an Increased Level of Radio-
activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
feeding Agricultural Aninals in Zones with an Increased
Level of Radioactivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Using and Craving Tinher in an Area with an Increased Level

of Radioactivity o a a s s I s s a a e a a a a a a a a a a a

Protecting and Decontaninating Food. Peed. Hater and

Sources of Water . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Decontaminating Food. Feed and Hater Under Kolkhoz and
Sovkhoz Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Quick Methods for Detecting Radioactive Substances.

Herbicides and Biological Agents in Food. Peed and Hater . .

The Civil Defense Plan for an Agricultural Facility . . . .
Purpose of the Civil Defense Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Basic Require-eats for the Civil Defense Plan . . . . . . .
Basic. Initial Data Required to Develop Civil Defense
P 1.“, O D I O I O D l t C O 0 O O O O O O O O O O b O O O i
Procedures for Developing. Approving and Correcting the
Civil Defense Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Civil Defense Plan Documents and Their Contents . . . . . .

Brief Contents of the Basic Appendices of the CD Plan . .

Methods for Evaluating the Radiation Situation Based

on Reconnaissance Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l.

2.

3.

Deteraining Zones of Contamination Based on the Known

Level of Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Determining the Dosage of Radiation Received by People and
Aniaals While Located in Contaminated Zones and While
Traveraing Such Zones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Detersining the Per-issibla Tine for Renaining in a
Contaminated Zone Based on the Known Level of Radiation . .
Deteruining the Permissible Tile for Beginning Work in a
Contaminated Zone with a Given Dosage of Radiation and
Deternining the Duration of Dark . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

192
193

195
197

197
201
202
206
208
210
212
215
218
226
22k
225
226
228
229
233
236

236

239
2‘

262
S.

6.
7.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Determining the Contamination of Grass in Pastures,

Grain. Local Food and Horizontal Surfaces by Radio«
activeSubstances......................
Estimating Agricultural Crop Losses . . . . . . . . . . . .
Determining the Number of Shifts for Conducting Rescue

Work Based on the Radiation Situation Which Nos Developed

at the Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Determining Work Conditions for Kolkhoz Workers. Workers

and Enployees in an Area of Radioactive Contamination . . . .

Chapter 10. Organizing and Conducting Rescue and Energency Restoration

workssoseeeosssaeossssaeslesssnsso

1.
2|

3.
[is

So

Organizing Rescue and Energency Restoration Work . . . . . .
Work of the Staff and Services in Preparing Data for the
Facility CD Chief to Make a Decision on the Conduct of
Rescue Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conducting Rescue Work at an Agricultural Facility . . . . .
Rendering Assistance to an Urban Facility in Carrying
OutRQSCueworko.....o.o.....o......o.
Relieving CD Formations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 11. Fighting Fires and Other Natural Disasters in Rural

Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1.

6.

Fightingl'il‘eu......................o
Firefighting Safety Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rescue and Emergency Restoration Work When Cleaning Up
After an Earthquake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rescue Work During Catastrophic Inundations (Floods) . . . .
Rescue and Emergency Restoration Work During hurricanes . . .
Rescue Work DuringTorrential Dounpours, Landslides. Snov—
slides and Snov Drifts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Supporting the Actions of CD Formations in cleaning Up after
Natural Disasters and Their Aftereffects. . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 12. Political Indoctrination Work with CD Formation Personnel
in a Coabat Situation and While Cleaning Up After Natural
Disasters. Moral, Political and Psychological Training is an

Integral Part of the Training for Civil Defense Forces and the
Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

l.

2.

3.

The Organization. Tasks and Content of Political Indoctrin-
ation Work with CD Formation Personnel in a Combat

sttu‘t‘on O O I O I O O O O O O I O D s I l 0 O O O I O C I 0
Special Features of Political Indoctrination Work in CD
Formations During Exercises and While Cleaning Up After
Natural Disasters and Accidents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Moral. Political and Psychological Training is an Important.
Integral Part of the Training and Indoctrination for Personnel
of Civil Defense Non-ﬂilitarized Formations . . . . . . . . .

5
ma orncm. use can

266

265

255

248

252
256

257
260
270
279

281
282
289
290
292
293
29k

295

296

296

303
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 11. Civil Defense Training for the Population of an
Al'slculturall’nclllty....................... 312
l. Organizing and Planning Civil Defense Training for
the Population . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
2. Training the Population and Leadership. Command. Officer and
Rank and File Personnel of CD Formations . . . . . . . . . . . 314
3. Civil Defense Special Arms Tactical Training and Exercises . . 318

a. CD Training Facilities for an Agricultural Facility . . . . . . 322
5. Preparing to Take and Giving the RLD [Ready for Labor and
DefenseITests on the Section "Civil Defense" . . . . . . . . . 325

Appendices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327

INTRODUCTION

[Text] True to the Leninist course of strengthening friendship and cooperation
between peoples and in close unity with the fraternal socialist countries,
the Soviet Union is steadfastly pursuing a peace-loving foreign policy.

Thanks to these enormous efforts. the principles of peaceful coexistence

and mutually advantageous cooperation between states with different social
systems are being more and more firmly established in the modern world and

the process of international detente, which is being filled with an even
greater concrete. material substance. is taking place.

The documents adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress devoted a great deal of atten-
tion to the problems of disarmament. preventing a thermonuclear world war and
resolving unregulated international problems by means of negotiations. However,
in spite of the thaw in the international political climate. the contemporary
international situation continues to be complex and contradictory. The
imperialist forces of the capitalist states are attempting to undermine

the positive processes taking place in the world.

while taking the contemporary international situation into account. the
CPSU, the Soviet government and all the Soviet people are constantly
strengthening our state and its defense capability. "Strengthening the
Soviet State." Comrade L. I. Brezhnev. general secretary of the CPSU
Central Committee,emphasized in the Central Committee Report to the 26th
Party Congress, "also means strengthening its Armed Forces and increasing
our motherland's defense capability in every way possible. As long as we
live in an uneasy world. this will remain one of the most important tasks."

The need for strengthening the country's defense capability can also be
explained by the fact that, in spite of the fact that the USSR and US
concluded an agreement on preventing nuclear war. other nuclear powers
have not entered into this agreement; an agreement still has not been
reached on an unconditional ban on and elimination of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons.

6
son orncmz. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under these conditions, the Comunist Party, the Soviet State and all the
Soviet people are devoting the necessary attention to strengthening our
country's defense capabilities. including organizing and improving civil
defense. The main CD mission is protecting the population against all
modern weapons of destruction. 'lhe CD missions also consist of preparing
national economic facilities for stable operations in wartime and also
of carrying out rescue and emergency restoration work in centers of
destruction. The accomplishment of the enumerated missions can be

achieved by carrying out an entire complex of protective and other
measures.

This textbook ‘examines all these issues relative to agricultural facilities.

Civil Defense Tasks

Along with strengthening and improving our nation's armed forces. we are
now faced with the essentially new task of reliably defending the rear
against modern weapons. This is due to the fact that as the state's
material base, its economy is increasingly becoming the objective of armed
action. This couple: and important task can be accomplished both by an
armed struggle and with the use of civil defense forces and facilities.

It is now essential to prepare the nation to protect itself not only against
attacking enemy forces but against nuclear strikes as well, in which. along
with military installations, the targets may also be administrative and
political, economically developed and heavily populared areas, power supply.
communication and transport centers located in any part of the nation. Be-
cause of this the nation's civil defense system must protect the population
and facilities of the national economy against weapons of mass destruction
and other means of aggression, along with preserving manpower and material
resources. Civil defense tasks are mainly determined with this in mind.

The Kain Civil Defense Tasks

The main civil defense task is that of protecting the population and instal-
lations of the national economy against weapons of mass destruction. In
setting up the systen and protecting the population it is essential to
strive to implement an integrated group of protective measures. thereby
reducing to the minimum the effects of nuclear, chemical and bacteriological
weapons and creating favorable conditions for the life and work of the popu-
lation and the functioning of civil defense facilities and forces in the
performance of their tasks. The civil defense chief and the chief of staff
and service chiefs are responsible for timely development and implementation

of civil defense measures to protect the population against weapons of mass
destruction.

Protection of the population is set up and carried out on the basis of in-
structions from the senior chief or superior civiLdefense headquarters.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Civil defense formations. kulkhoz workers, workers, employees and other groups
of the population are assigned radiation shelters. With the onset of a

threat of enemy attack all protectiVe Installations and routes leading to them
are designated with established symbols (signs).

Providing the population with individual means of protection is of great
importance for their protection. This includes medical protection. taking
steps to prevent epidzmics and conducting hygiene and sanitation, special
prophylactic and other medical measures. Gas masks. respirators, gauze
dust masks and cotton-and-gauze strips are used to protect the respiratory
organs. and standard materials and ordinary clothing are used to protect
the skin.

It is essential to foresee and ‘tomptly inform kolkhoz workers. workers,
employees and other members of the population of a threat of enemy attack,
a danger of radioactive. chemical or bacteriological contamination or dis-
astrous flooding. The population must know their duties under a threat of
enemy attack. as well as civil defense signals. and must be able to react
precisely to these signals.

The training of kolkhos workers, workers and employees in methods of protec-
tion and steps to eliminate the effects of an enemy attack is of great
importance in the performance of the main civil defense task. Training
must be conducted regularly, in accordance with guiding documents on these
matters and on a level measuring up to modern requirements. It is also
important that the training he planned in good time and that the instructors
be well prepared. A proper training materials base is also required.

Tracticai drill exercises comprise the main method of training. Special
attention should be devoted to meeting the standards for protecting the
population and installations against weapons of mass destruction.

One important civil defense task is that of increasing the operational
stability of the facility and protecting farm animals and crops against
weapons of mass destruction. This can be achieved by the timely conduct
of organisational. agrochemical, engineering and technical and other
measures aimed at minimizing the effects of the use of weapons of mass
destruction against facilities, farm animals and crops. creating favorable
conditions for rapid elimination of the effects of an enemy attack and
insuring the production of the required group of quality farm products in
the proper quantities.

Reliable protection of animals and animal husbandry products. crops and
cropping products from the effects of weapons of mass destruction is of

primary importance.

Measures to improve the operating stability of facilities and to protect
farm animals and crops are planned and conducted on the basis of instruc-

tions from the senior civil defense chief and the heads of the corresponding

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

branch production associations. The. civil defense chiefs of facilities.
their chiefs of staff and chiefs of services for the protection of farm
animals and crops are charged with responsibility for planning. organising
and carrying out these seasures in peacetime. at the threat of an enemy
attack and following the use of weapons of mass destruction by the enemy.
Other services and. at the instruction of the senior civil defense chief.
specialists of veterinary. livestock management. agronomic and other estab-
lishnents may be drawn upon for working out and planning seasures to in-
crease the operational stability of facilities and for the conduct of such
measures.

Factors which may have a negative effect on the operational stability of a
facility during a war should be studied in advance and measures defined to
increase the operational stability of the facility. based on an appraisal
of the situation which is likely to develop at the facility as a result of
the enesy‘s employment of weapons of mass destruction.

With stable operation of agricultural units the population and the nation's
Armed Forces can be provided with an adequate quantity of basic food products
of the proper quality. and industry will have the necessary raw materials.

It is also important to create at facilities and maintain in a state of
readiness coemand posts and a system for warning and conunication. recon-
naissance and monitoring for radioactive, chemical and bacteriological
contasination. as well as to provide timely warning for workers and employees.
kolkhos workers and the rest of the population of a threat of enemy attack
and a danger of contamination and disastrous flooding. The cos-land post and
the warning and cosmunicstion. reconnaissance and sonitoring system should

be readied in peacetime. The contend post should be located in a protective
civil defense structure. A well-prepared radiation shelter can be used for
this purpose in the rural area.

The comaand post and the warning and comnication system. as well as the
forces and facilities required for their support should be maintained in a
constant state of readiness. Reconnaissance is set up at the threat of
enemy attack. It is conducted round-the-clock. primarily by the radiation
and chemical reconnaissance posts.

It is very important to inform the population of various instructions and
civil defense signals in good time. Radio, line communication facilities
and sigml equipment are extensively used for this purpose. The population
should learn the civil defense signals well and work out the action to be
taken at the various signals. It is also important to familiarize the
population with the procedures they should follow and to teach them how to
care for the livestock under various conditions of radioactive. chemical
and bacteriological contamination.

The civil defense readiness of an agricultural facility to perform the tasks
assigned it depends to a great degree on the state of readiness of the head-
quarters. services and foraations. Constant attention should therefore be
given to the creation and preparation of the civil defense headquarters.

9
son orncm. use our
FOR “FPICIAL USE ONLY

services and formations of an agricultural facility and to maintaining them
in a state of constant readiness. The civil defense headquarters; services
and formations at an agricultural facility are created in accordance with
guiding documents and the senior chief's instructions. Classes covered by
the corresponding programs are systematically conducted for the personnel of
the headquarters. services and formations. and this must be planned and well
organized in advance. Training of the personnel of services and formations
is conducted according to documents on the population's mandatory minimal
level of knowledge of protection against weapons of mass destruction and
documents covering the training of civil defense formations. taking their
functions and the specialties of the personnel into account. Special
tactical classes and exercises are conducted with the civil defense forma-
tions. These are the most effective form of training for them.

The main form of training for the facility as a whole. as well as the civil
defense headquarters. services and formations. is the exercise involving
the entire facility. during which the entire group of civil defense neasures

are worked out and the facility's readiness to perform its assigned tasks
is checked.

Another civil defense task is that of protecting the facility's supplies of
food. feed. water-supply sources and systems against radioactive. chemical

and bacteriological contamination and eliminating the effects of such
contamination. The headquarters and the service for protecting the facility's
livestock and crops are directly responsible for the accomplishment of this
task. As a rule. the Job of protecting food. feed. water-supply sources

and systems should be assigned to the civil defense teams for the protection
of livestock and crops and decontamination.

Food. feed. water-supply sources and systems can be reliably protected
against radioactive. chemical and bacteriological contamination by totally
isolating them from the environment. mainly from contaminated air.

Should feed. feed or water become contaminated. it must be decontaminated.

Permission to use food and livestock feed is ordinarily given by representa-
tives of the medical service and the service for the protection of livestock
and crops.

The Conduct of Rescue Operations at a facility and Restoration of Its
Production

Direct responsioility for this task is borne by the civil defense chief of
the agricultural facility. the chief of staff. the service chiefs and the
co-anders of civil defense formations. The civil defense chief personally
organizes and directs rescue operations and measures aimed at restoring the
facility's production capability. All civil defense formations. except

for those which are detailed to provide assistance to a city facility. are
involved in the conduct of rescue operations.

10
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Rescue operations are conducted for purposes of rescuing people and assisting
the wounded. for cuntaining and eliminating fires and emergency situations

at the facility. in a center of nuclear destruction people are removed and
rescued from piles of rubble. shelters and covers. damaged and burning
buildings. gas- and woke-filled areas.

when centers of radioactive. chemical and bacteriological contamination are
created it is important to provide the population with timely and rapid
warning of the danger of radioactive. chemical and bacteriological contamina-
tion and for them to know the rules they are to follow and be able to react
skillfully to civil defense signals. The facility's civil defense chief and
headquarters are required to take proper steps rapidly. to inform the popula-
tion in good time. to issue precise instructions on what the people must do.
depending on the situation. and to define the procedures they are to follow.
People subjected to contamination must receive medical assistance.

The successful conduct of rescue operations is one of the definitive measures
for restoring the facility's production capability. After this the living
and working conditions must be established for the population: the livestock
must undergo veterinary treatment and the conditions for their maintenance
must be established: the area. housing. production. livestock and other
buildings. protective structures. food. feed and water-supply sources must
be decontaminated; the crops must be inspected. possible losses determined
and agrochemicol and agrotechnical measures outlined and conducted to pre-
serve and raise the crop; the harvest must be gathered and the manner in
which it is to be used determined (as food or livestock feed or for indus-
trial processing).

It is essential to do everything possible to obtain pure animal husbandry
and cropping products in accordance with the plan. This is the criterion
for determining that the facility's production capability has been restored
to the level specified.

Blackout Measures at a Facility

Blackout measures are worked out for a facility and carried out in accordance
with instructions from the superior civil defense headquarters. Blackout
conditions are also planned for the civil defense headquarters by the power-
supply and blackout service. Special attention should be given to blackout
arrangements for production and livestock buildings. housing and other
premises, as well as outside lighting. In production buildings and housing
certain individuals are placed in charge of blackout conditions. and the
proper blackout materials must be prepared.

Upon receiving blackout instructions. all openings which shed light in
housing. administrative. trade and other buildings must be immediately
covered with devices to prevent light from escaping. such as blinds. shutters
or panels. The population must halt the use of heating devices from which
sparks escape to the outside. It is recommended that special lamps or

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

lighting in special fixtures to be useu on staircases. in lobbies and other
places. Blackout effectiveness for production and administrative buildings.
housing and other buildings and premises should be checked from the outside.
Upon leaving a room it is important always to extinguish the light.

One of the civil defense tanks of an agricultural facility is that of
detailing formations as part of the rayon civil defense forces to conduct
rescue operations in centers of destruction at city facilities and those of
the rayon. which have been danaged by an enemy attack. Formations are
assigned to the rayon civil defense forces at the instruction of the senior
civil defense chief in accordance with a plan prepared in advance. in such
a case the facility's civil defense formations ordinarily operate as part of
the rayon civil defense forces.

The agricultural facility's civil defense fonsations must arrive at the
assembly area complete and ready to conduct rescue operations at a city
facility.

Such are the main civil defense tasks of an agricultural facility. Their
successful accomplislssent requires great effort on the part of the facility
civil defense chief. his chief of staff. the service chiefs and the civil
defense for-etions. as well as all civil defense personnel and the popula-
tion. This is achieved by the timely planning and conduct of measures to
protect the population against weapons of sass destruction and to increase
the facility's operational stability in time of war; by good coral-political
and psychological conditioning and fighting efficiency on the part of the
personnel in civil defense foraations and on the part of uorksrs. kolkhos
workers, eeployees and the rest of the population at the facility. and by
their constant preparedness to perform tasks at the threat of enemy attack
and following the enemy's use of weapons of sass destruction: by training
the population sell to protect thanaelves against veapons of mass destruc-
tion; by skillful and fire leadership on the part of the facility's civil
defense chief and by the selfless work of civil defense forces under his
csamand in various situations: by organizing and aaintaining continuous
interaction among forces and facilities involved in the perfornance of

civil defense tasks; and by the prospt assignment of coapletely outfitted
civil defense formations as part of the rayon civil defense forces to render
assistance to a city facility which has been subjected to a nuclear strike.

The Civil Defense Organisational Structure
Civil Oefense Organisational Principles

The directors of holkhozes, sovkhoses and livestock coepleses. training
institutions and other facilities are their civil defense chiefs.

A civil defense headquarters and civil defense services are created at a
facility. which interact closely anong the-selves and vith superior head-
quarters and services.

12
!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
-« FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Civil defense formations (various detachments. teams. groups. brigades.
volunteer squads. posts and sections) are created for conducting rescue and
emergency repair work in centers of destruction (contamination) and areas
of disastrous flooding. as well as for conducting civil defense neasures.

The procedure for creating formations. their nunber and numerical strength.
as well as the procedure for putting then in a state of readiness. are
covered by special instructions.

Setting Up the Civil Defense System at an Agricultural Facility

Civil defense is organised for preparing an agricultural facility in advance.
mainly for protection against radioactive fallout. cheeical substances and
bacterial agents. lts organization and improvement should take into account
the trend in the development of agricultural production. the extent of the
tasks psrforeed by production and civil defense tasks. as well as the
situation which may develop at the facility should the enemy employ weapons
of mass destruction.

Agricultural production facilities are kolkhozea. sovkhoaes. livestock com-
plexes. poultry farms. enterprises. establishments. organisations and
educational institutions dealing with agricultural production.

The civil defense organization will naturally not be the same at different
facilities. The facility's civil defense chief is subordinate to the superior
civil defense chief. He bears responsibility for ssintaining a state of
constant civil defense readiness at the facility and for the timely planning
and conduct of civil defense measures in peacetime and in war.

A civil defense headquarters and civil defense services are created by order
of the facility's civil defense chief. The make-up of the headquarters
depends on the importance of the facility. It may consist of a chief of
staff. two or three workers dealing with operational matters and the train-
ing of formations and the population. as well as specialists serving
simultaneously as the chiefs of the corresponding civil defense services.
The facility's civil defense headquarters is directly in charge of organic-
ing and performing all civil defense measures at the facility.

The work of the headquarters is set up on the basis of orders. directives
and instructions from the facility's civil defense chief and the superior
hnadquartcrs and decisions of the executive committee of the local soviet

or workers' deputies. He has the authority to issue orders and instructions
In the naee of the civil defense chief. The chief of staff beers personal
responsibility for the performance of tasks assigned the headquarters.

Civil defense services are created at a facility. The number and list of
path services is determined by the facility's chief of staff. depending on
tlu specific nature of the facility and the availability of the proper base.

13
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Civil defense services are not created at small agricultural facilities.
their functions being performed by its civil defense staff and departments.

The following civil defense formations may be created to perforn civil
defense tasks at agricultural facilities: composite teens (groups); rsdio~
active and chemical rcconun.ssnnce poets: medical detachments and medical

aid posts; fire-fighting (forest fire-fighting) teens (detachments. sections):
teams (groups) for iJe preservation of public order and teams for the pro-
tection of fare animals; crop protection teens; and other formations.

The following are created in the sovkhoz detachments and kolkhoz brigades:
one detachment for the protection of fare animals and one for crop protec-
tion: one aedicel aid post. and one shelter servicing section for each
protective civil defense installation. Formations (teams. detachnents)

for ceebetting forest fires are created at enterprises. in timber nensge-
neut organizations and establishments and in timber procurement and other
organizations with facilities in the forest. regardless of their departmental
subordination. Forest fire-fighting teams (detachments) are created from
chemical fire-fighting stations. regular fire-fighting teams and volunteer
fire-fighting squads of enterprises. organisations, establishments. kolkhosea
and sovkhozes and communities located in or near large forests.

Chapter IV. Protecting the Population Against Heupona of Mass Destruction

Protecting the population against weapons of mass destruction is the nain
civil defense task. Protective measures nust be readied in peacetime under.
s sandstory procedure. The extent and nature of the protective measures

are determined on the basis of the specific features of the individual
regions and facilities of the national economy. as vell as the situation
which is likely to develop should the eneny employ nuclear weapons. chemical
or bacteriological warfare agents.

The population can be effectively protected by carrying out a system of
aeasures. including the folloving: sheltering the people in protective
civil defense structures; dispersal and evacuation of the city population

to safety zones outside the cities; and providing the population with
personal protective equipment. The aain method of protecting the population
is to shelter them in protective installations.

Protective Civil Defense Structures

According to their purpose and protective features civil defense protective
structures are subdivided into shelters and radiation covers.

Shelters: Purpose and Classification

Shelters are structures which protect the people inside from effects of all
destructive factors of a nuclear blast. toxic substances and bacteriological

1%
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

warfare agents. In areas in which large fires and secondary centers of
chemical contamination are possible. the shelters must also protect people
against high temperatures and poisoning by combustion products, toxic
substances and chemical toxins. Shelters are built in areas not subject
to flooding. Shelters must have entrances and exits providing a certain
degree of protection for the main compartments and emergency exits in case
the former should become obstructed; unobstructed approaches and main
compartments at least two meters high. The floor level should be at least
20 cm above the groundwater level. Shelters are ordinarily used for
operational purposes in peacetime and for sheltering people in time of war.

Shelters are classified according to their protective features. capacity.
location and time of erection and the degree to which they are provided
vith air filtration equipment. Shelters are divided into classes according
to their protective features. Depending on their capacity (the number of
people they can shelter). they are small. housing up to 150; medium sized.
with a capacity of 150 to 650; and large. housing more than 650 people.
Shelters are either built-in or detached. depending on their location.
Built-in shelters are those located in the basements of buildings, while
detached shelters are located outside of buildings. According to their time
of erection. shelters are subdivided into those built in advance. in time

of peace. and those which are rapidly erected. creatdd under the threat of
enemy attack. The air filtration equipment for shelters may be industrially
produced or simple and improvised. In either case it must remove all
harmful impurities from the air and provide a supply of clean air within

the established standards.

A shelter should make it possible to maintain the required sanitary and
hygiene conditions for the people sheltered therein: air with a carbon
dioxide content of no more than 1 percent (maximum permissible level,

3 percent). a humidity of no more than 70 percent (maximum permissible
level. 80 percent) and a temperature not above 23' C. (maximum permissible
temperature. 31' 0.).

The Shelter Layout

Shelter compartments are subdivided into main and auxiliary premises. The
main compartments include those housing the people and air-locks, while the
auxiliary compartments include air filtration compartments (FVK). lavatories,
protected diesel electric power plants (DES) and protected entrances and exits
(Figure 18).

Entrances should be located on opposite sides of the shelter. Air-locks are
built at the entrances. which prevent radioactive and toxic substances from
entering the shelter. Hedge-type locks and rubber linings are used for
securing doors snugly against the frames.

15
Iron onrcm. use ONLY
FOR (WI’ICIM. “SB (WIN

 

Figure 18. Diegree of e ehelter for prolonged protection egeinet effecte
or wenpone of eeee deetruction

Key:
1. Air-tight protective doore 5. Gellery end top of emergency exit
2. Air-lock coepertnente 6. Air filtretion chenbere (coeperteente)
3. Levntorioe 7. liedicel eid root:
4. Hein ereee for houeing 8. toad etorerooe

people (coepertlente)

An energency exit in built in the fore of e 90 x 130 CI underground seller-y,
which write into territory which will not hecaee obetructed through e
verticel eheft with the outlet encloeed. The entrence to the gellery ie
covered both ineide end outeide with protective. hereoticelly-eeeled ehuttere.
The etructure covering the -ergency exit ehould be renewed iron the
our-rounding buildinge by e dietence et leeet helf the length of the building
plue 3 netere. A 0.6 x 0.8 eeter opening ie nede in eech well of the cover-
ing etructure which ie equipped with e louvered grete opening to the ineide.

lnternel Bqu ipeent

The internel equipeent of eheltere includee the eein eree for houeing the
people, levetoriee. air-lock end filtretion coepertnente. e Iedicel eid
roan. e food etorehouee. herneticelly-eeeled. protective doore, e gellery
end the etructure covering the eeergenty exit outlet.

Electric Power Supply end Co-unicetione

The electric power eupply ie ueuelly provided free the outeide electric
power eyeten. end when neceeeery. free e eelf-conteined electric power
eourceone protected dieeel electric power unit. In once the electric
power eupply ie dierupted. emergency lighting ie provided with fleehlighte
end iron betteriee, treedle generetore end other eourcee.

16
roe orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The shelter should have a telephone connection with the facility‘s col-and
post and a loudspeaker linked to the rayon or local. facility radio network.

Water Supply and Sewer System

A water supply and sewage removal systen are provided for shelters using the
general water-line and sewer systens. In addition. an energency water
supply is crested and receptebles for savage are set up in a shelter. which
should function regardless of the condition of the outside systens.

A minimal water supply is created in flow-type containers. amounting to

6 liters of drinking water and 5 liters for sanitary and hygiene needs for
each individual housed in the shelter for the calculated length of their
stay, and an additional 10.5 cubic meters is provided for fire-fighting
purposes in shelters with a capacity of 600 or sore.

Beating

heating is called for in a shelter. It is provided frost the general system
(the building's heating system). A shut-off device is installed for regu-
lating the teaperature and cutting off the heat fron the heating systaa.

Furniture

Double-tier benches or bunks are installed in the shelter rooms for the
people housed therein. The lower tiers are for sitting and provide

0.25 x 0.35 actors of space per person. The benches for sitting are

0.65 neters high, and the distance from the top of the benches to the
second tier. which is for lying down. is 1.1 neter. There should be space

for 20 percent of the total nunber of people in a shelter to lie down at
one tine.

Shelters are also outfitted with fire-fighting, nedical and other equip-eat.
Rapidly Erected Shelters

In such shelters, as in those which are built in advance. there lust be
rooms for housing the people. spaces for simple or industrially produced
air filtration equipment. lsvatories. an energency water supply. entrances
and exits and an emergency exit. In mall shelters the lavatories and
waste receptacles stay be placed in the air-locks. and the water tanks nay
be kept in the rooms housing the people.

It is best to use precast reinforced concrete. elanents free the collectors
of installations for the city's underground engineer works. for exanple,

for the construction of rapidly erected shelters. Cranes are used to install
the sections. Dependable so or 20-70 netel doors oust be placed at the
entrances of such a shelter. They must be capable of absorbing the sane
force as the ahelter's naln ele-ents.

1?
res ontcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The internal equip-ant of rapidly erected shelters includes air delivery
equipeent. gravel and cloth filters. water tanks. receptacles for excrement
and waste. means of protecting the air-intake and exhaust openings and
lighting devices. as wall as bunks or benches for the people. Various types
of fans are used to supply air. including blower unite with a bicycle drive
end unite with bellows. Gravel or slag filters can be used for purifying
the incoeing air of radioactive substances and bacteriological agents.

and cloth filters can be used for removing dust. Air intake and exhaust
ducts are protected against penetration of the shock wave by scans of
conpact zsu-u protective sections. as well as wooden and natal deflectors
(D20 or 21)). Snell tanks. barrels and other containers. which say be
carried into the shelter. are used for storing the water supply. A lavatory
is set up in a special roan partitioned off free the people. Legs end panels
are used to sake bunks and benches.

Dispersal and Evacuation of the Population: what Dispersal and Evacuation
Mean

Dispersal and evacuation of the population are one method of protecting the
population against weapons of mass destruction. Dispersal is the transport-
ing of workers and enployees of installations continuing production operations
in wartime free the cities and important installations to safety zones out-
side cities. using all types of transportation. After being transported to
the zone outside the city and settled there. workers and employees in this
category travel in shifts to the city to work at their enterprises. returning
to the safety zone for rest after conpleting their work. Because of this

the areas in which the workers and esployees are settled outside the city
lust be far enough frost the city to insure their safety but close enough

so that a sinister mount of ties is required to haul thee to the city for
work and back to the safety sons for rest.

it is also practical to locate dispersal areas near railroad stations and
sain roads.

workers. eeployees and aesbers of their faailies are settled in groups
according to their work. One or several comnities located near each
other say be designated for a single enterprise. The workers of an
enterprise thus reaain together. asking it easier to deliver the work shifts
to the city. provide the people with food and sedicsl services and to re-
solve other problae.

Evacuation scene the organized reeovel of workers and asployees of installa-
tions halting their production work in the city or transferring it to a
safety zone outside the city. as well as those individuals not eeployed in
production. to a safety zone outside the city. on foot or by actor transport.
By using the cosbined method. the population can be evacuated to safety
zones within a relatively short period of ties. workers and esployees of
enterprises, organisations and esteblisl-snts. as well as individuals not
engaged in production. can be renoved on foot in accordance with plans

18
ron onxcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

worked out in advance. This category may also include nonworking members
of the families of workers and employees. students of higher and secondary
educational institutions and vocational and technical schools and other
members of the population able to evacuate on foot.

The dispersal and evacuation (on foot or by motor transport) of workers.
employees, members of their families and students to a safety zone is
arranged through the corresponding enterprises, establishments. educational
institutions and other organizations. As a rule. ZhBK's [housing operation
offices] and housing management offices handle the evacuation of workers
not engaged in production.

The population evacuated to safety zones located near the city are removed
on foot directly to the sites where they are to be settled, and those
evacuated to more distant areas are moved to intermediate evacuation
points (PPR). After evacuation measures have been carried out. they are
led (transported) from there to permanent locations.

workers and employees of an installation transferring its production work to
a safety zone outside the city are located near existing or newly created
production bases beyond the locations of workers and employees of those
enterprises continuing to operate in the city. That segment of the
evacuated population who are not involved in production and are not members
of the families of workers and employees subject to dispersal are located
in the more remote areas of the safety zone, while people evacuated from
areas of possible disastrous flooding are removed to communities located
near these zones. A diagram of the arrangement of a safety zone outside

a city for the evacuation and dispersal of the population is shown in
Figure 31.

Plans are made for the people subjected to dispersal and evacuation to be
settled in the houses of local residents or in public buildings when
necessary.

Planning Dispersal and Evacuation

Planning the dispersal and evacuation is an extremely important task of the
installation's civil defense chief and headquarters and its evacuation
cos-uttee. The section of the civil defense plan on protecting the popula-
tion against weapons of mass destruction serves as the basic guide for
determining the magnitude and nature of measures to disperse and evacuate
the population and the deadlines and procedures for accomplishing them.
Instructions and excerpts from the senior chief's plan for dispersal and
evacuation of the population are used as the main initial data for compiling
thls section of the installation's civil defense plan. It indicates

the number of people subject to dispersal and evacuation and contains
information on the specific features of a given area of the safety zone

and its possibilities for locating the people there. information on the
condition of routes. especially routes to be traveled on foot. and on the
type and quantity of transport equipment assigned for dispersal and

19
ran orrtcm. us: can
_-_-——--

FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3i. General pattern of dispersal and evacuation
Key:
1. Safety zone outside the city 23. Bezinyanka
2. Dispersal zone 26. Sovkhoz "Corki"
3. Evacuation zone 25. Peski [ssnd7]
h. Territory for dispersal of 26. Petrovka
vorkers and employees 27. Berezovki
S. Territory for the settle-ent 28. Sovkhoz ”Pobeda“
of evacuees iron central area 29. Territory for settling evacuees
6. City of N--sk from the southern area
7. SE? [evacuation assembly point] 30. ZhEK [housing operation office]
8. IP [forming-up site] 31. Kalinovka
9. AH [motor transport route) 32. Pavlovka
10. PM [pedestrian route] 33. Vocational and technical school
ll. 3? [long halt] evacuatedfronthe city
12. Pedestrian column 36. Gorenki
l3. Sovkhoz "Vesna" 35. Boarding point
16. Town 36. Disenbsrkation point
l5. Sovkhoz "Sady" 37. Sovkhoz "Cgarevcf'
16. Shop 38. Evacuated V02
17. Dnchnaya 39. Petushki
)8. PPS [intermediate evacuation pointlho. Enterprise evacuated from city
19. Viahnynki bl. Kuchino
20. Plant 02. Oblsst boundary
21. Lcsnsya 63. Khutorok
22. Vyselki bk. Dubki
65. Andreyevo

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

evacuation purposes. and information on the operating conditions of the
evacuation cosmittee and the evacuation assembly point and their capabilities.

A march plan is worked out to insure that the pedestrian columns of evacuees
proceed in an organized manner. The march plan for a pedestrian column may
indicate the following: the composition of the column; the route of move-
ment. the forming-up site. traffic control points and the time required td
pass them; halt areas and the duration of halts; medical aid points and
warning stations; the intermediate evacuation point and the procedure and
periods for leading (hauling) a column from this point to the permanent
sites: permanent settlement sites; control and warning signals (Figure 32).

Organizing the Dispersal and Evacuation of the Population

All of the work of organizing and carrying out dispersal and evacuation of
the population is performed in accordance with the instellation's civil
defense plan and instructions from the senior chief. Evacuation commuttees
are created at an installation. and at large installations-evacuation
assembly points as well-~to oversee the dispersal and evacuation of the
population. An installation evacuation committee is formed at the order
of the installation's civil defense chief to plan. organise and carry out
measures to disperse workers and employees and to evacuate the rest of the
population. The evacuation committee may include representatives of the
plant committee (trade union camaittes). the personnel department and the
installation's civil defense headquarters and services, a representative
designated by the party conmittee (party bureau), shop chiefs, and other
individuals at the discretion of the installation’s civil defense chief.
One of the assistant directors of the installation serves as chainman of
the installation evacuation committee.

Dispersal and evacuation of the population is carried out through evacuation
assembly points (SEP). The evacuation assembly points are set up for the
assembly. registration and dispatching of evacuees; those being transported--
to stations, wharfs and other points, and those evacuating on foot (in
pedestrian columns)--to forming-up sites for the trip. Evacuation assembly
points are ordinarily set up near railroad stations or platforms, ports '
and vharfs; at the installations. as a rule. for those being transported;

and near routes of movement to the designated areas for those evacuating

on foot.

Shelters and covers adequate for all of the people vho may be at the point
at a single time aust be prepared on the territory of the evacuation
assembly point and near it. Each evacuation assembly point is given a
number. and nearby installations of the national economy, establishments
and organizations. as well as those housing operation committees. the
residents of which will be evacuated through a given evacuation assembly
point, are assigned to it.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’Olt OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3:9— ma
Inca: no»: ganged-o #33 338.» .353:-

uuaa 3v...— vouuoanauuu. .3 "on: «TL—on!- n.§.~oo 9.56 603.328. man .s
93...»: 3a :33: .3 you 3.5.60» 0:: “5:8— 76 752— 2.3.3025
.5. mo 3sz .2 Ian—3.838 mo nova. .96 33333:: man .0
add: scan oupouuom .3" Hanan cu ousou no 00530.3 1: undo.— gonzo->0
nozouuaoo 333,—. .3 :3!- 3» new 333333 an .335 .n
50.3: a «dong» cu aux .3 conga: 25» 033.338 .3 :33 on 12 .e
«28.. .2 9.52 «-93 32 9.8 .o .58. .n
noun! Nouns—v 0.59. N 99.30:: hound no.“ 2.9.30 .N
5530 no couuaauom .NH 35.. on we 32 ~33 an»: .a and. 31338 4:38
13.31:! 3.3

 

$11.3.8
93.55%. 8:
£53: Aqu
e \ ii. hunv

\ I
‘ xix 0:3. 3:

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An administration system In created by decision of the inatallation's civil
defense vhlef. ltu approximate composition is shown in Figure 33. An
evncuntlon assembly pulnl chief is recommended by the chairman of the
evacuation coenittee from among the directing personnel of establishments
and organizations creating the given evacuation assembly point and is
approved by decision of the executive committee of the rayon soviet of
uorkers' deputies. and the rest of the staff is formed of workers and
employees from those sane enterprises and establishments forming the basis
for the given assembly evacuation point.

(I) (2)

' mane/1m»
M VIINIUM

010

U yvlnd
(3)

  
 
 

  
  
    
 
 
     

 
   
  

   
   

Ha I at
Kiel!!!
anwursaaosn

ouuwu
anuumdpmun

 

figure 33. Model organizational structure of an evacuation assembly point

Key:
1. Deputy chief of the evacuation 6. Formation of echelons (pedes-
assembly point triaa columns)
2. Chief of the evacuation assembly 7. ?reservation of public order
point 8. Information station
3. Commandant 9. Room for mothers and children
& Groups 10. Medical aid station

5. Registration and reporting
Carrying Out Dispersal and Evacuation of the Population

Upon receiving instructions to carry out dispersal and evacuation the instal-
lation's civil defense chief should arrange for the performance of evacuation
measures in accordance with the plan and instructions of the senior chief.
After this he ascertains the extent of dispersal and evacuation measures

required and their sequence. assigns the tasks involved in conducting the
evacuation to the chiefs under him. the civil defense headquarters and the
evacuation committee. and eonitors the performance of those tasks.

23
roe owner/u. use ONLY
FOR UPPICIM. USK ONLY

The inatallation‘e civil defenee headquarters and evacuation couittee
arrange for the notification and aaaenhly of vorkere, eaployeea and lenhera
of their iaailiea at the evacuation aaaenhly point in accordance with in-
atructione tree the civil defenac chief . aa vell aa the boarding 1 trana-
port and the diepatch of pcdeatrien coluene. and aaaietn the rural evacuee
reception agenciea with the reception and diatrihution of the people subject
to dieperaal and evacuation.

After all inetructione have been ieeued for conducting the diepereel and
evacuation. the chief of the evacuation aaaaahly point gathera the aaaeahly
point personnel. taken the atepe neceeealy to can that the point in ready to
operate in good tine and to organize the vork. aacertaine the number of
people auhject to diepereal and evacuation and the procedure for aending
then to the eefety tone. and. together with the repreaentative of the head-
quartcre and the evacuation cmittee. arrangea for the regiatration of
people arriving at the point and their trip to atetione (pointa. vharfa) ,
for hoarding neana of tranaport or to fouling-up eitee for than noving out
on foot.

The chief of the evacuation aaaenhly point reporte at epecified tit-ea to the
civil defenae headquartere and evacuation co-ittee on the progreeeion of
the diaperaal and evacuation.

The population of an inatallation ie inforaed that evacuation ie to begin
via the enterpriee. eetehlieluent. educational inetitutien. houeing
adeinivtration of f ice. houeirg aenag-Ient co-ittee or police. ae veil aa
over the local radio and televiaion netvorlte. Upon receiving notification
that diapereal and evacuation are beginning, the population ahould
i-ediately ready everything required for the trip and appear at the
evacuation aaa-hly point pronptly at the deeigneted tine vith their
faailiee. docuente. Ioney, eeaentiel articlea and food euppliee. If it ie
iepoeeible to locate the vorluere and eeployeea together with their feniliee,
the aeehere of their feeiliaa are evacuated aeparately to note reeote areae.
and a aepercte tine ie epecified for their appearance at the evacuation
eeeuhly point.

People arriving at the evacuation aeeeehly point are regietered and grouped
for boarding railroad care or truche (veaaele) and are taken at the deeign-
neted tine to boarding pointa. Together with the atation (point. vharf)
adeiniatration. repreeentativea fro- the inatallation place the people in
railroad care (trucke. veeaele) and aeintain the eetabliehed border.

A train (veaael) chief in appointed for each train (veaael). and one
individual ia placed in charge of each actor vehicle coluen and one in
charge of each railroad car. The train chiefe and thou in charge of the
actor vehicle coll-Ina auat take all neceaaary atepe to adhere to the
echedule and arrive at the proper atation (point) in the eafety zone at the
deeigneted tile. The people neat atrictly oheerve the eatebliahed rulee
on the vay. Iaintein diacipline and not leave the care (trucka) without
the per-ieaion of thoee in charge.

215
FOR ORIGIN. 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Evacuation of the inetallation'a population evacuating on foot is carried
out over routes establiehed in advance. he a rule. these are broken down
into stretches to be coVerad in 1 day. traveling 10 to 12 hours. The
pedestrian columns may range in site free 500 to 1.000 people. For ease
of control a column should be broken down into groups of 50 to 100 people.
with individuals placed in charge of each group. Thoae in charge of groups
are required to keep track of the number of people. prevent outsiders from
entering the group and lake certain that no one falls behind.

A speed of 6-5 kn per hour should be naintained by the colunna on the march.
with a distance of up to 500 meters between columns.

Short halts of 10 to is ninetes oust be made every 1-1.5 hours on the march.
and a long halt lasting 1-2 houra is made at the beginning of the second
half of the day‘s aarch. During the brief halts the people are provided
with needed medical assistance. the ceaposition of the colunns (groups) is
checked. those who cannot keep up are helped and the people are pereitted

a brief rest. Ooluns which have become spread out are tightened up during

the breaks. In addition. the people are provided with a hot neel during the
long halt.

Medical services should be made available during the dispersal and evacua-
tion. Hedical aid stations are set up for this purpose at the evacuation
assaebly point and the boarding stations (ports. wharfs). One or two workers
with a secondary aedical education are appointed to each train (vessel). and
a pedestrian column includes one or two such aedical workers and one or two
members of the volunteer medical detachment.

It should be borne in aind that the enany may also deliver nuclear strikes
during the dispersal and evacuation process. It is recon-ended that action
be taken in accordance with the existing situation in such a case. It the
"Air Alert!" is sounded while the people are at hone. they nuet warn their
neighbors and take cover in the nearest shelter. If the signal catches the
people on the way to the evacuation assembly point or at the point. they
should go i-ediately to the nearest shelter. The dispersal and evacuation
are continued. if necessary. following the signal "All clear'"

People moving in pedestrian colunns take shelter behind natural features of
the earth or in nearby protective installations. In an easrgency situation
for a train (eater vehicle column). created by the enploynent of weapons of
mass destruction. the people should be removed from the cars (aotor vehicles)
and necessary steps should be taken to protect the people behind natural
features of the land or in nearby protective installations. as well as to
repair the track or road and report the matter to the senior chief. If
arena of radioactive. chemical or bacteriological contamination are encounter-
ed on the way to the safety zone. they should be bypassed on the windward
side when possible. If there is no way to bypass than. these areas should
be passed through rapidly and with the people wearing their personal pro-
tective equipnent.

25
roe OFFICIAL us: ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

Reception end Lodging of People Involved in Dispersal and Bvecuetion

Evacuee reception comittees and stations are created for planning and arrang-
ing the reception and lodging of the urban population involved in dispersal
and evacuation. and for providing thee with everything neceedery. Rayon.
settle-ant and rural soviet evecuee reception coemittees are created by de-
cision of the proper executive connittee or the rayon soviet of people's
deputies. the installation evecuee reception con-itteeuby decision of the
inatellation's civil defense chief. The evecuee reception co-ittees carry
out their work in cooperation with the civil defense headquarters and
services.

The evecuee reception co-ittee of a rural eoviet. settlement soviet or
installation may include the following: an official iron the executive
cosmittee of the local soviet of people's deputies or the installation;
directors oi trade and public catering enterprises. nedical. personal-
service end other establish-onto drawn upon to eeet the needs of the people
involved in the dispersal end evacuation. Party organs assign a representa-
tive to the collaittec. An official from the local soviet is appointed
chairmen of the evecuee reception couittee of e rural (sattlenent) soviet
of people's deputies. and an official from the installation is appointed
ehnirnan of the installation evecuee reception coemittee.

The evecuee reception couittee of a settlement. rural soviet or installation
may be assigned such tasks as the developeent end timely coordinetion (cleri-
fication) of the section of the plan dealing with reception. lodging end
provisioning at the sites where the people are to be located; nesting.
receiving. registration end quartering of the people arriving end providing
then with everything they require; end reporting to higher evecuee reception
agencies on the course of the reception. lodging and provisioning of the
urban population which has arrived. Bvacuee reception co-ittees of settle-
aunts and coemunities serving as intermediate evacuation points are also
assigned the task of sending the people on to their final destinations.

At the threat of an enemy attach steps are taken to ready stations and
wharves. lending (unloading) points and evecuee reception points for
receiving the evacuees.

The evecuee reception coemittee of an installation. settlement or rural

soviet establishes contact with the evacuation co-ittee of the city installa-
tion and clarifies the plan for receiving and lodging the population. the
schedules of trains. motor vehicle and pedestrian calms. the number of
people travel ing on each train. in each motor vehicle column and each
pedestrian column. the location of the intermediate evacuation point (PPB)

for pedestrian columns and the type and amount of transportation required

to haul the people iron the intermediate evacuation point to the billeting
areas. on veil as problame of housing. supplies and aervicea tor the
population.

26
ron orncuu. use our
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

Buildings designated for housing the population and installations are readied
on kolhhnsea and sovkloses and at other installations. and all matters per-
taining to the quortoring of people in the homes (spartaents) of local resi-
dents (sharing their housing). boarding facilities. Pioneer and tourist csnps.
subsidiary installations and other public buildings. Evacuee reception
points (EDP) are set up at the instruction of the rayon evacuos reception
consittee for receiving the people arriving from the city. The latter are
set up in schools. kindergartena. clubs and other public buildings near the
stations (points) at which the evacuees are to disembark. A diagram of

such a point is shown in Figure 36.

 

Figure 36. Model organisational arrangenent of an evacuee reception point

Key:
1. Deputy chief of the evacuee 6. Dispatch and escort
reception point 7. Preservation of public order
2. Chief of the evecuee reception 8. Information station
points 9. Room for nothers and children

3. Commandant 10. Medical aid station
6. Groups
5 Meeting. reception and tesporary

lodging of the population

Evocuee reception points are charged with nesting the arriving people. dis-
tributing then anong the communities. providing them with first aid and
arranging for their transportation to billeting sites.

Personnel at the evacuee reception points maintain constant contact with the
railroad station (point) of diseebarhation. meet the trains and motor vehicle
coluens and help organize the disentarkation of the people. and provide assist-
ance to the elderly. invalids. pregnant worsen and women with small children.

27
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
mu (WPNHM. "SK ONLY

The group for oootiog and rocoiving end providing tosporory housing for tho
population ooots. roceivoo and rogiotoro on o tonporory basio thoso orriving
at the point (too the city.

The sodical aid ststion providos first aid for thou who hovo hocooo ill and
sooo to osnitation conditions ot the ovocuooo roccption point.

Tho individual on duty ot tho roo- for oothcrs ond childron arrangoo for tho
rocoption sod registration of wooon with oosll childron snd spocial trans-
portotion for thoir shipoont to tho billoting oito.

Tho group for tho prosorvotion of public ordor insures order ond tho safety
of citioons on tho torritory of tho ovacuoo rocoption point.

Tho diopotch ond oscort group (hoodod by tho doputy chiof of tho ovocuoo
reception point.) ussigno all of tho orriving pooplo to co-unitios after they
have boon registered snd osads tho- to thoir poroonont billoting oito
oocortud by roprooontotivos of the rural soviot, tho co-unity and a hrigsdo.
All avoilablo transportotion should bo usod for dolivoring tho ovocuotod
populstioo to their living quartors. If thoro is s shortogo of tronsporta-
tion tho peoplo ooy be soot to thoir billoting sitos on foot. In this care
trsnoportation io providod only for oothors with childron. prognont wooon.
involido and tho oldorly. as well so for holongings.

Tho ovscuooo not bo sat in ooch coo-unity by opocislly sosignod pooplo and
taken to tho honor in which thoy oro to livo. Tho ovoouooa oro in turn
roquired to corry out all inotructiono from tho locsl psrty end ooviot
orgono and to ohocrvo tho ruloo of conduct otrictly.

Colloctivo protection is sot up in odvsnco in tho oroos of disporul and
evacuation. If thoro oro not onough oholtoro by tho tilo tho urbon popu-
lation arrivoa. the conotruction of odditionol oholtoro and tho crootion
of sioplo rodiation covars is orranged. and stopo oro also token to proporo
individuol protoctivo oquipoont. All sblo-bodied pooplo, including thooo
arriving tro- .tho city. oro drown upon to porforo this work.

It is oxtroooly inpartoot to provido food. utilitioo. poraouol ond oodical
oorvices in tho oofoty oonoo for workers. osployoeo sod uoobors of thoir
fooilics. so woll oo for tho ovocuotod populstion.

Tho rural rayon's food and oupply sorvico io chorgod with providing tho

populotion with food and oooontial itoso. For tho firot 2 days tho people
my on the food supplioo which thoy hovo brought with thou. llot ooslo con
bo ohtsinod in tho hoooo in which thoy are ponooontly oottlod or in dining
halls. onsck boro. cofos ond rootouronts. ‘n'ovoling ootia iocilitioo oro

sot up whoo noceooary. Fiold kitchens. spociol stool kottloo and othor
equip-out oro used for this purpose.

28
ton orncm. us: our
DOM OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Local utilitycnu personal-service establishments (workshops. barber shops and
beauty salons. lnundries and baths) are charged with providing utilities and
personal services for the population in the areas where they are located. If
necessary. the number may be increased by setting up in the safety zone
similar establishments brought from the city. Specialists among the evacuees
in the various utilities and personal services should also be extensively
used in the utility and personal-service establishments.

The ispolkoms of rayon soviets of workers' deputies must see to it that the
evacuees can obtain their deposits from savings accounts in the city.

The task of providing medical services for the population will be primarily
the responsibility of the existing system of medical establishmsnts--hospitals,
health centers. rural medical aid stations and pharmacies. Their work will
be greatly complicated in the case of radioactive. chemical and bacteriolo-
gical contamination. since. in addition to the general patients. there may be
people affected by radioactive and chemical substances and bacteriological
agents. Medical aid in the form of house calls will become far more
important. it is important to take steps to expend the system of health
centers. hospitals and medical aid stations and to increase the number of
medical personnel: doctors. nurses and medical assistants from among the
evacuated population must be drawn upon and people vith medical training
must be used for this work.

The evacuees should be placed at work on kolkhoses and sovkhoses and at
enterprises removed from the city and continuing to operate in the safety
tone. it is especially important to place evacueees at work on kolkhores

and sovkhozes during the planting of the main crop. their cars and harvest-
ing.

The Civil Defense Training Materials Base for an Agricultural Installation

It is impossible to conduct the military training of civil defense forms-
tions and to accomplish the mandatory training of the population for reliably
protecting themselves against the effects of weapons of mass destruction
without the proper training materials base. This is due to the fact that
under the present programs the training is mainly of a practical nature.
Training centers, full-scale outdoor sections, training sites and points.
which are an extremely important component of the training materials base

for an agricultural installation. are required for the practical training

of formation personnel and for the meeting of practical standards by kolkhoz
workers, sovkhos workers and employees, as well as students.

Depending on the practicality and the possibilities. training centers can be
set up for a rural rayon or for one or several installations for the practi-
cal coverage of the entire group of tasks performed by civil defense
formations. for meeting the standards specified in the program of mandatory
minimal knowledge and for conducting special tactical classes and exercises.
that is, so that they contribute to the accomplishment of the tasks involved
in the comprehensive training of formations and to their achievements of a
high level of training.

29
ron omcuu. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sites oust be set up in a training center for sealing off livestock. storage
and other preeioes; platforss for the veterinary treatsent of livestock and
the decontasination of food. feed. water. notor transport. agricultural
equipment. clothing and footwear; and sites for teaching techniques and
nethods of conducting rescue work. personal cleansing and other isportant
elensnta of the training (Figure 78).

Training centers nust be constantly isproved. It is asst practical to do this
while exercises are underway there. The truinees receive good practical know-
ledge and skills in the process. The use of training centers is ordinarily
planned by the civil defense headquarters of installations.

Pull-scale outdoor sections can be created instead of training centers at
agricultural installations with lisited possibilities for the coobat train-
ing of [creations and the training of kolkhos workers, sovkhoz workers and
enployees. They consist of the separate eluants of a training center
designed for working out a certain group of problens under realistic condi-
tions: areas for the veterinary treatment of livestock. for exasple. for
the decontasination of food. feed and water. personal cleansing and decon-
tanination of clothing and footwear. Other slesenta also say be set up.

It is taco-ended that special training sites be equipped in the absence of
o training center or a realistic outdoor section at an agricultural installa-
tion for the practical training of civil defense fornations and the seating
of standard by kolkhor workers. sovkhoz workers and employees. Specially
prepared radiation shelters. storage and livestock buildings. sedicel aid
sites and so forth can be used as the training sites.

in addition to the above. it is recon-sanded that civil defense training
points he created at each installation. They are designed for the training
of co—anders and chiefs of civil defense fornations. kolkhot workers.
sovhhos workers and eeployses and other nesbers of the population in
accordance with contesporery reouirenents. A well-equipped trainim point
should first of all reflect the nost isportant element—the possibility

and reliability of protecting the population and agricultural production
against eodern weapons-as wall as insure the stable operations of agricul-
tural and other installations in a war involving the use of nuclear nisailes.
It in isportant to naintain ideological-theoretical focus and to desonstrate
the power and fighting efficiency of the Soviet Arned Forces.

A training point should include protective equipsent. co-unicstion and
warning equipnsnt. decontaaination articles. sock-ups of various protective
structures. livestock and other buildings. and so forth. Theoretical and,
lost ieportnntly. practical classes and drills should be conducted there in
the appropriate training subjects and progress for civil defense “nations
and the progras covering the sandatory sinisal knowledge.

30
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Juana no 330400:
uncanuswo
vaunuuauunouov new «new
ucoanwavu

vanqquQuaou new ovum
uaoanwnvo uuonnunuu

no nuaannuono Huauoauv
nauunduauuaooov new ¢0u<
uaoauoou no»
vaunawauuaou

mucuOnu undue new Moan
3:3..qu

wanna cacao nan ovum
nonouuun

vauucuaducoo you ovum

    

_ 33

$73 5 5.3

n 02 ouum unwoucuh

  

51'. .2... I .. ..

.jﬂrﬁiﬁ‘iiit
«ngn.s ’1 . .u“

.g‘ﬁl
”m - f
1

 

.mN unoanuavo
van unﬂauOOu .mdun»0no

.mm aauuqcuaauaooov new n0h<
nouuunuuuno

.nn nuaoauHo o~nn»ncs
Aug: no. auqsvub

tuna“ on nan nounoto

.3 53 3:53 Banana
.nN nUuHuso
.ea vauosuunno van vuwoain
.n~ unouunuuou cannon ooaouov
.NN nw>uo madam-nu new non<
.nN ounuununua noowuoa
mnuuuvaou you chewy-um

.ON hvon anua£o> no nalxoo:

   

        

m 3:
. 3:

.ou
.mu

.na
.o~
.mn

.en
.nd

acauanununcw u~u=u~:u«umo an ham nausea wanna-nu I uo as»

U 1!:RXstal
. 1.33.238 .128 2.4 :‘33—6

2 2 1.4. . 3..” than?
Aiaa _ _ _ ﬂ J
.luI . .
s ' — . . o ’0'?! 83:..an
- _ . .1 . 2 3
.3393... 1.10. «I — .. ~
I! . l lllll L . Am u v
. «1:303... 31... . . . . 2.89.. ..
sits; ~ 1.3!} 1.1.1.... .M _ .p-Ysusnr. {two-1.2% «6‘99.»
nap—09: 3.3m... , _ «10805 00.60:»

 

~ 02 cunm acuculuh

         
 
 

no». oocnuauunn ”canon: .~n
nosey» "dean .~H
.5305 c0333.. .3

socouu cone o
ucoanusvu o>uuuououn
«>«uooamou mo 0.: an» new
ovuqucauq co «summon nan oou< .Q
notocoa new onnqh .n
unease-nan .o amazon .n
nan: souum cc poncho .n
nvuavceua no noun gnu: vuqon .N
ucoaa«avu «>«uoou
noun auscu>unau we no: any you

ovuqvaau» co «ensue: you nou< .~.aox

9.3

        

" 03‘...

ﬂ.
.5:

an! I.
.aPaNta::8:I:¢u:3iaua¢ad:l
g¢§§c§<§3

“uv’iiia‘t. .

 
  

 

  
  

      

   
 

_ 31...: 5.6333

3.9.9....3335... 1.5835: .8
.155! 3.2.9205 5'31}:

v} 080: 830.3%
a on uuwm «cuduh

   

  
 

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR DVFICIAL USE ONLY

it in reconsended that th training point he set up in preaises convenient
for conducting classes. and in the absence r: auch--in a basement used as a
radiation shelter or in some other suitable structure. it is rscoenendsd that
display stands be set up there for the following main sections! "The Arned
Forces of the USSR";"Civil Defense Tasks and Organizational Structure";
"Party-Political work"; “Protecting the Population”: "Protecting Livestock
end Animal Husbandry Prrducts”; “Protecting Crops and Cropping Products";
"The Operational Stability of Installations": "Action To Be Taken by the
Population st Civil Defense Signals”: ”Combat Training" and others. The
training point should be provided with the necessary quality of individual
protective equipment. instruments, devices. literature. technical training
equipment and other itess. There should be an adequate quantity of all this
equipment for at least an entire group to engage in practical training at

one tile.

It is expedient to eat up an open area not for from the training point for
the practical training of civil defense (creations and the nesting of the
appropriate atsnderds by the trainees. it is a good idea to concentrate in

this area the equipment used for protecting the population, livestock and
crops. as well as that used for decontasinating food, feed and water-supply
sources; toxic chemicals and various fertilizers; instrusents and gear.

The creation of a proper training materials base will sake it possible to
conduct theoretical and the required practical coabat training for civil
defense formations and to train kolkhoz workers. sovkho: workers and
esployess on the level dictated by contesporary requirements.

32
ron omcm. use om
FOR Ol’l’chl. USE ONLY

 

  

g .8339. Ha.
.138... “38.8
69:88 .339:
3.8809 menu-«-
.1. stink—o 8:.
£3.33 .33..

 
 

238-18 98880.. 2320 8 «.232 i. 22.8.32. «3:5;
as}... 98.3.2259 259.8. 2.2.6.3... i. 95.830

         

«52.933 :88 .—

         
       

‘né - slit-n
“Pip-rugs: 6....

ill... 9.0888.
3.3.... 8 2.2.3
2. «.33» 0.52...
.2. 89.8.8339
9589.3. 9.33.6

   

 

35cc?- Ecxnia... 2.53

I 338628.... 3.8.9.3: 3.33.013...

I123: :28
$.82 1.3.9»
o n O.— n30?
at R‘s-bu?!»
.39): 9.3.9.!
$3536.61.“

.3383»...
329...»...9...‘

QC

               
     

      

   

:55 as...
6.35.35.
.93... 363

no..-
.nuoi‘ u!-

ulzs 3‘8!

         
 

is . can-soc .6
6w: £35.08 2... o

u I
Itanuc . . .Mo- ... Ian! 0.— a-soooaaaaco 32:38 inane-“How
I 3859.» . . 5 lg $928.2. :58 «322.: onsunoonuma
. . n A3

5.6 3:82:

   
 

33

1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cu; 2‘31- .l:
.leeoqulsaqs anti—9.. .3188. Ital-IP80;-
uorunonnloa o '32.! as £2.88. 3!!!!- Coal!

“Ob nun.
£85199 - goal. .5582: I Dial»: .‘a‘.

5.- ill
in... coge- gu. “g O.- 13 u
. n

8.53
Egg;

gig; ’I C .42?

 

M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OSFICIAL USE ONLY

Key to Addendum 2:

1'
2.
3.

6.

12.
13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Population of the USSR

Directing civil defense personnel
Personnel of paramilitary civil
defense formations

Barkers, employees and kolkhos
workers vho are not members of
paramilitary formations

Citizens not employed in pro-
duction or the service field
Students

Commanders and chiefs

Rank and file

Second-grade students

Fifth-grade students

Officer training. training methods
assemblies. training in civil
defense courses and at advanced
training institutions

Training directly at an installa-
tion of the national economy
Independent study of the mandatory
minimal skills in protection
against weapons of mass destruction.
Practical classes and drills
arranged by the civil defense
agencies of cities. settlements.

and rural communities and the
meeting of standards. Mass infor-
mation and propaganda media (movies,
television, radio and so forth) are
used for more thorough study of
methods of protection against modern
weapons.

Fourth- and eighth-grade students
participate in the "Zernitsa" mili-
tary sports games. in drills, compe-
tition and other civil defense

19.
20.

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

measures and activities for military- 30.

patriotic indoctrination. which are
conducted at the schools. at Pioneer
camps and other establishments out-
side the schools

General training

Training under the program of uni-
versal mandatory minimal knowledge
for the population in protection
against weapons of mass destruction
Special training

Under specially developed programs
35

31.

Under training programs for para-
military formations

Under the program for training
paramilitary formations

Civil defense exercises
Ninth-grade students of second-
ary general education schools
Students of vocational and
technical schools

Students of secondary specialised
educatioaal institutions
headquarters exercises

Special tactical exercise“ for
paramilitary formations

They may be involved in civil
defense exercises at the deci-
sion of the appropriate civil
defense chiefs

Comprehensive. installation-wide
civil defense exercises, involv-
ing the following: installation
directors. commanders and chiefs;
the installation'e civil defense
headquarters; the instelletion'a
civil defense services; the maxi-
mum number of civil defense for-
nations; uorkers, employees and
kolkhoz workers who are not
members of civil defense forma-
tions; students and the population
not employed in production or

the service field (of a settle-
ment, city or other residential
area belonging to the installation)
In addition, girls training as
members of volunteer medical
teams

Ninth- and tenth-grade students
of vocational and technical
schools and tekhnikums take

part in the "Orlenok" military
sports game

VUZ students. Female students

of VUZ's in the humanities train
under the program for the train-
ing of nurses for civil defense

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100020005-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

        
 

3.3 133'...
91.5.6!» Eggiudv

 

  

”09:3... I
3.883 iguana... 2.3!. 1.8588 3833.18. A xxx§§.i 3:51. «.5

XIII“
.33. 0.; 98302 79.3%

. «at»...
.3633 a. 52.37» unseat—.233 3%: 3.325.: .. rag-Nuns

32:9?» .. cap-=3 gran-hangioav

a??? 2.08.5512?»an

       

 

      

c.3333.
nan— .67.. 5...?» «133.255.0133...

"no: .

v5.3 3.3.3.9
"323....“ ““3.- assaulgaaedv

3135363
335.3: «2.9.23

         

32.2.» 9...! "g! cgiéaﬂs

its: egnpéuac? 2»...ch- 93.33:

    
  

I 2:335. 3» 3. 3.338%
8H .3“ not-3.8 2: no .
0388 450 mam wanna-us :3 95361qu no. noun-3.3 uou uncanny-locum n .5132!

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-R0982‘00850R000100020005-3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Continuation of Key to Addendum 3)

22. Special training (or fornntions

23. Special tactical exercises for formations

24. ﬂeadquarters exercises at an agricultural installation (for May)

25. Conpreheneive installation-wide civil defense exercises

26. Civil defense activities conducted at Pioneer camps by personnel of
national econonic installations and civil defense courses

COPYRIGHT: tzdatel'stvo "holes." 1978

9001
C80: 1801 Run

37
m orncm. use om