APPROVID FOR R. .A -: =M71°2I°.: cuA-RDPOa-oo-nonooo-Ioooaooan-a
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040058-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NILY

Jpns L/8422
26 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 9/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040058-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain infornation primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials fro- foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and

other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the

last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-

mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tines within items are as

given by source .

'lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Gwernnent.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGUIATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP 0F
MTBRIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPPICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/84:
26 April, 1

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR .ESOURCES
(POUO 9/79)
CONTENTS

e

ELECTRIC PM All!) rm mum

Power Stetione: Result- end Goele Diecuued
(Ye. I. lorinov; mmmncarm. Jan 79)..............

Intesreted Power Syntax of Siberie end the For ant
Deecribed

(A. I. Noni-ova mwmmczrm. Jen 79)..............

Development at Siberian Pour Syetu Discussed
(A. A. ‘leechinekiy. A. A. mum; mmmmmm.

J.” 79)....Oeeeoeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeoeeoooeoeeeeeeoeeeeeeeee

hone-1c Aepecte of Control Beating Growth Shown
(A. s. Gorehluov. Ye. Ye. Soholov; rammm.

DOC 78)_eeoooeoeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeooeeeoeeeeooeeeoo

Electric Machines love Hejor Role in Uzbek Irrigation
(L. A. Yevdokilov; PWSELMAYA ENERGETIKA,

Oct 78).eooeoooeeoeeeeeeoeeoeeeeoeoeooeeeoeeeeeeeeeeoeo

Electric Power Engineering ussn Stete Prize Avera- for
1978

(mmwo. P.b 79)...0000...OOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOO0.0.
FOR OFFICIAL 082 ONLY

BISClRIC MR AND ma EQUIP?!”

UN: 690.9
MR STATIONS: RISUIJS AND GOALS DISCUSSED

ﬂeece» nmmornn in Ruecien No l, Jen 79 pp 2-5

[Article by Ye. I. Dorieotr Firet Deputy Minieter of Power end Electrification
of the 088R: ”Reeultc of BLectric Power Plent Operetion in 1978 end coele for
1979"

[Text] The yeer 1978 wee e yeer of further inplenentetion of the coupler
plen of econolic end eociel development in the life of the Soviet people.
Political evente of greet inportence took plece in the country: the eixtieth
ennivereery of the Soviet Regine, ecceptence of the new Conetizution of the
USSR, the Decenber (1977), July, end Hove-her (1978) Plenm of the CPS!) Cen-
trel Co-nittee. All thie enlivened the ectivity of the entire Soviet people.

Supporting end epproving uneninouely the doneetic end foreign policy of the
Lenin‘e perty, end the theeee end conclueione of the progree epeechee of the
Secretery-cenerel of the CPS!) Centrel Conittee, CheirIen of the Preeidiu
of the 088R Suprene Soviet. Conrede L. I. Brezhnev, pover induetry vorkere.
juet ee ell Soviet people, ere melting their contributione to the ceuee of
the etrengthening of the econonic power of our country.

Fulfilling the teeke of the netionel econo-ic plen, power induetry workere of
the country ere |.roviding e dependeble end economicel power eupply to the ne-
tionel econon.

In 1978, e coneidereble increeee in the energy potentiel wee echieved. Blec-
tric power etetione of the Soviet union produced ebout 1200 billion Wh of
electric energy including elnoet lll2 billion kwh et the pover plente of the
USSR Hinenergo [Hinietry of Power end Blectrificetion]. Theml electric
power etetione produced 821 of electric energy. ﬂeet end electric power ete-
tione of the USSR Hinenergo delivered 759 nillion Gcel of theml energy.

Leet yeer, new pover-genereting equipment for e cepecity of ehout lo nillion
ldl wee put into operetion et the electric power etetione of the country, in-
cluding 2-2.5 nillion Id! et A23 end 2-2.5 nillion kw et 638, which ie of greet
imrtence for inproving the fuel end energy belence of the country.

FOR MICIAL USE ONLY
P08 OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The increase of energy capacitiee at 1'28 wee achieved chiefly through the
introduction of large nore economical condeneetion power unite with a unit
capacity of 200-500 DH and heating unite for live etean preaeure of 13 end
26 “Pa.

The following unite were put into operation: a 500 at power unit at Reftin-
ekaya 61138; 300 ll! power unite at lriklinokaya, Stavropol'ekaya, and 8yrdar’~
inekaya cuts; 210 m unite at Gueinooeerekaye. Pechorekeya, Snolenekaya,
Surgutekaye, Cherepovetaheya. and Shaturekaye ms; heating unite with a cape-
city of 135-110 II! at Volgograd TBTe-J, Lipetekeya TBTe, hirhne-Iamakeya TB‘i‘e-z,
Ivanovekaya Tue-3, Keregandinekeye Tue-3, and Hinekaya Tun-lo.

At the preeent tine, power production ie beeed chiefly on unite operating at
a live etean preeeure of 26 and 13 “Pa which were reaponeible for core than
791 of electric energy produced by ell thermal electric power Itatione.

Further development of nuclear power engineering wee achieved by introducing
powerful nuclear energy generating unite with a capacity of 1000 til at the
Novovoronuhelteyo, Kurekaya, and Chernobyl'ekaya A38.

The equipnent of the firet power unite of 1000 it! at the Kurekaya and Cherno-
byl'ekaya ABS introduced in 1976-1977 ie being need aucceeefully.

Hydropower engineering eleo developed further laet year. The eixteenth hy-
draulic unit with a capacity of 250 HI wee put into operation at the vet'-
Ilimekaya 633. With ite introduction, thie CBS reached the capacity of 3860
m. At the Sayeno-Shuaheneheye 638, ite firet and country'e largeet hydrau-
lic unit of 660 rev wee put into operation.

The introduction of the firet three unite of 260 it! each wee enaured at the
Inguri 638. No unite were put into operation at each of the following 038:
300 )0! each at the Nurekekaya 688, 215 m each at the Zeyekaye 63$, 78 PI! each
at the Nirhne-lanekaye 638.

Further development of the Unified Power Syeteal (Tens) wee an iqortant area
of work. It covera a huge territory which includee the power eyetese of the
Center, South, and Rorthweet of the country, Traneceucaeia, Northern Caucaeue,
Oral, and Northern latekhetan. In 1970, the Integrated Power Syeten of Siberia
wee connected to the YeBS. At the preeent time, electric power networke cover
almoet the entire populated area of the country and have a length of over (0.3
million kilometere. Laet year, the following high-voltage electric power
traneniuion linee eterted operating: ﬂeet Maine -- State Boundary 750 IN
Line; Stavropol' 61138 .. Tikhoretelt, Inguri 638 -- Tbiliei, Reftinekeya GRBS
-- Kocyrevo, Sayanekaya -- Abekan, Toktogul'ekeye CBS .. France, and Omeh --
Petropevlovek 500 RV linee; Kahhovakaya -- Dahenltoy 330 IN linee; Shetura --
Roginek and any other linee of 220 IN.

Much work ie teing done on improving the dependability; stability, and effec-
tiveneee of power eyeteme determining uninterrupted electric power eupply to
the national economy.

2
PM OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Distribution power transmission lines of 0.5-20 kV about 130,000 km long were
introduced for supplying power to rural areas; 27,000 km were built in the
nonchernosem sons of the RSPSR alone. Power industry enterprises gave con-
siderable help to kolkhoses and sovkhoses under their partonage in electro-
mechanization of production processes and in training the personnel for these
networks.

In 1978, work was continued on the development of the Ekibestus end Ksnsk-
Achinsk fuel and energy complex. The Ekibsstus complex will include five
powerful electric stations with a total capacity of 20 million RH and coal
mining enterprises with a total capacity of 120-160 million tons per year.

Construction and installation work is in progress at the Ekibastus GRBS-l on
the first two power unite of 500 HR each. It is planned to put them into
operation in 1979. The Kansk-Achinsk complex will include electric power
stations of a unit capacity of 6.6 million kw, with power units of 800 H",
with a total capacity of about 60 million RH, and power engineering enter-
prises for coal processing.

In 1978, extensive work was carried cut at electric power stations for further
improvement of the effectiveness of fuel utilisation. which contrihuted to

the successful fulfillment of goals for further lowering of specific fuel
consumption. Specific fuel consumption for the delivered electric power was
lowered in comparison with 1977 by more than 3.0 g/(kﬂh). and for thermal
energy -- by 0.1 kg/Gcal. This made it possible to save about three million
tons of specific fuel for the national economy.

The reduction of specific fuel consumption for the delivered electric power
was achieved as a result of the improvement of the structure of power produc-
tion [1 g/(kﬂh)], operation economy of the equipment of electric power sta-
tions [0.6 g/(kUh)], and improvement of the effectiveness of heat supply [1.5
g/(kuh) .

The improvement of the structure of electric power production was ensured as
a result of the introducrion of highly economical units, removal of worn-out'
and outdated equipment, and implementation of measures directed toward reduc-
ing the use of noneconomical TBS units. Thus, the utilisation factor of the
installed capacity of condensation equipment operating on steam with s pres-
sure of 9 HPa dropped in comparison with 1977 from 62.3 to 59.2 percent.

Increased economy in the operation of electric power stations was also achieved
as a result of the reconstruction and modernisation of their equipment, im-
provement of the layout of heating systems.end improvement of the technical
level of operation. The implementation of measures for the modernisation of
the existing equipment was continued; this included the replacement of low-
pressure rotors of the turbine sets of 300 and 200 1" power units and tur-
bine diaphragma, and the installation of more effective burners, steam super-
heaters, and other assemblies on steam boilers.

3
FOR OfPICIAL USE ORE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

\

The production of electric energy in the dietrict heating cycle increeeed by
0.51 and reached 21.2%. At Me with equipment for a live eteen preeeure of
13 We, the epecific fuel coneunption enounted to 25¢. g/(kﬂ‘h). The loweet
epecific fuel coneueption -- at a level of 150-170 g/(kﬂh) ~- wee at the
Nevinnonyeek cars, Balm TETe~l, Groanenekaya rue-3. Kreenoyerek TBTe-l, end
Sterlitanek me when their turbine eate worked in the dietrict-heeting
cycle.

In order to increaee further the effectiveneee of dietrict-heeting eyeteme.
it ie neceeeery to increeee the utilization of the thermal power of eome Me
by epeeding up the conetruction of heating networke, making new econoeical
turbine eete (T-ZSO, T-l'IS, [Vt-13$, rhea) fully operational within etenderd-
iced periode of the. end implementation of a complex of ueaeuree for the
moderniaetion of individual eeeedlieo end technological flow diagram of the
operating equipment, ae well ee the reconetruction of condeneing turbinee
with organisation of regulated eteen bleeding end ewitching them to the oper-
ation node with counterpreoeure end a woree vacuum.

For the group of 800 ll! energy units, the epecific fuel conemption wee low-
ered by 6 g/(Wh) end conetitutce 331 g/(Wh). The epecific fuel coneu-ption
at the 800 ll! energy unite of the Zapororhekaya end Uglegorekaya 6338 wee

325 g/(ldﬂt). The reliability of the operation of the equip-ant at theee elec-
tric power etetione hee improved coneiderably.

There wee a considerable improvement in the operating economy of the groupe
of power unite of 300 and 200 m. Their average epecific fuel coneuwtion
decreeeed in comparieon with 1977 reepectively by 1.3 and 0.8 g/(Wh), being
336.3 and 352.9 g/(ldlh). The loweet apecific fuel coneuption of 318-320
s/(hﬂh) at electric power etetione with 300 it! power unite operating on gee
and oil fuel wee achieved at the Iriklinekeye, Karlenovekeye, Koetronekaya,
and Sredne-Ural‘ekaye cars. Along coal-operated electric power etetione,
the beat epecific fuel coneunption of 333-336 g/(ldfh) wee achier by the
Belovekeya. Yermekovekeye, and Reftinekaya CRIS.

however, not all electric power etetione ueed the available reeervee for in-
creeeing the effectiveneee of fuel utilization, end the conauption of fuel
at eome etetione exceeded the eetebliehed nor-e. Such electric power etetione
include: Slevyenekeye, Naurovekaye, Pridneproveltaye, Navoiyekeya cars, and
others.

The main factore effecting the reliability and operating efficiency of power
equipment are ite maintenance in a proper technical condition and high-quel-
ity overheule.

In 1978, more than 720 boiler-a with a total capacity of 210,000 t/h end about
570 turbine eete with a capacity of (07 million ldi were overhauled. In per-
forming euch e volule of overhauling, the moat ieportant indexee are the ae-
eurance of the quality end deedliree of euch jobe, ae well an the lowering
of the repair coat and labor input. Thie requiree tieely and high-quality

lo

FOR 0?"an USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

preparation for overhauling, raising of the level of working out the tech-
nology and organisation of jobs, and assurance of the necessary quality docu-
mentation, materials, and spare parts.

Serious attention should be given to the organisation of careful acceptance
of equipment after repairs. the quality of performed repairs must be evalu-

ated on the basis of rapid tests and normative operation indexes of the equip-
“ﬁt.

It is necessary to give more attention to improving the quality of mainten-
ance of auxiliary equipment which is one of the important factors of effi-
ciency iqarovement.

An important role in major overhauls is played by the availability of minor
mechanization facilities. it is also necessary to iaprove the development
of measures for a better utilisation and workload scheduling of the mainten-
ance bases of enterprises.

Hork was continued in the power systems on the implementation of a complex of
measures for enviromantal Protection.

Last year, the ash-trapping equipment was reconstructed on 73 steam boilers,
which made it possible to reduce annual ejection of ash into the atmosphere
by 310,000 tons. The pollution of public water reservoirs by waste waters of
electric power stations also decreased. An experimental industrial model of
a high-temperature electric filter was put into operation on boiler No 6 at
the Kostromskaya cats.

The initiative of socialist competitions to make the year of 1.918 a year of
outstanding labor and to ensure the achievement of the highest results with
the lowest expenditures was taken up by many enterprises and contributed to
renewed enthusiasm in the struggle for early fulfillment of the 1978 plan.
Much attention was given to shortening the time of attaining rated indexes.
The rated specific fuel consumption was attained ahead of schedule at the
MC!“ units No 8 and 9 of 500 a: each at the 'l'roitakaya GRES and at the power
units ho S, 6. and 7 of 800 In each at the Zaporoshskaya and Dglegorshaya GEES.

The workers of the belglavenergo [belorussian liain Power Supply Administra-
tion], ‘l‘roitskaya 6338, and other enterprises initiated stepped-up plans for

1978 for early fulfillment of the tasks of the third year and of the five-year
plan as a whole. -

Hany collectives of the industry supported the initiative of the enterprises
of Roetovskaya Oblast ”To work without lagging", and the initiative of Zapo-
rorhskaya Oblast "Let machines do manual labor". They introduced a new form
of competition .. ”Labor relay race". and are developing creative scientific
and technical cooperation in utilising the experience of twenty-eight Lenin-

grad organisations participating in the construction of the Sayano-Shushen-
:kaya G88.

5
FOR MEI“. USE ONLY
FOR MICIAL USE ONLY

In 1979, power industry workers of the country heve to solve lsrge-scele pro-
blees in connection with further develop-cut of the power industry in the
country, organisation of power supply to the netionel sconony. inrovenent
of the effectiveness of production and quality of work, and observance of the
policy of econony of energy resources in the national econony.

Country-wide electric power output will reech 1265 billion huh, and the pover
output of the 088R hinenergo stetions will increase to 1176.6 billion um.
Atonic electric power stetions will produce about 62 billion lab end hydro-
electric power stetions will produce 172 billion huh of electric power. The

production of therlel energy by power industry enterprises will anount to
855 nillion Gcel. '

It is necessary to reduce the specific fuel consunption used for the delivered
electric power to 329 g/(ldih).

Extensive work hes to be done in order to increase labor productivity.

Many enterprises are consistently observing the policy of fuel and energy
conservetion. In this respect, the valueble experience of the workers of the
Kostronshays Gills should be used more widely. As a result of the i-plenen-
tations of measures for the reconstruction of the equipoent and Iaintaining
a high technicel level of its operetion, their specific fuel conauption is
less then the rated values.

In 1979, it is planned to introduce new power cepacities of 12.5 nillion W.

The power industry workers and builders participating in construction of s
power unit of 1200 II! at the Kostronskeys GEES promised to couplete its in-
stelletion in 1979. ,

In accordence with the resolution of the 25th Congress, nuclear electric power
engineering will develop rapidly in the European part of the country.

An important place among large electric power stations will be occupied by
the Chernobyl'sluya and Kursluya ABS which are now under construction. In
1980. the third power units of 1000 in each will be conpleted at these ste-
‘tione. Yushno-Ukrainskaye and Snolenekeya ABS will stert opersting.

Kuch attention is being given by the power industry to the development of a
lerge base in the west-Siberian oil end gas region. Surgutskaye cars is be-
ing expended. A highly effective complex of very large electric power sta-
tions will be created in ‘l'yuIsnskeye Oblast.

In order to expend intersysten connections. the following electric power trans-
mission lines will be introduced: 750 kv Kursltaya A28 -- Brysnsh, and Cherno-

byl'skeya ABS -- Rovno; 500 IN Chusovays -- Severneye, Hegnitogorsk -- belte-
two end others.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

In order to fulfill the reeks net for 1979, it in neceeeery to mobilize the
efforce of collectivee of neeocintione, orgenieetione, end enterprieee of the
USSR Hinonorso for improving the effectivcnoee of the utilizetion of power
production end the fuel end energy reeourcee, to neintein the policy of ecnn-
any, end to epreed widely eocieliet coepeticione for achieving high work in-
dexee.

COPYRIGHI: Izdetel'etvo "Bnergiye", "teploenergetlke", 1979

10,233
030: 1822

7
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC Pm MI) W EQUIP!!!“

mac 621.311
INTEGRATED rm SYSTEMS W SIBBRIA AND no: FAR EAST DEER“!!!
Moecow armament“ in Rueeien No 1, Jan 79 pp 5-8

[Article by A. I. Hakeinov, board no-ber of the USSR Hinietry of Power end
Electrification]

[Text] The developnent of the power eyeteoe of Siberia end the Par Beet de-
terninea to e coneidereble degree the growth of the entire Soviet power in-
duatry end the Unified Power Syaten (ms) of the Country.

At the preeent tine, the Yeas of the USSR includee the Integrated Power Syeten
(038) of Siberia which, in turn, includee the Geek, Novoeibirek, Berneul,
Tonak, Knebaee, Kreenoyerak, lrkutek, end Buryat power ayetene. The Chita
power eyete- which is within the zone of the Par Beat operatea in parallel
with the 038.

The oil-producing regione of ‘l‘yunenakaye obleet get their power eupply fro-
the Surgutehaye ones which ie within the Sverdlovel: power ayete- of the Ural
088.

The Baetern oes hae been created. It includee the Amr, Khabnovelt, and
Primorye power eyetena end in operating separately.

The remaining power eyete-e of the Far Beet (Yehut, Megadan, Ranchetka, Sakha-
lin) and the Noril'ek power center of Siberia are operating in ieoletion.

rhehlntegrated Power Syeten of Siberia ie one of the largest eyetene of the
country. Ite territory exceede three willion b2 end ie were then 2000 he
fro- weet to eat.

The country'e largeet hydroelectric power etetione ere located in Siberia:
Kreenoyareluya (aix million k9), Iretekaye (4.5 million W), and Uet'-Ilin-
ekeye (3.8 million It"). In 1978, the firet, country's largeet hydraulic unit
of 640 a: wee put into operation at the Seyeno-Shuahenekaya 638 with a rated
capacity of 6.6 nillion W. Uydroelectric power etetione of the Angere-Yeni-
eey eyaten provide lore than 601 of the total output of all USSR (:88.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 038 of Siberia has thermal electric power stations with a capacity of
over one nillion kw: Nesarovskaya, Tom'-Usinskaya. belovskaya cans. Krasno-
yerskaye cans-2. lrkutskays TBTs-lo. The first 210 W units have been put
into operation at the Gusinoorerskaya GRBS in Zabaykal'ye with a rated capa-
city of 2.1 nillion kw. Electric power and heat for large cities (Omsk.
Novosibirsk. Kemerovo, Krasnoyarsk, Irkutsk, and others) are supplied from
Me of 500 lid and more.

The power systems of Siberia are connected by 500 kV networks (Figure l).
The main lines of Siberia are: 500 kV two-circuit transit Irkutsk -- Bratsk
-- Krasnoyersk .. Nasarovo -- Anshero-Sudzhansk, and 500 kV one-circuit tran-
sit Anahero-Sudahansk -- Novosibirsk -- barnaul -- Rubtsovsk.

Prom the 038 of Kazakhstan, power is transmitted through the 500 kv transmis-
sion line Yernakovskaya GRBS -- Omsk and Yemakovskaye GRBS -- Rubtsovsk --
Ust'-Kamenogorsk; the Rubtsovak -- Ust'-Kaaenogorsk section is teeporarily
working at 220 kV.

Networks of 220 kV connect the chin power systen with the 085 of Siberia and
an electric power transmission line of 220 kv connects the Gusinoorarskays
GRBS (USSR) with Darkhan (m [Mongolian People's Republic]) and the power sys-
tem of the HER.

A 220 [IV In. is 3.11: along w: [bakal-Asur Trunk Line] which will connect
regions of Siberia and the Far East. The 083 of Siberia differs sharply from
other power supply associations with respect f' the structure of power capa-
cities and conditions of power consuaption. It has the most solid load sched-
ules (the variable part of the day's schedule constitutes only about l“),
and the share of CBS in the total installed capacity exceeds 50%. In this
connection, in spite of the overall high possibilities of electric energy
production at the 628 of Siberia, their capacity cannot be used in the solid
schedule of loads. The (88 of Siberia has considerable excesses of peak ca-
pacities (about 3 million Id!) which can be used for transmitting power to
other regions with nore uneven loads.

The main problem of the operation :nodes of the 038 of Siberia in connection
with the great importance of the ass situated on various rivers is the opti~
mal util iretion of water power resources with the moat economical loads of
thermal electric power stations. Lake Baikal is a regulating water reservoir
for all OBS of the Angers system. It accumulates the reserve of water created
during the spring-sinner period. This reserve is used in winter when the
needs of the national economy in electric power increase. The utilization
of the water resources of Lake Baikal must be regulated in such a way that
only the voluna of water which the Angara carries under the conditions of un-
regulated runoff is used. Only the redistribution of the water resources by
the seasons of the year should occur.

The effectiveness of the utilisation of the water resources of Siberian rivers
characterised by the asynchronous mode is increased considerably due to the
operation of all 638 in tbe association. For exaqle. during the flood

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

>8

E3850 mm. .Na .3338 .QN ans-anal .3
30.33. hi auuuoouoouvhn :3 35:0 KN mane-n .n.—
332. 933:6 .3 8:29 .8 23.358289 .ﬁ
and: sung» Manon 9.3003 .3 33> .nu 26.3.38 .3
303333 .3 33 .3 «has .3
son-um “833268 .3 £333.23 .nu :33 .o
sauna—End 30303 Snow—88H E .on 02-239 .«N 5.3:.” .o
s..8uoa..lu..»6 3 .nn 9:8. .8 333.33.89.34 .u
053—393 .on 33 .ON salon. .0
30:3- ulxx— uuuuoono 1303. .3 >330» .3 .00 .n
{3.38812 .3 n»!.u3§nm.8¢»¢m .2 _ {1.53.252 .e
mg 058—33833 .un :31: .3 153188350» .n
u§.L§»3u~-x§»£ .on 338333.. .3 x30 .«
133.5 ow 8.50.: .3 5.5»: .u u
2.3 now 3.33.8 «0 mac «Au «0 3.3.502 ugh 3303» 3-! mo 5-: 39.350» .

    

.no

Ana
0... a . Ad'V {is a \3

Illa-Iva ‘ hang-'1. AQMVI
ASV pnv nun-pc-aouo nan-onu-
8

\ Iao‘.\)cal

\

3 E

    

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period on the Yenisey. the Krasnoyarskeya GBS produces excessive amounts of
electric power. As a result of this, the presence of electric connections
makes it possible to reduce the flow of power to the Kresnoyarsk energy sys-
tem from the Irkutsk energy system where during this period the output of thc
Bratsk OBS lowers and a part of the Angers runoff accumulates in the water
reservoir. During the period when the Yanisey water level is low, the output
of the Bratskaya CBS increases and, accordingly, the flow of electric power
increases from the Irkutsk energy system to the Krasnoyarsk system.

Hydroelectric power stations on the Angora are used also for regulation over
many years. For example. the output of electric power of the Bratskaye CBS
in 19‘”. amounted to 28 billion kﬂh, which was 2‘! higher then the averave for
many years, and in 1977 it was 19.7 billion lab, which was 77. less then the
average for many years.

During the years when the level of water is low, the production of electric
power at the 688 of Siberia can drop by 10-11 billion km: in comparison with
the level for many years, which makes the balance of electric power of the
association considerably heavier and leads to the necessity of maxim load-
ing of thermal electric power stations and increased transfers of electric
power to Siberia.

The operation modes of the main network of the association are determined by
the distribution of the largest hydraulic and thermal electric power stations
in Eastern Sibera -- in the Irkutsk and Krasnoyarsk energy systems which have
considerable excesses of power, which causes considerable transfers to defi-
cient power systems of western Siberia.

The operating mode of the main Siberian network is characterised by complete
utilisation of its carrying capacity almost in all sections. The most heavily
loaded 500 kV transit lines are Bratsk -- Irkutsk and Rrasnoyarsk -- Anshero-
Sudshensk which connects the power systems of Western Siberia (Kusbass. Tomsk,
Barnaul, and ﬂovosibirsk) with the rest of the 038.

The 500 kV electric power transmission line Yermakovskays GEES -- Omsk trans-

mits power from Kasakhstan to the Omsk power system which does not produce
enough power.

The Integrated Power System of Siberia was switched to operate in parallel
with the Yeas of the USSR in September 1978 when a 500 kv ltovosibirsk --
Barnaul electric power transmission line was introduced and, thus. the work
was completed on the construction of a 500 kV intersystem transit line Ural
.. Kazakhstan -- Siberia of about 2200 km. The connection of the 038 of
Siberia was a decisive step toward the completion of the formation of the
Unified Power System of the country. The area covered by the Te“ increased
to 10 million km square, and the production of electric energy at its elec-
tric power stations reached almost 907. of the total union output.

The connection of the 028 of Siberia to the was of the USSR increased the
effectiveness of the utilisation of Siberian 62$, improved the level of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY

econoay of the operation of thermal electric power etatione of Kaaahhetan
and Ural. and increaeed aherply the reliability of power eupply to the regiona
of Heetern Siberia and Karakhetan.

Due to a four hour differe..ce in the tone tine in conparieon with the Hoecow
tine. the load of the 088 of Siberia during the maximal load at YeBS lowere
by nearly two zillion kit.

the treneaieeion of power between Siberia and the remaining part of the rats
ie determined by the etability of the 500 kV traneit line and announce to 500
m in both directione.

During the houra of daily maximum loada at Yeas. the etreane of power are
directed iron the OBS of Siberia to the Yeas, which nakee it poeeible to uee
the exceeeive peak power of the Siberian CBS in the low-level power eupply
regione of Katakhetan and the Urale, during elack houre, the power produced
at thermal electric power etatione of Kazakhetan and the Urala ie tranenitted
to Siberia, which nakee it eaeier to maintain the balance of electric energy
of the eeeociation. Due to the revereive nature of power tranefere between
Siberia and the 1e38, the obtained effect exceede one million kw.

The connection through the 500 IN electric power tranenieeion line of Siberia j
with the Yeas ia inadequate. lte carrying capacity conetitutee epproxinatelyt.
2% of the power of the 088 of Siberia, therefore it cannot enaure the necee-
eary tranefere of power connected with the realization of all advantagee of
parallel operation. For parallel operation of the 088 of Siberia with the
Yeas, one of the moat iaportant problem ie to eneure reliable and etable
operation of the intereyetu connectione. Thie ie eneured by eyetene for con-
trolling power tranetere in nor-a1 conditione and autouatic eaergency eyeteae
for preventing or correcting energency eituatione.

In normal conditione, the connectione of the Siberia ~- Kaealthetan -- Ural linea
are regulated by the diepatchere of integrated diepatching controla (000) of
Siberia and Kazakhetan. The diepatcher of the 000 of Raaahhetan regulatee

power tranefere of Katakhetan -- Oral and, if he hae eoIne difficultiee, he
requeete the diepatcher of the ow of Siberia to help bin in thie.

‘i'he diepatcher of the 000 of Siberia regulatee power tranefere for the Siberia-
Kaaakhetan line and helpe in regulating the tranefere for the Karekheten-Ural,
if the load of the Siberian -- larekhetan trcneaieeion line nakee it poeeible
for him. The auto-atic eyetea for regulating power tranetere operatee on the
cane principle.

The automated eyetea of the Siberia-Katakhetan ~Urel line eneuree the
invariance of the working conditione in varioue parte of the power eupply
aeeociation ee a reeult of the balancing action of the auto-atic equipment.
When 500 kv linee are awitched off or when .too nuch power ie eent to then,

the generatore of the Yer-ekovakaye. 'i'roitekaye, lriklinekaya cans, and othere
are dieconnected (or unloaded), part: of the loade in low-level power centere

12
FOR orncm. use ONLY '
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Barnaul'skiy, Rubteovskiy, reelinogradekiy, and others) are switched off,
and control connmnds are transmitted at hundreds of kilometers. For serious
accidents when the balancing automatic equipment cannot ensure synchronous
operation, provision is made for separating automation, automation of fre-
quency unloading, frequency starting of standby unite, and automatic fre-
quency connection of disconnected consumers.

One of the USSR'e first complexes of automatic emergency equipment with the
use of controlling computers is being created for the Ust'-Ilim-Bretsk center.
Emergency control systems are being developed with the use of electronic com-
puters for the Krasnoyarskaya and Saysno-Shushenskaya CBS.

By combining the high operational discipline with automatic control of power
transfers and emergency automatic equipment makes it possible to ensure stable
parallel operation of the OBS of Siberia with the Unified Power System.

Long-range development of the unique deposits of the Xanek-Achinsk brown coal
fields with the construction of the GRES of the Iansk-Achinsk Fuel and Energy
Complex (KATE!) of 6.6 million hﬂ each, and each with a total capacity of
several tens of millions of kilowatts, and the introduction of the full capa-
cities of 6.6 million kﬂ of the Seyano-Shushenskaye CBS, Boguchanskaya ass of
6 million kw, and other largest 638 of Siberia will increase the role of the
OBS of Siberia in the power engineering industry of the country and its ef-
fect on the operating conditions of the Unified Power System as a whole.

Due to the utilization of the Kanek-Achinsk coal, more than 25% of the total
needs of electric power stations of the OBS of Siberia in fuel is satisfied
even now. In the next 10-12 years, the annual need in this coal will increase
3-4-fold, and the first 6338 of RA!!! alone will be burning more coal than all
electric power plants of the 038 of Siberia are burning today. Kansk-Achinsk
coals will be used also in other regions of the country.

Optimal utilisation of the rare: cans and complete utilization of the CBS of
Siberia in covering the load schedules of Yezs can be ensured by construct-
ing a powerful Siberia -- Kazakhstan -- Ural llSO kV alternating current line
with a carrying capacity of 5-6 million kﬂ. This main transmission line pass-
ing through the main centers of western Siberia, Kazakhstan, Southern Ural,
will ensure large scale maneuvering of power fluxes, transmitting 4-5 million
kﬂ during the maximum load of the Yeas from Siberia to Kazakhstan and to the
Urale, and transmitting back up to 3-b million kw during the slack hours.

The first section of this main line, Itat -- Kurbasg is being constructed dur-
ing this five-year plan. In the middle of the Eleventh Five-Year Plan, section
Ekibastur -- Ural must be put into operation for delivering power from the
Ekibastur cars, and in the beginning of the Twelfth Pive-Year Plan, the con-

struction of the entire 1150 kV transit line Siberia -- Kazakhstan .. Ural
must be completed.

It is planned to construct several very large Surgut 6328 operating on inci-
dental gas with capacities of 6.8-7.2 million k". This will require the

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Key: 1.
2.

3.
lo.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
16.
15.

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

  
    

  
 

monu- (15)

a m (17-)
e cum-no (18)

 
  
 

 
 

llOIIi‘ROI

No I‘\

figure 2. Schenetic Hep of Rein Electric Power Network
of the 038 of the Beet for 1978

mm.

Electric pour trene-iuicn
line, 500 IN
ma.

Zeyekeye

Siveki

A-ur

Svobocnyy

Aqua

Bureya
Reychikhinelzeye
Mr

Obluch'ye
Volccheyevke
naeberavek
Conventional eigne

16

16. Thernel electric power plente

l7. Hydroelectric power plate

18. Subetetione, 220 IN

19. Blectric pover tremiuion lines,
220 IN

20. Suboretiuue, 500 W

21. Primorekeye

22. Leeorevodek

23. Khenke Leke

26. Speech-Del'niy

2S. Coreloye

26. levelerovo

27. Pertirenelteye 31. liekhodke

28. See of Jepen 32. Chmuyevke

29. Arte-

30. Vledivoetok

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

construction of an 1150 kl] electric power transmission line Surgut -- Ural.
These main lines will become the eastern link of the main 1150 kv network of
the Unified Power System.

The Integrated Power System of the East which eventually will cover the en-
Lire territory of the southern and central parts of the Far East is now under
construction. The territory covered by the 028 of the Best exceeds 1500 kilo-
meters in length. The largest electric power stations are: Zeyskaya 685,
which is under construction, and Primorskaya ms. Large Tate are operating
in the cities of Vladivostok, Khabarovsk, and Komsomol'sk. The power systems
of the association are connected by 220 kV networks (Figure 2). Construction
is under way on the 500 kV electric power transmission line Zeyekaya 638 ~-
Svobodnyy -- Khabarovsk; its first section, Zeyskeya CBS -- Svobodnyy. has
been put into operation.

with the completion of the 220 kV Neryungrinskaya GEES -- Tynde electric power
transmission line in 1979, Aldanskiy Power Region of the Yakut Power System
will be connected to the 028 of the Best. The operating conditions of the
OBS of the East are determined by the problem of the moat rational utilization
of the capacity of the Zeyskaya 638 when its water reservoir is filled and
reduction of power production at small uneconomical electric power stations,
or even their elimination after the appropriate regions are reliably connected
to the integrated power system.

Because of the long distances between the centers and the relatively low trans-
mission capacity (100-200 M) of the intersystem 220 RV connecting lines, the
operation modes of the electric networks of the association are intense, which
will be considerably alleviated after the introduction of the 500 kv electric

power transmission lines Zeyakaya 638 -- Khabarovsk and Primorskaya CRIS --
Vladivostok.

At the end of this five-year plan when the Komsomol'sk power center is con-
nected through the 220 kV Khabarovsk -- Komsomol'sk electric power transmis-

sion line, almost the entire lhabarovsk power system will be included in the
association. '

Further development of the CPS of the Par Bast depends greatly on the 220 kV
electric power transmission lines which are being built for supplying power
to W [Baykal-Amur ‘l'runk Line], as well as on the large electric power sta-
tions which are under construction in its zone: Neryungrinsknya GRBS in South-
ern Yakutiya with a capacity of 0.6 million IN, Bureyskaya 028 on the Bureya
River with a capacity of 1.7 million kw, Hokskaya 025 on the Vitlm River with
a capacity of 1.5 million kit, and Kharanorskaya cats with a capacity of 1.3
million kw in the Chits power system.

After the introduction of these electric power stations in the networks which
are being built for supplying electric power to Mil, it is planned to connect
the OBS of the Best to the has in the Nelfth Five-Year Plan.

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the connection of two power eenocietione of Centrel Aeie which ere etill
operating eeperetely (in the Eleventh Five-Peer Plen) end of the Bent (in
the leth Pivo-Teer Plen) to the Unified Power Synten, the work on ite for-
mation will he precticelly completed.

Only relatively neell remote power nyntene end power centern of the Per Eat
will renein outeide the ass. Their totel power output will conetitute 1-27.
of the union'e totel.

The integreted power eyntene of Siberie end the Beet, which will cover elnoet
one helf of the entire territory of the Unified Power Syeten of the country
end will yield ehout 201 of the electric energy produced in it, will heve e
determining effect on the energy helence end operetion noden of the Yeas of
the USSR.

An inportent tent for the utilinetion of eveilehle reeerven end inprovnnent
of the effectiveneen of the Tess in to include in the energy helence of the
Europeen regione of the country 6-5 nillion In! of extensive peek cepecitien
of Siberie which for. en e rneult of e lerge nhern of G88, e nolid loed
nchedule, end difference in the tone time. For thin, it ie neceeeery to
npeed up the conetruction of the 1150 RV electric power trennnieeion line
Siberie .. Ketekheten -- Urel en the nein line of the enetern none of the
Unified Power Syntee.

The conhinetion of lerge ass of Siherie with the 6338 of the Bkihentue end
hank-Achinek conplexen eneuree their minelly effective loeding with the
une of themel electric power plente in their heeic operetion node end trene-
fern of coneiderehle cepecitiee of the siherien (:38 to the veriehle pert of
the loed nchedule. The uoet inortent tent for ennuring coeplete utilieetion
of the electric power ntetionn of the 038 of the tent in the conntruction of
the 500 xv electric power trennninnion linen Prinornlceye ms -- Vledivoetok

end Zeynkeye 638 -- Kheherovnk to which the hureynheye nrs will be connected
leter.

Thene nein trenemienion linen will creete ntron; connectione between the nein
hydreulic end ther-el electric power ntetionn for their opti-el utilinetion
for teking tern of excneeive loede. Their creetion will he the necennery
condition for the preperetion of the 088 of the Beet for operetion within
the Unified Power Synten of the country.

COPYRIGHT: Itdetel'ntvo "Bnergiye", "tnploennrgetike", 1979

10, m
cso: 1822

16

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. ~5r
FOR OFFICIAL 038.081.?

BLBCTRIC me AND rowan EQUINE!“

unc 620.9l:662.6(57l.1/.S)
mm 0? 81:3an m SYSTEM 018008830
lioscov “MW!“ in Russisn No l. Jen 79 pp 8-12

[Article by A. A. leschinskiy end A. A. Heherov. Doctors of Bconoeic Sciences.
All-Union Stete Plenning Surveying end Scientific Reseerch Institute of Power
Systems end Electric Power Networks, end Institute of high Teeperetures of
the USSR Acedeny of Sciences]

[Text] The develop-en: of productive forces of Siberie is closely connected
with the creetion of the lergest fuel end energy bese in this region. This
deter-nines the lending role of the fuel end energy coupler (TB!) in the for-
netion end structure of the productive forces of the region end the necessity
of speeding up their develop-ent in cowsrison uith other regions of the
country.

The conditions of the developnent of the fuel end energy coupler predeter-
mine prefersntiel plecenent of industries coast-sing lerge counts of energy
in Siberie end stinulete the developnent of deep fuel processing, end indus-
tries producing fuel end energy equipnent end using fuel as e rev uteriel
(prinerily petrochemicel enterprises). An inportent chsrecteristic of the
next stege is the eppesrence of objective economic prerequisites for plecing
in Siberie such industries which consume reletively noderete enounte of en-
ergy for their Isin line of production but bring shout c'onsidersble indirect
power consumption (for exemle. for Iunicipel end donestic services).

According to the eveluetion of the euthore, the reeliretion of such e progre-
vould neke it possible by the end of the twentieth century to increese the
shere of Siberis in the totel consumption of energy resources by s fector of
1.3-1.0. ensuring the rete of the ennusl increnent of energy constqtion by
20-30! higher then the country's sverege.

This relocetion of consuere to inexpensive fuel end energy besee increesee
the effectiveness of the netionel economic production. llouever, it does not
elininete, but only sonevhet sllevietes the ecute problen of fuel supply in
the Buropeen regions of the country. The essence of this proble- is in the
feet thet. even with sccelersted developnent of nucleer pover engineering,
the energy resources of the Europeen regions uill be eble to setisfy only e
little eore then one helf of their needs in fuel end energy (including

17

P08 OFPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

export) during the period under coneideretion. 'i'he reneining pert of energy
reeourcee nuet cone in increaeingly lerger enounte front the eeetern regione
of the country, end inereeeingly from Siberie. By the end of thie century,
Siberie, evidently, will not only perform theee functione in reletion to the
Buropeen regione, but will eleo pley en increeeingly inportent role in energy
eupply of the fer But. Ketekheten. end Central Arie, conpeneeting then for
their delivery of fuel end energy to the Buropeen regione through the exiet-
ing power linee.

It to inportent to etreee thet modern economy ie extremely eeneitive to lini-
tetione in energy coneunption: eccording to the euthore' celouletione, e
forced reduction of production (end coneueption) of energy reeourcee by 1%
reducee the netionel income by 1.2% end the coneumption fund by 0.9%. Under
theee conditione, it ie perticulerly inportent to eneure full eetiefection
of retionel neede of the netionel econon in fuel end energy even if thie
requiree edditionel cepitel inveetnente. In thie connection, two epeciel-
purpoee progrene ecquire e epeciel netionel economic eignificence: develop-
ment of oil end gee reeourcee in weetern Siberie end eccelereted development
of the Kutnetek end Keneho-Achineh coel fielde.

The content end forme of reelitetion of theee progrene require epeciel cleri-
ficetion. It ie inportent to etreee thet the inplenentetion of theee progrm
will nehe it poeeible to obtein more then two thirde of the totel increment
of the production of energy reeourcee in the country in the leet querter of
the twentieth century ee e reeult of ueing the leett expeneive fuel, i.e.,
they ere noet effective (end not only within the limite of the fuol end en-
ergy complex). At the eene tine, the expendituree on the reelitetion of
theee progrene ere meeeured by meny tene of billione of rublee, 25 to 601 of
which heve to be epent on releted brenchee of the netionel economy 7-10 yeere
eerlier then the nein production cepitel inveetnente.

'l'he creetion of lerge fuel beeee end the fuel proceeeing induetry, further
development of other neturel reeourcee of Siberie, end the development of
the epproprinte proceeeing induetriee end nechine building creete inportent
probleme in connection with energy end fuel eupply to the coneunere within
the territory of Siberie. ‘l'he eolution of theee probleme ie cherecterired
by the neceeeity of not only repid quentitetive growth, but eleo e quelite-
tive improvement of the fuel eupply of thie region. The letter ie expleined
by the fect thet the neede in fuel ere eetiefied here chiefly with coel,
which ie often of low quelity. In the Europeen regione of the ocuntry, the
ehere of high-quelity fuel (oil end gee) conetituted 651. in 1975, while in
Siberie end in the Per Beet it did not exceed lei.

Thie eituetion ie not juetified by the feet thet locel coel ie reletively
inexpeneive. Thie ie true when euch coel ie ueed et lerge electric power
etetione, but it to improper to one it for enell boiler roone end moet tech-
nologicel end doneetic unite. llere, the uee of coel (perticulerly the or-
dinery kind) ie connected with coneidereble loeeee to the netionel economy,
perticulerly beceuee theee coneuere eccount for 601 of the totel fuel end

18

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and energy oonaunption of Siberia. The following nain factore are reapon-
eible for thie aituation:

l) overerpanditure of fuel when coel ia burned inatead of a high-quality fuel
(for email oonrmara. not leae than by 10-12%), which. on the region-wide
scale. reaulte in annual overerpenditure of funda for the extraction, rail-
road and highway tranaportation of tone of nillione of tone of coal;

2) unproductive overexpenditure of acarce manpower reaourcee connected with
exceaaive extraction and tranaportation of coal and aeh, aa well at operation
of power unite (about 100,000 people are now engaged in Siberia at enall
boiler roone);

3) manpower ahortege. Creation of favorable ecological environ-ant ia of
great ieportanca in the complex of neaeurea directed toward eolving the pro-
blel of manpower reaourcea for the regione of Siberia. 'l'hie requiraa a quali-
tative improveeent in the fuel and energy aupply to the citiee of Siberia.

The waya of aolving theae proble-e muat be different from thoae accepted for
the European regione of the country. it would be wrong to atteept to achieve
the aane high percentage of oil and gaa in the fuel and energy balance of
Siberia (although it ia iaportant to increaee it above the exiating level)
due to the fact that the difference in the aocially necaaaary expendituraa
on theee fuele and coal in Siberia ia 2-3 tieea higher than in the European
regione of the country. mder theae conditiona. it ie nore appropriate to
speed up the electrification of the national economy and to expand the cen-
tralisation of heat eupply chiefly on the baaia of diatrict heating eyatene.
Now we ehall diacuaa concrete waya of the realieation of the above-sentimd
directione in the improvement of the fuel and energy aupply to the national
economy of Siberia.

The noat important index of the quality of power eupply ie the level of elec-
trification of the national economy. For Siberia, thia problan ia eepecially
acute, eince it hat the moat inortant power-coneuning induetriea, coal ie
the moat important fuel. electric power ia relatively inexpeneive, and. due
to linited manpower reeourcea, it it naceeaary to eneure the noat effective
application of labor in all epharea, including aervicea and houeehold neede.
‘i'heae leada ua to a fundamental concluaion: the level of electrification in
all branchea of the national economy and the rate of growth of electric power
conaunption in Siberia nuet be higher than the 1583 average. however. at the
preaent tine they are approxiutely equal with reapect to the country'e aver-
age.

The placing of new energy-conﬁning induetriee in Siberia itaelf determinea
increaaed indexer in the level of electrification of ite national economy.

It ahould be etreaaed. that the development of large energy-coneuaing induc-
tries in Siberia ia the noat econonical way for involving highly economical
energy raaourcee in the national economy. The exportation of acne of the pro-
ducta produced in Siberia which require a high power input to the European
regione of the country will be one of the nain waya of the participation of

19

1’0! OHICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

sihorie in the interreyon labor divieion of the entire country. The ehere
of the cnergy-coneuing hrnnchee of induetry in the electric power coneunp-
tion of Siberie reechee 301, while the comtry'e everege ie ebout 131. The
everege union level of the electrificetion of the netionel econon (celcu-
leted ee e percentege of the finite energy obteined fro. the electric energy
in the overell coneueption of the finite energy) during the period under ex-
eninetion will increeee, probebly up to 20%. Coneequently, juet ee e reeult
of increeeing the ehere of electric-power-coneuning brenchee of induetry, the
level of the electrificetion of the netionel econc-y of Siberie euet reech
et leeet Zb-ZSI.

lncreeeed electrificetion of 8iberie ie eleo feciliteted by the retio of ex-
pendituree on high-quelity (technologicel) fuele end electric energy. The
relatively low coet of electric energy eti-uletee ite uee in thoee technologi-
cel, egriculturel. public, end houeehold proceeeee which it ie expedient to
orient in other regione of the country toverd direct utilieetion of fuel.

Time, the exeminetion of the expendituree on the production of ecu typee of
products with the uee of fuel end electric energy hee ohm thet. in conperi-
eon with the Buropeen regione, Siberie hee obvioue edventegee for the elec-
trificetion of euch inportent proceeeee ee the production of cut iron, con--
nerciel cerbon eteel, end heeting of netel for forging end preeeing (neee
high-tenpereture proceeeee of Inchine building).

In conetruction end treneportetion, the level of electriiicetion ehould be
echieved chiefly ee e reeult of the electrificetion or nonetetionery power
proceeeee. Along with the electrificetion of reilroede, it ie expedient to
replece internel coubuetion enginee by electric trection in querrying (trollyo
type duep trucke, electric excevetore. etc), in the ephere of city trenepor-
tetion, end, pertly, in conetruction.

‘l'he uee of electric energy in egriculture will neke it poeeible to increeee
the productivity of lebor coneiderebly. Evidently, it ie eleo expedient to
uee electric energy pertielly for eupplying heet to egriculture in Beetern
Siberie, where there ie e ehortege of unpower end the treneportetion of fuel
to reeote egriculturel regione in difficult. however, the effectiveneee of
theee neeeuree depende coneiderebly on locel conditione end nuet be confined
by epeciel celculetione in eech individuel ceee.

with the coneideretion for the pleceeent of energy-coneuing induetriee in
Siberie end the edditionel directione in the utiliretion of electric energy
in the induetriel, treneportetion, egriculturel, nunicipel, end houeehold
proceeeee thet have been diecueeed ebove, the optieel level of the electrifi-
cetion of the netionel econo-y of Siberie end the Yer Beet conetitutee 29-301
egeinet 201 of the country ee e whole.

Along with the electrificetion of the netionel economy, centrelieed heeting
with etee- end hot weter ie en ilportent ecene of increeeing the effective-

neee of energy eupply to the coneuere, creetion of the eppropriete etenderd
of living for the populetion, e eherp reduction of the need in Ienpower

20

P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rueourcce, and ineuranco of a normal purity of air in citiee of siberia and
the Far Beet.

The orientation of the national economy toward the develop-out of auch heat-
coneuning induetriee ae chenietry and petrochenietry, pulp and paper indue-
try. and wood pulp chemical induetry,aa well an aevero clinatic conditione
determine the accelerated growth of heat coueunption in Siberia and the in-
creaee of ite ehare in the heat balance of the country. The eane factore are
reeponeible for the concentration of thernel loada. Eventually, the thermal
load of individual citiee here will reach moo-10.000 Gcal/h. and heat con-
eunption of citiee with thernal loada of over 1000 Goal/h will conetitute
about 801 of the total continuation of heat by citiee and city-type eettle-
nenta. The ehare of citiee and aettlenente with loada below $00 Goal/h will
conetitute only 52 of the total heat coneunption.

At the preeent tine, one half of thermal loada of Siberia are covered by Me,
approriuately one third of then are covered by rayon and induetrial boiler
room, and the remaining heat coneueption in eatiefied by decentralized
eourcee: eeall boiler roone and heating furnacee. Alnoet all eourcee of

heat eupply work on coal.

The ecological and economic factore nake it neceeeary to change eubetantially
the conditione of heat eupply of nediu and email producere of heat. It ie
pernieeible to uee coal for Me provided that electric filtere are need,
while central boiler roone and particularly enell unite ehould be ueing high-
quality fuele: gee, purified coal, and partially fuel oil. Coneidering the
great difference in the erpendituree on high-quality fuel for boiler rooaa
and on coal for ‘l'l'l'e, the level of the centralieation of heat eupply in Si-
beria nuet be incraaeed in conparieon with the European regiona by 30-50%.
For the cane reaeon, even without coneideration for eocial factore (purity
of the air, comfortable living conditione for the population, etc), the
ephere of the developnent of centralized heating eupply in expanding eubetan-
tially 'in thie region: the minim level of the concentration of thernal
loada at which the uee of Tl‘l'e beconea effective ie 20-60% lower in Siberia
than in the European regione of the country. Accordingly, the ehara of Me

in the total production of heat here Iuet conetitute 65-67! againet leee than
401 for the country.

Rapid electrification of the national economy in Siberia (with a high per-
centage of induetriee coneuling large anounte of electric energy which are
reeponeible for the high deneity of the overall electric load echedule) in
colbination with the large ehara of Me and favorable conditione for the
develop-ant of hydropower engineering predetenine the high rate of the devel-
opnent and apecific etructural peculiaritiee of the Integrated Power 8yeten
OBS)“ Siberia. At the preeent tine, the ehara of 039 in the etructure of
power-generating capacitiee of the (83 ie approachi one half, the ehare of
Me in approaching one third, and the ehare of as Condeneation Electric
Power Statione] conetitutee leee than one fourth of the total capacity of the
ayaten. Anelyeie of the balance of electric energy production in the 035 of
Siberia indicatee a attained eituation. particularly becauee of exceaeively

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high loads of thermal electric power stations while a considerable part of
038 capacities is not being utilised. Therefore, along with further construc-
tion of 638 and further development of Ms. much attention must be given to
the construction of us during the next period.

M main areas are forming in Siberia for mass (possibly flow-line) construc-
tion of very large ms. The first area is connected with the development of
the Kansk-Achinsk coal field; its development was started with the construc-
tion of the first baresovskaya 6338. Eventually, the total capacity of elec-
tric power stations in this area will reach tens ofmillions of kilowatts.
The energy of these electric power stations is intended for the needs of con-
sumers in Siberia and for transmission (including direct current) to the
European regions, Kaaakhetsn, and Central Asia.

the second construction area of condensation electric power stations is being
created in the middle part of the 0!" River (Surgut GIBS) and is oriented
toward the use of casing-head gas, and later for low-pressure natural gas.
At the present time, these [33 are intended, and will be intended in the fu-
ture, chiefly for electric power supply to ‘ryuenskeya Oblast and the III-ale.

Condeneation electric power stations will also be developing in other regions
of Siberia and in the ‘i‘renebeikal area primarily for satisfying the needs of
local consumers in electric energy. .

The hydroengineering construction progran for Siberia, along with the comple-
tion of the Sayeno-shuehenekaya CBS and the construction of Boguchanskeys 628,
includes the construction of the main ass of the Yenisey eystee (Sredne-
Yenisayskaya ans, Osinovskaya Gas, and Niahne-‘rungueskaya ass) before the
end of this century. It is necessary to implement complex optimization of
the main parameters of these as and the delivery schemes of their power.
There are reasons to believe that it is preferable to transmit the power of
the Yenieey 638 to the Urals and further to the European regions. In this
case, the installed ens capacities must be selected with consideration of the
fact that they will operate chiefly in a basic mode during the first stages,
and their economic indexes muet be competitive with the A38 in the Oral and
Volga regions.

The internel and intersyatem electric connections of the 038 of Siberia will
be strengthened substantially during the next period. Provisions will be
made for its parallel operation with the 038 of the Orals, Kazakhstan, and
Central Asia with the use of high-voltage alternating current electric power
transmission lines.

Along with thie, after the construction of a direct current 1500 IV VI. [over-
head line] Bkibaetur -- Center, possibilities of constructing a direct-cur-
rent VI. of higher voltages are being examined for supplying the power of the
electric power plants of the lanek-Achinsk complex and, possibly, the power
of the hydroelectric power plents of the Yenisey system to power associations
of the European part of the country.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The total carrying capacity of the intersystem connections will reach tens
of millions of kilowatts. Electrical connections with the Transbaykal area
and the Mongolian People's Republic will be strengthened. It is expected
that the 088 of Siberia will be linked with the 088 of the Far East along
the MM route.

Along with the development of the electric power and heat supply, an iepor-
tant role in increasing the effectiveness and pace of economic growth of
Siberia is played by the improvement of the conditions of fuel supply to the
consumers. Hultivarisnt calculations in the optimisation of the fuel and
energy balance of Siberia within the framework of the fuel and energy complex
of the country have indicated the passibility of solving this problem without
any damage to the fuel supply of the European regions of the country and with
consideration for export needs.

Coal remains to be the predominant kind of fuel and will continue to be in
the future. however, its overall percentage in the balance will decrease
from two thirds to one half as a result of increasing percentage of natural
gas. It is expected that the distribution of coal by consumer categories
will improve: the percentage of its consumption by electric power stations
remains unchanged, and its replacement with gas will occur chiefly among
small consumers, in technological processes. and. partly, in boiler rooms.
however, the percentage of natural gas will increase somewhat even at elec-
tric power stations (at Surgut GRBS and, partly, at the electric power sta-
tions of the lioril'sk industrial complex).

Siberian consunsra can benefit greatly from technological reprocessing of

Kansk-Achinsk coal and the production of smokeless solid fuel (semicoke) and
liquid fuel (resin) for households and small boiler rooms. In a more distant
future, it will be necessary also to process coal for producing liquid fuel.

The main means of solving the problem of improving the fuel supply services

to the consuners of Siberia is to accelerate the installation of gas supply
facilities in economically developed areas. Of course, under any conditions,
the density of gas consumption will be much lower than in the European regions
of the country, not only because of the lower density of the population, but
also because of the much lower effectiveness of the use of gas instead of coal.
And nevertheless, gas supply for most regions of Central Siberia will be eco-
nomicslly justified.

In Western Siberia, it will be effective to have gas supply in almost all
oblast cities, large industrial centers, using gas for technological and house-
hold needs, for small and medium boiler rooms, and, selectively (primarily
with consideration for ecological factors), for large boiler room: and

some Tﬁ'l‘s. The following gas must be used for these purposes: (after repro~
cessing at GPZ [gas processing plants]) casing-head gas of the fields of the
middle Ob' River area, gas of small fields of Tomskaya and Novosibirskaya
oblasts and later, if necessary, some of the Tyumen' gas sent to the Euro-
pean regions through Surgut and ‘l‘yumen'. The same sources must provide gas

for large consumers in the western regions of Krasnoyarskiy Kray.

23 ‘:.'

~ son orucm’uss om!
POI! OIPICIAL USE ONLY

It ia expedient to orient the gee eupply for rain induatrial cenrere of
Irkutekaya Oblaat toward the aucceaafully proapected reaourcee of natural
gaa depoeita in the Lena River area. The ephere of in uae enong the con-
aueera here it the aane ea in the regiona of Reatern Siberia, but technoloci-
cal uee of gaa ia ouch greater.

In conclueion. it ie neceeeery to etreea that all eleeentt of the fuel and
energy couple): are cherecteriaed by a high degree of inertneee. Realitation
of large atructural and territorial ahifte requirea coneiderable periode of
tino. Thia appliee equally to the fuel and energy baeea of Siberia vhoee

role in the aolution of long-range power problem of the country increaeea
eharply. Therefore, the implenentation of exteneive progrene for the creation
of large fuel and energy baeee in Siberia requirea unabated attention and op-
tinel coordination of the unionvide and regional problem. in accordance vitn
Comrade 1.. I. Brethnev'e inatructione given during hie tour of the regions

of Siberia and the Far But.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatel'atvo "Energiya", "teploenergetiha". 1979

10, 233
680: 1822

2‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NONOHIO mm OF ONE“: EATING GMT" 3mm
llosoov mmmmn in Rucsien lo 12. Dec 78 pp M

[Article by MS. Gorshkov end reds. 8okolov. doctors of technical
soiegoeaésx'l'i-Mn ”Netionsl Economic Effectiveness of Centrel Meeting
in t e "

[Text] The economic development of the Soviet Union is hesed only on
its on fuel end power resources. hergy independence is en ilportent
edvsntege of our eoonosic systes and e very isportent prerequisite for
its stable growth. In order to reelise this edventege in full nessure
it is neo s to strive for retionsl ml econosicel utilisetion of
resources’flf

It is required strictly to churn end intensity the regise of e eeving
of fuel end power resources for the purpose of insuring a helenoe of
then. hos the nstionel econonio stendpoint it is necessery to conduct
measures directed et s seving of fuel and power resources st the present
tins and in the resote future. Under the condition of a strained fuel
and poster helenoe. rstioml utilisetion of fuel. host end electric ’pover
will lead both to en increase in the econcsioel nature end in the
reliability of the energy supply.

Observsnoe of e regise of seving fuel end power resouoes is not only
e scientific technicel end production-economic problem but also en
ilportsnt sooiel ten]: [1].

In the country‘s fuel end power hslsnce et the present tics shout 23
percent of the utilised resources fells to electric power and 17 percent
to best. These resources ere being concentrated sore and core in power
engineering cysts-s. and therefore pleced on then is the greetest
responsibility for insuring their reticml end eoonosic utilization.

The specific expenditure of fuel for the production of energ hes becone
not only e sector indicator. but also a mJor nstionsl-econosic indicstcr.
which is pointed out in the d ives of the perty end the govern-em.
end eppeers in the stete plans 1].

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0"“

Already conducted cuocessmllv and being conducted in the power system
is ewtmsive work for insuring the assigned reduction in the specific
expenditure or fuel by the erd or the Tenth Five-Year plan to 325-328
grams per kilowatt-hour. The average reduction in the specific expendi-
ture will be attained with ever greater difficultiec and outlays of
labor. of physical and monetary mans. In turn. in absolute term

1 gran of specific expenditure yields at the present tine about 1 sillion
tons of standard fuel per year and as there is amrther increase in

the production of electric power this value will grow. contributing to
an expanded e rgy supply and to a rise in the effectiveness of public
production [2 .

One of the min directions of further rational and economic utilisation
or fuel and power resources. of a radical isprcveaent in the country's
fuel and power balance is centralised coupler production of electric
energy and heat-4 central heating systes. ll'hie has been proven by
the half-century oi‘ know-how of our country. which steadily occupies
first place in the world with respect to the level or its development.

In the planned socialist eoonosy or the IBSR the central heating system
is being dejloped at high rates. which is evidenced by the data for
1950-1975 3 .

Production of mel and power resources. million tons

of steward mel 3‘54?”
Production of h t. sillion ”Joules MOO-10.500
Including mo ﬁuat and electric power plants].

million gigaqules 290—3800
Production of electric power of Me.

billion kilowatt-hours 27-320
Including {or the heating supply cycle.

billion kilowatt-hours 9-330

One of the ilportant irdicators of the effectiVeness of heating supply
is the saving or fuel in cosparison with the separate ache-e or
centralised energy supply for IE [condensation electric power plants]
and heating supply tron large regional boiler plan“. This effect by
the end of the Ninth Five-Year Plan reached approxintely 35-40 million
tons of standard fuel per year. Such a saving is colparable with that
provided by all the Mroelectric power plants of the Union (about Ito-165
million tons of status!!! fuel per year). Necessary however is a sore
objective evaluation of the effectiveness of central heating in oowpari-
son with the actual scheae of a replaceable separate energ y supply
[3]. Under actual conditions the introduction ot a 11m. as a rule.
leads to ceasing the construction of new boilers and the operation of
existing cull low-econoay boilers. In such a case the attained effect
of cent-a1 heating is evaluated as a sa of fuel of approxintely
loo aillion tons of steward fuel per year 3]. Thus. according to

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

different estieatione. the We alredy provide annually a saving of
fuel in the lisits of 31-100 eillion tons of standard fuel. This
effect of a saving 01' 0101 can be evaluated in various ways.

If the resources of power fuel were not lieited. the indicated saving
of it would lead only to reduction of the corresponding outlays for
extraction end delivery. which in today's prices ooee on the average to
15.5 rubles per ton of stendeni fuel or on the whole 1865-1550 aillion
rubles per year. If we figure according to the eo-celled closed ex-
penditures. which eVen according to lowered estiletes cone to 30-35
rubles per ton of standard fuel. then the fuel effect of central heating
supply can be estimtsd at 900-3500 sillion rubles per year.

In fact the resources of highly velmble encrg m1: are lieitsd.

Under these condition an additional release of energ is imured owing
to the eoonoeised fuel. Thu. produced ell together in 1975 was 1038
billion kilowatt-hours. including 90-300 billion kilowatt-hours on fuel
econceieed thanks to central Ming. which oosprises 9-30 percent in

the total release. that is. a very substantial share. This scene that

the effect of central heating supply is Ianifested also in an additional
release of electric power on the eccnceised fuel. This ultisately is
reflected in the volume of industrial production all! the national inooee.
The national eocnosio effect of oentrel heating supply from the additional

release of energy is proving to be significantly greater then the
ebcve-indicated cost of the econcaised fuel.

Release of heat Bpenditure of fuel

heating supply source “111°“ 8158- $ lillion tom 5

Joules/year st. fuel/year

Heat and electric power plants lI000 33 12'».0 23.5
large boiler rcon (sore then

60 ssgajoules/s) 1300 11 55 10. 5
3.11 industrial and epertsent 1

boiler room (lesc then 60

nsgchules/s) 3100 25 1‘66 28
Decentralissd sources 3000 28 200 38
Secondary energy resources 330 3 0 0
Total‘ 12100 100 525 100

i"l‘alxing into account the saving of fuel from coabined output.

It is necessary to consider also that thanks to central heating there is
a significant reduction in the disohsrgs of products (to. burning fuel
and heat, which corresponds to looting the dsmds about protection of
the environ-mt and creates the possibility for an increase in power
capacities in regions where this is liaitsd by sanitary norm.

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is a reduction in the derande for cooling water for condensation
of spent steaa in the heating supply imtallations. which creates the
possibility of increasing the energy capacities in regions with liaited
water resources.

The work of the Me increases the reliability of the electric power

engineering system thanks to the output of electrics]. capacity at the
site of its consuapticn. In forcing out the eaall boiler rccas. the

m release vast mnpover resources that have been occupied in their
erection and servicing.

It is obvious that the effectiveness of central heating supply is re-
flected not only in the indicators of the power engineering sector.
but also of the whole national eoonoay. The effectiveness not be
revealed and evaluated with adequate coapletenees in order to uphold
the right to further developsent in the case of increased donuts on
guaranteeing the effectiveness of capital invest-ants. The difference
in the econcaioal nature of heating supply and condensation equipsent
with increased panneters of steaa is being reduced. The resources of
lees expensive coal of the eastern deposits are appearing. Atoaic
heat and electric power plants are proaising. In realistically evaluating
the effect of different conditions. one can concluie that integrated
production of electric energy and heat using fossil fuel should
receive further developnent.

In the presence of considerable advances in the developnent of technolog
and the scales of heating supply. and also the isproveeent of indicators
of operation. its effectiveness still has been far fros fully nnifested.
since an well-km scientific-technical and practical aeasuru Isve
notbeen carried out 2A].

Presented in the table are data ctnracterising the distribution of the
release of heat and the expeunturee of fuel according to sauces of
heat supply during 1977.

As is evident fro- the data cited. the heat and electric power plants
satisfy only one-third of the heating load of the country. using for
this purpose about one-fourth of the total expenditure of fuel. Satis-
fied by ssall boiler rcone and decexdmlised sources is still 53 percent

of the country's heat load with a com caption of 66 percent of the total
expenditure of fuel.

The available reserve of a saving of m1 m. forcing out decentralised
heating supply and stall apart-ant boiler rccss by centralised heating
supply fro- Me and large boiler room can be estinted according to
the level of heat oonsusption in 19?? in the esount of 125 aillion tons
of standard fuel. This coup-ins about one-third of the total annml
expediture of fuel for the output of electric potter in the country.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’PICIM. USE ONLY

In order to realize the indicated vast resorVe of a saving of m1. the
rates of develop-ant or central heating should be increased. but they
are being reduced. Cause for alert is the fact tint during 19?? the
release of heat free mm or the Ministry of Power wao increased by

a total of 25 million gigajoules. that is. by less than 1 percent.

instead of the increase of not less than 125 aillion gigaJoules per year
during the previous period.

This directly affected the lowering of the average specific expenditure
of mel at the Ms. which in 197? case to only 3.6 gram per kilowatt-hour
instead of an annual reduction by 8-9 grass per kilo‘att-hour in preceding

the me leads to a reduction in the absolute uxpendituns of fuel Just
at the M the-selves. but in this case there is an ovempenrliture of
m1 in the country since the heat load that is not released iron the
TE'I‘e is lads up. as a rule. from boilers with a low level of eoonow.

0n the aVerage an under-release of heat from Me in the asount of

l nillion gigaqulss leads to an overexpenditure in the country of amooo
tons of starriard mel. and or this anount 65 percent is as a result of
rscution of the combined- output of electric enery and 35 percent is
due to decentralization of the heating supply. As we see. a large part
of the damage occurs from reduction in the output of electric power in
the heating supply cycle at the Me.

nodem large m. The: are placed according to ecological. health and
lay-out coalitions on the outskirts or even beyond the boundaries of

scdern cities. while regional boiler room can be located closer to the
heat consulsrs.

tures for transit heat-carrying pipes tron sodern high-capacity TEl‘s
with an estimted heating load on the order of 1700-2300 joules/s
and more cone to approxilntelv 9.000 rubles per 1 ugajoum.

The specific annual saving of mi in the case of oosbined output or
electric power at nodsrn Ms cones to about 175 tons of steward mel
per 1 negaJoule/s of the calculated heating load. Therefore the initial
outlays for transit heat-carrying pipes even with a significant distance
of the We {ro- ths city cons to about 50 rubles per ton of stasﬂard
fuel saved per year. which is 3-1; tiles lower .than the specific initial
outlays for creation or a fuel base and the corresponding transport
comnications for 1 ton of standard fuel per year.

29

1'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

In connection with the overloading of the utilities transportim fuel
froa Siberia to the Mopsan part of the 0888. certain specialists are
proposing to liait the further development of the central heating systea
using fossil fuel in this part of the country by leans of satisfying the
growth in the heating load froa boiler facilities and covering the
increase in the electrical load frca atoadc condensation plants (Am:
atcaic condensation electric power plants). It is necessary to point
out the doubtful effectiveness of this proposal in general and froa the
positions of linitation of the delivery of fossil fuel in particular.

At aodern Me for every 100 nagawatte of installed electrical capacity
released per year is 16.6 aillion gigaJoulee of heat with a specific
sxpslﬂiturs of standard fuel of approxintely lol kilogram per gigaJoule
and 500 aillion kilowatt-hours of electric power with a specific «pendi-
ture of fuel of approximtely 220 gram per kilowatt-hour. The annual
expenditure of fuel for the indicated release of heat and electric power
cores to 300.000 tone of steward fuel. and out of this 190.000 tons of
standard fuel (6" percent) is so: nded for the output of heat and only
110.000 tons of standard fuel ( percent) is, upended for the output of
oleﬁn-lo power. The basic slurs of tin fuel is expanded for the output
0 t.

As pmctice shows. lowering the rates of deVelcpnent of central heating
supply. as a rule. leads to decentralisation of heating supply and the
connected substantial increase in the specific mpsnditunof starﬂard
fuel for the release of heat up to 53-58 kilogram per gigajoule instead
of “0-152 kilogram per gigajoule in the case of central heating supply.
Therefore the expenditure of fossil fuel for heating supply increases

by 30-35 percent. In the case considered the expenditure of fuel Just
for heating supply. that is for the release of u.6 aillion gigadoulss
of heat. cones to 250.000 tons of starriard fuel. At the sans tile there
is a substantial increase in the emperrliture of fuel for the output of
electric power according to the coniemation cycle. which ccaeeto 170.000
tons of standard fuel. The total upetxliture of fuel in the case of
separate energ supply cones to 5:30.000 tons of student fuel per year.
that is it exceed: the annual expenditure of fuel in the case of centrul
heating supply by 120.000 tons of standard fuel. or by ho percent. In
addition the delivery of fossil fuel is reduced only by 50.000 tons of
statuard fuel per year. that is by 1? percent of the total apenditure
of fuel at the heat and electric power plants. tut the overeapenditure

According to the expert evaluation of the authors. the heat consulp-
tion in the Mopsan 0888 in 1980 will reach 10.500 million Moulos
per year. including 3500 Iillion gigajoules per year. or 33 percent. iron
the Me. Iron these Ms 300 billion kilowatt-hours of electric power
will be issued. In this case the annual expenditure of fuel at the

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
heat and electric power plants comes to 210 million tons of stardmi
mel. including lbs nillion tons of steward fuel for the output of
heat and 65 aillion tone of etwdard fuel for the output of electric
power.

In the absence of central heating supply the expenditure of fuel for
heat would cone to 200 million tons of nL-uvlard fuel and for electric
power 100 million tons of standard m1. and in total 300 million tons
of standard fuel. that is 90 million tons of standard fuel more than
with central heating supply.

A reduction in the rates of development of central heating supply in
the European man will lead to a substantial overeatpenditure of fuel
without any marked effect at all in reducing the delivery of fossil M1
in the airspean part of the uses.

The positions stated preserve their force also in the cautious hypothesis
that instead of the m . heating supply will be realised by 50 percent
from large boiler facilities and by 50 percent mm slall boiler facilities.

Also warranted is the development of heating supply from atoaic Ms. 0!
course. it follows to depend in the development of heating supply on

the new sources of energy-atomic. and tlurmocuclear. but it is necessary
realistically to evaluate the possibility of their utilisation in time.
Until practical raster-y and broad developaent of atomic Ms it is
necessary as before to develop heating supply using fossil fuel.
improving the techniques and organisation of construction and operation
of the heating supply systems. including the comumer installations.

Bibliography
1. Kosygin. A.N.. "Osnovm napravleniya rasvitiya narcdnogo khoayaystva
SSSR na 1976-1980 gcdy" Eliasic Directions of Development of the 1331!
National Scone-y for 197 1980]. noscou, Politizdat. 1976.
2. Gorehkov. n.8, . “National Economic Effectiveness of Lowering the
Spezifio Btpenditures of tasty Nel." MONEY: STAN'I'SII.
19? . “0 9.

3. Helent'yev. L.A.. "Heating Supply in the Energy Economy of the USSR.“
rmmmm. 1979. No ll.

16. Sokolov. Yoda” Belinskiy. 3.1a” "Fifty Years of Soviet ﬂeeting
Supply,“ mmmn. 19715. No ll.

comicm‘. Iadatel'stvo "Enema". “Teplcensrgetika”. 1978

10908
030: 1822

31

FOR OPl’ICIAL 053 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8! ONLY

mm PM AND Pm 30mm

BLBC'IRIC WINK: “AVE MAJOR now In UZIBK IRRIGATION
Hoacow ruomsmuu ”3303‘!!!“ in Ruaaian No 10. Oct 78 pp 2-3

(Articla by anginaar L. A. Yavdokinov. Uranargoabyt: "Blactronachanical
Irrigation of Land in tha Uabak 8811"]

[Text] During tha yaara of Soviat rula in tha rapublica of Cantral Aaia
largo araaa o! barran virgin atappa land have bean irrigatad. aa hava un-
uaad land. on tha adgaa of old irrigation ayatau. Landa olavatad and re-
nota iron watar aopply aourcaa ara baing irrigated with watar punpad up

by alactronachanical naana. to thin and artarial canala ara built with
pulping atationa at atappad lavala ao aa to provida not only for gatting
watar up to tha tracta to ba irrigatad. but alao (or naintaining irrigation
during parioda wban flow and vatar lavala ara low. Divaraion of watar into
tha artaricl canala ia accolpliahad by naana oi larga cnginaaring facili-
tiaa which function raliably whatavar tha watar lavala in tha rivara.

Particularly artanaiva oparationa in irrigation of virgin land by alactro-
nachanical watar lift ara going on in tba vibak SSR wborc about 30 parcant .
of all irrigatad land in tho country ia concantratad. Hort on irrigation of
land in tha larahinokaya. Drhiukakaya and Surkhan-Sharabadahaya atappaa

ia in procaaa. and irrigation of tha Golodnaya atappa and landa in lukharakaya
Oblaat ia baing iiniahad. Thin involvau the use of a conplon approach to
opening up tba virgin atappaa. which covara not only bringing in watar and
building collaction and drainaga nata but alao the conatruction of. wall.
organirad aovkboa Iarnataada. putting in roada. powar linaa and watar linaa.
attracting panpla atc. Such an approach ia naking it poaaibla to aatabliah
in Cantral Aaia an irrigation ayata which haa graat national acononic aig-
nificanca and ia activaly aftacting tha davalopnant and diapoaition of pro-
ductiva (orcaa.

htanaiva alactronachanical irrigation to put larga tracta of land to uac
began davaloping in about 1962 with tho conatruction of tha Ann-Kara“?-
oltiy nachina-aidad canal with a ilow of £8 a3la and two clactric pup ata-
tiona providing for a watar liit of 15 natara. A projact waa davalopad on
tha baaia oi thia canal to food watar iron tha Amdar‘ya into a luhharakaya
Oblaat cantral oaaia. wharaby tba baad raaarvoir of tha Am-lukharakiy

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

machine-boosted canal was integrated with the head equipment of the Amu-

Karakul-skiy canal. which was expanded to provide for a flow capacity of
m m3/s.

In Surkhandarinshaya Oblast the irrigation of the Surkhen-Sherbadskaya tract
is being accoaplished by means of the Zonr arterial canal and the machine-
boosted shirsbadskiy and Amu-Zang canals. Irrigation of the Xsrshinskaya
steppe relies on the Karshinskays arterial canal which has six electric pump
stations providing a loo-ester lift and flow capacity of 200 a3/s.

when we are dealing with arterial canals with electric pumping stations lined
up on than we have the problea of coordinating the operation of the stations
since. if one stops while the rest are working. the canal might overflow

and the stepped station night get flooded. Full or partial stoppage of the
pumping equipment at the rest of the stations disrupts the hydraulic regimen
of arterial and branch canals. In the growing season this can upset cotton
plant watering schedules. In connection with this it is necessary to ensure

a high degree of reliability with reapect to the power supply to pumping
stations on arterial canals.

Blactroaschanical irrigation will. in the future. be accomplished via the
construction of large stations with high-capacity pumping equipment. The
installed capacity of pumping stations is. aa a rule. selected by starting
from the maximum summer productivity during the growing season. taking into
account the capacity of reserve equipaent. The facilities of the large
arterial canals with large electric pumping stations for lifting water makes
it possible in many cases to resolve the technically complex problem of

transferring water from aajor water arteries into the basins of rivers carry-
ing little water.

Besides the major pumping stations of the arterial canals there are stations
having local significance in the republic. These include floating and

fixed stations which provide for replenishing water in the irrigation canals.
There is. moreover. extensive employment of electromechanical listing of
ground water for irrigation using vertical walls. Central vertical pumps
rated at 22 - 45 k" are used for the purpose. lifting water 35 meters with
an output of so - lOS l/s.

The main sources of water and hydroelectric power in Central Asia are the
Amudarya and Syrdarya and their tributaries. Due to the fact that the
possibility of building large hydroelectric stations and the reservoirs
associated with them are extremely limited where the rivers traverse flat-
lands. they are being designed and built on the rivers' upper reacheso-in
the mountainous areas. The intensive utilization of the waters for irriga-
tion is becoming a basic factor in the aodification of the flows. Regulation
of the flow of the rivers is therefore subordinate to irrigation conditions.
and the power stations' water storage basins are compelled to function
mostly according to the irrigation schedule. The result is that the hydro-
electric stations don't reach their installed capacity and the shortfall

has to be made up by thermal stations.

33
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

The growth of euuer loede on the Centrel Aeien pover eyetee hee become e
reguler thing in recent yeere in connection with the deve-opeent of irrige-
tion beeed on the uee of electroeechenicel fecilitiee. 1n the Uebeh pert of
the power eyetee the nexienun 1oed during the growing eeeeon in care then 90
percent of the winter nexieu. The ective cepecity contributing to the power
eyetee'e eexieue enounte to no at for the Kerehineltiy cenel pumping etetione
end 220 It! for the Am-lukherehiy cenel punping etetione. According to the
dete of 1 Jenuery 1978. the inetelled cepecity of pueping etetion equipnent
for the Ann-lukherekiy cenel ie 335 m. Kerehinekiy prinery ‘50. "Sherebed"
etetione 65. end ell othere 53‘ m.

The expending electronechenicel irrigetion ie now e eignificent ueer of elec-
tric power (eoee 13 percent of the republic'e overell coneuqtion). Over the
leet decede the coneueption of electric power by punping etetione hee ehown
en 18-fold increeee. noet of it ettributeble to the lerge etetione. Thue.
the pueping etetione of the Anu-lukhereltiy cenel uee 1135 eillion Wh of
electric power. Kerehineky prinery 1381 Iillion. "Sherebed" 159 eillion.

end ell othere 12‘0 nillion.

Power ie eupplied to the lerge pulping etetione vie owerheed 110-2204“! net-
work linee. The other etetione ere fed by linee cerrying 6 - 35 W. The
eubetetione for the electric pueping fecilitiee eerve not Juet the pulping
fecilitiee but the ereee eround then ee well.

Since the lerge pulping etetione heve euch e lerge intake. e chenge in their
opereting echedule ceueee e chenge in end upeete the etebility of the power
eyetee ewitching center which ie routing power to the pooping etetione. The
problem of reliebility in eupplying power for the lerge pulping etetione ere.
in effect. eyetee probleee.

whetever the eyeten'e opereting conditione. it ie neceeeery to eneure en
econoeicel eupply of electric power of eetiefectory quelity to the coneueere
et eininue poeeible expendituree for production. treneeieeion end dietribution.
The need for high reliebility in eupplying eejor punping fecilitiee with
electric power eteee not juet froe the deeire to evoid dierupting the hy-
dreulic reginen of the irrigetion eyetee. but froe the feet thet the electric
notore with which the pulp eeeedrliee ere equipped require non-routine

eejor overheul efter 20 etert-etop cyclee.

The reliebility of the electric power eupply eyetee reete upon eyetee fecili-
tiee end control equipeent being there. reeerwee edequetc to cope with nege-
tive effecte. relieble equip-ent end cepeble pereonnel. i. e.. en ell-round
eetiefectory leve1 of operetione1 orgenieetion.

The nonel functioning of en electric power eupply eyetee depende ceeentielly
on the operetione1 reliebility of the equip-ent. which depende. in turn. on
the equip-eat deeign. quelity of production end inetelletion. how it ie
opereted end eeinteined. end how it ie repeired. we heve to note thet the
quentity of equip-eat running the pulping etetione end the cenel ee e whole
cennot be foreceet on e reguler beeie beceuee it depende on geophyeicel
proceeeee. 3‘

roe ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The question of possibly starting directly or self-starting of pulp facility
electric sotors has not yet been answered. The effects of individual and group
self-starting of these electric actors on the stability and reliability of
operation of the power supply systea of the large puaping stations has not
been looked into to the degree necessary. The optiaua operating conditions

for the electric motors of the puaping equip-ant and the stations as a whole
have not been detersined.

The problea of providing a reliable power supply for the pumping stations and
ensuring stable operation of the power system load centers is a coaponent

part of the overall task of optiaising their developaent since the reliability
rating of the systea has to be inside econoaical liaita. In the initial
stage. one can talk about the correcting effect of the factor of reliability

upon optisua solutions. Subsequently. it is necessary to find the options
solutions wherein the factor of reliability (taking into account the operating

conditions of large electric puaping stations for the power systea) is an
integral component in the calculations.

In the years just ahead for the Usbak 88R. the arid lands will have to be
developed through electrosachanicsl irrigation. To this end. for the purpose
of irrigating the Dshisakskaya steppe there is being built the first phase

of an arterial canal with four electric puaping stations which will raise
water sore than 200 asters. The power supply of the cansl's puaping stations
will be 220 xv fro. the Syrdsrya center of the power system. At the present
tine. construction is winding up on a puaping station with a two-transforaer
substation of 220/ll0/l0 kv (two autotrsnsforaers at 200 HVA each). The
projected consuaption of the canal'a puaping station“ is 375 H".

For the further irrigation of the Karshinskaya steppe lands. it is proposed
to build a second phase of the Karshinakaya arterial canal. The proposed
capacity for the puaping stations of the cansl's second phase is 650 HR.

Since the water resources of Central Asia are liaited. the further developaent
of agriculture by irrigation can be handled by feeding water into the Aral

Sea basin froa outside. Preliadnary investigation shows that the problea of
shifting water from the Siberian water arteries into the basins of the rivers
of Central Asia will be successfully solved by asans of arterial canals with
high-output electric puaping stations lifting water to the water divides.

COPYRIGHT: lsdatel‘stvo "Energiya." Proayshlennays energetika.“ 1978

5‘56
C50: 1022

35

TOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC PM]! All) PMR‘ BQUIWI

ELECTRIC mm 31161“!!an ”38!! STATE PRIZE 1mm FOR 1978
Hoacow MIRICBISTVO in Rueeian No 2.!eh 79 pp 1-3

[Text] By reeolution o! the Central Co-ittee of the CPSU and the USSR
Council of Hinietere publiehed on 7 Nave-her 1978. a group of vorkere in
electric power engineering and the electrotech cal induetry were awarded
the 1978 0883 State Prize for "Creation and Int duction of Powerful
nigh-Voltage Autoeatic Power Traneionere into Power Engineering." The
honorery rank o! USSR State Prize Leureate wee conterred on K. H. Antipov
(Glavtekhuprevleniye o! the USSR Hiniatry of Power Engineering). V. A.
Ivanov. candidate of technical aciencee V. M. Sukhanov. B. G. Troyan and
Tu. I. 61erunov (Zaporoehtranaioreator Planning Section), candidete of
technical eciencee A. G. Ire: -. candidete of technical noiencee s. D.
Lizunov and A. ll. Gorhunov (Hoero Blektroeavod'Plant ineni V. V. myhyehev),
A. I. Kayorete (USSR Kiniatry of Ilectrotechnical Induetry). h. P. Pufurin
(All-Union Scientific leaearch Institute of Blectric Power Engineering).
cendidate of technical aciencee V. H. Chernogotekiy (All-Union Scientific
Reeearch. Planning and benign and Technologicel Inatitute of Traneforeer
Conetruction) and S. I. llahioovich (All-Union Blsctmtcchnicd Inetitute

ineni V. I. Lenin).

The 150-500 kv eutoeatic power trmionere and higher rated onee are

a new ion of treneiorner equipeent. and the work on the creation of the.
in a new area in the developeent of tranafoner construction. The eigni-
iicence of thin work goee beyond the frnework of the heaic inprovenent
of one o! the noat inportant typee of electrical equipeent. The intro-
duction of the high end «perhigh voltage antonatic power treneiornere
hae had decieive eigniiicance for the develop-ant of all Soviet electric
power engineering during the poetwar period. and it hae opened up new
pathe oi ite further developeent.

The application of the eutonatic traneforner principle in power traneforeer
conetruction hee node it poeeible not only to introduce haeic improve-onto
in the technical-econoeic indexee of the large general-purpoee tranaiornere
(a reduction of the coneuption of electrotechnical eteel by 30 percent

and winding copper by 10 percent. a decreaae in the electric power loaaea

36

IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and total weight of the automatic transformers by 35 percent). but also.
and what is no less important. to increase the power of the automatic
transformers transportable by railroad in a single unit by two or more times
by cosperison with transformers with the same voltages.

The creation of the high powered automatic power transformers to operate

at high and superhigh voltages has requir- d an enormous mount of scientific
and engineering research-electromagnetic. insulation and thermal-«he
solution of prohlaas connected with the development of new structural
elements.

One of the peculiarities of the automatic transformers is that the magnetic
dispersion fluxes occurring in them greatly exceed the dispersion fluxes

in the analogous transformers. These fluxes can cause significant additional
losses and local heating in the wires of the windings, the core of the
magnetic systes and different structural elements (the pressing rings.

the armature beams. the tank wells, and so on). On the basis of the research
that has been performed, effective methods have been developed to reduce

the additional losses and heating of the indicated elements. In particular,
in order: to decrease the additional losses in the windings, split and
transposed conductors have been developed and used; a study has been made

of the effect of lowering the additional losses in the plates of the edge
packets and other elements of the magnetic system, and methods of accom-
plishing this have been developed; studies have been made of the methods of
channeling the dispersion fluxes by using magnetic shields on the walls of
the tank and the webs of the armature beams, and the execution of the rings
pressing the windings from nonmagnetic materials or electrotechnical steel.

As a result of these and other measures, additional losses in the windings
and structural elements have been reduced by tens of percentages.

In the automatic transformers. alongside the higher voltage series winding
there is a common winding also of relatively high voltage class (110 kilo-
volts or more). This determines the specific problems of protection against
lower voltages and the peculiarities of the operation of the principal and
longitudinal insulation. The studies of the electric field on mathematical
models. the electric strength of the elements of the principsland longi-
tudinal insulation and the insulating structural elements as a whole on the
diminished and full-scale models have made it possible to increase the
admissible intensities of the electric field, to develop and introduce
efficient structural designs and decrease the dimensions of the insulation
while maintaining or even increasing its electric strength.

The studies of the distribution of the pulse overvoltsges along the winding,
including the use of a digital computer. have led to the creation of new
types of windings with the pulse voltage distribution approaching linear.
The peculiarities of the distribution of the pulse overvoltages in the
windings of the sutonatic transformers have also been discovered. and the
necessity for special requirements on the protection of the automatic
transformers from overvolteges in operation has been demonstrated.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The high unit powers of the automatic transformers causing the release of
significant amounts of heat in relatively small volt-es have required
investigation in the development of new highly effective methods of re-
moval of heat from its sources (the magnetic system and the windings) and
transfer of it to the external envirorment.

The studies of the heat transfer processes from the magnetic circuit and
windings to the oil, the processes of moving the oil in the horirontal and
vertical cooling channels. the heat transfer from the oil to the walls of
the tank and the elements of the cooling system have ensured the develop-
ment of new types of cooling and improvement of the previously used
cooling systems with forced end forced-directional circulation of the oil
in the active pert of the automatic transformer. This has made it pos-
sible to increase the specific thermal loads in the automatic transformers
by 1.25 to l.lo tines without a noticeable increase in the expenditures

and eaintaining the admissible excesses of tapereture of the parts inside
the automatic transformer according to the effective ISO standards and
recommendations .

The voltage regulation systems used in the transformers are unsuitable for
automatic transformers. Accordingly. studies have been made of various
systems for direct and indirect voltage regulation (on the high voltage
side, the medium voltage side. in the common neutral of the high voltage
and medium voltage windings). which has made it possible to develop the
most efficient regulation systems considering the peculiarities of the
automatic transformers. These studies have also served as the basis for
creating new fast-operating RPN resistor units. In addition. broad studies
have been made of the insulation of the adjustable windings of the auto-
matic transformers and the switching units. They have made it possible to
develop standards which have been used for the basis for creation of the
structural designs of the RP" automatic transforaers and the are devices.

A large volume of scientific research work has been aimed at improving the
mechanical strength of windings and structural elements under the effect

of short circuit currents. improving the technological processes of manu-
facturing the automatic transformers. methods of transporting them. installing
operating and maintaining them.

The creation of the series of high-voltage autotraneformers in a wide range
of powers and voltages has also demanded a large volume of experimental
and planning and design work. It is necessary to note here that the
structural slnents of the most widely used types of autotraneformers have
been revised many times since their initial development and improved con-
sidering the increased demands of the power engineers end else with the
use of the results of scientific research work and new technological pro-
cesses and the application of improved materials and hi: products.

As applied to the autotraneformers and other types of transformer equipment.

structural elements have been developed for magnetic systems ensuring
maximal use of the specific properties of the textured cold-rolled

38

I03 OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

electrotechnical steel. Considering the peculiarities of the autotransformors.
new types of windings have been developed and introduced--continuous without
shielding turns and additional insulation on the coils. intertwined and
combined. New structural designs have been developed for the regulating
windings. including with increased dynamic strength. In the autoaatic
transformers that are adjustable under load. special compositions have been
used with location of the adjustment winding outside the basic windings

on the basic cores of the frame and also on the side nrmatures which ensured
an increase in the dynamic strength of the windings and improvement of their
characteristics. Significant improvements have also been introduced into
other structural elements of the autotransformers--leads. tanks. cooling

systems and so on and also the methods of protecting the oil from oxidation
and aging.

The mastery of the production of powerful. high-voltage autotraneformers
has been an additional impetus to the improvement of the existing techno-
logical proeesses. attachments and process equipment and the development

of new ones which then have become widespread on all transformers. Auto-
matic lines for longitudinal cutting of the rolled electrotechnical steel
and transverse layout of the plates of the magnetic circuits. test units
for assembling the frames. a device for pressing them and mechanized
application of the glass bands have been developed and assimilated. All-
purpose mandrels and special units for axial pressing of the coils while
winding them and special vertical winding machines have been built to manu-
facture the coils. An original unit has been developed and introduced for
pressing windings under their own mass during the process of drying chem.
Significant improvements have been introduced into the processes of thermal
vacuum treatment of windings and the active parts of automatic transformers.

The procedure for qualification and acceptance testing of sutotransformers
has been improved significantly. The methods of measuring the intensity
of the partial discharges when testing by industrial frequency voltage
have been improved. New devices have been introduced into the process

of installing the autotransformers in order to keep the insulation from
getting wet.

The advantages of using autotransformera for substations with a rated voltage
of 150 kv or higher are determined by the basic properties of the auto-
transformers. in particular. the decrease in size. cost. losses. ratio of
losses in the steel and copper. and the no-losd current. Considering the
economical nature of the autotrsnsformers. it turns out to be advantageous

to install larger units at the substations with prospects for growth of

the load over a longer time interval. The consolidation of the powers of

the substations for installation of autotraasformere will permit the number

of substations with high-voltage distribution units to be reduced. providing
the users with deep inputs on medium voltage.

At the thermal and hydroelectric power stations (in contrast to foreign
practice) the autotrsnsiwrmers are also used as step-up units with con-
nection of generators to their third winding. This makes it possible to

39

FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

obtain significant sconosy as a result of great flexibility of the electric
circuits and the possibility of connecting greater generating capacity to
the medium voltage distribution unit with the s-e load distribution.

The developeent and introduction of the powerful high-voltage autotrsna-
for-ere into power engineering in the Soviet Union has a nuber of theoretical
differences from their application in foreign practice. The scales of
introduction of autotranaforeers into USSR power engineering have greatly
exceeded the foreign scales where the autotrsnsforlers have linited ap-
plication end are basically used only for connecting the networks to the
different rated voltages at the junction substations of the power systees.

The USSR has specially developed end introduced step-up autotransforners at
eany of the hydroelectric end thereal power stations differing free the
step-down transforeers in that without additional transfonetion they sake

it possible to release the generator power and couple two systees with
different voltages. In the Soviet Union sutotransforeers are being developed
and introduced with broader range of transforestion coefficients than abroad--
up to 4.6:1.

with respect to the technical-econonic indexes (efficiency, losses and uses
per unit power) the Soviet autotransforners are not inferior to the best
foreign nodels. and in s nusber of cases they are superior to then. The
duagesbility indexes of the Soviet autotransforaers do not exceed the
corresponding indexes of the analogous foreign units, and for the auto-
transforners manufactured after 1970. they correspond to the eininu values
recorded in the foreign power systems in the best years.

The high technical level of Soviet autotraneforners reached in recent years
ensured their high coepetitiveness on the international eerhetnthey are
exported to nore than 30 countries.

Since the beginning of their introduction in the USSR, sore than 2.000
150-500 kw sutotrsnsforeers have been unufactured with a total power of
several hundreds of sillions of hilovolt-snperee. The provisionally re-
leased power exceeds 160 eillion kilovolt-nperes. the released no-lond
losses snout to nore than 110 thousand kilowatts, the short-circuit losses,
eore than 350 kilowatts. For specific annual expenditures in power engineer-
ing of 91 rubles to conpensats for l kilowatt of no-losd losses and 23 rubles
for short-circuit losses. the cost benefit fro. introducing the autotrsne-
for-era in power engineering aeounts to eore than 258 eillion rubles if we
consider only the savings of materials (50,000 tons of electrotechnicel

steel and 12,000 tons of copper winding) and electric power. the annual
saving of which counts to 1.5 billion kilowatt-hours.

The actual cost benefit in the national sconony is appreciably higher if
we consider the savings in the power systole as a result of consolidation
of equip-ent. iaprovelent of the operating conditions of the electric power
trenseission lines. econoey of transport expenditures for hauling the

(.0

P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

transfornsr squipnsnt. In addition. it is necessary to consider that tho
creation of a broad range of autotransfornors has wads it possible suc-
cessfully to solvs ths basic problem of providing powar anginssring no
the various branchss of tho national economy with transforasr squipasnt
without incrsasing the production arsss and building nsw transfer-er plants.

This indicatss ths grsat significancs to the national cconoay of tha country
and1 in particular. power snginssring. of tha work that has been awarded the
1978 USSR 8tats Prirs.

Ths editors of BLBKTRICRESTVO [Blsctricity] join with their nsny rsadora

wholsartiiycongratulats tha prits winnsrs and wish than naw crsstivs
success.

COPYRIGHT: Irdatsl'atvo "anrgiya", "Elsktrichsstvw', 1979.

10m
cso: 1322 m

‘1
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY