APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030059-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100030059-3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8356
27 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Economc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100030059-3
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.3. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, washington. D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Rooster. uhio. 4469!.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Globe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
TRANSMTIONS ON EASTERN EUROPE - ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRIAL
AFFAIRS. (POUO 5/79)

. Federals; 0:;

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

n. spa-«n, one-hams Name and Mines

As above

' “M“

The serial report contains articles on economic- theory, organization, planning
and management; major asreemente on and development of trade within cam and
outside the Bloc; articlea on all aspects of the uterials, services. “chine,

electronics, and precision equipment industries; and concepts and attaiments
in agriculture. forestry. and the food industry.

International Afteirs Economics

Albania ‘ Technological
Bulgaria

...L Czechoslovakia
_ East Germany

_ Hungary
__ Poland
_ Romania

_ Yugoslavia
lit. Bouillon/Operated Tens

In court Held/Glove sc, 131
. "ileum nae-sac
For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

     

'0“ "VI... I .70. 0.6.0.0: .OOIO‘.’.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8356
27 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N EASTERN EUROPE
Ecouonlc AND INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS

(POUO 5/79)

CONTENTS

CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Poland Building CSSR Pousr Station Prunsrov II
(Psvsl Lands; TBCHNICKY mmxx. 30 Jan 79)

sossooososo

Computers in Machine Tool. Industry Discussed
(Milan Borky; acumen TYDENNIK. 30 Jan 79)...........

Conprshsnsive Expenses: in Chemical Industry mslusced
(Ivan Zich; canacxy PWSL. No 11. 1978)

0000000000...

-a- [III-EE-M
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECHOSIDVMQA

POLAND BUILDING CSSR PWER STATION PRUNEROV II
Prague TECHNICKY TYDENNIK in Czech 30 Jan 79 p 1

[Article by Pavel Ianda: "The Biggest Power Plant Under Construction in
North Bohemia"l

[Text] Our biggest power plant comprising five 210 MW units, to be known as
the Prunorov II Power station, is under construction by Polish specialists;
the Polish People's Republic will deliver it in ready-to-start condition.

It needs to be said that it is the biggest power installation ever exported
by Poland: its contract value amounts to roughly hso million rubles. The
supplier was not chosen randomly. He has to his credit among other projects,
the construction of 50 210 m units which are in operation in Polish power
plants and has acquired ample experience in the construction of brown coal
boilers for Yugoslav power plants.

The biggest problem the Polish designers faced was the low-grade coal from

the nastup mine which will also supply this power plant. But again, the
problem was not insoluble because they have already designed-~and successiully
--boilers for coal of even lower caloric content. And so in the case of
Prunerov they also rely on deliveries of so-called ameliorative coal which
burns easier and is designed to improve the combustion process.

The environmental problem of this project was also considerable. The sup-
pliers guarantee that separators will remove 99 percent of the fly ash and
that particulate emission from the 300-meter-high stack will not exceed 205
kilogram/hour per unit.

The consortium of Polish foreign trade enterprises Budimex and Elektrim is
consequently delivering Prunerov II in operational condition, or according
to Polish specialists on the construction site, they will deliver everything
"inside the fence," because the pipeline for the supply of cooling water and
the storage repository for ash are being built by Armabeton Prague and the
transfonmers will be delivered by Skoda PlZen. But Polish building site
facilities, for which the suppliers used modern prefabricated parts, are
also "outside the fence." The buildings are good and considered worth buy-
ing for continued useo-perhaps as repair shops for the Tusimiee power plant.

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Something about deadlines. The contract with the Budimex-Electrim consort-
ium was signed by our Skodaexport on 20 November 1976. Construction began
that same year. The first power plant unit is expected to go into operation
on 31 December 1980 and each subsequent unit in intervals of h months. when
we visited Prunerov at the end of last year, 2,600 people were at work there;
when construction peaks, about the middle of this year, 3,500 Poles are
expected to be at work there.

We asked managing engineer Hilinsky, whom the consortium appointed to direct
the construction of the technological part, about the problems he has had to
cope with: "I must confess that in the beginning we had to overcome a cer-
tain diffidence on the part of Czechoslovak specialists, a lack of confidence
in the standard and quality of Polish products. But that is no longer‘so,

in my opinion, partly as a result of visits by your people to our country,

to Polish enterprises.“

(In explanation: About 50 Polish enterprises, belonging to 25 associations
which are analogous to our VﬂJ's, participate in deliveries for Prunerov 11.)

"Further, certain problems arose as a result of differences in safety regu-
lations and standards. We are in consultation on this matter and I believe
that also in this respect nothing stands in the way of construction."

The only real impediment is the weather, especially the weather which we had
in the first days of this year. But the suppliers allegedly take such delays
into account and create various partial lead times. For example, of the over-
all volume of 75,000 tons of equipment they already had 5,000 tons ready in
well-organized depots in Prunerov before Christmas.

And how do our specialists assess the progress of construction? This question
was addressed to builder Zdenek Mace! who represents the central investor-~the
general management of the Czech Power Enterprises Prague:

"I believe that the Polish suppliers will make a concerted effort to bring
the power plant into operation within planned deadlines and the stipulated
output. The construction part need not be evaluated. He in our country
know the Poles to be good builders. But apparently our neighbors attribute
especially great importance to the supply of the machinery for Prunerov 11.
And no wander: they are supplying power plant equipment to a country which
is traditionally a manufacturer and exporter of such equipment. And this
will earn them a reputation they can be proud of internationally.

"As to construction progress proper, no unforeseen problems have arisen. The
party organs and national committees of the Chomutov okres deserve reeogni~
tion for the utmost assistance they are rendering to meet the needs of the
builders such as, for example, in housing and provisioning the Polish workers.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 VYDAVATELSTVI A NAHADATEIISI'VI ROH PEACE
866k

CSO: 2&00 2
C

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CZECROSIDVAKIA

COMPUTERS IN MACHINE TOOL INDUSTRY DISJUSSED
Prague TECHNICKY TYDENNIK in Czech 30 Jan 79 p 6
[Article by Milan Horky: "Establishing Interconnection in Ministries")

[Text] The development and establishment of the Ministerial Automated
Control Center (OASR) is proceeding currently on the ac 1030 computer at
the Inorga Computing Center and to a limited degree on the IBM 370 computer
at the Poldi United Steel Works Kladno. The minicomputer HANG 2200 is being
used for operational calculations and for the solution of some tasks with a
low data input and output volume (it is located in the building of the 0881!
Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering);

In accord with the increasingly exacting demands placed on the management
or the Czechoslovak engineering industry it was decided that in the future,
OASRs of both engineering industries will provide the computer system
which in the first place will enable the creation of an extensive data base
for use by managelnent workers using disr‘ay terminals and the question-
answer regime. In addition, the data base will facilitate interactive
designing and programming in program development and upkeep.

Only an imported 3.5 generation computer can meet these requirements. 0n
the basis of a selection procedure the decision was reached to purchase the
IBM 370/138 computer, a decision which was approved by the CSSR Ministry for
Technical and Capital Development.

Meeting the two functions required of the system will be reflected in the

proposal of the necessary technical and programming equipment for the entire
system. The interactive terminals and the corresponding programing equip-
ment are indispensable. Altogether 18 display terminals will be installed,
15 of them for local use in the building of the (2838 lunistry of Metallurgy

and Heavy Engineering and three distant ones at Inorga work places in Prague.
In the first stage, most terminals will serve for interactive designing and

only two to five for verification and the gradual introduction of the inter-
active approach to the data bank: the data bank system terminals will ini-
tially be available to employees or the CSSR Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy
Engineering at a designated work place with the assistance of the designers

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the automated control system. In the next stage, the number of data bank
system terminals will be increased by transferring the terminals used for

interactive programing directly to selected management work places of the
ministry.

In order to implement management automation between the ministry on one
side and the economic production units on the other, the proposal for
equipping the computer center of the Czechoslovak engineering industry
will have to include technical and programming equipment necessary for
maintaining contact with the managed sector.

The computer centers of VPJ's should as a minimum be equipped with a terminal
for obtaining, preliminary processing and transmission of data and printing
equipment (for operational documentation). In the first stage (l980-l9&),
data transmission will be accomplished without interconnection by means of
magnetic tape or an elastic disc. In the next stage, when a terminal net-
work will be set up as a necessary prerequisite for the establishment of a
hierarchic computer network of the ministry which will serve the needs of
the automated management centers of middle management, conditions will have
to be created for interconnected transmission. In the full stage, a differ-
entiated minimum of equipment should exist in all VliJ's which are not equipped
with an intermediate computer.

Temporarily, other means of coumunication can be authorized for data trans-
mission or data transmission can be accomplished by tcleprinter, especially
where due to the small volume of transmitted data the investment into equip-
ment with the above-mentioned functional characteristics is not warranted.

'lhe programing endowment of the system will fully assure the possibility of
interactive work in a question-answer regime and programming. It will mr-
ther supply the necessary mathematical-statistical tools for the establish-
ment and upkeep of the data base. the following operational systems will

be used: VH OS/VSI,CMS, Assembler frequency translator. PL l/Optimizing,
Cobol, APL/SV and additional programming equipment Sort/Merge, INS/DB (or
IDMS) for the 0103 data bank, for communication with terminals in the
question-answer regime.

Connecting the 134 370/138 computer with EX: 1030 and with computers of organ-
izations supplying or accepting data for processing on magnetic tape is made
possible by the magnetic tape system of the Telex Co which records and reads
MP9 stop with recording density 1600 DP] and 800 BPI and '/ stop 800 or 556
BPI. This system, which now works with the computer EC 1030, will be linked
with the 13! 370/138 computer. 'ihe magnetic tape units BC 5012-1201' will
then be available to the EC 1030 computer. Connection with the "All: 2200
computer will be established by means of an elastic disc.

For the present, the information carrier at the ministry cannot be completely
unified due to the disparateness of canputing equipment in the managed sector.

1.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The main technical equiment, i.e., the IBM 370/138 computer, including
input and output uni ts, supplementary memories and auxiliary equipment,
will be installed at the Inorga Computing Center (in the building of the
088R Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy ﬁzgineering). The center will also
have equipment for the storing of data on elastic discs. Up to 10 local
IBM 3270 display system units, situated mostly at Inorgs work ple=.-es during
the testing period, will gradually be reinstalled at the CSSR Ministry of
Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering.

The IBM 3275 type display units (including printers) situated during the
testing period at the Inorga Computer Center will be moved to the insti-
tute's distant work places in Prague (or to its branch in Ostrava). The
implementation of this plan depends on the availability of remote data

transmission possibilities. Terminals for the managed sector will be at

general managements of individual VHJ's of the ministry (in computing
centers).

About 1,000 typewriters with OCRB type print will be installed (or rented)
in the ministry's VHJ's and enterprises and the equipment for reading this
print at the Inorga Computing Center should the use of OCR forms for data
collection prove practical during the testing period.

'Ihe "Am 2200 computer will also be situated in the building of the 088R
Ministry of Metallurgy and Heavy Engineering; it will be used to solve
operational tasks with a temporary local data complement. In using this
minicomputer and similar equipment in VHJ's the conceptual processing
integrity of the entire system will have to be assured.

After the installation of the IBM 370/138 system the ac 1030 computer will
be used to process some routine proportional tasks for which there are no
deadlines.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 - WDAVATEISTVI A “AWLSTVI ROH PEACE

8661.
C11): 21000

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

CZECROSLOVAKIA

CMRBHBNSIVB manmm IN cannon. INDUSTRY EVALUATED
Prague CHMICKY PRWYSL in Slovak No 11,1978 Submitted 20 Feb 78 pp 599-601

[Article by Ivan Zich. slovchemia. General Management. Bratislava: "Energy
Hanagement and the Comprehensive Experiment in Managing Efficiency and
Quality in the Chemical Industry"]

[Text] The article deals with energy management problas in
the evaluation of the comprehensive experiment in managing
efficiency and quality in the chemical industry. The rules
of the comprehensive experiment designed to improve manage-
ment work, uncover reserves and overcome shortcomings and

waste in managing energy in the chemical industry are the
starting point.

Introduction

The comprehensive experiment in managing efficiency and quality is based on
principles which were approved for the sixth Five-Year Plan on 2 October
1975 by the CSSR Government Resolution No 285. According to the resolution.
the experiment is an open-ended system which will be further improved and
modified on the basis of experimental findings and as new experiences are
acquired. The experiment is comprehensive in that it is designed to evalu-
ate new elements and tools which bear on efficiency and quality in all areas
of planned management such as planning, material incentives. increased
responsibility at individual management levels, etc. It is further expected
to confirm the correctness of implementing the approved principles which
consider the VHJ to be the ‘basic management unit equipped comprehensively
in the form of a concern or a branch. operating on the khozraschot basis
and differentiated according to conditions and the nature of production. In
connection with these principles the 6858 Government Presidium approved on
6 December 1977 by Resolution No 279 the "Skeleton Principles Governing the
Comprehensive Experiment in Hanaging Efficiency and Qualtiy."

In accord with the proposed- evaluation of the comprehensive experiment in

managing efficiency and quality in selected VIIJ's energy management in
these organizations must primarily:

6
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«increase economy and efficiency in the use of all kinds of fuels and
energy;

«raise the standard of organizational, management and productive work of
the VﬂJ's energy sector to insure the rational use and maximum utilization
of individual kinds of fuels and energy;

«test and introduce new. improved planning methods which would further the
development of the national economy;

«improve economy in the use of fuels and energy in key and selected power-
genersting and technological processes;

«improve the efficiency of capital resources and reduce power consumption
in production;

«improve energy efficiency by introducing new technological discoveries in
production and applying Soviet experience in the comprehensive management
of efficiency, etc.

In fulfilling these tasks in the evaluation of the couprehensive experiment

in managing efficiency and quality. energy management of the V113 mat aim at

a steady reduction of its specific power consumption. the improvement of

quality and efficiency of labor in the energy sector and the planned direc-

tion of the development of the VHJ's power economy and its regulatory function
to nest consistently the objectives of the state's energy policy and insure
the balanced development of the national economy.

These tasks must be fulfilled by setting mandatory indicators for the
implementation of the plan. nalely:

«fuel and energy limits;

«power consumption standards for selected key products;

«tasks of the state rationalization program for fuel and energy consumption;
«selected tasks to insure energy efficiency of the economy:

«power production capacity;

and by setting orientation indicators of the plan. namely:

«energy requirement of production;

«electric power requireaent of production;

«energy resources of production facilities;

«electric power resources of production facilities;

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--energy‘availability;
-electrie power availability;

-mean efficiency of thermal stations and heating installations of the
enterprise.

In recent years. industry has achieved important accomplishments by raising
the energy efficiency of individual processes and technologies, in the
chemical industry. for example. in the production of ammonia. ethylene,

motor fuels and other chemical products. An overall positive trend of the
power consumption curve in the chemical industry can be noted (Table l) and
relatively high savings in fuels and energy in the first 2 years of the Sixth
Five-Year Plan (Table 2) were achieved by the introduction of more advanced
technological processes (ethylene, ammonia, electrolysis. etc.) and by the
gradually rising unit efficiency of the installations and the introduction

of rationalization measures.

But in spite of these favorable results which were achieved by fulfilling
the tasks of the state rationalization program of fuel and energy consumption

and energy must become more exacting. Therefore. further work in this

area should start from the conclusion that in the experimenting VHJ's and
organizations energy is not being utilized rationally enough and that better
organization and more purposeful management would raise the efficiency of
the energy economy. Therefore. in this endeavor rationalization of consump-
tion of energy must gradually change its focus from partial rationalisation
measures (aiming hitherto mostly at increasing the efficiency of the energy
economy and at the utilization of waste heat) to the planning and implemen-
tation of technological measures in the energy systems of selected
technologies aimed at modernizing them wherever this is technologically.
technically, and economically feasible; realizing that achieving a saving

in energy consumption may be technically more exacting but still cheaper
than the construction of new power resources. integrated systems for the
utilization of energy must be established in selected key technologies and
manufactures.

In the future. technologies which hitherto generated low temperature waste
heat will be classified as technologies with an imperfect energy generating
system which will have to be improved to reduce the heat loss. Rationaliza-
tion programs for selected key technologies and manufactures must be
purposefully conceived and specify clear technological and design solutions
including implementation programs. The technologically exacting and far-
reaching modernization of energy systems of production technologies frequently
exceeds the jurisdiction of general managements of VHJ's and can be accom-
plished only with the cooperation of design organization, research institutes,
equipment manufacturers. etc. The endeavor to reduce energy consumption of
products requiring high energy input must not be directed only toward the

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OVPICIAL 082 ONLY

Table 1. Development of energy indicatora in the chemical induatry in
1976. 1977 and levels planned for 1978 (in 1977 prices)

I d

two In»: lane

 

Key:
Energy require-ant of production.
Electric power requirement of production.
Energy reeourcca of production facilitiea.
Electric power reoourcea of production facilitiea.
Energy availability.
Electric power availability.
tap (-tona apecific fuel)

total work

Table 2. Pnel and lnergy Savinsa in Cheaical Induatry in 1976 and 1977
and Savinsa Planned for 1918

dopory palfv a energie (tap) 0. 352.686 368,3‘0

 

Key:
0. Fuel and energy eavinsa (tap).

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efficient use of energy in the given technology but must extend to the
observance of strict economy. including selected samiproducts and finished
products from factory to consumer.

The comprehensive experiment in managing efficiency and quality builds
predominantly on current indicators of the state plan but it contains also
some new or differently conceived indicators. The principles underlying

the experiment deal with questions of efficiency. quality and output and
are predicated on the intensification of socialist pledging and the partici-
pation of workers in management. For this reason the main thrust in raising
the efficiency of the energy economy in VhJ's through the comprehensive
experiment is directed primarily toward the utilization of secondary energy
resources. reduction of losses. standardization of energy consumption and
intensification of analyses including control activity.

Utilization of secondery energy resources which constitute an important
reserve of the energy economy. Even though increased attention has been
paid these resources in recent years, considerable untapped reserves exist in
this area. The CSSR chemical and paper industries alone expect by 1990 to
utilize 1.295.300 tmp waste fuels and 60.3695 PJ (6 x 1016 J [Joule]) waste
heat. The balance of resources and use of waste heat in the chemical and
paper industries is given in Table 3 and of waste fuels in Table 6. The
overall economy of production is the key issue in using secondary energy
resources. From the viewpoint of arriving at the technologically best
solution the concept which views production installations as technological
energy units not only from the aspect of quality but also of quantity is the
most appropriate. Therefore. individual and haphazard solutions must be
replaced by thorough technical and economic analyses of given technologies
and processes which are viewed as technological energy units where the
proliferation of secondary energy resources is controlled already in the
technological process with a resulting reduction of energy input.

Recoversble energy losses constitute a potential energy saving which in view
of our current technical and economic know-how can be achieved by various
means. Analyses of energy balances for the years 1972-1976 uncovered in the
chemical and paper industries alone energy losses amounting to 750.300 tmp.

of which in this period 449.900 tmp. i.e.. 59.7 percent were recovered

(Table 5.) The lesson to be learned from this experience and also from

other sectors is that efficiency of energy use must constantly be reevaluated
and new measures aimed at reducing energy losses planned and implemented.

For this reason. in fulfilling the tasks concerned with energy efficiency

of the economy. the evaluation of the comprehensive management experhment must:

--evaluate comprehensively the level of energy use and institute measures to
eliminate preventable losses. These must be devised so that they can
serve as the basis for the preparation at specific rationalization measures
for inclusion in the state reationalization program for fuel and energy
consumption;

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

--eveluete proposals designed to raise the efficiency and improve the
utilisation of energy taking into account the technicel feasibility of

meeting the specific energy requireeent; the existing differences must
be thoroughly analyzed and methods for reconciling the- proposed;

--create conditions for the speedy iaplementation of the eeaeures adopted
to reduce the level of preventable energy losses.

 

Teble 3: Sources of Haste Heat end Its Utilieetion (Teal)

I".
vS-nol mals‘n‘ﬁ‘lww

. . sum 1:: 1.: am

5:3,: {1:33 . . new 3-".- cum
’7... ’05.. . '8‘! “1.7 0“,)
as... sou . ms nu ma

—- ——

00”.. 00".. . . ”Ito “00.. IO“... OOI'J .

 

a. General management
b. ‘rotel

c . Exist ing

d . Recoverable

e. Actuelly recovered

 

Table 4: Sources and Utilization of Haste Fuels in 1,000 tmp

 

a . General nanegenent
b. Total

c . Existing

d . Recovereble

e. Actually recovered

 

11

P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

 

Table 5: Balance of Recoverable Energy Losses in Cheaical Industry for
l972--l976 in tip

 

a. Sun of recoverable energy losses

b. or this recovered

c. Percentage of recovered preventable losses
d. Total

 

Standarditation of energy consumption which can serve to raise efficiency

of energy use also by means of scientifically based energy consu-ption
standards which constitute one of the base data for the purposeful rationali-
zation of fuel and energy consumption. The state rationalization program

for fuel end energy conaunption for the Sixth Five-Year Plan calls in Point
11/4 for the gradual introduction and specification of technically attainable
standards for selected technologies and products requiring a very high input
of energy. For this reason standardization of energy conaunption in the
comprehensive experi-ent in managing efficiency and quality sust be considered
as:

--one of the basic requirements of the rational use of energy. of reducing
the energy and actual material requirement. especially in industrial
sectors requiring a high input of energy.

--part of technical and econoeic standards which together constitute the
necessary prerequisite for economically efficient production; °

--a consistent process in improving production ssnagement and creating
conditions for the control and maintenance of technological discipline;

--one of the management tools of the energy economy used at all energy con-
version levels;

--a tool of technologists and power engineers for efficient use of energy
in production.

Intensification of analyses of the energy econoey and control activity. 11w
state rationalization program for fuel and energy consumption approved for
the Sixth Five-Year Plan calls in Point [1/3.b for an annual preparation of

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

analyses of the energy economy beginning with 1977 and for specifying potential
reductions of energy losses in order to reduce fuel and energy consumption

to a minimum. Analyses of energy econoay and control activity must aim at a
systematic improvement of energy efficiency in the energy economy and
specifically at:

--applying and aeeting approved fuel and energy consumption standards as an
objectively necessary prerequisite for the evaluation of economy and the
maintenance of technological discipline;

--the purposeful implementation of tasks arising from an analysis of recover-
able energy losses and the utilization of waste fuels and heat serving for
the reevaluation of fuel and energy efficiency and for the planning and
implementation of new measures to reduce energy losses;

--fulfilling the tasks of the state rationalisation program for fuel and
energy consumption in accord with principles governing the adopted energy
Policy;

--evaluating the efficiency of power production resources with the view of
improving their operation as best possible;

--assessing the impact of socialist pledging and material incentives on the
fulfillment of tasks of the state rationalization program for fuel and
energy consumption. etc.

The evaluation of the principles of the comprehensive experiment in managing
efficiency and quality must also be viewed as an aid in the detection of
reserves. the fight against shortcomings. lack of thrift. waste and shoddy
work and in improving management work in the energy economy. The successful
mastery of the comprehensive experiment is predicated on a responsible and
ambitious approach of management workers to raising the efficiency of the
energy economy. Efficient utilization of power and the reduction of its
consumption per unit of social product will become a permanent factor in
raising the efficiency of the national economy only when the implementation
of the tasks of the state rationalisation program for fuel and energy
consumption is fully mastered and strict economy in energy consumption is
effectively maintained. For this reason the implementation of the compre-
hensive experiment in selected VHJ'a and organizations must at the same tune
be accompanied by the adoption of specific measures and a rise in the
standard of the energy economy which will contribute to the fulfillment of
the tasks of the Sixth five-Year Plan even beyond their planned level.

Summary
The article enlarges on the principles of managing the energy economy during
the evaluation of the comprehensive experiment in managing selected VHJ's

and organizations. The results achieved in assuring high efficiency of the
energy economy in the chemical industry are critically analysed and new

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approaches and proposals derived from the fulfillment of the tasks of the
state rationalisation prosra- for fuel and energy consuaption. the utilisa-
tion of secondary energy resources. the recovery of preventable losses of
energy. fro- atendardization and the introduction of energy constnption
analyses end the control of the energy economy are advanced.

COPYRIGHT: 8141!. - Nskladatelatvi technicke literatury n.p. 1978

8664
080: 2600 EN!)

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY