APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007I02100: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00030003-6
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030063-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8360
30 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(FOUO 9/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02109: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM000300634
NOTE

JPRS publ ieationa contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Ileadlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion stark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGlT LAWS AND REGL'UTIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS “PRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0!" THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICML USE ONLY.
IIILMIA'MC DA‘IA ”Mn No.
ms u 3360 _W
I Q I e I O

TMNSIATIONS 0N JAPAN, (POUO 9/79)

   
 

I
‘ l ’

_ ‘ W... °""""“

0. Palm Gunman. None eel Menu '0. Helen eel/Int Unit No.

Joint Publicetione Reeenrch Service
1000 North Globe Rood
Arlington, Virginie 22201

 

l3. Sonic-temp None

I . Abemcle

The report conteine preee end radio coverege on politicel, economic. military.
eociologicel. ecientific end technological develop-ante.

y 'v to - Iceman-ewe“. o. . cerium

JAPAN

Political and Sociological
Military

Economic

Science end Technology

"L acumen/Operated Tune

In COM“ ﬁeld/Gun SC. SD. 5K, 150, 160. 18!, 19?. 223

""“"""'"""' mn-
For Official Use Only. , ,H , . , . 37
Limited Number of Copies Available Fro- JPRS. mm

It. . . '

M I"... (I. "I once-roe “no.”
FOR. orrzcnm use ONLY

JPRS 14/83
30 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N JAPAN
(rouo 9/79).

Coursurs

POLITICAL AND SOCIOWICAL

Defense Role Following Japan-Chino Treaty Aouooed
(mm Nahum; cauo MON, Jan 79)

ECONOMIC

NIT Preuident View 0.8. Demand for Liberalisation
(TokuJi Akikuoo Interview; union m1 summon,
0 “r n) 000.00000...oOOOO‘OO00.000000000000000...IO.

Economic Bxports Spculate on Japan's 1979 Economy
(8%" ASAHI, 12 J” n) o0.ooooooocoooooooooooooooo-

ononoion of Consumer Credit System Inevitable
(Isoo mtouurn; NIKKEI BUSINESS, 29 Jan 79)

Brie rs
PRC Contracts

SCIENCE AND WHOM!

Liquid meson to me). 3-Stoge 3.1 Rocket
(nnocm Kano snmun, 11 Dec 78)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

POLITICAL AND SOCIOLOGICAL

DEFENSE 301.8 POLWING JAPAN-Gum ”KATY ASSBSSD
Tokyo 0100 row in Japanese Jan 79 pp 02-96

[Special report by Prof Minao Nakajina. International Affairs Dept. Tokyo
Foreign language University: Poet Japan-dune Priendahip Treaty—”The
Question of Defense")

[Text] Japan. undue to becone a nilitary power. has no

alternative but to depend on a foreign policy bued on a
diversified axis of coordinates.

1. Anxiety Over Our Stake in Japan-China Relations

The eeinent Anericon historian on foreign affaire (Erneet R. ﬂay). incisively
points to the danger that. in rendering irreversible and essential foreiu:
policy decisiona. the parties concerned tend to nieapply lessons fron con-
tenporary history ("Lesaona fron History"). Also, if I nay exeggerate so.-

vhat. the nodern era has frequently produced tragedies becauee of such glar-
ing irrelevanciea.

In the recent past. Japan node a grave historical choice. that is. the aim-
ing of the Japan-mine peace and friendship treaty. however. with the advent
of this new era of Japan-Chine friendship. us are non timed with deeper fear

and anxiety than heretofore concerning the future of our international en-
vironnent.

Fluid State of mina'a Internal Affairs

It is not necessary for ne to point out that this fear ad anxiety has been
unlined by the fluid political situation in Oaina, which surfaced in nid-
Hovenber. inediately after Deng Xiaoping's return to Peking fron a busy trip
to three ASEAN nations folloving hie visit to Japan. The reaaon is that the
present state of mina'a internal affairs. directed toward sharp criticise
of fiao Zedong'a peat patriarchial ayaten and a clear de-ﬁaoification of
minese society. is on the one had an outcropping of the deep fisaure and
internal diacrepanciee latent in the power structure and leaderahip of Ilue

1
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI'ICIAL US! MY

Guofeng's regine. 0n the other hend. it ie e result of the ineviteble feil-
ure of the etteept to unreeeonebly bleee the sins of the "geng of tour" so
the eole ceue of Owine's reterded politicel end eociel condition. It is e
situetion which. in generel. could heve been foreseen.

Of course, to those who rennin obseeeed with Heoiet eythe, the present etete
of effeirs uuet indeed hove been shocking. however, within Chine's society
itself . criticien of lieo wee so letent and recurring thet it ie no exegger-
etion to eey ell "line"-releted etrugglee in the pest hed been pert of this
criticien. Also. during the recent seven or eight eonthe. the de-heoifice-
tion process wee tding e concrete for. internelly. Therefore. atine's de-
Heoificetion ie definitely different fro. the process of de-Stelinieetion
which required the shock treetnent of iconoclm. For the nejority of the
Chineee neeees. it out heve been en. ineviteble phenoeenon.

Chine hen thus begm to “teke off" fron e cloned eociety of Heoist uythe.
However. thie doee not seen thet de-Heoificetion will proceed enoothly be-
ceuee there ere etill elenente et the center of power which have inherited
the legecies of Heo's policies and beceuse the Heoiet regine continuee to
exist es s sociel systen. Nonetheless. beceuee the ebeence of clerity dur-
ing the poet-Hen eucoeeeion to power in beginning to be definitely criti-
cized. there is no denying thet the preeent etete of effeire is ceueing
Preeier llue Guofeng hisnelf to trenble with feet behind the "ehedow of

ﬁne Zedong." who we the eource of hie politicel exiotence.

when the present treneition ultinetely reeulte in the eo-celled "totel
victory of the forur power along the fectionel forcee." the next step in
Chine'e future will probebly be the rise of en intellectuel end etretegic
anti-Soviet uereneee. unlike the enotionel cud Heoiet enti-Soviet con-
ecioueneee of hete. Todey. when even Peng ‘l'ehuei. e pro-Soviet leeder
known es the ”Kluuechev of Chine.” hen reportedly been restored to honor.
the eforeeentioned probebility deserves ouch thought. The outside world
still see- unuere of thie fect. however. regerdless of the Chine policies
of the outeide world. it he elweye been e historicel fect thet e certein
recuperetive force exiete within Chine-Soviet reletione. constituting e cor-
reletion of ellience ad hoetility. It ie (set ebout which nothing cen be
done. It in. therefore. e eource of greet enxiety end concern.

Honey-etricel Neture of Jepen-Otine Treety

b (er en the eigning of the Jepen-Chine pence end friendship treety is con-
cerned. the Jepeneee definitely locked e perepective thet the present Jepen-
Chine reletione cen no longer be bileterel; tether. theee reletione nuet
neoeeserily be internetionelly ective end bluid. moreover, euch e perspec-
tive lay heve been clouded, first. by our unique end treditionel eentiunt
in eddition to e certein inertie in Jepen-aaine reletione. while it my be
unneoeeeery to point out theee fects st thie t'ine. once the Jepen-Chine pect
wee concluded. it hen been evolving under its eelf-propelled notion, unre-
leted to the verioue fectore unique to our country. end it hes been raising
Iejor internetionel repercussions.

2
FOR OMCIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. a fact which has hardly been recognized despite its self-evidence
is the unswereness of the conspicuous lack of sy-stry regarding decisions
on policy and intentions between Japan and China. It is abundantly clear
that. from the standpoint of present-day China. the two decisive factors
which made necessary a Jepan-China peace and friendship treaty with a pro-
vision on "hegemony" were China's global strategy (the forging of an uti-
"hegemony." i.e.. uni-Soviet. alliance) and her national goal (the four
"modernizations”). In this regard. despite the emphasis on a relationship
of two nations "separated only by a narrow strip of water" and two peoples
"coming from the same stock and using the same script." such a global
strategy and national goal are inconceivable for our nation. To begin with.
we say be the only "power" without a national goal or global strategy.
Therefore. our policy decisions could be described as being very faithfully
patterned after the general models of international and domestic policy de-
cisions. It goes without saying that this treaty was greatly influenced by
the various (political) factors of our internal affairs under due Pukuda
administration and by econonic demands ate-ing from a long period of re-
cession. Although Foreign Minister Sonoda's tenacity and the antiquated
theatrics he displayed in the process of concluding the treaty were con-
spicuous. it cannot be claised that our bureaucratic structure (the Foreign
Office) assumed the leadership in the policy decisions per se. llor were

public opinion. the mus media and pressure groups decisive factors in this
case.

The process of the policy formulation leading to the conclusion of the Japan-
Giine pact thm extremely lacked syI-etry and. wherecs China's position was
determined solely on a strategic basis. our nation adopted a "low policy”

in concluding the treaty. We concentrated our attention passively on the
wording of the "hegemony" clause. worried about the direct response from the
USSR and were unﬁle to maintain a broader strategic perspective concerning
the post-treaty situation. Due to this difference. despite our earnest ad-
vocacy of en "all-directional foreign policy." the nations of the world in
general evinced little interest in our ”all-directional foreigz policy."
They saw in the treaty only the significance of Quinn's strategy.

It may be redundant to point out China's global strategy \‘Iis-a-vis the USSR.
but what about the stake our political and financial circles are placing on
the "four modernizetions" which constitute wine's present national goal?

From Deng Xiaoping's present position. the strengthening of his own politi-

cal base may not be possible except by pushing forward the "four modernisa-
tions" with an urgent sense of mission.

Meanwhile. the greater the development of Japan-China economic relations.
the more dissociated dune would become from the principle of "salvation
through self-help" and the greater its risk of major problems in the future.
such as the burden of foreign payments. Therefore, it is worth noting the
recent warning by (Raymond Allan) . who states: “Nothing seem so ridicu-
lous to me as the idea of an ‘unlisited Clnina market.’ Hhile I can under-
stand the bankers and industrialists running to Peking. I hope no one will

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"carry any fantasies with then." ("Japan-China Cooperation." L'BXPRBSS.
28 Oct - lo Nov edition)

Paying a Two-fold Price

ﬂeanwhils, the enonity of the price being paid by Japan‘s foreign policy
for a stake in China becaae quickly and abundantly evident through two re-
cent develop-ants. One is the signing of the Soviet—Vietna- friendship and
cooperation treaty on 3 Novednr. The other is the foreign policy fiasco
suffered by Japan during the UN Security Council election for nonparament
usher seats. ‘ihe Soviet-Vietnam treaty was clearly a direct reaction to
the Japan-China peace and friendship treaty. Further-ore. when we realize
that the conclusion of the forner, which includes a “consultation" clause
(stating that the parties concerned will consult on ailitary md political
natters in en aaargancy situation) initiated by Moscow. is a hidden ad
futuie-ental element of the eo-called "Asian collective security" concept
(for details see the chapter. "that Is the Meaning of the Asian Collective
Security?". in my article: "The atoice of Japan's Foreign Policyu-Betwesn
the Global Strategies of the 0.8., USSR and China"; mo KIIZAI SBINPOSM.
1978), one cannot deny that the significance of this treaty in terns of
Asia’s future is very great. with even the current eilitary clash between
Urine and Vietnae. the Japan-Chine cooperation is, of course. a eajor threat
to Vietnam. forcing Vietnu to seek strong ties with the USSR. This earkad
increase in Soviet presence on the Indochina Peninsula nay invite the "re-
turn" of the United States which "withdrew" froa Asia. This cannot help but
increase the tension in Mia.

The latter fact has clearly exposed the weakness in the foundation of Japan's
foreig: policy which is oriented toward the major powers. Regardless of how
we any bank on Japan-China relations, when we realize the cold reality that
Chins itself failed to vote on our side and that sons of the ASIAN countries.
for exsaple. on when we had counted did not vote for us, we feel that this
indicates the cautious attitude of the countries surrounding Onina toward

"a union of Asia's giants.”

Therefore, in spite of the optimists that our international environ-ant would
become peaceful and stabilized with the conclusion of the Japan-mine peace
and friendship treaty. reality could be said to be such worse. Hesnwhile.
why was our govern-ant unable to perceive even such a short-rage outlook?
Our Foreign Office has apparently erred in its evaluation of the U.S.-u:ina
rapproachenent. the Albanian resolution (on China representation). the anti-
Lin Biao and anti-Confucian love-eat, China's internal situation during the
last years of Mao, the lien An Men incident. etc., and other aspects of
Chinese affairs.

Also. regarding the recent fluid trend of amine'a internal affairs. foreim
Hinister Sonoda's outlook appears to be extrenely optinietic, but it is
questionable whether it will be Justified.

I.
won orncuu. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In eny ceee. if the choice of concluding the recent Jepen-C‘hine treety juet
edde to the eccunuletion of ouch errore. we, of couree, cannot help but feel

greet epprehmeion concerning the future of our netionel eecurity. to eey
nothing ebout our foreign policy.

2. A New Cold "er in the Porn of e "Cool Her"
”Cool Her"

The extent of repercueeione end effecte of the Jepen-Chine unity pect wee.

of course. deternined by the preeent etege of develop-eat md direction in
internetionel effeire. Aleo. in the nidet of whet eey correctly be viewed

ee e "cold wet." the preeent internetionel eituetion ie noving in en extrenely
elereing direction with the ecceleretion in the eree rece involving cruiee
nieeilee end neutron bonbe. not to mention tectieel nucleer weepone end con-
ventionel weepone, elthough the United Stetee end USSR ere eeelting nutuel re-
striction of etretegic nucleer erne through the SALT negotietione. The prob-
len of the deploy-ht of lilo-2h to Cube, eeid to be confined by the United
Stetee leet Novedler. end efforte by the Certer edninietretlon while coping
with SALT negotietione to prevent the ieeue tron developing into e "eecond
Cuben crieie" reveel the innerde of the "cool wer.“

The cherecterietice of the current internetionel eituetion, in contreet to
the poetwer Beet-ﬂeet cold wer period, ere ee followe: on the one hend.
eutuel eree deterrence end chennele of egreeeent ere working between the
United Stetee end the USSR while on the other hend etretegic intervention
by the two powere in internel conflicte eromd the world he inteneified
elong with the denger of lieited were. Koreover, the eddition of the Chine-
Soviet cold wer to the current eituetion, in the for: of mine-Soviet con-
frontetione eround the world. hee epurred end nplified etretegic coepeti-
tion between the United Stetee lid the Soviet Union.

It becoeu cleer et thie point thet the "detente" which begen throng: e
polerizetion of internetionel politice wee eerely illueory. 0t couree,

the very neet "detente" concept in internetionel politice proved thet not
only could the cold wer be etructured. but eleo thet it continued e tredi-
tionel internetionel reletionehip celled the "Europeen etete eyetel." which
wee euited to e Buropeen-type internetionel environ-ent equipped with ouch
conditione of detente er the neintenuce of the etetue quo. peeceful co-
existence end eociel etebility. In the non-Buropeen regions of Aeie. the
Hideut end Africe. which leek euch conditione. it nuet be pointed out thet
the beeie for their exietence ie inherently ebeent. In Aeie, the U.8.-
Chine repproechenent wu generelly viewed on e eynbolic ceee of "detente."
end it wee widely believed thet the cold wer etructure hed elreedy self-
deetructed. however. ee I diecueeed eerlier. the cold wer eubeyeten hed
eerely been treneforned or treneeuted on e reeult of the Chine-Soviet con-
frontetion einoe the l960e ad concurrently ee e reeult of the reletive
decline in 0.8. power. Fer fro. being e dieintegretion of the beeic cold

5
roe orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

war structure. 1 third: it must be viewed as the co-enceeent of a new and ex-
panded "cool war" which includes. in addition to Europe and Asia. the Middle
and Near East. Africa and the entire Pacific region. (See sly article. ”The
International Environ-ant of the Japa-Uhina Treaty—A Choice between Peace
and a Dagerous Alliance"; srm. October 1978 edition.)

U.S. Strategy

Under these conditions. the United States has switched to e dual global
strategy. as clearly eanifested in the so-called "New Pacific Doctrine" of
Usceeber 1975—that is. to implement the "detente" strategy between the United
States and the USSR as far as Europe and the Atlantic region are concerned
and to strengthen the U.8.-Japsn-auina ”Transpacific coalition" in order to
secure the superiority of the strategy. Uith China's response to this
strategy. a clear outline of the anti-"liegeeony" coalition was delineated.

(On this point, see Iy article: "New Pacific Doctrine and the China-Soviet
Her"; own K0308, March 1976 edition.)

The Japa-atina peace and friendship treaty. which is winning the hearty ap-
proval of the United States, canot escape the reality that it eaterialired
in the context of international politics. no eatter how our countrymen nay
eephasire an "Pu-directional foreign policy." Also, when seen iron the
0.5. policy on mine. a Stanley Kernow. the perceptive 0.8. critic on
problees of China ad Asia has stated: ”Por the first tine in half a
century. the United States has not been obliged to choose between China and
Japan, but ha been able to encourage cooperation between the two nations."
(”historical kapproachenent in Asia”; BALTIMORE SUN, 6 low 78)

On the other hand, the USSR. faced with a drastic shift in its position vis-
e-vis Asia. has won a increasingly freer had in its strategy of countering
the anti-”hegaeony” alliance. Japan, which is unable to forts any kind of
global strategy. is therefore not only being drawn into the Chine-Soviet
confrontation. but has also been handed eaabership in an increasingly global-
iced "cool war." This is why we cannot ignore the "coincidence" of the so-
called ”eeergency” debate in our comtry about the tin of the signing of

the Japan-dune peace treaty.

Under such conditions, the series of statenents by National Security Advisor
Brzezinski and Secretary of Energy Schlesinger indicates that the United
States has now overcoee the difficulty of finding a foreula for the restor-
ation of U.S.-China relations, which has eerely been an internal U.S. prob-
lee. and U.S. policy is clearly chaging toward a buildup of Otina's mili-
tary resistance against the Soviet Union. The keystone of this U.S. policy
is being given further concrete iqetus by the policyeahare at the core of
the Carter administration. For instance. the speech by Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asia and Pacific Affairs llolbrooke, "me United States ad
Southeut Asia" to the World Affairs Comdl in ‘roston on 18 November shows
this clearly. Hhen he was chief editor of PORBIGN POLICY . Bolbrooke pub-
lished a treatise by Michael (Pillsbury) advocating a U.S.-O|ina military

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nllience. In his recent treetise. "Is Jepen Also e trump Card?“ (FOREIGN
POLICY. winter 1978). (Pillsbury) focmed on Jepen's recent defense debete in
which he enpheeisee end edvocetes the need for U.s.-Jspen-Chine nilitery co-
operetion.

chine'e Stretegy

He cennot help but be deeply apprehensive ebout the young steff in the Certer
edninistretion which preeches such stretegy es e letter of course. Keen-
while. on the Oninese side, there heve been well-known ststenents by Deng
Xisoping end Lieo Cheng-zhi. For instsnce. Lieo Oteng-zhi stetee: “In the
present world situetion. the Jepen-U.S. security treety is still useful.

As long es we view the Soviet Union es the greeteet force cspeble of cm-
ing e globel wsr. we will show understending towerd the treety.” (This was
in reply to e question by plenning chief Soge of the Jepen Socielist Perty
(‘Antrel Coeeeittee; MINICRI Slinmm 22 Nov 78) ‘ihis stetenent not only in-
dicetes Chine'e eeceptsnce of the Jenn-0.8. security treety but elso Grine's
interpretetion of the security treuty es s link in snti-Soviet defense coop-
sretion. The Jepen-Chine treety with the "hegeeony" provision hes nede it
possible for Chine to leeks this choice.

Thus it ney be seid thet the outline of Chine'e globel strategy. which seeks
to form en eestern NATO by linking the Jepsn-Chine pect to the Jepen-U.$.
security treety, is beconing increesingly cleer. Also, Chine is reedy to
ebrogete the urine-Soviet friendship ellience end nutuel eid treety. which
is due to expire in 1980, with the usreness thet the nullificetion of this
treety will remove eny binding restriction on the Soviets froe etteclting
amine and thet the Soviet threet will increese. 'iherefore, it is well-known
thet (:hine is courting on e strengthening of Jepen's defense power es s link
in the anti-Soviet defense. Gains is elso beginning to move forwerd towerd
its netionel goel of prosperity end nilitery power through the eo-celled
"four nodernizetions." while urging every stretu of its people to pertici-
pste in building productivity through de-Heoificetion.

Ihe "four nodernieetions" include egriculture. industry. netionsl defeme,
end science end technology. However. eccording to the peredoxicel neture
of Chinese logic. priority will be given to the nodernizetion of science
end technology. including production control. end the insinent terget will
be none other then the strengthening of its netionel defense. It is there-
fore cleer thet the intensified Jepen-Otine econolic reletions will, in
concert with the "four eodernizetions," ultinetcly contribute to aline's
nilitery strength. This strengthening of Gaine'e eilitsry power will not
only be comtered ectively by the Soviet's increesed ere-ent end stretegy

in Aeie. but will elso spur en em growth in Vietn- end other neighboring
comtries. inevicgbly resulting in the niliterizetion of ell of Asis.

Despite its pesoe end friendship slogen. the Jepen-Ghine pect oust be viewed
in the light of this letent dengerous trend. In view of this trend. light

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

not the "all-directional diploeecy" for peace wind up as a eere show and
seriously threaten our own national security? We have so far been unable
to find my clear answer which negates this possibility.

3. Pitfalls of the Defense Debate
Meaning of the "Emergency" Debate

Ihe recent debate on "emergency" in Japan arose coincidentally under the
eforenentioned international circumstances. In the light of the interns-
tionel situetion. the "Japan-0.8. joint measures guidelines" between the
0.3. forces and Japan's Self Defense force under the Japan-v.8. security
treaty. which were reported in late November last year. contain e greet
eany irritating problem.

The detailed study of these problems nust be left to the eilitary and de-
fense experts. however, the nest problematical issues concern the " ,argency
legislation" and the "Japan-0.8. joint eeasures guidelines." In contrast to
the criticism which is expected from some opposition party mentors. the
policymakers and defense authorities in Japan seem not only to be virtually
unaware of the dangerous direction of international affairs surromding Japan.
but have been regarding Jepu-china relstions within a bilateral fr-ework.
They also seen to be dealing with the various problems related to the Japan-
u.s. security treaty as bilateral problems or as neesures between our two
countries for the purpose of strengthening Japan's defense power.

Frankly. beceuse they are highly pleased with China's acceptance of the
Japan-v.5. security pact and (:hina'e enticipetion of the strengthening of
Japan‘s Self Defense Force as the bankruptcy of the so-cslled "unarmed
neutrality" concept. Japanese Government authorities lack awareness of the
overall structure of the "'cool war" and cannot see the price they are pay-
ing for their choice of the ininently approaching danger. of course. some
of the supporters of an anti-Soviet Japan-China alliance seen to be whole-
heartedly in favor of s U.S.-Japan-Chins anti-"hegemony” alliance. However,
the majority of governesnt leaders. including Prime Minister Fukude and
Secretory General Ohirs, have not gone that far. This is why they have
supported the slogan of an "all-directional diplomacy."

I noted earlier that "coincidence" of our national "emergency" debete.

History teaches us that the crises of a nation and its people often fall
within such a "coincidence."

Dangers of the Defense Debate as a Military Theory

Now. according to my discussion in the previous paragraph. in the present
international situation all problem related to foreign policy involve ne-
tionel security. And. conversely. it can be suggested that our national
security is decisively involved with our foreign policy. From the

8
roe OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

otsndpoint of our netionel position. which is slnost 100 percent dependent on
the internetionsl environnent. this feet is undenieble. However. it is true
thet . slthough such en excellent end strstegic choice es the Jepen-Chins pence
end necurity tresty hes been nsde. the debste on foreign policy stretsgy es s
"high policy" in this context hes lecked depth. 0n the other hend. es seen
in the "seergsncy" debste. the debste on defense techniques or tscticsl de-
fonss hes been waged sctively in conjunction with the discussion of defense
in the fore of s constitutionsl debste unique to Jspen. end the debete hes
intensified in recent emths. This discussion of defense as e nilitsry
theory hss been stinulsted by wine's eveluetion of the Jenn-0.8. security
treety end its snticipstion thet Jspsn's Self Defense Force would be
strengthened. It will probebly becons further intensified by the lstsnt
theory of s Soviet threst which exists in Jepen. es well es by the sctive
buildup in Soviet stretegy in Asis.

This will probsbly result in s defense theory with e silitsry biss. It ney
even deter our fundenentsl usrensss of the feet thet our netionel security
in the present internetionsl environment cennot exist es s purely nilitsry
probler-thst it exists only es s setondsry fector--but thet it csn only
exist in the broed context of our foreign policy stretegy. Such s defense
debste, which locks the swsreness of netionel security on e foreim policy
strstegy. conteins s berrenness which cen only result in e nere theory of
vslues. Hhile it is only nstursl to be prepsred for en ”energency.” we
would be blinding ourselves to the obvious fsct thet there on be no no-
tionel security for Jspen unless efforts ere node to svoid such an "energency."
Of course. if it were possible for our country to becone s greet nucleer
power. coqsrsbls to the superpowers. the defense dobste would be logicelly
fessible u s nilitery theory. However. this is inpossible for our netion
end such e direction is clesrly not the course our netion should choose.

0n the besis of such s self-evident prenise. the course of being spurred by
the "eeergency" debete. of being induced by Chins's contentions end of
dresticelly strengthening our defense power would not only be e dsngerous
choice but it would slso be neeningless. Hesnwhile. the feet thst. with the
signing of the Jenn-Grins tresty es s turning point. such deeends sre gsin-
ing force in Jepsn. end the unique situstion in our country in which sdvo-
cetes of s Jspen-Ouins ellience srs often enti-Soviet deserve our ettention.

Therefore. we lust consider thet there is e ujor pitfell in Jspen's defense
debste. ‘ihere is neither a sctive foreig: policy concept es our netionel
etrstegy for survivsl. nor e serious usrsnese of netionel security in the
sense thet foreign policy is defense stretegy itself.

d. Foreign Policy es s Stretegy for Survivel
Jepen: A building of ”Close Hells"

Professor Alisteire (lekken) of Oxford University (theory of internetionsl
relstions). who died two yesrs sgo. in describing the internetionsl situstion

9
FOR OFFICIAL us: ONLY
I'Oh OFHCIAI. USP. ONLY

in East Asia. said: "Asia stands today in an environment of entrees con-
trssts--Chine end the Soviet Union in er-d confrontation and an unerned
Japan which stmde apart like a glass skyscraper." (”'ihe Asian Quadrangle:
Japan's Foreign Policy Sandwidied between the Giant Nations of the United
States. China and the USSR”; ssc broadcast lecture. 2 Dec 76) If I were to
add a few changes to this description. Asia today could be described as s
three-sided contest in which two enorloue steel buildings represent China and
the Soviet Union. one a huge steel skyscraper end the other striving to reach
the sane height. Beside than stands a glass-covered building representing
Japan. Unless the glass building is converted to steel. it would be sore
secure by reneining as a totally pliable glass structure. 0n the other hand.
if it were to try to becone s seni-ferro structure. it would be deprived of
its safety end night even fall with a loud thud. Of course. although the
foregoing allegory is sinply that. it does suggest our nation's security
situation.

If the idea of e pliant structure is applied to the security strategy in
foreiya policy. it would seen a diversified axis of coordinates. l‘o becone
a totally glass structure neens to reject the deep-rooted protectionist
trend which exists even anong the advanced capitalist nations in the face

of an upheevel in the international rates of exchange. It means to establish
an internal structure which could internationalire the nation internally and
open it up fron the standpoint of free trade. In effect. our national
security can only be secured in this way. when viewed fron our strategy

for survival.

Abstinence Necessary in China Relations

in this case. the first problen worth attention in the Japan-China post-
treety reletims concerns the danger of viewing these relations through the
concept of e comnity of joint destiny. Since the signing of the Japan-
Chine treaty. Quins has repeatedly stressed the slogan of "the friendship and
solidarity of the one billion people of China and Japan." This slogan nay
sound pleasant fron the Chinese side. since 900 nillion of the one billion
are Chinese. Also. fron the standpoint of Japan's unique synpethy toward
(mine. this concept of the integration of Japan and China is an inclination
into which we can easily fell in the light of our historical precedents.
However. an over-enpheeis of it could bring on s new "yellow peril" fever.
invite suspicion nong China's Asian neighbors and in Europe. and also helper
the diversification of our foreign policy. his was nede abundantly clear by
the reaction in Singapore and other Asian nations during Deng Xiaoping'e
recent visit to Southeast Asia.

‘ihe control of Asian tendencies in our nation's foreign policy because in-
creasingly necessary with the broadening of contacts between Japan and Quinn.
Also. when such abstinence is lacking. an it is already apparent to sons
extent aeong our bureaucrats md ”old boys" in the defense-related orgmize-
tiOne. there is even sons danger of an uncertainty of "nationality" arising
reong the bureaucrat class.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. 088 ONLY

The reeeon cool detechnent ie denended in foreign policy vie-e-wie Chine ie
thet the future of Chine-Soviet reletione ie etill uncertein end the future
holde two elternetiyeeuthe extrenee of e Cline-Soviet wer or e reconcili-
etion—which ere both greet threete to our country. Ieceuee of thie uncer-
teinty. it ie cleer thet our foreign policy etretegy euet be reletively in-
dependent. ‘rhie ie eleo true when viewed froe the etendpoint of enxiety
concerning the future of the Koreen Penineule, which ie vitelly ieportmt
to our netionel eecurity.

In effect. our netion ehould etrictly evoid the dmgeroue line of e Jepen-
U.3. eecurity eyetee edyoceted by both the United Stetee end urine in fore-
ing en eeetern NATO. nether. we ehould uee the reletione between Jepu. the
United Stetee end the edvenced Europeen netione ee e beee for our foreign
policy etretegy within the fr-eworlt of the eecurity eyetee. Jepm-Chine
reletione ehould be pleced etretegicelly ee e eubeyetee of the owerell
etructure. ‘l'o chenge the greet-poaer-oriented neture of our foreign policy
end to etrive ite divereificetion would divereify thie eubeyeten. ‘l'het ie
why Jepen-mine end Jepen-Soviet reletione. ee well ee reletione with ASBAN.
tndochine end the Pecific region nuet be viewed with inportmce. Md. of
couree. remote ereee. free the etendpoint of foreign policy etretegy. euch
re hongolie end new Zeelend. nuet eleo be recorded with inportence.

Elinineting the Confidence Gep between Advenced hetione

Secondly. efter coneidering theee eituetione, the problem of how to eliein-
ote the confidence gep in the expended Jepen-Chine reletione, end between
our country end the edwenoed Heetern netione enid the rieing yen. Iuet be
noted. There ie repetition enong Heetern comtriee over the eerioue prob-
len to cope with the future of e clinging anine. but there ie no co-on eree
of egreenent whateoever. Aleo. there in no fire end con-on underetending
concerning the inportent internetionel took of coping with the North-South
problem. Pro- thie etmdpoint. the eunit conference of edvenced netione
(the Tokyo euonit). which will be held in Jepm for the firet tine in June
1979. will probably becoee e touchetone for our foreign policy, on to
whether we con eecepe fron the frnework of the treditionel "world econonic
conference" end enbrece ell of theee problene.

heed To Coneider e Detour Approech

Thirdly. there ie the queetion of e detour epproech to the problen of
foreign policy etretegy. In thie regerd. e chenge in the concept of e etep-
by-etep eolution to pending ieeuee ie neceeeery. euch ee teking up the Jepu-
Soviet ieeue efter the Jenn-Chine leeue. An inroveneat in Jepn-Sowiet
reletione ie the noet ieportent foreign policy ieeue we now fece. end todey,
progreee cat no longer be echiewed by treeting the ieeue in tern. of e
trienguler reletion between Jepen, Chine md the USSR.

An exuple ie the Jepen-Auetrelie reletionehip, which in extrenely ilportent.
Not only fro- the etendpoint of lutuelly caplenenting our econolic

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

relations with Australia. but also frou the standpoint of auguenting our
negotiating capability with mine and the United States. it out be consid-
ered as our cost iaportant international relationship at present. The reason
is that Australia. which already shares the nmsber three position aong our
trading partners and which is extreaely important in terms of our inports
of resources and food products. is indispeneihle as a source of fishery
resources. it is an inortant link in our strategy for survival froe the
standpoint of diversifying our foreign policy position. which has become
weakened vis-e-vis the Soviet Union through our overdependence on northern
fishery resources.

however. the iaportance of Japan-Australia relations is not sufficiently
recognized despite the fact that. in terns of trede, the relationship is
such broader than Japan-China relations. Moreover. as seen in the disputes
over sugar and beef. factors which could hers those relations—such as the
distribution systes. speculation. protectionisa. etc.-lie latently in our
nation's makeup. if these conditions are left unattended and the inherently
conplex feelings tward Japan which exist in Australia becose unwieldy in
the future, our nation will suffer greet losses. As mentioned earlier.
there is no guarantee that China would replace such losses. Our attitude
toward Japan-china relations is an outstanding exanple of the lack of aware-
ness of our foreign policy's role as a strategy for survival and its con-
tribution to our national security.

A Cultural Diplomacy of Substance

A final but serious problal is the fact that foreign policy as a strategy
continues to hold an inferior position in comparison to the priority con-
sideration given to the traditional areas of politics and econonics. In the
present international situation. foreign policy is in effect also a gene of
isages. It is. of course. at the ease tine the hush. cultural and infom-
tional exchange between different cultures and the avoidance of conflict in
cultural contacts. Such cultural diplouscy can be an important contribution
to our national security. Also. in the present cross-fire of the global
strategies of the United States. Guns and the Soviet Union. our nation.
which is characterized by a nodern and diverse culture. has reached the
point where it must give further substmce to its cultural diploIsacy.
Speaking of cultural exdrange. however. the en when we can export our
uniquely Japanese culture and arts. the first stage in the era of interns-
tionslisation. is ending. Our cultural diplooacy has reached the point where
Japan's cultural and academic achieveunts and exchange of human talents
should be proeoted under a nore conventional form.

of course. in this respect, the International Exchange Fund and Overseas
Youth Cooperation Corps have brought great noteworthy results. llmver, the
question of whether to include cultural exchanges as a link in our foreign
policy strategy constitutes a dile-a, with a concern about "cultural in-
vasion" on the one hand and the neglect of cultural diplonacy on the other.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR ONICIM. USE ONLY

The inportance given to the queation ie etill rat from adequate. Yet it
ocean to an that the atratagy for survival. or the poeition of cultural

diplomacy an a defenae attatezy for our nation which in lacking in both a
global strategy and a national goal. in an ineteaeingly urgent tank. In

thin respect. aleo. Japan'e totem policy in at a najor taming point.
COPYRIGHT: Chuo Koroneha. Tokyo. 1979

5 886
C50: 6105

13
FOR orncm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

NTT PRESIDENT VlBlis 0.8. DBMND FOR LIBEMLIZATION
Tokyo NIKON KEIZAI SNINBUN in Japanese 8 Mar 79 Morning Edition p 3 09'

[Interview with Tokuji Akikuse. president of the Nippon Telegraph-Telephone
Publlc Corporation, by NINON KEIZAI SNINBUN on 7 Harch--place not given]

[Excerpts] Question: What is the reaction of the Nippon Telegraph-Telephone
Public Corporation [N11] to the 0.8. demand for giving foreign companies
access to its procurements?

Answer: I cannot understand why the NT? has become an issue. It may be that
the bigger a business becomes. the more severe criticism it receives. NTT
operations are very specialized and. perhaps for this reason. the issue is
not even fully understood within the N11. I am certain that it is beyond

the comprehension of the general public.

Since it is not a domestic issue and is entirely left to diplomatic negotia-
tions. there simply is nothing I can do about it. I am just counting on

Mr Unhibo (goverment representative to the Tokyo-round negotiations) and
other specialists in the diplomatic field. I think that this is the first
time the Foreign Ministry has become involved with the telecommunications
area although ministry officials are highly familiar with economic problems.

Question: It may indeed be an issue that is difficult to understand, but
how do you explain your position to the ".8. side?

Answer: If the United States needs to understand the facts involved, then
we can glve them to it one by one. however. we will be in trouble if the
United States is aware of all the facts and refuses to hear us any further.
Another problem is that we can hardly find an independent ”.5. office with
which we can deal on this issue.

Question: The Tokyo-round negotiations are now in their final phase and a
settlement on the NTT issue has become a pressing demand. Judging from the
present situation. Japan has no alternative but to accept the 0.8. demand
one why or another. "hat is your viewpoint?

1“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OPIICIAL US! ONLY

Answer: Yes. indeed. Further-ore. there is another grand forum scheduled--
that is. the Tokyo summit meeting (of major industrial nations). The govern-
ment wants all problems (pending between Japan and the United States) to be
resolved by the time of the sum-it meeting. For this reason. too. the N11
issue calls for an early settlement.

Question: Specifically. how will you respond to the 0.8. demand?

Answer: We are still unable to foresee how the situation will develop. At
the same time. we know that the N11 is not allowed to do everything in the
way it wants under present circumstances. One thing we know now is that the
United States has some understanding of the NTT's view and is not demanding
a complete. foolproof bidding system on all equipment and materials. First
of all. should foreign companies be given access to 93 billion worth of
procurements as demanded by the United States. it would take. according to

my computations. lo years tc carry it out. It is impossible to totally
alter the present procurement system.

Question: Nevertheless. the private contract method seems to be hardly
understood by the public. correct?

Answer: The lritish Telegraph-Telephone Public Corporation shifted from
private contracts to bidding in 1969. resulting in a deterioration in
quality of materials. construction delays and trouble at worksitss.
Consequently. it reverted to private contracts only 2 years after the change.

Question: It seems an overstatement to say that. if the NIT opens itself

up to foreign companies. it will lead to bankruptcy for many businesses
related to the NTT, correct?

Answer: If we adopt a competitive bidding system. I am afraid that it would
entail a drain from the country of techniques developld by the efforts of
our specialists. This would apply not only to the N11 but to other manu-
facturers as well. If these techniques developed through severe competition
would be made public. it would demoralize the specialists. There will be

no such thing as all related businesses going bankrupt. one right after
another. but we should remember that some companies partially or entirely
depend upon the NIT. including Nippon Denki and fijitsu. Nippon Denki
depends on the NT? for 20 percent of its business and Fujitsu. 22-23 percent.

Question: will the N11. after all. be left outside the Tokyo-round inter-
national pact governing government procurements?

Answer: It has been suggested that communications equipment be excluded.
ﬂoweVer. I would like to refrain from making a hasty comment on it. I went

to open the NTT's door to foreign companies gradually: however. if we parti-
cinate in the international pact on government procurements based on the
prlnciple of competitive bidding. it will put our company under the super-
vision of other countries and will cause it to pay a high price in the future.

COPYRIGHT: Nihon Kcizei Shinbunsha I979

680: 6105 15
FOR OFFICIAL 033 out!
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

ECONOMIC EXPERTS SPBCULATB ON JAPAN'S 1979 ECONOMY
Tokyo SNUKAN ASA”! in Japanese 12 Jan 79 pp lbs-1‘7

[Discussantsz Toshihiko Yoshino. Director of the Economic Research Center.
Yanaichi Securities 00.. Ltd. and hisao Kine-ori. Director of the Japan
Econoaic Research Center]

[Text] Industry has started to lake gains. but with the government giving
up its 7 percent growth "pledge." the future is not at all clear. Where
is the Japanese econoey of 1979 headed? has there been any change from
Fukuda to Ohira? we have spoken with the positive Hisao Kins-ori and the
cautious Toshihiko Yoshino.

Kmuwn InnkmnwuluauHHWWgwdnn.Puothu.Wh
ing 1978 the econony finally got a grip on recovery. Five years after the
oil shock. industry is adjusting well and has found the strength for self-
recovery. Prices have also stabilized and business loans and inventory
have decreased-things are looking good. Invest-ent in equipment. which

up until now has been very sluggish. started to nove in 1978 with the focus
on service industries. Isn't this quite a change?

also. because fairly aggressive public invest-ant policies were enacted in
1978. demand has recovered. mainly in construction industries and construc-
tion machinery.

0n the other hand. the end of 1978 saw exports greatly reduced because of
the rise of the yen. But when you look at the pluses and sinuses together.
I think the plus side is still stronger. Hon't this trend be carried for-
ward into the new year and won't 1979 be bright?

The reins of govern-ent have switched free Fukuda to Ohira. I think that
Pukudo nor-sliced the econoly but I would like the new administration to
take a little more positive action above and beyond what he did.

Yoshino: I thought the pledge of 7 percent growth basically impossible.
The idea of 7 percent growth was an outgrowth of the Japanese-American

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

discussions of December 1977. It is a number that arbitrarily emerged as

n neasure for reducing our international balance of payments surplus. Con-
sidering the problens of doaestic unemployment and those of industrial man-
ogemcnt. I cannot view it on something Japan decided on voluntarily.

Therefore. I oppose the 7 percent growth. which the Ohira administration
known is impossible. I think that planting the seeds of future inflation
and greatly increasing the national debt. which are the result of a general
expansion of spending. are things we should not do at this time.

However. I am not saying for a minute that the more we restrain the rate of
growth. the better. I think we should find other ways to deal with employ-

ment and the surplus in international payments—and not by generally increas-
ing the growth rate.

Kinamori: I think the economy has gradually improved. but the growth rate
is still not sufficient. Even though domestic demand is at a good level.
exports have decreased more than expected. The government‘s interpretation
is that this has depressed everything. Exports also exert an important
influence on the employment problem. and when we take this into account. I
think the question. after ell. is the rate of growth of the economy. If
growth is lower. the employment problem will be difficult to solve. Because
Japan has a very high rate of rise in productivity. when the growth rate is
about 5 percent. industry can get nlong even without hiring more people.

At a 5 percent rate, the nuaber of jobless people has increased about 200.000
over last year.

Isn't the most important target of economics the employment problem? As
usual, there is a surplus in international payments. and equipment is in
good supply; even the rate of price increases is extremely low. Hholesale
prices have probably fallen 6 percent relative to last year. Therefore.
isn't It on important task for the new year to go ahead with a more positive
policy and to stabilise the economy. which has finally begun to recover?

Yoshino: Although I have several reasons why we should not always oppose

a 7 percent growth rate. one is that I fear inflation will result if we
reach for a predetermined growth rate whatever the cost. and if we must
increase public consumption based on a large increase in the budget in order
to nuke up for what is lost in exports. In 1978, although we issued national
bonds amounting to ll trillion and several hundred billion yea. I think

that in 1979 so large an amount will not be permissible. If those national
bonds are satisfactorily absorbed. I am certainly not opposed to taking in
excess capital by increasing the national debt and stimulating the economy
financially. However. conditions have changed since April 1978. when we
reformed the regulations for issuing national bonds. and lowered the 10-
yenr bond interest rate to 6.18 percent. In other words. the sellers of
national bonds have increased and the buyers have decreased. If the value
of national bonds is lowered. absorption is hindered. hereafter. if we
further increase the national debt by a great amount. this tendency will

17
FOR onrcm use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

become more apparent. In 1979. will the market value of national bonds be
considerably lowered. or will lowering it be bad? The Bank of Japan. in

order to support the market value of national bonds. is buying enormous
amounts. Although I won't go so far as to say that danger umaediately follows
when we buy national bonds in the same way as we support the dollar. by

using "excess" currency. isn't there a danger that prices. which we have
worked hard to stabilize. will go up again? In that sense. I think that
excessive attention to increasing the money supply and the policy of gener-
ally increasing demand is an old way of thinking.

Rather. the important thing is to pay a little more heed to how to reemploy
people of middle and upper age levels who are the victims of their place in
the industrial hierarchy. in what can be called a "structural recession."

At any rate. I am not opposed to a broad rate of growth in 1979. Here than
that. I think it is a year to take specific steps regarding the important
employment problem.

Interest rates: will they go down or not?

Kinamori: If we do not continue the recovery of fiscal initiative at least
for l more year. in 1979. I think there is the possibility that the economy.
which has just begun to recover. will deteriorate again. In order to make
recovery permanent, a broad expansion of public investment is necessary.

At this year's level. the national debt is 11 trillion yen. That is unaccept-
able. If we do not raise an additional 5 to 6 trillion yen. we will not be
able to put together the necessary budget. Although it is a question of
whether or not it can be absorbed. we had better improve the so-called tech-
nical problem of diversifying the national debt.

However.-as a whole. there is an excess of savings in Japan. If interest
rates are unrestricted. I do not think we will be unable to sell the necesarry
national bonds. however. because we have a system of controlled currency. I
think that a policy is required via-a-vis the level of interest rates whereby
we adjust those rates to the point at which necessary growth can be realized.
Therefore. by lowering bank interest rates a little more and by issuing
national bonds. we will expand necessary public investment.

Yet there is a problem of balance in using public investment alone. because
I think it is desirable to consider the economy as a whole. it has been my

opinion for a long time that we should match our demands for public invest-
ment with a decrease in taxes.

However, because there is a strong feeling that it is nonsense to talk about
reducing taxes when the economy is in trouble. I think there is no prospect

of a lowering of taxes. Therefore. don't public investment and lowering bank
interest rates somewhat become central concerns?

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Yoshino: Until a lowering of the price of national bonds occurred in April
mm.lwsnnninuuwutumhrnumu.RumnunutMtuu

I thought we should lower taxes. however. because I judge the change in the
condition of the national bond earket since April to be an ones of great
danger. I have cone to think. from that time. that tax reduction is not
appropriate. The reason is that if we lower taxes. we must increase our
national debt. At that ties, if we cannot smoothly absorb that debt. we
will carry out Iasaive buying support in order to check the fall in the ear-
ket value of national bonds. because there is the danger that this will be-
cone the basis for greatly increased currency production in the future and
a source of price increases. 1 have changed ny nind. and think we should
grit our teeth and give up the idea of reducing taxes.

And. concerning Hr Kinseori's point that Japan's interest rates are too
high. ay view is a bit different. The official rate between America and

Japan is 6 percent. and the prime rate can go higher. America is far higher
and Japan is far lower.

The rate of increase in consumer prices has reflected the rise of the yen

up until now. Up to the present. the base rate for the country as a whole

has been 3 percent. But when the yen went down when President Carter announced
hie support of the dollar on 1 November 1978. wholesale prices aince Nova-bar
have had a reactionary rise. Now interest rates on l-year fixed-term deposits
are 6-5 percent. but if this trend. which has appeared in wholesale prices.
affects consumer prices. I think the day is near that savings will decrease.
Certainly. if we lower interest rates on loans, industry will benefit. To

that extent I think it is desirable, but given the conditions of present
banking facilities, I think that we cannot lower interest rates on loans to

the extent that Mr Kinsmori says without greatly lowering savings interest
rates.

Kinanori: Anerica has a $20 biilion international balance of payments deficit.
Imported goods cost that nuch lore than goods made domestically. Thus. I
think it is appropriate that they raise interest rates and don't use too

nuch money. However. in the case of Japan. although we repeatedly say we

will lower our surplus. in 1978 won't it be about $17-$18 billion? Therefore.
isn't it appropriate that on the one hand we use if financially. and on the

other hand lower interest rates so we can use more equip-ant invest-ant
donesticnlly?

Regarding prices. wholesale prices have declined 6 percent and are the same
as last year. Certainly. if the exchange rate is lowered. prices may go up
because costs for imported raw esterials will go up. however. there is no
previous postwar example in Japan of prices having acutally gone down 4

percent. isn't this true for the world as a whole? I think it strange to
worry about inflation at such a time.

As for s 3 percent rise in consumer pricatthis too is historically very low,
and because the rise of wages has fortunately become fairly slack. I don't

FOR 073101121. USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

think there's a danger of inflation for the time being. Now. if we fear
inflation and don't carry out credit and fiscal policies. there won't be a

chance for such policies.

A decrease in the workforce: will the decrease in income and the increase
in profits continue?

Yoshino: I am not saying we already have inflation now. The rate of in-
crease in wholesale prices relative to last year is minus 4.01 parcent--it
has really gone down. If. however. you divide it into domestic and foreign
factors. and than if you divide foreign factors into contract and exchange
factors. exchange factors energe as minus 6.18 percent. This means that
the decreased portion is almost entirely because of the rise of the yen.

Although wholesele prices have gone down 5 percent compared to last year.
the rise in consumer prices is at the same time close to 4 percent. If
wholesale prices set off a reactionary increase in prices. there is no doubt
that consumer prices will go up more. If this occurs. there is naturally
the possibility that the vicious circle of wage and price i-:reases will
occur again. and soon a consumer price increase rate of the sort that will
exceed the interest rate of fixed-period savings will occur. I am older
than Mr Kinsmeri. and although it may be the fault of nervousness. I really
do not think it is that simple a thing.

Looking next at the economy. what will happen to industrial profits is
important. In the past a separation of macroeconomics and microeconomics
was spoken of. Macro was good; micro was bad. I an opposed to that view
now. Although sales have declined 2.7 percent compared to the previous
period because of liquidations in the period ending September 1978. earn-
ings have increased 11.6 percent.

As the government expected. the growth rate has been low. and therefore un-
employment has increased. th does this kind of macro and micro separation
occur? Because of the rise of the yen. things purchased from abroad are
cheaper and there are companies which make a great marginal profit on ex-
change. Also. even companies which buy domestically. processing things
which other companies have imported without importing things directly from
foreign countries. are able to say to other companies. "Because you have
bought at a cheap price. isn't it strange to sell at such a high price?"
Industry is not the same as consumers. If industries are united. there is
much room for negotiation. When the exchange market price goes up. cases
often come up where they even put in a sliding clause which says they will
lower the price by that much. Therefore. the cost of imports has generally
decreased considerably. If we look at the Bank of Japan's import price
index. conpared to the same month last year. it has gone down more than 20
percent. About two-thirds of the reason that industrial profits took a
favorable turn is the benefits from the rise of the yen. The other one-
third is that the Bank of Japan enacted a policy of low interest rates. and
rates fell. Added to this. consumer prices have stabilized and wages have
not gone up very much.

20
P08 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

man we think of what will happen to industrial profits now. a big factor
which has revived industrial profitsunusely. the lower cost of imports-wan-
not but weaken. Up until new. interest rates have. on the whole. fallen.

but there is a subtle difference between lung and short-tern rates. Still.
for the tine being. I think short-tern rates will continue to decline. but

seen as a 10-year national debt. won't long-tern rates probably cease to go
down?

Also. if the falling rate of wholesale prices brings down personnel expenses.
and if the rising rate of consumer prices increases. the rate of wage increase
will probably go up.

One more thing concerning the rapid decrease in the workforce—I think this.
after all. will run into resistance fro. society.

Kinalnori: Macro is not very attractive. but Iicro has iaproved. Thus. I
think the feelings of industry have greatly changed and have bees-e brighter.
Industrial sales have fallen off. but profits have increased. when you ask
why this happens. I answer that it is because differences find some outlet.
One is abroad. Japanese industry aakss aoney. and because it buys lower
from abroad and sells higher. foreign countries lose. Another reason is be-
cause wages have not gme up much and the workforce has decreased. and the
rate of labor-sharing has gone down. Another reason for increased profit

is. 1 think. the government's deficit. Because the govern-eat has spent
sore than it has received. industrial profits have risen. however. I do

not think this increase in profits while sales as a whole decline will con-
tinue for very long. Certainly. we cannot have such a reduction of the work-
force. The rate of labor-sharing has risen a little too such. I think this
effect on industrial profits case about in the course of nor-alieation. but
by a certain tile. if sales do not increase. profits won't go up either.

Even though we lay soaehow make it through liarch 1979 under these conditions.
I feel profits any drop around Septeaber.

Thus. for another year, in 1979. we trust boost finances. And isn't it
necessary to bring increased revenues and profits into the new year? The
expansion of a aonetary deficit is definitely a problem. but for a while we
lust close our eyes to it. Closing our eyes will. I think. expand the lone-
tary deficit a little more. If we look at it only fro. this angle. it is
certainly not a desirable situation. but if we do not take the long view
that the econay will improve. the result will be that we Ilust continue
issuing national bonds indefinitely. Therefore. even if the deficit expands
for a short while. taking the longer view, if we don't use finances so that
the economy inproves. it will be a bad situation.

The yen market: 200 or 210 yen?

Yoshino: One iaportant factor in thinking about the economy is what will
happen to the yen exchange rate. 0n 1 Novenber 1978, President Carter

21
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

announced a policy of dollar protection. Anerica deposited (traded) currency
with other countries, withdrew capital from the International Monetary Fund
(IMP), and sold Special Drawing Rights (SDR). 0n the one hand they expressed
their determination to maintain the dollar and procure funds up to $30 billion.
And because they even took steps once to raise the official rate by 1 percent,
a novsment resulted whereby the excessive rise of the yen was revised. how-

ever, I really do not think this will take us back to the level prevailing
around the end of 1917.

Although the calculation differs depending on who is doing it, the amount

of dollars which has gone from the u.s. to foreign countries is at least

$b50 billion, and many people say $600 billion. Taking an average of $500
billion. speculating 10 percent would be $50 billion. Twenty percent is

$100 billion. There are plenty of reasons to suspect that $30 billion is

not enough to support the dollar. Moreover, because Alerica's international
payments deficit still continues, excess dollars continue to increase. There-
fore, American inflation is clearly coming to an end [sic]. It would be good
if the international payments deficit were reduced, but as long as it is

not, just how long we will have a policy of dollar protection is problematic.
If you see things that way. I think there will be a movement from 190 to 200
yen.

Kinamori: Because America has taken the position of buying and supporting
the dollar with $30 billion, the dollar has recovered, but the basic causes
have not changed that much. I do not think American inflation will readily
end, and Japan's surplus in balance of payments will continue for the time
being. This factor still works in the direction of raising the yen. If
the veneer of policy wears off, won't the yen become still stronger? The
desirable level is about 200 yen. If the yen does not get a little weaker,
Japan‘s export industries will not be able to carry on normal business, I
think, and because our domestic economy is suffering and our international
surplus in balance of payments continue, the possibility that a rise in

the yen may recur is very real.

He cannot conjecture about matters of foreign governments, but the American
government says that because the dollar is its currency, it must protect it.
I think they feel that if the dollar becomes a little weaker, more strength
would accrue to American goods in export competition, and if the balance

of payments improved. it would be good. However, that is not the only rea-
son why they are giving positive support to the dollar: they are worried
that OPEC will greatly raise its prices. Moreover, an important thing is
that American inflation has becone very pronounced. If the dollar gets
weaker, American domestic prices will increase. And the popularity of the
government will decline. Therefore, I think that policies to fight infla-
tion are an extremely important goal. however, America does not have basic
confidence in the dollar now. Therefore, even if we think that the dollar

has now stabilized, I feel that the possibility is strong that this will
not last.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Currency revaluation: whether or not to do it.

Yoshino: Just to add one more thing--if you ask. therefore. whether indus-
trial bankruptcies will cone in quick succession. that will not happen. In
October 1977. when S! equaled 260 yen and it looked like the dollar would
break through the 250 yen barrier. there were those who said that if we go
beyond the $1 equal 260 yen level Japan's export industries will be washed
up. however. there was unusual flexibility in Japanese industry with respect
to the exchange rate. That is to say. recent export prices expressed in
yen. when cospared to a year ago. are about 8 percent cheaper. Speaking
only fros the change in the exchange rate. prices should be down about 21
percent but 12 percent. which is approinately half. is covered by the rise
of dollar-indicated export prices. Hhether you say it is that the delivery
period of Japanese goods is short. or the quality of the products is good.
or that you can innediately get parts-othe fact that we have cospstitive
strength outside of the price aspect. and the fact that Aserica. who is our
biggest custoser. is suffering fros inflation. plays a great part in it.
Added to this. the lowering of isport coats based on the rise of the yen
had an unexpectedly great effect.

Kinasori: But exports fron Japan have declined in asount of revenue and

in quantity. This is a rare thing for Japan. Even if the rise of the yen
is not directly related to bankruptcies. there are in reality eany industries
which can no longer afford to export. Also. there are sany which do not
export any more because it is senseless to do so. In the autosobile and
hose electric industries. where up until now exports were favorable. even
doocstic demand has ossified. Because profits originally were relatively
good. the dreaded bankruptcies did not occur. However. I think there is no
mistake that the decrease in exports has been a fairly large negative factor
for the econony. Therefore. to say it again. I think things will be bad if
we do not sake it the basis of our policy to give careful thought to those
points and to cover that portion by expanding doaestic desand.

Yoshino: An isportant thing is how to keep Japan's econosy on the track of
stable growth. In other words. we are not presently in a period of high-
level growth like before. Now can we best deal with the unenploynent that
cones about in the course of that? And. because we have too great a sur-
plus in the international balance of pay-onto. we have exposed ourselves to
fierce international criticism. we are not solving the problea of how best
to deal with that. Therefore. government policies should put great stress
on measures which directly shrink the surplus in the international balance
of payments. and on unesploynent counter-easures. Moreover. now is not the
tile to think about the redenoninstion of the yen. which has alnost no re-
lation to the substance of econonics.

Kinauori: No. 1 think we had better carry out redenooination. With 51
now equal to 200 yen. it is very strange. internationally speaking. and for

business. too. it is inconvenient. i think that prices will stabilize. and
that now is a good chance to do it.

however. taking the long view. because Mr Pukuda has been replaced. the
tine for carrying it out has receded a little.

COPYRIGHT: Asahi Shinbunsha 1979

9391 ?3
cs0: ms roe omcm USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

300180110

BXMNOIO“ O? CONSIDER CREDIT SYSTDi INBVI‘I'MLE
Tokyo mum BUSINESS in Japamee 29 Jan 79 pp 103-105

[Article by lsao Hatauura. chief researcher. business planning depart-ent.
Sanwn Bank: ”NI l’orecast on Consumer Credit Market: 16 Percent Yearly
Growth. 80 Trillion Yen Level After 5 Years. Centered on Card loans. New

Products Coeing to the Pore"!

[Text] The outlook is for an even greater qualita-
tive eni quantitative expaneion of the consuaer
credit narket to continue in the future. swelling
to the level of 80 trillion yen. over twice the
present level. by 1982. of this. the Iarket for
consular loans. supported by the appearance of
bank card loans. a personal credit reporting
systen. end the expansion of the warranty struc-
ture. will probably reach a scale of 15-16 trillion

yen.

with the recent expansion of conauaer credit we have a remarkable develop-
lent. In the distribution industry rapid growth of uonthly installaent
salce speciality stores is continuing. and depart-eat stores and super-
markets are competing by offering their own credit. In order to turn up
new demand, unufacturers of autonobiles. household appliances and other
item are further expanding their existing install-eat sales capacities.

hat "arch. the Ssnwe Bank began offering the card loan. through which a
loan of up to 500.000 yen can be obtained from an autonatic cash disbursal
aschine. One bank after another followed suit. As a result. as of Decenber
outstanding bank loans were said to exceed 100 billion yen.

Consueer loans 10 Reach 15 Trillion Yen by the and of 1982

In this atlosphere of consumer credit for everyone, while the phenoaenon has
appeared of the "wage earner" loan shark trsnsforaed into a social problen.

the expansion of consuaer credit has become a Iajor force supporting

2‘0
708 ORIGIN. 083 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

conuuner buying power during the recession. Cited as an explanation for this
is: (I) The predonlusnt ststus of firne es the source of danand for capital
is in the process of shifting to the nationsl and local goverruent and the
household: and (2) with tho ropid sdvance of cosputer technology. it has be-
cause possible to process and nanage cones-er credit rapidly and accurately.
the greatest portion of which is [words illegible) in snall wants.

It is wrong to view this flourishing of consuser credit as a tesporary pheno-
nsnon of the recession. Since it is rooted in the structure of the sconony
itself. its continued expansion is a certainty. Rather. it any be said that
consuner credit is at last heading into s period of growth. According to
calculations by the Sanwa Bsnk's research depart-ant. asming an isprevesent
end perfecting of the systen. the outlook is for the overall consuner credit
narkot to reach the level of 80 trillion yen by the end of 1982. Of this.
consussr loans will probably expend fron their 1977 level of 5.76 trillion
yen to 15-16 trillion yen. however. even so. the proportion of coneuer

spending taken up by consussr loans will only be 5.6 percent conpared with
17 percent in the United States.

Before there can be a quantitative expansion of consular credit. systen is--
provesents are necesssry such as: (l) Expension of the target group of con-
suers; (2) sinplificstion of hendling: and (3) expansion and liberalization
of borrowing purposes. The classic exsnple of this is the bank card loan.
Moreover. the equipping of a personal credit reporting system network and a
wsrronty structure etc indispensable. Because it will be connected with the
problen of porsonsl privacy. a personal credit reporting systes in particular
involves sons very difficult aspects. but in any case it will probably take
the fern ot‘ a link-up between the National Bank Association's personal
credit dntn bsnk plan now under study and the organised credit file of the
rest of the credit industry when this is cospleted. In addition, the equip-
ping of collection organizations end a consussr protection systs- are also
likely to cause problens.

Greet Convenience Hith Interbank On-Line

Next. let us look at the forecast for individual products. first. the card
loan will probably be the heart of consuer credit for existing products.

In functional terns. for exssple. innovations such as sets of various types
of accounts; agreed upon repsynent plans; and transfer. deposit. and with-
drawnl of funds by telephone ere envisioned. Also. through interbank on-line
hookups. it will probsbly be possible to nske and repay loans at any the
through the auto-stic cesh disburssl machines of any financial institution.

Until now. the principal type of personel losn hes been s joint loen tying
together household appliance and eutenobile conpenies. Recently. Mwever.
the trend is to move away free things. that is. loans for the purpose of
purchasing specific products. toward loans for the purchase of services.
such as hospital expenses. funds for educetien or weddings. or loans for

25
roe onicm. use OllLY
The

FOR ONICIAL US! ONLY

bmmnmnaummue
' an me (l) mu

   

sgéggfgzﬁlnlﬂlﬂ

Netion'e Conn-e: Credit Syeten

1. Con-user Credit 19. Deperteent Store Cerd
“one been. 20. Inetellmt Type
Privete Pinenciel lnetitutione 21. Sm‘.11'f Maude-921:: Agency
Public Pinanciel lnetitutione TYPO "
Coupeny been 22. Coepreheneive lnetellnent
Coneueer home. etc. 23. Specific nee lnetell-ent
Pinence 26. Independent Type
Non-Inualllent two 25. Affilieted Type
Poetel 140800 26. Note: The eeti-eted unit velue
“WIN? "Mi!“ of loene outetending et the end
Inetellnent 090 of 1977 wee 10 billion yen.

Privete Pinenciel lnetitutione
Nonjoint belle

been Brokers

Selee

Non-inetellnent type

lent Credit been

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

no epecified purpose. Last year. in accord with government policy. educa-
tional loans and small sum loans were inaugurated. however. this suggests

the possibility that locns which until now have been tinged with the character
of government policy neasures. such as the low interest welfare loans. may

be introduced on a wide scale. and the crossing of policy goals and the
private nanageeent of financial institutions may becose a problsn. Home loans
account for over 80 percent of the outstanding consular credit. and this will
probably not change in the future. The inauguration of loans for older bones.
the introduction of floating interests rates. the sales of mortgage securi-
ties and sieilar aeasures will be the key to future growth. and the reali-
zation of all of these is probably not far off.

Moreover. automobile ashore and large distributions. such as depart-ant
stores. are currently switching fron traditional reliance upon credit sales
companies and banks to direct loans iron coapany funds. however. for this
type of loan an effective revolving credit for-uls will probably be central
to holding customers.

Credit sales and installment sales conpanies differ in whether or not they
have an instellnent paynent capacity. Each has exploited its special
characteristics while expanding the scope of its business. However. in the
future. a new credit systen merging the functions of both will probably be
developed in response to consumer needs. Both are putting efforts into
direct consuaer finance. attempting to offer low cost, good quality financ-
ing as an alternative to the "wage earner" loan sharks. Their future de-
velopment will be watched.

Meanwhile. with respect to new product development. with the inprovesent of
computer use technology. the developeent of all sorts of consumer credit is
said to he theoretically possible. The three resaining major problens are:
(1) Personal credit protection; (2) legal regulation: and (3) profitability.
As for l and 2. provision of facilities and adjust-eats are gradually pro-
gressing in response to the trend of the time and will probably make possible
the development of consumer credit based upon a new system such as that of
the Japan Data Center (NBC) plan.

The "DC Plan Suggests Future Direction

The NDC plan was unveiled last Novenber. “Since then. study by Japan Tele-
phone and Telegraph. financial institutions. distributors. and others has
been progressing. The essential eleacnts of the plan are: (1) shopping
service at retail stores; (2) reaittsnce by telephone instruction (Data
Phone); and (3) in-store cash advance service. The shopping service system.
which is the main pillar of the plan. is shown in the preceding figure. At
present its prospects for realization are faint. but it is believed to in-
dicate the future direction of consuner credit.

Even if the expansion of consumer credit makes life more convenient. it
does not necessarily make it affluent. The fact that the destruction of

27
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
POI OHICIAI. US! ONLY

11309 e v ewxv- a. 93“.

   
 
     
     

"KIIVO-

(11?

Ml blféiﬂﬂl')

(lurch-04:.eavuaeueumsunr-nwmun-v "Whitening
I.“ 711 t r eJ-e'aeve-rur-eovreolveheunt. amines: I t
In. elm"new.“van-amount“

Future Shopping Service Syete-

Key: 1. Bonk Cord Preeentetion 9. Individuel Haber
2. Reference Inquiry 10. lie-her Store
3. 0.x. 11. Service Center
a. Ite- Purcheee (Signeture on 12. Pinenciel. Inetitution

Selee Ticket) 13. Pinenciel Inetitution
5. Requeet (Sele- Ticket Porverded) u. Note: (I) - (3). The individuel
6. Peylent (Account Trenefer) ember ineerte the henlt cord in the
7. Deduction Breehdoun dete phone provided et the ember
8. Deduction (Account Trenefer) etore end inpute hie eecret nulber.

the purcheee price, etc. At the
eervice center, in reeponee to the
dete phone inquiry. credit out-
etending. credit record. etc ere
eutoneticelly verified, end ep-
provel or deniel of the ehoppin;
eervice uee in given.

28
m omcw. use out!
FOR ORIGIN. ”8! ONLY

whole-one living in nleo eonetinoe e denser in not due only to e eingle
"ungo corner" loen ehnrk.

Borrowing by line is linked to the future growth or eelee. but pet-ml
borrowing ie tied to retrenehnent in future living.

It in the duty of finentinl inetitutione to recognize fully the cherecter of
consumer credit no e double-edged word end to work to creete end eupport
e healthy ooneuner credit etructure by not encouregin; eeey borrowing end

any lending. At the none tine. the teetering or judicioue noney eenee by
tho coneunere will he denended nore end nore in the future.

COPYRIGHT! Klkkni-NcGntI-lllll. Inc. 1979

9‘07
080: 6105

29
FOR OFFICIAL I188 OIL!
FOR OP?IClAL US! ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

PRC CONTRACTS-oohina recently froze a nunber of plant inport contracts by
withholding the issuance of inport licenses after the contracts had been
initialed. According to a report by affected Japanese fires. the value of
the contracts froren by China total 580 billion yen as of 12 “arch. In
addition. the contracts that have been for-ally signed and that will car-
tsinly be frozen are expected to reach 50 billion yen. According to the
terns of the plant export negotiations. the contracts were to have taken
effect on the 60th day after they were signed and Japan and China were
required to issue export or ieport licenses within 60 days of the signing
of contracts. According to a survey conducted by the Hinistry of Inter-
national Trada end Industry. China had withheld the issuance of isport
licenses beyond the 60-day lisit on 20 contracts valued at 620 billion yen
es of the end of Pebruary. The total value of the frozen contracts rose to
580 nillion yen as of 12 March. In addition. 60 days have not passed since
Petroleus Refinery and Cooper works and other plant contracts totaling over
500 billion yen were signed. Thus. no contract withholding notices for
those plants have been received. however. it is certain that China will
serve withholding notices on these contracts unless the two countries agree
on financing terns. Therefore. the total value of the frozen contracts
will reach 630 billion yen. [Text] [Tokyo "IRON KEIZAI SNINBUN in Japanese
ll Mar 79 Morning Edition p l 09]

C50: 6105

30
FOR 0!?ICIAL US! OﬂlY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

BCTEﬂCF) AND TECHNOWY

LIQUID HYDROGEN TO FUEL 3-STAOB H-l ROCKET
Tokyo NIKKAN KOGYO SHINBUN in Japanese 11 Dec 78 p 5

[Text] The Space Develop-eat Cosnittee hopes to have
for-ulated by the end of March the basic plan for de-
velop-ant of the “-1 rocket which will be Japan's
Iain launch rocket in the decade after 1985. Based
on this. the Space Development Corporation (director
Yokoi Hstauura) is anxious to get started on basic
experisents on the liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen
(LN-Lox) propulsion systes which will be a key

point in the development of this rocket.

This rocket is to be developed by our own technology
to cope with the increase in the sire of stationery
satellites for meteorology. coenunicetioa. and
broadcasting. and the Lﬂ-Lox fuel technology to be
used for the second-stage engine, which we are at-
tacking for the first tine. is considered to be
state-of-the-art technology. This will not only
enhance our technological potential in space de-
velopsent. but it is hoped that the use of L8 fuel
will also produce ieportent future applications

for aircraft and autonobilas.

Plan To Use Second-Stage Rocket

The "-1 rocket is a 3-stage rocket weighing a total of 120 to 200 tons with

a capability of putting a $00 to 800 kg artificial satellite into a 36.000-hs
high stationary orbit. It will be characterized by an LB-LOX second stage
propulsion system. a more advanced guidance control systes. and furthereore.
heat-processed eateriale. the third stage eotor. and other objects will be
newly developed.

A subcoenittee of the Space Coesittee. which has been studying rocket specifi-
cations in relation to the need for practical satellites in the decedesterting

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USS ONLY

1985. is expected to have an interim report out by about the 20th. Standing
on this report. the coanittee hopes for a final decision by the end of March
of next year. since rocket specifications will vary considerably depending
on whether the launch capability is to be for a stationary satellite of the
500. 600, or 800 kg class. In other words. for a soo-kg class satellite.
currently existing N-rocket technologycanbe utilised as is for the first
stage. whereas for an BOO-kg satellite. both the second and third stages
have to be strengthened in addition to adding booster rockets to the first
stage.

There are other probleas demanding urgent consideration such as for instance.
increasing satellite size will mean higher output power and less demand on
receiving facilities. but would this be economically and technically feasible?
Also the development of the “-1 rocket contains elements of the bssictechnology
for the develop-ant of the “-2 rocket for eanned space develop-eat.

DeVelopmcnt Cost About 180 Billion men

The total develop-eat cost for the "-1 rocket is expected to be about 180
billion yen. This includes 60 billion yen for the development of a LH-LOX
propulsion system to launch a 500 kg artificial satellite. 60 billion yen
for the launch site and ground test facilities. and 60 billion yen for two
test flights in FY 1986.

There has been the opinion in some quarters as to whether it wouldn't be
cheaper to make use of American space shuttles instead of spending all of
this time and money for rocket development. Take Tsunashiea. deputy chair-
non of the Space Develop-eat Committee states however that "when considering
a practical satellite for the future. there is no assurance that shuttle
launch will be adjusted to our schedule. and also when we have to consider
the possibility of having to launch a second satellite in case of failure
of the first. it is necessary to have rocket develop-eat based on our own
technology.“ There is no denying the fact that the establishment of our
own unique technology is a necessary condition when there will naturally
ensue many probleos involving international cooperation in space develop-
sent.

Prototype Manufacture and Testing Prom FY 1980

In the "-1 rocket develop-ant schedule. research started in FY 1974 with
basic studies on the second stage engine, critical to development of the
entire system. preceding that on the first and third stages. Basic studies
on the third stage and the guidance control systeo will start in the next
fiscal year, and prototype manufacture and testing start in FY 1980.

Regarding main engine components. the Space Development Corporation is

directing and is responsible for their development. Responsible develop-
ment contractors are lshikewajioa-lierima Heavy Industry for the turbo pulp
and ether fuel propellant feed systems. Hitsubishi heavy Industry for the
nozzles and combustion chamber equipment. Nissan Auto for the third stage

32
rot omcm use can
POI ORIGIN. ”8! ONLY

solid propellant rocket. Mitsubishi heavy Industry for the second stage tanlt
and related equipnent. Nippon Electric for conputer and guidance control
synten. Koltu Denshi (Aerospace Electronics) for control sensors and related
equip-eat. Ishikawaj isa-Ilariu Heavy industry for the gas-jet control systen.
hippon lllectric and Mitsubishi Electric for radio equip-ant. and Mitsubishi
Space Systens for software for the guidance control system

Accelerated Study of the Inertial Guidance liquipnent

At present for the basic developsental testing of the second stage rocket.

its developncnt is being proaoted by an LII-Lox Engine Develop-ant Coordinating
Council forned by the Space Developnent Corporation together with the Aero-
nautical and Space Technical Research Laboratory and the Space and Aero-
nautica Research Institute of Tokyo University. The council is also pro-

noting Joint research on the inertial guidance systen and the solid pro-
pellant rocket notors.

Since the Lil-LOX engine. which will be the hero of this rocket. uses liquid
hydrogen as the fuel and 1.0)! as the oxident. cryogenic techniques involving
-250 to ~2so°c teneratures are required. This puts severe desands on the
design of the Ll! pulp. conbustion chanbers. and related equip-ant. Towards
this end. Lil punp testing is being perforned at the Tsunoda Rocket Develop-
ment Center of the Space Developnent Corporation, while a water-cooled lO-ton-
thrust combustion chanher is being tested at Hitsubishi'e Tashiro Test Site.
Various other tests are progressing on schedule as witnessed for instance

by the expected design peri‘ornance in a basic Lli rest of a 7.5-ton class
prototype Ll! puw built in FY 1976.

Scale-up and Higher Perfornance

Starting with Japan's first rocket. the pencil rocket developed by the Space
and Aeronautical Research Institute of Tokyo Univeriety in 1955. both sire
and porter-ante have increased through the Baby. Kappa (K), Lalbda (L). and
ﬂu (M) series of rockets. with s Lawbda-‘S rocket launching Japan's first
artificial satellite Osuni into space. 0n the other hand. with respect to
practical applications or rockets and satellites for space co-unicatione
and Ieteorological observation. the Science and Technology board. the
Ministry of Posts and Telecomnications. and the Ministry of Transportation
have been conducting research since 1960. and the develop-eat work has now
been taken over and pursued since 1969 by the corporation.

The N-rocket currently used by the corporation is s liquid-liquid-solid
3-stage rocket capable of launching a roughly lilo-kg stationary satellite.
The first stage has three solid propellant booster rockets. Particularly
the second stage uses Nzog-A-SO as a propellant. The next rocket in line
for developnent. nanely the "-2 model capable of launching a roughly 350-“
stationary satellite, is ailply a scale-up of the N-nodel.

33
ron onrcm. use out!

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Outline of "-1 Rocket (Sample)

       
 

Key to lagend:
~‘. 116"? mm!
(1 on

7379'»: ('3,

(1) Outline of 3-1 rocket (era-ole)

   
 
 
 
   
   
    

(2) Third stage
(3) Second stage
Min-um" 8) (6) First stage
no,» (9) (5) Faring

(6) Third stage motor
”Via-«99:» 10)

ﬂing??? (11) (7) Spin Clbl.

(8) Guidance section
may»: (12 (9) Second stage tank
“WWW-(13 (10) Adapter section

€9st

(11) Second stage engine

_ (12) First stage tank
mmun'n M16
‘ (13) Center body section

(15) Solid propellant booster rockets

W118??? (‘5 (15) First stage engine

35
m onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Main Rocket Types for 1985 and Thereafter

0n the other hand. taking into consideration energy conservation and enhanced
lift capability. the -ﬂ-l rocket to be built around an Lﬂ-LOX nonpolluting
engine is receiving closer attention es the Iain power plant for the decade
after 1985. This will also be a nilestone in Japan's future space effort
which will be working towards experilenting with uterisls in a space labora-
tory and preparing for armed flight.

In any case, the 11-1 rocket is in line with the Space Development Conittee's
concept of develop-en: using its own technology, and since this is a key

link in Japan's future space develop-ent program, the outcone is being
watched with particular interest.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha 1918

55 76 '
C50: 4105 END

36
Wk ORIGIN. USE ONLY