APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100040010-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040019-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8383
9 April 1919

TRANSLATIONS 0N SOUTH AND EAST ASIA
(FOUO 2/79)

ll S.J()ﬂ11'PllﬂJ(DAJ1CﬂHS RESEJAR¢J+ SERVHCIE

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100040019-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily fro- foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sourcea are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlines, editorial reports, and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was suanarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transiiterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or nanes preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Tines within items ue as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverll'aent.

COPYRIGT MUS AND RECUlATIONS MINING M38881? 0?
KK‘I'BRIALS 32me HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATIOI!
OF THIS PUBLICATIOI‘ IE RESTRICTED MOPFICIAL USE ONLY.
POI! Ol-‘l-‘JCIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/
9 April

TRANSLATIONS 0N SOUTH AND EAST ASIA
(moo 2/79)

Commas

CAMBODIA

Clondoouno “-1: to Pol Pot Controlled Zone Reported
(beau huh; rats "Am. 9 hr 79)....00. 0000......

JAPAN

Btlefo
Cholera Outbreak

Intonation on he Hillary units...........................
Intonation on Loo musty Unlto...........................
Infomtmn on no mtury un:t..0.00000QOOOOOOOOIOOOOOOOI.

snzwm

8:1 huh OP General Secretary Promo Soviet Antl-
coloniali-
(Pletor Kenna“; WRIST 023mm. Jan 79).. ..
FOR OFFICIAL “8! ONLY

mm

WMTNMMWMW
MOMSMMUMnch9IIr79pp3-8.10.78

[Article by m. Mom “Ce-bodian hoot -- ‘1‘) Get Into whom. e
mam-m. 1!: Get on. a Me']

[M] I left this lot-lung fro- lmteona. A colleague took ae by aotomyole
toArenyeP:athet.25moaoterotothenu-th. Ikneuthathoathuwmoa
toot.Mlleftoarlylwuldbeahletomhttnbomuthoutthenak
ofrunninsintoa‘matpatrol. Ibreover.1e1readykneuthehemtoottho
petiole in that sector. ‘l‘uo border yotrol stations, 6 monotone apart no:
eeohotm.yatmlzmoeetereoneithere1deotmeuhaee. unmthere
reauneeZmoaetez-hole. mtmaorettmlneeded. ‘nuetnontterot
caahodiamthere.5003etereeheadotae. Inubuehldidnotmnany
rioko. Ihadonlyptoaeeeedémoaetereeinoemms. Iuantedtouut
mtnnmttocoecroee. mtneaeinine. mmoﬂmeide.e5mo-
lemonade-toefieldemtedaeendldidnotteelupwmmtm
dark. Shortotloouumlmgom‘toputdomwfeet. Rhona
chancetoeeeat least eonethingupoeeihle. mteepoctany nottoloee
melfandrmintoamnouse checkpoint. Ivould wait until tourrou.

I rechecked the contents of a1 three motto-huge. One for the aedioineo.
Itieetleutaenportentutheoneuththem-endthephotoequlmt.
mix-1n. vita-due. anti-anode pine. anti-diarrhea. mt tahleto. mm-
vel rations. Another with two carton of cianttee and eoaa clean m
wear. Altmfe. eooapau. enpandaoanteen. luththeheat. Iknewthat
one can hold out for e 10!! the without eating. but without drinking? I
onlyhadtuter. Inprmciple. Imeuppoeedtommeeuatereupply
points. I: I named to penetrate tar mush. nor-e11: they dwuld not fire
etuvithoutanungaemtt ”dictum. mmtdirectionand
howlsot theme. ‘meanouldluveeohence. Ihedeoaehottymlteaea

noteinnnu': "Ia-ahenchreportera Imuldnketotailktoheeident
Pol not."

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

mm. 7|” ‘s.e

‘l‘hatis it. Igot through. Ifselliketheworstisover. dodwaswithse.
Nowalliewell. Iwesdyingtrosheat.butthesunhsdnothingtodowith
it. Inadegoodprogress: -Ismtbe7or8kilosetersinsidecanbodia.on
the other side of the sine field.

then I started across. one feet beoase self-evident. I know who I love. I
knowwhoIholddear. Atestoftruth. UitheeohstepItook. wleftfoot
said "goodbye" to I, right foot. and so on. I could not sansge to unglue
my eyes fro- the ground. appraising the slightest sound. the slidttest busp.
‘n‘ysslnighttopmuedesyselfthstlwaswrong. thattlnsdneswhiohhsd
been planted lb years ago would have beoose perfectly integrated with the
topography. I went on trying to guns the location of death under the grass.

After500seters. Ideoidedthsthasluokyandealkedonstx-elghtup.
preferring to look only for the traces of fire which logically should have
mde the aineeexplode underthesffectofttnheet. Inplacestherewere
seall craters. a few dosen oentiseters wide and appmxintely 20 centineters
deep. Probauy refugees who were not lucky. Ihe traps. on the other hand.
were visible. ‘mickets. the branches weighed down by the rain and drought
of a years. Sons of then were veritable pits. 2 noters long and equally
deep. with basboo spikes stuck onto then. Others were esaller. M to 50
centiweters. but sufficient to espals oneself.

Alongthetrail. Ialsocmssedttwrealboder.theailitaryborder. uses
which had been out down on the spot. entwined with bushes. over a width of
sons 20neters. cutbynarmwpassogsstogotluough. Ihsdbsentoldthat
the Inner petrol stations were only about 20 monsters inland. ‘lhst was
not true. I saw two of thee. M ehelterlike stmctures. trues-quarters
underground. One of then was elptn as for the other. fertlnr away. I
watched it for a few sinutee. nothing. No apparent activity. ”be they
were sleeping. I knocked down a trap. a trunk spiked with basboo spears.
hanging between two trees. A cowplicatsd systes of counterbalance. but the
tip of sq foot was sufficient to topple it. During the day it would have
been impossible not to see it. At night ey skull would have been bashed in.
my first picture in Casbodia.

honday evening.

I have walked well. A rate of append-etch 1% or 5 kilo-stars an hour.
Since norning. I have counted 18 bodies on u way. It was ilpossible to
saywhetherureywereciviliensornuerenouges. whethertheywerekilled
by bullets or died of illness or emanation. has only things left of thee
are a few shreds of clothins attached to sose bones. and a skull. But if
Isawiaofthenonnylinsofwalk. Iiseginetlnresusthsvsbeensany
wore scattered about on u left and on up right. I platographed the first.
a child. mostly to give ”self professional ootfort. After all. I wee
there to take pictures.

2
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

mesday evoning.

I as going to die of thirst. mllowing sy idea of avoiding villus“. I have
also avoided water supply points. It is the dry season. I know scaething
about that. I as thirsty. I crossed the beds of several rivers: nothing
but earth. I can no longer swallow anything. I tried to chew a vitaain
tahlet. but the pieces stayed on my tongue. dry as sand. I spit out part of
it. which I had to got out of u south with sy fingers. ’me rest lodged it-
self in sy throat for a few ainutes. without halting. It say be a aistake.
but I an sacking constantly. It is the only thing which is still going
through. If I do not find any water tenor-row. I will have to mks a decision.

Usdneeday sorning .'

Neusetryingtoeat. lothinggoesinanysore. ‘lhirst. thirst. Icannot
hold out such longer. I will walk a little sore. to the limit. Who M
then. by chams. luck ... I will find water. 3y evening I will know.
According to sy calculations I not he approxisately 80 kiloaeters east of
the border. It is not yet quite daylight. I preferred to start off "re-
ﬂushed."

Iaathirsty.AndIaasxhsustsdhecauseIasthirsty.Rothavstoaake
a decision. 1o go any further is ispossit‘.e for so. lloroover. there is no
reason for as to believe that I will find water further on.

Mareﬂnre. 200aetersaheadofae. IthinkIwillgossethss. ‘lhey
are wot-him in the rice fields. mess are prohahly ny last ainutee of free-
dos. mtIanscverythirety. Soaeofthesarenctworkiu. ‘meyseeato
be keeping an eye on the others. Apparently nchody is arned. Ihus. they
will not shoot as without listening to es. Besides. at one point or another
I will have to case out of hiding «may. I had thouaat I Mt get farther.
at least to 200 or 300 kiloaeters. Here. I met be about 110 kilcastsrs
anyfroa‘mailmd. Ifcnlthadwater! ‘Doohad! Icannctgohackthe
way I case. ﬁrst of all. I would not have the strength for it and. secondly.
Indethewholetripteseethea. well.heregoes! IhisiswhatIcaae
for.

Hednesday evening.

So far. so good. me surprise effect went beyond ay expectations. First.
those intherice field. Vhentheysawse walking toward thee. appearing
outcfncwhere. asifIhadcosscutoftheground. theycaaeuptcas.
They searched as and appropriated the contents of ay ausette-hags. There
were two of thee. Overseers. ‘lhsy divided up the spoils: asdicines.
cigarettes. knife. Ihsy let as keep the cassras. which I was carrying over
thsshouldsr. andallthefils. ‘lhenttwytooksetcthechisfoftha
ailitia. Obviously. the latter could not understand it. A foreigner.
alone. on foot. 110 monsters inside the country. A hrtian in the aiddls
cf the French countryside would not have had as great a success. I i-e-
diately showed his u slip of paper: "I as a French reporter: I would

3

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

like to nest with President Pol Pot." Pros that aoaent onward I becaae
nearly untouchable. He did not know what to do with as. The none of Pol
Pot was like an electric stuck. I took advantage of w saall effect to fill
any canteen at the well. I saptied it ooapletely. in one gulp and filled it
again. W aorale returned at ones.

He took as to a political ooaaiesar. I had already understood one thing
about the organisation of the Khmer Rouge: their clothing is a function of
their iaportanoe. The nest wretched ones, the civilians. the sea. the when.
the elderly. have tattered gar-onto. hon one day to the nert. with the
advent of the regias. all the clothing was dyed black. Four years later
thiehadtmedintoallehadesofsrey. TheailitiaandtMoverseerwere
also barefoot. like the civilians. but they were wearing plain black Manes.
andoftenaho cap. The nilitiawaenot arsed. 'mennersnoms. the
soldiers. had raw rubber sandals and a weapon. the Chinese AK ‘67. The poli-
tical coaaissar had an auteaatic pencil.

mating the hour long walk to so see the latter. I aanaeed to take my first
pictures secretly. discreetly. Finally. I had aade it. I was taking pic-
tures. That is n profession.

Thursday .

The hierarchy between the various categories is very distinct. First. at
the top of the pyraaid. the Chinese liners. They are cos-issue or ailitary
coaaanders. Below. the Khaere Rouse. soldiers. for the seat part kids.
Average age: 17 years. but aany of then are very young. 12 to is years old.
Below then. the ailitia and the overseere. These are not arsed. As a rule.
they cone i‘roa areas already under lhner Rowe control during Lon Nol's
regiae. Sonatiaee. around the ace of 25 or N years. for-er soldiers becoae
ailitianen. Finally. at the very bottea. the civilian. the slave. the one
who is afraid of everything and of everyone. For the aasters. he is only
an instruaent. a shovel or a pickers. and does not deserve any acre consider
ation. He could die of exhaustion. of illness. of hunger: it is not in-
portant! It is only a tool at one bowl of rice a day!

Saturday. 3 February.

I an asking the tour of the political officials. ‘lheir importance increases
by the day. As long as no one aaone then considers hiaself strong enough
to make a decision about as. I will be fine. W case is coapletaly beyond
then. If I continue to cliab the hierarchy as I have. I say finany get to
neet Pol Pot. All the interrogations are the seas. Asian patience and
series. A politeness which does not reassure as as. with the ease sails.

the seas face. they night announce that they will gently take as back to the
border or that they will shoot as within a ainute.

Always the seas question:
- who are you working for?

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

- I u as French reporter. I work for e hench marine. PARIS HAM.
- Yes. but who ere you working for. the Russians or the Anericene?

They ere convinced that I en working for sons power or other. men I hevo
to tell then the story of w life.

Sunday.

Yesterday evening. violent Vietneneee artillery fire conpelled us to retreet
Skiloeetere. ‘lhenextdny. anemottinecldiereendlretmedtothe
sens spot. lIo possibility et ell for en attack by the [More Bougee ...
Mover the Vietneneee went to. the country will be theirs!

Howey.

Thie homing. I was entitled to the weekly noming of rest. Five hours of
politicel speeches. Ihe co-ieeer honored ne with hie neetinc. He scored
delighted to see we teking pictures of his eudience. There were “.000 people.

Saturday .

Itiethei’irsttinethetIhsvekepttheseneteentoecconpenyne. Six
youngpeople. meyounseetisIZyeu-eold. llecen’ieehisAKWQunes
ifhehedbeenbornwithit. Heneverleeveeit. ‘nxechiefiei'lyeere
old; heieeteeeeonlywhenIeninehut. ﬂewouldlikenetosleepee
nuchespossibleeothntrncenkeepleeeofeneyeonne. Ieeterdsy'e

politicelcomseerie with us. heiewelkingtco. Walkinaietheonly
neensoi‘ conunicetioninthie country. Ididnotseeesinsle vehicle.

except for 3 Jeep which was being pushed by e pletoon like e wegon without
oxen.

mesday.

Thietine itisellover! ‘l'heytockeweywcueres. Icennolongerwcrk.
‘me couiseer wee inﬂexible. I nearly begged his to let so keep et leeet
one: "It is the only thing which still connecte us with the outside. It
is the only reeson why I cue here." nothing doing. He took everything
may. Including the file. It was tortunnte thet I had sonowtnt forseen
this. For eeverel days. I prepared u trick. All the exposed rolls: in
w briefs. I hnd nlreedy rolled up n total of sbout 20 unused rolls of
fun. including the enell leaders. like exposed till. I had also put
nubere on then. 1 objected e crest deel es s utter of fan end especme

to keep hin free loom elsewhere. It worked. me political co-isssr
intorned ne thet inquiries ere being nude ebout ne. lie told no that it

would teke e nininun of 3 scnths end probably 6 soothe before they would
get a response. I en not too excited sbout waiting!

5

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

many.

For 3 days I have been watching the habits of sy guards. more are eight
now. and they are equipped with an electric lsnp which has Just been brought.
No spot is right for an escape. ’Ihsre is always soaething which does not
work. Never twice the ease spot. Still. I have to lake a decision. It has
to be here!

'lhs guards are staying in front of the Muse. They never go in the back. On
that side there is a serious obstacle. ‘lhere are leaves on the ground. as
large as fans. which asks a dreadful racket. I have gathered myself a pile
of rocks. Pretty soon I will asks ny sows. I will throw the rocks through
the window onto the leaves. and I will quickly get back to u observation
post and see if the kids havs roasted. I hope that by the tenth one they
willhavegottsnusedtoit. Itwillbsuptonetonekethenexteove.

Hy susette-hsg is ready and ny canteen is full.

Saturday.

Only a short quarter of an hour to catch ay hrssth. I do not care about

the physical effort, about the tiredness. needs- is at the end. I have to
cover sore than half the way in one stretch. Ihey will nsVsr find as. My
trick has worked. The kids Junped at the first noise in the leaves. By the
eighth tise it was over. 'lhey no longer reacted. I node a dash for it.

Fifty esters. I stopped for a few seconds to listen to the reaction. Nothing.
AtleastI thoughtso. bscsussall Icouldhssrwssuheartheatinginny
”most. I ran to the forest ... And I have been walking for 10 hours.

Saturday. 10 February. Lets afternoon.

I did it ... I did it! I have returned iron Gasbodia The nines. once
I got in then I paid no sore attention. I use convinced that I would be
lucky A woman working in the fields: she was wearing red clothes ...

Icrossed into'lhailsnd. Isstdowninthegrsse ... Inthesky. themds
were ﬂying back and forth over the border. graceful. tree.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL IISB ONLY

P1010 CAPTIONS

i. p (1)
nor the first tise. a reporter snow the Khsere houses.

Our special correspondent. Denis Reich. spent a fortnight in the Casbodia

of the Khaers houses after having clandestinely crossed 5 kiloseters of nine
fields. 'lhe only per-sit he had was a sheet of paper on which the following
words had been written in Cambodian: "I as a French reporter. I would like
to seet President Pol Pot." At the ears sention of this dreaded nase. Denis
Reich was received with a sixtnre of caution. apprehension. distrust and
sosetises even good husor. Finally. having been kept prisoner for 3 dnys. he
sanaeed to escape and to get back to Thailand alone and on foot. Hie report
tells about the euteiseion of a people. shout a tar of me against Vietnasese
tanks. as well as his own edventure. his solitude and his fear.

2. p (2)

These cavalrysen iron another age. arsed with Soviet ems. are the elite
troopeofthelhsarshouges. 'lhispatrol waspmtographedbyoun-specinl
correspondent. less than 1 kiloseter m. the Vietnaseee front.

3. p (3)
A whole people subject to the law of the gun.

‘lhese pictures are docments. ‘lhey testify to the poverty and the enslave-
sent of the Khser people. They w-re taken freely In our special correspondent.
Denis Reich. whose actions nobody dared to criticise after he had pronounced
thedresdednaseofPolPot. antheroad. hetellsus. Ihovecoseacroes
endlesscolunscfciviliane ontheirwnytowcrk. Islsogottoknowon
the spot the very clear hierarchy of the new Ihser society. At the top of
the pyrasid. there are the mo-Qiinese. political oonissars or silitary
cossanders. Below. there are the soldiers. soatly kids. whose average age
is 18 years. Sose of then are berely 12 years old. Ihder this silitary
category. there are also the silitiasen and the overseers. bees are not
arsed. ‘bst of than are peasants who have been indoctrinated in the "me"
zonebythenuersacmsm-thetiseofetnuleeadnstthebonﬂol
resins. Finally. at the bottos of the pyrasid. there is the snow-om sass
of the slaves. They are neatly townspeople. none of when have the right to
pronounce their real nase. 1hey only have the right to be called "co-rade.”
As the fasilies have been systesstically dispersed or seesacred. the children
mlonssrevenknowtheirnaseormtheirparentsare. Ferrel Potand
his cops. this laboring population of slaves is the crucible in mich will
bepouredthenewssn. theperfectnn. the conunistsaninwhosenasethey
work to death a whole people. a people whose only law henceforth is the
whisofaguardandthepoint ofabayonet.

7
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These peasants are going to the fields in a wagon. 'lhe arsed guard who
accoapanies then will not leave then the whole day.

'lhsse slaves. who are walking single file on their way to work in the rice
fields. were townspeople. Separated from their fanilies. they work 12 hours
a day. For one bowl of rice.

1*. p (1})

mese fenalo soldiers belong to the privileged class of the were Ranges.
This picture was taken in the region of Battanbang.

5- p (5)

It was before this audience of 16.000 slaves. l0.000 unfortunate people tired
out from work. faaished. that our special correspondent had to sake a speech
in French at the request of the political ccuissar. ‘lhe speech was retrans-
mitted by a hone-ads loudspeaker (on the right on the table. in the picture).
The battery which allowed this apparatus to work was in fact an old car
battery. The audience listened patiently to Denis Reich's speech in which
he hadtorepeatthelessontheyhadtsuhthis. hobodydarsdtoadnitcr
to show that he (or she) understood or spoke Ranch. Since the takeover of
power by the moors houses. the intellectuals have been systeaatically
sliainated. Anyone who can read is suspect. Besides. these unfortunate
people were too exhausted to have any reaction at all. they knew that they
were going to go back to the fields and work for hours for a bowl of rice.
Thus. the elininstion of anyone who has the least little'bdt of knowledge.
the systeaatic exhaustion through work and hunger. have caused a whole country
to regress. while all the ‘mird \lorld countries are fighting illiteracy

and advocate schooling. Pol Pet's Gubodis has abolished schools. “to” is
no longer any other education than political indoctrination. As for the
books which survived the auto-ds-fe of the takeover of power by the [hears
Rouges. they have been torn up page after page to be used as cigarette paper.

6- p (6)
After 12 hours in the fields. 2 hours of propaganda.

Speech by the political coaaissar. Our special correspondent in turn had
to sake a speech in trench. The audience. “.000 unfortunate people. did

not react. ‘l'ney knew that they would havo to work another 8 to 10 hours

to earn a bowl of rice.

7. p (8)

Our special correspondent. nenis neich. and the more Rouges. 'lhe two on
the left are only 12 years old.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 par Cogedipresse SA

8663 8
(ISO: 6200 FOR, OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY

JAmN

BRIEFS

CROLBRA Oln‘BRBAK-daobetere imported from Indoneeia and aerved by a wedding
hall in Tokyo were the min cause of a mu cholera outbreak acare that
evept acroaa the country last fall, according to a preliminary report by
the Tokyo metropolitan government's panel of epidemiologieta. The panel

agreed the lane day to draw up its final conclusion on hr 7. [Text]
[Tokyo mnucm DAILY N338 in Englilh 1 hr 79 p 12]

680: 5600

FOR OFFICIAL 083 ML!
Renarka

lield a carnony on 3 February to open a
nilitary specialized twining courae.
Participanta engaged in agricultural
production while atudying. (14 Feb 79)

Attended political and cultural claaaea
aince January 1979. (16 Feb 79)

ﬁeld claaaea to atudy U'LA traditiona
aince early February 1979. (15 Peb 79)

Attended a apacialired and cultural

training courae. Alao engaged in agri-
cultural production. (15 Feb 79)

Reviewed achuvuanta over the peat
3 yeara. (21 Peb 79)

lleld neeting 8 February to diacuaa l979
aporta eventa. (21 Feb 79)

Report on 1978 acbieveaenta in carrying
out patrol activitiea, printing docuenta.
vaccinating people, atudying politica.
repairing bouaea. planting cropa and
raiaing aninla. (20 Feb 79)
M OFFICIAL US! OIL!

Any Factory me

Any Ganent Factory
Vientiane

'9‘ N8"
Vientiane

Any Kueic land

Any Sporta Corpa

Political Office
Viang Sai kegion

Peace-keeping Training School

Any Production Unit I 3
Central legion

Diaeaaea Control Unit of

Any Logietice Deparnent'e Piedical
Section in Vientiane

Co-unicationa Unit
Any Staff Deparnant in Vientiane

’n 99A"
Vientiane

Poeition Defenae Coupany attached
to Peace-keeping Porcea Co-nnd.
lauang Prahang

Any Uoodle Factory
Vientiane

Any Medical Training School
Northern Region in Louang trahmg

lieu Souang leaervoir Conatruction

Unit attached to legiatica Dept.
Vientiane

ll

Produced traditional nedicine, food
in l970. (19 tab 79)

Produced over 5,000 unitona in peat
eonth. (19 Pet» 79)

Adopted a reeolution to carry out work
at 19 January 1979 aeating. (19 Feb 79)

Attended political couree 7-ll tebruary
1979 and engaged in agricultural
production. (22 tab 79)

Organised eporta activitiaa and attended
political training claeeee in 1976.
(22 Peh 79)

lleld a care-any 3 tahruary for co-enda-
tion of cadree and couhatanta. (22 Veh 79)

Achieve-onto in 1978. (16 Pet: 79)
Vieited by the Executive Co-ittaa of the
Patriotic Leo Uouen'a Union or the Any
on 7 Pehruary 1979. (16 tab 79)
Achieve-ante in apecialixed work in
1978. (16 tab 79)

Scored achieve-ante in 1978. (23 Pet 79)
Coupletad in atudying politica in
Pehruary 1979. (26 Feb 79)

Carried out epecialieel taeka. booated
production in January. tehmary 1979.
(26 Val: 79)

hulated in producing noodlaa in
February 1979. (25 fab 79)

Studied uedical docuanta in Pebruary l979.
(25 Feb 79)

Iuilt a raeervoir in January. l’ebruary
1979. (25 Yet 79)

M OFFICIAL 08! our
Haa transplanting dry aaaaon rlca
lo Fabruary 1979. (26 Fab 79)

Ravlavad 1978 achlwalanta 20 February
1979. (2‘ Feb 79)

Revlavad 1978 achlavuanta lo Pabruary
1979 and opanad a cupalsn for nan
achleveunta. (26 l’ab 79)

Scored achlavmnta ln 1979. (27 Fab 79)

Attandad political courua: amlnad
and curad patlanta. (28 hb 79)

Spaclallud tachnlcal Iaatln; andad
26 Iahruary 1979. (28 Fab 79)

Attandad political. Illltary claaaaa
baslnnlns 12 Pabruary 1979. (2 Mar 79)
mm

1978 eporte ectlvlttee reported
(5 lit 79)

Pleated treee, releed plu eloce eerly
Jen (lo 7hr 79)

Herveeted rlce eod other trope. releed
eat-lo to 1978 (6 lit 79)

Accepted lore Indore tn oer-my on
22 Ieb 79 O Ihr 79)

IIerveeted rlce, pleated vegeteblee,
bullt houeee for people to I978
(3 Her 79)

Opened coltorel trelnln; Jen, no 1979
(3 Her 79)

lepelred. built hooeee. hemeted crope
to 1978 (l Ieb 79)

Built lumen. repelred vehtclee. roede
pleated trope (l tel: 79)
POI OHICIAL USE ONLY

Gunrrillae in liaueu 8antai
lloua man Province

Reception lhit
Vientiane

Engineering In
on Route 7

Gonetruction Unit
Northern lesion in loouang Praban;

Political Training School
Arty Political Department.
Vientiane

Inuans Praban; Northern
Regional co-nd

Prov inc ial iii litary Con-end
'Savannakhe t

Codeined Specialized “at School
of LPIA Logietice Depertnent

Politicel Office 0! liilitary
(to-and of Ilse-ouan Province

motography Unit
Arw Political Depart-eat

Projection ‘raan
Aruy Political Depart-out.
Vientiane

Pile Projection Unit under
Xien; mourn liilitary Region

LEA Aninal liuebendry Unit
Xien; niouang legion

Any Culturel School
Vien; Sai

Local alert-idea of 8ivilai.
Pahean Cantone, Peban Dietrict
(Io-end

Attended political and cultural couraee
vorked in agricultural production in
1978 (l lob 79)

Attended political and cultural coureee,
repaired ecboole. cleared land. planted
vegetablee, fruit in me (3 Feb 79)

Built houeee, repaired roade, vehiclee.
luilt bridgee in l978 (1 Feb 79)

iiald Cerenony on 16 Jan to-reuiev
achieve-elite. open new canpaisn
(22 Jan 79)

Celebrated 30th LPIA anniverecry on
18 Jan (25 Jan 79)

Nailed outet-Idin; unite on 16 Jan
(26 Jan 79)

_0r;anixed two nilitary and political

training coureee in 1979 (2‘ Jan 79)

Officially opened 3 liar for l000 etu-
dente (6 lhr 79)

Scored achievemta in food production,
conetruction work in 1978 (6 lhr 79)

Fulﬁlled epeculited taste in Feb

- (6 liar 79)

Preeanted file ehoue to varioue Any
unite in Peb (6 liar 79)

Shared film to local mite in Jan-
Pab (7 lhr 79)

Built houeee, cleared land (7 hr 79)
lleld ceremony on D-lb Peb to review
achieve-nu (7 liar 79)

lhld tactical training for conbat.

peace-keeping dutiee for 60 pereonnel
iron 2-8 Jan (7.". ll Jan 79)
M ORIGIN; US! ONLY

Non Pek Locel Forces
xieng Khousng Province

No Ihlt

Locel Guerrilles oi ‘l‘ssseng lhno
lieueng Loueng Prebeng District,
LP Province

Regionel Arud Forces
Heueng Sentei, llous hen Province

Regionel Arnd Porces
Heueng lious lhusng. nous Phen
Province

Production Ihit lo 5

no "on"
Centrel Region

Arty Livestock Reieing, Crop
mltivetion Unit
Xieng Drousng Province

Any mblishing House
Vientiane

Public Security Porce
Heusng Vspi, Ssrsvene Province

Any lend
Vlnnt iene

Construction Unit under
Die-mun Provinciel (Io-end

Logistics Office under
the-ouen Provincisl Co-snd

(:80: 5206

W of teules end enti-eircreit
urchins gun (smut: macs 5 Jen 79
p 3)

mom of jet eircrsit of Leo Air Porce
pertielly obscured by people. (81AM:
mason 23 Jen 79 p 3

Proe 7-l0 Jen 79, to personnel (includ-
ing 3 uo-n) received treining in pence-
lzeeping work iron locel District end
Province Hilitery Co-nd (um SAN
Mtlll'i' 1A0 26 Jen 79 p M)

Stepped up petrol ectivitiss, boosted
production in l978 (l3 lhr 79)

Plented fruit trees. sterchy crops in
Pet: (13 Her 79)

Studied politicel, nilitery. speciel-
iced subjects, pro-noted production
(13 In: 79)

Puliilled, specielited tesks. pronoted
production, helped people in pest 2
nonths (13 Her 79)

Boosted production in Peb (12 lhr 79)

Printed donnents, engeged in egri-
cultursl production in Pet: (ll Her 79)

Conducted petrol operetions Jen-Pen
(ll Her 79)

Ilsrvested dry seeson rice since 7 Her
(10 Her 79)

Built, repsired houses. verehouses
(10 Her 79)

‘i‘rsnsported goods. built. repsired
vsrehousss. hervssted rice lest yesr
(l0 tier 79)

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

INFORMATION (I! LAD MILITARY UNITS

LAOS

The foilovin; infomtion on Loo ni1itory unite voo entrocted iron
Vientione Doneetic Sorvico hroodcooto in Loo ot 0‘00 our un1ooo othervioe
noted on tho dotoo indicoted. or (to. Loo prooo notoriel oo indicetod.
Unit dooipotoro and locotiono ore oo given. The rourko inc1udo o hriuf
many of the infornotion ovoiloblo in tho oourco.

mg

m "A"
Vientiane

LPLA Auto Repair Shop
Vientiono

Projection Unit. on Co-ond
Office. Northern Region

‘l'oooeng Pekhok Guerrillo Unit
Henna; Sion; "gem. Luong
Probeng Province

Dietrict hi1itory Unit
Houons Soi Dietrict. Oudo-oi
Province

‘l‘oeoen; Phon Then We
Guerrilla. llouo muons
Diotrict. noun Phon Province

£21m.

Attondod politicol couroe on 12 Horch
(16 Nor 79)

Scored ochiovo-nto in opeciolicod work
oinco only 1979 (16 Nor 79)

Showed til-o to unite in lebruory
(1‘ Her 79)

Severn hundred troope including 69
voaen received tocticol troinin; in
pace-keeping took. They voro troinod
by Heuon; Sien; noun legionol lorcee
co-end (KNOW rm LAD 30 Jon 79)

$ucceeo£u11y perfor-d pace-keeping
dooiono. otudiod ond perfor-d tocticol
training. Attoqted to becone eel!-
ouificiont (810“: Pm 5 rob 79 p 1)

upended their orunirotion to note 2
coqonioo: one Inbilo. one ototic.
Hero givon S doy couroo in codut tec-
tico end pence-keeping work by louo
Noun; Diotrict legionol minty On.-
an!) (0108” um LAO 7 ten 79

P

16

m ORIGIN. US! MY
M OFFICIAL ()8! ONLY

lltory

oond

at

School

otpo

Rooolvod guooto. plutod fruit trooo
(16 an 79)

Attonded polltlcol courooo loot yoor
(16 “or 79)

llold nootlng for lccol codroo/colbotonto
(ton 5 to 12 Hotel: to otudy molutlon
of 6th Plonun of cc (17 Hot 79)

Cutod potlonto loot yoor (17 Ho: 79)

Studlod 6th Iooolutlon of cc olnco
6 Notch (19 “or 79)

Studlod polltlco. ulltory ond opoclol-
lood oubjocto. boootod productlon in
out 2 nontho (19 Hot 79)

Bold coronony l7 Notch to nork conclu-
olon of courooo (20 Hot 79)

ﬂold nootlng on 13 Notch to otudy tooo-
lutlon of 6th Plan- (21 Hot 79)

Attondod clooooo to otudy tooolutlon of
6th Plonul (21 Hot 79)

Prodncod 37.263 bottloo of “oh oouco
in Jonuoty-l'obruoty (21 Hot 79)

lull: houooo. ropolrod roodo. vohlcloo
tronoponod goodo, curod potlonto.
homotod dco. rolood onlnolo in 1978
(22 Hot 79)

Cloond load ot Non Souon; Don olto
(22 Hot 79)

Ballot“ to com out opoctollxod :ooko
(22 Hot 79)

Hold trolnln; contoe to otudy rooolutlon
of 6th Flow. of potty Control Co-lttoo
(2‘ Hot 79)

Scoud ochlovo-nto thlo you ll: food
producclon. public «Moo votk
(25 no: 79)

17

M 03716141. 03! 0'“
"u 30 "A"
Central Region

Coqany "3" attached to Ground
Artillery In "Y" in Sayahoury
l’rcvince

Medical Cadree. Priaary
Ko-adaa School. Southern
Region

I!“ Agricultural Settle-
aent ll. Vientiane

Ko-adaa Priaary School
Southern legion

LPLA Air Defenee in "A"
Vientiane Capital

Auto ‘l‘ranaport In
Southern legion

Mechanized Conny. 236
Agricultural Settle-out,
Southern Region

Infantry in "A"
Southern Region

Art and Literature Troupe of
Political Office, Central
Region

Hekong River Trenaportation
Unit. Vientiane

In "NC"
Haueng Sing lgun. Northern
Region

Infantry in ”A”
Vientiue

Varioue Conatruction Unite
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Military Training School
Viangaak Region

LPLA Con-and. Lakhonpneng
Matrict. Seravene Province

LPLA llotorired Tranaport
Unit "GR." Vientiane

LPLA Ground Artillery Bn "A"
Vientiane

Mekong 'l'raneport Route Unit
Any Logiatice Depart-ant.
Vientiane

Regional Porcea. Chaqhon
Diatrict. Savannakhet Province

Local Guerrillae of Hnnaaai.
Pholek Cantone. [ha-wan
Province

LPLA Infantry in "S"
Vientiane

LPLA Ground Artillery in "a!"
Vientiane

Air Force Co-and
Vientiane

u" "n”
Route 9 Conatruction Corpe

Central Region Co-and

60: 6206

Opened training courae for 100 atudenta
on 22 January (30 Her 79)

Organized political training for local
guerrillee in two cantone in February
(31 Her 79)

Scored achievenenta in apecialired
taalta iron January to March (31 Mar 79)

Cleared land (or cropa laet nonth
(31 Mar 79)

Cowleted 90 percent of aecond big boat
(l Apr 79)
Carried out eecurity taeta in peat (av

nontha (l Apr 79)

Carried out aecurity duty in firat 3
aontha oi l979 (1 Apr 79)

Organised political training (or cedrea.
codatanta 30 March (1 Apr 79)

Coqleted irrigation cenal (1 Apr 79)

Marked official cloaing of internadiate
engineering courae 28 March (2 Apr 79)

Organized cultural claeaea (2 Apr 79)

Bald training couraea to etudy reeolu-
tion of 6th Plenu of Central thee
(2 Apr 79)

19

”I OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

nu um

8” WM 0? OHM SWAIN MB SOVIET mummy!

mum". xmmr mmawm in Ruooion llo 1. Jon 79 lipid to proo-
u Jon 79 pp 85-66

{NWT} mm mm nrtiolo "upooiolly for mm wmsmw w
Piotor Kano-n. connl ooototnry of tho Omani-t My of 8:1 hula.
in tho oolum ”hon tho Lifo of 0min. mi Iatkm' Pix-tin": 'Tho
Gmnntoo of m: Viotwioo']

[mo] Sixty you! ogo throo-tourth at tho globo m occupiod w
colonic. oo-i-oolmioo. doniniono. And dopomlont torritwioo. Toby tho-o
for- of coloniol rulo hovo vita-ll: “app-rod fool tho “no of tho
oorth. All thin no ndo poooihlo In tho victory of tho Grut Ootohor
Sooioliot Rovolution. which lod to tho landing of oooioliol in tho man
all tho clot-3mm or o world oooioliot oyotoo.

Tho Octobor Revolution mm About tho doclino of tho oo-alloll sold-I
ogo of ooloniolin. 1t nrkod tho hoginnim of tho orioio of tho oolminl
oyltoo. on inml wt of tho small orioio o! oopdtnlion. and oorvod
u o tino. impiring mplo to opprooood pooplu. Grout Ootohor
«zoom-Icon thou- hopo a! victory our! guo tho- contidnco in thoit oltn
nix-15th. ‘lhoy our in Boviot huh o not onto. o not your. an.
roJootod tho policy of colonnl cannot ond onloitotiax on! no o truo
mm or on tho not-o oppooood.

V. I. Lonin not C11, oubJootod inpciAlion to o ociontitio only“. but oloo
worked out tho hole lino of tho onti-iupotioliot otnulo. and olwoyl
ootivoly oupportod onto-uni pooploo. Ho mto tiory Articl- in dorm-o
of tho revolution in Inn. Mo). And Chino thot Iroko out otter tho
Rusoinn Rovolution of 1905 on! local o bond politial coop-in in

oupport o! ”oak-tin Aoio.“ V. 1. Latin null: cello-nod column
tynnny in Innis. knot. and othor countrioo. In tho at);

20th cmtury tho My of Lain m tho only politiool prty to oupport

tho rovolutionory mount in Aoio.

ludiotoly {ollaim tho tomloo of tho ilporioliot intmmtiu mi tho
victory our intorml canton-ovulation. tho ym Soviot ototo moron ito

20

F0! 0?!!an USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

help and eupport to neighboring otetee in their etrmle eaeinet
colonieliee. With the Nildim of eocieliee Soviet eeeietence to
netionel libereticn eoveeente beceee lore ooepreheneive.

In the yeere preceding Ucrld Her 11 the politicel end ideologicel
influence of the October Revolution on the peoplee of the coloniel end
dependent countriee increeeed etill further.

The Soviet Union wee not effected by the generel cepiteliet crieie of the
1930:», which further inpoveriehed the peoplee of the coloniel end
dependent comtriee. Thie fhct incrueed the eteture of the USSR in their
eyee. ee did the epeechee of the Soviet Union'e Leegue of hetione
repreeentetivee in eupport of the netionel eepiretione of the colcniel
end depmdent peoplee.

During \lorld her II the Soviet Unim ado odor-cue eecrifioee end
pleyed e decieive role in defeetin; the root eureeeive detechemte of
world ieperieliem Ger-en end Itelien fieciee in Iurope end Jepeneee
niliteriee in Mie. Iith the defeet of feeciee ceee the victory of
eocieliet revoluticne in e nueber of Mopeen end Aeien ccuntriee end
the forntion of e world eocieliet eyetee.

Since 1957 douhe of ccuntriee with e populetion of ebout 1.5 hdllion
people heve eohieved politicel independence. Soee of theee countriee hed
to use en erred etru‘gle egeinet their ieperieliet oppreeecre, while
othere echieved independence without reeortim to weepone. But ell of
thee innriehly eede use of the eorel. politicel. or eeteriel euppcrt of
the Soviet Union. ‘I’hie noble eieeion widerteken by the vase ie well Imam.
The Soviet Unim'e trad end eultifeceted eeeietence to the peoplee of
Aeie end Afr-ice in their ctr-ugh for independmce will never be forgotten.

The 0583 has inveriebly helped thee withetend ieperieliet etteepte to
export counterrevolution. heplee ere the Soviet Union‘e eeeietence to
Egypt in repelling ieperieliet eureeeion in 1956 end to Syrie end Jcrden
during the lereeli eggeeeicn of 196?; end of course the ccepreheneive
eeeietence end euppcrt of the Soviet Union for the heroic end victorioue
etruule of t;.e Vietnueee people eaeinet the eareeeicn of the United
Stetee of Aeerice.

Nowedep the veJority of young etetee heve coneolideted their politicel
independence. It will therefore be correct to eey thet the echievenent

of econoeic independence. eociel progreee. end e thorough eocioeconceic
treneforeeticn ie the new case of the netionel libereticn etruesle.

Such e eequence of ovate fully confirm Lenin’e theeie tut the netionel
liberetion etuule doee not end with the winning of politicel independence
but ccntinuee an toweni the echieveeent of full eccnoeic independence end

eociel prop-coo.

Experience he ehcwn thet thie new etege will epperently leet longer end
he eore difficult then the previous one. for it ie et thie etege of

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

developsent thst young ststss {see the probles of soonosic and technologiosl
haloserdness end sust repel the oounterettsoks of isperinliet forces.
lcononio oooperstion with the 0831! is en the sore isportnnt Ia- these
countries. Soviet econonic essistence to developing countries is
fundsnsntsny different iron the so-osllsd sssistsnos or the isperislist
powers. since it osrries with it no politicsl canditions or silitery
obligstione. It is intended to struthsn developing countries in their
struggle against nonopoly ospiul end to sinus thee to mks tepid

eoonosio and cultured progress.

The peoples of the develom etetss recognise tint tire trietdship with
the Soviet Unim and the countries of the socielist oommsslth is their

best Mates of finsl victory.
COPYRIGHT: "Kmist Usbekistsns". 1979

8893
cso. 1800 m

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY