APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100020003-5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8258

1 February 19 '79

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE INLY
- 3. Reeipnem'e Acreeeuoe No.

'epon no

1 Pobrua 1979

' 1.u- N.
C

. n l "MI \ul-I-l I'

rmsmnous 0N ussn SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PHYSICAL
SCIENCES AND rrcnuomcb (P000 7/79)

 
 
 
 
        
   

       

    
  

     

 
 

9. I'rvlnrlmu Oveemuuioe Name and Mame
Joint Publicatione Eeeearch Service
1000 North Olebe Road

Arlington, Virginia 22201

     
    
   

n. Spec-mung Ovueueuoo Name end Home l)- Typc of. Royal t Period

Coven

     
   
   
      
   
   
   
   
      
         
        
   
       
     
       
     
      
       
   

 

Ae above

. Ahmeru

  

The report contains intonation on aeronautice; aetronony end eetrophyeice;
etnospheric eciencee: chenietry; earth eciencee end oceanography; electronice
and electrical engineering; energy convereion; neteriale; nethenetical
eciencce; cybernetice. coepetere: mechanical, induetrial. civil. end urine
engineering; nethoda and equipoent; nieeile technology; nevigation.
coraunicatione. detection, and counteneaeuree. nucleer ecience and technology;
ordnance; phyeice; propuleion and fuele; epace technology; and eoientiate

and ecientitic orgeniration in the phyeicel eciencee.

    

. ey 'enle and Deon-eat Aeeiyeie. e. Oeeuigeeca
USSR Electronice nieeile technology
Aeroneutice Electrical Engineering navigation and
Aetronony Energy Convereion Comicatione
Aetrophyeice lietariale Detection and
Ateoepheric Sciences Methenetice Counter-lean!“
Chenietr-y nechaeical Engineering nuclear Science end
Coeputere Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetice Indutriel Engineering arm“ Q
ﬁrth Scie:cee Marine Engineering Phyeice
eeno re
”L mudér‘re/(lppez-Eeeed Tee-e :33‘ 3mm”

  
 
     
 

Availability Steer-ens

For Official Uee Only. Linited
umber of Copiee Available Pre- .1228

mu ~Vl’.’ 00". .0"! m 'm “A? “ .mm
NOTE

JPRS publications contain Information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or translitersted are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items «are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGiI' LAWS AND REGULATIONS MINING WISH” 0F
MTBRIALS REPRODUC- RBREIN mums 'DIAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MMICIAL USE ONLY.
l-‘(m nl-‘I-‘lClm. mil-2 ONLY

JPRS L/82

l E‘ebruar

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(POUO 7/79)
CONTENTS

OEOPHYSICS, AS'I‘RONOM! AND SPACE

"I‘ASS' Publishes First Photos of Venus Probes
(Ammcom’ 6;“ w) O...OOOQCCOCOUIQCCOCOOOO...

Results Pros and Goals for Regional Geological and
Geophysical Work in the Caspian Depression
(1;. v. Nevolin, et a1; ammorm m: I am,
No 10’ 1978) 0.0.0.0...0'00.3.0.00ICOOOOOOOCOQIOCOIOO

PUBLICATIONS

Using the Critical-Path Method for Military Organization

(v. n. Skngnrev, L. v. Khdin; ssrsvoxs PLANIROVANIIE
mm, 1973) OOOOO0..Q...0...0............'..III..

New Ideas in Automtion
(0. '1'. 'l'ukeshevz swam-12mm: uovm; DEL
No 11, 1978) 0.000......OOOOOOOOOOOQCOOOIOOOOOOOIOOOO

Commter Sinulstion Used To Study Digital Transmission
Systems _
(L. n. Ogsnyan, L. v. punkov; unssznuxxz Hanan!
ISSLEJOVANIYA TSIFROVYKB srs'rm mm, 1978) ....

Ultrasonic Hicrauelding Technology Featured in New Book

(Vladimir Mikhaylcvich Koleshko; UL'WAXA
mmm' 19") OO0.0.0.0...OOOOOOOOIOIOOODOO...OO

Mechanized Agricultural Data Processing
(N. '1'. Baranovskiy; mm may
WK]: man-slant men V m'smu
Maw, 1978) 000.00.00.00...IOOOOOOOOOOOODIDOIO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comma (Consumed)

AbuLmuLu From the lhlvllmtlw 'AI’I’MED GEOI’IIYSICS'

(M. K. Polnhkov, A. I. Kuznctaov; mIKMDﬁAYA
GEOFIZIKA’ no 90, 1978)....0..I............C....

List of Soviet Articles Dealing um: Composite
Mam-mu
(oosumns'rvmm mar sovzm mnemov sssa
P0 mum I mm. mm mm sssa.
smmvmn mm. mmmmm
mm,“ 19’ 1978) uIOIOIIDOOOOOOOIOOCCOOOOO

- b .
P0! omcm. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS, ASTRONM AND SPACE

'TASS'PUBLISHBS mar PBUDOS OF VENUS PROBBS
Eris AIR m COSIDS in French 6 Jan 79 p 37

[Krucie by P. L.: "Venera-ll and 42:7

@er The Soviet news agency was has Just published the first photographs
of the ”Venera-ll end "Venera-l?" probes, which landed last month on the
planet Venus (01‘. AIR BR cosmos, Noe 7&5 and 7%). The probes released

by each satellite are identical and carry the sane instruments, which are
intended principally for the chemical analysis or the Venusisn atmosphere.
The photograph sham here depicts one of the probes in the assembly and
testi hall (in landing position, sitting on the circular shock absorbing
device . Note the aerodynamic stabilization shield at the top.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the other photographs, the trajectories of the "Venera" probes are shown
on the screen at the Soviet Flight Control Center. In the photoaraph below:
"Venus-12," which was launched on ll; September 1975, traveled the 2&0 mil-
lion kilometers to Venus in 98 days. The probe released by the satellite
landed on the surface of Venus at 0630 hours Moscow time on 21 December

and continued to function for 110 minutes. "Venera-ll," which was launched
on 9 September, also released a probe, which landed at 0620 hours Moscow
time on 25 December and functioned for 95 minutes (in 1975 "Venera-9" and
"Venera-lO" transmitted for S3 and 65 minutes).

 

The next photograph depicts the "Veners-ll" descent sequence: release 32
days before arrival) and netration into the atmosphere (at 1.1.2 km/s ,
aerodynamic deceleration at an altitude of about 1&0 kilometers), ejection
of the jettison and main parachutes and landing. The "Venera-lZ' landing
trajectory, which can be traced from an altitude of 62 kilometers, is

comparable. The probes landed on the illuminated side of the planet 800
kilometers apart.

 

3
FOR onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the photograph below: the relationship between "Venem-ll"o.nd the satel-
lite orbiting at 35,000 kilometers (the earth is not visible at. this moment).

 

COPYRIGHT: AIR ET COSMOS Paris 1979
C80: 3100

u
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS, ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

UDC 550.812:553.98(-925.22)

RESULTS FROM AND GOALS FOR REGIONAL GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL WORK IN TNE
CASPIAN DEPRESSION

Moscow GEOLOGIYA NEFTI I GAZA in Russian No 10, 1978 pp 1-5

[Article by N. V. Nexolin, P. A. Blokhin, V. N. Kudymov, S. S. Haksimov

(Soyusgeofizika) , G. Yc.-A. Ayzcnshtadt, H. G. Aristov (VNIGRI), L. G.

Kiryukhin, Yu. A. Ivsnov (VNICNI), T. N. Dzhumagaliyev (KazNIGRI), D. L.
Fedorov (NVNIIGG), and T. K. Neanov [deceased] (Kszneftegasrazvedks)]

[Text] The Basic Directions for Development of the USSR National Economy

in 1976-1980 call for accelerated detection and exploration of new deposits
of petroleum, natural gas and condensate in the most promising regions, in-
cluding the Caspian depression. Regional geological-geophysical investiga-
tions have a vital role in the successful solution of this national economic
problem. Significant features of the underlying structure of the Caspian
depression have been distinguished in the cones of correlating regional geo-
logical and geophysical work. In areas near the side of the depression, on
the surface of the base, favorable large, buried structures have been spot-
ted or confirmed: Tenirskiy, Zharkamysskiy, Biikzhal'skiy, Astrskhanskiy'and
Troitskiy protrusions,Severo-Kaspiyskiy and Ozinkovskiy uplift zones and more
(Figure l), which may be promising with respect to the presence of oil and

gas in subsalt deposits.

Regional productivity of the subsalt complex (mainly lower Permian) within
the bounds-ice of all border zones of the Caspian depression has been con-

firmed by parametric and exploratory drilling. A number of oil and gas de-
posits of industrial significance hue been discovered here: northern edge-
Zapadno-Teplovskoye, Borodinskoye, Vostochno-Gremyachinskoye and others;
eastern-Kenkiyakskoye and Ksratyubinskoye; southern-Tortayskoye and
Tazhigalinskoyc; southwestern-Aetrakhanskoye; western-Lobodinskoye,

Komsomolekoye and others.

At the same time, substantial shortcomings are noted in the conduct of the

regional geophysical work:
1. insufficient concentration of work in the most promising (in light

of recent data) directions and low volume of investigations;
2. lack of a uniform procedure for field geophysical observations and
their interpretation, which makes the analysis and correlation of

the resulting material difficult; ‘
5 ,
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Relief Map of the Caspian Depression Base

Ieohypeee, km: l-surfaccs of Preriphean base (in places, probable); 2-refrac-
ting seismic surface, V8-6.2-6.5 kin/e (hypothetically correspo'nde to Predevo-
nian erosion structure surface, according to date of N. V. Nevolin); 3-salne,
for V -6. 7-7.0 kill/8 (probable "basalt" stratum); Io-tectonic eacarpents;
5-fac urea manifested in base relief.

Major tectonic elements. Depressions: l-Caepian central part; Il-Belskiy;
lII-Yaysanskiy; IV-Koebulakskiy. Foredeepe: V-Sarpinakiy; VI-‘lfusarakchanekiy;
VII-Dzhanterekskiy; VIII-Primgodzharakiy. Protrueiona: Ix-Aktarekiy;
X-Pugachevekiy; XI—Priearpinakiy; XII-Aetrakhanskiy; XIII-Zavolzhakiy;
XIV-Troitekiy; XV-Syrtovekiy; XVI-Sol'-Iletakiy; XVII-Twink”;
XVIII-Zharkanyaskiy; XlX-Biikzhal'skiy; XX-Terelkcnakiy.

Uplift zones: XXI-Kmyshineko-Balykleyskiy; XXII-Dzhanybekskiy;

XXIII-Ozinkovekiy; XXIV-Severo-Kaspiyekiy; XXV-Tayeuganekiy tectonic area;
XXVI-Donctekiy grabcn.

Geographic names: a-Seretov; b-Orenburg; c-Ural'ak; d-Aktyubinak; e-Gur'yev;
f-Caapian Sea; g-Aetrakhan'; h-Volgogtad.

6
FOR orncm. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. unsatisfactory depth of geophysical (seismic) investigations-~es-
timates of the thickness of subsalt deposits and structures not
consistently reliable;

0. deep parametric boring takes care of only the uppermost part of the
subsalt profile; a full set of geological-geophysical investigations

is not conducted in all boreholes, and the quality leaves something
to be desired.

For the aforementioned reasons, the zones which show promise are not oppor-
tunoly ready for geophysical prospecting and drilling operations.

Exploratory drilling is at present concentrated mainly in the narrow border
zone of the Caspian depression. Exploratory wells, as a rule, are sunk on
a structural basis constituted according to seismic level P1, which does not,

in all cases, reflect the subsalt structure; and this lowers the effective-
ness of the exploratory drilling.

Taking into consideration the material from investigations done in 1976-1977
and the correlated work of the All-Union Scientific Research Institute of‘
Geophysical Exploration Methods (VNIIGeofizika), the All-Union Petroleum
Scientific Research Institute of Geological Exploration (VNIGRI [Leningrad]),
the All-Union Petroleum Scientific Research Institute of Geological Explora-
tion (VNIGNI [Hoecow]), the Lower Volga Scientific Research Institute of
Geology and Geophysics (NVNIIGG), and KaleGRI [expansion unknown], as prime
objects for regional study we recommend the Temirskiy, Zharkamysskiy,
biikzhal'skiy, Astrakhanskiy and Troitskiy baseiprotruslons and the Severe-
Kaspiyskiy , Kamyshinsko-Balykleyskiy. and Ozinkovskiy uplift zones (see
Figure l). The tectonic element boundaries shoull be refined, the structural
and lithological facies characteristics of the subsalt complexes should be

studied, the physical parameters of the rock should be determined, the loca-
tion of major faults established and so on.

On the eastern edge of the depression, the Temirekiy, Zherkamysskiy and
Karaulkel'dinskiy uplifts' structure and boundaries remain as yet unclear
for the most part. The structural plots made according to seismic level P1
do not always correctly reflect the structure of a subsalt complex, and the
structure has been studied altogether inadequately according to levels P2
and P3. Parametric boreholes on the Zharkamysskiy and Temirekiy uplifts
revealed for the most part only Prekungurian Lower Permian formations.

it is obvious, therefore, that regional geological-geophysical work on these
three structures should be continued. It is recommended that HOG? [expansion
unknown] seismic observations be run on lines transverse to the course of the
uplifts, and that four parametric wells be drilled in order to reveal Carbon-
iferous deposits and one (6 RIO to reveal Devonian deposits (Figure 2).

The Blikzhai'skiy (Kul'sary) protrusion has been studied by means of a sparse
network of seismic profiles and a single deep well (there are no data for
compilation of a structural chart by the P2 and P3 seismic boundaries, nor

even by the P1 level). Meanwhile, it is deserving of special attention be-
cause it is in a region where there are productive fields.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ()Fl-‘lClM. USE ONLY

 

, In places, to the Philippianlo
stage (a-known, b-probublo); 2
Paleozoic formation.
uplift-3 J-toctontc 0

Major tocto

achevskty anticllno. Uplift zones: II-Oztn-
Itowkly; Ill-Kmy-Mmko-Bolyklcy-k1y, IV-Dzhonybokokly; V-Ku'okul'okty.
Uplift-z ovnkiy; VIII-Yuzhno-Enbomkty;
or“; XI-Oronburg «01‘

lo
o-Soutov; b-Oronbura;
f-Mtnkhan; 3-Volsogrod.

Geographic "mu:

c-Aktyubtmk; d-cur 'yov;
o-Caoplan Soc;

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It in necessary, In l978-l980, to develop a minimum of two seismic profiles
covering AOO km on this structure, using the correlation method of refracted
waves fKMPVl and NOGT. Moreover, since the super-deep Biikzhal'skiy hole

No 2 didn't reach planned depth, failing to cover the full thickness of the
Cerbiniferous formations, the available machinery should be used to drill

to a depth of 7.5-8.0 km for the purpose of studying the entire cross section
of Carboniferous and Devonian rock. This is of fundamental importance to

evaluation of the oil- and gas-bearing prospects in the southeastern part of
the Caspian depression.

The Severe-Kaspiyskiy uplift zone (southern part of the Ural-Volga interflu-
vial area) were surveyed via widely separated KHPV profiles. The structure

of its sedimentary mantle was not defined. The surface of the base and upper
level of subsalt sediments (seismic levels F and 91, respectively) lie 7.5-8.0
and 5.5-6.0 in deep. The regional upheavals southward, toward the Caspian Sea
proper, may very well rise to 5 km or less. Structural correlations between
the Severe-Kasplyskiy uplift zone and the Astrakhan protrusion are not in
evidence. To give us a better picture of the structure of subsalt rock in
this zone, we recoauwnd continuing, primarily on dry land, regional HOGT
seismic investigations using the old KHPV profiles and developing two new
KHPV-Hocr surveys. Further work in the Caspian littoral will make it possi-
ble, on the one hand, to study the structure and lithology of subsalt com-
plexes in the zone where they are at minimum depth and, on the other hand,
will enable an understanding of the tectonic nature and situation of the
Sewero-Kaspiyskiy uplift zone. The OzinkoVskiy uplift zone extends north

of the Caspian depression, with subselt strata lying at a depth of 6-5 km.

in this region, the seismic data for individual profiles are poorly correla-
ted. To tie them in and confirm the presence of the Ozinkovskiy uplift

zone, it is proposed to develop three regional KHPV-HOGT profiles with a

total extent of 560 km, drill the planned Altatinskiy hole and extend its

planned depth to 5.5 km to expose 700-l,000 meters of the subsalt forma-
tions.

The Troitskiy and Akbulekskiy protrusions, with subselt rock at elevations
of -h.0 to -6.0 km, are located on the northeastern periphery of the Caspian
depression. There have been sparse KHPV surveys and, on small portions,
detailed reflected wave [HOV] and H007 work. The subselt strata have not
been drilled into. A series of KHPV-ﬂOCT profiles is proposed for these
uplifts. a portion of which profiles should intersect the Clo-Ural foredsep

in order to study its deep structure and the nature of the connection with
the southeastern edge of the Russian platforms

On the SoI'-Iletskiy protrusion, besides the parametric and exploratory

wells being drilled, it is recomaendsd that another parametric be put down
(planned depth 5.5 km) to disclose the whole thickness of subselt formations
and evaluate oil and gas prospects of the Predsvonian rock. Additionally,

a parametric well (planned depth 5.5 he) should be drilled on the Akhulakskiy
uplift to study the upper part of the subsalt formations.

9
ran ontcut use out?
I-‘(lll ill'l’liilltl. USE ONLY

The northern edge of the Caspian depression between the 02inkovakiy uplift
zone and the Troitskiy protrusion is of undoubted interest with respect to
oil- and gas-bearing potential. Seismic prospecting has established that
the lower levels of the sedimentary mantle have sunk here to the north and
are unconformably covered by the upper layers (with a dip to the south).
This is evidently related to the existence of a protrusion of the base
which extends in a latitudinal direction. Probably the Koshinskiy swell,
evolvud from Devonian formations; is also situated on this protrusion.

Prospecting operations which are concentrated in a narrow band do not throw
light on the structure of the region as a whole, particularly with respect
to base relief. To study it thoroughly and reVeal structural connections

with adjoining tectonic elements it is necessary to incorporate a number of
meridional KHPV-HOGT profiles.

As far as the Astrakhanskly protrusion is concerned, the main problem lies
in upgrading the accuracy of the seismic prospecting work done on the sub-
salt formations. On a regional scale, it is necessary to more accurately
define its connection with adjacent structures by means of two HOST seismic
profiles, and to study the cross section of the sedimentary mantle's lower
lchls via one parametric well (planned depth 7 km) in the central part,

another on the northwestern dip and a third on the northeastern dip of the
anticllne.

0n the western edge of the depression it is logical to continue work in the
Kamyshinsko-Balykleyskiy uplift zone and on the Kerasal'skiy monocline.

The proposed regional geological-geophysical investigations are the minimum
necessary for the initial-stage survey of major subsalt structures. They
will make it possible to evaluate oil and gas prospects of the subsalt com-

plexes and to concentrate further exploratory and regional operations on
the most promising ones.

The question of further study of the western and northern rim of the Caspian
depression is not examined in this article. we will note only that these
areas have not been explored to a sufficient degree (particularly the lower
levels of the sedimentary mantle) and that here, likely, there is an exten-
sive reserve of as yet unrevealed local, productive uplifts.

The following recommendations are made regarding regional geological and
geophysical investigations:

1. Use a uniform procedure for field geophysical observations and for
processing the results.

2. Try to perform seismic prospecting in interdomal zones in order to
reduce subsalt-structure-plotting errors due to insufficient know-
ledge of the propagation rate in the domes' salt-bearing mass.

3. Study the subsalt complexes by seismic prospecting all the way
through them (including the base surface), with a tracing below the

subsalt surface (P1) of a series of reference seismic levels (’29
P3 and others).

10
FOR OIVICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

4. When processing the uelumic date, try to determine not only the
quucture or the subunit complex but its substantive makeup as well.

5. in all deep wells carry out vertical seismic profiling, refracted
wove seismic logging and other geological-geophysical studies for
purposes of interpreting the wave field, learning the nature of the
medium and the stratigraphic location of the seismic levels.

This is the basis for injecting refinements into the 1979-1980 plan for
regional work in the Caspian depression, and the foregoing recommendations
should he studied in the course of considerations for the llth live Year

P 1.".

(DPYRIGNT: lzdatel'stvo "Nedra"."ceologiya neEti i gaza" 1978

$456
(30: l870

11
i0! OIPICIAL 082 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NBLICM'IOPB

USING m CRITICAL-PATH M81100 FOR mom OMIZM'ION

Moscow 53mm: WVANIB Ill mm (ngrs-d anlustion and Rovisv in
tho Nsvy) in Russisn 1973 signsd to proso 18 Apr 73 p 2, 21.7-21.8

[Annotntion snd tshlc of contsnts from book by V. D. My snd L. V. ludin.
Voyonisdot, sooo oopios, m psgss]

pm. 7 Tho osssnco or the criticnl-psth Isth is pnsontod so o m
or th'o' scisntitic orgmisstion of lilitsr] work in tho llovy. listhods of
constructing And procossing critiosl-psth disgrsls which provido tho hosis
{or thsir ass on ships on snuinod. Psrtiochr sttontion is givon to tho
uso ohsrcctoristics of oriticsl—psth nothods for phnning ond oontnol in
comt tnining, in booms-tors opontion, during ornnisstion of tho
tnining pnooss in odnostionsl institutions on! also Mm tho p1snning
and snoution ct scisntitio "sou-oh work.

Tho book is intsndsd for s vido poop of nsnl oﬂiooro. It will doc in-
tonst otticors or othsr bunch“ of tho Ansd Poms, poroomsl of tho
shipbuilding inautry, tho Isrohsnt urino nod oo-rcid {lost snd .11 Iho
on pndtiosn: involvod in planning in ono w or mothsr.

Contonts

Forward
erupts:- 1. ho mum-mm Nothod snd Bosos for Constructing
Critical-Pot): Disco-s
1.1. m ososnoo or tho oritiosl-psth nothod
1.2. Buss {or oonstmoting critical-goth dings-us
1.3. Dosign snd optixisotion principlss ct oritiosl-poth disglus
1.1.. toning tin ostintss
1.5. Tho intonstion syst- dnring oontnol om nnitcring using

oritionl-psth disgr-

Choptor 2. Mo of tho Uss o: canon-nu Disgru- in
Mot ruining
2.1. Conditions {or using OH! in odst tniniu

2.2. Construction and conutstion o! critical-goth discs- for
oo1ving oodnt trsining pious- 55

8 GBSIo u g

I)?»

12
P01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l-‘ICMI. USE ONLY

2.3. Control 0! oolbot training prohlu prooooaing uaing
critical-path diagram

2.1.. Principloa or oolpooition and an of typical oritioal-
path diagram

2.5. On or critical-path nothoda by hoadqurtora for cont

training

Chaptor 3. critioal-Path nothodo in tho ﬂoor Suppl: Am

3.1. Charaotoriotioa of tho uoo of critical-path diagram in
tho nau- aupply anoa

3.2. Critical-pot): diagrm with now-lino organisation or
oporotiona

3.3. Coqooition of oritioal-path diagram for oporotiom in tho
roar amply aroo and thoix- optiniution with roopoot to
noourooo

3.1.. Planning nintonanoo uaing critical-path diagram

Chaptor lo. Critical-Path Diagram in tho Training Prooaoa
8.1. Flaming principloa for tho training px-oooao
“.2. Fonda-outdo of oonatmoting otmotural and logical noto
I»). 8oa1o and unoc- diagram in tho training prooooo
l..l.. Critical-path diagram in our...» tor-o of training

Chaptor 5. Critical-Path Hothodo in Sciontitio Boooanoh
5.1. Singlo-tu-got no.1. {or planning and oontxol or ooiontitio
numb work
5.2. control or aoiontitio roooaroh work
5.3. “ti-“not no.1. for planting and oontrol ot aoiontuio
naaoanoh work
5.1.. Critical-path nothodo oo a tool for aoioutitio noooaroh

5.5. Planning and ton-outing ontou dovolopnont

Chaptor 6. lioano i’or loaning Plum Motion 'am Ioviov
in tho Navy

6.1. Solution of organisational and toohnioal pub}.

6.2. Trainiu inotmtora and noon-ihlo month» by critical-
path mm

6.3. Critical-path diagram and atandardo of oodat trailung

6.5. thtion or nnitoring daring tho propantion of toohnioal
auto. for ootion

6.5. Datonining tho unhor o: poroomol tor aorvioing tho
toohnioal ayoton

Bibliograplv
comm Vonnimt. 1973

896
coo: 1870

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

109
118

11.7
156
165

178

.189
198
no
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

NEH IDEAS IN AUTOMATION

Moscow AVTOMATIZATSIYA: NOVYYE 1031 in Russian No 11. 1978 signed to
press 23 Aug 78 pp 2. 3. 11-16, 33-3b

[Annotation, table of contents and excerpts from the book by 0. T. Tukeshev.
Izdotel'stvo Znaniye. 62,590 copies, 61 pages]

Annotation

[Text] Discoveries node in recent years in the fundamental sciences and
new equipnent and technology using then permit a coeplex attitude toward
the possibilities of automation free positions of a systems approach. that
is. taking into consideration not only the technological but also the

social and other aspects of the problel. The brochure is devoted to this.
it is intended for a wide range of readers.

Contents
Foreword 3
Features of Autosation 8
Autosation of Discrete Technological Processes 29
The Electronicized City 60
Conclusion 58
Foreword
lease 3]

{Excerpts} According to data of the Central Statistical Adsinistration.
in the first half of 1978 instrusents and spare parts for then and leans
of autoeation valued at 2.2 billion rubles were produced. and coeputer
equip-est and spare parts valued at 1.6 billion rubles. In the sele
period. 3.600 eechines tools with numerical progre-ed control were lads.

Features of Autosation
[pages ll-l‘l

[Excerpts] Auto-sted control systess (A80). the develop-est of A80 has
been and is influenced by both techcologicel and long-range socioeconoeic
1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[actors such as the preservation of the environment. a shortage of energy and
manpower, safety and the casing of working conditions. That influence in for from
Hell-defined. The absence of servicing personnel directly at the objects

of control mode doubtful the safety of production when critical situations

arise in the case of failure of means of automation. 'lhe release of the
operator from routine labor on a specific production section did not free

him from simultaneous observation at a control panel. The need to spend

considerable time on the coIpilation and issuance of programs has led to
a low efficiency of A50.

Today it is a matter of the entire statewide pyramid of A80 of different
levels: of objects, technological processes, productive enterprises, branch
of the national economy and the entire national economy. In the final
account a statewide automated system, an OGAS, gigantic in its complexity,
had to be created, one into udod to solve problems in the accounting, plan-
ning and control of the national economy on all levels.

Much has already been done on the path to the solution of that problem.

One of the main problems facing the national economy is the creation of

complex ASUPP (automated production enterprise management systems]. The
work is being done in three main directions which envisage:

-- automation of the control of technological processes (a developent of
the ASUPP);

-- automation of the control of organizational-economic processes;
-- automation of the prediction of the development of a given production.

Only the combination of these directions into a single whole permits the
creation of an ASWP. In many branches of the national economy this ex-
tremely complex problem has been successfully solved. me next stage of
the ASU hierarchic pyramid is automated control systems of groups or asso-
ciations of enterprises and of branches of the national economy.

The basis of those successes were achievements in the area of the mathe-
matical description of technological objects and of identification theory,
new results in reliability theory and the theory of schedules, and successes

in the development of the principles of dual control and mltiply connected
regulation.

it also is important to note the introduction of cyst-n of automated design-
ing of automated control systus and the auto-ted developent of programs,
and the creation of specialised data banks and packages of applied' programs.

Among the new trends in the automation of any object is assurance of the
possibility of its subsequent inclusion in an A5012 (automated syst- for
the control of technological processes), formulated by various departmental
and interdepartmental documents. In turn, in the developent of such a

system its subsequent use in an ash? or branch of the national economy must
be taken into account. ihese requirements are met by the creation of

15
m ontcm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centralized structures of control from single dispatcher points and the
installation of additional data transmission and remote control equipment.

Such an approach to the creation of means of automation. corresponding to
the long-range problems in management of the economy, is successfully
realized. for example. .by the "Soyusgazavtomatiko" VlPO [all-union scien-
tific production association] of the USSR Ministry of Gas lnduatry. The
automted systems of gas f ields, the compressor stations of thin gas pipe-
lines, underground gas storage and gas distribution stations. besides the
outcomtion of all local objects without exception. include units assuring
the functioning of the list"? of the main pipeline. The combination of

separate ASUTP's makes it possible to create a unified automated syst-
for control of gas supply.

Almost 2.000 ASU's were introduced in the Ninth Five-Year Plan. Their repay-
ment period was about 3 years on the average. But. for example, at the L'vov
Television Plant the ASU paid for itself in 2 years. One of the first ASU's
in our country was created at the Moscow "Moloko" Association. in spite of
the ”capricious" character of production and the fluctuations of the demand
for it, the splintering of trading points, the mass of specialized trans-
port end tens of contradictions. the A50 coped with the problems. The saving
was more than a million rubles that previously were lost within the frame-

work of only one association due to unoptimal management and insufficiently
clear organisation.

At each industr iai enterprise there is the concept of the "operativka" --

a weekly (and sometimes daily) conference of the nnagement personnel at
which the state of affairs is made clear. An electronic coqmter gives for
more precise. complete and objective information in counted minutes. The
data output of the machine, with a complete picture of the work of the enter-

prise ¢aring the elapsed days, months or quarters, can be analysed thoroughly
in l0-20 minutes and a corresponding decision made.

busting ASU's are unique nn-machine systems in which man remains the prin-
cipal actor. It is interesting to note that if the ASU fails at an enter-
prise which has introduced it, the enterprise probably will have to shut
down. This unexpected turn corresponds completely to the words of Corre-
sponding Huber of the 0558 Academy of Sciences N. N. lioiseyev: ”it is
important to understand now that the simple growth of industrial might.
without qualitative change of all the inforntional basis of its function-
ing, without the organisation of human labor, cannot give the desired effect
but, on the contrary. leads to the erection of a lower of label.

in the management of the national economy as a whole an ever-larger role is

being apquired by special systems which permit predicting the scientific and
technological possibilities. with simultaneous for-sluice of the corre-

sponding goals, and also creating and ”playing" models seeming the achieve-
ment of those goals. Absolutely new in that case is the result-ant of

16
ton onlcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

constant renewal of the prediction and corresponding change of the national
economic plan. Such a task cannot be solved by purely mathematical methods
and the introduction of heuristic rules cannot help. in connection with
which tho institute of Cybernetics of the Ukﬂl inian Academy of Sciences
has proposed a dialog model that envisages the direct participation of man.

'ihe model has been called the dialog system of planning, abbreviated as the
"displan."

Up to new the correction of plans required Just as such time and efforts as

their compilation. 'iho displsn opens up completely new possibilities of
using the enormous advantages of the socialist system of managuent.

A prerequisite for the practical realization of the displan is the State
Network of Computer Centers (GSVTs) that has been created. it will include
thousands of computer centers. including those servicing individual industrial
enterprises and organizations. The symbiosis of man and electronic ccmpiter

is new bringing surprising results and has made it possible to automate such
especially creative processes as. for example. planning.

Automation of Discrete Technological Processes
[pages 33-36]

[Excerpts] Automation of auxiliary operations. The specialised "Sided-78" exhi-
bition was held with great success at the beginning of 1978. The slogan of the
exhibition was the complete mechanization and automation of transport, uare-
housing, leading and unloading work. Among the exhibits were numerous types

of conta iners. automated loaders, automatic machines. shelving and storage
where the articles are untouched by human hands.

imagine that the elevator of your apartment is able to move not only up and
don but also along the floors and to deliver you directly to the door of
your apartment. Now let the elevator have a mechanical hand which plshes
and pulls freight, and you obtain an idea of the cont-porary automated ware-
house. The apartments must just be replaced by cells of shelving. Such

a warehouse with the height of a ten-story building has been constructed,

for example, at the Avtole. Association. An electronic complter controls
maneuvers of the elevators. It also keeps precise records of stocks, in-

stantly responds to inquiries about quantities. and receives and issues at
first request containers of parts.

in the future. man's intervention will not be required at all. Needed parts.

upon the request of an electronic computer of any ASI‘D, go in containers
with an addressing syst- from storage directly to an automatic line.

‘i’he effectiveness of automation of warehousing and transport work is 5-10
times as high as that of basic technological work. Thus the expenditures
required for the release of 10-15 transport and loading workers amount to

i0,000-20.000 rubies. and an automatic line which releases the same lumbar
of workers costs 100,000 rubles on the average.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tasks solvable with wheeled intro-plant transport arc in their structure
similar to the tasks or reloading containers from ships to rail or truck
transport. ’Ihe protection of raw Iaterlala on open areas and the ware-
housing and shipment o! finished goods can be auto-ated through the use

of practically ready-made solutions. [in automated systan of reloading
containers tron ships to land leans 0! transport is in Operation, for ex-
ample, at the port of li'ichevak. it was designed by specialists of the
Institute or Problem of Control under the supervision of G. K. Sorokin.
The electronic colputor not only plans the optimal dispoaition of contain-
ers on the area of the port, issuing orders and keeping a preoiso record
of the work of the container loaders (automatic container movers). but at
any given moment reports data on the location of each container, the pre-
senco of unoccupied pieces and the optimum change 0! the container process-
ing program during Variation of the starting information. The systen sur-
passes the world level.

CWYRIGHT: Izdatél‘stvo "Znaniye", l978

2i“
CSO: 1870

18
you other». use my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIOIB

mum SIMILA‘I'ION m ‘10 STUDY DIGITAL mm mm

Moscow mum mm mmvmu 13an 3mm mom (Muhino
notbodo for cumin; Digital tmo-iuion auto-o) in Nation 1978 oinod to
pan 13 Jan 78 p 2, w.

[Amtntion and sun. of oonunu no- book 1.. I. Own and L. V. Pom",
Isutol'otvo ”Swot". A800 oopioo, 11.1. m.-

oxt. 7 Punduontd problou in tho stow of tho noioo-rooiotnnoo of o
gitoI trunniooion onto. nnd its ooqononto m (emulated on tho but.
of only.“ at the gononl construction principloo of digital. trono-iooion
mun. moi: oolution noquinu the an or oi-Ihtion 30th. on mun.
Principles tor dovelopim whim D6010 of Quito]. tun-10010:: onu-
oro onninod and Algorithms for on auction}. ond om Idol 0: digital
tannin-ion m ooqononu m givon in noon-60 (W).

Th. book is intondod {or qoiontii'io pox-oomol 0m“ in chaining and
“Win diam trunniooion mm min; digits]. mun.

Contonto Pogo.
Pom“ 3
Introduction 5
cup»:- 1. Oononl Own-tic. of mum. Mann m 8
1.1. commotion principloo 8
1.2. Win moi. of «am caution .thodo 1.1
1.3. mutation of diam tun-ionic»: out. 37
1.1.. Minotion and “motion at tho diam “no. ’00
1.5. The linou- ell-ml of digital tnnoniooion ”It. 59
Chart” 2- Probl- and m to: Min; “to. Mouton
W on Count». 71.
2.1. Bomb pub]... aficionq indicator- and «um
nonunion onto- Mn 7!.
2.2. Bonn-n primiplu of diam tron-ind.“ m mum
on Wu 7?
2.3. contour “mission or o unnu- signal and “national
wants of digital trunnion mm as

19
you ontcw. us: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 3. Algorith- ot Analytioﬁ Hodele of the Regeneretor end
Lineu- chennel or e Digital Tremnieeion Byeten
3.1. Probebility ehereeterietioe of {mutation of the tiling
pen-euro in e einae «generator
3.2. Sedation o! the noiee innit: of e eingle ”generator
3.3. Salvation or the noiee Unity of e lineer obennel

Chapter I» Algal-it]. or aimleted liodele or Digitel Tun-denim
ante- commnte
5.1. A eimleted noel for Win: phone Jitter daring
digitel smp—gemretion
lo.2. A ei-neted Udell. of e regent-nor tinim circuit
5.3. A ei-neted nae]. or e liner ohennel tiling circuit

311:1:on
oomuou'r‘: Imtomm mm". 1978

ms
083: 1870

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR "FFICIM. USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

UUI'RABONIC MICROWELDINO TRHNOImY FEATURED IN NW BOOK

Minsk un'mzwmvnn 341008th (Ultrasonic Hicrovelding) in Russian
1977 signed to press 20 Jun 77 p 2-8, 328

(Annotation, Foreword and Table of Contents from book by Vladimir Hikhaylovich
Koleshko, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka i 'Dskhnika." 3,200 copies, 328 pages]

[hxt] Problems of the theory and technology of ultrasonic microwelding are
considered in the book. no latest data on the Iain principles and charac-
teristic features of formation of a microvelded joint in the solid and
liquid phases under conditions of activation by ultrasonic oscillations are
presented. Data are presented on theoretical calculation, develop-lent and
investigation of acoustic systems for nicroualding. ma results of investi-
gating the structure. nechanical and electrical properties of nicrweldad
joints are given. New methods and development of methods and design of

equipaent for conducting the nicrovelding process are theoretically and
experimtally justified.

Intended for a wide range of scientific and engineering-technical personnel
of industrial enterprises and design and scientific research organisations
and nay also be useful to teachers, post-graduate students and students
specializing in the field of electronic technology.

foreword

Science and technology are being developed at exceptionally rapid rates

at the modern stsge. Special attention is being devoted to intensification
of various production processes'. It is intensification that unites it possible
to solve the problem related to the need to simificantly increase labor
productivity in variom branches of the national econoqy of the country and
to increase product quality. Science is being transfoued to the asin pro-
ductive force and has been called upon to have a deep, ever increasing
revolutionizing effect on various spheres of its practical applications.
the possibilities of which are inexhaustible. Science is faced with
grandiose tasks to inrove efficiency. further expansion of finds-natal
research and concentration of forces on the nest inortant and proaieing

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

trends of scientific-technical prOgross. The scientific and technical re-
volution nukes its imprint on development and progress in the field of
electronics. The vigorous development of automation and mechanization of
production processes is related to the ever increasing use of cosputer tach-
nolOQY. various electronic instruments and devices in the national economy.
A great deal of attention is devoted in this case to microminiaturisation

of individual functional coeponents and to manufacture of the latter in
cosplex versions.

Important advances have been achieVod during the past few years in the field
of production end use of semiconductor devices, integrated and hybrid cir-
cuits whose high dependability is determined not only by the quality of the
initial tutorials, but also to a significant degree by perfection of techno-
logy at different stages of development of the device or circuit. Success-
ful manufacture of semiconductor devices and microcircuits requires solution
of the problem of developing permanent contacts between various cosponents.
specifically joining of the semiconductor crystal with its functional capo-
nents to the housing of the device and also joining metal leads to thin-film
contact surfaces of the planar edge of the crystal and to the external leads
of the device housing. At the same time. the continuous growth of the nunber
of cosponents in each microcircuit. i.e. . development of large integrated
circuits. leads to a vigorous increase in the number of contacts whose
quality largely characterizes the efficiency and dependability of micro-
electronic apparatus. The coeplaxity of making high-quality micrcwelded
and soldered joints consists in the fact that the method of producing joints
and the materials used for this should provide good electrical contact. high
mchanical strength while retaining the integrity and required physical pro-
perties of the joined microcosponents, high resistance to vibrations and
impact loads and efficiency over a wide teaperature range.

the existing production processes of producing dependable contacts in manu-
facture of semiconductor devices and integrated and hybrid circuits are
based on the use of pressure. telperature and various methods which intensify
the process of formation of the joint both in the solid and the liquid phase.
ultrasonic microwelding occlpies a special place in the tedlnology of pro-
ducing dependable and stable bonds between various materials.

“the advances of ultrasonic microwelding are inseparably related to the
advances of solid-state physics. the physics of metals and physical metal-
lurgy, chemistry and physicochesical mechanics. acoustics and other sciences.
with the use of new devices and apparatus. ‘l‘hese advances permit a deeper
understanding of the essence of the physicochemical processes on the surface
of a solid and study of new phenomena and principles which permit develoilmant
of production processes which ensure production of articles with enhanced
electrical. cechanical and chemical properties.

the leading position in development of fmdsmental problem of the theory
and practice of ultrasonic microwelding belongs to acoustics, solid-stats
physics and physicochemical mechanics. It is true that the advances of

22
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUR HFFICIM. USE ONLY

these branches of modern science also affect to a significant degree all the

various production processes of microelectronics in modern industrial produc-
tion.

Equipping industry with high-quality modern equipment in production of set
conductor devices and integrated and hybrid circuits for various production
processes. including those for ultrasonic microwelding. which include highly
productive automatic machines and automatic lines which meet modern require-
ments. with the increasing complexity and an increase in the veins and rate
of assembly of devices requires reliable data on the design of ultrasonic
systems and on the principles of materials behavior under conditions of
plastic deformation in an ultrasonic field. ever more complete data on the
nature of formation of the structure and properties of joints produced by
ultrasonic microwelding.

Eutectic contact-reactive soldering and joining by using glass, epoxide pesto.
soft solder. conducting glue. eutectic alloys and their cowbinations are

now used extensively to join semiconductor crystals with their functional
components to the housing of the microcircuit device. Among the known
methods of welding during wire assesusly of microelectronic devices. thermo-
cospression. contact point microwelding with unilateral and bilateral
arrangement of the electrodes or with a dual electrode. pressure micro-
welding with pulsed indirect heating, cathode-ray. laser and microplssms
welding are used along with ultrasonic microwelding.

A number of monographs and survey papers ha. been published during the past
few years which reflect some theoretical and technological problems that
may also occur during microwlding and soldering during production of semi-
conductor devices and integrated and hybrid circuits (1-30]. Soviet scien-
tists have made an important contribution to worldwide science in the field
of studying the principles of electric-arc welding. thenocospression micro-
welding. pressure welding. laser and cathode-ray welding and ultrasonic and
diffusion welding in a vacuum Hodern production processes of welding
various materials and also highly productive and dependable equipment for
accosplishing them have been worked out.

One may essentially find everything that is known in the field of the science
of metals and the meduanics and physics of a given physicochemical process

in numerous papers devoted to theoretical and experimental study of various
methods of welding. Advances in the field of welding theory and practice.
related to development of traditional trends. have been widely illuinated

in textbook and special scientific-technical literature. mentors. prc-
blams of the development and current state of welding theory and its prac-
tical applications are not considered on a broad scale in the given book.

but references to the literary sources used are given in the outline of the
material.

It should be noted that there is now a meter of problems both in the field

of theory and practice of forming the joints of hosogeneous and heterogeneous
materials in the solid and liquid phases which must be solvsd.

23
m onxcm. use our
Hm HFPHZIM. "SF. (mm

The economic potential of the state at the modern stage is determined to a
significant degree by the level of automation and mechanization of various
production processes which largely depends on the quality and volume of
output of products from the electronics industry. The higher the qualita-
tive and quantitative indices of semiconductor devices and integrated and
hybrid circuits, the higher their efficiency of use in the national economy
of the country. Various methods of nicrowelding used at the modern stage
of production development are characterised by progressive production pro-
cesses. 1his is especially true of ultrasonic pressure microwelding with
regard to its advantages. 'lherefore. the greater the nusber of various
methods of ultrasonic microwelding is used in the national econo-y, the
more feasible it is to use ultrasonic equipment and the higher the efficiency
of the entire production process will be in producing microelectronic de-
vices and circuits. However. various methods of microwelding and all the
technological principles of producing products which were effective yester-
day are now negated by the appearance of new scientific ideas and develop.
ments based on extensive introduction of intensification using acoustic
waves. Hence. the need to constantly improve the various production pro-
cesses and to study the principles of formation of the real structure and
properties of the produced articles is quite obvious. Continuous ilprove-
ment of the efficiency of production processes and universal mechanism and
machines used in the national economy places over newer requirements on
production and in some cases also requires development of essentially new
products. The main and most general requirement which is placed on the
entire electronics industry and on microelectronics specifically is con-
tinuous isprovessnt of the quality and reliability of products with the
ever increasing volume of industrial production.

Development of new scientific ideas for microelectronics is directly related
to development of the theory and practice of developing new functional cos:-
ponents, study of their structure and properties, finding new materials for
acconplishing then and also design and developnsnt of new machines and pro-
duction processes and isprovemsnt of existing ones. In this case all inves-
tigations in this field should be organized on a basis which permits a
contribution to scientific and technical progress in the best manner.

Further development of the theory and practice of ultrasonic microwslding
is obviously related to solution of a number of problems, among which those

of primary isportance ere development of fundamental theoretical positions
and cathode of the most efficient use of various types of energy of the
acoustic field, designed for use of ultrasonic aid hypersonic freguncy.
and various types of acoustic oscillations: increasing the quantity and
quality of the ultrasonic equipment and tools used and increasing their
productivity of production processes; development of nondestructive methods
of testing the quality of joints and developssnt of hiwly productive auto-
matic sadiines. autcsatic lines and automated control systems of the pro-
duction process of aicrocircuit assesblyn reducing the tins of develop-ant
and materialisaticn of the lost effective scientific ideas and principles
related both to isprovessnt of quality and to inrevensnt of production

2%
'0! OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL “SI-2 ONLY

processes which ensure production of joints with previously given properties:
and expansion of the nomenclature of products produced by ultrasonic micro-
welding, which is directly related to an increase of the quality. reliability
and durability of various semiconductor devices and integrated and hybrid
circuits.

The need to take into account these factors which determine not only the
prospects of use but also the quality and effectiveness of using various
methods of ultrasonic nicrouelding is manifested in all aspects of organizing
production of microelectronic devices in the country and generates a nusber
of interrelated problems.

it has undoubtedly now been proved on the basis of extensive experimental and
theoretical material that the properties and reproducibility of the quality
of microvelded joints depend on conditions of the entire aggregate of pro-
duction regimes during production of then. Knowledge of the physicochenical
processes occurring during different production conditions of microwelding

is required for design of nicrowelding equipment. selection and calculation
of optima parameters of creating dependable contacts in metal-metal and
wetal-sesiconductor systems with the required mechanical and physical proper-
ties.

it is of considerable interest to conduct investigations to determine the
principles and characteristic features of formation of the fine structure
of gold-silicon and alminun-silicon systess in the liquid phase and gold-
guld. gold-aluminium alminun-sluinun and aluninm-gold systens in the
solid phase during plastic defamation in the ultrasonic field in the zone
of forming the joint of seeuconductor device and integrated circuit cospo-
nents and also to deteruine the effect of the initial structure of the joined
materials on the nature of joint forsation. 1he state and structure of the
surface layers are directly related and determine to a significant degree
the quality and properties of the produced joints. A knowledge of the
principles of surface phenomena occurring at the interrace or joined suste-
rials permits more couplets representation of the physical characteristics
of the processes occurring in the outer layers of solids contacted during
ultrasonic nicrowelding. Research data are senseless without a knowledge
of the effect of acoustic waves on the properties of the solid, since the
nature of the acoustic field significantly affects the physicochenical
processes occurring on the surface. the interphaee interfaces and in the
voluu of the solid.

Taking the foregoing into account, the goal of studying and outlining in
comact fern the Iain data on fonstion of the constituent joints of seni-
conductor devices and integrated circuits by plastic defamation in the
ultrasonic field in the liquid and solid phases end also to deter-ins
methods of designing equipment for accoqlishing the sicrenelding process
were posed in this paper. The concluding step of the paper is practical
use of the results of investigations in production and determination of
the further direction of research related to iqroveslsnt of the tedtnology
of modern discrete semiconductor devices and large integrated circuits.

25
not onzcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An attesupt was made in the book to relate jointly the entire complex of
phenoosna studied by the author.

since a book on ultrasonic uicrowelding is being published for the first
tine it is naturally not devoid of deficiencies. All consents and desires
of the readers will be gratefully accepted.

The author feels it his duty to express gratitude to academician of the nssn
Made-y of Sciences, Doctor of technical Sciences. Professor V. P. Saverdenko
and to Doctor of 'nachnical Sciences L. I. Gurskiy for valuable advice.
oouents and attention to the work. V. Ya. Sunka and A. v. Gulay rendered
great assistance in conducting a number of experisents.

Contents Page

Forevordsasseeosaosaooasoooaesoaeooeoo 3

Chapter l. Main Uses of Acoustic Vibrations to Intensity Production

Processes........................ 9
chapter 2. slectroacoustic Transducers for Ultrasonic Hicrovelding . 61
Chapter J. Power Supply Sources for Transducers for Ultrasonic

“icXWCIG‘nq O o O C a 0 O O O O O C 0 O O O O O O O O O 1“
chapter 4. Joining Metals in the Solid Phase During Ultrasonic

"‘cmldtng I J O O O O O I O O O O I O O I O 0 I O O O 179
Chapter 5. Interaction of the Metal-Seniconductor in the Liquid Phase 261
Chapter 6. Checking the Quality and Control of the Hicrovalding

pm.‘ 0 O O D D O O D O O O O I O C O O O O O O O O O O 302
Bibllwtiwy O O O I O I l O O D I O O O O O O b O I O 5 O O O D O O 315
COPYRIGHT: udatel'stvo 'Rauka i tokhnika“. 1977

6521
C80: 1870

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

HEWIZINO AGRICULTIM DATA PWING

M00001! OWZMSIIA WINDY 0mm minnow! INNM‘BII V
m'smu 100an (The Orgeniution ci' Auto-etic Pmeeeing or loom-1c
Intonation in Agriculture) in Rueeien 1978 eisned to pme 2 “A? 78 p 2,
355-358

I'Annotetion end tehle of contente from book edited It. 1‘. Beremvekiy.
Indetel‘ctvo ”Stetiotike". 10.000 copiee. 360 pegee

/"l'ext 7 Thie book preeento the eubjooto of the netionel economic nine

3! necﬂenieing name-out work, counter eyeteu end mtoeetic pnoceeein;

or dete in en eotoeeted ocntnl eyeten (OASU) for e eeotor ct inhet end
don the theoreticel tomudeticne (or plenning end opentin‘ mu mono
eechine mounting eteticne 7 . ”V8“ republic intention-counter

ten 7 , V'l'e'e [counter oenfere 7. 0e rhythmic counter oentere

end Ether counter Iecilitiee «Fm»; ea'icuIturel entetprieee. "

Scientiﬁc end nethcdologicel principleo for eyeteee omeniuticn ct leee
dete end ito pmceeeing by mohoerd pmeeein‘ ewipeent end counter-e en
given elong with notth for the deecription end proceeein; ct econodo in-
tonation on comten in mot-mun lemme.

The inetmction eemel ie intended for etudente of eoomdc epecieltiee in
egrimlturel echcole end In eleo he need by the eQ'Lcyeee of ecdentitic
neeeerch inetitutee, mu etudento end experienced pereomel working in
‘m. ttdde

Contente Pep
Intmhmticn _ 3
‘lhe Iletionel Iconoeic Velue c: Kecheniein; end Auto-tin;
Monument Bork 3
The Develop-at end atetue of bohenioetion end Intention of
Dete Pnceeeim 5

Pmepecto for the Kechenieetion end Intention of Pete Pnoeeeiu
end the mum-m. of cow. [It’te-vide unto-um m] end
um [mtoeeted control onto--

27
you omcm. use om
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Contente, abject, Method end Couree Problem
Seotion Ono

meontioel Beeoe of lutoeetio Dete Pnooeuin‘
Chepter 1. Auto-eted Dete Pnoeleing ante-e
1.1. Brier ohereoterietioe or the eteto-eide entouted eyetene
for dete collection end pmooeoin. — one:
1e2e P150. ‘1“ N1. of 0w
1.3. Dyetene for vein; ooquter equipment nMer esu condition-
1.l.. Auto-etic dete pnoeeein;

Ohepter 2. Sottwene end Dete Structure
2.1. aottuue oontente end promo-e
2.2. Intonation end ite role in eutoeetio dete prooeeeing ente-
2.3. Intonetion oleeeitioetion
2.1.. me concept of eoononio intonation, ite oontente end
oleeeitioetion
2.5. )teeeuring the mum. of intonetion
2.6. Dete etmoture

Cheater 3. Herd-ten for en Antonetio Infomtion Prooeeein. ﬂyeten

3.1. Antonetio intonetion pnoeeeing prooemtee, oontente end
ite hex-dune pmbleee

3.2. Intonetion oerriere

3.3. Inbnetion oodim

3.1.. Omeniein‘ eouroe intonation

3.5. hate intention trennieeion

3.6. Intonetion prooeeein;

Ghepter a. aottuere end hon-e {or Auto-etio Monetion

Pnoeeeiu ante-e
l..1. Sottvue oontente end noble-

I..2. suture tor eoonolio noble.
I..3. hon-en for mtouetio intomtion pmeeeing

Geotion ‘hlo

Fleming. Onenieetion end Operetion o: Comte:- but.
Mr 5. Hernia; Counter om.-
5.1. Genet-e1 “nation-

5. 2. Deter-min; the work volu-

5.3. Deter-min the Inquire-ate for coyote:- new

5.!» Deter-min; the "gnu-onto for work tone, work me
end “lief: WM.

Mt“- 6. Onenieetion end Operetion of amt" wet-
6.1. Structure end Nnotion of “bonito

6.2. Omenieetion ot teohzioel prooeeeee
6.3. Tahitian]. mun

28
703 OHICIAL IJSB ONLY

ﬁSBH

Xgﬁﬁ SSSSKE 2 $88

336d a $233
6.1.. Technical etandardiaation and tone of pay-ent for work
6.5. Technical aaintenance

Chapter 7. Plaming and Accounting tor the Operation ot Cmter
ante-e
7.1. Planning the operation
7.2. 11.. work noon! and eettlenent with cliente

Section Three

Planning and Organisation of Auto-etic Intonation Pmceeeing ante-e
Chapter 8. Organization 0: Planning work
8.1. Planning problem
8.2. Theoretical eolutione tor eoom-ic intonation pmeeeing
8.3. Contente and eequence of planning work

Chapter 9. Ketnode tor Bxaninim an Intonation Oyatea tor
Planning Targete

9.1. Analyeie or an intonation ente- tor planning tanete
9.2. liethode of evaluating intonation in tloue

Chapter 10. Planning Codee tor Claeaitring loom-lo Intonation
10.1. General aeeumtione ot oodiu ot intonation oleeeitioation
10.2. Coding eyete-

10.3. Codee need caring utonatic pmeeeing ot eoonclic
intonation

Chapter 11. Plannim Boone-1c Intonation Carrie"

1.1.1. Plum tone and oontente ot com-ca deco-ante

11.2. P1anning eoum docnnnte tor auto-atic intomtion
nan-out

11.3. Planning layout ct intonation oarrien tor "We
[punched pnoeeeing «pip-eat ‘

11.!» Planning tom and oontente ot re tin intoI-tion
oarrien

Chapter 12. Organisation of Intention Pilee in Coyote:- Onta-
l2.1. automated intonation ayato-

12.2. Auto-ad data but
12.3. Organisation ot entriee into storage

Chapter 13. Organiaetion of Input Pilee ot Intomtien
13.1. Organisation of intonation input tilee (ax-me) on

Meade
13.2. Organieation ct intonation um tilee on pet-tented tape

13.3. Organisation of intention innit tilee on Ianetie tapee
and alphan-erical diaplave

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

100
101

103

55

E SE § £555 Q g E 55 5 EEE E
Chaptor 11.. Organization ot Intonation Filoa in tho Oomtor
Maury

11..1. Oanoral umtiona about maory organiaation

1t..2. Organisation ot atorago in dinot aooaaa tilaa

No.3. Organiaation ot intonation atorago in aoqtontial aoooaa
tilaa

Dodo. Bmhanga ot intonation batman oxtornal atoraca and
now [nanotio oora atoraao 7

nus. Organisation ot intonation tiIao in mzu

cnaptar 15. Logical Proooaaing and tho Organisation ot Output
Iilao ot Intonation
15.1. notrioul ot data in a tile
15.2. Manchu data in a tila
15.3. Oomotiru and roprodnoin‘ ti1a data
15.1.. Oruniution ot ti1aa ot output data

Chaptar 16. Rttioianoy ot Auto-tic Proooaain; ot loom-lo Intor
ntion
16.1. hotora raaponaihlo tor ooonoazio ottioianoy
16.2. Boone-1o attioianoy indicatora
16.3. Mothoda ot oo-puting labor ooat and datonining tho
attioionoy ot auto-atio intonation prooaaain‘ ayato-

8aotion Pour

Intogratod Intonation Prooaaain; ot Nnotiona1 AN ”Into-a
Chaptor 17. Intonation Prooaaaio‘ tor Kamila Agricultural
Production
17.1. Contonta ot plannad intonation and naoono tor ita
mtoaatio pmooaain‘
17.2. Organisationa1 and aoonoaio naturo ot promo-a in
calculating mm
17.3. loom data
17.1.. Output data
17.5. Probl- aolvin; algorith-
17.6. Organiaation ot tho counting prooaaa

chaptor 18. Danny-ant ot Prodsotion Prom and Calculation 0t
tho lot Goat ot an Anioutural Condity
18.1. Organiaational and acorn-1o natun ot tho plou-
18.2. Souroo data
18.3. Output data
18.1.. Prou- ao1m alpritba
18.5. Omniaation at tho omting prooaaa

cnaptor 19. man. M
19.1. OrpniaationaI and aoom-io natuo ot tho proud
19.2. Sauna and outﬁt data
19.3. Promo- aolviu outwit!-

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
19.1.. Ornnintion or tho oolputing pnooou

Gupta- 20. Oononl Aonqtiono of Autmtio mooning of
Aooountina Infomtion
20.1. Orsoniutionol nooono for pnooouin‘ oomntin.
intonation
20.2. Intomtod onto- tor pmoouin‘ «muting intonation

Choptor 21. Prooouin‘ Intomtion on the Labor looord and Hugo.
ﬂolo Ornniutionnl ond ooononio nature of tho- proble-
noZo M". «g.
21.3. (mm. dots
21.1.. Probl- oolvin; Ilsorithn
21.5. Solution of prom-o on o ooqmtor
21.6. Solution of promo-o on man prooouing oquip-nt

Clapton- 22. Pnooouin; Aooomtiu Intonation on Notoriolo
Voluoo and Au-ioultunl Condition
22.1. Oumutionol and mm.“ notuno of tho prob)..-
22020 ”N. do“
22.1.. Pnoblo- oolvin; Algorith-
22.5. Solution of ”oblo- on o counter
22.6. Solution of promo-o on pumhoord pmouiu «gamut

Bibliom
comm: Iodotol'otvo “sutiotiko'. 1978

8955
w: 1870

31
mi: onrcm. us: on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

ABSTRACTS PROM TNE PUBLICATION 'APPLIBD GEOPNYSICS'

Moscow PRIKLADRAYA GEOPIZIKA in Russian No 90. I978 pp 3, I7. 3|. 66. 56.
69, 78. 86. 95. I05. IIO. II9. l29. I35. I67. I57. I66. I70. I75. l88

UDC 550.81%

CEOPIIYSICAL FIELD ACCOUNTING IN DATA PROCESSING FOR AN OPTICAL SYSTEM "111!
RANDOM DBTUNING PARAMETERS

[Abstract of article by Polshkov. H. K.. and Kuznetsov, A. I.]

(Text) Ah analysis of optical systens for processing infatuation given un-
controlled detuning system elements which are observed in industrial prac-
tice it presented. Expressions were derived for a signal in a Fourier
plane and following spatial filtration relative to the parameters of the
system's defocusing. sinplifiad aethods for evaluating and calculating the
influence of detuning on a signal under a well defined experinsnt geonetry
were examined.

I table. I illustration and 6 bibliographical references.
UDC 550.83‘.5
CORRECTION OP SRISI‘I‘IC CONSTRUCTIONS IN LAYERBD EDIA um! CDRVCD macs:

[Abstract of article by Nevinnyy, A. v.; Zentsov, Ye. le.; Durhin, A. 1.;
and Ranazanowa. 8. H.)

[Text] The construction of seisnic surfaces in layered media with curved
demarcation boundaries is described. The question concerning refine-ant of

a high-speed stratified medium nodal in the construction process was examined.
An algoritha for calculating the coordinates of the reflected layered ele-
ments in conplicatedly constructed nedia is presented which allows for the
refinement of the status of reflected surfaces and the forecasting of the
magnitude of the velocity intervals.

I table and 6 illustrations.

32
POR OPPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 550.8“.5

TliE INVERSE PROBLEM OF SEISMIC REFLECTION SHOOTING FOR ALTERNATE SEISMIC
HAVE VELOCITIES

[Abstract of article by Piyp, V. 3.]

[Text] A method in propoaed which would allow one on the baaia of a mv
[reflected wave method] time profile to determine a certain two-dinenaional
continuoue velocity function which approximatea the diatribution of the
true wolocitiea in the profile. Algorithm are derived with the aid of
which one nay calculate the nean tine profile and by comparing it with the
original one nay evaluate the level of differentiation between the actual
Velocity diatribution from the honoganeoua function.

1. illuatrationa and 9 bibliographical raferancea.

one 550.8%.5
ALGORITHMS OP INTERPOLATION l-‘OR EFFECTIVE AND INTERVAL VEIDCITY DETECTION
[Abatract of article by Karaailt. V. M.]

[Text] Varioua aapecta of interpolation along the tine axia for reflected
wave parenetera are exuincd. An eValuation ia perfoned of errora under

a widely diaperaed linear interpolation of the gene value which in propor-
tional to the tine gain along the in-phaae axia. Optiairad algorithm are
analyzed for interpolating "(7*th which in the abaence of by diaplaca-
neat. agreee with the more accurate hypotheeia concerning the unifonity
of velocitiea between two reflecting lavela.

\

I table, 3 illuatrationa and 3 bibliographical rafarencaa.

ODC 550.834.05

A RTNOD POE CALCULATING “ION-SPEED EETERDGENEITIES IN THE UPPER PART 0?
THE PROFILE "MILE RECORDING REFLECTED WAVES IN CDP DATA PROCESSING

(Abatract of article by Lorineltiy. 2. ll.)

(“textl A aathod ia deacribad for correcting random and regular coaponant
arrora in atatiatical corractiona baaad on their utilisation at aourca in-
formation for the t line of a reflected wave in the 0“ [total point erup-
tion] and 01? [totaI point reception] tine profilaa. Ina-plea of the
aethod'a teating againet aimlated and actual aateriala are praaented to
illuatrate the effectiveneaa of ita uaa.

5 illuatratione and a bibliographical raferancea.

33
ton onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1106 550.834.058.519

THE DIGITAL SIMULATION OF A HAVE FIELD CONSIDERING THE “FRACTION BASED ON
1118 FERN PRINCIPLE

(Abatract of article by hatveyenko. G. V.)

[Text] An algorithn ie refined for digital ainulation of wave fielda by
the utiliration of the introduction into the nodal of refraction linite of
undefined configuration. The programmed aolution includaa the original al-
gorithn for rapid calculation of been trajectoriea haaed on the Fern prin-
ciple. The reeulta of the progran'a application atteat to the conaidereble
influence of the focuaing factor on the dynamica of wave deacription and on
the neceeaity for calculating the bean refraction in taaka of time inten-
eive tranaiornatione.

3 illuetrationa and 5 bibliographical referencee.
uoc 550.3%.5

THE EFFICIENCY OF 1118 GDP TECHNIQUE FOR A DIPPING OCCURRENCE OF EEFLECTING
SURFACES

[Aberract of article by Kotlyarov, V. 1.)

[Text] It ie ehovn that under conditiona when reflecting eurfacea are
characterized by inclination anglee oi nore than I0°. the efficiency of the
COP technique decreaaee. Crapha are preaented which depict vithin which in-
clined angular relationahip of multiple generatricee and reflecting eurtacee
the multiple reflectione are au-narized coherently. A concluaion it reached
concerning the neceeeity for calculating the inclination angle in the CD?
lethod.

3 illuatratione.
unc 550.834.05:5 l9

COMPUTER 980C858!“ OP csz [Deep Seianic Sounding] AND W [Scienic Refrac-
tion uerhod] 8818mm

[Abetract of article by Pavlenhova. N. 1.; Pilipenko, V. 1a.; and Dryuba. V. v.)

[Text] A nethod ie propoeed {or conputer proceeaing or 682 and m aeino-
gran which per-it the reception of provieional protilee ai-iler to the 30V
profilea, and thereby utilize all the exiating nethoda for proceaaing the
recordinge -- at-etion. nerging. va'rioue (one of ﬁltration. etc. The
technique in baeed on the nethod for reduced travel tine cuma and propoeee
a mltiple rewriting of portions of the interference oecillationa vith vari-
oue velocity reductione. Thin eneuree an uninterrupted recording in a pro-
viaional profile and ellove for the interpretation or the interference aonee.

3'0
m omcm. us: 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5 illustrations and 6 bibliographical references.

000 550.836 .0“

FREQUENCY CHARACTERISTICS FOR THE 'EARTHQUAKB-SHOCK RBCORDBR-CABLE-AHPLIPIER
INPUT ' SYSTEM

[Abstract of article by Ryabkov. V. V.; Polyakov, A. P.; and Antipin, Yu. 6.]

[Text] An algorithm and a computer processing program is described for the
frequency characteristics of a group of earthquake-shock recorders which are
included through s joining cable to an amplifier input. The program which
was developed allows in each specific situation for the calculation with
sufficient accuracy of the frequency characteric of thc "Earthquake-Shock
Recorder-Cable-Amplifier Input" systen and thereby significantly simplify
the development of seismic channels with given properties.

1 table, 6 illustrations and S bibliographical references.

UDC 550083706
SBARCBING FOR BENCHBS 0P SALINB SUBSTANCES BY TUB TBLLURIC CURRENT METHOD

[Abstract of article by Anishchenko. G. N.]

[Text] The applicability of the TT [telluric current] method for searching
for benches of saline substances is evaluated on the basis of the theoreti-
cal calculations of a telluric current field over a two-dimensional model
of a two-level profile with an escarpment of insulated substructure.

It is shown that the graphs for a median field intensity over a sharply in-
clined escarpment, a vertical grade and a bench are similar and can hardly
be used to establish the differences in the models depicted above.

3 illustrations and 7 bibliographical references.

unc 550.837.6(538.32)

TRANSIENT SOUNDING IN A THIN CONDUCTING um WITH DISSEMINATBD WRI-
TIBS 0P CONDUCTIVITY ' '

[Abstract of article by Glechikov. V. A.. and Sidorov. V. A.]

[Text] The earth's crust is nonhomogsneous in thickness and longitudinal
conductivity, and frequently can be presented in the form of conducting
layers with the inclusions of some longitudinal conductivity.

Examined in the article is an approach to average the parameters of the non-
homogeneous surface for calculating the heterogeneity through electromagnetic

35
ron orncw. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eoundinge. It waa ehovn that the incluaion of heightened conductivity in-
fluencee the redistribution of the Vortex field more etrongly than the in-
clueion of lowered conductivity.

6 bibliographical references.

UDC 550.3708550.837

Til! APPLICATION OF A STOCHASTIC ROCK mom. IN Til! TIiEORY OI" INDUCED POI-ARI -
ZATION

[Abetrect of article by Lobanov. Ye. M.)

[Text] In the application of the method for induced polaritation a atochaatic
rock model in exanined. An integrated equation it deriVed for the etructural
function. The reaulte of ita digital eolution are etated by a method of

nornaliration through the uee of rav data which hae been neaeured to a high
degree of accuracy -- on the order of IX.

12 bibliographical referencee.

UDC 550.837.82
AN APPROXIMATION THEORY OF TRANSIENT SOUNDINC IN MAGNETIC IDDII’ICATION

[Abatract of article by Gubatenko. V. P.)

[Text] Aa exanplee for the formation of a vertical nagnetic dipole field
which hae been poeitioned above a honogeneoue and nonhonogeneoue fine con-
ducting plate, criteria are given for the application of an approninate aolu-
tion. It ie ehovn that through the proper aelection of a vorking nodal an
approximate eolution givea eatieEactory reaulta in the region of the early
etagee in the proceaa of field formation.

2 illuetratione and II bibliographical referencea.

UDC 530.838.016

CIRCULAR MAGNITIC ANOHALIBS 0? THE RUSSIAN PLATFORM AND THEIR RILATION ro
CIRCULAR HAGNBTIC STRUCTURES

[Abetract of article by Hoahinekaya. I. P.)

(Text) It is shown that circular regional and local magnetic anoaaliee of

the Rueaian platform. the circular tectonic for-etiona of the noon and ground
circular magnetic atructuree coneiet of elenente eimilar in for: and connected
by an analogoua ehape. The concluaion ie reached that the circular magnetic
etructuree vhich are einilar to the circular lunar cratere and rear correepond
to the circular nagnetic anonaliee of the Iueeian platforn. Geologic data
are preeented vhich aupport the validity of thia conclueion.

36
POR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
l-OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Examined ia the connection between the poaition of the regional circular mag-
netic anonaliee of the Ruaaian platform and the location of ore. coal. oil
and gaa depoaite which have a well defined practical interaat.

I table. 3 illuatrationa and lo bibliographical raferencaa.

"DC 550.83l.0l6
THE INTERPRETATION OF RBSIDUAI. GRAVITY ANOHALIES

[Ahatract of article by Golitdra. O. I.)

[Text] In a aeriea of exanplaa arrora are ahown in the quantitative inter-
pretation of local gravitational anonaliea which ariae aa a reault in aut-
[iciently taking into account the radiatribution of one to the excluaion
oi the regional background. Theae errore are eapecially great under vari-
able naaa denaitiea which create local and regional fielda.

6 illuatrationa and I4 bibliographical referencea.
UDC 550.831.23.084

INVESTIGATION OF THE NONLINEAR“? 0? TN! REVOLUTION VALUE 0? A GRAVIIBTER
WINTER

[Abetract of article by Nantaov. L. 0.. and Romanov. I. 8.]

(Text) Examined are certain factora which appear aa the aourcea for errora
in the reaulta of neaaurenante with gravinetera which contain cryatal aan-
aory ayatena conatructed on the Golitayn aeianograph principle with two typea
of conatruction for the conpenaetion aaaenbly: gated and non-gated. Bvalu-
ationa of the influence of the inatellation of a conpenaation apring. the
alope of ita era. the inatebility of ita linear tenaion and the irregularity
of the nicronetric acrew are preaented. Race-nandationa on the application
of the two typaa of conatruction for the conpenaation aaaenbliea are given.

3 illuatrationa and a bibliographical referencea.

00C 550.832.“!

THE APPLICATION OF SYNCNRONOUS ORTNOGONAL DBTICTION I'OI RECORDING 0F SWIG
LOG PRIHARY SIGNALS

[Ahatract of article by Lin'hov. V. A.)

[Text] Reported are quaatione pertaining to the application of aynchrenoue
orthogonal detection through proceaaing and recording of geophyaicel aignala
which deacribe the wave proceaeaa. Buninad are queationa concerning in-
creaaing the accuracy in deternining the dynanica of nplitude and frequency
conpoaition of the AK [acouatic logging] aignala.

37
’03 OWICIAI. USE ONLY
THE ASYHPTOTBS 0F EXTREME CURVES OP BORSBOLE SOUNDING
[Abetract of article by Al'pin. L. H., and Bondarenko. H. T.)

[Text] Examined and evaluated are Varioue methode for determining the any-p-
totic valuee of apparent reeietanre. Through grid modeling in a homogeneoua

(ield aeymptotce for curved borehole aounding in fine etrata are derived with-
out penetration.

I table. 3 illuetrationa and 5 bibliographical reterancee.

UDC 550.832.53
THE EFFECT 09 ROCK DENSITIES ON TR! RESULTS OF NEUTRON BORBMOLB HBASURBHINTS

[Abetract of article by Reavanov, R. A.)

[Text] Examined ie the approximation method for calculating the effect of
rock denaity on the neutron method readinge. The technique in baeed on utili-
zation of the L-equivalency principle. Nomograme are calculated for the in-
troduction of deneity influence correctione into the readinge of the neutron
methode. The utilization order of the nomograma through interpretation of
the data from the neutron methoda ie deecribed vith the objective of deter-
mining the poroaity and the gee aaturation of the atrata.

lo illuatrationa and 6 bibliographical referencee.

UDO 550.83795l8.5l7.9‘8

THE SOLUTION O? m IMRSR PROBLEM OP RADIOACTIVE LOGGING BY m RRGULARI-
ZATION METHOD

[Abetract of article by Timonov. A. A.. and ‘ranana, V. 1’.)

[Text] The formulation of the general inVerae problem of radioactive logging
in given. A comparative analyaie of the known methode for ite aolution are
preaented. A conclueion ia reached concerning the (act that the moat pro-
mieing method ie A. h. Tikhonov'e. It ie ehovn that the aolution of the
general inveree taah oi ax [radioactive logging] leada to the eolution of

the implicit operator equation of the I-type vith the approximately given
operator by the regularization method. the algorithm (or the approximate
eolution of the inveraa problem of g-e-ga-a logging by eingle diapereion

ie preeented.
II bibliographical reterencee.

oomxcar: Vaeeoyuanyy nauchno-ieeledovatel'ahiy inetitut geotieicheekikh
metodov raavedki. I978 38

9°“ m orncm. use our
cso: lezo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATION

LIST OF SOVIEI‘ ARTICL- DEALING WITH comma MATERIALS

Moscow GWUDARSTWYY KO‘UTEH' SOVB'I‘A HINIBTROV 888R P0 NAME I 'rmmm.
MDIIYA NAUK 888R. SIQML'NAYA INFORMATSIYA. WIM WY

in Russian Vol 3, No 19, 1978 pp 3-6

[Following is 6 listing of Soviet entries m- SIQML'NAYA DII’ORHATSIYA.
xmrrsmmms Imam! (3mm. mmmmnmsm mmma). e
:ibliomphic publication of VINITI. This listing is from Vol 3. No 19.
978

[noel-pa]

2. Investigation of interaction in the system of the meoeerth ole-eat.
mulu-e “MM/A. 20 'Pe' K”h1.hm' To "e. VIMOV. As 80. mupm. ”e 8e.
Skid“. Be 80 “fr. Mk. kh1I.-tokhnol. ill-t. 1.0 be 10 ”4.1.1."... 1m.
No 98. 19-21.

10. Effect of high teeperetnre casting and egine on the quelity of biutenio
steel-copper wire. mm. 1. K.. ”have. Ye. I” Levin. Ye. N. 'Peoriye
i mktike pr-ve eetisov." Svetdlovsk. 197?. 116-120.

8. Investiption of edheeive interaction between unlike reﬂector: mus.
:ggchgv.zgu. N. "Polucheniye i ieeled.evoyetv novykh Item-mom" Kiev.
. 3- .

11. P. Method for nonfatal-ins two-ply pipes me steel tepee. 8113:».

Y“. Is. Muho. Ve ‘e. him. Y‘e ”e. "GOV. Ve ‘0' M“. Le be. u“"
I. A” 81min. V. 3.. bpovteev. In. A. ﬁgs-mu. [III tram. woe-eti.
Sinmk. trubn. H.] Avt. ev. am ( 23/02). no 556021. mm. 28.
11.75. No 2300206. opubl. 21. 0677.

13. Stresses in uni-cane :11- of the (re-m)“ (310)1‘ entee.

mulch Ve 8'. hollow 0. Is “'18. m. 1 mvdeo. ima. “so '0 6.
1289-1291.

39
mu onxcm. as: om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

17. 01 nechsnisne for rupturing orthogonally-reinforced composite nsterisls
under plane stress. Psrtnevskiy. V. V.. Strel’nikovs. N. L. “Pr. Honk.
snore. in-ta. " 1978. N0 353. 30-3“.

18. Nonlinear-slutic defornstion to dispersion-filled cospositss. Pert-
sevskiy. V. V.. Yskovlsv. A. A. "Tr. Hosk. eners. in-ts.” 1978. No 353. 316-37.

19. Effect of strstificstions on the durability of s three-ply core under
conpreesion. Kursin. A. A. “Tr. Honk. onsre. in-ts.“ 1978. No 353. 37451.

20. Durability of sultilsyer plstes in s supersonic stress of gas. Rossnyuk.
V. I. ”Dr. Honk. snerg. in-ts." 1978. No 353. 20-216.

22. Hicrosechenicel theories of strength. Oasis. r. “Kospositsion. nsteri-
CIYe To Be mmh‘niyo 1 “81-61081...” "e. 1978. 106'165e

3i. Investigation of sons properties of conbinsd fibers of silicon carbide
“d mwl‘.' IVN'IOV. A. vs. K003110111“. Te Ne. VIA-GOV. ‘e as now; Vs Fe
"Tr. hock. khis.-tskhnol. in-ts in. D. I. Hendsleyeve." 197?. No 98. 32-35.

32. Investigation of the nicrostructure and some properties of fibers lads
of silicon nitride end conbined fibers of silicon nitride and silica. Ivenov.
A. Veg x”h1.h’anp Te Nu Vhbov. ‘e 8e me make ”1‘s't‘mole 18““ 1‘s
D. I. Hendeleysvs.” 1977. No 98. “6-167.

35. A new olsss of conposite nstsrisls using eutectic setsl oxide system.

Boadsnovs. 2. P. Ksshishysn. 'i‘. 3.. Vlssov. A. 8. "Dr. Honk. khin.-tekhnol.
ill-M 1‘s ns Is MOIO’W$.' 197?. no 98. 26'28e

36. Study of conditions {or obtsining stronger conposite Interisls. Vlseov.
‘0 8e. “Wotan”. Ne 8e. ”02080“. V0 Ae ”u ”ask. mrtmols 111-“
is. D. I. hendeleyevs.” 1977. No 98. 16-18.

37. Technology of nnufscturinc end investigsting hest-rssistent mphite
uterisl with sirconiun-diboride. silicon and vsnsdius sdditivss. Krivorshein.

D. A.. myrekh. h. A.. Des-move. V. 8.. Petrov. in. l.. Levsdsv. Yu. N.
"Poroshk. setsllurgiye." 1978. no 6. 60-61: (nag. sbetrsct).

38. Relention of initisl stresses in the process of ﬁnding products ads
of cosposite nterisls. 'harsekhenov. 1!. lb. 'i‘r. lock. enerc. in-te."
1978. No 353. lei-lob.

39. a. the lechmies of cospreseion in setsl-cersnis nterisls. mtnm.
Le 3.. VIMOV. As 8e. mtuw. 'e Is. Pom. Ge ‘0. ”to “Re Hill.-
tskhnol. 111-“ 1-. D. I. MOIO’M." NO 98. 29-31.

00. Belt-lubricating iron costings with oxides. carbides and boa-ides.
Borodin. 1. 1. “Percent. utelltn‘ciys.“ 19m. so 2. 26-29 (m. ebtrsct).

to
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

9). Investigation of solo properties of netsl-oorenic composites. Gutnovs.
Lo 3. . Vhlov. A. 8e. K03t1k0V. V. In. Skid“. Be 80. “‘1“, Ge Ae 8h°p11°V9

{5 i. "Pr. Meek. khie.-tekhnol. in-ts is. D. I. Hendeleyeve.“ 197?. No 98.
- 3.

M. Coupoeite core-ice with greater permittivity ueing o utrix of quarts
gloss and e rutile nodifying phase. Popil'skiy. B. You Doreenevich. 1.. A.
"Tr. Hook. khin.-tekhnol. in-te in. D. I. Hendeleyeve.” 1977. No 98. 7 - 11.

“9. Investigation of capillary penetration of liquids in hotel-poly»: coe-
pounde. Pinehuk. L. 8. "Vestei AN 388R. Ser. fie. tekhn. n.. Iev. All 888R.
Ser. fia-tekhn. n.." 1978. no 2. 119-122 (ml. sbetreot).

5". Point welding of oonpoeite materials of the elulinun-boron eyetee.
ny‘m‘ogozi Ve Io. wlov, I). Be. Shlvyrin. Ve "e "8mm pit-VD." 1978'
N0 5. 1 ‘ e

55. All-Union Conference on "Using tibroue rei‘reotory uterine for lining
induetriel furnacee.“ Shekov. I. 1.. Geodu. A. N.. Kutukov, V. P. "Ogneupory."
1W8. "0 7' 51‘9‘0

58. Corpoeite thick-fill: resistors using eolybdenul boride. Bulevin. I. A..

Koehelev. N. 1.. Yekovlev. B. Ye. "Tr. Hook. khinwtekhnol. in-te in D. I.
Hendeleyevs.‘ 197?. No 98. 168-52.

60. K. Hodern nethode for herd-facing end hemd-feoing nteriele. Tee. dokl.
l Veee. neuch.-teldm. konf.. nur'kov, 1978. Elite: Dudko. D. A.. Neuk.
dunks. 1978. 131 pegee. 90 illuetretione.

85. P. Gurge for nnufecturing ooepoeite materials. hrpinoe, D. h.
Groeheve, V. H. Hikheehchuk. Ye. P.. Rutkovekiy. A. Yen Akhletehin. H. A..
nummm. v. I. [In-t siren. nterieloved. an neon]. m. ev. seen

0

$010" 735/10. s on v 35/70 no 576302. any. 3.05.76. no 2356755. om.

8?. Syntheeie end inveetigetion of coepoeite eeteriele ueing low-ulting
point leed-eiiieete glue end condenser cenelioe. Dyetlove. Ye. 11..

She-kelovioh. V. 1.. Hinenkove. G. You Preteeevioh. G. I. “steklo. eitem
i eilikety (H.nek)." 1978. no 7. 117-123.

88. Coupoeite oerelioe with higher permittivity ueing e atria: of querte
ghee and e nodified pheee -- rutile. Popil'ekiy. 1!. You Bereenevioh. L. 1..
me Mk. “Io-tmol. in.“ 1-o D. I. mum.“ 1m. ‘0 ”9 7-110

WWI VHITI. 1978
3291
(30: 1370 m

kl
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY