APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100030024-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8321

8 March 19 79

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 14/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parcntheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNIM (MNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA'IION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
*—

BIDLIOGIA'NIC DATA
SHE E T

I. u...”- N... JPRS L/ 8321 _
I. lnl- n IMiusI

TRANSLATIONS 0N ussu SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY - PHYSICAL
SCIENCES AND Trzcumum, (Fouo 14/79)

  

I. In Ipnrﬂ’s Arron-Ion km

     
        
 
  
  
   

  

. upon an.-

8 Match 1979

I l'rrim-nng Granulation liq-[c

  

 
  

’. \us'u-rul

  

  

0. Prune-uni. ihgamluum Van- and AM" “
Joint Publications Research Service
l000 North Globe Road

Arlington. Virginia 22201

   
     
      
   
 
   
 
    
    
   
      
  
  
 
    
     
  
  
  
   
  
  

W. I'roprnITnh/‘orh Dan No.

 
   

  

ll. (neuron/Gnu No.

12, Hume-"lull: i‘lyanlllinn Reno and More“

   

IJ. Type ol Report It Prue-i
Lowered

As above

I}. m” '- m nun NIII‘\

  

.—-——.——

IG. \l»- II II '

 

 

  

The report contains information on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences; chemistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; sathematical
sciences; cybernetics. computers; mechanical. industrial. civil. and marine
engineering; methods and equipment; missile technology; navigation,
communications. detection.and counter-assures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance; physics; propulsion and fuels; space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

 
   
    
    
          
    
  
   

II. A- ‘ Ina-k .In-I I|.- via-m Analysis. We. [hwy-upturn

USSR Electronics Missile Technology
Aeronautics Electrical Engineering Navigation and
Astronomy Energy Conversion Conounications
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atmospheric Sciences Matheeatics Countermeasures
Chemistry Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Computers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics industrial Engineering - Ordnance

l Earth Sciences Marine Engineering Physics
Oceanography Methods

Propulsion and Fuels
Equipnent Space Technology

Ink l-l. u'IIlal- (qu n-l '1.ch 1mm.

Ih -”~\H h-thmo- 01.03.04.07.08.09,10.11.12.13.lé,l6,l7,l8.19.20,21.22

II. |. ul aldlll‘ " II: nu nl

     

  

. No. ol Pages

116

     

  
 

For official Use Only. Limited
Number of Copies Available From JPRS

.... u-u- . v n;-

rnsrosuuavsssrpnonucsn ““°°‘°‘““”'”
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/832
8 Ketch 1.9

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND. TECHNOLOGY
(9000 14/79)

Coureu'rs

“ETHICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

Nuclear Pore: Cmerating Unite Hith Ram-1000 Reactora
Deecribed, Bvelueted

(L. H. Vermin; BLBK‘IRICHESKIYE STANTSII, No l, 1979) ....

A Method of Interchennel Synchroniution in the Playback of e

Hultichennel Recording of a Hideband Signal Hith Prequmcy
Divieion

(A. I. Gnchilthin; RADIOTBIONIKA, NOV 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeee-o

Filtering Diecrete Multifrequncy Signale in Nongeueeion
Interference

(I. H. Pyﬂm, .t .11; “almm' NOV 78) coeeeeoeooe

A Shield in the Shepe of a Double Ring To Shield Antmnae
Ageinet Interfermce

(Yu. H. HOI'nlkOV; mlmm' NOV 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

The Structure of a Receiver end the Optimal Detection
Oteracterietice for Signale Hith e Randal Initiel
Phaee, Amplitude and Duration
(Go Do P111“: BADIO‘I'EIGIIIKA, Nov 78) eo.eeeeeeeeeeeeeeoeeee

The Application of the Hethode of Gene Theory to the
Recognition of the Signale of e Source "here Trenefouins
Type Interfermce le Prue-It in the enamel
(Y0. Po KUINCtCOV; RADIOTBIONIKA, NOV 78) eeeeeeeeeeeeeeel

A Quantitative Evaluation of the Economic Engineering
Efficimcy of Diecontinuoue Cmmicatime Service
(1*. r. Yurlov, L. A. loahdeetvmekeya; mmm,

NOV 78) 0.0.0.000...II..0.0...OI.0......ODCOOCOODOCODCCOOO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONst (Continued)

Equivelent. Perenetere of Gunn Diode in Two-Frequency Hode
(A. s. Koeov, 1. A. Stankov; MDIOTEIGNIKA I
ELEKTRQIM. NO 10' 1978) 1'000000000OOOOOOOOIOGOO...

Principlee of Hinieturieetion of Peeeive Hicmeve Strip
Elnmte
(Ye. L. Bechinine, et el.; RADIOTBKINIM I
ELmeIKA' A08 78) .OOICOOOOUOOOOOOOD-lﬂol000......

GEOHIYSICS, ASTWMY AND SPACE

Fundunmtele of the Theory end Technique for Neutron
Activetion Blunt end Selt Anelyeie of See Heter-
Under Pull-Scele Conditione
(Ye. M. Filippev, I. A. Lanenove; HORSKIYE
GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSLENVANIYA, No l, 1978) ........

Poeeibility of Determining See Heter Selinity end Dneity
Fm Cme-Redietien Attenuetion
(Yo. H. Pilippov; MORSKIYE GIDIDPIZICHESKIYB
ISSszVmIYA, No l, 1978) ICOOIOOOOOOI‘ICOOOOOOOa...

Experimatel check of e Beeeleee Hethod for Heeeoring
the Electrical Field in the See
(Yu. P. Butmv, et el.; HORSKIYE GIDROPIZICHESKIYB
ISSLEmeIYA, NO 1' L978) OOOOOOOCCOOI'OOOOIOODOC...

Celculetion of en Equivelmt Beee for e Heeeuring
Syet- Hith Current Feiring of e Rectanguler Fem
(V. I. Lopemikov, et el.; HORSKIYE
GIDIIOFIZICRESKIYB ISSLEDOVANIYA, No l, 1978) ........

PUBL ICATIW S

Infometicn Netwrke end Their Anelyeie
(A. D. Kherkevich, V. A. Gemeeh; mFORiATSIWNYYB
SET! I m. MALIZ. 1978) O'COOOOIOOOOOOOUOOOOOCC.I...

Liet of Soviet Articlee Dealing Hith meeite Heteriele
(GOSUMRSTVDINYY KCMITET SOVETA MINISTROV 8885 P0
NAUKE 1 MIKE. AKADDiIYA NAUK SSSR. SIGIAL'
NAYA INFORMTSIYA. KMPOZITSWYYE MATERIALY,

NO 21’ 1978) eaeeoeeeeeeeoeeeeeveeeeoeeveeeeeeeeeeour

Liet of Soviet Articlee Deeling With Coupoeite Heteriele
(wSUDABS'IVBiNYY xmrm' SOVETA HINISTRDV sssa
PO NAUKE 1 mm. AKADDiIYA NAUK sssn. SIGIAL'
NAYA INFORMTSIYA. xmpoznsmmm MATERIALY,

No 23. 1978) .0000.0do.0ecoco.ecoe'oodoeoeoodoooooooo
- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pege

63

68

81

89

96

101

110

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

NUCLEAR Pom GENERATING UNITS "111! RINK-1000 REAC'DORS DESCRIBED. EVALUATED
Hoscow BLBKTRICUBSKIYE srmsn in Russian No l. 1979 pp 10-15

[Article by Lu. Voronin. candidate in technical sciences. Scyuzatoaenergo
[Nuclear Power Alliance]: "Experience in Starting up and Mastering the
Rated Capacity of Power Generating Units with ”MK-1000 Reactora"]

[Text] In keeping with the "Main Guidelines for the Development of the
National Economy of the USSR for 1976-1980." adopted by the 25th CPSU Congress.
there has been an unprecedented advance in nuclear power in the European
sector of our country. During the years of the 10th Five-Year Plan period
alone. the plan is to add 13.7 million kl! of capacity at nuclear power plants.

At the present tine extensive construction is under way on nuclear power genera-
ting units at the sites of the Novovoronethskiy. Kola, Kursk. Charnobyl'.
Leningrad, Smolensk. Arnenian. Deloyarsk. Rovno. Southern Ukrainian. Kalinin.
Ignalina and other ABS'a. .

At nuclear power plants whose construc'ion is planned for the next five to 10
years will be installed chiefly large power generating units with nuclear re-
actors with an electrical capacity of one million to 1.5 nillion W and turbo-
generstor sets with a capacity cf 500.000, 750.000 and one nillion W.

An inortant contribution to the develop-ant of nuclear power in the 10th

and following five-year plan periods will be power generating units with

type ”HR-1000 and ”MK-1500 channel-type uraniun-grsphite boiling water
reactors. Bach power generating unit of an ABS with an ram-1000 is furnished
with two 500,000-li turbines, and in units with an RINK-1500 will be installed
two turbines with a capacity of 750.000 kw each.

The installation in a power generating unit of two turbogensrator sets operating
fro- a single nuclear reactor noticeably facilitates the mastery of coaplex

ABS equipsent and pronotes better utilization of installed capacities and
efficient organization of repair servicing of turbines and auxiliary equipment
in turbine room.

At the end of 1978 in operation were four power generating units with ”HR-1000
reactors (two at the Leningrad ABS and one each at the Kursk and Chernobyl'

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Aﬁs's). The total electrical capacity of power generating units with type

RBHK reactors in operation and under construction at the present time is

20 million k". About one half of all the electric power which will be generated
at nuclear power plants in the 10th Five-Year Plan period is planned for pro-
duction at Aﬁs's with RBMK-lOOO reactors.

The first prototype power generating unit with an anus-loco at the Leningrad
ABS was put into industrial service in December 1973 and reached its rated
capacity of one million RH by the end of November 1976. A second similar unit
at this ABS was put into service in the middle of 1975. Both power generating
units at the Leningrad ABS have been operating reliably and stably in the
Lenenergo [Leningrad Power] System in the basic load mode.

In 1976-1978 about 65 billion kWh of electric power were generated with them.

Broad utilization of the know-how gained in starting up and mastering the
prototype power generating units at the Leningrad ABS has made it possible to
master successfully similar units at other nuclear power plants. For example.
in December 1976 the first power generating unit at the Kursk ABS began to
produce power, and its rated capacity was reached in the first half of October
1977. At the end of September 1977 the first power generating unit went into
industrial service at the Chernobyl' ABS. and its rated capacity was mastered
as early as in the second half of May 1978.

The first phases of the Kurak and Chernobyl' ABS'a differ little from one
another with regard to design solutions. They consist of two power generating
units with an electrical output of one million h" each. The basic equipment

of each of these units is an Rana-1000 reactor, two K-500-65/3000 turbogenerator
sets and two type TVV-SOO-Z generators. The basic technological layout of

a power generating unit with an RINK-1000 is shown in fig 1.

A distinctive feature of ABS's with type RBHK reactors is the fact that the
technological layout of each power generating unit is of the single-circuit
type and differs little in this respect from the traditional layouts used in
thermal electric power plants. Serving as the source of thermal power are
channel-type uranium-graphite reactors of the boiling water type with water
as the heat transfer agent.

The water heat transfer agent. at a temperature of 270°C with a total flow
rate through the reactor of 65, 000 to 50, 000 m3/h, is supplied through indi-
vidual pipelines to the reactor' a fuel channels (TK's), where it is heated to
the saturation point and is partly evaporated (the mean vapor content at the
outlet of a TX is approximately 15 percent). Then the steam-water mixture
through individual pipelines from each TK enters a drum-type steam trap.
After separation, the steam, at a rate of about 5. a million tons per hour

at 286°C and a pressure of 70 kg/cm2 , is sent to the turbines, and the con-
densate from the turbogenerator sets. passing through feed-water heaters. is
mixed with the water from the drum-type steam traps and is supplied to the
TK's by means of the main circulation pumps (GTsN's).

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
A

.9.0.0.0....”U'0C00000OOOQOOOQCOOOCOOOOICOOFQ 0..

Figure l.

:unuooo usuosooeeosnoucusses-ounce nomooooooouoe souou 0000500.":
Woes-omens“. uuoomoooussouunu .00 no; 3 recon-£7

  

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

      
 

ﬂdmubnqw

one.

0

w > aw

   

  
   

. .
ommmeoeeeo esumemoNeomsooo-eemoooo..omoou

' 7 .
OOOOOOOO’OOI"

Basic Technological Layout of Power Generating Unit of an

ABS with an Isak—1000 Reactor:

l--heat transfer agent; II--decontamination loop water; 111--
steam-water nixture; IV-ateam; V--teed water; VI--condensats;

, VII--gas loop; l-ateam trap; 2--reactor; 3-—induction manifold;

h--cTsN pump; 5--preasure header; 6--heat transfer agent de-
contamination system; 7-intersediate steam trap; 8--inter-

mediate steam heater: 9--Curbine; 10--condenser; ll--condensate
decontamination system: lZ--feed-vater heater; 13-deaerator;
16--3enerator; A--vater to 802 [control and protection system]
channels; B—-cooling of deflector; c--cooling of SKh"L" system; _
D--vater from washing system; B--to second turbine loop; P--

to KTsTK [fuel channel circulation loop] system

[Key on following page]

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key:
1. E 9. PEN [delivery pump]
2. F 10. To“) [high-pressure cylinder]
3. A ll. TsND [low-pressure cylinder)
lo. 8 12. Cooling water delivery
5. c 13. Condensate pumps
6. Mixture “C + N
7. a 2

8. To bubbler

The repeated forced circulation loop (Me) for the heat transfer agent con-
sists of two independent parts, each of which contains two drum-type steam
traps connected by connectors for steam and water. downcomers from the drum-
type steam traps, the intake and pressure manifolds of the GTsN's. four
GTsN's (three active and one standby), group distributing manifolds. and

also circulation pipes and the necessary stop and regulating fittings. A
circuit water ion exchange decontamination system with a capacity of 200 t/h
is provided for both parts of the We.

The steam partly used 2up in the turbines. at a temperature of 140°C and a
pressure of 3.5 kg/cm2 , after the high-pressure cylinder (TsVD). is sent to
steam superheater traps. Steam superheated to 263‘C at a pressure of 3 kg/cm
enters the low-pressure cylinders (Talm's) of the turbines. and then the
condensers. The major condensate from the turbines, after the condensers.
undergoes total decontamination in ion exchange filters and is heated in the
recovery system to 155°C, and is then sent to the deaerators, whence it is
delivered to drum-type steam traps by means of delivery pumps.

The key reactor and turbine equipment is remote controlled from a unit control
console. All technological monitoring at the A35 is performed by means of

the "Skala" totally automated cmuting and intonation system, making it
possible to monitor the state of equipment. Inks measurements and record para-
meters. warn of deviations in parameters from established limit values. and
to calculate the major conditions and technical and economic indicators for
operation of the power generating unit.

At the Kursk and Chernobyl' AES's a recycling water supply system has been

used which employs open artificial reservoirs. From the reservoir, through

an open delivery channel. the cooling water is delivered to the pumping station
and then by means of circulation pumps with a flowrate of approximately 105

It 3Is is delivered to a delivery tank with a capacity of 20. 000 m3. whence the
water by gravity flow enters to cool the turbines' condensers. This arrangement
improves the reliability of the ABS's operation, since it makes possible normal
cooling of turbine condensers even with a brief interruption (3 min maxi-mm)

in power in the circulation pun motors.

The electric power of the first phases of the Kara]: and Chernobyl' ABS's is
being released into the united power system through three 330-kV overhead lines,
originating at each of these electric pour plants. Hith further expansion of
these ABs's, power will be released also through 7SO-kv overhead lines.

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bach ”MK-1000 reactor is supplied with e loading-and-unloading machine

(82H). designed for removing spent fuel elements from the reactor's core

and installing fresh elements there. The design of the R2“ makes it possible
to perform these important operations in a reactor without reducing the output
0 the ABS.

Based on the experience of constructing and putting into service existing
ABS's. there hes been further elucidation of the main aspects of and steps in
starting up and mastering power gene. sting unite with RINK-1000 type boiling
water channel reactors.

The specific features of the technological process at an ABS. the presence

of a considerable amount of complex special equipment, and the need to

ensure nuclear and radiation safety impose special stipulations and require-
ments on the quality of performance of building and erection work and startup
operations and tests. especially of tests which determine the extended capacity
for work of equipment and pipelines in the process of operation.

One of the major conditions having a favorable influence on the quality and
duration of startup and adjustment operations, as well as on progress in the
mastery of the rated capacity of A3: power generating units with an smut-1000.
is a high degree of readiness. from the construction and erection standpoint.
to begin startup. on the part of all equipment. key and secondary systems.

and buildings and space of the ABS. since the appearance of ionizing radiation
and radioactive contamination after startup of the reactor unit considerably

hinders and at times lakes impossible the performance of startup and adjustment
work.

The technological sequence. extent and structure of startup and adjustment
operations at nuclear power plants depend to a considerable extent on the
type of reactor unit used at these ABS'a.

0n the basis of know-how gained in constructing and putting into operation

the first power generating units at the Rural: and Chernobyl' AES's. as well

as at other nuclear power plants. it is possible to single out the following
major steps in starting up and mastering the rated capacity of power generating
units with snot-1000 reactors.

1. Testing. adjusting and putting into service secondary equipment, systems
and units enabling the startup and normal operation of key technological
equipment (under this heading come chemical water treatment systems. electrical
equipment and electrical service equipment of the power system for the AES's
internal needs. lubrication maintenance. nitrogen and air compressor units.
industrial water supply systems. and the like).

2. Post-assembly individual and systemic cleaning ("shooting through" or
blasting). as well as hydraulic testing of the equipment and pipelines of
the We and all other systems enabling the operation of the reactor and
turbine units.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Cold and hot circulating flushing of the 1091's.

’0. A hot running test of key reactor equipment and thorough adjustment of
technological systems under conditions approximating to a maximum operation
at rated parameters.

5. Inspection and examination of the condition of key equipment of the 10m.
and individual units of the reactor after the hot running test.

6. Thorough check and final adjustment of equipment of the regular and
startup systems for controlling and protecting the reactor (502's).

7. Initial loading of nuclear fuel into the reactor's core.

8. Physical startup of the reactor (checking neutron physics characteristics
and the effectiveness of the 802's absorbers. organizing initial loading of

the core. and also bringing the reactor to the capacity level. on the order of
one percent of the rated, which is minimlly controllable by the regular $02).

9. Power startup of the reactor unit.

10. Thorough testing of equipment and all technological systems of the
startup power generating unit when operating at the essigned electric power
in parallel with the power system.

11. Step-by—step mastery of the rated capacity of the power generating unit.

Experience has demonstrated that for the purpose of improving the quality of
and shortening the time required for startup and adjustment operations at an
ABS it is advisable to perform all key startup operations according to regular
systems and to refrain to a mudmm extent from using temporary technological
and electrical systems for testing individual equipment or systems.

A typical feature of the startup of an ABS with Rant-1000 reactors is the
considerable amount of work involving post-assembly decontamination and
flushing of reactor equipment and pipelines. Post-assembly flushing of the
We and secondary technological syst-s serving the reactor unit represents
essentially the beginning of startup operations at power generating units
under construction.

Flushing of Ms equipment and pipelines is performed in two stages: First
high-speed water flushing is performed on individual elements or sections of
pipeline mains and technological systems according to an open system, with
discharge of the flush water into the waste water system or into special con-
tainers, and then hot and cold circulating flushing is performed on the Ma
as a whole.

In high-speed flushing of individual pipelines and systems it is necessary
to ensure the required rate of flushing water (as a rule. water rates are
set 1.5 times higher than design rates). Flushing of pipelines and 1001‘s

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equipnent it is a good idea to begin with individual rapid flushing ("shooting
through"). with chenically desslsed water. of each fuel channel for 3 to 5 nin
at a rate of flow of about 150 I /h. After individual flushing of all key
and secondary pipelines and equip-eat. cold (misu- water temperature of
SO’C) and then hot circulating flushing are perforaed in each separate half
of the We.

Hot closed-cycle flushing of the We is parforned for the purpose of guaran-
teeing the necessary cleanliness of the inside spaces of equipment and pipe~
lines. The water is heated in the Ms on account of the heat released during
the operation of the G‘l'sh'a. Experience has demonstrated that in hot closed-
cycle flushing it is advisable to turn on two G‘rsﬂ's apiece alternately in

each half of the 1001's. Then the temperature of the water in the circulation
loop is held steadily at 150 to 155'!) with a total rate of flow of approximately
30,000 Ila/h. and continuous cleaning of the water is perforled by nssns of
nechanical regular bypass decontamination filters and special sieve-type
filters teqorarily installed in the group distributing headers.

Closed-cycle flushing of the We is terminated upon achieving the required
quality of the flushing water.

For exaaple. upon conclusion of hot closed-cycle flushing of the lCHPTs in
the first power generating unit of the Rural: ABS, the quality of the water
in the loop was characterized by the following figures: iron content--
approximately 0.1 lag/kg; chloride content-mot greater than 0.05 ng/kg;
hardness-abouts ug-equiletg; and presence of oil--less than 0.2 ng/kg.

An iaportant feature of single-circuit ABs’s with Ram-1000 reactors is that
the asjor amount (up to 90 percent) of iron corrosion products enters the
resctor's Ms from the turbine roon along with the feed water. Therefore.
the condensate delivery channel and other secondary loops of the turbine
room especially aade out of stainless steel should be subjected to a thorough
cleaning and washing, both for post-asseably contaminants and corrosion pro-
ducts.

At the Rural: and Chernobyl' ABS's, for these purposes extensive use is made

of manual and aechanical cleaning and of rapid water flushing. as well as of
chemical flushing of the most contaminated sections of equip-ent and pipelines.
For the purpose of asking possible acid flushing of the condensate delivery
line, circulation of a chenicsl washing solution has been created at a rate

of 800 to 1000 n3/h by means of special acid-resistant puaps, containers for
chemical reactants, and tenporsry pipelines provided for in the planned tech-
nological systen for post-assembly flushing.

As a principal washing solution for acid flushing. reco-ended is a composition
consisting of "Trilon B" (3 g/l), citric acid (3 g/l) and a moderate amount

of a special inhibitor. Acid flushing of the condensate delivery line takes
about 20 h. After its conclusion special anonia passivation has been carried
out--the loop is flushed for not less than 8 h with a water and amenia solution
(pl! higher than 10) at about SO‘C.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Acid t'luehing of loops made of stainless steel gives good results. At the
some time the experience of starting up the first power generating unit at

the Kurslt ABS demonstrated that in individual cases at an AES with an RINK-1000
it in possible to refrain conpletely from acid flushing of the condensate de-
livery line. liniting oneself to thorough pre-startup washing of it and all
steam pipes with water. as well as to blasting through with steam the main
steam pipes in the regular system leading from the reactor operating at low
output.

A quite important and critical step in operations at an ABS is the physical
startup of the reactor. The main objectives of a physical startup of an
RINK-1000 reactor are the foraation of the composition of the initial load

of the core and an experimental check of the key physical characteristics
of the reactor.

At ABs's with "MK-1000 reactors fuel assemblies (TVS's) are loaded into
the reactor in several stages. At first so-called minimal loading of the
reactor is carried out. whereby only 23 or 26 TVS's are loaded (with initial
LII-percent fuel enrichment and without water in the fuel channels and 802
channels). Then the nuﬁer of TVS's loaded is increased step-by-step. while
at the same time installing additional absorbing rods (DP's) in the core.

From the know-how gained in starting up the Kurslt and Chernobyl' ABS'a. the
initial load for the core of an m-iooo reactor is approximately was to
1655 TVS's and 230 to 2‘0 DP's. In the process of step-by-step formation

of the composition of the initial load for the core, the critical ntate was
approached at a very low power level (on the order of 10'5 to 10“ percent

of the nominal) and a precise determination was made of neutron physics charac-
terietica of the reactor. the effectiveness of the $02 rods, and of other
characteristics of the core.

Physical startup of an Blot-1000 reactor concludes with bringing it up to
the minimum power level controllable by the regular 502 (to the ﬁlm). which
is maintained steadily by an automatic control and equals about one percent
of its nominal thermal capacity.

After the completion of operations relating to the procedure for physical
startup of the reactor. all key and secondary equipment and systems of the
power generating unit are readied for the power startup. when the unit is
brought up to a power level greater than one percent of the nominal.

Experience in constructing an ABS with ”MK-1000 reactors has demonstrated
that it is advisable to perform the power startup of a power generating unit
also in several stages. constantly broadening the amount of checks and tests,
as well as the makeup of technological equipment and systems taking par: in
the power startup.

The first step (stage) in the power startup for a power generating unit with
an Klimt-1000 is customarily considered blasting the min sten pipes with
the steam of the reactor when operating at an output of eight to 10 percent

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICKAL USE ONLY

of the nominal. For proper cleaning of the main steam pipes of an ABS.

it is necessary to provide a steam -,’.lowrate of up to 350 t/h. with a pressure
in the drum-type steam traps of 12 to 14 hg/cmz. Blasting of the steam pipes
should be performed according to the regular system. using an insignificant
number of temporary pipelines to enable exhausting the blasting steam into

the atmosphere above the roof of the turbine room building. The total blasting
period for all steam pipes is about 15 to 20 h. During blasting of the main
steam pipes into the atmosphere, it is necessary to arrange for careful monitor-
ing of the radiation situation in the area of and in areas in the ABS. as well
as around it within a radius of a few kilometers. The experience of starting
up the Rural: and Chernobyl' Aﬁs's demonstrated that performance of this blastin.
practically does not exert an influence on the radiation state of the environ-
ment.

The second stage in the power startup includes adguating and mastering the
operating modes of the key and secondary equipment of the power generating
unit at a thermal capacity of a maximum of 10 percent of the nominal. During
this time safety valves and rapid-response reducers are adjusted. emergency
steam admission systems are tested. and other startup and adjustment work is
performed. The time required for the second stage of the power startup de-
pends on the level of readiness of reactor unit and turbine room equipment
and systems. At the Kursk and Chernobyl' AES's this stage took not more than
three to five 2b-hour periods.

The third stage in the power startup can be either a trial startup of the
power generating unit lasting up to 8 h. with alternate testing of turbo-
generator sets in operation with a relatively moderate power load (50.000
to 70.000 k"). or a 72-hour thorough test of the power generating unit
when operating with a specified load.

A thorough test of the power generating unit's equipment and systems is the
concluding stage in the power startup of an A35. The main objective of this
test is to test the working capacity of the power generating unit's equipment
when operating under a load with parameters close to the rated. The load
level, procedure and conditions for the thorough test of the power generating
unit are selected on the basis of the repressntativeness of this test for the
purpose of confirming the reliability and working capacity of the key equip-
ment and all systems of the A33.

The following are the key parameters of the thorough test cycle used in the
startup of the first power generating units at the Rural: and Chernobyl' AES's:

Parameter
Rated With combined equipment

Thermal capacity of reactor.

thousand h" 3160 650-900
Electrical output of a single

(or of each) turbogenerator.

thousand k" 500 150-220

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pressure in drum-type stean traps.

kg/cnz 70 65-70
Peed water temperature. 'c 168 135-4“
Flowrate of water in 1091's.

thousand tons per hour 36 24
Temperature of water in 1091's.

°c 2810 275-280
Number of operating G‘rsN'a 6 6
Mean steam content in fuel

channel. I 15 (0.5-5.5

After a successfully performed thorough test of power generating units.
further nastery of the rated capacity is carried out in stages at the follow-
ing levels: 20 to 35 percent, 60 to 50 percent. 55 to 70 percent. 80 to 90
percent and 100 percent of the noninal (thermal) capacity of the reactor.

At each stage in nastery of the rated capacity. a large anount of work is
done relating to studying and adjusting operating modes and optimizing the
distribution of energy release in the reactor'a core, along with other work
relating to ensuring reliable operation of the power generating unit at
various power levels.

In single-circuit Aﬁs's of especially great inportance are high-quality
adjust-en: and naintensnce of the required water chmistry in the We.
in the condensate delivery line and in other loops of the A28. Yor the
purpose of running power generating units with an knot-1000. a correction-
free neutral water chenistry is used for the We and condensate delivery
line. The standards for water quality are the following:

Index

For 1cm. water For feed water
pll indicator 6.5-8.0 6.8»7.2
Iron content. ug/kg 1 50 1 10
Copper content. tug/kg 1 $0 1 2
Chloride content. tug/kg 1 100 «-
Oil content. ug/kg 1 200 -
Hardness. ug-equikag 1 5 1 0.5
Electrical conductivity. Inn/ca 1 1.0 1 0.2
Radioactivity of water. curiesll 2-10'3 -

The time required for mastery of individual stages in the rated capacity of
the [irst power generating units of the Kurak and Chernobyl' Ans’s is shown

in table 1.

In the process of entering capacities at the Kursk and Chernobyl' AES's.
individual detects and naladjustnents were discovered in the operation of
heat exchange and pumping equipasnt. fittings and secondary system.

l'or exuple. durit, the initial period of operation there occurred increased
vibration of feed water equipment and pipelines. This required additional

10
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

unfastsning of pipelines and reinforcement of supports, which node it possible
to reduce vibration to the normal level.

Table 1.
Stage Capacity. Tine required for mastery. 24-hour periods
thousand kl! irst unit of Kursk Pirst unit of Chernobyl'

A28 A38

1 350 53 27

2 500 89 65

3 650 100 83

lo 800 210 85

5 1000 272 238

For the purpose of improving the separation of moisture in drum-type steam
traps with different loads. the internal equipment in the drum was modernized.
Isprovements were made in the planned systems for additional feeding of the
not. from emergency delivery pumps. in circuits for electrical powering of
pulsed safety valves. and in other systems.

In the course of mastering the first power generating units of the Rural: and
Chernobyl' ABS's. new progressive measures were also introduced, such as. for
example. the employment of absorbing rods (SP's) for the purpose of equalizing
the distribution of energy in the reactor's core and extending the length of
the operating period. the improvement of gas purification system. and the
like. All this made it possible in a relatively short time to ensure reaching
the rated level of capacity and the stable operation of the power generating
units of the Kursk and Chernobyl' “8's in the united power system.

The key operating figures achieved by the first power generating units of the
Kursk and Chernobyl' 1133'. are given in table 2.

Table 2.
Indicator Rated Figures achieved
Kursk A25 Chernobyl' ABS

Thermal capacity of reactor,

thousand It" 3140 3160 31450
Electrical load of turlsgenern-

tors. thousand It" 2 x 500 2 X 500 2 X 500
maximum capacity of reactor's

fuel channel, it" 2990 2700 2650
Maxim bulk steam content in

TX, 2 20.1 20.0 17.0
Reactor's nonuniforn heat release

factor:

In terms of radius 1.27 1.27 1.18

In terms of height 1.2 1.33 1.26

{Continued on following page]

11
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Mini-um safety (actor prior to

heat rel-oval crisis 1.0 1.05 1.10
Rate of flow of heat transfer

agent through reactor.

thousand n3/h 69.0 68.3 69.6
Pressure in arm-type steal

traps. kg/cez 7o 70 70
Rate of flow of steam to turbines.

t/h 2 5600 5670 5650
Live steal pressure. kg/ce 65.9 65.9 65.8
Live steal telperature. 'c 280.6 280.6 280.0
Peed water teaperature. ‘c 168 166 165
Efficiency of power generating

unit. 1

net 29.9 29.8 29.8

Gross 31.86 31.86 31.8
Conclusion

The operation of two power generating units with RINK-1000 reactors at the
Leningrad ABS. as well as the experience of starting up and mastering the
rated capacity of the first power generating units of this kind at the Kurak
and Chernobyl' Aﬁs's. have denonstrated that the key equip-ent of these nuclear
power planta operates cospletely reliably under all rated conditions.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'stvo Energiya. 1979

8831
080: 8166 [0756

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BLWMICS AND ELECTRICAL “BREEDING

A HETNOD OP INTERCNANNBL SYNCHRONIZATION IN T“! PLAYDACK OF A HULTICHANNEL
RECORDING OF A NIDEBAND SIGNAL HIT“ FREQUENCY DIVISION

Moscow mto'rmmrn in Russian No 11. Nov 78 pp 48-52
[Article by A.I. Crechlkhin. manuscript received 26 Oct, 77]

[Text] "hen the volume of a signal in which there is no redundancy exceeds
the capacity of one transmission channel, which cannot be increased, one
resorts to multichannel transmission of this signal. a special case of
such transmission is the multichannel recording of widebend signals.

A block diagram of a signal conversion device is shown in Figure l for
N-channel recording with frequency division. The signal spectrum which
occupies a bandwidth (0, f), is split by frequency filters °k (l .<_ k g N)
into N adjacent sections. the width of which is P. Then using record
converters, P2, the spectra of each of the high frequency sections (2 g

g N) are converted to the low frequency range (0, F), corresponding to the
paesband of one record-playback channel. The record carrier synthesizer,
$2. is synchronized by a pilot signal (PF), fed from the GPS generator
[pilot signal generator]. The pilot signal can be recirded in any of the
channels. During playback. the pilot signal it segregated from the infor-
mation signal, back conversion is accomplished in the high frequency chan-
nels, as well as the combining of the individual signals into a composite
signal.

we shall assume that the components of the signal conversion devices, with-
in the limits of the corresponding frequency bands, are nondistorting, and
assume that the recording and playback in the K-th channel reduce only to

the time delay tk(t) of the reproduced signal, where dtk(t)/dt << 1. it

is then not difficult to show that a component of the spectrum of the input
signal which appears following division in one of the high frequency channels.
uk(t) - AR cos up: (2 g k g N), and following playback and back conversion

of the spectrum has the form:

UK!) "' Bee“ (”ill - ‘s (I)! + Nuke“) - *o.(l)|). (1)

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

where ”0k is the frequency of the carrier for the playback converter of the
k-th channel (it is assumed that “Oh - Zak? for simplicity); t k‘t) in the
delay of this signal, which is identical to the delay in that c ennel where
the pilot signal is recirded, which is used for its generation.

As follows from (1), for the precise restoration of the composite signal
during playback, it is necessary to meet three conditions:

1. tk(t)= 0k(t). i.e., to generate the carrier for the back conversion
from the pilot signal, rec rded in "its own" channel; in this case, the
k-th section of the signal is reproduced within the precision of the group
delay tk(t) and the phase shift '0k(Tk - Ink) is eliminated in (l).

2. rk(t) E tn(t); k i a. This means the elimination of the mutual inter-
channel time shifts, and the complete restored composite signal differs
from the original one only in the delay, i.e., uouc(t) - const “in [t -

- Tk(c) ] e

3. The elimination of time scale distortion in the composite signal, for

example, by means of a delay block with a delay function r(t) - rc - 1k(t):
re - const.

6. PNChl [low pass filter 1];
7. Low pass filter K;
8. Low pass filter N;
9. KL1 [switch 1];
10. KLK [switch K];
ll. CPS [pilot signal generator);
12. Record;
13. t1 [time delay 1];
16. Playback;

; s n 15. Time delay N.
13‘.‘
13$ 15.

 

For the case of multichannel recording
1”"‘”"”"'l'na' on a moving vehicle, for example, on
Fi ure 1 magnetic tape, one of the most serious
3 ' causes of distortions in the waveform
‘ , . of the composite, reproduced signal
K‘y' 1' Fl [frequency filter 1" is interchsnnel time shits Arnk(t) -
2. P" [frequency filter N]; _ r (t) _ 1 (t)
3.” Klrecord converter K]: m k '
4. :[record converter N];
The classical timeswise procedure for
5’ Ef:£:?cord carrier synthe- correcting interchannel shifts using
9

delay blocks, which are controlled by

14

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the output voltages of pilot signal phase detectors [1]. has a number of
Controlled delay blocks are required with a wide passband

(up to the frequency f).
each channel, soaething which sakes it difficult to autually decouple the

drawbacks.

information signal and the pilot signal.

It is necessary to record the pilot signal in

Phase detectors are required as

well as individual playback synthesizers for each of the high frequency

channels.

Playback

    

Key: 1.
2.

it can be
the upper

Mismatch":

Figure 2.

VPS pilot signal
separator;

SV [playback
carrier synthe-
syzer];

PVK [playback
converter K]:
Playback con-
verter N;

F1 [frequency
filter 1];
Frequency
filter N.

The distortions of the reproduced signal
can be substantially reduced using phase
equalization [2] with considerably siapler
scene, without resorting to reducing the
physical sizes of the interchannel shifts.
Depicted in Figure 2 is a signal conversion
channel for playback with phase equaliza-
tion. The back conversion carriers for all
the high frequency channels are generated
from one pilot signal. recorded only on the
track of one low frequency channel (only

the key KLl [9] is closed during recording).
It follows frou (1). that in this case. the
signal in the k—th channel will receive
phase distortions in the form of a phase
shift which does not depend on the frequency.
aok(c) - “bk [1 (t) - 11(t)]. By represent-
ing (1) in the following form

a; (l) .- 8, cos (a, [l — t. (l) - 6:; (0”.

Following sose siuple transformations. we
derive an expression for the equivalent tine
shift of the spectral cosponent of the re-
produced signal having a frequency “k in the
k-th channel with respect to the signal in
the first channel (the low frequency one.
where the pilot signal is recprded):

4:; (I) r. A." ("(1 _ as) (2)

seen from (2) that the most complete equalization is obtained at
frequencies of the channel passband. and at the lower passband

frequencies, there is the greatest uncompensated residue (sore accurately.
an over-compensated one).
with respect to the "duty factor", but not with respect to the envelope.

He will note that equalization is possible only

15

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

since changes in the carrier phase can influence only the phase of the con-

verted components of the signal

and no way influence the group delay in the

channel. Thus, the method is based on the partial correction of the thee

shift (delay) in the passband by a phase shift of the components

spectrum in this passband.
The distortion in the signal
portion of the
below. on the

of the

which does not depend on the signal frequency.
waveform which results in the channel (in a
wideband signal) nonetheless has less influence. as shown
distortion of the reproduced signal as a whole than the ab-

sence of equalization with the combining of the undistorted portions of
the signal. while the record and playback unit proves to be significantly

simpler.

Only one pilot signal detector,

VPS (Figure 2), is required. and

a synthesizer converters and record filterssare sutiahle for playback (see

Figure 1).

 
  
  

NF I
gonna
Channel

.1; Number

Figure 3.

’Key: 1. without correction;
2. With phase correction.

correction is equal to 4°msx
“.max . ZI(N " I’vo‘t. 1..., 1t 1' N

He shall assess the capabilities of
the phase equalization method from
the viewpoint of signal distortion.
Shown in Figure 3a is an idealized
phase-frequency response character-
istic (PChKh) of the through chan-
nel of a four channel record-playback
system with phase equalization for
the case where the shifts between
signals reproduce from adjacent
tracks are identical in the tile in-
terval being considered and are equal
to At, so that Armk . dr(s - k),
where m and k are the numbers

of channels. Such an assuaption is
close to reality if the major cause
of interchannel shifts is the dynamic
misalignment of the tape. The phase-
frequency response for playback with
the generation of the carriers from
the pilot signal of "its own" channels,
but without correction of the time
shifts, is also shown here for com-
parison. The maximum deviation of
the through phase-frequency response
fro. the linear response representing
the extension of the phase-frequency
response of the first channel. without

- 2I(N - l)NFAr. and with phase correction is
times less.
show that an increase in the number of channels promotes a reduction

It is not difficult to
in the

distortion of the reproduced signal with phase correction, since in this

case. the through
smaller in size. although more frequent

l6

phase-frequency response will have overshoots which are

(Figure 3b). 0n the other hand,

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in this case, one can allow a greater swing in tape sisalignnent (an increase
in 5‘N1) while Iaintaining the persissible nonlinearity of the phase-frequency

response.

Playback
sacnpou10cdeuue

 

(Figure Sn)

shift of to

Figure h.

Pilot signal separator 13
Pilot signal separator N;
5V playback carrier syn-
thesizer;

FDR [phase detector K];
Phase detector N;

321 [delay block 1];
Delay block K:

PYK [playback converter
K 3

In“ [delay block N];

FY" [playback converter
N 3

F1 [frequency filter 1];
Frequency filter N.

"hen it is undesirable to increase
the nusber of channels, then with
large values of the interchannel
shifts, a coshination tine-phase cor—
rection proves to be extreeely pro-
mising (Figure b). Tile correction
is first accosplished in the low fre-
quency passband by means of controlled
delay blocks, 32's. For this, it is
necessary to record the pilot signal
in each channel, and pilot signal
detectors and phase detectors, FD's,
are required. Then, during the back
conversion of the spectra of the high
frequency channels, the phase correc-
tion reduces the distortions which
can arise due to the residual inter-
channel shifts, not eliminated by

the tine corrector.

A study of the tile characteristics

of a two-channel ayst with frequency
division, which was conducted both
theoretically and experimentally, has
confirued the arguaents presented
above.

Shown in Figure 5 are the transient
characteristics of a two-channel
system calculated for the sale con-
ditions as above, where the system
has ideal filters for cases equivalent
to the recording of the pilot signal
in the high frequency channel (Figure
5b) and in the low frequency channel

. It is not difficult to see that with identical values of the
tile shifts, the distortion is significantly less with phase correction. A

. 5.5. nsec corresponds to an overshoot of 121 without correction,
while with phase correction, to . 17 nsec.

The operation of the phase corrector is well illustrated by the oscilloscope
traces of Fiugre 6 (a: with phase correction; b: without correction), re-
corded when testing an actual two-channel systes for signal separation and
addition with the sale boundaries of the frequency bands as in Figure 5,

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

35 “.eﬁwm

(n)? (b)?

Figure 6.
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

for the case of a sinusoidal variation in the interchannel tine shifts at e
frequency of 600 n: and uplitudcs of Ar“ - 5—35 nsec. A sequence of short
pulses with a width of 10 nsec (6 pulse) was led to the input. The output
pulse of the first channel was used for external synchronization of the
oscilloscope. The distortions in the pulse response of the through channel
were hardly noticablc st Ar 5. 15 nsec, which in our case corresponds to

69 g 0.5 tad. This result a in complete agreenent with the requirenents
placed on the phase characteristics of video and pulse aaplifiers [3].

3131.106“!!!

1. Federal Republic of Germany Patent No. 1071755,,c1sss lel, 32/11 (304-),
1960.

2. A.l. Grechikhin, Patent 575678 [USSR].

3. S. Gol'dnan. "Gamnicheckiy analiz. nodulystsiya i shuny" ["heruonic
Analysis. Modulation and Noise"). Hoscow, :11. Publishers, 1951.

COPYRIGHT: “lsdiotekhnika,” 1978

8225
050:1870

19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELMMICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 621.391.019.b
FILTBRING DISCRETE NULTIFREQUENCY SIGNALS IN NONGAUSSIAN INTERFERENCE
Moscow RADIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No 11, Nov 78 pp 52-60

[Article by l.M. Pyshkin, V.V. Druzhinin and R.T. Pantikyan, manuscript
received 17 Feb 78]

[Text] Intnadhstion. In the majority of modern radioelectronic systems,
useful signals are detected and discrimsted against a background of inter-
ference which differes substantially from gaussisn noise. This is manifest
particularly clearly in asynchronous address information transmission sys-
tems (Ans) [l], where along with the internal noise of the receiver, cross-
talk interference also acts which coincides in structure with the useful
signals. Subscribers to an AAS are arbitrarily distributed over a large
territory, and for this reason, the interfering signals have a considerable
dynamic range of amplitude variation, and because of this, the mutual inter-
ference at the input to the receiver (even for a large number of interfer-
ing signals) is not normalised. In this case, the operational characteris-
tics of receivers which are optimized for normal noise are substantially
degraded. This leads to the necessity of: in the first place, finding a
system of address signals which create minimum mutual interference. and
which in terms of their statistical characteristics, tend towards normal
noise; in the second place, synthesizing structures which make use of the
difference in the probability densities of the acting mutual interference
and the gaussian noise to improve the receiver characteristics.

The best results under these conditions are given by systems of discrete,
multifrequency signals [2], studies of which as applied to AAS's were started
in [3, 6]. To improve the receiver characteristics for a discrete multi-

frequency signal (DHCh), a stiff limiter [2] which performs the useful nor-
mslizing operation on the crosstalk interference, is introduced into the
device on analogy with an ShOU [2 noise limiting amplifier 7] circuit [5].

A study was made in [2) of the noise immunity of a nonlinear receiver, where
the processing of a discrete multichannel signal consisting of n frequency

samples is performed by an n-channel filter, which differs from a matched
filter by the presence in each channel of a two-way amplitude limiter.

20

FOR OFFICIAL U58 ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A suboptimal circuit for the processing of such a signal is synthesized
in the following-on the basis of statistical decision theory. where the
circuit takes the for. of s hatched filter. in each channel of which a

nonlinear network is enployed which processes in an optimal leaner a sig-
nal ole-eat against s background of structural interference and noise.

The synthesis of the optimal detector of a signal element. An element aunt).
of the interfering signal (structurel interference) and noise act on an
element U(t,e) of the useful signal. where the noise interference is approx-
inated by white noise, and where o and t are the randoe initial phases of

the eleaents of the useful and interfering signals, which are uniformly
distributed over the range [0, 2']:

2-2. s
I I '
35 §”’ [-N:[S('“)-I(I. !)-I..(!. mm 4.
a. v

, | ' n
3:; up [‘17.- [SMO - I. (l. mm +.
T
. 4 §(x(t)--tt.v))'tt]}««
-e —'-r—‘_ .
+ 5.1.“) 41]} 49
Q
- (1)

where 1‘3 [Tc] is the width of the useful and interfering signal elenents;
the solents of appearance of the interfering ele-ents in the range have a

uniform distribution; 1’, is the overlap tins of the useful and interfering
elenents.

If the saplitude of the interfering signals is much greater than the sapli-

tude of the useful signal, i.e.. un(t.9) >> u(t,e), expression (1) assumes
the fore

I h l r'
9.75 up{ -}7; Slim-I (I. um} I?

.
0.0::

 

, .
exp I “141:5." (l) 41} (2)
'a

it can be seen from (2) that the network for processing the signal eleeent

against a background of an interfering signal and noise eleeent (see Figure 1)
should consist of a latched filter (8?), which is cut off during the time the

element of the interfering signal an“. 0) acts. The circuit contains a

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

notched filter for the element u(t. O) of the useful signal (SPe). a noise
detector (0?) an a switch (K) which does not pass the input signal to the
filter if interference is contained in it. The interference detector for
the range At - t1+1 - ti << 1, detects the interference against the back-
ground of noise. and in accordance with the decision which is made. controls

the operation of K [the switch].

 

Figure 1.

Key: 1. K [switch]:
2 s sPc [Mtchcd
filter for
the useful
signal eleacnt]:
3. 0P.[intcrfer- '
ence detector].

 

Figure 2.

Key: 1. LZAt [delay line];

2. K [switch];

3. SFe [matched filter
for the useful sig-
nal eleaent];

6. PU [threshold gate];

5. SPA: [hatched filter
for At];

6. D [envelope
detector].

The probability ratio for the interference
eleaent. taking into account the action of
noise, is equal to:

‘4}. 0.0“
3:5up{-N';[ S (no—umwmnu
you '

mI-n': ; my
I

and correspondingly, the optimal detection
circuit for the interfering signal element
with a random initial phase consists of the
latched filter with a detector or a quadra-
ture correlator and a threshold device.

hf.-

Taking this into account. the circuit of
Figure 1 assumes the fore of Figure 2 and
consists of the latched filter, which de-
tects the element of the interfering signal
in the range At (SPAt)v an envelope detector
(D) and the threshold device (PU) with a
threshold of 00. The voltage from the out-
put of the threshold gate controls the
opreration of switch K, to the input of
which the input signal is fed through a de-
lay line At (Lth). Hhen an interfering
signal voltage is present in the input sig-
nal. K is cut off. and there is no voltage
at the output of the matched filter.

With At tending to zero, the portion of the
block diagraa in Figure 2 (see the dashed
line) is replaced by a nonlinear elener.
(as) with the characteristic (Figure 3):

U" nnu IU..I< U .
0 "I” lussl>UO U.)

uout ' U"“—

'"sx - 0in]

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USB ONLY

Such a nonlinenrity furs run be easily realised. Correspondingly. the opti-
nun processing circuit (030°) for the elenent u(t. O) of the useful signal
against the background of the element ug(t. p) of the interfering signal
[u“(t. u) >> u(t.¢)] and the noise interference consists of a bandpass filter
(1?). a nonlinear elesent with the characteristic (h), r a sstched filter
for the useful signal elesent (Figure é).

«J’out

 

Figure 3.

1. 2. 3.

p----__-__-_1

‘.
Figure 6.

Key: 1. PP [bandpass
filter];

2. NE [nonlinear
element];

3. SP. [latched
filter for the
useful signal
element]:

a. 03°C [optical
processing
circuit for
the useful
signal element].

 

Figure 5.

Key: 1. 080,1 [optimal
procesing circuit
for useful signal
ele-ent ell.

The block diagram of a suboptinun receiver

for filtering a discrete Iultifrequcncy
signal against a background of mutual inter-
ference and noise (Figure 5) is at n-channel
filter, each channel of which consists of
an optimal nonlinear filter for the signal
elenent.

Noise ﬁnnunity analysis. He shall consider
the signal to noise ratio at the output of
one of the channels of the suboptimal filter
as a function of the threshold level 00 in
the absence of mutual interference. “hen
the signal and noise pass through the non-
linear elenent; the power is redistributed
with respect to frequency at the output as
coapared to the input, something which
must be taken into account in calculating
the error probability. For this. we shall
compute the correlation function of the
signal and noise nixture at the output of
the nonlinear elelent. In accordance with
[6]. taking into account nonlinearity of
the fore of (6). we write

an. c)-zc,(oc,(: +-.)*Ln{2.
.10 (5)

ﬂn2ar
where Rm‘ﬁr'wuﬁ is the noise

correlation coefficient at the output of
the bandpass filter;

0'.“ (a-%m0)’
r, (l) — 7":- xH, (x --(.£-coso)e- ’ dx;
- do

 

o is the lean square deviation of the noise
at the output of the bandpass filter, a2 -
- ZNOAF: AF - ll'l'e is the bandwidth of a
signal elenent; No is the spectral noise
density; o-uot + 0 is the total phase of
the signal; U is the signal asplitude;

23

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H,(x)-(-l)‘ "73;?“ T) “W “‘0" ' " " is a "suite polynonisl.

when U/o << 1. we have:

1-1:“!

12' . ~I.G’;;-) c's'c‘7[l.(—x) +2 XI, (— - x)cosu].

H («I-£603.); “El—‘1”...

“‘4 ')'——o—X

a:-——-cou)
(1-400.
Xle'_’ Iz(-I)~t.(‘{' e“'=*:7‘;x

x {e' $94!} x) +2.; I. (4 x)cosk0]} .

then
,2

~<o~u<:'—.:>e"‘5'[o<':—~>- 3/!“ 310m"-
"4%)“an e 9%) -1/Zf:e-="J.

cwz — VI. |.(ﬁ 4):.(U—‘ée' "(ﬂan + I) x
X Hm:(‘+)+”aul(7)]. €3.20.

Correspondingly, expression (5) sssunes the form:
an. I): “(1):.“ + ,) +E‘3'" 1% (a)

From (6), we find the asthmatics] nun I1 and the dispersion D st the
output of the matched filter-

,lUl 2 U. I"
“WW ‘ WW?) 1/: -° ”Hr-cow <7)
mart-2% 7R“*'(°)coso.uh (8)

He represent the integral. in (8) ss:

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 097101“. USE ONLY

7
31: R"*'(1)¢030.?dt- Srlﬂnim iulm,",..'d‘_ .
f

«IE-”L"? ‘7‘" mm"?! xdx.
where x - Mir-(in; 2MP.

Then when abide >> 1, conaidering only the conetant conponont of the aeriea

“8""a-x-a' W512: (21:42) X

in. *

X°°”<~+'-~z'sx+(’::f)1.

Do have ..

OI
HS( 0 c H3"”w""".%?:—JX

2o

(2: :12) S C$fmdx a In ﬁnal)! $.an 2m dx... ~

~Ir (204-1)! In “and
“'ﬂ‘a’fﬁ‘m an+ MSCT 1

Following tranefomtione. we finally obtain:

o~ %g<$>u<%>en{
-l/¥T°c "‘j’+.ie'wzl5c_';_ )Waxx

xfau I)u,,_,(5’_—° a.” (2331'!

x «I ll
“Wk (9)

Pro. (7) and (9). the signal/noise ratio in equal to
n W
7%‘7l/wr‘°-‘?-

where the coefficient 7 determines the loaeea in the eignel/noiee ratio

which ariee aa a revolt of the signal and noise passing through the non-
linear ole-cut.

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

we shall study 72 as a function of (00/0. 0/0); and since U/o << 1. we will
plot the function 72 - {(uolo) (Figure 6).

It can be seen from Figure 6 that with a decrease in 00/0. 12 also falls
off. i.e.. the losses in the signal/noise ratio increase. This is explained
by the fact with a decrease in the threshold, the input signal which has a
normal distribution, exceeds the threshold for the majority of the time.
Consequently. the matched filter is cut of! the majority of the time and

the signal/noise ratio will fall off. Hhcn 00/0 I 1.6. y2 - r/A, which
corresponds to the losses for a circuit with a stiff limiter. Thus, when

Uo/o > 1.6. the losses in the signal/noise ratio for the circuit studied
here are less than for a circuit with a still limiter.

He shall consider the action of strong mutual interference (Uh/o >> 1) on
the signal elelent. He shell compute the dispersion at the output of one
channel of the suboptimal filter for a discrete nultifrequency signal.
where this dispersion is deteruined by the passage of the mutual interfer-
ence through the channel. For simplicity in the calculation, we shall
assume that the interference element completely overlaps the signal element.
The voltage at the output or the channel is equal to:

e-mmge: ""'“"gf

 

 

U....-¥[U. .5, cos-#«WHMHU. “S x

stem” cameos”
I w

I» '5
XcosoJcosw HM].

Following transfornations. we have:

"out ' U...-”;—'eos+ msm‘é': _ gfl/"(vv‘jl-
Averaging 02

out with respect to O. we obtain an espression for the dispersion:
017' 4 U ' U —U—-1
D,-UL.=+? snslnat-UfVl—(UE)T,

In the absence of mutual interference. the amount of dispersion deternined
by the noise and the system operates in a linear node. The interference
which creates a dispersion which does not exceed the dispersion due to
noise does not cause a substantial degredstion in the noise insanity of

the circuit. Its amplitude “u.w. [05,“.] can be cosputed by equating on
to NoT/b, 1.6.3

 

 

0!. T’ 4 u. . .
+rr "“'"vr.‘v'f—.V'-(a.—DT‘£4£~ (1°)
26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By designating 00/0“ n I z, and taking into account the equality ZNOIT -

- ZNOAP - 02. following transformations of (10). we obtain an equation in
terms of z:

éH—ucslnz-VI—zﬂ-U‘? (11)

By plotting a graph of the following function in Figure 7:

y-=-:-[+arcslnz- iii-Ty].

We solve equation (11) graphically. The graph defines the function 0/00 I

I ((uo/un.n ): plotting the reqeisite o/Uo ratio along the y axis. we
find the value of "Oluu.n. corresponding to it on the z axis. For example.
when 0/00 I 1/3 (at a threshold three times greater than the mean square
deviation of the noise), Uo/Uu,n, I 0.78, or 0",“, I 1.2800. i.e.. in this
case an interference element with an amplitude of U“ I 1.2800 creates a
dispersion at the channel output equal to the dispersion due to the noise

OH I NOT/6. Hhen UH > U“.n., the interference element dispersion is less
than the noise dispersion.

[n carrying out preliminary studies of the change in the signal/noise ratio
when the input signal passes through the nonlinear element, we compute the
noise iamunity of a suboptimal circuit for processing a discrete aulti-fre-
quency signal when transmitting discrete information with two orthogonal
signals and with incoherent reception. "white" noise with a spectral den-
sity of "O and mutual interference, the amplitudes of the elements of which
exceed uﬂln.' act on the signal. He designate a I 0“,", where n“ is the
number of elements of the discrete multifrequency signal. where these ele-

msnts are subject to the action of mutual interference; n is the overall
number of elements in the signal.

I
.1
o
a:
“at
0 i 0
Figure 6.

 

Considering the fact that the voltages at the outputs of the channels of a
suboptimal filter have a finite dispersion and are statistically independent.
while n is large, the probability density at the output of the adder can be
approximated by a normal distribution. The error probability in the case of

incoherent discrimination of two orthogonal signals against a background of
normal noise is equal to [9]:

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(till!
use

l’err ' I’m-4": '

In this caseE;-=1nE.(l -e) =11E(l —e)where 31 - 021/: is the energy of a
signal element; F. - n31 is the energy of the entire signal. If the size
of the dispersion fro- the interference elements does not exceed the size
of the dispersion due to noise, then D; - nNoT/lo. and

[lolly-all":
B
- o .v
1m" '

Perr P~<+e “'1‘ -+e .

when UH * 0. the asount of dispersion Eros interference elesents tends to
core. Then 0; + MOT/Ml -o) and x

_ "all [I -O"Ul‘

e
+ I -l'wI|-I\
POI" P°-_+e CI -Tc s ,
We finally obtain the inequality:
r e
I -v' (l-n I -I'n—_ 0-."
T” m: <P-<T° " - (12)

Inequality (12) is justified for interference, the amplitude of which exceeds
"Hm. - ka. where k is a certain coefficient determined fro. the graph in
Figure 7. With the action of interference with a lower nlplitude. the noise
inunity of the circuit will fall off.

For protection against low alplitude interference. it is necessary to reduce
the threshold 00, sosething which leads to a reduction in 72. i.e.. to an in-
crease in the losses in the signal/noise ratio and a degredation of the noise
inunity. If the threshold is equal to 30, 72 I l, and inequality (12)
nssuses the fore:

I.’ ' 9 -w
| .. (I—s) _I- -f.q:(‘ '
’-'“ ’7' '<”"'< '1 ° ' (13)

He shall coapare the noise inunity of the synthesized suboptimal circuit
with the noise inunity of a circuit with stiff limiting [2], for which the
error probability under the same conditions is equal to:

s I
Perr' ~_+e‘7m“-"‘.

in the absence of mutual interference (o - 0), the losses in the signal/noise
ratio of the latter circuit are 1 d3 (12 - 1/6). In this case, the noise is-
nunity of the suboptisal circuit corresponds to the noise i-nunity of the
linear circuit. since y =- l.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPflClAL USE ONLY

Shoun in figure 8 are graphs of the error probability of a function of the
signal/noise ratio, also. at the input of the resolver of the receiver where
a - 0.5: curve 1 corresponds to the lover bound of inequality (13); curve 2
corresponds to the upper bound; curve 3 charac-
terizes the error probability for a circuit with
a stiff limiter. Comparing curve 2 and 3 we see
that the suboptimal circuit has a gain in the
noise hmaunity over that of a circuit with a
stiff liniter, the losses of which amount to

1 d! as s result of the limiting of the input
signal. “hen the anplitudes of the interfer-
ence elements tend to infinity. the dispersions
at the outputs of the channels of the subopti-
mal filter of such elesents tend to zero. as a
result of which, the overall dispersion de-
creases. The error probability in this case is
determined by curve 1.

 

ﬁ- ' ' ’ Thus, the gain in the noise immunity of the

Figure 8. structure studied here as compared to a struc-

ture with a stiff limiter is determined by the

felloving: in the first place. by the absence of losses which arise as a re-
sult of severe limiting; in the second place, by the decrease in the overall
dispersion (the increase in the signal/noise ratio) at the output of the adder
as a result of the action of the interference elements having an amplitude of
0“ >> 0",“, with the action of interference elements having lesser amplitudes.
the noise ismunity of the circuit studied here is degraded, however, as exper-
imental studies have shown. it can be assumed that they will not exert a sub-
stantial influence on the noise immunity. due to their normalization at the
output of the adder.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
I. L.Ye. Varakin, 1.". Pyshkin, RADIOTBKNNIKA, 1973, V0. 28, No II.

2. v.». Vlaaov, IZVESTIYA VDZOV SSSR [PROCEEDINGS OF The HIGHER EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF TBS USSR]. RADIOBLEKTRONIKA Series. 1975, Vol XVIII. No 4.

3. L.Ye. Varakin, 1.". Pyshkin, Article in the book, ”Trudy nauchno-tekhni-

cheskoy konferentsii professorsko-prepodavatel'akego sestava NETS"
("Proceedings of the Scientific and Engineering Conference of the

Professorial and Teaching Staff of the Moscow Communications Engineering
Institute"l. S“ 558%. 1967.

a. L.Ye. Varskin. 1.“. Pyshkin, TRUDY UCHEBNYKB INSTITUTOV SVYAZI [PROCEED-
INGS 0!” me CWICATIONS TMINIRC INSTITUTES], Leningrad. Leningrad
Communications Engineering Institute imeni H.A. Ionch-Bruyevich. No 35.

I967.
29

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
5. YUJ. Chernynk. RADIOTBKIINIKA I ELBK‘I‘RONIKA. 1962, Vol VII. No 7.

6. LR. Levin, "Teorotlchenklye olnovy atatiettcheokoy rudiotekhntki"
["‘l'he Theoretical Principlu of Statiltleal Radio Engineering"). Book 1.
Houcov. Sovetskoye Rodio Publishers. 1974.

COPYRIGHT: "Mdiotekhnlkn." 1978.

8225
CSO:187O

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SLWIOS AND ELECTRICAL momumo

UDC 621.391.8281621.396.677.83

A SHIELD IN TN! SHAPE OF A DOUILS RING TO SHIELD ANTENNAS AGAINST INTER-
FERENCE

Moscow RADIOTBKNNIKA in Russian No 11, Nov 78 pp 68-72

[Article by Yu.H. Nel'nikov. manuscript received following revision 15 Hay.
1978

[Text] One of the siaplest ways of combating the interference whicluacts on
an antenna is shielding the antenna in the direction of the incoming inter-
ference. Electromagnetic shields. uhich are passive and rather siaple de-
vices. permit the solution of a complex of problems related to improving
the electromagnetic compatibility of various radioelectronic equipment.

The use of various shields is described in [1-3]. An analysis shows that
the simplest. continuous rectangular or square shields are of little effect-
iveness in many cases. The cooperatively high field level in the shaded
region. due to the penetration of diffraction fields from the edges of the
shield into the region of the geometric shadow, does not allow for a satis-

factory compromise between the level of field suppression by the shield and
its dimensions.

The electrical characteristics of an annular shield, described in [h], were
studied in [5]. For this shield, the ratio of the size of the suppression

region for a specified level to its area is maximu- as cospared to other
shields described in [6, 6. 7].

when a plane or a spherical wave falls on the annular shield from the left
(Figure l). the field is equal to zero at the design point P on the axis
of the shield, taking into account the assumptions we have nade, if the di-
mensions of the shield are 01 - 90/175 : 92 - soJ273 . where 90 is the
radius of the first Fresnel zone, defined for the point wave source and the
point P. For plane wave, 90 - dioro . It is assumed in the analysis
that 92 << r0; 9; >> 1; and a: - 0 >> 7, and in this case. Kirchoff's
method can be used in scalar fora without a great loss in precision.

31

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The shield described here can be successfully employed to shield compara-
tively poorly directional microwave antennas against interference. however.
for antennas with a relatively high gain (33 dB and above), its effectiveness
is inadequate.

In this regard. there arises the problem of designing a shield of increased
effectiveness, which would permit protecting coapsratively highly directional
antennas against interference (for example, radio relay link antennas).

 

Figure 1. Figure 2.

To solve this problem. the field a point P can be represented in the
following form [5] where an annular type shield is present:

is"

U _ .
U'-U.exp(— ”39-212488 £P‘_':£'_:L “1,4,, (l)
V .I

It follows from (1) that the field at point P is the difference between

the field of the plane wave at this point and the field produced by the shield.
The field distribution produced by the ring has a maximum at point P (figure
2). Plotted along the U axis are values of the plane wave amplitude and
the amplitude of the ring field (curve 1); the maximum of the ring field is
equal in amplitude and opposite in phase to the plane wave field. For this
reason. there is complete cancellationof the fields at point P. When mov-
ing from point P along the x axis. the equal amplitude and equally op-
posite phase conditions of the fields are violated, something which leads

to a sharp increase in the resulting field. The axial symmetry of the ring
easily allows for independent adjustment of the amplitude and phase of the
field created by the ring at point P and in its vicinity.

By increasing the area of the ring without changing its center radius, one
can provide for equality of the amplitudes of the plane wave and ring fields
not at point P. but at some point x1 (Figure 2, curve 2). Then. by changing
the phase of the ring field without changing its amplitude. the precise op-
posite phase conditions of the fields considered here can be obtained at this
point. As a result. we obtain complete cancellation of the field on a circle

32
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ul’ radluu x with n meter at point I’. which falls in a plane parallel to
the plane oI the ring. In this case, there will be a partial min:- of
the field at point P.

The expressions for the inner and outer radii of the ring are [5]:

n-Vﬁﬁ/w} 4-1: a-VVBV 7' -P+1. (2)

By varying B with a constant 1, we change the phase of the field created
by the ring. while its auplitudc is constant. By varying y with a constant
B, we change the aaplitude while the phase is constant. "hen 8 I 0 and

y I 1/6, we obtain the values of p and 02 for the usual ring, which pro-
duces complete suppression of the Iield at point P.

The expression for the field NV. u._v, B. y) nor-alized with respect to
the incident wave. where /,!+,l has the fore [5]:
11-] #L; P-‘I‘o: "-2,”.

F(o.p.'.9.1)-l+°’p[-'a+vt]x

ix [up [-——-” (+;:'-1)] é Paar-1)];

 

use
an]
XA. '3 . :r-I'—1)_exp[_u(+;r+t)]x
x.§: II(T;"+1)] A.(%VT-P+l }. (3)

It follows fro. the curves in Figure 3, plotted from formula (3) for differ-
ent values of B and 1 (curve 1: the function F(v) for B I O, y I 1/6. i.e..
for the usual ring; 2 corresponds to B I 0.1. and y I 0.177; 3 corresponds
to B I 0.2 and y I 0.215; and 4 corresponds to 8 I 0.25. y I 0.287) that

at specified ring parameters. the suppression region can be expanded with
respect to a specified level. Thus. for example. the suppression region

for the -26 dB level (curve 2) is 621 wider than the suppression region for
the sane level of an un-edified ring (8 I O; y I 1/6). The increase in the
width of the suppression region permits a reduction in the spacing between
the shield and the unit being protected by i.2-l.5 tines.

it would be possible to significantly boost the effectiveness of the shield

if one could suppress the partial minus of the field at point 1’ without
substantially increasing the field at the maxim suppression :ircle. The

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

coopensntion of the field aaxinun at point P is possible by using an
additional ring with a greater radius, concentric to the first one. The
dimensions of the additional ring should be chosen so that its field at
point P is opposite in phase to the field of the Iain ring. Obviously,
this ring should fall in this case in the out-of-phase (second) Fresnel
zone. Since the dimensions of the second ring are greater than the dimen-
sions of the main one, its directional pattern is narrower, and for this
reason, it can be assumed that its field will not substantially increase
the field close to the circle of radius :1.

0 a! Cl 41

  

   

  

To obtain a shield with the widest possible
region of suppression, it is desirable to use

a main ring with paraseters at which the radius
a of the circle for complete suppression of
the field is maximal. however, calculations
show that even at B - 0.3, there are no values
of y at which a sufficiently deep trough can

be obtained in the field distribution in the
vicinity of point P. This is related to the
fact that point x1 falls in the region of the
out-of-phase side lobe of the field distribu-
tion of the ring, where it is already impossible
to obtain the out-of-phase condition of the
ring and plane wave fields. For this reason,
we shall use a ring with parameters of 8 - 0.25
and.y - 0.287 as the initial shield.

 

8‘ V

Figure 3. As an analysis and calculations for the inner
and outer radii of t s seco ng show. we
have: p,=-£,V ~oro- Wee-lugg- Pa-‘J‘ M's-
VW , where d - 1.3353. The
quality yl can be deternined through selection taking into account the re-

quiresents for obtaining the best suppression function F(v), fro. the view—
point of effectiveness. For F(v, u, v), we obtain from (1):

. at.“ Nev 2..
F(v.p,v)-l—1;-e ' 2(—1y$e '" J.(;of)£d£. a.)

all

There is no point in expanding the integrals in a series in terns of the
functions “n0 as for the case of a single ring, since for large values of
((C3. (4). the series converges slowly, something which creates inconveni-
ence in the calculations. For this reason, we shall lake use of another
method. in accordance with (8]:

‘
Se-‘WJ.(ox)adx- taint/.mmwwaﬂ. an (S)

34
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where 01(2), 0) and 02(2). 0) are the corresponding Lou-cl functions two
variables. By using (5). (1.) can be reduced to the torn:

‘ O
'F(v.p.v)-I—|¢‘ :“2(-l)'x

an!

(-:—’ ’-:—:~)+w.(*—1::.ae—:~)]} m

The functions 01(w, a) and 020:, z) are tabulated in [9] for v > 0.5 and
z > 0.5. In the once considered here, when v + 0. and x + 0, it is also
iapossible to use the tables. Approxinate expressions are derived in [101

for the functions 00(11):, x) and 01(ax, x). By employing [11] (after cor—
recting the misprints) and [12], we obtain:

um. x)-=U.(-";'-. x)—eoa-.}-( y+.-’§'-

IU,(y,x)=U,(xT.,x)+slnq‘2-(.y+3;). (7)

In accordance with [10], we have:
l—a

0““. X)= Tl.(x)+1-—;cos bx 4- ﬁx
X[( l +a'-— Vfa’)cos(xsln -;-) + (1 14‘ +Y'fai)x

x oos(xtos-;-)] + Rel: ‘

Udax x)... mslnbx+gg+ﬁgx

X [(1 + a‘ — P’Ta’) sln 33-5!!! (x sin ii) 4-

+ (I + a‘ + W”) cos-“r sln (zoos {914-1110;
(8)

l+o'

vherc a- xly; a.._;_; a-nH—'—i‘emSe-In 2(—1r1.,(e)dt

In the case considered here 1-22: 0 V: =2 :
”(53+ oaym ' - ’F V ﬁller. ans/t,

By making use formulae (6) -- (8), the function NV, 14, v) can be colputed
for small values of 2st“ vluu. In this case, when v - 0 and v - in , formu-
las (8) yield the exact “value of the functions 000:, x) and U1(sxn, x) [10].

35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After performing the corresponding calculations. the best shape of the curVe
(the deepest and most uniform suppression in the wide region) for F(v. l. 1)
was obtained at 71 - 0.1 (the solid curve in Figure 6). Thus. we find the
parameters of the double ring: 6 - 0.25. v - 0.287, d - 1.3153. and 71 - 0.1.
The corrgsponding values for En: El - 0.388; :2 - 0.851; £3 - 1.111;

(I. - [.18.

Calculations of P(v. l. l) were performed on a computer [by
means of direct integration of (5)]. and using formulae (6)
--(8); the precision wan good to the second decimal place
for F(v) in decibels. in orange of values of v - 0.l-l.0.
the maximum difference in the results obtained on the com-
puter and from the formulas at the point v - 0.1 amounted
to 1.3 d3. In this case. the average deviation for 12 points
in the indicated range amounted to 0.15 dB. Thus, formulas
(6). (7) and (8) can be successfully used to calculate the
characteristics of a double ring throughout the range of
variation in v, which is of interest in practice.

also shown in Figure 4 are curves which characterize the
coverage range of the double ring (for a - 0.9 and u - 1.1
at v - 1.0). The experimental curve for u - 1.0 and v - 1.0
is plotted with small circles. The dashed and double dotted
curve of F(v, 1, 1) indicates the conventional single ring.

 

The effectiveness of the shield described here in the form
of a double ring exceeds the effectiveness of the well known single ring
by many times. Thus. for example. to produce a suppression of -18 dB at
the edge of a reflector 3 m in diameter of an antenna operating at a fre-
quency of 4 CH2. the double ring can be positioned at a distance of to -

- 200 m from the antenna. i.e., six times claser than the usual ring. In
this case, its maximum radius will be 96 - 6.75 m, while its area will be
2.65 times less than the area of the conventional ring which creates the
same suppression at the edge of the 3 m diameter reflector. with such a
small spacing of re. the screen is quite effective under the actual condi-
tions of varying atmospheric refraction.

Thus. the screen developed here in the for- of a double ring exceeds well
known screens by many times in terms of effectiveness and coverage, and

for the first time permits the shielding of antennas with gains of 60-63 dB
from directions close to the direction of the main lobe. The interference
suppression in this case amounts to 20-25 dB.

BIBLIOGRAPRY

l. F.K. Prclkschat. TﬂE HICROHAVE JOURN.. 1966, Vol. 7, No. 8.

2. G. Ruse, F.i. Sheftman, D.A. Cahlander, PIEEE. 1966, Vol. 56. No. 9.
36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

I2.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J.ﬁ. Becker, J.-C. Surcnu. IEEB, 1966. Vol. AP-lé. No. 6.

".6. Buaaey. "Reflected Ray Eliminators". US Patent. H. Cl. 363-841,
No. 2.763.001.

Yu.H. Nel'nikov. TRUDY NIIR [PROCEEDINGS OF THE SCIENTIRIC RESEARCH
INSTITUTE FOR RADIO], 1975, No b.

0.9. Frolov. TRUDY NIIR, 1976, No 3.
Yu.H. Hel'nikov, TRUDY NIIR. 1976, No l.

6.N. Hatson. "Teoriya beclclevykh funktoiy" ["Beooel Function Theory"),
Part I. I.L.H. Publishers, 1969.

10.8. Dcknnoaidze. "Tablitoy tnilindricheskikh funktsiy ot dvukh

percucnnykh" ["Tobleo of Cylindrical Functions of Two Variables"].
USSR Acadeny of Sciences Publishers, 1956.

Yu.A. Ycrukhinovich. Yu.V. Pinenov, ZHURNAL VYCNISLITBL'NOY HATEHATIKI

I HATEHATICNBSKOY PIZIKI [JOURNAL OF COMPUTER HATNEHATICS AND MATHEMATICAL .
PHYSICS], 1969, Vol 9, No 3.

A.S. Yudino, ZNURNAL VYCHISLITBL'NOY HATEHATIKI I NATEHATICNESKOY PIZIKI,
1961, Vol 1, No 6.

I.N. Ryzhik. 1.8. Gradahteyn, "Tablitoy integralov. au-n, ryadov i

proizvedeniy” ["Tnbles of Integrals, Suns, Series and Products"]. Moscow.
1962.

COPYRIGHT: "Radiotekhnika," 1978

8225
CSO:187O

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTMICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

UDC 681.883.63

Tllli STRUCTURE OF A RECEIVER AND THE OPTIMUM DETECTION CHARACTERISTICS FOR
SIGNALS NITN A RAND“! INITIAL PNASE, AMPLITUDE AND DURATION

Moscow RADIOTBKNNIKA in Russian No. II, Nov 78 pp 77-80

[Article by 6.0. Pilin. manuscript received following revision, 27 January,
1978]

[Text] Signals with a random initial phase, amplitude and duration occur

in radar. sonar and other types of range and direction finding of extensive
objects (their dimensions are large as compared to the wavelength of the
irradiated signals), the aspect and position of which in the search space
(range. azimuth and elevation angle) are unknown before detection. The model
of the useful signal in this case can be represented as:

. _ sxmmemHL reu.v.+«t
mama [o ' nefmn'ut

where Mr) and ”(0 are functions which describe the amplitude and phase
laws of the signal modulation; to. no. 8. b and 'c are the moment of arrival.
the carrier frequency. the initial phase. amplitude and duration of the sig-
nal respectively. In the following analysis. for the purpose of illustrating
the influence on receiver structure of the indeterminacy in the knowledge of
the signal width, we shall aasme as in [I] that B has a Rayleigh distri-
bution, 8 is uniform in a range of (0, 2!), and to and do are parameters
established during detection.

The specific feature of taking ‘c into account consists in the fact that

IC is a priori unknown (prior to the moment of detection). Thereafter,

Tc changes little from observation cycle to cycle. The mini-um useful sig-
nal width is equal to the width of the counding radiation To. The range

of variation in tc is determined by the specific observation conditions [2].

He shall designate the signal energy as 3 [8] when 3 - l and re - to. Then
the signal energy for any rc can be represented as:

A
3.“, u) - 8'0, 4- an - 8".(1 + 7:) - 8'31»

where kt - tc/ro is the normalized signal duration.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The probability ratio for the ease where B has a Rayleigh distribution.
a has a uniform distribution under conditions where the interference n(t)
is steady-state gaussian white noise with a satheaatical mean of zero and

a spectral density of No. taking [ll into account. can be represented in

the following fore: , v '“"%

14?."1'7?" ""‘ mom.
|

IMO/«l - Sm. mom. (2)

.-

(l)

where

y(t) - n(t) + x(t, re): p(kt) is the probability density of the quantity
R‘. For the assumed limitations. the correlation integral (2). in being

t h limit of the linear combination of gauasien randou quantities, is also
a gaussian random quantity. the gathelatical mean value and dispersion of
which are respectively equal to z - Ek‘ and 0% - NoBk1/2. In this case.

for a uniform distribution of k, in a range of [1. k1 maxlv the probability
ratio (1) is written in the fore:

' ’ ”"1,
' -_'— W“: I cw; Fee 5, d! (3)
“M" Na + 5‘s " a

integral (3) can be solved by approximation methods [3] squares of the high-
est precision power. Legendre polynomials form an orthogonal systea of poly-
nomlals or constant weight in the interval ll, -l]:

mm- ' "——ﬁw" '

FM in '

This allows the representation of the probability ratio in for: (3) in the
following form: ' ”(¢Q)

I - é—k’” em H.982?
an! N‘ + 3“: . (U
Q —'
‘MI' ;‘(l|-'+_}'_.'.'_.‘)+':
where ' “‘9‘.” : Pawn”) “ 2 (r ) ; x0!) are the

roots of the Legendre polynomial of power n (n is determined by the pre-
ciaion in the solution of the problea); P5(...) is the first derivative
of the Legendre polynomial.

An analysis of expression (6) shows that the circuit for processing signals
with random 8, B and ‘c should take the form of a multichannel system in
each channel of which there is generated the correlation integral 2(ksn)),

k - l. .... n. the sQuarc of the absolute value at which is defined

08 ‘3‘

I. (it?) - l'} 3 y (1)10, ‘2?) d! r. (s)
where r52) - ‘Oksu)-
39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Expressions (lo) and (5) allow for the representation of the circuit for the '
optimum processing of the received signals in each channel. The complete
circuit (Figure 1) consists of an optimal filter 01’ for a single radio pulse
of width rs“). e s uere-l w detector RD, a Iultiplier circuit 50 using
multipliers of llb n) (bﬁn - so + Raps). a nonlinear element, NE. with a

characteristic of the form as: (u/Nob(“)), a second lultiplicr circuit using
P k

quedriture coefficients A‘“) and en incoherent adder-store, which performs

the functions of colbining the video pulses which do not act simultaneously.
as well as su-ing them.

(A) (l) (c) (D) (B) (F) with an exponential distribution of

it}, one can employ Lsguerre polynomi-

I I: g. n .-
mm -~'-,;r‘—‘..—(t:."'). n-o. I. 2....

which are orthogonal with respect to the
weight exp (- ) on the half-axis (0, .),
In this case, or the signal model con-

sidered here. the probability ratio has
the form:

 

(s
Figure l. a N': "("0

d N Jun” 3
Key: A. Optimal filters; "‘2'”. “Hams ° ' u) ' (6)
B. Square-law detector; '
C. Hultiplier circuit;
D. Nonlinear elesent;
B. Quadrature component
multiplier;
P. Adder-store;
c. To the threshold gate.

where “P are roots of the Laguerre
polynomials of power n.

The structure of the receiver deter-
mined by formula (6) is similar to that
described above. The difference is de-
termined by the number of channels n.
the characteristics of the optimal
filters at the input. and the quantities Ag and HIV This makes knowledge
of the probability density p(k.r) fundamental in the design of an optimal

receiver for signals with an initial phase, amplitude and width which are
random.

The probability density of the quantity 2 for the case of a fixed useful

signal width can be represented as: ’3‘.)

2: 0.) ' 2.1m!
Punk/h) - W e .
I T

This allows the representation of the correct detection probability and the

false alarm probability at the output of the processing circuitry in the
form:

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:- as ' '3’”!
. as - —ﬁ_
0 -§ 0) Pee woman. - 5 e """h "gm“
' 1
r - So‘”h"pa.)u. '
I

(7)
where the following eynbola are used: 10' ’J':- "3";- ': -No9ﬂ

The structure of relationships (7) is siailar to (l), and for this reason.

the integrals incorporated in than can be solved by spproxination [3] using

the schele adopted above. depending on the nature of the probability density
tort). with an exponential distribution of k... it is easy to obtain:

I p . II ’0] '0".
1'- 2.4.4“... a. 2,4,. ""Z'i‘uu' . (g)
0-! DII

The quantities “It and Ed: are here equal to the corresponding quantities
in (6). and F0 - szp(-q5/2).

The calculated detection curves are shown
in Figure 2 for three cases: a) a signal
with a randoe initial phase (solid line);
b) a signal with s rando- initial phase
and amplitude (dashed-dotted line);

c) a signal with a randoe initial phase,
anplitude and width (dashed line). The

   
  
  

'1 1".w‘gégga
" I, Wﬁn

sac/annul-
lﬁgbﬂﬂilllllllll

 
  

  
 

II .‘dms IIIIII
III gnaw IIIIIII

   

“‘III IIIIIIIIIIIIII E
5 ' irst two are taken free [1] while the
“Ian .ruIIIIIIIIIIIII mm 1. ”on“ m. (a) to; m. ton”.

   

I'l' IIIIIIIIIIIIIII

I56 ,
z

 
 

 

ing initial date:

 

«contents;

0 01-2. hu-OJS. ln-3,4]4. A._o.m A.-0.N&

F U
13““ 2 The precision in the calculation of D

4 for n - 2 and n - 3 was coupared for
F - 10 and q - 10. The quantities 0 do not differ by lore than one in
the third significant digit: D - 0.910 (n - 2), and D - 0.902 (n - 3). It
follows from Figure 2 that in the region of large detection probabilities.
the curves for a signal with rando- B, B and 'c occupy an interlediate
position with respect curves a and b. This attests to the fact that
signal fading caused by fluctuations in amplitude is partially coepensated
by the increase in its energy due to the pulling of the width. For this
reason. the specified detection probability are assured at a lower average

41

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy of the sounding signal. At low probabilities of correct detection.
the fluctuations in the vidth and amplitude substantially inprove the de-
tection and the curves shifted considerably to the left. The advantages
indicated here are assured by the sore couple: structure of the receive

channel, (or the design of which. it is necessary to know the probability
density of the width of the useful signal.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. "Teoreticheskiye oanovy radiolokatsii" [”The Theoretical Principles of

Radar"]. Edited by Ya. D. Shirnsn. Moscow. Sovetskoye Radio Publishers.
1970.

2. V.V. Surnin. G.D. Filin. "Hodeli fluktuatsiy dlitel'nosti sidroakusti-
cheskogo ekho-eignal" [”Hodels of the Variations in the Uidth of a Sonar
Echo Signal”), Abstracts of the Rsporta of the First All-Union Conference
on the Study and Utilization of the Resources of the Pacific Ocean.

DVPI [Par eastern Polytechnical Institute ileni V.V. Kuybyshevl Publishing
house, Vladivostok, 1976.

3. v.1. Krylov, "Priblixhennoye vychisleniye integralov" ["The Approxiaation
o! lntegrals"], Moscow. Nauka Publishing House. 1967.

COPYRIGHT: "Radiotehhnika." 1978

8225
080:1870

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTWICS AND ELECTRICAL mOINBERINO

UDC 519.17:621.39l.26

TN! APPLICATION OF THE NETIIODS 0? GAMES THEORY TO THE RECOGNITION 0? TN!

SIGNALS OF A SWRCE WHERE TRANSPORNIN ma IN'I'BRFBRZNCB IS rnrsm IN
THE CHANNEL

Nosocow RADIOTBKHNIKA in Rusoisn No ll. Nov 78 pp 810-86
[Article by Yu.P. Kurnetsov. manuscript received 15 June. 1977]

[Text] The formulation of the probles consists in the following. There are
two sources 51 and 82, each of which has a set of n different signals s1.
.... In. The sources are turned on in rsndon nanner: $1 is turned on with
a probability p. while 8;. with (l - p).

The source 51 has different operational nodes. In each node. only two dif-
fere signals of the set of n g1gnals. s1, ..., I“. are transnitted. for
exampl£‘_p1 and I] in accordance with the law 013 - (P(ut) - q; P(s - l - q}.
i,j - l.n. i f j. where Nu) and POIJ) are the a priori probabilit es of the
trans-lesion of the signals I1 and s5 respectively, while q is a specified
nusber. where b g 1/2. The total nusber of possible operational nodes of
source S; is equal to n(n - l).

The signals of the sources are transsitied using a sultiposition sy-etrical
channel without a nae-cry in the presence of transferring type interference.
Such a channel is defined by the set of transition probabilities:

‘-'0' l".

P( I u
. null) 17%” 1*],

where p0 is the probability of the conversion of a given signal into any
other one. where po 3 (n - l)/n.

There is an observing system (SN) at the output of the channel. where this
systel should equate the receive signal with one of two signals transnitted
by source 51 in the given rise interval. or consider it to be a signal of
source 82 without indicating the number of the signal. Let the source 5‘
transait the signals at and I: in the given tine interval. Then. the ob-
servation system should note one of three decisions based on the received
signal: 1) the source 81 sent the signal s1; 2) the source 81 sent the sig-
nal s3; and 3) the signal was sent by the source 52. He shall designate

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

these decisions wtih the symbols m1. m3 and 52 respectively. By virtue of
the action of interference in the channel and the randomness of the trigger-
ing of the sources, the observation system can make both correct and incur-
rect decisions. Let g > 0 and g‘ > 0 mean the respective wins of the obser-
vation system for any correct or incorrect decision concerning the signals
sent by the source 81. while h > 0, and h' t 0 mean the corresponding wins
of the observation system for any correct and incorrect decision concerning
the presence of the source 52. where g.h > g'.h’.

There is an informational link between the cource 81 and the observation
system which consists in the fact that in each time interval of the observa-
tion system, the numbers of the signals and the law governing their trans-
mission by the source 81 are known. As regards the source 82. it is assumed
that it plays an ant gonistic game against the observation system. simulat-
ing the operation of source 81. In this case, the operational modes of $1
in different time intervals are not known to the source 82. we shall adopt
the win average of the observation syscem as an index of the outcomes in the
game. The observer strives to maximize it. while the source S; strives to
minimize it.

He shall enumerate the pure strategies of the players. The source S; has
n strategies, where the i-th strategy consists in its transmitting the signal
D1 (1 - l.n).

The strategies of the observation system are conditional [l]. and they are
represented in a more complex form than the strategies of the source $2. in
fact. since following the reception of any signal. the observation system
should make one of three decisions, then the entire set of input signals

(u) should be broken down into three subsets, where a particular decision
corresponds to each one 3‘ them. But with a sufficiently large n, the number
of possible breakdowns. and consequently. the number of possible strategies
for the observation system increase sharply. This complexity can be ever-
come by means of using one special breakdown of the set in). which is opti-
mal for the solution of the entire problem as a whole and consists in the
following [1]. ,
Let the source 81 transmit the signals m1 and ml in the given time interval
in accordance with the law 0‘ . He shall subdivide the set in) into three
subsets: the first contains o‘ly the signal 'i' the second only the signal
m]. while the third. ('i ) contains all the remaining signals. It is con-
venient to break down al the possible strategies of the observation system
into groups of n(n - 1) strategies each. The number of different groups of
strategies of the observation system is 27. Of them. only five groups of
strategies are the active ones:

_ - Illa. “Ia-Rd. ’J - '7'. '1)”;

A6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICXM. USE ONLY

M». J. ,
"( "VLF ")"N-lwd. ”~17. 1+];

“.m,‘n ’
h(—'_'L”_’.’. -[a,.n,.8.i, 1.]..5: [4,];

Mun." )
’|("—#l)'|'lnssrsol. '0,‘ n". ‘+I;

"I.” 0‘. I
"(#)'lsn seasol. “III“. 1*].

The strategies written out here are read in the following manner. For ex-
nlple, the fourth group incorporates those n(n — 1) strategies such that

if 81 sends the signals It and 33 in accordance with the 91 law, then the
decision is lads that 81 sent the signal '1 when at is received at the input
of the observation system. and the decision that the signal was sent by the
source 81 when any other signal was received.

Calculations show that for the first. second. and fifth groups of strategies.
the win average of the observation systea does not depend on the operational
node of source 51, while for the third and fourth groups of strategies. the
win average of the observation systea achieves the greatest value for the
case of the equiprobable use of different operational nodes by the source
81. he shall designate the win average of thLobservetion system when the
i-th group of strategies is used as v1 (i - 1.5). The qunntities v1 are
equal to:

o.-ur + MI - or + (i —m':
v. - n (I - :97) r + n 7911+"! -s)(|-Mr+p‘| -m.r'+u -p)h';

VO’Pﬂ—P.)l+Pp.:' +(I-p)h—nl(I—p)(A—A');

'- -M(I —r.)r + mor' + m -s)(' +(I—p;n—+(I_,m-y,;
w-n’Hi-nh.

it can be seen fro- these expressions that the values of v1 depend on the
relationship of the probabilities p, p and q. where one can segregate
several ranges of linkages between then, in each of which. an optimal group
of observation system strategies is easily found. as is the value of the
gene v which deter-ines the Iaxiaul guaranteed win average of the obser-
vation systee. Let:

I
.°<'<mw:,m—.r-vo-

where A - (g - g')/(h - h'). Then for any values of the pare-eters of the
problos. the fifth group strategies doeinstes all the resaining ones. and
consequently, is the optinsl strategy. The value of the gene is equal to
v - os'+ (1 - em

’05

FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhen p g, p . the nature of the application of the observation system strate-
gies dope s on the ratio of the probability q and p0. Here, one can
segregate two cases of this linkage.

cal! lo

 

‘ «<1.

H'in-lHi-P.) (1)

Under condition (1). the useful groups are the first, third and fourth
groups of strategies. Now let

I
"- l-er-Nﬂ (9‘ '+l.lLl-P°" (2)

in this case, the dominant group. and consequently. the optinal one is the
fourth group. The value of the gates is equal to:

' l
'- Nil-p.)r+ rem' 4» p(l- nr' +(I—p)h--,,-(l-p)ih - h L 0)

’ n
Further let "" '/"+"—-1'°“)<"<" Then the first group of strategies is
doninant. and consequently. it is the optimal one. The value of the gale
is equal to v - pqg + p(l - q)g' + (l - p)h'.

Cale 2a ' ‘
T ‘4 "' | + p..'(n- im- ru)’
(’0)
Under condition (6), the useful groups are the second. third and fourth
groups of strategies. Now let
+< ‘ ' - (5)
r.- l'q-lU—pJQ-l I’ —n+n(I-p.NI—03 "‘

The fourth group of strategies is doninant here. and it is the optimal one.
The value of the gene in this case is defined by (3). Further let:

' I
h' +n( -P.)(|-¢)‘ <'< |+—n—iM°
"-

Then the dosinant one. and consequently, the optimal group of the third
group of strategies. The value of the gene is equal to v-r('-P~)1+”¢'+

2
4‘ l- :a—— l- a..s', . Pinall let
( , . t m ) y. N. ,/('+$p,gd)<p<l.

‘6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

In this case, the second group of strategies is dominant. which is the
optimal one. The value of the game is equal to:

""("EE'OH "£114 MI -0)(l-N( +.

+ pil-¢)M'+(I—p)h'-

This completes the solution of the problem. He shall consider the results
obtained. In the range of small values the probability p. where p6 [0.p‘].
the optimal strategies are those of the fifth group, which order the obser-
vation system to consider any received signal as a signal of the 82 source
with any operational mode of the source 81. The indicator of the operational

quality of the observation sytem v. does not depend on the probabilitss p0
and q. or on the number of signals n.

In the ranges [p1, pzl under condition (1) and [p1, p3] under condition (A),
the optimal strategies are those of the fourth group which order the source
s to use all possible operational modes with equal probability, and the
observation system to change the breakdown of the set of signals at the in-
put each time there is a change in the operational mode of the source 8;.
Por a specific operational mode 51. the optimum decision is that the signal
of source S is being transmitted with the greatest probability if the re-
ceive signal coincides with it. and the decision that $2 is present in the
contrary case. The operational quality indicator of the observational
system in the ranges considered here depends on the probabilities p0 and

q. as well as on the number of signals n.

in the range [p3, pg]. under condition (A), the optimal strategies are those
of the third group, which order the source 51. and the observation system

to take the same actions as the fourth group of strategies does. However.
the character of the optimal behavior of the observation system in this
case is different and consists in the following. If the received signal
coincides with one of the signals of source 51. then it is equated to the
latter. otherwise, the received signal is considered to be a 52 source
signal. The operational quality indicator of the observation system in
this range depends only on the probability p0 and the number of signals n.

in the range [p5, ll under condition (b), the optimum strategies are those
of the second group, which for any operational modes of the cources $1 and
82 order the equating of the received signals only to the signals of the

81 source according to the following rule: if the received signal coincides
with the 5, source signal, transmitted with the least probability, then it
is equated to the latter. otherwise. the received signal is equated to the
51 source signal, which is transmitted with the greatest probability. The
operational quality indicator of the observation system in this range de-

pends on the probabilities p0 and q. as well as on the number of signals
n.

in the range [92, ll under condition (1). the optimal strategies are those
of the first group. which order the observation system to equate any received

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

signal to a signal of source 81, transmitted with the greatest probability.
and (or the case of other operational nodes. of the sources 81 and 82. The

operational quality indicator of the observation systes in this range depends
only on the probability q.

Hith an increase in the number of signals n, the range of values of the
probability q determined by inequality (4), expands, while range (1) con-
tracts. In this case. the indicator of the operational quality of the obser-
vation systel in all ranges of values of the probability p, uhere it depends
on n. increases. Consequently. increasing the nulber of signals pcrnits
reducing to a certain extent both the harIEul action of interference and

the "interfering" action on the part of source 52.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. V.F. Nestaruk. RADIOTBKHNIKA, 1969, V01. 26, No. 5. 8, 9.
COPYRlGnT: ”Radiotekhniks," 1978

8225
680:1870

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BLECMICS AND ELMRICAL momsssmc

UDC 621 . 391365.011 .106

A QUANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF THE BCG‘G‘IC ENGINEERING EFFICIENCY OF DISCON-
TINUOUS CWICATIGIS SERVICE

Moscow MDIOTEKHNIKA in Russian No ll, Nov 78 pp 97-100
[Article by LP. Yurlov and LA. Roshdeatvenskaya]

[Text] Discontinuoue service is an effective means of transmitting infor-
mation in channels with randomly changing parameters; it is employed in
meteor scatter radio col-unications, as well as for combating fading in the
VHF and UHF bands [1, 2]. Discontinuous comeunications permits increasing
the information trannission rate by tens of times or reducing the trans-
mitter power by the same amount at the requisite transmission rate for a
specified noise inunity. However, the equipmeu; is complicated in this
case, something which is due to the presence of a feedback channel and stor-
age devices with a large memory; this leads to additional economic expendi-
tures. To justify them. it is necessary to compare discontinuous conuni-
cations with continuous service based on economic engineering parameters.

Used as the criterion for evaluating the efficiency of the systems analysed
below are the expenditures referenced per unit of transmitted intonation
at a specified information reproduction quality [3]. In the system being
analyzed, the intonation is transmitted only in those tine intervals when
the signal/noise ratio at the input to the receiver exceeds a specified
value. Ilnder unfavorable reception conditions, the system is shifted over
to a standby mode by means of a feedback channel, and the information at the
transmit end of the connunicetions channel is stored in a special store.

At the receiving station, besides the detection of frequency telegraphy
signals, the carrier level is also monitored. An analysis of the effici-
ency of discontinuous comunications is made under the conditions that

Rayleigh fading and fluctuating interference of the white noise type act
in the channel.

Shortwave transmitters for trunk link comnications were used as the trans-
mitting devices. R-ZSOH receivers were employed in the transmitting and re-
ceiving stations. It was also seemed that the narrow band feedback channel

did not introduce any errors. The efficiency of the systems being compared
is determined from the formula of [3]:

49
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

' a E K
3"7f'75'+‘-7!" (1)

where 31 [21) are the referenced annual expenditures for the i-th variant:
Q; is the amount of information which is transmitted at a specified infor-
mation reproduction quality; K1 are the capital inVestments for the i-th

variant; E“ is the normative c licieney coefficient; £1 are the annual
operating expenses for the i-th system.

Since the system: being analyzed differ in terms of their noise immunity,
transmission rate. communications range, etc.. it is necessary to reduce

them to a comparable form. Comparability in terms of noise immunity is
accomplished when the following conditions is met:

Pea-Pea 'Pen (2)

where 90."! P0." is the reception error probability for the case of continu-
ous and discontinuous communications respectively; Po.1 is the requisite
error probability based on the conditions of the problem.

Comparability as regards the communications range is relsized with the con-
dition:

f. -r. emf"

(3)

Ir" - r continuous; rn - r discontinuous], where r1 is the requisite coe-
munications range.

The average error probability in a discontinuous communications system is:

Ih.($)-ED¢$
ms). - —L,_,

isms:
I

where S; is the threshold level of the signal/noise ratio; 9(8) is the
probability density of the signal/noise ratio at the input to the receiver.

For systems with an active pause with incoherent reception, the expressions

for the average error probability in the discontinuous and continuous com-
munications systems have the form [2]:

pe.e($)'ﬁ;0 T: pe.s(s)-f+s- (1.)

it (4) is used and conditions (2) and (3) are met, then one can determine

the levels of the so," and so." signal/noise ratios at the inputs to the
receivers of the systems considered here. as veil as the powers at the re-
ceived signals:

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Na.“ - s... 'a: ”a.” - sea. 'ao

"(an - N discontinuous system, receiver input; PM.“ - N continuous
system. receiver input], where on and o" are the interfernce powers with-
in the limits of the effective passband of the receivers.

After this. we find the necessary transmitters powers to assure a specified
noise i-unity and communications range r. i.e.:

“’I ’ ”a." _

”-- 1:7: m: ”-- ﬁg’ﬁ

where r, A and P are the communion range. wavelength and attenuation
factors: 01 and 62 are the gains of the transmitting and receiving antennas
respectively. The power gain using continuous cousunications is defined by
the ratio 3 - Nu/Nn. By having available the capital investments and annual
operational expenditures as a function of the power of the transmitters. one
can determine the referenced expenditures needed to design and operate the

transmitting devices. Having computed the referenced expenditures of the

receivers, we shall determine the overall referenced annual outlays for the
conunications systems being compared.

To attain the requisite co-unications range. noise i-unity and other para-
meters in a system with continuous information transmission. it is necessary
to substantially increase the transmitter power. something which entails
considerable additional outlays. The referenced annual expenditures for a
continuous comnications system are determined from the formula:

3. - (K. + Mas. + a. + 55.,

where AK“ are the additional capital outlays related to the increase in
transmitter power; AB" are the additional annual operational expenditures.

A discontinuous conunications system includes a direct and a return channel.
as well as devices for storing information as well as automatic start-up and
shut-down equipment. This requires additional capital investments AK" and
operational expenditures AB“ (as compared to just a forward couunications
channel). The referenced annual outlays for the case of discontinuous infor-
mation transmission are found from the expresssion:

all" (Kn 4‘ 5K1!) £- 4‘ Es + ‘Ea.

The equipment cost was determined from price list 16-01 for products of the
radio industry. The individual expenditures (for the installation of equip-
ment. transportation, etc.) were calculated in a consolidated fashion in
percent of the basic type of expenditure and were determined on the basis of
experience in the project planning. construction and operation of col-unita-
tions installations. The cost of the transmitters were computed from the
formula [6] C - dh‘. where n is the transmitter power in kilowatts;

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m and d are constants. For automated transmitters. which operate in a
telegraph mode, d - 10 [103 . rubies/Kw]; m . 0.54. The operational expenses
were computed taking into account the structure of the outlays and the rela-
tive share of the amortization deductions in the overall sum of the expenses
indicated here. The amortization deductions were computed from the norms
established for communcations and radio broadcast enterprises. The specific
reference expenses were computed in accordance with (1). Using the proce-
dure set forth here, the following functions were obtained:

'0 3:. " “(30- 3:. - v.01). 1'. - tonal. I - roan:
2- 3; " “(P-L 3.2— hip». 5: - tonal. r a roast;
3' 3; 'ld'). 3; - 1.0). $1 - tonal. P.- toml,

where the subscripts "H" and "n" characterize continuous and discontinuous
communications respectively; 3h [Zﬁ] and 3ﬁ [zﬁ] are the annual referenced
expenditures per unit of transmitted information in the systems considered
here; r is the communications range in kilometers.

The specific expenditures 2' are shown in Figure l as a function of the
threshold level Sp. computed in the systems being compared for P0 - 10“,
r-2-103km,Nn-3‘lozmandNn-Zmlaic].

The specific expenditures increase sharply when S: < 2 and 5t > 12. and
moreover, there is a threshold at which the quantity 1' is minimal. The
latter is explained by the fact that when 8; tends to zero, the noise immu-
nity for discontinuous communications approaches the noise immunity of a
discontinuous information transmission system. i.e.. it is substantially
reduced. Although in this case the volume of information being transmitted
is increased. the transmitter power nonetheless significantly increases.
something which causes a growth in the referenced annual outlays at low
threshold levels. At large threshold levels. because of the increase in
the noise immunityI the referenced expenditures fall off, but the average
time and rate of traffic transmission are considerably reduced. At the
limit when St a -. the volume of transmitted information tends to zero.
Correspondiy, the expenditures referenced per unit of transmitted infor-
mation increase considerably with a large threshold signal/noise ratio.

The most important parameters of the systems being compared are shown in
Table i as a function of the reception error probability for a communications
range of r - 2 . 103 km and a threshold of st I 10; shown in Table 2 are the
values obtained when r - 1.5 - 103 km and St - 10; shown in Table 3 are the
most important parameters as a function of the communications range r when
Po - 10" and S‘ - 10. From the curves plotted in Figures 2 and 3 for the
specific expenditures as a function of the reception error probability for
the case of discontinuous and continuous communications service and ranges

of r1 - 2 - 103 km and r2 - 1.5 . 103 km respectively, it is apparent that

in the first case somewhat of an increase is observed in the expenditures

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0313

   

Figure 1. Figure 2.
Key: 1. 2' [hopecks/bitl; Key: 1. z' lkopeeks/bit);
2. Discontinuous service; 2. Diacontinuous service;
'3. Continuous service. 3. Continuous service.

with a reduction in the reception error
probability. This is explained by a
decrease in the assent of correctly re-
ceived intonation with a drop in the
noise i-unity. But the reduction in
the absolute level of the outlays is
poorly realized, since at low power
levels of the transmitters, the major
proportionate share in the outlays
belongs to large capacity mories.
figure 3. An analysis of tables 1 and 2 shows

_ . _ that when P < 10" , discontinuous eon-
Key. 1' z lltopecks/bit]. Iunicstionsois significantly lore effic-
ient that continuous. For example,
uhenl’o- lr‘andr-Z - 103kl, the
annual savings which can be obtained when using discontinuous co-unications
amounts to S - [Zﬁ - zﬁlq" - 67.500 rubles. It follows from an analysis of
table 3 that the efficiency of discontinuous co-uniestions increases with
an increase in conunicationa range. For exaaple, when r - 4.4 0 10
the specific expenditures for the systems being conpsred are:

Zl" - 28.3 Ropecka/bit;

zll - 2.8 . 10-2 kopeckslbit.

 

2. Discontinuous service:
3. Continuous service.

it follows fron Figure I: and table 3 that with an increase in co-unications
range, the rate of growth in the specific expenditures for the case of con-
tinuous transuission considerably leads the rate of growth in these expendi-
tures for the case of discontinuous couunicstions. In fact, when using
continuous transnisaion, transmitter powers are required which are figured in

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Table 2.

 

(A) P... | Io--| 1on l0-' (A)

   
 
    
       
       

(B) P.. an: n i 150

(B)

 
 

(e)
(o)

(3)

(F)

I“ (G)

(G)

    

   

2J6 5.31 so. (a)

(H)

(I) 1.31 2.5

(u
.5
_'._
9'
o
g-

(I)

 

Key [for both tables]:

A. Error probability;
3- Pcontinuous: K";

c. Pdiscogtinuousv “"3
D. 2H0 10 rubles/year;

B. 2“, 103 rubles/year;

F. q“ . 10'6, hits/year:
G. q - 10‘5, hits/year;
H. 2 . 102, kopecks/blt;
1. 2,1 - 102. kopecks/bit.

hundreds of kilowatts. A change in the coununications range of several
tines leads to a considerable increase in translitter power, sooathing

which entails the necessity of large capital invest-ents and current ex-
penditures. The use of discontinuous communications requires the use of
transmitting devices having a power of units of kilowatts. For this

reason, for the case of a change in the coununications range, the referenced
annual expenditures also increase, but the rate of their growth is consid-
erably less than for continuous communications.

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 30

(a) “to“. $2}.

 

Key: A. Pu, KW [continuous];
B. P", K" [discontinuous];
C. 2“. 103 rubles/year [continuous];
D. Z“. 103 rubles/year [discontinuous];
E. q“ . 10 6, bits/year;
F. q" - 10-5, bits/year;
6. lg . 10;,kopecks/b1t;
- 102,kopecks/b1t.

Figure h.

Key: 1. Z' [kopecks/btt];
2. Continuous communication:
3. Dlscontinuous cannunlcat:

 

$5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusions. The coaprehensive econonic engineering analysis performed here
has denonstrsted the advantages of discontinuous comunicutions over con-
tinuous service in a rather wide range of the Iain parameters (Po. r. q).

1.

2.

3.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

"Heteornaya rsdioevyuz' na ul'trahorotkikh volnakh" ["Heteor Scatter Radio
Conunicationa at Ultrashortwave Frequencies"). Collection of articles
edited by MA. Kazantssv. Hoscov, Ill. Publishers. 1961.

A. 6.2yuko, "Po-ekhoustoychivost' i effaktivnost‘ sisten svyazi" ["Conlun-
icntions Systen Noise qunity and Efficiency"]. Hoscou. Svyaz' Publishers.
1972.

FJ. Yurlov, "Otaenke effektivnosti sredstv svyazi e ucheton zatrnt na
ikh sozdaniye i ekspluatatsiyu" ["‘I‘he Evaluation of the Effectiveness of
Communications Equipment. Taking into Account the Expenditures for Its
Desig and Operation"], The All-Union Scientific Session Devoted to Radio
Day. Moscow, 1976.

"Bkononicheskays effektivnost' i stinulirovaniye sozdoniyn i vnedreniya
novoy tekhniki svyszi. Infomtsionnyy sbornik" ["Econouic Efficiency
and Providing Incentives for the Design and Introduction of New Conuni-

cations Bquipnent. Informational Collection"], Moscow. Svyaz' Publishers.
1969.

COPYRIGHT: "Radiotekhnika," 1978

8225
CSO:187O

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIM. USE ONLY

BLECTWICS AND ELECTRICAL momma

EQUIVALENT PARAMETERS OP GUNN DIODE IN THO-FREQUENCY MODE

Moscow RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLSKTRONIKA in Russian No lo, 1978
pp 2208-2211

[Article by A. s. Kosov and I. a. Strukovl

[Text] Results are presented of the experimental investi-
gation of a two-frequency oscillator generating sig-
nals at the basic frequency and the 2nd harmonic.
The maximum generated power at the harmonic was
30‘ of the maximum power of the single-frequency
oscillator. The mechanism of generation of the
2nd harmonic was investigated. It was shown that
in the case studied, generation is basically para-
metric; that is, the negative conductivity intro-
duced as a result of parametric coupling of signals
considerably exceeded the intrinsic conductance of
the diode at the 2nd harmonic. This makes it
possible to increase by a factor of two the maximum
frequency of Gunn oscillators. The effect of a
reactive 2nd-harmonic load on the efficiency of the
oscillator at the basic frequency was investigated.
The possibility of increasing the efficiency by a
factor of 1.5 in comparison with the case of
single-frequency oscillation was demonstrated.

Introduction

Oscillators with output at the 2nd or higher harmonic may be
used in systems in which synchronous oscillations are required
at the basic frequency and at some harmonic, and also may be
used to shift frequency into a region in which an instrument
has no intrinsic negative resistance. As shown by calculations
[11, at a frequency of 140 cu: the Gunn diode has no negative
resistance. However, as the basic frequency is raised, the
effect of the 2nd harmonic increases, and a two-frequency

oscillator at a frequency of 140 GR: may be of comparable

57

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efficiency with a single-frequency oscillator at 70 Gﬂz. At
the same time the power at the basic frequency of 70 on:
remains approximately at the maximum produced at this frequency
in the single-frequency mode. Additionally, a reactive load

at 140 on: makes it possible to increase by a factor of 2

the maximum efficiency at 70 GB: in comparison with the single-
frequency case. Thus, two-frequency oscillators using Gunn
diodes may be widely applied in the mm-band and require
detailed investigation and the choice of a system of basic
parameters.

1. A system of equivalent parameters
of a two-frequency oscillator

The approach used for analysis of a two-frequency oscillator
is that of the authors of [2], applied by them to the analysis
of an avalanche transit-time oscillator. The state of the
oscillator is described by the amplitudes of the let and 2nd
harmonics v1 and v2, their relative phase 0-02-201, and the
frequency mo. An active instrument is characterized in
addition by the conductance matrix

(1) IYu(o..o.u..v..x)- || 5'" ”" ||.

Un Uu '

Here x signifies the bias. the temperature, and other para-
meters. The equivalent circuit of the active element is
presented in fig. 1. The voltages of higher harmonics are
assumed to be much smaller than those of the let and 2nd
harmonics, justifying the representation of the instrument by
a conductance matrix rather than by a total resistance matrix.

 

Fig. 1. Equivalent circuit of two-frequency oscillator.

The condition for free two-frequency oscillation may be written
in the form

58

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yo‘U.) +Yug-o.
(2) “(2000) + Yul-00
Y _ ll Uu Uu ll .
Uh ﬂu
where
mahvﬁ’

yi-I-Uaa'i'hl“;
"I

-N )

y""'VIl+Uu ”ﬂu; .
a

As shown by experiment, y 2 and Y21 have little dependence on
02 and v2 and are preportional to v1:

Unakul’u‘”""’.

Uocukw.¢"’-‘*’.

Thus, in order to describe the active element in the two-
frequency mode it is necessary to know the following equi-

valent parameters: y 1, the intrinsic conductance of the
diode at the lat harmgnic, depending only on the amplitude of
the let harmonic: yzz, the intrinsic conductance of the diode
at the 2nd harmonic, depending on the amplitude of the 2nd
harmonic: constants k1 and $1, determining the effect of the
2nd harmonic on the lat: and constants k and #2, determining
the effect of the lat harmonic on the 2nd.

(3)

2. Design of a measuring cavity

The cavity of the two-frequency oscillator investigated is
shown in fig. 2. To calculate the geometric dimensions of the
diode holder, the method developed by Bisenhard and Khan was
used [3]. Shown in fig. 3 are results of the calculation of
the admittance of the load connected to terminals of the
semiconductor structure with the geometric dimensions shown

in fig. 2. A short circuit mode occurs for oscillations with
a wavelength equal to b1/2n, where n is a whole number, in

the plane of the broader wall of the waveguide, where the
contact pin 9 enters the coaxial portion.

As shown by calculations, with the design studied the magnitude
of the impedance modulus of the load from the side of the
waveguide for the basic frequency does not exceed 1 ohm in the
region of 500 MHz, corresponding to the short circuit mode for
the semiconductor instruments examined. Therefore, in order to
decouple the oscillations, the height of the basic-frequency
waveguide was chosen to be 8 mm, corresponding to a short
circuit at a frequency of 18.8 682.

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Pig. 2. Design of a two-frequency
oscillator: l - waveguide 8x23: 2 -
diaphragm; 3 - waveguido 5.5x113 4 -
three-pin transformer: 5 - shorting
plunger: 6 - oxidized insert: 7 -

Gunn diode: 8 - thick volume diaphragn
9 - contact pin.

 

¢ Ghz

 

Pig. 3

Fig. 3. Calculation of load conductance: a - in the region
5-20 GHz; b - in the region 9-10 GHz.

The diameter of pin 9 was chosen to be 3 mm to achieve an
active conductance for the first harmonic at the terminals
of the semiconductor element on the order of 1/30 co, where
G is the conductance of the diode at zero bias voltage.

0 aphragm 2 served as an impedance transformer at the basic
frequency.

A three-pin transformer was used to match impedance at the

second harmonic. The bias was introduced through an oxidized
aluminum insert.

3. Experimental results
Investigations were performed with an unencased Gunn diode.
The doping profile was uniform. The dopant concentration was
(l-Zi-lo‘ cm". The length of the active region was 10 um.

The threshold voltage "T'3°5 V, and the threshold current
Ivy-0.5 A.

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USP. ONLY

Pig. 4. Dependence of input conduct-
ance at the first harmonic on ampli-

tude v for various reactive loads at
the 2n harmonic.

 

The investigations were performed at a basic frequency of 9.4
on: and a corresponding second harmonic of 18.8 on: with a bias
voltage of 2°50T- Measurement of the oscillation parameters
v1, v2. mo, and O, as well as the parameters of the instrument,
was made according to the method discussed in [d].

The following results were obtained: v1-SV, vz-0.9V, Re Yll'
-6'10"mho, Im y 1-+30'lo"mho, Re y --l.5°lo ’mho. 1m yz -
+60olo"mho. k -b.S-lO"mho/v, o1-+1EG-, k2-0.8"mho/v. and
02I-70°. The ollowing were the load conductances:
Y1(uo)-(6-330)-10" mho,
”(havoc-”0) ~10" mho.

It should be noted that Re Y2(2uo)>>Re y 2. This indicates

that it is possible to form negative conauctance at the second
harmonic in Gunn diodes as a result of the parametric coupling
y21. The value of 02"70° shows the impossibility of describing
an instrument with a volt-ampere characteristic having a segment
with a negative resistance.

The case of a reactive load at the second harmonic. Re Y2(2u°)-0.
was also studied. The input admittance at the first harmonic
was measured for various amplitudes v , and the corresponding
efficiency value for the first harmon c was calculated.
Experimental results for three different modes at the second
harmonic are presented in fig. 4. The parameter is the angle
82-0-0 . The case 02-278“ corresponds to a load at the second
harmonic such that the maximum efficiency at the first harmonic
is increased by 30‘ in comparison with the single-frequency
case. The case 02-25' corresponds to the case in which the
maximum efficiency is increased by 15%. Thus with an arbitrary
reactive load at the second harmonic the maximum efficiency of
the oscillator may vary by a factor of nearly 1.5.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Conclusion

Investigations of the two-frequency mode show that the negative
conductance introduced as a result of coupling between ”0 and
2wo oscillations considerably exceeds the conductance of the
instrument at the frequency Zmo for vz-o in the instrument.
This confirms the proposed possibility of using two-frequency
Gunn oscillators at frequencies twice as high as those
achievable in the single-frequency mode. The proposed
measurement method makes it possible to give an adequate
description of the instrument and may serve as the basis for
the design of two-frequency oscillators.

References
1. w. R. Curtice. J. J. Purcell. IEEE TRANS., 1970, 80-17. 12,

1018.
2. C. A. Brackett, BELL SYSTEM TECHN. J., 1970, 49, October, 1777.

3. R. 1.. Eisenhard. 9. J. Khan, was TRANS., 1971—, Hrs-19, a, 706.
4. D. F. Peterson, 1828 TRANS., 1974, "PT-22, 8, 783.
Received by editors 18 duly 1977.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka,” 'Radiotekhnika i elektronika.”
1978

9187
C50: 8144/0567

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRONICS AND ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING

PRINCIPLES OF MINIAIURIZATION OF PASSIVE MICROWAVE STRIP
ELEMENTS

Moscow RADIOTBKHNIKA I BLBRTRONIKA in Russian No lo, Aug 78
pp 2216-2218

[Article by Ye. L. Bachinina, N. I. Prokhorova, and A. L.
Fel'dshteyn]

[Text] The object of this article is to introduce criteria
for the quality of bandpass filters taking into account all
their basic parameters: passband (V",t), dissipative losses
(b;,db), volume (v,cm’), and frequency selectivity (number of
resonators n). The proposed criterion is of the form

O
(1) —. Va; -G>cs-L
s a

This relationship is based on the particular parametric rela-

tions given in [1-5]: between losses and passband for

v/n-const. [1,2] and between losses and volume for Vﬂ=const.
[3-5] e

Relationship (1) has a simple physical meaning. Since the
quantity G is bounded below, the simultaneous improvement of
all filter parameters is possible only up to a definite limit.

The dependence of achievable values of G on wavelength A,
determined by experimental methods, is presented in fig. 1.
Data from the literature conform to the laws found: thus, a
definite system is formed for evaluating and selecting
materials from the literature.

The practical utility of the criterion G will be explained
through examples.

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Example 1. The following parameters
are given for an opposing-stub band-
pass filter: n-7, b;-2.Sdb, Vn-Zt,
volume-60cm’. The quality criterion
is to be determined. we find

a
4V.L-2:£; c-mdb-cm'.

s a 1 1
Conclusion: the filter is poorly
designed or constructed. since the
n *“ average value of G in the lO-cm
Pig. 1 region is 3 (see graph in fig. 1).

    

Baample 2. The following characteristics are given for a
microstrip filter with parallel-coupled resonators: n-S,
bg=4.5 db, Vn-St, v=4 cm’. We find the quality criterion

6-2.? 5 g... 3.5 dbocm’.

Conclusion: the filter is well designed and constructed.

Some characteristics of the basic types of s-band bandpass
filters are presented in the table. The filters are listed

in order of increasing average thermal losses at the resonator
for a 1! filter band. From the table it follows that the
basic types of s-band bandpass filters all have G-values of
approximately 3; that is, the reduction in resonator volume
from type to type is accompanied by a proportionate increase in
losses; new types of filters -- using supercritical waveguides,
dielectric resonators, etc. -- may be evaluated using criterion
(1): as demonstrated by experiment, the quantity 6 for these
filters lies within the limits corresponding to the range of
the graph in fig. 1: in wideband bandpass filters (passband

not less than 5\) the limitations found are immaterial. This
makes it possible to miniaturize them, in particular, in

planar microstrip form.

The criterion shown above and the laws that follow from it
are applicable not only to bandpass filters but to other
passive microwave elements with resonant amplitude-frequency
characteristics as well.

In conclusion we present an analytic proof of the connection

between losses and passband (for a given type of filter).
Previously this connection was found numerically [l].

64

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We proceed from the known relationship [6]

(2) 20'

. m 0-!
" o.
where 00 is the intrinsic 0-factor of the resonator; Qi is
the Q-factor of the ith (ideal) resonator under load. Multi-
plying and dividing the right-hand part of (2) by the quantity
8, where Su2Af/fO-vﬂ, we introduce the normalization in n:

 

(3) -" -—.

Uh
where V, is in per cent and Vn-S'lOOQ.

 

This equation will be a hyperbole if the expression in braces
(having the same meaning as the quantity a in [1]) is suffi-
ciently unvarying. We will show that this is in fact the case.

          

2 o t a n r n s s»
Fig. 2 Fig. 3
+ limits of constant value of a for Aa/as20t

Pig. 2. Dependence of the hyperbolic coefficient a (normalized)
on the number of resonators. The frequency characteristic
of the filter is maximally flat.

Pig. 3. Dependence of hyperbolic coefficient a (normalized)
on the number of resonators. The filter has a Chebyshev
frequency characteristic.

We will introduce the normalized value aﬂ=a(Q°/O.68): then

“'(VQ2P5- With a maximally flat amplitude-frequency character-
istic

65

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I I \—
-_ n V.
(‘) 2:05-vu21uma-u;:- ".

gun 0-! .l .—
u 2»

 

where A-Il'l... /V1-|r|1...: m... is the allowance for mismatch in
the passband. Hence
{a

(5) a.-.‘__

Adam/2h)

Graphs of this function are given in fig. 2: they approach
asymptotically the value 2/! as n+w. The region over which
a" is relatively constant is marked on the graphs: it is
bounded on the left by the values of n-4-7.

Parameters of basic types of s—band bandpass filters

 
 
 

 
  
    

   

a)
“I’ll DMD-WNW!“ .mp-

mys-
IJI m

a e , . ”I
'0 ulnar-3;“. v

 

f) nonhuman hump t holy-oatm-

sun poaoutopaxr 0.1 WOOD moo-woo 14.6
9) Onaup n uspcnesuux ”anemia: 0.2 0.15 moo-sow 3-.
Oatmeal Ouaup u enuuorpmuoﬂ
h) nonsense! nun" c autumnal
manual 03 0.22-0.36 woo-2500 2.2-2.0
04 patio-«omen! Warp um
i) cnnunpuuoi ammonia-son auuuuc
emu-nu uuoaueuueu 1 MW woo-mo 2.3-3.3

. I'm-«1am dump as cunnnpus-
3’ lol lemma nonocnoaod .muum

k) Ounp a. mutual swamp-mm
mammal sauna

1) Ouaup Ila mmponoaocnosoi mmuu

0.1 zoo-no 3—3.5

III-2.33 200-300 7.5-“
uo-aso 150-210 3.0-5.0

MOI”

a) Type of bandpass filter

b) Minimum recommended passband, V", t

c) Average losses at resonator for Vu'l‘ b/n, db

6) Intrinsic resonator Q-factor, 00

e) Dimensional index 6, db-cm’

f) Waveguide filter with semiconductor resonators

9) Filter using supercritical waveguides

h) Bonochnyy filter using symmetrical strip line with air fill
i) Oppgsing-stub filter using symmetrical strip line with air

j) Comb filter using symmetrical air strip line
k) Filter using printed symmetrical strip line
1) Microstrip line filter

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We will perform similar operations for a Chebyshev amplitude-
frequency characteristic. The results are shown in fig. 3.

In this case the asymptote has the value eH-l. The fact that
a" is constant for both types of amplitude-frequency character-
istic indicates that equation (3) is, in the asymptotic
approximation, a hyperbole.

References

l. Ye. L. Bachinina. N. I. Prokhorova, A. L. Pel'dshteyn.
RADIOTBKHNIKA. 1971, 26, 10, 46.

2. V. P. Leonchenko. A. ET Pel'dshteyn, L. A. Shepelyanskiy.
Rsschet poloskovykh fil'trov na vstrechnykh sterzhnyakh,

[”Design of strip filters with opposing stubs“) (Handbook)
12D. SVYAZ', 1975.

3. V. M. Osipenkov, Ye. L. Bachinina, A. L. Fel'dshteyn,
motorsxmrm, 1973, a, s, 25.
4. Ye. D. Lotkova, prrosy rsdioelektroniki ("Problems of

radio electronics'], SER. TEKHNIKA RADIOSVYAZI. 1975. no. 4,
110.

S. A. V. Alekseyev. A. Ye. Znamenskiy, Ye. D. Lotkova,
Elektricheskiye filﬂtry metrovogo i detsimetrovogo
diapazonov (“Electrical filters for the meter and deci-
meter bands”), IZD. SVYAz', 1976.

6. 5. Kb. Regan, RADIOTBKHNIKA I ELEKTRONIKA, 1962, l. 8, 1316.

Received by editors 16 July 1976.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo 'Nauka.‘ 'deiotekhnika i Blektronika,‘
1918 '

9187
050: 8144/0568

67

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASPRONGIY AND SPACE

unc 551.46.083

Sevastopol' HORSHYE GIDROII'IZICMIYE ISSIEIXNANIYA in Russian No i, 1978
pp 98-110

LArticle by Ye. H. Pilippov and I. A. Lananova]

Abstract. Based on calculations it is shown the in
neasm'eaents with neutron sou-ces with output 10 -1010

neutron/s one can define in sea water sodiumm'oaine and

of saline cospoeition. These sethode are gemrally very labor intensive
and are carried out on ships and in shore laboratories. Using such sethods
it is ispossible to rapidly solve the aforesentioned problem. At the ease
tine it is known that analysis of chesical elesents can be solved rapidly
with the help of the neutron activation aethod (HA) [8] which uses devices
with radio isotope neutron sou-cos (califotniun-Zsz and other . or with
neutron tubes operating on the (d,t)-reaction principle [7.8 . Based on
these and other sources of neutrons instrusents can be crested for full-
scale hydrophysical studies. Besides this. to carry out NA under ship

conditions laboratory neutron generators of the type 116-1501, Ill-160 and

He studied by calculation the possibility of using M to analyze chenical

elesents of saline conposition. These elements can be activated both
under the influence of fast. and theraal neutrons.

directly fro- the source. In the (d.t)-rssction they have energy 1h.6, and
in calii‘orniugzsz on the average 2.3 HeV. The thersal neutrons (0.025 eV)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

substances (water. paraffin, etc.). See water is a natural noderatou: of
fast neutrons.

The NA techniques that can be realized based on fast and theraal neutrons
are designated respectively NA—f and NA-t. By combining these techniques
one can select the optimal pattern of irradiation and measure-ant of the

induced activity of sea vater as applied to the determination of each chemi-
cal eleeent or their groups.

The nunber of iapulees governed by gases-radiation of radio isotopes emerging

in a hoaogeneous unlimited nediue, according to L?.8] will be defined by
the following ratios

[neerfad/gmna')”. m_

Here innmber of gam-qmnta of certain energy eaitted by radio isotope:
Q--output of fast neutrons from sources eueffectivenees of detector: s--
effective surface of detector: Eusauoscopic cross section of isotope

activation: n10! )--function that describes the distribution of neutrons
at distance R on source; n

(R )--function of distribution of gases-quanta
from the point of their energan 3

c R1 to the site of location of the detector
R23 V--voluae of studied medium

_ _(N _m ‘
Irv-(’4' $662576 7—6" ﬁlm

where to. t and t—-respectively the ties of irradiation, pause. and assente-
nent: '1‘“ -life. If neasuremnts begin inediately after the end of
irradiation of the substance. then tn-O and foraula (2) adopts the appearance

,1!) (mfg) 7' (/4 1,551,).

mi

 

(3)

In practice the ties of irradiation and eeasureaent are often selected as
equal to-t. In this case formula (3) is written as:

12(0- ig—(I-e- 4:”): . (4)

69

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! Oﬂ’ICIM. USE ONLY

In sotivetion of the isotopes by i‘sst neutrons of s spot source the function

/ 4/! )1: a. (5)
Mt)???” ' /°" °

where kneesn psth of test neutrons in wster. The distribution of saus-

qusnts fro- s spot source without regurd for the accumulation of scsttered
rsdistion is eubJeot to the law

/ "9’
”My”? 3 l

where tvulinesr coefficient of sttenmtion of m-qmntsinwster.

, 'r/m'. . (6)

By substituting the given functions in expression (19 we obtain the fornuls
for NA-f

”(A .’4 (
I- (0 f) e I I . . (1)
51* J 1,”? .

J

The greatest nunber of rsdiosctive isotopes is for-ed near the source. There-
fore. where this is possible the useuremnts ere nsde ss follows: the
studied nediun is irrsdisted by neutrons. then the source is renoved and

in its place s rsdistion detector is installed. The cslculstions for such
csees have the sinplest fore. since here the distances R -n -R. It is con-
venient in this ass!» to compute the integral of expressi n e?) in s spherical
systen of coordinates. snd for-uh (7) will adopt the followim sppeersnce:

at ”'oz- - '
I’é¢}’ U ”ﬁg-p _ . ‘ (a)

where s—-rsdius of sphericu detector: Qo-mszﬁtﬂlm. By integrstion we

obtain
I =4[(q‘1"Yz[-a(q+a")]+}eﬁor)}. (9)
By directing a. to zero we have

1' I
[30.6 LLXL-c 1.1) (1°)

vhere C-O . 5772--Euler ' s constant.

70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For convenience of calculating iron this formula figure 1 presents the do-
pendenco of the values for the function (1+ 15 l)/A on energy of the for-ins
radio isotopes. The values of coefficients ‘l:Y are taken i‘ton reference book
[6]. The mount 1 in mootdance with [7,8] alum 10.28 on.

(/99. ”/1

 

Figure 1. Function (1+ tyxm

In practice the source and detector in a whole nunber of cases are placed a
certain distance 1 iron each other. Then the distance: R and R2 are defined
differently. Here it is nore convenient to conpute the integral (7) in a
cylindrical ayeten of coordinates. For NA-f it adopts the following

appuanc‘
. 0” ‘trlt‘
-4. ra’rIe ﬁll-3‘”)
" z , 4;

(-f‘oz‘. 5&4"! f

A detailed computation of this integral is given in publication [11]. There-
fore we will only given the final expression for the M-f technique

I--§'{.,f-%"—"2¢‘r§<ris)<«aln:,f%”ﬁ iffczmwl

(12)

where m- ’1' (4/01; (_ diaeeter of the inetrulent. The integral is com-
puted nunerically.

71

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«a. \‘Q

 

Figure 2. View of Functions 11/ -f(l) in Activation of Chemical Eleaents by
Fast Neutrons of (d.t -Reactions

For convenience of caculations of this expression figure 2 presents the values '
for the functions “log-“1): the lower the energy of sauna-quanta. the faster
the value of the func ions f(l) drops with an increase in distance 1.

lie will now switch to derivation of formulas for calculations of NA-t.

The calculation of the aoderation process of neutrons in water-containing
aedia is a fairly Couplicated mathematical problem To simplify it in this
case often a one-group approximation is used 2]. The distribution of
thorns]. neutrons with regard for diffusion vi have the appearance [2]

'41“: ’4/‘
a L._"___ M2 . 3
4(4) ”4 EM?“ v m (13)

here I. and In «respectively the length of aoderation and diffusion of

neutroas: l: «sacroecopic cross section of capture (absorption) of thermal

neutrons inases water.

The number of impulses governed by gem-radiation of radio isotopes that
energe in sea water under the influence of thermal neutrons in a spherical

system of coordinates will be detersined from the following expression:

’8 41- ‘, ‘9’ 9’“: _ t' 47‘ 4;!!— , (.Id)

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
With s—DO we obtain
[-4 z»[(r,_+z")/(r,+ 1," )]. . (m

For convenience of patterning calculations by this forsuls figure 3 presents
the dependence of values for logsritheic functions on the energy of gunn-
qusnts of surging radio isotopes. The length of soderstion of the neutrons
l. a is eetiested from the noun values for rise in neutrons [3]. For neutrons
of (d.t) -ree.ctions it is taken as equal to 12.69 CI. and for the celifocrniun
sourcsns cs. The sea. water selinity is taken so equal to 32.5°/.°. The .
necrorcopic cross section of therssl neutron capture 2 in accordance uith

1.7.8] eqmls 0.032; on“. while the length of amnion of thernl neutrons
-2.09 cs.

egg: . (a) ‘

 

Figure 3. Dependences of logarithmic Functions on Energy of Gsue-Quenta of
Parsing Radio Isotopes for Neutrons
Key:
8. (d.t)-resction b. californiun source

73

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the one of NA-t the umber of inpuleoe reoouled in e definite time
interval will be deterlimd by the following ratio.

1-?frdr{fe‘°’""afé-f *‘ 9.1%

Couputetion of theee integrals ie given in publication [10]. In eumry we

I-@(4- 4 ) .015 (I): “.3’
4... _ 2A6» "7 &(:(§-4j W/aVJ—I-e e“yz[-".z(;+4)“

B «the ease when be is replaced byla.

2

 

Figure to. View of Functions u/qi-r -r(1) in Activation of Chenicel Elements
by Thor-31 Neutrons

Key:
e. on (d.t)-reectione
b. on onliforniun source
c. Nev

The relationship N/Q-f (1) is depicted in figure I: where the curves for the
gem-quanta of dﬂf‘reht energy deaeue according to the ease law.

He now switch to an estiute of me possibilities of 08118 the )IA method as

applied to e deurninntion of son of the lost widespread chenicel elements
in eea water.

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After examining the cross sections for the reaction and half-life of the
forcing isotopes [i]. as well as their concentration in sea water [14. 12]
we believe that the scat suitable for M are the following chemical elesonts
salinity. °/..). oxy on (857). chlorine (19). sodium (10.5). magnesium
1.35). calciua (0.0%? and hroaine (0.065). The nuclear characteristics of
isotopes that are the nest suitable for seasurenents of NA-f and NA-t are
given in table 1. The thresholds of the reactions of all isoto s that
develop under the influence of fast neutrons are lower than 11;. Nov. there-
fore those isotopes can be activated. If they are irradiated by neutrons
of a califerniua sources 8 -2.3 HeV. then only chlorine-37 will be

noticeably activated. mPe‘i‘Bre in the future calculations for run-r will
only be made for fast neutrons of (d.t)-reactions.

For spectroaotry of gonna-radiation of induced isotope activity scintillation
or seniconductor detectors can be used. The cintillation detectors are
siaplo to handle and-ore efficient than the semiconductors which have a
higher resolution. but can only operate at the tenperature of liquid nitrogen.
This coaplicatos their operation. For protection from neutrons the indicated
detectors can be screened by boron. lithium and cadaius. In the calculations

of induced isotope activity we evaluate the possibility of using these and
other detectors.

As a semicondustor detector in the calculations we take a geraaniun-lithim
crystal 100 on in values and ffective area s-1h.5 cue. Its effectiveness
is evaluated according to [5.65. Free the scintillation detectors it is
cost convenient to use not sodiue iodide activated by thallium and widely
used in practice. but the crystal of cesiua iodide also activated by thalliua
since otherwise the activation of sodiua in the crystal will introduce
additional errors to the analysis of sodiua of sea water that has very high
cross sections of activation by thernal neutrons (table 1). The disaster
and thickness for cesiua iodide are taken as 70 as. For isotopes with

cosplex spectrum we take the energy of gears-quanta for the nest intensive
lines (in table 1 they are underlined).

The calculations in all cases are ends for the stationary condition of the
aediun. 1.0.. we will assume that there is no water aoveaent.

First we will study the possibility of using the NA sethod for the case l-O
(thodetector is installed at the site of the source). We take the following

ties paraaetere: for NA-f t -t-60 s. t -2 s; for NA-t t -t-30 ain. t -2 s.
The calculation results are esented in table 2. For e rors we ado the
designations: AN and SI--absolute and relative errors in the nunber of
recorded ispulses; AC--absolute error in determining the concentration of
the element in water. Since the product as for germniuu-lithius detector
is 20-3) tines sasller than the analogous aaount for cesiua iodide. then
also the induced activity seasured with the help of the gersanim-lithiua
detector will be the ease aaount lower than for CsI('l'l). Therefore in the
case of seaiconductor detectors to deternine the elements with hiyi

accuracy conparable to the seasureaents for scintillation counters it is
necessary to use a source with higher output of neutrons.

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. .uluu1l1 a11~€u¢ I f‘\ l‘ Cu 1-. 0““ a I E§§-!‘\ I“
.8.o:8.:h:§ 3 .. 2 . To. .5; x . s . «3288 a‘

c o a
:88; .333 3 I: a. 5 ab. .36 86 n. .. \¢V\\£§

98.352. gauge
33v... 22on

g :88; 5 I: . 72 .2... on a.» «Q {3%
h a
.8236; 3 o no. 92 .8.» o: 3 \a?$~\a
.833 3 o 3... 72 .8.» on 3.. \ $.ka
O a ‘ §

89.3 .2:— p 3 o 8:. .386 8 ed. $Q£§
Q

coaooaouuauiv Mo 30533 gum

 
  

A3 >0: .2333 mango."
Mo codaduvaungo

noun: mom no nucoaoam adoanonu no
cauanuvamndllao 93mg «0 cauuauoaaoo and gagged 3032 no acavdauogH .u 0.39..

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100030024-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Calculation Results iron Deterninins Content of Certain Elenents
in Sea Water by NA Method with 1-0

 

Oxygen 000110 31? 0.122 . 1.06
Chlorine 334 so 3,30 0,84
Sodiu- 3000 00 1.80 0.19
Magnesium on 1 7.8 12.00 0.17
Fast neutrons of (d.t)- reaction QI-101o neutron/s. CsI('l‘1)
Oxygen 211348” 4597 0.0217 0.188
Chlorine 2860] 183 0.81? 0.11.8
Sodiun 34030 201 0.343 0.030
Magnesium 1333 88.5 2.788 0.087
Thor-31 neutrons fro- (d.t) -reaction. 0-1010 neutron/s. Ge(Li)
Chlorine 2403 _ 49 ' 2,0 ' 0,38
30‘! 1“” 1 100101 \ 1040 0.000 0.01
Hasmsiun 5001 10 1.34 0.02
c8101"- 111a . 33 0.0 0.012 4
3‘0“” 100303 320 0.3 Lee-10,
Thermal neutrons i‘ron (d.t)-reactio11. 0-108 neutron/s. CsI(Tl)
Chlorine 129 ' 27 ‘ 8.7 0.70
Sodiua 330430 003 0.17 0.018
Magnesium 1242 '33 2.84 0.038
Calcium 190 14 7.26 0.020 4
Bromine 18604 "I 0.80 8.8110
Thernsl neutrons from 252“, Q--108 neutron/s. CsI(Tl)
Chlorine '
2927 84 1.85 0.35
gm“. 71340300 1101 - 0.030 0.009
c333,,“ 5110 71.8 1.40 0.019
Bromine 7” 27" 3'“ 0'0” 4
57000 289 0.42 , 2.7240

After comparing the data obtained by the NA-f and NA—t methods (table 2)

we see that with identical conditions the activation of chemical elements
of a saline composition occurs more intensively under the influence of
thermal neutrons. Sodiun and bromine are activated here best of all. while

by fast neutrons~-oxy3en. This .phenonenon can be employed to investigate
the rate of sea water novenent [11].

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
. cu v- . -v...“ was. an...

Table 3. Calculation Results i‘ros Detersining Content in Sea Hater 01‘
Certsin Blenente by M Method with 1-10 on

 
 
   
 
  

Element
inpulnee
N lap

 
    

Feat neutrons of (d,t)-resction. Q4010 neutron/e. 60(Li)

 

Oxygen 402000 03.7 0.100 I.”
Chlorine 2W '0 0.3 1.10
Sodium ”7 28.0 8.0 0.“
Hagnesiun 0.8 2.5 80.8 0.“

Fast neutrons of (d.t)-renction. QniO1° neutron/s. CsI('l‘l)
Oxygen 12110845 8074 0.028 ' 0.24
Chlorine 1000 00.4 1.110 0.212
Sodium 10000 100.4 0.100 ' 0.077
Magnesium 140 11,3 8.46 0.114

Thermal neutrons i‘ron (d.t) —reaction. 0-1010 neutron/s. Ge(Li)

820 23.0 8.47 0.00
$323” 00000? 000 0.10 0.011
Magnesium - 1100 42.0 2.00 0.002
Gale! 1111 408 I we I ‘ 44“ 0.020
4
Bro-10° 01020 110 0.00 0.04.10

Thermal neutrons iron (d.t) -reaction. 0-108 neutron/s. 601(1‘1)
Chlor 1110 288 [8 6.8 ‘30
Sodium 120623 841 0.8 0.0”
Magnesium 002 24 4.0 0.001
Calciu- 124 11 0.0 0.000
”“3“” 9752 00 1.0 0.00000

Thermal neutrons fronzsch. 0-105 neutron/s. 031(1‘1)

“1°“ 1'” 14s 12 8.0 1.0
San“ 00214 201 0.08 0.04
"“8““31“ 221 10 0.1 0.00
Calcium 0° 3 ‘2 0.m
”"°"‘"° 2200 41 2.1 ' 0.0014

In the transition fre- sources with output 1010 to sources with 108 neutron/s

with other conditions eqml it should be kept in mind that measurement
errors will rise by an order.

The calculation results for 1-10 on and tn -O are given in table 31 with
an increase in the distance no. 1-0 to 1-10 c1: the measured auount of
induced activity is reduced for each chemical element differently. This

is linked exclusively to the alount of energy of sans-radiation emitted
by the isotopes.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

With a further increase in the distance 1 to 20 cm the measured effect for
RA-t is reduced roughly 3-fold in measurements with source of (d.t) -roaction.
and 5-fold in measurements with a c'alifornium source.

Analysis of the data of tables 2 and 3 permits the conclusion to be drawn

that of the chemical elements of saline composition chlorine is activated

the worst of all. Therefore it is better to ammo it by rem-t L9] or use
L10]. In determining chlorine by NO! one can use the same detector as for
NA: in the case of HIM-t it is necessary to include in the set of NA apparatus
an additional plastic scintillation detector. The possibility of using a
germanium-lithium detector in measurements by "OH is examined in publication

L10]. Unfortunately there aro no data cu the use of scintillation detectors
for these purposes.

Thus. in NA with sources 108-1010 neutron/s a number of chemical elements of
sea water are activated (tables 2 and 3). For gamma-spectromet of the
isotopes that emerge here it will be more convenient to use scintillation
detectors of the type cesium iodide since in working with such crystals one
can use sources of neutrons one-two orders lower than in measurements with

a germanium-lithium detector. Therefore it is preferable to begin a check of
the possibility of using NA with measalaements with scintil ation sources. In
switching iron sources with output 10 to sources with 10 neutron/s with
other conditions equal one should bear in mind that the measurement errors
will increase by an order.

In analyzing the aforementioned one can draw the following conclusions:

the methods of neutron activation analysis can be completely used for
determining the change in content of chemical elements of a salire composi-
tion under full—scale conditions. highly accurate determinations of chlorine
in water can be simultaneously carried out here by the tephnique of NNH-t or
NGM. If a stationary neutron generator with output to 10 2 neutron/s L8] is
installed aboard the oceanological ship them. by irradiating water samples
of approximately 1 a3 volume with other conditions equal from those examined
the chemical elements of saline composition can be analyzed with even
greater accuracy. In addition. with the help of such gemrators a whole

series of other chemical elements that are contained in sea water in small
quantities can also be analyzed.

BIBLICXJRAPHY

1. Aliyev, A. I.. et a1. “Yaderno-fizichesigiye konstanty dlya neutronnogo.
aktivatsionnogo analiza (spravochnik)" Nuclear Physical Constants for
Neutron Activation Analysis (Reference) , Moscow, Atomizdat, 1969.

2. Kozhevnkikov. D. A. "ﬂeytronnyye kharakteristikigornykh porod i ikh

ispol'zovaniye v neftegazoproeyslovoy geologii" LNeutron Characteristics
of Rocks and Their Use in on and Gas Geology]. Moscow, Nedra, 1971a.

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
9.

10.

11.

12.

Kozhevnikov. D. Au and India. V. A. "Effect of Inelastic Scattering on
Rise in Neutrons in Rocks." in "Novyyo setody i sppsrsturs yedernoy
geotiziki i geokhisii" [Nuclear Methods snd Apparatus of Nuclear Geo-
Physice and Geochesistry]. Moscow. ONTI VNIIYeGG. 1970.

Moro. Duh. "Ninerelny-ye boaststvs okeuns" [“Minersl Resources of the
0cesn"]. Moscow. Progress. 1969.

Reznikov. R. 8.: end Sel‘dyskov. Yu. P. "Prosyshlennyyo proluprovodni-
kovyye grimy" [Industrisl Senioonduoting Instrusents]. Moscow. Atoniz-
dot. 1975.

Store. 8: end Icrsel'. Kh. "Secheniya vuinodeystviys m-lzlucheniys
Esprsvoohnik " [Cross Sections of Interaction of Gene deistion
Reference) . Moscow. Atosizdat. 1973.

Filippov, Yo. M. "Priklsdnsys yederneys geotiziks" [Applied Nuclear Geo-
physics]. Moscow. Isd-vo AN SSSR. 1962.

Filippov. Ye. n. ”Yederneys aeofizlke" [Nuclear Geophysics]. Vol 1.2.
Novosibirsk. 1973.

Filippcv. Ye. M. ”Possibility of Using Neutron Methods to Determine

Chlorine Content of Ocean Hater.” MMStIYB GIDROFIZIWIYB ISSLEDO-
VANUA. Sevastopol'. No 2. 1W7.

Filippov. Ye. M. "Possibility of Using Gem-Radiation of Radiation
Capture of Neutrons to Deter-sine Chlorine Content of See Ester under
Full-Scale Conditions." nmsme GIDROFIZICMESKIYE ISSIEDOVANIYA. Saves-
topol'. No 3. 1977.

Filippov. Ye. M. ”Study of Possibility of Using Neutron Activation Method
to Study the Velocity of See Meter Currents.” Ibid.

Khorn. R. "Morsksye khiniye" [Murine Chesietry]. Moscow. Mir. 1972.

Received b May 1977

COPYRIGHT: Morskoy gidrofizicheskiy institut AM USSR (KI AN USSR). 1978

9035

050:

1870

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GWPRYSICS. ASIRONW AND SPACE

UN 551 .1663. 13621 .039.8

POSSIBILITY OF DE'I‘IHIMNG SEA HATER SALINITY AND IENSITY
PM MOM-RADIATION AWUATIN

Sovaetopol' HORSKIYB GIDROFIZIOWIYE ISSISDOVMIIYA in Russian No 1. 1978
pp 90-97

[Article by Ye. n. Filippov]

Abstract. Based on calculations it is shown that when
aeasurenents are made with the help of radio isotope
sources that suit about 1010 photon/a. and the nano-
second technique the soft scattered radiation of 30-

60 keV will carry intonation on sea water salinity with
accuracy 0.01-0.0ﬁ. while the hard radiation over go-

100 keV-—on sea water density with error about 3- 10 s/cna.

[Text] Publication [8] has shown that the technique based on sans-radi-
ation absorption (cm) can be used to determine sea water density. This
same techniilue in recording soft scattered radiation in the range 33-60 keV
can be used sinultareously to determine the sea water salinity.

'l‘o deter-ins the density of different substances usually sources of salsa
radiation are used below 1 Nov. The rain effects of that interaction with
the substance.l.re Compton scattering and photoelectrical absorption. The

sunnary coefficient of saw-radiation attenmtion will be for-ed from the
coefficients

f-¢;+¢',ny‘P +£I,P a“. (1)

that determine these two effects of interaction between the sauna quanta and
the substance.

The coefficient for the Coapton attemntion of gamma quanta is defined from
the ratio

I ' I \
1; ”.0; = 7606 ”$3094 ”29- m

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Here ”f—Iﬁzp- "3,5? «nunber of electrons in a unit of substance

volune: No--Avogedro nushor. a-z/Anratio of atomic nuaber of cheaical
element 2 to its atoaic wei t A; 6' kueffective cross section of gun
quanta scattering [2.3.6.7 .

The expression for the linear coefficient of genus radiation attenuation due
to the photoeffect is defined fro- the ratio

2'? -%£Dfefp ugzm’ﬂpfp all’P,’ (3)

where Qua-mum of effective cross section of anaquanta attenuation in the

substance due to the photoeffect [2. 3. 6. 73- The size of the exponential
factor a for the guns quanta with energy 0.1. 0.2. 0.3. 0.1}. 0.5 and 1.0 Nev

in?“ respectively the following values: Molt. b.20. 16.27. 4.33. 15.36 and
I. 7.

For media with coaplicated cheaical cosposition instead of B B is intro-

duced. and instead of the atolic numbers of the cheaical eieeeﬁteuthe
effective atosic number [9]

23¢ -‘v/ﬁgﬁﬂ‘z‘z” ' (0

where ﬁg, Ilgﬂ‘ ,0; 3 Pinweighted concentrations of i-th element in

studied sodium BfZJAr—ratio of atomic nuaber of i—th eleasnt to its
atomic weight.

For fresh water 9 -0.555. and for sea water with salinity 17.5 and 35V"
respectively 0.555%!!! 0.551. The relative difference in values J's”-

brim/p {P¢(%)‘Ap W0] ‘°° ‘ ”3”" The effective atoaic

nusber for fresh water L -7.u5. while for water with salinity 17.5 and 35%,.
respectively 7.?2 and 8.36.

The values of the ease coefficients of gens-radiation attenuation for fresh
water taken from reference [to] and computed for ocean water with salinity
35°/eo are given in table 1. It is apparent tron it that with E: > 100 keV
there is practically no influence of the photoeftect. Hith Ey-BU-kev the

relative difference in the coefficients of gem-radiation attenuation in fresh
and ocean water all-.mlymi») -,u (0%)]: 100-1.”: (see'uble 2). i.e.,

is located on the level of change in the value 8 for these sedia. but

opposite in sign. It follows iro- this that if Sﬂe water is irradiated with
streams of guns quanta of 100 keV and over. then from the data of recording
radiation of 80 keV and over one can Judge the density of the sea water. and

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 1. Mass Coefficients of Gonna-Radiation Attenuation in Rater. cnz/g

Oseeusecres -ne (85/00)

0.178 0.488 0.878 0.1788 0.8588
0.188 0.181 ‘ '
0.183
0.180
0.171
0.170
0.183
0.147

20
80
40
30
80
80
100
150
2 0.135 0.000258 0.185 0.1845 0.00088 0.1848
833 0.118 0.000070 0.118 0.1178 0.000108 0.1178
400
500
800
800
1000
1500

   
    
        

 
  
 
 
   
 

 

  

  

0.0488

0.M88
0.0181

0.00502
0.00240
0.00085

  

  

  

   
 

0.108 0.108 0.1088 0.1083
0.0808 0.0888 0.0882 0.0002
0.0883 - 0.0885 0.0882 0.0882
0.81% 0.0188 0.0788 0.0788
0.0781 0.0701 0.0704 0.0704
QM“ 0.0814 0.0371 03$”
Key:
1 . Rev

2. fresh water
3. ocean water

from recording radiation under 80 keVuthe salinity of sea water and the uoun‘t
5
cp

In practice studies of sea water are usually carried out in specific regions
in which the limit of change in sslinit is known. For each such region the
JBOP will be very snail (close to “reg. while Bop can always be oonputed.

The amounts 6].; for such regions will also be very small. while u is coeputed
in advance.

0

The distribution in water of the scattered gens-radiation from emu-cos with
different energy obtsined by calculation is given in publications [2.6].

Book [3] gives the spatial-energy distribution of the scattered radiation for
a. cesium source (EV-661 keV) obtained experieentally.

In his work v. I. Utkin [5] cites the calculated spectra of pus—radiation

for the range 0-200 keV obtained in an spproxisation of continuous losses
for media with effective atomic nunbers fro- 6 to 13. By using these data

the spectra were computed for fresh water and water with salinity 17.5 and
35%. (fig 1).

83
F011 OFFICIAL USE 011W
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Contribution of Photoei‘fect (S) to Gosplete Coefficient of Ga-a-
Radiation Attenuation in Hater

 

K0 2
y 1. Rev 3. ocean water
2. fresh water 1+. difference of values

It is apparent fro- the 1‘ are that the spectrun obtained in the approxina-
tion of continuous losses solid curve 1) agrees welll with the s ctrun
conputOd iron the nethod of nonents (dotted curve 1) for tr-s [2 . At such
distances and over. as shown in publication [3] the spectrum becones equi-
librius and coapletely identical. Therefore in determining the salinity of
sea water the indicated distance will be the optinl.

Publication [2] presents the spatial-energy distribution of -radiation
with starting energy 255 keV. For this radiation 1: -o.125 or inter). The
size of the aean length of the urinary radiation in water 1- t' -8 on. Ron
tr-S we obtain r-5 Mo on. Consequently. in determining the salinity of
sea water the distance between the source with EY-255 keV and detector should

be selected as equal to ‘60 on. Pro: the sources put out by the all-union
association ”Izotop" seleniue-75 approaches the closest to the indicated
value (1'42th days. a 4:00 (16s) 30!; (1.3;). 279 (2 . was (715). 199

(1.85). 136 (61%). 1217(2ox). 97 (3. keV. and others . As we see its
nost intensive is radiation of 13). 2 .5 and 279 keV.

F‘ron the spectral distributions of gam-quanteﬂ'ig i) it is apparent that
to determine the salinity of sea water it is best of all to record the
scattered radiation in the range 30-60 keV. According to the data of publi-
cation LZ the radiation intensity for one incident quanta will be I -
5.51-10' photon/s. Further in the calculations we will start iron Qhe
parueters of the seleniun solace. Currently the all-union ociation
"I20top" is supplying sources with exposure dose r i.2°10' R/cn which
can be placed in a lead container weighing about kg. Such a source in
the range «400-1300 Rev emits 2.2-1010 photon/s and corresponds to

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Wmd,’

    

Figure 1. Spectra of Scattered Gena-Radiation

Key:
1. for ﬂesh water a. rel. unit

2.3. for water with salinity 17.5 b. keV
Md 39/00

51.5 eg°equiv Rs or 290 nei. To record the radiation (in calculations) we
use a plastic detector no u in disaster and 100 In high. i.e.. the one as
in publication [8]. The effectiveness of recording guns quanta of 30-60 keV
averages 0.5. As a result we obtain t with t-3 sin the rate of calcu-
lstion in71‘reeh water will be b.3640 iep. in water with salinity 17.5°/.°
--3.56-1o lap. and in water with ealinit 35 °/oo--2.8-1o inp. Based on
these data we obtain that salinity 5- 5° 09 will be deter-ined with error

A S-0.00666°/oo. ”m9 -3. 45-0.020° .0. while salinity S-i?.5°6.°--with
errore 4s-0.0029u°/ee, ssh”, -o.0088°/ee. -Calculstion 3.00401

hp with
t-3 lin will correepond to the energy range 80-255 lee . The error of
deter-ining the density is obtained fro- the ratio [8

I . . a J, a
AP‘W'%§ ““7 W.”

From here {JR-3' 4 11-2. .10-5 g/cn3. These amounts are obtained for r-l-

8 on. E, -0. 3 P40 on (2 detectorn).

Thus, in creating an instrument with three scintillation gages the degsity
of sea water can be determined with t-3 nin with lilit error 2.65-10' g ce3.
salinity-with limit errors 0.01-0.02 °/... The density here is leasured

85

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIlLY

r'e'V,

    
   

---—----- -

0

Figure 2. Spectrun of Cesiua Source Recorded with Plastic Scintillator
with Various Thicknesses of Steel (Iron) Housing

with the help of two scintillators placed at a distance of 8 on iron the
source. and salinity--with the help of one detector 9placed at a distance of
1&0 cm. In sessureeents with cesium sources 8.77-10 photon/s (125 ag'equiv
Rs) [8] with the help or a third detector set at r~60 cm one can deternine
salinity withd -0.0ilb-0.0 2 ° oe with t~3 sin. The sea water density
here is defined ith p" -3-10‘ ce3 with r-11.5 cl [8].

In the examined instruments in order to deteraine p and 5 highly stabilized

systems are necessary with re a ence gas-a radiators. A number of such works
are described in publication 1 .2 In density aeasuresents s: a threshold

systea one can use the instrument housing. Figure 2 depicts the spectra of

radiation that has passed through the housing of varying thickness. It is
apparent that the intensity of the recordable radiation is reduced 10-fold

as compared to the minus for d-Z ms with B -50 keV. for d-lb u with E -

65 keV and for d-o6 as with E -?0 keV. The iXdicated filters essentially

do not distort the radiationyin the hard section of the spectrum with E >
200 ke'l. Thus. in the densitonetric gages the soft scattered radiatioan-cith

E < 80 keV can be suppressed by contining a natal filter (instrument housing)
ah electronic circuit. It is necessary to make the housing of the gages

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Equilibrium Spectru- of Scattered Gem-Radiation

Key:

1. in water [3] a. rel. unit
2.). deformed by layers of absorber b. Rev
5 as thick made of plastic and
duralunin

for the "salinity“ channel of light materials (fig 3) that are weak absorbers
or soft radiation (plastic, duralunin, etc.). measurements of the recordable
radiation can be nade with the help of intensisetric high-speed radioneters.
In recording radiation with energy 3) keV and over a measure-ant will be ads
of the product of water salinity tines density. while in recording hard
radiation with energy E >80-iOO keV--density. To exclude the effect of
density on the channel *Sf'salinity" one can use the approach of normalization
for readings of the ”density” channel H-N ﬁlm, . Such approaches of
measuring radiation ,are widely used in Mann-geophysical studies and have
shown good results [5.7]. The size of the ratio will depend only on the
change in the salinity of water, 1.0.. 114(8). In relation to the fact that
in the salinity channel rates of calculation are recorded on the order 2-

105 iap/s. for neasureeent of such rates one can use inorganic scintillators
of the type NaI(1'l) as well that have tins of scintillation 2.5-10-7 3. Here
the radiation in the range 30-60 keV can be recorded with the help of a
highly stabilized one-channel asua-apectroneter. and in the density channel--
- .th the help of a threshold highly stabilized mnosecond inten'sine’eer.

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

9.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLINMPHY

Cart. 6. .”deioizotopnoye izsereniye plotnosti zhidkostey i bimrnykh

sisten" [Radio Isotope Heesuresent of Liquid Density end Binary Systens].
Moscow. Atosizdst. i975.

Ipupunskiy. 0. 1.. et sl. “Rssprostu niye m-kventov v veshchestv"
[Spread of Gem-Quanta in Substances . Moscow. Fizntgia. 1960.

Nelips. N. F. "Vvedeniye v teoriyu Inogokrstnogo rssseyeniye oh tits”

[Introduction to the Theory of Hultiple Scattering of Particles . Moscow,
Atonizdet. 1960.

Stern. 8.; and Isreel'. Kh. "Secheniyn vuinodeystviya gam-islucheniye.
(spravochnikr' [those Sections of Interaction of Gun-Radiation (Reference
80010]. Moscow. Atolisdut. 1973.

Utkin. V. I. ”Selektivny'y nm-gaus-ksrotesh m ugol'nykh nestorozh-

deniyakh" [Selective Gun-Gnu-Logging on Coal Fields]. hoscow. Ranks.
1975.

Pilippov. e. H. "Priklsdneya. yedernm goofizika." [Applied Nuclear
Geophysics . Hoscow. Izd-vo All 8888. 1962.

Filippov. Ye. H.”Yadernuys geotizika" [Nuclear Geophysics]. Vol 1. Novo-
sibirsk. Neuke. 1973:

Filippov, Ye. H. manovs. I. M and Doronin. I. F. ”Question of De-

bernining the Sea Hater Density with Gum-Radiation." HORSKIYE GIDRO-
F‘IZICHESKIYE ISSIE'DOVANIYA. Semtopol'. No b. 1976.

Kraukovich. I. 11.. et :1. “Effective Atomic Nunber of Inifinite Hono-

geneous Hedis with Sources of Gun-Redistion.” ATOHIMYA mm. Vol
25. No 1. 1968.

Received 28 July 1977

COPYRIGHT: Horskoy gidroi‘izicheskiy mum. In 0383 (um All 11853). 1978

9035

650:

1870

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPIlYSICS. I .ROHOHY AND SPACE

unc 621.31?.725(oaa.a)
mm“. cascx or A 34381388 man ma msurum m2 mum mm

Sonsbopgl‘ HORSGYE GIDROF’IZICHESIYE ISSIEIDVANIYA in Russian No 1, 1978

[Article by m. p. Butrov, n. V.Psnenko. m. 1.. Tsibul'skiy]

conductor during its movement in the earth's geomagnetic field. Publication
[1.2] theoretically substantiated the possibility of eliminating this defi-
ciency if instead of s bees the sessuring systes used s length of non-
conducting surfaces (current ratings). uhile the electr

the center of each side of the fairing. In such s assuring systes the

electrodes are geosetricslly superposed with sects-soy to the thickness of the
nonconducting surface. i.e.. do not form a bees, con

noveeent of the system in e geesegnetic field with the ease secrecy the
effect of the electrical field of induction is elisinsted.

The purpose cf the experiments use to investigate the offer.
sent results of the cement of the systel with current 1‘s

magnetic field. For this s cosplex was set up (fig 1) to mechanically

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure l. Coaplex for Conpurstive Study of the Effect of Velocity

is distinctly recorded when the towing velocity is included (fig 2.8-) which
indicates the application of electronotive force of induction in the bees
conductor when it intersects the ngnetic force lines. In the mating
circuit with fairing there is practically no application of electronotive
force of induction. and there are no Jmps in voltage when the towing velo-
city is included in the recording. In individual cases an instability of
the recording is observed, and the so-called afterei‘fect iapulse of charac-

teristic shape eaerges (that shape so after the third engagement of towing
on fig 2.1:).

 

Figure 2. Model of Synclu'onous Recording of Voltage in Circuit
Key:

n. of electrodes of seesuring base i. Drift
b. of electrodes of fairing 2. Hove-ent

90
FOR OFFICIIJ. USE ONLY
The citod results confirs the basic possibility of excluding the electro-
motive force of induction with the use of lengths of a nonconducting surface
instead of the base in a moving measuring system with electrodes.

Further a study was made without a control base. The towing of the system
in different directions in calm weather and without currents aade it pos-
sible to draw a conclusion on the independence of the recorded signal from

a change in the course. In the presence of a current a signal was success-
fully modulated from an electrical field excited by the current and the
sovement of the measuring system in a circle. The amplitude of the obtained
sinusoid is proportional to the horizontal component of the field intensity
generated by the current. The latter confirm! the possibility of using the
rotating system with fairing to measure the intensity of the electrical
field excited by the current. and consequently. to determine the current
velocity. The creation of a measuring systes that sinks with rotation would

make it possible to determine the vertical epure of current velocities in
the ocean.

The next experiments were directed towards revealing the different factors
which could introduce errors into the operation of the system with fairing.

The dependence of the voltage in the circuit .f the electrodes on their
arrangement on the fairing was checked with tne help of towing the fairing
with the alternate advancing of each electrode. The asymmetry was~25~30 cm.
In a specific experiment of moving one of the electrodes ahead no anomalies
were introduced into the recording. when anotherelectrode was advanced an
instability was observed in the recording each time towing was engaged: an
impulse of aftereffect of characteristic shape developed as in figure 2.b.

After the system stopped moving the electromotive force of the electrodes
returned to the former value.

Thus. analogous impulses are observed under different experisental conditions.
Therefore we should attempt to find the reasons for this phenomena.

is will examine the physicochemical processes that are possible here. linen
the nonconducting fairing is immersed in sea water, due to the adsorption
of ions on each side of it a double electrical la r is formed. while in the
adjacent liquid-~a layer ofi‘ree diffusion ions [3 . The average thickness
of the ion-diffusion layer Ar and the contact voltage 6‘ depend on the water
temperature and the concentration of substances dissolvgd in it. as well as
on the material of the fairing (polar. neutral dielectric) whose electro-
chemical properties and surface condition can differ on two sides. Under
such conditions even a strictly syuetrical arrangement of the electrodes

does not gmrantee the absolute identity of the electrical phenomena on
both sides of the nonconducting surface.

The complete electrical charge of the ion-diffusion layer on one side with
uniform distribution of the contact voltage £01 in accordance with [3] equals

4'66}, ‘ 77396—6... “ (l)

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00050R00010003002‘-1
«capacitance' f: --electricn1 permeabilit of the liquids Snares of one
side or the fairing equal to c- m (figure 1‘. Vith the movement of the
fairing relative to the stream of water with velocity V the diffusion layer
is attracted by the moving liouid. a current of ions of one sign develops
(for example. positive)J+. proportional to velocity V. Hith rewd for
expression (1) the current .J+ can be written in the form

- a. - .-
~Zr 7‘ 73%— ‘o, ﬁff"u. (3’

u... .un-

while the mean density of this current. depending on the width of fairing h
and thickness of ion-diffusion layer-Ar will equal

“£5": .Z‘m» “0'" W"" m

0n the other side of the fairing current 3 with density 3 correspondingly
emerges. We present the fairing in a systog of three mutually perpendicular
planes P. Q and S. Yuplane of the actual fairing: Q~-plane passing through
the center of the fairing and transverse to the stream of water during its

horizontal movement: S--horizontal plane passing through the center of the
fairing.

In the absence of symmetry of the adsorption processes on the two sides of
the fairing relative to the plane In]...1 f3 2and 5+1fj+2 Since the charges

of one sign are carried away by water, on the front edge of the fairing a
shortage of them develops and on the back edge--an excess. as a consequence
of which a field of outside forces E is formed that is common to both sides.
On each side it elicits equal inverse currentsa_ with density

' (4)
/~ '16 --
where yuconductivity of sea water. The density of the inverse current

'+
’I'BATAL°

Ry substituting this value in formula (h) and considering (3) we obtain

I- 1% [git/l" 4—).” (+* 7%“). ‘5’

Thus the field E depends on the velocity V. the parameters 0;" the current
fairing and the sea water.

In U10 presence only of the indicated asymmetry the points of zero poten-
tial Oi and 02 are located in the center of each side of the sheet and the
electrodes in them do not record the difference in potenitals.

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with additional asymmetry relative to the plane 1’ the poinm of zero poten-
tial are displaced roaltive to the center different distances from plane Q.
remaining in plane 8. with the horizontal movement of such a nonconducting
surface the electrodes arranged in the central points of the fairing sides
record the difference in the potentials not equal to zero.

If there is asymmetry only in the planes P and S. then the points of zero
potential 01 and 02 are displaced different distances from plane 5. remaining
in plane Q. Then the difference in the potentials of the electrodes with
horizontal movement of the system equals zero. since in the field B the
electrodes are located on the line of zero potential. Then the movement of
the fairing along the vertical is accompanied by the emergence of a stationary
field E in which the difference in the potentials does not equal zero.

Brief mdvement of the fairing along the vertical is possible at the initial
moment of towing if there is a strong jerk.

With asymmetry in relation to three mutually perpendicular planes P. Q and S

the difference 5' and? is recorded with horizontal movement. and 391% yz'
with vertical (Lee figare 3).

 

Figure 3. Example of Possible Arrangement of Points of Zero Potential on

Two Sides of Fairing with Asymmetry of Adsorption Dynamics
Relative to Planes P. Q and S

The advance of one of the electrodes in the aforementioned experiment arti-
ficially imitates the indicated asymmetry. The aftereffect impulse can be

interpreted as a recording of the result of the summation of these differences

I
ISI‘VJWI' Y: ) - which for the studied case had opposite signs.

At the starting moment of movement when strong vertical Jerks are possible.
and the horizontal velocity has not yet reached a sufficient amount. and
when the fields I: and 8 develop. according to the absolute value the second
addond dominates (starting phase of the impulse). In the next period with

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’FICIM. USE ONLY

steady-state towing velocit; and reduction in vertical jerks the first
nddend for the modulus rises. and the second is reduced. The top of the
impulse-«quality of two differences in potentials. In the absence of
vertical Jerks the field E and consequently, the second addend (Y '- ')

disappear. while the difference (71' Y2) continues to rise sometimes all2
the way until towing stops.

It would see- that with an increase by the water flow of all diffusion ions
and the establishment of a stationary field E the indicated difference oust
be established on some definite level corresponding to the given towing
velocity. Since sometimes this does not occur it is more likely to hypo-
thesize that in the flowing water stress the properties of the surface of the
nenconducting material are continuously altered. In any case the studies
wade show that the condition of dynamic equilibrium of adsorption during
movement of the fairing in sea water is not always attained.

There can be othorreasons for this phenomena.for example. the drop in tem-

perature d‘ the electrodes on different sides of the fairing. This will be
discussed further.

Thus. the asyasetry of the adsorption processes significantly impairs the
stability of recording and introduces great interferences. To disinish then
it is necessary to make a fairing of neutral dielectrics that possess the
anxious hooogeneity of the adsorption processes ever the entire surface. and

high stability of the adsorption processes during the reverent of the fairing
at any velocity.

and the electrode housings. Pairings were studied that were made of organic
lass. polyethylene (neutral dielectric) and polyvinyl chloride plastic
fpolax dielectric) with electrodes in housings made of organic glass; in
addition on the electrodes of the first two fairings polyethylene sleeves
were applied. The indicated measm'ing systems were successively kept for
a certain time in the sea with simultaneous recording of the voltage in the
circuit of electrodes. The testing conditions were maintained as identical
as possible for an the materials. In the beginning and end of each test
the zero was recorded of the electrodes imersed in the vessel with sea
water. The obtained realizations that are a recording of the change in the

A comparative analysis of the curves shows that to sake the fairing the most
suitable material of the studied dielectrics is organic glass. The factor

of the heterogeneity of the materials of the nenconducting surface and the
electrode housings does not play an important role.

Thus. the key factor for the operation of the syste- is the material of which

the fairing is ends. and in the first place, the adsorption properties of
this material.

94
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A study of the effect of temperature on the system with fairing was made under
laboratory conditions. Two electrodes separated by a thin nonconducting
sheet were immersed into a vessel with sea water. The water was heated at
first in turns at each electrode. then simultaneously at both electrodes.
Continuous recording of the electromotive force of the electrodes in the
process of the experiment made it possible to conclude that such heating
does not influence the recorded voltage. With a sharp change in the water
temperature at one electrode s Jump in voltage is observed on the recording
which is repeated with the opposite sign during analogous heating..of the
second electrode. A noticeable change in the voltage in the electrode cir-
cuit is observed already with a temperature difference on the order of 0.2-
MM. However it should be noted that when working with fairing under
natural conditions the probability of any noticeable temperature drop in its
electrodes is small. In such close points of the medium a difference in
temperature is possible only with insufficient stabilisation of the fairing
along the vertical in the presence of a large vertical temperature gradient.

which is pessible. for example. in sunny weather in the near-ain'fsce water
layer.

Based on the preliminary experimental studies it was confirmed that it is
possible to exclude the effect of movement in a magnetic field of a system
with current fairing on the measurement results of an electrical field in
the sea obtained with the help of this system: the reasons Were establist
for errors in the system operation with nonconducting fairing: asymmetry of
the adsorption properties of the material on different sides of the fairing.
a sharp rise in the instability of the adsorption properties of the fairing
material in the flowing water stream. and drop in temperatures at the
electrodes on different sides of the noncozziucting surfacessa conclusion was

drawn on the possibility of using in subsequent experiments organic sheet

glass that among the studio materials possesses the greatest stability of
adsorption.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

i. Lopatnikov. V. I. "Problem of Measuring Electrical Field in the Ocean."
NORSKIYE: GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSIEDOVANIYA. Sevastopol'. No Is, 1973.

2. Lopatnikov, V. 1. "Parameters of Measuring Systems with Current Fairing."
MORSKIYB GIDROFIZICHESKIT'E ISS‘IBDOVANIYA. Sevastopol'. No 2. 1971‘.

3. Krayev. A. P. “Osnovy geoelektriki" [Fundamentals of Geoelectrics].
Moscow-Leningrad. Gostekhizdat. 1951.

Received 20 Hay 1977

COPYRIGHT: Horskoy gidrofizicheskiy institut AN USSR (MCI AN USSR). i978

9035
C50: 1870

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONWY AND SPACE

UDC 551.46.08

CAIBUL‘J‘ION OF AN NUIVAIBH‘ BASE FOR A HEASURDE SYSI‘D! WITH CWRENT
FAIRIM} OF A RECTANCUIAR FORM

Sevastopol' HORSHYE GIDBOFIZICHEQIYE ISSLBDOVANIYA in Russian No 1. 1978
pp 117-120

[Article by v. I. Iopatnikov. 1. p. stadnik. and A. s. Boguslavskiy]

Abstract.. The theory and procedure for calculating the
parameters of baseless neasm'ing systems to investigate an
electrical field in the sea are discussed. The algorithm
and calculation results of the equivalent base for the

systea with rectangular current fairing are given. The

calculation data can be used in the practice of hydro-
physical research.

[Text] The problem of studying an electrical field in the sea with the

help of instruments that drift together with the ship is solved on the basis
of using baseless seastn'esent fairing [1.2]. The most important parameters
of the system with fair ng of simple shape (circle. elliptical disk) are
defined analytically Lzﬁ. When the indicated systems were put into practice
it becane necessary to employ fairings of diverse shape: in the form of a
rectangle. piece of helicoid surface. etc. It is easy to see that the
graduating operations to determine even individual parameters of such systess
are very complicated. and in addition. inaccurate. The analytical methods
are limited. Therefore in order to calculate the paramters of measuring

systeas with fairings of a certain shape it is expedient to involve nuseri-
cal aethods and modern computer technology.

Publication [3] presents a method of numerical solution for the general
emblem of fairing of a diolectrical sheet of arbitrary shape placed in a

homogeneous current field. Based on this method we will exasine the calcu-
lation of an equivalent base for a rectangular current fairing.

The boundary value problem for the potential? that describes the fairing by
the electrical current of nonconducting sheet 3 has the appearance

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

719 ,0 outside 3

gay—-0 for s (1)

Y " 90 for

where Y «potential of homogeneous electrical field not excited by sheet S
by whice in the future will be neant rectangle with sides 2a and 2b.

We find the potential} in the form of a sun ofyo and the potential of a
double layer- of density v(P)

yQy) _ ”(,0 + #Jﬂg—M’J’ , (2)

where Punctml point of integration; anoint of observations r --distance
between these pointsu Ff --external perpendicqu at point P to t3: surface

of the rectangle. As sRown in [3]. the density of the double layer v(P) is
limited in all points of S.

we will break the integral in (2) into the following components:

p
9W)=”(M)+!;(3_312: «gv‘ém—ﬁ-W X3?" 49;, m

M’

where AS --circle of seall radius R with center at point Q on rectangle. In

the firs? integral the amount v(P) is taken out for the integral sign due to
the insignificant asount of R and the limited nature of v.

By differentiating (3) for the perpendicular to the rectangle and the liniting
conversion with H—eQ with regard for the second and third equalities in the

system of boundary conditions (1 one can obtain an integral equation for
the density of the double layer 3

I v (I . '
“(4) =' [—5.15 #04; +1.0; . - (4)

The solution to (b) can be obtained by the method of successive approxisations.
The convergence of the method for any small R is proved in [3].

By breaking the surface of the rectangle down into n squares from the side
2!! we rewrite the integral in (lb) in the form of a sun

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“y? ="' w ' (J
35.4 W gKvawum

Here Sinsquare with center at point Pii x .yi} . The index i traverses the
values fros 1 to n, with the exception of the number of point Q; 3 ~05 --

area forned by the square 3 with center at point Qi .y ninue Qhe Q
circle Asq. The integrals anluded in (5) per-it the us icsl expression

w m- m-” --
37”(‘z*"%W-I-t) (aw-txvnf-ra“

+\Al‘-I“ x3 i+(y‘+£—y,_)‘_ y(";"f‘;i'(’;‘:4_£"’—?"

(ll-I- X, )(&*4"%) 01"" e )(‘Ve -,f—y‘)

we _ get-2,52 P.
g .

.L‘

Thus. the integral equation (h) is replaced by a system of algehraic equa-
tions

vm-(I-é‘f-va? «4);??sz m
aq_ l

Algorithm (6) is easily realized on a digital computer. The program of

cosputations was conpiled on the [mm-60 algorithmic language. Here sass
values u(P

) were calculated for several rectangles with different ratio
of sides a’Id

equivalent base (a, for current feirings of the same shape.
The rain property of the double layer potential

sum—9(0)- M).

where points Q and Q' lie on different sides of the fairing ghee produces

a simple link between the size of the equivalent base and the density of
this layer in the center of the fairing

’ 9(0)'2(()‘ V(4¢2 .
Jr! 61 f” .

The calculation results are expressed by curve 1 of the figure. Here along
the x-axis the ratio is plotted for the sides of the rectangle a. and along

I)

98
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure. Dependence of Size of Relative Equivalent Base ( on Geometry of

336
Fairing 2b
Key:
1. For rectangle 2. For elliptical disk

the y-axis--the ratio of its equivalent base to the infinitely long band of
width 21:. For comparison curve 2 is given which expresses the same relation-
ship for fairings in the shape of an elliptical disk with semiaxes a and 1:.
Curve 1 lies above curve 2, but does not intersect the straight line with
ordinate 1 corresponding to the infinitely long hand which expresses the

direct dependence of the size of the equivalent base on the linear dimensions
of the fairing.

Prom the value of the equivalent base one can determine also two other para-
meters in the system with current fairing: inner resistance and anplification
factor for the current if the dimensions of the electrodes (size of the

opening in the fairing in the case of a current system) are small as compared
to the dimensions of the fairing [2].

The findings confirm the effectiveness of using numerical methods for calcu-
lating the parameters of measuring systems with current fairing. and can be
used to put these systems into practice in measuring an electrical field in
the sea. One should note however. that the conver nce of the process of
successive approximtions for equations ('3) and (6 is very delayed with a
reduction in R. This results in an increase in machine time and is a short-
coming of the cited calculation method. The question of improving the con-
vergence of the examined algorithm requires further studies.

Harmonia”

1. Inpatnikov. V. I. "Robles of Measuring an Electrical Field in the Ocean."
HORSKIYB CIDROPIZICHESKIYE ISSISDOVANIYA. Sevastopol', No a. 1973.

2. Inpatnikov. V. I. "Parameters of Measuring Systems with Current Fairing."
HORSKIYE GIDROFIZICHESKIYE ISSIEDOVANIYA. Sevastopol'. No 2. 1974.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3. Stadnik. I. P. "Nunericnl Hethod for Solving the Problel of Fairing a
Dielectrienl Sheet by Direct Current." MAGNITNAYA GIDRODINAMIKA. No 2.
1977.

Received 7 September 1977

COPYRIGHT: Horekoy gidrofizicheekiy inetitut AN USSR (MCI AN USSR). 1978

9035
080: 1870

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

INFORMATION RETHORKS AND THEIR ANALYSIS

Moscow INFORMATSIONNYYE SETI I IKB ANALIZ in Russian 1978 signed to press
7 Jun 78 pp 2, 213-220

lAnnotation. table of contents and list of abstracts from book edited by A. D.
Kharkevich and V. A. Germash, Izdatel'stvo "Nauka", 2,550 copies, 220 pp]

[Text] This collection deals with analysis and synthesis of information nets
and individual elements. Questions of numerical analysis of certain queuing
systems are discussed, and incomplete-access systems with a finite number of
waiting positions and low load intensities are analyzed. The results of

load measurements in rural communication networks are presented, the work of
certain computer networks. particularly ring structures, are described. the
synthesis of digital conmmucation network structures is discussed, and the
operation of information distribution devices, e.g. spatially rearrangeable
switching networks with pulse time division of channels and with loop connec-
tions. nonordinary one-time [razovyy] switching systems and systems in homo-
geneous networks, are analyzed. Nodal switching systems are matrix switching
units are discussed.

The collection is intended for specialists dealing with questions of the de-
sign of communications networks and switching units in information distribu-
yion systems and the operation of various types of queuing systems.

Contents Page

A. M. Gersht and A. B. Mitnitskiy. The Influence of Abrupt Changes in
Input Flow Intensity on the Effectiveness of Tandem 0peration......... 3

L. G. Ionin. Investigation of Irreversible States of Queuing Systems
with Repeated Calling and a Finite Number of Sources.................. 13

M. A. Shneps-Shneppc and S. N. Stepanov. Some Relationships for Systems
with Repeated Call Attempts........................................... 26

Yu. M. Kornyshev and A. M. Zelinskiy. Analysis of the Status of Sub-
scriber Lines......................................................... 31

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M. A. :Zlnnepn-Shncppe and A. V. Arutunynn. Optimal Incomplete-Access
Systems with a Finite Number of Waiting Positions Under Minimal Load

Intensttieau..un......u......uunun”“a.....n..........on..

A. I. Gromov and V. A. Naumov. An Approximate Method for Study of
mtipmne systemawwolltlvllOotth00......DIOIIIOOOOOIOIIOIOOOIODOOOOOD

S. N. Stepanov. Iteration Methods for Numerical Calculations on
Queuing Systems....

B. S. Tsybakov. Current Status and Prospects of Utilization of Com-
puterNetworks........................................................

L. V. Andreyev. Some Ring Data Transmission Networks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ya. L. Shreyberg. Some Results of Statistical Analysis of the Operation
ofaComputer Center.

N. P. Niki forov and A. M. Svetlitskiy. A Method for Synthesis of the
Optimal Structure of a Digital Interexchange Communication Network. ..

A. I . Krapiva. On Identification of Independent Trees of a Graph in
Problems of Comunications Network Viability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ya. V. Fidlin and V. S. Shul'ga. Optimization of Spatially Rearrange-
able Switching Networks with Pulse Time Division of Channels. . . . . . . . . . .

G. G. Morozov and Ya. V. Fidlin. Digital Switching Networks with Loop

Connections

M. P. Zyuz'ko and L. A. Shor. Nonblocking Systems for Nonordinary
Switching........................ ..... ............ ...... ..............

L. A. Shor. NondisJoint System for Nonordinary One-Time Switching.. . ..

N. I. Vltiska. Multistage Systems for One-Time and Nonordinary
Switching with an Arbitrary Number of DisJoint Inputs and Outputs”...

V. A. Carmash and V. A. Shmelev. A Switching System with Unreliable

Relays..
Ye. 0. Naumova. Iterative Construction of Nodal Switching Systems......

Ye. 0. Naumova. Estimation of the Blocking Pr-bability of Some Nodal
Switching Systems.... .....

A. P. Kiselev. A Method for Switching TUo-Pole Elements in a Homo-
geneous Computer Medium

V. A. Sherlev. V. A. Garmash and V. D. Shershukov. A Matrix Unit for

Contact Switching ..... 10
2

ma OFFICIAL USE GIL?

37

51

57

T6

86

99

105

110

129

132

135

1100
1101:

1’48

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

N. I. Artyukhin. Control of One-Time Switching Systems with an Arbi-
trary Number or Arriving Demands...................................... 169

A. A. Podol'skiy and D. S. Shitova. The Question or Controlling Main
Distribution Frame Switching.......................................... 178

V. D. Vitchenko. Estimation of Relative Complexity of Integral Digital
Communication Network Switching Nodes Constructed with Structurally
Equivalent Switching Units............................................ 187

S. C. Sitnikov. On One-Time Switching Systems with Blocking............ 193

H. F. Shimko. Analysis or Characteristics of Aggregated States of a
Group of Channels..................................................... I98

Yu. A. Baklanov and A. D. Kharkevich. A Graphic Model of a System for
Collection or Information on the Quality of Call Service in a Switch-
ins center'lID.I...00'.OOIO...OOIIOOIOIOIOODOOOOIOOVOODOOOOOOIICOOOODI 202

Abstracts

A. M. Gersht and A. D. Mitnitskiy. The Influence of Abrupt Changes in Input
Plow on the Effectiveness of Tandem Operation.

The question of determining effectiveness of tandem routes with a nonstation-
ary (Jump-type) flow is studied. The results are compared with the station-
ary case. Bibliography, 6 items.

6. L. Ionin. Investigation of Irreversible States or Queuing Systems with
Repeated Calling and a Finite Number of Sources.

A theorem on the transition of the system described to an irreversible state
in which service is impossible is proven. A method for calculating the

average time for transition to the irreversible state is discussed and illus-
trated with examples. Tables. h; illustrations, 5; bibliography, h items.

M. A. Shneps-Shneppe and S. N. Stepanov. Some Relationships for Systems with
Repeated Call Attempts.

A model of a complete-access grading which gives the best approximation of
subscriber behavior and leads to a system of equations which are easily solv-
able by computer is discussed, and relationships between the main probabilis-
tic characteristics or the model are presented. Illustrations, l; biblio-
graphy, 7 items.

Yu. N. Kornyshev and A. M. Zelinskiy. Analysis of the Status of Subscriber
Lines.

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A mathematical model describing the busy and no-anawer conditions of a sub-
scriber who is called is discussed. Formulas for the main service quality
characteristics are derived and an analysis of measurement results is made.
Tables, 2; bibliography, h items.

M. A. Shneps-Shneppe and A. V. Arutunyan. Optimal Incomplete-Access Systems
with a Finite Number or waiting Positions Under Minimum Load Intensities.

A theorem asserting that when load intensity tends to zero the optimal incom-
plete-access system in terms of loss probability, with a finite number of
waiting positions, should contain the maximum number of individual lines is
proven. Illustrations. 2; bibliography, h items.

A. I. Gromov and V. A. Naumov. An Approximate Method for Study of Multi-
phase Systems.

An approximate method for study of multiphase queuing systems which can be
described by Markov processes with a finite number of states is proposed.

The basis or the method or the method is expressions satisfying the station~
ary probabilities of states of two-phase systems. The precision of the method
is illustrated for certain 3- and S-phase queuing systems. Tables, 1; il-
lustrations, 2; bibliography, 7 items.

S. N. Stepanov. Iteration Methods for Numerical Calculations on Queuing
Systems.

The convergence of iteration methods for numerical solution of systems of
equations for statistical equilibrium is discussed, the speed of convergence
of the iteration process is studied, and practical methods of accelerating
convergence are examined. Illustrations, l; bibliography, h items.

V. S. Tsybakov. Current Status and Prospects of Utilization of Computer Net-
works.

The current status and trends in the development of computer networks in the
West is discussed. The two most important network configurations are con-
sidered: the configuration with a centrally-located computer center and the
configuration with a centrally-located trunk network. The hardware which made
construction of the networks possible is described: high-speed communication
and digital transmission lines, packet switching and adaptive route selection.
Some existing networks and the tasks performed by them are described. In con-
clusion, the main stimuli to use of computer networks are identified. Illus-
trations, 5; bibliography, 15 items.

104
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
1.. V. Andreyev. Some Ring Data Transmission Networks.

Mathematical models of ring-type data transmission networks are discussed.
Such networks consist of a single central exchange and several terminals
connected by a communication line. Data are brought from the terminals to the
central exchange and from the central exchange to the terminals, with the
first type of data having priority. hot more than a single message may be
transmitted at one time on each section of the line. Accordingly, some data
must be delayed at intermediate exchanges while more important messages pass
through. The number of waiting positions for each exchange does not appear
to be limited. Stationary queue length distributions are found for each ex-
change and for each message delay time in the network. Illustrations, l;
bibliography. 10 items.

Ya. L. Shreyberg. Some Results of Statistical Analysis of the Operation of
a Computer Center.

On the basis of various statistical data that have been collected, the article
analyzes the distribution of the incoming flow of orders reaching a specific
computer center and the service time for random values. It is shown that the
computer system in question can be studied as a queuing system with a recur-
rent input flow and an exponential service time. A number of other statisti-
cal results are obtained. and recomendations for organization and analysis
of computer operations are given. Tables, 3; illustrations. 1:; biblio-
graphy, 6 items.

N. V. Nikiforov and A. M. Svetlitskiy. A Method for Synthesis of the Optimal
Structure of a Digital Interexchange Comunication Network.

This article presents a method for synthesis of structures for digital inter-
exchange commnication networks which are optimal in terms of capital expen-
ditures, based on transmissions with pulse code modulation which have been
developed and put into use. Bibliography. 7 items.

A. I. Krapiva. On Identification of Independent Trees of a Graph in Problems
of Connunication Network Viability.

Machine algorithms for determining the number of k-dependent trees of a non-
oriented graph are presented, along wi th a theorem on the maximum number of

k-dependent trees of the graph and an algorithm for synthesis of graphs whose
degree is not less than a value sepcified in advance. Bibliography, 5 items.

Ya. V. Fidlin and V. S. Shul'ga. Optimization of Spatially Rearrangeable
Switching Networks with Pulse Time Division of Channels.

An algorithm for optimization of multistage spatially rearrangeable digital
multiplexed and supermultiplexed switching systems for special optimization
functions which are not necessary proportional to the number of switching
points is given. Numerical results are given for specific equipment and
cost functions. Tables, 1; illustrations, 2; bibliography, 2 items.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
VON OFFICIAL "SI-I ONLY

6. 6. Mnme and Ya. V. i-‘idlin. Digital Switching Networks with Loop Con-
sections.

Hethuuis or using 100p connections in digital switching sysetms both for the
creation or bypass routes and for secondary multiplexing of the switching
systems are discussed. A noniterative method for calculating loss probabil-
ities which in suitable not only for space-time systems but also for non-
mntrixed systems is discussed. A comparative analysis of a number of methods
for calculating losses is made and the corresponding computational equations
for a three-stage switching system with loop connections. variable delays and
a space-time.- distribution of channels is given. Illustrations, 8; biblio-
graphy. 1'! items.

M. i'. Zyuz'ko and L. P. Shor. Nonblocking Systems for Nonordinary Switching-

The article discusses switching systems which allow. with identical making
and breaking of connections. the connection of any specified input to several
outputs. Structural parameters of such systems are optimized for limited
quantities of simultaneous connections proceeding from a single input and for
the total number of simultaneous connections. Bibliography. 3 items.

i.. A. Shor. NondisJoint Systems for Nonordinsry One-Time Switching.

it is shown that ii‘ switching points are placed between two adjoining outputs
in a disJoint system for ordinary one-time switching. and the inputs are con-
sidered as terminals. i.e. as both inputs and outputs. it is converted into
a nondisJoint system for nonordinsry one-time switching. Illustrations. 3;
bibliography. 2 items.

ii. i. Vitiska. Multistage Systems for One-Time and Nonordinary Switching
with an Arbitrary number of DisJoint Inputs and Outputs.

Methods for design oi‘ multistage systems working in the one-time switching
mode and making possible any connection between one of 10 system inputs and
an arbitrary subset oi‘ outputs without blocking are considered. The para-
meters which require a minimal number of switching elements for the one-time
and nnnordinary switching system structures which have been obtained are de-
tel-mined and formulas for estimation of expenditures on switching equipment
are round. Illustrations. 35; bibliography, h items.

'I. A. Garmash and V. A. Smelev. A Switching System with Unreliable Relays.

A method for designing a switching unit which is resistant to k-i‘old failures
in described. The system has k/n times as many switching points as a system
based on the Shannon-Moore method. where n is the number of switching network
inputs and outputs. Illustrations. h; bibliography. 2 items.

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE JXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Yc. 0. Naumowa. Iterative Construction of Nodal Switching Systems.

The design of multilayer switching structures based on application of the
iteration method to planar nodal switching circuits is described. Formulas
for calculation of the main structural parameters of iteration systems are
given. Illustrations. 2; bibliography. 2 ital.

o

Ye. 0. Namova. Estimation of the Blocking Probability oi‘ Some liodal Switch-
ing Systeas.

A method {or finding the upper and lover bound for detenination or blocking
probabilities of single-connection and k-connection planar non-disjoint nodal
switching systems consisting 01‘ similar elements is given. Computational
formulas are obtained by using the method of probability graphs. Illustra-
tions, 8; bibliography. 3 items.

A. P. Kiselev. A Nethod for Switching'Iwo-Terminal Elements in a Homogeneous
Computer Medium.

It is proposed to use spatially staged switching systems to connect hom-
geneous two-terminal simulating computer elements or the medium among
themselves. Estimates of the maxim recovery chain for the graph are made.
and these are used to establish a priority or two-terminal elements. making
it possible to decrease switching unit size. Illustrations, 3; bibliography.
ll items.

V. A. Shemelev. V.A. Garmash and V. D. Sherahultow. A Matrix Unit for Contact
Switching.

Expressions for the ratio d or noise to useful control signals in a two-
dimensionai matrix with multicoordinate control as a Motion of the number
of groups of independent control windings and circuits operating the switched
element are presented. The distribution of the magnetic field within a matrix
with three-coordinate control is discussed. the nonuniformity of the magentic
field within windings or various groups is determined, and a distribution of
magnetic-controlled contact elements in the matrix is chosen. Formulas which
make it possible to obtain the necessary relationships between currents in
the windings for different coordinates so as to assure a specified value for
1 and to estimate the deviation of the latter are presented. Illustrations.
3; bibliography. 5 items.

N. l. Artyuhhin. Control of One-Time Switching Systems with an Arbitrary
number or Arriving Demands.

Nonbloching algorithms for establishing connections in nonsylnetrical one-
time switching circuits with truncated switching units in four-stage systems
with limiting and with an arbitrary nusber of incoming demands are developed.
Illustrations. 2; bibliography. 8 itelgsi

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. A. Podolskiy and D. S. Shitova. The Question of Controlling Main Distribu-
tion Frame Switching.

The problems associated with control or main distribution frame switching sys-
tems are considered. A method for separate control or the capacity or groups
of power lines within a branch and the establishent of bypass routes is pro-
posed. Tracking 01‘ the number of free lines in the group is implemented in
order to detcnine the necessity of reswitching power lines. Illustrations,
3; bibliography. 8 items.

V. D. Vitchenko. Estimation of Relatiw: Complexity of Integral Digital Com-
munication Network Switching Nodes Constructed with Structurally Equivalent
Switching Units.

The design of a switching unit in a digital communication network using
switching units constructed from non-controlled time-coordinate converters

is discussed. An equation for the relative complexity of the switching system
in question in comparison with switching systems constructed with switching
units with controllable time-coordinate converters is obtained. An example

or the comparison is given. Tables, 2-. illustrations. 6'. bibliography, 2
items.

5. G. Sitnikov. 0n One-Tine Switching Systems with Blocking.

The causes of production of blocks in one-time switching systems with limita-
tion and without limitation or the number of simultaneous connections are
studied. Host detailed consideration is given to blocking resulting from
the use of simplified algorithms and procedures for making connections. 11-
lustrations. 3; bibliography, 1% items.

M. F. Shimko. Analysis of Characteristics of Aggregated States of a Group of
Channels.

Possible methods of representing a group or channels in a network with dynamic
control are discussed. The relationships between the length of time spent by
groups or various capacity in aggregate states are given for a wide range of
losses. along with expressions for the frequency or change or these states.

An analysis of the results obtained is given. Illustrations, b; bibliography.
h items.

Yu. A. Baklanov and A. D. Kharkevich. A Graphic Model or a System for Col-
lection of Intonation on the Quality of Call Service in a Switching Center.

The quality indicators for servicing of calls by switching center automated
control equipment are studied. A graphic model or a system for collection

108
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and analysis of infonnstion on the quslity or servicing which is used to
determine the required quality indicstors is proposed. Tables. 3; illustra-
tions. 3; bibliography. 3 items.

COPYRIGRT: Izdstel'ltvo "lam". 1918

8580
CSO: 1870

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

LIST OF SOVIET ARTICLES DEALING um! COMPOSITE MATERIALS

Moscow OOSUDARSTVENNYY WITET SWETA HINISTROV SSSR PO "MIKE I TBIOlNIKE.
AKADEHIYA NAUK SSSR. SIGRAL'NAYA INFORHATSIYA. KOHPOZI'ISIOIINYYB HATERIALY.
Vol 3. “o 21. 1978 pp 3-6

[Following is s listing of the Soviet entries from SIGNAL'NAYA INPORHA‘ISIYA.
KOHPOZI‘ISIORRYYS HATERIALY (SIGNAL INFORMATION. MPOSITE MATERIALS). s
bibliogrsphic publication of VINI‘I‘I. 'Ihis listing is fros Vol 3. No 21. 1978]

[Excerpts]

1. Influence of annealing on the structure and conpetibility of tungsten
fluoride with structural grsphite on s subleyer. Yenyeshev, A. V.,
Slsvgorodsksyn, Z. V.. Hartynov. S. 2., "Konstrultts. nsterisly ns osnove
uglerods" 1978. No 13, 70-78.

2. 0n the kinetics of phase growth in e diffusion lsyer between solid and
nolten setsls. Pisenov. V. 8., "Fit. i khisiya obrsbotki uterislov."
1978, No 6. 58-63.

3. Influence that the strength of the bond between fiber and nstrix hes on
the nature of destruction of a composite material reinforced with brittle
boron fibers with a nets! astrix of. aluminu- slloys. Shorshorov. ll. 91..
Kolesnichenko. V. A., Yusupov. R. 5.. Ustinov. L. IL. "Fit. 1 khiniys
obrsbotki uterislov," 1978. No 10, 117-123.

lo. Investigation of the influence thst processes of interaction of s salt
with s substrate have on the kinetics of gallium flow over the surface of
thin silver fills. Grebennik. I. P.. Lengths-er. Kh.. Shipkows. I. 6..
"Fiz. i khiniys obrsbotki materielOV." 1978. No lo. 75-80.

5. A solder for diamonds. El'bor boraton naterial end other superhsrd
asterisls. Naydich, Yu. \'.. Kolesnichenko. G. A., Zyukin. N. 5.. Kostyuk.
B. D.. "Svsroch. pro-v0," 1978. No 7. 21-23.

6. Determining tenperature stresses in metal-plastic parts. Ushekov. 3. IL.
"Sb. tr. mm) in. N. B. Bsunsna." 1978. Vol 16. 3-11.

110
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. P. Joining dissisilar hard-toweld sstarisls. Dubovik. A. 8..

Osipov, A. A.. USSR Author's Csrtificats (I 23 K 11/10). No 573293. filed
16 Apr 76, No 2360960. published 27 Oct 77.

8. Horpholosical stability of thin filss on reinforcing fibers.
Gol‘dinar. H. 6.. Hazur. V. A.. Halinovskiy. T. 1.. Yasubets. A. IL.
"Fix. 1 khiaiys obrabotki Iatsrialov." 1978. "0 4. 112-116.

9. Durability of Ac-los fiberglass plastic with bending in sulfuric acid.

Shevcbsnko. A. A.. Krasovitskiy. A. 8.. Starikov. V. P.. “Pia-kiln. nekh.
sstsrislov." 1978. Vol Us. No lo. 121-122.

10. On the influence that the gaoutry of initial sash elesents has on the
properties of high-porosity fiber uterial. Zorin. V. A., "Polucheniye i
issicd. svoystv novykh asterialov." Kiev. 1978. 153-156.

COPYRIGHT: VINITI. 1978

6610
656: 1870

In
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

LIST OF SOVIET ARTICLES DEALING WITH COMPOSITE MATERIALS

Moscow GOSUDARSTVENNYY KOMITET SOVETA MINISTROV SSSR PO NAUKE I TEKIlNIKE.
AKADEMIYA NAUK SSSR. SIGNAL'NAYA INFORMATSIYA. KOMPOZITSIOMNYYE MATERIALY.
Vol 3. No 23. I978 pp 3-6

[Follouing is s listing of the Soviet entries fron SIGNAL'NAYA INFORMA‘I‘SIYA.
KOMPOZI‘ISIONNYYE MATERIALY (SIGNAL INFORMATION. (DMFOSITE MATERIALS). a
bibliographic publication of VIN‘ITI. This listing is fro. Vol 3. No 23. 1978]

[Excerpts]

1. 0n terninology and classification in the field of composite tutorials.
Solo-in. N. V.. "Poroshk. letallurgiye." 1978. No 7. 102-103 (English abst.).

2. 0n the classification of conposite laterisls. Pshanin. N. P.. "Poroshk.
setsllurgiya." 1978. No 8. 102-103 (English sbst.).

3. interaction of tungsten fibers with cobalt-based matrices. Miro-
tvorskiy. V. 5.. 01'shevskiy. A. A.. “Poroshk. netsllurgiys." 1978. No 7.
57-“ (English sbst.).

6. Influence that surface trestsent has on the properties of carbon fibers
and plates based on then. Kobets. L. P.. Polyakove. N. V.. Kuznetsova. M. A..
Kolyssinsksya. 0. 3.. Sssoylov. V. 5.. Bondarenko. N. V.. ”Mekh. poliserov."
1978. No 6. 579-582.

5. P. A sethod of butt-lei: welding titsnius and its alloys to high-
tenperature stainless steels and alloys. Poplavltodiikhaylov. M. V..
Strlshevskaya. L. 6.. Stsrova. L. I... Zhuravleva. L. 3.. Kuliltov. F. IL.
Sorokln. 5. Ya.. Karev. V. F.. Berlin. M. Ye.. USSR Author's Certificate
(8 23 K 35/32). No 280719. filed 28 Jul 69. No 352930. published 28 Oct 77.

6. Accounting for initial hast stresses in studying the energy capacity of
flywheels ads by winding cosposites. Portnov. G. 6.. Kulskov. V. l...
"mu. poliaerov." 1978. No 6. 615-620.

II!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

7. inelastic properties of cosposite materials. Mechanics. "Novoye v
zerubeah. nauke." 1978. No 16. 295 pp vlillua.

8. 0n the develop-ant of sicroinhosogeneous plastic defornation in leainar

coeposites. Yavor. A. A.. Hukhin. V. N.. Abdrazakove. N. A.. "12v. AN SSSR.
fiscally," 1978. No A, 157-160.

9. Fatigue fracture of a laainar composite. Anishchenkov. V. 11.. Mileyko.
s. 1.. "Dokl. AN 888R,” 1978, Vol 241. No 5. 1068-1069.

10. Viscoelastic stresses of tesperature shrinkage in linearly reinforced

media. Popov. A. 1.. Kuznetaov. s. V.. "Hekh. polieerov." 1978, No a.
737-740.

11. Detersination of characteristic voluaes of regular coaposites by the
method of photoslasticity. Kosheleve. A. A.. "Veatn. LOU.” 1978. No 13.
86-91 (English abst.).

12. Influence that the rate of heating has on theraal deformation of carbon-
netel plates in different sedia. Tret'yschenko. o. h.. Gracheva. L. 1..
"Probl. prochnosti," 1978. No 8. pp 68-71.

13. On the question of optisua arrangement of the reinforcing in plates.
Neeirovskiy. Yu. V.. "Hekh. poliserov.” 1978. No 6. 675-682.

16. investigation of the sechanical characteristics of e coeposite aaterial

with volueetric structure. Pichkhadze, c. P.. '1iekh. poliserov." 1978. No b.
621-626.

15. x-ray extinction detersination of the diameter of silicon carbide
whiskers. shchetanov. a. V.. Gorobets. B. R.. chernyak. A. 1., Kendra-
tenko. A. V.. "lavodsk. 1ab..“ 1978. Vol 66. No 7. 827-828.

16. On the problem of studying the strength properties of carbon fibers
based on polyacrylonitrile fibers by ultrasonic aethods. Kotosonova, V. Ya..
Perepenko. I. 1.. Prolov. V. 1.,‘1kkh. poliuerov," 1978. no 6. 726-728.

17. influence that crystallization rate and heat treatsent have on the
structure and properties of eutectic Cu-Cuzzr coaposits. Sonov. A. 1..
Sverdlov, V. 1a.. Tikhonovskiy. H. A.. Oleksiyenko, H. H.. "Pit. i khiniye
obrabotki seterialov." 1978. No 0. 124-129.

18. Investigntion of the kinetics of crystallization of two contacting
ingots. Solov'yev. V. V.. Sokolov. L. A.. "12v. AR 8858. Hetelly." No 6.
102-105.

19. P. A cladding layer plate for cosposite ingots. Shevbunov. E. V..
Ovayannikov. V. 6., Butorin, V. 1.. Tokerenko. A. A.. USSR Author's
Certificate (3 22 D 17/20). No 579096. filed 22 Dec 75. No 2199935.
published 20 Nov 77.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

20. A device for making cylindrical sandwich specimens based on Syntsct

foam. Lipatov. Ye. A.. Kanovich. H. 2.. Levanova, T. A.. "Zavodsk. lab.."
1978. Vol 1.6. No 7. 887-888.

21. On filtration of a polymer binder in the setting process. Hurzakhanov.
R. Kh.. "Hekh. polimerov," 1978. No a. 750-742.

22. chemical heat treatment of two-layer nickel-chromium compOsite electro-
lytic coatings. Arkharov, V. 1.. Ysr-Hukhamedov. Sh. Kh.. "Fiz. tverd.
tels (Kiev-Donetsk)." 1978. No 8. 66-70.

23. Low-cycle fatigue of a composite material with dispersed tiller under
cyclic compression. Pilyanov, Ye. H., Shchedrov, A. K., "Mekh. polimerov."
1978. No 6. 653-657.

26. Particulars of tonsils tests of high-strength unidirectional composites.
Zhigun. l. 6.. Hikhaylov. V. V.. "Hekh. polimerov." 1978, No 6, 717-723.

25. Determination of conditions of joint plastic deformation of the com-
ponents of bimetallic wire with a soft coating. Tuktamyshev, I. Sh..
Shchegolev. G. A.. “Tekhn. progress v metizn. pr-ve (Moscou)" (formerly
"Hetizn. pr-vo"). 1978, No 17. 21-24.

26. K. insoluble lead-based alloy anodes. Dunayev. Yu. 0.. Alma-Ate.
Nauka. 1978. 316 pp, w/illus.

27. Electroslag surfacing of a small blast furnace bell with composition
alloy. Shekhter. 5. Ya., Reznitskiy. A. H., Lazarenko. Yu. N., Razinskiy.
V. V.. "Avtomst. svarka.” 1978, No 8, 53-64. #7.

COPYRIGHT: VINITI, 1978

6610
cso: 1870 am

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY