APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R0002000‘0038-7
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2067

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primrily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted. '

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

PROCURDIBM' 0P PUBLICATIOIG

ms publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is recomended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Gaverunent Reports
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Honthlz Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, u.s. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell 6: Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, Ohio 44691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
my be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
It. “I” (Li-III M “I

This sorial report contains information on socioeconomic. govern-em. political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

-——___——_____————————-——-

 

|I WM Andrus s Doorman

l' -Ilr lunl Sclunce Liner-Arab Affairs _Libya __Sultanate
sncinlogy _North African _Hsuritania of Oman
Econom lcs Affairs _Horocco _Syria
Culture (Social _Afghsnistan _People's Demo- _‘l‘unisia
Sciencvs) _x_A1geria cratic Republic _x_United Arab

Ethnology L. Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Geography _Bgypt _Persian Gulf _Hestern Sahara
Techological _Llran Area _Yeuen Arab
Military Sciences _Iraq _Qatar Republic

Lionel _Saudi Arabia

_Jordan _Spauish North

_Kuvait Africa

_LLebanon Sudan

   
   
 
  

o HIM-MN)” hast Vows

 
 
  

c mum’s-u. SD. SC, 5K. 15
“linumgtc vailability

5011' by NTIS _._
Springfield. Virginia 22161
(saw-nun u. m .. n... m son m 9-":

(7m HIS-39
w 0' WI

1.. Maud-"um“ '
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

N00 2067

CONTENTS PAGE

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

‘Dunis Arab Sui-it Meetings, Resolutions Discussed
(AL-HUSTAQBAL, 1 Dec 79)............................... 1

Report on General Discussions, by Ghassan Bayram
Smit's Secret Resolutions, by George Bashir
Report on Compromises, by As'ad Haydar

USSR' s Relations With Southern Neighbors Reviewed
(Emile Pignol; DEFENSE NATIONALE, Oct 79) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

ALGERIA

Student Strikes, Demonstrations Disturb Authorities
(Daniel Junqua; LB MNDB, 7, 12 Dec 79)................. 33

'Arabizing' Students Strike
Teacher Shortage Hampers Arabization

BAHRAIN

Highway Projects Announced by Director of Works
(GULF MIRROR, 1-7 we 79)sosoooooooooesoooosooeoooooaooo 37

Briefs
Hyundai Cable Deal 38

IRAN

Soviet Strategy Seen Behind Present Turmoil
(Annie Kriegel; LE PIGARO, 16, 26 Nov 79)............... 39

Communist-Anticomunist Alliance
Soviet Strategy in Iran

-a- [III-NESA-lZl]
More U.S. Embassy Documents Reveal Secrets
(mm, 3 me 79)....‘U...’IOCUDVOIIOIOIOOIIOOOIO...

Staff Contacts With Locals
Ties Hith Capitalists

ISRAEL

Briefs
Uranium Production

LEBANON

Bashir sl-Junayyil Explores Possibilities of Solution
to Country's Crisis
(Bashir sl-Juuayyil Interview; AL—NAHAR AL—‘ARABI
"A AL-DWALI, 26 NOV-2 Dec 79)....eeeeeoeeoeeoee'ooeoo

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Abu Dhabi Tanker Fire widens Operations
(Michael Fernandez; EMIRATB NEWS, 11 Dec 79). . . . . . . . .
TUNIS ARAB SUMMIT MEETINGS, RESOLUTIONS DISCUSSED
Report on General Discussions
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 1 Dec 79 pp 28-31

[Article by Ghassan Bayrum: "Complete Dossier of Arab Summit No 10; Tunis
Summit Underlined Continued Wager on U.S. Position Till After U.S. Elections;
Hhat Happened in Last Moments to Save Summit Resolutions on Southern Lebanon
From Failure; Lebanon Given Financial Aid for which It Has not Asked and It
“as not Been Denied All It Went for"]

[Text] TuLls--The Tunis summit which has not been able to constitute more than
extension to the Baghdad summit and which has not been able to do more than
renew the minimum-limit resolutions adopted by the Baghdad summit--what has
this 10th summit of the Arab kings and presidents achieved insofar as the
problem of southern Lebanon is concerned?

Before the summit started its works on the morning of Tuesday, 20 November,
Syrian Foreign Minister 'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam sat among a group of Arab jour-
nalists and talked about the accomplishments of the meeting of the Arab
ministers of foreign affairs which prepared for the summit.

Minister Khaddam considered the meetings of the ministers of foreign affairs
among the most successful meetings held since he became minister of foreign
affairs. Furthermore, he believed that the summit conference being held under
the most serious conditions experienced by the Arab nation will not be less
successful than the summit held in Baghdad.

The statements of the Syrian minister have been interpreted in many ways.

Some believe the statements to have emanated from the attitude of "expect

good and you will find it" whereas other Arab circles have considered minister
Khaddam's statements to be justifiable. Days, and even weeks, before the con-
vocation of the summit. there were numerous wagers, and some of those wagers
were American in inclination and identity. The first wager had imagined that
if the Arab summit, or some of its leaders, tried to go further than the
Baghdad dummit had goneI it would be exposed to an explosion and that the
beads of the rosary of opposition to the Camp David accords would also be
exposed to the danger of being scattered.

1
There were two Arab theories, each with its own vision of what should be de-
cided so that the Arab reply to Camp David may assume new and effective
dlmvnnlnnn and no that means of pressure may he adopted on the basis of the
“Jghdﬂd summit rvuulullnnn Lu movu gruduully and progressively from the
minimum limit to maximum limits.

The Arabs who had originally put their wager on the Americans have not changed
their view of affairs and they still insist on their wagers which call for
awaiting U.S. positions and initiatives that will cancel or adjust the Camp
David course and will create new facts in the situation to help the realiza-
tion of a comprehensive Middle East solution. the achievement of the Pales—
tinian people's legitimate rights to establish their state and withdrawal

of the Israelis from all the occupied Arab territories.

From the outset. the Arabs making these wagers dropped from their calcula-
tions any discussion of the use of Arab oil as a direct weapon against the
6.5. policy. preferring to develop the means of political pressure on the

United States to achieve this goal.

0n the other hand, the other Arabs. led by Syria and the PLO, believe that con-
tinuing the wager on the U.S. position is a futile act and that Camp David
which is now facing a dilemma and standing at a dead end has to be countered
with Arab resolutions that deal it the fatal blow and make the Americans
reassess their calculations and change their positions and policy. These
Arabs believe that the only means to achieve this goal is to use the Arab

oil weapon.

It was evident from the concentrated side consultations, which surpassed in
their importance the summit meetings themselves. that the Arabs of the Soviets.
it we may use the term, are eager for the unity of the Arab position as
reflected by the Baghdad summit resolutions and do not want to lose in any

way the minimum limit as the price of other demands, such as the use of the
oil weapon against the United States.

This eagerness for continued solidarity over the Baghdad resolutions greatly
helped to reduce excessive radicalism in the conference and to make moderation
the fundamental base for discussing and debating matters with the purpose of
reaching an understanding.

Libyan Chairman Mu'ammar al-Qadhdhafi refused from the outset to attend the
Tunis summit personally and delegated his minister of foreign affairs to re-
present him. But al-Qadhdhafi continued to express until the last moments
before the summit convocation his readiness to attend the summit provided
that a resolution to use the oil weapon against the United States and a
resolution in support of the Iranian revolution are adopted.
it was very easy for the oil Arabs to accept the absence of the Libyan chairman
if this meant dropping the possibility of discussing boycotting the United
States and using the oil weapon against it. however, this was not enough, in
the view of these Arabs, to solve the problem and to avoid falling into cri—
tical pitfalls. It was feared that the Palestinians in the conference, led

by Abu-‘Ammar, would explode the issue of the oil weapon and would present this
issue as an inevitable option which the Arabs have to use to fight the U.S.
Camp David policy in the area. This issue commanded a large part of the con-
sultations which took place before the summit and during the "violent“
meetings that accompanied this summit.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian resistanc leadership found itself facing one of
two options:

Either proceed to the end of the road with raising the 011 issue and with
insisting that an Arab resolution be adopted to use the oil weapon as the
most successful means to compel the United States to abandon the Camp David
policy;

0r approach this matter flexibly in return for an Arab position supporting
the resistance's presence in southern Lebanon and opposing the Lebanese
working paper which the resistance had rejected, considering it a paper
intended to terminate its presence in the area of southern Lebanon.

The Arab oil countries have known how to exploit the card of the Palestinian
resistance in southern Lebanon in the interest of the inclination calling
for not getting embroiled in the adoption of oil and political resolutions
aimed against the United States.

when the Palestinian resistance felt that its insistence on bringing up the
oil issue will cause it to pay the price in southern Lebanon, it accepted the
barter offered it--a barter which called on it to forget about embarrassing
the summit with the oil issue in return for an Arab position supporting its
right to exist on the soil of southern Lebanon.

An Arab minister of foreign affairs said that the success of this deal saved the
Arab summit from a failure that the sunnit had been certain to meet when it
started to discuss the developments of the Hiddle East crisis, the U.S.

Camp David policy and the means to bolster the confrontation against this

policy.

what contributed toward this success was the predominance of the general
Arab inclination insisting on guaranteed continuation of the Baghdad summit
resolutions as a fundamental base for Arab solidarity and on not exposing
this base to collapse should Arab differences erupt in the conference over
what Arab position should be taken toward the United States in the coming
phase. Before the start of the summit's first working session, satisfaction
was evident in the circles of the Arab delegations rejecting the adoption of
resolutions against Washington. A member of these delegations said that the
compromise agreed upon in regard to the oil issue prepared the climate for the
adoption of moderate Arab resolutions reaffirming the course of the Baghdad
resolutions in confronting Camp David on the basis of the minimum limit agreed
upon in the Baghdad summit.

Despite 3‘] this. the issue of oil as a weapon in the battle was not alto-
gether absent from the Arab s'mnit because the proposal made by Iraqi Pre-
sident Saddam Busayn somewhat eppeased the Arabs on the frontline with Israel.
including the Palestinians, while managing not to anger the oil Arabs.

The lruqi proposal called for an economic Arab sumit to study the formulation
of a plan that links the oil weapon with the Arab nation's political interests,
provided that this plan be submitted to the 11th Arab sumit scheduled ini—
tially to meet in Jordan.

The Arab delegations opposed to boycotting the United States and to adopting
oil resolutions against it believe that between the present time and the con-
vocation of the next Arab summit many new realities capable of changing the
present U.S. policy will have -erged.

The next Arab sumit will be held, according to the estimates. in similar
days next year, :l.e. at a time when the 0.8. elections will have taken place
and when it would be possible to talk about a new U.S. policy toward the
Middle East crisis--a policy free of the election pressures and considera
tions.

This is why the iraqi resolution was approved quickly when presented to dis-
cussion, especially since it was supported by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

The kings and presidents then proceeded to discuss the political means of pres-
sure to foil Camp David and to continue tightening the blockade against this
policy at the Arab and international levels without dwelling on the oil

issue for too long.

When the Arab kings and presidents began to discuss the formulation of an
Arab working plan for the coming phase, the discussion focused on the Euro-
pean role and there was almost unanimous consensus that western Europe's
position should be more clearly and effectively on the side of the Arab
right and the side of working to achieve a comprehensive settlement for the
Middle East crisis-~a settlement that brings about full withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories and would give the Palestinian people their right
to self-determination and to the creation of their state on their own land--
and, consequently. on the side of the efforts to drop the Camp David policy
and to recognize the PhD officially.
After reaching consensus on entrusting delegations of Arab ministers of
foreign affairs to tour the European countries. a tendency emerged within the
conference to include the United States in the countries to be visited by

the ministers of foreign affairs.

Sudanese President Ja'far Numayri initiated the proposal in this regard,
aksing the conference to adopt a resolution calling for opening a new dialogue
with the U.S. administration and with the U.S. constitutional institutions.

Numayri said that the signs of new transformations have begun to emerge in

the U.S. public opinion and that big political and non-political sectors of
this public opinion have begun to display an ever—growing understanding of the
Arab right, especially the Palestinian people's rights. This is why these
new conditions must be exploited to open a new Arab dialogue with Hashington
to compel it to change its stances toward the Palestinian people's rights

and toward the Arab cause.

The strongest opposition to this proposal came from Syrian President Hafiz
al-Asad nnd PLO Chairman Yasir 'Arafat. President al-Asad has come to con-
sider the position of Carter's administration hopeless, as proven by experience.
He said that the U.S. administration considers the Camp David accords its

firm strategy in the Middle East and that it approaches the crisis on the

basis of this logic.

President al-Asad addressed President Numayri, saying that the United States
is still plotting against the Arab and Palestinian right and that it has not
and will not give anything to the Arab right. If I had a dim hope in the
possibility of effecting a change in the U.S. position. I would be the first
to go personally to Hashington to hold a dialogue with it.

Abu-‘Ammar followed the example of the Syrian president in opposing Numayri's
proposal and in launching a scathing attack on the U.S. policy. describing

it as a policy opposed to the Arab right generally and to the Palestinian
right in particular. Abu-‘Ammar provided a historical rec0unt of the U.S.
positions that harbor nothing but hostility and plotting against the Arab

and Palestinian rights. He called for dropping all the wagers on the U.S.
policy whose bankruptcy has begun to show in the dilemma being faced by the
Camp David negotiations.

Betting on time has been the undeclared outcome with which the Tunis summit
has emerged. The Arab kings and presidents who underlined with their con-
sensus the success scored by the Baghdad resolutions in fighting the Camp
David policy and in enabling the Arab solidarity to succeed in the face of

all the attempts made to bring the Camp David accords from the sphere of the
partial solutions that have been confronted with the crisis of the self-rule
negotiations to the sphere of comprehensive solutions-—these kings and presi-
dents believe that continuation of the Baghdad summit resolutions is the

only possible means for continuing the confrontation and that it is impossible
to formulate a new and more effective and influential policy in the coming

phase.
5
A member of the Palestinian delegation has acknowledged that the Arab states

demonstrated In the Tunis summit that they cannot go farther than the Baghdad
summit went because there are still among the Arabs those whose wager on the

U.S. position and on the need to wait till after the U.S. elections.

Excluding the opening and final sessions, the Arab summit held only one
working session which was devoted to discussing the first item of the agenda
concerning the Middle East crisis and Camp David. The second working session
in which the Arab kings and presidents were supposed to discuss the problem

of southern Lebanon was not held because of the fundamental conflict existing
between the Lebanese working paper on the one hand and the Palestinian working
paper on the other.

Lebanese Problem

As of the moment the Arab kings and presidents started arriving in the Tunisian
capital. the lights were focused on the role awaiting the Syrian president

to bring the Lebanese and Palestinian positions closer to one another and to
exert efforts to save the summit from failing to reach resolutions on southern
Lebanon.

in the side efforts he made in this regard, Syrian Foreign Minister ’Abd-
ai—Haiim Khaddam was stressing that Lebanon had rejected the Palestinian
working paper and that the Palestinians had rejected the Lebanese working
paper and that, therefore, the solution could only come by compelling both
sides to accept the Arab working paper drawn up by the committee emanating
from the Arab ninisters of foreign affairs because this paper was eager to
establish a balance between the Palestinian revolution's right to struggle
and the right of the State of Lebanon to sovereignty over its southern
territories. Khaddam added that as a consequence, a formula had to be reached
to make it possible to implement the Security Council resolutions concerning
the south.

Hhat drew the attention of all the conference circles was the intransigence
displayed by Lebanese President ilyai Sarkis in all phases of the side con-
sultations and meetings held to emerge with a solution formula for the problem
of the south. The Lebanese president's intransigent position spread the be-
lief among Sume Arab delegations that Lebanon had come to the conference to
put the Arabs face to face with one of two things:

Either produce an Arab solution that costs the Palestinian resistance from
southern Lebanon and restores peace to this area;

Or he will go seek an international solution that may perhaps consist of
joining Camp Daivd.
The Palm”. lnlnu delegation members knew how to strengthen lluls lwl lcl' amour,
the majority of the Arab delegations and to create an atmosphere of dissatis-
[action with the Lebanese position.

The Palestinian delegation charged that the Lebanese working paper entails
abolition of the Cairo agreement and the ouster of the resistance from the south
for purposes that ultimately serve certain U.S. goals which the latest U.5.
initiative had already tried to achieve.

The Lebanese delegation found itself compelled to exert efforts to disperse
this atmosphere engulfing the Lebanese position. This caused President Ilyas
Sarkis to expand the circle of his contacts with the Arab leaders, especially
those with influence, to underline the dangerous situation in the south and
to stress the enormous dangers awaiting Lebanon and the Arabs in case the Arab
sumit fails to adopt decisive resolutions.

Lebanese Prime Minister Dr Salim al-liuss said that President Sarkis attended
the conference. and had even called for this summit, to avert three danger:-
threatening Lebanon through its southern part:

The first danger is that of Israel resorting to renewing its attacks on the
south in a more ferocious manner.

The second danger is that of the eruption of a sedition in Lebanon that as-
sumes this time serious dimensions that would submerge the Arab area in re-
ligious and sectarian seditions.

The third danger is that of internationalizing the situation in Lebanon and
of the possible subsequent dangers that may cause lore than one Arab country,
in addition to Lebanon, to pay the price this time.

Prime Minister al-Huss said that if the Arab summit could not guarantee an
end to the Israeli attacks, then it could put an end to the two other dangers.
namely: The eruption of a sedition and the internationalization of the Le-
banese situation.

in the mini-working sessions that included a number of Arab heads of state,
in addition to Abu-‘Amar, the Lebanese president explained these dangers
very clearly and stressed that the Palestinians had misunderstood the Le-
banese position. {saying}: "They thought that we have come to demand aboli-
tion of the Cairo agreement and the ouster of the resistance from the south
whereas the truth is that we have come, through the working paper that we
have presented, to try to give priority to the implementation of the U.N.
Security Council resolutions concerning the south. These are immediate and
urgent matters. When we succeeded in inpl-enting them and when Lebanon
regains its sovereignty, it will then become possible to discuss implementa-
tion of the Cairo agreement."
l'resldcnt Sarkis constantly stressed the need not to indulge in faulty inter-
pretations. Even though the conference atmosphere was from the outset a
'aiestinian atmsphere, the Lebanese position was understood and a strong

cr. nviction developed among the Arab leaders of the need to give the Lebanese
president an Arab solution so that he may not be faced with the inevitability
of lmking for other solutions through internationalization or any Other simi-
lar channels.

It was obvious from the atmosphere that predominated the sunnit conference as
a result of the open confrontation which erupted between the Lebanese and Pa-
Iestinian sides that the Arab leaders felt that this was the first time in
which they were truly faced with a struggle between two rights: Lebanon's
right to regain its security and sovereignty and to avert the fateful dangers
surrounding it and the Palestinian revolutions's right to survival. Regarding
these two rights, President Sarkis once again reaffirmed that adoption of

the Lebanese working paper constitutes the beginning of the path toward
achieving security and peace in Lebanon, saying that it is not permissible
that the Arab states continue to burden Lebanon with all the weight of the issue
because Lebanon has endured more than it can withstand and that it no longer
has the capacity to endure any more, unless it is at the expense of its fu-
ture and survival.

Lebanon's Fate and Palestine's Fate

The Iraqi president was frank when he asked President Sarkis: Where do you
want to go with the Palestinian resistance and the Palestinians? He then
added: I want to be frank with you on matters that you already know, namely
that none of the Arab states is prepared to receive the Palestinian resistance
on its soil. The Palestinians were in Jordan and we know what happened to
them there. They then came to Lebanon and Lebanon has become their only re-
fuge. This has been their fate, as it has been Lebanon's fate.

The Iraqi president went on with his conversation with President Sarkis.
advocating more patience and wisdom and saying that Lebanon has no option other
than to reach an understanding with the Palestinians until their issue is
settled.

The fact is that what President Saddam Husayn said reflected the opinions of
all the Arabs kings and presidents who made it evident that none of them is
ready to take the responsibility for a decision to oust the Palestinian resis-
tance from the south. keeping in mind that its presence in the south will
continue to be a source of danger to Lebanon or at least a justification for
continued Israeli attacks.

in the final session in which votes were cast on the resolutions concerning
the issue of southern Lebanon, the prevalent belief was that the Arab sum-it
had not been able to score a victory in connection with the situation in
southern Lebanon. This failure was reflected in the disappointment preva-
lent aaong the Lebanese delegation circles.
The source of this feeling was the mutual reservations expressed by both the
Lebanese and Palestinian delegations on some provisions of the resolutions.

The Lebanese side expressed its reservation on the provision calling for
"regulating the armed Palestinian presence in the southern areas within
jurisdiction of the U.N. forces in accordance with an agreement reached be-
tween the State of Lebanon and the PLO."

0n the other hand. the Palestinian side expressed its reservation on the pro-
vision stating that "the conference has taken cognizance of what the PLO

has done in regard to refraining from issuing statements from Lebanon on the
actions carried out by the resistance inside the occupied territories."

At the conclusion of the final session and while the delegations were pre-
paring to leave the Tunisian capital, Lebanese Prime Minister Dr Salim al-
Huss contacted Syrian Foreign Minister 'Abd-al-Halim Khaddam and held with
him an urgent meeting in which al-Huss expressed his disappointment over the
conclusion of the conference with resolutions on which reservations are
expressed. saying that these reservations constitute a failure for the summit
because they torpedo completely the possibilities of implementation and turn
the resolutions into mere ink on paper. Al-Huss proposed that President

Hafiz al-Asad take the initiative to intervene quickly and persuade Abu-‘Ammar
to drop his reservations.

Khaddam asked Prime Minister al-Huss: If Abu-‘Ammmr drops his reservations,
will President Ilyas Sarkis drop Lebanon's reservations?

Prime Minister ai-Huss replied that the situation is different insofar as
Lebanon is concerned and that Lebanon is forced to maintain its reservations,
or at least to turn them into observations, because it will ask on the 19th
of next month for extension of the U.N. forces stay in southern Lebanon and
this extension may falter if there is an official approval for continuation
of the armed Palestinian presence inside the areas of the 0.". forces
operation.

Prime Minister al-huss, accompanied by Minister Khaddam, then proceeded to
President Hafiz al-Asad's suite and reviewed the situation with him from
this angle. The Syrian president was persuaded and immediately contacted
Abu-‘Anmar who went to President al-Asad's suite and held a short private
meeting with him after which the Palestinian leader was persuaded of with-
drawing his reservations.

It was also agreed to hold an emergency meeting at the airport VIP lounge

where the Arab kings and presidents will have arrived in preparation for de—
parting.
In [hr VIP Inuugv. Ahu—‘Namlr;uuuuuuu1|lu the Arab kings and prvsldrnla wllh-
druwul ul the PLU's reservations on the summit resolution concerning the south.
In his address, Abu-'Anmar said: Our presence in Lebanon is temporary and
transitory. We hope it will not be prolonged and that it will end shortly.

he also said that the Palestinians reject a substitute homeland for Palestine
and refuse to be resettled in Lebanon or in any other Arab country. Had

we wanted resettlement. we would have accepted the Camp David accords which
are tantamount to a plan to resettle the Palestinians in Lebanon.

Abu-‘Ammar wanted to reassert this Palestinian position against resettlement
to disperse the many fears expressed by President Sarkis in the meetings and
consultations held and in which he warned that the continued presence of the
Palestinians in southern Lebanon in its current form is only a prelude to
their resettlement in the south. He said that this has begun to pose the
threat of a sedition erupting between the southern citizens and the Pales-
tinians and assuming serious dimensions throughout Lebanon, and perhaps the
Arab area. because Israel and its supporters are still wagering on this kind
of regional and sectarian seditions and wars among the Arabs to pass the par-
tltiun plans.

Though the Palestinian delegation to the suit knew how to use the oil

card to get an Arab position supporting the Palestinians in southern Lebanon,
the Lebanese president also knew how to get benefits for Lebanon from the
evident race emerging between the Syrian and Iraqi presidents to satisfy
Lebanon and to achieve whatever gains may be achieved for it.

The most prominent aspect of this race became clear when Iraqi President Saddam
Husayn proposed that Arab financial aid be advanced to Lebanon to bolster

the steadfastness of the south and to rebuild Lebanon. President Sarkis
expressed reservation on this proposal initially and said that Lebanon had

not come to the summit to get financial aid because money is worth nothing

in the face of the fateful dangers threatening Lebanon's entity. The Iraqi
president then reaffirmed his proposal, saying: "Whatever the situation,

it is not permissible that Lebanon not be given big financial aid to partici-
pate in its enormous burdens."

The Iraqi president set this aid within the limits of 200 million dollars
annually, of which one half is to be set aside for reconstructing Lebanon
and the other half toward bolstering the south, given every year for a period
of 5 years.

At this point Abu-'Ammar spoke, saying that Lebanon has endured a lot and

that the proposed aid should be bigger, suggesting that this aid be raised
to 600 million dollars annually.

10
After approval by the Arab states concerned to advance this aid, Abu-'Atllr
li-uni'd toward President Sarkis and said to him: "Do you see what I can do
lor you whenever you are positive toward me."

At this point, a diplomat said: "Lebanon has been given what it did not de-
mand and has not been totally denied what it had come for. "

Smit's Secret Resolutions
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 1 Dec 79 pp 31-“

[Article by George Bashir]

[Text] Tunis--Many had expected the 10th Arab sunnit in 'i‘unis to fail.

Rather. many had not expected this smit to convene but to be postponed to
a later date when the Arab ministers of foreign affairs disagreed with each
other on the proposals contained in the two Lebanese and Palestinian working
papers concerning sauthern Lebanon. The question posed 24 hours before the
conclusion of the summit was: What comes after the failure? But after the
finnl session. the question turned into: What comes after the success?

At .1 special meeting attended by some of the Arab ministers of foreign affairs
participating in the Tunis conference, a diplomat asked Arab League Secretary
General (al-Shadhili al-Qulaybi) about the reasons that have always obstructed
implementation of the resolutions of Arab smite. Al-Qulaybi answered:
Because the Arab summits failed to take the Arab reality into consideration
and because the resolutions were taken to appease sentiments. Thus. most of
the resolutions adopted were beyond the capacity of the Arab states and beyond
their ability to implement them, especially since the executive agencies needed
were not in existence. This is why most of the resolutions adopted at the
Arab League meetings, whether those adopted in the League Council or in the
meetings of the ministers of foreign affairs or of the heads of state, re-
mained unimplemented. The world stopped believing the Arabs whenever they
adopted weighty resolutions. One of those present at the meeting reminded

of the statement made by a participant in the Tunis conference when the sen-
bers of the ministerial comittee formed to settle the dispute over the
solutions proposed for the situation in southern Lebanon. This participant
had said: why should we disagree? Leave the text as it is "because these
words are for consumption."

Those who attended the recent Tunis summit and observed the progress of its
work returned with their memory to the last Arab sunit convened in Cairo

in 1976. After the final session of the said suunit and while the Arab kings
and presidents were preparing to leave the Hilton Hotel in the Egyptian
capital. they saw with their own eyes Lebanese President Ilyas Sarkis asking
one of the Arab leaders to sign the Cairo sumit resolutions. The said

11
lcudrr tuuk an immediate oath and told the Lebanese president: it is a shame,
Mr President. Signatures are not at all necessary and you will shortly see
the heglnning of implementation of the resolutions.

The Arab League general secretary has persisted in saying after the recent
Tunis summit that the resolutions adopted by the conference were adopted

to be implemented and that before the first month of the new year passes. those
resourced 'o implementation will see the first steps in this regard [sic].

The night of Wednesday-Thursday last week was the longest night in the Tunis
conference because the entire world was awaiting the outcome of the labor
through which the conference had been going as a result of the various phases
of [altering that it had encountered. The sixth floor of the Hilton Hotel

on Carthage summit was the stage for the most important, rather the most deli-
cate and serious, consultations among the Arab leaders until that moment. An
atmosphere of oneupmanship dominated these consultations for a time but wisdom,
reason, seriousness and a sense of the fateful and historical responsibility
are what ultimately prevailed as a result of the frankness characterizing the
last neeting which was attended by Tunisian Prime Minister Hedi Nouira (the
conference chairman), Saddam Husayn (the Iraqi president), Hafiz al-Asad

(the Syrian president), Ilyas Snrkis (the Lebanese president). Prince Fahd
(chairman of the Saudi delegation), Shaykh Jabir al-Sabah (the Amir of Kuwait).
King Husuyn (the Jordanian monarch), Yasir 'Arafat (the PLO chairman) and a1-
Shadhili al—Qulaybi (the Arab League secretary general). The suite of the
Tunisian prime minister was like an operation room which witnessed the two
phases of labor and then the birth of the final resolutions of the Tunis
summit.

Several sides had wagered on the failure of the Arab leaders to reach agree-
ment on the desired Arab strategy to confront the coming phase in the wake

of the implementation of the second part of the Camp David accords because

the 011 owners do not relish the idea of using this commodity which is of
importance to all mankind as a political weapon. Other sides had wagered

on the impossibility of reaching agreement on the future of the U.S.-Arab
relations because some regimes do not want to subject the strategy of their
political and economic relations and employ it in the interest of the U.S.-
Soviet struggle in the area. Other sides had wagered on the failure of the
summit because of the Lebanese—Palestinian disagreement over the issue of the
south and the issue of how to reconcile the logic of the revolution and the
logic of the state onlhe same land. There were numerous, and big, rumors

in the conference lobbies and those disseminating the rumors were found in

the corners of the Hilton halls and in the places set aside for the press
people. One of the rumors was that a violent clash had taken place between
President Sarkis and Yasir 'Arafat, that another clash had taken place between
Presidents al-Asad and Saddam Husayn and that a third clash had taken place
over the principle of receiving the Iranian delegation and listening to what
it had to say at the conference. Other rumors said that Lebanese Prime Minister
Dr Salim al-Huss had resigned from the premiership because of differences

12
among the regime members over the Lebanese working paper. that the Saudi
delegation had decided to leave Tunis at dawn and before the conclusion of
the conference because of th~ incident at the Holy Mosque in Hecca, etc.
however, the results produced by the mini-summit meetings that night refuted
all the rumors and exposed their disseminators, in addition to exposing their
goals.

The frank-discussion meeting between Presidents Sarkis and al-Asad which pre-
ceded the mini—summit and which lasted for 3 hours laid down the first

brick in the edifice of Arab detente over the issue of Lebanon and its southern
part. This meeting was followed by another meeting which included the
Lebanese and Syrian presidents and Yasir 'Arafat and which laid down the second
brick in this edifice. Then followed the mini-summit meeting in which the
leaders of Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Jordan and Tunisia, in addition to

the leaders of Lebanon, Syria and Palestine, participated. This meeting
complemented the initial preparatory meetings which had overcome the differ-
ences that emerged during the meetings of the ministers of foreign affairs
because the said leaders discussed the crux of the problem profoundly and

in the light of its local, regional and international dimensions and ramifi-
cations. They discussed it with utter responsibility and seriousness and

in a manner free of oneupmanship, demagoguery and compulsion. They, thus,
finally reached the common denominators combining the minimum limits of
agreement in the various positions and formed out of them a single Arab
position on which the Tunis summit attained consensus.

Those taking part in those consultations which lasted until the early hours
of dawn admit that numerous disagreements of opinion did occur among some
Arab leaders and that more than an argument did take place as a result. But
the general atmosphere dominating the discussions of the main leaders of the
mini-summit abounded with prudence and with the eagerness to shoulder the his—
torical responsibility amidst the dangerous dramatic developments sweeping

the world. especially the Arab world, each of its countries and each of its
regimes. The leaders compared the dangers of the disagreement and the bene-
fits of agree-eat, even if only on minimal limits, and opted for agreement
because they had all been aware in advance that the failure of the summit

to emerge with decisive, applicable, programmed and definite resolutions will
expose them to defamation by the sides that benefit from the disagreement, led
by the parties of the Camp David summit.

Those people who took part in the consultations also admit that each leader
who participated in the consultations resorted to wounding frankness at
times and censure was the soap of the hearts, as the proverb says. It was
not easy to include other Arab leaders in the said frank consultations be-
cause had the dossiers of Arab differences at the mini-summit been opened,
as originally scheduled, at the plenary summit, the Tunis summit would have
dispersed without reaching any of the results it has attained.

13
Oil and Relationship With Hashington
The question here is: what are these results?

those who had prepared for the summit in advance agreed on definite issues
which were included in the agenda because they were aware ahead of time that
deviation from the set agenda would cause the summit to be lost in the sea of
issues over none of which the conferees could agree. This is why it was
agreed from the first moment that exclusion of the issue of the Algerian-
Moroccan dispute from the summit would give the Moroccan and Algerian leaders
the opportunity to participate in the summit works. It is also because of
these reasons that the issue of the Iranian revolution and of the dispute
between the Tehran and Washington governments was excluded and why the summit
leaders even refused to receive the Iranian revolution representatives sent
by the Tehran government to Tunis. They refused, as a summit, to receive
them but the choice was given to any member of the conference to meet with them
separately because such meetings would not be the concern of the conference
as a supreme council but would concern every participating country within

the framework of its bilateral relations with the new Tehran government.
Acceptance of the Iranian delegation would have evoked the sensitivity of not
only the Iraqi delegation but also that of the Saudi delegation and of other
delegations from the Gulf. Thus, the issue was excluded altogether and the
conference did not touch on this issue closely or remotely. The ministers

of foreign affairs maintained in their preparatory meetings the agreement

to steer clear off whatever may provoke new differences among the (influential)
summit leaders attending the meetings of the kings and presidents.

The oil issue was discussed in detail in the mini-summit and it was agreed
to threaten with the use of oil as a political weapon as a first phase.
Threatening precedes warning and then implementation follows warning. It is
the policy of phases or the step—by-step policy.

The United States is currently going through a phase of options that it has
never before countered in its relations with the Arab world and the Palestinian
issue. Through those who will wage next year its election battle politically,
economically, militarily. financially, informationally, and even spiritually
and at the humane level, the United States is now discussing the Middle East
issue with a new logic and with a tone of give—and-take and of dialogue. It
is dealing withlhe crux of the Arab-Israeli conflict with a new mentality.
Therefore, the Arab side is required to deal with the United States with the
same mentality and not to repel it or be repelled by it, at least not in the
election phase that could produce an open dialogue between the U.S. adminis-
tration and the PM).

Israel is trapped domestically, regionally and internationally. It is trapped
at the U.S. level also. lt is seeking a confrontation between the Arabs and
the world public opinion. especially the U.S. public opinion, on the threshold
of the elections. Israel is seeking an armed confrontation with the Arabs--

14
a confrontation in which Israel will have the main say in determining the con-
ditions and choosing the time and place because it knows in advance the outcome
in such a case and under these regional and International economic and poli-
tical conditions. In the year of U.S. and European elections. Israel needs
now more than ever before, because of its domestic crises, to score a de-
finite military victory that brings back to mind the dazzle of the Israeli
military superiority. The mini-summit leaders realized that southern

Lebanon, rather the Lebanese stage generally, is the right framework for al-
lurement to reach such a situation. The review presented by Lebanese Presi-
dent Ilyas Sarkis to the mini~sumnit leaders covered all aspects of the problem
and all its frameworks. The discussion was confined to the question of how

to defuse the situation and foil Israel's opportunity to exploit its explo-
sion--how to do this with a deliberation that does not harm the political and
diplomatic victories scored by the Palestinian cause at the international
level on the one hand and that preserves. on the other hand, Lebanon and the
surrounding countries from the evils of Israeli attacks, rather from the evil
of changing the map of the area in its entirety and of preventing the Arabs
from controlling their stragety, their resources and their wealth in the future.
Those who watched over the success of the consultations of the mini-summit
admit that the leaders who participated in the consultations overcame nu-
merous mines and endured with a patience that was similar at times to Job's
patience. Amidst the atmosphere of provocation, rumors and oneupmanship in
which each side had placed itself through those surrounding it before, and
even during, the summit, it was difficult for any side to make concessions

or to cede to any demand. regardless of how justifiable, under the pressure of
this atmosphere that was abounding with pitfalls. For example, any capitula-
tion by the Palestinian resistance to an announcement by the summit declaring
its support for stopping the fedayeen military operations from southern
Lebanon would have angered the radicals and would have even angered the po-
litical and ideological organizations that live on the resistance's political
and military victories. The same could be said about the Lebanese side.

But the participation in the mini-summit by the leaders concerned with the
issue more than others guaranteed for the resistance on the one hand and for
the Lebanese government on the other the cover required to accept the common
Arab denominator of the two conflicting Palestinian and Lebanese views and
made it inevitable for all involved but to reach the resolutions that were
adopted in the light of the collective Arab political, military and strategic
interest. The European and 0.8. political transformation in favor of the
Arab causes, though not as complete as desired yet, is still a very good
transformation and distinguishing landmark between the two periods of the
1950's and 1960's (sic, presumably meaning between the periods of the 1950's
and 1960's on the one hand and the present on the other]. This transformation
must be countered by wise, alert and logical positions. Rather, the trans-
formation must be encouraged to proceed forward on the positive path through
moderate resolutions and positions, with a little threatening. This is why
importance has been gained by the resolution to prepare for an Arab economic
sunnit established on profound and advanced studies that rely on the logic

15
i inc reality and free of the influence of the emotions and of the demago-
uery that preceded every Arab resolution in the past. The topics of this
mmnit's agenda have already been defined and they consist of balancing the
tab political and economic interests in the Arab relations with the various
ountries in the light of the positions of these countries vis-a-vis the

rah world so that the benefits may be mutual politically and economically,
specially at the oil level. This economic summit will be preceded by visits
ads by the ministers of foreign affairs to the various countries of the world
0 hold discussions, to explain the Arab causes and to bolster "the so far
imited" international understanding of the Palestinian rights in the Arab-
sraeli conflict. This is to be done with the countries of the three continents

if Europe, Africa and America.

Lecrct Resolutions

in their consultations, the leaders of the mini-summit proceeded on the basis
>f tangible facts, the most important being the phase separating the Tunis
summit from the conclusion of the Camp David accords. They compared the re-
sults of each step. Nobody had imagined that the official, political and
popular world public opinion would take the position that it is now taking
toward implementation of the aforementioned accords compared, for example.
vith the sweeping international position [of support} that followed the
Egyptian president's visit to Jerusalem and toward the later steps culminat-
ing in the phase of the Camp Daivd summit. The European support for the Egyp—
tian-Israeli strategy has receded by more than 60 percent and the positions

of some European states that support this initiative in one way or another
haVu become timid. Moreover, the wave that swept the political and popular
public opinion in the United States in the wake of the Jerusalem visit and

of the conclusion of the Camp David [accords] has also receded. Any negative
step that could have been taken by the Tunis summit would have inevitably
wiped out all these positive aspects immediately, especially since the rela-
tious of some Arab countries with the United States and the extent of their
political, economic and financial ties with it do not enable these countries,
for one reason or another, to go too far in any negative positions. These
Arab countries cannot do this for principled reasons over which these countries

cannot be debated.

The mini-summit leaders visualized during their consultations the situation in
the Middle East in case the U.N. forces withdraw or are withdrawn from south-
ern Lebanon or in case the situation between the Lebanese government and the
Palestinian resistance explodes when no bases are formulated for an Arab
solution to the problem of Lebanon and of its southern part. Such a situa-
tion will lead to negative results and will, moreover, drag all of them to a
premature fifth war in the area with Israel-a war over whose details none

of them would have a say under the current international conditions of the
area. This is why these leaders adopted a seven-provision secret resolution
underlining "Lebanon's full sovereignty over all its territories, preserving

16
its ludvpendunre and national unity and the need to establish the sovereignty
of the State of Lebanon over all of southern Lebanon, particularly through

the return of the various state administrations and its civilian and military
establishments In the exercise of their powers and jurisdiction over the south
and the conference s rejection of all the attempts seeking to establish
Zionist domination over the south and its holding Israel responsible for all
the suffering of the southerners. The conference has also taken cognizance of
what the PLO has done in terms of refraining from launching military operations
iron southern Lebanon and refraining from issuing statements from Lebanon

on the operations carried out by the resistance inside the occupied territor-
ies. The conference reaffirms the right of the resistance to engage in its

Riyadh. Cairo and Bayt-al-Din resolutions. to support the Lebanese government
in the various international spheres to exert utmost pressures on Israel to

tation of the Security Council resolutions concerning southern Lebanon and for
enabling the U.N. forces to carry out their tasks. The conference also
reaffirms the need to regulate the armed Palestinian presence in the areas
within the jurisdiction of the zone of the U.N. forces operations in

Lebanese government's efforts to deploy the Lebanese army in the south to
carry out its national duties and urges all the parties concerned to facili—

The mini—summit leaders also approved an Arab political and military coordina—
tion strategy that calls for advancing financial aid to Syria, Jordan. Le-
banon and the PLO and agreed to exchange military information with each other.

ginning of the end of the serious and explosive situation in southern Le-
banon and the basis fit for solving the difficult Lebanese crisis because

the parties to the mini-summit will deal withﬁurparties to the Lebanese
crisis without any distinction, on the basis of new realistic approaches.

with a flexibility that avoids the pitfalls of the previous approaches and

on the basis of the strategy of the Lebanese legitimate authority alone and

the policy of the president of the Republic of Lebanon. The observers ac-
knowledge that the cohesion of President Ilyas Sarkis and Prime Minister

Salim al-Huss before and during the conference played a prominent role not only
in me conference's success but also in helping the conference to reach this
strategy. Moreover. the frank Syrian-Lebanese discussions which took place
before the conference between Presidents Sarkis and al-Asad and then the frank
iiscussions that took place between them in the presence of Yasir 'Arafat
>1ayed a major role in helping the mini-summit leaders to reach these solutions
wh:.h madv Iraqi President Saddam Husayn take the initiative and write down
p.rsauaily the bases for the financial aid to reconstruct all of Lebanon.
beginning with lraq's share of this aid and then the shares of the other
countries of this five-year aid which amounts to 2 billion dollars towards
which iraq. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Libya will contribute.

1hr qﬂrﬁliﬂﬂ that poses itself now is: Hill the Arab leaders implement what
lhvv harr agreed upon?

It in no: easy to give the answer now. But this is a new test for the Arabs
at the [up level. even though implementation did actually begin as of the first
momrnt alter the conclusion of the Tunis summit.

Somr penple may wonder about the practical results produced by the summit

at the level of the confrontation with Israel and with the Camp David parties.
MoreOVer. what are the practical results produced by the summit in terms of an
actual solution for the problem of Lebanon and of its southern part?

At the level of the common Arab strategy. President al-Sadat can reproach

to: b more months the summit for not reaching an alternative solution to the Camp
David accords. But afterwards. al-Sadat will not be able to do so because

the Arab strategy will have then begun to emerge through the political,

military and economic cooperation and coordination. The oil weapon will,

in accordance with the step-by-step policy, replace Egypt as a political power

so that the Arabs may fill through this weapon the deep gap and vacuum left

by the absence of Egypt from the Arab group as an important political and
strategic military force.

As Int Southern Lebanon, both the Lebanese and Palestinian teams emerged from
the summit "neither defeated nor victorious.“ The situation in all of Lebanon,
and not just in the south alone, has become, with the admission of all con-
.erned, a common Arab responsibility. Spreading the national sovereignty,

the army and the full authority of the president of the republic and putting
an end to the classification act in which some Arab sides engaged against

the Lebanese on both the Arab and international stages are things upon which
the leaders of Syria. Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Kuwait and the chairman of the Lib-
yan delegation agreed with President Ilyas Sarkis. The outcome of the new
test that will be undergone by the Arab world at the level of implementation--
melementation of what was agreed upon at the Tills summit-—will make it
possible to pass a final judgement on the Arab solidarity which is once more
in the scales.

18
Report on Compromises
Paris AL-MUSTAQBAL in Arabic 1 Dec 79 pp 36-35
[Article by As'ad Haydar]

[Text] Tunis--"The happy ending" of the 10th Arab summit was expected as a
natural and inevitable conclusion for such a meeting at such a level.

Failure to issue the final communique declaring "detente and reconciliation"
would have meant a "divorce" between Lebanon and the Arabs and the reemer-
gence of the conflicting axes and alliances among the Baghdad summit partici-
pants. It would have also meant a subsequent rise in temperature turning
some of the current cold and silent wars into hot wars on more than one front.

The half success achieved by the summit eliminated the question prevailing
in the halls of the Tunis Hilton and in the air of the Arab homeland. namely
the question: What will happen now and how will Lebanon. the Arabs and the
Palestinian resistance face the situation? But the "half failure" which is
evident in the summit's final communique that has not satisfied either the
Lebanese or the Palestinian side and that has imposed somekind of an under-
standing based on the status quo and the intensifying danger in the Middle
East situation have imposed another question. namely: What will happen from
now until the next Arab summit in Jordan in November 1980?

With the initiation of the works of the conference of the Arab ministers of
foreign affairs at the same Hilton on 14 November 1979, it was evident that
the achievement of full success by the summit conference would lead to the
approval of a unified Arab policy that would transfer the Arab position from
steadfastness in the face of the Camp David accords to a position of con-
frontation primarily. It also seemed that defusing the situation in southern
Lebanon and bringing to end the endless and inconclusive Lebanese war were
almost impossible. Each of the Arab delegations fundamentally concerned with
the conflict came carrying a working paper that meets at some points with the
other papers. But there were among these papers gaps that the goodwill and
the deep desire to keep the situation from exploding could not bridge. Per-
haps the disagreement and the conflict between the Lebanese and Palestinian
working papers was the most evident. The Lebanese delegation, led by Foreign
Minister Fu'ad Butrus, came on the basis of "either a comprehensive solution
or no solution." This is what Pu'ad Butrus expressed in one of his statements
when he said that "the contents of the working paper are not negotiable and
not subject to concessions." Perhaps the only time in which Butrus (resorted
to tactics) in his stiff offensive was when the provision in the Lebanese
working paper on opening the Arab fronts to the Palestinian resistance was
discussed. After approval of the provision on terminating military operations
from southern Lebanon and when discussion of the next provision started,

the Lebanese delegation tried to add the word "other" to the phrase of "all
the fronts" so that the phrase may end up as follows: "Open all the other
Arab fronts." But the Palestinian delegation. led by Abu-al-Lutf, realized

l9
the political meanings of this linguistic addition and thus hastened to demand
[lull the wurd "other" be omitted, and got what it wanted. The Lebanese de-
uln- In rmcrgt‘ with an Arab acceptance of the Lebanese working paper reached
the point when- the Lebanese delegation refused to discuss the bases of the
financial aid to Lebanon because money comes after, and not before, the solu-
tion. This intransigent Lebanese position urged a prominent member of one of
the Gulf delegation to tell AL-HUSTAQBAL: "Fu'ad Butrus deserves to be a
minister of defense and not the minister of foreign affairs." The Palestinian
delegation asserted that in the absence of a comprehensive solution to the
Middle East problem, there is nothing for it after the south but the sea.

The delegation asserted that it will not accept this [end] after these long
years of struggle.

The conclusion of the conference of the ministers of foreign affairs comple-
mented the course of the conference's works. The first working paper. con-
cerning the Arab~lsraeli conflict, was approved and the working paper con—
cerning Lebanon was referred. along with both the Lebanese and the Palestinian
reservations, to the sunnit to adopt a resolution on it.

At the sumit which was attended by the largest number of Arab kings, presi-
dents and stairs, totaling 110 altogether. the side meetings and the bilateral
meetings in the chambers of the heads of state were the ones which dotted the
11's and crossed the tt's insofar as the conference works were concerned and
they were the meetings that made the resolution that was later announced

at al-Qayrawan hall where all the delegations met. Hhat had happened in

the conference of the ministers of foreign affairs also happened at the sum-
mit. The Arab-Israeli conflict paper was approved in the smit's first
session and the issue of southern Lebanon continued to be the problem. On
Wednesday. 21 November 1979, the issue was presented to the auIInit. Addresses
came in succession from the Arab kings and presidents. The situation became
more tense and the intransigence in stances was translated into violent words
exchanged loudly. The stance of President Ilyaa Sarkis was that Lebanon

can no longer endure the war, that it has gotten tired of continuing to be

a card in the Middle East game and that nothing could compensate Lebanon
other than the restoration of peace. stability, territorial integrity and
full legitimacy over all of its lands. This is why the Lebanese working
paper presented by Fu'ad Butrus has to be [Sarkis said] approved or at least
the joint Arab working paper. especially its fourth and fifth provisions
concerning the Palestinian resistance's withdrawal from the south, has to

be amended.

Abu—‘Anmar, the PLO chairman, answered the Lebanese approach with a word
which he intentionally addressed to all those present and not just to Presi-
dent Sarkis alone. He said: "If I withdraw from the south, you will not let
me into this hall and I personally would not come. So, what is the meaning
of my presence here when l have nothing? Had I stopped or agreed to stop
the fight ing, you would not have welcomed me here. He will proceed on our

20
path until we are able to fly the Palestinian flag over Jerusalem." All

left the session with the ghost of failure casting its shadow on the sumit.
This situation urged the most prominent Arab delegations to clarify or re-
affirm the positions in side contacts with the journalists. In an interview
with AL-HUSTAQBAL, Tariq 'Aziz, the Iraqi deputy prime minister and member

of the Revolution Command Council, said: "Nobody can impose all he wants.
Every inflexible position will be countered by another inflexible position
and every flexible position will be countered by another flexible position.
Lebanon should approve the Arab working paper as a prelude for further Arab
action in the next summit one year from now. Lebanon must accept the Arab
aid so that it may contribute toward helping the southern citizens to dress
their wounds." As a result of these Arab efforts, rather as a result of the
absence of the official Lebanese media, Prime Minister Salim al—Huss held

a meeting with the Lebanese journalists at his chamber and explained to them
the Lebanese postion by saying: "A distinction must be made between two
provisions in the Lebanese demand for withdrawal of the armed presence from
the south. The first provision deals with the zone of the U.N. forces opera-
tions and defines the withdrawal with the words "all the armed elements,"
Lo. the resistance and Sa‘d Haddad and will not do the resistance great
harm because all know the small size [of the armed elements] the resistance
has in this sector. The second provision deals with the area extending until
the Litani River and concerns the armed presence of the Palestinian resistance
alone. This provision does not deal with the issue of the "joint forces"
which are Lebanese forces. The question of the withdrawal of these forces
will be left alone until the issue of withdrawal of all the armed forces from
all the Lebanese territories is brought up. Despite Prime Minister al—Huss's
efforts to explain the Lebanese position and to stress the need not to be
carried away by a counter-propaganda campaign, he was not able to achieve
what he wanted. This situation urged a prominent member of the Lebanese
delegation to say: "We came with a just and legitimate cause but we have
not known how to present it. We have forgotten that we are before an Arab
summit and not before a Lebanese round table."

Tripartite Sumit Before Agreement

During the evening session, news of the incidents in the venerable Mecca was
received and the atmosphere became charged. Talk of Prince Fahd's iminent
departure from Tunis for his country dominated the halls of the Hilton llotel.
This would have doomed the summit to failure. But Prince Fahd's composure
and the support of the Arab kings and presidents for Saudi Arabia and their
public condemnation of the attack prepared the atmosphere for completing the
summitfs work. However, this situation led to cancelling the meeting that
was scheduled to include Lebanon, Syria, Saudi Arabia, the PLO and Kuwait

to find a joint solution.

21
At 0800 on Thursday. the day set for ending the conference works. the decisive
and originally needed meeting took place. President Ilyas Sarkis and Abu-‘Allnar
met at President Hafiz al-Assd's suite. During this tripartite meeting,

the agreement facilitating the establishment of the legitimate authority over
the Lebanese territories and preserving, at the same time. the Palestinian
resistance. was approved. It wasn't long before the final session. in which
the sumit's final comunique was issued. was convened.

According to reliable sources, some points and resolutions in the two work-
ing papers were amended in the following manner: In the first working paper
dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict, the following phrases were added:

1. The need for the Arab states to participate in the Islamic Solidarity
Fund and in the joint projects, to fulfill their financial co-itments toward

the General Secretariat of the Islamic League Organisation and to advance
moral and aaterial aid to this organization.

" Support the Arab Fund for Aid to the African and Arab Countries and support

so

other International funds and organizations.

‘3. Replace the phrase "within the framework of not separating" by the phrase
"on the basis of" in the issue of cooperation with the European group count-
ries. Another phrase was also added to make the passage read as follows:
"Cooperation with the European group countries to enhance the joint Arab-
I-luropean interests and to develop the positions of the European group on

the basis of not separating dealings in the economic relations from the poli-
tical positions of the countries of this group toward the Arab causes and their
central link. Palestine." In implementation of this provision. five committees
were formed, each headed by a minister of foreign affairs. These comittees
are divided among Latin America, Asian countries. West Europe, East Europe
(Syria will undertake this task) and Africa (the Democratic Yemen, Mauritania
and the PLO will untertake this tat-3').

A. The addition of a full point to the 11th provision concerning the re-
lations with the United States. This point is "condemnation of the policy
exercised by the United States in regard to its role in the conclusion of
the two Camp David accords and the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and stressing that
the continuation of this policy will have a negative impact on the relations
and interests between the Arab countries and the United States of America.

5. Call for a "special" session instead of an "ordinary" session to support
the Arab and Palestinian right.

6. The addition of a new provision, namely provision 11c, concerning the con-

vocation of the Arab Economic and Social Council which includes the ministers
of foreign affairs and of economy to discuss the Arab situation.

22
Amendments and Reservations

In addition to these amendments, which have been considered a stiffening of
the Arab position and the beginning of formulating a new line for an Arab
strategy to counter Camp David and while taking into consideration the efforts
not to isolate the people's Egypt and to continue isolation of the Egyptian
regise. another resolution was adopted but not announced. This resolution
calls, according to reliable sources, for granting Somalia, on the basis of
.1 Saudi proposal supported by Iraq, an aid of (.0 million dollars shared in
half by Saudi Arabia and Iraq. Meanwhile, Kuwait pledged to advance an

aid of 10 million dollars after bilateral talks with Somalia. Dr 'Ali al—
Turaylti. the Libyan secretary of foreign affairs, objected to this aid by
saying: “Some Arabs remember the Arab causes only when financial issues are
discussed . "

Insofar as Lebanon is concerned, an Arab working paper was approved. This
paper can, in case it is implemented, give Lebanon rest and leave the Pales-
tinian resistance as a fait accompli. The resistance has taken a moral
coultaent before the conference to stop its operations from "southern
Lebanon," keeping in mind that the resistance has maintained its reservation
on the third provision which concerns "taking cognizane of the organization's
action of refraining from launching military operations from the south,"
instead of the phrase "across the borders" which was proposed originally.
Meanwhile, Lebanon has maintained its reservation on the fifth provision.
especially on the phrase "regulating the Palestinian presence" instead of
the phrase "withdrawing the armed Palestinian presence."

In addition to these resolutions, Lebanon has been given an aid of 2 billion
dollars divided over 5 years, beginning with 1980 and ending in 1984. AL-
NUS‘I‘AQBAL has learned that one half the annual aid, amounting to 600 million
dollars, will be set aside for the south to help its population stand fast
and reconstruct their damaged property.

II

On the basis of these resolutions whose only secrecy lies in the word "secret,
the observers are again asking the fundamental question, namely: What will
happen in the future, particularly in the coming year?

First, it must be taken into consideration that Lebanon's problem is tied to a
solution for the situation in the Middle East area. But at the same time.
Lebanon cannot wait until the Palestinian problem is solved. This is why

what happened at the Tunis sumit constitutes, as viewed by a prominent member,
a partial solution on the way to the comprehensive solution. This partial
solution will permit Lebanon, through the Arab financial aid, to dress some

of its present wounds, both at the level of reconstruction and development

and the level of building a modern military force. Such wound dressing will
help Lebanon in the future to establish its control over all the Lebanese
territories in a manner whereby the legitimate government will not be again

23
lurrd with the question: "Hhat has the government done with the hayt-al-Dln
rusuluilnns and why isn't the legitimate government establishing its control
over Beirut. the mountain [Mount Lebanon] and the north as it wants to establish
it over the south which is hanging from the rope of the non-Lebanese wills,

as well as the Lebanese will?"

This solution will also permit the PLO to continue its diplomatic offensive

in Western Europe, this time with obvious Arab support and with a well-studied
plan based on a clear economic plan. This will enable the PLO to gain addi-
tional positions, perhaps the first of which will be France [which may be won
over] during Yasir 'Arafat's forthcoming visit to Paris. Moreover, the
Palestinian rifle will continue to be raised and capable of threatening with
military action against Israel and also capable of touching off the situation,
depending on the developments and requirements of the coming phase.

The limits of the future possibilities do not stop at these options. There
are the other Arab fronts and there is the flaring Iranian front in the Middle
East area. The balance of these conditions in all the fronts collectively or
in each of them separately [will determine] whether Lebanon can wait another
year to make more partial gains or whether it will not be able to stand

any longer in the Middle East station with all the Arabs (excluding Egypt)

and will look for another means to transport it [to a new situation] that may
begin with an explosion and conclude with an unhappy ending, exactly as the
beginning of its war was tragic for itself and for the Arabs.

849k
C50: 4802

24
USSR'S RELATIONS WITH SOUTHERN NEIGHBORS REVIEWED
Paris DEFENSE NATIONALS in French Oct 79 pp 55-64

[Article by Emile Pignol: "The Soviet Union and Countries of the Southern
Arc: Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey"]

[Text] Is the Soviet Union seeking to exploit recent
reverses met by Western nations in that are of coun-
tries continguous to Russia's southern borders from

the Black Sea to the Himalayas, a region of turbulence,
revolutions in the name of Islam, and economic depression?
Emile Pignol, a young researcher at the Political Science
Institute and a specialist on that region, answers this
question.

The balances of power which have existed for more than 30 years along the
Soviet Union's southern border were upset by the April 1978 coup d'etat
which placed a pro—Soviet regime in power in Kabul, and also by the Islamic
revolution in Iran.

Until recently, countries on the USSR's southern flank were conspicuous,

in fact, by their pro-Western attitudes and their mistrust of their big
northern neighbor. This mistrust did not, however, prevent them from main-
taining satisfactory relations with that neighbor.

Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan continued to retain, officially at least, their
membership in CW1, a military organization supported by the United States
although it was not legally a member. Only Afghanistan, a long-standing mem
ber of the nonalined movement, confined itself to a position of strict neu-
trality.

Today, however, the deteriorating economic situation in Turkey and Pakistan

as well as the political crisis in both of those countries, all constitute
factors of instability that appear likely to mortgage their future.

25
All things considered, the USSR's entire group of neighbors from the Black
Sea to India are, therefore, "destabilized" or in danger of being so.

we shall examine the role the Soviet Union has played in these develop-
ments, the opportunities they give that country, but also the obstacles
Soviet policy is encountering. In so doing, we shall try to answer the
question of whether, and in what instance, the decline of Hestern influence
in the region has meant a strengtheningof Soviet positions.

Afghanistan

Afghanistan has long-standing ties of large-scale, but not exclusive, mili-
tary, economic, and cultural cooperation with the Soviet Union. Yet until
last year it had retained its independence from its powerful neighbor by
following a policy of nonalinement. The April 1978 coup d'etat and the
resultant establishment of a Moscowbbacked Marxist regime in Kabul marked a
radical turning point in Afghan policy and its regional consequences are con-
siderable. Hhile it has not been possible to prove any Soviet involvement

in the coup, it does appear likely that Soviet leaders were kept informed of
its preparation.

The Kremlin could not have been anything but pleased to see Afghanistan
rapidly enter into the Soviet orbit, as is evidenced by the way Afghan
diplomacy has invariably alined its positions with those of Moscow. Hasn't
Afghanistan one of the first countries to recognize the new Cambodian Govern-
ment and condemn Chinese intervention in Vietnam?

The considerable economic but primarily military aid the Soviet Union quickly
granted the Taraki government and the USSR's slacrity in signing some 50
agreements. the most important of which is the 5 December 1978 treaty of
friendship and cooperation, clearly show that Moscow does not intend to

skimp on ways and means of ensuring the survival of a pro-Soviet regime in
Afghanistan.

The USSR's interest in that country is, of course, prompted by a combination
of strategic and political considerations. The Soviet Union has, in effect,
always endeavored to surround itself with friendly countries that act as
buffer states. In addition, Afghanistan's geographical situation, the first
“step" to the Indian Ocean, enables Moscow to adopt as its own the old
czarist dream of gaining access to warm waters, by taking advantage of
Afghan irredentist designs on the Pakistani provinces of Baluchistan and
Patchunistan.

Furthermore, the Soviet leadership's attachment to the dogma of the irreversi-
bility of socialism's conquests cannot help but commit it to maintain its
support of a regime which, without being officially socialist, Openly re-
lates to the Soviet experiment.

26
in addition, this Soviet commitment has been increasing in the face of the
expansion noted in the Islamic rebellion since March.

This growing commitment has resulted in accelerated deliveries of military
equipment and in an increase in the number of Soviet "advisers.“z

Because of the magnitude of the rebellion and the increasing number of purges
and defections that are thinning Afghan officer ranks, the Soviet "advisers"
are now playing a decisive role within the armed forces. Actually they are
very closely involved in combat operations. Despite Moscow's denials, it has
definitely been established that Soviet pilots are taking part in harassing
missions being flown against the rebels.

While Soviet assistance has thus far made it possible to contain the rebel-
lion after a fashion, we wonder what would happen if that assistance were
to become insufficient. Should that occasion arise, would the Soviets con-
sider resorting to direct intervention as Afghan Prime Minister Amin has
hinted they would? Under the present circumstances, we can only speculate
about what might happen. Admittedly, Soviet leaders have on several occa-
sions clearly indicated their firm determination to sustain the present
Afghan regime. In this connection, Brezhnev'a statements during the June
visit to Moscow of Indian Prime Minister Desai--"He will not abandon our
friend the Afghan people in its hour of need"--were meant to demonstrate
Moscow's determination.

in all likelihood, however, the Soviets will do their utmost to avoid having
to make this difficult decision. According to certain rumors, they have ad-
vised Taraki to broaden his political base,3 to halt massive purges, and to
slow down the implementation of reforms that are too premature for a back-
ward country.

There is no evidence that this moderating advice will be headed by Kabul
officials who, on the contrary, seem determined to pursue a policy of
repression. It is questionable, therefore, whether a policy of national
reconciliation would have any chance of succeeding in view of the intransi-
gence of not only the authorities but also the rebels who are engaged, with
the support of most of the population, in a veritable holy war against the
"atheistic" Kabul government.

For the time being, the progress of the rebellion is not such that it can
threaten the regime's existence, particularly because of divisions among

the different rebel movements. This situation could change rapidly, how-
ever. The attitude of the armed forces is still the major unknown factor.
The revolt by a garrison in Kabul in early August-—the third dissident action
within the army in the past few months-was crushed with the help of Soviet

pilots. Such defections make one wonder about the army's loyalty to the
Taraki regime.

The fact remains, however, that any possible intervention by Soviet armed
forces would not fail to have considerable consequences, particularly on the
USSR's relations with Pakistan and Iran who would feel directly threatened.
ﬂucrv is no doubt that such intervention would constitute a new stage in the
deterioration of Sino-Soviet relations. In addition, at a time when the
summit meeting of the nonalined countries has recently concluded its deliber-
ations in Havana, this intervention could not but tarnish the Soviet Union's
image with the nonalined movement. Phrthermore. it would certainly not con-
tribute to improving the climate of detente and would most likely jeopardize
ratification of the SALT II treaty.

Iran

The Soviets abandoned the posture of neutrality they had been observing ever
since the start of the Iranian crisis only when the victory of the religious
leaders became certain. They apparently did not intervene in the revolu—
tionary process, being merely content to deter the Americans from doing so.
We cannot exclude the possibility, however. that theymmyhave encouraged the
Iranian Tudeh Communist Party to campaign againstthe United States so as to
channel the Iranian people's discontent in a direction more compatible with
Soviet interests.

The creation of a focus of instability on their border may have caused the
Soviet leaders some anxiety, but they were, nevertheless, pleased by the fall
of the pro-western Shah's regime and the attendant loss by the United States
of its most powerful ally in the Persian Gulf, and especially an all: who in-
tendcg to act as "policeman" of that region against "progressive" subver-
sion.

Consequently, Moscow was one of the first capitals to recognize the new
Iranian regime and offer it assistance. The Soviets viewed with great satis-
faction a certain number of "positive" decisions made by the Islamic authori-
ties, such as elimination of the American presence, the closing of electronic
monitoring stations, withdrawal from CENTO, cancellation of contracts for the
purchase of Hestern arms, severing of diplomatic relations with Israel and
South Africa, rejection of agreements with the oil consortium, etc.

Yet developments in relations between the Soviet Union and Iran these past
few months have not confirmed the Kremlin's initial expectations upon the
establishment in Iran of a regime hostile to "imperialism." 0n the contrary,
these relations have deteriorated rapidly, notably because of the part played
by the Soviet Union in quelling the Islamic rebellion in Afghanistan.

The Islamic fundamentalism of the new Iranian leaders has actually led them
to denounce Soviet activities in that country. For instance, in receiving
the Soviet ambassador on 13 June, the Ayatollah Khomeyni warned him in

rather undiplomatic languages about the Soviet Union's interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan and Iran. A week later,re1ations between the
two countries deteriorated even further with the Iranian foreign minister's

announcement that the provisional government intended to cancel simultaneously
the two basic treaties between Iran and the USSR and between Iran and the

28
United States. This measure only appears to be balanced.6 Actually it would,
if implemented, deprive the Soviet Union of the "right of inspection" in Iran
which it has had for more than 50 years. It will be recalled that the treaty
of 1921 allows the USSR to move its troops into Iranian territory if the lat-
ter is being used by a third power as a base for aggression against the USSR.
This treaty was the basis for the warning Brezhnev issaed to the United
States in Nevenber 1978 in a statement noting that any American intervention
in favor of the Shah would be viewed by Moscow as an attack on its security.

For the moment, the Soviets are adhering to the policy of appeasement they
have practiced toward Iran ever since the Shah's departure. Yet they are

no longer limiting themselves to protestations of good faith whenever they
are taken to task. While avoiding all polemic as much as possible, the
Soviet press no longer hesitates to criticize Iranian leaders-with the ex-
ception, however, of the Ayatollah Khomeyni-who make remarks hostile to the
USSR. It also more frequently denounces, and with less verbal precautions,
Tehran's favorable attitude toward the Afghan rebels.

Moscow is convinced that the Islamic revolution has an "unfinished" aspect
about it. But in view7 of the present weakness of the Iranian Marxist left,
particularly the 'rudeh7 which is now but a shadow of the large communist
party it was shortly after the war, the Kremlin has no choice but to seek
some accommodation with the Iranian authorities. Consequently, the Tudeh
has up to now followed, probably on advice from Moscow, a "national front"
policy that has led it to support the Ayatollah Khoaeyni and his proposed
Islamic republic. The apparent open clash between the Marxist left and the
ayatollah'a supporters could place Moscow in a quandary of being obliged to
take a definite position on the matter. In another connection, Moscow has
refrained from expressing any opinion on the worsening of the situation in
those regions of Iran populated by non-Persian minorities: Kurdistan, Azer-
baijan, Khuzistan, and Baluchistan. Nevertheless, the growing agitation for
autonomy, and especially the Kurdish rebellion, offer the USSR a formidable
potential means of exerting pressure.

Economically, the Soviet Union wanted to continue the very flourishing co-
operation it had with Iran during the time of the Shah. It also entertained
the hOpe of benefiting from Iran's cancellation of numerous contracts with
Western companies. But the USSR has been treated no better than those com-
panies by the Islamic authorities. In fact, several major projects with

the Soviets have been cancelled these past few months. The largest one was
a 3-billion dollar project involving construction of the IGAT-Z pipeline
designed to deliver Iranian natural gas to the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia,
Austria, France, and the PRC.

Pakistan

Pakistan' a relative isolation on the international scene, particularly in
relation to Western countries, has not brought about any rapprochement be-
tween Islamabad and Moscow. As a matter of fact, the government of General

29
Zia-ul-Haq remains essentially true to Pakistan's basic foreign policy orient-
ations founded by Ali Bhutto on active cooperation with the Islamic world and
on close ties with China in the face of the Indian "threat." Although Paki-
stan's relations with the United States have been noticeably affected by
Pakistani nuclear plans—-the Americans suspended their economic aid last year-
leaders in Islamabad are well aware that the American Government cannot take
the risk of a break that would accentuate instability in the region. The
alternative policy Pakistan seemingly wants to initiate, after its with-
drawal from CENTO and its entry into the nonalined movement. cannot be inter-
preted as a desire for rapprochement with Moscow. 0n the contrary, there

has been an obvious rapid deterioration in Soviet-Pakistani relations as a
result of the mounting antagonism between Islamabad and Kabul. In fact,
Pakistan does not hide its sympathy with the Afghan Islamic rebels Kabul
accuses it of helping and of harboring within its territory.

The Soviet Union for its part has issued several warnings to Islamabad and
accuses it of playing into the hands of "imperialism" by actively supporting
the rebels Moscow claims are being trained by Pakistani and Chinese advisers.
More or less inspired by the Soviets, Afghan leaders now appear to be serious-
ly considering encouraging Pakistani autonomist movements (the Baluchis and
Patchuns). In warnings issued to Islamabad, Taraki has Openly threatened

to give these movements direct support. Under these conditions, Pakistani
authorities cannot help but be pessimistic about the future of their rela-
tions with the USSR. For the time being, they are striving to thwart, after
a fashion. the Soviet propaganda that likens the Afghan rebellion to foreign
aggression. We can see, therefore, that the USSR's relation with countries
in the eastern part of the southern are are far from satisfactory. Are they
any better on the western end of the arc?

Turkey

Disappointed by the attitude of both NATO and the United States during the
Cypriot crisis--the embargo on arms sales imposed in February 1975 by the
U.S. Congress was lifted in September 1978, but with severe conditions-
Ecevit's government decided to pursue a more open and liberal policy toward
the Soviet Union in order to free itself from an altogether too exclusive
"tetc~a-tete" with Washington.

The rapprochement between Moscow and Ankara was marked by Prime Minister
Ecevit's visit to the USSR in June 1978. Even though the theretofore very
loose political ties were drawn closer and the already long-standing eco-
nomic cooperation between the two countries was diversified, one has to note
that this evolution was always in conformity with the norms of the policy of
detente and was not marked by any important concession by Turkey.8

For instance, Torkey rejected Moscow's military-oriented advances, including
proposals of cooperation nade by Marshal Ogarkov during his March 1978 visit
to Turkey, and Soviet attempts to get Turkey to agree to a sort of bilateral
military detente. Nor can Turkey's desire to diversify its foreign relations

30
he Interpreted as a means of exerting pressure on its Western allies and
even less as a reorientation of its foreign policy.

Under present circumstances, it does not appear likely that Turkey, despite
the gravity of its current economic and political crisis, can give up the
"Atlantic umbrella" or the economic aid from which its belonging to the
West has enabled it to benefit for the past 30 years. Nevertheless, if the
military were to assume power through a coup d'etat, Turkey might conceiv-
ably question its ties with the West and revert to a policy of suspicious
and sensitive nationalism. In that event, the USSR could not help but be
pleased with a situation it seems unable to instigate itself.

We note, therefore, that there are cracks in the rampart which has been
blocking Soviet attempts at penetrating in the direction of the Persian Gulf
and the Indian Ocean. Afghanistan has become a Soviet satellite. Iran is
once again on the brink of civil war. Turkey is weakened by very serious
internal problems. Pakistan is in danger of a secessionist explosion. This
particularly gloomly assessment must be qualified, however. The expansion
of Soviet influence in the region faces sizable obstacles. The largest of
these is the antagonisms between Islam and Marxism. Events in Afghanistan
have been most revealing in this respect. It was in the name of Islam that
Afghan rebels took up arms against the pro-Soviet Taraki regime. The fact
that the two neighboring countries, Iran and Pakistan, are also deeply de-
voted to Islamic fundamentalism could not fail to compel them to rise up
against Soviet encroachments. Moreover, the continued unlawful status of
the Turkish and Iranian communist parties-there is apparently no communist
party in Pakistan--does not facilitate the USSR's action in those countries.
It is interesting to note that the draft constitution published in Tehran
includes a provision banning communists from directorial positions. Lastly,
we must not forget the lessons of history-particulsrly where Turkey and
Iran are concerned-which have made these countries highly suspicious of
their big neighbor. while the successes achieved by the Soviet Union along

its southern border are undeniable, their irreversibility remains to be
shown.

FOOTNOTES
1. CENTO's activities had actually been extremely limited since 1965.

2. An estimated total of 3,000 to 5,000 Soviet adviserscontrol to a large
extent the armed forces and the governmental administrative machinery.

3. The Khalq communist party-—now in power after eliminating the Parcham.
a pro-Soviet rival faction--has but a very limited membership.

4. The Moscow-supported Marxist Dhofar rebellion was crushed in 1975 by
an Iranian expeditionary force.

31
5. The conversation between the Ayatollah Klmaeyni and the Soviet ambassador
was broadcast over Iranian radio, in all probability without the ambas-
sador's consent.

6. The American-Iranian treaty is merely a regular defense treaty.

7. H. Kianouri, Tudeh'a secretary general, is considered to be "Moscow's
man."

8. It should be noted, however. that the Turkish Government has been most
obliging on several occasions such as uben Soviet military aircraft
have flown over its territory and when the aircraft carriers Kiev and
Minsk passed through the Straits. Likewise, the negative reply given
to the American request for use of Turkish airspace by 0-2 aircraft
was attributable to Turkey's anxious desire to deal tactfully with
Moscow.

801.1

cso: 1.800

32
STUDENT STRIKES, DEMONSTRATIONS DISTURB AUTHORITIES
'Arabizing' Students Strike
Paris LE HONDB in French 7 Dec 79 p h

[Article by Daniel Junqua: "Authorities Fear Protest by 'Arabizing' Stud-
ents Hay Turn Into Anti-Anerican Denoustrations"]

[Text] Student‘orgsnized strikes and demonstrations have generated a certain
degree of agitation in Algiers these past 2 days. Police have been able thus
far to channel or disperse marches and rallies that have never consisted of
more than a few hundred participants. Authorities are, nevertheless, care-
fully watching developments. They undoubtedly fear that this agitation,
whose origins are purely local, may mount and ultimately turn into anti-
American demonstrations, as has been the case in other Arab capitals.

Such a development cannot be ruledoutespecially since this upsurge of agi-
tation is being fomented basically by "Arabizing" students from the Faculty
of Law and Economics, students who are probably more eager than others to
demonstrate their solidarity with the Iranian Islamic revolution. These
students have been on strike for 2 weeks along with students from the
Institute of Political Studies. They are requesting that some postgraduate
courses be taught in Arabic. At the present time, all their postgraduate
courses are taught in French. They are also demanding better job opportuni-
ties upon graduation and Arabization of the civil service.

Slogans posted on walls of faculty of law buildings and the Ben-Aknoun stu-
dent resident hall are revealing: "Unity of languages, unity of spirit
(mind)!“, "The Arabic language is part of the 1954 revolutionl", "ls Algeria
a French colony?"

This very determined protest movement comprises some 3,000 students. The
problem is not a new one. Last year, "Arabizing" students from the Univers-
ity of Science and Engineering of Bab-Ezzouar, near Algiers, boycotted
classes and then examinations because they refused to be "condemned" to

only one job market, namely teaching.

33
The coexistence of two separate curriculums or streams, one "bilingual" the
other "Arahized," is becoming an increasingly explosive situation. The
principle of Arabization [replacement of French by Arabic as the dominant
language in all realms of national life] was sol-lly reaffirmed by the
December 1978 congress of the Algerian Youth and subsequently by the Fl."
congress in February 1979. But the spread of Arsbization is plagued with
difficulties, the greatest being the shortage of qualified teachers.

Algeria is currently engaged in an accelerated development effort. Hence
in all fields. particularly the industrial, the country needs highly quali-
fied executive and managerial personnel skilled in modern methods and. tech-
niques, personnel who are in constant contact with the West. The majority
of such personnel in Algeria are French-speaking. The "Arabizers" are
confined to minor positions or to tasks that are not directly productive.
They are tolerating less and less being shunted off in this way when offi-
cial policy vim Arabization as a veritable dogma. This dogma was reaf-
firmed more strongly than ever with the removal, in March 1979, of Hostefa
Lacheraf as minister of primary and secondary education and his replacement
by Mohamed Kharroubi, a stanch supporter of Arabization.

Early in the week, law students were joined in their strike by lycee
[university-preparatory secondary school] students. The latter are protest-
ing a measure which restores certain subjects to the baccalaureat [final
examination], subjects on which such examinations have not been required for
several years. Under this new neasure, science majors will henceforth take
examinations in history and geography, while literature majors will take them
in physics and natural sciences. This protest movasent involves all of the
capital's lycees: boys and girls lycees, inner-city and suburban lycees.

The thousands of young students boycotting classes are thus at loose ends.
In the present climate created by the Iranian situation, this student unrest
disturbs the authorities who fear a possible deviation of the protest move-
ment.

For instance, despite the precautions taken and the police forces assigned to
maintain order, authorities in Oran were hard pressed Monday when a protest
march suddenly headed for the 11.8. consulate and got to within 100 meters

of the building before being stopped and dispersed. Although no official
demonstration has thus far been organized in Algiers, authorities there have
taken precautions for guarding and protecting the American embassy.

Public opinion does, of course, largely disapprove of the acts of violence
that have been committed in other capitals, and particularly in Tripoli

and Karachi. But Algerian authorities must reckon with a large number of
young persons who flare up easily and whom certain fundamentalist movements
would no doubt like to mobilize. In this regard, the posters displayed in
Bab-Ezzouar by a new group calling itself "Students of the Bl-Harrach liosque"
are quite revealing. The posters announced that the Grand Mosque in Mecca
had been bombed by American F—S aircraft and called upon students to support
the Islamic revolution instead of lazily spending the afternoon "in musical
siestas by couples" on the university lawn.

31o
Teacher Shortage Hampers Arablzation
Paris LE MONDH in French 12 Dec 79 p 7

[Article by Daniel Junqua: "Calm Returns to Algiers' Lycees while 'Arabizing'
University Students Remain on Strike")

[Text] Calm returned to lycees in Algiers on Monday 10 December in the wake
of the Ministry of Education's brief statement on the front page of 9 Decem-
ber's EL MOUDJAHID announcing that "no new subject matter would be added to
the1980bmccalaureat examinations." The authorities had reportedly planned
to include examinations in the natural sciences and physics for literature
majors and in history for science majors. "Leaked" reports of this plan

had prompted a large week-long protest movement that made several attempts
to march to the Ministry of Education.

These demonstrations were in all likelihood the expression of a general
feeling of utter dissatisfaction, and the rumors about the baccalaureat mere-
ly served as a detonator. As a matter of fact, lycee students are grumbling
about their working and living conditions: overcrowded classrooms, inade-
quate libraries and laboratories, shortage of textbooks. transportation dif-
ficulties, meager scholarships, etc. They were able to voice all these
grievances Monday afternoon at a working meeting organized by the National
Union of Algerian Youth (UNJA) attended by university student representatives
and several senior government officials. Delegates from the lycees, 10 per
school, submitted their demands and deplored the "absence of a forum of
expression" capable of taking official cognizance of their problems. In so
doing, the students were implicity condemning the UNJA which appears to have
been unable to cope with this problem.

In contrast, silence continues to surround the strike by some 3,000 "Arabiz-
ing" students of the Algiers Faculty of Law who could well continue their
protest action until the meeting. on or about 26 December, of the FL" Cen-
tral Committee, the supreme body of Algier's single political party. The
committee is scheduled to examine, inter alia, educational problems and more
particularly the ticklish Arabization issue.

The striking students would like to see the central committee establish, at
this meeting, a definite and compulsory timetable for Arabization of the
civil service. Such a timetable is the only procedure, in their opinion,
that is consistent with the principles proclaimed in the Constitution, the
national charter, and the resolutions of the most recent Pin congress, and
also the only procedure that permits effective monitoring of the implementa-
tion of Arabization. They have written letters to this effect to President
Chadli Bendjedid, party coordinator M. Yahisoui, and chairman Boualem
Benhamouda of the FLN's education and training committee with whom they have
unsuccessfully requested a meeting. The students reject any accusation of
"Moslem fundamentalism." They explain: "Re are operating within the PL“

framework and are simply requesting that officially stated policies be
implemented."

35
Rec ru i ting of Teachers

This: Is. tlu-rel'nrc, .1 political issue that is clearly beyond the scope of
Ilu- Mlniatry of Higher Education. Since his appointment, however, the new
head of that department. Abdelhak Berheri, former rector of the University
or Constantine, has not spared hiuelf in his efforts to forward Arabian-
tinn of the university. One of his first actions was to visit Syria, Iraq,
and Jordan in May 1979 for the purpose of recruiting teachers. Teachers
are, In fact, the major "bottleneck." The results of his recruiting trip
were disappointing. Only 22 Syrian teachers have joined the nearly 500
Middle Fastern teachers-20 percent of the total teaching corps—already in
Algeria. The cooling of relations with Cairo has not helped the situation,
Egypt being the principal pool of cultural assistance personnel.

th several pertinent decisions have been made recently. These include: the
opening, on 1 December of the National Arab Translation and Terminology Cen—
ter; establishment, within the master continuous education program, of an
Arahi'utiou program for French-speaking Algerian teachers, some of whom could
he sent to the Middle East for training; and lastly, preparations for estab-
lishment of an Arabic university-level summer school. Furthermore, "decennial
planning guidelines" for the Arabization of the university, beginning with

the social sciences, were formulated recently.

The Arahization measures taken by the ministry are coupled with a series of
social measures, a fact which undoubtedly accounts for the calm prevailing in
all other departments of the University of Algiers. Student grants given to
future secondary and technical school teachers have been doubled and all
scholarships are to be increased 20 percent effective 1 January 1980. Special
emphasis is also being placed on student housing problems and the ministry

has had some 30 projects inserted into the next student housing plan.

In the meantime, the university has to cope with tremendous growing pains,
and while strike movements may have spared the capital this time, they did
ai’i'ect several provincial university centers at the start of this school
year. Particularly hard hit was the Tizi-Ouzou center where student
housing problems are especially acute.

8041
(ISO: 6600

36
llClMAY PROJECTS ANNOUNCED BY DIRECTOR OF WORKS

Ianarnn GULF MIRROR in English 1—7 Dec 79 p 5

(Text I BAHRAIN will start work

FR“:

on 8D In million-worth of
roads rojects next year. it
the abinet a roves
proposals by the inistry
of Works. Power and
Water.

11a: director nl worlrs. Mr
Ali Murad. this weelt
unveiled a development
Erogramrne to cover 20
ilornetres of new roads.
including major six-lone
highways to ease the ﬂow oi
traﬂie in hoth Manama and
Muharraq.

It allows for BDI .6 million
to he spent on maintaining
existing road network in
I980. and III) 801L000 for
the mmpulsory acquitition oi
land.

Prnptned spending in 1980
will he ahout Ill) 8 million:
another III) 5.6 million of the
cost oi the arnmc will
come lrornt mar budget.
rind III) 3.3 million (tom the
hudget ol I'IIIZ.

By that time. further new
road wojects will be under-
way. and the Will pros
ramme calls tor a start on H
8.7 million-worth. Of that.
80 3.4 million will b.- . nt
in Will andliDSJlJrni lion
in ”82.

I'otzil \pcndln ' on rorrtls in
the [Wit-19 but get was only
it!) I0 million. so road,
development over the next
two year'\ mold he increased
try 60 per cent. ‘

New year will see major

ro re“ on the air-lane

iu way to provrdc a
"secure“ route lrorn the
Muharraq causeway to
lizrhram airport.

h820

Nearly three Itilornctres of
new carriageway and two
traIIie-Iight-controlled
intergekction; 3AM .idrgmlor
corn tron y pn .

Phase two of this south-
east Muharraq rin road pro-
ject. beginning in anuary for
completion in IS months.
includes a service road for the
new coast-guard headquar-
ters and other premise: alga
the shore. 11th 80 860.
phase tnltesthe It“ waylrom
the causeway to I existing
section.

Phase three. which starts in
February and will he ﬁnished
in II months. com leter the
ring road as tar as t airport
roundabout at a cost of 80
L2 million.

In Manama. the east ring
road to Mina Sulman I5
already entering its ﬁnal
stages. with the 2.5 Ittn of
phase two costing 80 LBS

millioa. .
A D I.‘ million deve-
lopment for the Kuwait Road
involves the construction ot a
lour-Iane extension (or L9
km from the rear of the Iraqi
embassy to Urnm Al-Hassan.

There. a big intersection
will serve (our major trafﬁc
routes: Sitra Causeway. the
Minn Sulrnon approach road.
Kuwait Road. and the future
south rin road to Kawari
Bridge an the Saudi Arabian
Highwa . m project will
start in aorta? and III)! |llllll
Fehruargcl‘n .

Next ptemher.work will
start on phase one of the main
west ring road. to he lrnown

37

n the Zrni Road.

This will he a tour-lame ear-
riageway leading \oth from
the Dill-nun Gauge roundab-
ou towards Toolili. It will
cover about hall the distance
lathe south ring road at a ﬁrst
at BB 250,000

A long list of further roml
pinieetx lor I930 include:

cOCIthcr ‘80 — A ril ‘Ill —
xetvice roads neurt central
aarltet and open car parking
areas (30 430.000);
oScptcmher 'ao — May in
— n lint mad tmrn Kuwait
Road to Shaikh Isa (Jultrirl
llrard. trt Moon Plant (III)
"0.000):

oNovernher ‘80 -- June ’Ill
— rmrin Ili'ill’illtlkil’ roads in
West MahooztBD 350.000).

ooecernher ‘ll0 -— Mureh'tll
—scrvice math in the Ahu
Ghoul are-an)“ Kuwait Road
(Ill) 325.000);

March ‘80 — June '80 --
improvements well as Item-
in; and pavements trt Shaikh
lu (Juluir) Road (III)
IWJXKl);

.luly‘llll— Deeenrlwr'tll ---
erlensinn of Government
Road Manama from I.qu
Road to Naim t Bl) 300.000):

.Septetnher 80 — March lil
— ltnlr road trom Manama
West Ring Road (Zinj) to
Kawuil ltuutt (Ht) minor»;
.Novemher ‘80 — February
'31 — road (or new homing
duelopmcnt in north-east
Muhurraq (ND 250.000);

.0eeemher '80 — Augthl
‘ll — entice ro:td\ iii the
Salmuniyu ares: (Ill)
2m.tmo).
BRIEFS

HYUNDAI. CABLE DFAL--Hida1 Cables in Bahrain has signed a $6 million
contract with Hyundai for the supply of alulinun conductor cable.

llyandai is carrying out an electrification project in North Yalen, and
will take delivery of the 3,000 tonnes of conductor from February next
year. over a aix-nonth period. Hidal, a private sector joint venture
between Olex Cables of Australia and Interateel, a Bahraini company owned
by the Zayani family. went into commercial production at the end of last
year. It takes hot metal from the Alba smelter, for drawing into rod or
a wide range of wire cables. [Text] [Hanna GULF MIRROR in English

1-7 Dec 79 p 1.6]

CSO: 6820

38
SOVIET STRATEGY 3m BEHIND rassm TIMI].
Commist-Anticousunist Alliance

Paris LE FIGARO in French 16 Nov 79 p 2

[Article by Annie Kriegel]

[Excerpts] On one side we see an America. that still has not nanaged to
extricate itself from an initially explosive and then creeping crisis which
continues to strike at its most deep-seated convictions, a crisis that does
not challenge America's existence but the exercise of its power. This fact
is glaringly nanifested by the unpronising dearth of candidates of suitable
stature for the position of chief magistrate at a time when the United
States abounds with top quality men heading its various business and in-
dustrial firms.

0n the other side we see the Soviet Union continuing its steady upward cliab
which, at tines, seems lightning fast. The USSR has, of course, definitely
depleted the reservoir of high expectations which existed at the beginning
of its Promethean effort to create a new man in a better and sore equitable
society. Yet at the sale tins, the USSR has amazingly succeeded in getting
its loyal supporters who initially viewed it as a architect of a halcyon
future to now view it, with undiminished loyalty. as the essence of con-
stantly expanding power.

He must make it clear, however, that the power in question is not economic
power. Hence there is nothing "modern" about this power if we define nodern-
ity as the primacy of economic considerations. One of Khrushchev's fantasies
was his proclaiming or even believing that the Soviet economy, in its civilian
components, would have to stand comparison with the developed economies. The
sources of Soviet power are, on the contrary, altogether traditional, nsaely
the armed forces and diplonacy, but, of course, with the peculiar connota-
tion these two terms have in the co-aunist system. It has become obvious

in very recent tiles that the famous gap between the ailitary capabilities of
the two superpowers has narrowed, and to such a point that experts currently
waver between two conclusions: either the balance of forcea-which is dif-

ferent from the "balance of terror"--has now been achieved, or else has
already been upset in ; favor of the Soviet Union.

39
But what the 1970's have settled is something which is more in the sphere
of diplomacy, provided we correctly define diplomacy as the construction of
a system of alliances, or what is known as a "camp" in socialist terminology.

Iran: Revolution and Strategy

What is most striking, and rightly so, about the latest events in Iran is
their frenzied character. It is a fact that what has just been violated in
Tehran is an imemorial taboo, a foundation of international society just as
the taboo of incest is the foundation of human culture. But frenzy is not

a sufficiently specific stigma to cover what is peculiar to the Iranian

, event. For after all, the 20th century is replete with frenzied episodes in
which peoples, who perhaps had less excuses than Tehran's wretched masses,
have become hallucinated peoples. I recall to mind Germany and its un-
employed in the 1930's, Argentina and its "descamisados" in Peron's day,

and also. excuse me, America during Watergate. After all, how could anyone
possibly draw the utterly ludicrous parallel between the Shah and Hitler

and get sowe people to believe it, other than in an atmosphere of frenzy?

In most cases, however, frenzy does not exclude a s'.rategy, in other words,
a logical method of development. The taking of 0.5. hbassy personnel as
hostages in Tehran was in response to a dual idea, whether that dual idea
was preconceived and prompted the seizure action itself or whether it came
to the actors in the course of their action.

The first idea: it was necessary to put an end to what remained of the ini-
tial alliance between the Khomayni revolution and the liberal bourgeoisie
which Bezargan could be said to represent. That alliance had lasted as

long as was required to destroy, through widespread anarchy and the exercise
of power on two levels, the socioeconomic framework of the forest society,

a framework that had continued to exist even after the Shah's departure.

The second idea: it was now necessary to move on to the reconstruction
phase, the reconstruction of a radically new regime that could be built,
not on the Koran which offers no base whatever and for a very good reason,
but solely on the base offered by the only model which is an alternative

to the liberal model, namely the socialist model. And that base is anti-,
imperialism whose concrete form in this case is anti-Americanism. This is
what accounts for the apparent "miracle" that has caused Khomeyni, whose
anticoamunism is not merely apparent but is very real, to no longer be
indirectly approved in a relatively neutral and reserved manner by the
pro-Soviet socialist world, but to now be directly acclaimed and vigorously
supported as the champion of "national independence" and "anti-imperialism."

Reading L'HUMANITE and the Soviet press this past week has been most con-
vincing in this respect, even if the Soviet Union, as a state, could not,

in the United Nations, avoid deploring the taking of diplomats as hostages.
For exauple, on 12 November, L'HIJHANITB reported: "he demand for independ-
ence is asserting itself more intensely every day in Iran where the struggle

40
uuulnul imperialism rumnlns the prime mover of the rcvolutlon." 'ﬂnis lduu
was translated Into concrete lungusgc.and indeed perhaps in a somewhat
venturesome manner, by Foreign Minister Bani Sadr: "Believe me, the USSR
would not remain neutral in the event of military aggression against Iran"
(LE HONDE, 14 November).

Such is the "anchor" to what so frequently seems absurd to observers who are
too set in the ways of their mechanical logic. I refer to the political
convergence and the alliance between "frenzied" anticommunista and the inter-
national communist movement. Admittedly this convergence or this alliance

is and will remain rather fragile as long as the anticommunist component is
not done away with. I am not saying that in Brezhnev's View there is no

real difference between Khomeyni and Pham Van Dong. Sometimes the anti-
communist component ends up ruining the alliance in a situation where the
anti-imperialist component is no longer sufficient to justify that alliance.
Such was the case with Nasserism.

But sometimes too the alliance ends up toning down the most rabid anticom-
munism and becomes stabilized. Such was the case with Qadhdhafi and his
conversion to a bizarre type of "Libyan socialism." Suchwasthe case with
Boumediene and his conversion to a kind of socialism less ludicrous than
the preceding one and almost limited to a state military bureaucracy. Such
was the case with Castro in his gradual submission to pure and simple com-
munist orthodoxy.

Soviet Strategy in Iran
Paris LE FIGARO in French 26 Nov 79 p 32
[Article by Annie Kriegel: "Iran: Keys for a Revolution"]

[Text] The taking of hostages in the American Embassy in Tehran is the end
result of a remarkably contrived Operation whose real objective was to move
Iran successfully into the second stage of the revolutionary process, and to
do this "economically," in other words, "peacefully."

Under these conditions. it is understandable that the captors may "concede"
to release the hostages whose seizure was never any more than instrumental
and meant solely to permit achievingthsresults that have actually been
obtained. Continued detention or slaughter of the hostageswould now risk
compromising these results. We cannot, of course, theoretically exclude the
possibility of the execution of one or two hostages by captors enraged at
the release of their prisoners, or by uncontrolled persons who would not
have understood the imperatives of a program justified by the necessities
of the science of revolution. But such apprehension is based on the idea
that the embassy incident was produced by "spontaneous generation." by an
outburst of frenzy at the height of a sort of “May 1968“ relived by fanatics,
and that these "students" think and act as they please with nobody having
any real control over them.

41
Surh an assumption is almost ridiculous. Even though we are far from having
any detailed knowledge of the ins and cuts of the operation, a person has

in have a large amount of naive confidence in the "spontaneousness of the
masses" re view the whole occupation of the American Embassy in Tehran as

an lruuiJn equivalent of the occupation of the Sorbonne by the harebrained
ifnlm "linmlli. .

Top“! . ,3, All of Iran

Thu (ruth 15 that the incident thus created did, in fact, imply preliminary
dccisiuns and choices at the very highest level. The Soviet Union first

had (0 decide to switch from a minimum objective to a maximum objective.
Incidentally, a few weeks ago, I wrote, in this column, that it was up to

the Soviet Union "to get into the act" after a period of necessary discretion,
3 period long enough to allow for completion of the breakup of the govern-
mental and power structures of the former Iranian society.

The Soviet Union's minimum objective was to retrieve Stalin's only stinging
defeat in the immediate post-World War 11 period when he had to abandon his
hope of incorporating the Iranian provinces of Kurdistan and Azerbaijan into
his empire as two new "Soviet republics." The Soviet Union felt that by
supporting the demands of autonomists and separatists in defiance of the
Persian government, even Khomeyni's government; it might be able to obtain,
at the expense of the imperial entity, 8 limited but clear success in the
northern provinces. Hence the period of acute tension between the Kurds and
Khomcyni last spring and summer.

lbs maximum objective is not only to retrieve the Stalinist defeat but to go
even further by neutralizing and than toppling all of Iran. The fact that
the Kurds have just recently rallied to Khomeyni's now "anti-imperialist"
venture is evidence that the maximum objective is definitely the current
Objective.

No Dirort intervention

it goes without saying, that this in no way means that at this stage the
Soviet Union has to move up onto the front line and take direct frontal
artiun, especially military action.

Nor does it mean that the Soviet Union would like to see Iranian-American
tension per se degenerate into Open war. Economic war would be sufficient.
Communists in general andtheSoviets in particular have no tendency to
view war, even a "just" war, as purifying or regenerating. For them, the
iu-yenr war in Vietnam is not the moat ingenious model for the expansion of
socialism.

The Soviets then had to consider that the time had arrived when it was
possible to consummate the collapse of the alliance established 6 months

62
ago, an alliance uniting in so-so fashion the reformist, liberal, and moder-
ate upper and lower middle classes grouped behind Bazargan and the under-
privileged working masses rallied round Khomeyni's Islamic banner.

The Anti-Imperialist Second Have

Last but not least. it was necessary to define a shock-producing incident
sufficiently spectacular but still sufficiently meaningful to permit setting
off a second wave that would rouse the Iranian masses as intensely as last
winter's first wave had done, but a second wave rousing them in a cause that,
this time, would no longer be essentially religious-Allah akhbar--but prim-
arily political: "Down with American anti-imperialism." The new alliance
between Islamic and Marxist populists would be formed in the wake of this
"anti-imperialist" second wave. Yet it would not be simply a new alliance
but also an alliance whose "common program" would fully conform to the Marx-
iat-or rather Leninist, to be strictly exact-view of the world, a view
whose central governing concept is known to be imperialism.

The plan outlined above has been implemented and well implemented.

Hhat should we deduce from all this? First of all. that highly effective
use has once again been made of all the pretexts and roses designed to mis-
lead world Opinion and make it lose sight of what is really happening. One
of the most successful of all the pretexts employed is the "gadget" of

"the Islamic revival" coupled with reflections on "religious fanaticism,"
"Koranic fundamentalism," and "irrationalism." It should be no surprise to
find that such a powerful event has a religious dimension in an area of
culture and civilization where the process of secularization has barely be-
gun.

Thia must not hide the fact, however, that the specifically religious dimen-
sion is already secondary. Proof of this? The rapprochement with Soviet-
ized Afghanistan, a country that only a few months ago Khomeyni was still
holding up to the Moslem rebellion's public scorn. As a matter of fact,

the Ayatollah Khomeyni's "providential" role is now very close to being
spent, even though there is no need to put an end to it by a coup which
would be at least premature and probably superfluous. Having been spoliated
by the "white revolution" of the Shah--who perhaps acted unwisely in this
matter--the Shiite church was a ready-made mass-like the "nobiliary reac-
tionary attitude" in pre-revolutionary France of 1788-with which to over-
throw the Pahlavi regime in the name of a nebulous dream of fundamentalist
restoration combined with some very powerful clerical appetites. Having
finally "put the revolution back on its anti-imperialist feet" as it were.
there is no reason for the Marxists to quarrel with Khomeyni unless he
eventually rejects "anti-imperialism." Yet any attempt to coapare Khomeyni
to Gandhi, as Jean Daniel has done, is far-fetched: Khomeyni's anti-
imperialism has none of the authenticity that was Gandhi's distinctive mark.

43
Diversionary Maneuvers

And what shoot the stray sparks of revolt in Saudi Arabia or Pakistan,
sparks that also bear evidence of that "religious fanaticism"? It is too
early to assess their consistency. We cannot help but suspect, however,
that those are "diversions," spontaneous or not. who does not recall how
the Soviets consolidated their hold over Central Europe at the beginning
of the 1950's, shielded from any prying eyes, the latter being riveted

on the turbulent spectacles in Western Europe and notably in France?

What else can we deduce from this situation? That the deceptive power of
deceptive cognates is still as dangerously effective as ever. The life and
death of hostages are flesh and blood realities each with its own distinctive
face. Diplomatic immunity is a thoroughly defined rule of law that conditions
the most routine aspects. the very realities of international life. Yet all
of these realities are scornfully rejected by communists as being more "form."
apparent and superficial. If such is the case, what does constitute "sub-
stance"? That substance is "independence" and "the struggle against imper-
ialism." These are two "open sesame" words, spell-binding and ambiguous
catchwords whose meaning in this case is fixed according to the communist
ideology. Hence in communist terminology Czechoslovakia and Angola are
independent states while France must, according to an appeal issued by Georges
Harchais, "struggle for its national independence" and Iran must "gain its
independence." In short, "independence" is determined not by criteria de-
fining the exercise of sovereignty but by membership in the socialist camp.

Standard Stalinist Arguments

For that reason it is quite futile, in my opinion, to scrutinize such Ameri-
can moves as the Shah's admission to a New York hospital in an effort to
assess whether the U.S. Government was not imprudent or frivolous. Any
other move would have done just as well. Similarly, Andre Pontaine's
comments (in the 22 November LE HONDE) on the partially justified, if not
legitimate, "hatred of America" are very flimsy. The frenzy of those mobs
shouting "Go home"! is not prompted by any visceral anti-Americanism of the
people. What is visceral is rather the fascination of America, because that
great country, where millions of poor transplanted men and women were able
to create very quickly a prosperous and free society, remains, no matter
what may be said about it, a poor man's dream come true and the dream of
those who are still poor.

Anti-Americanism is, therefore, merely the current version of anti-imperialism
and its tenor does not depend on the possible faults or crimes of the real
America. Moreover, this fact explains that rather strange attempt made by
lrnn-—the cradle of lndo-Europeans (the whitest of the white!)--to divide

and pit American Blacks against American Whites by releasing the Black
American hostages and calling upon American Blacks to revolt. Is this a

64
"wild idea" of the "Islamic students" or of Khomyni‘! No, it is simply a
revival of the standard Stalinist arguments which in the 1930's had com-
pelled the American Col-uniat Party to consider the American Blacks aa "a
people" struggling for its ”national independence" against "Yankee imperial-
ian." These arguments were. in fact, revived for a time during the 1960's.
Now we see the. being advanced once again in Tehran.

8061
080: 6900

45
MORE U.S. EMBASSY DOCUMENTS REVEAL SECRETS
Staff Contacts Uith Locals
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 3 Dec 79 p 2

[Text] The Islamic students, followers of the Imam
occupying the American nest of spies have issued their
16th revealing statement. It exposes what the criminal
United States had been doing in Iran, from where and
which sources it received its information and to whom they
were given. In addition, after the revolution. it was
revealed how the treacherous Shah's dreaded SAVAK
gathered its information from its network of informers
throughout the country. As it [SAVAK] was the hand-made
product of the world-devouring United States imperialism
and the CIA, it became well-known that the American
Embassy, this spy center of the CIA, had, in cooperation
with the SAVAK. its own spy center and informers and
various other sources of intelligence, collected infor-
mation and passed it quickly to the embassy. These people
were treacherous mercenaries serving foreigners against
the Hoslem people of Iran. These elements. facing the
fisted arms and determination of our struggling people,
have retreated, but not completely wiped out. The fol-
lowing document reveals the relations that existed among
the network and the spies with the embassy. Here is the
text:

From the United States Embassy to Washington, D.C. Confidential.
Subject: The Loss of Embassy's Sources of Information.

1. The entire subject is confidential.

2. In brief, the end result of the deterioration of the U.S.-Iranian

relations has been the lessening of the desire of Iranians to meet with the
embassy staff. This problem, as was noted in previous communications, is

56
getting mu)ro serious. Continuous pressure in connection with the appoint-
ment of Cutler as 0.5. ambassador and the ever continuous charges of the
U.S.-CIA interference in Iran have helped increase Iranians' fear of talking
to or being seen with the embassy staff to a point which will destroy all
our efforts in collecting intelligence.

3. One of the grave consequences of the deterioration in U.S.-Iranian
relations has been the disappearance of our best sources of information.

It has also resulted in making many Iranians reluctant to talk or to be

seen with embassy staff. These started with the 7 May Senate condemnation

of the execution by the Revolutionary Courts which was followed by demon-
strations in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran on 22 and 26 May and culmi-
nated in the extensive reflection of Yazdi's views in the press and the
increased attacks on the 0.5. by the media. All these have made our position
more shaky and even worse than it used to be at the beginning of the
revolution.

6. A staff member in the economic section. with four years of experience,
reports that many Iranians who used to meet with him in his office or gave
answers to his requests over the telephone now could at the most. be con-
tacted for an appointment or reached by telephone at night. They now are
reluctant to talk about issues which they discussed freely some six or

eight months ago. There are a number of people who, because of warm and
close relations [in the past], feel embarrassed at not keeping their

regular and business appointments with us and they continuously try to
postpone them. A Persian speaking employee of the oil company who has had
three years of training [sic] has reported about problems he has had because
of his extensive contacts with us. Some people no longer have access to
sources of information which they had in the past and almost all of them are
reluctant to talk to us.

5. All the staff members in the political section of the embassy have had
the same experience. Some of our intelligence sources have left the country
and even those who have had close and friendly relations with members of

the political section for four years, now are not showing willingness to
meet with us. Although there are some who are still willing to meet with
embassy personnel at their homes. There are, of course. individuals who
still meet with members of our political section but their number is not
sufficient and are not the ones we would like to contact. Staff members

who have been in Tehran even longer have noticed this reaction even from
their old friends.

6. Our charge d'affaires reports with regard to a number of former Iranian
ambassadors with whom he had been in touch, that none have contacted us
after their return to Tehran. A retired ambassador told a political section
staff member that many of his colleagues consider contacting the embassy as
a highly dangerous venture in the Islamic Republic of Iran. He must now wait
and see how amny Iranians will be cooperating with us after those who have
been worsing with us leave the country next month.

#7
7. Our past experience indicates that one of our best sources of information
were the Jewish Iranians. however, when we looked for sources of information
they all were concerned about grave consequences if contacted by the 11.5.
Iemhassy].

8. A nuaber of intelligence sources in Tehran have indicated that the
suspicion of their colleagues and friends nad increased. This is more true
at university campuses where militants have been attacking intellectuals
from an anti-American position. As a result, this group [intellectuals]

and even those who are more aware of the current situation, are disappearing
from the scene.

9. No doubt. in such circumstances collecting of intelligence needed by us
becomes more difficult. Conditions have not yet reached the point where. as
in some Third World nations, contacts between the embassy staff and the people
Is under strict control. However, pressure in recent weeks has moved Iran
toward that direction.

The above-mention document reflects and confirms the existence of a United
States intelligence and spy network in Iran. One wonders if those who are
living in Washington, especially Mr. Carter, still refuse to admit that this
[U.S. embassy in Tehran] was not a spy nest.

Moslem students, followers of the Imam.

Ties With Capitalists
Tehran KEYHAN in Persian 3 Dec 79 p 3

[Report: "Relations Between an Iranian Capitalist and United States' Nest of
Spies"!

[Text] Following is the text of the document revealed by the students, fol-
lowers of the Imam, that was broadcast two nights ago by radio and television.
It reveals the relations between an Iranian capitalist and the not so United
States. The text of the statement by the students, followers of the Imam,

Is as follows:

Following the document which was revealed to you, our dear people, we now
expOse another one which deals with a capitalist and the sucker of the blood
of the underpriviledged people, named Hehdi Rowghani. The text of the
document is as follows: Document No. l.

"A group led by Mahdi Rowghani plan to form a large committee to act as
liaison between the provisional government of Baaargan and Imam Khomeyni's
comittee. It is hoped that this could be accomplished by 10 March, 19
lisfand. Rowghani (a Khomeyni confident) told the embassy'a political
officer, Stenple, [sic] on morning of 5 March that he, Mehdi Rowghani, had

48
spent the weekend in Qom and had been busy forming the committee which will
try to harmonize relations between Bazargan's government and the lmam's
rummlilve. He said that JSOf 4 March. relations between the government and
lhr lmam's ctmmﬂttee had been badly strained and added that in several areas
the committee ignored the government.

Rowghaui is after forming a group made up of 100 people, broken down into
units consisting of 8-10 people. who will be responsible for specific
problems. Rowghani did not mention the names of these individuals, but

said that the group consisted of reputable and influential elements from all
areas of the revolutionary movement.

"The center of the liaison committee will be in Tehran. He said that the
main goal of the committee was to draw the Imam's committee to a position

so that it would adopt a more cooperative attitude toward the government.

He hoped to go to Qom on 18 and 19 Esfand [10 and 11 March] to complete the
arrangement. He also said that the Imam approved of this idea and talks
with the government of Bazargan were in process. He was asked by a political
officer if the forming of another committee would be helpful in solving some
problems? Rowghani. who apparently was unhappy about the lack of law and
order in the first three weeks after the revolution. said he was very hopeful

andtluu something had to be done."

Note: At the end of his report to Washington about the meeting. the political
officer remarks that Rowghani's application for a business visa to go to the
United States indicated long—term benefits from him.

Following is the text of another document: Confidential.

Hay, 1979. From the American Embassy in Tehran to Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance. Subject: Meeting With Rowghani. Strictly confidential.

"Rowghani left for the United States this morning for a six to eight week
visit. 'Bluff' gave him 'Precht's' name and telephone number and urged him
to get In touch with 'Precht.‘ Rowghani had asked 'Bluff' if there were
people he should meet. Rowghani is willing to meet 'Precht' and probably
would be willing to hold secret talks with others as well. Because of his
family ties with Imam Khomeyni he could be an important source of information
about people surrounding Khomeyni.“

Signed [no name given]

Document 3, Regarding connections with Mehdi Rowghani. From the United

States embassy, Tehran to the State Department, Washington. Subject: Mehdi
Rowghani.

With the possibility of being accused of pessimism we would like to indicate

that Rowghani's optimism has grown in relation to his distance from Iran. in
May, when he left for four to six weeks, he was very much disturbed about
conditions in Qom and was not quite sure what had gone wrong with the revolution.
..'-1 II =‘nnd1tions have changed why does he need a "ken card" [green
..n 1.] or .1 rltlm-nship card. In one of the Persian-language newspapers we
.-:r.u- :r-r-ms‘ .1 news: item which Indicated that he had fled the country one
'-::I::- .mu. Refer to problems with Ford Co. in London. A copy was sent to
[in Ih-purtum-nl for its information. A report on Rowghani's position had
i-wn uuheitted. Ford had reported that basic problems had been settled.
.u-:;.u.;i.;'..1tion of relations, of course, could be expected through bureaucratic
:n' -.-.-s;sen. He cannot confirm if progress was made. Rowghani is in the
'.-'.-:I (Lute: and Ford's lranian lawyer is temporarily out of Iran. Signed:
.‘mu-riunn Charge D'Affairs in Iran, Laingeo.

.h-uutarnt 6, Regarding connections with Mehdi Rowghani.
From :‘mnericnn embassy, Tehran to the Department of State, Hashiugton, D.C.
i.3n:csificntion: confidential.

subject: Complaint about Commercial Affairs.

I. The following letter of complaint on commercial affairs from Hehdi
l-towgnani has been received by the American embassy: Mahdi Rowghani's
latlwl was the person who kept Khouyni in his house for 15 days before he
was exiled in 1963 that is 1363. Therefore. Rowghani's family members have
- lusc- ties with Khomeyni and his close associates. Hchdi Roughani himself
Ha) instrumental in assisting the ewassy in securing the release of U.S.
marine S.J.'i‘. Krisc [sic]. The marine. had been imprisoned for seven days
following the attack on U.S. embassy on 110 February, 25 Bahman. Therefore,
immediate action with regard to his complaint will be greatly appreciated.
L’. u-nwghaml's family is the agent for the sale of Ford Company cars in

Iran for the next 25 years. During an October 66 meeting in London Ford
Company has agreed to pay Mr. Rowghani a four percent comission for all cars
Hull: outside Iran and then taken into the country. Following the agreement
F-mi ('ompany had requested and apparently received information about cars
inside the country. The report was examined twice by Ford. There are about
1.500 such cars involved and we reached an agreement about the amount to be
p.25" to Rowghanl. In the year 1357 (1978-79), a Ford company representative
Hror twice examining the report on the existing cars in Iran. the payment
of «omission on 1,500 cars to Rowghani was promised. Hr. Rowghani would
like to know when is the Ford Company going to pay him. The liaison in
London is Deputy Middle East and African Operation Chief, Roder Benifice
Isl: ].

‘i. For London. when answering please inform the Department [of State].
«.‘n the basis of information determined in London contact and correspondence
with the Department may or may not be proper [sic].

(- ln midltion to the emission problem. Rowshani has another difference
with the Ford Company which concerns the sale of some 60 heavy trucks to
file: lrnnlnn National Oil Company. He claims that the difference between the
export price and the sale price to the oil company should be paid to him as
the agent of the company. The oil company has paid for the purchase directly
to the Ford Company. He believes he should be compensated. This proh‘ an is
four years old and is still dragging. Any information provided wi‘,‘ .egard
to the Ford Comsny's position and their willingness to pay and clear the
account will be greatly appreciated. Signed: Sullivan.

Note: The man called Stenple [sic] is a well—known agent of the dreaded CIA.

Attention should now be paid to the Inan's statement in which he said that
these weaternized intellectuals are the ones that will cause our revolution

to deviate from its course. By publishing these two documents we have exposed
the attitude of the western-inclined intellectuals and the capitalists, the
two elements who would like to bring the United States back to our country.
They favor the western rule of Iran. Our nation will no longer be fooled

by these intellectuals and capitalists who call for compromise with the

United States. They are condenned by our people. Our people are alert and

intend to uproot these elements of corruption and do away with the Anerican
bases of power in our country.

9561
050: 4906

51
BRIEFS

URANIUM PRODUCTION-4d Aviv Dec 21: Israel will next year start produc-
ing uranium for power plants. Bliahou Teounin, Managing Director of the
Negev Phosphates Company Chemicals, Israel said today. It has reserves
of 100,000 tons enough to supply eight to 10 one-megawatt nuclear reactors
for several dozen years. he said. The 0.1 to 0.2 percent uranium content
in the Dead Sea and Negev phosphate deposits is insufficient to justify
direct extraction. But attraction is commercially wortluhile as part of
fertilizer. acid and phosphate derivate extraction he said.--AFP [Text]
[Karachi MORNING NEWS in English 22 Dec 79 p 8]

680: (0820

52
BASHIR AL-JUHAYYIL EXPLORES POSSIBILITIES 0F SOLUTION T0 COUNTRY'S CRISIS
Paris AL-NAHAR AL-'ARABI HA AL-DUUALI in Arabic 26 Nov-2 Dec 79 pp 10-15

[Interview With Bashir al-Jumayyil, Chairman of Lebanese Forces Military
Council. by Ilyas al-Dayri and May Kahhalah; "This Legitimacy [Legitimate
Government] Cannot Achieve Any Detente; I Don't Believe That There Hill
Another Har in Future; Who Hill Fight whom; I Defy Valid Junblatt to Agree
to Meet with Me; I Am Ready to Go to Him Wherever He Rants and Ready to
Meet Ibrahim Qulaylst and All; For First 3 Months, He Fought with 30 Rifles
He Purchased Prom Palestinians; He Had Fear of Lebanese Muslim But Now We
have Freed Ourselves of This Complex 80 Welcome to Muslims in al-Ashrsfiyah
and in All Our Areas; President Sarkis Must Be Convinced That Forces on
Stage Are Ones That Can Close Ports, Control Violations and Administer Jus-
tice"]

[Text] "There will be no war after now but the intellectual terror insists

on putting the country in this charged atmosphere. The state is weak and it
must seek the help of the actual forces on the stage. I want to reach an
understanding with the state to put an end to the wave of crime and chaos.
Legitimacy [legitimate government] is a point of meeting among all the parties
concerned. Re are studying a common denominator and practical cooperation with
the state. I address this appeal to my brother the Lebanese Muslim: 1 am

a sword in your hand and I am not against you." These are the words Bashir
aI-Jumayyil, the chairman of the Lebanese Military Council, uttered in his
interview with AL-NAHAR AL-‘ARABI HA AL-DUHALI.

[Question] Let us start with the Lebanese war. The war climate is still
prevalent and Lebanon is still suffering under the burden of its consequences.
th did this war occur, what good has it done us and where do we now stand

in comparison to where we were before the war’

[Answer] When the war started, none of us knew where it would reach and what
its consequences would be. I remember that in the Phalanges Security Council
we had 30 (Slavia)rifles which we had ,urchased from the Palestinians. During
the first 3 months of the war, we fought with those 30 rifles. Can it be
still said that we are the ones who imposed the war? They are the ones who
imposed it. They forced us to fight and we fought.

53
[Question] You always repeat "they imposed the war." Who are “they?" What
state. what faction. what side?

[Answer] I don't want to again talk about plots, agreements and issues of the
sort. The war was imposed and its factors were numerous. It so coincided that
the Lebanese soil was mobilized politically and socially. He must focus

in this Interview on the social aspect which will constitute a considerable
part of our battle. It is not essential that the battle be a military or a
political battle because we have today a social crisis that is more serious
than any other crisis. It is possible that national unity will be achieved
through the social crisis whose whirlwind we have begun to enter. This

crisis is more serious than any military battle.

[Question] He will not say that there are factions. There are big, ramified
and common international factos that have no objection to Lebanon staying
as it is now or even to Lebanon disappearing.

[Answer] They will have rest and we will thus solve a large part of the
crisis.

Not Us and not President

[Question] He, therefore. ask this question: What do the Phalanges actually
haVe, other than emotional and amicable words, to offer and to implement for
the restoration of this country?

[Answer] 1 don't know if 1 have the right to speak in the party's name.

Buy my answer. and perhaps it is the feeling of everybody in the Phalanges
and in the National Front. is that we are under occupation in the full sense
of the word.

You ask what, other than nice words, we can offer. These words are necessary
because we will one day return and reap their fruits. These words prepare

for a certain climate after the elimination of occupation. We may not be
capable at present, and nobody is. Even President Ilyas Sarkis is not able

to realize the national unity. The legitimate government to which they de-
liver military vehicles, jeeps and trucks and with which they write statements
and offer verbal support--even this legitimate government is not able to
achieve any detente.

It is my opinion that talking about detente at present is like deceiving our-
selves. The Muslim faction is eager to return to its previous Lebanese roots
because it has suffered the worst of evils and because it has found out where
its experiment has led it. The Lebanese Muslim has begun to feel now that
his position is different from that of the Muslims of any other country.

Even the personality of the Lebanese Muslim is distinct from that of any
other Arab Muslim. The Lebanese Muslim has now begun to be aware of this.

56
What we are thinking of practically at present is to be prepared when the
Syrian occupation disappears. and it must disappear. He are no longer trapped
because the countdown has started and Syria will not stay long among us. So.
the practical thing for us is to stand fast, as we did in the summer of 1978,
i.e. to preserve a part of Lebanon free-—not only for the Christian community
but for the Lebanese society as a whole--where the Christian and the Muslim
communities can see that this resistance has been for the sake of all of
Lebanon and the sake of all the Lebanese factions and where these communities
can see that any Lebanese can benefit from the resistance of al-Ashrafiysh
and 'Ayn al-Rummanah.

This resistance has succeeded whereas the Syrian control of Lebanon or of the

free areas constituting the starting point for the liberation of al-Bastah,
the south, 'Akkar and al-Biqa' has failed.

He can now see what is happening in Burj al-Barajinah and al-Shiyah. A
Syrian patrol passed under a Shi'ite woman sitting on the balcony of her
house and the woman hurled at the patrol a flower pet that "split open" the
head of a Syrian soldier. This woman is not Harunite, isolationist or an
agent of Israel. This means that we hope that our resistance in al-Ashrafiyah
will expand. The practical thing that the Phalanges are offering is to pre-
serve the spirit of resistance so that when Syria withdraws from our country
under the impact of events or developments which we do not know, Lebanon
will move in order that we may establish detente and that President Sarkis
may perform his role. Even if he doesn't wish to do so, we as a people will
he prepared to perform this role, having gained sufficient maturity and a
sufficient sense of responsibility. At that time the Phalanges, along with
the other factions, will call for a roundtable or for a national conference.
And we must agree.

Lebanese State Hill not Do It

[Question] But to reach this result or this solution, we must have two
things: A state capable of saying to the Syrian "thank you for your coopera-
tion and services" and then to take charge of affairs. This state cannot

exist as long as you have your separate state and as long as you don't recog-
nize the legitimate state.

[Answer] No, no. I object to both projections. I object to the first be~
cause the state is no longer required to tell Syria: Go. The state is no
longer required to do so because, first, the State of Lebanon will not do it
for numerous considerations and, second, because Syria is not here with our
approval but acts as an occupation army. The proof is the offhanded arrests
which are the basic characteristic of any occupier. An occupier can collect
funds and protection money, can levy taxes on plants and can dissemble

them, as states did in World War II.

55
The basic characteristic [of any occupier] are the haphazardly arrests.

Look at the shaykhs that they have arrested and who do not know whether they
will come back or not or look at our people who have been detained in Syria
for 16 months and with whom we have lost all communication and about whom we
know nothing. There are things imposed by the Syrian on the army. on the
public security, on the judiciary and on all the state agencies. This is
why the state is incapable of asking the Syrians to leave.

Comprehension and Smashing

[Question] But if you give the state power, if you let it get strong and
if you help it...

[Answer] I beg your pardon. If the State of Lebanon tells the Syrians

to leave, a small army detachment will be sent to B'abda Palace or to al-
Yarzah and will throw everybody out. Such an act has become ordinary.
Historically. the examples are numerous. France under the occupation was

in a similar position and (Beitan) was not required to tell the Germans: Go.
He must not [sic] view these issues from a different angle because the State
of Lebanon is incapable of expelling the Syrian. You also say that the State
of Lebanon will grow strong if I give it its strength [sic]. Here permit me
to say that we all know that when President Sarkis was elected in 1976

Pierre al-Jumayyil compelled all the party deputies to go under fire to vote
for President Sarkis. Pierre al-Jumayyil was able to persuade ex-President
Camille Sham'un to elect Sarkis as president of the republic. I was the
middleman who conveyed Shaykh Pierre's message to ex-President Sham'un to
come to the council [Chamber of Deputies]. He opened all the possibilities
and gave the state all the means at the beginning of 1976 so that it may
"take off" and regain all its positions and strength. Regrettably. the state
was living in the climate of 1958 and as if nothing had happened. It was
living in the climate of indifference of the 3 years of the war.

Thus. I was compelled to go along with the state and to surrender all my
resources to the ministers who ruled us in the first 3 years. At the same
time, we were forced to act as an authority or with some of the legitimate
government's powers to preserve some of the accomplishments made and also

to preserve our position and entity. But instead of understanding all the
effective forces on the stage. the state tried to smash them. This is where
the dispute erupted between the state and the forces that considered themselves
no longer committed to the state for any thing.

we tell the state: Do not ask us to give you everything on a silver plate.

The state must take these powers away from us and if it fails, we are not
responsible.

$6
Sarkis is to Blame!

[Question] He are not talking about the legal powers nor about the legiti-
macy of the Syrian presence. However. from your point of approach. how can
the homeland be liberated and regained when the legitimate Lebanese government,
represented now by Ilyas Sarkis, does not give your resistance or the resis-
tance of any other faction the benefit of legitimacy and of constitutionality?

[Answer] Right.

[Question] If you give the state strength, you would be giving this strength
to the homeland. So if Sarkis tells the Syrians to leave and they fail to do
so. then he can create an international crisis. But how can Sarkis say this
[tell Syrians to go] when he does not have control even over a single police
post?

[Answer] He is to blame because instead of building a modern army in every
sense of the world in the first 3 years, he smashed the remnants of the Le-
banese army. Instead of showing respect to the officers who fought for a
cause, who never asked about their salaries and who sacrificed everything.
Sarkis and the army command resorted to breaking those officers (here

Bashir mentioned the names of some officers). They broke these officers in-
stead of giving them an opportunity with officers from the other faction.

1 am not demanding a factional army or an army that belongs to one faction.
Let them rely on the persons who fought for a cause and who performed the
duty of blood, not on television but on the soil. President Saikis committed
a mistake when he thought that by breaking tnese elements he can build an
army. Now Sarkis has reached a situation where the army is nonexistent.
Some ambassadors persuaded Sarkis that what he was doing was great. There
were parades on television but at the first tremor, his army splintered in
the port and in "Uyun al-Siman.

Free by 180 Degrees

[Question] Even if the state responds to what you are asking it for we

would not achieve anything because we are emerging from a bloody war and
Sarkis cannot gather people tainted with blood and who were enemies in a civil
war and form an army and a state with such people.

[Answer] This is the mistake in the thinking of President Sarkis, of some
ambassadors and of those who are in charge of Lebanese affairs. They were
mistaken when they thought that rearranging the Lebanese situation comes
through ousting the groups present on the arena. They committed a mistake
when they started to classify the opponents as moderate and radical elements,
describing this as a fighter and that as somebody who creates sensitivities
and saying that we must rely on persons who represent nothing so as to avoid

no

57
sensitivities. Here I say that it is a million times easier for you to reach
an understanding with a person who knows what he wants and is capable of
carrying out what he wants than to reach an understanding with a person who
doesn't know what he wants and incapable of carrying out something on which
you agree with him.

[Quustlon] why didn't you agree to a cabinet representing all the opponents?
[Answer] we did not accept? Hho vetoed it?
[Question] All the opponents vetoed each other.

[Answer] why, who does Talal sl-Mar'ibi represent? And does Salim al-Huss
represent me?

Abu-Hasan and National Movement

[Question] We see that there are the Lebanese Front parties on this side and
the National Front parties on the other side.

[Answer] Abu—Hasan used to tell me that there is no such a thing as a Na-
tional Movement but there is a Palestinian resistance with a screen called

the National Movement.

[Question] They say that Israel is behind the Lebanese Front and if each
[action continues to cling to his part we will need a miracle to regain the
country and the legitimate government. But practically, we are doing nothing
to save the country that can endure no more dragging and no more heroics.

The practical thing...

[Answer] Yes, we took the initiative to do the practical thing. I visited
Kama] Junblstt.

[Question] That was in the past. What prevents you from meeting Valid Junb-
latt now?

[Answer] I defy Valid Junblatt to agree to meet with us. In invite him to a
meeting and I am ready to go wherever he wants or wishes. I defy him to
accept.

[Question] th don't you meet Ibrahim Qulaylat? Have you tried to establish
bridges with the Shi'ite leaders and with the Sunni leaders?

[Answer] The bridges are numerous but they are timid because the person who

will hold a dialogue with us today is exposed to assassination at any moment
as a result of the occupation under which such a person lives.

58
[Question] This is said to be because of your relationship...

[Answer] Hith Israel. This story has become like that of the oil jar. This
la n pretext. I am not the ally of anybody. I am the ally of my cause.

AL one time we were compelled to cooperate with those who were able to help
us. When Abu-Iyad believed that the path to Haifa passed to Junyah, what
option did we have before us?

[Question] what limit did this cooperation with or help from the "devil"
into which you were forced reach?

[Answer] I will not say that I cooperated with the "devil." We cooperate
with whoever agrees to help us, regardless of who he is.

[Question] To what degree can Israel commit you to any decision?

[Answer] I am free in my actions by 180 degrees. We are free and we work for
our interests as Lebanese. When our interest requires cooperation with this
or that, then we do so. When our interest requires us to fight so or so.

then we fight him. We are not committed or tied to anybody. Re are Lebanese
and free and we wish the entire world had the degree of freedom that we have.

We Want All of Lebanon

[Question] It is said, and only you have the proof, that Shaykh Bashir is
the leader of the cooperation with Israel because he has a visualization
For a specific Lebanon and because he accepts nothing but the Lebanon of
Bashir al-Jumayyil personally.

[Answer] Right. I want this Lebanon whose borders [contain within them]
10,a25 square kilometers.

[Question] They say you want less.

[Answer] Less] "ban you read some newspapers that abound with fabrications
and you listen to some radios that are welleknown for their inclinations, how
do you want the Muslim public opinion not to "believe" all that is said.
especially when what is said is groundless. They fabricate news. One time
they bring Sa'd Haddad to Junyah and another they have me meeting with Begin in
Israel. Every day, hirelings fabricate these stories and, naturally, the Mus-
lim public opinion is affected by then. I address to the Muslim public opinion
and tell it that everything it hears and everything that some people try to
ingrain in its mind is wrong. The Lebanon that we want has an area of

10,425 square kilometers and it is a Lebanon for the Muslim and the christian,
but within a certain constitutional framework that spares them and spares us
another massacre like the one we have gone through. Is there anything to be
said about this?

59
[QueStionl What is said about your wanting a Christian Lebanon or a Phalang-
is: Lebanon is reinforced by a fact emanating from the war, namely the fact
that the Phalanges have clashed even with their allies and it has appeared
that they have tried to reduce the weight of all their opponents so that they
may impose themselves as the sole power on the Lebanese stage.

[Answer] Do you think that we can reduce the weight of Camille Sham'un?

[Question] You have clashed with Sham'un, with Pranjiyah, with the Armenians
and with others and it seemed as if you, as the Phalanges Party and as Bashir

al-Jumayyil. want your own state.

[Answer] At the end of a war like the one we have gone through, the clashes
could have been more crushing and bloodier, especially since there is no
state, no army and no police. There was a popular war and weapons were in the
hands of people in an unimaginable way. There were individual interests on
the part of many in this faction and the other faction. I do not deny these
clashes and we are all pained by them. However, we and ex-Preaident Sham'un
are a single hand to solve all that has happened.

[erstion] The question is: Does Bashir al-Jumayyil have a plan to set up
his own state?

[Answer] Do you believe that this state can come into existence by destroying
all the existing institutions? Impossible. The clash with the Armenians
started because of a trivial matter and we needed 2 days before we could settle
it. But ultimately, we and the Armenians restored our previous relations.

We have political objections against the Armenians that go back earlier than
1975. These issues must be dealt with and we are dealing with them. He

have held several meetings with the social leaderships and we will very shortly
come up with a unified working paper so that we may feel a stronger organic
unity than before.

[Question] "hat is the basis?

[Answer] I prefer not to speak now because we are in the heart of the nego-
tiations with the Armenians. After nearly 2 weeks, we will emerge with some-
thing unified which. I hope. will end the dispute finally.

State! Can He?

[Question] So you in the Phalanges Party don't want to set up your own state.
[Answer] Can the Phalanges Party set up a state? “here would we go with the
other factions? th are they trying to portray the matter in a manner that
conflicts with the truth?

[Question] Because you have been eager in the Lebanese Front areas to keep
a certain type of people. In al-Ashrafiyah, you rarely find a Muhammad, a
hasan. a Mustafa or a... [Muslims].

[Answer] Have you passed by Bayt Baydun Quarter and by al—Burjawi where there
is a Druze concentration and in Karm al-Zaytun where there is a Shi'ite con-
centration. They remained there throughout the war, fought on our side and
had martyrs fall from among them.

[Question] These are the ones who fought with you. But those who do not
want to fight...

[Answer] We still have a Druze community and a Shi'ite community that re-
mained among us.

[Question] These proofs don't deny that you have wanted an area where no-
body other than you is present.

[Answer] Because at one time I had a fear complex.
[Question] And now?
[Answer] Now I have been freed of it.

[Question] Why don't you do something, for example. to let one third of the
Muslims who were in al-Ashrsfiyah return to it? This means that you have been
freed but that the residues are still present among the fighters.

[Answer] 1 say that we, not as fighters but as a group of people living in
this part of the free Lebanon, have fr°ed ourselves of this complex. We

now know that the Lebanese Muslim has come to cling to the entity like us.

it has taken us 600 years to free ourselves of this complex. Now the Lebanese
Muslim is supposed to return and consider these areas his own. The individual
problems will persist and we will continue to be exposed to incidents of this
kind here and there. This means that these issues will not be controlled in
24 hours with a magic wand. But now the leaderships are supposed to move
closer to each other, to hold dialogue, not to insult each other and to in-
spire trust in the base on one part may mingle with the other.

Take. for example. Halid Junblatt's statement in Paris that Pierre al-Jumayyil
is senile. that Sham'un is a bandit and that I don't know what. Is it proper

after 5 years of war to return to the expressions and methods followed before?
Valid Junblatt is the chairman of a party speaking about the chairmen of

61
ntht'r parties who have their glorious history. These things complicate rather
than facilitate. We. as leaders. are supposed to rise above these methods
that do not befit a responsible and refined person and that do not facilitate
the restoration of conditions to normalcy. He mut be eager to reach under-
standing with each other. The Syrians will go one day and the Palestinians
will become, and must become, disciplined. The Palestinian must know that

in- nu. no longer live in the chaos under which he has lived and that the

red c-‘II'DL'L that he is spreading in Europe will be riddled with holes and
blown up as a result of a small problem with the Marunite or the Shi'ite

In Lebanon.

l'ulcstinian's Profits and Losses
[Question] And why are you excluding the Sunni?

[Answer] This is possible yet... the days will come. But the Palestinian

must know that all the propaganda and diplomatic gains he is achieving in

the west will disappear when he returns to faulty or irresponsible practices

in Lebanon. This is why we, as Lebanese, oust understand this. The Pales-
tinian diplomatic openness to the west makes the Palestinian's cause more deli-
cate and his position more critical and the Palestinian will not be able to

do what he used to do previously. I hope that these words will reach the
simple and ordinary Muslim: The driver, the grocer, the student and the family
head. i.e. the true Muslim Lebanese conscience. My words are addressed to them
and not to the leaderships that do not represent them. Samir Furnayjah does
not represent the Islamic public opinion and neither do George ﬂabash,

Georgt- llawi, Michel... It is preposterous that the real Islamic public opinion
is represented by a group of Christians who have nothing to do with Islam.

As [or the Islamic public opinion, it must rest assured that the resistance
in which we have engaged has been in our one and in its name and that the
liberated areas are for us and for it so that this public opinion may march
forth and liberate its own areas. One day, the hour and the opportunity will
come and this public opinion must be prepared to proceed with the act of li-
beration as we were in 1978 prepared to proceed with the act of liberating
ourselves. National unity can be achieved from this angle. The true pro-
blems are not Jobs and lies alone [sic]. Lebanon had been built on lies.

on business and on interests of which we were proud in our financial and
economic system. He tied to say that the country was prosperous. This pros-
perity was built on lies, theft and cheating.

Now we must all understand that the true national unity will consist of par-
iicipation in the responsibility. So far, we have been given the responsibi-
lity. But the day will come when the Lebanese Muslim will participate with
us so that we may march forth together. We want the Lebanese Muslim to be-
lieve that any action we carry out is carried out in our name and his name.
One day, he will see that all that has been done was done in Lebanon's name
and not in the name of one faction for building the state of one party or of
one faction.

62
[Question] But the Muslim is still very wary.
[Answer] I understand this.

[Question] What bolsters this wariness is that you were the one who accused
the Muslim previously of having little allegiance for Lebanon, rather than
this allegiance was nonexistent.

[Answer] And he admits that he was so at one time.

We Don't Trust Army

[Question] But it has now -:ecome evident that you. as a faction and not

as a person, are not letting the homeland return to legitimacy by your pre-
venting the state legitimacy and the state army from returning, to your area
as long as you have no Syrians and no Palestinians among you.

[Answer] You are talking like Salim al-Huss. Is there still a spot in this
small area of Lebanon in which the army doesn't exist? There are seven road-
blocks between al-Madfun and this place. The army is in the center of al-
Ashrafiyah and in all the areas.

[Question] But for every army roadblock there are two Phalangist road-
blocks.

[Answer] This is another subject. However, it doesn't mean that the army
is not present among us. But we do not trust the army. This is a television

army and not a real army.

[Question] So you are saying that the army is nonexistent, even though there
are no dangers in your area. What will the resident of al-Bastsh and the resi-
dent of the south say? National unity cannot be restored through any militia
other than the state militia.

[Answer] okay, okay [said in English].

[Question] So. you must give the example by showing that the state militia
can enter al-Ashrafiyah in order that we may ask it why it doesn't enter
Sabra. for example.

[Answer] Let it enter. Am I o: is Salim al-Euss preventing it?

[Question] Casting doubts prevents the army from entering.

63
[Answer] 1 don't accept this analysis. I refuse it because the Lebanese
.Irmy hasn't received so far any backing and any support from anybody except
us. The army entered Burj Rizq and it should have entered Burj al-Murr at
the same time. The Palestinian resistance didn't allow it and Salim al-Huss
agreed with the resistance on not permitting the army's entry to Bar] al-Murr.

I don't trust in the Lebanese army at present because it is not in charge of
any front. It did not come to 'Ayn al-Rullmanah until after the events that
we know. The Lebanese army is not in al—Zu'rur and not in any area where
there is a front or tangential lines. The army is in our internal areas.
Yet, we have accepted it. But we don‘t trust it because it has not been
tested. We ask Salim al-Huss to permit the army to enter the markets [al-
uswaq] front. We ask him to deploy the army in Patral buildingand in the
port. not on gate No 9 to watch for thefts, if there are any thefts, but on
the first pier where the front is. in Ashmun building. in al-staris and on
the wall. Let the army enter al-Damur and al-‘Ayshiyah. th should it
enter al-Ashrafiyah and not al-Dswhah or some other place? This is why we
don't trust the army. Yet, it is present in our area.

I Say to Lebanese Muslim

[Question] But the others consider the "Deterrence" our army. Your position
vis-a-vls the Syrians is clear but the Muslim believes that the Syrians
defend him against you more strongly than the army.

[Answer] The Lebanese Muslim is still holding this position?
[Question] He still has the complex of. fear of you.

[Answer] This fear is there because the Syrian and the Palestinian make the
Lebanese Muslim think that if he comes to our area the Lebanese Forces. tne
Phalanges and Bashir al-Jumayyil will slaughter him. This is the pretext

of the Syrian and of the Palestinian to secure their continued presence in
Lebanon. Here I ask my Lebanese Muslim brother. stressing the request and
twice underlining it with red. and tell him that throughout 43 years of joint
coexistence, no similar incidents took paice before the Palestinian and the
Syrian came. The Lebanese Muslim must not believe this rumor and this pro-
paganda. 0n the contrary, there has been a cliche for 5 years and the
Lebanese Muslim has been reiterating it under the impact of the circumstances.
We are doing all we can to free the Muslim of this cliche. I tell the Muslim:
Bashir al—Jumayyil is a sword in your hand and not against you.

Green Light

[Question] It is possible that direct dialogue is the means.

64
[Answer] Hill they be permitted to hold the dialogue? He had several indirect
contacts with Halid Junblatt and the answer always was: “Brother, my father
[Kamal Junblatt who was assassinated during the civil war] is enough." So

why do they always accuse us of rejecting the dialogue? Go-betweens mediated
between us and the Palestinians several times and the answer was: "Get the
go-ahead signal from Syria and we are ready. Otherwise, we are sorry.“

[Question] Abu-lyad has opened the way and called for a dialogue.
[Answer] Abu-Iyad says the opposite of what he wants.
[Question] th haven’t you exploited the opportunity?

[Answer] We have exploited the opportunity. Abu-Iyad says something in
the papers and when you get down to the real situation you find something
different.

Social Crisis

[Question] Let us return to the real situation. Your state diminished greatly
at one time. How can you give on this small spot the example for what you
call the Lebanon of the future?

Regarding the small spot in which we are, large parts have stripped away.

of course. But this does not intimidate us because the occupation has been
military. The occupation of so many more or less square kilometers is no longer
the problem. They can occupy land, buildings and soil as long as they have
not occupied minds and hearts and as long as they have not broken the will

to stand fast and the will to resist. They can occupy all the kilometers they
want. What we are living under in Sinn al-Pil and al-Mukallas and up to the
north, to 'Akkar, to western Beirut and to the mountain is occupation. All
this is land occupation. 'Abd-al-Nasir occupied Yemen and ultimately the
sands turned into a graveyard and he was in a hurry to get out of it. Every
kilometer that the Syrian occupies nowadays causes him to be more and more
deeply stuck in the Lebanese quagmire and sands. I don't think that this
occupation scares us. The shrinkage of the land is not important. Naturally.
the population density is an inconvenience and the enormous demographic
pressure creates a social crisis to which we will come back. But nationally,
the occupation of several more or less kilometers does not scare us.

As for the second part of the question, I would like to draw your attention

to a social crisis that may touch off the entire situation. Take for example
the problem of rent, the high cost of living, the inflation, the installment
payments. all the essential commodities that we need, fuel and all the essen-
tials that should occupy more of our attention than any other issue. The
political issue is projected urgently and has the top priority. But the
developments in the entire area, especially what has happened and is happening
in Iran, can constitute to the Americans an event as important as Pearl

65
Harbor was in Horld war ll--an event which changed all the criteria and all
the alliances. Now, the Iranian action may be as important as Pearl Harbor
and this brings up the issue of the international and Middle Eastern alliances
uncw. we are waiting for the developments to see what will happen at this
leVei. Meanwhile, we have an internal problem and the Labor Federation will
meet on the 26th of the month to study inflation.

Forty Three Years of Prosperity

[Question] This is the result of the political reality and the housing pro-
blem in alvAshrafiyah cannot be solved without political solution. One thing
follows the other.

[Answer] Yes, I accept this. At times I project the political crisis through
the social crisis and tell all of Lebanon's workers and all the Lebanese

to unite in the face of this social crisis. This perhaps is the gate to
reorganize matters and affairs seriously. He used to say that the Lebanon

of 1963 had died and that we buried it and we placed guard on its grave so
that it may not rise again. Actually, what was the Lebanon that we buried?

it was the Lebanon with the mentality of the merchant and the mentality of a
country established on services.

[Question] But we have not buried it.

[Answer] If the responsibility of our generation and of our resistance is

to build a new Lebanon, then I assert that this Lebanon [of 1943] will go.
For 43 years of independence, we sang the praises of prosperity and of the
country of services. Did those services enable us to build one good univer-
sity? The universities existing at present and enjoying respect are the ones
founded in the past century. We have not built a single Lebanese university
in the full sense of the word. We have not learned to build good hospitals
that offer good services. Services do not consist of our having a banking
sector for smuggling and for cheating. Real services are services that we
can offer to the entire area and we have not been able to do this.

Priority for Social Issues

[Question] All this is a matter of ethics. The war has exposed hidden
Lebanese ethics. However, we tell Bashir al-Jumayyil: More than one incident
has taken place in your area which you cannot accept even from somebody con-
sidered your supporter. Still, you have not taken any measure indicating that
your era is better than the previous eras and that your state is better than
the State of Lebanon at which you are angry. As you have fought for the piece
of land, you must also fight for man. The problem is ethical primarily and
you, like any dictator, must give the people examples and the people must

be told: Look, this murderer is now standing against the wall [presumably

to be executed].

66
[Answer] We did something of the sort a short time ago. Frankly, we fought
hard to take this decision when three employees of the electricity company
were attacked and killed and their money stolen by a colleague of theirs.

At times, we still fight with ourselves for decisions toward which some peo-
ple express their reservations on the grounds that we are not the state and
not the legitimate government and that, therefore, we have no right to pass
sentences. Temporarily and until the state regains its strength and as I

have shouldered the responsibility of the war and of defending a certain con-
cept of Lebanon, I must deal with issues that are not within my jurisdication,
such as setting up courts and approving sentences issued by agencies of the
Lebanese Forces. Though illegal, this matter is no more legal than our having
artillery weapons or armors in our possession. I believe that when facing

a crisis, the party becomes more strongly inclined to get firmer control of
the situation. The party's inclination does not, and I stress this point,
emanate from the single-party theory or of the desire to impose partisan
control on the crisis. But the party is studying the truth of the social
crisis and of its causes so that we may start dealing with it. The priority
must be given now to the social issues because this is what the people want.

I know that young men are hesitant to get married because of the social hard-
ships that they will face. There is no social security and there are no social
laws that preserve society's integrity and this encourages theft and smuggling.

Let us take for example the issue of smuggling and of the ports. Can a state
and a society respecting themselves agree to have all the Lebanese shoreline
from Tyre to Tripoli containing piracy ports and the subsequent international
and Arab reactions that Lebanon has to face because of these ports? All
these issues need to be dealt with. As a party. we are studying these

issues in a practical manner so as to present them to the state and to ask

it to carry out its functions. If the state refuses, we can shoulder
responsibilities.

[Question] As long as we make it a precondition thatthe state seal a port
there before we close a port here, the issue will not end. If you have a
criminal residing in the first floor of a building, would you deal with all
the building residents on this basis? Uhy don't you close your ports and
embarrass the state?

[Answer] I do not view matters from this angle. You want me to implement the
principle of 6 and 6 repeated and to embarrass the state. Even if the ports
here agree, the state is incapable of doing this. If I let the army enter
Burj Rizq and al-Ashrafiyah, it will still not be able to enter Burj al-Hurr
and al-Bastah. The state is incapable of implementing the principle of 6

and 6 repeated because it only exists among us and because we agree to have

it exist among us.

Look at the issue this way: The situation in Lebanon as a whole is abnormal.
I take Lebanon with all its ports and all its territories and I say that the

, situation is abnormal. I believe that the solution lies in the participation
of the actual forces on the arena in the decision, in the authority and in

67
implementation. Even if the state closes all the ports, there are still peo-
ple who do not dare go to their homes. The problem is not here. The pro-
biem is in the fact that the state is nonexistent at the level of decision
making and of implementation. The solution does not lie in my closing Junyah
port and telling the state that I am good and then telling the ambassadors:
Look what I have done. I am a moderate. The solution lies in our partici-
pating in the government. Then all the ports will be closed. This is what
the regime does not comprehend. The principle of 6 and 6 repeated cannot

be implemented at present.

So, the solution lies in actual participation in the responsibility. Pre-
sident Sarkis must be convinced that the forces on the arena are the forces
that can close ports. control violations and administer justice. I repeat
that there are no moderate elements and radical elements. There are elements
who believe in their cause and who are capable of closing ports. administering
justice and restoring Lebanon.

[Question] Will you not share the state's responsibilities unless you are
in the government?

[Answer] This is not what I am saying. I am talking about what is asked
of you when you are "on the outside." I don't want to be a minister or a
deputy but a force on the stage.

Legitimacy for Militias

[Question] "hat. with utter clarity, do you want from this state so that
it may be reflected positively on the homeland and on the situation?

[Answer] The formula is under study presently. We have made long strides
insofar as this formula is concerned and I think that we will get there be-
cause after 3 years of no peace. no war and no government, the state has begun
to feel that it is incapable of doing away with the forces present on the
stage. After 3 years of resistance, we believe that we have reached a posi-
tion that enables us to take part in the responsibilities. With this common
denominator between us and the regime, we will move closer and closer toward
it.

[Question] "hat is the common denominator practically? A new formula for
Lebanon?

[Answer] The new formula for Lebanon is not the common denominator over

which I and 'he regime will reach an understanding because this formula will
consist of a national agreement among all the factions. Hy relations with

the regime are more practical than patriotic. The formula is something be-
tween me and the other faction. The regime should stand neutral and act as

a referee or should take my side because the president is from a certain group

68
and the prime minister is from another. I don't know how these positions

will be coordinated. But I want an understanding with the state to put an
end to the wave of crime. inflation and chaos. I will give them my legiti-
macy over the land and let them give Ie their legitimacy as a (force on the

stage) and we can then participate in lightening the burdens carried by the
citizen.

Legitimacy Is Point of Meeting

[Question] This means merging the militia in a certain national framework.
[Answer] This may be a solution. Or the militia can be given a legitimate
role as a support force or we may disband it, provided that we get the
guarantees that the army will defend us if 'Ayn al-Rummanah is exposed to
another massacre like that of 13 April 1975.

[Question] But some say that the solution is not in one line. You and

Sarkis cannot solve the problem, not even you, Valid Junblatt and Muhammad
Mahdi Shams-al-Din can do so.

[Answer] This is possible when the Syrian leaves.

[Question] But why should we oust the Syrian with the force of arms and
not with a bouquet of roses?

[Answer] Because you don't know the Syrian.

[Question] At one time, there was a dialogue and a big alliance between
Syria and the Lebanese Front. Hhat prevents holding the dialogue anew?

[Answer] There is something constant in the Syrian rule, namely the Syrian

desire for Lebanon. Any Syrian in power wants to dominate Lebanon and annex
it to Syria.

[Question] Why. then. did you ask for them and bring them to this country?

[Answer] Are we the ones who did this or was it the result of Arab and in-
ternational conditions?

[Question] But you gave the Syrians the legitimacy.

[Answer] The first thing I said was that when we started the war, our

leaders did not know where we would get. He later found that there were
things that should not have happened.

[Question] But you are responsible because you have appointed yourself.

69
[Answer] Not at all. i was in my office and was compelled to descend [to
the stage] against my will. If you want my place, you are welcome to it.

[Question] But you accepted the task and so you are responsible.
[Answer] Of course. I don't deny this and I don't try to evade it.

[Question] So you cannot shoulder the responsibility of restoring Lebanon
by yourself because the Syrians are a party and so are the Palestinians,
Shan'un. Sarkis and Franjiyah. The side capable of creating the detente is
the state and the legitimate government. Will you tell the state: Please,
go ahead, act and I am ready?

[Answer] This is what we have said and how we act and this is why I have
said that we have finally opened the dossier of these issues with the govern-
ment. At the end of 1978 when our resistance emerged and put an end to the
Syrian-American plan, we said to the government: This is the situation,
either you go and we take over or you shoulder all our responsibilities

and fight for us and we put our resistance on the stage at your disposal or
you put some of your legitimacy at our disposal. This issue has taken a long
time and I think we are about to reach it. He will talk about this later on
when we reach more practical issues. But the idea is in our head and in the
state's head and is making progress. Legitimacy is the point of meeting of
all the factions. We oppose it if it commits abnormal actions. But we turn
a blind eye to such actions when the state's reasons call for them. We
support when it is time to give support and we interact with the state on
this basis. This is what has upset a lot of people. Shaykh Bashir has em-
barked on this line and the candidates for the ministries have become nu-
merous. But we want no ministry, no parliament seat, no handgun license

and no company lawyer [sic]. He want the cause for which 6,000 youths have
died to be realized.

No Battle From Now on

[Question] Go the basis of the reality. what is happening now? Some people
say that the Lebanese Forces are preparing for a new round or that the south
is moving toward Israel. What are the facts that you have in this regard?

[Answer] There is no doubt that the Lebanese resistance will not accept re-
treat or defeat. It will seek strenuously to maintain its positions and its
capacity so as to achieve the goals about which we have spoken-goals that
are neither Harunite nor Christian but national Lebanese goals that we want
to realize in the interest of the country's real citizens. We are preparing
ourselves on this basis. Such preparation has become natural since 13 April
1975. We are required to be prepared for any emergency. I don't think any-
body in the south is ready to declare his allegiance to Israel or to join

70
it, not the Shi'ites, not the Druzes and not the Christians. The southern
Lebanese is more strongly attached to his land and to his Lebaneseship than

the Lebanese living here. As for the "flareup," we have been hearing this
for 5 years.

[Question] But in view of the precedents, the people are prepared to believe
such a thing when they hear it.

[Answer] Tlere is a social, military and political terror being practiced
against the citizen and causing him to live in an atmosphere of anxiety and
tear. As for the talk about a battle atmosphere, I don't think that this is
true. who will fight us now, the Syrian or the Palestinian? Neither the
Syrian will permit himself (to be dealt a slap) nor will the Palestinian
engage in heroics because his base is weak and because the first tremor he
causes with us or with any other Lebanese faction will cause him to lose
the gains that he has scored. The Palestinian can intimidate [yitmarjal]
all the Arabs but he cannot intimidate us because with the Arabs, he rises
whereas with us, he falls. This is why I see no interest for anybody in a
battle. I wish that the Lebanese state would exert itself and gather the
Lebanese opponents. if it can and if it is convinced of this.

Question Mark Remains

[Question] Do you believe that the time has come for the state to take the
initiative?

[Answer] The 6-year experience with the regime does not encourage any future
optimism. Yet, we still hope.

[Question] Let us assume that President Sarkis addresses an invitation to
the Lebanese opponents, both the politicians and the fighters. will such an
invitation succeed?

[Answer] To us, the word fighter does not mean that our hobby is to kill.

We are strugglers. The success of the invitation will depend on the agenda

it presents for discussion. If the [Tunis] summit conference fails to produce
the desired results, and this is what is expected, we will stay as we are
because the Palestinians and the Syrians will not give the state anything,
despite the honeyed words. President Sarkis may put the Lebanese face to

face with their responsibilities. Hill all those invited dare to respond

to the invitation to a national conference? Here also there is a big ques-
tion mark.

[Question] Regardless of whether the summit succeeds or it partially rea-
lizes what Lebanon wants, the Lebanese element, namely the national conference
without which there is no solution, will remain essential.

71
[Answer] At such a time. new constitutional issues, such as a new system
of government and administrative arrangements. can be discussed.

[QuestiOn] Hhat is important is a working program consisting of a single
point, namely Lebanon as an entity. a homeland and a sovereignty. The rest
is details.

[Answer] This is true.
Lebanese Lobby

[Question] Why did you return from the United States a month ago with the
impression that it is preparing something that is not good for Lebanon?

[Answer] My latest visit was for 4 days to attend the periodic meeting of
the Lebanese—U.S. League which meets every 6 months. Insofar as we are con-
cerned. organizing the Lebanese presence there has become very essential
because any resistance in Lebanon not relying on friendships in the United
States is futile. The source of the decision is the United States.

[Question] You mean that you want to create a Lebanese "lobby?"

[Answer] Exactly. When we explain to the U.S. people a just and rightful
cause. they cannot but support us. This is why it was necessary to present
our cause to our expatriates. They will, in an American style, present it
to the U.S. officials to explain the problems from which we are suffering.

I visited the United States and the expatriates 2 years ago, not to collect
money or purchase weapons but to make the expatriate aware of our cause. He
sucueeded at the time and now the Lebanese existence expects more.

I also held routine and spontaneous meetings with influential people and
decision makers there and it became evident to me that the information of
the decision makers on Lebanon is faulty and that there is confusion insofar
as we are concerned.

[Question] Is it faulty information or a premidated position on the part
of the United States toward you?

[Answer] The American is good by nature and harbors no premediated inten-
tions. He accepts matters as they are presented to him. These matters were
presented to him in a faulty way that is incompatible with the reality.

when we contacted the officials in the Department of State, the Department
of Defense. the House of Representatives and the Senate and explained to
them some of the issues, they were astonished at how different from our
statements were the reports they had received.

72
Hhen I returned. I wanted to put matters in their true place. Many of my
Lebanese brothers said: Isn't it enough that he is fighting all the sides,
that he now wants to fight the United States? From a Lebanese angle, I
understand this feeling. But the [my] words were addressed to the Americans
so that they may know that there is a fault in their view and so that they
may correct it. In my opinion. the message has been conveyed.

[Question] Let us return to the fundamental question: Has the United States
taken this position toward Lebanon intentionally or did the reports drag
her to it?

[Answer] Two years ago, we were not present on the U.S. stage. The Pales-
tinians have a lobby and so do the Jews, the Kurds and the Copts whereas

the one of us goes there to collect a couple piasters for the church dome or
for the village school. When our presence there became concentrated, the
issue was presented. Until then, the Americans were v.ssing many things
against our interest because one of the factions continued to be silent

over solving the entire issue at its expense. (The United States wanted)

to solve the issue of Palestine, and to give a part of Lebanon to Syria in
return for the Golan. Israel was to get a part and the Christians were to be
squeezed between al-Hatn and Kasrawan and anybody who didn't like it could
go to California and join the Vietnamese refugees. The public opinion was
for the plan but when we presented our issue, matters changed Now we can
hear our voice. Next week, Bob Basil and a delegation of the Lebanese-U.S.
League will come to familiarize themselves with the real situation. Last
summer, we invited 25 young men and women from Lebanese extraction on what
we called "roots" so that they may get acquainted with the cauntry of their
forefathers. The U.S. administration thought that it could pass the solu—
tion. Now it knows that our positions will not enable it to do so because
we are people with a right and because we have not yet decided to cede any—
thing.

8694
630: 4802

73
ABU DHABI TANKER FIRM WIDENS OPERATIONS
Abu Dhabi mIRATES NEWS in Englilsh 11 Dec 79 p 7

[Article b} Michael Fernandez]

”9"” ' mun-smacwmm bum-w-
me ulﬂ‘ ,muanm In the m m.
InkuMthcMuWNam- M 0.. ~
IlMuCommy «DRAWN! Melon:
momma-mm "a: In If"

ADNATCOv-Wm'lm m m g
on"! demw- run 3.11m
M Ma Timon WI ADNA‘I’CI
Mohammad Alwwml We.”
Huanwmmummm “up
my-RHMOIMM WM!
:oum lhe {ow nus-of I}: Inn-nu.»
ommummmm then-mall
In W to w mm Wham;
wmmduwm momma

cwmwm.m~ "new
wamam.mm mmmu
Emu News N IN m mango
WMMMMHWI “an.“
an. A W "in"! m ads m h
MMwWNWW mum.
ellklency d I“ an. Sued m- mm
This. I: M. W “1- I wanna:
mum d m sum-Ind Sudan
mnnmumvﬁkm “came:
uuluyoflhesuu. ADNOC Mn

Omatwo-yarmmm (WWI

uulny ol ADNATCO mun has W