APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP02-00050R00010003006‘-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030054-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/83Sl

23 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0R USSR TRADE AND SERVICES
(FOUO 4/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM000300544
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newopapers, Periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. luterials fro: foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and

other characteristics YVtﬂlncd-

“cndllnca, editorial fovort8. and material enclosed in bracket;
[1 are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each iten, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
where "0 Processing indicator is given. the infor-

processed.
mmgrized or extracted.

nation was su

Cnfanillar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclo‘cd in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion svrk and encl°9¢d 1" Paronthvscs were not clear in the
originai but have b°¢n supplied nsnpproprlate in context.
Other unattributed Parenthvtical notes within the body of an
item originate with the seurce. Times within items are as

gchn b} source.

The contents of this PUhllcation in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 6.5. Government.

COP‘I'RIGIT [Al‘s AND REGL'IATIOXS GOVERNING WNERSIIIP OF
MATERIALS REPRDDCCED HEREIS REQUIRE THAT DISSEMINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOS BE RESTRICTED FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY.
_—
No.

0. Paloma; Oman-“non Name and “dual IO. PtsneI/Tasil'oa Us: No.
Joint Publications Research Serviea

1000 "on“ 61.5. no“

Arlington, Virginia 22201
I; Ens 01 I'm a I‘md

"CM

 
   
   
   
    
     
 
  

ll. Sousa-s. a‘lnl8IKOI Name and Mdma

As above

I}. Sunk-rusty Notes

  
 
      

 

IO. Absnaua

 
 
     
  
 

This serial report contains information on international economic relations.

communications. consumer goods. domestic trade. transportation, manpower. and
industrial sociology.

. Key was and wee-nest Aaalyau. o. Duchy."

USSR

International Relations
Commerce

Consumer Goods
Domestic Trade
Economics
Hanpouer
Telecommunications
Transportation

lib- ideu-ims/Oun-Eaded Tuna

I)c.((l\AUfle/anp 5C. 52. 178

 
  
     

It. Madam-:4. wan-um

'. ’Uﬂy Cu" ( Is II. .\o. 9! Pay!
[’03 OFFICIAL USE OSLY. Limited Number of ""9? u- | 41
Copies Available From JPRS ' P. :my qu Ins .1. M
W' “

to... an. n 0-1... 9-".

has roan an at stnooucw ""°“""‘ """"'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/
23 Marc

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR TRADE AND SERVICES

(9000 4/79)
Courturs
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

CEHA Role in International Socialist Division of Labor
Discussed

(Yu. Shiryayev; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI, No l. l979).........

Briefs
Machinery for USSR

HANPOHER: LABOR, EDUCATION, DDDGMPIIY

Labor in a Developed Socialist Society
(R. Ivanova. D. Kozlova; VOPROSY EKONOHIKI. No 1.

1979)..................................................

TRANSPORTATION

l.c.Pavlovskiy, Minister of Railways. Views Rail Transport

(1. G. Pavlovskiy; ELEKTRICHESKAYA I TEPLOVOZNAYA
"A“. Jan 79)...oeoeooosottlseeooooo0.000000000000000.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

CEHA ROLE IN INTERNATIONAL SOCIALIST DIVISION OF LABOR DISCUSSED
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHIKI in Russian No l. 1979, pp 92-99

[Article by Yu. Shiryayev: “The Role of the CEHA in the Development of the
International Socialist Division of Labor"]

[Text] The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance within whose framework
ten European, Asian. and Latin American cOuntries with a total population
of 630 million are cooperating is effectively helping to strengthen the
positions of socialism in the world economy. The CEHA countries account
tor approximately one-third of the industrial output and one-fourth of the
national income produced in the world. The activities of the CEHA are
becoming not only an increasingly important factor in the social and
economic develop-sot of its member states. They are exercising a growing
influence on world economic relations as a whole.

At all of the stages of socialist construction the CEHA countries have
provided each other with extensive economic and technical assistance.

The CEHA. as L. I. Brezhnev emphasized, has given the world "a unique
experience in equal cooperation by a large group of countries. in the
harmonious combination of their national and international interests. and

in th; practical realization of the principles of socialist international-
ism."

in 1979 the world's largest economic cooperation organization is celebrating
two important d1tes--three decades of its work and the tenth anniversary

of the 23rd Session of the CEMA (1969) which adopted at the highest party
and government level a decision to develop socialist economic integration.
Both of these dates are important landmarks in the practical utilization of
the advantages of international economic relations of a new type and in

the concretization and development of the forms and methods of socialist
economic management in the international arena.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR nl-‘PICIM. USE ONLY

The formation of the CEMA in 1969 was a logical consequence of the establish-
ment of relations of a new type between the Soviet Union and the countries
which had taken the path of the construction of socialism. Even before the
complete liberation of the countries of Eastern and Central Europe from the
fascist yoke people's-democratic agencies of power were formed on the terri-
tory of a number of them. As early as 1956-1965 the first inter-govern-
mental agreements were concluded which provided for mutual aid in the
restoration of the war-torn economies and which laid the basis for mutual
relations organized on the principles of socialist internationaliam. in
subsequent years the political and economic alliance of the fraternal
countries acquired increasingly clear rorms. Economically, this alliance

was made formal by the creation of the Council for Mutual Economic
Assistance.

The system of cooperation by the CEHA countries has undergone several
stages in its development during the course of which problems of diverse
socio-economic character and scope were solved. Thus. the basic forms of
interaction between these OSHA countries which were used during the first
postwar years played the role for most of them (with the exception of the
Soviet Union) of the foreign economic conditions for the construction of

a socialist economy and the accomplishment of the tasks of the transitional
period from capitalism to socialism.

The new social system in each country which had taken the path of socialism
had to be based on an adequate material and technical base. However. the
development of the material and technical base of socialism is the result
of a quite long process of the transformation of the elements of the
material and technical base inherited from capitalism. of the formation
anew of a number of them. and, finally. of the unification of all of these
elements into a single system which ensures the functioning and dynamic

development of all of the spheres of the production and non-production
activities of socialist society.

One of the most important characteristics of the formation of the material
and technical base of socialism in the foreign CEMA countries consisted in the
fact that to a large extent it was founded on the already created material
and technical base of the new social system in the Soviet Union. and then

in a number of other countries of the socialist commonwealth.

The role of the Soviet Union in the accomplishment of this very large
socio-economic task is well-known. The USSR's natural resources have been
and continue to be of decisive importance for providing the growing industry
of the foreign CEHA countries with fuel. mineral raw materials. and metal.
Thus. at the present time the Soviet Union covers more than 70 percent of
the import needs of the cane countries for these goods. while for certain

basic types of raw materials and fuel this proportion reaches practically
100 percent.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The USSR has becose the largest supplier for the CEHA countries of sachinery.
equipsent, and transportation equip-est and has given then technical assist-
ance in the construction. reconstruction. and expansion of more than 2,000
diverse enterprises, shops. and other objects. The Soviet Union has given
these countries around 78,000 sets of technical documents and product and
materials nodels end has provided extensive help in the training of national
cadres. At the same tine, the Soviet Union hes served and continues to
serve for the countries of the socialist commonwealth as the basic sarket

for the sale of their sachinery. equipnent. and industrial conaunet goods.

As the econonic and scientific and technical potential of the foreign CBHA
countries has grown they have also joined on a wide scale in the process
of collective assistance for the forsation of the sateriel and technical
base of the whole socialist conmonwealth. Mention should be Iade. in
particular. of the large deliveries of machinery and equip-eat (including
overall equip-ant) froe the GDR. Czechoslovakia. and Poland and about the

increasing amounts of deliveries of specialized output iron Bulgaria.
ﬂungary. and Romania.

An essential characteristic of the formation of the saterisl and techni-
cal base of socialise in the foreign CEHA countries has been the substan-
tial differences in the initial levels of their econonic development and
in the unequal degree of the development of the preconditions for accosplish-
ing the above task within the framework of the preceeding formation. Only
two countriee--Csechoslovekis and the GDR--possessed a developed industry.
skilled labor resources. a nerked scientific and technical potential. and
a highly productive agriculture. As a result, they did not have to carry
out. for exanple, socialist industrialization in its classic fern; that
is. to practically recreate the basic branches of industry which serve

the econony and the systen of the production and non-production infra-

structure and to shift all agricultural production onto a nodern technical
base.

in addition to solving the problem of eliminating the consequences of the
war on their territory which was cannon for all of the countries. the
Czechoslovakian Socialist Republic and CDR were faced by the task of the
socialist reconstruction of industry and of the econony as a whole and of
overcoming the dieproportions in the branch and assortnent structure of
production uhicn had been inherited free the past. This task was an
especially acute one for the GDR. Despite the above difficulties. the
Czechoslovakian Socialist Republic and the GDR quite rapidly restored and
increased their industrial potential and began to sake an appreciable

contribution to the process of the socialist industrialization of the other
CEHA countries.

The remaining European socialist countries belonged to the mediun-developed
(Hungary. Poland) or the least developed states (Roeania. Bulgaria). All

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of these countries had to carry Out socialist industrialization at forced
rates. making use in certain cases of certain elements of the old produc-
tion apparatus (the coal industry. ship building. and some of the enter-
prises of light industry in Poland; bauxite mining. and some enterprises
of the light and food industry in Hungary; petroleum fields and the wood-
working industry in Romania). while in other cases (the most typical
example in this respect is bulgaria) they had to form the industrial base
of the national economic complex practically anew.

The qualitatively different conditions in which the foreign CEHA countries
began the formation of the material and technical base of socialism3
meant. in essence, that within the commonwealth an experiment of unique
dimensions and aocio-economic consequences was being conducted: the
accomplishment of an essentially single task in the face of diverse
initial preconditions and sharp gaps in levels of economic development.

The successful accomplishment of this task in all of the above countries
has demonstrated the exceptionally high effectiveness of socialist methods
of economic management and of the international relations of a new type.
As. for example. approximate calculations show. the gap between the
individual OSHA European countries in the production of per-capita
national income decreased from 3.2 times in 1950 to 1.4 times in 1976.
while for the production of industrial output the decrease was from 5 to
1.5 times.

within the socialist commonwealth the process of the formation of the
material and technical base of the new social system in the foreign socialist
countries is thereby being carried out with incomparably more favorable
foreign economic preconditions than was the case in the Soviet Union which
had to accomplish this task in the face of a capitalist encirclement.

The formation of the material and technical base of socialise in the
foreign CEHA countries was connected with the necessity of solving a number
of difficult problems. It has to be considered. first of all, that this
process could be carried out only on the basis of the concrete production
possibilities which were possessed by the CEHA countries. The production
apparatus which was in the process of being formed, especially in those
countries which did not possess a developed industry. inevitably had to
reproduce the most essential features of the production apparatus which
existed in the Other socialist states. One of the side effects of this was
a definite universalization of production structures whose emergence, in
addition. was made objective by the existence of a number of common deficits
for the most important types of output.

The realization in all of the CEHA countries of programs of postwar
reconstruction and development engendered shortages of many types of
resources. including resources of investment goods. which at first
objectively decreased the possibilities for a collective maneuver and

k

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prevented the forestion of production structures oriented not only towerd
the satisfaction of basic intra-econoeic needs, but also the needs of other
countries. The aovenent across national borders of goods and services under
these conditions (especially during the first postwar yeers) was to a
substantial extent, above all. a material expression of international nutuel
help. and not a result of a planned division of labor strictly based on the
criteria of econoeic efficiency.

Finally. it also has to be noted that the historical situation. above all
the policy of the "cold war" which was carried out by the inperialist states.
demanded a rapid reorientation of the geographical directions of the foreign
economic relations of neny of the socialist countries in order to unite
their efforts for econonic progress. This reorganization placed new
countries before the necessity for an accelerated creation of productions

to satisfy econoeic needs which previously were treditionelly satisfied
through iaports froe third countries.

All this could not but have an effect both on the qualitative and on the
quantitative characteristics of the development of the international
socialist division of labor during at least the first two poet-war
decades. In addition. tine wes also required for the creation of an
effective nechenien of economic cooperation adequate to the new type of
international division of labor. As practice has shown. this was a
difficult task which in a number of its essential upsets has retained its
inportance today.

The solution of the above problems was achieved (and is being achieved)
through a deepening and development of the international socielist division
of labor and through bringing the production capacities of the onus countries
into correspondence with the collective needs of the socielist co-onwealth.
all of which presupposes an active utilization of the possibilities connected
with the work of the can end its agencies.

At the first neetings of the cm concrete proposals were worked out on the
solution of the soot inportant problems of the "start-up" period of its work.
In particular, at the Second Session of the cm (August 1969) it was found
advisable to develop nutuel trade aaong the menber countries on the basis
of long-tern agree-cots. the principles of scientific and technical coopera-
tion and of an exchange of technical experience were worked out. and the
question of the develop-cot in the CEIA countries of the production of
bellbesrings was exanined. which. in essence, was the first approach to the
developnent of international production specialization and cooperation.

The subsequent meetings of the cm were of great importance for the foru-
tion of the mechanisa of planned cooperation in the sphere of production.
The Seventh Session (1956) discussed the probleas of coordinating develop-
nent plans for the basic branches of the economies of the cm countries
for the period 1956-1960: the machine building. coal. petroleum and gas,

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and chemical industries. a number of branches of light industry, ferrous and
nonrerrous metallurgy. and agriculture. The growth of the dimensions of the
cooperation resulted in the adoption at this session of a decision to
establish permanent CEHA commissions on economic and scientific and tech-
nical cooperation which had the task of promoting the development of economic
relations among the CEHA countries and organizing multilateral economic

end scientific and technical cooperation in the most important branches of
the economy.

The greater complexity in subsequent years of the production structures in
the CEHA countries and a further deepening of their economic relations

led to the necessity for improving the forms and methods of regulating
their cooperation. The coordination of the direction of its development
solely by means of coordinating foreign trade deliveries. which was
practiced at the initial stage of the cooperation, ceased to correspond

to the increased maturity of the economies of the CEHA countries. The
need arose to move to new and more effective forms and methods of regu-
lating the international socialist division of labor and, above all. to
move to a strengthening of planning principles in its development.

By the middle of the 1950's. when the foundations of planned socialist
economic management had been formed in all of the CEHA countries. it

became possible to move to the coordination of five-year national economic
plans. At the same time. important steps were taken in rationalizing the
developed system of mutual relations by means of working out recommendations
on international production specialization and cooperation for individual
types of industrial output.

The recommendations which were adopted during those years helped to develop
bilateral and multilateral cooperation and to achieve the coordination

of the first CEHA long-term national economic plans. The practical
realization of these recommendations promoted the successful fulfillment

of the national economic plans. the achievement of high economic develop-
ment rates. and the realization of fundamental socio-economic transformations
in the states which were solving the problems of the transitional period

from capitalism to socialism.

The Conference of the Representatives of the Communist and Horkers' Parties
of the CEHA Hember Countries (Hay 1958) which mapped out a concrete program
of work for it for the forthcoming years was of great importance for

the realization of the important new tasks of cooperation. Basing itself

on the cooperation experience which had been gained, the Conference gave
instructions to coordinate the national economic plans for 1961-1965,
concentrating the efforts of the countries and CEHA agencies on a compre-
hensive development of the raw material branches of the economy and of

power engineering. on a further development in introduction of new eoelpment.

and on strengthening production specialization and cooperation in machine
building.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In subsequent years decisions were made which were ained st ieproving

the fetus and netth of the organization of mutual econonic cooperation.
Thus. the Conference of Representatives of the Couuniet end Horkers‘
Parties of the cm Countries (June 1962) recognized the coordination of
national econoaic plans as the basic sethod of the case's work and the

chief means of the planned developeent and deepening of the international
socialist division of labor. This conclusion followed froa the objective
need to place their nutual division of labor at the service of optimizing
the development of the national econoaic complexes of the fraternal
countries and of ensuring greater balance in the basic proportions of

the couonwealth as a whole. The Conference approved "The Basic Principles
of the International Socialist Division of Labor" which had been worked out
by the Fifteenth Session of the cm. These principles were the theoretical
and practical foundation for the realization of neasuree aimed at an intensi-
fication of the international socialist division of labor and they helped
to solve a number of new problems which had arisen as a result of the
increased dimensions and coeplexity of the structure of autual cooperation.

The period of the 1960's was characterized. in this way. by a substantial
intensification of mutual cosperation and an expansion of the international
sarket of the cm countries. The movement of the growing co-odity masses
among the can countries took place during this period not so such under

the influence of tenporery needs and relative "surpluses," as of a profound
long—tern division of labor. An especial role was played here by the
coordinatioa of many important indicators of the national economic plans

for 1961-1965 and 1966-1970 and by collectively developed recouendations
regarding the international specialization of the cm countries in the
production of sore than 5,000 types of machines and equipeent and more than
2.600 itens of chemical products. 0f considerable importance was the con-
clusion of bilateral agree-ants which provided for cooperation in the produc-
tion of parts and units, joint scientific research and planning and designing
work. and the joint financing of the development of the production and expor-
tation of raw ssterials.

The increasing internationalisation of the econonic life of the cm countries
manifested itself during this period in the joint development of international
transportation. the unification of power systems, and the creation and
develop-ant of the activities of international econonic and scientific and
technical organizations.

The growth of their economic and scientific and technical potential and the
accumulation of practical experience in econonic interaction Ilade it possible
to set the system of cm cooperation even more couples: and large-scale tasks,
including assistance in the construction and further development of a highly
developed socialist society, a consistent unification of the advantages of
socialist: and the scientific and technological revolution. and the strength-
ening of the economic foundations of the national econoeic complexes of all
of the fraternal countries.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the 1960's the necessity began to be felt with increasing urgency
for the formation of the kind of model of economic interaction between the
socialist countries which would make it possible to create an integrated
system of economic relations organized with regard to the long-term
tendencies of scientific and technological progress, the future tasks of
the socio-economic development of the socialist commonwealth. and a
consistent realization of the potentials existing in the planned mutual
division of labor.

The degree of socio-economic homogeneity which the CEHA countries had
attained by that time created favorable preconditions for strengthening
their interaction. The higher level of the deve10pment of the socialist
social system was urgently demanding a maximum use of all of the possibil-
ities of cooperation for the accomplishment of such key tasks as increasing
production efficiency. accelerating technological progress, and raising
standards of living.

The 23rd Session of the CEMA'which was held in April 1969 in

Moscow with the participation of the leaders of the communist and workers'
parties and heads of governments of the member countries of this organiza-
tion was an historical landmark in the development of the economic coopera-
tion of the CEMA countries and of an overall improvement of its forms and
methods. The especial importance of the session consists in its validation
of a shift to a qualitatively higher stage of cooperation--international
socialist integration. "Practice has brought us." L. I. Brezhnev said in
his report at the 26th Congress of the CPSU. "to a common conclusion: it
is necessary to deepen production specialization and cooperation and
coordinate national economic plans more closely. in a word, to move along
the path of the economic integration of the socialist states.“

The 23rd Session of the CEHA defined the basic directions for the development
of an overall long-term program for the development of the economic relations
of the CEHA countries. The overall program for the deepening and improvement
of the cooperation and for the development of the socialist economic
integration of the CEHA member countries which was approved by the 25th
Session of the CEHA in July 1975 developed and concretized the principles

of relations between the socialist states. It contains, in essence, a
general plan for the joint economic and scientific and technical work of

the CEMA countries for several five-year plans in advance. While deepening
and enriching the foundations of the cooperation. the Overall Program at

the same time defines a broad aggregate of interconnected concrete measures
(it contains around 200 measures of diverse character which are slated for
study. development, or realization) and establishes the schedules and organ-
izational and legal mechanism for their realization thrOugh the joint efforts
of the fraternal countries. The adoption by the CEIUA countries of the Over-

all Program laid the basis for a systems approach to the achievement of
their collective goals in all fields of cooperation.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Among the measures to develop cooperation in the field of science and
technology. the Overall Program maps out means and methods which cover

the joint development of strategies for the further development of science
and technology. Among them the most important are the systematic holding
of consultations on the basic problems of scientific and technological
policy. the development of scientific and technological forecasts. and the
joint planning of development work by interested countries on the most
important scientific and technical problems.

As is noted in the Overall Program. the basic method of the organization

of cooperation is cooperation in the field of planning work whose distinc-
tiVe feature at the stage of integration consists in a shift from the
coordination of mutual comnodity turnover to the coordination of the economic
work of the cm countries directly in the sphere of production, science

and technology. and capital construction.

This is to be promoted by an improvement of the forms of joint planning. in
particular the adoption by the countries at the 29th Session of the can
(1975) of the Coordinated Plan for Hultiluternl integration Pleasures. and
the inclusion in economic plans of sections on economic cooperation within
the GEM. The OSHA Couittee on Cooperation in the Field of Planning which
was created at the 25th Session of the CW has an isportant role in working
out the measures to raise thc level of planning in economic cooperation.

As a result, an overall system of cooperation in the field of planning has
developed in the cm which makes it possible to successfully accosplish
major economic tasks in industry. transportation. agriculture. and capital
construction and to carry out large-scale projects to develop raw material
and power resources and protect the environment.

The deVelopment of long-term special-purpose cooperation programs is the
next: step in improving the planning base for the solution of important
prol-lems of the socialist couonwealth. The work of the countries and CW
agencies in this field has already produced important practical results.
The 12nd Session of the Cauncil (June 1978) approved long-term special-
cooperation programs in the field of energy. fuel and raw materials. agri-
culture. and the food industry. and also in machine building. These programs
have been worked out in accordance with the decisions of the comnist and
workers' part ies of the CW countries concerning the deVelopment and deep-
ening of economic and scientific and technical cooperation aeong the CW
countries and they reflect the agreement of their leaders.‘ Cooperation

programs are being worked out in the field of the production of industrial
consumer goods and of transportation.

The long-term special-purpone programs define the coordinated long~terl
cooperation strategy of the CW countries in various fields of material
production and are a concretizstion and development of the Overall Program
for the Socialist tconomic Integration of the CW ueeber countries.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OJLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic purpose of the measures included in the long-term special-
purpose programs of cooperation is to provide for the economically valid
needs for energy. fuel and raw materials, foods. means of production. and
technologies of an advanced technical level. The development and realisa-
tion of these programs has become a new step in the development oi the
molti-latsral cooperation of the CEHA countries.

The realization of the long-term special-purpose programs in close
coordination with the measures to coordzuate the national economic plans
of the CEHA countries, and also the hil;;eral long-term plans for produc-
tion specialization and cooperation will aske it possible to increase the
effectiveness of collective efforts to solve key economic problems and

to achieve a more efficient use of material and financial resources and
of the advantages of an international socialist division of labor.

The work of the CEHA is creating favorable preconditions for the development
of tendencies toward the internationalication of the economic life of the
socialist states which is manifesting itself at the current stage as a law
of the gradual equalization of their development. This process leads in the
final result to an ever greater equalization of the basic parameters of the
socio-economic development of the socialist countries. to a gradual leveling
off of their economic levels. and to an increasing similarity of their
national economic structures. There is a steady expansion and deepening of
the international interaction of the socialist countries in all spheres of
social life and a rising level of the integration of the commonwealth of
sovereign socialist states as a new inter-state community formed on the

principles of socialist internationalism. voluntariuess. and complete equal
rights.

Thus. the practice of CEHA cooperation. especially the experience of devel-
oping long~tera special-purpose programs in the key sectors of the economy.
shows that in a number of branches of tno.r economies stable and essentially
international production proportions are taxing shape. an ever-wider joint
use of resources for the attainment of coordinated common goals is being
carried out. and more and more common features in their socialist way of
life are appearing.

The deepening of mutual cooperation and progress in socialist economic
integration has already led and. undoubtedly. will continue to lead to an
increased role for planning and management. including in the systems of
managing foreign economic relations in related or analogous elements.
indicators. and economic levers.

10
FOR OFFICIAL HSE ONLY
FOR DFPICIAL USE ONLY

The process 01 the gradual toning together of econonic ncchnnisns is the
result of the seas types of changes in the nsteriai and technical base

and the socio-acononic structures of our countries and of the increasing
equalization of the levels of their-social and econosic develop-ant. The
equalization of the levels of econoaic developsent. of the socio-clsss
structure of society, and of the degree of concentration of social produc-
tion and the increasing sinilsrity of the isnadiate goals of socio-econoaic
develop-ant (an increasing orientation of the econoeies toward inproving
the well-being of the workers and iaproving their working and living
conditions)and of the scans of achieving these goals (the necessity for

a profound intensification of the entire reproduction process on the basis
a unification of the achievenents of scientific and technological progress
and the advantages of socialise) are objectively leading to greater sini-
lnrity in the systens of econosic planning and nanagesent.5

The constant developnent and isproveaent of the force and nathods of the
cooperation of the CEHA countries is at the sans tine both the result of

and the precondition for the growing international socialization of socialist
production which develops during the process of the deepening of the nutual
division of labor and of socialist econonic integration. This nanifold
process at its current stage cannot be reduced to any single aspect or to
sons Ianifestation at a definite level of econonic activity. it includes

at least the following components:

~-An acceleration of the process of the socialist socialization of produc-
tion within individual national econosic coaplexes on the basis of their

fuller inclusion in the systea of the international socialist division of
labor;

--a strengthening of the planned relations between the national econonic
conplexes of the individual countries and the establish-cut of the eleeents
and preconditions for the developnent of the internationnl socialist

division of labor into international cooperation on s nacro-econonic level
(the end result of the process of international socialist socialization
through a strengthening of planned relations snong the cooperating countries);

--The fornstion of stable and technologically anchored interrelations
between definite eleaents of the production apparatuses of the individual
countries. the realization of joint capital construction plans. and so
forth (the process of the "infornal" socialization in fact by neans of

the pooling and collective use of the resources of the interested countries
for cos-on and concretely specified goals);

--The developeent of the organizational ferns of the collective nanagenent
of production or other types of econonic activity which. with definite pre-
conditions. nay turn into experinentsi forns (a kind of laboratory) of the
direct international socialization of production (of course, taking account
of their ”built-in nature" into the above-nsned forss of "indirect" and
"infernal" socialization).

ll
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The unfolding of this objective process and an awareness of it during the
coordination of the econoeic policies of the sovereign socialist states

is asking it possible to draw the conclusion that the iorthcoeing period
of socio-econoeic developnsnt for the CEMA countries will be characterized
by an even aore overall and consistent realization of the advantages of
the socialist systen both intra-econonicslly and internationally. This
will ensure stable socio-econonic progress for the fraternal states. and.
at the sane tine. a steady developeent of the process of the international-
ization of their material and spiritual life and of a strengthening of the
unity of the countries of the socialist commonwealth. A new stage of
maturity will be reached for the international econonic relations of a new

CVPCe

FOOTNOTES

1. At the present tine the CEHA neehvr countries are the People's Republic
of Bulgaria. the hungarian People s Republic. the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam. the German Democratic Republic. the Republic of Cuba. the
Mongolian People's Republic. the Polish People's Republic. the Socialist
Republic of Roaania. the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. and the
Czechoalovakian Socialist Republic.

2. L. l. Brezhnev. "following Lenin's Path. Speeches and Articles." Vol. 5.
Politizdat. 1975. pp 79-80.

3. Examining the given process in application to the foreign socialist
countries the conclusion can be drawn that it has been coepleted at the
present time (at least in its basis) in the European CEHA ueeber
countries. Their experience enphasizes the common nature of the basic
directions of the foreation and deVelopnent of the esterial and technical
base of socialism which becsee defined during the process of the
construction of a developed socialist society in the USSR. At the sane
tine. the experience of the foreign CENA countries testifies to the broad
diversity of the concrete conditions. (ores. and methods of sccoeplishing
this conmon task. It can be foreseen that in the future. as has already
occurred in the practice of the formation and developnent of the unterial
and technical base of socialism in the Mongolian People's Republic, Cuba.
Vietnam. and Laos. this diversity will be expressed even eore clearly.

"Declaration of the Heads of the Delegations of the CEHA haeber Countries
Connection with the Approval by the CEHA Session at its 32nd ﬂeeting of
long-tern Special-purpose Cooperation Programs." PRAVDA. 30 June 1978.

S. This sieilarity nanifeats itself both in the tasks which are forced in
the national aconoeic plans and in the cstablishnent of the concrete
ferns and eethods oi the realization of the planning goals. In this
connection. it can be stated that the economic planning and manage-eat

12
FOR OFFICXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

eyote-e of the cm countries are at the praeant tine characterized by
an expanoion of the horizone of planning. a greater conaidaration of
eociei factor. in the doveiopaent and realization of economic policy.
the development of ovarall. program-purpoae planning. the axtanaive
nae of lathauticai acononic aethodo and electronic coaputere in
planning calculationo. the creation of varione kinda of aaaociationa
in induetry and other hranchea of tha econoay. the develop-nut of

coat accounting. and no forth.

COPYRIGuT: Izdatei’atvo "Statiatikn". 1978

2959

680:

1823

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS

BRIEFS

MACHINERY P08 USSR-mite“ Preciaion Hachincry Induatry haa signed a 3.2
billion yen contract to export Sl machining ccntera. ll boring nachinaa
[Dora]. end 12 grinding uchinea to the USSR. The contract price will he
paid in dollaro and the ohipent will he completed by the end of 1979.
Toyota Hachine Horka haa aleo signed a contract with tho All-Union Autono-
tiva Induatry Import Auociation for export of 20 grinding uchineo vorth

320 nillion yen. [Tokyo MM 1mm: 3mm in Japanaae 7 Pet 79 norning
edition p 7 at]

can: 6105

II.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MANPOWER: LABOR. EDUCATION. swam!"

LABOR IN A DEVBIDPED SOCIALIST SOCIBTY
Moscow VOPROSY BKONOHJKI in Russian No I, 1979 pp 110-121

Lirticle by R. lvenove. D. Koxlove: "The Nature of Lebor in e Developed
Socinl int Societyf]

[Iexg/ Production reletions. which determine the sociel systee. else for.
the socio-econoeic essence of lebor. its nature. Sociolise eliminated the
systee of hired lebor. chenged the nesns of uniting the seens of lebor end
oenpower. which eede it possible to eliminete the entegonistic contredic-
tion between neceseery end surplus lebor. to use surplus lebor in the inter-
ests of the workers. The integrel unity of the worker end the subject of
the ownership of the eesns of production crested the besis for the nssurence
of the unity of the fundenentel interests of the workers. Lebor freed froe
all forms of exploitetion beceee the sole source of existence of both soci-
ety es s whole end eech of its eeehere. V. I. Lenin wrote: “Per the first
tile after centuries of lebor for others. of forced_lebor for_exploiters
there is the possibility of [working for oneself] [in Relics/”u“l Close-
ly connected with this trsit of the neture of socielist lebor is enother
one-~the discipline of lebor. Under conditions when the worker hisself is
sinultaneously both the subject of the ownership of the neens of production
and their co-owner. the discipline of labor is the indicetor of the new,
conscious attitude towerd it. toward the use of all the cosponents of the
process of lebor. towerd the development of the lebor end sociel ectiveness
of the workers.

Labor under socielise is the criterion of the perticipetion of e person in
sociel production. the criterion of distribution end consueption. The
greater the productivity end efficiency of nstionel labor ere, the greeter
are the possibilities of the increese of the level of well-being of both
society as e whole end each of its members. The antagonism. which was in-
herent in preceding forestions. between the verious types of lebor:

 

I. V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobreniye sochineniy" [Eonplete Collection of
works]. Vol 35. p 196.

15
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

physical and mental. industrial and agricultural. simple and complicated.
was eliminated under socialism.

The reality of the right of each citizen to work is recorded in the new
USSR Constitution and is secured by the socialist economicsystem. the steady
increase of the productive forces. free education. the development of a sys-
tem of vocational guidance and job placement. In this lies the fundamental
difference of the questions about the right to work and its real guarantee
in the Soviet Constitution and the constitutions of bourgeois states. Under
socialism not only is practically all the able-bodied population involved

in the labor process and is truly full :uployment achieved. but enormous
opportunities for the expansion of the spheres of the use of labor in physi-
cal production and in the nonproductive sphere are afforded in connection
with rapid aoeio-economic development. Thus. the number of those employed
in the national economy of our country increased from 62.9 million in 1960
to 121 million in 1977. During the years of the Ninth Five-Year Plan alone
the number of those employed increased by 8.3 million. in the developed
capitalist countries the number of those unemployed is increasing: in the
United States from 6.1 million in 1970 to 7.8 million in l975. in the capi-
talist countries of western Europe from 2.6 million to 5.2 million. Accord-
ing to the official data of the American Government, in the next five years
another 7.8 million people will be without work as a result of the introduc-
tion of automation equipment. In 1977 in the developed capitalist countries
there were 15.9 million officially registered unemployed people. Socialism
is a society which for the first time in the history of mankind solved the
problem of universal employment both on the social plane--for it attracted
all classes and strata of the population to socially useful labor. and on
the personal p1sne--within each class. social group and stratum practically
all the able-bodied citizens are employed. An essential feature of the
nature of socialist labor is its universality.

The socialist cooperation of labor on the basis of the public ownership of
the means of production made it possible to establish a direct tie between
all the subdivisions and links of the unified national economic complex
which was organized according to plan. which made labor directly national.
The planned nature in the management of the economy is an enormous advan-
tage of socialism as compared with the capitalist economy. for it makes it
possible to avoid those colossal losses of living and embodied labor. which
inevitably accompany capitalism. A graphic example is the economic crisis
of [975-1975. the consequences of which are being felt very acutely by the
developed capitalist countries. Thus. the considerable underlosding of
production capacities in the materials-intensive and power-intensive sectors
of Japanese industry led to the demolition of 20 of the 59 blast furnaces
belonging to the 5 largest metallurgical companies. 20-30 percent of the
capacities were eliminated in a number of other sectors as well.

in socialist society the inequality in distribution and consumption is re-
duced on the basis of economic growth and the increase of the general educa-
tional and skills level of the workers. however, the socio-economic

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

differences between mental and physical. industrial and agricultural labor.
differences in the conditions, difficulty and danger of labor. the degree
of its mechanization and intensity still raesin. This requires the measur-
ing and precise standardisation of labor. which is carried out at the pres-
ent stage not only directly in units of working time. about also in value
form. and at the same time predetermines certain differences in pay. the
general educational level and the vocational training of workers. Labor
under socialism is not yet cosmuniat labor in the strict sense of the term.
for its obligatoriness and material interest are specifics of socialist
labor. "...A duty and matter of honor of each USSR citizen capable of
labor is conscientious labor in the field chosen by him....” This specific

trait is governed by the fact that labor has not yet become the first vital
need of all citizens of socialist society.

Hhereas the nature of labor is its socio-economic essence within the entire
society. as applied to each specific type of labor (sector. enterprise.
occupation or specialty) the nature of labor is manifested in its content.
The content of labor is closely connected with the technical and economic
aspect of labor and changes at a more intensive rate. The nature and con-
tent of labor reveal the qualitative and quantitative certainties of the
labor of a given mode of production.

The period of developed socialism is the most important stage of the build-
ing of a socialist society. of which the change of the conditions, content
and nature of labor is one of the essential tasks, which affords the op-
portunity for the use of the capabilities and the development of the per-
sonality of workers in the process of labor activity.

The change of the content and nature of labor under the conditions of a de-
veloped socialist economy involvesabove all structural changes in social
production. which occur under the influence of technical progress. Tens of
new sectors. which promote technical progress. have appeared in recent dec-
ades. Hhereas in l9lB statistics took into account about 20 sectors of
industry. at present there are more than 160 major sectors and 500 types
of works.

The shift of the economy to the intensive path of development is affording
great opportunities for the emergence of new sectors both in the sphere of

physical production and in the nonproductive sphere. The accomplishment of
the complete mechanization and automation of production and the accelerated
updating of equipment are intensifying the process of the release of manpower
not only from agriculture. but also from other sectors of physical produc-
tion, which is making it possible to utilize more efficiently the living
labor of workers both in the sectors of physical production and in the non-
productive sphere.

A complicated structure of social production. which predetermines the set

of spheres of the use of national labor and the occupational features of
manpower, is typical of the socialist economy at the present stage. The

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

structure of the individual sectors and production links has become com-
plicated. many new occupations have emerged. In industry alone at present
there are more than $0,000 occupations and specialties. The labor of the
aggregate worker has become more diverse end complicated and esbraces those
sectors of production and processes. which did not exist at previous stages
of the development of the economy of the country. More extensive opportuni-
ties are thereby being created for the choice of occupations in conformity
with the interests and inclinations of the workers. At the same time
scientific and technical progress is making more rigid demands on the psycho-
physiological capabilities of man in the choice of specific occupations.
Sociological research has determined that a significant number of adoles-
cents cannot master the initially chosen occupations. There are added to
the expenditures of society on the training of this contingent of workers
the expenditures on their retraining. This prolongs the process of the so-
cial adaptation of a portion of the young people and gives rise to discon-
tent with labor, and at times a negative attitude toward it.

The creation of a unified statewide system of vocational guidance and the
choice of a vocation would make it possible to solve many questions which
are connected with the determination of the current and prospective demand
for personnel in a breakdown by sectors and regions. occupations and skills.
with informing the population about the demands of the national economy for
workers of specific occupations. with the use of the means of mass communi-
cations (movies, radio. television) for the promotion and increase of the
prestige of a number of necessary occupations. with the development of work
on vocational guidance at general educational schools and among the popula-
tion. the choice of occupations at vocational and technical schools, second-
ary and higher specialized educational institutions. at enterprises and
others.

Another typical feature of national labor is the considerable increase of
the level of its mechanization. The data on the power-worker ratio, which
increased from 1940 through 1977 in industry 6.6-fold and in agriculture
13.2-fold,srean important indicator of this process. The mechanization of
production processes entails an increase of the number of workers of mechan-
ized labor. From 1959 through 1977 alone. with a 1.5-fold increase of the
total number of workers. the number of workers performing work with the aid
of machines and mechanisms. as well as on monitoring the operation of auto-
matic machines and automated units. increased 2.3-fold, while the number of
skilled workers engaged in the repair and adjustment of machine and mechan-
isms increased 2.5-fold. At the present stage the material, scientific and
technical conditions are being created for the solution of the problem of
the maximum decrease of unskilled and seaiskilled (above all difficult)
manual labor. In the USSR Constitution it is noted: "The state is taking
care of the improvement of working conditions and labor safety.... the de-
crease. and subsequently the complete displacement of difficult physical
labor on the basis of the complete mechanization and automation of produc-
tion processes in all the sectors of the national economy" (Article 21).

18
FOR OFFICIkL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the Ninth Five-Year Plan an extensive program of the coqalete mechan-
ization of labor-intensive jobs and the automation of production was imple-
mented. The work on the reequipment of the national economy is being con-
tinued during the 10th Five-Year Plan. The production of the implements

of labor will be increased 1.6-fold during the current five-year plan. the
output of instruments and automation equipment 1.6- to 1.7-fold. The as-
similation of the industrial production of the means and cowlete system of
the automation of the control of technological processes in the metallurgi-
cal. chemical. petroleum refining. petroleum. gas. coal and other sectors
of industry is continuing. The development of systems of machines. which

are designed for the complete rsequipment of the mining. coal. tiﬁer and
wood processing industries. construction and a number of other sectors, will

be completed and they will be put into production. Specisl assignments on

the production of equipment, which sharply reduces manual labor end ensures
the increase of its productivity. are envisaged. The output of means of

the mechanization of labor-intensive and difficult construction. materials

handling. loading and unloading and warehouse jobs will increase approxi-
mately 2-fold.

The decree of the cc CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers “0n the Further
Development of Machine Building in 1978-1980" stipulates specific assignments
for the machine building ministries: on the placement into production of
machines, equipamnt. instruments and automation equipment with a productiv-
ity not less than 1.5-2 times greater as compared with the 1975 level for
the purposes of expediting the work on the accomplishment of the complete
mechanization and automation of production processes in all the sectors of
the national economy; the increase of the degree of mechanization of labor
and the considerable decrease during the current five-year plan of the num-
ber of workers engaged in manual labor; the elaboration and implementation
of measures on the further decrease during 1981-1985 of the use of unual
labor at machine building enterprises; the acceleration of the construction
and placement into operation of capacities for the production of means of

mechanization. materials handling. loading and unloading and warehouse
operations and others.

By March 1979 the machine building ministries should submit proposals on

the development of the sectors of machine building in 1981-1985 and for the
future up to 1990.

As the complete mechanization and automation of production areaccomplished.
the functions connected with direct influence on the object of labor are being
shifted to a greater and greater extent to machines and mechanisms. At the
same time complicated functions, which are conditioned by the greater ex-
penditures of mental energy (calculation. monitoring, control, the mainten-
ance of machines and mechanism. the monitoring of- their operation). are as-
suming primary isportance. As the shift of sectors to complete mechaniza-
tion is coupleted, these functions begin to play the main role in the con-
tent of the labor of workers. The labor of a worker, in which the functions
of both physicsl and mental labor ere integrally combined, is becoming

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

typical. The change of the functional content of labor in physical produc-
tion reflects the process of the increase of its complexity, which requires
an increase of the level of skills of the workers.

The content of the labor of production managers and specialists is changing
and its complexity is increasing. The demands on the special engineering
technical knowledge of the workers engaged in the field of the economics

and organization of production are increasing sharply. Sociopsychological
functions, which require a knowledge of such sciences a pedagogy, social
psychology. sociology and others, are assuming greater and greater impor-
tance in the work of managers and specialists. The technical functions of
the given group of workers are being decreased on the basis of the mechan-
ization of administrative labor, the introduction of computers. the central-
ization of accounting and the storage of information. Substantial changes
are also occurring in the labor of workers engaged in the nonproductive
sphere. In the sectors directly serving the population (trade. public din—
ing. consumer services), the content of labor is changing in connection with
the more extensive use of advanced forms of service, preliminary orders.
service by traveling brigades, mail-order trade and so on. On the basis of
the increase of the level of technical equipment the functions of service
are being replaced to a greater and greater extent by the functions of ac-
counting, the study of demand, the selection of the most feasible methods

of meeting it. The material and technical prerequisites are being created
for the considerable decrease in this sphere of manual, inefficient labor.

The process of the intellectualization of labor. which finds expression in:
the increase of the importance and proportion of mental labor in the total
amount of aggregate labor of society. the acceleration of the process of the
intellectualiaation of physical labor in connection with the change of its
content, is accelerated as the structure of national labor becomes compli-
cated and the achievements of the scientific and technical revolution are
introduced. The proportion of the people engaged primarily in mental labor
in the national economy increased from 19.3 percent in 1959 to 27 percent

in 1970. In 1977 the number of those engaged primarily in mental labor

was 37.5 million, having increased as compared with 1970 by 6 million.

The increase of the importance of mental labor in the total amount of the
aggregate labor of society is characteristic of the present stage of the
socialist economy. A developed socialist society is characterized by a

high degree of industrialization of production. The increasing diversity

of the sectors of production means the implementation in practice of the
achievements of various sectors of science, each of which has its own center.
scientific research institutes, planning and design institutes, experimental
works and so forth. From [950 through 1977 alone the number of scientists
employed in the national economy increased 7.9-fold. Under the conditions
of the high technical level of production the material conditions are being
created for developing the sectors of the nonproductlvc sphere, especially
those which predetermine the solution of the most important social problems--
In the area of public health, education. culture and so on. where the

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

performance of mental functions is the main content of labor. The propor-
tion of those employed in the nonproductive sectors increased from 13.8
percent in 1950 to 25.1 percent in 1977. including from 7.7 to 16.5 per-

cent correspondingly in public health, social secutiry, education, cul-
ture, art and so on.

The high level of development of physical production and the nonproductive
sectors requires the training of the appropriate labor force of highly
skilled specialists. During the period from 1950 through 1977 alone the
number of specialists with a higher and secondary specialised education in-
creased 7.6-fold with an increase of the total number of those employed in
the national economy by nearly 2-fold.

The increase of the complexity of labor gives rise to the need and creates
immeasurably more conditions for the development of the personality of the
workers both from the point of view of the very content of labor and from
the point of view of the physical possibilities of society for the solution
of the problem 0: increasing the general educational and cultural level of
the workers. The new USSR Constitution proclaimed: ”In conformity with the
communist ideal 'The free development of each is the condition of the free
development of ell,’ the state sets as its goal the increase of the real
opportunities for the application by citizens of their creative powers,

capabilities and talents, for the comprehensive development of the individ~
ual."

Under the conditions of developed socialism, with the achievement of the
maximum universality of labor the scientific solution of the questions con-
nected with the general educational and occupational training of personnel,
which are acquiring more and more importance as one of the most important
functions of the socialist state, is becoming objectively necessary. "In
the USSR there exists and is being improved a uniform system of popular
education," it is noted in the new USSR Constitution (Article 25), “which
ensures ﬂargeneral educational and vocational training of citizens, serves
communist education, the spiritual and physical development of young people,
prepares them for labor and social activity."

The aggregate labor force under the conditions of a developed economy is
characterised by a higher and higher general educational and vocational
level. In 1939 per 1,000 people employed in the national economy 123 had
a higher and secondary (complete and incomplete) education, in 1959--433,
in l970--653, in 1977--780. At present the training of a skilled labor
force of workers, who have an 8-10 year education, is a central national
economic problem. The introduction in the country of a universal secondary
education, the organization of a vast network of vocational and technical
schools1duchgive a secondary education, the further development and im-
provement of higher and secondary specialized education are creating the
necessary conditions for the even greater increase of the general educa-
tional level and vocational skills of the workers. The increase of the
general educational level and the receipt of the appropriate vocational

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

training by workers are ensured by the increased material resources of so-
ciety. their purposeful use and the high skills level of the labor force.
"...In order to be cultured. a certain development of the physical means
of production is necessary, a certain material base is necessary."

The right of citizens to the choice of an occupation. the type of work. a
job in conformity vith their calling. abilities. the possibility for the
improvement of skills and the learning of new occupations is realistically
ensured by the establishment for workers and employees of a work week which
does not exceed 61 hours. a shortened work day for a number of occupations
and workers, the granting annually of paid vacations. days of weekly rest.
the availability of a system of free education and vocational training.

At the stage of developed socialism the conditions are crested for the
process of harmonization between the opportunities afforded workers from

the point of view of the choice of the type of labor and its content. and
their inclinations. abilities. desires and interests. This process is
governed both by the acceleration of scientific and technical progress. the
change of the content of labor on this basis. and by the development of the
entire system of social relations. In particular, universal secondary edu-
cation means the equalization of the general educational level of young
people who are beginning their labor activity. The solution of the problem
of reducing unskilled and semiskilled labor to a minimum. the change of the
content of labor and the increase of its creative nature are creating im-
measurable greater opportunities for the realization of the abilities of

the workers in the labor process itself. the formation of a creative atti-
tude toward labor. The possibilities of creativity in labor are also being
realized as a result of the development of the movement of rationalizers and
inventors. the number of when in 1977 was 4,566,000. while the amount of

the saving from the introduction of inventions and rationalization proposals
was S.296,000.000.rubles. Thus, qualitative changes in the main productive
force of society--man--also correspond to the reequipment of labor.

The development of the productive forces. which caused an intensification of
the division of labor. at the ease time is increasing the cooperative nature
of labor. which is manifested in the formation of the socially uniform ag-
gregate worker. At the stage of developed socialism. in connection with
the intensive processes of socialization of production and labor. the socio-
economic unity of the aggregate worker is obtaining the appropriate mate-
rial and technical base. The occupational structure of labor at this stage
has not only a sectorial. but also a social aspect. The first feature,
which it is necessary to take into account in the formationofthe occupation-
al and sectorial structure of labt' for the future. is the gradual weaken-
ing of the influence oi the social factor, which is caused by the conserva-
tion of the socio-economic differences in labor.

 

2. V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy." Vol 65. p 377.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The shortcomings of the occupational and sectoriai structure of labor at the
stage of developed socialism to a considerable extent are caused by the
fact that its formation during preceding periods was accomplished mainly
at the level of the primary economic link. The training of the bulk of

the workers directly at enterprises was opposed to the planned training of
a labor force of specialists of the intermediate and highest links. This
led to the inequality of the training of workers for individual occupations.
to considerable differences in the level of their theoretical knowledge
and practical skills and. consequently. in the skills of workers of the
same occupation. in the standards of labor and its remuneration not only

in different sectors of the national economy. but also within a single sec-
tor. To a certain extent the primary training of workers at the level of
the primary economic link was caused by the great number of occupations in
different sectors of the national economy. which differ little from each
other in their content. The standardization of the occupations of workers
made it possible instead of 23.000 names of occupations to leave in the new
Unified Job and wage Rates Classification Manual only 6.500.

The second feature of the inrovement of the occupational and sectorial struc-
ture of labor at the present stage is the regulation of its formation. The
solution of this problem is connected with the policy of our party of in-
creasing the efficiency of social production. with the increase of labor
productivity. the release of a portion of the workers at operating enter-
prises and the sending of them to other sections of production. the orienta-

tion in the training of the work force on specialised secondary educational
institutions.

The acceleration of the rate of scientific and technical progress is the
most important and quick-acting factor of the change of the occupational and
sectorial structure of labor. This is the third feature of its improvement.
in industry a number of new occupations are appearing under the influence
of this factor and at the same time hundreds of obsolete occupations are
ceasing to exist. Thus. such new occupations as fitter for the assembly
of metal constructions. operator of automatic and semi-automatic lines.

of machine tools with program control. vacuum furnace steel worker and
others. are undergoing extensive development. The occupations of loaders
of bore pits. manual granulators. ore dumpcrs. sandblaattrs have disap-
peared. The number of occupations of skilled labor, which require knowledge
on the level of the :ekhnikum (for eatsmple. instrument technician. x-rsy
technician. plasma equipment operator and others). is increasing. The in-
crease of the material well-leing and the comprehensive development of the
individual require the increase of the proportion of national labor in the
nonproductive sphere, which affects the development of its sectorial struc-
ture and the change of the ocrupationai composition of those employed. The
redistribution of labor in favor of the nonproductive sphere as the level
of productivity of national labor in the national economy increases is an-
other feature of the changes of the occupational and sectorial structure of
labor at the stage of developed socialism.

23
FOR OFFICIAL CS£ ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

lhe completion of the process of forming production associations in indus-
try during the l0th Five-Year Plan, the creation of ogre-industrial enter-
prises and associations and the formation of territorial and sectoriai com-
plexes will promote the improvement of the occupational and sectorial struc-
ture of labor at a higher level of the socialization of production.

The structure of labor. which is becoming more complicated. and the greater
demands on the intellectual level and psychophyaiologicai attributes of
workers under the conditions of the scientific and technical revolution are
giving rise to the need for the creation of a statewide system of vocational
guidance and the choice of an occupatiow. the functional purpose of which
is the achievement of a rational corres..adence between the demands of the
national economy for workers of specific occupations and skills and the
training and distribution of the labor force with the most complete consid-
eration of their physiological capabilities. inclinations and abilities.

At the stage of developed socialism the economic potential of the country
makes it possible to solve major national economic tasks in the area of
the improvement of working conditions. These tasks are becoming an objec-
tive necessity. which stems from the more complete realization of the ef-
fect of the main economic law. The increasing degree of the socialization
of production is making it possible to enlarge substantially the boundaries
which are covered by statewide policy in the area of the lmprovoment of
working conditions and labor safety. The scientific and technical revolu-
tion is creating the prerequisites for a radical change of technological
processes. The introduction of automatic remote control. the smokeless
loading of coke ovens. electrohydraulic and water jet cleaning ensures the
radical improvement of working conditlras. At the same time the increase of
the technical level of production and of its efficiency under present con-
ditions involves an increase of the capacity and speed of equipment. the re-
placement of traditional technological principles with electrophysical.
electrochemical and ultrasonic principles. the increase of the temperature
and pressure of the working mediums. the speeds of the flows of substances,
the introduction of new flammable oxidizing agents and construction mate-
rials, the increase of the use of radioactive substances, lasers and so on.
The gaps in the plans for the section of labor safety when developing gi-
gantic production complexes are leading to undesirable consequences. This
raisv< in a new way the questions of labor safety and labor safety tech-
niques and requires the redou‘ling of the attention toward these questions.
The provision of normal and safe working conditions, of the maximum produc-
tion comfort is becoming an essential factor of the increase of labor pro-
ductivity and the output-capital ratio. that is. the increase of the effi-
ciency of social production. The increased economic potential of the coun-
try ls creating the material prerequisites for the solution of the major
national economic problems of the radical amelioration and improvement of
working conditions. in our country the necessary technical level of the
elaboration of these problems has been provided. a vast network of scien-
tific research institutes. which elaborate special questions of labor safe-
ty and labor safety techniques. has been set up. Annuallvthe state expendi-
turto on the improvement of working conditions and labor safety, on the

2L
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

provision of workers with special work clothing and shoes and other means
of individual protection are more than 3 billion rubles.

Tnhlun lulu ucruunt the Increased lnportnnre of working conditions as a
factor of the increase of production efficiency. the 25th CPSU Congress
outlined the task of continuing this work during the 10th Five-Year Plan.
of creating more favorable conditions for highly productive labor and the
extensive use of the creative abilities of the workers.

The AUCCTU and the USSR State Consittee for Science and Technology approved
an extensive program of work on the solution of the scientific and technical
problems of labor safety. which provides for the elaboration and introduc-

tion of methods and means. which ensure the decrease of injuries and occupa-

tional diseases and the improvement of the sanitary and health conditions
of labor.

The main direction of the improvement of working conditions is the compre-
hensive consideration of the sanitary. physiological. psychological and
esthetic requirements when planning new and modernizing old enterprises.

The elaboration of the criteria of the evaluation of the social and economic
efficiency of new equipment from the point of view of the improvement of
working conditions is becoming one of the most important tasks. in the

new USSR Constitution it is written: "The state is taking care of the im-
provement of working conditions and labor safety. its scientific organiza-
tion. the decrease. and subsequently the complete displacement of diffi-
cult physical labor on the basis of the complete mechanization and automa-
tion of production processes in all the sectors of the national economy"
(Article 21). The changes of the conditions and content of labor serve as
the material basis for overcoming the socio-economic differences in labor.
The differences between workers of mental and physical labor. which are
caused by the insufficient level of development of physical production on
the part of both its physical-material and subjective ﬁxtors.are the most
profound differences. which are connected with the retention of the sur-
vivals of the attachment of a person to one type of activity. The surmount-
ing of them is a complicated. lengthy process which in terms of time will
take up the entire period of the building of the communist society. V. I.
Lenin wrote that the intelligentsia will remain a special social stratum
henceforth until the acheivement of the highest degree of development of

the comaunist society.3 The realization of the main directions of technical
progress in the foreseeable future--complete mechanization and automation--
is gradually changing the place and role of the workers of physical labor

in the system of social production. Much attention is being devoted to the
increase of the general educational level of working young people. Voca-
tional and technical schools. which train skilled workers in the most com-
plicated occupations and at the same time give a secondary education, are

 

3. See V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sechineniy." Vol 64. p 351.

25

FOR 0F?ICth USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE "NLY

undergoing extensive developsent. The deVelopmsnt of the network of general
educational schools, the free nature and broad accessibility of education
are the basis of tae considerable increase of the educational level of the
workers of physical labor. The gap in the level of education of the popula-
tion by social groups has been reduced. in I919 per 1,000 people of the
corresponding groupsiherehad a higher and secondary education: workers-~8h.
kolkhoz iarserso-lb. specialists and enployees--5£2. in 1977 respectively
732. 562 and 972. in the future the differences between then will concern
mainly the correlation between the level of secondary and higher education.
The gap between the level of income is gradually being reduced on the basis
of the increase of the level of skills of the workers of physical labor

and the improvement of the system of din..ibutive relations. The overall
increase of the standard of living of the workers. which along with the
extensive development of the network of general educational and cultural
institutions is a necessary condition of oVercosing the differences in

the consumption of cultural wealth. is of great importance in eliminating
the socio-economic differences between workers of mental and physical labor.
Article 66 of the USSR Constitution states: "USSR citizens have the right to
use the achievements of culture. This right is guaranteed by the general
accessibility of the values of domestic and world culture. which are in
state and public foundations; the development and uniform location of cul-
tural and educational institutions on the territory of the country; the
devolopment of television and radio. the book publishing business and the
periodic press. the network of free libraries; the expansion of the cultural
exchange with foreign states."

The building of a mature socialist society was accompanied by socio-rconomic
transformations in agriculture. which were aimed at its transformation into
an industrial sector of production and at the overcoming on this basis of
the substantial differences between industrial and agricultural labor. None
the less the level of development of the productive forces. the degree of
saturity of socialist production relations and so on are still inadequate

in agriculture. The capital-labor ratio and the power-worker ratio. the de—
gree of the division of labor. the level of the skills of workers are lower
in agriculture.

The kolkhoz form of ownership gives the differences between agricultural
and industrial labor the nature of class nonantagonistic diiferences. This
is manifested in the fact that the reproduction process in the kolkhoa sec-
tor is accomplished mainly by means of the assets of the kolkhozes them-
selves. Kolkhoz ownership sets definite limits to the redistribution of
material and labor resources. The pay of kolkhoz farmers and its level de-
pend on the level of the income of the individual koikhozes. although at
the present stage the state guarantees the provision of the necessary mini-
mum pay by means of granting credits. At state enterprises the amounts of
the stimulation funds are regulated by uniform norms. within kolkhoz owner-
ship there is not such uniforaity. therefore there are substantial differ-
ences in the supplementary pay. in l977 the average monthly wage of sov-
khozes workers was 80.1 percent of the level of the wage of industrial

26

FOR OFFICIAL SSE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

workers. while the average monthly pay of kolkhoslerserswss 61.3percent of
that level. with allowance for the private subsidiary farm. to which

26.3 percent of the budget of the faeily of the holkhor farmer falls. the
differences in the level of income are less significant than the differ-
ences in the level of pay.

The industrialization of agriculture serves as the material basis for
soreountlng the socio-econoeic differences between agricultural and indus-
trial labor. Huch was done in this area during the Ninth Five-Year Plan.
During the 10th Five-Year Plan the capital invest-ants in agriculture are
planned in the amount of [71.7 billion rubles. Isportant leasures on the
further development of the sgro-industrial complex are being i-ple-ented.
Interfarl cooperation end agro-induatrial integration underwent extensive
development during the industrialization of agriculture. As a result of
the developeent of these processes the framework of the group ownership of
individual kolkhoses will be overcome. Interfere cooperation is. in par-
ticuler. an important fore of the integral convergence of kolkhos ownership
with state ownership. In the new USSR Constitution it is noted: "The state
is promoting the increase of the social uniformity of society--the oblitera-
tion of class differences. the substantial differencao between the city and
the countryside."

The effect of the main economic law. which predetermines the need for the
change of the nature and content of labor. the ilproveeent of its condi-
tions and the decrease of the duration of the working time. is creating

the possibility for the developsent of the personality of the workers in
the process of labor activity. and on the whole the increase of the attrac-
tiveness of national labor. Attractive labor is. as Marx expressed it.
labor which is the self-realization of the individual. that is. labor which
enables a person to realise hie creative abilities. and at the sane time

an activity. in the process of which a person develops and improves these
abilities. . l. Lenin indicated that socialise opens for workers the

way to creative labor. they will be able "to shew their worth. to develop
their abilities. reveal their talents. which in the people is an untapped
spring...."S connecting this not only with material and technical. but.
what is the Iain thing. with socio-econonic conditions. The question of a
new attitude toward labor. Lenin said. "/could/ Lin italicg7 be raised in
practice only after the gaining of political power by the proletariat. only
after the expropriation of the landowners and capitalists. only after the
decisive victory of the proletariat which has won state power....6

The data of sociological research attest that the aspiration to engage in
creative labor. to work for the good of all of society is beco-ing to a

a. See at. Mars and r. Engels. "Soch." 5mg. Vol ‘6. me n. 9 no.
5. v. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy.“ Vol 35. p I95.

6. V. I. Lenin. "Polnoye sobreniye sochineniy." Vol ‘0. p 316.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂlY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

greater and greater extent the most important stimulus of the participation
of the7broad masses of the workers in social production at the present
stage.

The formation of the demand for creative labor for the good of all of soci-
ety as one of the most important spiritual demands of the individual under
the conditions of developed socialism is evidence of the increased level of
intellectual deVelopment of the broad masses of workers. the increase of
their social self-consciousness. The high general educational and occupa-
tional level is increasing the interest of the workers in scientific and
technical creativity. is promoting the iurther improVement of production.
The creative nature of labor and its social significance are influencing
the formation of the attitude toward labor as a vital need.

One of the typical features of a developed socialist society is the further
increase of the social activeness of the workers. the main forms of which
are the participation of the workers in the management of production and
the extensive scope of socialist competition. Public socialist ownership
of the means of production objectively governs the fulfillment by each mem-
ber of society of specific functions on the management of production. The
participation of the workers in the management of production. on the one
hand. substantially increases their responsibility for the fulfillment of
the national economic plans (which involves the tightening up of labor dis-
cipline) and. on the other. requires (owing to the increase of responsibil-
ity) the considerable increase of their rights. the granting of greater
independence and the display of initiative in the organization of the ful-
fillment of the assignments of the national economic plan.

The increase of the participation of the workers in the management of pro-
duction at the present stage is objectively governed by the changes both

in production itself (the enrichment of the content of labor) and in the
aggregate labor force. The level of the general and vocational education of
the bulk of the workers has increased substantially. the proportion of en-
gineering and technical personnel has become significant. various forms

and methods of involving the workers in the management of production have
been developed by many years of practical work.

Socialist competition is the most massive and effective form of participa-
tion of the workers in the management of production. it is capable of in-
volving nearly all the competitors in participation in the management of
production. At the 25th CPSU Congress it was noted that mass socialist
competition has become an effective method of influence of the working
class. the kolkhoz peasantry and the intelligentsia on all aspects of

 

7. In the past IS years alone tens of new creative organizations and as-

sociations of workers have emerged: permanent production conferences.
scientific and technical societies. societies of rationallzers and inven-

tors. public design and economic bureaus. councils of specialists. leading
workers and innovators. personnel divisions on a public basis and so on.

28
FOR OFFlClAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

economic activity. At present care than 90 million people are taking part
in socialist cowetition. including more than 50 million in the movement
for a conmunist attitude toward labor. The competition participants. by
assuming obligations. are revealing reserves of the increase of labor pro-
ductivity. the economy of eaterisl resources. the organization of labor.
are promoting the drafting of sure stepped-up plans and the increase of the
efficiency of social production. The extensive dissemination of various
forms of the participation of the workers in management confirms the objec-
tive dependence of this process. It is typical that at present there is
being revealed a shift from the fulfillment of the tasks of promoting the
development of production. which previously faced various public organiza-
tions. to the direct exercise by them of a number of functions of manage-
ment. Generalizing what has been achieved. the new USSR Constitution in
Article 8 recorded the increased role of labor collectiVes in the solution
of state and production probleas. The main direction of the development of
the political system of Soviet societynthe further development of social-
ist democracy--is promoting further changes in the nature of socialist labor
on the path of its development into conmunist labor.

Recoanended Reading List

K. Marx. "Criticism of the Goths Program" (It. Nora: and F. Engels. "Soch.."
Vol I9).

V. I. Lenin. "How to Organize Competition" ("Polnoye sobreniye sochineniy."
Vol 35).

"Haterinly XXIV s"yezdo KPSS" Liaterinlu of the 26th CPSU Congress-L Polit-
izdnt. I97].

"interiely XXV s"yetda KPSS" ﬁateriels of the 25th CPSU Congress]. Polit-
izdet. I976.

"Konstltu_t_siya (Osnovnoy :akon) Soyuxa Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskilth res-
publ ik" [the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Union of Soviet Social-
ist Republicgl. .‘Ioscov. 1977.

L. I. Brezhnev. "O Konstitutsii 555:3. Doklady i vystupleniya" LOn the USSR
Constitution. Reports and Speechegl. Politizdet. 1977.

L. l. Brezhnev. "A historical Landmark on the Path to Counnism" (PROBLDW
HIM I SOTSIALIZNA. No 12. I977).

"de v_usloviyakh razvltogo setsializma: sotsial'no-ekonomicheskiye prob-

lemy" LLpbor Under the Conditions of Developed Socialism: Socio-Bconomlc
Problemgl. lzdntel'stvo ”nonomika". 1977.

N. V. Markov. "Sotsialisticheshiy trud i yen budushcheye. Nekotoryye
probleny razvitiya truda v usloviyakh h‘TR" _/_$ocialist Labor and Its Future.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Some Problems of the Development o[_Lebor Under the Conditions of the
Scientific end Technical Revolution]. Politizdnt. 1976.

D. Kerpukhin. I. Oblonekeye. "National Lebor Under Socialism et the Preeent
Stage" (VOPROSY BKONOHIKI. No II. 1977).

COPYRIGHT: ladetol'etvo "Pravda". "Voproey ekononlki". 1979

7607
680: 1823

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFHCML USE ONLY

MNMA‘I'ION

I. C. PAMVSKIY. MINISTER OF MIWAYS, VIEWS RAIL M9081
Moscow MMYA I EMVOZIM‘M ‘I'YAGA in Mllen No 1. Jan 79 pp 2-7

[Article by Hero of Socielist Lebcr I. c. Pevlovskiy, ussa hinister of Roll-
weys: "Raise the Level of “Prensport Operetione'f]

[melt] Under present condition trenepcrt ie. eecordin; to the concise ex-
pression of Coende L. I. Brezhnev. gemrel secretery of the oc CEBU end cheir-
een of the Presidiue of the (583 Suprene Soviet, one of the decisive sectore in
the ceepeiot for efficiency end quelity in our netionel eoonoqy. u for the
role of reilweys, the voluee of treneport operetione is sufficient to provide
e full description of their role: we perfore eleost three-ouerters of the
country's dceestic freight tun-hover end neerly 40 percent of ell pessenger
Mu.e

A leading pleee belongs to enployeee of the loconotive end power services end
of plente nekin; repeirs on the uni“ stock end produciw spere perte in
enconpliehin; the eein teeke connected with the further developent end reisin‘
the level of the operetionel eotivity of roll treneport. ‘l'hese pnblees. which
were brought to the forefront in the decisions of the 25th CEBU Congas”. the
decrees of the eubeequent plenues of the cc CPSU. the decree of the cc 0180
end 1881! Council of hinieters: “On "ensures to Develop Reil ‘l‘rensport for
1916-1980," end other dooments of directive crane, ere well known. mderetood
end close to us. The eforenentioned doounente ere regerded by ell reilwey
workers es e continuing diepley of the inert» concern of the Mist Petty
end Soviet goverment for the country's eein steel We end the toilers on
then.

mic Results

Three yeere of the 10th Piwe-Yeer Plen. which were three yeers of persistent
end purposeful work by ell Soviet people, have peeeed. This wee deeply end
cospreheneivel illustreted in the speech by Coerede L. I. beehnev et the
Howe-her (1978 Plenum of the 0180 Centre]. Co-ittee.

Our econoeic echievenente find generel reflection in such e ccnprehensive ne-
tionel econonic indicetor ee netionel incone. In 1978 it increeeed by 4 percent

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

or neerly 16 billion rubles over 1977. while it increesed by 46 billion rubles
for the three yeere of the rive-yeer plen. In connection with this. three-
qusrters of it hes been chenneled into increesing the public weli‘ere.

Productive cspitel in the netionel econoqy hes been substentielly expended end

repleced during the yeers of the 10th Pive-Yeer Plen. It hes grown by 195 bil-
lion rubles end by the end or 1978 lad resched one trillion rubles. Hcre then

100 eeJor industriel enterprises were built.

Industry is developing dyneeicelly. Duriu the pest three yeers output worth
450 billion rubles ncre then thet of the first three yeers oi‘ the Ninth rive-
Yeer Plen hes been produced. A future thet is new in principle hes been the
oreetion end developent of e series of territoriel-produotion coeplexes. tiret
end fore-ost. in the country's hot.

The Pnrty's course of inproving the neteriel end teohnicel bees of egrioulture
is being purposemlly ieplenented. Lest your 235 million tons of grein were
gathered. which constituted the greetest hervest in the history or our country.
Unebetod ettention is being peid to inpnwing housing conditions for workers.
Since the beginning of the rive-yes:- plen. nesrly 6.5 million new well errenged
end seneged epertnents hewe been put into operetion. Successes in other sec-
tors of tho neticnel econosy heve elsc been considereble.

There ere elso certein achievements in reil trensport. Under difficult condi-
tions Soviet reilwey workers echieved e wolune of trensport operetions. the
likes of which hed not been known in the history of donestic trensport. height
turnover on reilweys in 1978 inoreeeed by 24 percent over the third yeer oi' the
previous tiwe-yeer plen. the dispetoh of height grew by 350 sillion tons end
the deperture or pessengers by 250 eillion individuels. how sore then 10 nil-
lion tons of wsrious types of freight ere dispetched end elncst ll nillion
pessengere set out deily. All the eene, ee wee noted et the lumber (1978)
Plenu- of the cc ciao. reilweys still do not setisiy the require-ents of the
netionel econony end populetion for trenspcrt.

During the period or the rive-yeer plen which hes elreedy trenspired. 1.100 Inn
of new reilweys. on the whole in the eastern regions of the country, were built,
1,860 of second (double) treokn were put into cperetion, stretches with e
length toteling 2,000 b were electrified, end 9,200 In of lines were equipped
with eutoeetic block syste- end oentrelized treti'ic control instellnticns.
Trei'i‘ic c ing cepeoity wee inoreesed by e length of 18,000 he on the test-
ing ground poligon‘I]. Industry supplied the reilroeds with 1.350 electric
locosotives. 1,800 min-line diesel lcccnctives, 225,000 freight end 9.000

passenger cers.

If you're telking or the development of locomotive services, then one lust teke
note. to begin with. of the eoceleretion in the rsts of its technical renova-

tion end of introduction of new technology. During the three yeers of the
five-yeer plen. neerly 200 objects were newly built end modernized. on which
more then 100 nillion rubles were spent. Work is now underwey on 300 sore ob-
Jects. In edditicn, e series or prefebriceted buildings {or tectmicel service

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

points for light metal design locomotives is being installed. which will enable
one to raise substantially the quality of work and to iaprove working condi-
tions. Hore than 1.100 new (transfer) lines and acre than 1.200 meotunized
sections and points are operating at depots.

The collectives of new railroads and enterprises are marching in the forefront
of cospetiticn for achievement of high production indicators and ahead-of-sche-
dule mlfillsent of assignments for the five-year plan. The following can
serve as an example: the nelorusskeya [Belorussian]. Odeeso-Kishinlvskays
[Odessa—Richinlv end Hoekoveltaya [Hoscow] Railroads, the collectives of
tho Sol'vyche . Zhaerinka. Moscow-Sortircvochnaya [harshaling], Rybnoye.
Uzlc a. Kiev-Passazhirskiy [Passenger]. Kurgan. hoskovka, Inskaya. Georgin-
nezh Gheorgiu DeJ]. iaeni Ilich and Petrczavodsk locomotive depots. as well
as the 'i‘uapse. Panza. Georgiu-Dezh, Pers', and Hoskovsko-Paveletshiy electric
power supply sections. the Daugavpils. Moscow and Smelyanskiy plants and others.
One must note that 52 depots have been awarded the honorary title of “ﬁlter-
prise of Con-unist Labor." while the movement for a Col-Innist attitude toward
labor was itself born. as everyone WI, at the Ibscow—Sortirovoohma depot—
the hoaeland of the “Great Initiative.“ Collectives at six depots have been
honored with high government decorations.

What then distinguishes these leading collectives now? To begin with. scien-
tific organization of labor, the introduction of flow (transfer) lines and
sechanicaticn. strict industrial and labor discipline end a high sense of con-
scientiousness.

Let's take. for instance. the collective of the Sol'vychegodsk depot. which
was favored with a greeting frca Coarade L. I. Brezhnev.

Shops have been aodernized here and 12 flow (transfer) lines and 14 sechanized
points have been organized here, i.e.. practically all the basic operations
have been transferred to flow systeas. A great impact is being provided by
the network schedule and the new technology for repairing diesels. The quali-
fications of workers in the basic trades have been substantially raised.

in a result, the collective at the depot is achieving high indicators in the
operation, repair. technical maintenance and efficient utilization of locomo-
tives. The layover of diesel locomotives has been reduced for all types of
repairs. while it has been reduced to 2.5 days for the Til-3. i.e., it is more
than two times lower than the average network-wide nora. The average daily
run of the diesel locomotives exceeds 700 Its.

in efficient system for quality control in repairing electric locomotives is
employed at the mbnoye depot on the hoskovskaya RR. which enables one to
check the work of each fitter—repairman and to obtain a steady reduction in
the nusber of breakdowns of locosotive equipment.

The collectives at aany depots are continually reducing the proportionate ex-
penditure of mel and power resources. The leading Sol'vychegodsk and Kupyansk
depots. where practically all the locomotive brigades fulfill the established

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

norne for the expenditure oi‘ power reeouroee, oen eerve en en emple. One
oen elwo include the depot. et mum. Yeroelevl'-Glevnyy [min]. Dele,
Polteve, mmnme, Zlotouet, Rtiehohevo, Cher-nigov end elsewhere enong the
peoeeekere. In e11, eince the beginning of the tive-yeer plen, 1,100,000,000
kwt/hr of electric power end 144.000 tone of etenderd dieoel m1 were eeved
on trection for the trains.

The reduction in e anther expenditure of power reeouroee ie the duty or eech
loooeotive hrigede, which, to e large extent, depende on ekill in running
treine ee well no on the ebility or diepetchere to organize unobetructed trein
treﬂio end on the trecke, oere, etc. being in good working order. One euet
coepete Wt engineere v. P. Orlov (manner). v. A. Foeiohev (Oktyebr'ek),
Yu. V. Korotkov (Sher'ye), K. D. Hegdenko (Polteve), end othere in the coupe-
tition tor thrifty expenditure 01‘ m1 end electric power.

Under conditions chenoterieed by growing chip-onto end e ehorttell oi‘ produc-
tion oepeoitiee, the leeet inﬂation of the rulee for operetion end repeir of
locoeotivee end electric power eupply inetelletione cen leed to eericue coe-
plioetionn in operetione work. Hence, we ere epeeking today of the need for
every kind of increeee in quelificetione, reeponeibility end buoineeelike
efficiency in your work, ooerede loco-otive engineere. The level oi‘ quelii'i-
cetione of loconotive brigadee hed grown in the network ee e whole in 1978.
when coepered with 1970: the number of top-grede operetore hed increeaed from
47.7 to 56.6 percent, while the nueber or eeeietent operetore who hed obtained
e licence to operete e locoeotive hed grown tron 12.1 to 23.4 percent. end in
thie work no eeell enount or credit ehould go, firet end torenoet, to operetor-
inetruotcre, operetor-tutore, ee well co to the eeee—oirouletion Journel m-
measure I EMMA“ ﬂied end to enployeee o: the "l‘reneport' Publiehing
House.

A ecet treeeured poeeeeeion oi' eny enterpriee ere the peceeekere or production,
who ere dietinguiehed by impi'oeoheble mlfillnent oi‘ dutiee to the Petty end
lbeelend. ﬂigh-quelity labor ie e eetter or their honor end conscience end an
object of their pride. One oen neee the following enong thee: ﬁeroee of So-
cieliet Lebor s. n. Yetekov (Depot ieeni Ilioh) end v. r. Sokolov (Homew-
Sortirovochneye), operetore: G. P. htin (Seretov II , i’ittere‘ briade leed-
er; Order of Lenin recipiente N. l. Porkhun (Keenan , N. I. Vygovekiy (toro-
eten') end V. K. Vegorov (Zletouet), operetore; Third Degree Order or Lebor
Glory recipient V. P. Hironenko (Dene), eenior tore-en. And recently we ell
leerned with greet eetiefeotion oi‘ the ewerd or the task Stete Prize for 1978
for outetending eohievenente in labor to peceeekere in the All-Union Socieliet
Coupetition: V. e. Zhilin, senior fore-en or the Sol'vyohegodek depot, II. P.
Hikheyev, fitter, end N. A. Sevin, operetor.

The eenegere oi‘ ell linke in the locoeotive eervicee met eleo iurther oerry
on the work or training the 1ebor force, of inetilling e sense of responsi-
bility in then for the work entrusted to then, end of further developing
eocieliet ccepetition end tutorehip.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lsportant social aeasures are being carried out during the current five-year
plan. During the [past] three years. 4.5 aillion square aeters of living
space have been built and children's preschool institutions with 51,000 places.
general educational schools for 34.000 and hospitals with 6,000 beds have been
opened for railway workers. Supple-entary pay-eat for work during night hours
has been raised and the wage rates {or eaployeee in a series or leading occu-
pations have been increased. Coefficients for the salaries of railway workers
working in regions with harsh natural and cliaatic conditions have been intro-
duced. the average acnthly salary in our industu is 174 rubles, as opposed
to 159 rubles in 1975. {the salary for locoaotive brigades in 1918 has grown
by to percent over that of 1,970, while that of repainen has grown by 57.9
percent. The wage rates and salaries of wireaen and electricians for the over-
head wire network who are engsged in work involving heights and oft-ground
activity as well as of a series of electricians at traction substations and
repair and inspection shops of the electric power supply sections have been
raised.

A decieion has been reached to pay a one-tine lusp award {or prolonged aeri-
toricus service to eaployees emaged in the basic activity of rail transport.
ll'he size of the award. which is directly dependent upon the length of uninter-
rupted service. will be 0.6 to 1.5 [percent?_7 or the acntbly wages rates or
salary. What will this provide. for instance, for a loooactive engineer oper-
ating a passenger train with a length of service o: it) years? When the year's
results are cited, he will receive a one-tine lusp award in the amount of
242 rubles. An electrical wiremn of the Fourth Category engaged in sain-
tenance of the overhead wire network will receive an award of nearly 185 rubles
upon a length of service of 15 years.

The first nt of the one-tine lusp award to esplcyees of the Dal'nevco-
tochnaya in Eastern]. Zabaykal'sksya mm]. VcstocMo-sibirskaya

Eastern Siberian]. Zapadncnsibirshaya western Siberian]. Alan-Atinskaya

also—Ate , ‘i'selinnsya [- Virgin Land] and Zapadnc-Kaaakhstanskaya [Western
Kazakhstan Railroads will be nde when results of the work for l 79 are
cited, the nt to eaployeee of the Sverdlovekeya [Sverdlovsk . Yuzbno-
Ural'skaya Southern Urals], Xuy shevsltaya [Kw shew]. Gor'kovskaya
[Cor'kiy . Severnaya [Northern . Privolzbskaya Volga Valley] and 81:0st-
aziatskaya [Central Asian] Railroads when results for 1980 are cited. while
awards to employees of the renaming railroads and subway system will be node
when results for l981 are cited.

A series or other iuportant social aessures is also being carried out.

Lagging Sections

The situation in rail transport could be substantially better it the so-called
"bottlenecks" were eliainated with greater vigor.

hplcyees of the locomotive services or the Sverdlovskaya, Alan-Atinskaya,

Sredneaziatekaya. zapadno-Keaakhetansksya. Xuywsbevukaya, Zapadno-sibirskaya
and a series of other railroads still do not provide for steady and noraal

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US}: ONLY

operation of the locomotive fleet. The percentage of diesel locoaotivee in a
state of disrepair is 1.5 to 2 times higher than the established norm on these
railroads, while the nuber of instances of dasage to machinery en route to
and while stopped for repairs that were not stipulated in the plan is substan-
tially higher than the average network-wide indicators.

The basic reason for this is a violation of the planned preventive maintenance
system for locomotive repairs, their low quality. weak discipline, the lack of
a lull complement of personnel and the slow developent of the repair base at
depots. The technical condition of locomotives is substantially worsened by
their operation on stretches for traffic turnover that are not securely
fastened, at speeds lower than the rated speeds and pulling trains weighing
snore than the critical weight.

The level of the technical. condition of locomotives has been reduced also
owing to the fact that the oomasnders of a series of railroads, services
within locomotive services and depots are managing their units in an insuffi-
ciontly organized and operations-effective aanner. Thus, a need arose on the
Alma-Atinskaya, Zapadm-Kazakhstanskays and 'i‘selinnaya Railroads for a sharp
increase in the size of the fleet owing to frequent instances of locomotives
being out of ordeH need which depots were not ready to meet. is a result.
the traffic handling capacity of the technical service points and repair base
of these depots does not provide for prompt preparation of diesel locomotives
for operations, which leads to an even greater increase in the number of W
chines in a state of disrepair. A vicious circle is formed, like a chain which
one can break if one performs the necessary task of extracting one decisive
link, which is done in this instance by improving the technical condition of
locomotives through prompt execution of planned repairs and naintenanco.

Meanwhile. in some depots diesel locomotives are turned out from certain types
of repairs that are provided for in the plan at a rate that is 1.5 to 2 times
less than what it was in 1974. since the basic work forces of repairman here
are being channeled into repairing diesel locoaotives damaged during the course
of operations, the nuaber of which is growing as the number of repairs pro-
vided for by the plan is reduced and the care for locomotives on the part of
brigades deteriorates. This situation is also aggravated by the fact that the
dispatcher personnel send locomotives for repair at inopportune tines.

Plant repairs play an important role in restoring locomotive resources. in-
creasing their reliability and improving their technical condition. Measures
are now being taken to expand and modemize the plant locomotive repair base,
which, of course, requires a certain amount of time. Hence, employees of our
industry, first of all, at the Tashkent, Orenburg and Voroneah plants, aust be
more persistent in utilizing internal resources to increase the productivity
of shops, more widely incorporate advanced methods of organizing labor and new
technology for repairs and raise the quality of work.

Recently, serious violations of the labor schedule and time off for locomotive
brigades have been peraitted on a series of railroads. Thus, in 1978, acre

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFXCML US}: ONLY

than half of the violations oi‘ tho established duration of work by brigades
for the entire network were concentrated on the Yushno-Ural'skaya and Sword-
lovskaya Railroads.

In December of last year the Board of the Hinistry oi‘ Railways in conjunction
with the Presidius oi‘ the Central (lo-ittee or the Rail Transport Horkers'
Trade Union eraained the state at affairs on the Svenilovskaya Railroad. It
was noted that the adainistratcrs ot the railroad. as well as of a series of
other railroads. are attcspting to explain the situation that has been created
bmsioally by pointing to inadequate traffic carrying and processing capacities
on freight-intensive stretches and st anor aarshaling yard Junctions. forget-
ting about their own shortooaings in work. is a aatter of fact. the basic
reasons for this are often to ho round in serious oaiesions in operations plan-
ning for train operations and control or the loooaotive nest, in the organiza-
tion or the passage oi‘ trains, above-non layovers en route, cancellation of
trains owing to dosage to the rolling stock and a weakening oi‘ industrial dis-
cipline at aarshaling yards. In a series of instances less—than-consoientiouc
dispatchers sisply do not follow the work schedule of loccsotive brigades.
since their cos-andsre do not hold then responsible for this. UthIstified or-
ders by chiefs of railway branches to lengthen the work schedule are also not
Me ’

v. H. Skvortscv. director of the Sverdlovskaya RR. has been strictly warned
concerning nerioun violations of require-ants of the labor legslaticn, failure
to execute Finictry of Railways orders No. 541‘s of 1911 and son or 1978. ms-
tici'actory organization ci‘ the labor and tine or! of loco-otive brigades. and
a growth in instances of detaining then at work beyond the established non.

The Hinictry of Railways will also hencoi‘orth bold those administrators
strictly responsible who penit violations of labor legislation and of norsal
working conditions and terns for tire off of locoaotive brigades.

Om: aunt note that on aany railroads. including the L'vcvs a [L'vov],
Odessko-Kishinsvskaya [Odessa-Kiohinlv]. Pridneprovckaya Dnepr Valle .
murmurs”. mm. [Southern]. selorusskeyn and Pribaltiyskaya

tic Coast] Railroads. the necessary workiw conditions and terns for tins
of! by engineers and their assistants have been provided for over the course
of a series of years. Hore than 82 percent of the bripdes on?“ in mid“
traffic worked last year according to the non-volunteer systes bssvyzyvnsys
sistena7] and nase schedules [innnoye raspisaniyﬂj, which are drawn up in
a series or depots with the use of computers. There not be sore urgency in
incorpo...‘l~: this tnnd in practice.

chief Tasks

Very crucial tasks in assiailating growing shipents face railway workers in
the next few years and in the long ten. The chiei‘ ones were torsulated in
Progra- Order 501’s. The reserves of locosctive services were pointed out re-
contly in an article by V. P. Sosnin in the Journal Woman I TEND-
VOZNAYA rum (No. n, 1916). Hence. let us dwell tor a assent on the i-di-
sts probleas.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
It is very iaportant under the conditions that have arisen to incorporate in
ovary way possible advanced experience from the work of enterprises and inno-
vators in production and to asks this experience the property of all. In the
area of locoaotive utilisation. one aust cospete with the Georgia-Dean depot.
where many brigades have achieved a 1.000 kn average daily run and 1,000 ainutee
of useful (effective) work froa a loco-otive in 24 hours.

At the Scl'vychegodak depot, as was alrt uiy noted earlier, the useful (effect-
in) run of diesel loco-otiVue as a whole is equal to 700 its a day. while
here at the libs depot on the Zapadno-Kasakhstanskaya R. the average daily
run of aain line 28'1‘101! diesel loccaotivea is only 30} Its. In other words.
one auet saintain a fleet of diesel loco-caves here that is 2.) tiaes larger
than the aforementioned in order to perform identical transport operations.

High productivity of electric locomotives—1.5 times higher than for the net-
work on the average—was achieved by the collectives of the Kuybyshevakaya,
'l‘oelinnaya. Yugo-Zapadnaya [Southwestern], Zabaykal'skaya and Yugo—Voatoch-
hays [Southeastern] Railroads. at the sane tine, the average daily produc-
tivit of an electric freight loco-otive on the Zakavkazekaya [Transcauoa-
sian . Sverdlovskaya. Dal'nevostoohnaya and L'vovskaya Railroads was substan-
tial y lower than the average network-wide figure.

Reserves for improving locomotive utilization are available on all railroads.
The tank of transport enployees—froa fitter at the locosotive depot, engineer
or dispatcher to aanager of an enterprise or a railroad—is to utilize then

more fully.

A special question is that of providing for traffic safety. During recent
years a series of railroads. first of all. the Yugo-Voctochnaya. Kuybyehevekaya
and Yuzhno-Ural’shaya Railroads—have been operating without accidents and
wrecks. while on sose others the amber of slow orders and instances of defec-
tive pcrfornnce in train operations have been reduced. The chief task of
loceaetiwe brigades is one of not permitting slow orders to occur in the
future. for which the efforts both of the engineers the-selves as well as of
operational adainistrators and of public organizations aust be sobiliaed.

A: before, electrification of railways will be the chief trend in further in-
creasing the carrying and traffic capacity of freight-intensive lines. lapor-
tant lines in Western Siberia. Kazakhstan. the Urals and elsewhere sust be
electrified as early as the next few years.

Electrification will. in the aain. be carried out according to a progressive
system with an alternating current of 25 kilovolts. One of the sections is
being electrified according to a new systen with a current of 2 x 25 kilovolte.
which is being proposed for use in the future on the Baykal-Msur Main RR Line

and in Kazakhstan.

An important task in the electric power supply services is that of increasing
the reliability of a series of installations, to begin with, of the overhead
wire network, particularly on ice-covered ground. In terns of needs for

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electric power supply installations. one sust eeke still wider use of the
aesenbliee for diecnosis of the technieel condition of basic connections end
equipeent. teke the necessary eeeeuree for a further reduction in the weer on
overhead wires and proloncetion of their service life end introduce new. sore
efficient servicing nethode that auerentee n high quality of eeintenenoe of
technicel facilities.

Modern electrified lines providiru for intensive trein traffic and hidt speeds
are unthinksble without inproved eeene of auto-etion end teleeeohenios.

At the present tine 20.700 in of electrified lines. or 11 percent of their
total length. cperete on renote control. w the end of the five-year plsn the
length of the telenechenized sections will grow to 31.000 Ice. Vork will con--
time in 1979 on the further exunsion of etetion treohs. strengthening of
tracks and developent of other instelletions.

In the nature industry will begin to supply rail trensport with electric loco-
notivee with a power of 8,000 to 10,000 kwt with support-frees suspension
[oporno-remoye podveshiveniye‘l] in the traction ector end an electronic
control systen on thyristors [tiristory’t] end diodes with high perenetere.
electric treins. diesel looonotivee with a power of 4.000 to 6.000 horse power
in e unit. new six-oni- diesel treins with eleetrieel drive end nil diesel cars
with cm which oen be coupled to thee.

A diesel switching engine with a power of 2.000 horse power end an e-erle cer-
riege hes been crested for work at esJor hup nrshelinc yerde end for heevy
switching end heulep operations. hployoes at depots lust be treined pmptly
to operate the new loco-otives end to perfous technical eeintenunce end repeirs
on his

Greet attention nust be peid to working conditions and conditions for the every-
dsy life of enployees of loconotive services end plente. leprsvenent in the
working conditions for sore then 35.000 work plsces threw eutontion of send-
conveyiru units end conpressor stetions. the introduction of flow lines

for the repair of looonotives end their Joints, nodernizetion of the systens
for suction-end-exhsust ventilation end dust renovel. inprove-nt in the sow-
proofing of engineers' cebs end inprovenent of control devices is enviseced
during the current five-yes: plen. It will be necessary to put new senitery
end living coco-odetions for 50.000 eeployees into operetion.

In recent yeers scholers et the Centred Scientific Reeeeroh Institute of the
Ministry of hilwnys end at higher trensport educationel institutions have ex-
pended their connection with reilreeds. depots end repeir yexde. For instence.
reseeroh on the reesons behind the msetisfectory teehnicel condition of die-
sel locoeotives on the reilroeds of Kemhsten end the Gcr'kovsma an end
study end disseeinetion of the positive experience on the Sevems end Belo-
msskeyc ﬁnilroeds heve enabled the dreftinc of a series of eeesures to isprove
the operations of the diesel loooeotive fleet.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'UI Ul'l'lblﬂlu U35 Whl

All the one. we expect en even cloeer tie with precticel work on the pert of
ecientiete end en even greater yield in tone of preotioel reeulte.

A syetee end epperetue for diegnoeie of the condition of dieeele through e
epectrel enclyeie of the oil. which hen been developed end introduced on 26
reilroede. eneblee one to prevent cone denege to dieeels while en route. How-
ever. e well-proportioned syeten ie needed to diegnoee the condition of ell
the Jointe in the looonotiveo. which would eneble one to uncover defeote dur-
ing the couree of cperetionn and prior to beirc cent for repeire end to evelu-
Me the quelity of repeire when the locomotive deperts from the enterprice
performing then.

it is not a einple situetion thet hee developed in reil trenepcrt. ee Coerede
I. I. Brezhnev noted et the hove-her (1978) Plenm of the cc CPBU. In thie
connection. in eocord with the State Plen for the Economic and Social Develop-
ment of the USSR edopted et the 10th Seeeion of the USSR Suprene Soviet. eore
cepitel inveeteente ere being elloceted in 1979 then enviseged by the five-yeer
plan to inprove the eeteriel end technicel beee end to inoreeee the oepeoity
end use of eoveeent of the reilweys.

in order to increeee the treffic end certying cepecity of nein linee. 820 be
of second (double) treoke will be put into operetion. 1.300 in will be elec-
trified end ncre then 3.500 he of reilwey lines will be equipped with cute-
ratio block eyeteee end centrelized treffic control. There will be 770 kn of
new linee thet will go into cperetion. of which 220 kn will be the Tyndn-
Berkekit line. elou which ehipeent of southern Yekut coel will begin. Perti-
culer attention in being peid to the developeent of reilroede in the eoetern
regione of the country to provide for the growing value of ship-onto of
Kenekoeginekiy [Kenek-eginekcye]. nub-em end Kumtekiy coel.

There will be 1.350 new dieeel locoective unite. «0 electric lcccnotivee. ee
well on freight end peseenger oers. conteinere. etc.. delivered to nilroede.

Plans ere being outlined for e further inprovenent in the quelitetive indica—
torc for utilizetion of rolling etook. heioit reiloer turn-exound tine not
be eccelereted by 5.5 percent end the everege daily productivity of e locono-
tive nuet be reieed by 1.5 percent.

On eccount of the eeeeuree which heve been outlined. reilwey workeio euet ee-
siailete e freight turnover of 3.518 billion ton-kiloneterc. or 2.6 percent
higher then in 1978, and likewise nuet oerry 5.0 percent acre peeeengere then
in 1978. In this connection. the growth in lebor productivity eunt be 2.1
rercent en oppoeed to 1.4 percent lect yeer.

Coneidering the greet end heiyxtened teneicn in the oporetione of the nil-
xoeds. reilwey workere out do en even fuller Job of bringing to light the
internel reeourcee which are eveileble to trenepert in order to pox-fore euc-
ceeemlly the ieportent teske thet heve been est forth by the Perty end the
government and to eneure high quality end efficiency in the operetiono of the
country'e nein etsel hiamye.

COPYRIGHT: lzdetel'stvo ‘Treneport'. "Slektricheekqe i teplcvczneye tyega".
1979

9“} :~;.\'o
coo: 1823 40

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY