APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: cuA-Ropoa-oooaonooo1oooaooao-a
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300395

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8336

14 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 11/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030039-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.S. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OUNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
OIIUOGRAPNIC DAY!
SNIIT

    

l. Hep-m No. JPRS L/8336 _ ’. Recipient's Arena-en No.

pen ' re
14 March 1979

    
  
   
   

rwsuuous 0N unconcs AND omzaous naucs
(P000 11/79)

7. Auk-1(a) O. Peeler-is. Omaniralisa Rep.
9. I'rdotninp (kg-sumac. Nan! and Adduu l0. Packet/TasII/Iock Use No.
Joint Publications Research Service

1000 North Glebe Road I. Cocteau/Gran No.
Arlington. Virginia 22201

12. Spec-one; Omaniuuss Name and Address I)- ‘I’ne ol laps" t Pevisd

As above

g f
.3.

IS. Supple-mm, Notes

. Asmara

The serial report consists of translations fron the world press and radio

relating to law. lav cnforcensnt, illicit traffic and personalities concerned
with narcotics and dangerous drun.

. Key Words and ecu-rat Aaalyana.

Narcotics
Drug Addiction
Law (Jurisprudence)

Law Enforcement

m. ldrmulirvlepea-Esded Tenn

Dangerous Drugs
Drug Control
Drug Traffic

17:. COSA‘I'IFu-ld/Ccoep SK. 60. 61‘

ll. Avanlabnluy sung“: . rarity Clan ( M! II. No. 0! Pans
For Official Use Only. \ ,
Liaited Number of popies Available From JPRS. " ' m

'°"“ ""“' """' ”"' rm: roan nu s: nepnooucso “"°"‘°‘ "‘"""
TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 11/79)

Contents PAGE
Ax“
BURM
Brief.
Youth, Roman Jailad for Pooaoaaion l
INDIA
Editorial llama Again-t India Booming Too Tolerant of Druga
(Editorial; MM! SIMMRD, 18 I“ 79) ooaaooooooooooaa 2
MALAYSIA
Pout Charaod With Trafficking
("Eu STRAITS TIMES, 1'1‘: 79) ooaoooaoaooaooaooaooaoaaaa 3
‘ Dmga Bound for Auatralia Pomd in Staroo Sot
("w STRAITS Twas, 12 Feb 79) 0.......‘OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO l0
Piahaman Hold on Drug charge Ordered To Make Dafanae
("w “HITS Tmzs' 1‘ P'h 79) O'OOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOO. 6
SINGAPORE
Briafa
Trafficking Hatdn Jailed 7
Drug Offanao 7
SR! UNKA
Briofa
Auatralian, Briton Artaated 8
THAILAND
Hanun ﬁmmd ntnltar
(NATION ”VIE", 15 Feb 79) O00..OOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 9
- a - [III - INT -138 FOUO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTBH‘S (Continued)

Policenen Get 40 Years on Drug Charge
(WGKOK ”ST, 15 F3!) 79) JOOOOOOOOOOOCO0.0.0.000...

4.5 Tone of Harihuana Seized, Deetined for Seattle
(NATIW “VIE", 2 Mar 79) eeeeeoeceeeeaooeoeeeeeeeee

Raid Neta Another Harihuana Bonanra
(”81" 24 Feb 79) 0.0...OOOOOODOIOOO0.0.0.0000...DO.

Farmer-a Gm 'Pot' on the Sly
(NM, 25 Fob 79) 0.0....OCCOOOCCCOCCCOOIOQIC.00....

'Hippiea' Nabbad for Druge
(NST, 25 Feb 79) onI...0.0.0.0.000.00.000.000000000

Briefa
Auatraliana Arreeted

CANADA

Cocaine Seizure Near Montreal Reported
(u Pussz’ 31 J“ 79) 0.0.0000...OOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.

Lndian Millionaire Smtenced for Drug Traffic
(LE mm, 15 J.“ 79) ICOOOOOOOO..O-OOOOOOOOOOIOOOO

LATIN AMERICA

BAR-W8

BELIZE

Briefa
Druge Found in Plane Craeh

Briefa
Heroin Intercept in Belize

001.018“

Fonner DAS Official Lope: Oyuela Arrested
(EL TImm' 12 Jm 79) CIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.000...

1V0 American Traffickera 'Dieappaar' Pm Cimaga Jeil
(Halter P. Martina; In; El. 1mm, 15 Jan 79) ......

Cocaine Laboratory Explodea, Five Injured
(EL Tlmm, 16 J." 79) ICOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0.0.0.0....

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

10

12

13

ll.

15

16

l7

19

20

21

22

25

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

couraus (Continued)

Ooceine 'Hule' Dioe et Berrenquilie an Route to New York
(EL ESPECTAwR, 16 J.“ 79) OOIOOOCOOOOOOOO....0000...

Treffiokere Trede Heepone for Herihuene
(J00. Cervantee; all TIDﬂ’O, 13 J” 79) ooeeeoooeeeeee

Ooceine with New Proceee' hided
(EL ESPECTANR, I“ J.“ 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO00......

Treffiokere, Plane, Vehiclee Seized in Deliver
(£10 Emma. 15 Jm 79) 0.0.0.0...OOOIOOOCCOOOOOOO

DAS Reide urge Coce Plantation
(EL ESPECTANR' 10 J.“ 79) OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.0...

Herihuene Seized, No Arreete in Headline
("111° ACOV.“ stlv.‘ EL ESPECIAWE, 6 J.“ 79) eoeeoo

Merihuene Entere Prieon in 'Triplex'
(EL ESPMANR' 11 J” 79) OOOOOOIOOCCUOOOOOOOOOOO0.0

Coceine, Aircreft Seized Neer Gainer
("Crctn “Ct”; EL TIMPO, 11 J.“ 79) oooeeoeeeoeooo

Neerly Pore Coceine Seized et Airport
(EL ESPECWR' 11 J." 79) OOOCOOOOOOCC.....O...OI...

Briefe
Couine Confieceted
Coceine Shipment Seized
Coceine Confiecetion

ECUMXJR

HEXIOO

Briefe
Colonel Chet-god on Dmge

Review of Book ‘vaoetitution end Druse'
(bourdee Romero A., Ane Herie Quintanille;
BL slow. 1‘ J.“ 79) '0’....0000....I...‘.......C.C..

Briefe
Cocaine lieu].

-c.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

27

28

30

32

33

35

36

37

38

39
39

60

lol

42
CONTENTS (Continued)
PANAMA

Colt-nut Vieve Effecta of 0.8. Legalization of Harihuena
(Mario Augueto Rodriguea; LA RENBLICA, 28 Feb 79) ..

PERU

Cocaine Ring Poeing ae Handicrafte Exporters Uncovered
(“Pmsso’ 19 J0“ 79) O...OQGOOOOOOIOOIOI0.0.0.000...

URUGUAY

Draft Law on Druge Sent to Council of State
(31! PAIS' 23 J.“ 79) COCO....00...OOOOOOIOOOOOOOOO...

VDIEMLA

Briefe
Traffickere’ Arreet

NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
EGYPT

ﬂeehiah Gmere Arreeted
(m EcYnm mm, 8 P'b 79) COCOOOOOOOOOCIODIOOO

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
MADAGASCAR

Raeoenaivo Paper Detaila Propertiee of Khat
(MADAGASCAR-“arm, 7. 8 Feb 79)

MAURITIUS

Antidrug Drive Reported
(LE MAURICIEN, 15 Jan 79) eeeeeeeeeoeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee

HESTBRN BUNPE
ITALY

5mm: In JPRS L/8278 (F000 [79) 15 February 1979 of
thie eeriee in the article entitled "Druge Seized, Five
Arreete Made at Airport," pp 51-52, on page 51 please
change in paragraph lo, line 7 360,000 fixee to read
160,000 fAXOCe

Page

05

67

’48

69

50

55
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000300396

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conmrs (Continued)
SWITZERLAND

Brief.

Sentence for Trafficking
0mg Bathe
Dulu- SOIItClCOd

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00860R000100030039-6
BRIEFS

YOUTH, wow JAILBD FOP. POSSESSIm--Handaley, l7 Feb--Handelay Northeast
township court No l with I) Xhin Haung as chairman and Dew "in Kyi and U

Tun Sein as nembers today found he Shosi, 32, daughter of u Sholu of Lashio.
guilty as charged under Section 6.3 [of the Narcotic Drugs Law] and sentenced
her to 10 years imprisonment. The case was brought to trial after Subinspec-
tor U The: Shay of Mandalay police station No 8 and war: council members
found a packet of heroin and a cigarette tin containing heroin from defendant
Ha Shosi on 16 December 1977. The same township court No 1 today sentenced
Haung l’ho Gyawt, 22, of Hay-yo's Hawgon ward, to 7 years inprisoment after
the defendant was also found guilty under Section 6.3. The case was that

on 31 Deceaber 1976. Corporal U Aye Haung of Mandalay police station no 8

and ward council members seized lO packets of heroin, each worth 10 kyate,

from Haung Pho Gyawt. [Text] [Rangoon amen ALIN in Burnese 22 feb 79
p 6 BK]

cso: 5300
EDITORIAL WARNS AGAINST INDIA BECOMING TOO TOLERANT 0P DRUGS
Delhi SUNDAY STANDARD in English 18 Feb 79 p 6 DK
[Editorialz "Drug Traffic")

[Text] During the sixties and early seventies the media wrote extensively
about the drug traffic that threatened to route itself through India. Then
having run the subject to the ground. everyone forgot all about it. In
these last five years of public ennui, drugs like marijuana. heroin, cocaine
and charas in our larger cities have become openly available. It requires
no more effort or subterfuge than purchasing a packet of cigarettes. They
are no longer an amusing novelty but a danger. And the student faculty as
well as the urbane Indian are providing an adequate market for the whole-
sale dealers in the East to seriously reconsider India as both a potential
selling area as well as a major stopover point for raw opium on its way to
Europe and the Americas.

It is equally likely that with our casual attitude to the invasion of hard
drugs. we will soon be a serious port of call for the Poppy Kings of the
Far East. Young boys and girls smoke charas with impunity in Delhi and
Bombay, on campus and off. Private pot parties in elite circles are no
longer eyebrow-raising exceptions. It is happening. today. in front of our
noses. to our children. Large consignments of contraband drugs are caught
by Customs regularly. coming in and going out. The massive hippie popula-
tion we give refuge to are prime carriers for the unscrupulous narcotic
magnates. Despite such obvious indications, nobody is perturbed.

If things go on in this ridiculously tolerant manner. it is a question of
tine before India replaces Nepal as the Asian Connection. Our relatively
unpoliced coastline and mountains are ideal escape routes for traffickers.
Hust we wait for things to get out of hand before we tackle the problems.

Today. in Bombay. any street urchin will tell you when a new consignment
hits the market. Immediately the prices go down. Tomorrow, it is your
children who will be hooked on the habit and by then it will be too late.
The drugs are here on our streets already. We either come down hard imme-
diately or suffer the proliferation in the future.

And that is one trip we must not take.

680: 5300 2
POUR CHARGED HIT“ TRAFFICKING
Koala Lumpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 1 Her 79 p 5 BK

[Excerpt] Alor Star, Hed.--A former Central Narcotics Bureau officer told
the high Court today he saw a son placing a paper bag—which was later
found to contain 10 plastic packets of heroin--on top of a chicken coop
during a drug raid on a house.

"I introduced myself and told the man not to run away." lnsp. Mohamed
Anin bin Abdul Saut. said.

He added that he drew out his pistol when he saw the man attenpting to run
away.

Insp. Mohamed Main was testifying against lorry driver Teoh Kai Seong, 32,
and three others, including two women, on separate charges of trafficking
in heroin.

' lnadaisaible'

Teoh. defended by Mr Karpal Singh and Mr P.S. Gill, is charged with traffick-
ing in 1.862 kilogranes of heroin at a house in Sungei Petani on July 21.,
1976. Labourer Yeoh Cheng Poh. 35. Lil) Sun Kin, 66, and Hg Cha Nya, 67,

are charged together with trafficking in 1.862 kilogra-es of heroin on the
same day and place.

C80: 5300
DRUGS BOUND son AUSTRALIA FOUND IN STEREO SET
Kuala Lumpur NEW STRAITS TIMES in English 12 Feb 79 p 1 BR

[Text] Alor Star, Sun.--The High Court heard today how Custoas officers
at the Changloon checkpoint found 10,416 grannes of ganja hidden in a
stereo tuner and a casette deck belonging to an Australian tourist.

Superintendent of Custom Mohamed Yusuf bin Che Long of the Bukit Ksyu
llitem Custons office said the drugs were discovered after the two sets

were opened.

The drugs, in #9 packets wrapped in plastic, were hidden in the sets and
believed to have been intended to be taken to Australia.

Bncik Mohamed Yusuf was testifying against baker Ross Anthony Cribb, 21,
who is charged with trafficking in ganja on Jan. 26 last year.

Bncik Mohamed Yusuf said Customs officer Mohamed Moor bin Baheri brought
Cribb to hin and expressed his suspicion about the two sets.

'Surprised'

Mohamed ﬂoor had earlier been instructed to examine the sets before issuing

receipts for the payment of deposits required for dutiable goods on transit
to Malaysia.

The sets were weighed and each weighed 12 kilogranes. However, the
attached catalogue listed the weight of the stereo tuner as 5.7 kilogramses
and the cassette deck as 6.1 kilogrmes.

Because of the discrepancy, Encik Mohued Yusuf said he asked Cribb what
was inside the sets and he replied there me nothing.

He said he then told Cribb he had to open up the sets as they suspected
there was sonathing in them.

Opening the stereo tuner, Encik Mohamed Yusuf said, he found a plastic

wrapping of 25 small plastic packets containing green herbal materials
believed to be ganja.
Another 23. siniler pockets were found wrapped in plsstic, inside the
csesette deck.

"Cribb see-ed surprised and ass muttering to himself." he ssid, when on
Bncik Abdut mlik bin llaji Ishek asked about Cribb‘s resction to the find.

The trio! is before Justice Dstuk Syed Agil Bsrekbsh. Cribb is being
defended by Mr K. il. Choe sesisted by Mr Js-es Ponnish.

The hesring continues tonorrow.

C50: 5300
Koala Luapur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 14 Feb 79 0 p BK

[Text] Kuala meur, mesa-The high Court today ordered three fisheraen
to make their defence on a drug trafficking charge involving 6.31 lb. of
heroin.

“‘11; Ah Bah. 27, Too Ah Bah. 26, and Ong Sui Kin. 27, will make their re-
spective defence tomorrow. They were jointly charged with cousitting the
off nce at Nanyang Hotel in Jalan Sultan here on Oct. 10, 1976.

The order by Mr. Justice heron Hashim was made after their respective
counsel had submitted "a no case to answer."

Il'ng is represented by Hr. Ksrpal Singh, Tee by Mr. R. Rajasingan and Dog
by Hr. Jag-Jit Singh. DP? ancik Hohued Yassio Ibrahim appeared for the
prosecution.

Di asset led

At 4: previous hearing, ASP h. Ranalingan of the Narcotic Branch, Selangor
CID headquarters told the court that he recovered lO packets plastic
packets containing heroin hidden in two separate stacks of wooden trays,
when he raided a room at the hotel.

He recovered another two plastic packets from a suitcase which he dia-sntled
at his office after arresting the three sen.

Earlier, under cross-emination by Mr. Jag-Jit Siogh. ASP Banding- said
that he arrested the three aen after failing to locate s an by the nape
of N3 Go Gah.

lie said 'Jg was mentioned to him by Ong and is believed to be involved in
an international drug distribution.
BRIEFS

TRAFFICKING Hanna" JAILZD--A 28-yesr old prison usrder. (Hussein Bin Ahnsd),
was sentenced to 6 yesrs‘ jsil snd ordered to be given six strokes of the
cone for trsfficking in 1.85 grs-s of heroin st the Queenstoun Remand Prison
lsst sonth. He was slso sentenced for 1 year for possession of the drug.
"is sentences will run concurrently. ﬂusssin plesdsd guilty to both of-

fences. [TEXt] [Singspore Dossstic Service in English 1130 GMT 15 Feb 79
BK

DRUG OFFENSE--Alor Stsr. Tues.--Satny-seller Adek Truna bin Sukimsn. 21.
was yesterday sentenced by the Sessions court to five years' jsil snd
ordered to receive five strokes of the rotsn for possession of 5.61

grammes of heroin. {Text} [Singspore THE STRAITS TIMES in English
28 Feb 79 p 15 BK)

C50: 5300
BRIEFS

AUSTRALIAN,BRITON ARRESTED--Police arrested two foreign nationals who had

in their possession 1,246 grains of hashish in the Hikkaduws tourist resort
last week. The police Narcotics Bureau reported the arrest of an Australian
on Monday in Hikkaduwa. who had with his 775 grains of ﬂashish. valued at
Rs. 2,100. Previously a UK national had been taken into custody for pos-
sessing 221 grains of hashish and 250 grains of hsshish oil. Narcotics
Bureau sources pointed out that since hashish was not ssde locally it sust

have been snuggled in to Sri Lenka from another country. [Colombo SUN in
English 16 Feb 79 p 3 BK]

680: 5300
“EROIN FOUND IN ALTAR
Bangkok NATION REVIEH in English 15 Feb 79 p 8 BK

[Text] Crime Suppression police yesterday searched a warehouae in ﬂua
Hark area and discovered two kilogramnes of No 6 heroin pending snuggling
out of the country to France.

Police aaid the drug was neatly packed in a set of altar at the warehouse
of the Boonna Moving Company which handles the packing of goods for
shipment to other countries.

Police are hunting for the owner of the drug which was reportedly sent here
from Chiang Mai.

 

worshipping table set and a wooden elephant stuffed with heroin for shipuent
abroad which were seized by police. [Bangkok DAO SIAM in Thai 15 Feb 79 p l BK]

C50: 5300 9
POLIGEHEN GET 40 YEARS 0N DRUG CHARGE
Bangkok BANGKOK POST in English 15 Feb 79 p 3 BK

[Text] Deputy Prime Minister General Dunchai namrungphong. acting on behalf
of the premier. yesterday exercised his absolute powers under Article 200 by
sentencing a police officer and his subordinate to 40 years' imprisonment each
for possessing heroin for sale.

A third accomplice, a civilian identified only as Louis, was sentenced in
absentia to 30 years' imprisonment. The fourth accomplice. Pol Hat-Sgt Kitti
Naicharun attached to Ayutthaya District Police Station, was found not guilty
and released.

The order imposing heavy jail terms on the two policemen-Pol Lt Bunsup Aphasak
and Pol Hat-Sgt Sa-at Sinun. both attached to Ayutthaya District Police Station-
cited that they deserved heavy penalty to set an example to other policemen

and because they were law enforcers. but broke the law themselves.

According to reports. Pol Lt Bunsup. Pol Hat-5g. Sa-at and Louis who is still
at large met with narcotics agents in front of nctel 32 on Suthisan Road last
17 November trying to sell 2.06 kilogramnes of heroin chloride to undercover
agents for 165,000 baht.

As the three men were counting money after a deal was made. the agents gave a
signal for the other plainclothes cops laying in wait to make the arrest.
Dunaup and Sa-at were apprehended on the spot, but louis managed to escape.

The six bags of heroin contained in a suitcase were confiscated.
During police interrogation. Pol Lt Bunsup denied any involvement in the nar-
cotics racket. He said he was hunting a person in Ayutthaya when he met Pol

Hat-Sgt Kitti who carried a suitcase whose contents he wanted to sell in
Bangkok. The suitcase was later found to contain the heroin.

10
-A: wﬂs. ....zmmr QBRSA
)‘ n$8 2...: any 399
-..._ Ear? 3. :r .NOO .93
. éﬂmwi?0 A01 r.
6.5 TONS OF HARIHUANA $81280. DESTINED FOR SEATTLE
Bangkok NATION REVIEW in English 2 Mar 79 pp 1, 8 BK

[Text] highway police seized sore than 0.5 tons of narijuane-estinated
to be worth around 66 million baht in overseas black nerket-fron an
Express Transport Organization truck in Rayong Hednesday.

The truck driver, Suriya Phayung. #2. was also arrested and handed over
to the Crime Suppression Police Division in Bangkok.

Acting on a tip-off. Commissioner of the Central Investigating Bureau

Pol Lt Gen Kitti Seribut radioed Pol Col chaiwat Chiradaarong, Deputy
Col-ander of the Highway Police Division. to intercept four 8T0 trans-
port truck suspected of carrying large asount of marijuana which would
leave Don Huang airport for Rayong.

However. a soldier with the rank of lieutenant colonel. riding in a Volks-
wagen which led the convoy resisted a search at a checkpoint in Chonburi.

As it turned out there was only one truck left when it was finally halted
by highway police at a checkpoint on Rayong-Baan K1i Highway in Rayong.

A total of 4,562 kilogram-ea of dry marijuana contained in 280 aluainun
boxes were discovered on the truck.

The driver was quoted as telling the police that he had been assigned to
transport the goods from Don Huang to Sattship Deepsea Port without the
knowledge that they were in fact aarijuana.

All the 280 aluninua boxes bore labels saying that they contained dry
shrimps destined for the Fish and Oyster Coapany in Seattle, Hashington.

CS": 5300

12
RAID NETS ANOTRER HARIBUANA Bonanza
Bangkok POST in English 21. Feb 79 p l BK

[Text] Another 900 kilos of stick marijuana bound for the United States
was uncovered in Chon Buri's Si Racha District when Custoss officials and
Crime Suppression Division police searched the house of a woman suspect
who was arrested Thursday with 1,676 kilos of marijuana.

The drug is worth 9.4 million baht in New York streets.

Police said the new haul of drug belongs to the sass clandestine group
which attempted Thursday to ship out 26 crates of stick ssrijuans worth
26.7 million baht in street value in New York or about 1 million baht at
street prices in Bangkok.

The drug was discovered when a combined Customs-€80 teas raided the Si
Racha hcuse early yesterday morning.

The accused, Hrs Boonying. disclaimed any knowledge of the drug but said
that she had been hired by an American tourist named Johanes V. Hadsen to
ship the crates to Broadway, New York and knew nothing about their contents.

Believing the group was using its Si Rscha hideout to pack the drugs into
crates for shipment. the authorities rushed to 102/100 Village lo. Bangphra
yesterday morning.

No one was present when the officials made the raid.

The drug found is worth 51.0.000 baht at street prices in Bangkok or 9.1.
million baht in ﬂew York.

C50: 5300

13
FARMERS GROW 'POT' ON THE SBY
Bangkok POST in English 25 Feb 79 p 3 BR

[Text] Phetchaburi--Parners in this province are still growing marijuana
cinndeatinely in addition to regular maize and rice crops in order to
boost their income. Deputy Superintendent of Phetchaburi police Pol
Lt-Col Vichit Kouyphet disclosed yesterday.

He said that after the marijuana is harvested. it is snuggled into the
provincial capital concealed under other farm produce. thus making it
difficult for the authorities to detect the drugs. The aarijuana here
fetches about 50 baht per kilo. which is considered a good incone compared
to other crops.

"c said marijuana is secretly grown in hilly areas in Tanbon Song Pi
Nong and Tanbon Keen Kracharn of The Yang District; Tanbon Nongyapong.
Tnabon Kladnua and Tanhon Kladtqi of Yapong Subdistrict.

C50: 5300

lb
'hIPPIES' NABBED FOR DRUGS

Bangkok POST in English 25 Feb 79 p 1 BK

[Text] Phuket--Seven hippie-type foreigners were arrested Friday on the
well-known Rawai beach in this resort town and charged with possession of
small amounts of marijuana and heroin. police reported yesterday.

The of the seven were charged with possession of heroin while the rest
were held for possessing marijuana. police said.

The nationalities of the seven Hesterners were unknown. They are being
detailed at the Huang District police station.

chief of Phuket police. Col Sonthit Hengnoi, ordered the arrest after
receiving a nunber of reports that the hippies were using the drugs and
walking naked on the beach.

CSO: 5300

15
sum

AUSTRALIANS WWW-Three Australian tourists were arrested last night
at the Reno hotel on Kaselsan Soi 1, in front of the National Stadiua on
a charge of possessing 10$ granes of high grade lo lo heroin, police re-
ported. The trio were identified as Mrs Janice Ann Hunter, Mr 8. node):
and Hr Michael Kinner. They are being detained at Pathullwan police station

for further investigation. The report said a narcotic suppression police
tea headed by Pol Lt Sealertrit Rattanaviboon raided the roots of the trio

at 7.30 p... and lads a thorough check until about 9 pm. [nangkok mm
m in English 9 Pub 79 p 3 BK]

650: 5300

16
COCAINE SEIZURE NEAR mam. REPORTED
Montreal LA PRESS: in French 31 Jan 79 p A 6

Lfcx£7 A kilogram of cocaine seized in Carlo Arena's resident on Sunday
night in Saint Leonard, proved to be 99 percent pure in one test and
97 percent in another.

The above was reported yesterda afternoon by a police-officer of the RCMP
LRoyal Canadian Mounted Polic£7ywho had conducted the raid at 9118 Rue Chaubelle.
where both Charles Rodriguez. a former "real estate salenan," who had been
sentenced to lo years in the penitentiary for the Lakeland Corporation affair.
and Fernando d1 Carlo, a 26-year old nan, were apprehended, the latter having
tried to escape when the police broke into the premises.

The result of the analysis conducted by the federal cheaists showed that the
value of the drug confiscated climbed to almost one-half million dollars.
while at first it had been valued at $375,000.

Testifying in front of Judge Joseph Tarasofsky during the inquiry regarding
bail for the three men. Sergeant Elie of the RCHP reported that at the

tine precision scales and some substances used ordinarily to "cut" the
cocaine when it is pure, were found in the lavatory of Arena's residence.

Enfalac. medicinal glucose and lactose. as well as plastic bags were found.
Many firearms and ammunition were also discovered in another room.

lnterrogated by the prosecutor the police officer stated that in view of
the purity of the drug which was found. these men were probably the highest
ranking in their organization. and possibly, were even the importers themselves.

Under cross-examination. the defendants' attorney tried to prove that since
both his clients had not resisted the police officers and had even voluntarily
answered their questions. the attitude of the third defendant did not neces-
sarily indicate any couplicity as he may have easily panicked due to the
manner in which the combined squads of the RCMP and the Cl!!! (Montreal Urban
Con-unity) had raided that residence.

17
In view of the lateness of the hour, the counsels' speeches were adjourned
to today's date. However, as of yesterday, the defense 1', ready to furnish
s real estate bond in an amount of $25,000 and $50,000 for the release of
the three defendants until their trial.

7993
(ISO: 5300
INDIAN HILLIONAIRE SBNTENCBD FOR DRUG TRAFFIC
Brussels LB PEUPLE in French 15 Jan 79 p 6

[Tesg7 An Indian millionaire. Curdev Singh Sangha. was sentenced to lb years
in jail and a half-million dollar fine by a Toronto court for having imported
aore than 500 kg of hashish into Canada.

The defendant who had been extradited froa Belgium had pleaded guilty.
According to the indictment he headed an international drug traffic network
with activities extending from India to Europe and North America.

A neat unusual man. Shanga. A9 years old. had been sentenced in I968 to

5 years in prison in Great Britain. for trafficking in narcotics. He served
3 years of his sentence. during which time he obtained a doctorate in laser
technology.

According to the evidence presented before the court in Toronto. Sangha

had teams in India who "passed" the hashish in Canada. confederates in

Great Britain for its sale. and still others in Europe and Canada to collect
the cash and deposit it in Swiss banks.

This Indian millionaire's assets were frozen by the Swiss authorities at
'1..ne's request as they had discovered that Sangha invested his illegal
income in gold. silver. savings and treasury bonds. and even in Hydro-
Ontario. a most respectable crown company.

A millionaire in dollars. thanks to this lucrative traffic. Sangha took
ainilum risks and directed his operations from the Netherlands which has
not signed an extradition treaty with Canada.

however, a year ago he made a mistake by driving through Belgiua on his

way to the Netherlands. Arrested. Sangha lost an appeal to the Belgian
courts and was extradited to Canada.

The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) stated that he had smuggled into
Canada more than half a ton of hauhish with a retail sales value of $6 million.

7993
C50: 5300

19
IRIBPS

DRUGS FOUND IN PLANE CRASH--A light plane crsshed last night into a house

near (South Beach). The plane was apparently on a drug run fro. Colodaie
in South Anerica to hoaestead. Florida. The men have been identified as

Mericans from Iloeeatead. Reports say that the men were returning to
homestead fro- Colonbis when the plane nose-dived into the 90,000 dollar
split-level hone. Police say the pilot could have been attelpting a land-
ing in order to refuel. The bodies will undergo autopsies before being
released. Police have in their custody 16 sacks of highly scented sari-
huana and other drugs. The drugs are valued at nearly half Iillion
dollars. (Nassau Doeestie Service in English 1800 GMT 28 Feb 79 FL]

C50: 5300

20
BRIEFS

HERO!" xmncarr 1N BELIZE-d anon who arrived in Belize last Saturday by
private plane and who wanted to fly inediately to Caye Caulker has been
detained by city police and charged uith carrying nearly two pounds of heroin
worth close to half a million dollars on the drug market. Mnty-five year
old Bruno Traverso, an Italian. arrivod from Costa Rica aboard a small
chartered aircraft shortly after lo o'clock Saturday afternoon and sack: in-
quiries about an immediate flight to Gaye Caulker. During the routine
search of his baggage customs officials cue across little aapoule bottles
of liquid and capsules containing a white powder. which he described as
"medicine." In court yesterday chief government analyst Mr Douglas Pair-
weather stated fir-ly that the white powder was heroin. 'l'eats run on a
sample of white powder supplied to him by the police proved to be dicetyl
norphineuone of the most deadly of habit forming drugs. [Excerpt] [Belize
City m: mama in English I. Mar 79 p 1 n]

(:80: $300
FORMER OAS OFFICIAL LOPEZ OYUBLA ARRESTED
Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 12 Jan 79 p 6-A

[Text] Tony Lopez Oyuela. a former judge and former chief of the Judicial
Police of the Administrative Department of Security (OAS). was arrested
yesterday because of his alleged connections with the "-19 [19 April
Movement].

The arrest. which shook the country, took place around noon on Hednesday
as he left his office. which is located a short distance from the Phoenix
Building [Edificio Penix]. an apartment house which yesterday was the
object of a thorough search by military investigators.

Lopez Oyuela was for many years a legal officer with the armed forces, but
more recently he had been a practicing attorney. particularly in the field
ofcriminal law. He maintained his old friendship with Rafael Arteaga
Caicedo and his wife. Esther Heron de Arteaga. the couple who owned the
house with the tunnel. He was engaged to Hrs Moron de Arteaga in Girardot
before her marriage.

Career

Tony Lopez Oyuela. a native of Tolima. is well known in Bogota, especially
since General Hatallana. on becoming director general of DAS. appointed
him chief of the Judicial Police of that agency.

The official had a rather notorious career there until he suddenly broke
with the then head of the organization. Gen Jose Joaquin Hatallana.

Before joining OAS. Lopez Oyuela appeared often before the Supreme Court.
of Justice in exequatur claims [demands de inexequibilidad], none of which
had a favorable outcome. He also worked for some Bogota newspapers.
specifically our colleague BL ESPECTADOR.

Appointed Judge

The real reason for Lopez Oyuela's leaving DAS has not been ascertained.
is certain that he broke very abruptly with General Hatallana and offered
his resignation. which was accepted immediately.

22
At that time the country was under the first state of siege of the Lopez
Hithelsen administration. and as the military penal justice systes was
clogged with cases. the government decided to create. tenporarily. a new
court in the high Military Tribunal. which is the highest silitary court.
lope: Oyuela was appointed then to one of the temporary judgeships and
renained in the post until the state of siege was lifted and his job.
therefore. was ended.

Practices Legal Profession

After that Tony Lopez Oyuela devoted himself to his legal profession. and
his most outstanding performance was his representation in the civil courts
of the murderer of labor leader Jose Raquel Mercado, who was kidnaped and
executed by the H-l9. Through this civil case he received an appoint-eat
to the CTC [Colosbian Confederation of Workers] on the reconnendation of
Teresa Valencia. who was one of the secretaries of the confederation and

a very good friend of Tony Lopez Oyuala himself.

Today it is recalled that Lopez Oyuela's behavior. at least in appearance.
gave rise to some enbarressnent. This was when the justice department.
which also suspected Teresa Valencia in the Jose Raquel Mercado tragedy.
issued a warrant for Maria Victoria Marin do Cones. She was represented

by Cesar Hontoya Ocaspo. the expert in criminal law. who appealed her arrest,
an action which was immediately supported by the CTC counsel. Lopez Oyuala.

Drug Trafficking

Another of Lopez Oyuela's recent actions. viewed with equal anasement, was
that of acting as defense counsel for syndicates of one of the drug traffick-
ing nafias. This is surprising. not because there was any legal impediment.
but rather another. strictly sorel. one, since Lope: Oyuela, as chief of

the DAS Judicial Police. had been sent officially to the United States to
receive special instruction in the fight against the narcotics traffic.

Cotenant with Arteaga

The evidence concerning his possible connections with the “-19. which led
to the arrest of the for-er military judge and DAS police chief. is not
known in detail.

It has only been possible to confirm two facts which indicate that it was

not just a simple friendship and a professional relationship which existed
between Tony Lopez Oyuela and the Arteaga Heron couple. but sosething sore
intiaate and secret.

One is that Rafael Arteaga was a cotensnt of the professional offices

which Lopez Oyuela saintains at 401 Korkidi Building. on 12th Street between
Highways 5 and 6.

23
That fact fits in with another of special significance: some of the
Arteaga Moron couple's nail was aent to Lopez Oyuela'a office and from
there was delivered to the addressees. however. the couple who und.rtook
to construct a tunnel to bring weapons out of the North Canton naintained
their central offices of ”Produaedicos" in full operation. as well es

their post office box. Therefore. the nail which arrived for then at Lope:

Oyuels‘a office must haVe been sent by persons who wore privately instructed
to do so.

To the foregoing nuat be added the arrest of Elena Isaac. another wonsn
allegedly involved with the H-l9. about when we will report elsewhere in
this sane edition.

Yesterday Tony Lopez Oyuela was placed in custody of the 106th Judge of
Military Penal Instruction. who will hear his state-ent at the end of this
week or the beginning of next. Former court judge and attorney Humberto
Barrera Doainsuez. whose offices are next door to those of Lope: Oyuela.

yesterday inforaed the military judge that he would assist his colleague
at the hearing.

It nust be added that Lopez Oyuela also appeared in the case of Alberto
Snntofinio Botero and others. since he represented Olinpo Cardenas, lover
of the invalid girlfriend of the former president of the house. who has
been arrested and incarcerated.

9735
cso: 5300

2h
THO AMERICAN TIAIFICKERS 'DISAPPBAR' FRO“ CIENAGA JAIL
Bogota BL TIEHPO in Spanish 15 Jan 79 p 16-A
[Article by Walter P. Martinez 9.]

[Text] Santa Harte. lb Jan--Two American drug traffickers arrested by the
army last 18 December on the "Caribu" ranch in the banana district with a
planeload of marihuana have disappeared from the Cienaga municipal jai1
under strange circuaatanees.

The traffickers are lraley Joseph Hayluck and Robbin Pittock. crew of a
06-3. American registration “-788 x. who had taken on a load of marihuana
and were all fueled up and ready for takeoff.

The Americans were surprised by a patrol froe the Cordoba Battalion of
Santa Marta. who seized then after they had already loaded the plane with
£.300 pounds of the "grass." valued at more than 12 million pesos.

The action took place on a clandestine strip on the "Ceribu" ranch in the

Gus-achito region. in the jurisdiction of Cienaga. and during the military
operation three vehicles were also impounded: a tank truck which supplied
fuel for the DC-3. a Ranger van and a Dodge Power wagon.

The two Americans were taken to the Cienga jail. from which they disappeared
last night.

According to reports. the narcotics traffickers fled without any violence,
since not even the locks or latches of their cells were damaged.

873$
CSO: 5300

25
COCAINE LABORATORY EXPLODES. FIVE INJURED
Bogota EL TIEHPO in Spanish 16 Jan 79 p lk-c

[Text] Five persons have been seriously hurt in the explosion of a sophisti-
cated cocaine laboratory.

One of the nost technically perfect of the cocaine laboratories found to
date exploded on 14 January in the municipality of Pacho. Cundina-urcs.
according to reports given this paper by official sources.

All indications are that the five injured persons were involved in the
millionaire laboratory. end for this reason they are under heavy police guard
in the hospital there.

The injured. who were taken ia-edistely to the hospital. suffered severe
burns all over their bodies and faces and are totally disfugured. Three
adults, a youth and a child have been placed in intensive care in an attenpt
to save their lives and ease their pain.

According to the physician on duty. the wounded were identified as Julio
Restrepo. 30 years of age; Tiberio Bocenegra, 28. whose condition is the
most serious; a Mr Rojas, 26; a youth nansd Ovalle. l9. and the boy,
Victor Gabino Roldan. lb.

All suffered first. second and third degree burns.

Authorities from the Depart-ental Police and the Division of Narcotics are
investigating the lsboratory, considered one of the biggest in terns of its
capacity for processing the drug.

Unofficial reports say the explosion occurred when a notor used to run the
costly equipsent was started and enitted sparks which then ignited a tank
of gas used as fuel.

The residence where the clandestine laboratory wss installed was owned by
Omar Bocanegrs and was conpletely destroyed.

8735
080: $300

26
COCAINE 'NULB' DIES AT BARRANQUILLA EN ROUTE TO NEH YORK
Bogota EL ESPECTADOR in Spanish 16 Jan 79 p 9-A

[Text] Barranquilla. A young Coloabian wouan traveling on Avienca flight
0052. which covers the Bogota-Barranquilla-Naw York route. died when
several tiny packets of cocaine she had swallowed burst. and she becsse
intonicstad.

The young woman was identified as Hyriss Angarita de Cases. about 27 years

of age. who left Bogota bound for New York with a stopover in Barranquilla.
According to police. the young wosan appears to have been one of the so~cslled
“mules“ in the narcotics traffic. and her job was to carry about 1 kilo of
high-quality cocaine to New York City.

An autopsy was perforsed by the medical exasiner of the sunicipsl cesetery.
who found in her digestive tract. between the std-sch and esophagus.
several very small packages of cocaine. which burst for reasons unknown.
causing the death by intoxication of the young passenger.

Hoeents before the plane landed on the runway of "Ernesto Cortisaot" airport
here. the young wosan becase violently ill and was taken to the Clinics

del Caribe where she died later in spite of the efforts of the sedicsl
staff.

Police here have begun inquiries into the case in order to find possible
contacts of the unfortunate young woman. as well as those responsible for
. her death. i.e.. the persons who gave her the drug.

8735
cso: $300
TRAFFICKBRS TRADE HEAPONS FOR MARIRUANA
Bogota EL TIEMPO in Spanish 13 Jan 79 p 6-A
[Article by Jose Cervantes]

[Text] Barranquilla. l2 Jan-~A Cuban and a "gringo" were to exchange weapons
for marihuana with Colo-bians at a clandestine airport on La Guajira Peninsula.

The Cuban. Pedro Otoniel Pena. and the "gringo." Michael Lee Carroll. who
were captured aboard a 00-3 on a rural road near Maracaibo last Tuesday. con-
feaaed to this intention.

The pair of traffickers also confessed that aboard the plane they were trans-
porting a giant arsenal.

The captured traffickers did not say whether the exchange of weapons for
narihuana would take place with people connected with Colombian urban guer-
rillas.

The arsenal which Pena and Carrell were trying to bring into Colombia con-
sisted of 60 Magnum-£6 revolvers. 12 M-l rifles. 100 boxes of ammunition,
30 fragmentation grenades and other smaller firearms.

Pens and Carrell confessed to the authorities of Maracaibo. Venezuela. that
when a mechanical failure was registered aboard the nc-3 they were flying to
Cuajira they threw a large quantity of weapons and ammunition into Maracaibo
Lake. but some weapons remained aboard. This indicated to the Venezuelan
National Guard and the secret police of that country that weapons were being
taken to Colombia.

Venezuelan detectives were able to recover aboard the DC-3 with 0.8. registry
acne M-l rifles. grenades and Magnum-65 revolvers.

Capture

The capture of the nc-J and its two crewmen occurred Tuesday on a rural.
little-traveled road of Zulia State. near Maracaibo.

28
The 00-3. whose registration was not given to BL TIBHPO's reporter from
Maracaibo by telephone. suffered from overheating of one of its engines when
it was flying over a portion of the lake.

The plane took off fros a clandestine airport in southern Florida for another
clandestine airport in La Guajira.

It node a short refueling stop on one of the islands located off the Venezuelan
coast. where a connection of the international gang of traffickers in weapons
and drugs supplied the fuel.

According to the confession of Pens and Carrell. this is an alaost obligatory
stopover for all the "sari-bares" planes which fly fros the United States to
La Guajirs to load the grass.

For unknown reasons. after refueling and starting the flight the nc-3 began
losing altitude because of the overheating of one of its engines.

Carrell quickly maneuvered over the lake while Pena was throwing the weapons
into the water.

Later they made an energency landing on a deserted road a few kiloseters from
the Zulia capital. Authorities appeared. and the two traffickers tried to
bribe the National Guard members. but they failed to do so and were arrested
and forced to confess.

Landing Strip Maps

Aboard the plane the Venezuelan authorities found a lap indicating at least
20 clandestine air strips in La Guajira.

Carroll and Pensa said that they were going to exchange a shipment of weapons
for one of nsrihuana at one of these clandestine airports.

They added that they had carried out this type of exchange before without
any difficulty.

Venezuelan police confirmed froa Maracaibo that all the seats on the plane
had been removed to facilitate the loading of more packages of usrihuana.

Also aboard. the police discovered modern radio cosnunications equipment, the
maps. and weapons which the two use were unable to throw into the water, as
well as many dollars.

As usual in these cases. the two crewaen of the "sarinbero" plane had no
identification papers.

11636
CSO: S300
COCAINB "IT“ 'NEH PROCESS' RAIDBD
Bogota EL ESPBCTADOR in Spanish lb Jan 79 pp l-A. 7-A

[Text] The regional antinarcotics team of the Attorney Goneral's Office
delegated to the Judicial Police, with headquarters in Barranquilla. yesterday
struck a serious blow against drug trafficking gangs when they located in

that city a cocaine processing laboratory and seized over 75 lbs of the alka-
loid ready for illegal exportation.

Four Captured

Reports received in Bogota indicate that the laboratory was discovered in
house number 85-93. 52-A Avenue. "Alto Prado" section of the capital of
Atlantico Departnent [Barranquilla]. and that during the operation three sen
and one woman were arrested.

Powder and Tablets

It was learned that during the raid the members of the antinsrcotics team--
who acted in cooperation with units of the P-2 of the police department of
Atlantico--seized 75 lbs and 480 ounces of very pure cocaine and 573 tablets
or pills of the sale product.

The occupant of the residence, who was indentified as Jose de Jesus Gomez
Lopez. was arrested together with his wife and two other individuals who were
apparently engaged in processing the alkaloid.

Dollars and Pesos

At the some location the antinarcotics teaa seized $5,000 and 25.700 pesos
in cash. which apparently came from one of the cocaine sales to international
traffickers.

The successful operation carried out by the regional antinarcotics team of
the Attorney General'a Office delegated to the Judicial Police. with the
valuable assistance of the F-2. is of special importance. because this is
the first tine that a laboratory of this kind has been discovered in
Barranquilla.

3o
New System

It should also be pointed out that the raid nsde it possible to discover a
new system being used by the drug traffickers in their desire to deceive the
authorities. The systea consisi- of solidifying the cocaine into tablets
to sake traffic in it less noticeable not only within the country but also
abroad.

It use also learned that the investigators seized tvo antonobiles, one of
then a Dodge Dart. license plates Ali-1568.

11636
CSO: 5300
TMPFICKBRS. PLANE, VEHICLES 83123!) IN BOLIVAR
Bogota Bl. ESPECTADOR in Spanish 14 Jan 79 p zl-A

[Text] A snall plane and two autonobiles were seized and six persons who
allegedly were tee-hers of a drug traffickers gang operating in Bolivar De-
partment were arrested by the authorities.

The announcenent was made by the governor of that section of the country.
Elvira Paccio de Espinosa. who said that the operation was carried out in
Calanar municipality, where there is an airport of the sane nane.

During the operation a stall int-1017 plane and two Ranger station wagona
were seized.

‘l'he arrested persons were identified as Julio Jimenez Rosado. Mario Peliciano
Lopez. Gabriel Martinez Gaucho, William baby, Walter Franklin and Anilcar
Rafael Arnero.

It wae reported that two of the arrested persons are 11.8. nationals.

11636
080: 5300
0A3 RAIDS LAMB C(XIA PIANTATION
Bogota EL ESPECTMDR in Wish 10 Jan 79 p 13-A

[Text] Members of the MS [Administrative Department of Security] Judicial
Police Division discovered, at a site, in Meta Department, a coca plantation
of 3,573 plants, that is to say, bushes whose leaves constitute the raw mater-
ial for producing cocaine.

The significant discovery took place last ibnday in the "Guacanayas or Ia
Vcnadita" strip, Nerto Llcras Jurisdiction, on land belonging to the
""Gorgona farn.

Near the plantation the DA5 agents found a cocaine paste processing laboratory
which was operating from some straw huts. 'Ihe finding of this laboratory is
especially signifith in the official struggle against narcotics production
and trafficking.

According to the participants in the operation, the 3,573 plants which con-
stituted the plantation had been exploited twice before, that is to say, the
narcotics traffickers were going to harvest the leaves for the third time.

'No person: whose indcntities remained undisclosed were detained. As far as
the plantation is concerned, it was destroyed.

It is worth noting that this is the first time that officials have detected a
coca plantation in the eastern plains [Llanos Orientales] of the size of the
one found in the Jurisdiction of Puerto Lleras, a fact which indicates that
drug traffickers have decided to make use of those lands to raise their crops
and keep away from the Colombian southwest regions where production of the
bush has been traditional.

33
'Ihe photograph shows the size attained by the 3,573 coca plants which con-
stituted the plantation discovered in Puerto Llcras, Meta, by the DA5
Judicial Pollen Division. It is the first time that a coca crop of this
size has been found in the plains. As is known, the buah's leaves are the raw
material for producing cocaine.

93M
cso: 9300
MARIHUANA SEIZED, N0 ARRESTS IN MAGDAIENA
Bogota t‘L BSPESTADOR in Wish 6 Jan 79 p l-A, 8-A
[Article by Ulilo Acevedo Silva]

[Text] Santa Marta, 5 Jam-Special antinarcotics units of the kgdalena ms
[Athinmtrative Department of Security] confiscated lls,000 kg of narihuana in
the Magdalena Dcmrtnent today during a special operation near La Gran Via, a
road leading to the Sierra Nevada in Santa Marta.

The culture of the lb,000 he of the drug resulted from several investigative
steps implemented by the ﬁgmena DAS which culminated in the confiscation
of 201 packages of aarihuana already pressed and ready for export.

No Arrests

The secret organization's sectional chief, Capt Policarpo Garrido Alvarez
(ret), told EL ESPECIADOR that no one was arrested durim the action against

the narcotics traffickers: apparently the presence of the uarihuana-
confiscating patrol was detected.

It was revealed that the narihuana was found about 500 meters from the La
Gran Via Jurisdiction highway in the sector leading to the Sierra Revsda.

The 1h,000 ha of the drug were incinerated at the confiscation site in the
presence of the military and Judicial officials of this section of the country

The snuggled drugs seized by the DAS in Magdalena are worth about 15 nillion
Colombian pesos on the black market.

93"].
cm: 9300

35
MARUNANA ENTERS Plum" IN 'TRIPLEX'
Bogota l-Il. l-tSPBC’MDOR in Spanish 11 Jan 79 p 13-h

[Text] 'lhankr. to the shrewdness of several of the Model Prison's outside
mama, It was soible, yesterday afternoon, to confiscate more than 70
muted."- ni‘ mrlhuuna, which someone tried to introduce into the prison by
an otherwise lmvnious method.

The «mt-um: took place at 1530 when two persons showed up at the outside guard
mat varryinr, three sheets of plywood [triplex] in a small truck and requesting
that these be delivered to one of the innatcs who work in the prison's ear-
pentry workshop.

Dincnwrry

:‘auapa-ctina that this was one of the many tricks used by drug traffickers to
introduce narcotics in the prisons, guard members broke the thickest of the
sheets fl rat and discovered that the inside layers had been cut out to form
a scrim: of secret compartments which were stuffed with pressed urihuana.

In the three hollw sheets whose outside layers had been perfectly glued back,
a total or more than '(0 pounds of the grass were found which, according to the
managers-m, of the prison, would have brought its owners a huge Amount of money
since a Inth- portion of the product is worth 10 pesos.

u :M.
(:11): 9-200
COCMNE, [mum SEIZHD NEAR GAMMA}!
l'onotu l-ZL rum in Spanish 11 Jan p 9-A
[Artich- l»_v Narcico Castro]

['l‘vxt] Cartugena, lo--0nc light aircraft, two late model cars and six persons
wu-rc captured last night at an old airport near Calamar on the Madalena River
and 50h cocaine pills were found in one of the vehicles.

w: thuut official confirmation, it happened that when the key positions were
taken to speed up the operation, other persons aboard a third car were able
to escape.

The linht aircraft, it has been learned, carries Colombian registration
plates and the two vans are Ford Rangers, one with plates PK-33-9lo and the
other one with free transit. In a hidden nook of the cabin of one of the
vans. the detectives found a polyethylene bag with 50k cocaine pills.

931:1
(1:1): {300

37
NEARLY PURE COCAINB SEIZBD AT AIRPORT
"(moth EL ESPBCTADOR in Spanish 11 Jan 79 p 13-h

[Text] The Institute of Forensic Medicine has Just reported to the local
office: of the Judicial Police on the degree of purity of some of the cocaine
lot: which were seized during the last days of December and the early part of
this year at l-ildorado International Airport. 'me cocaine weighed nearly 97 kg.

According to that report, the 51 kg of the alkaloid seized on 28 December
from Ruben Dario Velez Arboleda, when he got off a Ini‘thansa plane coming
from Lima, was 99 percent pure.

The 20M? kg confiscated on 20 December from Jose Pablo Enrique Castellanoa
Vu-re 100 percent pure. a fact which mkes the cocaine much more valuable and
desirable to the narcotics traffickers. Castellanos brought the cocaine in
a suitcase and wax: arrested by local Judicial Police agents at Eldorado Air-

port at the moment of his arrival from the Peruvian capital on an Aerolineas
Argentinan plane.

'Ihe 23 kg 119 grams of cocaine discovered in a suitcase which arrived in
Bogota from Lima on 22 December were also found to be 100 percent pure.

Nobody claimed the suitcase apparently because the interested party realized
there wan danger of being arrested.

'l'lu: lam. eom'incation took place on 7 January and a woman, l-hria Norma Castro
Camano, waz: captured, 50‘) grams of 100 percent pure cocaine was found in her
possession. A union worker, she has been living in [as Angeles for a long
time and war. on her way there on an airplane which departed from Lima.

Other Confineationn

laboratory reports are pending in the ease of 2,188 grams seized from a woman,
Stella Concepcion Rchclo Canada, who on 26 December arrived in Bogota in
another lAIi‘thansa airplane, carrying the alkaloid in a girdle next to her body;
and th-- ease of the 120 grams hidden among giftwrapped packages which were
found in the possession of Romira Zuzluaga.

Wu
can: 9300 38
BRIEFS

comm CONFISGATBDHA shipuent of cocaine that was confiscated yesterday

by custous officers near the wnicipality of Aguachica was on its way to a
cocaine processing laboratory in Bogota. The cocaine was camouflaged in

oil drus. had a high grade in purity and has been valued at 50 nillion pesos.
The drus were being transported in a car driven by a an identified as Juan
Cueller. who has been arrested. [Bogota Cadena Radial Super in Spanish 1100
cm lo Mar 79 PA]

comma SMIMNT szxzrnuomceu of the Administrative Deparuent of Secur-
ity in bucarallsnga confiscated a shipent of high-grade cocaine valued at
over 7 million pesos as it was being transported in a vehicle on the road
to the sea. The cocaine weighed 77 kg. [logota Radio Cadena Nacional in
Spanish 1100 cm 5 Her 79 PA]

OOCAINE CONFISCATION--Bogots, 6 Her (APP)--l’olice reported the confiscation
of 887 gram of cocaine st Bldoredo airport today. The cocaine was found

hidden in the suitcases of Carlos Arturo Moreno Giraldo end Anna Cetina
Gonzalez who were taking the drug to um and from there to the United

States. [Paris APP in Spanish 1310 our 6 liar 79 PA]

CSO: 5300

39
BRIEFS

CDLONEL CHARGED 0N DRUGS-ocuayaquil. Ecuador, 3 Mar (BPE)--Ecuadorean Arly
Col Luis Alfredo Santillan has been identified as an scconplice in an inter-
national drug trafficking gang operating in this country. The infornation

was revealed here today, Saturday, in a report presented by the investiga-
tions depart-cut attached to the 0.8. Consulate. The document presented to

the district attorney handling the trial adds infatuation on the relations
between seven non on trial here and a drug trafficking gang operating in
Colombia and Venezuela. The report also contains an exhaustive biography
and cruninsl record of the Coloubian and Ecuadorean gangsters, their cour-
iers, contacts and suppliers of raw material. Colonel Santillan serves with
the Constitucion del Oro Battalion stationed in a province bordering on Peru.
In the docuaent he is charged uith transporting drugs in a ailitary jeep
froa this province to Guayaquil. [Text] [Madrid 8?! in Spanish 0304 GMT

3 Mar 79 EA]

C80: 5300
REVIER 0? BOOK 'PROSTITUTION AND DRUGS'
Bogota EL SIGLO in Spanish lb Jan 79 p 3

[Review of book "Prostitucion y Drogss" by Lourdes Romero A. and Ana Maria
Quintanilla. Trillaa publishers, l92pp]

[Textl This exploratory study concerning the phenomenon of prostitution and
its relation to drug use is based on research carried out by members of the
Mexican Center for Drug Dependency Studies. working in conjunction with the
director of the Mexican Institute of Social Studies. The research was in turn
based on a questionnaire-interview given to a group of 27 prostitutes living
in A Mexican states.

The findings, presented here in a theoretical framework encompassing socio-
logical as well as psychological factors, were obtained as a result of a
methodology which took into account the criteria for selecting the cities and
towns studied. the description of instruments and indicators employed in the
compilation of facts. the training of the interviewers. the detention of

the prostitutes and the processing and analysis of the information obtained.

The authors of this book present interpretive hypotheses concerning the causes
which led to the adoption of prostitution as a way of life and to the habitual
use of drugs.

The valuable conclusions. grouped in a special chapter. point out the typology
of each case according to its different stages of advancement and its manifest
psychological characteristics. as well as the general features of prostitution
and its connections with drug use.

The work also contains an ample bibliography and presents. in appendices. an
interpretation of five different types of prostitution.

9077
C80: 5300

kl
BRIEFS

OOGAINE MULuHetida, Mexico. 2 Mar (AFP)--The police seized 7 kg of cocaine
here today and arrested Peruvian Guillemo Negron Valdes snd 0.8. citizen
Dolores Ada Ruiz de Castillo. The traffickers had hidden the cocaine in a
large leap. They were traveling with Castilla's 8-year-old son and were
supposed to deliver the cocaine in Los Angeles. the United States. ‘lhe
police became suspicious when they noticed that the hip was unusually
heavy. [Paris APP in Spanish 0352 Off 3 liar 79 PA]

cso: 5300
COLUMNIST VIEHS EFFECTS OF 0.3. LEGALIZATION 0F MARIHUANA
Panama City DA REPUBLICA in Spanish 28 Feb 79 p é-A PA
[Hario Augusto Rodriguez column: "The Right to Harihuana"]
[Text] Legalization

I have referred several times to the experience I had when I visited a
government office in San Francisco, California, involved in the narcotics
problem. A doctor who worked there told me that he believed narihuana would
be legalized very soon in the United States. he explained that legal efforts
in this regard were being undertaken in some states. he added that in his
opinion the consumption of many substances that are more dangerous and harm-
ful than marihusna is already legal. He said that he believes that marijuana
users are victims of abuses and unjust violations. He also conmwnted on the
"high quality" of marihuana produced in Panama. It is smuggled to the United
States and sold at a very high price to consumers who know it as "Panama red."
For that doctor, a u.s. official and drug expert, it is only a question of
time before the consumption of marihusns--widely accepted at all levels of
0.8. society--is officially accepted as are tobacco and liquor.

Before the Court

Now I read in the newspapers that a ".8. Federal Court is studying a demand
for annulling the law which makes consumption of marihuana illegal. Harihuana
opponents argue that its consumption harms the respiratory system, affects

the heart, and provokes dangerous situations of violence and irresponsibility.
But the defenders of marihuana maintain that those arguments have not been
proved, adding that the restrictive law has not reduced the consumption of

the weed. Instead. there is a constant increase of consumption throughout

the country. The statistics--which might be faulted for their lack of scope--
indicate that there are 16 million habitual users, 63 million occasional

users and many more vho sporadically smoke marihuana. The statistics also
note that. out of the half million persons who are annually arrested for
smokin marihunna, 80 percent are poor persons who do not have the means for
[legalﬁ defense while many millions of wealthy persons, including those in
high political, intellectual, economic and social positions, continue to smoke
the weed without being bothered by the authorities.

I03
Interest

Aside from thr public debate on the risks of nerihuana, for Panama and other
Latin Anerican countries there is another Very different interest in mari-
huana; if the use of mrihuena is legalized in the United States, its in-
portance would not be based on its criminal connotation. Therefore. Colombia,
Venezuela, Peru and other countries where narihusns could be planted on a
large scale could also legalize, if not its consuuption, its cultivation,

processing and export. For exsuple, Panama could dedicate certain areas
to the cultivation of "Panama red" for export to the United States. In

this way, our countries could obtain foreign exchange and open new sources
of jobs, reducing the deficit in their balance of payments by exporting
sarihuana to the United States. We get seny drugs as harmful or more harm-

ful than marihusna fron thst country. If they believe that the weed is not

harmful and authorize its use. it would not be illegal or inoral to supply
it.

cso: 5300

M
COCAINE RING PNING AS NANDICMFTS EXPORTERS UNCOVERBD
Linn BXPRBSSO in Spanish 19 Jan 79 p 9

[Text] Two agencies engaged in the export of handcrafts served as a
front for the activities of a powerful international gang of drug
dealers. directed from Colombia by a Peruvian lawyer. The gang made
nillions with its contraband drugs.

The crisinal organization was broken up by the Peruvian Investigative
l’olice. according to inforsation provided yesterday in the course of a
press conference with the Director of the Peruvian Illegal Drug Traffic
Departsent (DINTID) Inspector Major Francisco Abanto Arias.

The gang leader. Roberto Arrospide Valencia has fled and is in Colombia.
The Peruvian authorities have requested his extradition, according to
the Investigative Police Chief.

It was stated that the bogus exporting agencies operated under the nanes
of "EKG?" and "Loa Angeles" and worked hand in glove with an ewloyee
of one of the i-igration sectors. who facilitated examination and ship-
sents of the drugs at the airport customs unit.

It was alleged that when the sen were arrested, a total of 132 kgs of
basic cocaine paste was taken with then. The contraband was valued

nt 8/; million soles. and. in addition. they had with them 24 million
soles in Peruvian currency and 35 thousand dollars. A station wagon.

o truck. three pistols. two revolvers and a rifle were also confiscated.

11w clue leading to the arrests was provided by a Colodaian. Enrique
Petra Goytan (aged 27), detained with two Peruviane at the Jorge Chavez
International Airport.

Other nesbers of the gang are: Jorge Luis Arnebianchi Horeno. Gladys

Rasos Portanova. Carlos Palna Caray. Juan Panasai Damiani. Jose’ Prias
Yescn, Dante Casusso liidalgo. the two lastnamed being custom esployees.

‘55
, I.. . 4...~.. .
. .M.....P&r... 45,:
~ 5.11.)... ‘ L

933-889.
DRAFT LAN ON DRUGS SENT 10 COUNCIL OF STATE
Montevideo BL PAIS in Spanish 23 Jan 79 p 6

[Text] The executive yesterday presented for the consideration of the
Council of State a message and draft bill proposing approval of the South
American Agreement on Drugs and Psychotropics signed on 27 April 1973 in
Buenos Aires.

ﬂue main point considered at the conference in the neighboring capital was
the problem of improper use of drugs, and it was agreed th the permanent
and solidary attention of all South American nations was rtuuired. because
its risks and harm affected all members of the Latin American system.

The agreement--according to the message sent to the legislative body--tries
to coordinate the necessary measures so as to reach close cooperation and
exchange in the fight against improper use of drugs and psychotropics.

Stress was placed on control of illegal traffic. cooperation between national
security organizations. coordination of penal and civil rules. uniformity

of administrative provisions which control distribution. prevention of drug
addiction. treatment. rehabilitation and rehabilitation of drug addicts.

The measures proposed in the above-mentioned agreement would be implemented
by means of establishing in each country an entity in charge of coordinating
and centralizing. on the national level. everything related to improper use
of drugs nnd psychotroplcs. In addition, it is established that yearly
meetings of a technical nature will be held. as well as consultations and
exchange of information allowing permanent contacts among the various
national coordinating organizations.

There in also a plan for intensive education of the community by methods
suitable to the problems of each country.

[1634
C50: 5300
BRIEFS

TWFIQRRS' ARREST--Caracu. 2 Her (BPB)--'l1|e Judicial Technical Police
today captured Jone Juan Palna Liendo, a 28-year-old Venezuelan , and
Dcnostenec Castillo Gonzalez, a Colombian, and seized drugs valued at
approximately $350,000 tron than. The drugs included cocaine, narihuana
and "undrax," a hallucinogen. [Madrid BEE in Spanish 0315 cur 3 Mar 79 PA]

050: 5300
HASHISII GRWERS ARRESTED
Cairo TI“: EGYPTIAN GAZETTE in English 8 Feb 79 p 2

[Text] Ninety-two people, accused of cultivating 183,000 hashiah bushes
in two villages near the Hinia/Assiut border, were arrested recently.
infomed sources at the Ministry of the interior said yesterday.

These arrests were among the results of a coaprehensive 4-day police raid
over the two governorates. About 800 machine guns and rifles were seized
as well as about 17,000 run-away criminals, who were hiding in and around
the area.

Major General Zaki Padr, Director of the General Security Department led
the raids with 2,500 police-en of the Central Security Force who were
later joined by 1,000 local police from the two goveruorates.

The police troops boarded boats and crossed to the East Bast of the Nile
during the night. They began raids on El Meinaria and El llouta villages
at the crack of dam.

water-Tight

Police used the most up to date long-range weapons to form a water-tight
circle around the villages.

In El Ilouta village. Assiut, about 150,000 opium plants were discovered
as well as 6,570 hashish plants scattered over 6 feddans. All the growers
have been arrested. except 26 who were out of the village at the time of
the raids. Police are now tailing then.

In El Heinria village, about 23,000 opium bushes were found growing in»
lo ieddans. These 7 opium cultivators were also arrested.

A report on the raid was later submitted to Mr. Nabaw'i Ismail, Minister
of the lnterior.--GSS

(:50: 5300

1*9
[Textl Very recently, Mr Rasoanaivo Philippe. who holds a Doctorat d'Etat

in chemistry, is chief lecturer, chairlan of the Departaent of Cheaistry at
the National Center for Pharmaceutical Research and winner of the scientific
prize on the 75th anniversary of the Malagasy Academy, has delivered a very
interesting speech on “Khat, the Sweet Drug" to the Academy, of which he was
recently elected a corresponding aeaber. The cultivation and consumption of
khat are increasing in Madagascar, and last November the drug was the subject
of an international conference in Antananarivo under the auspices of the Nar-
cotics Bureau of the United Nations. The following is the text of his speech.

As recently as last Neveaber we had the privilege of receiving experts froa
various countries of Africa. Europe and America to sun up present knowledge
of the botanics and chelistry of khat and to make plans for research that
might solve pending problems. The various meetings were held in closed
session. and you were able to find out through the newspapers and radio only
in brief what was discussed here. Thus, it would be interesting to give you
more information now about the botanical and chemical data on khat and the
socio-nedical consequences of its use.

Botanical nata

Khat probably originated in Ethiopia. it grows in various regions of West
Africa and in the southern part of the Arabian peninsula. About i941 it was
introduced by Arabs into the northern part of ihdagascar. where it is widely
grown. According to where it is grown. this plant takes the form soaetines
or a bush I-S meters high and sometimes of a tree that can reach 20 aeters
in height. Its generic name is Catha edulis. of the Celastracea faaily.
skis! botanists are of the opinion that the genus Catha is represented by

a single species. Catha edulis. The genus is. therefore. nonotypical. but
it does present nulerous varieties. Growing in the wild. khat has reaarkable
facility of ecohgtnl adaptation: it grows at altitudes of 2-3.000 aeters and
can also be cultivated in coastal regions. The plant thrives in different
clinatic conditions and on the most varied kinds of terrain. from light and
sandy soil to heavy, black loan. in Faritany d'Antsiranana. for exaupie,
large plantations exist at the seashore and in the Anbanja basin as well as
in high zones like Joffreville. As a result, it is not surprising to find

so
a broad spectrum of morphological and probably chemical variations in the
plant not only in the wild but also under cultivation. This botanical pocu~
llarlty of khat has caused its cultivation to spread swiftly. and the extent
and geographical limits of its natural habitat are not known at present.

in every region where khat is grown. there seem to be two dominant varieties,
known as "white khat" and "red khat." This distinction is due to the fact
that the color of the stem and veins varies from green to red.

holy Drug

The psychotropic properties of khat have been known for a long time. The
young leaves and the ends of the fresh branches are chewed for stimulant

effects. In regions where it is consumed. khat must always be chewed in

two or three days after harvesting because the stimulant effects decrease
rapidly after this brief time and disappear rather quickly.

Other properties have also been attributed to this drug. but aside from
anorexic qualities. the other effects are subject to contradiction. in

some regions. like Madagascar. it is reputed to be an aphrodisiac, while
among the Arabs it is considered a holy drug that aids abstinence. Cases

of aggressive behavior have been noted among some addicts; however. according

to other information. it soothes passion and anger and thus favors harmony in
social relationships.

[8 Feb 79. p 2]

[Text] Khat is taken in groupa.generally after a hearty meal. Hhiie chewing the
young shoots. the consumers drink a lot of water or Coca Cola; alcoholic
beverages are very much the exception. They smoke a lot and eat little;
they sit up all night talking incessantly. The enjoyable atmosphere of
these meetings and the feelings of well-being that they get from chewing
khat incite the revelers to seek this gemuetlichkeit. this conviviality.
This makes it imperative for them to obtain their necessary ration of khat
often to the detriment of such vital needs as food. The use of khat thus
means a loss of financial resources for users who are already rather poor
and the gradual loss of their working capacity. A package of khat costs
more than $00 FMG [Malagasy francs]. but the price can double in times of
scarcity. According to one article. the inhabitants of Djibouti bought
more than $3 million worth of khat in 1966; you can see how much it is
costing a population that is already poverty-stricken and undernourished.

It is undeniable that the malnutrition that results often causes emaciation.
tuberculosis and anemia.

Tim Phases

Clinical observations have been published on khat intoxication. According
to some observations. the effects of the drug are felt in two distinct phases.

The first. or tonic phase lasts about 6 hours. The first 2 hours are marked

by hilarity. excitation. stimulation of the memory and facility of speech.
For the next 4 hours. the user feels a kind of well-being and is subject to

51
illusions: he thinks he is lucid, and his physical and sexual stamina seem
to be increased.

The second. or depressive phase lasts longer. it probably corresponds to
the exhaustion following the period of excitement. it is characterized by
insomnia, anorexia and a slight depression syndrome. After the period of
insomnia comes a deep, restful and often quite prolonged period of sleep.

The great difference between these two phases might explain the contradictions
that have been noted in sexual behavior. The effects of the drug are felt
essentially on the cardiovascular system. and the genital and digestive func-
tions.

The classic cardiovascular effect is an impression of increased circulation

and hot flashes that appear at the beginning of intoxication. But the most

important fact is unstable blood pressure and poor adaptation to work, which
causes cerebral hemorrages in subjects predisposed to them.

Effects on the digestive system are quite variable. Generally. the following
have been observed:

- dryness in the membranes of the mouth with strong thirst and an imperative
need to drink abundantly;

- delayed anorexia.

Two States

Very often noted are intestinal upset and abdominal discomfort ranging from
constipation. in most cases, to diarrhetic syndreaes.

in the genital dysfunctions that have been observed. sexual impotence is the
most frequent. it is characterized by difficulty or impossibility of erection
or ejaculation.

Analysis of the psychic manifestation of khat intoxication enables us to
establish two main clinical types:

I. The excitomaniacal type of crisis, which is most frequent among younger
people. it goes with a passing exaltation of mood and of cerebral activity.
This excitement is often accompanied by aggressiveness.

2. The deficitary state that is typical of older intoxicated subjects: it

is characterized by a subtle loss of contact with reality concerning previous
professional or political occupations or sexual prowess. A morbid lack of
will power and impractical behavior are very marked.

The various troubles caused by khat addiction have brought the United Nations
Narcotics Commission to examine this problem since 1956. Finally, in 1973,
a resolution was adopted to undertake extensive research, especially into
identifying the active substances in khat and their pharmacological properties
in order to clarify otherwise inexplicable ambiguities.

The chemical study of khat began in 1887. The early work was intended espe-
cially to isolate the basic elements presumed to be stimulants. 'ln l901. a
compound was isolated and called cathine i; it was identified as nor-pseudo-
ephedrine 30 years later.

For many years it was thought that this compound was the only active element
in khat.

Recent studies made by the Narcotics Laboratory of the United Nations have
cast doubt upon this hypothesis. Alcaloids of very high molecular mass have
dlso been isolated.

Tannins

They are polyester-type alcaloids with a very complex structure. You have
here the complete structure of one of them. named Catheduline-d, which was
very recently determined. it is formed from this sesquiterpenic polyol in
which the OH groups are esterized by various acids: acetic acid. nicotinic
acid, and trimethylic ether of galiic acid.

Besides these basic constituents, essential oilsv-tannins, flavonoids and
amino acids--have been found in khat.

Nonetheless. the results obtained before 1973 were confused and contradictory
and did not_allow of any valid conclusions. in particular, they cannot ra-
tionally explain why psychotropic activity occurs only when khat is taken
fresh while all the isolated compounds are stable.

Through the work of the United Nations Narcotics Laboratory, another compound
closely related to cathine has been isolated from the leaves of fresh khat
that have been previously lyophilized.

It is cathinone. a very unstable compound that decomposes readily in the
presence of light and oxygen to yield, through dimerization, 3, 6-dimethyl.
2. S-diphenyl pyragia and, by oxydative desamination. l-phenyl i, 2-propane-
dione. There may he a relationship between the activity of fresh khat and
the instability of cathinone.

It was recently synthesized for evaluation by various phanaacologicai tests.
The Young Shoots

Cathinone and cathine constitute, along with norephedrine, the three compounds
of the phenylalkylamine type so for isolated in khat. Their chemical

relationship to the amphetamine series explains certain physiological properties
of the drug.

53
Catblnone exists mainly in the young shoots. while cathine and norephedrine
are localized in the older leaves. This has led the National Center for
Pharmaceutical Research. at the conference of experts in Antananarivo, to
propose this biosynthetic outline to explain their interconversion.

This biosynthetic process is thought to have a direct relationship to the
aging of the leaves.

Particular attention has also been paid recently to the chemical study of
the polyester aicaloids in khat. Some is have been isolated so far and
the structures of some of them have been found. however. so far as I know,
nothing has yet been published on their pharmacological activity.

The other compounds of khat. especially tannins and polyphenols. have not
been studied thoroughly. Several articles. however. mention that khat
extracts stripped of their nitrates are still as toxic as the whole plant.
It is probable. for example. that the presence of tannin in appreciable
quantities causes the frequent digestive complications among users. it
would be worthwhile to study these compounds.

Steps to he Taken

This has been an outline of the present botanical. chemical and socio-medical
knowledge of khat.

It is undeniable that use of this drug may cause deleterious consequences to
both the individual and those around him. Some Arab countries have already
passed laws against it. and the drug is listed under category B in France.
and has been since 1956.

The United Nations Narcotics Commission has also concerned itself with this
problem. and a considerable effort has been made by their laboratory since

I975 to improve our chemical knowledge of this drug. But chemical research

is not yet complete. and one of the recommendations of the latest conference

of experts encourages countries where khat is grown to continue the work
undertaken by the United Nations Narcotics Laboratory. Thus, the CNRP [National
Center for Pharmaceutical Research] is undertaking its present work on khat.

Finally. serious pharmacological studies of the chemical constituents of this
drug ought to be undertaken to resolve any contradiction concerning the pre-
perties attributed to it. The HHO [World Health Organization] is presently
working on this problem.

8782
C80: 5300
ANTImw ' DRIVE REPORTED
Port Louis LE HAURlCIEN in French is Jan 79 pp 1, 6

[Article: " Encouraging initiatives"; passages in slantlines are enphaslzcd
in the text]

[Text] An "anti-drug committee" launches a poster campaign in Port Louis.

'lhe Better Movies Movement gathers 52.000 signatures in favor of forbidding
porno f llms.

[Public opinion is Finally beginning to react to the unprecedented escalation
of drugs. especially opium "shooting," which has killed many people on Mauri-
tius. Anti-drug committees are organizing in many places at all levels: in
private businesses. unions. clubs. socio-cultural organizations, etc. in order
to discourage the use of the drug and to return addicts to society. Two
different anti-drugicellnittees that are active mainly at the port and in
Port-Louis have formed a single. more solid organization to pool their efforts
against this scourge. As a part of their public education campaign, the top
leaders of this comittee, among when are officials of the Association of

Port Employers and representatives of the Port Louis llarbour and Deck Workers
Union (PUIDWU). are meeting with Police Comissioner M. A. Rajarai today to
ask him to take the steps necessary to discourage "shooting up" on MauritiusJ

In their interview with the police comissioner, the leaders of the "anti-
drug conittee" will demand that the vice squad be reorganized and that the
police do their job more seriously. According to Mr Michel Gerard Nina. a
Port-Louis city councilman and secretary of the PUlDlVU and spokesman for the
committee, the police will be requested to show more severity towards pushers
/"before Mauritian youth becones a generation of addicts."/

The members of the committee came to the conclusion, after a thorough study,
that the main causes of this drug escalation are unelployment and the lack
of leisure tine activities in poor neighborhoods, where the number of addicts
is often highest. Thus. a whole series of proposals will he recommended to

the authorities in order to stop these evils that are eating away at Mauritian
society.

8782
C50: 5300

55
BRIEFS

SENTENCE FOR TRAFFICKING--sda--The district court at Aarau has sentenced
three Turks and a Swiss to prison terms of between 2 1/2 and h years. The
four men belonged to an organization that had smuggled 50 kg of hashish,
valued at more than 150.000 francs. into Switzerland. The Swiss confessed;
in contrast, the Turks tried to mitigate or deny their crimes. The
prosecuting authority for Aargau demonstrated that Turkish officials are
obviously not inclinded to prevent "the massive export of drugs into western
countries." The four defendants were on a low level of the drug trade
hierarchy. The head of the Swiss drug organization. Yilmaz Gokmez. has
vanished without a trace and is being sought internationally. Among other
things. it was claimed by the defense that because of the frequent change
of ownership of the hot goods only the profit in each case. not the total
proceeds. should be the determining factor in setting the amount of punish-
ment. But the court followed the proposals of the prosecuting authority.
according to which the Swiss is to give the state 176.000 francs and the
Turks 151.000. 100.000 and 112.000 francs. Probably the state will only be
able to obtain certificates of loss instead of these amounts. The three
Turks were also banned from the country for periods of between 8 and 10
years. [Text] [Zurich N205 ZUBRCRER zstruuc in German 28/29 Jan 79 p l]
22b5

DRUG DEAThs--ma--There are already two drug deaths to mourn in the new year:
a 27-year-old mechanic and a waitress of the same age independently of each
other injected themselves with lethal doses of heroin at the beginning of
January. Both have been a part of the Zurich drug scene for several years.
On 8 January the mechanic was found dead in his attic room in Zurich Zone
ll. Together with an addict who lived in the same house. on the previous
night he had injected himself with heroin which came from a break-in into

a drug store in the same city zone. When his comrade had a look around at
0300. he found the nechanic lying on the floor groaning. Immediate life-
saving measures were useless. and the emergency doctor who was summoned
could do nothing but confirm the death of the addict. The 27-year-old
mechanic had been injecting since 1973. The young man's personality
structure has been so changed by his dependence on drugs that he no longer
had any human contacts and had lived in complete isolation in his attic.
Only a day after the death of the mechanic. a waitress was found dead in her

56
roan in Zone 2. her arm was tied with twine. and revealed several needle
sorts; the right hand of the dead woman was clutching a one-way hypodersic.
The dead woman had first come into contact with the police in 1975 because
of violations of the narcotics law: however. she had been taking drugs

since 1972. In spite of two sentences. withdrawal cures and voluntary stays
In a psychiatric clinic. the young woman had never been able to free herself
from the addiction. In Zurich's Zone 2 a 20-year-old draftsaan and a
26-year-old aechanic-both Austrians-~who had appeared sane tine before on
the drug scene here. were arrested recently. The investigation by the
narcotics division of the Zurich city police finally showed that the duo had
traveled froa Zurich to Amsterdam four times and from there had snuggled
about 60 grass of heroin into Switzerland. The two are not drug addicts
themselves and were selling the hot goods. According to their own statement.
they claimed to have “earned" a total of about 19.000 francs. [Text]
[Zurich "BUB ZUERCHER ZEITUNG in Gernan 18 Jan 79 p 23] 2265

DEALER SENTENCBD--sda--The crisinal court in Basel has sentenced a 26-year-old
Italian to 3 years of prison because of theft and qualified violation of

the narcotics law. The Italian. who has previous related convictions. was
stopped in the train from Brussels to Milan in Basel because his description
had been given as a result of the theft of a blanket from a hotel room in
Basel. In the investigation the officers noticed the numerous needle holes
in his area; this indication of drug use led them to a sore careful investi-
gation. in which they found 75 grass of herein. The Italian admitted that
he had bought heroin in Brussels as an assignment from and in cospany with
an older wholesale dealer free Milan and tried to snuggle it over the border.
The Italian explained the fact that he did not give away his employer when
he was stopped by a fear of reprisals against his wife. since this wholesale
dealer is a southern Italian and a Hafioso. [Text] [Zurich N802 ZUERCHER
ZEITUNG in Gerssn 31 Jan 79 p 5] 2265

9337
CSO: $300 END

57