APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000100020000-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8264

2 February 1979

TRANSL’ITIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sourCes are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but llave been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
OIILIOGIA'NIC on; i. Reyna No. 1. ._ J. RCCIDIQDI.I Area-ms Ne.

mu! .II’RS I./826¢

. ice-s.- . - . open on
'l'MNSiJiTiONS on ussu SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 2 Pebrua 1979

Manama/u. AND maunvwwu. scumcn-zs , (pogo 5/79) _

     

7. Avalon“) 0. Euler-is; Q‘s-items! Rm.
0.
O. Peder-log (kg-mutton Nelle ed Adieu W. Hokti/Tsslliui Um Nn.
Joint Publications Research Service
[000 North Globe Road II. Colman/Gum No. -

Arlington, Virginia 22201

I). Soon-ms; chuixuioo None sod Mdms II. Type oi Report & Period

Covered
As above

 

M.

IS. Supple-envy Notes

M. Abuneu

The rrport contains information on aerospace medicine, sgrotechnology, bionics

and binncoustics. biochemistry. biophysics. environmental and ecological

probiema, food technology. microtiology, epidemiology and immunology. '
marine biology. military medicine. physiology. public health. toxicology.

radiobiology. veterinary medicine. behavioral science. huusn engineering.

psychology. psychiatry and related fields, and scientists and scientific
organizations in biomedical fields.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/8264

2 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES
(F000 6/79)

CoureuTs
PSYCHOLOGY

Changes in Speech Characteristics in the Presence of
Emotional Stress
(E. L. Nosenko; VOPROSY PSIICHOLOGII. No 6. 1978)........

Signal Frequency in s Probabilistic Environment and
Strategy of Operator Behavior
(1.. 1. Peresleni; VOPROSY PSIlO!0LOGII, No 6, 1978)......

A Portable Instruent for Separate Recording of Tonic
and Phanic Reactions of Electrical Resistance of the Skin
(Rh. Yu. Butkevich, et s1.; VOPROSY PSIlOlOLOGII.
N0 6. 1978)....OOIO‘OOOO'OOOOOOOOOOOOIOO000.00.000.00...

Applied Research at the Ukrainian Scientific Research
Institute of Psychology
(V. 1. Voytko; VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII, No 6. l978).........

PUBLICATIONS

Use of Polymers in Surgery
(rat'yana Esperovna Lipstove. Georgiy Alcksandrovich
thsjsdze; PRmENENIYE POLIHEROV V KHIRURGII, 1978)

Current Problem in Space Biorhythnology
(S. 1. Stepenova; PROBLW KOSHICHESKOY 31010011:
AICI‘UAL'NYYE PROBLEM! KOSKICIIBSKOY ”01111101010611,

[977) 0-0-00-aeoeeooaoseoaone.ooaoooeoooooosooooecooooso

Theoretical Bases of the Planning of Life-Support System

(6. 1. ﬂorozov: PROBLZHY KOSHICHESKOY 81010611:
TEORETICHESK IYE OSNOVY PROYEKI'IROVANIYA SISTEH

ZHIZNEOBESPECIIENIYA, I977) .............................

- a - [III - USSR - 22 881‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

13

22

28

42

66
POUO]
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

CHANGES IN SPEKCN CHARACTERISTICS IN THE PRESENCE OF EMOTIONAL STRESS
Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOGII in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 76-85

[Article by E. L. Noaenko, Laboratory of Psycholinguistics. Dnepropetrovsk
University]

[Text] Against the background of continuous Increase in demands made of
man by modern industry. the problem of finding the way to diagnose the
condition of an operator and to evaluate his reliability while working

under complex conditions is acquiring great scientific and practical
importance.

The use of the speech channel is particularly valuable for purposes of
monitoring man's condition, since it is readily accessible to observation
no matter how complex the conditions under which man works.

The method of identifying man's state described in this article is based

on comparison of so-called background speech characteristics, i.e.. the
characteristics that are typical for an individual under ordinary working
conditions. to the corresponding speech features in the presence of emotio-
genic situations. Such comparison is made for an entire set of quantitative
and qualitative indices. the informativeness of which as indicators of
changes in the speaker's state was tested experimentally.

It should be noted that only some of the changes in intonational features of
the verbal signal associated with a state of emotional stress have been
more or less thoroughly investigated and described in the literature [2, a.
9. 15. 18], and these changes were tracked within the framework of the same
words and phrases (isolated from the flow of speech) uttered by the speaker
in different states.

As for studies, in which an effort was made to record changes not only in
intonation but a number of other characteristics of speech in the presence
of emotional tension (temporal. syntactic and others [3, 17], they were
based on rather limited experimental material obtained chiefly under labo-
ratory conditions. Emotional tension was artificially stimulated in the
speakers (for example, by imposing a time limit on their statement).

1
FOR CFFICEAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this investigation, we analyzed an entire set of quantitative and quali-
tative changes occurring in man's speech with onset of a state of emotional

tension. on the basis of diverse verbal meterial obtained in real emotio-
gcnic situations.

Methods

A comparative psycholinguistic analysis was made of the speech of 95 subjects
(university students, civil aviation traffic controllers. patients admitted
to a surgical clinic for serious surgery. servicemen) in emotiogenic and
ordinary situations. He used a differentiated approach to selection of
emotiugenic situations for each group of subjects, on the basis of the con-
ception we adhere to that an emotiogenic situation does not exist as such.
but depends on the value an individual places on his activity and his mani-
festations under some life situation or other [8]. For example, the
situation of an important test (as opposed to a routine laboratory

seminar situation) was used for the group secondary school graduates and
university students; for the controller group. the situation consisted of
performing test assignments. in the presence of an authoritative commission,
to determine their professional fitness for work involving receipt and
transmission of verbal communications against the background of noise and
verbal interference (as opposite to the situation where the subjects per-
form an exercise series of analogous tests); for the group of surgical
patients. the situation involved conversing with the surgeon just prior to
the operation, before premedication (as opposed to talking with a patient
after successful surgery. on the eve of discharging him from the clinic);
for the group of servicemen. the situation involved performance of their
professional duties in an atmosphere of increased personal responsibility
for their outcome, combined with the factor of a danger of disruption of
activity due to possible exogenous intervention. The verbal reports of
subjects in this group on the progression of their occupational activities
in an emotiogenic situation were compared to the reports on performing
analogous activities in a situation when the subject bore considerably

less personal responsibility and was informed of the lower probability of
disruption of activities.

Results

He demonstrated statistically significant differences in a number of psycho-
physiological indices in the above-listed situations, in the same subjects.

For example. in the student group (52 people) the differences between a
test situation and routine class were substantial. with respect to pulse

rate. GSR [galvanic skin reflex). arterial pressure and perspiration of the
palms' according to the criterion of Hilcoxson. with o<0.0l (Z - 5.125 for

pulse, 6.936 for AP [arterial pressure]. 2.215 for GSR and 2.877 for

in portable Hishchuk apparatus was used to measure perspiration and 68R; a

pulsotachometer was used to take the pulse and AP was measured with a
sphygmomanometer.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

perspiration). In the group of surgical patients (12 people) the differences
in intensity of tremor of the hands* are also substantial. with a<0.0l

(Z - 2.562). in the group of servicemen (19 people). in addition to sub-
stantial differences in GSR (a<0.0l; Z - 2.759), we demonstrated differences
in degree of perception of verbal information in an emotiogenic and ordinary
situation (a<0.01; Z I 3.316). In the controller group (12 people), we

recorded substantial differences in quality of performing nurdon's cancella-
tion tests (n<0.01; Z . 3.353).

Determination of onset of emotional tension in emotiogenic situations was

made on the basis of the above-mentioned differences in the psychophysiologicsl
parameters of the subjects, as well as their reports.

A comparative analysis of the speech of the subjects in an ordinary situation
and in a state of emotional tension revealed the following:

Speech in a state of emotional stress is characterized by difficulty in
formulating thoughts and choosing words to express them, manifested by an
increase in number and duration of hesitations, work searching. semantically
irrelevant repetitions, "heavy" pauses, searching and descriptive gestures
associated with speech. Reduction of diversity of vocabulary is also one

of the manifestations of these difficulties. In addition, there are sub-
stantial changes in performance of verbal operations that require conscious
control. In particular, there is more contrasting than usual manifestation
in speech of tendencies toward syncretism in the area of structural syntax
(i.e., incomplete morphological formulation of words in a phrase, according
to syntactic "obligations") and separation in the area of actual syntax
(consisting of the fact that the sequencesof words that could be syntactically
continuous chains are separated into individual syntagma connected by means
of simple apposition). The increase in number of syntactically and logically
incomplete phrases, impaired integrity of superphrase [7] entities and

an increase in number of uncorrected errors are also indicative of poorer
conscious control of the quality of lexical and grammatical formulation of
statements in a state of emotional stress.

In the presence of emotional tension, there is activation of spontaneous
verbal manifestations; there is a sharp increase in number of ordinary
statements. "parasite" words and cliches. These ordinary statements are
articulated at a faster rate than in speech occurring in an ordinary state,
and this leads to changes in rate of articulation. There is a substantial
increase in number of noncommunicative gestures associated with speech, and
the speaker is not aware of their appearance. The presence of difficulty
in chasing words and formulating thoughts. on the one hand, and activation
of spontaneous manifestations. on the other, lead to a sharp fluctuations
in the overall rate of speech at different segments of the train of speech,

and fluctuations in frequency of the fundamental tone are also involved, to
some extent.

*Dynamic tremor was measured with an ADKD-Z instrument (measuring the
number of contacts).

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Difficulties in perceiving speech also arise under the influence of emotional
stress: diminished fullness and adequacy of perception of verbal information.
especially in the presence of interference, and appearance of sudioverbal
perseveration. He recorded a substantial decrease in fullness of perception
of verbal inquiries in a state of emotional stress, as compared to an
ordinary state (especially in the presence of noise) among airport controllers
(the differences are substantial according to the criterion of Hilcoxson.

with a<0.0l; Z - 2.2290), servicemen (o<0.01; Z - 3.31s) and students

(o<0.0i; 2 - 2.134). In some cases, in the presence of emotional stress.

there is simplification of purposehi activity to extract meaning from

traces imprinted in sensory memory, such as perception of speech in an
ordinary state, to the level of echolalic (perceptive resonance) behavior.
For example, the same stimulus phrase. "Leaves fall in the autumn," perceived
in the presence of noise is repeated by the same subjects as "Leaves fly

in the autumn" in an ordinary state and "Laziness occurs in the autumn"

when in a state of emotional stress.*

The tendency toward simplificationis demonsuable in the presence of emotional
stress when performing all types of verbal activity. The vocabulary of
verbal speech becomes poorer and more stereotypic; verbal associations are
"shallower"; hypotheses concerning the meaning of something read are made
hastily and inadequately; reproduction of information heard becomes echolalic.

Speech u\ the presence of emotional tension is characterized by superemphs-
sized actualization of the intent of the statement. It is manifested by the

predominant use of words with a distinct positive or negative connotation
(such as "very good--absolutely no good") and with semantic absolutism

(such as "always-never"). The increased number of emphatic gestures,
superiatives, words singled out by logical stress, etc., are also indicative
of superemphatic sctualization. We recorded the most substantial differences
in the index of semantic absolutism [categoricality] when we compared the
preoperative and postoperative interviews with surgical patients (o<0.01;

Z I -3.l7S).

0n the basis of analysis of the above-mentioned distinctions of speech in
the presence of emotional stress, we singled out a number of indices that

could be submitted to quantitative evaluation, and they can be used for
comparative analysis of the speech of the same subjects in different situations
for the purpose of identifying their state. Some of these indicts are

listed below.
1. Mean Size of Speech Segment Uttered without Hesitations

To measure this index, as well as other temporal characteristics of speech,
we developed and now use a portable "speech automatism analyzer," which

records the duration of pauses between words, "pure speech" time and number
of pauses of any specified duration, in particular the number of hesitations
[ll]. The near length of a segment of speech is calculated by dividing

*Translator's note: the last phrase bears some alphabetical relation to
the first, in Russian.
4

FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY '

the time of "pure speech" (or number of words in the statement) by the number
of hesitationa.‘

According to this parameter, statistically significant differences were de-
monstrated between the verbal statements of all groups of our subjects in

a state of emotional stress and ordinary state. For example, while a hesita-

tion appeared on the average every 1.9 s in the airport controllers in an ”'
ordinary state. this interval decreased to 1.4 a in the presence of emotional '
tension, and this indicated that there was an increase in number of hesita-

tiona and, consequently, appearance in speech of difficulty in formulating
thoughts and operational choice of words to express them. In the course of

the preoperative interview, when surgical patients experienced extreme

emotional stress, the hesitations occurred every 3.6 words, whereas during

the postoperative interview, the day before their discharge, pauses of

this type appeared much less often, on the average every 6.3 words. An ana-
logous trend was also found in the speech of students (mean size of speech F
segment without pauses constituted 3.7 words in an ordinary state and

3.1 words in a state of emotional stress), as well as servicemen (in whom

the mean length of a speech segment decreased from 3.8 words under ordinary
conditions to 3.3 words with emotional stress).

2. Rate of Articulation**

This refers to the ratio of number of syllables in the statement to the

time required to utter them (i.e., "pure" speech time). The most vivid
differences in articulation rate can be illustrated by comparing the

verbal statements of airport controllers in an ordinary state and in a

state of emotional stress. The mean rate of articulation in this group of
subjects constituted 8.7 syllables/s in the presence of emotional tension

and 6.2 syllables/s in their usual state (the differences are substantial
according to Hilcoxson's criterion, with a<0.01; Z - 2.230). In some of

the subjects in this group, the rate of articulation doubled in the presence

of stress, as compared to an ordinary state (from 5 to 10 syllables/s). -

3. Latency Period of Verbal Reaction

According to the data for the controller group, where this parameter is of
particular interest. the mean latency period of the verbal reaction in-
creases from 1.1 s in the ordinary state to 1.9 s in the presence of

tension in some controllers, whereas in other subjects it drops from 1.7 s
to 1.3 s in the presence of emotional stress, and this reflects the distinc-
tive features of emotional verbal reactions of subjects with the excitatory

*Like P. Goldman-Bisler [15], we considered pauses lasting 250 ms or more
to be hesitations.

**Together with engineers A. A. Chugay and 0. N. Karpov [13], we developed
a basically new instrumentation method for measuring articulation rate,

based on counting the number of alternate noise and tone sounds per unit
time of pronounced speech.

5
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and inhibitory type of emotional tension (please refer to [10] for more
details on this score).

a. Range of Fluctuations in Rate of Speech in the Course of a Verbal
Statement

This parameter is convenient for quantitative evaluation; it describes two
types of changes in different directions, which occur in speech under the
influence of stress, namely: onset of difficulties in operational choice

of words leading to an increase in number of pauses and slowing of speech,
and animation of spontaneous speech activity associated with an increase

in rate of speech. The wider the range of fluctuations in speech rate

at different segments of the "train" of speech, the greater the probability
that the speaker is experiencing emotional stress. According to the data we
obtained, the ratio of rate of speech of our subjects averaged for time
intervals of 10 s constituted 1:2 and even 1:3 at different times in a
state of emotional stress.

5. Duration of interval, after which areas appear in the flow of
speech where the frequency of the fundamental tone of voice is higher than
the mean, typical frequency for a given speaker.

The mean duration of this interval constitutes 0.53 a in the speech of air-
port controllers in an ordinary state and it is 0.38sin the presence of
emotional stress.

6. Number of signs of uncertainty (semantically irrelevant repetitions,

reformulations, "heavy pauses," incomplete words or phrases) per 100 words:
Substantial differences were demonstrated in this parameter between verbal

statements in the presence of emotional stress and without it in all groups
of subjects, with a high level of significance of differences.

For example, according to the data we obtained, the mean number of signs

of uncertainty per 100 words of speech in the statements of patients con-
stituted 8.6 in the presence of emotional stress and 4.8 without it (the dif-
ferences are substantial according to the criterion of Hilcoxson, with a<0.01;
Z - 3.002). The number of elements of uncertainty increased by more than

2 times in the speech of servicemen in the presence of emotional stress,

as compared to an ordinary state.

7. Coefficient of diversity of speech vocabulary, which charac-
terizes the ratio of different words in statements to total number of words:

In students, for example, this coefficient fluctuates from a mean of 3.7 in
an ordinary state to 2.9 in the presence of emotional stress (the differences

are substantial, with a<0.01; Z - 3.100).

8. Mean number of gestures (per 100 uttered words), associated with
speech, in particular searching and noncommunicative gestures:

6
FOR GFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There is a substnntial increase in number of gestures in the presence of
stress, as compared to the ordinary state, in the speech of students in

a foreign language, proficiency in which has not reached an adequate level
of automatism. For example, while students make an average of up to 6
gestures per 100 words in narrating something they read in a routine
class, when so doing in a test situation the number of gestures almost
doubles, reaching ll.

9. Mean number of syntactically incomplete phrases in verbal
statements: According to our findings, there was a particularly marked
increase in number of interrupted phrases in the presence of emotional

stress in students and controllers (from 8-91 of the total number of
phrases under ordinary conditions to 20-23! in the presence of stress).

10.Henn number of mistakes (slip of the tongue, paraphasia) in
speech:* The number of slips and paraphasias ranged from 1.7 in a

normal state to 2.5 per 100 words in the presence of emotional tension in
all of the groups. As we have already indicated, there is a sharp increase
in number of speech perception errors in the presence of noise and verbal
interference, as well as the number of linguistic mistakes made in a foreign

language. The latter ranges from 3-6 per 100 words in an ordinary situation
to 6-10 in the presence of stress, depending on the proficiency in the

foreign language, and the lower the knowledge of the latter, the more
mistakes are made when speaking in emotiogenic situations (as compared to

speech in an ordinary situation). This serves as convincing experimental
confirmation of the fact that the components of activity that require con-
scious control of quality of expression are particularly affected in the

presence of emotional stress (with lack of proficiency in a foreign language
a significant part of operations related to lexical and grammatic formula-

tion of states is not automated to an adequate extent and is performed
under the control of voluntary attention).

Discussion

In view of the fact that the quantitative and qualitative changes in speech
characteristics in the presence of emotional stress are manifested rather

distinctly in all groups of subjects involved in our experimental study,
it may be assumed that these changes do not occur by chance, and that they

reflect some common patterns of intellectual activity when in a state of
emotional stress.

Impaired orientation when performing a complex intellectual activity and
appearance of difficulties in reaching the goal of the activity may be
considered to be one of these typical patterns. In speech, this is mani-
fested by the following: a) oversimplification of the perception process:

instead of meaningful phrases presented for auditory perception in the pre-
sence of noise, the subjects perceive a meaningless set of words in the

;A more comprehensive list of speech characteristics that could be used to

identify emotional states is given in the article of A. A. Leont'yev and
E. L. Nosenko [7].

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

presence of emotional stress, whereas in an ordinary situation the same
phrases can be reproduced, though not always exactly, but in the form of
meaningful series of words; b) in the form of an increase in logically
incomplete phrases in verbal states in a state of stress, as well as
impaired integrity of superphrane entities due to surfacing incidental
associations; c) in the form of an increase, as compared to a normal
situation, in number of inadequate (chance) associations in performing
associative tests.

An individual appears to forget the purpose of his activity when in a

state of emotional stress. The following finding, which we demonstrated

in the course of experimental investigation, can serve as a graphic illustra-
tion of this statement: Hhen performing an assignment involving reading

of a text with concurrent filling of blanks in it with the required words,
our subjects (studentﬂ not infrequently read the entire text aloud without
inserting any words or even making searching pauses where the blanks
occurred in the presence of stress. Such instances were totally absent

when reading analogous texts in an ordinary situation.

Aside from forgetting the objectives of activity, the diminished effective-
ness of intellectual performance is also manifested by deterioration of
situational afferentat‘on, i.e., insufficient consideration of factors that
would permit making the decision as to how best to perform the action. In
verbal speech, this is reflected in the following: a) in the form of a
choice of words that are not suitable within the context, for example,

in answer the the question "What figures do you see in picture No 3?" the
controller states "0n the horiz...* on horizon number three I see a star,
triangle, circle"; b) in the form of impaired dominance of a name within
the framework of superphrase entity, for example, to the question "what did

you hear as you went to your work place?" the subject answers "Hell, it is
hard to hear the sounds. They are walking behind me ... I only hear the

squeaking of shoes." The pronoun "they" is not dominant here, since the
noun it replaces (people, friends) was not used in the prior context.

The fact we established, that of formation of inadequate hypotheses by the
subjects when reading partially distorted texts. could serve as a convincing
example of inadequate situational afferentation when performing an activity
in a state of emotional stress.

Late appearance of the triggering stimulus, which determines when something

prompted by motivation and situation should be done, constitutes the
further impairment of intellectual activity in the presence of stress. The
subjects' efforts to reproduce what they heard on the basis of one or two
words taken from the entire phrase, when perceiving speech in a state of

eﬁotionsi stress are a reflection, in our opinion, of delay in initiation
o trigger ng stimulus.

*The wrong start I‘in horiz..." indicates that the speaker apparently considers

the choice of this word to be unsatisfactory, but cannot immediately
recall the required word.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

One of the typical patterns of organization of Intellectual activity in the
presence of emotional stress is, as shown by our analysis of speech distinc-
tions of subjects in such a state, the sharp decrease in critical attitude
toward une's own behavior. In our opinion, this is attributable to the

fact that difficulties arise in the presence of stress in implementing yet
another stage of the intellectual act, that of comparing the results of ac-
tion to the original intent. and this is apparently related to generalized
excitation of those parts of the brain that are involved in integration of

emotional states [5. 14] and are responsible for implementing normal func-
tion of the system of detecting mistakes.

it must be stressed that worsening of conscious control of quality of
performance in the presence of stress was manifested simultaneously in our
subjects, both in verbal speech and other forms of intellectual activity.
For example, in the presence of emotional stress, there was a substantial
increase in number of erroneously perceived inquiries and reactions to a
so-called false call signal, as compared to an ordinary situation; there
was a decline of coefficient of accuracy in working on cancellation tables.

Comparative psycholinguistic analysis of speech distinctions of the some
subjects in an ordinary situation and in the presence of emotional stress
enabled us to discover one more specific distinction of organization of
intellectual activity in the presence of stress. which is related to the
uniqueness of motivation of activity in such a state.

Since a state of emotional stress arises as a specific form of reflection
by the subject of an inconsistency between his vital needs (motives) and
success or possibility of successful performance of corresponding activity.
it appears obvious that a subject in such a state strives to have the

most radical influence on the behavior of his interlocutor in the direction
required for the speaker. to form in his interlocutor the attitude to the
subject of conversation that is needed by the speaker. He relate the
increase in number of lexical entities with the significance of semantic
sbsolutism, with distinct positive or negative connotation, to expressly
this distinctions in motivation of activity in the presence of stress;

this also applies to diverse emphatic elements. words singled out by logical
stress, as well as emphatic and descriptive gestures.

The distinctions of motivation of activity in the presence of stress also
cause a tendency toward alteration of activity, as manifested by excessive
acceleration and simplification thereof. In speech. this is also indicated
by simplification of structural syntax; the speaker does not "read out"

(in the term of A. A. Leont'yev [51]) all of the ”grammatical obligations"

in the course of his statement, as well as the more stereotypic vocabulary
reflecting a tendency toward dimplification of the work retrieval process for
adequate expression of thougnts, the intermittent syntactic train as a result
of separating the statement into syntagma linked by the apposition method,
increase in number of mistakes of concordance of linguistic entities of an
anticipatory origin that the speaker does not correct, as compared to speech
in an ordinary situation (such as “As compared to 1965 in l978....") and
substantial increase in articulation rate.

9

FOR 0??! {Rs 655 thY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HoweVer, expression of the tendency toward faster act.vity in the presence
ul emotional stresa is inhibited due to deterioration of immediate recall

in such a state. which leads to difficulty in choice of words for adequate
expression of thoughts and related increase in number of searching pauses.

as well as slower speech at some segments of the verbal train.

Evidently. deterioration of immediate recall reflects an impairment of the
process of fixing and activating traces of impressions that reach the
organism, which is inherent in emotional stress and which is due to changes

in the nature of interaction between the cerebral cortex and subcortical
ntructures,‘ that occur in the presenct of stress. The many auditory and

verbal perseverations, which reached 6-10 per 100 words spoken by our sub-
Jects. are indicative of disturbances in trace activity of the cortex in
the presence of stress.

Conclusion

The results of this investigation indicate that there are substantial changes
in many speech characteristics under the influence of emotional stress. as
compared to the same speech characteristics in a calm state. The speech

vharacteristics that can be submitted to quantitative evaluation. which
are informatiVe from the standpoint of reflecting emotional stress. can be

recorded for identification of emotional stress and detection of situations.
under the influence of which it appears, as well as to determine which sub-
ject of speech induces emotional tension in the speaker.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. Anokhln, P. K. "The Problem of Decision Making in Psychology and
Physiology," VOPROSY PSIKBOLOGII [Problems of Psychology], No b. 1974.

2. Vitt, N. V. "information About Emotional States in Verbal Intonation,"
lbid. No 3. 1965.

3. idem. "0n the Question of Correlation Between Intellectual Processes and

Functional States," in "Lingvopsikhologicheskiye problemy obosnovaniya
amtodiki prepodsvaniya inostrannykh yazykov v vysshey shkole. Tezisy

dokladov nauehno-metodicheskoy konferentsii" [Linguopsychological
Problems of Substantiation of Methods for Teaching Foreign Languages in
institutions of higher Learning. Summaries of Papers Delivered at a
Scientific and Methodological Conference]. Moscow, 1971.

._-———..-_ —..-—

"it may be assumed that attenuatita of the inhibitory effect of the cortex
u" subeartlcal structures in the presence of stress [5] is related to the

phenomenon of activation of spontaneous manifestations in speech (an in-
crease in number of "parasite" words, cliches. habitual statements, non-

communicative gestures. etc.).

10

FOR “EFZCiRL V51 JXLT
S.

6.

80
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

I6.

15.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Galunov. V. 1., and Manerov, V. Kh. “Speech Signal Characteristics as

an Indicator of the Operator's Emotional State," in "Problemy inzhcnernoy
psiLhologii i ergonomlkl. Tezisy doklsdov k [V Vsesoyuznoy konferentsii

po inzhenernoy psikhologii i ergononike" [Problems of Engineering Psycho-
logy and Ergonomics. Summaries of Papers Delivered at the 6th All-Uniom

Conference on Engineering Psychology and Ergonomics], Yaroslavl',
Vyp 3, 1976.

Gelhorn, E., and Luthborow, J. "Emotions and Emotional Disorders.
Neurophysiological Studies," Moscow, 1966.

Leont'yev, A. A. "Psycholinguistic Entities and Generation of Verbal
Statement," Moscow, 1969.

Leont'yev, A. A., and Nosenko, E. L. "Some Psycholinguistic Character-
istics of Spontaneous Speech in the Presence of Emotional Stress," in
"Obshchaya i prikladnaya psikholingvistika" [General and Applied Psycho-
linguistics], Moscow, 1973.

Leont'yev, A. M. "Needs, Motives and Emotions." Moscow, 1971.

Lck'yanov, A. M., and Prolov, M. V. "Signals of the State of an
Operator,“ Moscow, 1969.

Nosenko, E. L. “Effect of Emotional Stress on Perception of Speech,"
in "Smyslovoye vospriyatiye rechevogo soobshcheniya" [Perception of
Meaning of Verbal Communications], Moscow, 1916.

Mosenko, E. L., et al. "An Instrument for Evaluation of Degree of
Development of Proficiency in a Foreign Language," in "Inoatrannyye

yazyki v vyshey shkole" [Foreign Languages in Institutions of higher
Learning], Moscow, 1972.

Idem, "Evaluation of Changes in Acoustical Speech Characteristics With
the Use of Computers,” in "Problemy i metody avtomatizstsii

eksperimental'nykh issledovaniy" [Problems and Methods of Automating
Experimental Research], Dnepropetrovsk, 1976.

Idem, "A System for Automatic Identification of Emotional Stress in

Man According to Acoustical and Temporal Characteristics of Speech.
Speech and Emotions," in "Materialy simpoziuma 11-16 noyabrys, 1976 g."

[Proceedings of Symposium on 11-16 November 1976], Leningrad, 1975.
Suvorova, V. V. "Psychophysiology of Stress," Moscow, 1975.

Tishchenko, L. 0. "Investigation of Acoustical Parameters of Speech for

the Purpose of Identifying Emotional Stress in Man,“ in "Materisly 111
Vsesoyuznogo simpoziuma po psikholingvistike" [Proceedings of 3d
All-Union Symposium on Psycholinguistics], Moscow, 1970.

11
FOR OFF1CXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[6. (kiidnan-Eiuer, P. "ﬂouitation and Information in Speech." in "The
Fourth London Synponiuu on Information Theory," Vol 6. Pt III. 1961.

17. thl. G. F. “Henuurlng the Pailcnr'u Anxiety During interviews From
'ﬁxpreuuive’ Aspects of "in Speech." TRANS N. Y. ACAD. SCI.. Vol 21,
Ser 11. No 3. 1959.

18. Hiiiians. C. 5., and Stevens. K. N. "0n Determining the Ehotionni
State of Pilots During Flight. An Exploratory Study," AEROSPACE
MEDICINE. Vol 40, No 12. 1969.

COPYRIGRT: "Voprooy poikhoiogii", "Pedagogika", 1978

10,657
050: 1870

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

SIGNAL FREQUENCY IN A PROBABILISTIC ENVIRONMENT AND STRATEGY OF OPERATOR
BEHAVIOR

Moscow VOPROSY PSIKHOLOOII in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 120-126

[Article by L. l. Peresleni. Scientific Research Institute of Defectology
(study of handicapped children), USSR Academy of Pedagogical Sciences. Moscow]

[Text] The unwaning interest in the study of processes of probabilistic
forecasting is attributable to the fact that the methodological procedures

used make it possible to come closer to comprehension of the mechanisas of
mental phenomena that play a substantial role in cognitive activity. Motor
reaction time is the most informative parameter. which permits evaluation
of formation :7 adjustment or readiness for perception of events varying in
probability. .t has been demonstrated that the reaction time (RT) in res-

ponse to signals delivered with a high probability is shorter than RT for
signals that are less probable [5, 6, 8, 9, ll, 15, 16, 18, 19 and others].

In one of our studies [7], it was found that RT to a signal delivered less

often was reliably longer than RT for a frequent signal in children 8-9
years of age. in whom we recorded the motor responses to two vibrotactile

stimuli delivered with different probability. The obtained data led us to
the conclusion that the process of probabilistic forecasting is already
formed in the youngest school children. Moreover. it was demonstrated that

there is less distinct development of probabilistic forecasing in mentally
retarded children.

A study of age-related dynamics of psychophysical parameters of children.
with both normal and retarded intellectual development, revealed a decrease
in difference between RT in response to frequent and occasional signals

in older school children.

According to the obtained data. we should have demonstrated deterioration
of processes of probabilistic forecasting in ontogenesis. However, it is
difficult to assume that behavior becomes less adaptive in the course of

ontogenetic development. The data in the literature [1. 3. 8 and others]
warrant the belief that the observed leveling off of differences in RT with

frequent and unfroquent signals could be related to another factor. a greater
diversity of behavior strategies that appears with accumulation of life

13
FOR CFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

experiences. To test this hypothesis, we conducted a series of studies with
adult subjects. recording Kl under the some experimental conditions as were
present in the survey of the younger school children.

Methods

The study was conducted with adults 20-35 years of age (11 people). He
delivered alternate signals (let us designate one of them as "signal A" and

the other as "signal B") through two vibrators, one of which was attached
to the left arm and the other, to the symtrical part of the right.

The subjects were instructed to depress "usquickly as possible and without
making sistekes"the left button on the recording device with the left index
finger as soon as they felt the vibration signal on the left are. Upon
feeling the signal on the right are, the subjects were to press the right
button with the index finger ofthe right hand. The fingers were kept over
the buttons during the test.

We recorded the RT of choice by means of a modified chronoreflexoseter with
an accuracy of 1 ms. Preparatory signals were not used. Headphones were
used through which white noise was delivered to sash the sounds from the
vibrators and external interference.

Two series of experiments were conducted. In the first series, the proba-
bility (P) of delivery of each signal was as follows: PIA] - 0.5 and PI!) -
0.5; in the second series conducted on another day: PIA] - 0.8 and Pll] - 0.2.
For some subjects, we used PIA] - 0.2 and PlB] - 0.8. A total of 100 signals
were delivered in the first series and 125, in the second. The interval
between stimuli constituted about 5 s. There was some brief training prior
to the first series.

Results

Table 1 lists the arithmetic mean values of RT (in ms) for the group of
adult subjects and. for the purpose of coaparison. data are listed for

8-year-old children with normal intellectual development [7].

Table i. “can data on RT (es) in response to alternate signals

 

In both series. we recorded shorter RT in the adult group for both stimuli,
as compared to the school children. The difference between RTIA] and RTIB]

in the first series. when equally probable stimuli were delivered, was

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

statistically insignificant in both groups. In the second series. the dif-
ference between RT for stinuli presented at a different frequency probability
constituted 57 ms in children 8-9 years of age and 19 ms in adults.

the former difference being statistically reliable (p<0.05) and the latter
insignificant (p>0.05).

in view of the fact that adults presented shorter RT, it is expedient to
calculate the above difference in relative units (percentage of mean RT
for a frequent stimulus). He found that in relative units as well. this
difference was less by one-half in adults than in children.

Thus. the differences between mean RT in response to frequent and infrequent
stimuli, as recorded under our conditions. level off with age.

It is expedient to pursue analysis in two directions, to demontrate the
causes of this fact: 1) analysis of the program we used for delivery of
stimuli; 2) analysis of possible behavioral strategies of the subjects

under the specified experimental conditions.

The program for delivery of signals used in the second series of studies was
prepared on the basis of the table of random numbers. and it consisted of

the following sequence:

AAABAAAAAAAABBAAABAAAAABABAAABBAAAAAAAAAAABAAABAAAABABBAAAA
BAAAAAAAAAAAAAABABAAAAABAAAAAAABBAAAAABAAAAAAABAABBAAAAAAAA
BAAAAAB

The main feature of this program was, as we have already indicated above,

as follows: PIA] - 0.8; PIB] - 0.2. However, in the sequence in question,
one can also single out a feature such as probability (or, more precisely,
frequency) of appearance of a certain number of repetitions of the same
stimulus. Let us call such appearance of the same signal several times in
succession a "block." There may be one to 14 signals per block for signal
A. whereas 3 is never encountered more than twice in succession. In the
above sequence, there is a total of 40 blocks of signal A and 3 (20 of each

type of signal).

Table 2 shows the number of blocks consisting of different numbers of A and
B signals. as well as the probability of their appearance in the above-

iadicated sequence (program).

On the basis of the foregoing and tabular numbers. the sequence used is
characterized by the following probability correlations:

(l) PIA1>PIBL
(2) {PlA(3-S)]>P[A(l-Zl} - {P[A(6-8)I>P[A(9-llo))).
(3) P[3(1)1>P[B(2)l.

15
FOR GFFXCXAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2. Frequency characteristics of sequence of signals

Number of signals Number of Probability (P) of appear-

Signal or block blocks ance of block in

       

 

In the correlations between probabilities given. A(j) and 3(1) refer to
blocks of j elements of signals A and B. 1 having the value of l, 2, ... id,
according to number of signals in the blocks.

In addition to the above correlations. it is purposeful to consider other
distinctions of the program.

In this sequence. there are four types of transitions: from signal A to
signal A. which we shall designate as (A * A}: from signal A to signal 3--
iA * B}; from signal B to signal A-{B * A}; from signal 3 to signal 3--

[B * 8}. In all, there are 12k transitions in the sequence. The arbitrary
probability of transitions of the above four types is not the same. Thus,
the probability of appearance of B after the third, fourth or fifth A is
higher than the arbitrary probability of B after the ninth to fourteenth

signal A. Let us refer to the arbitrary probability of B after the third-
fifth A as PlB/Ag-5] and the arbitrary probability of B after the ninth-

fourteenth A as PII/Ag-:.]. In this program, PIE/A3-5] . 0.08 and
PlB/Ag_1t] - 0.02. Moreover, of interest are the correlations between

arbitrar probabilities of the most informative transitions {3, 4 A} and
{3; e 31‘. In the above program, PIA/B1] - 0.11 and Flag/3,] - 0.06.

Thus. we can add two more probability correlations to the above three:

(‘) Pin/A)-sl>?lB/As-|~lc
(5) PIA/3|I>P[31/B|].

Hhile the 2d and 3d correlations of probabilities refer to evaluation of

a sequence consisting of blocks of a different number of repeated signals,
i.e., attention is focused on the length of a series of A or B signals, the

6th and 5th correlations refer to evaluation of the incidence of transitions
from one signal to the other. In the latter cases, the emphasis is on

appearance of signal 8.

it may be assumed that, if there is a correlation between the subjects‘ reac-
tions and probability of presentation of alternative signals. according to

16
FOR U USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/0ﬂ08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020009-9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the five probability correlations discussed. analysis of experimental data
should demonstrate the fiVe following correlations between the subjects' RT:

0) RTIAI<RT[B].

a) {RT[A(3-S)]<RT[A(l-2)l) - (RT[A(6-8)]<RT[A(9-l§)ﬂ. where ar[A(3-5n
is the mean RT for the 3d-Sth A signal in blocks of 3-5 signals; RT[A(l-2)l
is the mean RT for signal A in blocks of l and 2 A signals, etc.

c) RT[B(1)I<RT[B(2)I.
a) RTlBI-RTlAa-sl< RTlB]-RT[A1-1~I.
e) nr[Al-ar[a.l<ar[n:]-ar(n.].

As we have already indicated, in children 8-9 years of age, the arithmetic

mean RT for the infrequent signal was significantly (p<0.05) longer than
the RT for a frequent signal. At the same time, additional analysis of the
experimental material revealed that such correlations between probabilities
as (2). (3) and (5), and accordingly TR correlations such as (b), (c) and
(e) are not demonstrable. But difference RTIBI-RTIA;-5] [condition (d)] is
smaller than RTIB]-RT[A9-1~I. according to probability correlation (6);
however, this difference is not great (statistically unreliable).

Analysis of individual data revealed that correlation (a) applied to 921 of
the children. (c) to 151 and (d) to 392.

in adult subjects, the differences for all five correlations (according to
mean values) did not reach reliable levels. However. upon consideration of
individual data, we found that correlation (a) applied to 602 of the adult
subjects. (b) to 10%. (c) to 602, (d) to 302 and (e) to 39%. Thus, while
children do not take into consideration all probability correlations in
signal sequences. over half the adult subjects (60!) considered the 1st

and 3d correlation. while one-third of the subjects considered the 6th

and 5th. i.e., there was expression of all correlations, but not by all sub-
jects. This indicates that adult subjects make a finer analysis of the

probabilistic features of the stimulus sequence.

He examined the characteristics of time parameters of reactions as a function
of probability characteristics of sequences of stimuli. However, according
to data in the literature. the above-discussed special and general functions.

as well as others similar to them, cannot be analyzed apart from the stra-
tegy of behavior. which is determined by the instructions that were given

and the life experience of the subjects.

The instruction that was given. "answer as quickly as possible and without
making mistakes." determines three possible behavior strategies in the
subjects: 1) anticipation of frequent signal, which could save reaction
time; 2) anticipation of infrequent signal, which could aid in mistake-
free reaction; 3) anticipation of both frequent and infrequent signals.
which could aid in fulfilling both parts of the instructions.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it is unquestionable that the choice of the first strategy should aid in
reducing RTlAl, as compared to RTIB] [correlation (a)].

Hith the choice of the second strategy, all the other correlations should
prevail, but especially (c). Anticipation of infrequent signal 8 should aid
in consideration of the higher frequency of appearance of the unrepeated
signal 8 and infrequent occurrence thereof twice in succession. Such a
behavior strategy is based on consideration of probabilistic features of
sequences of stimuli; however, being on the alert for the infrequent signal

will lead to neutralization of differen.es between RT in response to fre-
quent and infrequent signals.

The subjects' choice of the third strategy could also result in leveling off
of differences between arithmetic mean values of RTIA] and RTIB], although
this does not rule out the possibility of fine analysis of stimulus sequences
and consideration of some of the above probability correlations, particularly
the one in (2). Horeover, the length of a block within the framework of a
specified probability of presentation of signals and chosen strategy of
behavior may be important to a number of subjects.

All of the foregoing indicates that the use of the instructions, "answer as
quickly as possible and without mistakes," and use of a random sequence of
signals, such as the one discussed, does not rule out the possibility of
expression by the subjects of different strategies of behavior, each of

which is related, to some extent or other, to the probability of presentation
of the stimuli. The most elementary strategy is the one that makes the

subjects ready to react to the frequent signal. Expressly this strategy

was selected by the young school children under our experimental conditions.
in addition, analysis of individual data revealed that, in the group of
adults, this strategy was more often chosen by the younger subjects (19-20
years old). The different behavior strategies selected by adult subjects
determined changes in RT in different directions, in response to the frequent
and infrequent signals, as a result of which, in turn, there was leveling

off of differences between mean group values of RT referable to the frequent
and infrequent signals.

in view of the foregoing. the contradictions encountered in literature
sources are interesting. Using a randomized sequence, regardless of the

probabilistic correlations between alternative signals, there is a repetition
of two, three or more identical signals (blocks). First P. bertelson [13, lb],
and later 5. Kornblum [17], R. Remington [201, Ye. P. Krinchik, P. D.
Hednikarov [4] and others described the "repetition effect," which consisted
of shortening of RT in response to a repeated stisulus. At the same time,

J. Hillians [21] demonstrated the opposite tendency. According to the data
submitted in this work, the repetition effect could consist of extension,
rather than reduction, of RT. Analogous facts are cited by H. A. Tsiskaridze
and V. A. ivannikov [12]. Both our data and those in the literature warrant
the belief that these contractions could be based on the distinctions of
interaction between the sequence and number of alternative signals presented,

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and the subject's behavior strategy, which was formed in the course of the
experiment.

The consistent changes in RT as a .-nction of correlation between probabilities
of delivery of alternative signals and prior experience of the subject. as
expressed by the choice of a given behavior strategy, compel us to call

attention to the theses of I. H. Feygenberg [10], indicating a link between
probabilistic forecasting and memory processes.

From this point of view, of interest are the works [1. 2, 5 and others], in
which it was shown that readiness or presdjustment to perception of events

occurring with a different probability is formed largely on the basis of
prior experience.

Analysis of the accumulated facts leads to the conclusion that the effective-
ness of remembering the sequences of current events is determined by the
direction and level of preadjustment (or selective adjustment) of the

reception systems of the brain. This selective adjustment is. in turn.
determined by instructions, which are the code signal (or signal code) that

triggers retrieval from memory of the engrams consistent with a given
situation. There is "superposition" of traces of prior experience over

traces of current events. The operator's strategy of behavior is a re-
flection of this process.

with increase in importance of the situation to the subject, there is in-
tensification of processes of remembering and retrieving information from
memory.

Our results indicate that the experimental set-ups that have become very
popular in the study of probabilistic forecasting are of interest for

demonstration of distinctions of formation of selective adjustment for
perception in ontogenesis.

The choice of an adequate strategy of behavior by the subject. determined by
the instructions. and pattern of alternation (or probability) of events.

can serve as a diagnostic and even prognostic indicator for differentiating
between the norm and mental deficiency.

According to all of the foregoing, the methodological procedures used in
experiments dealing with probabilistic forecasting and methods of analyzing
experimental data (both quantitative and qualitative) are very important

to the study of the significant aspects of mental activity under normal

conditions and nature of disturbances therein in the presence of mental
defects.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

S.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Asnolov, A. G. "The Question of Set in Meobehaviorisa: the Past and
the Present," in "Veroyatnoutnoye prognozirovaniye v deyatcl'nosti

cheloveka" [Probabilistic Forecasting of Human Activity], Moscow, 1977.
Brunet, J. "Psychology of Cognition," Moscow, 1977.

lvannikov, V. A. "Human Behavior in Choice Situation," in "Veroyatnostnoye
prognozirovaniye v deyatel'nosti chelovekn," Moscow, 1977.

Krinchik, Ye. P.. and Mednikarov, P. D. "Mechanisms of Influence of
Signal Probability on Man's Reaction Time," VOPROSY PSIKMOLOGII

[Problems of Psychology], No 6, 1970.

Osnitskiy, A. K. "Effect of Probability and Importance of Signal on

Motor Reaction Time," in "Sensornyye i sensomotornyye protsessy"
[Sensory and Seasorinotor Processes], Moscow, 1972.

Osnitskiy, A. K., and Savel'icheva, V. L. "Probability and Importance

in the Structure of Regulation of Activity and Effects on Unintentisl
Memory," in "Veroyatnostnoye prognozirovaniye v deyatel'nosti cheloveka,"
Moscow, 1977.

Peresleni, L. I. "Distinctions of Probabilistic Forecasting in Children

Under Normal and Pathological Conditions," VOPROSY PSIKMOLOGII, Mo 2,
1976.

Stepanskiy, V. 1., and Osnitskiy, A. K. "Human Reaction Tine as a
Function of Structure of Forecasting in s Probabilistically Deter-ined
Environment," in "Veroyatnostnoye prognozirovaniye v deyatel'nosti

cheloveka," Moscow, 1977.

Feygenberg, I. M. "Inpairnent of Probabilistic Forecasting in the
Presence of Schizophrenia," in "Shizofrcniya i veroyatnostnoye
prognozirovaniye" [Schizophrenia and Probabilistic Forecasting], Moscow,
[973.

Idem. ‘ﬁkmnry and Probabilistic Forecasting," VOPRDSY PSIKMODOGII,
No 1, 1973.

Feygenberg, I. M., and Tsiskaridze, M. A. "Reaction Tine as a Function
of Probabilistic Forecasting," in "Msterialy III Vsesoyuznogo s"yezda

psikhologov" [Proceedings of 3d All-Union Congress of Psychologists],
Moscow, Vol 3, 1968.

Tsiskaridzc. M. A., and Ivannikov, V. A. "Subjective Probability and
Reaction tine," VOPROSY PSIKMOLOGII, No 2, 1973.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13.

16.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bertelson, P. "Sequential Redundancy and Speed Two choice Responding
Task." QUART. J. Exp. PSYCHOL.. No 13, 1961.

Idea. "S-R Relationship and RT to New Versus Repeated Signals in
Satin Task.” J. EXP. PSYCHOL.. 65. 1963.

Hyman, R. "Stimulus Information as a Determinant of Reaction Time,"
lbid, 65, 1953.

Bale, D. I. "Repetition and Probability Effects in Serial Choice
Reaction Time," ACTA PSYCHOLOGICA, 29, 1969.

Kornblum. S. "Sequential Determinants of Information Processing in
Serial and Discrete Choice RT," PSYCHOL. REV.. 76, 1969.

Krueger, L. E. "The Effect of Stimulus Probability on Tuo Choice
Reaction Time," J. EXP. P8YCROL., 84. 1970.

LsDerge. D., and THeedy. J. R. "Presentation Probability and Choice
Time," Ibid, 68, 1966.

Remington, R. 1. "Analysis of Sequential Effects in Choice Reaction
Time," Ibid, 82, 1969.

willians, J. "Sequential Effects of Disjunctive Reaction Time;
Implication for Decision Models," Ibid, 71, 1966.

COPiRIGRT: "Voprosy psikhologii", "Pedagogika", 1978

10,657
080: 1870

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

A PORTABLE INSTRUMENT FOR SEPARATE RECORDING OP TONIC AND PHASIC REACTIONS
OF ELECTRICAL RESISTANCE OF TNE SKIN

Moscow VOPROSY PSIKROLOGII in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 125-128

[Article by Kh. Yu. Butkevich, Yu. G. Spivak and I. A. Semochkin, Moscow
Institute of Railroad Engineers]

[Text] As we know, changes in electrical resistance of the skin (385)

are manifested in two forms, tonic and phasic. Phasic reactions consist
of brief (lasting 1%5 s) decrease in cutaneous resistance by fractions of
a percentage point to a few percentage points in relation to the tonic
component. These phasic bursts may occur either spontaneously or .fter
delivery of some stimulus. In the latter case, the phasic reaction re-
flects the emotional significance of the stimulus. Tonic reactions are
manifested by slow build-up of skin resistance with development of inhibi-
tion and marked reduction of ERS with activation.

Of course, when using electrodes to record 585, only one signal is present,
which is the sum of the tonic and phasic components. A bridge circuit is
mainly used to record ERS, and it permits measureaent only of the overall
change in resistance, without separating it into components [2]. The

method of Ye. N. Sokolov, in which an electropotentiometer is used as the
measuring instrument [1], does not permit separate recording of ERS compo-

nents.

In this article, we shall describe an instrument, which we developed, for
singling out and recording the tonic and phasic components of 885.

As we know, 385 can be measured by passing either direct or alternating
current through the skin. In most studies, preference is given to alternat-

ing current. From the standpoint of technical execution, this is the most
convenient method. For this reason, at the first stage of developing the

instrument for recording ERS we considered the variant using alternating
current.

These studies revealed that there is significant and uniform decrease in
resistance in the course of continuous ERS recording for several hours in
a subject who was asleep according to encephalographic data.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to the latest data on the physiological nature of HRS, one would
think that prolonged exposure to alternating current alters the cutaneous
reCeptoru in some way, and sensitization thereof is reflected in the ERS
level. For this reauon. the results are not distorted in the case of
taking hriei readings using alternating current. whereas in the case of

prolonged measurement the tonic component declines regardless of the physio-
logical state. For thin reason, we abandoned the use of alternating
current and recorded the BRS using direct current.

we selected a current considerably lower than the prethreshold level, not

exceeding 10 uA. to be passed through the electrodes. The measuring cir-
cuit of the instrument was so built as to have a voltage not exceeding 1 V

in the electrodes. which does not lead to polarization phenomena.

He should specially discuss questions related to the electrodes. He know

of a wide variety of electrodes and methods of applying them. One generally
uses current-conducting paste to record bioelectrical processes, to reduce
interelectrode resistance and make a good contact with the skin, or else

the space between the electrodes and skin is filled with current-conducting

fluid. The requirement of rather low interelectrode resistance is due
to the relatiVely low input resistance (no more than l an) in the recording

equipment that is manufactured.

Various artificial methods of lowering interelectrode resistance when
measuring ERS distort the actual changes in skin resistance. This occurs
the most substantially in long-term experiments. when interelectrode re-

sistance does not remain constant and changes independently of BRS changes.
due to changes in properties of the paste or fluid used. For this reason,

we believe it necessary to use dry electrodes to record ERS.

in our opinion. the terminal phalsnges of the fingers are the most convenient
place, from the standpoint of ease of applying electrodes and simplicity of
their design. In this case. the electrode consists of a tapered ring with a
springdoaded contact on the inside. with an overall area of at least 1 cm’.
which comes in contact with the pad of the terminal phalanx. Such a design
provides for good ventilation in the contact zone. which rules out the
possibility of reduction of BRS as a result of accumulation of perspiration

under the electrodes.

when using electrodes of this type, in our experiments ERS did not exceed
2.5 HQ with 0.2 no current in the electrodes. hence. when using dry elec-

trodes. one must have an equivalent input resistance in the recording
instrument of at least several dozen HR.

1he main specifications for the recording apparatus ascent to provisions for
a high input equivalent resistance and minimum distortions when separating
the ass signal into the tonic and phasic components.

Optimum separation of the ERS signal into components is related to the
problem of reasonable choice of parameters of filters.

23

FOR c-u'i‘lCl/sl. l'a'l.‘ GSLY
Fth ilFFliZlAl. llfil, ONLY

'lhe signalu ol lnltlt and phauie common-uni are nonperlodie. thelr spectra
are cont inuouu and, consequently. overlapphm. However. in View of the
uubatantinlly dlfferent nature of change» in touie and phaiuc componentu
and. conseuQently. different shape of apertra of then" signals, it in poa-
ulhle to make a frequency uepnration ol the IZRS nignal into componentn.

The ulgnal oi the phaoir component can he iuolated from the signal of the
tonic component by means -f an upper-frequency filter (UFF). The UFF

cut-nif lrequcneyshould he determined on the basis of the condition that

the tonic componenl cannot page through and minimum distortion of the phaolc
pulse. In order to determine the optlra rut-off frequency, we moot

know the shape of the uignaln of both LES components and define their

upectra. 0n the basin of our experimental ntudiea and data in the literature.
the tonic eonponent with HRS build-op can be approximately described by an
exponent with time constant K, and the phasic pulse. in a rough approxima-
tion. by the "quadratic cosine" function in the range of -t/2 to ill, where t
in the duration of the pulse at the base.

It was experimentally entnhlluhed that. with maximum rate of build-up of
the tonic component. the value of t doe» not exceed 180 s. and the maximum

duration of the phasie puloe can be conoidered to equal 5 s.

The equations for the spectra of the tonic and phauic components are:

i ta’

_.. '_______.,
“‘0‘” " tT‘/|?;"ﬁ' 0"“, ' i’u ta' :’ - in" '5'" ['0'

where m In the angular frequency. The curves of these spectra. for I - 180 a
and t - 5 a, are illustrated in Figure I.

Figure 1 shows that most of the
energy of the signal of the tonic
component is contained in the
frequency range of 0 to 0.05 82,
while the energy of the phanic pulse
lasting 5 a in in the range of 0 to
several tenths of a Hz. In View of
the above stipulation concerning
choice of UP? cut-off frequency. we
conclude that the optimun UFF
cut-off frequency in in the range
of 0.05 "1.

however. it should be noted that

the upper-frequency filter causes
relat Vely little distortion of

phasic pulses of less than 5 3.
Most of the spectrum of longer lasting

 

Figure l.
CurVes of spectra of tonic 0,0»)
and phdhlt i%(w) components of ans

2L
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

pulses is in the range of frequencies below 0.05 Hz. i.e.. in the range of
the spectrum of the ionic component. For this reason. pulses of sore than

J a would be subject to substantial distortion.

As we have stated. the phasic reaction constitutes a few percentage points
of the tonic one. i.e.. it differs substantially in amplitude. For this
reason, the ERS signal picked up by the electrodes (overall ERS signal)

can be considered approximately as the signal of the tonic cosponent.

The flowchart of the portable instrument for separate recording of the two
8R5 coaponeats is illustrated in Figure 2.

 

Figure 2. Block diagram of portable instrument for separate recording
of tonic and phasic 5R5 reactions

Conversion of ERS into voltage occurs as follows: A controlled power source
(CPS) sets the constant level of direct current through the electrodes (E).
in this case, the voltage in the electrodes is proportional to the ans.
To rule out the deterrent influence of bioelectrical potentials of the

skin (galvanic skin response. according to Tarkhanov) and polarization of
electrodes, we selected 1 V as the maximum voltage in the electrodes.

According to the results of our studies, ERS in the terminal phalanges
of the fingers. using dry electrodes in the form of tapered rings with
an internal spring-loaded contact adjacent to the finger pad, is in the
range of l0 kn to 2.5 ill in different individuals.

The signal fros the electrodes passes through the lower-frequency filter
(LP?) to the input of amplifier (AT) of the tonic component. The LP? is
designed to provide protection against industrial interference. The signal
from the output of AT is fed to the TON output terminal, to which one of
the channels of the automatic recording device is connected.

Since there are low-asplitude phasic pulses in the overall ERS signal. to
isolate them this signal is passed through the UP? then amplified by

amplifier (AP) of the phasic component and fed to the PHASES output terminal.
to which the other channel of the automatic recording device is connected.

25

FOR Cf?! X'u. B'SE. (“LY
FOR OFPlCIAL USE ONLY

The HRS recorder la a portable instrument, the general appearance of which
is illustrated in Figure 1.

This instrument is powered by 220 V.
50 "a alternating current. 0n the
front panel are the following: "line"
tumbler [cuts in Figure 3]. “3

button to short out the electrodes.
"e'ectrode" lanourp] outlet and two
switches to select the ranges lauanaal
0. measurement of tonic and phonic
reactions, “ton" and "phase." 0n the
back panel are the "ton" and "phase"
terminals to connect an automatic
tracing device of any type with input
resistance of at least 1 kn.

 

Figure 3.
Portable instrument for separate Several specimens of the portable
recording of tonic and phosic two-channel ERS recorder were built
288 reactions in accordance with the block diagram

by the Moscow Institute of Railroad
Engineers. and they are now in use. One of them was used in a study, in
collaboration with the All-Union Scientific Research institute of Railroad
Engineers. of the problem of continuous automatic monitoring of level of
wakefulness on the basis of ass parameters. Quantitative values of ass
parameters were obtained--relative increment of tonic reaction and interval
between two adjacent pulses of the phasic reaction--characterizing different

levels of wakefulness.

Phasic ERS reaction (89)

      

I
Exogenous/” '

stimulus

I
‘

Figure 6. Phasic and tonic 58$ reactions

26

FOR GFF2CXAL P55 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Figure 4 illustrates typical curves of tonic RT and phaaic RP components

recorded in the course of actual work performed by an operator. as an
example of the ERS curves obtained with this ruu»rder. The recording was

made using two type "-390 automatic tracing devices. As can be seen in
this figure. in the time interval of tl. t2, we observe the most vivid

tonic reaction with concurrent extinction of the phasic reaction. which
is typical of decline in wakefulness level.

On the basis of the da (a obtained from these studies. several variants
were developed of an automatic device for monitoring wakefulness level of

an operator. and they differ in set of monitored 385 parameters. in one
variant. the relative increment of the tonic reaction is used and in the
other. in addition to this relative increment there is also monitoring of
the interval between adjacent phasic pulses; in the third variant. only
the interval between phasic pulses is monitored. The latter variant.

which is technically the simplest. is in the procest of being adopted
in the railroad transportation system to monitor alertness of locomotive
engineers.
BIBLIOGRAPNY
l. Sokolov. Ye. N. "Perceptioa and Conditioned Reflexes." Moscow. 1958.

2. Utyamyshev. R. 1. "Radio Electronic Equipment for the Study of Physio-
logical Processes." Moscow. 1969.

COPYRIGHT: "Coprosy psihhologii". "Pedagogiha". 1978

10.657
CSO: 1870

27
FOR OFFXCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PSYCHOLOGY

APPLIED RESEARCH AT Tﬂﬁ UKRAINIAN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF PSYCROLOCY
Hoscow VOPROSY PSIKNOLOCII in Russian No 6, 1978 pp 178-182
[Article by V. I. Voytko, Kiev]

[Text] in the last few years, the Ukrainian Scientific Research Institute
of Psychology has devoted much attention to expansion of the front of
applied psychological investigations as it is refining the strategy of
scientific research directed toward development of basic and exploratory
investigations. The former deals with both the area of education and
various areas of industrial and scientific endeavor.

Applied research is being pursued in the following directions: 1) upgrading
the educational process in preschool institutions; 2) improving the effective-
ness of teaching and educational work with lower, middle and higher grade
school children; 3) upgrading the general education and occupational

training of students at vocational and technical schools; 4) increasing the
effectiveness of professional activity of pedagogues at schools and PT"
[vocational and technical schools], as well as instructors of young workers;
5) screening and psychological training of operators of complex systems,
computer users. as well as administrators of departments at scientific
research institutes.

Specific problems referable to all of the above directions are developing
on the basis of theoretical research pursued in the laboratory of metho-

dology of psychological research (laboratory head: Prof V. I. Voytko). Re
are trying to implement the complex approach to analysis of pressing problems

of development and function of the individual at different stages of his
life and socialization. with such an approach. it is possible to take

into consideration the system of objective and subjective factors that
influence the effectiveness of educational and occupational activities of
man. The personality and role-related approach to applied research makes
it possible to investigate the individual both as an object and subject
of cognition. labor and intercourse at the same time. Applied research

is directed toward the search for and activation of psychological reserves
of the individual (worker, engineer. operator, scientist, administrator,

pupil, student, preschool child. etc.).

28
FOR GFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

As indicated by our experience. such work can develop successfully along

two lines of paramount importance: l) detection and utilization of reserves
of the individual (especially young, growing) for optimum participation in the
socially useful work process, in the world of modern occupations and spe-
cialties; 2) investigation and activation of the reserves for the apeediest
and best socialization of the individual among other people, developing in
his psychological readiness and ability to find hisself anong those around
his, aiding in development of both the individual and the entire group.

Hhen studying the individual. psychological profiles are prepared of differ-
ent people; when studying a group, a sociopsychological portrait is

created of work and creative groups.

Socialization of the individual begins already at a preschool age. as the
child learns the demands of adults and his peers. Psychological preparation
of children for school plays a substantial role in this process, and it
includes the following elements: motivational (creating a desire to learn and
readinesu for a social role as a school child, which is based on proper
conceptions of school and future life in school), intellectual (acquiring

a certain level of knowledge and ideas about life around the child, forming
certain thinking actions and operations), emotional-volitional (readiness

to obey rules and ethical standards, capacity for controllable behavior,
development of voluntary mental processes: perception, memory, imagination,
thinking, etc.). All these elements together provide for the necessary level
of active social adaptation of the child to school conditions, in which
educational activity is the chief element.

The staff of the laboratory of preschool rearing psychology (laboratory head:
V. K. Kotyrlo) have prepared two monographs, on the basis of studies pursued
for “-5 years, and they are intended as a practical aid to parents and
teachers in preschool institutions to prepare children for school.‘ The
monograph by V. K. Kotyrlo, "Developnent of will in Preschool Children,"

was also published in CSSR (1977).

Republic-level seminars convene regularly for instructors at preschool
institutions, and they deal with questions of preparing children for school.

50.0 methodological recommendations have been published on how to organize
and implement such work in nursery schools.

The staff of the laboratory of psychodiagnostics and formation of the per-

sonality of lower-grade school children (laboratory heaszu. 2. Gil'bukh)
worked in 1976-1977 on the study of effectiveness of teaching nonachievers

in the 2d grade in special "catch-up” classes. For this purpose, a set of
diagnostic test methods was used, which was developed in the laboratory.
The results confirmed the hypothesis that instruction in such classes is

'"Home Preparation of Children for School," Kiev, 1976 (aid for parents);
”School Starts Tomorrow,” Kiev, 1977.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

heuellrial and that it would he purposeful to institute individualized
instruction classes at the time childreu are enrolled in school. in 1977,
such classes were filled on the basis of data obtained in a psychodiagnostic
examination of children. At the present time. the queztion of how long
children should remain in such classes is being considered.

in addition to beneficial changes in mental development of children instructed
in individualized teaching classes. there is also formation of a positive
attitude toward studying in them, appearance of self-confidence and acquisi-
tion of a satisfactory sociopsychological status in the school group. The
knowhow gained in conducting such classes merits praise. Studies warrant

the statement that this is one of the tested means of increasing the effective-
ness of the teaching and educational process in elementary school. in our
opinion. the specifics of such classes consist of the fact that maximum use

is made of the psychological reserves of young school children and that

an individualized approach is practiced.

in the laboratory of teaching psychology (headed by s. D. Haksimcnko),
studies are directed toward refining control of the learning process. Psy-

chologically substantiated methods have been developed for formulation of
school assignments, distinctions of their acceptance and performance by
school children: the optimum conditions have been defined for self-control.
self-regulation and mutual control [checking]. A search is in progress for
educational material that would contribute the most to the mental develop-
ment of pupils, their practical activities; studies are in progress of

the psychological aspects of designing textbooks, which are based on the
experimental genetic method of investigation. Due consideration is given to
sociopsychological determinants of the educational process in the “pupil-
teacher” and "pupil-pupil" systems, which makes it possible to develop a
positive attitude toward learning in school children. thereby solving not
only educational but teaching problems, as well as permitting formation

of psychological readiness for productive labor under socialism.

He include among the sociopsychological determinants of education in the
"teacher-pupil“ system the sociopsychological state of the pedagogic team.

as the social environment that develops examples of intellectual, emotional,
work-related. ethical and cultural behavior, and which exerts a constant
influence on pupils on all levels of awareness. Accordingly, in the labo-
ratory of social psychology (headed by L. A. Leplkhova), studies are con-
ducted on sociopsychological mechanisms of functioning of pedagogic groups.
The personality features of pedagogues, sociopsychologicsl mechanisms of
adjustment, interpersonal compatibility. public opinion in schools with
different levels of organization are investigated.

Investigation of the effectiveness of the process of socialization of pupils
revealed that it depends on the number and content of social roles per-

formed by the individual at the stage of school education. Since the main
form of pupil activity in school is educational activity, one must provide

for roles in class self-rule that would not only aid in mental development

30

FOR OFFlCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of pupils. but would be helpful to the class supervisor with regard to
organisation of the teaching and educational process. For this purpose.
studies have been In progress for several years on the effectiveness of
class supervisor helper groups in the upper grades or one of the schools
in Kiev. The members of such groups perform the following duties: they
participate in regulating the study load (amount of homework), resolving
conflict situations among pupils. collecting information about the occupa-
tional interests of the pupils, preparing educational and work-related
descriptions of each pupil. All these functions are performed in accord-
ance with the instructions of the class supervisor and under his immediate
supervision. This work aids in developing organizational [management]
skills in students and in developing interest in pedagogic work. It enables
the pedagogue to gather information. both about the class group as a whole
and individual pupils. which aids in practicing the personal-role-related
approach to management of aociopsychological adjustment of students.

Organization of specialized sports classes in some of the general education
schools of the Ukraine. in connection with Olympiad-80 [1980 Olympics], is
of considerable interest. from the standpoint of increasing the effective-

ness of management of the process of organizing pupils. The staff of the
institute. which participate in these classes as consultant psychologists.

work with the trainers in developing programs for psychophysical develop-

ment of pupils. The classes in physical culture and sports have the objective
not only of stimulating physical development of pupils, but using partici-
pation in sports for development of emotional-volitional traits. sociopsycho-
logical adjustment and regulation of behavior, preparing pupils in the

middle grades for considerable intellectual and work loads, which are

expected of them in the higher school grades and when they begin to work.

In the laboratory of psychophysiology (headed by A. H. Karpukhina), studies
are pursued of the parameters of various psychophysiological states in man
(different levels of mental tension. operator and emotional stress, fatigue,
sleep, etc.). New approaches are being developed to solve the problem of
monitoring and regulating psychophysiological states of operators. The
studies are directed toward development of ergonomic requirements and re-
commendations referable to psychophysiologicsl states of man in ergatic
systems, as well as development of bioengineering systems and complexes
directedtoward increasing the efficiency of performance. including that of
school children in the learning process.

The staff of the laboratory of vocational guidance (headed by B. A.
Fedorishin) is holding experimental classes on vocational information in the
upper grades of one of the schools in Kiev. A monograph,entitled "Classes
on Vocational Information in Upper Grades of Secondary School," was
published (1976) on the basis of the accumulated experience. It has been
recommended by the Ukrainian Ministry of Education as a textbook in the
vocational guidance class,"?undamentals of Choosing a Profession." (17 hours)
in the schools of the Ukraine.

31
FOR OFFICXAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For several years there has been a vocational counseling center attached

to this laboratory. its purpose is to help students of higher grades in
Kiev to choose their future occupation. A vocational counseling center was
organized at one of the schools, where methods are being tested for
demonstration of occupationally significant traits in the students. The
objective of this work is to develop models of a school vocational
counseling cexter for subsequent adoption in this republic's schools.

A set of l5 simple and reliable methods has been tested. which are
suitable for use by teachers.

A Luch-68 apparatus has been developed at the institute shops by scientists
and engineers. and it is used to examine some of the mental qualities of

young people for vocational guidance purposes.

By order of the Ukrainian Ministry of Education, the laboratory of
vocational training psychology (headed by V. A. Holyako) prepared psycholo-
gical recommendations for a "Statute on interschool educational and
industrial combines." The laboratory staff participates in studying the
knowhow of interschool educational and industrial combines and is working
out recommendations for deployment thereof in the different oblasts of the
Ukraine. Investigation of creative activity of designers. psychological
readiness of secondary school students to choose occupations in industry and
agriculture occupies a significant place in the work of this laboratory.
Problems of scientific control of psychology of individuals through
mechanisms of public opinion. consideration of public interests and forma-
tion of internal conviction in the individual are prominent in this work.
Psychology of vocational teaching and education is closely linked with
problems of social psychology. In essence. a new discipline is emerging:
industrial social psychology.

The work of the staff of the laboratory of psychology of occupational and
technical education (headed by R. A. Ponomareva) is directed toward
developing the psychological bases for improving assimilation of technical

professions by young people (electricians, all-purpose lathe hands,
assembly plant mechanics). Analysis of the professional performance of

such workers made it possible to define the main psychological requirements
for development of a system of ln-class tests, the use of which optimizes

vocational training in secondary PTU. At the same time, an experimental
study is in progress in several secondary PTU of Kiev to find problems
directed toward determining the level of formation of the system of
vocational knowledge and skills of students. as well as didactic procedures
for introduction thereof. In collaboration with the Ukrainian State
Commission for Vocational Screening. regular republic-level seminars are
held for PTU workers, which deal with pressing problems of psychology of
vocational and technical education.

A "Program of sex education for PTU students and premarital counseling
[preparation for married life!" was prepared in the laboratory of
educational psychology (headed by H. i. Borishevskiy). on the basis of

0 32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

experimental studies conducted in prior years on adolescent psychology
(self-awareness. value orientation. ideals. self-regulation of behavior.
relations between adolescents of opposite sex). Methodological instructions
have been worked out on experimental adoption of this program. A republic-
level seminar was held for instructors and teachers of PTU who are
presently directly involved in introducing this program in 100 vocational
and technical schools of Ukrainian SSR.

Studies of the personality distinctions of school children with behavioral
problems are conducted in the laboratory of psychology of difficult
adolescents (headed by 8. I. Dranishcheva). Significant deviations in

the personality structure of such pupils. distinctions of relationships

at home and in the peer group at school are investigated on the basis of
theoretical analysis and experimental research. Criteria and practical
procedures are being developed for defining the type of difficulty.

problem area in the structure of the personality and methods of forming
positive traits. The monograph. "Theoretical Problems of Preventing
Juvenile Crime." was published (1978) it collaboration with the Institute

of Government and Law. There is a permanent psychological consultation
office at one of the schools in Kiev for pedagogues and parents of difficult
adolescents. while periodic consultations for school children and pedagogues
are available at several other day and boarding schools. The laboratory
staff participates in organizing republic-level seminars for educators who
work with difficult children. In particularly difficult cases. forensic
psychological expert evaluations are made in criminal cases. at the

request of court and investigative agencies, where the suspects or victims
are minors.

The laboratory of psychology of personality (headed by G. S. Kostyuk).
which investigates the conditions and moving forces of personality develop-
ment at a young age. devotes much attention to psychological aspects of
improving education of higher grade pupils as a social form of controlling
their instruction. increasing its role in their development. preparation
for work and mastering the chosen profession. 0n the basis of investiga-
tions. recommendations are being prepared on problems of developing
satisfactory motivation for learning in higher grade pupils. as well as
cognitive interests. desire for independent supplementary learning.
application thereof to work and public activities. Attention is given to
the need to detect and consider the individual typologicsl distinctions

of pupils. These recommendations are described in articles published in
pedagogic journals and collections. A monograph dealing with the psychology
of early youth is being prepared for publication.

A new approach to construction of the "man-computer" system was developed
in collaboration with the Institute of Cybernetics, Ukrainian Academy of
Sciences. which is directed toward various categories of nonprofessional

users of computer technology.

Development of this system is based on investigation of activity of computer
users. planning standard activity. working out a psychologically natural

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE OXLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

programming language (YAUD) as a means ol solving problems with computers.
development of psychologically substantiated teaching devices (content and
methods of teaching) using programmed aids. as well as the software system.
As a result, it was possible to reduce drastically the time required to

learn to solve problems with computers and. what is the most important
factor. to obtain close to standard performance by most subjects. The system
is used in automated control systems of several industrial enterprises and
educational institutions. Studies are in progress in the laboratory of
psychology of training computer users (headed by Ye. I. Mashbita).

in 1973-1977. studies were conducted on psychological problems of tutorship
(V. i. Voytko, i. S. Gichan). The main concepts of these investigations
served as the basis for the work of the tutor faculty based at the Ukrainian
Republic Center for Economic and Scientific-Technological Propaganda, in
Kiev.

In 1977. work began in the laboratory of psychology of scientific creativity
(headed by V. G. lvanchenko) on sociopsychological instruction of adminis-
trators of scientific departments at scientific research institutes. The
psychological and pedagogic implementation of such instruction implies
broad use of diagnostic and teaching films [situations], made on the basis
of scripts written by psychologists. The method of designing such films
and principles involved in working with training films have been worked

on at the institute since 1972.

Since 1969, the Ukrainian Republic Hedicopedagogie Commission has been
based at the laboratory of psychology of mentally retarded children (headed
by N. H. Stadnenko). It deals with diagnostically difficult and conflict
situations submitted by oblast commissions; it offers consultant, manage-
ment and methodological assistance to oblast commissions in the area of
studying children and placing them in special schools: it organizes
measures for advanced training of physicians and pedagogues (members of

oblast medicopedagogic commissions); it participates in preparing proposals
for development of a network of specialized general education boarding

schools and special-purpose preschool institutions in this KGPUBIIC. 8‘
well as measures to improve education and teaching for children with mental

and physical developmental defects. A set of methods for determination

of the level of mental development of lower grade school children (for
placement in specialized schools of Ukr inian $88) was developed. tested
and recommended to oblast commissions. The laboratory is involved in pre-
paring the prcgram for auxiliary schools, in particular, an original

program for a diagnostic class; methodological letters were prepared for
teachers, as well as textbooks for auxiliary schools.

Research dealing with socialization of preschool children with hearing
problems is being conducted in the laboratory of psychology of children
with impaired hearting (headed by L. S. Lebedeva). As a rule. the hearing-
impaired child attends a special school. where -nstruction lasts 4 years
longer than in the usual school. we undertook the task of forming, during

34
FOR GFFXCIKL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the period of preschool development, of skill in auditory perception of speech
using sound-amplifying equipment. as well as normal speech development in
children. He found that it was possible not only to place the child in

public school, but to organize intercourse with all of the main socializa-
tion agents (parents. peers. mass media, etc.).

The cycle of such classes is conducted on an individual basis with the

active participation of the child's parents. It lasts for l to 3 years,
depending on the extent of hearing and speech disturbances.

An experimental program has been prepared for workers in surdologicsl labo-

ratories and parents, which permits the use of an individualized approach
to speech instruction when a child has partial impairment of hearing.

Methods of quantitative evaluation of psychological characteristics of opera-
tors of complex systems are being developed in the laboratory of occupational
psychodiagnostics; there too. recommendations have been prepared on the
design of consoles. information models and work places for operators who

have to pick up multichannel. different-level information. An instrument
test was developed for identifying and forming a number of psychological

traits that are professionally important to perators: distinctions of inter-
action, short- and long-term memory, operational thinking, emotional equi-

librium. etc.

There is a patent department at the institute. whose tasks include metho-
dological assistance to inventors of devices that pertain to specific
psychological principles. In 1975-1978, a number of author certificates was
issued for inventions, including a driver-training simulator, flight control
device, apparatus for psychophysiological research, etc.

In 1973, a specialized laboratory for introduction of psychological achieve-
ments in practice (headed by V. L. Huntyan) was created at the institute.

It will make it possible to improve applications‘of psychological achieve-
ments in various branches of practice and make this work purposeful and
well-organized.

COPYRIGHT: "Voprosy psikhologii." "Pedegogika", 1978

10.657
680: 1870

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

USE OF POLYMERS IN SURGERY

Kiev PRINBNENIYB POLIHEROV V KHIRURGII in Russian 1978 signed to press
23 Dec 76 pp 2, 3-6, 130

[Annotation, introduction and table of contents from book by Tat‘yana
Bsperovna Lipatova and Georgiy Aleksandrovich thsjsdse. Bayjiva Dunks,
1,500 copies, 130 pages]

[Text] The monograph describes the possible applications of synthetic poly-
meric materials in medicine in medicine as endoprostheses and tissue ad-
hesives. The polyurethane-based medical adhesive KL-3 used as an example,

a complex of physicochemical and medicobiologicsl research. which is essential
for a characterization of alloplastic material, has been described. The
monograph contains information on the biological destruction mechanism of
polyurethanes in an animal body and its model media, the mechanism which de-
termines the approach to the production of polymers applicable in medicine.
with a predetermined length of stay in animal organisms.

The monograph is intended for specialists who work on the production of
materials for alloplasty. and also for medical workers engaged in the usage
of synthetic polymers in surgery.

The application of polymeric materials in surgery is now one of the most
important trends in the sceince of polymers. Even though numerous polymeric
products are used extensively in medicine (various surgical devices, equip-
ment, vessels, films for the covering of an operative field, dressing mater-
ials and others), their application in the surgical treatment of human in-
ternal organs was started relatively recently. This new trend, which was
called alloplasty, proved to be quite promising. Polymeric alloplastic
material is frequently more acceptable, in terms of both its influence on

an organism and its physicomechanical properties, than autoplasty, homo-
plasty and heteroplasty by biological substances [1].

The development of alloplasty has posed many extremely important problems in
the areas of: the biplogy of tissues which are in contact with a polymer, the
perfection of surgical methods and the creation of biologically compatible

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Hm ul-‘I-‘IiziM. "5!. "Mix

polymers. Fulfillment of ”new goals not". he achieVed through the joint
efforts of specialists in high-molecular eumpouudu. in biology and in med-
irine.

Polymers used now in endupreuthesis belong to different classes of chemical
compounds, namely. carbon-chain pnly m1 r21 1onininlnr, vnrlmm substitutes in
He main (1' .1rhuu) 1h.1iu I2]. heierm'huu Ill and lul1r1mrguui1 polymers [4].
ihelr structural configuration (Fig. l) can be linear, branched and cross-
linked ISI. it hecomeu evident that in terms of chemical and macromolecular
structure. polymer chemistry offers surgery an unlimited range of polymers
which can serve as a base for the manufacture of synthetic materials and ob-
jects made of synthetic materials.

——————«z‘4<4<4

TLEEE

(h) ¢
I'ac. I. Cam can-ups snaps-mean:

a -a-uasas nun”..- a. o - ”amass-sa- c sun- I Oahu-s «use sun-
aM-aa «stamens-so. o - consul. sport's-trusses. cps-aun-

Figure 1. Schematic of Macromolecular Structure
Key:

i. Linear structure
2,]. Branched structure with small and large number of branches, respectively
6. Cross-linked. spatial. three-simensional structure

As far as their mechanical properties are concerned, polymers made to work
at human body temperatures are categorized as flexible and rigid ones.
Flexible polymers are characterized by a greater degree of reversible de-
formations. and most often they have a cross-linked structure or strong
physical links between certain functional groups (for example, some linear
polyurethanes. rubbers). Polysmides (kapron. nylon). some polyurethanes.
carbon-chain polymers and others can be classified as rigid polymers.

In addition. polymeric material can be monolithic or porous. To s consider-
able extent. different types of fillers (mineral or organic) make it pos-
nlhlv to determine the structure and to change the properties of both types
of polyrwrs in a desirable direction.

Polymers of almost all classes. except for those with a blastomogenic effect.
have been tried experimentally in endoprosthesis. It is likely that many
polymers. after being purified of low-molecular impurities, may turn out to
be biologically compatible.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fim (IFFICIM. IRS}: ONLY

lluuulmvnugraph does not present all types of polymers. which have been studied
in animal experiments, for application in alloplauty. because they often did
not provide the iniormation sought. The failures were most often due to the
fact that In the process of investigation. attention was paid only to the
reaction of the organism or surrounding tissue to the introduced implant.
while Ihe chemical structure of the polymer was not taken int" consideration.
Such experiments do not enable specialists in high-molecular compounds to
draw conclusions about the chemical structure of polymers suitable for use in
medicine. In our opinion. along with medicobiological investigations, it is
vital to conduct a thorough physicochemiral study of changes which take place
in a polymer when introduced into an animal organism: i.c., the solution to
the problem of polymer use in surgery must be comprehensive. it is the only

way to develop scientific bases for selecting polymeric materials for endo-
prostheses.

Considering the problems which are solved in surgery by means of alloplssty,
it turned out that endoprontheses can be divided into two groups: those with
a temporary effect (for example, prostheses of extrahepatic bile ducts,
hollow organs. muscles and aponeuroses) and those with life-long effect
(atriovontricular valves. substitutes of the lens and vitreous body of the
eye). Endoprostheses must meet different requirements. depending on how
long they "serVe" in the organism. in the first case. as the biological
destruction of the polymeric implant is taking place. it must be replaced by
a regenerated tissue and removed from the organism, without causing any harm.
in the second case, it is necessary for the alloimplant to preserve the
complex of physicochemical and mechanical properties during the whole period
of its stay in the organism. Therefore. it is natural that the requirements
for the materials used in the manufacture of endoprostheses are different.

he a rule, it is required that the hermetic quality be preserved for an
alloimplant of temporary action during its stay in the organism for a certain
period of time. This means the destruction of polymeric material must par-
allel its replacement by connective tissue. Therefore. the time period of

the polymer’s destruction in the organism must be strictly specified; this
necessitates a thorough morphological study. There exist literary data [7]

to the effect that even polymers which are considered extremely stable undergo
destruction when introduced into an organism. This monograph discusses a
possible mechanism of such destruction under the influence of certain cellular
systems in the organism. it is probable that almost all synthetic polymers
undergo the process of destruction when introduced into the organism, but
these processes evolve at different speeds.

In order to use polymeric material successfully in medicine and to specify
the area of its application, it is essential to clarify a number of important
properties which are discussed in the monograph. One of the important tasks
is to investigate the reaction of the surrounding tissue to polymer and to
determine the direction of the most important biochemical procesnes in them.
in addition. it is necessary to study the antigenic properties of polymeric
material. since it is extremely important if it is used repeated.y.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The possibility of providing polymers with therapeutic effects represents a
completely independent trend. There can he dIVerse ways of "inoculating"
polymers with pharmacologically active substances, depending on the purpose
for which the alloimplant is intended.

Along with biological analysis, the monograph demonstrates a need for physlco-
chemical studied of the polymeric implant itself. The results of such studies
should. first and foremost. clarify the degree of stability of the chemical
bonds in polymers and the degree of their destruction under the influence of
various factors in the organism. and should also identify the products of
biological destruction. Therefore, it seems expedient to investigate the
influence exerted on a polymer by various media which model the media of the

organisms; i.e.. extracts of tissues and organs. solutions of enzymes and
others.

The problem of studying migration and ways to remove the products of de-
struction from the organism is closely related to the question of the speed
of biological destruction in polymeric materials. Use of polymers with a
radioactive label allows for answering this question with a sufficient de-
gree of precision.

The monograph contains data regarding the influence of mechanical loads on a
polymer in a model medium. The necessity of conducting experiments of this
kind is brought about by the fact that an alloimplant introduced into the or-

ganism is subjected to loads of various types which exert a certain influence
on its structure.

The behavior of a polymer in the organism is influenced not only by its chem-
ical structure. but by its permolecular structure as well. The latter. in
our view. comprises formations consisting of a large number of macromolecules
and their segments. The monograph shows that changes in the permolecular
structure of amorphous cross-linked polyurethanes are parallel to chemical
changes. In linear crystalline polymers. even insignificant variations in
their chemical structure result in a change of degree of crystallization [5].

Numerous studies indicate that porous polymeric material is more suitable

for implantation into an organism than monolithic material. Apparently. it
is first of all stipulated by a larger contact surface of such alloimplsnts
with media and tissues in the organism. Therefore. study of the moistening
of polymers. which are intended for endoprosthesis. with model media acquires
a particular significance. It is probable that augmentation of the polymer
surface in contact with tissues and media of the organism can be achieved by
introducing into them harmless (and. possibly. even therapeutic) fillers
which eventually will be washed out, thus exposing a greater area of the
alloimplant.

This monograph examines in detail two kinds of polymeric materials used in
endoprosthesis; i.e., polyurethanes which are destroyed in the organism, and
Polyglycol Hethacrylates which are intended for life-long stay in the organism
and are used as swollen Gels.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONIX

Medical ndhvuchu represent a special kind of alloinplantn. because they
polymerize (or harden) while in contact with the wound area. Polymerization
of a medical adhesive must be fast enough, because the monomers which form

It are. as a rule. toxic and therefore should not diffuse in the tissue. The
adherent suture is normally for-ed under conditions of high humidity. there-
iore it is necessary that the adherent material either force out most of the
moisture from the wound surface. or bind the moisture chemically while pre-
serving a sufficient strength of bonding. In other respects. an adherent
suture must meet the same requirements as the regular temporary endoprosthesis.

The monograph comprises a comprehensive literary survey which basically covers
cyanoncrylate adhesives since they are most common; it examines the mechanism
of their destruction in the organism. With the polyurethane adhesive KL-3
synthesized in the institute of Chemistry of High-Molecular Compounds of

UhSSr Academy of Sciences taken as an example. it is shown which particular
investigations must be conducted prior to the delineation of the area in which
the medical adhesive can be used in surgery. Such investigations will help
formulate the criteria of biological compatibility of polymeric materials,
recommend ways to regulate the periods of time during which endoprosthesea

can stay in the organism. and outline further studies in the area of allo-
plauty.

Contents Page
introduction 3
Chapter 1. Polymeric Haterials for Alloplasty 7
Polyurethanes 7
Reaction of tissues to polyurethanes 8
Biological destruction of polyurethanes l7
Hydrophilic polymer implants 20
Influence of some properties of the implant on the
implantation 22
Experimental and clinical research 22
Chapter 2. Medical Adhesives 27
Cyanoacrylate-based adhesives 27
Reaction of tissues to cyanoacrylate adhesives 29
Use of cyanoacrylate adhesives in various branches
of surgery 36
Other classes of medical adhesives 47

Chapter 3. hedicobiological and Physicochemical Approach

to the Selection of Material for ﬁndoprosthesis 51
On the stability of bonding 52
Behavior of polyurethane adhesive in animal organisms 59
Destruction of the medical adhesive KLPJ in physiologically
active media and in the animal organism 60
‘0

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Morphology oi hardened KL-J adhesIVe and its changes
in the process of biological destruction

influence of static and dynamic loads on the destruction
of the hardened adhesive

investigation of the cellular mechanism of biological

destruction and resorption of polyurethane medical
adhesive

Hays for renoving the products of biological
destruction of the polyurethane adhesive
Reaction of the organism tissues to the polyurethane
adhesive
Biochemical indicators of the state of skeletal muscles
during the nyoplaaty of their defects by the adherent
method

Antigenic composition of skeletal muscles under the

conditions of application of the polyurethane
adhesive

Delineation of the area for the application of tho

KL-J adhesive

Morphological evaluation of healing of kidney Hounds
under the application of the polyurethane adhesive

Distinctive features of skeletal muscle regeneration
when their wounds are bound with the polyurethane
adhesive

Closure of colonic fistulas by the KL-J adhesive

Conclusion
Bibliography
COPYRIGRT: lsdatsl'atvo "Naukova dunks", 1977

9327
C80: 1870
FOR OI’FICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS UDC 613.695

CURRENT PROBLEMS IN SPACE BIOMY‘HWLOGY

Moscow PROBLEM! KOSHICRESKOY BIOLOCII: AKTUAL'NYYE PROBLEHY KOSHICRESKOY
BIORITHHOLOGII in Russian Vol 23. 1977 signed to press 5 May 77 pp 6, 5-6.
311

(Annotation. introduction and table of contents from book by S. I. Stepanova.
"Nauka" Publishing House. 1350 copies. 311 pages]

[Annotation]

[Text] This monograph is devoted to the analysis of a number of current
problens in space biorhythmology which are part of the general probiem of
the prophylaxis of desynchronism (disruption of the natural structure of the
circadian rhythms) among the members of space flight crews. The author
examines basic experimental data on the adaptation of the human organism

to phase shifts in the sleepwakefulness cycle and to unusually long

periods of daylight. Assuming the constancy of the ”information-energy
value" of the diurnal cycle, the author develops the problem of establish-
ing the limit of human adaptability to unusually long periods of daylight.

Intended for the use of specialists in space medicine and the planning of
work and rest periods during space flight, the monograph may also be use-
ful to physiologists. hygienists and clinicians.

Introduction

Space biorhythmology is a new direction in science which arose at the sane
time as piloted space flights. It is part of the more general science of
biological rhythms. known as biorhythmology or chronobiology‘. Space bio—
rhythmology embraces the principles of the scientific organisation of labor
and rest in the condutions of space. as based on the principle of rhythm.
This approach is determined by an understanding of rhythm as a basic pro~
party of living systems.

*The term "chronobiology" refers, essentially. to the science of life when
regarded in the aspect of time. This is a quite broad concept, since a
whole series of the departments of biology are concerned with time. notably
eabryology and the physiology of aging and pathology. "Biorhythmology"

62
FOR 0P?IClAL 088 ONE?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is narrower in scope. emphasizing precisely the rhythmical side of a given
process. or the phenomenon of rhythm. For that reason we prefer to use the

term "hiorhythmnlogy" whencvur the rhythm of vital activity is the subject
of research.

The rhythmic alternation of sleep and wakefulness is a necessary condition
for maintaining the stability of the human being's physical capability and
health not only in space but in any situation whatever. The experience of
transmeridional flights shows that disruption of the ordinary succession
of sleep and wakefulness has an adverse effect on health and physical
capability. The effects of episodic disruptions of this sort do not re-
main permanently; however, if the disruptions occur frequently. the nega-
tive consequences become chronic in the form of serious illnesses.

During space flight the usual succession of sleep and wakefulness is com-
monly somewhat altered. Most commonly the alterations take the form of
shifting the individual‘s sleep to unaccustomed hours. and of curtailment
(less often. increase) of the duration of the diurnal cycle (or migration
of tho sleep-wakefulness rhythm phase along a 26-hour scale). The negative
effect of such regimes in space life is intensified by decay of the pri-
mary system of external periodic signals which on earth regulate the rhy-
thmic activity of the organism--namely. systems of time sensors, or syn-
chronizers. Under the conditions of orbital flight at the present time.
the succession of light and darkness--one of the main time sensors--is
accomplished within a period of 90 minutes (the duration of a single loop).
In this situation the rhythm of succession of illumination obviously loses
the synchronizing effect which it would have on the human sleep-wakefulness
rhythm. Therefore. even simple maintenance of the sleep-wakefulness rhy-

thm. to say nothing of its reformulation. represents a more difficult pro-
blem in space than it does on earth.

It is interesting that control of the sleep-wakefulness cycle in human
subjects in space was of interest to K. E. Tsiolkovskiy. In his science-
fiction tale “Outside the Earth." where he describes a piloted space flight
for the very first time in human history (this author believed. by the way,
that space flight would first be accomplished in a near-earth orbit).
Tsiolkovskiy puts these words into the mouth of one of his heroes: “...
our rocket makes a full revolution of the earth in 100 minutes... The solar
day is 67 minutes in duration. the night 33 minutes... It is impossible to
pay any attention to our night. We don't sleep for half an hour--that's
not our custom. I propose 16 hours of activity and 8 hours of sleep--
approximatelV. of course. Each one of us can arrange his own night just

by closing the shutters. and similarly. arrange his own day by turning on
the electricity" (Source 196. p 60).

‘3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL llSl-I ONLY

Unfortunately. maintenance of the accustomed order of sleep and wakefulness
cannot always be obserVed in space. Not all specialists concerned with
organizing space flights take full account of the negative influence of
unaccustomed orders of living on the functional state of our astronauts.

in connection with this it has become necessary. using special earthbound
experiments simulating the conditions of space flight (simulating, first of
all. the separation from terrestrial physical synchronizers). to study the
possibility of adapting the human organism to such changes in the life
rhythm as are characteristic of modern space flights--that is, adapting

it to a rhythm phase shift of sleep-wakefulness and its migration. Close
to this problem is the more extensive one of establishing a limit of human
adaptability to diurnal periods of unusual length. Equally important is
the selection. for space flight purposes. of persons least susceptible

to the effects of primary alteration of the physical order of life (that
is. persons capable of a quicker and easier adoption of a new sleep-wake-
fulness rhythm). Finally. the problem of the utilization of free time on
space flights occupies an important position in organizing this activity.

Work on problems of space biorhythmology has been conducted at our labora-
tory for a period of 10 years. The theoretical bases of this vork were
formulated in 1975 by B. S. Alyakriaskiy in his monograph "Principles of
the Scientific Organization of the work and Rest of Cosmonauts." The pre-
sent monograph is devoted largely to an analysis of experimental material
accumulated by our ova laboratory. and also material obtained by Soviet
and American cosmonauts. including that from the Salyut and Skylab orbital
stations. The results of the present analysis are being used in the pre-

paration of a series of recommendations for the organization of human life
in the conditions of space.

Table of Contents

Introduction 5

Chapter 1. Desynchronism: a Component of the Total Adaptation Syn- 7
drone and a Criterion of the Functional State of the Organism. De-
syachronizing Factors of Space Flight

Chapter 11. Organization of Labor and Rest among Soviet and American 66
Cosmonauts. Some Features of Their Condition during and after Flight

Chapter iii. Human Adaptation to Phase Shifts in the Sleep-Hakeful- 87
ness Rhythm

Chapter iV. Human Adaptation to Unusually Long Diurnal Periods 155

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter V. Prophylaxis of Dcaynchronlsn during Space Flight

Chapter VI. Sons Sun-otlona and Prospects

Bibliography.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatcl'atvo "ﬂanks." 1977

6277
C80: 1870

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

000 613.693
THEORETICAL BASES OF THE PLANNING 0F LIFE-SUPPORT SYSTEMS

Moscow PROBLEHY KOSHICHESKOY BlOLOGiI: TEORBTICHESKIYE OSNOVY PROYEKTIRO-
VANIYW SISTEM ZHIZNEOBESPECHENIYA in Russian Vol 36, 1977 signed to press
2 Sep 77 pp 6. 5-10, 256

lAnnotation. introduction and table of contents from book by 6. I. Norozov.
"Nauka" Publishing House, 1250 copies 256 pages]

[Annotation]

[Text] This book deals with the theoretical problems of planning life-
support systems from the point of view of systems analysis. The author
establishes the concept of a complex of life-support systems and proposes
a classification for such complexes. Using the life-support systems of
transport and interplanetary spaceships as examples. he examines the
structure of these systems along with their interconnections and their
ties with other on-board systems. He demonstrates the basic methods in
use in the mathematical modeling of life-support systems.

Intended for the use of research workers in life-support system planning,
the book may also prove helpful to specialists in space biology.

Tables. 22: illus.. S9; biblio.. 8 items.
introduction

As a consequence of the rapid adoption of the achievements of science and
technology in literally every sphere of human existence during our times.
there will appear perceptible changes both in the conditions of human life
and in our ideas of the optimality of those conditions. The development
of technology enables man to exert so powerful an influence on the natural
environment surrounding him. and even on the biosphere as a whole. that
such development will inevitably exert a perceptible influence on the con-

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

dltiona of human life itself. In view of the present-day possibilities of
technology and the ever-increasing tempo of technical progress. we may
expect very soon to witness. side by side with the positive changes which
are already evident. the appearance of certain other changes which are
unfavorable for human society. Every year there is a more evident neces-
sity for the speedy development. on a scientific basis. of measures aimed
at the liquidation (or compensation) and prevention of unfavorable con-
sequences of tehcnical progress. The problem of developing such measures
has two aspects. One of these consists in utilizing means for limiting
the action of technology on nature. a Very great deal of attention has
recently been devoted to this aspect of the problem. especially in the
USSR. in 1972 the USSR Supreme Soviet adopted the resolution "Measures for
Future Improvement in the Preservation of Nature and Rational Utilization
of Natural Resources."1 That same year a second resolution was adopted

by the CC CPSU and the USSR Council of Ministers: "lntensification of

the Preservation of Nature and ImproVement in the Utilization of National
Resources."2 These two resolutions prohibit industrial installations

from discharging gases into the atmosphere which are harmful to human beings.
and from releasing unpurified waters into natural reservoirs; they also
prohibit a number of practices which disrupt the equilibrium of nature.
and. in particular, alter the conditions of human life.

All these measures are very important; they will no doubt make possible a
substantial reduction in the development of unfavorable changes in living
conditions. however. not all of the possible consequences of technical
progress can be allowed for by the application of legislative methods. No
less important is the second aspect of the problem. a second way towards
its solution--namely. the planning of technology with due allowance

for its minimal effect on the human environment. and. in particular. for
the development of technical means to assure environmental parameters com-
fortable for human beings.

historically. this problem was first encountered by specialists working on
high-altitude aircraft with pressurized cabins; later on it case to the
attention of builders of underground installations. submarines and space-
ships. At the present time the greatest progress in this area has been
realized by piloted spacecraft designers. Extensive scientific-research
and design efforts have gone into the creation. by Soviet industry. of
special systems usually referred to as "life-support systems"1. the main
function of which is the maintenance of conditions aboard spaceships
which make medical services possible.

[“Party worker's Handbook." No 13. Moscow. Political Literature Publ.
house. 1973. p 88.

211nm. p no

10. l. Voronin (1973) notes that the published literature on the subject
employs more than 15 different nomenclatures to cover these systems.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE UNIX

0| course. those systems which guarantee the vital functions of astronauts
are quite adaptable to the solution of many "terrestrial" problems connect-
ed with maintaining environmental conditions favorable for the human being.
however. as a result of the complexity and him! cost of these systems at
the present time. their use is econoldcally justified only for such unique
problems as those encountered in human space flight. Moreover. there are
no essential limitations on the possible area of application of life-sup-
port systems originally developed for use by astronauts. in the future.

as these systems are perfected and acquire simpler and more economical de-
signs. they may quite possibly find application in ground use. Therefore.
problems in the planning of highly developed life-support systems may well
be of interest to specialists outside the field of spacecraft design. Of
particular value in this connection is the "closure" principle now being
applied in space systems. This principle is simply that vitally necessary
substances required by the human body can be manufactured from ordinary
human wastes and excretions. The use of this principle in the construc—
tion of systems makes possible a sharp curtailment in the demand for
oxygen. water. food and other substances needed for human life. As often
happens in technological development. the principle was borrowed from
nature itself. since both on the scale of individual biogeocenoeses and
within the biosphere as a whole. there is continuous circulation of both
organic and mineral substances. The presence of this analogy between life-
support systems in space and ecological systems2 offers a basis on which
many specialists view the life-support system as a model of the natural
ecological system (in the extreme case. a model of the terrestrial bio-
sphere nboard a spacecraft). The earliest researchers studying problems

in the conquest of space believed that life-support systems would have to
be entirely "closed." and for that reason would have to be based on the

use of photosynthesis by plants. the plant excretions playing the same role
on piloted spacecraft as the one they play in the terrestrial biosphere.

K. E. Tsiolkovskiy in 1895 wrote of a "space greenhouse" as the basis for
a life-support system. however. with the creation of the first space-
ships. due allowance for weight limitation. energy requirements and system
Volumes made it clear that for short-term space flights it would be more
economical to use systems either entirely dependent on reserves or utilizing
certain physicachcmicai processes to produce pure drinking water and oxygen
from the products of metabolism of the crew. At the present time a majority
of design developments in life-support systems are following these two
lhws.

Extensive research on various possible technological processes in the clo-
sure of life-support systems has led to several unexpected results. It
appears that there are a great nuaber of technological processes of physico-
chemical nature which are known to be impleaentable. but which nevertheless
have been very little studied. so that any choice of the ones most adapt-

__________...__
7A3 Ya. Konechchi maintains (1967). "...the terms 'pressurized cabin' and

'closcd ecological system' have been used synonomously in bioastronautics."
(p 8}).

68
FOR OFFICXAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

able to practical use is difficult. In addition. althouph the creation

of a fully closed life-support system is scarcely even considered any

longer. individual biological objects may in principle be used for the partial
closure of life-support systems as far as regards water and oxygen (single-
cell algae. bacteria. higher plants). while higher plants in the near fu-

ture may become the only possible producers of food aboard spacecraft.

in such circumstances the most practically acceptable routes for the deve-
lopment of life-support systems are two in number. The first consists in
a comprehensive evaluation of the merits and weaknesses of the technologi-
cal processes being compared. in order to determine the most promising
ones and to implement them. The second consists in holding to a single
life-support system. or at least to a small number of variants which are
closest to practical realization. in order to speed up development. The
most logical and justified route appears to be the first. which would enable
designers to reject. with complete justification. any variants which were
insufficiently promising. even though offering more utility in the near
future. The second route would make possible an acceleration of immediate
projects. but it would also admit the presence of "blind-alley" decisions
offering no continuity with later projects.

The complication of space problems which is expected in the fairly near
future will multiply by several times the present requirements on techni-
csl capabilities. and will impose more rigid conditions for meeting those
requirements. This in turn will raise the probability of nonoptimsl or
erroneous solutions being adopted on an intuitive basis. with accompany-
ing material and mental loss. It is therefore necessary to develop methods
which will assure a selection of solutions not merely on the basis of
experience and intuition but also on the basis of objective. quantitative
criteria making possible a comparison of different variants of life-sup-
port systems and a selection of the optimal ones.

in planning a complex of life-support systems, allowance must be made for
a large number of factors affecting the choice of life-support system type
(purpose and type of spacecraft. functional life of ship and system.
number of crew members. character of ship directory, weight and energy
limitat.ons. operational safety. reliability, economic indices, etc.) and
for the specific features of life-support systems:

1) continuous performance of crew during the entire flight period;

2) close functional bond with design of the living quarters of the space-
ship and with other on-board systems (heat regulation. power supply);

3) complex interconnection between individual elements and subsystems;
A) dependence of life-support system characteristics on work routines of

the crew;

49
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5) great variety in possible variants of technological processes; and

6) presence of contradictory requirements (physiological-hygienic, volume-
weight. energy, operational, and so forth).

All these features dictate the necessity of developing specific planning
methods for use in creating long-range life-support system complexes--
methods based on the use of systems analysis, and, essentially, on the
development of a theory of life-support systems planning.

The use of a systems approach in planning such complex entities as life-
support systems makes it possible to embrace an aggregate of such systems
as a whole, the interaction of systems, subsystems and more partial ele-
ments; and it offers the timely elimination of contradictions between ele-
ments. along with full utilization of the advantages arising from the com-
bination of life-support systems into a single whole.

Current publications dealing with research in this area are virtually non-
existent. The majority of works dealing with the planning of life-support
systems are devoted to problems in setting up individual system components,
to the study of various technological processes supplying the vital require-
ments of the crew (oxygen, water, food), and to utilization of human wastes.

All of the foregoing impelled the author to write a book which would com-
bine and generalize the basic principles and methods involved in planning
life-support systems. Essentially. this book is an attempt to set forth
the bases of a theory of life-support system planning, a theory which would
facilitate the creation of plans for the most perfected combinations of
such systems for every type of piloted spacecraft. The book consists of
nine chapters.

In Chapter I are given basic definitions, along with a justification of the
approach adopted by the author regarding the composition of life-support
systems. The chapter also includes a classification of life-support systems
by type of piloted spacecraft.

Chapter II is a summary of published data on the condition of vital acti-
vities among astronauts during space flight, both when inside and when out-
side their ships. The chapter also takes up the magnitude of astronauts'
needs for vitally important substances, and their requirements in the eli-
mination of bodily wastes, the latter being given in the form of figures

on energy expenditure.

Chapter 111 is a statement of the bases of systems analysis as applied to
the planning of life-support systems.

Chapter [V is a formulation of the main problems in planning theory, with
indicated approaches to their solution.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Rik OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter V includes an analysis of various criteria tor the comparison of
life-support systems. here the author examines the possible forms assumed
by weight-energy criteria. and analyzes the special features of a compre-
henaiVe evaluation of life-support systems with the help of dimensional and
dimensionless coefficients. Two forms of dimensionless complex criteria
are given which are capable of the combined reflection of several life-
support system parameters at the same time.

Chapter Vi is an analysis of various criteria for the comparison of life-
support systems. Here it is shown that the solution of this problem. in
application to systems of this sort, is impossible uith use of a single
method. A rational combination of all known methods for the guarantee of
reliability. with obligatory allowance for organizational factors arising
in the practical development of systems. is required.

Chapter Vii is devoted to the problem of the mathematical modeling of life-
support systems. it includes a classification of life-support system
models. along with references to methods of model compilation and to
various problems in the planning and testing of systems.

Chapter Vill contains a survey of the methods of mathematical optimization
of the characteristics and content of life-support systems. Two methods
are examined in detail: linear progrnaming. which is the most widely used
in resolving various planning problems; and dynamic programming. proposed
by this author for the solution of problems in optimizing the composition

of life-support systems during comparison of variants based on various
different principles.

Finally. Chapter 1x is a presentation of the principles of optimization of
a test program.

in the present work the author takes up only life-support systems for spaCe
flight. However. those chapters in which the specific conditions of space

flight (ueightiessness. for example) are not implied may prove valuable in
the planning of analogous systems for ground purposes.

In Chapters l. Ill and V use has been made of certain materials prepared by
the author in collaboration with S. P. Andreyev, A. M. Kononenko, A. S.
Mironov and A. B. Sushinskiy.

For their advice and valuable comments on the manuscript. the author is
deeply grateful to Prof. A. S. Shataiov. i. V. Lavrov. Candidate of Techni-
eal Sciences V. F. Kozhnov and Doctor of Medical Sciences Ye. Ya. Shepelov.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SI-Z ONLY

Table of Contents

Introduction

Chapter 1. Purpone and Composition of u Life-Support System
Chapter 1!. Life Support in Space

Chapter Ill. The Systems Approach in Planning Space Life-Support
Systems

Chapter lV. Problems in the Theory of Planning Life-Support Systems
Chapter V. Criteria for Comparing Life-Support Systems

Chapter Vi. Reliability Guarantee of Life-Support Systems

Chapter Vii. Mathematical Modeling of Life-Support Systems

Chapter VIII. Optimization of Life-Support Systems

Chapter 1X. Tests of Life-Support Systems

Conclusion

Abbreviations

Bibliography

COPYRiGhT: izdatel'ntvo "Nauka." 1977

6277
650: 1870

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

5
ll

31
68

71
103
128
156
192
226
26k
2&6
248