APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007mm: ClA-RDPOZMOOROOMOWNDMOJ
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA—RDP82-00850R000100030019-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8316
7 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 6/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030019-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also free news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in patent? esea were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGNT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSHIP 0F
MTERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROPFICIAL USE ONLY.
LI No. 3-K i ' A ' .
. 5 -

open . air

TRANSMTIONS 0N NEAR ﬂST AND MR“! AFRICA, (F000 6/79) 7 x-rCh 1979 '

    

1. Actual) 0. Federal“ Omanlulion Rep.
0.

. PING-'0‘ (kg-airmen Neu cad Addin-
Joint Publ icationa Raaaarch Service
1000 ﬂorth 61.50 300‘ H. Connect/Gran No.

IO. Prokctl‘l'ull'ovk Uni: be.

Arlington. Virginia 22201

l2. Span-ale. Ouaoinuoa None ad Home l). Type ei Rape“ e Period

.‘Cl

Aa abova

. A - mum

o
a

11m aerial report contains information on eocio-econouic, govern-ant. political.
and technical developments in ‘the countriea of the Near Beat and North Africa.

. Icy «do and «mac Aaalyeio. o- ' “ripen

Political Science _Inter-Areb Affair. _Libya _8ultanate
Sociologv _North African _Hauritanie of Oman
Econooice Affairs _liorocco __Syria
Culture (Social Sciencea) Afghanistan LPeople'a Deno- L‘runieia
Ethnology IAlger-ie cratic Republic _United Arab
Geography _nahrain of Yuan Eniretee
Technological Egypt __Peraiun Gulf western
Hilitary Sciences In": Area —Sahcre

_Ireq _Qaur _Yeoen Arab

I78- uemﬁm/Oawi-‘M Tm. _lerael _x_8audi Arabia Republic

__Jordan _Spaniah North

_Kmnit Africa

_l.ebaoon __8udan

m. COSATIFnH/ch' 50. 5c, 5k. is

'0. Availability Scum“ 2!. .‘o. oi Fun
For Official Use Only. ,h . , 32
united Nil-bet of Copiea Available Fro. JPRS. W“

In . . '

'°‘“‘ """’" “"1 "" m: you: an at arraooucro “"°""°‘ ""“m
FOR OFFICIAL. USE ONLY

JPRS L/
7 March

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(P000 6/79)

CONTENTS
About IA

Nature. Effectiveness of Opposition Discussed
(JEUNE APRIQUB, 27 Dec 78. 3 Jan 19) ..............

Profile of the Opposition. by Mohamed Sele-
Chenging of the Guard

Letters to French Publication Express Hope for Change
(JBUNE AFRIQUB. 10. 2‘ Jan 79) ..esossoo'seooeooseeso

Algerian-Belgian Cooperation
(HARCNES TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBBNS, 19 Jan 79) ....

Japanese Group To Mild Liquified Oil Gas Plant
(MARCHBS TROPICAUX 81' MEDITERRANBENS, 12 Jan 79)

eoee

1978 hydrocarbon Production and Exports
(HARCNBS TROPICAUX ET HBDITBRRANBENS. 12 Jan 79) ....

Agree-cots With Japanese, Czech Co-psnies for Phosphate
Fertiliser Conplexes st Tehesss. Annebe

(MRCRES TROPICAUX ET MEDITWS, 12 Jan 79) ....

Brlcl's

Tie-con Scricuiture Center
Maritime Studies Bureau
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)
PEOPLE'S DMMTIC REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

Socorro Island Reported To Be Soviet His-no Duo
(“-"ATM Ala-'MI. 28 Dec 78’: J.“ 79) oooo-oooooo

SAUDI ARABIA

Briefs
Joponooo-Soudi Methanol Factory

TUNISIA

Alleged Socret Group Charged Hick Infiltrouns Any
(Souhoyr Bolhuun; am AFRIQUE. 27 Doc 78.

3 Jan 79) Ioolooooooooosooooooooonoooooolooooolooooo

- b ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

NATURE. ﬂPFECTIVBNBSS OP OPPOSITION DISCUSSED
Profile of the Opposition
Paris JEUNB AFRIQUB in French 27 Dec 78 and 3 Jan 79 pp 56-58
[Article by Mohaaed Sales: "Is the Opposition To Be Taken Into Account?"l

[Text] The silence of the opponents of President Mousri Boueediene while the
office seemed to be vacant following the agony of the head of state had sur-
prised the partisans and adversaries of the regiae. This silence was abruptly
broken. Cos-uniques. pamphlets. end declarations to the press have succeeded
one another, provoking an iaeediate reaction by the government. "These ghosts
from abroad have no political future in our country," the Algerian press
stated. The internal opponents (in jail or under house arrest) sees to be
scattered. But they were characterised as "men of the past" not long ago.

Opposition

"Ghosts froe abroad” or "sen of the past." the leaders of the opposition
nevertheless all played a role. often a detersining one, in the history of the
Algerian resistance. Since the assassination of Mohsead Khider in Madrid.
that of Kris Belkacee at Frankfurt-ae-Main. and the death of Kaid Ahead in
Morocco. lb personalities have doeinated the Algerian opposition. Hho are
they and what do they want?

Five cannot express the-selves today. They are deprived of liberty in
Algeria: Aheed Ben Bella. held since 1965; Perhst Abbas, Ben Yeassef Ben
Kheddn. Hocine Lshouel. and Mohamed Kheir deine. placed under hOuse arrest in
I976 following the appeal that they eode criticising the internal and external
policy of the'regiee.

Tho are veterans: Mohamed Boudiaf and Hocine Ait Ahead. The former withdrew
free the National Liberation front in 1962 and founded the PRS [Party of the
Soclnlist Revolution]. The latter tried first to oppose by parliaeentary
scans the monopolization of power by Ben Bella. In 1963 he established the
Front of Socialist Forces and engaged in arsed struggle until his arrest in
(ktober I966. Condo-med to death in April 1965 and then pardoned by Ben Belle
shortly before the toppling of the letter from power. Hocine Ait Ahead escaped

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on 1 May 1978 from the El-Harrach prison where the regime which ascended to
power on 19 June 1965 had confined him. Boudiaf and Ait Ahmed live in exile.
the farmer in Morocco and the latter in Switzerland.

1hc seven other personalities joined the opposition after Col Houari
Bounediene's coup d'etat. Faithful to the regime of Ahmed Ben Bella. Hocine
Zshousne and Mohamed Harbi refused to become involved with the men of 19 June.
Following a short-lived cooperation. Mohamed el-Msdi Hadi-Smaine. A11 Mahses
and Bachir (Bechirl Boumaaza left the government and the country. Mohamed
Lebjaoui. former head of the FLN federation of France, went to Switzerland
where he established the Algerian Movement of Popular Forces and of the Army
for Democracy and Unity in the Maghreb (MAFPADUM). Ali Mahsas on his part
created the National Rally for Democracy in Paris.

To Counterbalance the Government

The seventh opposition member is Col Taher Zbiri. one of the major artisans of
the coup d'etat of 19 June 1965. He himself arrested ex—president Ahmed Ben
Bella who had just appointed zbiri as chief of staff in the hope of counter-
balancing the power of Col Houari Boumediene. But toward the end of 1967
serlnuu difficulties confronted the president of the Council of the Revolution
and the chief of staff. Tahar Zbiri tried to stage a march on Algiers at the
head of an armored coluan. his move having failed. zbiri took refuge first in
Tunisia and then in Morocco.

institutional Failure

All these opposition members know that power is not there Just for the asking.
They are nevertheless persuaded that despite the superficial agreement which
seems to be taking shape. differences continue within the leadership team.

Mohamed Boudiaf feels that with the death of President Bouaediene "the context
has changed radically. At this time it is not known who is in charge of the
army, who is the center of power."

For Ait Ahmed the power vacuum is due to an institutional failure which is
reflected in the freezing of an administration premised on the monopoly of
power. But. he added, "the era of scapegoats and of the settlement of ac-
counts should be over." According to him there are two possible options: A
democratic opening up or the hardening of lines.

Mohamed Harbi and Hocine Zahouane believe on their part that "Algeria will
witness a period of institutional instability which can aggravate its situa-
tion." would loueediene's succession be finalized by a struggle "among groups
and individuals separated more by their ambitions than their ideas within the
power apparatus" or become the occasion "for the people to assume responsi-

bility for their destiny," they wondered in an "Appeal Addressed to the
Algerian workers."

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

Democratization

The National Movement for Liberty and Democracy (UNLD). which claims to be

close to Ben Yaussef Ben Khedda and his coapanions, mentioned in a bulletin
published in Algeria that boumediene's illness “evidenced the vacuua of the
institutions built by his alone." In this view it is the "survivors" of the

Council of the Revolution who would monopolize power instead of the projected
institutions.

"but can be the outcome for Algeria? Mohamed Boudiaf, in a five-point plan.

proposed notably "the dissolution of the National Liberation Front and of all
the nonrepresentative organizations. the immediate return of the multi-party

system," and freedom of expression for all Algeriana.

noancrncy could be imposed on the government by the majority of Algerians.
Then. "it will be urgent to solve the everyday problems." he asserted. "There
can be no talk of ideology, of a class struggle with empty stomachs." The
proeenu of deancratization sought by the leader of the PRS should be initiated
by elections. within 6 months, for a constituent asseably with free choice of
candidates and campaigns. This constituent assembly would be charged with
elaborating a new Constitution and designating a transitional government.

Ait Ahmed also feels that "devilish arrangements among various feudal
hailiwicks" should be excluded. The return to popular legitimacy has to be
concretised by the election of a sovereign constituent assembly. An interim
government, Ait Ahmed continues, for-ed of "wise patriots," without any
exclusion of meabers of the present government or opposition political
parties. should be for-ed. It should create a climate of "profound reconcili-
ation" which implies the liberation of all political prisoners.

Beyond political or ideological divergences. the revamping of the existing
structures of the government recurs as a theme in all comments. In their
communique ﬂarbi and Zahouane also ask for the calling of a constituent
assembly. The UNLD has made the same request. The latter. while setting as
its goal "the liquidation of the dictatorial regime.” specifies that “worthy
men” are available in the present administration.

Popular Reactions

For Ali Hahaaa, former minister of agriculture of Ben Bella and then of
nonmediene. the transition could be carried out by ”unanimously respected" men
such as Perhat Abbas, Ben Khedda, and Ben Bella.

Undoubtedly. the opposition is no longer in a period of intransigence. If it
Is necessary to change regimes, some declare themselves ready to hold a dialog
with the government should the latter be willing to turn a page and initiate
the democratization process. For the time being the sea of the Council of the
Revolution seam to be of a different mind. Claiming that they are ready to
insure the continuity of the regime. they reject the appeal of the opposition

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

members. Do the latter still have a chance to he heard? The opposition is
first counting on the masses which may force the hand of the leaders. But
the Algerians seen much more concerned by daily difficulties than by policy.

However, in this country popular reactions cannot be anticipated. Already
under Boumediene ill-humor had evidenced itself--admittedly. in timid manner--
through the strikes of railroad workers, bus ticket collectors. and dockers.

Acting in scattered ranks. the members of the opposition continue to ignore
each other mutually even if they overlap in demanding democratization. The
men of the Council of the Revolution seem to be in control of the evolution
the situation. One major unknown factor which will weigh on the Scale
remains: The attitude of the army, the basis of power since independence and
especially since 19 June 1965.

Changing of the Guard
Paris JBUNB AFRIQUB in French 27 Dec 78 end 3 Jan 79 p 58
[Article by A.M.: "What Kind of Succession2“]

[Textl Now that the succession to President Houari Boumodiene is being pre»
pared actively in Algiers. it is natural that the names of all those who
played a role in the advent of independent Algeria should be mentioned.

Among the latter many are in exile. a few in prison. They are bitterly criti-
cal vis-a-vis those who govern their country while the latter return the
compliment inasmuch as they have done everything to doom the former to
oblivion.

Both sides have their share of the truth. It is correct to say that the
Algerian leaders with President Boumediene at their head were able to build in
a few years an Algeria which is being listened to on the international scene
and whose independence is more clearly asserted than that of the large major-
ity of states. It is also true that real efforts have been made in the direc-
tion of economic development.

in contrast. the balance sheet is distinctly less positive as regards politi-
cal institutions and everyday life. Hhereas the Algerian revolution had bene-
fited from enthusiastic popular support. there is no doubt that none of the
lenders can be qualified today as popular. Several are clearly unpopular and
the image which the man in the street has of the government which has eaerged
from the revolution is not a glowing one. The powers which President
Boumcdiene concentrated in his hands were exorbitant and unjustified after 16
years of independence. The metamorphosis of the National Liberation Front
into a bureaucratic machine without effectiveness and without soul is discon-
certing. It is this as much as the economic difficulties which explains the
somberness of daily life in Algeria.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This country has nsny sore intellectuals, Isny more qualified people then the
majority of Third World countries. It hes succeeded in acquiring the essen-
tial attributes of a modern stste. Is it not possible to envision an opening,
not only vis-s-vis for-er leaders but especially vis-s-vis all ‘those. young
and less young. vho aspire to play a role in the building of their country?

The Algerisn revolution has not failed. but it is far from having succeeded.
It clearly needs new blood.

COPYRIGB‘I‘: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

2662
080: 61000

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

LETTERS TO FRENCH PUBLICATION EXPRESS HOPE FOR CHANGE
Paris .151)“ AFRIQUE in French 10. 2!. Jan 79

[Letters to Jams APRIQUE by various Algerian individuals and groups in
Algeria and abroad: "Special Algerian Forum-do: 250"]

[10 Jan 79, pp 7-11]

[Text] Hith the death of President Bousri Boulediene
announced at dawn on 27 December 1978, Algeria is faced
with a series of choices: First. the choice of individuals
but also of policies and orientations. Hill the decisions
to be taken be made under optimal conditions? He hope so.
but it is necessary to find that the discussion has taken
place so far in the wings and within a snsll group. The
purpose of the pages below is precisely to expand the dis-
cussion. to offer those who feel involved a kind of
“Algerian forun" where they can express themselves. In
this initial forum we publish three letters.

The first originates fron a member of the tea- in power in
Algiers who. for obvious reasons, has wished to remain
anonynous. ‘lhe author of the second letter is Bechir
Boulasaaa, former Algerian ainister. The third letter,
signed by a former Algerian officer living in France.
Hndjid Houma. gives an account of the views of a group of
emigrants.

Our Algerian forum will be open whenever necessary.

[Text of letters] Being surely one of the few privileged persons of the
"deaocratic and popular" Algeria to have read the issue of Janus AFRIQUB
devoted to what is really taking place in Algeria. I could not help express-
lug to you my feelings on whet was written by Hamid Barrada in clear and very
courageous fashion. I wish to apologize for the anonynous nature of my letter
for, under existing circumstances, it is inpossible for me to disclose my
identity to you and to reveal the exact position that I hold. Know. however.
that I am one step removed fro- the power hierarchy (and God is witness to try
words) which enables we either to confirm or to deny your articles. You will

6
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

also forgive the hardly journalistic style of my letter that I ask you to

kindly bring to the attention of domestic and international public opinion in
the form of a free forum or free opinion.

All the information that you report in your periodical is true. Hy cement
will thus have no other purpose than to add to what you said. ’Hhat is
appropriate to specify first is the fact that Algeria is living under the
regiae of a bloodless coup with the installation since 22 Novenber 1978 at the
Ministry of Defense of two colonels--Chedli Ben Jedid. head of the second
ailitary region (Oran) and Abdallah Belhouchet, head of the first military
region (Blida). These two men were installed by the Bouteflika-Draia-

Abdelghani triunvirate-qespectively. the ninisters of foreign affairs. trans-
portntion, and interior.

Within the Council of the Revolution it is now confined that these five men
fora a bloc in all evidence. Hhile the distribution of the portfolios among
than in the eventuality of the accession of one of 'the five to suprene power
is secret. it is quite easy to guess the nest likely combination: Abdelaziz
boutefiika, president of Algeria; Mohamed Ben Ahmed Abdelghani, priae minis-
ter; and Ahaed Draia. minister of interior (Draia held less than 2 years ago
the position of director general of the Security Police). As for the two
colonela installed at the Ministry of Defense, the purpose is to tantalize
each with the possibility of being the only master on board since their foot
is already in the stirrup. This operation envisions no sore and no less than
liquidating one in some way or other inasauch as they are bound to clash with
one another soae day.

The problea for the Bouteflita-Abdelghani-Draia triumirate at the present
stage is to teaporize in order to win tiae. va? The reason is that the
death of Houari Bouaediene (as I write these lines he has not died yet but the
fatal end of his illness is in no way in doubt) occurs as a surprise to every-
body. 1'he threesone is thus teqoriting to win time, to aarehal "support with-
in the arny. the mass organisations. and the country's cadres. is well as
support from abroad. By winning tine the trio will be able to come to the
congress of the National Liberation Front under the neat favorable conditions.
that is. the dice having been cast in advance for the designation of a single
candidate as stipulated in the Constitution. For your inforaation 1 specify
that the Algerian Constitution provides that in case of death (o'ther hitches
are not anticipated), the president of the People's National Assembly (Rabah
altnt) is to assume the interim presidency for 1.5 days during which a congress
is to he culled and, "upon the proposal of the FIJI." to designate a candidate
for election through popular universal suffrage. In short, a siaple plebi-

scite. Now. the question that is raised today is: What is the M Congress
in fact?

No one knows the answer because the criteria of definition. participation, and
number have never been established and codified. not even by Bouaediene in his
speeches. As for the party. the FIJI. emptied of its substance. it has never
been anything so far but a machinery tasking empty notions with individuals
representing only theuselves at its head.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. USE ONLY

A New lien Bella

All the conflicts now taking place within the Council of the Revolution strive
to have each cliquc'a congress approved. As you sentioned in your publica-
tion. there is the clique of Mohamed Salah Yahyaoui. Me is the horse being
played by the Soviets who aay so and let it be known through the eastern
European eshassies in Algiers in the course of simple. routine protocol con-
tacts or on the occasion of some receptions organised for the purpose.
Yahyaoui is also the horse on which the Libyans are placing their bets. and
the recent visit of Abdessnlas Jalloud in Algiers was not unrelated to this.
Yahyaoui can even count on the financial bathing of Tripoli. For the Libyans
the death of Bouaediene in itself is an asset to the extent that Bousediene
was in all evidence a rival of Mu‘aunar Qadhdhafi. With Yahyaoui. to whoa the
hihyan President feels close and to when he is attached. eVerything is then
possible for concretiaing the dreaea that Qadhdhafi has been unable to realise
with Egypt and Tunisia.

Hith Ynhynoui Algeria would have at its head a new Ahsed Ben hells who wished
in the spring of 1965 to have Algeria. viscerally s sesber of the Maghreb and
Mediterranean region. join a Middle Eastern United Arab Republic, defying the
nature and profound aspirations of the Algerian people. Such a possibility is
to be taken seriously for I know Yehyaoui well. he is pro-Arab. trained in
the native quarter of Constantine and not speaking a word of French or
English. He does not possess that quality which the head of state of a
country such as Algeria auat have: A broad vision of problems. the capability
of integrating then in the Maghreb. inter-Mediterranean. and Euro-Maghreb
entity. Like it or not. Algeria is the natural element «I an entity which is
the Maghreb and which faces Europe with which it has all its trade. Mot to
take this axioa into account would be a disaster. "hat the Algeriata should
know is that with Yahyaoui at the hell it would be a return to the Middle Ages
which has nothing to do with real national identity reflecting the Algerian
people: A tolerant Isles. open to the sodern world, to progress. an [alas
where democracy reigns and where individual freedoss are respected, an Isles
where the people are treated as adults.

As you an well revealed in your publication. this sea was responsible at
Angola for the death of several hundred young Algeriana of the national ser-
vice and the capture of several dozen others. He was the cause of sourning in
hundreds of Algerian fasilies. 1 want this Angela affair to be known as the
personal doing of Yahyaoui after he sisinforned housediene about the favorable
logistical conditions of the operation.

The Algerian people who have been deprived of newspapers for the past 16 years
and of infatuation for the past 6 aonths (since the Zeghar affair). the
Algerian people in whose nase people bandy words. the Algerian people who are
treated as ainors. the Algerian people who. sees are satisfied with susnoning
to elections in order to confirs then in their position--this people have a
right to know what is going on in the shadows and in secret because it is the
destiny of this people which is at stake . . . . (there followed a violent
personal diatribe against Bouteflika. Abdelghani. and Draia. which we refuse
to publish as is--Editor's note).

3
f0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
Thtal Isolation

With such leaders the Algerian people should know that their future would not
he secure. Quite the contrary. under the mantle of a "revolutionary eon-
tinuity" we would witness on one hand oneupuaaship in foreign policy whose
results would be the total isolation of Algeria and on the other a naxiaiza-

tion of certain practices in the realm of already sufficiently serious
domestic policy.

I shall not speak of that poor Tayebi Larbi who does not have the courage of n
Kaid Ahmed. nanely. to also the door shut and leave. He has ratified without
saying a word all the fantasies of sons so-called technocrats of agriculture.
and their econonic absurdities. Us are familiar with the result: A moribund
agriculture and the bulk of the foreign exchange of Algeria. which has the
highest external debt of the Third World. being earmarked to food imports.

Finally. there is Ben Cherif Ahmed. he has his shorteoaings like everybody
else. however. it is necessary to deter-inc that he seems to be the only one
to have the courage and to say and proclaia and demand that the people have

their say and choice. "is observations that you cite in the conditional need
In your article are true.

The Only Solution

The fact that Ben Cherif Aheed should have asked for a broadening of the FLN
Congress to include all the cadres of the nation is known by everyone in
Algiers. This is a serit that should be recognised in his and it is to his
credit. it was also that of s Kaid Ahned. If that is true it is possible
that Ben Cherif Ahmed say aspire to be president of Algeria. but the fact that
he thinks that the Algerian people do not have tr hold a plebiscite on a
single candidate but should choose along several is to his credit. I believe
that this is the best and wisest solution. Paradoxicslly. he is the one who
has an irreproachable past as a genuine resistance fighter. who probably
because of this symbolizes the land now that laid Ahmed is out of the picture.
Pnrndoxicnlly then. it is Ben Cherif who deasnds Algeria's return to popular
democracy. if this individual really believes what he says and his action
over the past 20 years evidences that his co-nitsents have always been kept.
then I sight as well tell you that the few officers who share my thoughts will
support his and back the proposed alternative once the assent has arrived. He
is incidentally the only one who can allow us to emerge from our rut. for the
past 6 annths Algeria has witnessed a power vacuua and for the past 6 soothe
the Algerian people have been waiting for the white ssoke to appear on the
evoning of each of the secret aeetings of the conclave of the eight. The
situation is perpetuated because we are unable to agree on one individual.

well then. we might as well choose several. even along these who have been
placed on the sidelines of the country's political life because they opposed
the region of Bousediene. For our country and for the generation to which I
helung. the occasion is henceforth a unique opportunity to give the word to
the people so that they say designate a chief. a genuine Algerian striving
exclusively in the interest of Algeria and for the sole well-being of its
people.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

llrtter by nechir nuumnazal The reports broadcast from the Algerian capital
and which mention the parachuting of weapons from an aircraft whose citizen-
ship was allegedly identified mandate my breaking a silence that I have
deliberately observed so far. it is in consideration of the exceptional cir-
cumstances witnessed by Algeria and my personal evaluation of its domestic and
external situation and. therefore, of the serious implications that untimely
and inconsiderate comments on law and order and the safeguarding of independ-
ence and the integrity of the territory might generate that I have voluntarily
remained silent. in this sense my silence should be interpreted as a
political act and not as an abdication of my responsibilities or resignation
to fate. i earmark for myself. incidentally. the right and the tine to express
like any Algerian my thoughts on events and individuals.

it happens that while every Algerian is free before his conscience. coamon
sense and the most fundamental patriotism set the limits which should not be
exceeded under any circumstances. First. recourse to violence must be banish-
ed in the settlement of disputes bearing on the former practices of the
government or the ambiguous conditions of its succession.

He sust under all circumstances emerge from the infernal cycle of violence and
the settlement of accounts and espouse forms of struggle which consecrate our
real reappearance as democratic forces.

we «suit then clearly determine "the rules of the game." those which are
allowed and those which are not. This crisis--and everyone is free to give
this term the content suggested to him by his own evaluation of the situation
--is essentially a domestic affair. As such. it involves Algerians exclusive-
ly. To the Aigerians who may be tempted to leave no stone unturned--including
the use of unnatural external alliances--to discover the limits that separate
the legitimate opposition from treason and disgrace; to foreign powers. big
and small. close or remote, formal friends or adversaries of the moment and
which, each in its way. believe that they have a voice to consolidate acquired
positions and reconquer lost positions--at any rate. insure for themselves a
politlcai. econosic. or military advantage through what will not in the last
analysis be anything more than an episode in Algerian life, we say loyally
that they will undoubtedly lose out in that game.

ll is not only in Algeria that such cireuastances are propitious to the
awakening of unhealthy appetites which build devouring ambition into an ideal
and convert it into political action. And because this assumption of position
accompanied by a warning would risk being interpreted in restrictive manner. 1
have to specify that in the perilous moments experienced by our country my
intimate conviction is that the lines of cleavage which separate well-
understood patriotism from some attitudes which border on treason run
lndistinctly through certain members of the opposition as well as amid the
renters of power. Civic behavior and lack of patriotism are found on the two
sides and neither ha- the monopoly of virtue.

10
[OR 07PICIAL USE ONLY
"('NIQII'N leulilawm- foam and npprcllcnaionn on the course of events. unhealthy
nahitinnn have not been in short supply both ineide and outside Algeria among
nose men in office as among sole opposition neabers.

A deepening of the socialist revolution through the introduction of doaocracy
has becoae a fundasentsl require-ant. That is why each time that someone

arrives to resort to force to ispose his views all he does is postpone a dead-
line: 1hat of denocrstic confrontation. dialog. and tolerance.

Down with violence froa whatever sourcei

[Letter from hadjid nouns. Paris. France] he a veteran of the AL" [National
Liherntion Arty]. an officer of the AR? [People's National Army]. and on offi-
cial well known on the basis of foraal. verifiable. and controllable evidence.
l have for several years been a diligent reader of JEUNB APRIQUE. l have at
rise» been shocked by your positions regarding my country.

You had enrlier evaluated the general situation in Algeria in terns that were
wore than kind. And here we are heading toward a nearly conplare fiasco.

whoever any be Bouaedienc'a successors. is Algeria doomed to always get its
uulutions froa abroad? The will of the people which all the aspirants to
lxnwer clnis to follow with apparent candor will not weigh heavily. once more.

at the tile of confronting the genuine probless (the deficiencies) which the
regise has increased during its rule.

1here is no shortage of worthy and qualified sen along the Algerian people.

But the government in office has obliged than to go into exile. to observe a
forced silence. or to despair without reaedy.

without anticipating God's will, our enslaved people have instinct and their
return to complete frecdoa will give then a new lease on life.

Hell then. in an Algeria exercised of its false gods. begin right away to
right the tiller of your boat. Grant only a liwited audience to actors with-
out a big role to play who should wait for the resuscitated nation to call

the. or recall the. to its service if at soac tile it should sees that they
have deserved such an honor.

An for continuity. do not preach it to us either for we need a ldO-degree
turnnhout for the following reasons:

1h race the national danger which threatens us fro. inside and outside.

To restore the government's ispartiality and lake it capable of protecting its
children fro. danger. hu-iliation. and poverty.

To do away with intrigues. persecution. suspicions. and the too well-known
ruabinntiona of cliques.

1n put a definitive end to decay. disorder. arbitrary rule. abuses of all
kinds. and totalitarianiss aided and abetted by foreign sssters.

ll
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
To march en massc (this is a duty and a necessity) toward salvation. general
reconciliation. healthy and solid reconstruction, social justice for everyone.
and finally toward a new destiny.

We have borne too much the imposition of humiliating and painful exile.
corruption. monstrous profits. ignominious and revolting excesses. So much
the worse if some squeamish and prudent circles do not find what they seek
there. Pure and honest Algerians can he found despite the spurious choices
made in Europe by offices of dreams until they discover such individuals to be
men "of steel." it is true that defective steel can be found.

heavily and shamefully orchestrated propaganda has recycled some of these men
in Hestern circuits. The resurrection of a voracious and fraternal Algeria
will also bring that of other Maghreb states. Rid of its various masks and
relieved of its ire. Algeria will be restored to the unlimited love of its
reconciled children and open to all human currents.

As for its genuine friends who. alas. are not numerous. they will not regret
It.

I am unaware of the fate that you will give this lengthy message. But on
addressing myself to you in the name of my very numerous comrades in arms and
struggle inside and outside Algeria. diligent readers of JEUNE APRIQUE, con-
demned to move in the shadows. I hope that our viewpoints during these supreme
moments will not deserve to end up in your "file" tray.

[24 Jan 79. pp 12-13]

[letter by H. Hadj-Smaine. former Algerian minister in exile in France]

[Text] The death of Houari Boumediene and his prolonged agony have generated
lengthy discussions on the Algerian political system. The gaps in the consti-
tutional provisions. the overlap of the topmost organs. the soundness and
legitimacy of the established entities (Council of the levolution. National
Liberation Front. People's National Army) have been abundantly commented on.

The game of making prognostications is now open to all the bettors of the
political realm. The names of the eight members of the Council of the Revo-
lution. still unknown in October 1978. all of them possible successors of the
deceased Algerian President. are again on everybody's lips.

No one however is certain on which square of the board he has to place these
possible successors to try to see the new directions in which the country may
turn. “an from the Moslem fundamentalist to the partisan of pro-Arabian.
true the socialist to the reactionary. from the friend of the East to the
friend of the west. will win the prize? who. benefiting from the trust of the
senior cadres of the People's National Army and the topmost echelons of the
security authorities and the administration. will be the first to scale the
dangerous steps to power?

12
FOR OIPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As is known since it has happened elsewhere, the process of the succession of
power based on the single party is settled and controlled entirely from the
inside. Nothing will appear froa outside to immediately alter its course. No
member of the present team is incidentally trying to involve the major person-
allty or the drama: The Algerian people. To tell the truth they are not
excluded but rather shown their place on the sidelines.

The coopting of the leadership teams by the PL" Congress and party. the
plebiscite with a 99 and some hundredths percent majority of the votes for the
strongest candidate--or the most insignificant--of the team in office are

part of the facts. Official declarations do not allow rose for any illusion
or opening. "how should one imagine a procedure of discussion of the serious
problems of the hour outside the framework of the FL" Congress?“ Rabah Bitat.
acting head of state. said at the installation of the preparatory committee of
the Congress. And Mohaned Salah Yahyaoui. in charge of the party apparatus.
stated more firmly: “if the political executive has decided to hold the
Congress at this time. it is because it deems that this is the only political
and constitutional alternative likely to solve the probless of the hour."

There is thus no other alternative than that of seeing the Algerian people
experience once again the violation of their sovereign rights. The people are
sorely good for ratifying the choices that their tutors will make for them.

The democratization of the political system in its fern and content will not
be on the agenda. The institutions no matter how bandy-legged they say be
have to survive events and individuals. Such is the stupid. even anti-
historic axles bhose inconsistency and misdeeds the people lust suffer.

The new and omnipotent feudal systems. moribund for the aost part (SONATRACR.
ONACO [Algerian Rational Marketing Office]. ONAHO [Algerian National Manpower
bureau]. OFLA [Algerian fruit and Vegetable Office]. and so on). the
bureaucracy with its privileges and waste. the extreme fragmentation of the
decision-making apparatus. the lack of coordination and concertation at all
levels of execution. the pompous plans which disrupt the land without being
offset by individual progress and cultural integration. the oppression. cor-
ruption. and trafficking--all this package rensins untouched. Perhaps there
are no plans to alter this state of affairs.

Valid in itself. the content of the National Charter. approved in June 1976.
is not directly involved in the present discussion. The Algerian citizen
knows however that the moment has come for him to wonder about the value and
caliber of the men whose responsibility it will be to put its fundamental
implications into operation. And if. to various degrees. the citizen in May
I976.hnd the opportunity to denounce their excesses. their weakness. and
their deficiencies. would the moment not logically have come fo: the citizen
in evidence to them trust or distrust? These are the very individuals who
wish to direct his future. So?

The crisis which has been in the offing for years in Algeria is a genuine
societal crisis. In all fields the choices. even if they were the best. which

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

are made outside or the sovereign will of the people will remain contingentinl
and subject to ehnllenge. Hill people take the immense risk of seeing this
crisis become extended and aggravated? That is a historic choice that it is
necessary to be able to make with all its consequences.

[Letter by a group of Aigerisns who are partisans of a democratic change in
Algeria; Lyons. France]

it is the future of several million Algerians. it is the future of the
prospective generations that is at stake today. Boumediene is dead. Hhat is
the legacy that he is leaving to the Algerisns? The regime installed in
Algeria is first of all a totalitarian regime. This means a regise which does
not allow the free expression of opinions and ideas. where any inclination to
challenge is repressed (intervention of the army against strikers. notably).
where all political life is stifled.

But for the immense majority it is also the painful daily reality. The
specter of shortages. the rise in prices. the obsession with securing housing.
a job. the agony of public transportation. the lack of water. and so on. At
the same time an arrogant bourgeoisie is accumulating fortunes on the misery
of the people and there is no limit in the bourgeoisie's rush to conspicuous
consumption and moral turpitude.

The death of loumediene. often represented as a great head of state. profound-
iy affects the Algerian people. People do not talk about the nature of the
regime in office since 1962. People forget that Boumediene. in the company of
Ahmed Ben Bella at that time. seized power by crushing ell opposition. that in
I965 it was by means of a coup d’etet that Boumsdiene became head of state by
sidelining his companion of the time. The settlement of accounts. assassins-
tions became current practice: Hahroug was sidelined in 1976. Cherif

Balkacem in 1975. Ahmed Hedeghri (assassinated) in 1976. Raid Ahmed in 1972.
and so on. As for the members of the opposition. they were condemned to

death (ﬂocine Ait Ahmed. Mohamed loudisf. and so on) or were even assassinated
(Krim Belkacem. Mohamed Khider).

By presenting the eight survivors of the Council of the Revolution as the only
possible successors to Boumediene an attempt has been made to create the
Impression that the Algerian people are ready to ac:ept that boumediene's
policy should continue. Why do people speak of the order and calm in Algeria
without mentioning the proliferation of roadblocks by the gendarmerie and of
police checks? "by is there no outrage at the lack of information from the
Algerian authorities?

Pnrndoxicnlly. this very press. which does not spare its support for the
partisans of democracy when the totalitarian regimes of Latin America, Africa.
or Eastern Europe are concerned. denies such support to the Algerians who have
been fighting for many years in their country and at times as political exiles
abroad for the advent of democratic freedoms in Algeria. Even better. it was
written that Ait Ahmed and loudiaf. both of them exiled. had become "cut off

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

I'rma anrlnn n-nlltlou" to be able to lake thmolvon heard in Algeria. Thin
In n nrnmitmm nmwrtlon. in [95‘ the colonial government conulderud thoac
Individuals who prepared and then unleashed the war of liberation as a handful

of rcholu Isolated fro. the rest '. the population. Boudiaf. Mt Ahmed. and
many others already belonged to tnat group.

It thus appears that the concern of cone "journallate" is to discourage. by
qulcting it. the struggle for a demcratic change in Algeria which eonc
Algerians are uagingnthcy are note and arm nuaarouauand to note it appear

as an isolated fact. It la the Algerian people who are deeplaeJ, the people
who nurse on lancnac hope for change.

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afriqua GRUPJIA 1979

2662
(30: 1.600

15
'0! OFFICIAL 08! (ML!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALBERTA

MBRIM-BELGIAN COOPERATION
Paris mains TROFIGMIX 31' MEDITBMBM in French 19 Jan 79 p 128

[Text] lelgiua takes necessary aaasures to increase its trade with
Algeria.

0n the occasion of the 15th Algiers International Fair. belgien Hinieter
of foreign Affairs Henri Sinonet. eccoepanying an important delegation,
sojourned in Algeria. At that ties he did not fail to enphaeire the scope
of the cooperative projects that were being negotiated between the two
countries. having to do in particular with railway and road transport and
harbor installations. These projects confined Belgiu's intention to
cooperate with Algeria in the develop-eat of already very extensive and
diversified econonic relations , aeking of this country one of its main
African partners. if not the Iain one.

Uithout waiting for the designation of President Bounediane's successor
and thus showing confidence in the industrial developeent of Algeria and
in its econoay. as well as in its political future. Belgian officials
are preparing for increased co-erciel trade with this country. A recent
report broadcast by AG"! (Beonoaic and Financial Agency) supports this.
It mentioned governaental conversations that took place in recent weeks
for the purpose of increasing the possibilities of 00630133 in Algeria's
favor. He recall that the national office of 01108018: is a Belgian
public establisMent that aims to encourage foreign trade by granting
appropriate guarantees to decrease foreign trade risks. especially credit
risks. lts guarantees are in the for- of insurance policies.

According to acm. J. Groothaert, director general and edninistrator of
Foreign Trade. recalled that "Algeria had had a great concentration of
credits in recent aonthe. which involves increased cover risks. However,
we cannot ignore the fact that Algeria is now offering sons projects of
great scope to high: and that that country is turning to ours to acquire
highly technical products. In addition, we have concluded an important
agree-ant for Algerian liquified gas which we will begin to receive in

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1982 end which will represent en expenditure of 8 to 10 billion a year

for belgiun. we therefore will. heve sufficient liquidity to ebeorh the
credits. Algerie intends to cooperate with us within an orgeniled
frenevork in euch fielde ee hydreulic energy. transports. houeing. iron
utenurgy, celent worke, end textiles; and greet decoretors heve con-
cluded. or will conclude. contrecte which will have importent repercussions
at the level of eub-contrecte in Belgium It was thus neceseery to
increeeo the DOCKOIRB etete oo-iteents. which the government hoe done.

COPYRIGB'I‘: Rene Horeux et Cie. Perie. 1979

(:80: 6‘00

17
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGBRIA

JAPANESE GROUP 1'0 BUILD LIQUIPIBD OIL GAS PLANT
Perie MARCRES TROPICAUX 81' “Elm in French 12 Jan 79 p 68

[Text] The Algerian national enterpriee, SONATRAOI. on 11 Deceaber 1978
granted a aigned contract to the Jepaneea group. c. Itah and I!!! (Iehi-
kawejima-llarima Heavy lnduatriee) to build a proceeeing CPL (liquified oil
gaa) plant in Bethioua (Anew). which will produce an annual 2.2 aillion
tone of propane and 1.8 million tona of butane.

Thia plant wil‘. handle four kinda of proceaeing, with a baeic annual unit
capacity of one million tone of CPL. Production will begin in 1981.

In addition,80NATRAOl will very eoon eak for bide to build a eecond CPL
proceeaing plant. with an annual capacity of five million tone.

The APS [Algerian Preae Service] enheeizea that, within the framewrk of
the VALHYD (Velorieation of hydrocarbone) progren. theee two plante. ea
well an the one that haa already been operating in Araew eince 1972, will
ate it poeeible to iaplenent the policy of unim- recovery of CPL from
varioue oil fielde (neaai k'mel. Alrar, Rhourde-NOuee, etc.) and of oil.

At Anew. arrangementa have been made in the fielde to aaaure the production
and proceeeing of gee. as well ea the traneportation of the CPI. to the
coaat. For that purpoee work haa already been etarted on a 26-inch

llaeai R'mel-Areew pipeline, having a capacity of nine million tone of CPL.
Ite conetruction haa been allotted by scam-m to the American coupany.
33mm. The contract for thia 510 In long project amounte to about

$150 million. covered up to $118 by a 10m.

The GPL ie intended both for exportation, to be effected from the port of
Anew-El Djedid, and for national conemtion. which haa increaeed aore
than tenfold in 10 yeare.

Financing for thia CPL proceeaing plant covere all of the foreign gooda
and eervicee and local coete; it amounte to 2.200 nillion dinare.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(Let us recall thet «tee-en“ were recently concluded vlth Cenede for the
"wattle-Noon neturel see plant. See m of 22 Dece-ber 1978. p 3491.)

COPYRIGI‘I‘: Rene Morena et cu. Perle. 1979

CSO: “00

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

1978 HYDROCARBON PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS
Paris meats TROPICAL”! ET mrrmmms in French 12 Jan 79 p 68

[Text] According to the agency. ALGERIA]! PRESS SERVICE. the balance
sheet for Algerian national production of hydrocarbons shows full
realization of its objectives. The MS specifies that the production of
crude and refined petroleu mounted to 57.2 nillion tons in 1978, an
increase of 7 percent conpared with production in 1977 (53.5 nillion
tons).the latter being an increase of 7 percent over 1976 (50.1 sillion
tons).

The MS pointed out that 85 percent of the quantities produced were
exported as crude. The renaining 15 percent was refined at house and
abroad for internal conunption (6.5 nillion tone) and for exportation
of refined products (3.5 lillion net tons).

Algerian production of natural gas further-ore rose to 14.1 billion 33,
that is, an increase of 70 percent cospared with 1977 (8.3 billion a ).
Exportation of gas rose to 6.6 billion .3 in liquified fora (LNG) [liq-
ull‘icd natural gas], an increase of 60 percent compared with 1977

(1. billion .3).

Finally. the production of CPI. [liquified petroleun gas] (propane and
butane). rose to 900,000 tons. 300,000 of which were exported. Produc-

tion of exported basic petro-chenicslr. (nethanol and ethylene) anounted
to 81,000 tons.

The national agency added that total currency receipts by Algeria fro-

the hydrocarbon sector mounted to $6.200 million in 1978, that is. about
$600 million sore than in 1977.

Heritine Transports: Launching of the MM
WMJ ship to transport wine, built for the CHAN (Algerian National

Navigation Coqany), was launched this past 22 Dace-her at the
scauamsc shipyard near Lubeclr, in Federal Ger-any. This highly

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

automated ship haa a carrying capacity of 3.600 tone, in 90 meters long
and 13.60 eaters wide. A 3.000 horsepower diesel engine neuua it a
speed of 13.5 Icnote.

In addition to wine. the ahip'e modern equipment um it poaaibla to

also tranapc' ' vegetable or aineral 011a. as well ea liquid chenical
producta.

mPYRIGHT: Rene Koren: et Cie, Paris. 1979

(:80: “00

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

ACREMENTS WITH JAPANESE. CZECH (XJHPANIBS FOR NOW“ FERTILIZER
WLEXBS AT “3388A, ANNABA

Paris mains TROPICAUX ET mtrsmrzus in French 12 Jan 79 p 60

[Text] Two Jspsnese fins. the W838! Corp. and "MAC"! Shibuilding
and Engineering Cospsny. and the Polish stste co-pany, ”hm-CROP.
hsvc been contracted by SONATMCII (Algerian Hydrocarbons National
Conpsny) to build two phospste cosplexes in Algeria at a total cost of
l.550 nillion diners (about 1.7 billion francs or $600 sillion).

The recently concluded agreement between these cospanies includes
financing. with 130 percent in foreign currency. covering all of the
iaported goods and services and a portion of the local costs of the two
phosphate complexes. These coqlexes will be located in Annsbs. an
isportant industrial city. and 'l'ebeeee. in the ertrene eastern part of
the country.

The Annsba unit. which hes had a first phosphate coupler since 1971. will
include s shop for sulphuric acid—1.600 tons a day; a shop for phosphoric
acid-400 tons s day; a shop for the ssnufacturs of fertilizer (db-cool
phosphote)-231,000 tons a year; a second shop for the mufacture of
fertilizer (nonosnom/phosphete)-l98.000 tons a year: and various
installations to pulverise the phosphates end for storage.

The Tebessa unit will consist of sinilsr sulphuric end phosphoric acid
shops as those in Annsba. as well as a shop for the Ienufscture of an
annual 280,000 tons of triple super-phosphate fertiliser and a shop for
an annual 5,000 tons of aluinun fluoride.

The Polish cospany. ratmzx-czror. has been charged specifically with
installing sulphuric acid shops in the two coqlexes. both to be installed
si-ultaneously. in order to assure that they will be in operstion by the
end of 1982. The A95 agency says that that will note it possible for
SONATMCII to acouplish its plan to produce fertiliser. It aspires to nest
the total needs of Algerian agriculture for the next 10-yesr period and

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to valorite an inportant quantity of phonphatea earmarked for exportation.

A Japanese soul-co «specifies that the total value of the contract would be
not at parity of 80 billion yons. It is divided into 12 billion yen. for
the Poliah enterprise; 52 billion yen. for inatallationo to unufactura
pboapbato fartiliur; and 16 billion yona for conatruct...n project. and
tutorial to be furniobad by Algeria. The Input-Export Bank of Japan
will provida a loan. in yono. for tho Japaneu portion of tbo projecta.

mﬂklcﬂ‘l‘: lune Hot-aux It (:10. Patio. 1979

(:80: “00

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPHCIM. USE ONLY

MIA

BR! BPS

11.ch 8811100th CENTER-«he Tleecen Sericulture Center haa been granted
a suppleeentary alloteent for the planting of 1.000 hectarea of nulberry
treee and 110.000 .2 for aericulture. An inveenent on the order of

26 nillion dinars has been allotted for thin operation. vhichvill be

paid for over a period of four yeara. The national agency, Algerian Free»
Service, ohearvea that the new plantinga ehould eaka it poaaihle to
satiety the needs of the textile Iill unit now in the proceaa of being
built. with coapletion aatinted for the beginning of next year. 111a
overall eericulture prograe undertaken in thia region already haa 10,000
n2 for aericulture and there are 1,000 hectares of eulberry treea in the
growing etage. An objective of $0 tone of cocoons is envisaged. Ihia
objective in required to produce five tons of silk. that is. 60,000 I2

a year of natural eilk cloth. [Text] [Paris mains mncmx 81'
WIWHS in French 19 Jan 79 p 120] 0255

MARITIME STUDIES sumo-4n 10 January the aecretary general of the
Algerian Hiniatry of Public works inaugurated a Haritine Studiea Bureau.
The latter. located in Algiera (Avenue de l'lndependence) apacielieea in
engineering activitiea. notably with respect to the harbor and earitile
intrutructurea to be inatalled along the entire coaet. thereby coepleting
the entire integration of the sector of teclnical etudiea. In reporting
the opening of thie center, the daily. 31. WNMID, obaervea that.
equipped with an important laboratory. it "in in anaver to the deaire of
the officials of the Hiniatry of Public works to limit the activities of
foreign organizationa which are entrusted vith etudiee on Ieritine and
harbor projecta and which generally turn out to be unfavorable. parti-
cularly fro- the viewpont oi‘ the quality of conatruction and the appli-
cation of technology. This bureau will provide easietance to all public
officee and to local co-unitiea." [Text] [Parie mam: noncwx 31‘
mlnm in French 19 Jan 79 p 127] 8255

(30: £600

2‘
to: onrcm. use OIM .
FOR IWVICIM. USE ONLY

IRAN

BRIEFS

titanium-mm EMISSARIBSnm Leonid Brethnev aecrctiy net with cuiaaaries
oi‘ Ayatollah Khoeeyni during his visit to Bulgaria (13 to 17 January). it
was at the end of thia interview that the Soviet preu unconditionally ap-
prchd. for the first tine. on January 20. the Iaianic nave-ant of Ayatollah
Khmyni. [Paria Jaime AFRIQUB in French 21 Feb 79 p 26]

C80: (0800

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF YEMEN

SOCOTRA ISIAND REPORTED TO BE SOVIET MISSILE EASE
hurls AL-HATAM ALP‘ARABI in Arabic 28 Dec 78-3 Jan 79 p lb

lTextl One of the Arab agencies suggested that the government of Aden
organize a trip for Arab newsmen and foreign correspondents assigned to

the Middle East. to the Island of Socotra. This would serve to confirm
their denial of American intelligence reports which say that the inhabitants
of this arid island had been evacuated recently in order to turn it into

a missile base on which the Russians have installed a network of ICBMs.
which is capable of encontrolling the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. More-
over, their range takes in a circle with a radius of 3.500 kilometers; in
other words. the entire Middle East is in their range.

in this regard. it is to be remembered that Baghdad put on end to the myth
of the Soviet base in "Ummal-Qasr" a few years ago, right after the
ratification of the Iraqi-Soviet friendship pact. when she organized a

big press outing to the harbor or "Ummal-Qasr".

The American and western propaganda machines have begun launching a
widespread attack on South Yemen which tries to portray her as having
been burned into a Soviet military base.

In this regard, American intelligence reports. supported by Sudani and
Somali sources. say that the Cubans. who learned their military role in
Eritrea. have sent 2.000 officers and enlisted men to train the people's
Militia in South Yemen in the most up-to-date methods of combat.

These reports add that about 200 security officers from East Germany have
come to work as advisers and trainers for the Yemen general security
forces. while hundreds of Soviet officers work as advisers and trainers
in the army of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.

1heue reports pointed out that a Soviet destroyer was to anchor on a con-
tinuing basis in the waters of the city of al-Mukalla after completion of
construction of a naval airbase there.

COPYRIGHT: I978 AL-MATAM AL-‘ARABI

9816
050: £802
26
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

SAUDI ARABIA

BRIEFS

JAPANESE-SAUDI MBTIIANOI.FAC‘I’ORY-The first roault of Japaneee Price Min-
luu-r Fukuda's trip to the Kingdoe of Saudi Arabia will take the torn: of
the direct participation of the Japanese Govern-em in a joint Saudi-
.lnpaneae project to construct a factory to produce nethanol fro- natural
an». The factory will be in the new harbor or al-Jubayl in- the Arabian
Gulf. and its productive capacity is eetiaated at 600,000 tons. The
marketing, of the factory's proposed production has already been asaured.
as a Japanese group. which includes the cmany "ITO” has agreed to in-
port as percent or the factory's production. an aaount that will provide
60 percent of the Japanese sethanol conaueption. it it expected that a
necond round of diacusaions will take place in Tokyo during the caning
loath between the Saudi co-ittee of basic industries. and the group

of Japanese comaniea which will take part in the project. Thie second
round of discussions will be to uorit out the final detaila before sign-
ing the joint contracts at the end of March 1979. The iwlmntation
oi the project will cost $6 uillion. The Saudi treasury will cover

60 percent of it. while 30 percent of it will he covered by a joint
Saudi-Japanese coepany, provided that the Japaneae Govern-mt and
financial institutions participate in picking up the reat of the tab.
l‘l‘extl ll’aris AL-HATAN Air-'ARADI in Arabic 6-10 Jan 79 p 53) 981‘

csn: 6802

27
FOR OPPICIAL USE MY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

TUNISIA

ALLEGED SECRET GROUP CﬂARBBD HIT“ INFILTRATIﬂG ARMY
Paris JBUNE APRIQUB in French 27 Dec 78 and 3 Jan 79 pp 52-53
[Article by Souhayr Belhassen: "who is Afraid of Zohra Hakhlouf?"]

[Text] "Girl wishes to sect officer aged 35 with a view to sarriage. Write
to Presse Publicite No #9085.” Between the tine that this advertisement was
published in the Tunisian daily LA PRBSSB on 3 March 1978 and the trial which
was concluded on 7 Deco-bar 1978 before the military court there is the story
of a surprising revolt.

The year of Tunisia's independence. 1956, was for the young Zohra Hakhlouf a
year when she received her studies certificate and passed the entrance exami-
nation into secondary school. It was also the year when her father. a ninor
iunctionary in the public administration at Biserte, lost his job. These two
events left a deep ispression on the adolescent girl.

Hypcrcriticsl

Hlth their hose sold. with her sother and then her father dead, Zohrs found
herself head of the fasily at the age of 17. her wages of 36 Tunisian diners
as an elesentsry schoolteacher were insufficient to cover the rent of the roos
where the fasily was squeezed in and to pay for the studies of her younger
brothers and sisters. Zohra however continued her own studies with deter-inn-
tion. earned her baccalaureate, and looked on the success of her fasily nee-
hers us a genuine lission for her.

For Zohra, "the individual is always responsible for his actions." A fervent
[Monies] believer. she rejected any deter-inisn and forbade the ters "saktub"
[it is written or destined]. Injustice and social inequality revolted her.
She helieved in an lslasic socialism and in a classless society.

Discreet. secretive. strict about anything involving sorality and sores. Zohra
did not preach the good word: She acted. She gave all her wages to others--
relatives. neighbors. or strangers. Hearing the sane overcoat for 10 years.
cutting her own hair, Zohra used to knit the clothes that she needed. The
senll library at the foot of her bed was that of a student in the graduating
class: The "Provinciales" by Pascal. "The Pall" by Casus. others by Giono.

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ros omcm. use 0va '

ionenco. Shakespeare. Reading everything that fell into her hands. she did
not buy any newspapers. After living for a year with one of her sisters in
the village of Zhsna midway between Biserte and Tunis. in October [1978) Zohra
Hakhlouf returned to her family in Biserte. That is where she was arrested at
dawn on b November 1978.

Accused of undermining the dignity of the army. forming an illegal organiza-
tion and encouraging military personnel to Join an illegal association having
a political goal. Zohra Hakhlouf appeared before the military court on

23 November l978. Veiled. wearing dark glasses. Zohra listened without
flinching to the reading of the charges pressed against her following the
advertiseeent that she had placed in the newspaper in Harsh. Zebra. who was
born in a garrison town. has always had boundless admiration for the military
uniform. to her the synonym of order. authority. power, and justice.

Clandestine Organization

The first military man who answered the advertisement was a naval officer from
Bizerte. But he did not go to the appointment set at Ielvedere Park in Tunis.
At his base Zohra was told that the officer had been transferred to SEax. The
same thing happened with officer H'Rebet. with the difference that Zohra met
him by going to the Heltine barracks (near Biserte). But he also skipped
showing up for the second appointment.

Officer H'Rabet. as well as officer Ben Amor. who answered a second advertise-
meat which appeared in June 1978. told the examining magistrate that during
their meetings Zohra encouraged them to stage a military plot to topple the
regime. The young Tunisian woman claimed to belong to an organisation whose
goal was to insure the success of the "revolution." Officer Ben Amor added
that Zohra Hakhlouf developed her theses at length. mentioning the deteriora-
tion of the economic. political. and cultural situation in Tunisia. which she
did in front of one of the officer's colleagues. presented to his "fiancee"

as a “reliable friend." Zohra reportedly even gave them the organization's
program.

After denying everything lock. stock. and barrel. Zohra Hakhlouf exploded at
the time of her confrontation with the officers.

A Mission

"Traitors." she told them. "unable to keep a secret. unworthy of the unit and
the people whom you serve. this people whose rights are being violated. you
are slaves and not free officers. Yes." she added. "I am a member of an
organization whose goal is the toppling of the regime by the army. My mission
.is to make contact with the largest number of high-ranking officers capable
of staging a military coup d'etat."

Turned on. Zohra continued by declaring that the people have been "reduced to
misery" before she launched on an attack of the regime which she blamed for
this situation.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then. Zohra Hakhlouf referred to the events of 26 January 1978. asserting that
her organisation was the product of that day of rioting. Finally she added:

"I am not afraid of the consequences of what I say or what I do. But espe-
cially. don't try to find out which is ay organisation or who are its members."

Attorney Kiln. a veteran of the bar. defended the accused girl before the
military court. The defense counsel showed that it is not possible to speak
of the foraation of an illegal organization since. despite the scans available
to eilitary security. the existence of such an organization was not proven.
lknw. he said. can one speak of incite-ant to join an organisation when
Article 130 l? of the Constitution] Isntions only recognised sovesents. As
for the charge of underlining the srsy's dignity. it cannot be ssde to stand
up according to Article 91 of the law of military procedures unless it

occurred in a public place. That was not the case with the office of the
exauining magistrate.

Surprise

Attorney Hila was undoubtedly convincing. 0n 7 Decesber 1978 the accused girl
was acquitted. The epilog is as surprising as the case. Should one believe
that Zohrs's revolt is individual. as the verdict would pro-pt one to think?
Or does she conceal aosething which is sore significant than the visible
portion?

COPYRIGHT: Jeune Afrique GRUPJIA 1979

2662
CSO: £‘00 END

30
FOR OFFICIAL BSE ONLY