APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00880R000100040007-9
IMAGE EVALUATION
TEST TARGET (MT-3)

 

IIIIIEL— egg :2;
: u: L20
I“ l.| :.

II L25

E
I5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8371
3 April 1979

TRANSUITIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPI’ENT
(FOUO 5/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS CWERNING WNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TNAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FGROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 5/837
3 April 19
TRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
(9000 5/79)
Coutsurs T
ASIA
JAPAN
“’"""zu¥éf&."‘éa&%° 573$? f3???t‘:§‘§:ﬁ'%fff.f’ff.??lf..
USSR
W22: max-:5:-.:t°:.':°:.::z..m..:::°::;:::x
SVYAZI, Doc 78) ..............................nun...
_ "ESTER! EUIDPE
MCI.

Hmioton‘ Comcu Hut. on Span Tolmmtcatlono
(Pierre Langomx: AIR 6 008108, 17 Feb 79) ...........

”5" lnx-mr-uo
FOR orncmn use 01m
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JAPAN

WJITSU. mama. NBC OUTLINE comm-m mm you run 80's
Tokyo MW KOOYO Slllﬂblm in Japaneee 10, ll. 12 Jan 79

[:0 Jan 79, p 15]

[Text] Pujiteu

Ill-l plane to announce world-wide aalee plane for ite ”I aeriee" cuputere
"Maya“ and "Inca" (develop-anal name) along about the end of thie
nonth. During the peat few yeare 1m hae been receiving good reaponee

to ice aalee progren on the "303x eeriea" of euperlarge nachinee. and
thin ie the background for ice entry into a phyeicel battle that involwee
length and breadth eaeault on the price policy. Of particular note it
the ”B" eeriee" uhoae coat perfonance la clai-ed to be four-five thee
better than that of Iechinen of the peat. and in targeted rivale areae
eeen to be the PCK (plug convertible nakere) and the Japaneee conputera.

At the aene tine, lying at the very here of thie progru ie the pruiae
to convert any nachine to what the ueer aide requeate under the notto
"no netter what nake. where, or who ie in need of convereion will be
accouodated." To be cute. thie program hae been developed with the
00'. in nind where the computer it expected to enter into all phaaee of
econonic and aocial actiwitiea, and llﬂ'a ehere of the pie will be
increeeed eccordingly.

'l‘he doueatic computer nekera who find thenaelvea in the trough between
computerization and this 1311 eeeeult are preeently planning to unveil
acne new plane. Thie pathway ia not enooth and coneiete of a aeriee
of thorny treile. Hith thin in lind, a study wee Iade of the three

leading caputer nahere of Japan who are being buffeted by thie m ee-
aeult to obeerve their development of nechinee to counter thie B aeriee
unite. aottware counteneeeuree. and overeeae etretegiee.

"The prelininary akiniehea to the Battle of me 80% have begun. Ill!
hae initiated ita wide and global ecale etrategy" (Shoichi Ahatawa
vice-preeident). "An IBM typhoon with wind velocity of 40 eatera ll

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

approaching. and all we can do is to brace ourselves and do our best”
(‘reiji Mekikawa vice-president). "this is the make or break year"
(lehiro llaehi director). 'l‘hese statmnsnts from the hierarchy of Fujitsu

reveal the importance of this all important decisive conflict with the
3 series.

The counter strategy of the domestic makers is not clear at this stage when
the entire outline of the 8 series strategy is not yet definitely knowm
but the thing the domestic makers fear most is an extraordinary lowering
in cost by IBM. If . for ex-pls, one considers that the Syst. 8100

that has been dubbed ”the machine to raise the curtains to the 80's" costs
but one-tenth of its predecessors on mere price. one would expect that

the cost of the 8 series would follow the trend end ride on the same

price curve. “are one can cite the confrontation between 1m end the
American antitrust laws which resulted in 18)! receiving silent assent

to its claims that it was not causing any definite damage such as
imustrial dismembsrmsnt. and m has been developing its strategy

against the rapidly developing POM industry (plug compatible makers)

and the Japanese sphere.

’r‘lero is a special effort to maintain this price operation in full force
against the three leading domestic computer companies. Fujitsu. Hitachi.
and NBC. There is clear evidence that "a series of IBM assaults in the
form of a five-year plan is designed to sweep out Japanese opposition.
The share of 18!! Japan's market will probably increase by about 5 percent

in the next 2-3 years." This statement (by Katashi Yamaoke chief of the
Information industry Research Association Office) reveals the fierce
confrontation taking place.

As seen in this shift to the 8100 system and the system 38, this move

by IBM that has in the past centered its efforts on superlarge and

large machines is a new direction taken by this company to go into all out
confrontation in computerisation involving smell machines (product
diversification) that was formerly a rather lightly regarded area.

with regard to the development of new cmaputers to counter the 8 series.

the following statement came from Pujitsu to the effect that "this

is top level strategy within the industry as a result of which there will

be no cements" (vice-president Hakihaws). but is seems that this company

is ready at any time to make its announcement. According to the following
statement "there is nothing in the 8100 series that we feel is technologically
outstanding. We are in a period of transient technological development”
(Takunao Yammaoto director). there seems not to be too much concern for

any threat from the performance capability of the 3 series.

Since the actual specifications of the 3 machines are not yet set as

a result of which no positive statements can be made. it is thought

that the domestic companies can adequately compete through the installation
of 64 kbit elements. new logic element development. and operational

system (05). llere again the major problu is cost performance (cost/
performance ratio) and the key to this situation is how to directly
confront the 2 series cost performance that is said to be four times that
of machines of the past through an appropriate price structure.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0N3
roe MICIAL USE ONLY

as for an machine capacities are concerned, the machines presently
marketed by Fujitsu including li-l30, 160. and 160 AD classes will be
indirect competition with the E series. In addition. there will also

be some effect on the higher close machines the "-180. 190. and 200.

In this respect this company is planning to install a model change in its
medium claes ll series as its first salvo in the struggle followed by
improvements to its superlarge machine to counter the IN! ll series
machines that are expected to appear the letter part of this year.

The switchover employed in this strategy hes just seen the completion
of the shift from the recon 5 end a seriee to the li series, however,
any move to a next step without first realizing adequate research and
development costs for the ll series as well as industrial merit will be
equivalent to adding on an extra burden.

Computer development is along the two directions of superlerge computers

and ultrasmnll computers. and the determining factors here are semiconductors
and software. The super LSI national project that is expected to be
completed sanetime during at 1979 is now at the stage that each company
involved is embarking on product development to finally enable installation
to computer systems. In cognizance of this situation. "the United states
hes elevated semiconductors to a target industry level and is throwing

all its might in this direction. Our company is planning. in decieive

manner. to fund facilities for producing semiconductors. (Vice-president
Aharawe).

In another direction. IBM is suppreseing the fraction of hardware end
increasing the density of software in its systems. so Fujitsu is

planning to promote still furtlmr software unbundling. In more specific
manner, eelea contracts involving sales engineers (83) service. application.
software. end 08 (basic software) are to be promoted. It is planned

to actively follow this unbundling program with the intent of doubling

the better than 20 billion yen sales of last year.

In addition. the 06 industry (expected to be started in April 1979)

as the subject of the post super LS! policy is expected to play a
leading role through incorporation of development themes such as firmware
and Jepaneee language information system. In this manner, all efforts

will be directed to the development of new superlarge machines to actively
contest IBM's future system (PS) machines.

The advent of the E series will make the replacement battle within this
country that much more fierce, but this company is "thinking of increasing
SB manpower during the coming 3-year period and reinforcing its
organization through manpower reallocationa" (director lleshi), and it

is said a policy of rsstructuri..g its industrial setup will be executed.

3
roe ”16m 083 MY
roe «new. us: My

At the some tine. the conbination of rcinforceaent of the industrial
network and reorganiretien of the computer industry is thought to be causing
a reanargance of closer ties betwun this company and Hitsubishi Electric.

Although both campanies seen to be denying any such possibility, the
increasing Ila onslaughts into the Japanese market. the cooperative setup
of the 08 industry. and Mitsubishi Slectric's development of IBM
compatible machines (research cost of 20 billion yen) are objective
manifestations of the closer ties being formed between these two
companies. or particular interest is that the nain banks involved

in this situation, Daichi Kingyc Bank and Mitsubishi Bank, have

expressed their receptivity to this closer tie.

As far as Fujitsu is concerned, this is also the year in which its overseas
strategies will be reinforced. First of all, the sales and industrial
cooperative agree-ant concluded with the Heat Ger-an Bienens Company

but stunner seens to be ready for actual enforcanent. It has been

said that "the export of superlarge nachinas to Europe is a profitable
area from the standpoint of system sales. The start looks even better
than we had anticipated." There are hopes of selling ao-so units of

these superlarge nachines.

Even where United States adversaries are concerned. there is a capital
participation relationship with the Andahl Cupany (about 30 percent
capital contribution) to which export of products marketed under the
trade name (one) exceeded 200 units as of the end of last November.
and export of superlarge V-8 nachines with the trademark of on will
be initiated. The Pijitsu-Andahl relationship is said to be an
"interadult relationship." and there has already been a closed license
agreenent ratified between these two companies (Dace-bar of last year)
on the LS! elements for the 66 kbit installation on Andahl's next
generation computers. In this manner, this cooperative relatimship
between the two conpenias is continuing in the face of the framework
of IBM's offensive. In addition, l'ujitsu is also considering direct
expert of its products to the United States by initiating export of

its medium ti series machines through its American subsidiary corporation
FACCH America.

This company, which presently is facing the IBM typhoon. is planning,
first of all. to convene a Fujitsu technological show at which it plans
to concentrate its technological quality for display to the world
sametine in February. It is vital that this colpany, which is the symbol
of excellence of domestic computers. take a stance that will have a
major inpact on the Japanese computer industry's fortunes.

MWHCIALMOFLY
roe M101“. 1183 ONLY

[11 Jan 79. p 15]
[Text] 31mm. Limited

Hitachi, Limited is reputed to be the member of the top three computer
companies of Japan with the strongest position as far as financial
structure and overall sales performance are concerted. and it will eloo
be faced with s make or break situation in the 80's when It“ plans its
massive assault. Certainly the "simple vigor" that is this company's
tradition will not see any outward display of flmnboyence, and it is
expected that this company will continue its line of assessing the actual
situation accurately in planning- its expansions.

First of all. there is the statement "this is the year for the end

of the life cycle of computer parts" (Pujimoto, chief of the llectronic
Equipment Industry Headquarters) that is the basic understanding by
which this company is quietly developing its machines to counter the
IBM 3 and Il series computers. The "1800 Information System" that IBM
announced last year is in direct competition with this company's

"l. series" machines. One of the measureo taken by this campany to
counter this an entry was the announcement of minor change machines

in the 1. series about the end of last year. It is said that wholesale

changes in the “8100" machines are being studied this year even involving
model changes.

The computers of the series with the developmental names of “Maya" and ”Inca."
which are the foci of maximu interest. are expected to be unveiled
about the end of this month. and this company. just so the other two
companies Fujitsu and NBC. is planning to up the performance of its
elements and to complete its software centered operating systems (08)

in order to counter this IBM development. It seems to be withholding
the announcement of the‘ new series till sometime later. "hat is of
concern here is the reputed four-fold betterment in cost performance
(cost/performance ratio) over the past models. and how to counter this
increase is a major item. This company rapidly switched over during
1973 and 1976 to own company rentals and thereby decreased the JBCC
(Japan Electronic Computer Co) rental density as a recult of which its
cmputcr divisions gained better financial status. At the same time.
the outlay for computer related research and development was increased
15 percent over the previous year (excluding outlay for facilities), and

it is thought that this company is in a position to adequately cover costs
of any new developments.

The nature of the struggle'of the 80's is expected to change according
to how far I!" intends to pursue its price policy. which is the main
weapon in its strategy. According to 1m. "series of price increases
will be due to mass production effects. and any new machine development
takes into account the wishes of users all over the world," and this

assault is expected to be continued ever a considerable period if this
statement is any indication.

5
PG! orncm USE ONLY
roe MIC!“ "83 GIL?

The E series may be thought to be the replacements for the 115. 125. and
system 3 of the IBM 370 series. It is expected that the monthly

rental for the 115 machine will be 2.300 dollars (current rental 3,500
dollars) per month, and the corresponding cost performance will be 6.5 times
that of the past. As far as Hitachi is concerned, upping the performance
of the medium type )1 machines is its most pressing problem, but it seems

to be waiting for m to come out with the entire specifications

for its 3 series before making any counter moves.

At the same time. the future cuputer is thought to be heeded toward
greater cuponents use, and this company plans to place greater

emphasis on semiconductors and 1c as a countermeasure. Directtr Hita, who
is considered the prince of this company. becmae the most responsible
personality of this division after taking over counand several years

ago. lie is revealing a posture of placing greatest weight on the
introduction of electronics to household end heavy electric use through
me greater use of 1.81 and super 1.81. '

0n the other hand, the manner in which its overseas strategy "blossoms out"
is also another focal point of this company. The basic policies here

are 1) export of trademark it-a (om) to contest relatively well
established competitors and 2) export of computer systems. than

are the two major policies under consideration.

As far as l) is concerned, 03H export to the Utel Company of the United
States (M series) has become substantial while export of peripheral and
terminal equipment to the BASS Company of west Germany is increasing.

The relationship with the ltel Company of the United States is expected
to see enhanced "intimate operations" between these two companies as a
result of one of 1831's major assault targets being the plug cmpatible
makers (P04). It has been indicated that the difficulties associated
with computer exports involve "the search for soil that can be nurtured
followed by the training of personnel to be nurtured" (Fuji-ate, chief of
the Industry headquarters). In this manner, there seems to be great
desire for systems export that has greater appeal in business negotiations.

that is here seen as the first "step" is export to the United States.

“He will decide by the end of March of this year whether we will or will
not export to the United States” (Pujimoto, head of the Industry
Headquarters). At the present time, market surveys and machine selections
are under way. It seems that the media: type machines will be exported
to the United States if the decision is to start this export. This

again depends on the edfect of the 3 series. and its schedule may also
be altered.

6
NR OFI'ICIAL 083 MY
POI! OFPICFAI. USE ONLY

The target for the next overoeaa penetration after the United Statea
ia the Chineae market. The 'raeatabliehment of relationa between the
United Statea and China that wee negotiated on 1 January and the
oaaing of regulatione by the Coluittee for Control of kporta to
Col-nuniat Countriea (cacao have cauaed anticipation of feveriah
exports of computera from both the United Staten end Japan. In thia
reepect thia company hoe eent one "ll-170" and two "ll-160 II" for
meteorological obeervational atudina. one “Ii-160 II” for reeourcea

proepecting use, and proceea computera for the Iloaan Steel Plant in
Shanghai.

Furthermore. it ie aaid that "there have been a nubar d inquirea in:
China,” and thia company aeema to be anticipating coneiderable buaineae.
It haa been claimed that the domeatic computer nakera muat aaaure
themeelvea of at leaat 10 percent of the world'a computer market if they
are to combat m in the future, and there ie not other way for theae

computer brigadea but to atand on their own and to direct aalea progrm
overaeaa and plan for maaa production.

It ie eaid that thia conpany'a computer aalea total more than 190 billion
yen. It ia reliably expected that thia year'a aalea will exceed

200 billion yen, but the computer aeeme headed for expeneion to the
foothilla induatriea. In thia manner. there are a umber of problua
that thia coapany muat revolve.

‘l'heae problem include 1) countermeaaurea againat Illi'a cmputer
atrategy baeed mainly on the hard machine main body and fulfillment

of aoftware linea centered on introduction of firmware, 2) development”.
of atrategy to introduce more electronica into houaehold electrical and
automobile uae. and 3) eetting up a new information oriented aociety
through the tiein between caaputera and ca-unication equipment.

Among the problems aaaociated with aoftware, fulfillment of increaeea'in
baaic eoftware in line with new machine development and increaae in the
lumber of aa'ea engineering peraonnel (88) room to be the aubjecta

under principal atudy. A firat atep in thia direction was the eatabliahmant

of a apecial company for training 83 peraonnel that wee initiated in
Septuber of laat year.

At the one time, efforts are being directed at introduction of more
electronica into houaehold electrical applicationa in addition to the

developmente in computerization. In addition. a "home computer" directed
at houaehold on ie being produced for induatry.

In another direction, this company ia in a weaker position in the area of
coununication equipment compared to l’ujitau and NBC. and there ia need
for promoting reaearch in thia area to cope with the comixg c and c
(computer and cq-unication era). Thie company follm the notto of
”atep by atep" approach that ateadfaetly permeatea ite buaineaa

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ron OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operations. but the manner and degree to which this integrated electrical
maker Hitachi with major emphasis on heavy electrical equipment will
develop its cuputer area will greatly control the directions taken

by the domestic computer industry, and it is expected that this company
will put forth its greatest efforts.

common: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunshe 1979

[l2 Jan 79. p 14]
[Text] NBC

President Hiroji Kobayeshi directed the following criticism at the
reporter with regard to computers. "You feel that IBM's compatible
(interchangeable) machines are superior while the noncompatiblas are
no good in your accounts. This is something the user hes to decide.
Assuring that there is complete conversion to compatibles. it would
mean that the entire market will be taken over by IBM."

Fujitsu. llitachi Limited. and even Mitsubishi Electric are hitting at
IBH'a competibles. Under the emphasis that compatible machines are
the only way to go, there are limits to which domestic sales can cover
development costs and sales ccsts, and sales must reach out to overseas
markets. In such a situation. the question arises whether the noncompetibles
will become a bottleneck. In this respect President Kobayashi has
been stressing that it is nonsensical to make that distinction between
compatibles and noncompetibles. At the same time, he stated that the
computer systems which are the central nervous system of the nation's
economy and society as well as national defense are best served by
noncompetible computers.

Ila also made the following analysis that the IBM assault centered on
the 3 series is not directed mainly at "Japanese makers and American
POM (plus compatible makers)" but is the outcome of the "100 year war"
between IBM and MT. This company from the outset has not been out to
topple IBM nor does it have any policy for cmputer specialization. It
runs a balanced business consisting of the four mainstays of
coemunicetions. semiconductors. computers. and household electrical
goods. It plans step-by-step strategy to the very end.

ﬂare is introduced this caapany's computer strategy, which can be su-narired
in the following manner: l) development of noncompetihle machines.

2) development of machines to counter the a series, 3) problus

with ms that is a joint venture with Toshiba. and lo) overseas

strategy centered on office cmputers.

Director Akira Koike, who is the actual party responsible for this
company's computers. stated that 1) there are no plans to replace

host computers by noncaabatibles and 2) the present practice of using
compatibles for pheripheral and terminal equipment will be continued.

This is the policy that seas to prevails. "There are merits and demerits to

Pal OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to both canpatibles and noncompetibles" (director Koike) as he frankly
stated his opinion. He also stated "the significance of using either
type differs with the situation at hand..."

If, for example, all the acos machines were converted to IBM compatibles,
it cannot be denied that vast development cost will be necessary. There
sauna to be a growing coacensus of this company's members that it

should continue to follow the noncompetible route.

The machines to counter the E series machines are expected to be announced
sometime this month, and the following clesrcut strategy was outlined
in the manner “we are not considering a completely new series of machines.
Leveling up will be instigated centered on the competitive A008 500 as

well as the 600, 300. and 200 machines also of the A008 series” (director
Koike).

In this sense this company has adopted a system that enables announcement
of its policy with no time lag following the appearance of the 3 series,
but the essential item here is just how much this canpany can make up

for the alleged cost performance (cost/performance ratio) that is
attributed to the 8 series and whether it can completely fill its software
repertoire. These performances will mark the demar etion between gain and
loss.

This company has announced its answer to IBM's concentrated and
dispersed type computer the "8100 information system" in the form
of its "M700 system." There seems to be the situation that this
company has already completed close analysis of the 3 series machine
capabilities to come out with this announcement.

In addition, this company opened up an office automation capaign last
summer featuring its Offcon and facsimiles. It is reinforcing its
System 1000 model machines (three types) and its dispersed treatment
systems by which it is hitting for expansions at the lowest level of use.

In another direction. with regard to future directions for computers, this
company stands on the basic awareness of "following the direction

of componentiaation." It plans to place even greater aaphasis on
semiconductor development to bolster the basic technology.

This company ranks third in the world in the value of semiconductor
sales followim companies headed by TI (Texas Instruments), and it plans
to lay the feundation for becming No 2 during the course of this year.
It has been clearly established that the 1978 sales in the area of
electronic devices will break the 120 billion yen mark.

The next major problem as far as this culpany is concerned is how to fill
out the system for ms that was started in April of last year. Last
April about 500 of Toshiba's large type machine business people and
about 50 people of 1180's etaff were merged into an operation in the form

9
roe ”167.“. US! ONLY
FOR WICIM; 083 ONLY

of "two people and three feet." The anxieties over confusion in
efforts and alienation of users that could have occurred at the outset
were very little. and there are assurances that the targeted sales
goal of 20 billion yen for m 1978 will be realized.

The subjects under consideration this year include the reinforcing of

the business systee, shift to a concentrated production system for

turning out superlsrge and large machines. and the unitisation of the
software and maintenance industries. In this manner. problems awaiting
solution are piling up. based on the judgnent "the basic steps are

in line" (director Koike), there is need to pursue what directions need

to be followed in order to enable establishment of the degree of cooperative
setup that can be built up under the development theme of the operational
systen (08) that is expected to be started in April of this year and
determine the manner in which the next generation system will be completed
to support super L81 development. It should be noted that the footprints
or" N'l'Is will serve as a "test case" in the light of the increasing

clanor for a third stage reorganization.

The major items in this company's overseas strategy are experts of
Offcons to the United States and Chinese export strategy. where Offcons
are concerned. "N30 inforeation systems" have already been built. and
market surveys and the business system are being completed. The
intelligence terminal printers head a list of itees that have substantial
export record. and it is planned to export the "system 100 Offcon

this year in addition to the above. This ce-pany together with Mitsubishi
Electric has been leading the field of Offcons. and it is expected

that some positive results are forthcoming.

In the area of exports to China an order was received in the fall of

last year for e medias type aces 300 free a light industry company
located in Shanghai to be used to control its trade. In addition.

an order for a large type computer aces $00 was received fru: the
Chinese postal service and is waiting approval from the Co-unist Sphere
Export Control Connittee (cocoa). Last year this cuspsny conducted

a staged exhibition of computers that was the first of its kind in
China, and it is said that the reception was very favorable. The
exports to China will eephssire the characteristics of noncompetible
computers, and some favorable results are expected.

As far as computers are concerned. this company is directing its attention
to growths in the colputerization area exploiting communications
technology designed in anticipation of the union of computers and
comunicstion (this company introduced this c and c concept some 15 year
ago). In this sense a considerable fraction of the company's strategy is
expected to be pointed in this direction, on the other hand. there

seems to be some question just how much weight should be placed on
development and sales in the computer area. and the time is not far off
when a definite choice has to be made.

COPYRIGHI': Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunaha 1979

2267 1°
cso: 5500
won omcm. us: can
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

088!

000 621.391
ORGANIZING A DATA TRANSIGISSXON “WORK ll! BBLORUSSIA

Moscow V8811!!! SWAZI in Russien No 12. Dec 78 pp 30-33
Inrtlcle by ii. P. Prokopenko end N. Yo. Onel'chsnkol

[Text] The republic-wide eutoeeted systee for esnegeeent of the netionel
econoey (M80) being set up in the lelorussien 838 includes sector-wide
auto-ted eenegeeent systees (oesu'e) end provides the nuns tor interection
between these eyetees end the republic-wide network of coeputing centers
(RSVTs) es well so the republic-wide dete trenenission network (RSPD).

The republic-wide de°e transmission network is understood to include dete
trensoission subscriber stetions. cousnicetion chennele. chsnnel switching
offices end oessege co-utetion points thet hendle reeote exchenge of
inforestion eeong e broed close of users (subscribers) end the couputet
intonation centers of the OASU's with output to the network of couputing
centers of OGAS [Sate-Hide Autoneted Systee of Dete Collection end Processing
for Accounting. Plenning end Henegeoent of the Netionel loom-y].

The 8890 is being set up es s collective-user systeo for oeeting the needs

of ell einistries end egencies for route dete processing in the coeputing
center network. As e consequence of the leg in the pece of develop-ent of
conunicetion fecilities behind the retes of developuent of coeputer herdwere.
this equip-en: is not being used to its fullest extent.

Up until 1970 the only ectuslly existing (ecility for dete trencaiesion wee
the “-50 teleprinter. which does not oeet eodern require-ents either for
transmission speed or for fidelity, which is lees then 103 for synbols.

In addition to developing e teleprinter network. steps hove been teken in
the republic to orgenite the trons-lesion oi iniorution et higher speeds
over eultiplexed locel end long-distence generel-purpose telephone networks.
nets trenssiesion teninei units (0110's) heve been invented. registered end
used in trenseitting inforestion without the knowledge of the ninietry ui‘
Oo-unicetions. Agree-ents hsve been node with subscribers heving Akkord-
1200. one-550 end “-600 W's (or using the generel-purpose telephone

11
'0'! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAI. USE ONLY

network to tranaait Intonation at a speed of 600-l200 bauds. 'ihis equipeent
per-its transaission of 128 symbols and is provided with an error-correcting
device that guarantees reliability of at least 105-106 for sysbole. 1he
representatives of conunicetion enterprises periodically check the power at
the output of the arm's. which should be such that the signal level at the
input of the closest transaission systee does not exceed -l3 db (50 u") at

a point with aero relative level.

in addition. work is being done in the republic on developing and registering
the Shtrikh facsimile equipsent. 1he proprietors of this equipeent are now
using it or are planning to use it for intonation Lrsnsnission over the
multiplexed general-purpose telephone network. Agree-ents have been made
with their [sic] proprietors. and paynent has been collected.

‘Ihus before organization of a separate network for data transsission in the
"fatal“. use is also being made of the sultiplexed telephone network.

A plan has been worked out for development of cmmications in the 388R
for the first phase of data transnission in coordination with the State-Hide
Data Transmission Network for 1976-1990 with separation of the years
19764980. Develop-ent of the first phase of the data transmission network
for the M50 of the 8888 is based on calculations of information flows done
by the Belorussian Affiliate of the All-Union Scientific Research institute
of Problems in Manageoent Organization. 1he planning organization determined
the capacities and types of stations for «mutation of channels and in-
clusion of data transmission subscribers for each regional and territorial
center. the required number of primary channels in each direction. and also
the masher of secondary nultiplexiug channels for the data transsission
network.

in addition to the necessity for further development of the “-50 network
for data transsiseion. the plan reflects development of a 70-200 network
with provisions for including about 6000 subscribers. The Iain purpose of
this network on the first phase is to aeet the requiruents of the rapidly
developing automated management system of the republic for slow-speed data
transmission. In addition. the plan gives a list of station equipeent.
primary and secondary multiplening channel-forming facilities and cable
connections necessary for organizing a data transmission network. 1he pro-
duction space that is required in co-unication centers to acco-odste

the equip-ant of the data trsnssission network is defined.

Consideration is taken of the develop-ant of co-unication facilities for
organising exchange of information between republic. regional and terri-
torial centers of the ISSR.

The sum of capital investments necessary for setting up the first phase of
the data trsnssission network is distributed through the einistriss and

agencies (shareholders) depending on the planned nuber of subscribers and
the voluees of data to be transmitted.

12

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The plan that has been worked out does not cover problem of develop-ant of
communication facilities for organizing the data transnission network free
subscriber enterprises to territorial comsunication centers or the expendi-

tures for equipment in local shops. including the acquiaion of transmitting
equipaent installed for subscribers.

Plans are being worked out for setting up data transmission networks between
computing centers and subscribers of Hinsk and regional centers of ilelorusoia.
The Ministry of Communication of the 388R has been emission“ to plan.
build and utilise outside line structures. station and channel-toning
equip-ent. and also to handle technical managelsent of network devalopeent.

He are faced with the problem of providing for the possibility of data
tronsaission over co-unicotion channels between hinak and the regional and
territorial centers of the republic during the Tenth Five-Year Plan. Per

each ms [expansion not known] provisions are node for specific appropriation
oI capital investments to pay for telegraph equipeent. and specifics are given
on installing switchboard and channel-toning equipeent in cities.

The base for setting up the data transmission network in the 388R was
already being prepared in the eighth and ninth five-year plans. Hork was
being done on constructing intercity cable coammication lines that enable
organization of considerable trunk groups of telephone and telegraph
channels. including for data transnission.

The I’D-200 network in the 3353 is being set up by:

-- construction of eras-Po or Nikola Tesla crossbar telegraph systems for
channel «notation in the next few years in the regional centers and large
cities of the republic:

-- installation of "8-K and Ant-PD automatic substations in territorial
centers;

-- organization of zoo-baud channels on main lines and within oblasts. using
11-68 and 11-12 series-produced equlpaent;

-- setting up zoo-baud telegraph channels between autoaatic stations or
substations installed on telegraphs and subscribers by using type ﬁll-12h.
"Ml. and DATA eultiplening equipment for municipal telephone lines:

-- using the local shops that are coaponents of the Yes Ryad coeputer syste-
os the terlinal devices that must be acquired by the subscribers.

To train managerial and engineering-technical personnel for setting up the
data transmission network in the republic. lectures on the fundaeentals of
organizing a data trans-lesion network have been distributed to all runs and
coaunlcation enterprises by the division of intercity telephone-telegraph
co-unications oi the hinistry oi Co-unications oi the $58!. This lecture
gives the brief characteristics of the “-50 network and describes the ways

13
NR OHICMI. USE ONLY
FOR ornctlu. USE ONLY

that the 90-200 network is being set up. the technical specifications of new

channel-toning and commutation equipnent. the layout of the terninals of
tho Rysd conputer system.

in the offing for the tenth snd eleventh five-year plans is construction of
autosatic telegraph stations for channel switching in A1“. PD and PS networks
in all regional centers. and channel connotation substations in all terri-
torial centers of Belorussia. 11.. years 1976-1977 sow the introduction of
a rs-ro station in hogilev. an Ar-ps-ro station in Bobruysh. and a Nikola
Tesla-D station in Minsk. This year (1978) A'r-Ps-Po stations have been

installed in Ooeel. Novopolotsh and laranovichi. and an A'r-PD station has been
introduced in crodno.

Before tho Nikola Tesla station was put into operation in Minsk. the com-

tntion oi ZOO-baud channels between hinsk and regional centers was handled
by .1 conbined nethod:

-- nanuoily at the Minsk telegraph. by using o special correspondence
cos-ureter (KOK. Fig. l) nodified for this purpose. Fig. 1 shows s disgra-
of a universal subscriber set for the "1-200 network designed around the
m-n-zo equip-cot: Fig. 2 gives a diagrae of the trunk set of the worksite
of the XOR-H conutetor eodified for the 90-200 network;

-- autonoticslly at the telegraphs of the regional centers by scans of type
H's-K and Ant-PD substations. Bxperisentai operation of the I’D-200 network
was begun in March 1977 in accordance with the nethod of channel co-utation
between Minsk and the regional centers. To do this. 1148 eouipnent was used
in the necessary directions to organize two or tore ZOO-baud nsinline
channels each. Such co-unication channels have also been organised to a
nuber of territorial centers by installing 11-12 equip-sot.

Between telegraphs and subscriber proprietors of terninal facilities for
date trsnsnission. ZOO-baud channels are set up by using mm and DATA
channel-forsing eouipnent. Practice has shown that 'i'W-lz equip-ant is the
lost suitable for organising codined SO-baud and 200-baud channels. This
equipncnt has shown stable operation with high reliability end does not
require large labor inputs {or hardware servicing. in the case of a snail
miter of 90-200 subscribers located in direct proxinity to one another.
zoo-baud channels are set up with DATA-6 equip-ant. or so a last resort -
DATA-J.

or all the 0110's for the Yes Iiysd cosputer systel developed in ﬂungsry.
Bulgaria and hat Ger-any. the TAP-2 apparatus is lost suitable for work on
the I'D-200 network. The republic received its first consigment of TAP-2
equip-cut (Yes-8502 produced in things") in 1976. ‘Ihe equip-ant was dis-
tributed to ninistries and agencies that were nest prepared to utilise it
in their own auto-sted control ’75:...

[lo
'0! ONICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Fig. l.

m: l--‘|‘ranssitting
2--Receiving
Joo‘l'ersinal set for data trans-lesion co-unications
t-oCentral ‘l'elegraph Office

As of late 1970. the I’D-200 network included 75 subscribers. besides. at
the Minsk and regional telegraph offices of the republic PIG-PD collective-
user data trans-lesion points had been set up.

To train technical personnel for servicing the TAP-2 tor-incl facilities.
the Ministry of Co-unications of the 8558 has conducted classes of instruc-
tion on the eouipnent. a nu-bar of republic ninistries and agencies that
are setting up sector-wide auto-sted Ianagenent systess have also held
claseen with wide attendance of their own engineering-technical personnel

to study the TAP-2 equipeent.

'nIe Hiniutry of Co-unications of the 355'! has worked out an agreesent for
use of the I’D-200 sultiplexed telegraph network according to which the sub-
scriber is obligated not only for tisely pay-ant for services rendered. but
also for technical servicing of the TAP-2 facilities. instructions on
operational servicing of subscribers of the 90-200 network are extremely
necessary.

It should be noted that the TAP-2 has a nuober of deficiencies thst lust be

eiininated. A weak point is the pushbuttona on the front control panel
that operate on the basis of the Hall effect. ‘Ihe drive belts and the chad

15
P0! ORIGIN. 088 ONLY
?OR OFFICIAL "38 ONLY

 

In. 2

cleaning cover on the Yen-35 reperfontor ere eubject to ieilure. The
roam-zoo electric printer neode frequent edjuetlent.

A nueber of difficultice heve been encountered in the proceee of cerryin;
out work on eettin; up the I’D-200 network end operetin; it in our republic.
For inetence otter putting the Nikole Teele etetion into operetion end
connecting the Ark-PD eubetetione to it. it vee found thet there ie no
pouibility for connecting the eubecribcre included in theee eubetetione to
thoee included in the Nikole ‘i'eele beee etetion beceuee the TAP-2 equip-ent
he. no provieione for the proccee of receiving end indexing en "invitetion to
preeot” eignel. i. e. the eecond reeponee of the etetion. Engineering-
technicel vorkere of the centere of emulation of the republic heve
euueeted e correction {or the circuit of the Ant-PD eubetetion et-erired
in the Teble. which elieinetee thie "incoepetibility."

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

TABLE

.......-........- ........-...... -..:_..::Fimm_
working node d::r1:::::n which Juapers
5 are installed

 

  
      
      
  

 

Reception of two station
response" signals without
transaisaion of a network
category index

 

 
 
 
 
  
 

 

   

Trananisaion of two "station
response" signals without
reception of a network
category index

-en—a—m.-.—..—-—.~

Register

  

 

Free the Table it can be seen that in the case of an outgoing connection for
reception of two ”station response" interaction signals without transmission
at a network category index. Juapers are installed across the pins of the
nmtwork category index transmission set (VKS-l. VKS-Z). while in the case of
an incoaing connection for trensaission of two "station response" interaction
uignals without reception of a network category index. juapers are placed
across the pins of terninal block n. of the register P. The problea of
warranty and post-warranty aaintenance of the TAP-2 equipment lust be
resolved. In our opinion these functions should be carried out by specialized
enterprises equipped with spare parts and having skilled specialists. A re-
examination should be made of the nakeup of the individual set of spare

parts for the TAP-2 date trans-lesion tereinal unit since the delivered

set contains only T63 plates.

There are still no confirmed noraatives for the expenditure of type 13v
station cable for installation of AT-PS-PD stations calculated per nusber

of installed capacity because the planning agencies do not take consideration
of the cable require-eats when calculating the funds to be allocated for the
planned year. For lack of TSV cable alone. the AT-PS-PD stations in the
Installation utage in Canal and Grodno in 1977 were not put into operation.
and construction was carried over to 1978.

Finally. none consideration should be given to firming up the rates to be
charged for use of the P9-200 network.

(nrvalcurz ladatel'stvo "Svyas'". "Vestnik svyazi”. 1976

6610
«so: $300

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

MINISTERS' COUNCIL MEETS 0N SPICE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 17 Feb 79 p 63

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "Council of Ministers on Space Telecon-unics-
tions”|

[Text] A aeeting of the Council of Ministers on space is scheduled for 28
February at the Elysee to address the basic guidelines of French space policy.
on a national level and on cooperative levela--bilateral (particularly with
Germany) and sultilatcral (with the ESA [European Space Agencyl). This nceting
should confirs previous guidelines already laid down by the Council of Minis-
ters and put into effect by the minister of industry. as regards reforsing

the CNES [National Center for Space Studies] tutelary and administrative
structures and subsidizing industrial and connercisl space activities. espe-
cially for export-this concerns especially the space telecon-unications
systeas consultant activities which are the responsibility of the Satal-Conseil
group-but also as regards creating a new structure for the production. nar-
keting and promotion of the European ”ARIANE" rochst: the Transpsce cospany
project that France nust shortly present to its Eu wean partners.

'TELECOM l' and Direct TV

But the principal topic of the seating will certainly be the report prepared
by Mr Cannnc at the request of the president of the republic in regard to the
developsent of teleprocessing. and especially space telecoulunicetions.

It will deal sninly with the two new French projects: that of "TELECOM l."
the national satellite for telecosnunications and data transnission. prepared
by the CNES and the DOT [General Directorate of Telecoasunications]; and
those of direct TV transaission satellites developed fro- CNES end TOP
[French Television Broadcast Network] studies on "TOP 1.“ a national satel-
lite for direct TV. and free studies on ”N-SAT." a European project. carried
out jointly by AEROSPATIALE [National Industrial Aerospace Company] and MD!
[Messerschsitt-loelkow-Blohs]in a Prench-Cersan cooperative effort. together
with ETCA [expansion unknown] (Belgius). within the Eurosatellite cospany
frnsework.

18

!OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The "h-SAT" project is actually at a standstill after Gernany's and France's
refusals to fund it (see AIR 5 COSMOS No 75l). Bonn having undertaken the study
or n competing project. 'ﬁV-SAT." in the hope of gaining the lead over France
in the market for television broadcast satellites which looks very pronising in
view of the interest being exhibited in Europe (France, Germany. the Scandin-
avian countries. Luxenbourg. Belgiua. Italy, Yugoslavia. etc.).

It is difficult to foresee whether a satisfactory coaproeise can be found to
reconcile German deaands and French interests.

In the absence of a reasonable concensus. France might well have to develop
its own television broadcast satellite, not so such to satisfy a donestic need
as to enable french industry--especially ABROSPATIALB and Thoason-CSF--to
enter foreign markets in the face of their Anerican--and Ger-an--conpetitors.

It will also be a matter of determining whether France has the necessary finan-
cial scans to support two new national projects ("TELECOH l" and "TOP 1")
simultaneously in addition to existing priority national projects such as the
ONES ”SPOT" observation satellite. and perhaps also its nilitary derivative.
the "SAHRO" reconnaissance satellite.

The direct TV satellite. however. is certain to be viewed as a new priority
for Various reasons. To begin with. esrket for satellite television broad-
casting is still untapped while that of classic telecommunications is largely
dominated by the USA. And. according to the industrialists. the direct TV
satellite aarket could take off like an avalanche as soon as one country
places such a propaganda instruaent in service and its trans-lesions inevi-
tably begin to spill over into bordering countries: The latter will have no

other recourse but to sinilarly equip the-selves to offset the influence of
their neighbors.

A heavy Launching Platforn for 'ARIANE'

But the develop-eat of a television broadcast satellite. which will necessarily
be a "heavy" (1 ton) satellite. is also a priority operation since it will
provide the opportunity for building a satellite (onnibus) pletforn especially
suited to the launching cceditions and perfornance of the "ARIANE" rocket. It
appears. in fact. that a European capability to offer its clients a "global
contract" which associates furnishing of the launcher with the building of a
"nude to order" satellite would favor the narket for the European launcher.

The heavy plotforn is thus the last indispensable link in the panoply of
launching facilities in which Europe has just invested so heavily. It would

he absurd to have invested 6.5 billion francs in the develop-eat of the rocket
and 1.5 billion francs in its proving ground 3 [as printed] and to not be able
to also build the satellites which this rocket can put into orbit. This is the
last step to be undertaken and perhaps the nest profitable.

COPYRIGHT: Air 5 Cos-es. Paris. 1979

9399 9‘”
cso: 5500 19

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040007-9

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100040007-9
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040007-9

END 0:
FICHE
DATE rm

1. 2. 22

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040007-9