APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100010017-1
I‘OR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8210
9 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publicatiwr- curtain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, pnrlndirals and books. but also from news agvntv
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated: those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasi:: and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are -Jppllcd by JPRs. Processing indicators such as [Text]
Jr :hxccrptl in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Pnfamilisr names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

'3.£? gens $39 REGULATIONS GOVERNING OHNERSHIP 0F
23“”L'.§ REPRQDUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENINATION
.'.~' I“?! [CAT ION 5E RESTRICTED FOROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. "vs Nu. 3-" I ' A ' N.

O
, ' rpm «e
T

9 Janua 1979
SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY, (P000 2/79)

     
      
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
      
   
   
   
     
 

 

     

 
 

9. IN-uumin‘ tip-niacin. Near AM Adda-a-
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road

Arlington. Virginia 2220!

I1. ‘rwmuine ("niacin New and Addie“

As above

I}. ban-Ire: Macy Nun

I0. Mun... u

  

The report contains infernation on aeronautics; astronomy and astrophysics;
atmospheric sciences; cheaistry; earth sciences and oceanography; electronics
and electrical engineering; energy conversion; materials; asthenatical
sciences; cybernetics. conputers; mechanical, industrial. civil. and urine
engineering; nethods and equip-mt; nissile technology: navigation.
comunications. detection. and counterneasures. nuclear science and technology;
ordnance: physics; propulsion and fuels: space technology; and scientists

and scientific organization in the physical sciences.

      
      
    
        
   
      
    
     
      
     
     

   

. Kc, lurk .m.l "on we! Analyse» O. "res—nylon

USSR Electronics Hissile Technology

  

Aeronautics Electrical Engineering ﬂgviggtion and
Astronony Energy Conversion Coumicstions
Astrophysics Materials Detection and
Atnospheric Sciences Hatheeatics Comteraeasurea
Chemistry _ Mechanical Engineering Nuclear Science and
Conputers Civil Engineering Technology
Cybernetics Industrial Engineering ordnance

l-iarth Sciences Harine Engineering Physics
()ceanogrephy Methods Propulsion and Fuels

 
  

'm. H. unis. r. '0" ml calul Trm- Equip-eat SPICG Technology

     
   
 
    

  

"r- i "M" 'v- “I'm-vu- 01.03.06.07.08.09.10.11.12.13.110,16.17,18.l9.20,21.22

M. \u "IA-elm ‘04an

For official Use Only. Halted
Nil-her of Copies Available Fro. JPRS

  

‘ "W ”"“‘ "" ' """ run run» an at narsooucco WW“ "”"’"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8210
9 January 1.979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE MD TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(moo 2/79)
CONTENTS Paar.

anemones AND “MIC“. ENGINEERS

"metallic Circular waveguides for Radio Relay Line Routee
(Yu. H. Iaayenko, at al.; BWSWAZ', Sep 78) .......... l

GNPHYSICS. amount“ AND SPACE

Studying the Bottom of Lake Baykal by Uaing Scheraiblee
(A.S. Konin. Ya. c. Hirlin; PRIRODA. No 10. 1978) ......... l5

PUBLICATIONS

Develoernt of Program Software for a Sectoral Actuated Control
System
(0N. Golovanov. V.V. Shkarupa; RAZRABOTKA 8W0
OBBstmIYA mstoY As". 1978) OOOOOOOOOOOCOCOOOOOCOI6 33

Protecting Conunicationa Pacilitica Prom llazardoua and Inter-
fering BfEecta
(Mikhail lvanovich Mikhaylov, at al.; ZASIlClll‘rA SOORUZIIERIY
SWAZI 01' OPASNYKH I HESIIAYUSNCRIKN VLIYANIY. l978) ....... 61

Verbal Communication in Artificial Atmepherea
(Doria lvanovich Petlenko. Leonid Sergeyevich Butyrakiy;
RZCBEVAYA SWAZ' V ISKUSS‘I'VENNYIOI ATHOSPBMKH. 1978) ...... Mo

Optical Comnicationa Haveguidea
(1.1. ‘reuain; vowOVODY OPTICIIBSKOY swan, 1978) 66

Tests (Theory, Deaign and Application)
(Nikolay Andreyevich Solov'yev; TESTY. 1978) .............. 69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BLBC‘I'RONICS AND ELECTRICAL BMINBBRIN

UDC 621.372.823
BDE‘I'ALLIC CIRCULAR HAVEGUIDBS FOR RADIO RELAY LINE ROUTES
Moscow BIBKTROSVYAZ' in Russian No 9, Sep 78 pp “-62

[Article by Yu. N. Iaayenko, V. V. Halin, and A. P. Kokonin, submitted 3
Apr 1978]

[Text] Introduction. The growth of the carrying capacity of radio relay
coummnication systems imposes heavier end heavier demands upon the quality
of the waveguide plumbing.

In principle, it is possible to separate the vertical and horiaontal parts

in the plumbing. The vertical part is characterized by its considerable
length (up to 120 e) and rectilinearity: the horizontal part is relatively
short (up to 20 m) and, as a rule, has several elbows. Therefore, waveguides
used in the vertical part must have sufficiently low linear ohmic losses.

It is nor necessary to bend waveguides (with the exception of the case of

a special elbow). The waveguides of the horizontal part may have higher lin-
ear ohmic losses, but must tolerate sharp bends. Due to this, it is practi-
cal to use rigid circular waveguides in the vertical part of the plumbing,
and flexible elliptical waveguides in the horizontal part.

Ol-uic losses in a circular waveguide working on a fundamental wave an can

be reduced by increasing its diameter. However, in this case, in a real
waveguide having random discontinuities the excitation of parasitic waves
growth and the parallel flow increases. As a result, the total (fluctuation
and transition) noise caused by the waveguide plumbing could even increase
for waveguides with enlarged diameters. The existing copper circular wave-
guides (CH) 70 n- in diameter have insufficiently high electrodynamic param-
eters and do not make it possible to realise a waveguide plunbing with a high
capacity due to the low precision of the inner channel of the waveguide. In
this connection, it became necessary to develop new waveguides with consider-
ably higher parameters than those of copper waveguides.

Individual problems of the development of new bimetallic waveguides (W)
are discussed in [1,2]. This article gives the results of a couple: study
of bimetallic waveguides and their geometric and electrodynnmic parameters.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Design Features. The bimetallic waveguide section is a steel carrier pipe
with a thin layer of copper 0.3 en thick plated on its inner surface. The
copper layer and the steel subntrate are connected permanently. The inner
diameter of the BER is 70: 0.05 on, the thickness of the waveguide wall is

lo Ill, and the length of the section is S n. The outer surfaces of the ends
of the sections have fitting bands and circular grooves machined on a turn-
ing lathe (Figure 1). In order to ensure anticorroeive protection and stable
highly conducting contact, the ends of the sections and a pert of the outer
surface, including the grooves, are covered with a layer of nickel.

 

figure 1

when sun are connected, flanges are placed on their ends, elastic split rings
are inserted into the grooves, and rubber sealing rings are installed. The
centering is done with a sleeve. The butt joint is tightened with bolts.

In order to obtain high-quality 3H", a special Iultistage production tech-
nique was developedl.

Main Advantages of BMW over C": l) a substantial saving in copper -- 90-951,
for exanple. for an RRL [radio relay line] of 1000 km -- over 23 tons; 2)

the possibility of using rigid suspenders, which are si-pler than the spring-
type suspenders, due to the closeness of the linear expansion coefficient of
the BHH and the radio relay most; 3) a considerably higher strength and the
rigidity, which considerably reduces the possibility of damaging waveguides l¢°
cidentally in the process of their transportation, storage, installation,

and operation; 0) completely dis-ountable structure of the butt joints which
ensures a greater degree of compactness and has 6-6 times greater tensile
strength; 5) a substantially higher real precision of the inner channel.

Electrical Parameters. The ohmic losses of BM" are practically analogous to
those of CH. According to the data of article [2], the losses in the freo
quency range of 3.0-3.9 on: do not exceed 1.8 dB in a route length of 100 n.

excitation Level of Reflected Have “11' The main sources of the excitation

of the reflected wave are the steps at the place of junction and the pulsation
of the diameter of the inner channel of the waveguide. As analysis has shown,
the second source can be disregarded in comparison with the first one, there-

fore oints alone are examined below.
i The production technique was developed under the direction of A. A. Shev-
chenko and H. 3. Rogov.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The theoretical evaluation of the reflected wave level wee done by formulae

obtained for a waveguide 70 In in diameter from general relationa for calcu-
lating jointe given in [3]:

__ -r -r
Wﬁ=3.24- lO"-E°7+0.58 31-

f-a3,4 [Tn ca:

__ 1' 'r (1)
“75:04 . 10"%+o.29%.

f=3.9 rm. 6“

where TV} to the neen value of the energy of the reflected wave from

one joint; 3—5-53 are the mean valuea of the equator of the zero and

eeoond harmonica of the Fourier series of function 6 U?) which character-
iaea the atep at the place of junction.

The valuee of 73. and 3? were determined by the reaulta of neaeurenent

of the diameter end ellipticity of the inner channele of large number of
uaveguidea. l‘he hietogran of Figure 2 ehova the reeulta of neeaurenente of
the deviatione of the average (over the croee section) diameter D from ita
rated value. The neeeurenente were conducted on 23 eectione of a waveguide
every 100 Ila along ite exia. The mean value of the dianeter D for thia group

wee 70.01 an, and the root-nean-equare value of the deviation of the diameter
from ita mean value vae 0.015 In. Renee

Vial/Wan" am.

 

Figure 2

 

an: up; «w: o an (m an

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2.9%

 

M 1W 495 407 M NH
Figure3

In order to find ‘1. we need neeeurenente of the elli pticity 3 only of
the ende ot the wevesuidee beceuee, due to additional machining. they heve
e eonewhet greeter ellipticity then the inner chennel of the weveguide. The
reeulte of the neeeurenent of 3 of 300 ende of wevesuidee ere ehown in e

hietogren 0! Figure 3. According to theee dete

end , eccordingly,

V—‘V— [Ga-0.017 uu.

Yor the found weluee of 8: end i; , in eccordence with (1). we ohtein:

TrTrI-oM-10"(—69 n5). ‘3
[53.4 m: GR:

w" moss 10" (—7215). an
{-3.9 rm. ‘

'l'he reflectione of the were ﬂu were deternined eleo experimentally with the
eid of e poleed reflectoneter Ill-lo which nede it poeeihle to ieolete the re-
flection tron individuel jointe. The neeeurenente were cerried out in the
wevcgoide plunbing inetelled et one of the opereting m. Reflectione iro-
epproxinetely 220 jointe were deter-ined end enelyeed. the 7evereged welne
of the reflected weve energy wee very eull "1 - 10.9 - 10'7 (-63 43). Con-
eiderins the poeeible individual ineccureciee in the eeeeohling of the wewe-
guidee. it ie pouible to coneider thet the esreenent between the neeeured
end celculeted (by the neeeured geonetricel perentere) reflection coeffi-
ciente wee good. Anelogoue electricel neeeureaente of butt jointe of CH

6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

were also conducted. They showed that the anplitude of the reflected wave
in them was, on the average, 3-4 times greater then in BM".

Excitation Level of thraneous Have 8 1. Haves of various types can be ex-
cited on waveguide discontinuities. 9n the frequency range of 3.4-3.9 68:
which is being examined, only the 801 wave among the extraneous waves in a
waveguide 70 an in diameter can propagate. The source of the excitation of
the 801 wave in the plumbing is the nonrectilinearity of the real axis of
the waveguides, as well as the steps and fractures in the places of their

junction. The evaluation of the level of the 301 wave excited on these dis-
continuities is given below.

The axis of a waveguide has, as a rule, a spatial bend, however, only the
projection of the bend onto the plane determined by the highest value of the
component Br of the wave "11 participates in the excitation of the wave 301.
As was shown in [3], the amplitude A01 of the wave 301 at the output of a
section of length L is defined by the formula

Au (63Q3*(3)¢"°'"M ‘42. (2)

where )c(:) is the curvature of the projection of the axis onto the above-
sentioned plane; 01 and £511 are the phase constants of the waves 301

and H11 respective y. The values of the fundamental values in (2) for two
frequencies are shown in Table 1.

Tab lo I

M
a" - e.
I cat l in I llcm I Q

30‘ l 0.7939 I.”
8.9 I 0.102 1.1

 

00

—‘

In formula (2), the amplitude is normalized in such a way that its square

modulus is equal to energy. The mean value of energy at the output of the
plumbing consisting of n sections arranged arbitrarily in relation to one

another --_. T—
V = M“ ('11.).a '= "I s: (l-)i’- (3)

The return 801 wave is not considered here, because its amplitude is substan-
tially smaller than the amplitude of the direct 301 wave.

The function )6(e) necessary for calculations was determined experimentally
by means of measurements with the aid of devices specially created for this
purpose. The results of the calculations for 90 waveguide sections (over
15,000 measurements of the axis curvature) conducted on an electronic com-
puter in accordance with (3) are shown in Figure 4. The curves in Figure ‘

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

were plotted in the following manner. Out of the 90 celculeted veluea for
eech' frequency of the Liv-3.9 on: range, we eelected the higheet and
the loweet valuee uhich were ueed in plotting the curvee. It can he eeen

iron the curvee that the excitation levele of the 301 veve are very low and
do not exceed -53 d3.

 

Figure lo

Heeeurenente of a batch of. vaveguidee manufactured at e diﬂerent tine

yielded eieilar reeulte. which indicatee e aufficiently good atehility of
the developed technique.

The everage level of the 801 wave at the output of the plumbing coneieting
n eectione determined by lomle (3) for n-lO (LI-50 I) ie ~67 end ~68 d3
reepectively for the fraquenciee of 3.6 end 3.9 68:. end for 11-20 (L-lOO n)
ie .51. end do! on for the eaee veluee of fraquenciee.

bet ue uee the relation given in [3] for celculating the excitation of the
301 wave et the jointe. ‘i'heee reletione are given in Table 2 for the aver-
age (£1: the net of jointe) veluee of the energy of the direct and re-

turn V51 vevee 301, where '8: ie the mean velue or the eeuere litude of

the tint harmonic in the Fourier expaneion of the etep 6 (1)); 31 ie the
nean velue of the equere angle of fracture of the exee at the plecee of junc-
tion. The data of Table 2 correepond to one joint. For e pluebing coneiet-

ing of n jointe, the nuericel valuee of the coefficiente euet he lultiplied
by n.

Table 2

       
  

1.10 , mm omw
e

3
. 0.517: 1.2367 on“?

 

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
son orncm. use 0qu

The value of TE was determined by the results of the geometric control of
the value of eccentricity of the outer diameter of the neck end the inner
diameter of the waveguide and the value of the gap between the neck end the

inner diameter of the centering sleeve

(Vii—0.03 nu).

The value of 92 is connected with the nonperpendicularity of the end plana'
of the waveguide in relation to its axis. Analysis of too ends of waveguides

yielded the value of Vﬂﬁ?2800003 radian. According to these data, we ob-

tain the following for one joint:

W=u69- 10"(— sushi/1‘...
muss . 10"(— 52 as) at f-
umes: "Ways. Io-‘(—55 as);

ﬁ=2.68- 10"(- 56 as)“ 1»-
-33 GUS.

Thus, the average accumulated level of excitation of the 1 wave (fro. bends
of the sections and from the joints) in a 50 m long channe is evaluated by
magnitudes of -hl and -45 dB for the freqeuncies of 3.6 and 3.9 one. respec-
tively; and in a 100 m long channel, -38 and -az dB for the same frequency
values.

Excitation Level of a Cross-Polarised Have (CPW). The main source of excita-
tion for a CPR, i.e.. a wave with polarization perpendicular in relation to
the fundamental wave, is the presence of even a small ellipticity of the
cross section. The excitation of the CPU causes elliptic polarization of the
911 wave at the output of the channel.

The CPU level was evaluated both theoretically and experimentally. Theoreti-
cal evaluation was carried out for the purpose of establishing the connection
between the CPU level and the value of the average ellipticity of the wave-
guides, which is necessary for substantiating the precision requirements

for their manufacturing (with respect to ellipticity).

Let us assume that the plumbing is assembled arbitrarily, i.e., without

matching the sections with respect to one another and the entire channel in
relation to the polarisation plane of the all wave. Then, in order to solve
the problem of the permissible value of ellipticitv, it is sufficient to ex-
amine the problem of a channel with ellipticity constant with respect to its

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

value and direction. Preliminary analysis has shown that it is in this case
that the CPR level will be the highest.

First, let us mention that the degree of the excitation of a CPU can be eval-
uated by two methods: either by the ratio of the axes of the polarization
ellipse of the elliptically polarized wave a1, at the output of the channel,
or by the amplitude of the R1 wave at the output of the channel polarized
perpendicularly to the direction of polarization of the H11 wave at the in-
put of the channel. For the bimetallic waveguides discussed in this article,
due to their small ellipticity, the direction of polarization of the funda-
mental H11 wave at the input is close to the direction of the major.axia of
the polarization ellipse at the output of the channel, i.e., the difference
between the two above-mentioned methods can be disregarded. Hereafter we
shall use the second method, which is aimpler.

Let us use A‘ to designate the relative (in relation to the amplitude of the
wave ll 1 at the channel input) amplitude of the wave n 1 at the channel out-
put poIarized perpendicularly to the polarization of the wave an at the in-
put, end, for short, refer to A“ as the CPR amplitude. Then, it is pos-
aible to obtain the following expression for A‘“ :

d3:
Lg, 2! ___.
A ‘sin 1. sin 2| (6)

where 81 is the angle between the major axis of the ellipse of the cross sec-
tion and the direction of polarization of the wave Rn; z is the length of
the waveguide; AI'S is the difference of the coefficients of the phases of
waves polarized along the major and minor axes of the cross section ellipae.
If a is the difference of the axes of the ellipse, then, as it is shown

in [3]. 3:15573l3m’.
where ﬁnal/P—Ipf'la': a is the radius of the waveguide, slit-1.84]... k-2n/l.

9 ' DInax'ualin '

At worst, when 61 - '17/4. from (6) Aga¢x=|
nesa of the magnitude Apr/2,

sln &
2 or, due to the small-

Ant-e == 163 21% (5)
.max
Thus, we have for the CPU level:
Ag-uamlgldazm. dB (6)

It follows from formulae (6) that the permissible value of the CPU level
(not over -25 dB) in a 100 m long channel is ensured at 9 .4. 0.0015 In.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The permissible ellipticity being so snail, the fabrication of waveguides
becomsa unrealistic. Thus, it is practically impossible to make waveguides
which would ensure high parameters with respect to the cross-polarieation

of the channel without any matching. The only way out of this situation is
to introduce some tuning of tho channel. The matching of individual sections
to one another is a very laborious operation. Therefore. it was suggested
to tune the channel assembled arbitrarily by rotating it in relation to the
exciter.

If the entire channel had a constant and nonrotating ellizticity, then. as

it follows tron (lo). at 01 a 0 or ‘JT/z, the amplitude A changes to care.
When the direction of ellipticity is not constant. :he amplitude A" is not
equal to tero, however, as it will be shown later. it decreases substantially.
First, let us examine a model of a channel consisting of two identical parts
(r/Z long) with constant ellipticity. but turned in relations to one another
at an angle of 02. If in this case 01 is the angle between the direction of
polarization of the I!" wave and the direction of the major axis of the el-

li so of the input waveguide, then the amplitude A" at the channel output

[Is is
val/[sinnmnO-m%)]’:[::E;;Eo.+o,)nn‘-g£]i '

When the entire channel turns, i.e.. the angle 01 changes, the minimal value
of A" will be

 

 

 

mlnA‘u-‘sin 2'), sin’l—‘ai . (7)

This minimua has the second order with respect to the snall value of A ﬁt,
and zero will be only in a special case, at 02- ’n‘f/Z. There is no first-or-

der term with renpect to A]! t even in more general cases when the channel
consists of an arbitrary number of parts with constant ellipticity or of wave-
guides with variable ellipticity.

Let us now examine a channel consisting of real waveguides whose ellipticity.
ns measurements showed, is variable both with respect to its value and direc-
ticn. First, let us establish the connection between the value of A" and

the. value of average ellipticity for each section. Prom the general relations

given in [3]. it is possible to obtain the following formula in the first or-
der with respect to Ag:

1
,‘L-é—L‘A3 sin2|d’(¢)+'l.ldl o (a)

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where O (t) in the angle of rotation of the ellipae of the croea aection
along the waveguide in relation to the poeition o! the ellipae at the wave-
guide input; 0‘ in the angle of the input poeition oi the ellipae of the

croee aection in relation to the polarisation of the wave II" at the input.

in order to carry out calculationa by (8), it ie neceeaary to know the differ-
ence of the area and the angular poeition of the ellipae along the axle of
the waveguide. ‘rheee data were obtained by neane o! neaaurenenta with a
apeciel probe pulled through the inner channel of the waveguide. Then, 01-
naxian- valuee of the on level were calculated for individual frequenciea.
The reaulte of conputatione for ten waveguidea aelected at randoI tron a
hatch are aa iollowe: the mean ellipticity '5 variea tron aection to aection
within the linite of 0.0l500.060 III, minu- (with reepect to the engle 01
and with reepect to frequency) valuee of the 01’" level vary within the linita
of ~53 dB to -25 dB. The obtained reaulte are deecribed with a eufficient
degree of accuracy by the relation 23*4‘8033'. if the waveguide had

a conetant ellipticity. then, ea followe free (5),
max *
M A “1.643.

‘i'hue, a waveguide with variable ellipticity ia equivalent to_ a waveguide with
conetant ellipticity equal to one-half of nean ellipticity 3 . ‘i’hia nakea
it poaeible to replace a real channel of aectiona with variable ellipticity
with a channel of waveguidea with conetant ellipticity. Analyaia hae ahown
that the woret caee for an equivalent channel will be that when one-half of
the pipee in the channel have identical poeition of the ellipeee and are
turned at the angle 02 - Tr/lo in relation to the other half of the pipee in
which the poeition of the ellipeee ia alao identical. ‘i’hen, proceeding iron
(7), .t

mink -(.\3 :H)‘.
(9)

hence, for x - 100 n, f - 3.6 an: and the CPU level $ -25 db, we obtain
the per-iaeible value of 3 s 0.0125 II. Allowing for the relation be-
tween the conatent and variable ellipticitiea, 5 é 0.025 an. no ie ahown
by the nnalyeie of the reaulte of neaeurenente. the diatribution of the el-
lipticity valuee ie clone to the ey-netric torn, therefore, the final per-ia-
aible ellipticity value 3 “x S 0.05 -.

The obtained value of the allowance for ellipticity correeponda to the woret
poeition of the aectiona in the channel. But, aince their arrange-ent in
relation to one another in accidental. we evaluated the probability P of ex-
ceeding the preacribed value of the cm level when the aition of the chan-
nel aa a whole in relation to the axciter ia optinal [bf ‘i'he reaulte of the

10
FOR OFPICIM. USE ONLY
FOR Ol'l'ICIAl. USE ONLY

 

conpucntione are ehown by the curvee in Pigure S. An a example, let ue ex-
anine a 75 I-long chaan with the ellipticity 9 - 0.018 III. In accordance
with (9). ite vorat cm level ie -25 dB. However, according to ﬁgure 5b,
the probability of exceeding the on: level value of ~35 db. i.e.. location
of the CPR level within the lilite of -(25-35) dB, conetitutea only 0.6%.

Elli—$3112!
, "5o: 7 a 9

Pigurc 6

Experimental etudiea were conducted both on individual eectione and on col-
plete channele. the diagram of neaeurenente ie ehown in Figure 6 which hae
the following deeignatione: l -- Iicroweve neaeuring oecillatore; 2 .. in~
dicator; 3 .. cmial-to-waveguide tranaducer; lo -- ferrite ieolator; 5 --

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ'lClAL 088 ONLY

treneforner of the ueve ll“) of e rectangular ueveguide into the ueve lln of
e circuler veveguide: 6 -- evivel union; 7 -- circuler veveguide 670 In uhich
in being neeeured; 8 -- roteting probe; 9 .. notched loed. Cooperieon of
the mounted veluee of the on level for the eene ten eeetione for vhich it
vee detenined by coeputetione ehoved that correletien between then vee euf-
ficiently good.

 

Figure 7

The reeulte of the experiuntel etudiee of veveguide chennele ecu-bled
vithout netching the eectione ere ehovn in Pigure 7: e .. the dependence of
the CW level of e 35 n-long channel on the eagle of inclinetion O . Ae cen
be eeen from the figure, the uoret velue of the cm level ie -22 d . end the
beet velue ie 402 db; h -- the dependence of the cm level for one of the
"good" poeitione of the exciter in reletion to the chennel. ‘l‘he cm level
for ell frequenciee being emined ie not over ~62 dB. The eolid curve cor-
reeponde to the firet poeition of the claim of the electricel field being
neeeured cround the periphery. end the broken curve correeponde to the net-
ond niniu. ‘l‘he fect thet the curvee do not quite coincide could be due to
the preeence of the 201 veve in the eggregete field.

Figure 7c ehove the frequency cherecterietic of e veveguide chennel 75 u
long. The erciter of the Ill veve ie turned to the optinel poeition, end
the cm level (eolid curve) oee not exceed ~62 db. The turn of the poler-
iretien plene of the working veve et the output of the chennel in reletion

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oll OPPICIAL USE ONLY

to polarisation at the input did not oxcood 1.5 dogrooo. the broken curve
io plotted according to the data of noaouronont conducted two nontho later.
It ohowo a good otability of the paronotoro with tine. Vory high reoulto
were oloo obtained in Ieaouring other channele. colparioon of the obtained
reeulto with an example of colputotiono ( 3 - 0.0l0 on) than that the ana-
ouronento corroopond to the theoretical ovaluationo.

0n the booio of tho conducted theoretical and experinental otudioo. a now
method of oooonbling waveguido channelo (in their linear porto) woo propoaed.
Sectiono are aooonblod in on arbitrary oannor without any netching with one
another. Then, the optinol pooition of the oxcitor in rolation to tho chan-
nol io doteroined. The doteroined outuel pooition of the oectione and the
onciter io narhed. Aftor dioeooeobling and tranoporting to the inatallation
cite, the olenontoof the channel oro oooenblod in the order lurked. 0y uoing
Th1! aooeobling nothod in coobination with high-procioion am, it io poooible
procticcily to enouro a on level of not woroe than «35-60) dB of the linear
part of the channel in the entire 3.6-3.9 Gilt rango. Hith the oano aooonbl-
ing nethod. the cm lovol for o channel with cu in by 5-10 d3 lower in the
oono frequency range.

In accordance with tho propooed method, it io not necoooary to tune individ-
uol oectiono by the angle of rotation, which Iohoo tho aoooobling ouch loot
loboriouo.

Studied on long (up to 120 n) antennauwavoguide chonnelo (men) with the nu
of Ill! with reopoct to the introduced noioo have ohown that a carrying capa-
city oi ovor l000 'i‘Ch [audio Iroquoncy] channolo can bo achieved in culti-
channol oyotooo with ouch chennolo (for oxanoplo. in the oyoton "uncover-2").
Moreover, nong the ole-onto of the channol, a long waveguide introduceo o
«all percentage of noioo.

Concluoiono. l. 'i'ho high-precioion Ill! which havo been developed, put into
production. and introduced on Iain consolation linoo oatiofy the require-
nonto ilpooed on waveguidoo uood in the nwcn of Iodern Iultichamol (about
1000) rodio relay oyotooo with reopect to all poroutoro.

2. with roopoct to tho goouotrical paroootcro, am not tho require-onto
i-poood by the we [lntornotional Bloctrotochnical Co-iooion]. l'or example,
the ollowanco for the m dianotor io $0.05 -, while in accordonco with the
Inc otandardo [s] it io 10.01 a.

3. The average neaoured aqlitude of the reflected wave an iron a butt
joint in approxiuotely 0.07% for llﬂ.

d. The proposed new Iothod of aooo-bling waveguideo io leoo laboriouo and
onouroo high pare-ctoro of tho aooo-blod channel. ‘l'ho level of the crou-
polarirod wavo in a 100 I channel dooo not oxcood «SS-£0) d0.

5. Hethodo were developed for calculating the slain electrical para-otor of
circular waveguidoo by known geoootrical para-acorn.

13
M OHICIAI. USE ONLY
1.

2.

3.

lo.

5.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bibliogrephy

Malia. V. V., end leeyenko, Yu. H. "Bveluetion of the Level of Excite-
tion of Undeniable We of ”even on Diecontinuitiee of Circu'er Reve-
3uidee Intended for chennele of India lleley Cot-unicetion Linee," um
Tents [Treneectione of the Centrel Scientific lieneetth Inetitute of
Cmicetione]. No 2, I975.

nettihin, A. A.: Nedenenko. l. 0.: end Poluehin, o. P. "Yeedet Chennel
iron linetellic end Elliptic aneguidee for Radio Reley Co-uniutione.”
ammu'. No 6, 1973.

Keteenelenheue, I. z. ”Teotiye netegulyetnykh volnovodov e nedlenno
unyeyuehthiuieye petenetteni" [Theory of lmsuler neveguidee with
Slovly Chengins Pete-etere]. mom, m 3333, 1961.

Helin. V. V., et el. "Anelyeie of the Excitetion of e Crone-Poluited
“ll wave in Circular Iiuetellit Reveguidee.” VIM! [All-Union Scientific
Reeeerch Inetitute of Inteteectoriel infatuation]. depoeited unoectipt
No «1.002344. Abetrett publiehed in MM collection ”Riport”, no 9.
1976.

me Publicetion 153-1. "cenetel Heeeute-ent hequirmnte end Methode.”

comma: Itdetel'etvo ”Svyu',” alehttoevyet‘.” 1978

10. 233
680: 1870

1‘
YO! OHICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OPHPIAL USE ONLY

OWSICO. W All) apnea

worm 113 m or mm mm BY 081m SWIM
hoooov mm in hugoian no 10. mo pp 58-69

[Articlo by A.S. Honin, cotroaponding aoobor of tho USSR Acadaay of Sciontoo
and diroctor of tho Inatituto of Octanology iaoni PJ’. Shirohov of tho USSR
Acodeoy of Soioncaa, and Yo. 0. hirlin. candidato of zoological-ainorologioal
Scioncoa and labotatory head of tho Inatituto of Oeoanolosy iaoni PJ’.
Shitahov of tho USSR Aoadoay of Scionoool

(hart) Laho mkal .. h oontinontal Rift

A now davioo -- aannod ouboaroibloo .. amorod manly rooantly in tho
aroanal o! oooan invootigatoto. by aoano of which tho goologiat on finally
ooo with hio own oyoo tho bottoa rolio! and can chock oonoopto about it
gainod by goophyoioal aothodo. Coqlax mo o! divano human. boginning
with ooho aouding and onding in doopvato: drilling. pox-alto ona to obtain
oxtanoivo data on tho not intanoting ragiono of tho hottoa of at. world
oooan and to chock nuom hypothoooo of thai: origin.

In 1976, by odor of tho 088a Madam of Scionooo. two 'Piaoaa" nomad
aubaoroibloo (Pioooo - tho consultation and oign of tho oodiac). dooignod
for oolplax invootigationo of tho oooan bottom ad of ito vatar aooo, van
oonotmtad in Canada. It woo daoidad to conduct tho tint invootigationa
with thoao vohiclao in Laho Iayhal, ainco mkal lo a oontinmtal rict.
No la that tho largo linoa: otmtuzoo of tho oarth’o mt. having tho
ohapa o! oxtandod narrow taught. on callod.

lntotoat in ritto hao inmuod oopooially afar diaoovory o! a global oyotoa
of aid-ocoan ridgoo in tho lSSO'o thoaxial part of vhichlocut by doap longi-
tudinal txougho. h bolt o! ooioaio activity oxtona along 61a. and 81a not
intauivo anoaalioo of tho goothonal hoot flux. gravitational and ”patio
tiold azo oooiinod to than. All than an aim of aotivo tactonic prooaooao.
According to tho idoao of tho nav global tootonica. tho nav ocamio oaxth'a
mt io tot-ad in tho axial part of tho aid-oooan ridgaa. with than
oapazataa (to. tho :idgo axio at tataa or 2-10 a/yoar. lhio ooparatial

o! ”no ooaan bottoa io part of tho largo-acalo outdol nova-ant o! tho tigid

15
FOR OFFICIAL I188 ONLY
lithoepheric platae which include continental and oceanic surface: in approxi-
mately identical neaeure. The platee are eeparated by relatively narrow
belte where a large part of the mechanical energy of our planet ie relented.
Interaction of the lithoepheric plates and the proceaaee occurring on their
boundariee determine the geological face of the earth. 'lherefor‘e. etudy

of the active tectonic belts in one of the min trends of both international
aciantific projecte and o! national program.

he geophysical fielde and the morphology of oceanic troughs located along
the axes of the lid-ocean ridges are einller to corresponding characteristic:

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Pox OFFICIAL Use

ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

underetend the history of the lake'e formation and also a nusber of essentially
important aspects of global tectonics.

The fact that bake Bayxal is a water-tilled rift permits one to approach
investigation of its structure by using methods for study of the ocean bottom.
In other words. the entire couple): of marine geophysical methods can be used
to study Lake Baykal and observations can be carried out tro- submersibles
for detailed investigation or the most interesting regions. mess are the
main concepts which were the basis (or the program oi study of Lake mkal
using oceanographic equipment. isplemented in the ulnar o! l977 by the
Institute of Oceanology imeni P. P. Shirshov end a group or institutes of

the Siberian Depermnt or the 0881! Academy of Sciences.

Ii‘he ”Pisces” Submersiblss

One can work in the seas end oceans up to depths of 2 km in ”Pisces“ sub-
mersibles. The crew or the vehicle consists of three persons .. two pilots
and one scientist-observer. Bach submersion usually lasts for not more than
0 hours. but the lite-support system permits the crew to remain in the
vehicle for 3 days. he weight of the vehicle is lo tons and its horizontal
speed is 2 knots.

The “Pisces-VI!” and “Pisces-x1“ vehicles were used during operations in
Lake neyksl. They were constructed for working in sea water and, Htsrsrore.
their use in the fresh water or Lake Bayhal created a nuﬂaer or difficulties
caused by the diirerence in the densities ct sea and fresh water: part of
the equipment had to be removed from esdl vehicle because or a reduction o!

buoyancy .

An ieportant advantage or vehicles of this design is their high maneuvera-
bility. Beet "Pisces' vehicle has a ballast-trim system which permits one
to regulate the rate of descent and ascent and to provide suspension of the
vehicle at any depth and move-mot o! it at the western horizon. m vehicles
are equipped with reversible electric motors which permit one to make
maneuvers in the water mess and to move horizontally along a given course.
All these qualities of the vehicles were very valuable during operations in
Lake oeykal. where steep slopes and almost vertical wells were investigated.

1he 'Piscee' scientific-apparatus cowlex includes a “mechanical arm' -- a
multistep manipulator (or taking soil and rock samples, television and
photographic cameras. devices for measuring hydrophysical parameters and a
water-sampling system. Orientation under water is provided by a gyrocoqass
and circular scanning radar. decorations from the vehicles are conducted
through three ports. Co-unications with the surtaa are acccqlished
through an underwater acomtic telephone.

Selecting the Region of Underwater Investigations
‘lhs main part of the ccqalsx geological-geophysical survey. the main purpose
or which is to obtain a general idea of the geological structure or the lake

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Geophysical data confirmed thst there is a shsrp structural ssyunetry of the
laykal trough. Its very steep northern slaps ie a ugnificent scam more than
l.3 kn high, which chsngse to an almost fist channel by a sharp break. me
eouthsrn, considerably more slanting slope consists of numerous submarine
valleys. canyons and outcrops of coastal structures. Asymtry is slso mani-
fested in the internal structure of the ssdinsntsry use which fills the
trough. me use or the sedimentary rock is deposited almost horizontally
along the northern slope in a narrow band approximately 10-15 his wide. The
eedimnts are crumpled into folds and are broken by tectonic disturbances
within the southern side or the trough. The thickness of the sedimentary
mess in tho southern basin oi' Lake Beyksl is not less than 2.l-2.4 kn.

   
 

|".-"IIIOIIII tun ens-a eslev senses-no
sauna-es so ‘dntlls

200 ".6"- a noun (6)

m ADD-0s»! ens-area has (7)
Mitt-OI"

Lake aaykal
m.
l. Angers River 5. aol'shiye Katy
2. Lietvennichnyy Bey 6. isobaths in enters
J. Listvyanks 7. novesent of vehicles during
4. Cape Benzowy subasreion

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A ugnotic ourvoy with rooording of tho vortiooi ohd horizontol coopononto
of tho qooooonotio tioid woo firot conductod in toko Boyhoi. It ohouid bo
oophooirod thot quiot. woohiy noqotivo nonotio ohoooiioo. Wntiy
occurring duo to tho foot thot tho cryotonino toundotion in tho trough io
ouboorcod to o oionitioont dopth. woro nninly rocordod in Loko mkol.
howowr. individuol intonoivo pooitivo onoooiioo oxtondihq toword tho oiopoo
of tho ioho hovo boon dotoninod. 'ihoy woro rocordod ohm tho pooh o!
Modooichookiy Ridgo. which ooporotoo tho oouthorn iron tho control booino
of tho loho. 1ho oourooo or thooo onoooiioo oro ohonow. opoorontiy
dirootly undo: tho oodioonto which ovorlop tho otrohqu hrokon ourtoco of
tho ridqo ond ooy ho roiotod to outcropo of tho ooin rock -- bonito. now
nil-known on tho Uohkon'iyo Ioiondo -- in tho upliftod port of Modonichoohiy
hi go.

Molyoio of qoophyoiool notoriolo ohowod that tho moot intorootino objoot
(or otudy uoino ouhooroibioo io tho northorn oMorino olopo of tho loko
noor Liotvyonho ond aol'ohiyo Koty viiioooo. whoro o dotoilod gooloqicoi-
qoophyoiooi ourvoy won conductod prior to tho boginning of undorwotor oporo-
tiono. ﬁrio ooction io oooontioiiy dovoid of oodinonto ond ono would oxpoct
thot ito roliot io dotominod prioorily by tootonic foototo. nocordino to
rooulto of ocho oomding oooourooonto. tho ovorogo ohgio of tho oiopo in
thio roqion vorioo from 25 to 40'. rho olopo io cut in plocoo by conyono.
port of much oro oontinuod by ohovowotor wonoyo. tho olopo io (lottonod
out oooowhot. ooporontiy duo to tho frowntory notorioi corriod out by
on“! rivoro. noor tho oouth of tho Monro nivor in hiotvohhichnyy Boy.

mo olopo for-o o otoop ooyoaotricol outcrop whooo wootorn oido io oonoi-
dorohiy ooro olontinq thou tho oootorn oido. noor Copo norooovyy. h oigni-
ticont nubor of divoo in tho vohicloo woo oodo in tho roqion of thio out-
crop oinco o cruohino :ono woo found in outcrooo on ohoro. on tho oontiuotion
of which tho oognotio onoooiy woo rocordod in tho 1oko.

A totol of 42 diwoo of tho otbooroibloo, inciuding 5 doopor than 1,000 I ond
opproxiootoly 20 to o dopth loco $00 to 1,000 to. woo oodo during tho oxpodi-
tion. In ono of tho divoo. tho crow of hydoonouto c-onoioting of h. u.
Podrorhonohiy. A. h. Sogoiovich ond N. s. noonikov roochod tho ooxiouo dopth
of tho oouthorn Boykoi hooin -- 1.410 I. 'lho pion of oporotiono during tho
divo dopondod on tho poood took. ‘lhuo. whon tho gooi of tho divo woo to
otudy tho oiopo within o opocitic intorvol of doptho, tho vohicio woo trono-
portod by o towboot to tho qivon point ohd o troo diwo to tho bottoo woo
thon hogun. ‘Iho 'Pioooo" thon hooon to oovo upword o1ong tho olopo, stopping
to toho toiovioion ond photogrophic pioturoo ond to toko rock onloo ond
for noro dotoilod ouninotion of tho intorooting ooctiono oi tho olopo. It
o ouhoorino conyon or mm hod to ho invootiqotod. tho vohiclo oovod por-
pondiculor to tho undorwotor otxmturo. otoppinq to: dotoilod viouol ohoor-
votiono ond for taking «who.

According to ocho-oomding doto. tho olopo of tho loko in tho roqion of in-
vootigotiono io o otoopiy inclinod ooooth outlooo. howovox. oboorvotion Iron

20
FOR OFFICXAI. USE ONLY
FOR nl-‘l-‘ICIM. USE ONLY

 

Clo-a ”on. oﬂo-uu- (mu - nun-nu an.
A..." n.- “(Hutu-n (In-o. (npua —M-
"tun-un- noun-an u-uu

E "nun-nu an...“ a-I.Iau‘ll (1)

m um. ova-oh. (2)
E yuula- noun-.- ug-oun-n- (3)

Plan of Operations of "Pisces." 0n the left -- movement of the
which during examination of the slope: on the right -- during
investigation of the submarine canyon

KEY:
1. direction of motion ofvenicle 3. sections of making video
2. stopping pointa recording

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the vehicles made it possible to determine additional details.‘ It was
determined that the slope has steps whose height reaches several tens of
meters or more and whose width reaches 200-100 n at different levels and
that the length at right angles to the slope exceeds 100 e. The steps are
most clearly earked in the region of Cape Bereaovyy and in Listvenniohnyy
Bay in the upper part of the slope. The steep sections of the slope sepa-
rating the steps are usually devoid of sediments and are outcrops of bedrock
intersected by cracks. The surfaces of the sore sloping sections are in-
clinsd toward the axis of the trough and their slope is approximately one-
half that of the separating soarps. These surfaces are covered with cosy
deposits and pebbles, rook frequents and detritus are accuuleted here.

The steeper parts of the steps are excellent objects for study of the geolo-
gical profile. Both vehicles approached the slope during the dive so that
the geologist-observer had the opportunity to inspect the structural-textural
features of the rock end their mineral coaposition in detail. This was diffi-
cult to do on fresh slopes. but in many cases the rock surface was covered
with a reddish-brown crust of rust end sasples had to then be taken in order
to determine the type of rock. It turned out that the slope in the region
of investigations is made q: of rock related to the Precambrian basement

of the Siberian Platform. Volcanogsnic rock, widely distributed in the
southwest and northeast of the Baykel rift zone, was not found anywhere.

The sibsarine canyons end valleys are yet another isportant aspect of sepa-
ration of the subnarine slope. Its surface usually changes in a sharp break
into canyon walls vhidl form an angle of 10-900 with the bottom of the can-
yons. ’lhe walls are frequently devoid of sedimnts end are outcrops of
severely cracked bedrock. Detritus, rock fragments, rubble and sand were
found on the bottoms of the canyons. All this and also the clearly marked
erosion channels indicate that the canyons are natural canals along which
the fragmentary material enters the deepwater basins. The underwater ob-
servers recorded nuerous grooves in the bedrock. oriented along the maxi-u
incline and formed more by fragnnts sliding downward on the slopes of Cape

Berezovyy.

The mrphology of the steps of the slope and submarine canyons indicates that
they have an origin related to tectonic movements. The geologists-observers
ascertained that the northern slope of the trough in the area of investiga-
tion was forned by a system of tectonic disturbances whose planes are
parallel to its surface. The northern side of the trough seems to be sepa-
rated into individual tectonic plates inclined in a direction from its axis.
Observations from the 'Pisces" vehicles confine the primary tectonic origin
of the canyons and their occurrence is apparently related to transverse

cracks and ruptures which feather the slain fault surromding the trough fro:
the west.

 

'Gsologists V. A. hbranov. Ye. A. Karabakov, V. V. Hatveyenkov, Ye. G. nirlin
and V. A. Pialkov participated in the dives.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
KEY:

mm 'll-‘l’NflM. IItJ' UNIV

 

(won-o anus-ow "nu-s “an” a use"
IOI.'-Olll I an ﬁlo-em OOOnOIIDODMIO
u a. nun-aqua. o. no..."

11s.... noaaeuoacs- 4.0... M QQOOOIIQQII

a “OD-Inn ‘OOQIU (1)

Fa one.» coon-n Mus . out" (2)
E 73333: .IZ'ZT'CTJIIZ.” (3)

Structure of Underwater Slope of Lake naykal in the Region of
Diving: I -- accordlnq to echo-sounding data: It -- according
to observations from the 'Plsces'y the nutors indicate the
depth from the surface

1. bedrock 3. planet: of proposed tecto:
2. fragments of bedrock and disturbances
oedimnts

21
FOR (WPICIAI. USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010017-1

FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

Outcrops of Bedrock Out by a

A slanting Section 0‘
Crack 0: 0 Depth of 300 a Covered with 002:: km

Steep Outcrop of Bed‘
of 320 a

24
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010017-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

will take Baykal Become an Ocean?

A condition for the occurrence of rift valleys and contiguous uplifte. re-
gardleee of where they are located -- on the continental or oceanic crust,
in the preeence of eeparatione in the lithosphere -- the outer, brittle ehell
of the earth. 'l‘hue, continental rifte are probably formed in the following
runner. 'lhe lithoephere ie broken due to the effect of teneile atreeeee and
a ehear crack having an angle of inclination of approximately 60' in formed
in it. No blocha located on different eidee of the crack are formed: one
in ite overhanging eide and the other in the oppoeite under eide. 1n.
overhanging block exerte eonewhat greater preeeure on ite bottcn than the
average preeaure of the vertical colm of the lithoephere, while the hori-
zontal block. out by the eloping crack accordingly exerte leee pressure.
Thie caunee a dieturbance of gravitational equilibrium, which leede to in-
teneive vertical rovenente in different directione. 1he notion of crust
which form the overhanging block rieee to the surface while the horilontel
block. on the contrary, eubnergee. A deep trough and contiguous ridge are
formed. mi. in the nodel for formation of aeymtrical grabene -- valleye
with equal aidea, propoeed by P. waning-Neinee in l950.

 

Surface of Ooze at Depth of 1,410 If goby (in foreground) and
gamma crayfish

Judging by available date. this model, at least in the first approximation.
is auitable to explain the nature of the Beykel rift. Actually, there are
numerous data of coastal geology which indicate a rise of the Primorekiy

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ridge extending elong the weetern coeet or Leke aeykel during the meternery
epoch. wewe-out grottoee end coeetel-lehe bouldere end pebbles ere i‘omd

et e height of lo I or more ebove the weter level in dii'i'erent regione on

the weetern chore or the lehe. In telling into the lehe. the chennele of
eeny river velleye ere eeeeingly jerked upwerd end ere broken on in e eteep
outcrop. The outcrope. etepe, iongitudinel feulte end eteep cliiie ere
generelly widely dietributed eleoente of the relief or the weetern ooeet of
Leke aeykel. he we heve eeen. the mderweter relief of the weetern elope

ie eleo chereoterired by the preeenoe of e lerge nudeer oi etepe. ln ell
probebility the upliit of the Prinorehiy Ridge, correeponding to euriecing
or the eection or cruet on the horizontel ride of the lithoepheric creek.

ie eccoopenied by (oration of tectonic pletee end their collepee elong the
i‘recturee of the nein ieult eyetee which leede to foreetion of etepe on the
elope of the trough. On the other hend, the etruoture of the cedieente end
the morphology of the exiel greben indicete thet it wee tor-ed under condi-
tione or eteble prolonged domwerping. 1hue. there ere dete on the inteneiwe
differentiel eoveeente o! the bloohe which ere predicted by the indioeted
oodel. the dieturbente of the eedinentery Ieee on the eeetern end eoutheeetern
eidee or the rift trough ere eleo coepletely expleineble within the fruework
or thie echeee eince. eccording to it. the lithoephere is bent upon deep
eubeereion of one of the blocke. Streeeee occur et the point of um bond
which ere nenifeeted in inteneive tectonic dieturbencee of eedieente.

If teneile etreeeee in the continentel lithoephere continue, en edditionel
creek eloping towerd the liret occure in it. sieiler verticel diepleceeente
of the eectione o! cruet will eleo occur elong the continuing crech. ee e
reeult or which e ey-etricel greben with omen exiel block end uplitted
liebe ie tor-ed. Subeeguently, ii the erpmione increuo. the with con-
tinentel lithoephere any be generelly ruptured end the uetter or the
eethenoephere .- e leyer which underliee the lithoephere end where the rock
ie in e pertielly molten etete - will begin to be introduced into the
formed eplit. Since the lithoepheric pletee ere eowed in thie ceee. the
width of the (recture zone will increeee end the edgee o! the continena
will eeperete (roe eech other. leeving e plece for the newly toned oceenic
crust. The progreeeive eepereticn or the lithoepheric pletee will contri-
bute to the fect thet utter or the eethenoephere will continue to be intro-
duced into the trectm creek. 1t herdens, cryetelliree end chengoe to the
eolid utter of the lithoephere ee the dietence iron the eplit increeeee.
the thickneee of the lithoephere will increeee end ite level will greduelly
eubeide eince the density of the colder cryetellired rock increeeee coepered
to the pertielly molten rock of the erthenoephere. 1he level will be eexi-
eu neer the trecture where the lithoephere ie theoretically generelly
ebeent dad will then emide more and more in e direction ewey from it towerd
the edger oi the eepereting continents. 'i‘he utter o! the eethenoephere
herdene eepecielly repidly i-edietely in the cone of the eplit due to con-
tect of the neon ejected to the eurtece with me oceen weter. ‘ihe cold end
coepect exiel block found in thie ceee deecende to the level of ieoetetic
equilibriue which in eeinteined during notion of the pletee. 'ihie ie how

e deep depreeeion whoee bottoe miete o: the youngeet ejected rock of the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POK OFFICIAL "8!! ONLY

ooun boom u lonod on tho bookgromd of tho gononl ”marten uplift
at tho botto- ournoo of I now ooun.

 

room-nun. «on loo-nun“ ”on.“ 6’71 to. «moon ”no-cu. (7)

IO- - (“mono-u N..lﬂ".'°l0.t-OCM “not.“
new mu“ ”not. 30- 0 cu..-
anonn noon-l W“ n Ion-o Ino-
cooou u no... coo-cum on out.
new: (no... noon-u upon-out.

[no I. n. Ion-ooh".

tunn- mtoop-u no!
- noun» no menu
sum-«M ”on.“ mu (8)

ﬁn! "new" *0... W

@000..- Oouunmo no. (2) (9)

loan.- mono-m (3)

Ennis-nu “’
Eur-u (S)

E Inn-o (5)

We Our: of mu m2: mono and Adjoining mu. m
dunmrhtic futuro of tho uctouiu of tho mm 21!: mo

no of tho odjooom: mu to «motion of tho uthoopMn into
a um and»: of non plot“ which oxporioaoo oooplox mm].
displace-ont- (nccording to L. P. zommhoyn)

mun-um nos-«n an (10)

FREE]

(lay on following pogo)

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m:
i. Loko Boykoi 7. unoo oi ccncontroticn ct con-h-
a. who). typo trough: quoko opiconton
3. diopiocooont voctcro a. bconcorioo c! iithcophoric piotoo
4. tonniio one oicropiotoo boymd tho
5. ohoorinq aoykoi rift ocno
6. ccnroooivo 9. you c! niotiwo nticn or plot”

10. aincticn c! nticn c! piotoo

and: is ﬁlo ochooo which ohcwo how on ccoon with tho uin unhoicqicoi
otmturoo c: ito bottco - tho oid-ocoon ridcoo ond tho coop longituainoi
doproooicno ot thoi: ooio -- ccoonic riito -- my occur ot tho rototiun c!
o ccntinontoi ritt. Dotoiiod inwootigoticno con-iod out in tho ritto by
uoing towod bcttcu gocphyoicoi onto- md cub-nihioo ohcwod thot thoir
oicpoo oioc hovo o ciooriy mkod otop otxucturo. tho outoooo of axon
otopo oxo inciinod in dinocticno'owoy loco tho oxio. rcnoticn o! tho otopo
io roiotod to tho toot thot owidonco of tho oxioi block cccun cn o bod:-
mund c! pioto ooporoticn, oo o aunt of mich tho iithcophozo io ooporotod
into indiviaun toctcnic piotoo which oro inciinod in dirocticno in. tho
tram: oxio.

it io prooontiy diuicuit to prodict with ccqioto cortointy whotho: Boykoi
will go through tho ontixo ccuroo of. dovoicpnont {too on ooy-otricoi ccn-
tinontoi grobon, which it in ot prooont. to o oy-otticoi ccomic rift iccotod
olcnq tho oxio of tho ccoonic hooin. It in not oxciucod thot tho tonoiio
otrooooo in tho lithcophono of Mo mm viii ottonnoto ond thot tho qrobon
win can to dovoicp ond will ho riiiod in by oodi-nto. Quito o tow c!
thooo buriod ccntinontoi rifts, 'uouccooofni protondoro' to tho mic of

tho ccoono. oro m. Anotho: thing io inortontn on tho booio of tho

now qicboi toctcnico. qociogioto con dotonino tho Coop couoo-oﬂoct roio-
ticnohipo of tho ovciuticn ct wozicu otructuno of tho corth‘o outoco.

m Notuxo of tho hnoiio Stroouo of tho mkoi Rift who

no prolonco c! o norm doop oodinont-tiiiod grobon within hiv- onkoi ond
otopo on ito olcpo on indiroct lootuoo of tho tonoiio oto'ooooo shim pn-
dcoinoto in o rift tcno. 'lhooo otnoooo on dinctiy ootobiiohod 2m ooio-
sic ootorioio. mo bolt 0! ocottorod ooionicity intonocto tho Miotic con-
tinont in. tho Ponin to atoncvyy Ridqo. northquoho opicontoro on locoiiood
within o roiotivoiy norm bond in tho Boykoi rift m. minio of tho
oriontoticn of. tho otzooooo ot oorthquoho toci ohcwo thot tonoicn criontoa
ot right ongioo to it- otriko io mount in tho who! ocno. ennui“
ccnditicno ozo rocctdod toztho: to tho ooot. Doto on tho oriontoticn of
otxooooo ot cortmnooko toci won mod by L. P. W ot o1. to coicuioto
tho pan of :olotiwo notion of lithcophorie piotoo which oxo ooporotod by
tho indicotod ooionic bolt. It turnod out thot tho pull in iocotod to tho
out of tho ncxthom tor-inn- o! tho Who]. m. ”to lithcophoric piotoo
opprcoch oodn otho: woot c! thio point ond m owoy 11c- ooch othor to tho
out o! it, whilo tho limo oicng which mtuoi lotion com on find by
concontrotim c! oorthquoho opiconton.

28
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICML "SI ORLY

u) mom-u mo

 

"cm can no." nun-out. u ”a
nun 0-0 on “won-o- mono-I. an
m- a.- »u-u-Imn nun-m an I
u «om luau—noun m
mom m o man-u m. o nun.-
nion-v pou- - “noun. an»... up...

a I u a p -uono-

E

u- ndo-n mac—con
E nun-Menu not ‘4)

on“. mam
E mum an

Dingnl Ming not a single mum“ Lithuphorio Pluto My

I. m Into a Mar of am Pint“ no. to an like: of
suction Occurring Open Intonation o! m. Hutu AM collision
of ‘81.. mp -- .9401 of inundation of 'xigid dio' into pmtic
body in mid: arm and uni-counts occur. chum by the Cubed
lino- md m; bogu- -- intonation of 1am put” (in the
(mama). 11:. neon at their mm “ﬁxation m proportiml

wmrnmotmpuummpmmmuorm 'dio'lad.
6.90M on the direction. of the mum bow than

(by on (allowing me)

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI omcm. USE ONLY

m:
l. plutio body i. oono of not intonoivo intorao-
a. rigid dio tion of plotoo
3. tiaod plato 5. dinotion o! molativo aotior, o:
platoo

'lho quootion ariooau aro tho oourooo o! tho horioontol tonoilo otrooooo in
tho Bayhal rift tho oalo pxooooooo ao thooo on tho homdaﬂoo o! lithoophotio
plotoo in tho oooaho whozo tho now oooanio amt io tor-o6 or an thoy cauood
by dittonnt. oxtomal footoro?

tho ooooyualioo ot tho mm rift Iona. wo tool. io onlainod boot by tho
chart of P. holhal and P. 'i'apon'yo, who analyud tho ooioaioity and tootonioo
or contral and mthom Mia. thin molyoio ohowo that tho ooourmoo of
largo iraoturo moo o! tho mt at tho location of tho nayhal ritt nay ho
oouooa by tho intonation o! largo lithoophorio platoo -- tho maoian and
Auotrolian. 'iho diagra- o! intonotioa of tho platoo agrooo woll with tho
“rigid dio' oodol, in tho tolo of which tho Indootan minoulo moving to

tho north and widt motto prooouro on mo mooian lithoophorio plato.
o-onoo. m thio oaoo otrooooo occur in tho lattor. duo to tho ottoot oi
whim it io oopaxatod into a min of onllox plotoo (nioroplatoo) moving
around dinoront poloo with mpoot to oodt othot. ham. to: omlo. tho
Chinooo plateon toootho: with tho hoooooio tolood miono of tho hmohayhol.
tho Pro-Alm- xogion and tho silhoto-hlih'. io ohittod in an oaotorly dinotion
away (to. horthom mania. m Iaykal rift woo io prooiooly looatod alum
tho lino- o! poooihlo otrooooo and io 91o homdaty of tho lioroplatoo. con-
ooquantly. in tho final analyoio tho tonation of tho mhal rift in tho
rooult oi prooouxo onrtod by on largo lithoophorio plato on uothor.

nun. tho idoao o! lithoophorio plato tootonioo ponit ooo to tio

tooothor dota o! dotoilod ohoomtiooo within tho ootivo toctonio bolt to
tho gonotal qooayn-io oituatim within tho lam mogioa o! our planot.

In itool! tho poooihility of invootioatino thio :olatiauhip in a oigniti-
oant advantaoo o! tho how global tootonioo which ponito mental planing
o! mtm goologioal-qoophyoioal mouth uoing now hardwm.

mo goolooioal ihmtigotiono ooodnotod in Lalo Mal govo can-o to ohook
oo- olohal oootootmio hypothoooo. not tho ooolooioal invootioatiooo woro
notthoonlypaxtotonrpmntho 'Pioooo'vahiololadooovondivoo

for biological WI and wo would liho to dioouoo thio at loaot hriotly.

tho Multo o! Iiological Innotigationo

momtiono ottinhohaviorottmhwatoraninaloworommtho
tint ti- at oiwtilioaht doptho. up to livo opooi-no o! 61o widoly dio-
trihutod mkal oil-tioh won locatod at tho oa- ti- in tho vional liold
at tho cannon. Attonticn io pziaarily drawn to tho not that tho tioh
ooutohovozinthowatorlaoobolowthohood. nthio ouothoixhody
ooutontly loco wow. pulsating ntiou. hoax tho botto- tho Iayhal oil-fioh

30
’01 ONICXAI. 038 OIL!
NR ()l-‘PICIM. "88 ONLY

(«'0 \
um: \\

 

Once-u! mun... out"... mung“...- - Ff: eon-ow «e ue-ueee- (18)
an“ A». Dee. men-en ace-u- meu ee-oeue-Ie- tune-u

on." Inaoeu- «load-lee “net. lumen-

(OOI «no. I awe-neu- cu it". I In" ‘ ION...” CIOOIUM 0". (19)
”one. - acne. Ann eon-no.0 Que-m e-o §\

'0. “Mann“ tone 0 fol-r poeuw «0‘70“.
I-O‘II
new no" an none “or. .eneor on... ..'.owuun~r "I“ (20)

a dll-.-.~or "um... (16) «pram-unnr oe-u .u-cpoaoo (21)

min Ble-ente of «mm o! Oenuel end Southern Aele.
woem, whloh to pet: of the Aucrellen plece end vhleh
me to the north. pleye the role of the “do“ ale" here.
Canteeelon (route, folded eonee end eleo feulte vhld: eepexete
eaeller pletee lm each other occur in General one! Southern

Mle

m:
l. mm at: me 3. 57: Du'ye River
2. All: Dex'ye River 4. Luke Belkheeh

(my continued on tollovlng pege)

3].
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
S. Alter 15. mt Rivor

6. Toxin Dor'yo Rivor 16. noin mm

7. Induo River 17. aaaproooien frento

8. Tibet 10. (unite with ohittihg aaqanont
9. chenoi rift tano a! dioploeonont

10. Roxane nivor 19. tortiory ceidod moo

11. ﬂung nivor 20. propaood woooien oanoo

12. Indaoton Poninouio 21. prapaood oxponoian moo

13. Conqoo hivor
id. Yonqtoo hive:

oppraoehod tho oemiotieho a! can (ran tino ta tine. viqarauoiy cut into
it end, poooihq oovorol aontinotoro undo: ito outoao. ogoin neotod toward.
1ho biaiaaiot-aboorvoro' aooariptivoiy eonod thooo iioh ‘piawnn at tho
Boykol battan.‘ mo boyhol ail-tioh uouoliy did not rooat to tho otrenq
lighto at tho vohiaioo ond woro not otroid of tho ptooonao at tho “Pioaoo.”
1ho nuoorauo qabyo o1oa rotated col-11y ta tho vohieloo. moro won eoooo
whon oeon at tho: otmod owoy on tho inotnnont been. The qabyo nawod

owoy during ottonto ta eanoat thon with o hone not. It woo natoe thot
tho gabyo dig thonolvoo inta tho batten a: dig uniqwo nooto in tho oatt
aato.

1ho voriotiao at tho acuity of tho anonioln olang tho vorticoi woo aboorvod
very ciooriy. Not only thoi: m-bo: pot unit value but oioa tho opoaioo
aaopeoitien voxiod. ‘i‘ho naot obmdont tom woo notod in tho batta loyot
ot doptho obavo ‘00 n. oopoaiony an tolotivoiy oionting aaty oiapoo.
W-eroytioh pndaninoto hoto ond loreo opoainono of mm ail-tioh
oro come. no batten ourfoao io papuiotod by batterdwoning atoyiioh.
planes-in and batten eabyo. mm calanioo a! opanqoo m (and ot tho
naot divoroo doptho an tho otoop tacky olapoo. It io typieoi thot tzoeoo
at tho oativo vitality of batten argoniou in tho (an at mum hiilacho
one (mole oro roeardod an tho batten ot tho non-I- dopth at tho oawthom
port a! Loko aoykol.

1ho ”Pioeoo' owbooroihioo hovo new boon inotouod an ociontitia roooorch
vooooio at tho 088R Medany at Scionaoo and oro gooey ta boqin aporotiano
ta otuey tho otructuro at tho aeoon batten. 1ho oxporionco oaqnirod during
aporotiano with tho oubnoroibioo in lake loykol will bo involaoblo in tho
(«taro invootigotiano.

 

'Bialaqioto a. u. latawo, v. N. Noni-av. 0. IO. sido7.ov one u. 8. nomihav
poxticipotod in tho divoo.

comm: Imul'ntw 'Nouko,‘ ”Prim." 1978

6521
C80: 1870

32
FOR OPPILMI. USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

OSVSLOPMSNT 0? PROGRAM SOPTNARB FOR A SSCTORAL AUTOMATED CONTROL SYSTEM

Moscov RAIRASOTKA PROGRAMMNOGO OSSSPBCNSNIYA OTRASLSVOY AS" in Russien 1978
signed to press 9 Jen 70 pp 2, 3-5. 180-190. 199

(Annotation. introduction. eppendix 1 end the teble of contents iron the
book by 0.V. Oolovenov end V.V. Shherups, Stetietike Publishers. Moscow,
23.000 copies, 199 pegeel

[Text] Experience in the developeent end introduction of progressing soft-
vere for s sectorel eutoeeted control eyetss for the chesicel industry is
described.

The cherecteristics of systee prohless ere trested, es ere the structure of
the genorel progressing softvere, questions of the design of dete processing
systsss using the stenderd equipsent of the opsretionel systess of third
generetion coeputers. Psrticuler ettention is devoted to the use of e
hiererchicel dete henk end resote processing. The developeent work use hesed
on the tin-360 coeputer, which is coepetihle vith coeputers in the stendsrd-
iced series of electronic coeputers.

The book is intended for specielists engeged in the developeent of dete pro-
cessing technology in sutossted control systole. end csn be useful to the
workers of coeputer centers.

Introduction

The developeent of the progren softvere for s sectorel 480 leutoested control
systesl (also) is hesed on the vide-ecele utilisation of coeputers of the
stenderdised cosputer series, end provides for the stenderdieetion of pro-
cedures (or dete processing end storege. es well es stsnderd sethods of oper-
etion in e "progreseer - operetor - coeputer" node. The correct selection
of the requisite herduere end softvere per-its the creetnulofsneconoeicelly
fevorehle technology for dete processing. oriented towsrds the support of
functionsl progressing suhsystess end complexes of the OAS”. in the hook
offered to the reeder here, the prisery ettention is devoted to coding end
progrs-ing processes, end to stendetd vsys of utilising stsndordisod tools

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POE OPPICIAL USE ONLY

for the creation of the program software of data processing systems. the
basic function of which is the derivation of reference, accounting and ad-
ainistretive information in the fern of reference repliesand interrogations.
this goal is achieved by means of concentrating the data on the information
carriraa of computers and controlling the processing of the information by
means of general and special program software. where the latter is based on
the first, taking into account the standard procedures provided in it.

sis of an economic analysis of

the system. as a result of which the framework of the future system is pre-
cisely outlined. An exhaustive and precise description of the system permits
a reduction in the developmental cost or the special program software and m
curtailment of the time required for its creation. The description of the
system is based on an understanding of the requirements of the functional
control subsystem and its economic essence. Taken into account are such
factors as the composition and volume of the initial and finsldsto.thecheracter-
istics of the document. the technical characteristics of the computer da-
vicea. the capabilities and limitations of the packages of applied programs.
as well as the standards for the overall program software and other factors.
if a system using remote processing facilities is developed. than the caps-
bilities of the peripheral equipment are also considered (communications
lines. terminals, control devices). and a provision is made for combining to
the greatest extent possible the work of the individual users, who share the
resources of the central facility. In designing large systems for integrated
data processing. posed along with qualitatively new probleas is the problem
of increasing the labor productivity of the program software developers. The

existence of packages of applied programs or programming systems creates

only the appearance of a favorable situation. which disappears when a specific
system is designed around them: months. and sometimes even years are required
for the introduction and development of the letter. he the experience of a
number of foreign firms has shown. outlays for system development where it

is initially thoroughly worked out, proved to be twice as small as the outlays
when a system is introduced concurrently with its development without a pre-

liminary analysis of the system as a whole.

Developmental experience with the automated control system for the chemical
industry (ASH-khim) using third generation computer equipment, which is de-
scribed in this book. can prove to be of interest for many designers. since
despite several specific features of this sector for the case of control

automation at upper management levels in the hierarchy, the nature of the
problems which arise is similar to the problems of automation in other sec—

(0:8.

A unique feature of the present moment. which is typical of the majority of
industrial sectors. consists in the fact that the design and introduction

of systems is carried out simultaneously with the training of the special-
ists. A multiplicity of new people work on the design of the program soft-
ware, and of them. only a few have experience in the automation of data proo

ceasing on third generation computers. Regardless of the tasks in control
automation that these specialists are called upon to perform. they are all

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

faced with dealing with the elements of data processing systems, and for this
reason, an effort is made in this book to combine the beginning working infor-
mation dealing specifically with these questions. In using the hardware and
software of third generation computers, it is essential to know the standards
for data control, and the functions and rules for working with common program-
ming software, high level programming languages, packages of applied programs
and understand the characteristics of other tools oriented towards increasing
design productivity and reducing the cost of problem solution.

Standard data processing systems, which incorporate a subsystem for data
gathering, an automated bank, and subsystems for problem solution and display-
ing the results as integral components have become the basic elements in the
design of program software. The structure of such systems is in accordance
with the logic structure of the control system, and for this reason, their
overall design is based on an analysis of the operation of the facility being
automated and the data processing functions in it, and are treated in Chapter 1.
In accordance with the analysis, requirements are established for the data
processing system, in particular, an enumeration of the specific output doc-
uments with their printout composition and periodicity indicated. These re-
quirements determine the structure and composition of the data base. The
economically acceptable data processing technology, including the initial

data input, the updating of mutually related sets of data (basis) and infor-
mation output as a result of the solution of specific problems, is established
through the use of standard programsoftware and hardware.

The project planning for the data processing technology based on standard
operational system equipment is described in Chapter 2, where the operations
of generating and maintaining files, and feeding out information are treated;
series processing using merger algorithms and sorting routines is analysed.
The specific features of direct data access are demonstrated using the ex-
ample of index-series organization, and the conditions leading to the crea-
tion of an integrated data bank are analyzed, while the specific example of
data processing technology in th( OASU subsystem using a package of applied

programs, which organizes communications of the "product composition" type,
is also analyzed.

The technological fundamentals of working with an automated data bank are
treated in Chapter 3 using the example of a hierarchical information control
system, and an example is given of the structure of a data bank for informa-
tion and reference problems of the ministry. In Chapter a. which is devoted
to the fundamentals of modern remote information processing technology, a
system of data input from a display keyboard is described, as are the techno-
logy for data processing using a remote processing system, the logic of ale-
mentary input operations, and data correction and examination.

Appendix 1.
The Equipment Complement of the Sectoral Computer Center

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basis of the equipment complex of the sectoral computer center of the
Ministry of the Chemical Industry is composed of "Minsk-22" (d units) and
”Minsk-32" (2 units) second generation computers, and one third generation
computer, a 360-50 hanufactured by the IBM company. The computers are
located in three places: the IBM-360-50 and two "Minsk-22" at the main cen-
ter, one "Minsk-32" computer at Tula, two "Minsk-22" computers and one
"Minsk-32“ at Kiev, as well as an IBM-3780 terminal station connected to the
IBM-360—50 via a separate telephone channel. Installed in the room of the
ministry are three IBM-3275 information displays, which are connected to the
IBﬁ-SbO—SO via separate telephone communications channels, as well as tele-

types for receiving information from the enterprises and punched card/tape
machines.

The following equipment is included in the complement of the IBHB360-50

(see the figure): a central processor with a one megabyte high speed mem-
ory, equipped with one multiplex and three selector channels and an IBM-1052
control board typewriter; the Isa-2314 magnetic disk memories (9 disc assem-
blies with a capacity of 29 betes each) with an IBM-2319 control block,
which is connected to the selector channel; IBM-3620 model 3 magnetic tape
memories with two IBM-3803 control blocks, connected to two selector channels.
The control blocks have a switcher which provides for the simultaneous oper-
ation of two tape transport mechanisms in any combination.

There are seven tape transport mechanisms in all, of which six operate with

a record density of 1,600 bytes/inch (66 pulses per mm) and one mechanism

can operate with a record density of both 1,600 bytes/inch and 800 bytes/inch
(32 pulses per mm); two IBM-2560 punched card input-output devices, three
IBH-lbOJ line-at-a-time printers; an IBM-2703 line couunications control
block, which includes one synchronous and one start-stop line base. Connected
to this block are the following: an IBM-3780 terminal in Kiev, CRT information
displays in the ministry and in the center itself, as well as five IBM-2761
terminals and telegraph channels.

He shall give a brief description of the devices cited here. The model 50
series 360 electronic computer is an intermediate model (in terms of the
technical characteristics) from a series of computers which are compatible
with each other at both the programming level and at the level of peripherals
interfacing. It operates with binary, decimal and alphabetic information.
Numbers can be represented both with a floating and a fixed decimal point.

The minimal addressable information element is the byte, consisting of eight
binary digits. The length of a computer word is equal to k bytes or 32 bits.

It is also possible to work with double length words.

The direct access memory takes the form of magnetic discs, which include
eight 2316-81 disc drives, and an IBM-2319 control block. There is a ninth
standby disc drive. Interchangeable packets of type 2316 discs are used in
the 2316-81 unit, where these discs include 11 plates with 20 working sur-

faces. The capacity of a packet is 29.177.betes. The working surface of a
disc has 203 tracks with a capacity of 7,296 bytes.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The [BM-3620 tape transport simultaneously records with nine pairs of heads.
thus forming nine information tracks. Nine digits comprise one byte with a
parity check digit. Nonreturn-to-zero recording is used to record with a
density of up to 800 pulses per inch. and the phase potential nethod is used
to record with a dcngity of 1.600 pulses per inch. The memories are connected
to two IBM-3803 control units. each of which in turn is coupled to different
selector channels.

The information output is accomplished by means of a 1403 line-at-a-time
printer. This unit prints at a rate of up to 1.100 lines/sin (with a special
set of symbols). covering a whole line at once. which contains 132 symbols.

The inn-2560 unit consists of two devices: a reader and a perforator. The
punched cards are fed out wide side first from the reader asgasine at a rate
of 1,000 cards/min through two sets of reader brushes into one of three re-
ceptacle pockets. Each pocket holds 3.100 punched cards. The cards flow
from the magazine of the perforetor through the perforation point, the read
point end go to one of three receptacle pockets at a rate of up to 300
cards/min. The central receiving pocket is used by both devices. which
operate independently of each other. The unit is connected to a multiplex
channel.

The control board typewriter (an IBM-1052) permits printout on paper and
the feeding of information into the computer from the keyboard. This unit
is usually employed for printing out brief messages for the operator at a
rate of 16.8 characters per minute. There are 89 print symbols on the key-
board of the IBM-1052, and of them. 26 are line letters and 63 are special
symbols.

The IBM-2703 is intended for organising the interchange between the central
processor and the terminals connected through communications lines. The
unit is connected to the multiplex channel and provides for operation in a
start-stop mode at a maximum speed of up to 600 bits/sec, and in a synchro-
nous mode at a maxi-um rate of up to 6.800 bits/sec.

The lad-3780 is the most productive terminal station, which provides for
reading punched cards at a rate of up to 600/min and prints out messages at

a rate of 300 - 625 lines/min. The unit operates in two modes: independently
and in an interchange mode through a communications line. In the latter case,
the [BM-3870 either feeds the punched cards through the reader, or receives
the data which is to be printed out on the station printer. Ir the indepen-
dent node, the data are read by the reader from the punched cards. are printed
out. but are not transmitted to the communications line. The Inn-3780 op-
erates in a semiduplex mode via switched or segregated communications chan-
nels. The data transmission rate in the communications equipment and the
modems is up to 1.200 bits/sec. Operation is possible via segregated chan-
nels in a duplex mode, increasing the transmission rate up to 2,500 bits/sec.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The IBM-3275 is a display, which was described in Section 4.2.
printer is connected to the Isa-3275 display for data printout, where the
print rate of the former is 40 characters/sec.

Information exchange is accomplished at a rate of 1.200 bauds.

The IBM-2761 terminal is a typewriter, and can operate in a time sharing

mode or can he used as a standard typewriter.

Table of Contents

Introduction

Chapter 1.

Chapter 2.

Chapter 3.

The Basic Components for the Design of A80
Program Software

1.1. Design problems in data processing
systems

1.2. The specific features of the managed
object

1.3. Basic models of the functional sub-
systems of the automated control system
for the chemical industry

1.6. General program software for the data
processing systems

The Project Planning for Data Processing Systems
Based on Standard Operational System Hardware and
Software

2.1. Standardization of operational system data
control

2.2. The fundamentals of documenting the operations
of data processing and files

2.3. The standard functions of data processing
system designers

2.b. An evaluation of the developmental time for
data processing programs

2.5. Sequential file processing

2.6. Extracting information from series files
and printing it out

2.7. Processing series index files

2.8. Extracting from series index files

2.9. Data processing technology in an automated
system for setting standards and planning

Data Processing in Hierarchical Information Systems
and Data Banks

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Ilﬂ-3285

11

17
36

63

63
71
75

78
85

106
115
123

130

142
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010017-1

FOR OFFICIAL 088 03".?

3.1. Design prerequisites for e hiersrchiosi
infornetion syste-

3.2. The functioning of e dste henk

3.3. The structure of existing dete beses

3.6. Dsts proceeeing technology

3.5. Rourke on working with e dets benk

Chapter 4. Mote Dots Processing

6.1. neeic probleee in renote processing

L2. The beeic functional cspehilitiee of the
Inn-3275 displsy

0.3. The principsl cspebilities of conte-porery
genersi progre-ing softwsre for resots
processing

4.0. The orgsnizstion of dots processing bssed
on the cuetoeer intonation sod control
systee

6.5. An applied rceote proceseing eyete- (en
eats-pie)

4.6. Rourke on the raote processing of dots

Appendix 1.

Appendix 3.
Bibliogrephy

OOPYRIGlﬂ': Irdstel'etvo ”Stetietike", 1978

8225
080 z 1870

to
tax omcm. use can

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100010017-1
FOR OPPICIAI. 088 ONLY

MLIOATIW

PROTECTIRO WIOM‘IONB PAOILII’IBS M HAZARDOUS AND IN'I‘BRI'BRIIIO sneer-s

Moscow usacurra soommrr SWAZI 01' OPASW I MBSRAYUSIICHIIO! VLIYANIY
in Russian 1978 signed to press 7 Dec 77 pp 2. 286-288

[Annotation and table of contents fron book by Mikhail Ivanovich Hikheylov.
Leonid Davydovich Rssunov and Stanislav Aleksandrovich Soholov, Isdatel'stvo

Svyas', 288 pages , 10,000 copies]

[Text] An account is given of key questions relating to protecting co-unica-
tions facilities fros the hazardous and interfering effect of m's [electro-
transnisaion lines]. electric railroad contact networks and lightning dis-
charges. The values are given, of penissible hazardous and interfering volt-
age and current in comication circuits. A technique is given for estinsting
the hazardous and interfering influences of highdvoltage lines on co-nnications

facilities. A discussion is given of the theory of the protective effect of
various pieces of equipnent and devices used in lines and in comnications

equiplent.

This book is intended for engineers and technicians in co-unications planning.
construction and operating organisations.

con-mars Page

Foreword 3
Chapter 1. Standards for Hazardous and Interfering Effects in Aerial and

Cable Line Comication Networks and Channels 6

1.1. Per-iesible values of hazardous current and voltage 6

1.2. Permissible values of interfering current and voltage 22

Chapter 2. Betinates of llaurdous and Interfering Influences of External
Blectronagnetic Poles on Co-Inication Networks and Chen-
nels 33
2.1. Estimate of the hazardous influence of high-voltage lines on serial
and cable co-mication lines 33
2.2. Estimate of the interfering influence of a VI. [high-voltage line]
on telephone channels 70

Chapter 3. Measures and Equip-sat Baployed on the Part of VL's and
Electric Railroads to Protect Pron hazardous and Interfering

Influences 80

lo].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

3.1. General etatenenta 80
3.2. Protective meaoureo in three-phoee VL'o end d.c. Vb'o 82
3.3. Seoothing unite in d.c. electric railway aubetationa 86
3.6. Draining trenoformere connected to a.c. electric railroad contact
netuorha 88
3.5. Reducing the influence of on e.c. electric railroad by uaing a
three-wire 2 x 25 k9 eyetea with linear autotranoformero 93
Chapter 6. Protecting Communicationo Pacilitieo from the Influence
of High-Voltage Linen or
6.1. Liot of protective meaoureo 95
4.2. Choice of critical route for laying coemunicatione linee 96
9.3. Protection by meano of ourge divartero 98
6.‘. Protection by meana of cutoute 109
b.5. Protective uoor'o equipnant 120
6.6. Protective effect of metal ceble cladding vith regard to the
influence of high-voltage linee (bVN'o) 123
4.7. Shielding effect of metal cableo and other extended vireo with
regerd to a magnetic influence 162
6.9. Protection by toeno of otepdoun treneformero 168
6.9. Protection by moano of neutralizing traneformere 173
b.10. Protection by aeano of ioolation traneformoro 176
$.11. Protection of aerial communication linea free the haterdouo
effect of three-pheeo VL'e with a grounded neutral vire. by
tonne of high-power ourge divertero 182
4.12. Protection of communication circuito free haterdoua and inter-
fering influencoo by meano of drain coilo 190
6.13. Protection of aerial line circuita fro- haoardouo and interfering
voltage by meeno of choke coilo ' 195
5.16. Protection of aerial line telephone circuita from the interfering
influence of VL'o end electric railroado by crooning vireo 198
6.15. Protection of aerial communication lineo from harardouo voltage
arioing in direct concoct with Vb vireo 199
Chapter 5. Protection of Aeriel Linen and Communicationo Equipment
from the Effect of Lightning Diochergeo 201
5.1. Protection of wooden oupporto 201
5.2. Protection of reinforced concrete oupporto 211
5.3. Protection of inouletoro in aerial Ls'o [communication linee] 213
5.4. Protection of cable ineert and lead-in cable, on well an of
boooting otetione and terminal otetione with an aerial lead-in 213
5.5. Complete oyoten for protecting CUP [key boooting atation] and

6.1.

“U? [oecondery boooting otetion] equipment in aerial LS linee

from hezerdouo voltage 222
Chapter 6. Protection of Underground Cable Linea from the Bffect of

Lightning Diochergeo 223

Liot of protective meaoureo 223

6.2.
6.3.

6".
‘05.

Protection of cable linee by neano of lightning arresting cableo 22‘
Protection of underground communication cableo from lightning

otrokao by meano of protective aerial vireo 231

Stormproof cablaa 237

Shielding cableo in a polyethylene oheath by meano of ground

connectiono 266
‘2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
6.60
6.7.

7.1.
7.2.

7.3.
7.6.

801.
802'

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Shielding cahlea by team of liniature lightning arreatere

Taking into account the protective effect of grounded railroad
raila or of pipelinea laid near a cable vhen lightning etrikee
Chapter .

Protection of Cable hain locating station Iquipoent Pro-
Iiatardoue and Interfering Voltage

Deeign principle of protective ayetec

key eleunte of protective equipoent need in cable co-unicetion

line equip-cot

ayatene for protecting equip-ent of different tranenieeion eyetena

lightning ehielding teete
Chapter 8.

Protection of Co-unicetiona Pacilitiea iron liegnetic
Stone

Protection of equip-ant relote power aupply circuite according
to the "wire (tvo vireo) - ground” ayetel

Protection of aerial and cable line telephone circuita
Bibliography

00mm:

8831
cso:

1870

ltdatel'atvo 8vyac' , 1978

63
M OHICIAI. USE ONLY

250
232

257
257

239
263
273

277
277

281
282
FOR ONIOML "8! ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

mum. WIOATION m NIKON immune

Moecov mun WYM' V 19mm “mom in lueeien 1978 eisned
to preee S Apr 78 pp 2. l“

[Annotation end table of oontente iron book by Dorie lvaoovich Petlenko and
Leonid Sergeyevich Butyreltiy, ledetel'atvo Swar'. l“ pagea]

[Text] Queetionn ere diecueeed. reletine to the propertiee of epeech eignele
under conditione of a nodiiied gee Indiu- and to technical prohlene in re-
etorin; intelligibility oi epeech under oonditione of deepvater i-ereion and
epece flighte requiring the uee of epecial hreethin: Iixturee.

Thin hook ie intended for epecialiete in the field of comicatione engineer-
ing. acouetical eneineere. lineuiete. pyecholoeiate end phyeioloeiete involved
in reeearch on epeech eiuele.

comm Page
Foreword by the Mitor-in-Chief 3
foreword lo
Introduction 5
Chapter 1. Atnoephere oi lncloead Spacee 7
1.1. An ”ective” ertificiel etnoephere 7
1.2. Pomlu for hreethin; nixturee 10
Chapter 2. Peaturee of Speech lornetion in Artificial Atnoepherea for
Breathing 20
2.1. General inforIetion regarding e speech eicnel 20
2.2. Source of a epeech aignal 22
2.3. Radietion of e epeech eienel 3l
2.‘. ‘rrenafer (motion of the epeech for-ins channel 33

2.5. Quantitative eetinete of the audio epectn- taking into eccount
the influence of the eource. the trenenitter and the epeech for-ins

chennel 39
Chapter 3. Perception of Speech in a lieliun and Oxygen Atloephere 63
3.1. Neturelneee. recopieehility ‘3
3.2. Intelligihiiity ‘5
3.3. Sound perception ‘9

u

M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

3.6. information content oi apeech eounde
3.5. Articulation meaeuremente of the intelligibility of heliumpatmo-
A ephare epeech in different eectiona of the epectrum
Chapter 6. Experimental lnveetigetiona of Speech Sound Parametere in
helium Atmoepheree
6.1. General etatemente
6.2. Spectrumptiee cherecteriatice of epeech
6.3. Certain featuree of audio epectra in a 0K8 [helium and oxygen
atnoephere]
4.6. Amplitude rengea in the epeech eignal epectrun
6.5. Influence of an artificial helium atnoephere on the fundamental
tone
Chapter 5. Raaaona for Reduction in lntelligibility of Speech in
Deepuater Submereion
5.1. Shift of formanta to high frequenciee
5.2. lepairment of articulatory action and function of the aural ana-
lyrer
5.3. Conditione for epeech formation and trenemiaeion
Chapter 6. Hethode and Equipment for Improving the Quality and
Intelligibility of Speech in a Helium and Oxygen Atmo-
ephere
6.1. Hethode of improving intelligibility without equipnent
6.2. Analog convertere of apeech in a 6K3
6.3. Convertere employing diecrete forms of epeech repreeentetion
6.6. Requirementa for ecouatical equipment for working in a 6K8
6.5. Comperiaon of technical uethode of improving the effectiveneae
of verbal communication in helium atmoepheree
Conclueion
Bibliography

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo Svyet'. 1978

8831
080: 1870

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

57
58

61
61
63

78
86

90

95
95

103
106

107
107
109
118
129

131
136
137
FOR OPPICIM. "88 ONLY

PUDLICA‘I'IOI‘S

unc 621.372.8
OPTICAL CWICATIONS “mums

nougwavoggvoov OPTICIIISKD! MM! in Rueeien 197B eicned to preee 30 Jen 70
PP e o

[Mnotetiom teble of contente end prefece to the book by 1.1. ‘l'eunin. Swet'
Publiehere. Hoecow. 3.700 oopiee. 168 pegee]

[Text] The elenente of the theory end engineering of opticel bend veveguidee.
intended for uee in opticel co-unicetione eyetele. ere preeented. Queetione
of eisnel propesetion. veveguide excitetion end the principlee of opticel
ceble deeisn ere treeted.

me book in intended for ecientuic workere ensued in deeiui vork on end the
epplicetion of option]. comnicetione devicee.

Table of Contente

Foreword 3
Introduction e
Verioue typee of Opticel Heveguidee (Theereticel Principlee)
1.1. Circuler duel-leyer vevesuidee 8
1.2. Low node meguidee 18
1.3. ‘rriple layer waveguides 19
1.4. Hultinode. duel-leyer vevepuidee 22
1.5. Gredient unvesuidee 27
1.6. Profile veveguidee 35
Energy Propeution Vie Optical Hovesuidee
2.1. boom in the nterinl 36
2.2. Louee in low node veveguidee 60
2.3. The field pettern end energy ebeorption in e uni-ode waveguide M
2.4. Inhaogeneitiee ‘9
2.5. The influence of inhouzeneitiee on the field pattern of e

mltinode meguide 52
2.6. boeeee in the protective jeclnet of e veveguide 57

d6

FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

2.7. Generalised psrsaeters for the inhomogeneities in
sultilode waveguides
2.6. Losses in waveguides using poly-er materials

Signal Trannsiasion Via Optical waveguides

3.1. Methods of analysing signal propagation and the initial
equations
3.2. Pulse characteristics

3.3. The transient and frequency characteristics of low soda waveguides

3.6. Signal propagation where a waveguide is excited by a spectrua
of carrier frequencies

3.5. The transient characteristics of sultinoda waveguides

3.6. Accounting for dispersion in the aaterial

3.7. Reflector distortions

The Excitation of Optical Waveguides

39
60

61
67
68

77
01
03
06

6.1. The specific features and conditions of optical waveguide excitation 90

6.2. The excitation of low soda waveguides by e seaiconductor laser
6.3. The excitation of sultinoda waveguides by a light aaitting diode
6.6. hatching to various radiation sources

4.5. Excitation of waveguides through the side well

6.6. Picking off the energy from the waveguides

waveguide Bundles

5.1. The specific features of the application of waveguide bundles
5.2. Bundles of single layer and dual layer waveguides

5.3. The selection of the nuaber of waveguides in a bundle

5.6. The excitation of waveguide bundles

5.5. The attenuation of bundles of sultinode waveguides

Optical waveguide Connections

6.1. The general characteristics of optical waveguide connections
6.2. The connections of individual waveguides

6.3. Group connectors

6.4. Per-anent connections

6.5. Machining the and faces of waveguides

Optical Cable

7.1. Soae of the physical and aechanical properties of optical fibers
7.2. The structure of an optical cable

7.3. The principal structural designs of optical cables
7.6. Crosstalk

Pro. the publishers

Appendix
Bibliography

47
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

93
96
100
106
109

109
110
110
122
12‘

125
126
132
139
139

161
1“
1‘7
153

156
160
16‘
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Preface

One of the pronieing trenda in the develop-ant of infatuation tranaaieeion
ayateaa ie the uae of the optical band of electromagnetic wIVea. Beginning
in the aiddle of the l960‘e. publicationa of the reaulte of work done in
thia field appeared in an ertreaely wide range of periodical literature.
Special attention wee devoted in thia literature to the develepaent of the
theory and a deecription of devicea for cloaed optical coamunicatione linee
ueing apeciel waveguidee. Aleeat all of the publiehed uateriala on optical
waveguidee were not coabined to the neceeeary extent with e coaaon approach.
in particular. fro. the viewpoints of the deeign work on multichannel optical
communicatione eyeteaa. A conaidereble amount of the work ie of a theore-
tical nature, and ita reaulte cannot alwaye be uaed directly in an engineer-
ing plan. For thia reaeen. the need hae ariaen for a eyeteaatited treatment
of the queetione relating to the theereticel ale-onto of optical weveguidea.
the tranenieeion of aignala through rhea. and their utilization for optical
coenunicatione.

An attempt is made in thia monograph to ayatematicelly preeent the ieeuea
indicated above to the extent neceeaery for engineering deaigne. at leaet

for the initial atagea. as well ea for the further deeper atudy of literature
in thia field. For purpoeee of effectively utilizing the volume of the

book, intermediate conclueiona (with the exception of original enea) have
been oaitted in diacuaaing individual queatione.

Soviet reaeerchera have made a large and eerioua contribution to the develop-
aent of theoretical and practical queetione relating to dielectric waveguidee
in general. and to optical band weveguidea in particular. thue. e eubetantial
contribution to the general theory of dielectric vaveguidea hea been made by
3.1. Kataenelenbaun, V.P. Vayatyehev and u.a. Seaenov, and in the field of
optical band waveguidee by V.V. Shevchenko. a.s. lelanov and Yu.N. Kazantaev.
A number of aeparate theoretical queatione. ea well at important experimental
developmental work in thia field. are reflected in the worke of A.H. frokhorov,
Ye.u. Dianev, 0.x. Seterev. v.3. Veynberg, N.Ye. Zhebotinakiy, A.A. Dyachenko
and other reeeerchere.

COPYRlcﬂT: ltdatel'atvo ”Svyet'”, 1978

8225
68021870

‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLICATIONS

TESTS (THEORY, DESIGN AND APPLICATION)

Novosibirsk T881? (TIORIYA. POSTIOYENIIB, PRIHENENIYB) in Russien 1978
to press 27 Peb 78 pp 2. 188-189

[Annotation end tsbls of contents free book by Nikoley Andrsyovich Sol
Irdetel'etvo Neuks. Sibirskoys Otdslsniys. 192 pages, 3,500 copies]

[Text] A presentation is esde of the key concepts of one of the new d
of cybernetics-the theory of tests. Methods of designing tests ere g
e discussion is presented of their spplicetion for troubleshooting in
circuits end for solving certsin problems in identifying objects.

This book can be useful to specislists interested in the spplied sspec
netheneticel cybernetics.

CORTBNTS

Foreword
Chspter 1. Prelieinsry Infornetion on the Theory of Algebreic Logic
functions

1. Algebreic logic functions. Key concepts snd properties

2. Intrinsic dependence of slgebrsic logic functions

Chspter 2. Grephs

1. Key concepts of the theory of grsphs

2. Structure of cheine in e greph

3. Structure of sections in e greph

6. Constructing e Intrix of sections and s cyclonetic matrix of e
greph by nesns of trsnsforns of its estrix of incidences

Chspter 3. Circuits. Circuit Peults

l. Contect circuits. Key concepts and definitions

2. Circuits iepleeenting elementary eyeletric functions

3. Definition of circuits consisting of functional elelents

6. Bleeents of the synthesis of rectifying (directionsl) circuits

5. Contect circuit fsults. Hiking tebles of feulte for contsct cir-
cuits

6. Peults of circuits consisting of functionel elements

49
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 6. Concept of a Test 57
1. Definition of a test -
2. 0n the maximum number of irredundant tests 61
3. Computation of the mean number of irredundant tests and estimating
their length 66

6. Algorithms for designing irredundant tests 68
Chapter 5. Structure of Diagnostic Tests for Individual Classes of

Arrays and Circuits 75
1. Minimal diagnostic tests for arrays with separated blocks of units -
2. Structure of minimal diagnostic tests for cyclic arrays 83
3. Tests for circuits implementing elementary symmetric functions 92
6. Complete test for non-repetitive contact circuits 103
Chapter 6. Diagnostic Tests for Circuit Inputs 120
1. Introductory remarks -
2. Additional concepts 123
3. Lower estimate for L(n) 126
6. Upper estimate for L(n) 127
Chapter 7. Application of the Theory of Tests to Problems in Identi-

fying Objects 135
1. Identification of visual objects - -
2. Identification of geometrical objects 138
3. The "sea battle" 139
6. Application of tests to problems in geological forecasting 166
Chapter 8. Methods of Technical Diagnosis for Combinational Networks

(Networks Hithout a Memory) 168
1. Yablonekiy's general algorithm . 169
2. Finding faults of the constant type by means of an equivalent

normal form 150

3. Shortening the list of faults by means of alpha-state functions 156
6. the d-slgorithm 161
5. Diagnosing circuits by means of Boolean differences 175
Bibliography 182

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hanks, 1978

8831
C50: 1870 m

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY