APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00050R0001000.0000-0

a:
m (I. 1979 (PM 7/79)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040006-0

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JP” LIST")
3 April 1979

TRANSLATIMS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 7/79)

U. S. JOINT FIDUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040006-0
NOT!

.ms publication. contain infornarion prinrily tron foreign
newepapere, periodicale and booka. but aleo iron newe agency
trananiaeiona and broadcaeta. Hoteriala fro- foreign-language
eourcea arc trannlatcd; thoee tron Bnglioholanguage eourcea
are tranacribed or reprinted. with the original phraeing and
other characteriericc retained.

ﬂeadlinee. editorial reporta. and naterial encloaed in brackete
I] are aupplied by JP”. Proceeeing indicatore ouch ae [Text]
or [ucerptl in the firat line of each iten. or following the
laet line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation wae
proceaaed. there no proceaeing indicator ia given. the infor-
nation wae at-rited or oxtracted.

Uni-iliar Ila-en rendered phonetically or tranalitarated arc
enclooed in parentheeea. Uorde or naoee precedod by a quee-
tion cart and encloeed in parentheaea were not clear in the
original but have been aupplicd an appropriate in contaxt.
Other unattributed parenthetical notee within the body of an
ite- originate with the aource. rhea within item on ae
given by eource.

nae contento oi thia publication in no way repreeent the poli-
ciee. wiewa or attitudee of tho 0.8. Covert-cut.

MIG? W08 AID WIN savanna masmr 0?
ammo WED mun: mum m1” DISSDIIM'I’ION
0' “HIS mutation at usnxcm "OFFICIAL 082 MY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J?” was
3 April 1

TRMSLATIONS (N USSR RESOURCES

(moo 1/79)
CONTENTS
nmxc mu no I’m momma

l'ourth Yaar of tho viva-roar Plan: Problem. ‘l'aaka
(‘0‘. M‘om: “Wm. J.“ 19)....000000000000

Organizational Havoc Planned ‘l‘o Pacilitata Introduction
of M Iquipncnt

(PJ’. Palaloyov; MIMI mlm's‘m.

J“ 79)....000000cauaaaoooooanooooooaoooooooooooooooouo

Nov tachnolou in Your Construction Molom. Nora Plonnod
(6.1. lyavlov; nummcnrsrou mm'sﬂo.

J“ 79)....aooaooonaooooonoonooaaoaoooaaooaonooooaooooo

Energy Syntan Davalopnant. Plano llaviavad
(mummu mama. Dac 70)

[naming Thorn-l Electric Pour Plant.
(VJa. him. at. al.; mm. Oct 78)....”

and Productn of Coﬁuotion
(LI. Kropp; manor-nu. Oct 70)

was All) alum norm

Oil and Can Pronoccto In lraonoyarakiy nay
(VJI. Grabcnyuk. at. al.; GmchYA um I GMAJJcc 78)

Ukrainian Coal Production Gnina not“
(m. "min. J” 79)...oocooaaaoooaaaooaooaooaoaoooo

Dallvary Syntan Planned for Coal lnduntry
(6.8. Pin'tovakly. ".8. Linotrkiy: new mm.

J” 79)..aoooooooooooooooooonaoaoaooooanaooooooaoooaooo
FOO OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ELECTRIC tom AND ram comm

mum TIM 01 Till rive-rm M: mm. TASKS
Moscow mm in Russien Ilo l. Jen 79 pp 2-3

[Article by A. K. Antonov. USSR hinister of the Bleetricel [quip-eat

Industry: "Fourth Yeer of the Five-Veer Plen - Problees end Tests
of the Sector”!

[Text] For workers of the electricel equip-eat industry. just es for
ell the working people of the comtry. lest yeer. 1978. wee s yser of
fruitful struggle to fulfill the essisneents of the 10th rive-Veer
Plen. During this yesr workers of the sector by heroic lshor weds e
significant contribution to progress in the energy systeo. setsllurgy.
end the petroleu. gee. end lining industries. to solving the proh-
lens of full sutoestion end eecheniretion of epiculture. techniesl
re-equippieg of trensportetion. end rsisine the level of electrifice-
tion in everydey life. The snnuel plen end socielist ohliaetions were
fulfilled for the principel techoieel-econoeic indms.

The work of the sector to supply eodern -chinery end equip-sot to ell
spheres of the netionel scone-y will continue in 1979. The concrete
guidelines for this work ere the decisions of the 25th perty congress
end subsequent Hem-s of the 6981! Centrel Co-ittee end the stete-ents
end conclusions cooteined in the reports er the. by Oenerel Secretery of
the CPS" Centrel Co-ittee end Ouiresn of the Presidiu of the I188!
Suprewe Soviet L. l. lreehnev end in his telhs during his trips to
Siberis end the Per Beet. Minsk. end Ieku. The 1979 plen slso includes
wery ieportent essimts given to the electrieel equipeent industry
by the crsu Osntrel Oo-ittee end 038! Cwncil of hioisters decree en-
titled "Further Develop-eat of Hechioe Iuildin; in 19704980.” which
wee edopted in Septe-her 1978 end illustrstes once seeio the snoreous
ettention thet the petty end morn-set give to the develop-sot of
electricsl equip-or es one of the key econolic sectors.

In the fourth yeer of the five-yeer plen. es in the preceding yeers.
ell comic uneners should focus their ettention on questions of
tinely supply of Iodern electricel equip-eat to the lost inortsnt con-
struction sites of the netiooel econowy. priesrily those in Siherie.

the Per North, end the fer lost. The tlshtrosile. Orelelehtrotyer-eh.

end llehtrospperet production essocistions. the Iher'hov llectricel

l
M OFFICIAL USE OILY
M OHICIAI. "8! ONLY

ﬂnchine end Lye've ‘l'urhogenerotor plate. end nnny other eeoocietiono
end enterprieee of our eector ere perfornin; en enornoue volue of

do] ivorioo for the SOHO-Shuuhenehnye 038. the ﬂeet Siberien hotel-
lurnical Plent. the Kenerovo Mot Aeeocietion. and other notionnl
econonic inetelletionn located in tho enetorn port of the country.
The rote of increene in the extrection of cool. petroleun. ond nee end
developnnnt of the eluninun. petrochenicel. end ninins induetriee. ell
the nectore thot ultinntoly doternino the econonic night of our coun-
try. depend lonely on how well our eector perfor- plenned deliverioe
end contrect obligetiono.

The fourth yoer of the five-yonr plon ehould he nnrhed hy the eector'e
noting e eimificent new contribution to further holeterinn the ne-
teriol-technicel bone of euiculture. ‘l'he decieiono of the July 1978
Fiona of the CPS” Control Co-ittoe obliged vorkore of the electricel
equipnent induetry to give priority to everything releted to building
end incorporotin; highly reliohle electricel equip-ent for the country-
oide. In 1979 not only in the production of electricel equip-out for
enriculturel needo to incronee 10 percent. but the quolitotive cowo-
eition of thin equipnent in expected to chengo fundenentelly. ‘l'hie
refere to e ohorp increoee in the production of npeciel euiculturnl
nodeln of electricel equipment. in perticulor eeriee 6A electric notoro
vith built-in tonporeture protection. lov-voltnge mite. end other or-
ticlen end neeedlien thnt work reliehly in the npecific end very con-
plex conditione of on eureeeive environnent with heightened duet end
hunidity in the eir. All noceeeery electricel equipnent for conetruc-
tion projecto to produce ninerol fertilieore. enon; uhich in the
Novgorod Mot Aeeocintion neon; othere. in to he delivered in the firet
eix nontho.

The porty end govern-en: hove given the electricel oquipnent induetry
the ndditionnl end very inportent teoho of increeoins the production of
induetriel end nninline electricel loconotivee end electricel equipnent
for nine dunptruche end large-cepocity truck treino. lncroeein; the
production of conounor anode end inrovin; their quelity. coneu-r fee-
turen. end externel nppoerence rennin one of the eector’e porn-out
chollengeo.

The plon for 1979 ruvioione continued grovth in the volu. of produc-
tion of electricel equip-oat. lehor productivity, end profit. lepe-
cielly high rntee of production ere envieionod for certoin typoe of
output: lnrge electricel nnchineo - 11 percent: opeciol production
equip-eat for the electricel equipnent induetry - 29 percent;
thyrietor tronefornere - 23 percent; norieo 4A electric notoro of
eieee 7-9 - 13 percent; electricel heetin; equipnent — 8 percent:
conounor goode - 7 percent.

Alonpide growth in the volune of induetriel production e coneietent
policy of inrovinn quolity. the technicel level of electricel equip-
nent. end ito econonic efficiency will be pureued. Horhore of the

oector fece o chollonge of enor-ouo inortence to the ntnte: before

2
'0! OFFICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the end of the five-year plan build and incorporate new. highly reliable
electrical equip-ent whose service life and productivity will be 1.3-2
tines greater than the l975 lml with a significent improve-ent in
technical-econonic indexes. A significant part of this work lust be
done in 1979: it will be essential to incorporate lore than 1.500 new
articles and assenhliee and take nore than 550 obsolete types of equip-
nent out of production. Plene cell for the percentage of output with

the State Mark of Quality to reach #2 percent, 2.5 tines greater than
planned for 1978.

Considering the national econony's enornous and steadily growing densnd
for ebsolutaly all types of electrical equipsent and understsnding
their lasting significance for intensificetion of public production.
workers of the sector euet do everything possible to relieve the strain
in supplying the econony with such articles as large electrical Is-
chines. high-voltage equip-cut. electric furnaces. cable and wire
(especially winding wire). gnlvanic elenents. and the like. This leans
that they should focus on ell fsctors involved in raising efficiency
and work: quality and not only fulfill. but overfulfill the plsn sssign-
nents and socialist obligations of the fourth year of the five-yesr
plan. This is e difficult challenge. but it csn be done if we skill-
fully concentrate our attention on solving the key probless of the
present day: grmh in labor productivity. scone-y seseures. end
putting scientific-technical advances to use.

Along the crucial reserves for reising labor productivity in our sector
ere waxim use of existing production capacities. fester incorporation
of new capacities. tachnicel re-equipping of enterprises. and (related
to this) efficient use of cepitel invest-eat.

In 1979 plens cell for using existing production cepecities in lost
specialized typee of electrical equip-eat at 95-100 percent. the shift
coefficient is to be rsised to an average of 1.69 for the sector. But
despite these high indexes. the volu-e of production of my types of
electrical equip-ent will still be inadequate to net national econonic
needs. Therefore. today when the party is forcefully restating the
challenge of raising etandsrds in all sectors. the question of the re-
sponsibility of all-Union industrial associations and enterprise and
organization nsnagers for unconditional fulfill-ent of capitel construc-
tioo plane and tinely introduction of new production capscitiee into
operation becones nore critical than ever. This applies above all to
ell-Union industrial sssociations each as Soyurelektroistochnik.
Soyurtrsnsfornator. Soyuzelektronesh. and Soyurelektrotyuh-ssh.

The bulk (sbwt 70 percent) of capital invest-ant this year is to be
concentrsted at priority construction sites. while the reseinder will
go for technical re-equipping of enterprises. It is very inortont
that efficient use of. capital inventeent becone s daily concern of sll
econoeic. party. and trade union lenders at enterprises and organiza-
tions of the sector. This is one of the key problels todey.

3
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The all-Union production oeeociatione ahould alao devote apeciel atten-
tion to refining capital conatruction plane to inrove the balance of
production capacitiee. It ia no eecret that. hecauee of an ill-
conaidered approach to thia prohlen in the rector. we etill have a
critical ahortage of production capacitiee to produce articlea need in
varioue aectore. and thia ultinately retarda the production of very
inortant itena. epecifically electrical equipeent for electrical and
dieael lrconotivea. large electric nachinee. and the like. In thia
connection econonic nanagera met give epecial attention to Conrado

1.. I. lrerhnev'e atatenent in Baku concerning note exact coneideration
of local and national intereaoand bringing that into line and nore
actively nobilizing local reeourcee to aolve Iajor national prohleee.

The party enphaeiree again and again the need for thrifty uae of la-
tarial reaourcee and ohe ervation of the atricteet econoniea with
reapect to natal. fuel. and energy. “rather it ie a queetion of
eeriea production of output or the develop-eat of new technology. we
met render that one of the Iain qualitative indexer of all work in
the eector in reducing the netal-inteneiveneee of output. It ie par-
ticularly inortant here to nake ekillful uae of ecientific-technical
advancee. including raieing unit capacitiee and voltagea of electrical
equip-ent. introducing progreeeive new technology and the technique
of functional-coat anelyeie. etandardiration of pane and aeeenhliee.
and the like. And thie in not all.

Practice teachee no that the heat reeulte cone fron cloee cooperation
between production. ecientific reeearch. and planning-deeign collec-
tivee. on the one hand. and uaere of our producte on the other. It ie
no longer enough to know the coneuer'e neede and fulfill contract oh-
ligatione on tine: it ie inortant to teach the coon-er to eelect and
uae electrical equipnent intelligently. Unfortunately. there are etill
nany caeee uhere electrical equip-ant ia uaed without conaidering oper-
ating conditiona and often nachinee with unjuetifiahly large paranetere
(power. voltage. heat-reaiatance. and the like) are uaed. Straightening
out thia natter would be equivalent to producing an additional. large
enount of expeneive and often acarce equip-eat.

The initiative of In"!!! [Scientific leeearch. Planning~neaip. and
Technological lnatitute of Blectrical liachine Building] deeervee atten-
tion here. l'hie inetitute. after analysing the uae of electric notore
in different apheree of the national econoey. worked out reco-enda-
tione on correct eelection and operation of theee nachinea. At the
cane tine they eatahliehed a rigoroue procedure under which a cuetoner
can only receive hie order in accordance with the reco-endatione.

‘I'hie innovation had a aignificant intact: lore than one nillion rublee
wee eaved in one year. All euheectora of the electrical equip-ant
industry ehould adopt thie practice of IIIPTIDI.

Speaking at the cerenonial Ieeting in honor of the Olet annivereary of
the Great October Socialiet Revolution. coerade A. II. Koaygin enha-

aiced that the pareeount challenge in to nobilira all forcea to fulfill
the five-year plan and eocialiet ohligatione in the collectivee of all

‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'ICIAL USE ONLY

enterpriaea and aanociationo. Plan aaaignnonto should be fulfilled for
total production winner. for oatabliohed aaoortoant. and for delivery
tinea. Ao alwayo. aocialiot coqetition hao an enoroouo role to ploy.

At the and of the third year of the five-year plan the nanao of the
laadera in aocialiat cowotition bacooe known. They were awarded 1978
State Pritao for outatonding labor achieve-onto. Along than were 1.. P.
Zayteava. leader or a brigade of oooaobly workere at tho
Hiaaoolohtroapparat [more Electrical Equip-end plant and A. V. Chohoy
and Ye. V. budiehtyan. onployeoa of the lioldavhobol' [Noldavian Cable}
Plant in londery. Thoueando of landero of induotry coqloted their
paraonal five-year plana and plant for tho firot (our yeore of the five-
yoor plan. The workoro of tho Blektrooilo Aaoociation oro netting an
oranple. They coaploted dolivary of o “Omgavatt hydrogonorator for
the Sayano-Shuehenokaya 08$ ahead of achedule and alao delivered primary
equip-cot for tho Iain unit of tho aecmd phone of tho 0ot'-llilohaya
CBS. The collective of the baku Donootic Air Conditioner Plant produced
tone of thouaondo of unite beyond the plan. The experience of theae and

other outotonding ccllectiyaa in thin five-year plan not be atudied and
dieaeninated by every ocane.

Por workera of tho aector'. juat on for all Soviet people. the fourth
year of tho five-year plan in a year of preparation to celebrate tho
110th annivoroary of tho birth of Vladinir ll'ich Lenin. The noveoent
to work out and propooe stepped-up counterplana nuat becona wideopread
iron the firet dayo of tho new year. Everyone knowa that tho petty
ottochea great ’laportanco to counterplane, which organically colbine
centralized nanagenent of the national econooy and tho creative initia-
tive of tho working people. It is ioportant to aee that qualitative
indexeo ouch on stepping up grovth in labor productivity, raining the
quality of output. lowering ita prino coat. and caving raw aatoriala.
energy. fuel. and level are centers of attention. He not create
favorable conditiona for acconpliohing counterplono in every labor col-
leotive.

The oearch for reaervea aaouneo thorough otudy. generalization. and
diooeninotioo o. progreaaive know-how. we are opoehing of wideaproad
introduction of progreaoive labor nothodo. inroved organization of
proJuction and nanageoent. and scientific—technical odvancoo. 1979
euot be e year of even nore energetic creative introduction of the
Dina-o nethod o! raining labor productivity on tho booio of peraonal
plane. the practice of continuoue production planning adopted by the
Novochorkaaak electrical locoootive buildera. the experience in col-
paigning for equality accumulated by the Blelttroaila workera and the
collectiveo of the Aaeroloktroovet [Azerbaijan Electrical Light] Mao-
ciation. the Plant ineni Vladimir ll'ich. and other enterpriaoo. the
proceduree of the Saranak Blektrovypryanitel' Plant to involve working
people in production nonagenent. and wariouo other progreaoive .ioroa
of work that have denonatrated high effectiveneaa not only in our aec-
tor. but aloo in other aectora of oachino building. All party.
Soviet. and oconooic eqloyeoa and trade union and Kano-o1 leadera
uuat direct their ettontion to there lattero.

S
'0‘! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL 083 ON“

Thou to no doubt that tho vorltoro of tho oloctrlcol oqutpnont loan-cry-
will work tholr harden to fulfill the out. plan ond otoppod-up '

oocloltot obligation. of 1979 and the: lay tho found-non for ouccuoful
conclusion of thoﬁvo-yoor plan u 0 whole.

WRIGHT: lulotol'otvo ”Inonlyo". "Bloktrotokhnllu". 1979

11.176
080: 1822

6
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY
_ ron orncm us: ONLY

ELECTRIC roan AID Ml! momma

OMIZATIOME ms PLAN!!!) N PACILITA‘I'B nmowc'rtou 0? m EQUIPNEI‘T
macaw WWW S‘I'ROI‘I'BL'STVO in Rueeien lo 1. Jen 79 p 72

[Article by P. P. Pelaleyev. firet deputy 088R .enieter of pover end
electrification: ”Introduction of Rev Technology in the USSR Hiniotry
of Power end. Blectrificetion"]

[Text] Raining the vol-k efficiency of ecientiiic reeeerch end plenning-
deeign orgenieetione ie one of the hey chellengee poeed by the 25th CPS"
Congreee. Achieving optieel reeulte froe labor in inconceivable with-

out accelereting the proceec of building now equipeent end introducing
it in_conetruction end induetry quickly.

In connection uith this. there in no queetion thet the diecueeion of e
broad renge of ieeuee in the journel MGBTIGIBSKOY! SMlm'S‘NO
ie tieely. ‘l'hie reiere to the erticlee "Introduction of New Iquipeent -
the Hey to laiee the Efficiency of Energy Conetruction" by G. A.
Denieov. Ye. A. Gel'een. end Ye. P. Sokolov (lo 9. 1978). "Deciding
Queetione of Introducing Itev Equip-em" by Yu. A. Gehilye, A. I.
Nubinehteyn. l. A. Kirtbeye. I. Ye. 0vcharov. V. V. Yereeenlto. L. G.
Nikolaichev. and L. A. Koetrm (No 10, 1978). "Organiretionel Probleee
of Melting and lncorporeting lieu Squipeent” by K. I. Chiheidu (lie 11.
1978). "Develop-mt and Introduction of New Technicel Concepte et the
Blektroetroypodetanteii ‘l‘ruet” by A. I. Brenner. ‘l'. 8. lurulthine. end
A. I. Kholzhlov (lo 12. l978). end "Prozieing Areee in the Developeent

end Introduction of New aquipeent" by G. I. lyevlev in the preeent
ieeue.

-‘l'he eoet i-portent taek of energy conetruction vorkere end the ee-
ployece of ecientific reeoerch end plmning-deeip orgeniutione ie

to continue refining the orgenir'etionel eyete- for building and intro-
ducing new equipeent for the purpoee of eigniiicently reieing lebor
productivity in energy conetruction. reducing the nueber of eqloynee.
ond inroving other qualitative induce.

At one tiee the Orgenergoetroy [Orgenizetion of Energy Conetructiou]
Inetitute uee neeed heed orgenixation for eolving generel proble- of
the. develop-cot of energy conetruction end ieeuee of the economice.

7
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

induetrieliretion. and full lecheniretion end «mention of conetruction
end inetalletion work. developeent of the hue of the conetruction in-
duetry. end reieing labor productivity.

The nueber of orgenisetione etudying reeeerch queetione end engaged in
experinentel design work in energy conetruction hee now grown end lead-
ing inatitutee epecieliring in particular queetionaheve energed. They
ere Atonenergoetroyproyekt [Stete Inetitute for the Planning of Atouic
Energy Conatruction]. Energouontaehproyekt [State Planning Inetitute
for Energy Inetallacion Bork]. end the ecientific reeearch aubdivieione
of the plenning inetitutee.

The problen now ie to increeee the working efficiency of each inetitute.
prevent perellel work. and echieve proper coordination. Thin ehould be
eccoqliehed through the Main Production-Technicel Adninietration for
Conetruction end clevniiproyeht [Hein Mninietration of Scientific
Reeeerch and Planning Orgenieetione]. Very little in being done in
thie aree et prevent. no my ueeful develop-onto by our inetitutee ere
not finding epplicetion and ruin Ierely peper. \
Other tinely problewe ere etudying and dieeewineting the useful know-how
of other ninietriee and depertnente end formulating new noruetive docu-
Ieente to regulate the work of ecientific reeeerch inetitutee. deeign
hureeue. end plante in develop-eat end wenufecture of new equipuent. in-
troduction of it in conatruction and induetry. end elininetion of ehort-
coeinge.

Needleee to eey, the prinary thruet continuee to be reieing the quelity
of ecientific reeeerch end uperinentel deeign develop-eat eimltene-
ouely with a reduction in upendituree on it. It would be edvieehle to
join the efforte of ecientific reeeerch orgeniutione to eolve the
largeet problem. In none caeee epeciel deeign eubdivieione could be
for-ed eccording to the liet of experi-entel Iodele of new equip-eat in
deeign end r-enufecturing, end nenufecturing plente could be eeeiued

to thee.

0f couree. before eeriee production of uodele of new equip-ent there
nuet he Inltifeceted renting et epeciel teeting eitee and under pro-
duction conditione. Por thie reeeon it ie eeeentlel-to review the
question of foruing epecielired orgenieetione (teeting grounde) within
the USSR Hlnietry of Power and llectrificetion einilar to wechine teet-
ing etetione end to net up expert-entel conetruction-inetelletion
organieetione that perforu conetruction work ueing progreeeive tech-
nology end new equip-eat.

Thue. further inproweuent in work to build end introduce new equipuent
on quickly ee peeaible with A reduction in labor inpundepende lergely

on organizing e eingle integrated eyeteu of acientific reeeerch and ex-
perioentel deeign work.

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
The USSR Ministry of Power and Electrification race-ends the following:

cm [Main Production-Technical Administration for Contraction] and
Clawniiproyekt. in order to eliminate duplication and parallelisn in
work. should prepare proposals in 1979 to ratify head organisations for
new equipment in energy construction according to prinry types of gen-
eral construction jobs and basic areas of work based on the specialisa-
tion of institutes and the jobs performed by then. They should de-
velop and ratify a statute on the planning of scientific research and
experimental design work in energy construction which defines and regu-
letes the procedures for developnent. ratification, and correction of
plane and financing of scientific research and experimental design
projects. evaluates the work of institutes. and so on. Bach year they
should publish an order on the plan for dewelopmalt and introduction

of new equipment following the practices of the Ministry of Installa-
tion and Special Construction Work.

Glavniiproyeht. cm. the Main Planning-Economics ministration. and
the Financial Administration should prepare steps to insure coordina-
tion of capital allocated for building new equip-ant by all sources
of financing and labor ceilings.

. In the first half of 1979 Clavenergostroymakhaniaatsiya [possibly
Rain Administration for Hechaniaation of Energy Construction] and cm
should prepare proposals on setting up within the USSR Ministry of
Power and Electrification System a large experimental plant for the
manufacture of experimental test models of new equipment and production
. of pilot series. providing this plant with a test site and central
. machine testing station. '

Clevenergostroynehhanisatsiys should, within the same time. prepare
proposals for the establiel-ent of a special service at the planning
and design bureau of Clevenergostroymekhsnieateiya to work on questions
of reliability in building and testing new equipment.

Clevsnab [min ministration of Supply]. Clevenergokonpleht [lain
Administration for Coordination of Asseebly Couponentsl. and
Clevenergostroylskhanisatsiya should review the question of centralised
allocation of materials. assenbly cosponents. and base machines from
038R Ministry of Power and Electrifization resources and submit pro-
posals on this issue.

Either directly or through the head organisations of the USSR liiniatry
of Power and Blectrification lnformenergo [possibly Energy lnforntion
Service] should establish long-term ties with the information services
of the ministries of Construction of Petroleun and Gas Industry Enter-
prises. heavy and Transport lfachine building. Transport Construction, In-
ambushed Special Construction Bork. and Construction and with the
intonation center of the Acadeny of Sciences. At least once a year it
should cover the most efficient achievements of these ministries in the
field of special and general construction work in a series of infom-
tion bulletins.

COPYRIG‘I'dadetel'stwo ”lnergiys". "hergeticheshoye stroitel'etvo". 1979

.11,l76

cso: 1822 9

P0! US! ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIARDPSZ-OOSSOROOMOOO‘OOOG-O
M ONE!“ 088 ONLY

nmtc roan M0 mu minim

m 1mm ll PM ”we?!“ DWI”. m rum
lbecov mmxmm WIM'STVO in lueeien lo 1. Jan 79 pp 69-71

[Article by c. l. lyevlev. engineer: ”Pronieing Araae in the Develop-ant
end introduction of Nev louipnent'ﬂ

[Text] The decieione of the 25th creu Congreae coneider ecceleretion of
ecientific-technicel progreaa one of our para-out challengea. ‘l'ha
pri-ary directiona of acientific work are raining efficiency. atrength-
ening tiee with production, accelerating the introduction of progree-
eive new concepte. ene concentrating pereomel end reeourcee on the
coat pre'uing ieeuea.

laiaing the technical level of conetruction work in one of the beeic
factora in the 2!!!! Ninietry of Power and llectrification'a five-year
plan frr raining labor productivity. The developmt. building. and
introduction of nev equip-nt ie a ephere of activity for ecintieta.
deaignere. and production workere. The niniatry in alloceting aipifi-
cant cepital for thie purpoee and doing najor work in thia aree.

Energy conatruction vorlcre have nede eignificent edvencae in continuing
induetrielintion. the one of progreeaive neteriele and daaigne. re-
fining technology. expending the nechanieation of production procaeeee.
and building auto-ted control ayat-. Planning end conetruction
orgeniutione of the einietry are eucceeefully cerrying out plane for
conatruction of inetelletione fron large-aieed ele-anta. aaea-bliee.
and nodulea with coqleta prefabrication of cerrying and aeparating
piecce. large-panel nodular houeing conatruction. erection of lerge-
panel cultural-do-etic buildings, inetalling techmlogical equip-at
in lnrge blocke. neing factory-ready eleba for the fecing of buildinge
and atructurea. end no on.

Main-ante are being fulfilled for the nanufacture of prefabricated
prcetreeeed reinforced concrete ole-ante end piecee end triple-layered
uparating piecee nede of ehaped eheet eteel and for use of ehaped
glean, cold-bent ahapea. increaeed atrangth ateela of gredea 346/33

and s-SZI‘O (for nenuiectnring eteel deeip elenenta). concretee of
gradee 500 and hiﬁar (for eanufacturing reinforced concrete ale-Iota).
end progreeeive kinde of pilee (preatreaeed. drilling-driving. pyrenidel.
rhodoidal. tinber. end othera).

10
rue omcm. U" “L?
M ONICML US". MY

Orgenisetions of the our Ministry of Power end Plectrificetion ere
introducing progressive construction end instellstion technology on s
broed scele. Speciel esntion should be ends of such projects es build-
ing prestreseed protective shells for wetsr-endsretsd weter-cooled power
reectors. ceeenting underground hydroenginssring structures with e
poured concrete einture, instslling steel bolt-t7" interesdiete towers
preesssdled in sections for $00 and 150 hilowett trenseission linse.
leying unchsueied hset line piping with bituesn-perlite ineulstion
spplisd st the fsctory. unheeted instelletion of trsnsforesre using
Iukbovey end lney devices, preinstelletion inspection end debugging
of equip-set. instelling reinforced concrete well end ceiling cells.

hydroinsuletion of underground design elensnts with polyethylene. end
others.

Scientific reeeerch end plenning-desin orgenisetions of the 0”!
Ministry of Power end llsctrificstion. cooperating with plents end
construction-instelletion orgenieetions of the sector. heve designed.

built. end sre successfully introducing eeny new eechines. eschenieee.
end lechenited tools.

About 220 descriptions of eechinss. eechenisns. end pieces of equipnent
heve been put in eeries production in industry es the result of develop-
Isnt projects cerried out eccording to the new equip-snt plen elone.
Lsrge-cepecity construction end instelletion crenes bewe been put into
production. specificelly the nos-1000. which cen lsy concrete in tube
with eight cub.’.c esters cepecity. end the SKI-2200a inetelletion crenen.

Speciel nechenises hsve been built for the construction end instells-
tion of power trensnission lines: the KVL-d tower ineteller (towers
up to 26 e high) end e line cerrier designed on the besis of e Ira-255
truck. Technology hes been devised end is being introduced for concrete
jobs. eshing it possible to significently increese lebor productivity
in this prieery type of work: the ISO-750 fest-insteilstinn eodulsr
ceeent liner; Iodemieed tube with cepecities oi 2.‘ end eight cubic
enters: e series of new types of deep vibrstors end unipuletor crenee:
en eiectricel sll-terrein vehicle with ribbed tires to escheniee con-
.crete lsying jobs in the construction of concrete den. Production of
Dbile stetions for finishing end pleetering work end trsweling worl-
shops end leboretories ie elso plenned. however. it met be noted

thet the plents of Clevensrgonhhenieetsiye [possibly Iisin Meinietrs-
tion for Phchenitetion of Construction] is ming slowly to incorporete
series production of new eechenjsee to perforn construction end instel-
letion jobe. end es e result eeny unreelieed technicel doct-snte re-

ieted to new equip-nt ere piling up et pienning end desim orgeniee-
tione.

Considereble ettention is being devoted to building euto-ted control
systeee. Anng the system now introduced ere the moss euto-ted
inforeetion syste- which solves such problee sets es eonitoring end
enslyeing progress in coutruction end instelletion st priority sites
of the 088! Iiinietry of Power end llectrificetion: the euto-ted syste-
for eonitoring moution of orgenieetionel-eeecutivs doci-snts (m)

11
roe OHICIAI. US! MY
POI OFFICIAL 0!! ONLY

of tho 088! Ministry of Powor sod lloctrificotion; on sutoostsd control
syston for tho production ond dolivory of rsinforcod concrots dosim
olononts to construction sitos (m-mlonohoton). which is s sot of
sutoostod systoos covsring tho structuro punt - trust — noin od-
ninistrocion (Glonnornootroyproo lpossihly Nsin Mninistrstion of
lnduotrioliution of Conotruction of tho USSR hinistry or Powor ond
Bloctrificotionl) with rospoct to dolivorioo. looding. one notoriol-
tochnicol support for production of profshricstod roinforcod concroto.

Colculotions show chst tho oworogo inoct of ono ruhlo of onpondituroo
for introduction of doyoloposnt projocto tron our sciontific rooosrch
snd planning orpniutions is o-S ruhlss. Iocnuso s siniilcsnt shots
of tho dovoloposnt work hoing dons doos not. for vorious rsooons. rooch
tho stops of incorporotion in production. thoro is moon to holiovs
thst wo hnvo suhstontiol rosorvss for rsisin. labor productivity snd
roducinn tho cost of onorgy construction thst con ho ronlicod hy organ-
icing ropid introduction of sll ot'fsctivo dovolop-ont idsos.

One of tho prion woys to shorply incrssso lohor productivity in onorgy
construction is to roduco tho lowol of nonunl lohor. At tho prooont
tino it constitutoo $1.2 porcont of prinory construction ond insulls-
tion work nod suxiliory john; in concroto. corpontor ond cnhinot. ond
plsstorin; wrk tho lowol of Inusl lshor is 64.6, 73.7,

and 62.7 porcont rospoctivoly. Such s lml of nonuol lohor in thoso
john grootly oncoods tho ovorogo indox in onorgy construction.

Tho print-y rosnons for tho hid: proportion of noan work sro tho
following:

a. poor installation tochnology in porticolor plon-
nin; sod dooip docisions (unnotisfoctory dosip
of connoctiounnd inodoqusto stondordiution of
construction ond milinry ol-onts ouch os stoir-
woys. doors. utos. and tho libs):

h. violotion o! plonnin; tochnology in tho ovoroll
ordor of work, rosultin; in unnocoosory iono-
tion of crowdod ond inoccossihlo plocoo with no
nochonirod oquip-ont milshlo to work undor such
conditions:

c. ohoonco of coqulsory rulos ond disgr- for tho
porforlonco of cortoin lroquontly ropootod con-
struction nod inotollotion procooooo;

d. insufficiont quality of inctory-roody conntrucrion
ole-onto (huildors oro l’orcod to fix tho- up right
at tho sito, anally hy hood):

o. ouhpor porforlnnco of construction ond inotollotion
job which undo. of couroo. to rodoin; ond fixing
up defects:

12
m OHICIAL US! MY
M OPPICIAI. 083 ONLY

f. insufficient oooortnont of nochonirod oquipoont
for oull John

g. lock of progroooivo. tootod tochnologicol plono
for full. intogrotod Iochonitotion or outonotion
of tho ontiro tochnologicol procooo for my
hooic lohor-intonoivo typoo of construction ond
inotollotion vorh. ond foiluro of induotry to in-
corporoto oorioo production of tho oot of onchinoo
ond oochoniooo noodod for intogrotod nochonitotion.

Blioinoting thooo couooo of tho utili-oxioting high lovol of nonuol
lohot in conotruction of onorgy focilitioo ohould ho tho priury ohjoc-
tivo in plonning ond corrying out progr-o for tho introduction ond
incorporotion of now oquipnont.

Tho oyoton of dovolopoont. building. ond introducing nov tochnology
thot nov oxioto in the USSR Hiniotry of favor ond lloctrificotion hoo
ooriouo ohortcooinso. including tho following:

o. inorfoctiono in tho plonning ond coordinotion
of ociontific roooorch ond plonning-dooign work:

h. lock of porlonont. cloorly orgoniood tioo o-ong
ociontific roooorch orgoniutiono. plowing-
dooign orgoniutiono. ond tho induotriol ontor-
priooo thot Ionufocturo tho orticloo:

c. lock of procioo planning for nonufocturing ond
uooohling tho porto of nov oochinory hoing
dovolopod by noncontrolitod oourcoo;

d. inodoquotoly orgonitod oconooic onolyoio of tho
introduction of now technology ond Iochonitod
oquipoont. lock of on orgonitod oyotoo of ooloct-
ing ociontific infonotion occording to tho toot
offoctivo dovolopoonto porfonod by orgnniutiono
of othor oiniotrioo ond donut-onto;

o. lock of oolutiono to tho quootiono of conoidoring
opocific lobar lioitotiono on tho orgoniutiono
thot dovolop ond oonufocturo nov quip-Int.

‘lho loin Prodution-‘l’thnicol Mniniotrotion for Conotruction hoo pro-
onrod o draft order on itlod "Systolotiting tho Planning. lfonufocturo,
ond Introduction of llov equip-oat ond loioing tho nu lfficioncy of
Controliood Capitol to lncorporoto thin Equip-ont in Capitol Conotruc-
tion ond lnduotriol Activity.” Thin ordor ooto out otopo to onto-tin
tho quootiono roviovod ohovo.

‘lho curront lml of comic dovolopoont of oil notionol oceanic
ooctoro dotorlinoo tho corroononding onorgy hooo ad. thoroforo. tho

1)
m onxcm. US! OIL!
prinery linee of developnent oi the country'e electrical power eyeten:
accelerated conetruction of etoeic power plente in the European 88!:
conetruction of lerge fuel-energy coqlexee in the eeetern regione of
the country ueing coal fron the ltiheetut end hneh-Achinek depoeite;
building the large eeriee of hydroelectric power plante on the Mgara
and Yenieey: conetructing euperhigh voltage M: end DC power trenc—
nieeion linee.

To eucceeefully neet theee chellengee the ninietry nuet terry out e eig-
nificent voice of tonetruction end inetelletion. By 1990 the volune

of thin work will double towered to the 10th Five-Year Plen. Accol-
pliehiug ouch taehe neceeeitatee reieing the nechine-worker ratio by
alnnet four tinee and the power-oorher retio three tinee. increeeing

the degree of prefebricetion of conetruction “cute to 90 percent.
reducing the proportion of neouel labor to 30 percent. end alnoet doub-
ling labor productivity. All thie eehee e eipiiiceot increeee in the
value and rice in the efficiency end quelity of planning, ecientific
reeeerch. end experinental deeign work urgent.

He ehould eleo coneider the noet pronieing areae in develop-eat end
introduction of new equip-eat to fecilitete eolutione to the pri-ery
problem of ineuring introduction of planned capecitiee end raining the
efficiency of cepitel invent-nt in energy conetruction.

Conetruction of Thu-eel end Atonic Power Plente

l. Further refinemt of the technology of large-nodule inatallation ot'
conetruction ole-ate and production equip-eat at thernel power plente
ueing inetelletion nodulee with e high degree of factory readineee.

2. Siqlification of "zero cycle" (Mourfece) deeign ole-onto with
none utility hookuppleced above thie nerher.

1. Develop-eat end introduction of etendardiled high-turnover feet-
inetelletion freling.

b. Deeiming and introducing fully prefebriceted heet ineuletion
dcnignn.

S. Develop-Int of new roofing technologiee thet heve nini-el lehor
inpute.

6. fuming deeigne end techmlogy for inetelletion end pouring
tenant of fitting and freeing nodulee in conetroction of reector coe-
pert—ate end epeciel winge of atonic power plente.

7. Vull nechaniution of finie‘-ing work in the epeciel roo- of etonic
power plente with develop-rot of new rediatioo-reeietent covering
neteriele.

1‘
M 01mm. 08! MY
f
ron omcm us: on!

Construction of Itydroolsctric Power Plonts

l. Devolopnont snd introduction of high-spud flow construction of
rock-till ond concrots dons using continuous trsnoport: using coshinos
to cut snd c-nt hydroonginooring tunnols.

2. Pull nschonisotion of tho construction of reinforced concrete
ponotochs instood of soul onos.

Construction of Trsnssission Linos snd Suhststions

l. Furthor rofino-om oi dosip concepts for sodulsr-ouilt substation
to roducs construction tinos. uso oi sotorisls. snd lohor inputs.

2. Building ond introducing now typos of some of trsnsportstion snd
instsllstion squipnont for construction of high- Joltogo oworhood limo

in inoccossihlo regions of lihoris end the Por lost. including holi-
coptors snd dirigihlss.

J. introduction of now -chonisod woys to socuro powor linu towors
in tho grouM with no sound lsbor st sll.

o. Dewelopnsnt ond introduction of quick-instsllstion nobilo consoli-
dotod sosoﬁly points for power lino towors on tho construction routs.

Construction of Toporsry Construction Insos st the Construction Sitso
of Power Plsnts snd Lorgo Suhsutions

l. Purthor roiinonsnt snd brood introduction of designs snd foctory
technology for oonuiscturing cuick-instsllsrion stondordisod buildings
to house the full cowlonont o! hosic wotsriols snd equip-out for tho
construction orgonisstion snd suhcontroctors in order to sipificontly
roduco tho propsrstory period with uni-:- lsoor inputs.

2. introduction or quick-insulation nodulor concroto plonts snd
grnvcl sorting oyot-.

It should to onphositod thst sotting w s singls intogrotod spot- of
scientific resesrch snd oxporinentol dosign work in the non Ministry
of Power snd lloctrificstion will Ito it possible to define pronising
orcsn or dsvolopnent honod on thorough snolyois of tho oxisting tech-
nical lovol o! downlopuent of tho soctor ond sll-oncoqsssing snd
reliohloinfornotion on donostic snd ioroign schiownsnts. It will
gusrsntoe preciso coordination of work snd uniiiod plsnning in sll
stsgos. fro- the beginning of scintific roooorch work to introduction
into production of now equipnt, nochinoo snd nochonisns, onsll power
tools. dosign olonsnts. notorisls. production linos. snd tho like.

First of sll certsin specitic plsnning. scientific reoesrch, snd dosign-
tochnologicol orgnnisotions not he idsntii‘ied so hood orgonisstions
to coordinsto porticulsr typos oi construction or porticulor types of

15
no OFFICIAL 08! MY
co-on conetruction john: electricel grid conetruction. conetruction
of tell etructuree euch ee chimeye end cooling towere. eerthwork end
epeciel johe in building etructuree et eero level. end concrete.
finiehing. end other work. when neeing heed organieetione epeciel et-
tention nuet be given to whether they heve highly quelified epecieliete
in the perticuler eector end how effective developeent projecte elreedy
perforned by theee orgenitetione in the perticuler eree heve been.

A correctly end cleerly orgenited ocientific-tnchnicel infornetion eer-
vice ie expected to pley e lerge pert. One of the field: of ectivity
of the inforletion eervice. elreedy nentioned ehove. ie providing
tinely infornetion on edvencee in other econoeic eectore end et ecedeny
inetitut-ee.

It one-e edvieehle to review the queetion of ennuel puhlicetion of e
eingle directive docuuent (in the forn of en order. plen. or eonething
eiuilnr. which would heve to include eeeignuente envieioning the
following:

e. introduction of progreeeive production technology:

h. develop-ent. teeting. end production of the firet
induetriel eeriee of new nechinee. equip-ent. et-
techoente. end toole:

c. introduction of flow uechenited end technologicel
linee et plente end enterprieee of the 088! hin-
ietry of Power end llectrificetion:

d. develop-ent. teeting. end nenufecture of the firet
induetriel eeriee of efficient new neteriele. de-
eim eleeente. end perte:

e. deter-inetion of the noet iuportent ecientific re-
eeerch. erperinentel. end plenning-deeign topice;

f. eetehliehent of eutoneted control eyetene:

g. uee of conputer technology et uinietry orgeniee-
t‘”.e

Prelininery celculetione not he .de for ell eeeignnente with reepect
to ecooouic inect end poeeihle reduction of lehor input ee well ee
the epproxilete nount of the honue or new equip-nut. Pull expandi-
turee for develop-nut nuet he tehen into eccount elong with the eco-
nonic efficiency echieved when deternining the ectuel nice of the honue

for new equip-ent.

ln eddition. the I]!!! hinietry of Power end Blectrificetion ehould eet
up e eervice thet etudiee queetione of the reliehility of new nodele
of equip-Int being developed end produced. It would he edvieehle to
eetehlieh thie eervice in.°levenergoetroynehhenieeteiye. One of the

16
M omcm. US! MY
. M OFFICIAL ”8| 0|!"

priury joho of thia oorvico ohoold ho to incroaoo tho motor capacity

of m nodolo of oquipoont tom dooinod. to do thia it io oocoooary
to work out coco-Maticuo (or dooin ormiaationo and umtacturin;

plaata and to oatahiioh tho aoaortnont and poriodicity of doiivorioo

of opocial oparo porto for oarioo Iodolo c! not: mic-oat in tho iirot
3-5 yoara of coo.

To achiovo furthor inﬂow-onto in tho roooarch - introduction cyclo piano
can for tho loin Productim-toclmicai Ad-iniotration ior Construction

and tho Orgouorgootroy taotitoto to dmlop in 1979 a draft otatuto on
tho planning. mufacturo. and introductioa of now mic-oat in tho
onus of tho 0883 Miniatry of Povor and lioctrification. In thia docu-

aout m oloaonto of tho coqrohoaoivo oyotoa ahocnd ho put in coocroto
(on to guido tho work of orunioatiou and actorpriaoo to building on

conic-out aa quickly ao poooihlo with linin- inputo of labor and
Iatorial-tochnicai roaodrcoa.

cornmm chatol'otvo ”looniya”. "unnotichoahoyo otroitol'otvo".
l9 9

11.176
080: 1822

17
M omcm. 088 out
POI OWICIAL "8! ONLY

ELECTRIC m AID mu momma-

m ”8191 pm. MB mm
hoocow PIMSIILIIIAYA mm in Mum In 12. Dec 70 pp 2-4
(Atticlo: "Energy Uorkere boy")

[Text] loch yoer on 22 Decoder the Soviet poople colohtote Inotgy
ﬂothoto boy. Thio troditionol holidoy of Soviet energy worketo ond
huildoto woe ootohliohod in honor of unin‘o plon for olecttificotion of
Ruoeie. which wee odoptod ot the Sth All-luooien Congtuo of Sovieto.
‘l’ho gloriouo hiotory of Soviet power workero hopine on thio oono deto.

mm to the conotont ettontion end concern of the Win Petty end
Soviet Govern-out our onotgy induotry heo hecone o lending oector o!
oocieliet induotty with e tinificont influence on conteqotery ecion-
tific-tochnicol progroeo. An o tooult o! coneiotent inplonontetion of
o policy of eccoletetod growth in promooivo oectoro of the fuel end
power induotry. our country quickly heceno one of the world loodero in
orttoction oi fuol end production of olectticel energy. Sloctricity
production in the country poeood one trillion kilowott-houto in 1975.
Thin io 2.000 tinoo note then woe producod hy oll " power plonte of
lluooio in 1920. when the can.» [Stoto Plon Pot . o Slectrificetion of
Mule] woo edoptod.

'l'ho Diroctiwoo of the 25th Oonpooe oi the (lo-nut Potty etipuletod
continued develop-cot of tho enorpy induetty end olectrificetion of the
country. During tho lOth Pivo-Yoor Plen ohout 10 nillion kilowetto of
new energy copocitioo will he lounchod. including note then 13 nillion
kilowotto ot otonic power plonto. Iy tho end of the Pin-veer plen
the totol cepocity of Soviet power plonto will be ohout 200 nillion
hilowotto end production of electricol enotgy will teech 1.36043”
billion kilowatt-noun.

‘l'ho proudoot footutoo of the Soviet onotgy oyotol ote tho Ktoonoyetoluyo
llydtoolocttic Power Plont with o copocity of 6 nillion kilowotto. the
Stoteheye llydtooloctric Plent with o cepecity oi Ll nillion hilowetto.
tho vet'-lli-|:oyo llydtoolocttic Plent with e copocity of 3.6 nillion
hilowotto. the honinptod Atonic Power Plent with two rooctoto thot hm
cepocitioe of l nillion kilowette opiece. ond tho lotgoet thetnol power

10
M otncm. 08! m7
M OWICML US! ONLY

plant. tho Krivoroahahaya cuts-2 with a capacity of 3 million kiloutto.
sixty-cavan tharlal powor planta hava capacitioa of non than 1 aillion
kilowatt” 27 of than hava noro than 2 aillion kilowatta.

Tranoaiaaion linoo with voltagaa of 220-750 kilovolta hava joinod tha
powar planta of tho luropaan 88R. Urala. antarn 8iboria. and Northarn
laukhatan into tho Unifiad Powor 8yatoa. Largo-acola powor aooocia-
tiona hava boon tor-ad in Biborio. tho rapuhlico of control Aaio and
Southarn lanthotan. and tho Par loot. Tho progra- adoptad by tho party
for intogrotad davalopaant. of tho natural waalth and productiva iorcao
oi Siborio and tho Par loot io ancoptionally inortant for furthar do-
walopaant of tho comtry'a iuol-onorgy baao.

llactrification of tho oactora of induotry. tranaportation. mnlcipol
oarvicoo. and ogricultura haa procaadad at a high rota baoad on tho do-
valopnant of oloctrical anargy. Thio nadc it poaaihla in a chart tiao
to roviao thoir tochnical baaoo. intonaiiy production procaaaoa. intro-
duco nochaniaation and autonotion of technological procaaoaa on a broad
ocalo. and ultinataly raiao labor productivity and iqmo working and
living conditiona for tho population.

lnduotry and conatruction aro tho lorgoot conaunara of oloctricity

(6S porcont of total conouqtion in tho country). It will ba nacooaary
to uoo at laaat 750 billion kilowatt-houra of alactricity in 1960 to
accomlioh tho taalta facing induatry in tho 10th Pita-You Plan. Thio
figura includoa 230 billion kilowatt-houra for tho noodo of oloctrical

technology. Tho powor-workor ratio in induotry will incroaoa 26 parcont
during thcaa fiva yoora.

Major advoncco havo boon aada in tho alactrificotion of agricultural pro-
duction. In tho tiao aincc tho March 1965 Plonun of tho 6'80 Control
Co-ittoa. which Iarkod a now atogo in davaloplont of tho porty'o
Loniniot agrarian policy. Iuch haa boon dona to ro-oquip agricultura on
tho baaia of olactrification. Hora than 2.5 nillion kilo-atara of powor
linoa hovo boon built: tho total langth ia nora than 3.7 nillion kilonatara
In addition. a. My. hung tranaforlar aubatotiona with a total capacity
of aoro than 160 hilovolt-aaporoa. Tho nu-bor of alactric aotora at
Itolkhooaa and aowkhoaoo to 6.6 tiaoa groatar than it woo in 1965. and

tho nunbor of oloctrical inatollotiona in production procooaoo haa in-
croaaod aovan tiaoa. In 1977 agricultura uoad about 90 billion hilowatt-
houra. 6.2 tiaoa loro than in 1965. Tho powar-workar ratio at tollthoua
and mkhotoa haa riaon 5.6 tiaoo. whilo tho conauqtion of oloctricity
for aunicipol and donatic naado haa incraaaod 3.5 tinaa. Tho July 1976
'lanua of tho C980 Control Co-ittoa outlinad a broad progran for furthor
dcvolopntnt of agricultural production by a plannad tranaition to an
induotrial baaia.

The party and govornnont. dovoting aimificant attontion to ouootiona
of tho dowalopacot of tho powor induatry and oloctrificotion in our

comtry. aro oqually intorootod in tho problo- of acononical axpandi-
turo and incraaaing tho uoo officioncy of fual-onargy roaourcoo. Tho

19
M OFFICIAL 083 MY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

problen of coneerving public vealth and etriving for rational one of raw
and proceeeed neteriale. fuel. and electricity ie poeed ae one of the
chief probleee of eocieliet neeegenent in the decieione of the Deceeber
1977 Plenu- of the CPS!) Central Co-ittee and in the Letter of the CPS!)
Central 0o-ittee. 088R Council of liinietere. wccru. and central coe-
Iittee of the Leniniet Koeeonol entitled ”Organitation of Socioliet
Coupetition for Pulfillnent of the l9" Plan and lnteneifying the Can-
peign to Raiee Production Efficiency end work Quality."

Thie challenge ia beconing crucial for the national econon hecauee of
the increaee in netorial. labor. and financial expendituree for the de-
velop-ant of the country'e fuel-enorgy beea in light of the territorial
ehift' of fuel extraction eitee to the eaet. Moreover. the coat of tel:-
ing etepe to eave fuel and energy ie leee than the coat of producing
thee and technological developeente‘that eie at energy eavinge my be
put into production practice lore rapidly than technology to produce an
equivalent aeount of energy. Energy eevinge ie eleo preferable to ad-
ditionel production free the etandpoint of environe-Ital influencee.

The 10th Five-Year Plan calle on energy vorhere in induetry. conetruc-
tion. and treneportation to cut electricity coneueption by $0 billion
kilmtt-houre or five percent cenpared to 1975 norne. ‘l'o accnqlieh
thie enterprieee are developing and iepleeenting nore than 2.500 arena
to eave electrical and therIel energy each year. he a reeult of the
eocialiet ceqetition for econon and thrift. all collectivee at indue-
trial. conetruction. and traneportetion enterpriaee have aeeuned etepped-
up obligatione vith reepect to eaving fuel. electricity. and thernel
energy. In the firet tvo yeere of the five-year plan 7.7 eillion tone
of etandard fuel vee eeved at our pover plante by reducing the epecific
expenditure of fuel per kilowatt-hour delivered fro. 3‘0 to 33m grane.
ln thin the enterprieee of induatry. conetruction. end traneportation
eeved 25 billion hilouatt-houre of electricity and £7 nillion gige-
caloriee of thernel energy; in the firet eix nonthe of 1978 their eav-
inge were 7.2 billion hilouett-houre and 13.9 lillion gigacaloriea.

‘l'he Herch decree of the 030 Central Co-ittee concerning the organi-
zational and political work of the Keeerovehaye mlaet 0P3" Co-ittee
to enve fuel and energy reeourcee at enterprieee and conetruction eitoe
of the obleet ie a breed program for continued work to eeve energy rec
eourcee. Special attention ie given to developing the creative ini-
tiative and' activiee of production collectivee and all working people.
to deteninedly ramving the ehortcoeinge that are retarding dieeeni-
nation of progreeeive bow-hoe: in ueing internal reeervee. iqreving
equip-eat and technology. raieing the quality of output. and reducing
ite energy-inteneiveneee.

The. etruggle of the working people for thrift end econon becane truly
national in ecope during the third yeer of the five-year plan. and
energy vorhere are the pioneere end organizera of caving energy re-
eourcee. ‘l'hie vorh takea Ieny for-e. ‘l'here are co-ieeione and head-
onertera for rational uae of energy reeourcee at virtually every in-
duetriel enterpriee. Here than 20.000 enterprieee in all the republice.

20
roe OFFICIAL 08' 08“
YOR ONICIAI. US! ONLY

hraye. and oblaeta are participating in aocialiet coqatition anong in-
duetrial enterprieee for the beat electricity eavinge indexee. Public
inepectione. contente. and conpetition anong ehope. eectione. and
worke for aeving energy raeourcen are organized at the enterprieee.
Each year there ie an ell-Union contact for beet propoas‘e to eave
electricity and theraal energy. Sinilar contaete are held in 00 kraye
and obleete. Uorking people include energy eavinge indexee in their
pareonel creative plane. eocialiet obligatione. and pareonel five-year
plan racorde (accomte). figurea on eavinge of fuel and energy re-
aourcee era conaidered equally with the prinery indexeu of the produc-
tion and econonic activitiee of entarprieee when am: icing the re-
eulte of eocieliet conetition anong induetrial entarprieee. People'e
control workere regularly nake aurpriee vieite to uncover niananagenent
and waete in the uea of energy reeourcae. maetiona of energy eavinge
are treated axtenaively by all can propaganda and inforeation India.
Study of progreeeive know-how in caving energy reeourcee ie etudiad in
the eyeten of acononic education and raieing worker quelificationu and
in echoole of co-uniet labor at neny antarprieee.

Many of our country'e induetrial enterprieae have accululeted valuable
experience in work on energy eavinge. Thie work ia baeed on future and
current planning of energy eavinge activitiee and “planting than.

The collective of the Hegnitogorelt Metallurgical Conbine ineni V. l.
Lenin worked out a plan of ‘76 etepe to eeve electricity and that-e1
energy in 1978. Carrying out thie plan will enable than to aave 166
nillion kilowatt-houre of electricity and 351.000 gigacaloriee of thereel
energy. 'l'hue the coebine will neat eetabliehed none for energy expendi-
ture and fulfill ite aeeignnent for an additional eavinge of at leaet
three percent. In addition to introducing technical neeeuree. a great
deal of organizational work ie being done at the conbine to nobiliee

the collective to identify and uee additional reeervee for energy eav-
ing. Large-ecule public inepectione of efficient uee of fuel and energy
reeourcee are held each year.

The collectivea of the enterprieee of the Ural'el: Turbine Hotor Plant,
the Perle' Permefteorgeinter Production Aeeociation ineni XXIII s'yeede
ms. the Volga Motor Vehicle Plant. the Zhdenov Tyeel-aeh Production
Aeeociation. and neny othere have nede eignificant edvencee in econoni-
cal uee of energy reeourcee.

Nonetheleee. we are far fron ueing all reeervue for caving fuel and
energy reeourcee today and caeee of niaunageunt and waete occur at
neny enterprieee. Each year nore than 1.000 enterprieea per-it epecific
expenditure of electricity and theme! energy to exceed eetabliehed
name. A eurwey nade by agenciee of the etate energy eupervieory board
in 1978 at 2.175 enterprieee found caeee of irrational uee totaling

905 nillion kilowattvhoure of electricity and 4.7 Iillion gigacaloriee of
thernel energy. lxieting reeervee for energy eevinge are aleo aeti-
nated to be large. It ie a very inortant duty of energy workere in all
econowic eectore to bring than into play quickly and preclude any nia-
eanegelent and waete in the nee of fuel. electricity. thernel energy.
and other energy cerriere.

21
roe OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OﬂlClAl. ”8! ONLY

Continued technical inprovenent in the energy eyetene of enterprieee end
uee efficiency of energy reeourcee will be pureued in the following ereee:

l.

2.

b.

5.

6.

8.

refining energy eupply echeeee to increeee their re-
liebiiity end econoey; develop-eat of integrated
future plene for develop-eat of the energy here of -
eech enterpriee:

wideepreed introduction of diepetchin. end remote
control beeed on Iodern neene of co—unicetion in
enterpriee power eyeteu end eutoneted eyeteu
for recording end nonitorins uee of electricity
end thereel energy: '

uee of eutoneted control eyetene for technologicel
proceeeee end enterprieee:

inrovin; the fuel-energy helence of enterprieee
by cowreheneive uee of energy reeourcee. pri-
Ierily by the' wideet poeeible uee of eecondery
(recycled) energy reeourcee end eleo by decreee-
in; direct loeeee of fuel. electricity, therlel
morn. end other energy cerriere:

refining technologicel proceeeee. retionel uee of
rev neteriele. deconteeinetion end utilizetion of
etdleuet geeee end effluent wetere. introduction
of cloned (recycled) weter euppliee: develop-en:
end introduction of fundenentelly new energy tech-
noloxy conplexee. building no-effluent end no-
exheuet production fecilitiee:

working out. for eech eector. the etretegic linee
of ection to increeee the use efficiency of energy
reeourcee end cut epecific energy expendituree to
produce the prinery typee of output;

deuelopnrnt end inlenentetion of integreted fu-
ture plene for energy eevinge et eech enterpriee
for the five-yeer period:

refining the eyeten of eetebliehin; energy uee
nor-e.

Bnergy workere hewe their holidey et e cruciel period in their work
cycle. the fell end winter period when electricel end there-l loede

ere hisheet .

The provieion of relieble. uninterrupted energy eupply to

the netionel economy in thie period end etricteet coeplience with ee-
tebliehed linite end echedulee of energy coneulption by eech enterpriee
will eneble induetry, conetruction. treneportetion. end egriculture to
eccoqlieb the teeke they fece in cerryinx out the hietoric decieione
of the 25th CPS" Congreee.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'etvo ”herein", "Pronnhlenneye energetilne", 1978

11.176
C80: 1822

22
FOR ORIGIN. 083 ON)!
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mm mm m ma mum

MROVIM MML ELECTRIC ma PLANTS
Hosea" W11“ in Russian lo 10, Oat 78 pp 91.94

Article by Denisov. V. Ye., Yskovlev. G. 6., Lipovtaev, 1.. Ya.

rovin. V. P. Work of the Soyuatekhenergo (onsets) on Raising the
Technical Standard of Them! Electric Power Plants (to the 45th
anniversary of the organisation)]

Text] The Trust on Organising and Iaproving Rayon llectric Power

lanes and networks (ORGRBS) was created in 1933. In the prewar years.
the om carried out start-up, adjust-ant and experiaentel work on
new equip-ant at electric power plants in the 0883, as well as technical
Ionitoring of the operation of electric power plants. This asde it
possible to raise considerably the standard of service and correlate

the advanced experience of operation with the preparation of the
necessary aethodological, reference and international data.

A great role in organising a single technical policy in the area of
equip-ant operation of power enterprises was played by the work begun
in I930 on preparing ”Regulations on Technical Operation of Electric
Power Plants and Networks” (PIE). These regulations were prepared by
the mores and tool: into account suggestion by workers in electric
power plants. design. scientific research and installation organizations.
‘lhe prepared P1! project was then reviewed and asde aore precise by a
co-iasion under the guidance of A. I. Letkov. deputy People's coniasar
of Electric Power Plants and Electrial Industry of the 0883. In

April 19140. II. c. Pervulthin, People's Coaissar of Electric Power Plants
and Electrical Industry of the USSR, approved the m as a coapulsory
docu-ent for the electric power plants and power systens of all
depart-ants.

“the regulations stated the basic organisational and technical require-
ments for operating power facilities which would insure reliable and
coordinated operation of all links of the power systans. They defined
requirenants for designing, building and installing power installations
and the volume of their aonitoring and auto-atic control facilities.

23
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OPHCIM. 0" MY

During the yeare oi the Great ibtherland liar. vhen there wee a great
lack oi electric power. the omen activity we concentrated baeically
on providing ior the reliable operation oi electric power plante in the
Urala and in libaria. incraeeing their capacitiee and putting into
operation new power inetallatione. liethode were developed ior burning
high-aah coale and advanced Iethode were introduced ior earviciog --
reclaieation and etabilieetion oi power oila at operating aquipunt.
direct water inteha iron heat natworbe. accalareted nethoda ior repairing
equip-ant. ’etc. During thie period. the meet developed end introduced
the nethod ior repairing electric power treneeiaeion linae witho:t
diecomecting the voltega which waa extruely inortant ior eupplying
power to induetry during the war.

Since l“). the onus hae participated in reetorin the electric power
planta in the Center and south oi the country. In the iiret poetwer
yeare. the baeic direction in the work oi cum wae the aeeieilation oi
new doneatic equip-ant operating on high pare-tar atean (9.0 m. 800°C).

In ”53-1956. etart-up and adjueting work wee carried out euccaeeiully
at the alerepatellaya cm on equip-ant with euperhigh etaae par-etare
(17.0 life. 555°C).

m the period oi l959-l965 inclueive. the baeic activity oi the m
wee aaeinilating.lso.2oo negawatt power unite. at well ae doing coqre-
heneive work on the etart-up and edjueteent oi 300 negewatt power unite
with eupercritical eta. par-tare.

1n the procaee oi thie work. the tiae between the atom and ecientiiic
reeearch and planning orgenieatione and plante that neeuiacture boiler-
turbine equip-ant were etrangthenad.

omens brigadee carried out a large volume oi work on 300 megawatt
prototype power unite on raiaing the reliability oi the heating auriecae
oi boilare at verioue nodae, iiniehing oii the etart-up ndoa oi unite
and inweetigating varioue vereione oi atart-up arraua-ente.

hethoda were developed ior preatarting ch-ical cleaning oi the eta-
water channel oi the power unite. tor 150 and 200 negawatt unite, the
hydrazino-acid seethod baca-e the goat widely need one and ior 300 nega-
watt unite .. cleaning by an idaibitad eolution oi citric acid and a
eolution oi a-oniue eonocitrate. no experience obtained neda it

poeeible to develop typical arranguenta ior clinical purification and
epeciiicetione ior equip-ant and ch-icale.

‘rhe etart-up nethod oi ueing aliding etea- pare-tare developed by the
0mm int 150. 200 and 300 negewett unite with dun end direct-ilow
boiler-e pleyed a great role in eolving the probl- oi raining the
reliability and tine oi atart-up oi power unite.

2‘
M OFFICIAL USE OILY
M OHXCXM. I!" ONLY

Along with work done on 150-300 negawatt power units. preparatory work
was done during this period on start-up and assinilation o‘i new higher
capacity 500 and son nsgawett power units. onus workers participated
actively in designing prototypee of equip-ant and technological
"rang-ants for these units which were installed for the first tins
at the Iaearcwshaya snd slawyanshaye OIII. and in the: start-up.
adjust-cot and aasi-ilation.

The acceleration of introducing and assinilating new kinds of power
equip-ant and bringing up indicators for its operation to rated valuea

is one of the nain directione of scientific research progress of the
industry. the clam. converted in 1977 to the soyustehhanergo
Production Association. and as the Iain organitation is participating

in assinilatiu all power unit prototypes and new kinds of equip-ents.

in developing and introducing planning-design and technological develop-
nents that raise the technical standard of equipnsnt operation at electric
power plants. During the Ninth and Tenth Five-Year Plan periods. a
considerahle wolune of cnprehensiwe work was carried out on assinilating
new equip-ant for 300 negawatt power units; on start-up and adjusting

a new series of equip-eat for 000 negawatt units with single-housing
hoilera and single-shaft turbines at the Uglerodshaya and uparothshaya
cm; 500 negawatt units at the ‘rroitshaya om; gas-turbine equip-ant
and new types of hoilers and turbines for ‘l'll‘s.

Since 1971 alone. with the technical help by the loyuatehhenargo.
shout so power units, with a total power of 25 nillion hw. including

000. 500 and 250 negawatt units. were put in operation at electric power
plants.

is a result of the wort done in cooperation with operating collectives
of electric power plants. scientific research institutes. planing
organitations and mfacturiq plants. the rnliahility and efficincy
of the 300 negawett units were increased considerably and this group
of equip-eat as a whole reached reted values. A coqlee of work is
being coupler-ed on sssinilating in operation and investigating the
efficiency and the nsneuwerahility of soo nagawatt units at the
Zapororhahayn and Uglerodshaya cuts.

The loyustehhenergo is telling part in developing progressive solutions
in creating equip-ant for electric power plants of the lansho-Achiuh
anal-tower Cowler. Iereoowshiy coal wee hut-nod erperinentally at the
Vladivostohahaya Tits-2 and Krasnoyarshaya ms-l stich node it possible
to nke the proper choice of a boiler design for the Ientowshaya
Oils-l -- the first electric power plant of the ocular.

As a result of an investigation on furnace nodels at the lahoratory
of the Siberian Irench of the Soyutehhsnergo. a design one developed

for a new in principle hoiler with a circular furnace that is consider-
ahly lower.

25
m OFFICIAL 082 cm
POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

A coneiderahle enonnt oi work wee done in eeeinileting the hurning oi
lhiheetwe ooele. liodernieetion and operating ode neaeuree were -
developed and introduced which provide higher weer reeietence oi coel
grinding equipnent. reliahility oi hurnere. etehility of furnace opera-
tion end leu eroeion oi the heating eurieoee.

Jointly mu the no ram [mum Irench or the Central Scientiiic
leeeerch Planning and benign Ioiler end thine lnetitute ineni l. l.
Polrunov] ad the Sytreneh Nthine Iuilding Plent. the deeign of e
prototype of a so tone/th h—er eill. edopted for eeriee production
for Bhiheetur coele. wee iiniehed off on e epecial teet etend at the
miteheye om.

Aeeiniletion oi equip-ent for 300 end 300 negewett power unite et the
lergeet thernel electric power plente in the Urele end eeetern regione
oi the countiy which operete on Itiheetun ooele -- the 'rroitehaye.
leftinehaye end Yenehovehaya one -- nede it poeeihle to develop end
adopt reliehle end efficient not. for pulverieing end honing
pulverited coal.

The experience of aeeinileting 500 end 300 negawett power nit equipnent
ie need in developing deeign eolntione for new equip-eat end technologicel
arrengenente for the new 1200 negewett power unite at the Koetronehaye
one end the new 500 ngewett halt-peek power unit et the who-l'ehaye
0B8.

ate“ worhare of the Soyuetehhenergo. jointly with plente. the VT
[All-Union lnatitute of heat Ingineeriu ineni I. I. Deerehinahiyﬁ .

the Tom end opereting porno-e1 of electric power plente have
perticipeted ectively in inproving the hydro-dynanice oi the eteen-
generating urincee oi “percriticel preeenre power unite. lhe coqlenity
oi the prohlen lay in inenificient previoue etudiee oi the thermphyeicel
proportion of the working nediw- et enpercriticel preeeuree. the .
newneee and variety of the adopted deeign eolutione. end the ne'ceeeity
for ei-alteneowe eolutione oi prohlene oi hydrodynanice end t-eretnre
nodee oi pipee under conditione of high then-l etreeeee and internal
eedinentationa.

A large volt-e of teate and analytical-calculation worh on m-no. TIP-210
end m-m hoilere node it poeeihle for plante to nodernite end. in e
ehort tine. pmide the reliability of m upaneion unknown] hoilere
of there typee. leeential chengee were nade n the deeign of a large
eeriee of m-Slb hoilere. which inanred their prectically leultlue

operetion iron the hydro-dyn-ic etandpoint.

Boiler hoilding plenta. jointly with the m. tor-slated end introduced
correlated reco-endetiono on deeigning hydrenlic erreng-ente (or eten-
generating ehielde for enpercriticel preeenreed'eeted m-m end
109-206 holler prototypee for the 100 neg-wett nriehehaye end 000 nega-
wett upotnehehaye one continued the reliability of the adopted amne-
nente. 26

M omcm. 088 MY
M MIC!“ "ll 0'“

0n the heeie of the experience or eeeiniletin. r-se hoilere. e eethod
wee developed (or celculetin. the hydrodynenioe in lifting penele oi
the "Ch M eleuinp. lo increeee the hydrodyneeic reliehility in
mltiilow loope of leree hoilere. pipe connectione ere need end e nethod
for celouletin; toqlex hydreulic loope with oroee tomotioee wee
developed. 1he eocunleted experience wee utilieed in deeimin; new.
are coqliceted hoilere for the electric power plente of the Idaho-
Achinehiy power-fuel conplex. the e-i-peeh power unit end the mo
negewett power unit.

work wee eleo done to inprove the eeneuverin. cherecterietice of thereel
electric power plente. ohteinin; the linitin. nenewverin. poueihilitiee
of ewpertriticel perenetere of equip-Int. the conditione for their

optinel nodee end eutonetion of the nonetetionery eodee o! equip-eat
operetion.

'ihe heeic volue oi work on the inveetipetione end technologicel
liniehinroii oi nonetetionery endee end the ieprov-ent in etert-np
emanate wee done on ewpercriticel preeeure power unite in recent
yeere.

1he techology wee eeeinileted tor the etert-np of 300 end 500 neuwett
power unite with e contined heetin; oi the out. of internediete euper-
heeti end with eteen r-oved et the top of the eunhee o! the
use liedinn-preeenre cylinder] end the Tel) [Low-preeeure cylinder]
of the turbine. which nde it poeeihle to elininete the m [Preeeure-
redncin; end cooling unit] (toe the etert-up erren‘enent.

0n the heeie ol‘ the ohteined experience. typicel etert-np eminenente
(or 300 neuwett douhle-wnite end eincle unite. end pee-duel oil 000

negewntt eingle neite were developed. end new typicel inetrnctione were

ieeoed (or the etert-np end tapping of 300 mu double end eiule
unite.

'i'eete were conpleted on e 300 W d~"~‘.r-::!t in nodee of etertin;
it in ecoordence with the erreq-ent end teclnnlou of e eiule wnit.

thie would nehe it poeeihle to eiqliiy the etert-up erreu-ent
coneiderehly.

Both ie heir. continued on the further eiqlificetion end reduction in

the etert-np tine of power unite by the nee of new inenletiu neteriele
end deeigne of thenel inenletion.

ln view of the feet thet the unloedin; of heeic power unite ie the heeic
noth for their pertitipetion in rouleting the deily echednle of the
power eyet-. prohl- o! expending the repletion reqe end ellowehle
uni-in [node of the unite ecquired epeciel ettention. A coneiderehly
volt-e of inveetioetione wee nede in thin direction on chain; over
power unite with eupercriticel per-tern to e elidin; preeeure et

27
roe OFFICIAL 08! “LY
'0! OPHCMI. ”I! ONLY

pertiel loede. deternining the overloed cepecity of power unite end
electric power plente on e whole. end introducing wide renge.eutonetic
controle.

1h. euiniletion oi the power unit eliding preeeure node of operetion
eede it poeeihle to inrove the work coneiderehly when there were
exteneive reductione of loed on the power unite. eepetielly thoee thet
ere opereted on gee-fuel oil. Meeee were reduced due to throttling of
eteen. the etetic chereoterietic o! the internediete euperheeting towere-
ture wee inproved end the operetion of unite on the turbine feeding

puep (or e wide rengc oi loede wee ineured.

liodee of eliding eteen per-etere within linite end preeeuree et which
etehle hydrodynenice oi loope ie provided. were introduced et neny
electric power plente with 300 negewett power unite.

Cloee cooperetion with eenutecturing plente end ecientiiic reeeerch
inetitutee. ee well ee (one of orgenicetion of work jointly with the
USSR hinenergoneeh Plinietry of Dover Ilechine Iuilding thet proved
theneelvee. Iecilite ed the eucceeeful eolution of proh ene of reieing
the neneuverehility propertiee of the equip-eat.

One of the noet ieportent directione o! the Soyuetehhenergo'e work ie
improving the control eyet- tor the 150.200 end 300 ngewett power
unite. Recently. heeic ettention in thie direction wee concentreted
on developing. teeting end introducing wide-rouge reguletion eyetene.
eyetene (or reguleting tepecity. eutoueted control of etert-up end
eutonetic eyet-e for .ergency unloediu o! unite.

Uide-renge eyete-e for reguleting the techologicel perenntere o! hoilere
were introduced on 300 negewett power unite et the Kiriehekeye.
Konehoveheye. Koetro-elreye. Lulu-l'eheye. dredneurel'eheye end other
cuts. unlike treditionel errengenente. they include devicee tor the
eutoeetic correction of eeneor chencterietice end repletor eettinge.
chengee in the dyn-ic perenetere of reguletor tuning end function“
convortere. lhe Smotehhenergo developed euch devicee end nethode for
inplenentetion on ere: enpeneion unknown epperetue. Principlee (or
eyntheeieing the regaletion eyet-e end their etrutture were chenged

in the proceee of introduction. Ceecede errea-ente o! reguletion
with eotor controllere. node on the heeie o! no [erpeneioo unknown]
devicee were ueed widely.

nae reeulte o! experinentel end edjuet-ent work by the Soyuetehhenergo
on introducing eyet-e (or eutonetic power roguletion were ueed to eelect
en efficient vereion of the eyeten. Such eyete-e connected to centrel
eyeteee for eutonetic reguletion of frequency end power. inetelled et
diepetcher edeinietretione. will he provided (or over loo 300 negewet:
end ehout )0 zoo negewett power unite.

2|
roe OWE!“ 083 OIL!
M OFFICIAL Ull OI“

Tho downtohhonorgo porticioatoo in-dovoloning and introducing all-oodo
oyot-o ior auto-atod control of technological procooooo (m 1?) that

oct at otort-up. otopping. rogulating load and ooorgoncy oituationo.

All nowor unito soo oogowott and highor aro oquipnod with ouch oyotno.
hocontly. tho hooic offorto oi tochnologioto ond opocialiato on autooating
“quit-Int oporotion aro hoing coooontratod on an: 7!. diiioring qualita-
tiwoly hy now. highor otondatdo. including tho introduction of fractional-

groop outrol (m ouhoyot-o. onto-tic ronlation. tochnologioal
nrotoction and ccqutoro.

for antooation oi otort-up ndoo of powor unito ocuippod with traditional
control oyot-o. tho downtohhonargo dovolopod on oiiiciont and on
cowarod to tho m o oiqlr auto-tic control oyot- (m). that
prowidoo for onto-tic otarting of tho unit ot voriouo thor-l conditiooo
Iron tho not of firing tho hurnor'to dun it roachoa tho nonal otoan
nor-otaro and tho giwon looding. 0n tho haoio of oporating o procotypo
oi’ thio oyotu. typical oolutiono will ho dowolopod of m for no and
200 oogowott powor unito with dn- hoiloro and ainglo 100 ngowott unito
oporoting on goo and tool oil. Vorh on croating and introduciu tho m
in hair; dono on 500 ond 000 oogowott pilot powor unito. oo woll on on a
1200 nogowott powor unit. 0! groat inportanco in doing tho worh on thooo
groupo of «nip-ont woro tho rooulto oi aoai-ilatin tho m on a 300
nogowott povor unit at tho laohirohnya ans. oquippod with Munro and

a control ayotoo of tho "Pillord" rill.

A conidorohlo volt-o of work woo dono on aooi-ilotiu cmtoro for
powor unito 300 oogawott and groator.

Sinco 1969. worh hao hoon dono on crooting ood introducing at oloctric
powor planta outcoatod wotor pnparation inotallationo with unitiaod
connoction of filtoro. which roquiro nini-n oorwico poroonol.

Dooigno of ouch inotollotiono worn dovolopod. odjuot-ont ond {iniohing
of! of tho oparoting ndoo io hoing dono ond tochnical holp io hoing

givoo to oloctric nowor planto on onto-ting prowiouoly dooigood
inotollotiono on tho haoio of introducing nocotandard apoarotoo.

lt ohould ho notod that tho wida introduction of tho outooation ot
ch-icol wotor purification at oloctric powor plonta io Mod hy

tho unootiotoctory quolity of tho roguloting quip-oat with anticorrooion
coatingo hoing omliod.

Iacontly. opti-ol oodco woro oooinilatod ond introducod for 250 oogawatt

thonificotion unito. oo woll ao Iodoo (or roioing tho officioacy of tho
unlto hy oroccooing tho hoilor condanooto Inro oiliciontly.

29

no 077161”. 08! “LY
M OWICML UBI ONLY

'lho aoyurtehhenergo nede detailed teeta of etean turbinea of all eeriee
nanufactured by doneatic plante. including thoee for nuclear electric
power planta. Ae a reault o! the teete actual thenal characterietica
o! turbinee were obtained and calculated data were checked on the
efficiency of the individual nature of the flow-through part or the
nodernieed turbinea.

A great anoint of work wee done on aeainilating and teating the punping
and auniliary equip-ant of eteal turbinea for 150. 300. 300. 300 and
800 negewatt power unite. feclmicel eolutiona were developed and
introduced on raieing the reliability of the regulation and oil aupply
eyetene. the optiniaation of the operating nodea of the condenear
inetallatione and the equip-ant o! thenel arrang-ente.

in view or the urgency of the problen o! nieing the eiticiency oi?
condeneer inatallationa in eu-ertine. work her been done in recent
ycare on developing and putting in practice optinal nodee for operating
water eupply recirculating ayetena. eﬂicient preventive naintenance
nethode and fighting againet water reaervoir end induatrial water
aupply eyeten pollution. and nethode (or re-oving low-tenperature acele
tro- condeneer tubee.

Since l962. the Soyuetehhenergo haa been working on teating and develop-
ing eyetene (or operational Ionitoring and regulatione tor eervicing
pwer gee-turbine inatallationo. 1he aeaociation participated in
aaeinilating prototypee of gee-turbine inatallatione put in operation;
the experience obtained wee utilired in creating new typee of nore
powerful gee-turbine inatallationa with higher gaa tenperature ahead

of the turbine with cooled vanee. ea well an when aaeinilating eteaa-
gee inatallatione.

New developenta and technical eolutiona by the Soyuttehhenergo for
raiaing the technical atanderd of operation are ueed widely. an a rule.
at power enterprieee. 1hey include: recipee for additivea for an
eaaential increaae in life of tranaforner and turbine oila, inpming
thc nethod for thorough drying of hydrogen and a eeriee of auto-tic
rcguletore (or central water aupply ayeteu.

Piniehing-oﬂ‘ ie being conpleted on regulatora (or the interlocking of
heetere and cowact preaaure regulatora for induatrial thenification
eyateu. 1he introduction of theee regulatore will nuke a aharp
reduction poeeible in the unproductive enpenditnree of the heat carrier
in theee eyete-e.

At ecu large electric power plenta. a new deaip oi‘ batere for ha-er
nilla wee developed and introduced. 1hey will unite it poeeible to
increaee the eervice life of heatere on the Hoecow region coal and ehale
by 2.1 tinee and on nibaatue coal -- by 2.2 tinaa. Thin deaip wee
adopted ae e baeie for etandardiring batere at all he-er nille.

30
FOR onxcm. US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ln eccordenoo with the onurtehhenerpo deeipn production wee onenired
of cruehing-nillin. eeohinee. which eeeed coneiderehly the lehor o!
workere of fuel-treneportinp ehope of electric power plente.

in recent yeero. inweetigetione end doeipn dewolopeente were node on
eoderniein. the ohut-o“. muletin; end protection equip-eat of no.

200, 300. 300 end 300 eepewett power unite. ee well ee on croetin; cut-
off quick-«tin; nee end fuel oil welwee o! werioue die-etere. All of
theee develop-onto were introduced et electric power plente. Jointly with
the Telllchereet [Centrel Scientific leeeerch lnetitute oi ferroue
Netelluru ieeni l. P. Ierdin] e high etren.th heet-reeietent elloy

wee developed for the noeelee oi burnere for hoilere. 'ihe induetriel

an of theee indiceted thet the life of the hurnero eey he increeeed

to 60.000 houre.

in l97l-1977 elone. the Sowetehhenergo coqleted end edopted plene [or
eeriee production over 290 plenning-deei'n dewelopente. which were
introduced et ‘00 power enterprieee.

1he soyuttehhenerpo piweo technicel help to power enterprieee on inm-
in; the omnieetion of production. end it correletee end diee-inetee
edwenced experience of the work of electric power plente end power
eyet-e.

1n. eeeocietion conetently i-prowee nethode for eettin; none end keeping
recorde oi iuel end enelyein; ite utiliution end eccountin. et electric

power plente .

A greet deel of work we done jointly with power enterprieee on eettin.
nore indicetore for ell the heeic end euriliery equip-eat et electric
power plente. 1'eete were node on ell typee of hoilere end turbinee in
operetion. on the heeie of wich typicel nor- cherecterietice were

doweloped.

An enelyeie of the technicel-ecooonic indicetore of equip-eat et electric
power plente done on the heeie oi coeperin. ectoel eonthly end eonuel
indicetore with none eeluee it poeeihle to detect dewietione of ite
operetin; node iro- opti-el efficiently. eeho on objective eweluetion

of the work of the ehift end ropeir pereouel. eod develop for eech type
of equip-out technical eolutione directed to further i-prow-nt oi ite
work.

An inweetiption of eewerel ler'e electric power pleate ie eede enuelly
to reiee the level of fuel utiliution et theee plente.

"leeulte oi Operetion of 'ihenel llectric rower Pleate" ie ieeued
querterly; "lewiew of technical-Ronnie lndicetore end on Anelyeie of
Pool Utiliution et Rey-on 11508-1 Electric Power Plente o! the 0381
Nioietry or llectric Power end llectrificetion." ee well ee rewiewe of
power unit operetion ere puhliehed emelly.

31

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL "8| ONLY

Purpoaeful inwoatigationa nada in recent yeara on large groupa of electric
power planta and the correlation of the obtained data nada it pouihla.
with the cooperation of induatriel inatitutea. to prepare guide nanuala
and inlenant technical aolutiona to increaaa the tightneu oi the

vecuun ayat-a. the reliability of the regulation and atean dietrihution
Iyatena o! atean turbinaa. the efficiency or the regenention ayatena

of the 300 nagawatt unite. the reduction in heat coneuption for heating
liquid fuel and other urgent prohlena of operating heating equipnent.

Data and circulare on accident prevention are publiahed on eocidanta
that happened and nakea it poaaihle to carry out an efficient aingle
technical policy on inauring reliable operation of the exiating equipnent.

leach work it being done by the Soyuntehhenergo on organieing the

monitoring of the natal condition at electric power planta and power
ayatena. ﬂeceaaary nathoda and nanuala were developed on nonitoring

welded connectione and the haaic natal. lhe following naterial wee
publiahed in recent yearn with the participation of the m [All-Union
lnatitute of that Bngineering ineni r. 8. Daerthinakiy] : "lnetructiona
for Ohaerwing and Nonitoring natal in loilera and Pipelinaa" and

"hemlation on the Ordera of Setting Perioda of turther Operation of loilere.
mrhinee and Stan Note that Operated Above l00.000 lioure."

in parallel with that. work it being done on inproving nonitoring-
diagnoatic docunentation. A tingle document waa prepared on nonitoring
and oheerving natal. which ie effective (or the entire period of

equ ipnent operation.

work done in recent yeara on perlite ateela nada it poaaihle to develop
new criteria for their working capacity. The reaulta obtained provide
a haaia to aaaune that the operational nonitoring of the natal of heat-
power equipnent will hecona leaa cubereona. note reliable and leaa
axpenaive in the very near future.

A large nutter of directivea and infornational data were publiehed which
correlated the advanced erperience of equlpnant operation. and work it
being done on a ayntenatic review of haaic gliding data -- renletione
.for technical operation of electric power plenta and networke. directive
nanuala. aaiaty rulea. technological deaign norna. etc. One of the noat
inportent papere wee the review and ieaue of the 13th edition of the
m [raclnical Operation rulea] .

Every year the Soyuatelnhenergo and ita enterprieea conduct over 100 local.
regional and ell-union couveea and eeninera end about 200 conlerencea on
varioue prohl-a of equipnent operetion for power enterpriae workera.

in rncent yearn. the Soyultehhenergo intenaiﬂed work on the protection
of the enviment.

32
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

e-

A coneiderehle enount of work wee done to nice the efficiency of
renoving eeh fron flue gem. lnetelletione of Net" cleening with
Venturi coeguletorc were developed end introduced et over no boiler
inetelletione; their inctelletion eede it pouihle to reduce the enheucte
of eeh into the encephere hy ehout e nillion tone per yeer.

A coneiderehle under of teetc with coneequent edjuetnent of electric
filtere in node ennuelly; etert-up end edjucting work it done on new
inertiel type of eeh trepe; et ceverel eleczric power plente finiching-
off work ie done on nodernired ctmcturee of electric filtere end new
devicee for contained inetelletione (”wet" rtege of eeh trepping end en
electric filter) . eleo of en eeh trep with e high unit productivity.

At eeverel electric power plente. neeeuree were introduced to reduce
the fonetion of nitrogen oxidee directly in the funecee. 1he new
errengenent of recirculeting flue gecee. not to independent chennele
eround the hotto- lumen of the ”-07 boiler. helve the enheuete of
nitrogen oridee; ehout the use reduction wee ohteined by noderniring
hurnere of the m-th hoiler.

Adjueting work ie being done on the inetelletiun for the geeificetion
of hi0! eulfur content fuel oil being introduud er the Drerrhinekeye
me; mch work wee done on neking the eyet- for hydreulic eeh r-ovel
nore efficient end orgenieing the operetion of eeh dupe.

A coneiderehle enunt of work ie heing done on edjueting end orgenieing
the operetion of lnetelletionc for cleening the induetriel eewege of
electric power plente.

nete wee collected end eyet-tired on cont-inetion eourcee. quelity
end conpoeition of production eewege weter. on the heeee of which were
doveloped: ’Vuiding lnetruction on Preventing Mteninetion of Ueter
Ieeine hy Sewege Ileter fron llectric Power Plente” end "l'qorery
lnltructione on Servicing lnetelletionc for Cleenin Sewege Heter fro-
llectric Power Plente.”

The eeeocie'tion in working on eolving the eerioue prohl- of protecting
hodiee of weter fro. themel "pollution" by the proper orgenieetion of
diecherging hot weter into weter reeervoire. reducing the aunt of
diecherged heet by neene of verioue typee of eprinklere being developed.

The Sowetekhenergo eheree ite experience with power engineering worhen
of eocieliet ccuntriee end prowldee greet help in edjueting Soviet heet-

power equip-ent eold ehroed.

At ell etegee of develop-en: of Soviet power engineering. Soyurtehhenergo
(ems) epecieliete hewe worhed in cloee cooperetion with opereting

pereonnel of electric power plente. collectivee of ecientific reeeerch
end plenning omnieetione. introducing new equip-ent end correleting
edvenced production experi-ce.

33
M OWICIAI. US! MY
M OHIO!“ 0" ONLY

A: pnunc. «11mm. of the Inn Manhunt" cant-pun in ”new
and counting in mutant. calm. L‘m. lomtunk, ‘ruhkonc
and Vlutvouoh In working ouccuuully on solving tho probluu of
mam forth“ the «clam! «mm of them! ﬂout-1c power plants,

on mama. ﬂu («in placed hum ch. pm: tom:- by ﬂu 25th
potty comma.

cormm: nuuvuvo ”lacuna”. "roploomnoulu". 1970

2291
080: 1022

3‘
M OFFICIAL 03! on!
POI 0"“:th 08! 0|!“

WC Ml. All!) PM! mum

WC “2.613

m vacuum 0? common
Noocow mm in luaoion Ilo 10. Oct 78 pp 67-69

Rum- by Km». 1.. 1.. Zologin. n. c.. Yonowokiy. 1.. r. All-union
omtochnical lnotituto: ”lndicotot of tho ‘l'otoi nantulnooo oi
Producto of Conbuotion of Powor No1o”]

[rout] Producto of conbuotion of (uolo contain contaninoting oubotancoo
of varying tonicitioo. In oono caooo. it it nocooooty to chatoototito
tho quality of powor fuolo with toopoct to tho poilution of tho onwiton-
nont by ono indicatot thot takoo into account tho u- ot tho count of
wotiouo cont-ionic» ojoctod into tho atnoaphoro ond thoir toxicity.*
Such o nocoooity noy otioo. for omlo. whon ootting tot powot fuolo

o cox-rooting cooﬂiciont to onioting pticoo with. at pnooont. toho into
occount only tho nining ond chipping cooto. It noy ho non-oi thot in
tho fututo tho prico of fuolo will bo not to toho into account tho
hot-(u! olfacto of pmducto of cmtion on tho onvirouut. lot
ononplo, tho ptico of tuol ohould ho incroaood it pyritoo ooo tonowoo
fro- cooi o: port of tho oulfut in tonovod fro- fuol oil. Hhon ono iuol
io toplocoo by onothot ot a m. on indicator in nocooooty to ovoluoto
tho “viability of ouch o chongo with mpoct to onwiroI-ontal protoc-
tion conoihrationo. Such on indicate: in aloo noodod in owoluating
tho oporation of on m whon. (or oxanplo. ooworal tooiooctiwo iootopoo
with wotiouo docay conotanto and rodiotion chatactotiotico onto: tho
mitonnont. Such an indicator noy chamtotioo tho rolatiwa hanfulnooo
of unit; a givon (no! in citioo and rogiono with nil-mo ontorpriooo
rooponoihlo foo background conconttationo oi cont-inning ouhotoncoo and
to a cortain ontont. for tho unit cooto of anti-pollution inotonotiono
whon noing tho giwon fuol.

" Tho ou- in thin cooo dooo not noon that tho honlul odnixtutoo hovo
an oqual aftoct on tho hunon crganion.

35

M MICE“. 03! m1
FOR OHICIAI. US! ONLY

Tho indicator of total harn ﬁn of powar fucla and tho producta of
tgoir conhuation nay ho oxprooaod by tho au- of tho partial indicatoro
o horn:

. j, _ ..
III-gm. (I)

whoro H, aro yaluoo of partial indicatoro of harafulnoaa that
charactorico tho unit quantity of tho hor-ful auhatanca and ito rolativo
toxicity.

Iiarnful adaixturoa of producto of coahuation of fuola any to dividod
into tho following groupa dapanding upon chair origin.

1ho firot group conoioto of haratznl adaixturoa. tho onounta of which

in producta of couhuation dopanda vary littlo on tho tochnology of
burning tho fual. It any ho dafinod with aufficiont accuracy on tho
haaia of tho conpoaition of tho fuol. l‘hio group conoioto of aulfur
dioxida, fly ooh. vanadiu- coapounda. aa wall aa othor adaixturoo which
paoo into tho conpoaition of tho aah whon tho fuol ia hurnod.

‘Ihoroocond group conoiata of horaful adaixturoo tho fonation of which
in tho producto of coahuotion dopanda not only on tho coapoaition of

tho fuol, hut alao to a conaidorahly oxtont on tho ocaloo, tochnology
and Ioda of fuol co-huotion: capacity of tho atoaa gonorator, noth

of praparing tho fool for burning. tho daaign of tho furnoca, oxcaaaaa
of air. otc. ‘lhio group conaiato of nitrogan oxidoa, carbon aonoxida
and othor producta of incoaploto cosh-notion of fual. including hydrogon
aulfidco and carcinogonic ouhotancoo. tho ojoctiona of thooo ouhatancoo
into tho at-oophoro vary atrongly dopanding upon tho annotated factoro,
thoroforo. thoy aro i-poooihlo to calculata without oxporinontol data.

‘rho third group conaiato of hanful adaixturoa duo not to producto of
conhuation of fuola at tho m. but to othor aourcoa. for axaaplo. duat
fro. coal atock piloa and uh du-pa, rolaaaa of carhohydrato vaporo in
oyatana for unloading fuol oil fro. ll tanho or rivor ahipa. ojactiona
of fino particulatoa in opon oyotano of pulvarriod coal proparation. atc.
'i‘ho o-ount of ajoctiona of thia group conparod to ojoctiono of harnful
adaixturoa with producta of co-huation ia couparativaly oaall, difficult
to calculata and, thoroforo. will not ho conoidorod in tho following.

the following conaidarotiona aro uaad aa tho haaia for dotor-ining tho
partial indicatoro that Iaho it poaoihlo to conparo and au-nrico tho
hanful offoct of variouo adoixturoo containod in flua gaooo. ‘l'ho
indicatora auat ho roducod to a oingla “union. in tho quantitativo
roapoct .. to a unit of hoot of coduation. whilo thoir rolativa toxicity
ia uproaoad in fractiono of tho valuo of m [Maxim poraiaoihlo
concontration] [l] of tho givon adlixturo.

36
M OFFICIAL "SB ONLY
m OFFICIAL 08! ONLY

Partial indicetore of the hernfulneu of the firet group are deterninca‘
by fornule °

run—ﬁT-‘J—"WT "If“ “" . (2)

where l; in the quantity of adnixture in the working fuel. 1; ‘IL

in the rate of renowal of the given adnixturn fro- the flue gaeee

before they are ejected into the etnoophere. 2; P in a nondineneionel
coefficient fro. the fornula of diepereion of the erhauete in the
atnoephere [2] . equal to two for aolid particlee and to one for,

' geaeoue ahixturea; "I" u, are nolecular weighte of the adnixture in
the fuel and in ite producta of conhuetion; m -- ie the linit allowed
concentration of ednixture in the layer of at-oepheric air near the
ground, n/n3. -

Partial indicatoro of the ha:- of the eecond group are detenined fro-
for-ale

”‘- agscivs ‘IWI—i . ' (3)

where 61 ie the concentration of the given adnirture in 1.3 of the flue
gaaee at nor-a1 conditione. gran/n3; Vr ie the volune of flue gaeea
multing fro- hurning lkg of fuel at nornal conditione, n3.’kg; ia
the loweet heet of fuel conhuetion. heal/kg; 11 ie the rate 0
cleaning of flue geeee fro. the given adnixture before the gates are
exheueted into the atnoephere.

In the table for haeic power fuels in the USSR are cited the reeulte of
calculated partial and total indicatore deter-ined in accordance with
fornulae (l). (2). and (3). Partial indicatore of hare for aulfur dioxide
and nitrogen. aeh and wanediu pentoxide were determined. Not too much

ie known about other hernful adnixturee in producte of conhnetion of not
fuele and in not taken into coneideration. Nevertheleee. it my be
aaeuned on a reaeonahle haeia that their deteninetion and taking then
into aceotnat will not reflect euentially on the order of producte of
conhuation of fuele in their degree of harn.

ﬂee following initial data were ueed in the calculations: fuel cheracteria-
tica [3 and the content of audit. pentoxide. It in accused to be
equal to .031 for fuel oil with a eulfur content of 31, while for other

kinda of fuel oil -- it ia new-ed to very in proportion to the eulfur

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\

a

.IBISSBII:

C
3
$
1
O
1
I
O
N

ii

M OWICIAL I!!! 0N”

5:”.
II:
Wad
w;
w
@-

q'w

: c hbik hk‘

_a:i.
99 9999
g: as:

Ms?

S;

a:

52:33;

E

w

33933’33800¢.:-.-0

-
O

3.2:
M 0"“:th US! ONLY

Tho vanadiu contont in all aolid fuola io aoouood conditionally to

ho tho aooo and aqual to 0.091 [ a] . rho toxicity of aolid Eu 1 aah
vao aaouod to ho aqual to that of nontoxic duat (PD! - 0.5 Ig/ ).

1ha coocntrotion oi nitrogon oxidoa in iluo gaaaa vaa around on tho
haoia of high unit capacity povor unita and for not fuolo woo tahan
tron upori-ontal data at nonal condition and a cooiiiciont of oxcooo
air aqual to mity. ‘l'haoo voluao mat ho noda ooro procioa for concroto
colculationa. for vanadiu pantoxido. tho oodical orgono of tho I188!
oot only ovorogo daily linita (or tho ollovohlo coocoatrotioo. thoroforo.
it io rolatod to tho ovorago daily valuo oi tho In of nontoxic duat

oqual to ml: min3 [l] .

Ollculationo worn nado for two caooo. in tho tirat tho partial ( n‘ )
and tho total (all) indicotoro of hon voro calculatod for producto

of conhuotlon. looving tho hoilaro. and choroctoriaod tho ha:- of
uncloanod gaoaa. in tho aacood caao. tho valuo of an‘ vao calculatod
taking into occount aah trapping and choractoriaiog tho total oxhauat
oi honl'ul adnixturoa into tho at-oophoro. no valuo of at" vaa
dotoninod on tho oaatqtion that 997. of tho particulatoa an ronovod
fro- tho producta of conhuotion of oolid iuola baton thoy aro oxhauatod
into tho atnophoro.

in calculating tho .‘Eﬂ' for tuol oilo. it io ooouod that non ooh
trapo aro uood. tho rota of trapping ooh and vonodiu conpoundo io 10:.

Iho ordor o! "rang-ant of fuola in tho tabla in comapondonco with
tho valuo o! har- iodicotor gn' ia oo-onhat diti‘oroot twat“ to

H1 . Uhon tlua goaaa on me! tron ooh. low anlinr contont
oolid fualo (put. lutnotoh and unto-Achinoh coalo) “I found to ho
.ong tho loaot h-niul. ohilo. for ox-pla. high oulfnr contont inal
oil (38., - 3.5:) ohiita in. tho 16th to tho 9th puco. than no aoh
trapo aro nood on fool oil hoilora, aa io tho proctico at prooont. fuol
oil appoara in 6th placa with napoct to tho oi- oi honiul adnixturoa
in producto of co-huation. ha ahovn in tho tahlo valuoo of an vary
within li-ita of 3.1565 for lotonion ohaloo to 0.0370 for naturol goo.
i.o.. by al-oat tvo ordoro of nopitudo. 1hia attoato to tho nocoaaity
of giving oorioua conaidaration to amino-natal protoction prohi-
vhn changing tho ﬁnal at m. Valuoa of totol and partial hon
indicator-o indicata in «hot caaaa it io poooihlo to obtain pooitivo
rooulta in protocting tho mimt again-t pollution nhon ch-ging
tho fool aupply and vico voroa.

In tho uppor part of tho tahlo oro locotod pri-rily oolid fuola of

dopoaito in tho lunpoan part of tho USSR (vith tho oxcoption of tho
Bhihootut coal) and in tho lovor -- of tho Aoian port.

39

M MICIAL US! MY
M 0"“:th US! ONLY

Producto o! conhuotion at low ouliut contont coolo ouch on. for omlo.
Inonotoh. whota otiiciont ooh trono ona uood howo lowoo indiutora oi
hon :rl’l' thon producto of conbuotiot. of high ouliur contont iuol oilo.

Tho nlotionohio oi naotiol iniicotoro of hon "nc_ond ”akin ptoducto
oi cubuotion oi oolid fuolo holpo in oalooting tho diooction of work

in fighting oir pollution. Thuo. for amplo. for tho cool ninod noot
Noncow Ilu- 0.1510 ond ll...‘- 0.0638. Tohing into conaidoto-
tion tho totol olioct o! thooa odnixtum, it io poooiblo to concludo
that ion ouch cool tho booic oourco of nit pollution in ouliut dioxido
ond o toduction in contamination by nitrogon oxido would ho inoigniiicont
in tho totol otioct. for honoowohiy cool nopoctivoly "u‘i 0.0077
ond I|..° - 0.06. i.o., a toduction in air pollution by gooaouo

odointuroo o"oy ba ochiowod booicolly by roducing onhouoto oi nitrogon
oxidao.

Ono progroooivo diroction in building m in onlorging tho copocity oi
pow" unito ond tho no tho-olvoo. bocouoo thin caducao unit copitnl
invootoonto in construction. iiowovor. thio io ttuo only «Ion building
tho noun: port of tho us. with tho inctoooo o! no copocitioo and tho
voluno oi tluo gnooo. it in nocoooory to incuooo tho hoight oi tho
otocho. Tho coot of tho otocho incmooo appmi-toly pmportionolly
to tho cubo oi tho hoight. Solving tho problo- o! ooh troningo io
rolotod not only to inctoooing tho volu- of tho opporotuo. but oloo
to incroooing tho "quit-onto for tho officioncy of goo clooning. no
wnll oo ovorconing dooign diiiimltioo. much inctoooo tho unit copitol
invootnonto in ooh tuning. Vith tho incnooo in tho otoo of ooh
dunno. it boon-no nocoooory. oo o tulo. to incroooo tho longth of tho
ooh ducto. unto: clooning linoo. no woll oo incurring odditionol
oopondituroo to prowont tho cloon wotor {no iiltoring through tho d-o
ouomnding tho ooh dupo. 1hio incnooooo unit copitol invoouonto in
building ontinollution inotollotiooo with groator povor of tho no and.
thoroioto. toducoo tho oconuic officioncy in building powor focilitiao
in thin dimtion. Othor conditiono hoing oquol. incroooing unit
copitol inwootnonto. dopondo on tho chotoctoriotico of tho fuol uood.
tho ou- of which io oxpnoood by tho voluo o! in . m gtootor 2n
io,tho m tho unit axpondituroo to: pntocting tho onvirouont nod
tho lowor tho goin tro- incroooing tho powor of tho m. Tho odwontogoo
of building unto pouotful us my bo noot iully roolinod by unit;
notutol goo to: tuol ond conoidorohly looo fully -- by uoing iuolo
locotod in tho uppor port of tho toblo. moo. tho voluo of an nay
bo o uooiul indicotot oloo in oolviq tho probl- conoidarod.

onuocnm

l. "Linito to: Allowohlo Concantrotiono of nonful Sub-toncoo in Air
ond Rotor.“ boningrod. mu. D15.

‘0
POI OFFICIAL 05! my
M ONICIM. 0” ONLY

2. "Inocmetom on Calculating Durant» in the amount. of nan-M
autumn. mama to must. of hut-puns." II! 369-“.
macaw. scroytmt. 1975.

3. 3h...“ “kahuna. of Donors.” (Ion uthod). meow. tannin.
73.

lo. zn'umm. V. A.. Katrina. v. ll. "0n Manhattan of Vanuatu
in “in“ Cull." ‘I‘IJDY vnos. um 87, 1936.

comm: Imut'om “Inn-31’0”. ”uptown-pun”. 1978

2291
GO. 1822

‘1

M OFFICIAL 058 on:
NI OWICIM. ll“ M“

m AID mm norm

WC 553-”:Sﬁooal2.l(571o51)
ON. AID 0A8 mm II MYAMY WY
Ibscow omwom m: I can in Russian lo 12. Dec 78 pp 25-31

[Article by V. V. Orchenyuh. A. B. Kontorovich. I. V. Iiel'nihov. V. 8. Stero-
scl'tsev and V. 8. Burhov (ammo [Siberian Scientific Research Institute
or Geolog. Geophysics and lineral Raw literialsl). V. D. laharyahov. V. 0.
Bihgatullin and V. D. Toharev (Krasnoyarehnettegasrasvedha). and A. A. Tro-
rm (tom 80 M 888]! [Institute or Geoloy and Geophysics. Siherian Depart.
sent. USSR Acadew of sciences“: ”thin Directions of Geological hploration
for Oil and Gas in Krasnoyarehiy lira [hiring the Concluding Years of the Tenth
Five-Year Plan“)

[Text] The decisions of the 25th cm Congress state that one oi‘ the nest
iaportant tasks for geological exploration during the Mth rive-Year Plan

is sore rapid location and exploration or new reservoirs of oil. natural gas
and gas condensate in last Siberia. Porecasts show convincingly that a large
proportion of geological reserves of hydrocarbons on the Siherian platfor-
are concentrated in Krasnoysrshiy tray [1. 3. ’0). Geological and econoaic
calculations conducted by canons. valor: [All-Union Petrolet- Scientific
Research Institute of Geological Rploration (Maintain. the Beveorgeo IPO
l8cienti‘ic Production Association). tom 80 Al 8883 and the Krasnoyarehnefte-
gasrasvedha trust name a rapid aowth of geological exploration work and of
certifications following its conclusion. This will sale it possible to iden-
my the Iain patterns of fol-nation and distribution of ludrocarhon acct-lla-
tions in the We syaeclise and adjoining territories and in various struc-
tural and tacies zones or the Yenisey-K‘hatanga Basin, and to deter-nine the
areas in which prospecting and exploration should he conducted.

Praising oil ad gas areas within Krasnoyarshiy tray fall into two oil-gas
provinces (WP): the lens-Mus and matuga-Vilyuyah provinces [31. and
the shall iiinusinsh gas region and the western part of the Vest-Siberian oil-
ms province. The ma-Nngus Province includes the Iorth Mgus. South M-
gus. Katanga and Sagan-Venisey oil-gas areas (Im: lertegaaovaya Ohlast')

and the Nruhhanshiy-loril'sk oil-ms region. The l'enisq-lhatanga oil-gas
area is in the nutnga-Vilyuysh oil-gas province. he shove-sentioned oil-
gns arcoa correspond tectonically to anor structures or the Siherian platform
the lorth fungus and Wienisq areas to the Kureyshiy and scan-Venice:
syneclises. the South fungus area to the layhiy anteclise. the Katanga area to
the Katanga saddle and the southeastern edge or the lure, syneclise (the areas
of the Chins“, and Ill-penny anhes). the Wkly-“rivet oil-gas

‘2
ran OFFICIAL 033 MY
roe onxcm. I’ll MY

region to the When-ﬂoriveh ridge. and the Yenieey-Khetenp area to the
am“? of the ease nae.

A- or 1 January 1918. ehout 66h.ooo netere or deep vene had been dri11ed.
The quantity end deneita dietrihution over the individua1 areee and region-

of the mange-Vim. Dene-hone end ﬂeet Siberian provincee ere ehovn
in the table.

0i1-0ee Aree or Region “unity of Deneity of
mum. urging.
1000 I I/
Yenieey-Khetenu 310 1. 3
Mimineh 153 5.0
Sw-renieey 58 OJ
South We 53 0.15
Part of ﬂeet diherian province
in Yenieev aree 38 0.13
Mhanekiy-loru'eh 28 0.83
Iorth We 21 0.09
Ketanoe 3 0.01

In epite or the «tr-e1: 1w 1M1 of hnovledce of the beenoyereh terri-
toriee on the heeie of deep drinin‘. ‘eo1ociee1 intonetion e1reedy obtained
can, when cahined with date tr. geophyeion reeeerchee, eerve ee tb haeie
for a quentitetive eve1nntion of initie1 potentie1 ludrocerhon reeou'oee. In

the W province. for m. they are concentreted winerm in the
lorthmngue. docthmendlataueeroee. endtoaleee degree inthe

Seven-Xenia: erea [h].

ll'he fonovin‘ Iein directiona for Wed exploration for oi1 and can hen
been hid don for the [bunny-Vina“ province:

1ooetion of oil and gee (with e high condeneete factor) and gee condenute
poo1e in Jureeeio depoeite in drew-diam tie1de end nev areee in the
veetern part of the Yenieey-lheten‘e eree;

e eeerch for on end “I poo1e in Mien end ‘rriaeeio tonetione in the out-
ern part or the renieqblhetenge eree;

eve1uetion of the M1 end gee proepecte or Meoeoic end 1over leeoeoic roche
in the veetern part or the Ian-Anahei- eree (Asher-Dem region).

The large oi1 end pe i'oreoaete tor the enteneive northern territory or Kreeno-
yerehiy trey ere being confined hy ‘eo1ogice1 up1oretion. 1n the veetern
pert of the Yenieey-lhntanp heein. for ere-me. e re1etive1y -e1.1 mat of
deep drinin‘ hee identified eevere1 pe end gee condensate pooh in Crete-
ceoue (priurm) end Meeeic depoeite. ‘i'he centrel. northern end particu-
1er1y northeeetern redone of the heein heve been etndied ctr-e17 11tt1e.

e1thou¢h theee redone ere ctr-e17 miein‘ in the eeeroh tor hydrocarbon

‘3
m mom WI on!
M OYHCIAL 0“ ONLY

eoouuletione in enticlinel trepe. Moreover. the pinching-out none of the
lower end niddle Jureeeie fornetione which extend elm the northern flenh
or the depreeeion free the gulf or the Yenieey in the weet to me w in
the eeet ie teworehle for the foreetion end etorege or lerge wdrooerhon ee-
euuletione in non-entiolinel trepe. A regionel pinching out or individuel
coeplexee of eiddle Peleoeoio depoeite ie poeeihle on the eouthern men! of
the Anehehxhetenge eeddle free the nouth or the Kotw Iliwer in the weet to
the eiddle Popiw River in the eeet. where Penien roohe lie on the eroded
eurreoe oi‘ Cnhrien depoeite.

Dete fro- deep drilling on the Penteheye. Meme. arednepyeeineme end
helehhnineheye eeetione eehe it poeeihle to euggeet thet the Jureeeio end the
lower portion of the Creteeeoue {onetione heve heeone ehely fro. the edge in
towerd the exiel eree or the heein. The eendy end ehely depoeite of the
Buhhodudinien euite (leter Velengien-heuterivien). for ample. which within
the men Arch end the Reeeohhinehiy Swell eontein gee-honing eendetone
horieone. ere repleeed to the north end northeeet (eloog the exie or the heein)
by ehely eleurite rocke which ere preeticelly devoid of perneehle horieone.
Judging by drilling dete (rm the herehhinehiy eeetion. Jureeeic depoeite

u. to undergo eieiler i‘eoiee chengee. Conditionn fevorehle to oil end gee
eeeuuletinn ere expected in theee depoeite on the inclined northern fleet!

of the Yenieey-Khetenge heein in e lone loo-150 hilaetere wide end ehout 600
hilnuetere long rru the Iouth of the Yenieey in the weet to the weetern end
or me W in the eeet. Proepeete here ere confined only by e eingle
teet well on the Demhineheye eeetion. loceted et the extreme weet of the
territory. where e powerml flow of gee end condeneete wee ohteined tree
upper Jureeeic depoeite. A eore confident eweluetion or oil end gee proepecte
in thie none requiree the einhing of e eeriee of teet welle elong the north-
ern edge or the heein. prilerily on the Ool'ehihhinehere. Meme. Yengodo-
Oorhiteheye. logetehnye end Kuhelehhehm eectione. The loeetion end etruc-
turel propertiee of the teet welle heve elreedy heen deter-lined tor the firet
two eectione. Additionel eei-ie exploretion will he required for preeiee
eiting on the other three eectione.

0n the eeetern eide or the Yenieey-Khetenge heein. eweluetion of the oil end
gu proepecte of ﬂower Cerhonifuroue end Jureeeie depoeite in the northeeet-
ern regione of the Reeeohhinekiy Swell (lowoye. Kur'inehoye end Voloohenehoye
locel uplitte) m the eeetern pert or the lorth 8iherien when” (left

henh of the Khetenge River in the eeetor between the loath of the Inter in the
eouthveet end the lower holeheye helenne in the northeeet) in of coneiderehle
intereet. 'lhe loeetion or teet welle hee heen detereined .'or the Voloeheneme
end home eectione. Belenic exploretion work euet he conducted in order to
eelect euitehle etructurel eonditione tor the einhing or ten welle on the

lame end holeheye lelekhne rivere.

The eeetern helf or the Yenieey-Khetenge heein end pertieulerlJ ite southern
flenh (rt-u the nouth of the Kotw in the went to the Aneher River in the
eeet) ere extruely pro-doing for the diecowery or oil poole in Pet-lien de-
poeite. ee indieeted hr the exteneive highly hituinieed none of Pet-lien

M
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M orncm. "II M?

eendetonee on the northern eiope of the Oienekehiy Arch end the ohteining of
I now of oil in. Lower Penien route on the ﬁneneme eeotion [2]. One
of the high-priority eitee on the eouthern eide or the heein ie the Metro-e
even. whole genera ereei etruotm hee heen deter-lined hv eeienie explore-
tion. 0n the eroh of ite weetern due it ie pienned to einh e teet well to
give intonetion on Per-lien end peeihie Cenhrien depoeite. In eddition it
ie pienned to drill teet wene on the eroh of the Tina-Anew awen end in

the oentrei pert of the Aneher-Ihetenge eeddie on the upper oouree of the
auoien River.

Time. in order to etudy regionei etruoture end to eeeiuete the uii end gee

promote of onu the noet pruieing perte c: the Yenieey-lhetengt heein. it
will he neoeeeery to drill 11-12 teet weiie in the next few yeere.

In the henn-‘Nngue oil-gee province the following direction heee been am.-
neted the prinery onee for geologioel exploretion for oil end gee:

etndy of the regionel etruoture of the territory no no to locete end nep out
oii end gee eommletion eonee; deterlinetion of the reeerenir dietrihution
petterne for productive coupler“ end their root root. elong with deternine-
tion of their perenetere; deteninetion of eyetiei ditterentietion in oil
end gee eooudetioneg end nore preoiee quentitetiee eetinetion or the
region'e oii end gee proepente;

preperetion or ierge ludrocerhon reeereee within the oil end gee ecu-union
:onee identified.

Judging by geologic“ end mien dete. the nut pruning oii end gen
ereee for iocetion or ierge oii end gne eoouuietione In, he the Iorth ‘mng‘ue

(m mecliee). death we (Inn: enteciiee) end Intenge (Ietengn eed-
die) ereee.

The Kurey meoiiee occupiee e ierge eree (1000x600 In) between the W
exig-Ioril'eh ridge end the ”hit enteciiee on the north end the Aneher end
lepehn-hotuohinnhit enteciieee on the eeet. a: the eouth it ie handed hy the
Ketenge Seddle. end on the north hy the Yenieey-Khetenge heein; lower end
Middle Peleonoio depoeite ere dietinguiehed in the nodern ereei etruoture.

The nein hydrooerhon remoee within thie eree ere concentreted in the urine
end legoon-nrine tor-tine of the Lower ad Middle Peieotoic. Intonetion
on the etruoturei layout of mining horitone in ctr-en eperee. 0n the
henie of regionei eoundinge with reflection end reﬂection eei-netry. four
men of erch-lihe uplifting in the cover end hen-eat rock here heen identi-
fied in the eree or the mm. end erneye river-e (My Arch). end in
the cover in the heein of the Vive. Iochech- end Indy- rivere (the Yuhteiin-
ehiyendxochecln-ehiqdrchendthe Indyndneupiift). heirereenrenge
iron 5.000 to 20.000 equere hilt-euro. end their .piitudee up to 1.000
uter- in the hen-eat couple: end 300400 netere in the cover. crevinetric-
negnetic end electricel dete fr. the centre]. pert of the M meciiee
identify three nore eroheez the hedyenehiy. Menu“: end M. with
ereee renging fr:- 10.000 to 22.000 equere kin-euro. ‘lheee ierge poeitive
etruoturee ere of definite intent in the eeerch for Mrooerhone. however.

‘5
ran OFFICIAL US! MY
NI OFFICIAL 088 0'"

it ie etill unknown whether they ere cloeed. whet their reel dieeneione end
ehepee ere. et whet lewele in the eection the reeerwoire ere loceted. end
whet the phyeicel propertiee of reeerwoir etrete thet hewe developed there
ere. One-him enewere to theee queetione eey only be obteined efter e
leree «entity of regienel geophyeicel inweetigetion end the drilling of teet
welle. neophyeicel work on reference end reeionel eectione ie plenned. coe-
priein. e couples: of eeieeic. electric. unetic end grewinetric nethode.

Re ionel proepectine will eehe uee of eeieeic end electric nethode. In 1976-
l the firet teet welle will be drilled in the firet- end «com-priority
etructuree identified by eeieeic proepectingi the Anuehiy Arch end the
Untuonehiy end lndyeehiy dcee nplifte.

The Whit entecliee (750 x 300 he) extende elcng the eonthweet edge of the
Biberien pletfore. it coeprieee the beeine of the eiddle end lower Podhenen-
neye Woke end pert of the lower lithneye Tonguehe (eee time). The
entecliee ie eepereted free the Angere folde. the fenieey ehelf end the M-
hheneh-loril'ek rideee by e nerrow trough whoee einieu depth towerd the
eeetern pert of the Yenieey Shelf ie e few hundred eetere. while north end
noutheeet of thie eector it increeeee to too-100 eetere. within the neyhit
unteeliee ere dietinguiehed three firet-order etrocturel eluente: the lie-ov-
ohiy Arch. coeprieing the eouthern. eoet uplifted pert; the Behhtinehiy
ridge. which ie en eeteneiwe terreced etructure loceted to the north of the
Ke-owehiy Arch; end the auringdehonehiy Arch. coeprieins the northern. noet
deeply buried eection of the entecliee.

The firet oil end gee poole were loceted in the northern pert of the lie-ow.
ehiy Arch Oinyunbineheye eection). Flowe of oil end gee were obteined fro-
cerbonete depoeite whoee ebeolute ege wee detereined by the poteeeiuoeraon
nethod ee 1080-1200 eillion yeere. correepondin; to the Middle end Upper
Ripheen. The deeply eroded Ripheen depoeite ere owerlein. with enuler uncon-
foreity. by eecinentery cerbonetee of the Ibtien enite of the bower Cobrien.
The etruetnrel leyout of the [4in for-etione within the Nubineheye eec-
tion hne been upped out very ehetchily free eeieeic dete. It eppeere thet
e lerge enticline hee developed. with Mite-min beeuent rock eppeerin;
et the Precenbrien eroeionel eurfece end with elopee coepoeed of cleetice
end cerbonete roche of the Middle end Upper Ripheen couplexee.

The differencee in elewetion between the gee-oil end oil-weter interfecee

enke it poeeible to hypotheeize the exietence of eewerel independent depoeite
in the hipheen etrete. They eey be loceted in both reeerwoir etrete of dif-
derent thichneeeee end in eerbonete eeriee of the hipheen eepereted by ehely
leyere. The epncee in the letter were epperently foreed through beret devel-
opeent in the cerboneten during the pre-Motien inter-rel. The depoeite ere
copped by ehely cerbonete depoeite of the hotien unite of the Lower Cenbrien.
The fluide ere eonteined in way-frectured end cewernoue-frectnred cerbonete
reeerwoire. Judging by the lerge oil end see yielde. the filtretion cherecter-
intice of the letter reeervoire ere eetiefeetory.

‘6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

M OHIO!“ I!" ONLY

The distribution of oil end gee pools in the KIWI-MM“!!! section is con-
trolled by the hipheen structurel pettern. 'i'he bedding englss of the root
renge free 10“ to ks". The thichnesees of cerbonete suites reech 600-800
netsrs. It eppsers thet the deposits ere distributed in bends. ‘ihe breedths
of the individuel bends hey be smrel hiloeeters in esssivs stretigrephicelly
enclosed deposits end severed hundred esters in stretigrephioelly enclosed
beds.

The oils in the Kuyuebinsheye pool ere um (0.79-0.83 g/cn3). low in sulfur
(less then 0.2!) end low in pereffin (less then 25). end hove less then 6!
of terend e yield of up to if)! of light frections. ln lmirocerbon content
they ere sssentielly eliphetic. such reeeebling oils ﬁne the lower ceebrien
end Vendien deposits of the Angers-Dene end lepsho-hotuobinsheye erees. They

differ only by s slightly higher cyclene content end en inereessd degree of
condensetion.

The elnost universel distribution of nipheen forestions of signifioent thick.
ness within the heyhit nnteclise expends the renge of deposits with oil end
gee proeiee. Oeologicel dete eneble us to predict the existence in the
Kenovshiy Arch eree of other buried Ripheen uplifts structurelly sieiler to
the Kuyunbinshiy uplift. 0n the southwestern end southern linbs of the
Keeovshiy Arch. tsrrigene strete of the Lower Motien subsuite underlying
cerbonete rocks of the Motion suite here been discovered by the maneuv-
end hishneteyginsheye test wells. The wedging-out sons of the hover lsotien
eendstones elong the southwestern end southern slopes of the Keeovshiy Arch
is of interest in the eeerch for lithologicelly end stretigrephicelly segrer
nted deposits sieiler to those found on the limbs of the Ispsho-hotuobinshiy
unteclise. In eddition. oil and gee pools eey be found within the erch in
lower Cabrien interselt deposits. perticulerly in the cover of the Notien
nuite end the Osinshiy horison of the Usol'sheye elite. Thus it is edventege-
cue to continue the eeerch for buried Ripheen uplifts by deep drilling on the
Kuovshiy Arch. to esteblish the presence end epproxieete outline of wedging-
out sones of the sendstonee on the linbs end to eveluete the oil end gee pro-
spects of the lower Ceebrien selt-heering couple: within the lergest end
eost reliebly prepered locel uplifts.

Another proeieing eree is the northern pert of the Whitshiy enteclise (besin
of the upper hehhte end the lower lishneye mngushe). llere ere loceted the
anhhte Ridge end the Suringdehonshiy Arch. The eein productive horisohs
nhould be expected in the wugg end cevernous doloeites of the lower. eiddle
end cspecielly the upper Kostinsheye suite of the lower Ceebrien. in the
sendstones of the lsyhit mite of the lower Ordovicien end in the own-
etic doloeites end linestones of the Henlochien stege of the Bilurien. These
coqlexes here excellent or setisfectory reservoir cherecteristics. cabined
with cepping horizons.

in the northern pert of the heyhit nnteclise. the sedieentery cover is dis-
rupted by nuerous intrusions. rendering description of the structures in
terns of the verious horisons eore difficult end eehing it herd to prepere
the: by geoplusicel eethods. During the next few yeere it will be necessery
to study the regiooel structure of these territories. to locete trep bodies in
the section. to esp out the tones conteining horisons with excellent or

‘0
roe OFFICIAL USS ONLY
”ll OHICIM. 03! MY

eetiefectory reeervoir chereeterietice. end to locete thee nore precieely

in eection end ereeny. which will neke poeeihle lore eyetuetic preparation
of locel uplifte end e eelective deeignetion of the letter for deep wildcet
drilling. The top priority teet welle ere Oneheheye end Bil'cheneheye welle
on the extrene northern linh of the heyhit entecliee end the Kochundeheheye
on the eoutheeetern linh of the Behhte ridge.

The very firet teet well. the Venevereheye. drilled in the Ketenge oil end
gee eree. loceted two pro-icing horieone: eendetonee in e lower euheuite of
the Motien euite end Bipheen dolceitee. 'l'he thichneee of the forner wee lore
then 30 eetere end their depth 3135-3168 eetere. with the upper pert eetureted
with oil. A conerciel flow of oil wee ohteined on teeting of the top 7 net-
ere with e fornetion teeter. “the eendetonee ere covered by e 60-mer lever
of ergillitee end elemlitee. The oil hee e deneity of 0.82 g/ce3. conteine
0.151 eulmr. end yielde ha?! light frectione. ‘l'he Ripheen depoeite were
found in the 3196-3333 neter renge. They were lerge-cryetelline. denee.
lerge-cevernoue doloeitce elterneting with leyere of greenieh-grey ergillitee.

It eppeere thet the eendetonee of the lower euheuite of the Notien euite end
cone of the Ripheen doleeitee ere the nein tergete for oi.‘. end gee proepecting
in the Ketenge eree. Other pro-icing horizone ney he found in the Buleyeheye
ouite. the liehnehel'eheye euheuite. the Oeinehiy horizon end the upper pert
of the Motien euite. Drilling of the Sohineheye, sol'nvodeheye end llinpey-
eheye teet welle ie plenned for the next few yeere in order to up out zonee
of occurrence of eendetonee in the Motien euite end to deter-ine their thick-
neeeee end reeervoir cherecterietice.

The greet extent of terrigene end exploeiwe forutione of the Upper Peleoeoic
end 'l‘rieeeic with thickneeeee up to 1.000 netere ie eeking preperetion of the
etructuree hy geophyeieel nethode Inch nore difficult. Accordingly it ie
plenned in thoee ceeee to cahine eeienic proepecting with core drilling.
atteneive uee will eleo he Iede of electricel proepecting hy eetehliehing the
field in neerhy men. which ie expected to help refine the etructurel plen
of the Venevereheye eector end deter-nine the locetion of the weter-oil inter-
fece.

‘lhe coepleted end plenned work in the verioue regione of Kreenoyerehiy Krey
in only the beginning of e nejor progree of regionel end proepecting-explore-
tion work eined et feeter locetion of oil end gee eccuuletion :onee end e
higher geologicel end econcnic effectiveneee for oil end gen proepecting in
the externely couple: geologicel conditione of the 8iherien Pletforn.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

l. V. I. Igrevehiy; end V. V. Suenowich. "leoeonic lffectiveneee of Geo-
logicel kploretion for Oil end Gee end Veye of Ilprowing it in the 0938
Ninietry of 000109 Byetel." GNWIYA um I M. No. 5. 1975. PP
1-15.

‘9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
2.

ho

POI ORIGIN. US! OIL?

II. K. hunk!» "011* And 0.. COMM“ of north-Contrd 815021..” in
“‘01)? IIIOA. Vol. 9?. 1958. pp 91-95 (“Mm“). ‘

A. equator-ouch; a. v. ammo" and v. e. eumwuw. "on
and On Geology Region. or the Siberian Plural-l." cumin um I
0‘". ”0 2. 1m6. pp 1.13-

A. 8. Kontoroﬂch; I. 0.‘ mm; l. V. m'nikov of. .1. "Prospects'
for the Discovery of on And an in the W Mann." WA
mmnA. '6 3. 1916. pp 11-220

COPYRIGHT: I!dntol'l%vo "lodru". ”0001031,. lorti 1 0.3;". 1978

8580

080

: 1822

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WWWTDﬂW

0mm»! 00“: m0! GAIN m
Kiev 0005' MI!!! in Russien No l. Jen 79 pp 1-10
(Article: "lore Coel for the Country2']

[ran] her: new yesr use its own distinctions. The stert of this one
is speciel. It is teking plece in en etsoephere of e greet pcliticel
end lsboc- upswing. ceused by the decision of the Novesber 1978 Plenus
of the MU Gentrel Conittee. At the Plenus cosrede LI. Breshnev seid‘
'Ve ere continuing to put e lisit on netsl end fuel. In order to insure
the develop-eat of ferrous and nonferrcus setellurgy. the oil. as end
coel indntries. in three yeers sore then 50 billion rubles use expended.
end ellcceted for 1979 is elsoet 23 billion sore. As you see. these
ere not null esomts. Nevertheless the eeeignsents for introduction of
cepecities end for the production of ferrous en! nonferms netels. end
for the extencticn or ccel end oil ere not being cospletely fulﬁlled.“

In coder to overocse the leg. urgent seesm'es were outlined. escng which
‘sn ispcrtent role is set eside for socielist cospetition. “Us have

elsc such e tested lever for multiplying lebcr successes es the socielist
cclpetiticn. lhving beocne by its scope end dqth truly netionel. the
ccspetiticn contently gives birth to sodels of elective lebor. it is

e good service for the develcpsent of the country's econosy.’ pointed
out LI. Breshnsv et the Plenus of the CPS" Gentrel Consittee.

lie heve entered the fourth yeer of the Tenth Five-leer Plen. end
depending on .the work during this yeer is mli’illnent of the five-yesr
plsn es s whole. The ccsmnist perty end the Soviet stete ere devoting
content attention to the developsent of the coel industry.

In the resolution of the Centrel Cc-ittee cf the perty end the govern-
sent 'On leesures for Developsent of the Ocel Industry of the Donets
Benin in 1976-l9m." end ”On Gnnting Additional Privileges to Workers

in the ccel end Shele Industry end Ilining Construction" the specific ways
ere deter-iced for speeding up the ccntruction. rebuilding end technicel
retoolim of the nines. ccncentretingsillsend pleas in coel nchine
building; end e brood progre- is outlined fcr ilproving lsbcr protection

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I!" ONLY

on! oofoty onginooring. hulth protootion m oooioouiturol Iounroo
(in portiouhr. roioiu uogo ntoo. tho omnto of outdo for non of
Iorvioo. mi old-m plnaiono).

Muroo for ntoriol ond oorol inoontivoo. ond brood privilogoo out
odvmtocoo m1 olnvoto linon' lobar otin Ion. Outfitting tho cool
induotry with oodorn lining oquipoont. on: okilml outcry or it oro

o suorontoo of ouoooooml work.

may norkoro ona oonootivoo o: ontorpriooo of tho Uboinion 88R Iiniotry
or the Cool Induotry on ouooooomny fulfilling tho piano ona oooioliot
obliationo. Coopiotod by tho onnivoroory of tho now Constitution of
tho IBM! In fulfill-ant of tho throo-yoor phn by M Iinoo. an
oxtrootion oootiou. 253 ctr-noting ond 11b tannoling Woo. on!

3.000 oino-tooo uorkoro. h? of who: mmuoa tho pin for tour you!

of tho fivo-yoor pun. And nino-tooo dorkoro ﬂoro of Socioliot hbor
P.Yo. Many-k (lino iooni Artoo). ond honoroti nine: of tho "minim
ssa v.0. Grim (um iloni 1ootov m1 v.9. mm 'loohoorko').

A.G. lhvorootyrn (lino iooni Ionin . and 1.1. Doyov ”Tarot-kayo“ lining
onliniotrotion) oolplotd thoir fivo-yoor plono in 1978. ‘mroo-yoor
piano for oxtnotion of cool voro mmuu oorLy. in lovonbor 1978.

by tho uoooiotiono of Donotokugol'. Unsopduoi'. boondomgol',
Shokhtorolantnuit. Oniohonikinoougol' ond Povlogudmoi'. An mu or
o okilml. mtivo opproooh to utiliootion o! quip-out ond noorvoo
of reduction in tho work of tho oonootivoo of tho linon inoni pooty
“Sotoioliotiohookiy Donbooo.” 'Ulrnino.’ iooni hum. 1mm.“

No. 3 'Volikooootovoluyo.‘ on! any othoro. Ihioh oro inoroooin‘ tho rotoo
of attracting moo you- to yoor.

Tho prido of workers in tho cool induotxy oro tho Wop-Woo.
At tho ooumo of tho thouoonior mount In tho Mario 01' tvico-
hero of Sooioliot hbor 1.1. Strol‘ohonko tron tho Mouton“ lino.
Having onto“! to portootion tho lump-grip oquipoont uni toomlogy
of oxtrootion. book in 1986 this oonootivo wanted o 1|;in «stron-
tion or 1,000 tons of cool on! Doro. mioh aooodd town-told tho oyorogo
10¢! per lmll for tho ropublio. Tho oootion. which to m hooliod
by lining onginoor 1.1. Strol'ohonko (brigade loader MD. Poliainhuk)
io the initiator of o cup-in for mention out long life or linim
equip-ant. on! oinoo tho otort of tho tivo-yoor pin it ho. atmtod
2.5 Iillion tons of cool. Over 3 zillion tom woo contributod oinoo
tho otort of tho rive-you- plan by tho brigdo of ﬂora of Sooihliot
hbor v.6. Inn-sumo 'Irunyy Partisan" lino) m 1.1.. loloonikovo
(lolodo‘vudoryohyo' . Incmsod pldgoo oro boing fulfill-d by tho
bripdon hoodod by ”on or Socinliot hbor 0.1. lIotook (inoni loo-o-
novtov). by honored unoro P.A. bunny (mum-mun“) uli
v.1. Ignt'yov (”motion-noun“). by honorod minor of tho Ukninim
ssn A.A. ”mm (1-. outy “Sotoioliotiohooldy Daub-no”) m
othor oolloctivoo vhich. hm uood noon-yo. to tho lain. Wt
thodoilyloodottho lonyolluptolsoo-moo tom.

52

FOR OFFICIAL USE “LY
POI OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

Omnod by a roooni achiowonont was tho shock watch in honor of hinor's
Day by tho briado of llorc of Socialist labor V.P. ackclov tron tho
lino inoni Oholyuskintsov. In 31 working days it cut a drift of 1200
aotors. Tho now accord wan sot by V.A. Nolopinskiy's brigado fro-

tho Donotslcohakhtcprokhcdha Trust. In Juno in 25 working days it out

a shaft of 100 aotors at tho lino iooni lalinin. having attainod tho
highost labor productivity—13.57 cubic notoro nor shift. Also with
high ratoo or cutting aro tho Wu m by v.0. Vondilcvich (aino
inoni mm). liaro of Socialist labor Ln. mam (”Sham koamisn“).
winnor at tho um suu rm. v.1. Donoshkc (Taylogradolnya') no
othors. 0n thoir initiativo rating in tho ooctor aro I93 Woo
of high-spud workors mint at tho start of tho fivo-yoar plan.

“at is tho oocrot of ouccoso of tho front-ranking brigadoo? In tho

coal induotry it is difficult to find two Iinos with absolutoly idontical
worm coalitions. In «ch spsciric coco it is mossaxy to cmsidor
tho aining-goologioal. toohnical. oconoaic and othor factors. And otill
with all tho dittoroncos in tho Iothcds of coal roocval on. tunnoling
thoro is mch in coo-on in thoir work. First of all this is ociontific
miution of labor. a good coral oli-to in tho cclloctivo. advancod
tninim. and incroasing labor diociplino. In tho (root-ranking col-
loctivcthoy aro ccncomod not only about fulfill-out of tho plan, but
also about growth in labor productivity. and improving tho quality of

tho coal. Inning quip-oat is uood with tho oaxim orrootivonoos. In
tho briudso full intorclungoability m boon achiovod. and tho linors
know all tho lining cpocialtioo. Spocial tttonticn is givon to provontivo
ropairs.

Thanks to tho soltloos labor of tho odnnosd brigados. sootions and
rinos sinoo tho start of tho tivo-yoar planmoro than 6 aillicn tcno of
coal Ins boon utractod abovo tho plon. Hod-k has boon dcoo ibr turthor
iwprovooont. for .noohanioaticn and autontion c! production on! toohnc-
lcgicalprccossos. mnmamkdmointhsnuabsrofmlly
oochaniaod lino tacos. tho voluao of attraction no: which wao inmasod
10-fold by ccmrison with 1975. How about 58 porcont of tho coal is
yioldod tron .ainos working sloping bsds with tho uso of oschuuasd
tinboring. Uos of cutting-loading nohinos on tho drifts has inczwsasod
Harold. In addition. any production acscciations and ainos of tho
ooctcr last you: did not uso all tho roacvos. thoy won-Izod bolow thoir
potontials. Tho annual voluno of attraction taking into accmmt tho
additional assign-ant owisagsd in tho plan for dolivorios of m1 to
tho comunors was not mlﬂllod by tho mblic's coal industry.

Tho Iain moon for tho ooctor'o lag was tho roduction in tho volu-ss

of mparatcry cporaticns. as a rosult of which any associations and
Iinss woro not providod with tho nocssoary and quality {root of

working tacos. Tho Pmonwﬂmgol' asoociation Ind a significant lag
in tho dovolop-ont of linos an! propantion of tho front of attraction
opsntiom.

$3

FOR OHICIIJ. US! ONLY
m OWICIAL 083 OIL?

Reduction of the front of «treotion operetiono. e worsening of its quelity.
end the ebsenoe of en effective reserve line occurred et lines of the
Dcnbessentretsit Assooietion. In the Artemgol' Associetion the voluee

of perfor-noe of mopretory encevetions in 1976-1977 wes reduced by

16 kilo-store. or by “.5 percent. end the plen wee not fulfilled in 1978.
At new lines there were devietiono froe the ennue1 groan. lot put

into opention on ties were 26 longvelle with e ponible entrecticn of
6.000tonsofccel. endBeinesdid nottevetheneoesseryressrvefront

of operetions.

The plene were not fulfilled end there wee e significant reduction in
the voluses of preperetory operetions by the essocietions Ireenceneysk—
ugol'. Dobropol'yeugol. en! the Stenunovugol‘ essocieticn reduced the
tunneling volune by 61 kilo-store with respect to 1970. The indloeted
essocutionn opereted unetebly. end owed e greet encunt of coel.

It is neoesoery to solve mule-entel problem directed et increeeing

the extreotion of coel. Ihe neoeseery coalitions for mlfillnent of the
plen ere tinely end quelity peptstion of the line of working feces.

end the presence of spere end reserve longuells. In 17” et eech nine

it is neceseery edditionelly to prepere not lees then one opereting

end one epere longwell. It ie necessery to estehlish effective control
over the introduction of the longwells. end to inoresse the responsibility
of engineering end production services. It is necessery to increese

the masher of tunneling modes. which would insure the weprsticn of
new sine feces. It is stress]: bed thet every yeer 50-60 percent of

the underuey leyers ere put into operetion et the en! of Deoenbsr. Fore-
eeen in the plen for 1979 in their introduction every querter. em ssneciel
ettention hes been given to netting up new were et musing nines.

Under the coalitions of en ecute shortege of nodern tunneling equip-eat
only the orgenisetion of high-oped perfornnoe on the besio of large
tunneling hriades will she it poesible to reduce the tiles for me-

peringthelmllsurltholeyers.endtoisprovethesiniu.

In the oeee of e deficit of the sxtrsotim front et any nines utilised
uneeticfectcrily ere the line of the working feoes end the existing lining
equipsent. In e you the fomui eovesent of the feces use reduced by ‘
3.3Ieterceuinottheplsn. theloedone uorldxfeoensrsduoedby

16 tone end in the Sverdloventreteit mooietion by 106 tons. in Vorc-
ohilcvgrsdugol' by 51 tons. in Shekhtsrcltentutsit by 75 tons. en! in

the Toresentretsit eeeoointion by 28 tons. The land on the fully
nechenised longvell wee eleo reduced. The low effectiveness of utilise-
tion of eeohnised cosplexee is the result of unsetisfeotory selection

end mperetion of the working feces. inadequete omnisetion of woduotion
end lebor in the extreoting end in the repel: shifts. end the poor stete
of the lend-in atoevetione end the ventiletion. Rel-1r shifte ere not
oleerly discrlnimted et e11 lines. end they ere not elueye nodded

with e oteff of electrician. In the iniioeted mitts coal at notion
com. therefore there In: been en increeoe in losses of working tile

due to eooidents of seohinery end lechenisn.

$6
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
'0! OHICML US! ONLY

Tho oohoduloo {or inotolling tiaboring an not boing oboorvod. and tho
actual longth of oporationo {or inotallation and dionntling of ooapluoo
oxooodo tho hora 34-fold. At tho 'YuMo-Donbauhya" lino lo. 1
(Donotokugcl' Aooocioticn) two oolpluoo woro boing dionntlod for alooot
a yoar. Colplcoo at tho ainoo “Inonoluohom' and iaoni hum
(Donbauantratoit) won in a otato of oollap. to: about 9 math.

Tho plan io not boim mnnd by 50.mont of tho Ioohaniaod facoo.
and Just during tho yoor tho production or coal woo ohort by about

7 aillion tom. Tho loadoro of tho aaoooiationc and tho ainoo no
obligod to bo oooupiod dooply and oomrotoly with quootiono of tho work
of mm aoohaniaod faooo. an! an inmaoo in tho loada at tho longwallo.
monjuotanimintholoodbymporoontwillimmaninmaoo
in attraction by 28.500 tono pot day. or 9 aillion tona por you. Thio
istho-onilportantbocauaoprowidodtythoplantorl979ioamrthor
incnoooo in tho ntoo o! tochnical moon. oopooially rounding ovonll
aoohaniaation or opontiono in tho worldng am mtory taooo.

hoplannodgmwthinthoatnotionofooalwillboimundbytho
additional putting into equation of 50 ooaplcoo. by an mom“ in
tholoadonthomllyaocmnodfaoobysporoontcnthoavongouﬂ
bybringingitupto660tomporday.

Tho Wank-made nvooont io playing a largo out in tochnioal
progrooo and in uplifting coal attraction. In a you- 1‘»: thmandon-
Woo putoutalnootSOailliontono otooal—athini otthoworking
oxtnotion on oloping bodo. each work will dotonino tho noulto of tho
oootor ao a wholo. Tho mica-out mating tho m of loogwallo

with a daily load «1,000 tooo and no was not mltillod by 13 mooiop
tiono. am 7 Muood tho mabor o! Won-longstan- by oolparioon
with 1977. Tho unaba- ot thcuoaniozubripdoo woo roduood coming-ably

in tho moodationo of lakoyowgol'. Dcnbauantntoit an! Swallowantratoit.

Inourtiao. oopooioloinitioanooiotohnonbythoatartoaﬂini-
tiativoo of innovators of production, ani of worku- oollootivoo.

Howvor tho initiativo or “Not ono lagging non-by!" otill has not
roooivod wido diotributiod. At tho ontapriaoo it is nooooou-y omtontly
to intmduoo tho advancod know-how of tho boot brigadoo. to inmaoo
thmaborotloogwanawithaW-tonlcod.mtoilprovothoir
opontion. '

hpooial attoation not bo giwon to filling mt tho staff or woo-ton of
tho baoio ooouyatiom an! oomot utilisation of labor momma. In
mmooiationoandatainootluworkonotthoworkingtaco. tho
tmnoloro and outta-o an otton divortod for tho fulfill-at of non-basic
amtiona.aminam-borofoaooothouio nothilhontottho
outwt norm. an! than an goat losooo ot ti-o.

55
FOR OFFICIAL US! OIL!
NI ORIGIN. "8| ONLY

it ie neoeeeery for the leedere of the eeeooiotione nnd ninee to take
urgent neenuree for tillilgin the our: of the beeio oooupeticu. to
reduce to n uni-1n the divereicn or workere Me the working hoe end
of tunnelere for perforeiu outoide prooeeeee. end to inoreeee control
over the etetm of the eohedme eyeten and reporting. end over winiting
of the ninee w nnegerinl wot-here (comm during night mm). It
ie neoeeeu-y to provide order in eeoh bripde. et eeoh eeoticn on! nine.
to increene tnining work. to etrengthen labor end production diecipline.
to nine the level of oraniuticnnl work ml to oreete the ccniiticne
for highly productive lnbor.

For e long tine 32 ninee have been opennting with e leg. uni in e yen:-
they were in debt ebout ‘6 nillicn tom of cool. 'lhe eotuel everege
openting length of the line or the working reoee fcr 20 c! the ninee
(out of 32) wen 1707 nten leee then the planned length. et 10 of thee
therewee notewenone reeerve longwell. end etthereet out «#9:.-
eerwe longwnlln only 16 were provided with equip-Int. ‘l'he downtinee
for the lcngnlln which bed not fulfilled the plnn for n long tine

one to 22.1 percent. nu! teldng into eccount the unproductive work
(die-ntling the box-rim. mum of geologiul m uni othere).
they one to ”.2 percent of the ehitt tine. which in 25 percent higher
tun the evenge dot: for the ninintry. About 70 percent of the downtinee
were oeued by ucidentn with the digging nohinex-y end recovery
neohnnieu. end nlfunctione in intrnnne tun-port.

In oomtruoticn the plen for capitol inwe tnente en! ocnetruoticn em
inetelleticn opentione in not being fulfilled. The work on noonetruu
tion of the 'lovo-hxtoveme' end "ruinoveme-Glubcm' lines in
being oomucted atrenely unutiefectorily. - Due to undereteRing
with worker-n. an the low level of .endneerim tnining et the linen
ieeni looicr. ineni Vekhruehev. en! lo. 21. the plen in being fulfilled
Just by 75-85 percent. line building ocebinee ocmhntly .oem over

the deedlinee for colpletim nine noomtmction. which plnoee the
unoodetione in e difficult eituetion.

In 1979 it in neceeeery to put into operation 0 million tone of cepecitiee
for attraction of cool. inclining the lint phone of the “Zepedno-
Donbeoelnye' um No. 16/17 (oepecitq 1.5 zillion tone per you). the
'lowonirgorodehye' nine (1.15 million tone of brain ooeln). end to
coeplete room-traction of the ninee move-Bummer ineni Vehimnhev
on! ethere. It in pinned to build 856.000 equere Ietere of living

one :9th 719.000 equere netere in 1978. to build children’e ohool
fecilitiee for who phcee. eohooln ct generel eduoetion for ,

opening. hoepitele with 250 bede end pclrclinice to eoocniete 600
winite. plue e zoo-p1“. recreation center.

ﬁne-net inportentteekor nine buildere ie tooonoentnte labored
ptveicel name et tandem contraction pro”. to introduced

the oepeodtiee ta: ctr-notion oi' ooel uni tecilitiee {or ecoiel em! cul-
tunl me in the outlined periods.

56

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OHICIAI. "8| ONLY

It is noooooory for all ontorpriooo. contraction projooto ond omino-
tiono of tho Ulnininn 883 Hiniotry of tho Cool Industry to intonoin
thoworktorooowinsormolmiolootriopour. tomoonoootmulo
for ottootivo utiliootion of ma ond powor room in .11 lohor
oollootiwoo in tho oootor. Quootiono of oofoty ouinoorin; and labor
protoction ohoum ho ot tho oontor of ottontion. Tho loodoro. tho
onunoorins ond toohniool union of tho oinoo on! mooiotiono

ohouln inoroooo tho roopomibility to: onin; lining ml blooting
oporotiono. tho: ohouln not “low violo ton! of tho tinhorln; cox-tiri-
ootoo. of tho mloo of oporotion of mono of tunoport. tho nino-tooo
and ototionor: oquipoont. thoa ohoum otriotly wotoh owor tho ototuo
of tho nino otnoophoro m tho po-pcotootion oppontuo opontion.

ond inoronoo tho uootinalooo to“ tho oxooutivoo.

aroot took: no room tho ooiontifio-noooonh. plonnins ml dooian
inotitutoo onﬂ oroniootiono. on! tho plonto in oool nohino building.
for whioh it in noooooory to orooto now oquipoont. to oodornioo thot

in opontion now. in onto: to nioo tho lovol of owonll noohniootion
undor oonplu lining on! coologiool .ooulitiono. ninly on thin out!
otoopbodo.ondolooonbodowithxoorothtmtudtooowooMun-
otnblo. It in noooooory to follow tho poth of o-ll-opontion toohnolog.
inonrin; olilinotion of ml hbor. all stood: on ottootiwo work
with toxin; tho ”in poooihlo nnnhor of pooplo out of tho «ovation
on! propontory opntiono. It. in nooooom oomtontly to otnongthon
tho rolotion botwoon ooionoo on! produotion. mi tho ooabinoli Woo.
dinotly opoutiu tho quip-out. on! {lotion to intMuoo in tho
dooign of oorioo-produood nohinoo tho apron-onto pupoood h: ninoro.
moh will immo ”liability on! quolity of tho quip-om.

‘l'ho ulna-o on! nino mildoro in tho npumo will an oil thoir otrongth.
lmowlodeo on! oxporionoo in odor to fill with honor tho who oot

forth by tho 25th cm Como on: tho 25th Conn-o of tho co-miot
PortyoftluUlu-oino,ondbytlulmnborl978rlmnotthomucon-
tnl conittoo. to lawn mlflllnont of tho plon on! tho oooioliot
plodgoo for 1979 on! tho Tooth Fin-You: Plan.

common-r. Idotol'otvo “PM". “0501' minim". 1979

10908
GO: 1822

37
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
plum mm mm m COAL mm
1m unox.‘ mm in Mona lo 1. Jon 79 pp 17-19

[Artlolo 2w mum. of mm“: oolonooo 0.3. Pln‘kovoldy on!

owlnoor NJ. 14mm. Wyn-count: '01: Dovolopnnt of Plano
m mnwonmmr mum Dollvory ln up Cool Mun-r]

[we] Pookot-oonttlnor mam dollvory :- tho .111 GM“! ln
ollnnotlng «mum. nun-l lobar 1:: loading on! unloading. “hot-1m
ml tnnoport opontlono. Tho IBSR mun-y of tho Cool lulu-try hon
omovod o m or plonnlu. duty: on! oolontlno roooomh prom.
tho fulfill-out of uhloh will lam moll Inhalation of opontlom
muting Mt dollvory m: tho ouppllo: (Motor ouboxuxntlon)

to tho Job olto in tho duo. Fulﬁll-ht at tho plan to: subt-
oontunor dollvcy mull!" oonoldontlon or o m of room. on!
tho oommlntlon a! knot-Mo. timotoro tho ml Moo for tho
dovolop-ont of nor-tho om oothodolq lml domaontatlon.

Tho opontlon of tho pout-coauthor dollvory onto- ull tho pootoot
ooonodo honoﬂtoonhoottolnod onlgwlth mumummn
of tho moooo of loving might {no tho omlloo-ontonrlooo to tho
Job olto in tho lino. Fa: o con-oat ocononlo onluotlon of tho outluo
on! dotcdnotlon of tho odvloomnty of lntrodndn‘ ”hot-contour
dollvory. . toohMco-ooomdo automation (w. W
choohoyo mm.) 1. mm out. patron-d m- u: mum-1
mochtlon or o lino building comm in too otogoou om. only
on! mulls of tho «toting oltutlom dovolopont on! ooonodo ovula-
tion of toohnlool oolutlouo. Tho octuol out». of pollution on!

tho lobar coumtlon of Mullins. “hm-1n; on! trumpet opontlon
u-o ootobluhod by owl»; oll tho limo. control hoooo. Woo.
plut- onl othor tocllltloo oupplylng utorhln to tho unoo ln tho
Men. M o rooult of tho out-mo of tho Povlognduol'. handou-
ugol' on! Yuohkmhouugol' moontlom it no novoolodt

50
no OFFICIAL US! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Tho loot Johan-oonouoing opntiono “quiz-ins tho uoo of noun lobor
oro unlooding. oat-tins. coming up out ioodiog or ootoriolo ot tho
dopoto. Won ond ot tho ourtooo of tho lino. tho ropootod
tnnotoro ot tho Junotiono of dittoront typoo of introoino tronoport.
duping on! otorin; of ntoriolo ot tho Job oiton

In viou of tho oonotont ohortogo ot poopio for mltinoont of rigging
opontiono on tho ourhoo on! in tho lino for donut-y or notorioio.
workoxo in tho hooio oooupotiou (tunnoloro ond melting moo oinoro)
on uood. oo o rooult or ohioh thoro io o noduotion in tho nto of
doing tho otoovotion ond oovinc tho working foooo ohoodl

mu tho muting oothodo o: dolivory or mumm- mi ortioloo (am:
in bulk) ond ropootod tnnoton uhon tronoporting hon tho omiioro to
tho Iino tooo. oonoidonhlo looooo occur. Thuo. tho broom of
roinforood oonomoto hoo- ooooo to 15-20 pomnt. looooo or oooont

oooo to 12-25 pol-cont. of roinforoooonto 5-? poroont. oi1 18-20 poroont.
up to 15 poo-cont of tho ronoro of bolt oonvoyox'o oro W. on! oo on.

On tho booio of onolyoio of tho quoting oituotion in tho toohnioo-
ooonooio ouhotontiotion. o dotoroinotion io ndo of tho ooot ooonooiooi
om toohnioom idool oohoooo of tho toohnologiool ohoin with tho uoo
of non oquipoont for oooh typo or m of ntoriolo. hoginning with
puttim tho- into hoiJat unito ot tho ounuoxuontomioo on! outing
with uoo ot tho Job oito. ond o1oo tho oonnootod monotmotion or
orootion of tooilitioo. Bolvod oro promo. ot oonoontntion ond

opooiouootion. ond ioprovooont of tho Wtion or ntoriol mi
toohniool manly.

Connidoriu tho divoroo nooonoloturo of ltortolo. ortioloo. onto porto
on! quip-ant '(up to amooo dooicmtionohnod by murmu- in a. cool
induotzy. tho lobar oonouoption on! tho ooononio imdvioobility of thoir
oonvmion to pooloot-oontoinor donut-y. onvioogod by tho Iothod ot

tho givon otogo of dovolopont ond intmduotion of tho oyotol in tho
oopontion of tho ntoriolo mi Nuoto uood for mining Jobo tint on
labor-conﬁning to dolivor to tho lino. on! tho tho {night dolivorod

in bulk ond tho Might tint iohbon-oonouning to wooooo ot tho dopoto
on! aroma. For tho oomntod produoto liot o olnoificotion io
colon-d on! o liot of tho booio ntorinlo to ho oovond by palmt-

contoinor dolivory in dotoninod. Tho upootod voluno of oomunption
of atom]- in ootohliohod booed on tho opocitio upotﬂitm of thoo

pox- 1.000 tom. hkon into ocomnt in tho opoitic mturo of dolivu'y
of tho ntoriolo to tho oinoo. during ohioh too typoo of rohtiono
occur: oupplioob-oino worohouoon ouppuohbb oito in tho lino.

Providod for tho {int typo of rohtion in tho uoo of tochniool Ioono
o! tho on-union oontoinor tnmport oyotoo (m. kontqnomo
trumpet-two oioton). m for tho oooond tho loon- of tho oyotoo or
pckot-contoinor mum dolivory in tho cool induotry ('Pokod' out“).

59
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL I!" ONLY

Thu. 'Pokod" oupplononto tho m with roopoot to tho opooifio noturo of
tho {night utiiiood by tho lining induotry. mi tho tronoportotion of
it in worn-mud lining uoovotiono. Tho tnnoit or urohmm {on

or dolivon in oolootod in tho oooo of tho oouuiohod torritouoi
loation of tho om lorontorpriooo toxin; into oooount tho tnnoport-
proouronont upondituroo. tho voluoo of oonoulption. tho lovol of
otooko. ond tho voluo of tho tnnoit ond pootod horn.

Ooiouiotod for tho ooononio onluotion of tho otiootivonooo of tho
'Pokod" oyotol io tho lohor-intomivonooo for oooh typo of notoriol

in tho uholo voluno of oonouogtion in tho mo of ditfonont loom of
doiivory taking into oooount on opontiono fro-tho mum to tho finoi
point of novonont of tho Itoriol. For this m1. oto oolpilod of

tho toohnologiooi. oporotiono or mooning tho {night ot tho dopoto.
unnhouooo. on tho outtooo of tho linoo. ond during doiivon of tho
Might thmsgh Moi-3mm onoovotiono. ot tho booio of uhioh in

tho uiotina toohnoiog of oporotiono m thot propoood ooooniiu to

tho mm" opt-(mun 1).

Tho oohoooo of tun-porting Might through undoruound uoovotiono in
tho one of pokot-oontoinor dolivory m workod out (for tho mrpooo
of oouporioon) for oooh nino opplioohio to tho oxiotiu toohnoiog of
conducting Mao ond mtory oporotiono oni to tho coalition of
tho «emotions during tho ourvoy poriod. Tho hoot-intuivonooo of
tho opontiono tor oooh typo of ntoriol io dotoninod ooootding to
dusting norm. on tho hbopintonoivonooo of tho opontiom. for which
nor- of production on looking. oro dotorlinod ooouding to tho-
otuiy ob orntiono or: omovod lino ooti-tiono.

Stipulotod by tho oothod on tho min- utiliootion of aiotinc uro-
houoo oitoo. quip-out on! other physical rooms-coo for admin; tho
capitol updituro for introduction of pooht-oontoinor {night
dolivox-y. Cot-Moria tho noooooity of o not poriod for oooililotion

of tho 'Pokod' oyoton unior tho coalition of opontinc ontoz'priooo.
onvioogod in tho intmduotion of pooht-oontoinor doling in two otogool
mlnlinont of priority mdooto for tor-tier: of tho {night unito ot
tho dopoto. \u-ohomoo ond phnto nod for loot-hintion of boiling.
“homing“ tnnoportopontiomonthoourtoooond inthoninou

om tho union of tho {ioid of oppIiootion or pooht-oontoinor doiivory
taking into ooeount Mthor oontnliution. oyooioliootion ond immo-
Iont of tho Minn-y production.

Tho oftootivonou of Woontoinor dolivory will ho rovoolod by
counting tho cponiituroo during rooliootion of tho 'hkod" oyotoo

mi tho «rioting onoo. hVingod during porter-mo of tho tootmico-
ooononic subtnntiotion in tho utilisation of- o oolplox of quip-oat.

dovicoo on! ooooonorioo of tho 'Pokod" oyoton on! tho oontoinoxh
Wynn-(m); mordootthfroidttmitoof-toriohoni
pnduoto; o nothod of oolouhtion of tho do“ for noun of

60
M OFFICIAL 053 cm:
7.

‘e
b.

M OHIO!“ US! ONLY

 

llenento of the Pocket-contain}: heidrt Deliwa'y lyeten
in the Gael Innuetry

Couple: of equipnent end eppentu for peohet-oontniner
freight delivery. recording And control of their utilinetion
Couple; of equipeent. technology end (valuation of the
{caution or delivery unit-

’l‘nneport neenn uﬂ oraniution of peolaet-oontniner ehip-
nente fro-themliertotheurehoune

Inehounee em nterinl-teokmioel beeee with neohninetion
of loading uni unloedin; opentione en! en “to-ted syste-
o! eeeroh. martin en! oontrol

hen-part Ieenn. amnion of ehipeente mi tun-fer

of delivery unite to donations

Omniution of peoket-oonteimr height delivery luring
the airing of uoevetionn

Orpniution of peohet-oonteiner freight delivery during
tutti-notion opentione

Mod

Mod Auto-tic Control 913%: (m) Center

pocket-«miner deliver” the teohnioel conditions of loening (no
tnmportin; poket-oonteiner freight; the technological chein of
tor-tum. moaning en! trenepartetion of e freight unit of etch type
of nterinl m. the eupplier-entexwinee to the Job eite in the line.

61
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
NR OFFICIAL ”8| ONLY

According to tho dooioiono ndo in tho toohnioo-ooonooic oubotontiotion
dooim-ooti-to doounontotion (toohniool daft on! working atoning.)
io dovolopod for otop-oy-otop introduction of tho toohnoloc ml quip-
oont or po'okot-ocntoinor dolivory ot iMiviAuol objootivoo of tho toch-
nologiool ohoin. In oddition it io nocoooory to oolvo tho promo. of
Ioohmiootiom for-tion of tho {hiya unito ot tho oupplior-ontomiooo
(mm (or mm oonoroto produoto. mu:- m Iohinory plum.
hoooo. control Woo). Mailing uni urohmin‘ opontiono ot tho
lino unhouooou tronotu-o of pookot-ccntoinor Mt by induotx-inl
tnnoport fro- tho oupplior to tho lino: intnoino tan-port out
tnnofor opontiono ot tho Junction of dittmnt tronoport linko. on!
oloo quootiono of cr’niootion of tho lobor of tonic production pro-
cooooo ot tho Job oito. ciopotchor control. oo-micotiono out omin-
tion or Itorhl All! toohnionl oupply.

m typo oiooo ond quohtity of noodod toohniool doviooo oro dotornnod
by tho plnn for pnohot-oontoinor oupplq of tho lino doponiing on tho
mining ouinooring coniticno (oyotooo of dovolopoonto. duo 95o.
dooign on! dilutions of lifting oontoinox-o. typo of tho hooo cor.

1m- of intronino tun-pm ml othorl). W io tho inn-mount
of Win. providing ovonll oochoniution or hurtling on! uno-
hcuoim opontionou tho uoodod front of houtinc on! tnnoport oporo-
tiono. rogulnticn on! prooomtion of notoriolo «in; to notion
mum-oat of tho unhouoooa oquip-ont on! tho tochnolog of Iochoni-
oction of tho tun-porting m rolooding of minor, Might (inoluiin;

lnrco-tiobor Might) with roopoct to Mora-cum uoovotiono drooth
to tho Job lit...

A omoy at tho Iinoo or diffonont oool mica! mi booin (bulw-
olnnoto. Vortutougol'. honodomgol'. Yuohlnnbo-ugol'. Rootowgol'
mi othoro‘) moolod tho wholo couploxity on! diva-nit, of lining coali-
tion- on! toohniool oolutiono odoptod in tho plnno for ozootioa on!

noonotmction of ninoo in tho on of tnnoptrtotion of miliu-y
Might.

Tho booio oooploxity and lobar-intensity or working out tho plono oon-
slots in thot fox- oooh voroion it in nooooou-y to tint tho optim-
tochnieol oolution. thing it poooiblo to oxoludo ml labor

tho uoo of tho quip-out of pohot-oontoinor dolivory; Tho dooioiono
odoptod in tho plm mot ho oomidorod ml opprwod ot toohniool omilo
of tho production moointiono. In ouior to ooooloroto tho introduc-
tion of tho docioiono ado. crootlvo ooopontion to motiodn on inti-

tuto dovolopo tho blueprints for on uporiooutol Iodol of o nochniol.
and a production moointion mufooturoo it uli dooo tho upon-nth].

tooting. Such on mango-out ninth botuoon Dnoproaproohkht on! tho
mocintiono of lnonodonugol' . Povlogndu‘ol. Gukovugol' om othon.

An mlyoin of tho multo‘ of tho ourvoy and tho inluotrlnl t-to of
uporinontol oodolo nhoo it poooiblo for tho ooiontifio noon-oh out!

62
m OHICIAL US! ONLY
M OWICIAL I!!! ONLY

plennins elli denial inetitutee to detereine end eccelerete the develop-
eent end eeeieiletion ct the production of the neceeeery eoene of
eechenieeticn. After mixing out the etendenic eni uthoiclca docu-
eentotion end industriel incorporeticn of the lane and technology

put into the plene. there in the pceeibility of crating stem-:1!

plus of eeclunieeticn of man. werehcuein‘ end tremport cperetione
of ell link: of the process of tnnltertin; freight fro- the eupplier
enter-prince to the Job eitee in the nine on the ma or pecketpconteimr
delivery. Introduction of the ccepletea projects will nice it pceeible
to elieinete difficult m1 labor. to increece lbs-told the productivity
of lebcr et euniliuv cpereticne. to elininete My all lceeee ct
uterine. end to reduce 5-6-th the downtime or trencport eeene

in freight mtiom.

COPYRIGHT. Indetel'etvo mm". “0301‘ 0mm“. 1979

IONS
GO: 1822

63

m 0177mm. us: can
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040006-0

END 0!
FICHE

 

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040006-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040006-0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00860R000100040008-0