APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: CIA-ROPoz-OOIBOROOOI00010032-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010032-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8225
16 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000100324
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
(l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Repgrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Honthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.8. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster. Ohio, 64691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
. ﬁrm Ne.
.Imes_l./ 8225
. ll 0 a II I

TMNS‘LATKONS 0N USSR AGRICULTURE ' (FOUO 1/79)

   
   

 

IIILIOGIAPHIC ONIA

rpm: Mir
16 January 1979
No.

'0. Halon/Teal och Unit Na.

    
 
     
 
 
 

  
   

    

9. Potion-in Ouaairulon Nan ud Addvcu

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North clebe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

I}, Swooning Ouaaitatloa Nana and Mirna

 
 
 

  

  
  

  

I). ward loan a Peliod

  
 

As above

 
 
 

IS. Sunkocamy Nance

 
 
 

”mac“

 
 

The report contains information on trends and policy at the national and
republic levels, plans and plan fulfillment. production statistics.
technological achievements and shortcomings. and agricultural invoetnenta.

adniniotration. and management. Information at lover levels is included
when it is indicative of trends or innovations.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 13/8225
16 January

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR AGRICULIURE
(moo 1/79)

Coureurs

Statistical Analysis of Soil Tendency 'l'o Hind Erosion
(A. L. Andreychuk, at al.; DOW VASKhNIL, Jun 78) ......

Capillary 'Isthod of Leaching Saline Soils
(S. V. Ssnoysn; DOKIADY VASRhNIL, Aug 78) .................

Book on 01611103“ Soils in Volga and Pro-Ural: Regions
(CHBRNOZM 888R (POVOLZR'YB I PREDUML'YB), 1978)

Classification, Application of Complex Fertilisers Discussed
(A. v. Potorburgskiy; IZVBSTIYA mm: NAUK 858]!
serum BIOLOGIWBSKAYA, Nov-Doc 78)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

UDC 631.4:551.053
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF SOIL rmmor TO WIND EROSION
Moscow DOKLADY VABKhNIL in Russian no 6 Jun 78 pp 22-23

[irticle by A. L. Andreychuk, Candidate of Agricultural Sciences;
Ya. L. Bronshteyn, Candidate of Technical Sciences; and H. I.
Rubinshteyn, Candidate of Agricultural Sciences (Presented n

5 Hey 7? by A. n. Hamytov, Corresponding Hember of VASXhNIL§

A full analysis of the degree to which soils yield to the forces
of deflation must, in the general case, also take into account
other factors affecting the erosion process--the presence of
stubble. soil moisture, etc. Since the effect of most of them
is stochastic in nature, the soil's tendency to wind erosion
should be determined by means of a robability index ﬁtting into
account the statistics arameters nvolved in the analysis of
these factors. Us will imit ourselves to an analysis of the
basic ones--the roughness of the soil surface, calculated on the::
basis of data on the fractional composition of the soil, and wind
speed. Then occurs a random event, the movement of a soil parti--
cle under the effect of the wind, with the presence in the soil ,
of particles whose dimensions do not exceed a certain criticalWRm
and the effect of the wind of a critical speedzu. 0n the strength
of the independence of eventsquandw) , the probability of this
event is equal to the product of the probabilities of the two
random events indicated:

P(D)-P|2R<2Ro)P(U>Uo).

Since the critical values lie within the limits of zero and a’

certain maximum, it is necessary to know the laws of distribution
0 .0 U.-

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Statistical analysis of the results of fractional separation

of soil samgles (from the southern sierozem of the Kazakhs R)
indicated t at the percent content of fractional masses with a
robebility greaterp than 0. 5 is subject to the normal law of
istribution:

Hm) - ' W“, x

[- user] ‘1’

where r. - the size of the particles.

The statistical picture of the distribution of wind speeds in
the area from which the soil samples were taken was obtained on
the basis of years of meteorological observations, data tron
which is presented in . Our analysis showed that the hypoth-
esis concerning the dis ribution of wind speeds does not contra-
dict experimental data with a robability of osn>ol which,

accord to the w-criterion insures the required level of
credibil ty. The wind speed pm ability density takes the form

[(Uﬁ-Wupx
' U - .
xl—Lfrgéz].

The theoretical-experimental study which the authors made of the
erosion of the li ghtly-textured soils of the southern part of
Kazakhstan made it possible to establish a relationship between
the radius R.of particles subject to deflation and a critical
wind speed at the moment deflation beginsz'

k.-ocwwz-ua

In the foregoing expression, particle sizes are presented in
the form of a determinate functional dependence on the random
argument, therefore, the radius R. is also a random variable.
The density of distribution of the sizes is found in the form

“WWW (2)
X [_ ('QTODJTGS) 1.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As follows from analysis of the last expression, the distribution

of the sizes of particles with a potential tendency to deflation
varies from the normal.

Considering the deflation of particles as a random process which
is the result of the interaction (intersection) of random vari-
ables R» ,the presence in the soil of particles of a certain
size and R. -- the potential possibility of their movement under
the effect of wind, we have a system of two random variables
with a distribution function. Fm..Ra. The deflation of soil ar-
ticles of a given size is a random event n. which occurs wit the
simultaneous realization of both conditions indicated above. On
the strength of the independence of R. and R. the probability of
the event r. is equal to

P0.) um) Pm).
while the distribution density of the random variable R. is
"rd-Iona“). (3)

where (00.10» are calculated in accordance with expressions (1)
and (2) respectively.

The distribution function of the random variable k. characterizes

the probability of the deflation of particles whose size is smal-
ler than the given

Hr.) -F(r,.m(r.).

The graphic solution of the foregoing equation, presented in the
form of a nomogram, is shown in the figure. In the first quad,
rant are plotted the curves of distribution density amend the
distribut on functioncu.nin the third, the curveslu.)andru.n in
the second is constructed the set of curves r.a.-:, where 0<c<l
is the levels of probability; while in the fourth quadrant is

constructed the curve of critical wind speed as a function of
particle size

u.-1ﬂﬁ?-u73v§2 un-

Thus, the statistical oriterion--the estimate of the tendency of

a particle with a radius R. to deflation by a wind of speedlh --
is equal to

e—ronopa.

3
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
For example, for a soil whose surface layer is composed of par-
ticles of equivalent diameter 2Rq—2un we find in the fourth
quadrant “—0.04 w Probabilities run—0.6 and Gun-0.81% find the
value of the statistical criterion in the second quadrant as
equal to 0.492. Thus, the probability of deflation of a mass of
particles no more than 2 an in size is equal to 49.2%.

Let us calculate. for example, the robsbility of deflation of a
soil by a wind with a speed of 5 s. We plot the value of the
speed on the lower horizontal axis of the fourth quadrant and,
erecting a perpendicular, we find the point of intersection from
the speed curve and the value corresponding to it R.-am um Iro-
Jecting it for sun amdavn we find in the second guadrant that
the probability 0 deflation of
the soil with a wind speed of

5 n/s is equal to 0.008 or 0.8%.

We have solved the problem of
establishing the statistical
criterion for the degree to which
a soil yields to deflation on the
basis of a knowledge of the rough-
ness of the soil surface and the
distribution of wind speeds. The
new method of determining the nu-
merical characteristic of the de-
flation index is finding practi-
cal application.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1. Nechayev, In A. at ale “vet‘-
rovaya ercziya pochv v yugo-
vostochnou Ksz2§hstane i nary
bor'by s ney" ind Erosion
of Soils in Southeastern
Kazakhstan d Measures to
Deal with I , Alma-Ate,
Izdatel'stvo Gosplana Kat.

83R. 1972.
Nomogran of soil deflation

probability. 2. Schapiro, S. s. and “ilk,
H. B. BIOHETRIKA, 1965, 52,

 

copusxcsr: Izdatel'etvo "Koios", "Doklsdy vasxnnxn", 1978

8963
cs0: 182h

I;
1'09. OYPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

one 651.432.31
CAPILLARY METHOD OF LEAGHING SALINE SOILS
Moscow DOKLADY VASKhNIL in Russian No 8, Aug 78 pp 37-39

[lrticle by 8. V. Sanoyan, Candidate of Technical Sciences (Pre

,sented on 30 Her 7? by S. v. Nerpin, Corresponding Member of
VASKhNIL]

(Text? The new capillary method (which we call the "circulation“
method) consists in the removal of excess salts by washing them
out onto the soil surface and then washing them away with water.
In order to carry out this leaching process, the ordinary fur-
rows are out 2.5 and 3.0 a from one another.

The water run into the furrow percolates into the soil and, as a
result of intensive evaporation from the areas between the fur-
rows, capillary forces begin to act on the surfaces of these
areas. Generated under their effect are circulation currents
moving from the furrows to the evaporating surface of the soil.
These currents c the salts out to the surface, from which
they are periodically washed off and removed. With the existence
of a good capillary network, the pressure gradient increase 10
times and more (in comparison with the ressure gradient with
routine leac against a drainage bacgground) due to the devel-
opment of capil any forces on the interfurrow‘areas.

The figure shows a diagram of circulation leaching. As can be
seen from profiles of soil salts, these accumulate primarily in
the upper 40-50-centimeter layer. The salts are more easily
brought to the soil surface from the upper layer than moved in
the opposite directions-deep toward the ground water surface.

It should be noted that the circulation method of leaching frees

the soil of salts and thereby removes the threat of its later
resalinization.

5
son OFFICIAL use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l current of evaporated moisture. '

83111111811133!”

- surface

       
   

ground water current

fimmmm

Diagram of water movement
with the
capillary method of leaching saline soils.

The degree of complexity of the theoretical ustification of this
leaching method depends on the type of squat one we use to de-
scribe the currents of water a and the salts m. If we ignore
electrical and heat fields, the currents 4. and a are described
by the equations

h-MIHOQXQ }
90-0..X.+o..x.

(1)

In addition to the salt flow, which consists of two components of
the diffusion flow ash and the flow of the differential com-
ponent of the concentration in the boundary layers hnx. (the me-
chanical-concentration effect), it is also necessary to take into

consideration the convective transfer of the salts found within
the entire interstitial space

Oct-en- V°Ce ( 2)

where v - rate of movement of the solution during filtration and
c. - the concentration of the filtrate. Then, taking into ac-

;ount the fact that V-v» the equation of salt transfer takes the
orm:

'O-qu+°eexc+m (5)

6
FOR OFFICIAL ass om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let us analyze the role (1) of the individual components of the

flows of moisture and salts as applied to the conditions of the
circulation method of soil leaching.

0n the basis of an analysis of experimental data, with a salt
concentration gradient X.-o.2| at" and a soil moisture content of
25% (of a mass of dry soil), the rate of osmotic capillary mois-
ture flow was found to be equal to 335x104 cal-8". Taking into con-
sideration the rectilinear profile of the rates with capillary
osmosis, we can calculate this value for the case of complete
saturation, multiplying it by the ratio of moisture contents of
25 and 37%. Then for saturated soils we will have ¢~X.~6'.7><Io-‘~¢x-c".

In order to estimate the transfer of moisture in the course of
circulation leaching we must multiply this value by the ratic of
salt concentration gradients in the experiment and under field
conditions. The calculation has been performed for an average
line of flow. The length of the filtration path is 150 cm. The
difference in concentration is calculated on the basis of the
fact that the solution at the soil surface is saturated with
salts, while the water in the furrow is practically fresh. The
value of the concentration gradient in this instance is 6xI0-' on".
The gradient in the experiment was 2.000". the ratio of the
gradients being axld-a Us this ratio, we find that with circu-
lation leaching the rate 0 osTotic capillary water flow is
nun-am no-txsto-m :1on-" cm. s" .

The value of the hydraulic flow aux. is equal to the rate of
evaporation. For the first stage of evaporation, that is, when
the menisci dropped only in the capillaries with the largest di-
mensions, this rate had, depending on {he season of the year, a
value of from memo-0 to l.43xl0-' cm-sec‘ . Thus, when osmotic
capillary flow makes the greatest contribution, its relation to
to the pressure flow is from 10 to 18%. When during the leaching
process the concentration of the solution drops to 0.6 of satura-
tion, the rate of evaporation increases correspondingly from
zasto-o tou2xl0“ cm-sec' . In this case, the ratio of the osmotic
capillary flow to the pressure flow is from 3.5 to 6.7%.

These calculations indicate that when in this case the filtration
calculations are performed without taking into account the ther-
modynamic forces x. , the error in the calculation of filtration

flow is on the» order of 10%. In order to reduce the error in the
hydraulic calculation and, at the same time, to avoid the neces-

sity of simultaneously solving the equations in (l), we may pro-
ceed as follows. Perform the hydromechanical calculation on the

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

basis of the equation ennui}. -; and then, after performing this
calculation, make the appropriate correction in the value of the
filtration rate taking into account the existence of forces x..

Let us now consider the relationship of the components making up
the second equation in the system in (1).

A value for the coefficient of diffusion of the order of

10"6 cmeos’l has been obtained experimentally for soils of the

type here under consideration. With an average value along the

line of flow, the salt concentration gradient was 6 x 10-4 cm'l.

The diffusion flow rate was a..X.-6x10"° cm-s" . If we assume that

the greatest gradient value may vary from the average by an order

2f one,9in this case the rate of diffusion will be of the order
I 10' cms' .

Let us move on to an estimate of the value dcho with the fol-
lowing assum tions. The ion atmosphere profile is identical in
the case of oth model system and soils--the ion atmospheres in
both systems do not overlap one another within the pores. Under
these assumptions, the values of aux. do not depend on the spe-
cific surface of the system and the results obtained for the
model system may be extended to the actual soil. The value of
aux. for the model system may be obtained from the experiment.
The change in the concentration produced by the flow emf. is cal-
culated in accordance with the following relationship

ac-%x—!-,

where v - rate of filtration. Therefore,

coax' -AC' V. (4)

Accord to experimental data, the value of 4c is of the order of
5 x 10" g/l with a low concentration, which corresponds to the
concentration in parts of a mass of water AC-Sxm-ﬂ the rate if
filtration being equal to 5x10-8 cm/s. Then a..x.-2.5xw-' cm/s- .
Taking into account the ratio of the pressure gradients in the
experiment and in nature, which is equal to 0.7, the value of

«J. an the case of circulation leaching will be equal to 1.75 X
I 10' cm/s-l. -

These assumptions regarding the applicability of experimental
data obtained in model systems at low concentrations of solution
apparently give a considerably higher estimate of the mechanica-
concentration effect. In the case of a solution of high concen-
tration, the ion atmospheres contract and all osmotic capillary
effects are weakened. Electroasmosis, for example, disappears.

6
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

We mu assume in this regard that the actual value of n...\‘. will

he su stantially lower than was obtained by using data from the
model system.

In conclusion, let us calculate the rate of convective transfer.
with a concentration of saturation of the solution 0:80.25 (in
parts of a mass of solution) and a tilt aticn rate equal to the

rate of evaporation (“2-3 X 10"6 cT/s' ). the rate of convective
transfer is (0.5-0.75) X 10'6 cm/s" .

These calculations make it possible to draw conclusions concerning
the individual components of the equation of salt transfer. In
describing the desalinization processes occuring during intensive

leaching it is possible not to consider the diffusion transfer of
no to.

In describing convective transfer it is to advantage to employ,
not a relation in the form ¢.-o..X.+VC.. where Ce - salt concentra-

tion calculated using the water extract method, but rather the
equation mam-Ce. which takes into account not only the conVective
transfer of salts contained per part by volume of the perestc.).

but also the convective transfer of the differential component
of the concentration of salts aux. passing near the surface of
the particles.

This alternative greatly simplifies the calculation of convective
salt transfer in the capillary method of leaching saline soils.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo "Koles", "Doklady VASXhNIL", 1978

8963
080: 1824

9
P03 OPTICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1300 631.6‘5.6(‘70.b)
DOOR ON CRBMOZB! SOILS IN VOLGA AND PRB-URALS REGIONS

Noncov CBBRNOZEMY SSSR (POVOLZIl'YB I PREDUML'YB) [Chernoeoe Soils of the

USSR (Volge end Pre-Urele Region” in Rueeien 1978 eisned to preee b Nov 78
pp 1-32. 293-297

[Annotetiong tehle of contente. foreword. firet chepter end conclueion froe
hook produced et All-Union Order of Lenin Acedeey of Agriculturel Scioncoe
ineni V. I. Lenin end Order of the Red Bonner of Lehor Soil Inetitute ieeni
V. V. Dokucheyev. edited by Prof V. H. Pridlend, Doctor V. A. Noein.

I. I. Lehedeve, R. A. Antipine. 7.. P. Zuhriline, R. V. Sureheve,
Izdetel'etvo "Itoloe". 1,600 copiee. 30b pegee]

[Text] Annotation

Thie eonogreph on chernoeee eoile in the 0888 (Volae end Pre-Urele regione)
repreeente e review of literery end other eeteriele concerned with chernoeee
eoile found in the leehkir use. Mordovien Assn, Teter Assn end in

Gor'koveheye. Kuyhyehevekeye, Seretovelteye. Per-bye, Orenhurukeye end
Ul'yenoveheye ohleete.

An exheuetive deecription ie iurniehed in thie hook on the cheeicel end
einerelogitel etructure. on the chenicel, phyedcel end veter-phyeicel
propertiee end eleo on the principel egriculturel-production indicee of
chernozee eoile found in the Volge end Pro-Urele regione. The geogrephy end
geneeie of the chernotee eoile end eleo the etructure of the eoil cover of thie
neturelly conpliceted region ere emined in deteil. The principel

cherecterietice o! the hydrothenel end nutritionel regione of theee eoile ere
reveeled.

‘l'he greet voluee of enelytic dete employed eekee it poeeihle to view the hook
ee e eource for epecific intonetion on eoile.

10
FOR orncuin use om!
Charnozao Sella o! Volga and Pta-Ural 'oraat-Stappa Raglona.
um. Durangulova, P.8h. Garllullln, P.Kh. malyav, l‘.V. Velegahanlna.
v.09. ‘ro‘kw.’ 30°. A.hMOOOIDIOOO0.00.00.0.000000000IOOOOOOOOOOOOOO.

FOR OFFICIAL "SI-i ONLY

Tabla of Contanta

'ot.wrdoelaataeaaeaeeeaaaaaataaateeaaaaaaaaaaaaeaeaeeaaeae'00000000000000

Natural Cendltlena of Sell Pemtlon and Sell Covar ln tha Chameaam Zena
of tha Volga and Pra-Ural Raglona. V.A. Noaln. 1.1. Labadava...........

Prlnclpal Paaturaa ef Orographlc and cooleglcal Structura............
cltultc condttton.t00O00.00.00.000000.00000IOOOOOOIIIIIUOIOOI0.00.0.
und.c.P. 20“.. .nd ’1‘“: cw.rOOOOCIOOICOOI0.0IOOOOIOIOOOOOIOOOOOOOO
Sena Quaatlona en Palae-saogtaphy, Palao-aoll-aclanca and tha
xvolu‘1°““£ $011.000¢00'...‘DOOOOOOOOOIIOOQICOIOOSOOOO0000.0000000
3'10: govt." of sott ew.rt0000000....OOIIIOOOOOOOOIOCOIDODOOO60.0.00

Charnezao Sella of Pra-Velu Poraat Stappa Raglon. 1.1. Labedava.
"0v. n.“£.w.g v0“. "0"“. AaSa ""y‘n°v00000000000.0.6...-00.50.001.00

“IMIZOd Ch.mo‘“ 8011......IIOOIOCI.0..‘OCCCCUOOUUIOOOIOOOOOO.QOC.
u.ch.d ch.m°'.. soil.aaaaaaaaaaeaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaeaaaaaaaaaaaeaoaa
Canarlc Groupa of Selodlaad and Laachad Charneaaa 8olla..............
Typtc.‘ ch.tn°:“ 8011.00000...O...OOOOOOOOOOOOOIIOIOOIOOO3.00.000...
Canarlc Groupa oi ‘l'yplcal Chameaa- Solla............................
Phyalcal Propartlaa of Charlton. Sella ln Pro-Volga tenet-Stanza
R.‘£°nOOOOIOOOOOOI...0.000.000...OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOIOOOO0.0000...0....
llananta e! Agre-preductlva Gtouplng e! Charnoaaa Sella ln Pro-Volga
'0'.."S:CPP. R.‘unOOOOOODOOOCOO00.0.0.990.000000000000000.0.0....

sol“t'.d ch.m°:.u “£1.0000000000000000.0.0001IOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCCOOO
men.‘ cumuu sotl.OIOOOOOOCOO0.0060..00...OOOCOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
Canarlc Groupa o! Laaehad Chameaala 3ella............................
TypicalChu’nozu301.1...”u...n.n............u....nonuuuu.
Canarlc Groupa of uplcal Charnoaaa Solla............................
Phyalcal Ptepartlaa of Chamota- Sella ln Iotaat-Stappa zona of
vol“ .ﬂd ,rC’Ur‘l l.‘£m.00000000.00..00.00.000.000.000.000.030.00
llaaanta o! Agrochanlcal Daacrlptlon of Charneaa- Sella ln Poraat-
Steppe Zena of Volga and Pra-Utal laglona..........................

Charnozeo Sella of the Pro-Volga Stoppa Raglen. VJ’. Vzun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chamoxao Sella of tho Stappa tom of tha Volga and Pro-Ural Raglena.
VJ. Noaln, Ya.V. llekhln, Ad. Klluant'yav. YaJ. Kretlteva.

5

5
17

21

27
30

33
37
53
70
79
86

98
106

A .V . Keleakeva.

108
111
123
136
161
150

159

163
171

V0”. MIMIOIIKO .n‘ Vo'o mdv.d.Vaoaaaaoeooaooaooooaaaeaooaoeooaooaooaoe 183
”"¢.l 05.2”!“ sott.aeeaaeeoaoeoaaaaoaoaaooaooaaeoaooaoaooooaooato 186
cm ChCﬂIOt“ sotl.eoeeoeeaaaooooaaoaoloooooatooeeeeeaaeaoooeoo 0. 186

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB 0““

southorn ch.tﬂ°‘w sotl...O000000960600IO0.00000DOOIOIOQIoOOOOIOOOO 198
Generic Groupe of Counon and Southern Chernoren Soile.............. 208
Principal Phyeical Propertiea of Chernoreu Soile in Steppe Zone of
vols. .nd Pt..ur.l R.s1°“0OD000000DOOOIOOIOOOOOOOOOOODIOOOOOIOO‘ 227
Elemente of Agro-Production Grouping of Chernoeen Soila in Steppe
Zone of Volga and Pre-Ural hegione............................... 230

Terrace Chernoren Soila of Southern Volga hegion. V.P. hedvedev........ 236
Chernorem Soila of Southern Upper Volga Terracea...................... 237
Chernoxen Soile of Southern Lower Volga terrace....................... 263
Brief Agro-Production and Reclamative lndicee of Chernoeee Soila in

500th.“ Vols. n.310n00...00.0600000000000...OOOOOOOOQ'OoOCOCOCOOOOO 2‘7

Temperature and Vater Regine of Chernoren Soile in Volga Region.

TOP. movtuOCICOOOOOOIOJOItI.OOOOCOIIOOOOOOOOOOOOO0.00000000000‘0000 251
Structure of Soil Cover in Chernoeen Zone of Volga and Pro-Ural Regiona

NOV. n.nt.w.000000000000000I.I.lbOOOOOOOItoIIQ00.00000300300D600500lo 271
Evaluation of Fertility of Chernoren Soila in Volga and Pro-Ural Regiona

1010 “m0”, Dos. ’u‘ukw. A0,. ‘lopotov.k‘y0UIOOOOOOIODODOOOOOOOOO 286
ConC1u.1°nw til. ub.‘.v.000‘0000000000000.00000000IOCODOOOO0000.000... 293
3‘blio‘:‘phyocdo.oooo.oDdIOOJIOIOOOO000000.000.0.COCOOOOOOOOOODOOOOOOOIO 298

Foreword

Commencing with V.V. Dokuchayev and P.A. Koatychav. who ran yeara ago
inveatigated the chernozeme found in the eaatern portion of the Rueaian plain.
theae aoila have heen atudied by many eoil acientiate. geographera and
agrononiata repreaenting different ecientific and production organizatione; the
vaat encunt of acientific-reaaarch. experimental-agronomic and production laterial
contained in their worha providee co-prehenaive deacriptiona (or the diveree typea
oi chernoaen aoila round in the ioreat-ateppe and ateppe areaa of the Middle
Volga and Pre-Urala regiooa. A conaiderahle portion or the uentioned neteriale
hae already been publiahed and ie well known; the remaining portion ia
dietrihuted along varioue inetitotea in the fort of working Interiale.

One of the principal aine of thia hook ia to deacrihe the chernoren eoila by
large phyaical-geographic regione which, with only a few excaptiona, are not
linked to eduinietrative houndnriea. thua, haaed upon a natural diversity, it
will he poaeihle to reveal clearly the more important genetic characteriatice
and regularitiea aeaociated with the dietrihution of there aoila. A great
amount of attention wae given to analyzing and deacrihing the chernoeen aoila.
their geneaia, morphological etructure and chemical and phyaical propertiea.
the lower typaa of chernoee- aoila .. kinda. varietiea and categoriea -- are
diecuaaed Iainly fro. a cooperative atandpoint.

Materiala are provided in acne aectione which deacrihe the atructure of tho
aoil cover in the principal regiona according to the water and therlel regi-ee.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USB FNLY

tho agricultural-production grouping and the appraisal of tho chornoron ooila
in tho torritory undor roviow. Thoy provide a gonotic-oyotomatic roviow and
can aorvo ao valuablo aciontific information during the couroo of oolving
inportant problooo concornod with farming oporationo. tho uoo of chomical
hrocoaaoo and land roclanotion work carriod out on chornoaon aoilo.

in addition to workoro attachod to tho Soil Inotituto inoni V.V. Dokuchayov.
ociantiiic workers from tho following organizationo alao participatod in tho
proparation of thia hook: Gor'kiy, Saratov and Oronburg agricultural inotitutoo,
Inotituto of Biology of tho Baohkir Branch of tho 088! Academy of Scioncoo.
Kazakh Stato Univoroity and loading opocialiato from tho Volgogiproaou and
Privolohgiprovodkhoa planning inotitutoa. Tho organization and ovorall
diroction of tho work woro carriod out by tho Dopartnont of Gonooia, Geography
and claoaification of tho Soil Inotituto imoni V.V. Dokuchayov and VASIhNIL.

Natural Conditiona of Soil formation and tho Soil Covor of tho Chornoron zono
in tho Volga and Pro-Uralo Rogiono.

Tho oaotorn portion of tho chornoaon oono of tho luropoan torritory of tho 088R.
which ouhracoa tho niddlo Volga and waotorn Pro-Uralo rogiono (aoo Piguro l), io
diotinguiohod by divoroo gonotic forno for tho chornoooo ooilo found horo. by
ouhotantial poculiaritioo in thoir co-pooition and proportioo and by difforont
dynaaico for tho procooooo and rogi-o conditiona occurring in thooo ooilo. Tho
natural cauao of tho divoroo naturo of tho charnocon ooila ia obvious:
conoidorablo broad-goographic and local variability in tho ooil for-ation
factoro for tho vaat and goologically cooplicatod aroa undor roviow.

Tho lattor io a part of tho Ruoaian platfor- which adjoina tho Ural mountain
ayaton in tho oaot and which undorwont a nuabor of difforont ago diolooationo
of varioua typoo. Quito ofton thio ia vary cloarly oxprooaod in tho
goological otructuro and aodorn raliof of a particular torrain.

In addition to tho offoct of conplicatod toctonica. tho gooiogical dovolop-ont
of tho torritory procoodod along tho path of intonoivo roorganiration of tho
hydrographic notwork and tranofor-ation of tho roliof in connoction with tho
ropoatod poriodo of golciation in tho north, woat and contor of tho Ruooian
plain during tho quatornary poriod. although thooo glaciationa did not oxtond
diroctly onto tho givon torritory.

Tho poculiaritioo of tho goological dovolopnont of a torritory oro nanifoatod
in many ohjocto of naturo, including tho ooil covor and ito fornation.

Principal Poaturoo of Orography and tho Goological Structuro

tho goological foundation of tho torritory conaioto of oovoral largo and doop-
oootod toctonic atructuroa -- archod olovationo and tho baaino that aoparato
thou. which aro tracod in o cryotalling baoo and in tho atructuro and thichnooa
of tho oodi-ontary rock and oanifootod in nodorn roliof and hydrography.

in accordanco with tho data containod in tho llth Voluoo of "Goologii sssn"
[Goology of tho USSR]. tho following largo toctonic forno (from waot to aaat,
aoo Iiguro l) oro oxproaood within tho boundarioa of tho torritory undor roviow.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Key Cont.
Al. Pugachev Sb. Tanyp
62. Kama 55. Ufa Plateau
63. Syun' S6. Ufa
66. Ikh 57. Southern "role
as. Butul'ninako-Belebeyevekaye 58. Dana
Elevation 59. Beleya
a6. Scepnoy Zoy 60. Sterlitanak
67. Sheehna 6l. Salmyah
68. Buguruelan 62. Orenburg
69. Tok . 63. 1-5 anticlinee
50. 301. ”ram 64 6-10 haeine
51. Oral 65. Hoecow eyneclioe
52. Kazakh 85R 66. Ryerano-Seratov downwerp
53. Ural'ek 67. Ohahchiy Syrt

Anticline elevationa: Tokuovekiy. Zhigulevako~Pugachev, Tatar. Baahkir.
Orenhurg.

loaine: Kamekaya. Helokeeekaya. Sergiyevekeihdulinekaya. Buzulukekaye.

The elevatione of the Hiddle Volga region in the woat and eouthweet are
eeparated from the Hoecow eyneclire and the Voronezh enticline by the
Ryerano-Saratov downwarp; the eaet ie diatinguiehed by the regional

pro-Urale downwerp, which proceede parallel to the meriodional mountain
etructuree of the Southern Urale.

In addition to the large tectonic iorma. amaller atructuree are aleo found
rather extenaively -- ewella. flexurea. local elevatione and eo forth. the
formation of which. in addition to the principal tectonic love-ante, ia

accompanied by veilinge. eroeione. alippegee and varioua typee of linear
dialocationa.

in accordance with the character of the principal peculiaritiee of the
geological atructure. the formation and the origin of the reliei on the
territory of the Middle Volga and Pre-Urala regione. oeveral large portiona

are diatinguiahed which appear aa goo-morphological communitioe of a high
taxonomic level.

the weetern portion of the territory under review, located on the right hank
oi the Volga River, appliea elmoat fully to the Pro-Volga elevation (with the
exception of the extreme eouthweetern eector. which liee in Saratovekeya

Oblaat beyond the waterahed-of the Hodveditee and Khoper rivere. which helonga
to the high Don or Pro-Volga plain).

The Pro-Volga elevation eppeara ea a raieod plateau which atretchea out

etrongly in e auh~meridional direction and which haa an intricately aeperetod
and denee river and ravine-gully network.

*5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Belonging on the whole to the zone of the veet Tokmovekiy tectonic enticline
end ite connected Zhiguli elevetion. the Pre-Volge elevetion, over en
extended period of time end in eeverel of its elemente, hee been subjected to
locel dielocetione of verioue typee end inteneitiee, to the eccueuletion of
precipitetion under merino regime conditione end to repented cyclee of ective
continentel denudetion, eroeion end the eccunuletion of depoeite. he e
reeult. the geologicel etructure end relief in different perte of the
Pre-Volge elevetion ere dietinguiehed by their unique neture.

The northern pert of the elevetion. which doee not exceed en ebeolute height
of 200-250 metere. coneiete for the meet pert of upper Pernien depoeite of
meinly the Teter leyer. with veriegeted (for the moat pert red) nerleceoue
cleye etretified by piety limeetonee, dolomitee end eendetonee. In the
eouthern direction the upper Permien depoeite ere covered by eendy-cley
Jureieic end lower chelky depoeite which often eppeer on the eurfece end yet
which more often then not ere covered by queternery formetione of e different
geneeie end coneidereble depth.

The middle portion of the Pre-Volge elevetion. which liee to the eouth of the
line connecting Serenek. Kereun end Ul'yenovek end roughly up to the water-
ehed for the upper reechec of the ﬂue (tributery of the Sure River).
Medveditee, Kedede end Tereehke rivere, ie reieed more: the high pointe of
the pleteeu ere loceted et en eltitude of epproximetely 300 metere, with
individuel eummite end outcroppinge reeching 330-370 metere. The centrel
poeition ie occupied by e weterehed terminel in the upper reechee; it diverte
the principel rivere of the region (Sure. Ieryeh. Sviyege end 8yerene) into
verioue directiooe ~~ it ie the huge bed-ridge pleteeu. the eo-celled
Surekeye Shiehke. with the exception of Semereheye Luke. where thick
cerboneceoue end fermien limeetonee end doloeitee ere found. the middle eree
of the Pre-Volge elevetion coneiete meinly of upper Creteceoue end higher
Peleogenic depoeite which form e lithologicelly compliceted complex of
compect end looee chelhe. cerboneceeoue end non-cerboneceeoue rock --
gleuconite end querte eende end eendetonee (meinly the Syeren' euite of the
Peleogenic period). here the queternery cover formetione often eppeer ee
ehellow eluvium-deluvium locel rock.

The e0uthern portion of the Pre-Volge elevetion. which nerrowe down
coneiderebly towerde the eouth from Petroveh end Vol'ek end beyond the
Cerpethien Hounteine end which tekee on the form of the tell end very etrongly
diepereed Volgo-Hedveditee Ridge in the Pre-Volge etrip. ie cherecterieed by
e predominence of lower end upper chelh depoeite. including white chelky hille
with locel menifeetetione of upper end middle Jureeeic depoeite. Phleogenic
depoeite predominete in the eree lying more to the weet of the Volge liver.
Theee depoeite contein e ierge number of eendetone ereee. eendy non-
celcereoue opoki end lemelleted-eendy leyere of the upper Seretov euite
(locene epoch).

The modern relief of the Pro-Volge elevetion. which ie not eubject to cover
freezing (perhepe with the exception of individuel eectore elong the

16
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

northweet edge), developed during the quaternary period with the principal
features of ancient orogrephy being retained under the influence of intensive
denudation of high surfaces. the formation of deluvium covers on the slopes
and silt deposits in the river valleys. The predominant forms of relief were
low ridge inter-ravine watersheds having narrow plateau suamits and steep
slopes. In some watershed areas and along the edges of river valleys, the
relief becomes ridge-hilly; one also encounters individual flat-summit
"tabular" outcroppings of former and higher surface levels. Moreover, the
altitude amplitudes are quite often considerably. up to 150-200 meters. In
addition. there are also slightly undulating plain areas which are usually
linked to the valleys of the principal rivers.

The western and Pre-Volga portion of the Russian platform under review is
relatively elevated and broken up; the eastern edge of this territory, which
adjoins the Urals directly. is raised and broken up to an even greater degree.

The Ufa Plateau is located to the northeast of the city of Ufa. It extends
to the Ksrateu Mountains and it has an absolute altitude of 300-650 meters,
with individual peaks ranging to 500 meters. The plateau appears as a broad
fold asymmetrical in structure having a steep western and an even more steep
eastern slope; it consists of a deep thickness of linestones, earls. dolomites.
gypsuns. sandstones and calcareous clays of the upper Carboniferous Period --
lower Permian Period and penetrated by a network of deep canyon-Earning
valleys with native rock found on the slopes. Tertiary weathering crusts are
found on the territory of the plateau above the coapact rock of the Paleozoic
Period. The quaternary eluviel and eluviun-deluvium surface formations have
a slight depth and quite often consist of pebbles or crushed stone.

To the south of the Sims River Estuary, along the right bank of the Delays
River and along its meridional flow. stretches the Pribel'ekaya piednout
ridge strip. which connects up to the leading ridges of the Southern Urals --
Tekty-Arka, Bash-Altau and others -- in the east. The absolute height of the
ridge peaks in this strip ranges from 300-350 meters. with even greater heights
in some areas; the ridges decrease to a height of 250°200 meters in the west;
here smooth and steeply undulating forms predominate which merge with a
complex of inclined and weekly undulating denudation-accumulative terraces of
the ancient Belaya River Valley. The ridges consist of Permian limestones,
sandstones, msrls. conglomerates and so forth, unmaintained Meeosoic
continental deposits; closer to the Ieleya River Valley the native rock is

covered by thicknesses of loose quaternary deposits and surface covers of
eluviun-deluvium formations.

The orographic regions cited above serve to outline the more elevated eastern
edge of the Pre-Urals region.

To the west of the lelaya River and at a considerable distance from it, there
is an isolated and raised region -- the Bugul'ninsko-Belebeyevskaya Blevetion
which is connected to the large and deep tectonic structure -- the Tatar

crystalline anticiine. This vast plateau with high markings of 380-500 meters

LY
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

serves an an important watershed terminal for drewing together the heedwsteru
of a number of large tributaries of the Beleyn, Kama end Volga rivers. This
river network, on the basis of a system of numerous small tributaries,
thoroughly breaks up the arse of the Bugul'minsko-Beleyevskaya Elevation into
individual interfluvial areas, which at times resemble the ridges of flat-top
hills ranging 150-180 meters in height above the surrounding terrain.

The elevation is made up of sandstones, fine-mica calcareous clays, platy
doIOmitee and limestones, marls with gypsum lsyers and conglomerates (upper
Permian. Kesen' layer); higher they are covered by a variegated complex of
deposits of the Tatar Permian layer. Owing to a differing stability level
with regard to denudation of the Kasan' and Tatar deposits, a typical
terracing of the high elements of relief occurs and this is expressed meinly
on slopes of southern exposure (southwest and southeast). 0n the whole, the
relief of the Bugul'minsho-Belebeyevskaye Blevation_is formed under the
influence of prolonged and intensive denudation and under the conditions of a
continental regime and poeitive epeirogenic movements. In this regard the
young surface deposits in watershed areas are shallow; they are deeper only
on the steep slopes of asymmetric profile ridges and on the terraces of river
valleys.

In the northeastern and northern directions the Bugul'minsko-Belebeyevakaya
Elevation changes into the Bel‘sko~Kamskaya ridge plain. which gradually drops
down to the Belsya end Kama river valleys, from 280-250 to l20~lOO meters of
absolute height (and lower along old river terraces). The changing of the
elevation into this plain is expressed in a number of areas by clearly denuded
spurs based upon a network of large lakes (Kandry-kul', Asly-Kul') and flat-
bottom dry basins of former lakes of old Karat origin.

The developed hydrographic network forms ridge interfluvial areas having a
predominance of steep slopes and slightly undulating watershed plains, where
in some areas one finds residual outcroppings of ridges, protuberancee and
shikhans.

The principal forms of macro-relief in this region are formed by deposits of
the Ufa layer of the Permian system. which consists of a red colored thickness
of sandstones, marl clays, aleurolites with thin layers of sandy grey marls,
platy limestonee and with inclusions of gypsum lenses.

Upper Permian continental deposits predominate in the large interfluvial areas:
Syun' - lk, 1k - lay and lay - Sheshma rivers. These deposits consist mainly
of red colored calcareous clays and sandstones with conglomerate members
(Belebeyevskaya suite).

Tertiary continental deposits are found near the edges of the ancient
hydrographic network in some areas. They are represented by sands and
sandstones and by pebble-gravel. clay and loamy deposits of considerable
depth and variable in terms of depth and extent.

13
FOR OPPICIkL USE ONLY
I-‘OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To the west and eouth of the Bugul'oineko-bolebcyevskeye Elevation there in

a vaet and rather nonotonou. from a geomorphological standpoint. area that
uae initially referred to es the Zavolzh‘ye Permian Plateau by L.1. Praeolov.
In the north it ie terminated by the ancient Kane River Valley, in the Veet -0
by the heedvetera of the Cherenehan River and the Kondurche River Valley.
which rune in a ecutherly direction, and eubeequently by the left bank of the
Volga River. The Samara River in the natural eouthern border of the Per-den
Plateau; the eastern border in only akatchily outlined by the headwaters of
the right and large tributeriee of the Samara, Large "ran and Small Utan
rivers, which have their eourcee in the elevation: of the Obehchiy Syrt.

within the hordera outlined. the territory can be deecribed ee a raised and
strongly undulating plain that ie "table-flat" in none areae and that in
broken up to a coneiderable degree by large river veileye into a nuber of
large interfluvial areae coneidered to be the principal orographic elemente.
A complicated network of «all tributarlee. ravinea and dry valleye eervea to
break up the principal interfluvial areae into a eyetea of secondary uetorehed
ridgee .. dividee having aeyuetrical elopea. the tope of which are diepoeed
at nearby hypeouetric levela. which teetifiee to their origin free one overall
levelling surface.

The abeoiute heighte in the eeetern portion of the plateau. which oer-gee with
the Bugul'oineho-Beiebeyevekaya Elevation. range from 280 to 300 oetere and
gradually decreaee in a veeterly direction to 180-160 netere.

That portion of the Zavolzh'ye region which liee to the Heat of the Permian
Plateau and north of Sanareltaya Luke ia cieeeified ea being in the zone of
the tectonic Helelteee baein (ace figure 1), coneieting of neogenic (pliocenic)
and quaternary. eainly ancient alluviun Volgaoxana depoaite. Thie territory
ie noted for its Chermheno-Kondurchinekiy gwwrpholnicel region and it
ie deecribed ae having a eteeply-ridged relief, an abeolute height of up to
150-180 oetere in the eaet and gradually decreaeing in the vest and north, in
the direction of the Volga and Kane rivere, where vaet elightly inclining
ancient river terracee are developed (too or three, in addition to the flood
plain filled by the Kuybyehev Reeervoir and aieo the low flooded terracee).

The high levolxh'ye region cooeiete ai-oet exclueively of upper Per-ian
depoeite l’azen' and Tatar layere). The epread of the for-er ie limited and
aeeociated tith local tectonic elevationa (headaatere of the Salt River. the
region around Kuybyehev and othere). The Kaun' layer conaiete of limestone
and dolo-ite euitee -- from coapect and clean to earthen. etrongly ciayed and
often with gypeun inclueione. in acne areae the layer ie repreeented by a
clay phaee coneieting of a euite of red and greenish-grey ciaye, gypat-
layere and pinkieh-brovn argillita.

The depoeite of the Tatar layer predoninate beyond any doubt and they aewa
ae the principal relief forming Iaterial over large areae. The Tatar layer

 

‘ it ie oore correct to refer to it ee the mahoosanarekoye Plato of the
high Zevolzh'ye region.

19
FOR omcm. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL Ulil-i ONLY

ie extrenuly complicated in etructure end it chengoe greetly as it epreede
out. Red, violet end brown cleye; grey. white end pink nerle; red end grey
eendetonee. leyere of plety lineetonee -- these different typee of rock. by
elterneting repeatedly in etretificetion, form e veriegeted lithologicel

coeplex. which et one tiee wee referred to ee "leyer of veriegeted eerie.”

Over en extended period of time (eince the end of the Jureeeie period). the
Fernien pleteeu of the Zevoleh'ye region hee reteined ite cherecter of
continentel lend. Thur. with the exception of rere depoeite of Jureeeic
eendetonee on the runnite of eome weterehed ridgee, there ere no depoeite.
including Neogenic onee, in the geologicel etructure of the territory. elthough
weter from the Akchegyl'ekeye nerine trenegreeeion heo penetreted through to
the depths of the Permien pleteeu elong the lerge river velleye. The

sediment from euch weter, in the for: of brown end grey cleye end eende, it
being oheerved elong the edgee of the Rene 80k, Kinel' end Snell Kinel' river
velleye end elong e number of other tributeriee.

The continentel regiee wee reteined even during the queternery period, et which
time eluviune end depoeite of deluviue cleye end loene foreed on the eloping
end conceve eurfecee of the encient relief end elluviel depoeite eccunuleted

in the river velleye.

The eoutheeetern edge of the Bugul'nineko-lelebeyevekeye Blevetion, which ende
with 500 neter high ridgee between the heedwetere of the left henk

tributeriee of the beleye end Seknere rivere. nergee with the ridge elevetion
of the Obehchiy Syrt. which curvee to the weet end which it the principel
weterehed between the Volge end Urel beeine. Initielly expreeeed in the for.
of e eeeeive hilly ridge 300-500 netere in height, the Obehchiy Syrt breeke

up into e number of brenchee ee it etretchee towerde the weet, with theee
brenchee eerving ee weterehede between the heedwetere of the greet rivere in
the Zevolzh'ye region; theee orogrephicelly ieoleted brenchee often ecquire
their own titlee -- Siniy Syrt. Helovoy or Bueulukekiy, Syrt end othere. The
principel ridge of the Obehchiy Syrt ie in the form of e eteep hilly ridge end
flet-euunit epure end ehikhene; it etretchee out towerde the eouthweet end ie
greduelly loet in the wide end low ridgee of the hmw Syrtoyoye 2evolzh'ye.

In the eeetern portion, the Obehchiy Syrt coneiete of e notioeebly dieloceted
thickneee of the Ufe Per-ien leyer. repreeented by eendetonee. doloeitee.
loose lineetonee end cley conglomeretee with the pebblee of herd Urel rock.
in the eiddle or Orenburg pert there is e predominence of deposite of the
higher leyere of the upper Perlien Period end to the weet ~- in the region of
the Burulukekiy Syrt -- veriegeted continentel thickneeeee of triee ere found
here exteneively; lithologitelly. theee ere very einiler to rock of the reter
leyer; in eddition, non-continuoue end eeell in eree end depth Jureeeic end

low-creteceoue depoeite of e eendy end pebble neture ere obeerved on the
higher levele of the relief.

To the eouth of the Seeere River, which originetee et the Obehchiy Syrt end
eeptiee into the Volge et Xuybyehev between the Obehchiy Syrt end the Volge.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬁLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stretches out the Syrtoveye Plein of the Zevolzh'ye region. It is usuelly
divided up into higher end lower perts by the Bol'sheye Irgize River Velley.
The principei orogrephit elements of both perts of the territory -- extended
slightly cenvex ridgcs or divides. divided by e system of revines end dsles
ususlly heving en overell exis towerds the velleys of the principel rivers .-
tributeries of the Volge. The letter represent the second typicel element of
the orogrsphy: they ere greet, deeply cut into end they include e number of

encient terrecee. developed in perticuler elong the left henke, where they ere
greduelly converted into syrt pleine.

The eesymetry of the slopes is cleerly expressed in the structure of both the
principal interfluviel erees end the secondery weterehede.

The wetershed pleteeus of the high eyrt plein lie et levels on the order of
220 meters end the low eyrt plein -- 130-80 meters. The high merkings epply
msinly to the eestern edge of the syrt pleine end the lower ones -- to the

western edge, where the syrts ere replsced by vest end ecercely unduleting
Pre-Volge terrecee.

The geological structure of the high Syrt Plein is hesed upon red-colored
stretified sandy-cley end thin limestone-merl deposits of the upper Permien
formetion. with e lerge portion being conceeled under lete formetions end
eppeering only in certein erees elong the southern, steep end reised slopes of
river velleys. Deposits of the middle end perticulerly the upper Jureseic
formetion eppeer in some erees of the eestern portion of the High Syrt Plein.
These deposits cover the summits of lerge wetersheds: they ere represented by
yellow cley sends heving thin leyers of iron end querts sendstones, grey end
hleck cleys with leyers of gypsum end inclusions of phosphorites end plety
limestones. Smell pockets of upper Juressic deposits ere often noted in the
western portion of the eyrt plein

A lerge gep is noted shove the Juressic sediments in the sequence of
geologicel stretificetions. right up to the Neogenic (its upper formation --
Pliocenic). The sediments of the letter fill the low erees of the encient
relief to e greet depth end trensgressively overlep its high elements. From
the slopes of the Ohshchiy Syrt towerds the west, the depth of the Neogenic
(Pliocenic) deposits increeses, reeching e depth of more then 100 meters in

the vicinity of the Volga eggredetion terrecee end thereefter spreeding ecross
the Volge velley.

The lower portion of the Pliocenic formetion consists of e verieble complex
of fresh weter, leke-evsmp end elluviel lemineted cley end sendy deposits;
such wes the vslley of the Pre-Volgs end its main tributeries during the Pre-
Ahchegyl‘ Period (Kinel' suite). The letter wes covered by deposits of the
upper Pliocenic formetion. consisting of sediments of the merine Akchegyl'
trensgression. which were represented by grey-bleck, yellow-greenish end
brown seline cleys heving thin leyers end lenses of sends, sendy loem soils,
weekly-cemented merls end shell rock.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The depth and composition of the Akchagyl deposits vary as a result of the odd
coastal line of the marine transgression and the phase peculiarities of the
sediment accumulation. Upwards the marine phase of the Akchagyl is replaced
by a fresh water phase, with subsequent conversion of the latter over to the
highest continental phase of the Pliocenic formation, represented by syrt
clays. They play a most important role in the formation of modern relief on
huge territories of the Syrt Zavosh'ye region, to the south of the Samara
River and also to the north of Samarskaya Luke in the interfluvial area for
the Kama - Cheremshan - Kondurcha - Volga rivers. The greatest depth for syrt
clay is found on the steep northern slopes of large interfluviel areas; where
there are high watersheds and narrow inter-summit ridge», the cover of such
clays is considerably thicker. Thus there is every reason for believing that

deluvial processes played the principal role in the formation of the syrt
clays.

The western edge of the Syrt Zavolrh'ye region forms a broad strip of ancient
Volga terraces. developed along the left bank of the Volga River. At the
present time, the geology of the Volga region is characterized by 4-5 terraces
of different ages, which were formed during the quaternary period under
conditions involving interrupted tectonic territorial elevations (Geology of
the USSR, Volume XI).

The highest low-quaternary terrace, which is located at an absolute height

level of 120-65 meters. resembles the Pliocenic syrts and cannot be distinguished
from them in terms of relief. But its outer edge is reflected by a clear and
smoothed out deluvial projection. Beneath this projection stretches a

correctly discernible, broad (up to 35 km) and slightly separated middle
quaternary terrace having a negligible slope and surface height markings of
65-65 meters; the terrace is genetically linked to the Dnepr glaciation

period.

Less developed and interrupted flooded terraces of the upper-quaternary
erosion-accumulation generations are found at the lover hypsometric levels.
The complex of flooded terraces of the Volga left bank region extends for a
considerable distance from the Volga upwards along the valleys of its
principal tributaries.

Based upon the review carried out, the conclusion can be drawn that the
orographic and geological conditions on the territory of the Middle Volga and
Pro-Ural regions are very changeable elements of nature from a spatial
standpoint; thus they exerted a comprehensive and intensive effect on the
formation of the soil cover, particularly on the genesis, geography and
regional peculiarities of the chernosem soils.

Climatic Conditions

The climate in the Middle Volga and Pre-Ural regions, being of the same type,
is characterized by appreciable and large regional and local peculiarities.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Owing to the great size of the territory -- more than 5° ln latitude and 10°
in longitude -- an extensive thermal reaction in maniieuted that is
conditioned by the varying amounts of solar radiation experienced throughout
the year: from 85-90 tilocelories in the north to “0-“: kilocalories in tlm
south. the annual radiation balance changes rudpectively from 28 to 35
ltllocaloricn per square centimeter of surface. Regular zonal changes in the
hot air regime arc sssocLeted with the radiation conditions in the principal
iuaturee -- an increase in the positive average annual and average monthly
temperatureo lor the warm period and its duration from north to south.

in addition to radiation conditions, the hot air regime is also affected to a
considerable degree by the peculiarities o! atmospheric circulation. determined
by the geographical location or the territory within the continent. to the
east of the nussian plain: the unstable and variable arrival of moderately
warm end damp ocean air masses from the Atlantic. cold arctic air, dry
continental or cooled air masses from Siberia or warm dry air from the steppe
and desert areas of central Kazakhstan and Central Asia. This involves great
fluctuations in the air temperatures both on a perennial basis and for
individual years and seasons, with the possibility of great anomalieo in
current weather conditions. All of this determines to a considerable degree
the continental climate of the Middle Volga and Pre-Ural regions (see Table l).

A typical feature oi the temperature regime is the sharp contrast between the
sewers and winters. expressed by a broad range of average temperatures during
the coldest (January) and warmest (July) months -- (roe 3l.$ to J7.5°
Centigrade -- or an absolute annual amplitude in air temperature of «0-880
Centigrade (from -33-50° Centigrade to 36-620 Centigrade).

winter lasts for loo-no days and similar (with temperatures higher than 10°
Centigrade) -- l32-lSS days. The total amount of positive temperatures
(higher than 0° Centigrade) annually fluctuates from 2,300 to 3.000° and
active temperatures (higher than l0 Centigrade) -- from 2.000 to 2.750°.

The annual course of the temperature is characterised by a rapid increase in
warmth during the spring, with frequent reoccurrences of cold weather. The
spring period is on the whole brief. approximately 25-30 days. Autum lasts
considerably longer (by l.5 to 2 times) and the conversion over to a stable
temperature regime takes place rather gradually.

Depending upon the relative influence oi air masses of a particular origin,
the thermal zoning (or the territory under review shifts noticeably and the
overall direction created for a change in the air temperature is from the
north northwest to the south southeast. The degree of continentiai type
conditions increases in the same direction: in the western part of the
territory, occupied by the PreoVolga Elevation and more susceptible to
penetration by air from the Atlantic. the climate is less continental than
that for areas lying at the same geographical latitude but to the east of the
Volga River.

.‘.

as
FOR osricm USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL WE ONLY

Tabla l. Climatic Indicaa 1n the Zona of Distribution of Chat-noun Sotla
(max. Volga and Pro-Ural Region.)

  
 

 
 

  

‘ lung-W‘sma 9 H II! ”I I” :- 2.0 gl” .0 J"
IIIzgngaégv'1‘IﬁISF-I ” I :It: IJI a I §I 3 I 3:.
r - 1'
’ ﬂ('2'0) 0;?aana'xttta::u m a" an
tuna I IA 1 -11) 3M 1 Q U
{13*miL£%:, $5 33 5 :13 :5; :3 a a 3: :3
83k§~3¢muw) t: a: a m :3 :3 a a: a: a:
(mm-.2. a 33 :7: :3 :h‘: a: a a: f: :3

{Man-432mm...“ 3

”sewza'aama:
mamm a I I I I

 

«a
Koy:
1. Gaographtc potnta 12. Duran Conttsuda
2. Mango annual at: towaratura 13. rum-um
3. Total man: of poatttva (nutm- 11o. Nottharn outaktrta o: zona
than 0°) comparatuua 15. Sanach (Gor'kovakaya Oblaat)
6. Total mount of acttva (Malta: 16. Chaboluary (Chwaah A882)
than 10°) tmataturaa 17. Mona-11nd: (Tatar 4383)
5. Avaraga at: “wanton during 18. Mai: (Baahktr asst)
var-oat loath 19. Karatdol‘ (laahktr ASS!)
6. Mango alt tapautura during 20. Middle portion of aona
coldaat month 21. Saranok (Hordovtan ma)
7. Indax of continental ell-Ito 22. 01 ‘yanovalt
5. Annual mum. in at: 23. Xuybyahav (obaarvatory)
taparaturoa (abaoluta 26. luaurualan (Oranbursakaya Oblatt)
9. Total uount of annual 25. lusul'la (Tatar A881!)
praclpttatton 26. Storutalalt (Baahktr asst)
. Total «aunt of ptactpttatton 7. Omaha:
during parted vtth tonparatuta ) 28. Southarn pottton of aona
10o Cantlgrada 29. Saratov (export-anal ﬂald)
11. Rydrothamal coatuclant for van- 30. Pouchov (Sarawakaya Oblaat)
partod with toaparatura > 10° 31. lol'ahaya cluahttaa (uybyahavakaya
ontt‘rada Oblaat

32. not (Oranbutgokaya Oblut)

216
PM ORIGIN. WE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The huet regime in individuel ports of the territory chengee more or lnu
coneiderebly depending upon the orogrephic eituetion. Per example. in the
Pre-Urel zone e noticeeble influence ie exerted by the cooling effect of the
Urel nountein eyetesn; thie eel-e influence on clinete ie unifeeted in e week
form in reyone oi the Bugul'nineko-Delebeyevekeye llevetion. the Zileireltoye
Pleteeu end the northern edge of the 0behchiy Syrt.

it cen be eteted thet the relief (ite form. eiee. expoeure) ie the noet
conetent end indluentiel fector of the locel chengee in the theml regime
(end eleo noieture end other elenente of the cliuete) on the reneining
territory of the Volge end Pre-Urel regione.

Syeteeetic obeervetione of e network of neteorologicel etetione hove ehown
thet elevetione (eyrte. weterehed pleteeue). conpered to ed Joining end
reletively low pleine end velleye, ere cherecterieed by lower (by 75-l00°
Centigrede) ennuel totel enounte of ective eir tupereturee for eech 100
netere of elevetion; moreover. elevetione ere dietinguiehed by e longer
froet-free period (by l5-20 deye) end leee enplitudee in tenpereture
fluctuetione, for both deily end ennuel cyclee. end with the exception of
low ereee in the vicinity of lerge weter ereee of the Volge. Keno end other
lergo rivere. where the effect of the weter ereee ee eccmuletore of eumr
heet it felt in the coeetel nonee during the eutunn period.

The differencee in the noieture conditione of territoriee, which ere ceueed by
etnoepheric precipitetion end which ere dependent upon the peculieritiee of
eir circuletion. generelly coincide with the epetiel chengoe in the thermal
conditione. The northweetern end weetern reyone of the Volge region end the
northern reyone of the Zevolzh'ye end Pre-Urel regione receive reletively
reieed end more conetent (in e perenniel cycle) enounte of precipitetion on
the order of (050-680 III ennuelly (in plecee up to 500 III); in the middle zone
of the territory. munte on the order of 370-650 In preveil end in the
eouthern zone -- 320-360 en. Moreover. in eddition to e decreeee in the
everege ennuel enount of precipitetion. the irreguler occurrence of ouch
precipitetion ie increeeing from yeer to yeer end eeeeon to eeeeon end e

ehexp increeee ie eleo telting piece in the repetition end duretion of extremely
dry periods.

neeed upon the moieture conditione end teking into eccOunt the degree of
weruth end precipitetion during the period of leoet ective plent growth. the
following regione ere ieoleted: region of edequete noieture, in which the
on [gidroter-icheeltiy koeffiteiyent; hydrotheruel coefficient] ie equel to
or eonewhet higher then 1 (input end expenditure of noieture ere belenced);
region of lowered or week aoieture conditione (with e 61'! of 1-0.8); region of
insufficient noieture conditione (61! 0.8). The geogrephicel locetion of
theee regione end the configuretion of their bordere ie more coupliceted then
the overell plen for letitudinel zoning.

An important role in the forution of the geogrephic picture of etnoepheric
noieture ie pleyed by euch lerge orogrephic elements no the principel

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0513
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY

weterehede of the Pro-Volge tievetion. which eehrece the flowe of tho
principel noieture-cerrying Atlentic currente, by the hugul'nineko-
lelebeyevekeye Klevetion with ite edjoining elemente of the High Zevoleh'ye
region end by the Ufe Pleteeu end the Pre-Bol'ekeye Zone of the Pro-Urel

region, which eccunulete edditionel noieture owing to reieed hypeoeetric
levele.

Lone! pecullerltiee of relief. the hydrogrephic netowrh end the vegetetive
covet end the condition of the eoil’e eurfece effect to e coneiderehle degree
the noieture conditione in eneli portione of the territory end even in enell
regione heving uniform quentitiee of eteoepheric precipitation. Thie effect
ie menifeeted through the redietrihution of noieture from felling rein end
enow. depending upon the eurfece elopee, the wind conditione end the expoeure
of individuel elenente of the relief. The verying enounte of eurfeco run-off
end the inteneity of noieture eveporetion ere eeeocieted with theee eene
conditione end. ee e reeult, e eneil epetiel heterogeneity for the weter regiee
of the eoil ie creeted. In perticuler. the locel relief conditione end the
condition of the eurfece exert e coneiderehle influence on the dietrihution
of the enow cover. which ie cloeely eeeociet.d with the depth end duretion of
the period of winter freezing of coil. e fector which ie of coneidereble
inportence fro. the etendpoint of ecology end eoil-foruetion.

The brief review furniehed ehove on the principel clinetic conditione -- heet
end denpneee -. reveele thet the territory of the Volge end Pro-"rel regione
of the chernoeen zone ie cherecterieed by e clieete regime the: is dryer.
more continentel in neture end epetielly more veriehie then the clieete of
the edjoining centrel Rueeien province. Only the weetern edge of the Volge
region -- the centrel reyone of the Nordovien ASSR end the extreee weetern
reyone of Seretoweheye Obleet -- heve conditione einiler to the letter.

The coneiderehle renge of veriebility in clieetic ccnditione within the
bordere of the Volge end Pre-Urel regione ie coneidered to he one of the
principel fectore underlying the eper‘c‘ change: in neturel lendecepee. the
geogrephy of the eoil cover end the genetic divereity of the eoile. However.
it would be incorrect to eeeuee thet the fornetion of the letter is
controlled entirely by clinetic pereeetere: the fecte indicete thet eoile of
different genetic typee. for ere-pie leeched chernoreee end grey foreet eoile,
cen he found under identicel cliletic conditione.

Lendecepe Zonee end Vegetetive Cover

The chernozee eoile in the Voige end Pre-Urel regione lie in two lendecepe
eonee -- foreet eteppe end eteppe -- the geogrephic poeitione of which
generelly involve chengee in the cli-etic conditione. neinly in connection
with the degree of deepneee in the clieete. The (erect-eteppe zone ie how-
eheped end enhrecee e lerge northern portion of the territory; it drope
towerde the eouth both in the weet, in the Pre-Volge region. end in the eeet.
in the Pre-Urel region; it conforms to regione heving edequete or e week
deficit of noieture (GT! 1.2-l; 1-0.8). The eteppe zone includee the

26
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

southern. extreme southwestern and southeastern regions of insufficient and
unstable moisture (GTK 0.8-0.7 and less).

The actual picture of the placement of the forest-steppe and steppe areas is
more complicated than the generel plan, since the vegetative cover -- the
principal spokesman for natural landscape -- is dependent in its formation
upon many teeters of both a modern ecological and also a historical-genetic
and peleogeographic nature. As a result and with no connection to the
climatic conditions. a trend is being observed in some areas wherein forests
are being transformed from an adjoining forest sons not only into a forest-
steppe but also a steppe tone and. conversely. vent purely steppe regions are
being converted into forest-steppe sones.

As in well known, the borders between natural landscape zones are not
sufficiently clear if they are not determined by large natural boundaries.
The Volga River. from Kuybyshev to Vol'ek. serves as just such a boundary
separating the forest steppe right bank region from the Volga Steppe region.
The valley of the Bel. Kinel‘ River also serves as such e boundary separating
the forest-steppe and steppe sones in the Volga region (L.l. Prssolov.

8.8. Neustruyev, A.I. lessonov. l903-l9l6).

The middle Volga and Pro-Ural regions are territories of high farming
development, with many areas having been developed many years ago. Economic
activity has altered the natural environment substantially and. in particular.
it has disrupted the vegetative cover in terms of both the composition of the
vegetative types of associations and the contours of their spread.

The Pre-Volgs forest-steppe region (to the west of the Volga River). especially
its northern portion, is distinguished by a high level of forestation and this
is manifested in the modern natural aspect of this territory. Here there are
regions in which. beyond any doubt. forests having large forest tracts
predominate. Moreover, a portion of these tracts can be viewed either as
regional projections or as isolated islets of a neighboring forest sons. Their
assignment to the high levels of the Pre-Volga Elevation relief underscores
their origin from the ancient non-glacial sanctuaries of forest vegetation
during the glacial period of the Russian plain.

The basic types of forest vegetation in the Pro-Volga forest steppe region
include the broad-leaf forests consisting of oak, maple and linden trees, with
ash and elm trees (complex oak groves) in some areas and mixed pine-broad-leaf
forests including birch trees. Pure pine forests (mainly on sandy terraces)
have spread to a considerable degree.

The oak groves of the northern forest-steppe regions (Gor'kovskaya Oblast,
Chuvash ASSR) are distinguished by a closeness of the timber stands. here one
encounters pine trees and the grass cover contains such taiga-forest plants

as majanthemum, pyrola, oxalis and wood reed (Stankov. 1951; Averkiyev, 1935,
l9b7). The oak groves in the central forest-steppe rayons of the Pre-Volga
region are thinned out; here there is well developed undergrowth which includes

27
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

haeel note with spindle tree and a etrong graes coVer conaieting mainly of
goutweud and hairy eedge. with the noticeable participation of mixed

graaeue -- onion graee. meadow graee end othore. In the more dry areae of
relief or in the eouthern third of the foreet-eteppe region. the oak grovea
are eeverely thinned out. the treat are not very tall and quite often a cloeed
tinber etend doee not fern. Rather there are groupe among which meedow-
ateppe nixed herbe rich in typea for: to a etrong degree. Theee groupa are
bordered by ehruba .. honeyeuckle. dog roee and apirea. Quite often the

neadow'atappa and ateppe graaeea in euch oak grovea penetrate under a cover of
note denee tieber etanda.

with a coneiderably greater apread of the foreate during the pro-culture
period conpered to the preeent tine. more or late treeloae ateppe areae have
renained between then eince tine innenorial. There can be no doubt but that
euch areae were utilized by the population priearily aa arable land.
Geobotanical data hae enabled ue to define the virgin land vegetation of
expoeed foreet-eteppe areae ae being nainly either meadow-ateppe or rich-graea-
nixed herbe in nature. however. it it quite probable that an inportent role
wae played in the peat by feather graee, nixed herba-aod-graea (with feather
graaeee and eheep'a feacue) "true” ateppea. The latter euppoeedly
predoeinated in the aouthern part of the Pro-Volga foreet-ateppe and to the
aouth of the Syeran' River.

The foreet-eteppe lying to the eaet of the Volga River and before the
foothille of the eouthern Urale. undergoee eubetantial changer throughout ita
extent. chengea which are noticeably eaeociated both with general geographic
changea in the clilate (nainly with an increaae in continental conditiona
towarda the eaat) and alao with the regional peculiaritiea of the relief.
ground and eoila and local climatic conditiona. Pirat of all. one noticea
that the overall degree of foreatetion in the territory ie cooperatively lower
than that for the Pre-Volge foreat ateppe region; treeleee ateppe eleoenta of
the landecape predoainate to a conoiderable degree over the ioreat elementa.
More often than not the foreate are ecattered in the for- of enall grovea on
the aulnita and along the elopee of ravinea and river valleya and quite often
they fern large iaolated tracte.

In the Zavolah°ye foraat-eteppe and prior to the Bugul'nineko-Ielebayevakaya
Blevetion. the foreate are repreaented by aeveral impoveriehed oak grovea --
with lindena. naplea and clue. but without aeh which hee not made the
traneition over to the left bank of the Volga River. Beyond the city of
Belebey. oak ia often replaced by linden. maple or also end in acne areae by
birch. In the Belabay region there ia an area of light birch foreatoateppe
which appears alaoet Siberian in nature and in which oek grovea are couplately
abaant. Thie ie obviouely the result of the colder and aore aevere local
clinete and the paculiaritiee aeaociated with the hietory of developeent of
the vegetation found in the Southern Urele and Pro-Ural region (Kraahaninnikov.
1937. l9bl; hil'kov, 1950).

The ateppee created a background of natural landecape in the Zavolzh'ya foreat-
eteppe region. forming vaet treeleea regione in aono areae (Chietopol'akiy

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 088 0RD!

Rayon along the loft bank of tho Kano Rivor. iron the Volga to tho Shoohna
rivora; Chorunohano-Kondutthinohiy Rayon. which occupioo a otrip of tho loft
bank of tha Volga to tha aouth of Mayna River up to tho lower roachaa of the
sol. Charonohana RlVor and a largo portion of tho intortlovial aroo for tho
Chorooohana and Kondurchi rivoro).

According to tho 3aobotanical data. tho rootorod vogotatlon of tho troolaaa
oxpanaoa of tho 2avolrh'ya toroot-otoppo rogion during tho pro-agricultural
poriod waa raprooontod oainly by oooociationa of tho noodow otoppa typo.
which in tho northorn part of tho oono wora transfer-ad into otoppa noadowo
and in tha aouth -- into truo atoppao. Tho graoa atando of naadow otoppoa
conoiotod of cod sraoooo .. ahoop‘o Eoocuo. koolaria. oaadow araoo. cartain
typoo of foothor graooaa and hairy foothor groan ond partly rhizouo araoaoo
(out graoa otoppo bro-o groan and othoro). Tho abundant and colorful nixturo
ot horbo that appoaro in lato opring and during tho firot half of tho aonnor
poriod alao playod a grant role in tho fornation of tho sraoo otond. Such
naadow atoppoa in tho loroot-otoppa aona of tho lavolch‘yo and Pro-Ural
roglOna axiatod up until tho niddlo of tho l9th Contury and thay can otill bo
found in soon aroao at tho proaant tioo.

tho naadow atoppoa of tho iotoot°otoppo aono c: tho lavoloh'yo and Pro-Ural
roglono aro charactorixad by aaaociationa having a prodoninanco of otoppo
ohruba -- dwarf aloond, otoppo chorrioo. opiuoa. paoahrub. broom and no forth
which ohow o proforanco for davalopin; along tho irrasolar and orodod oidoa

of ravinao. on tho otoop olopoo of ayrto or hillo or in low oroaa of watorohod
platoauo; equally typical aro tho diotinctivo and thinnod out broad-loot nixod
horb aaoociatlono of tho calcoroouo-rocky otoppo. which oro poculiar to otoop
and woll oxpoaod alopoo, tho aunnito of watotahod aroao. ohikhano and othor
proninont alononto of tho roliof having outcroppinso of crudo nativo rock on
tho surfaco.

Tho otoppo zono. which inclndao tho oouthorn portion of tho chornoaoo
distribution in tho Volga and Pro-Ural rosiono in ito natural (ondiaturbad by
non) condition. io charactoricod by alnoot a cooploto abaonca of foraata in

tho watorohod aroao and tho provolonco of {root and drought rooiotant poronnial
graoo plant con-unitioo containing a prodoninanco of cod graoooo. 1n
coniornity with dotinito opatial changoa in tho ocological conditiona,
cub-zonal atripo and ooallor rosiono having a prodoninanco of cortain typoa
and varianto of otoppo vogotation aro dittorontiatod in tho otoppo oono.

Tho landocapo strip. which bordoro to tho oootb and loado up to tho foroat-
otoppo cono. for tho "truo" or typical (according to Yo.H. Lawronko) or
oxpoaod (according to 1.1. Sprysin) otoppoo in choir northorn locations and

(or noro da-p roliof pooitiona, woo roprooantad by plant groupingo rooonblin;
thooo for tho aoadow otoppoo of tho foroat-otoppo cono. wharo a rich nixturo
of dittoront horbo provailo. Such warianto in tho oxpoood otoppoo woro
particularly widaapraad in tho northarn portion of tho tranaitional otoppo
otrip in tho Zavolxh'yo rogion (according to L.I. Praoolov). in tho
intorfluvial aroao for tho Sol. Rinal' and Hal. Kinol‘ and tho Hal. Kinal’

and Borovka rivoro and along tho hoadwatoro of tho Bol. Kinol' and 1bka rivoro.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE 08L?

Tho principal aroa of tho oub~oono of oxpoood otoppoo. which omhrocoo tho
ooutharn ragiona of tho Pro-Volga aroa. a voot otrip of tho 2avoloh’ya rogion
lying between the Samara Rivor on tho ona hand and tho Chagra. Chapoyowahayo
and nuculuk rivoro on tho othor and aloo tho oouthorn portion of tho

Oranburg Pro-Ural rogion. io choractorioad by a prodominonco oi mixod-horh.
ood-graao plant aooociationo in which tho principal rolo io playod hy ohoap‘o
foocuo. narrow-loaf taathor graaa and not grooa and partly by hooloria.

moodow graoa and atappo timothy. Comparod to moadow atoppo rogiono. thora aro
conoidorably towor typoo and a loooor abundance of dicotyledonouo aixad
grooooo. On hrokon rolioi. ono tindo aooociationo of otoppo ohrubo and

xarochalhophyllito aooociationo of "rocky otoppoo”. which aro oimilar to tho
oooociationo oi ioroot‘otappoo.

Ao tho climate hocomoa moro dry, tho mixod-grooo. ohoop'o ioocuo. foothor grooo
trua otoppoo aro tranoiormod into ioathor graoo otoppoo (according to V.V.
Alokhin). thuo forming a ouh-oono of dry otappoo. In tho graoo foundation (or
ouch otoppoo. Laooing faathar graoa togathor with brood-loot cat-tail and
ohaop'a Eoocuo oarvo an an indicator; hulhouo moadow grooo participatoo to a
conoidarahla dogroa in tho formation of late opring graoo otanda. Tho mixad
graoooa aro small in numhor and thoy otton includo aomi-ohruho -- oagohruoh.
pyrothrum. paronnial planto having a ohort growing aaaoon and hulhouo
ophomarona which dovolop in tho opring whon tho aoil ia oaturatod with thaw
wotaro. During tha'middlo of ouamar. a oharp poriod oi oami-dormancy occuro
in tho dovolopmont of tho vogatotion of tho dry atoppoa. An important ioaturo
of tho plant :ovor io tho ovorall thinning out of tho plant atand and tho
prodominanco oi incomplota and oomi-cloood aooooiotiona: among tho aporo mato
of graoaoo and tho huohoo of oomi-ohruho and mixod graaooo. opon ploto oi ooil
romain in which. following rainfall. low planto dawolop.

Tho otappo rono of tho Volga and Pro-Ural rogiona it an aroa of high farming
dovolopoont. howovar tho oxtonaiva dovolopmant of thio aroa hogan rathor
rocontly 0- 2-3 conturioo ago. Horoovor. during tho iirat half of thia poriod
tho (arming woo oxtroaoly oxtonoiva. nomadic and ocattorad. Thuo tho otoppo
plant covar dootroyod hy plowing and tho grazing of livoatock could
poriodically ho raotorod naturally by raioing it moro or loaa to tho initial
virgin land condition.

Somo Quaotiono Concornod with Paloogoogrophy. Paloopodology and tho Evolution
of Soilo.

Tho Volga and Pro-Ural rogiono. baing mainly on oxtra-giociation torritory,
appcor oo an onciont donudation-accumulativo plain within which ourfacoo of
diiioront agaa and rolatod to dotinito hoighto otand out. Tho oidoot ourfaca
datoa hack to tho and of tho Hooozoic ora. Throughout tho quatornary poriod.
tho torritory undor roviow dowalopod mainly in tho ahaonco of a hydromorphic
rogiao. with tho axcoption of tho anciont volloya of largo rivoro.

Tho ovolution of a majority of tho ooila in tho torritory atudiod can he
prooontod in aooociation with tho owolution of tho vogatotion and tho migration

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the vegetative conee ae n reeult of tluctuetlone in climate during the
period or development of the eoil cover. beepite the feet that the Volga

and Pre-Ural regione conetltute mainly an extra-glaciation area. glacietione
of the Rueeian plain throughout the couree of the quaternary period
undoubtedly exerted a eubetantial influence on the activity of the denudation-
accumulative proceaeee and on the development of the hydrogrephic network.

it can be stated that the arrangement of the eurface and the overall

toruetion o! the landecape. which cloealy reeomblea the nodern landecape. took
place at the beginning of the holocena epoch. 1t wee obviouely at thie eane
time that the tornatlon of the eoil cover began. the featuree of which can
etill be traced in the etructure and propertiee oi modern eoile.

The epore-pollen analytic data obtained and auanurired by 3.1. Neyehtadt,

V.P. Crichuk and N.1. P'yavchenho ehode eone light on the general featuree

of the paleogeography and evolution of vegetation in the Volga and Pro-Ural
region: during the period of tine commencing with the early Holocene epoch.
According to their materiele, the clinatic changee during thie period in the
eouthern and eoutheaetern European part of the USSR (to the eouth of
Kaluehakaya and Gor'hovekeya obleete) had a relatively low amplitude of
fluctuations and did not bring about tubetantial changee in the phyaical-
geographic conditione or in the landecapa ae a whole and the natural-landecape
ronee were dietinguiehed by definite etebility. 1hie applied in particular to
the zone of eteppee. the bordera of which were eetahliehed on the given
territory during the early Holocene epoch (Neyehtadt. 1957). In the opinion
of v.9. Crichuk (l950) and 8.1. P'yavchenho (1958). it can only be etated
with regard to the eteppee that a certain change took place in their vegetation
etructure, which wee more xerophiloue during the early holocene epoch.

0n the territory of the modern foreet-ateppe zone. during the early holocene
epoch. .1. Neyehtedt (1953. 1957) aeeuned the exietence o! thinned out pine-
birch foreete having a email nixtura of broad-lee! varietiee (oak. eln and
linden treee). which epread exteneively during the middle Holocene epoch
(cliuatic opti-un). moving eouthward into the area of northern eteppea.
During the late Holocene epoch. the hordere for the epreed of the broad-lea!
varietiee ehowed practically no change and yet the pollen epectrune reveal
the praeence of birch and at tinee pine treee. K.K. Markov and othere (1950)
tend to eeeociate thie circunetanco with the economic activity of man. that
ie, with the cutting down of foreeta and the appearance of eecondary (oreete.

1ntereeting eateriele on the paleogeography of the toreet eteppe in the Niddla
Volga region have been preeented in the worhe by ".1. P'yavchanko (l950, 1958).
Here, the author, baeed upon the data obtained from etratigraphic and pollen
atudiee of peat boge in Ul'yanovekaya and Kuybyehevekaya oblaete and in the
Hordovien and Tatar ASSB'e. drawe the conclusion that during the peat 6,000.
7.000 yeara (abeolete age of the peat boge) no eignificant climatic
iluctuetiona. eovenente of the vegetative zonee aeeociated with euch
fluctuatione or eharp changee in the degree of afforeetation took place in

the uentioned territory. ".1. P'yavchenho'e view of the dynamice of
vegetation in the (erect-eteppe zone ie ei-ilar to that held by ".1. Neyehtadt.

31
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the early holocene apOch. with relatively dry and warm climatic
conditione prevailing in the middle Volga region. a pine-birch foreat-etappe
exletud which. 6,000-S,000 yeare ego (average holocene), wee replaced by a
damp broad-leaf foreat-eteppe, with the broad-leaf variotiea reaching thie
area from the eouthweet and the central chornoaem oblaete. N.l. P’yevchenko
aeeumed tho preeence of e aaximum amount of foreet land at the beginning of
the late Holocene epoch; thie land hae been reduced aharply at the preeent
tine.

Thue. eharp changee did not take place in the climate and vegetative cover of
the middle Volga and Pre-Ural regione during the poet-glacial period. The
vegetative cover. at leaet eince the middle holocene epoch (7.000 yeare ago).
hae appeared ae a complicated aaaociation of foreat-eteppe and eteppe, the
border between which hee not changed eubetantielly eince that time. The
evolution of the vegetation ended with certain changee in the floral
structure of the vegetative eonee and obvioualy in a certain movement of the
bordere of the foreat tracte within the foraat-ateppe.

Theee concluaione and eleo the geobotanical materiale of 1.1. Sprygin (1931)
on pro-agricultural vegetation in the middle Volga region reveal rather
convincingly that the overwhelming majority of the charnoeem eoile in the
eteppe and eouthern foreet-eteppe regione developed under graeey atappe and
meadow-ateppe vegetation. Moreover. the hietory of the formation and the
arrangement of the eurfaca of theee terzitoriee teatify to the fact that the
hydromorphic etagee did not play a aubetantial role in their formation.

Leeched chernoeem eoile, ea a aub-eonal cub-type, were formed in the
relatively deep foreet-ateppe under the influence of meadow-eteppe vegetation
without being affected by the foreete. The paleoeoil etudiea carried out by
P.V. hadanov and othere (l967) provide a very good argument in aupport of thie
theory. here a compariaon waa made of modern eoile againet eoile buried under
burial mounde in the hronee Age (3.000-3.500 yeare ago). The authore
convincingly revealed that the modern and buried leached chernoaem eoile are
characterized by a very cloee einilarity in the depth of their humua layere
and aloe by practically identical propertiee °- humue content. ite qualitative
compoeition and ao forth.

Podzolieed chernoeem eoile. the areae of which are located in the peripheral
portione or exieting (or exieted in the peat) ioreet tracte. in the direct
vicinity of them or in araee of eattled foreeta are genetically aeeociatad
both with foreet and meadow-ateppe vegetation. Two beeic aethode can be
preeented for their formation: they could haVe been formed along the foraat
edgee and bordere of eteppa tracte or under a canopy of foraete of the park
type. where wood vegetation ie combined with an abundant amount of grace cover.
The other method conaiete of their having experienced an alternating effect
from meadow-atappe and foreat vegetation owing to a certain amount of movement
of their bordere.

A comparieon of chernocem eoile which develop on looee depoeite of eurfacee
of different agea reveale that the differentea in their etructure and

32
non omcm use on!
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY

propurtiua are minimal. eincc the denudation-accuunulaiiw procueeee which
took place during the glacier epoch enoothed out the former differencee
aeeociated with the age and evolution of the relief.

The complete analogy between the modern chernorema and thernoten eoile buried
3.300 yeare ago. deVeloped on depoeite of the eame age, reliably teetifiee to
the fact that during the eecond half of the niddle holocene epoch the
chernozeme in the Middle Volga region acquired a coepletely forned profile and
have been in a "climax" eituation for an extrenely long period of time.

Brief Review of the Soil Cover

The area of the VolgarPre-Ural eector of the chernoeen cone ehould not be
viewed ae a region in which chernoxen type eoile predooinate in all areae;
owing to a coneiderable degree of heterogeneity in natural factore. the eoil
cover in a number of portione of the territory under review containe eoile of
other genetic typee in addition to chernoeen eoile. Thie eppliee for the neat
part to the northweetern. weetern and northeaetern parte of the foreet-eteppe
belt (Pre-Volga, PreUral foreet-eteppee), whero during the pro-cultivation
period vaet areae were occupied by broad-leaf foreete, which adjoinod tho
foreet zone in the north. Thur grey foreet eoile predominate in the coil
cover found in regione of Gor'kovehaya 0blaet and the Chuvash Assn on the
Pre-Volga Elevation. The chernoeeo eoile form only ieolated ielande and their
areae are generally eaaller. The ease holde true for chernoeeme found in the
eoil cover of the Ufa Poreet-Steppe Plateau (to the northeaet of the Baehkir
essn) and the Kungureko-Kraenoufiaekeya Poreet Steppe in the Pre-Ural region
(to the eouth of Permekaya Oblaet).

To the eouth of the northern border of their dietribution in the middle
portion of the foreet-eteppe belt, the chernoeen eoile predo-inate in the eoil
cover and in a number of regione they cover vaet territoriea al-oet entirely.
Still in othor territoriee they alternate with lore or leee large tracte of
grey foreet eoile (and partially with other eoil typea), thue reflecting the
dual nature of the landecape in the foreet-eteppe belt. Thua the ratio for
areae between the chernoeem eoile and the grey foreet eoile of the right bank
of the foreet-eteppe portion of ul'yanowehaya 0blaet ie roughly Zzl and in

the eouthern foreet-eteppe of the high 2avoleh'ye region (Dl’yanovekaya and
Kuybyahevehaya obleete) -- 6-Szl and aore.

The eteppe belt of the Volga and Pre-Ural regione ie characterised on the
whole by a complete predominance of chernoxe- eoile in the eoil cover.
accounting for 90-95 percent of the area. The remaining portion ie occupied
by flooded lande. aeadow-chernoeca eoile. foreet eoile in acne areae, eolonete
coaplexee and othere. but towards ite eouthern edge the dietribution of the
chernotem eoile once again betomee leee intact; initially they are

interrupted by the appearance of dark cheetnut eoile on the eteep lower
portione of eyrt elopee and thereafter they diminieh to detached contoure
aeeociated with the eunuita of waterehede and. finally. they yield their
importance to eoile of the cheetnut type.

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thue, baeed upon the above. it would appear that chernoren eoila in the Volga
and Pre-Ural regione are found in two natural-geographic eonee -- toreet-
rteppe end eteppe. and thie creetee the first view concerning the dieparity
between the bioclimetic and coil eonaiity. However, it dieappeare when
etudying the geography of the eoil eub-eonee ieolated on the beeie of e
predOminance or particular chernoaem eoil eub-typee.

The eoil-cartographic materials accumulated over the couree oi aeveral decedee
by many reeearchere and coil acientiete have ustabliehed a picture of
unqueetioneble territorial concentration ot podrolixed. leached and typical
(mainly fertile) chernoeem eoile in the ioreatoeteppe zone: typical and
coemon chernotem eoile in the eub-eone oi the true eteppee; eouthern chernozem
eolle in the eouthern and more dry eteppe cub-cone. Sub-zonal articulation

oi the chernoeem aone ie meniieeted very clearly and geographically
eunuontielly (from north to eouth) in the middle portion of the Volga region,
roughly betveen 50 and 54° eaet longitude. To the vent of the Volga River on
the Pre-Volga Elevation, the foreet-eteppe zone, ae mentioned earlier, ie
quite well advanced tovarde the eouth and doee not have a clear natural
border; to the eaet oi the 56th meridian the latitudinal placement of the
chernoxem eub-ronea ie dietorted noticeably by the meridional orientation of
the principel orographic and hydrographic elementa of the territory.

In accordance with "Soil-Geographic Regionalieation of the USSR" (l962). the
Volga and veetern Pre-Urai regione of the foreet-eteppe and eteppe natural
:onee belong to tvo provincee .. the middle Rueeian (partially) and the
Zavoleh'ye (fully) for each zone. Vithin theee provincee, eoil dietricte and
“groupe oi dietricte" have been noted and partially ieolated. Theee
dietricte are eubeequently broken up into eoil rayone having relatively the
eeme relief. eoil cover etructure. plant cover and microclimate peculiaritiee.

Conmencing with the iiret remarkable experiment in complex landecape-eoil
regionaliration in the former Samarekaya Province, publiehed by Neuetruyev.
L.l. Praeolov and A.l. leeeonov in l9l0, varioue programs have been developed
by many individuals and collectivee for overall netural-geographic and aoil-
geomorphologicel. eoil-reclamative and agro-aoil regionalizationa. carried out
meinly in individual oblaete and republice.

Theee worke more or leee aupported a aonal-eub-eonal landecepe-geographic baeia
and ite accompanying geomorphological-genetic and quantitative (with regard to
areee) principle of ieolation of eoil regione. however. the degree of
divieibility and the taxonomic level of the latter cannot be the eame: in

eome inetancee. e vaet territory wee ieolated having an extremely heterogeneoue
reliet. parent rock and eoil cover; in other regions. they were reduced to very
email territorial eegmente. roughly correeponding to individual geo-
morphological elementa. her a monographic eu-merization. eyetemetization and
deacription of the chernotem aoile in the Volga and Pro-Ural regione, it ie
coneidered more advieable to employ ae the baeie a network of coneolidated
natural-geographic regione which. in terms of their content, conform to the
diatrict groupa of the mentioned all-union regionaliration in 1962 (eee

'igure 1).

3h
FOR OFFICIAL USE DEB!
FOR OPFlClAL USS ONLY

Five naturel~gaogrephic regions are singled cut on the territory of the Volge
end Pro-Ural eree studied: 1 - Pro-Volga forest-steppe; 2 - forest-steppe
of the Zavolzh'yo and Pro-Ural regions; 3 - Pro-Volga steppe; a - 2avolzh'yo
and Pro-Ural steppe and as - Low (terrace) Zavolsh'ye steppe.

Conclusion

The chernozem soils in the Volga and Pre-Ural regions are the farthest eastern
representatives of soils of this type on the territory of the European part

of the USSR. Distinctive natural conditions. a continental climate in all of
its aspects. a considerable lithological heterogeneity in the soil-forming

rock with an extensive distribution of calcareous clay deposits and, finally.

a predOminance of surfaces having reised and very broken relief -- all of these
factors served to bring about the substantial differences in the soils and

soil cover between the given region and regions further to the west.

0n the whole the chernossm soils in the Volga and Pro-Ural regions are
characterised by s contrasting water-thermal regime. ‘l'hey ere characterised
by more intense winter freezing conditions (roughly three times greater than
that for soils in the central province). a very brief snow-thawing period and
a severe and prolonged period of heat during the sun-er period. The
mentioned peculiarities are intensified by the wind transfer of snow, by a
reduced amount of precipitation and. in this regard, by and increase in solar
radiation and a reduction in the consumption of heat for moisture evaporation
purposes. Moreover. the features of a continental climate are expressed to a
greater degree in southern chernosem soils.

The water regime of Volga and Pre-Ural region chernosem soils, particularly
steppe chernozems, is extremely tense. Distinct from the soils found in the
western provinces. the chernosem soils in the region under review are
characterised by a good moisture supply in the autun end spring (following
the thawing of the soils. with winter precipitation playing a considerably
sealler role, and also by a reduction in the quantitative indices for
moisture and a substantial decrease in the amount of active moisture
circulation. During dry years, the probability of which is quite high in the
Volga region, there may be an extended absence of accessible (for the plants)
moisture in the upper one half meter layer of chernosem soil. particularly
coemon and southern chernosems. Such moisture may not even appear until the
second half of the susmer period. a trait that is not typical of regions
having a modified continental climate.

The peculiarities of the water-thermal regime are determined to a considerable
degree by the biological status of the soils and by the direction and
intensity of the biochemical processes. The contrests in the thermal regime
of the chernosem soils, the reduced water supply and lowered thickness of the
layer of active moisture circulation and the extended pauses in the activity
of the microorganisms represent one of the principal causes of the formation
of chernozem soils having more shallow hum: layers and profiles on the whole
than other regions in the Zuropean part of the USSR and with a considerably

35
ron orricuu. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

higher accumulation of humus in the upper portion of the profile. Winter
cooling and sensor overheating. combined with the lithologic-meneralogical
peculiarities of the soil-forming rock (clay mechanical composition and high
content of clay minerals of the montmorillonite group) cause cracking.
particularly in steppe chernorem soils. and they promote structural
differentiation of the profile. The active migration of solutions, so
characteristic of typical and cossson chernozem soils, is considerably weaker
hero. In the majority of instances, leached and podaolized chernozem soils
have a clearly glazed profile. The nature of the soil-forming rock and the
large humus content in the region's chernoaem soils result in a high
absorption capacity (on the order of 45-55 milliequivalents), almost complete
saturation of the absorbent complex by the bases, among which calcium
predominates and a close to neutral reaction of the medium.

From the standpoint of agricultural production, the chernozem soils in the
Volga and Fro-Ural regions represent on the whole a valuable arable land fund.
The favorable water-physical properties, the large supplies of humus. nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium and also their compound forms provide a high

potential fertility for these soils. For example, easily hydrolised nitrogen
constitutes e considerable portion of the gross supplies of nitrogen; it is an
important reserve for plant nutrition. Phosphorus-organic compOunds, which
serve as an important source for plant-accessible phosphorus, predominate among
the phosphates. The hydrolysis of these compounds is carried out mainly using
the biochemical method and it is dependent upon the activity of the appropriate
ferments.

Thus the task of supplying the plants with nutrients must be carried out not
only by applying mineral (primarily phosphorus) and organic fertilizers but
also by activating the biochemical processes. In particular, this is promoted
by applications of certain forms of nitrogen fertilisers and micro-elements.

Assuming a high potential fertility in the Volga and Pre-Ural region chernosn
soils, the chief factor limiting the development of high yields is that of
unstable moisture conditions for the agricultural crops. A review of the
water regime for chernozem soils in the region has revealed that measures
aimed at accmulating and retaining moisture must be carried out in two
directions. First of all and compared to other regions, greater importance is
attached to carrying out snow retention measures in the Volga and Fro-Ural
region. The retention of snow out on the fields is extremely important in the
case of broken relief and strong winds, it promotes slower thawing of the
snow, it thus reduces the unproductive flow of thaw waters over frozen
surfaces and it ensures a supply of moisture for the soil during the early
spring period.

Another complex of measures for imprOving the supply of moisture for the
plants met be directed towards reducing the unproductive consumption of
moisture for physical evaporation, which is considerable in the spring prior
to the closing of a grass stand and in the autumn during the post-harvesting
period. It was pointed out above that the 6total amount of this consumption
3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
' FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

ranges from [/3 to [/2 half of the total amount of annual precipitation.
cueat importance is attached in this regard to developing special agrotuchuical
methods and a special and qualitatively different crop rotation plan structure.

The lithological heterogeneity of the soil-forming rock and the proximity to
the surface of native deposits. particularly in regions having a raised and
broken relief, have produced a considerable variety in the chernoaem forms and,
as a result. a number of special kinds and types of chernorem soils have been
singled out. Among the kinds encountered. epncial attention should be given
to the weakly-differentiated, compact. residual-calcareous an saline chernorem
soils. These differ frOm their usual analogs in terms of a number of
properties and thus a special approach is required for their utilization in
agriculture. Por example. weakly-differentiated chernorems having a light
mechanical composition are characterised by relatively low supplies of
nutrients. a lack of structure and a low water capacity and thus they require
increased dosages of organic and mineral fertilizers. the use of green manure
crops and the cultivation on these soils of such crops as potatoes. peas.
buckwheat and millet.

The compact chernorem soile require first of all improvements in their physical
properties. since they differ in terms of low water permeability. low porosity
of aeration, high water retention capability and accordingly a low range of
active moisture; as a result of all this, the agricultural plants are subjected
to soaking during damp years and during normal and dry years they suffer from
a shortage of moisture.

Residual-calcareous chernorem soils having a fully developed profile in terms
of a majority of their properties and their use in production operations.
closely resemble their usual analogs. However. among the soils of this type,
residual-calcareous chernorem soils having a shallow profile warrant special
attention; owing to the proximity to the surface of compact native rock
atratificationa. they should ideally not be included in the arable land fund
but rather used for haying and pasture purposes.

Still another approach is required for saline charnorem soils, the reclamation
of which varies and is dependent upon the causes and degree of alkalinity.

The need for employing a special approach for utilizing eroded chernorem
soils also merits special attention. The objective causes of the widespread
appearance of such eroded land include: the presence of vaat areas having
raised and broken relief and a shallow cover of loose deposits; the
considerable participation in the soil cover of especially erosion-prone
components -- weakly-differentiated and calcareous chernosem soils; specific
nature of water-thermal regime. Some influence has been felt in this regard
by the ancient and extensive agricultural development of the territory and by
disruption of the natural ecological balance (reduction in the area of
watershed forests, unlimited plowing of slopes and so forth).

The natural conditions of the region are such that the enumerated generic and
erosion forms of chernozem soils rarely form areas that are considerable in

37
ron orrrcm. us: 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

alaa. Typical (aaturaa of tho aoil covor atructura includa a coaplicatad
nature. anall dinanaiona and a high contraat anon; cemponnnta which. aa a
roault of diffarancaa in the chemical and phyaical propartioa. often poaaaaa
diffaront productiva qualitiaa.

Thua. baaad upon tha abova, it would appaar that a aciontitically aound and
diffarantiatad approach ia raquirad for utilizing tha land raaourcaa of tha
Volga and Pro-Ural rasiona, uhila taking into account tha local paculiaritioa
of tho aoila. rock. raliaf and othar natural factora aaaociatad with
agricultural production.

COPYRIGMT: iadatal'atvo "Koloa". 1978

7026
080: 8160/0508

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

000 631.8
CLASSIFICATION. APPLICATIOII OP COMPLEX FERTILIZERS DISCUSSED

Moscow IZVE‘I‘IYA AKADMI NAUK 838R SERIYA BIOLOGICMKAYA in Russian No 6,
Nov-Dec 78 received by editors 12 Aug 77 Pp 805-813

[Irticle by A. V. Peterburgskiy. Moscow Agricultural Acadew imeni K. A.

Timiryazev: "Complex Fertilisers and Their Importance and Application in
the 11:83:]

[my An efficient classification of modern types of
complex fertilisers is set forth. Their composition,
properties and conditions of application in hydroponics,
in hothouse facilites and under field conditions are
presented. ‘l‘heir usually higher effect on the harvest
and quality of crops. as compared with equivalent doses
of N, P30, and K20 in simple mineral fertilisers, is shown
by numerous experiments.

Compound fertilizers contain two or three nutrient elements (P. PK. 1! or
m). Depending on production techniques and egrochemical properties they
can be subdivided into compound. combined and mixed.

Compound fertilizers represent one salt, whose anion and cation ere abso-
lutely necessary for plants (for example, ““32”... m3. mayo“ and po-
tassium end monium polyphosphates).

Combined fertilizers consist of a umber of salts including ell the ions
necessary for plants. Owing to the interaction and careful mixing of ini-
tial components and granulation in the process of production, these fertil-
izers are also characterized by a sufficiently uniform composition (nitro-

phoskss, nitroalnophoska. urea phosphates, cerboemmopboskas and so forth).
Nitrophoskas are obtained by the decomposition of nitric acid apatite in a

mixture with sulfuric or phosphoric acid with a subsequent addition of po-
tassiun chloride and granulation.)

 

i'l’rom the report to the 8th International Congress on Mineral Fertilizers!
vith A. It. Kulyukin's participation.

39
roe orrrcm. use oxzx
FOR OPHCML USE ONLY

Mixed fertilizers are the product of mechanical mixing of two or three
simple fertilisers. Their capacity for caking during storage and trans-
portation and for layer separation during application (especially. if the
latter is carried out by spinner broadcasters) must be considered a sig-
nificant shortcoming of such mixtures. Such s segregation leads to a more

or less marked separation of fertiliser mixtures into initial components,
which is extremely undesirable.

Our experiments (Peterburgskiy and Debretsoni. 1961a) disclosed that even
under conditions of vegetative experiments corn assimilated less ”1’. I and
It and developed the root systms more weakly during an uneven distribution
of fertilisers and this inevitably led to a considerable reduction in the
harvest. 0: course, this also occurs with nineral fertilisers.

The output of II. P302 and Kio in the form of complex fertilisers reached
n

155 in the Soviet on in 975. By 1980 it will greatly increase (291).
In the future it is desirable to have at least 50% of the total amount of
mineral fertilisers applied in farming.

Among compound fertilisers a-onium phosphates have become widespread in de-
veloped countries. especially in the United States. They have good phys-
icomechanical properties and a high total concentration of I and P 05 (up
to 60-70%). In hundreds of comparative tests. as the sources of phospho-
rus and nitrogen (with leveled doses of m in all the studied variants)

of mophos and diamophos for all basic crops and on the most important
types of soil in our country. it turned out that not in a single case were

these compound fertilisers inferior to an equivalent aixture of simple
fertilisers.

Conversely. in most experiments the effectiveness of amonium phosphates

was much higher. This can be seen from the suaries of experimental re-
sults (Kondrat'yev and Mamkina, 1968. 1973)-

At the same time. it should be noted that. owing to a too wide nitrogen-
phoaphorus ratio. monium phosphates. without supplementing them with ni-
trogen and potassium can be applied mainly as a local (sowing) fertiliser
(to rows and holes). However, during basic application (with plowing under
soil) anionium phosphates must be conbined with other nitrogen and potas-
siua fertilisers and even mixed with the latter, and this. inevitably. in-
creases farm expenditures on mixture preparation. Apparently, in such sit-
uations plant preparation of combined fertilisers on the basis of snonium
phosphates is more rational.

For example. a combined fertiliser containing 195 of It, P205 and K20 and

consisting of carbamide, anonium phosphates and potassium chlorides is be-
ing studied in the United States (Araten, 1968). Carboamophoska was also
obtained in the USSR (by mixing mophos and carbamide and potassium chlo-
ride solutions; they contain l9.8$ of l, P205 and K20). If KCl is not in-
troduced, carbon-ophos can contain a total of up to 60$ of II and P20 (both

ho
FOR OFFICIAL USE OSLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in equal parts). The granules of the new fertilisers are three to five
times stronger than those of urea and ammonium nitrate. Carboamophoska
tests produced good results. we (Peterburgskiy and Shafran. 1971) also
obtained such results for urea mophos (co(un,),-us.,n,ro.,) containing
305 of s and 9205.

Magnesium smonium phosphate (W~N~°hzo) is only slightly soluble in
water, but its constituent ions are well assimilated by plants. It con-
tains 15-16} of magnesium. 10-113 of nitrogen and 39-h” of phosphorus-
a total of Sis-67$. Its production is much cheaper than that of an eguiv-
alent amount of the same nutrient elements in the form of simple fertil-
18ers.

According to the results of our investigations (Peterburgskiy et al.. 1972).
it is advisable to use this fertiliser in hydroponics when growing vegeta-
ble crops on horamsit (table 1). Magnesium monium phosphate in a dose of
2-3 g of P30; per plant is introduced into small pets for growing seedlings.
This dose of phosphorus (and of the magnesia accompanying it) is also suf-
ficient for the formation of a rich harvest after the transplantation of
vegetable crops into the ground. however, amonium nitrate is sufficient
only for the initial period of growth. Therefore. during the first period
the nutrient solution supplied to the trays with plants should contain po-
tassius and calcium cations, sulfate anion and trace elements and. subse-
quently, nitrate in the form of potassium nitrate is also introduced into it.
When MglﬂisPou'ﬂzO is introduced into small seedling pots, calcium is added
to the solution before bloom and then the need of plants for Ca is met by
the Ca of tap water with which salt solutions are prepared. Such a method
greatly simplifies and lowers the cost of cultivation in hydroponics. be-
cause the preparation of a superphosphate extract and of a magnesium sul-
fate solution becomes unnecessary. Correction of the composition of the
nutrient solution (during its repeated introduction) is also simplified.
This has been confirmed by long-ten tests of the reconended method. Table
2 present the results of one of the experiments, which shows that granulated
and powdery magnesium anoniwm phosphate provides the same effect. The same
can be said with respect to its introduction into a small seedling pot, or
an even distribution in the substrate. The same result as with the use of
the water soluble salt of phosphoric acid was obtained in both cases. how-
ever, the quality of fruits had the tendency toward improvement in case of
application of magnesium a-nonium phosphate. although a little less phos-
phorus from it was assimilated. This means that it is better utilised by
the plant from this source. Usually. the quality of fruits is also better
than on a nutrient salt mixture.

we also obtained satisfactory results when growing cucumbers for seeds on
magnesiun amonium phosphate and in an ordinary ground hothouse (table 2)

on a leveled background of UK. especially with local application. It is
well known that the quite rapid salinization of the substrate. in particular
of soil, is the scourge of ground hothouses. This soil must be replaced
periodically, which requires large expenditures. There is no doubt that.

In
roe OFFICIAL use 0va
FOR Oﬂ'lOIAL USE ONLY

by applying concentrated compound fertilisers, it is possible to greatly
prolong the use of soil in hothouses vithout renovation. It is to be hoped
that with the development of industrial production of mamesium amnium
phosphate it will also find application under field conditions, especially
on subacid soil poor in mobile magnesium

Combined fertilisers. The following combined fertilisers are non: produced
in our country on an industrial scale: nitrophoekas and nitroasIIOphosxas.
The production techniques of the former vere discussed above. Nitroano-
phosxae are obtained by the ammonistion of a mixture of nitric and phosphor-
ic acid. addition (after concentration by evaporation) of potassium chloride
end granulation. The content of ll. P205 and K20 at a ratio of l:l:l com-
prises 11.5} of each. Phosphorus is represented by a-oniu phosphates, ni-
trogen. by ammonit- nitrate and partially by me: and potassiu. by its
chloride and nitrate. The proportion of voter soluble phosphates is very
high (up to 901). which is approximately 1.5 times higher than in nitrophos-
has (555). On the one hand. this lovers the cost of transportation, storage
and application of nitrossmophoska to soil and. on the other. requires much
greater energy expenditures on the decomposition of phosphate raw materials
and the production of extractive ortophosphoric acid. As amorous tests
showed, in their effect on the harvest nitrophoskas and nitroanophoskas do
not differ considerably. The superiority of both combined fertilisers over
equivalent aixtures of simple mineral fertilisers was noted many times both
in the 0881! (Peterburgshiy. 197$; Btefanov. 1969; Oryrlov et al.. 1971) and
abroad (Bsychi, 1961:; Yenikov and Atanasov. 1971; Kovach. 1972; batkovich.
1971 .

In tables 3 to 5 we cite only three examples of a comparison of the effec-
tiveness of combined fertilizers and mineral fertiliser mixtures in the cul-

tivation of cat and barley potatoes on nonchernotem soil.

Inanother series of our experiments on eoddy—podaolic soil it was estab-
lished that the availability of nitrogen. phosphorus and potassitn fran ni-
trophoshae to plants is slightly higher than from superphosphate in a mix-
ture with enoniu nitrate and potassitm chloride. Probably, this is due to
the more even distribution of combined fertilizer granules in soil. we
would also like to note that in soil phosphates from nitrophoskas are less
subJeeted to retrogradation than from superphosphate (Peter‘burgshly and Ve-
reykine. 1960; Selina. 1963:). A better development of the root system of
vinter wheat and an increase in its adsorption surface with nitrophoeha, which
contributed to an increase in the yield of crop fertilisers. use also noted
(Ustimenko et al.. 1975; lmeenko and lioldovin. 1961:).

In our vegetative experiments on soddy-podaolic soil conducted vith Debra-
tseni (1971b) ve thoroughly investigated the importance of solubility at

phosphates and of the granulasetric composition in simple and combined fer-
tilisers. The results showed the following: l) the different granulaset-

ric composition of the studied fertilizers (powdery and granulated) had no
great effect on the cat harvest and on the availability of phosphorus from

he
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

fertilisers to plants if the content of water soluble P 0 in than comprised
about 50% of nitrate soluble P209 2) the phosphorus of he fertiliser con-
taining only water soluble P20 was assimilated better from granules, and
the phosphorus of fertilisers gontaini only citrate soluble P 05. when
they were applied in a powdery state; 3 the availability of p osphorus.
nitrogen and potassium from nitrophoskas is slightly higher than from the
corresponding mixtures of simple fertilisers. This can be due to the more
even distribution of nutrients in the particles of the complex fertiliser
than during the application of a mixture of simple mineral fertilisers. which.
moreover. can be separated into levers during sowing; 1:) the calcium of su-
perphosphete and other phosphoric fertilisers in the described experiments
did not play any significant role in the calcium nutrition of oats.

0n soddv-podsolic soil in Moscow Oblast we set up an experiment with an eval-
uation of the availability to cats of various compounds of phosphorus from
nitrophoskas ("frozen" and carbonate) and a mixture of simple mineral fertil-
isers with the participation of superphosphate. The doses of II. P30 and

K 0 were loo kg per hectare in all variants. but phosphorus was calcuiated si-
t or according to the total content of P205 in the fertiliser. or according
to the P 0 occurring in an assimilated state. The experimental results are
presented in table 6.

As can be seen from the figures presented in table 6. when calculating the
dose of P205 in "frozen" nitrophoska and superphosphate according to its as-
similated form, the grain harvest was absolutely the same and the removal
of phosphorus was almost 61 lower than in nitrophoska. however. in case of
carbonate nitrophosha. the grain harvest also proved to be 85 lower and the
removal of phosphorus was 10! lower. But frosen nitrophosha contains only
about 553 of water soluble P203 (of the assimilated) and super-phosphate. no
less than 751. Carbonate nitrophosha does not have this form of phosphates

at all. Therefore, as a source of phosphorus the first nitrophosha is not
inferior to superphosphate and the second (as was to be expected) acts dur-

ing the first year slightly more weakly than the popular phosphoric fer-
tiliser.

Economic Effect From the Application of Mineral l'ertilisers and Nitrophoskas

however. the economic effectiveness of cabined fertilizers under production
conditions, which can exceed the mixtures of simple fertilisers by 515 to 761
in this respect. is their main positive aspect (Peterburgskiy and Smirnov,
1968; Pestnihov, 1965; his-nov and Peterburgshiy, 1969; Torin, 1962; Peter-
burgskiy and Shafren. 1971; Peterburgskiy and Kolelishvili. 1973; sorochinskiy,
1970; Arutyunvan, 1911'. less/eve, 1911 and 1972; Xalinichenko. 1968; Vinogra-
dove. 1970 and many others).

The economic effect of nitrophoshas is the highest when they are applied lo-
cally (to rave. furrows and holes) during the saving of grain crops and auger
beets and during the planting of potatoes. He shall cite only several ex-
emples.

'03
roe orrtcm use om:
It and Quality of Tmto Fruits of the Belay um Variety Deg
pncation of Magnesia Ammonia Phosphete

Content E Rev Substance

Dry sub- Rm
stance of P205
in Total by
Harvest rants, mam, Vital!) c. Caratin, harvest
Ire/punt f 5 ad Id Ins/plan!

“——
rr's

'e) um 5.36 2.01 25.9 1.52 1639
Al
I.
I8
M.

2.573 5.58 2.30 27.0 1.88 1322
the ‘
into:
pot 2.586 5.36 2.30 21.2 1.85 1595
the
:8
e1 2.366 5.35 2.32 25.6 1.85 1602
the
e]. 2.39. 5J1 2.26 25.9 1.86 1618

eoszosinmtheuperinentuvmmsm2¢perplmt.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'i'eble 2. ﬂervest or c \llbﬂ' Fruits end Beede (ram Einiryeuv Agricul-
turel Aced Veriety) Depending on the Methods of Applicstion

of Double Superphosphete end Mesnesiun Moniun Phosphete in e
Ground hothouse (Peterburgshiy end Kulyukin. 1976)

Experieentel verient Fruit hervest. Seed weight.

2 g of P205 per plent) kg/squere neter g/squere eeter
K stckground) 3.9 35.0
“our locelly 8.8 ' 82.».

KOP local: 9.): 90.5

lit up scettered 8.0 79.5

K9? ecettered 7.6 63.8
ucrg‘f‘; 0.96 6.).»

In our experieents conducted with D. Ii. Kolelishvili (1973) in Orlovsksye
Oblect the net income per hectere of potetoes totsled l58.7 rubles free e
nixture of simple einerel fertilisers end 237.6 rubles free nitrophoske.

0n the eversge. on e nunber of ferns in 8verdlovsheve Oblest production
tests on erees sown with spring whset end potetoes showed thet. if the net
income from e nixturs of simple ninerel fertilisers is token es 100. the
following were obteined from nitrophoskes: with besic (presowing) e lice-
tion to e) wheet. 176 end b) etoes. 151 end with row epplicetion during
eggs?) to e) wheet. 155 end b potetoes. lb? (Beirnov end Peterburgshiy.

1 .

Inportence of Joint end Beperete Applicetion of II. 1’ end It to Soil

It wee noted ebove thet en even distribution of e uniform eertilieer nix-
ture in the soil lever. to which nutrients ere epplied. is of greet import-
ence for plents. 'i'o illustrete this point. we will discuss our vegetetive
experiments with corn (Peterburgskiy end Dehretseni. l961e). In the first
experimentel verient enoniu nitrete. superphosphete (tegged 33?) end po-
tessiun chloride were cerefully nixed with the entire ness of soil before
vessels were peeked with it. In the second verient eech of these fertil-
izers wes mixed with one-third of the coil betch end then by neens of ten-
porery pertitions the vessel wee divided into three sectors. piecing one-
third of the betch of soil fertilized with only one nutrient in eech sector.
Corn oprouts were trensplented into the center of the vessel (the pertitione
were removed first) with the distribution of the root systee of corn into
three perts (esoh strend in one sector).

In the first experieentel verient esoh strend of roots found ell the three
nutrients in say sector noun the very beginning. In the second verient. how-
ever, the eppropriete strend st first could sbsorb only one nutrient (nitro-
gen, phosphorus or potessius). which wee introduced into e given sector. Of
course. with the development of roots they could eleo penctrete into other
eectore. utilizing two or three food eleeents froe fertilizers. not one.

1&5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Live Effect of llitrophoskas and Mixtures of Si-ple Mineral P
Mitions or Soda-Pedant: Soil (Went: by A. Peta-bur

Anlgcstion
Basic application ﬂannel can.

c - f 8 gummy—
" WM
tn
.1 . 2 .1 .
super- 56.]. 3.“ 22.9 3.56
ossiu
s per
3.6 - 3.2 -

st in control (without fertilizers) vss 93.5 and starch out]
on the average.

“2) «warm, containing 301 of s and 920,. m: is a we:
r. govever. it should be produced in granulated (on, othe:
not inferior to nitrophoska and mineral fertiliser mixture:
GU (table 5) and in 5-year experiments with potatoes (table
hates are promising both as solid (containing 10-121 of nit:
s) and as liquid (10! of nitrogen and 355 of phosphorus) re:
Its-em scroche-ical stations paid Imeh attention to the:
ishevskiy: 1961; stishevskiy et al.. 1910). Our osmium
dicate the sane. Oladkova and Cherepanan showed this for 1

Gaplu liquid fertilizers have already found application 1|
at a1... 1910).
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Teble la. Coeperetiwe Effectiveness of Uree Phosphete end of Iquivelent
Mixtures of Binple Minerel fertilisers in Potstoes Under Condi-
tions of Soddy-Podsolic Soil. (Averege in h fem) (:xperinents
by A. Peterburgskiy end 8. Shefren. 1971)

herwsst. quin- Tuben

remuner- (60 he per mm Mp ammo
hooters) Ii. 220‘ end K20 tubers top rstio 1 per hectere
Control {without fer-

tilissrs) 115.9 55.2 2.09 12.7 15.3
Ures phosphete (lleKCl 156.2 70.10 2.22 ll.6 19.0
Anoniun nitreteesuper-

phoophdteeKCI 162 . h 16 . 1 2 .00 12 . 8 20 . 5
Ureersuperphospheterxm 161.5 70.6 2.29 12.6 21.8

The soil teken for the experinent (deep chernosem of Tubowshsye Oblest)
wee diluted in helf with berren send in order to asks the plent reection to
fertilizers cleerer.

The doses of nutrients were 0.6 g of 1!. P 05 end X20 per vessel with 8 mg
of e mixture of soil end send. Corn developed free 23 July through 20 Sep-
teeber. It cleerly legged in growth in the second werient. By hervest tine
the plents of the first werient hed eers thet begsn to fern, while by thet
dste the pleats of the second verient only blossued (teble 1).

The cheeicel cceposition of leewee in dynsnics (in S of the dry substence)
is shown below (teble 8).

These figures indicste thet the greetest differences between the first end
second werients were in the content of phosphorus. The dewistions in the
eeount of nitrogen end potsesiun in leewss were negligible. This does not
neen thet the ebsolute differences in their removed. were elso snsll. Since
the hervest wee considerebly higher in the first experimented werient end
lower in the second. the remove]. of nitrogen. 2205 end K20 by the plents
of the second verient wee undoubtedly lower.

The second vegetetiwe experiment wee set up by sieiler methods with the dif-
ference thet one plent wee trensplsnted into esch sector of the vessel. 0b-
servetions showed thet corn developed best in the nitrogen sector. Corn
loceted in the sectors of phosphorus or poteesiun grew worse then with on
even distribution of m. The eesiniletion of phosphorus (in ng per vessel
with three plents) wee nuch lower in ceee of e seperete epplicetion of fer-
tilisers both st the expense of soil end from tegged superphosphete (teble 9).

The dots of our experiments on e better utilieetion of phosphorus. when
spplied Jointly with nitrogen end poteesiun, by e plent were confirmed in
the inwestigstione by A. D. lunceenko end l. I. Moldowine (1965). They noted

1.7
roe orrxcm. use oxvr
FOR OPHCML USE ONLY

that the preeence of nitrogen and potaeaim aaltn in the granqu or
Ca(H2P0.)3'll 0 or of nitrophoeka inereaaea the mount of phoaphorua ur-
i‘uoing in ooh and prolongs the dietanee over uhich it apreado and. there-
i'ore. reducee the amount of phoephorua aettiing near the granule in the
torn or dicalciu phcephate. he a reeult. plante abaorb lore phoaphorua.

Ii‘he production and application or moniun and potaeeim polyphcephatee

obtained on the baeia oi‘ polyphoephoric acide, the content or tvo coope-
nente in which reachea 805 (and in caee of potaaeiun Ietaphoaphate even

1005). are neat preaieing in the future.

Table 5. Comparative Effect of Urea Phcaphate. Sulfate hitrophoeka anc
Simple Mineral fertiliaere on Barley (Harmony-121). 0n the
Average. in 3 Yeare (Experiaent by Peterhurgakiy and Shaken.
1911) on Bonny-Pedant: Soil on the Kolkhoa ineni M. Oor'kiy
in uoeeov Obiaet

       

fertiliaere (60 kg Harveet. Crude Ruoval by harveot
per hectare) I. quin. Straw: protein (indtctal. with grain
P o and It 0 nor has. xgrain in gran 2g gnaw), kglhef.
2 s 2 gra n etraw ratio hee. nitrogen 920,

without fertiliurl 13. 22.2 129.0 32.7 1

on (mm: 20.8 21.? 1.33 9.6 22h.6 59.8 22.5 36.3
Sulfate nitrophoeka 21.5 25.0 1.11 8.9 223A 56.3 21.5 33.6
luPch 22.6 31.9 1.“ 9.7 253.5 52.0 2h.2 52.5
3.?er 20.3 28.5 lJbO 9.8 232.2 16.8 20.7 37.8

Remark. Geo-urea pheephate, hum-ea. lawman

3, Pe--euperphoephate and
Kx-OKCI.

Table 6. Dependence of Oat Grain larveet on tho Fora of Phoephatea in
tertiliure (Peterburgekiy and Kalinin. 1959)

"Proaen" litrephoaha IPK Carbonate litrophoeka [PK

 

ace. to ace. to . ace. to ace. to acc. to ace. to
total aaeinilated aaai-ilated total uninilated aeain.
liar-vent .
qu‘ue/h.¢e 19c, 2101 21-3 20.1 21.6 23.3
Room or
P o, ,
1371.». 19.5 20.5 21.1 17.9 20.1 22.5
M

F08 OFFICKM. [SSE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 7. Effect of Joint and Separate Application of NP]: on Corn

weight of weight or Phosporua Assinilated
wrung. dry naee dry roots Total from soil from fertilizer
Mixture of
m 36.2 100 7.1 100 239.1. 100 um 100 122.0 100
Separately
ll-P-K 28.3 77.9 3-? 52.1 125.9 52.1 1:95 102.1 75.1: 61.8
Table 8. Content oi‘ m in Corn During Their Joint and Separation Appli-

cation
20 I

Variants 1| P205 K20 ll P205 K20 N P203 K20 ll P205 K20

manure 3.0 0.“ 2.9 2.9 0.9 2.9 2.3 0.96 LR 1.28 0.56 2.30

ll-P-K sepa-
rately 3.0 0.63 2.9 3.07 0.69 2.95 2.1.1. 0.1.7 2.86 1.38 0.37 2.53

Table 9. harvest of Corn and its Aaaililation or Phosphorus During Separate
and Joint Application or Fertilizers

Coefficient of Utiliaap
Variants Average weight of Content of P205 , tion of P205 tron rer-

g 2%gt. g ghee"; tuners, 1
“PK 15' 2 gas 17a
ll-P-K sepa-
r“.1’ 210 3-1h e 2.130 s 211 e 1 1h. 9
BIBLIOGRAPHY
l. Amtyunyan, A. A.. 1271, "Udobreniye Kartotelya Kanbinirovanmi Kaliy—
nyni Udobreniyani” Lhrtiliaation or Potatoee with Combined Potassium
Fertilizerg. Yerevan.

2. Baychi. 9.. 1961., ”Sb. 5.40.. may v litre” [follection or the Agricul-
tural School in nun-J, Ix, lol.

3. Selina, ll. 1., 1965, in the co laction "Piaiologiya Pitaniya Rasteniy"
[Physiolog of Plant nutrition , Kiev.

0.. Vinogradova, a. 1.. 1970, BYUL. vma. lo 7.
5. Vol'ﬂtovich. s. 1., 1970. lOiINIYA v s. 1a., 110 h.
6. Gimme. x. 3.. and Cherepanova, A. 8.. 197b, amommra. No 1.

’69
ron omcm. use oxu
To

10.
11.

12.
13.

1h.

15.

16.

17.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Oryzlov, V. P.. Kertsev‘ Yu. 0., and Sindygshkins, R. K., 1971. "Ken-
pleksnyys Udo‘breniye." LConplex Fertilizery. Moscow. Kolos.

Yenikov. K.. snd Atsnesov, 8.,_l971. ”Tea. Don. Henchm-Mstod. Kon-
i’erentsii stren-Chlenov 83V" [Abstracts of Re s st the Scientific
snd Methodological Conference of cm Members . Moscow.

IIQQVI. In 0., 1971, HMYA V 8. ML, lo 3, 1972. Ibid, lo 9.
Kelinichenko. V. 6., 1968. AGROKHIMIYA, lo 1:.

Kovech. Keroy, 1971, "Tea. Doll. llsuchn.-Metod. Konf. Strsn-Chlenov
88V." Moscow.

Knrtsevs. 1’... IL, 1970, AOROKEIMIYA. lo 9.

Kondret'yev, I. 0., and Mind, A. M.. 1968, AOROICBIMHA. lo 9. 1973.
AGROKHIMIYA, No 12.

Lstkovich. 1;, 1971. in the collection "Ispol'zovsniye 10m Minerel'nykh
Udobreniy" ﬁltilintion of F'orns or_ninere.1 Fertilizers]. Moscow. 11lo-
vyye Vidy Konpleksnykh Udobreniy" Llew Types of Complex Fertiliser-y.
1972, collection edited by Avdonin, ll. 8.. end Vol'fkovich. 8. 1.. Izd.
“GU.

Peterburgskiy, A. V.. 1959, "Slozhny'ye Udobreniye" LEmpound Pertilizers .
Moscow. Znsniye. 1971. "Home 1 Persgektivnwe Konpleksme Udobreniys
[low end Promising Couple: Feniligery. Moscow. Znsniye- 1975. "Aero-

khiniye Koapleksnykh Udobreniy" [Agrochenistry of Complex Fertilizers].
Moscow. leaks.

Peterburgskiy, A. V.. end Vereykins. Yu. L, 1960. "Dokledv TSKHA" 5e-
ports of the Thiryezev Agricultursl Aceduq], Issue 57.

Psterburgskiy. A. V., and Debretseni. 8.. 1961e. "Dohlsdv 'rsm." Issue
70. 19611), IZV. m, to 1, 5.

Peterburgskiy, A. V., and minin. K. V.. 1959, "Bouncy TBICHA.” Issue '01.
Petertmrsskiy, A. V., and Kolelilhvili, D. IL, 1973. AGROIOIIHIIA, lo 2.

Peterburgskiy, A. V.. Kulyukin. A. ll., end Hskerenko. L. L, 1972. IZV.
TSICHA, Issue 3.

Peterbureekiy, A. V.. and Kulyukin, A. 11., 1976. "Konpleksme Udobreniys
v_2ekrytou Crunte. VIII Keshd. Kongrens po Hinerel'm Udobreniysn"
LConplex Fertilizers in Closed Ground. The 8th Internetionel Congress on

Mineral Fertilizers] . Moscow.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
22.

23.
2h.

25.

27.

28.

30.
31.
32.

33.
3h.

35.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Poterburgskiy. A. V., and gostnlkov. A. V., 1968. "Kontsentrtrovnnnyyo

Mincrel'nyye Udobrenlyn" [concentrated Mineral. Fertilizerﬂ. Moscow. Roe-
sel 'khomdct .

Peterbursskiy. A. V.. and Smirnov. A. P.. 1968. AGROIOiMYA. lo 1.
Peterbureskiy. A. V.. end Bhutan, 8. A.. 1971. ”Don. VABKHNIL" [ﬁe-
ports of the All-Qnion Order of Lenin Academy of Agriculture]. Sciences
men: V. I. Lenin]. Issue 1.

Pgstnikov. A. V.. 196b, "Ispytsnlye Noveyshtkh Kaspleksnykh Udobreniy"
L‘l‘esung of the Latest Couples: Fertilizers], Moscow. Ind-vo ram.

81111118. V. A.. Rmevichene. M. P., end Donbriusku. K. A.. 1970.
IGIIMIYA V 8. 101., no lo.

sn‘mov. A. Pu, “d Petu‘bm‘gﬂkiy. As Vs, 1969. We Ss'me “an.
Issue 3.

Sorochinsm. V. V., 1970, "Vltyshiyg Koupleksnykh Udobreniy ne Uro-
zhey 1 Kechestvo Sekhsrnoy Svekly” Effect of Couples: Fertilisers on
the “meet end Gunny or anger BeetJ. Izd-vo L'vovsk. Agricultural
Institute.

Stefanov. o. N., 1961._“'I'r. Kirovskogo am" froceedingc of the Kirov
Agricultural Imtttuty. Issue 315.

Torin, V. 8.. 1962, "Dokledy ram," Issue 79.
Khovsnov. V. 0.. 1972. mmm. V 8.101., 30 11.

lOzonenko, A. 0., end Moldovin. ll. 1., 196%. in the collection "Futo-
logtye Pitsniye Ruteniy," Kiev.

Yenishevskiy, r. v.. 1967. Aoaonmnu. no 2.

sttshevskiy. P. V.. Prokosheve. M. A., end lovikove. G. V.. 1970.
AOROIOIMYA, No 2.

Areten. J.. 1968. "Nev Fertilizer Meter-ills." London.

COPYRIGHT: Imtel'stvo "noun", ”Investiye Al 8888. uriye biologtches-

11.1039
(:80:

keys" , 1978

1821. EN!)

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY