APPROVED FOR RELEABE: 2007IOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“ 00030023-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030023-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8320

8 Match 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUU 15/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030023-2
NOT B

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asapprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGlT MRS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP 0F
MATEPIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIAE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
I. new: No.

   

3. Recipient's Attention Nu.

em Ale
8 March 1979

—_.
.- :evlemieg One-incion lion.
9.

3 onnct/l‘eei/Iecl Dan: No.

ll. Connect/Gnu No.

  

ms L/ 8320

 

BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA
“(‘1’

TRANSLATIONS 0N "ESTERN EUROPE.

   

    

(POUO 15/79)

       
 
    
 

  
 
  

  
 
 

9. Palm-mg Omen-nun New and A‘dlCOI
Joint Publ icetions Research Service
1000 North clebe Roed

Arlington, Virginia 22201

 
 
  

 

   

     

I1. Spec-swag Olguuutioe New end Adda" I). Type oi Regan e: "and

Coveted

   
 
 

  

As above

IS. Supple-«my Notes

 
 
 

It. A “teen

  
  

  

The serial report contains political/economic Information on West European
energy. finance and trade policy utters es well as developments and trends
in the doctrine. programs and problems of the ujor con-unis: parties.

including their relations with cor-mist parties outside the Heat European
area. - .

 
    
    
  

  

  

7. Key I‘onde eed Docent-t Analysis.

  
 

e. Deenipteu

 

     
            
    
       
        
  

Political Science _X_lnternationel Affairs __l.uxenbourg

Sociology _Auatris _Netherlande

Propaganda _Belgiul _Norvay

Econonics _Cenade _Portugel

Energy _O/prue _L$pain

Industry __Den|nerk _Sveden

Trade _Finlend _8vit:erland

Finance _XFrence _‘l'urltey

__Grecce _United Kingdon

m. Hem-lune/Opce-Ended Tm.- __Iceland ___Heat Genny

  
       

  

_Xltely

 
    
  

tn (manna/am so, so. 10

II. Asa-:ahslny Sum-wet

For Official Use Only.
Limited Number of Copies Available From JPRS.

  
 
      

'0“ 01".” I-‘V. 8-,"

ms row an as nsnooucro “"°“"°‘ """"'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L

8 Marci

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(9000 15/19)

Couteuts
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

’Black International' Terrorist Spokcanen Discuss Plans
(Roberto Chtodi; L‘EUROPEO. 18 Jan 79).................

France Condo-med for Sheltering ETA Terrorists
(Juan Tomas de Salas: CAHBIO. 21 Jan 79)...............

UNCTAD V and Changing Horld Economic Structure
(Eberhard Rhein; EUROPA ARCRIV, 10 Jan 79).............

FRANCE

PS National Secretary Calls for 'Break with Stalinian‘
(Gilles Hartlnet; LB NOUVEL DESERVATEUR, 22-28 Jan 79).

Combat helicopters Equip Ai:craft Carrier 'Foch'
(AIR 5 COSMOS, 20 Jan 79)..............................

Modern Combat Topographical Measure-ant Discussed
(Jean Aubier; ARHEES D'AUJOURD’RUI, Jan-Fab 79)........

Briefs
Air Baae Protection
Space Delegation to PRC

ITALY

PCI'a Pajetta on China-Vietnam-Caabodia Inbroglio
(Gian Carlo Pajetta Interview; LA STAMPA. 20 Feb 79)...
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

'BLACK INTERNATIONAL' TBRRDRIST SPOKBSHEN DISCUSS PLANS
Hilan L‘BUROPEO in Italian 18 Jan 79 pp 14-17
[Article by Roberto Chiodi]

[ToxtlThe fascist and Nazi groups throughout the world have
joined with the left extrenists to unleash a new wave of
terror; now their tactics stretch from the far eastern
countries all the way to Spain.

Barcelona. January-1n a matter of days this topic will be the subject of
conversation. As regards the "Black International." it see-ed for a while
that it had cone apart at the seams. As a letter of fact it changed its
style of operation and appears to be planning to function on a higher scale.
The objective now is Europe. the inevitable battleground for the coming
Third World war. The enemy is the U.s.-USSR axis. The ally. obviously, is
giant China.

Day dreams? Old nazi broken-down illusions? It would be a relief if it

were really so. Unfortunately, there are indications and confrontations

which prove this strategy. which on paper reseables a plot for a fantasy-
political novel. The extrene right is very much alive. has considerable

funds. more than substantial support and branches everywhere.

It has set aside all those leaders who were burned in the "unnecessary both-
ing and terrorist attacks." It has tightened important contacts with the
extrene left which is identified with the Maoist concept. It has chosen a
battleground. Laos. to experinent with the possibility of a cC'yon action
and begin to weave those bonds which before too long. it is believed, will
also be decisive in Europe.

The representatives of the 680 rightist groups in the world. held a conven-
tion in Brazil last su-mer. Organizational problems were discussed and a
general plan was set up to coordinate the efforts and initiatives of all. In
the fall in Barcelona. the second appointment: agreements and contacts were
perfected. decisions were made. mainly to intensify the collaboration with
groups of the extreme left who have identified their points of view with the

1

FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

major part of the programs established by the "Black International." The
next congress will be held in South Korea where joint results and expected
offensives in the Indochinese peninsula will be discussed, always keeping
in mind the European problens. since by unanimous convictions. it will still
be only up to Europe. as usual. to decide the destinies of the world.

Last October, in Perpignan. s small French town on the slopes of the Pyrenees.
closest to Spain, the royal government of free Laos was officially established.
It is presided over by the former president of the national assembly, and
includes some former ministers. The acknowledged leader is Hang Pao, but

the control of this operation is in the hands of Giuliano Hiotti Konisberg.
about «0 years old. from Bassano del Grappa. At this point it is interesting
to watch this comic-scenario behind the whole organization. But an indispu-
table reality exists: war; which is being fought on the banks of the Mekong.
with half a score or more dead every day. And against the Khner actually
these are the men who are identified in the government in exile in Perpignan;
they are the "Hens." thousands of guerrillas who are evidently being armed
and supported by someone. The experts on Indochinese problems have no doubts
regarding the military partner of the "Heos": it is China. And the Viet-
namese offensive in Cambodia only accelerates the moment when this same China
will not be able to withdraw or hide behind eventual phantom governments.

This general from Bassano del Grappa. who is planning the attacks while living
in Perpignan. is not an unknown character on the Italian scene. Hhen he was
very young he traveled all over Europe after stealing the plans of a nuclear
test. he was arrested in Italy and condemned on the charge of spying for

East Germany. Another conviction placed him on the fringe of the trial for
the massacre in Loggia Square in Brescia; he was accused of having involved
some important neofascists in this affair; undoubtedly some of the names in
question were revealed later.

In the past he had many eventful encounters and skirmishes with the police
and no doubt he has been in contact with the head of neofascisn- And it is
probably thanks to his good services that the "Black International" was a
godfather to the royal government in exile. guaranteeing assistance (France
and Spain tolerate this warlike government without worrying) and conduits
just for the supply of arms.

In all respects, the present alinesent, at first glance. seems to be quite
respectable. And the letters written to the right addresses are frightening:
orders for thousands of antipersonnel mines, armored equipment. helicopters
and armored cars. The companies which were approached (Valdec in Milan.
Racoin in Via Cleaentina in Rome and English and Swiss traders) have shown
great interest in these transactions. In addition. the viaticum furnished
by the "International" was first rate; the moves made by half the world (from
the United States to Norway. from Japan to South Africa) have supported the
royal government of Laos and want to help the imperial guerrillas to drive
back the Vietnamese invaders. openly supported by the Soviet Union.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

But. said Hiotti. assistance does not come only from the right. "They are
practically all with us. from Iran to Peking. Even the Vatican has decided
to support us. and here is the name of the Monsignor who has been pointed out
to us." and he leafs through the memorandum book which lists the top names

of worldwide neonasiiss together with the names of the CIA agents in Europe.
Among the others. the famous Gaston Guy Amaudruz. leader of the NOE (expan-
sion unknown); Yves Guerin Sersc. the Portuguese already involved in the in-
vestigation of the Piazza Pontsna slaughter. and who. at this tine uses only
the name of Morgan, as a battle name; Manuel Sanchez, the founder of the
"Guerrillas of Christ the King,” the guiding Iberian extreme organisation;
Jose Tolo Blssco. a professor in Barcelona (who speaks in the name of the
CEDADB (Spanish Circle of the Friends of Europe). of the New Force and the
Franco old guard. And among the Italians. here are the cover names and ad-
dressee of Sandro Seccucci. the "81 (Italian Social Movement) parliamentarian.
sought for shooting a young communist in Sezse (he wishes to be called Max
and can be found at No 77 Pujsda St in Barcelona); Stefano delle Chiaie.

Jean Hare for those who still associate with him in Paris; Bliodoro Pomar.
the Ispra engineer. tried for the Borghese explosion and accused of being one
of the principals in the Occorsio crime.

Miotti (the orders are signed by Konisberg. his mother's name) has Lao citi-
zenship and carries a Leo diplomatic passport. In the small villa in Canet-
Plage. the provisional residence of the government in exile. there is always
an M-l6 submachine gun at his side with bullets in the magazine: "There have
already been two attempts on my life and for this reason my assistant. Alberto
Prai. he also is from Bassano. is always with me. Can he not shoot anyone?

He has the rank of captian.“ Prai replaced another Italian, Plavio Holetts
Contesss. who is in Brussels on a mission.

The ease with which hiotti can get an appointment in Barcelona with Tolo
Blasco. a firmly convinced Nazi. proves that he is not a person who exagger-
ates [cacciaballel. The meeting took place in a room in the Calle Ganduxer.
a few steps from the place where the second congress of the "International"
was being held. Says Blasco: "It is most important for the future to have
an operational base in Asia. This with the view to an anticommunist world-
wide struggle. But it sust be immediately emphasized that we seek peace and
not violence. This may be surprising to you. but I can say that the comrades
and groups of the extreme left have been successful in reaching a common road.
Basically we have the same ideas on many subjects.

"Today we are witnessing an extraordinary phenomenon in the world. We have
become aware that Mao's concepts are not too far from ﬂitler's. A rapproche-
ment between right and left today is inconceivable and incredible to the
average population. and it will be difficult to convince them that right and
left understand each other perfectly.

"One year ago I was in China. Perhaps I was the first white man to salute
Hao's body with my arm held out. I said 'heil hitler‘ in a loud voice. And
here I an. I came out alive. without any problems. This is because the con-
cept is the same. Some small disagreements still exist. but they are not ser-

ious and can be limited if there is reciprocal goodwill. And today that
willingness exists."

3
PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Obviously there must have been some Italians among the extreme left repre-
scntatives whom I met. Red Brigades? I cannot say. Then, let me say that
I can insinuate it. The Red Brigades are divided. plainly speaking it can
be affirmed that they head two currents, Russian thinking and Chinese think-
ing. I must explain that we have been in contact with the Chinese faction.
For you. perhaps this will come as a revelation. But today many leaders of
the Red Brigade are in Spain. They live here. There is considerable pene-
tration of brigades from the Maoist side. And they are welcome. The extreme
Spanish right will protect them. Besides. even among Spanish extremists
this exchange exists. We are in contact with GRAPO (First of October Armed
Revolutionary Group), their operational base is in Algiers. a woman is in
command. she is a good friend of mine. Certainly they are sntifaacist. but
it does not take away the fact that they have been there and that at this
time there are positive contacts. And GRAPO naturally is in contact with
those Italians belonging to the revolutionary left who are here.

"For example, regarding the Lao problem. the Red Brigades have the sane idea
we have, which is to fight against the invasion carried out by the North
Vietnamese. Poor Europe does not understand that whatever happens in the
east. she suffers the consequences. Our objective is to liberate this small
territory. bring a little peace into being, have a small piece of land at
our disposal where groups of the extreme right and the extreme left can meet.

"During the meetings in Brazil and here in Barcelona, we agreed that there
should be only one organization entitled to give orders. Its authority will
be decisive and all the groups will be expected to respect it. In Italy, as
in France and Spain, it will be possible for the various rightist organisms
to exist. but the orders of this worldwide organism will be effective for
all. Also. to set an example. for the national advance guard and the new
order. Certainly not for the H81 (Italian National Movement). the leaders
of which should be scrutinized inasmuch as it includes some ambiguous indi-
viduals. Exponents of the H81 have obviously participated in the meetings.
but they attended on a personal basis. in short. in an unofficial manner.
They listened. then talked and expressed opinions. But do not think that
any of the authorities came. they would not have been welcome. They have
given way to the young. The world is for the young. All the dictators of

the rightist groups have already been burnt too much. We do not accept them
any more.

"we are trying in every way to understand these young people and advise them
for the best. To make them understand that the right and the left are prac-
tically the same if they are set up on a tray. 0n the contrary there are many
who are taking advantage of the movements who are fighting the adversary with-
out knowing exactly what the banner of one color or another represents. The
great error which has to be eliminated at any cost is the collective folly

in which these young people live. fighting brutishly without knowing the rea-
son. It is necessary to make them understand that right and left are looking
for the same identical thing: peace and a piece of bread to eat. That is

all. They have no ambition. For this reason it will not be difficult to reach

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an agreerant. Everyone with his own ideas. everyone at his post, we are all
looking for happiness and tranquillity for man. without getting hurt."

Disasters are bad enough on their own without looking for unnecessary dead.
He oust not kill, it is brutish. It is much better to save lives in every
corner of the earth. Because we must live in this world. To destroy is

easy and very convenient. building costs more. Surely when any movement

has reached power it will have made mistakes. To have all the people parti-
cipate in the leadership of the country will perhaps be impossible at first.
but we will succeed. I an an optimist because I believe that all Europeans
are looking for the same thing: tranquillity. Aggressiveness, this residual
of the second world war. is beginning to be set aside. This need for tran-
quillity must not be lost, nor the wish to do good. It is not important who
is the leader, not what is the political or party level, and those who are
subservient to small things must be thrown out at all costs. The H81? It is

an Italian problem and I do not wish to cement on it: undoubtedly it is
negative ow. it may change.

"How can it be that in order to have peace a war must break out. All this is
very serious. but perhaps there will be a real need for a third worldwide
conflict. I believe it will happen around 1985. It could be a 15 minute war.
but the number of dead will be extraordinary. Europe does not realize it.

but it will still be the battlefield."

ls there someone who keeps track of the contacts between the extrene right
and the Italian brigades? ‘l'olo Blasco's answer is the name of someone who
had been known for some time: Luis Garcia Rodriguez. It is he who after
having guaranteed assistance to all the Italian political refugees (Sandro
Saccucci is the most illustrious. he was working in an enterprise near the

port. in the employ of Augusto Pinochet's brother) established relations with
the Red brigade refugees.

Rodriguez manages a company. 2210. which manufactures renote control apparatus
and condensers. but he will not say a word about his program. "It is too
early. A couple of months must elapse. Then, everything will be very clear."
COPYRIGHT: 1979 Rizsoli Bditore

7993
C50: 3106

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

FRANCE OONDEHNBD FOR SNELTERINC ETA TERRORISTS
Hadrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanish 21 Jan 79 p 11
[Editorial by Juan Tomas de Sales: "Hithout Pretense"]

[Text] The recently established Spanish democracy still has not done all
it should in the struggle against terrorism. Two or three dozen maniacs.
who, indeed. enjoy the broadest support, are not going to destroy Spanish
freedom so easily again. It is certain, and even President Suarez-has

said this. that the state apparatus inherited from the Franco regime was
powerless and lacked the minimum means of ordinary self-defense in a modern
state. But the failures of Francoism cannot continue to be used indefi-
nitely as an excuse. The average citizen is beginning to get the impres-
sion that the democratic state is not capable of successfully confronting
terrorism. This is serious for the government and for the future of
democracy in this country, because if a state does not guarantee the secur-
ity of its citizens, its legitimacy will soon collapse. It is not enough
to keep saying that "we will not fall into the trap.“ if at the same time
one is mired down in the bog of indecision or in the profusion of more or
less spectacular measures which inconvenience the citizens without cchiev—
ing efficient results. If it is true that GRAPO [First of October Armed
Revolutionary Group] assassinated Judge Cruz Cuenca, how many lives does
GRAPO have. since we have been told for the umpreenth time that it has been
totally destroyed? But democracy must quickly acquire an efficient state.
Instead of lashing out at the innocent and the guilty and at the careless-
ness of the police. our free state must do better.

For the present there is one thing: it is intolerable that France should
continue to give asylum or protection to ETA [Basque Fatherland and Liberty
Group] guerrillas. It is intolerable that the "minister of extortion,"
Peixoto, should calmly negotiate in San Juan de Luz the revolutionary

taxes which the Basques must pay him at gunpoint. Hr Peixoto negotiates,
sets terns for, excuses people from and manages his extortions at working
meals in public restaurants. This is intolerable.

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Spanish Government must present a very clear list of undesirables. to
whom France cannot concede the right to main and murder all over the

Basque country. The Spanish Government must fix a very short period in
which those persons must cease to do such things. If this is not done. if
the French Government returns to its former tricks, such an attitude on

the part of the French Government must reserve all its rights to resolve
the problem, regardless of the cost. There can be no sanctuary across

the border; France canmt afford the luxury of having in Paris an Ayatullah
Khomeini. who is paralyzing Iran and breaking all the minimum rules of poli-
tical asylua. while two dozen ETA "Ayatullahs" are paralyzing Spain with
bombing attacks from their bases in France.

The Spanish Government, in addition. must apply the law in Spain without
further ado. Those who preach murder must be jailed. Father nslenciaga
and the elderly Telesforo Honzon cannot continue to preach with impunity
that Argala was so good. so good-dike Saint Rita de Cassia. Argala. pri-
vately could be as good as gold. but trying to make a saint of Argala

is like sanctifying crime and apologizing to the criminal. Anyone who does
such things in a free country can only hope to be thrown in jail. And
that is not enough. Very conflicting news reports indicate that the
newspaper BGIN is controlled by the ETA military. If this is true, if
suspicions that the terrorist organization has a newspaper in the Basque
country prove well-founded. it is natural for peaceful Basques to think
the government is abandoning the.

Finally. the German Government has dealt efficiently with the Baader-Heinhof
gang not only because it has an efficient police force, but also because

it used one of the most efficient remedies of all time against banditry,
abundant and absolutely discreet rewards. The government must mobilize

the citizens against terror and let them know that it will reward anyone
who denounces the assassins. Millions in rewards will open many closed
eyes. and can put the terrorists up against the wall. henty million
pesetas to. get to the murderers can be one of the most efficient weapons
for putting an end once and for all to the impunity of silence and compli-

city which is destroying 'peace in the Basque country and in the rest of
Spain.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 INFORMACION Y PUBLICACIONBS, S.A.

8735
080: 3010

7
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1

INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

UNCTAD V AND CHANGING WORLD ECONWIC 317mm“
Bonn EUROPA ARCllIV in German 10 Jan 79 pp 9-18

[Article by Dr Eberhard Rhein: "Right and Hrong Ways Toward New World
Economic 0rder"]

[Text] In May 1979, UNC‘I‘AD V. the Fifth United Nations Conference for Trade
and Development. will meet in Manila. It is expected that three topics will
be in the foreground:

--the realization of the so-cslled integrated raw material program and the
creation of the joint raw material fund;

--the fight against protectionism;

--the increase of resource transfers as an instrument of worldwide growth
and employment policy.

As is customary during such nan-0th gatherings, there will be an impressive
umber of speeches and resolutions. In anticipation of the meeting, various
groups of industrial and developing countries (EC. 0800, Latin American.
Asian, African groups. Group 77) will spend months attempting to establish
their "positions." “any national. supranational and international bureau-
cracies will make pilgrimages to Manila, some of them with the goal in mind
of significantly advancing the new economic order. others will attempt to
avoid unnecessary confrontations and make verbal concessions wherever
necessary.

whatever the results of the Manila conference may be, one thing seems certain:
it will not make a significant contribution to the establishent of a new
economic order. In that respect it does not differ from the Nairobi confer-
ence in 1976. The nature of the "dialog" which has been organized for years
between developing and industrial nations does not permit this. Even UNCI‘AD V
will not change the sterile character of the North-South dialog. It will
remain the same as it has been for 10 years: an esoteric machinery for the
production of resolutions and briefs, about which nobody seems to care enough
to see it transformed into reality.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nevertheless. a new world economic order is approaching. It is characterized
by the growing role which is played in the world economy by developing
countries-among them are particularly the oil nations on one hand, new
industrial countries like Brazil, Taiwan or Korea on the other hand. The
most important indication of the changing role of developing countries in

the world economy is the increasing fear by industrial nations of competition
from developing countries.

No Concrete Results in North-South Dialog

Since UNCTAD l in 1966. developing countries have united and formed the
so-called Group 77. which today comprises more than 100 countries. At the
beginning. the goal of this group was to establish a cannon position within
UNC'MD; but. especially since the Sixth UN Special General Assembly in spring
1976. by using organized political pressure. the developing countries were
hoping to be able to force extensive changes in the world economy which would
be in their favor. After all. did not OPEC establish an example of how to
extort economic advantages from industrial nations? Consequently. was it not
obvious that also other advantageous more substantial transfer of resources

by increasing aid. cancellations of debts or the raising of raw material
prices--could be forced?

Already in 1976, critical observers noticed that the example of petroleu

prices increases could not arbitrarily be transferred to other areas. They
proved to be right. In reality, to date essential items among the demands
made by developing countries during the last lo years are still unfulfilled.

There has been no reorganisation of the international currency systas. in
accordance with the demands by developing countries for a tie-in between
special borrowing privileges (52R). the proportion of which-when compared

to the world currency reservesuhaa decreased in recent years, and develop-
mental aid.

No significant results have been achieved in the area of raw material policies.
Indexing of raw material prices to prices of industrial products has not cone
abOut. There has been no breakthrough with regard to raw material agreemento.
Since 1976. there has been no raw material agreement for a single new product.
Prospects for an agreement in the near future are warranted only for one
product: rubber. There have also been no effective producer cartels. pat-
terned after OPEC. Unions of copper and bauxite producers were not able to
prevent price decreases. The united raw material fund--a central steering
mechanism of raw material markets-~is still a wishful dream of ideologists

and a few developing countries.

‘lhe demand for an improvement in the--preferantlab-marketability of indus-
trial products from developing countries fell on deaf ears in view of the
economic difficulties in industrial nations. 0n the contrary, because of
strong domestic pressure. Europe and the United States felt the need to
restrict imports from developing countries.

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Grants of public developmental aid rose only nominally; since 1970. its
proportion of the gross net ional product of OECD nations has been atagnating
at approximately 0.3 percent. In 1977 it was 0.31 percent and almost at

the lowest level for the past 15 years (0.30 percent in 1973).

There have been no comprehensive debt cancellations. as was deaanded by some
countries. The PRC and several other countries merely declared that they

were willing to cancel the debts of the least developed countries. Neverthe-
less. this gesture which gives the appearance of generosity applies to less
than 2 percent of all the public and private debts of all developing countries.

Considering the intellectual. financial and physical effort which was invested
during the past lo years in the North-South dialog.1 it is indeed a pitiful
balance. To be sure, the phase of confrontation between industrial and
developing nations which existed at the beginning of 1976 has been replaced
by a greater degree of mutual understanding. a more cooperative basic attitude.
But. does this alone justify the constant recurrence of international
squabbles. the creation of ever-new international comaittees. institution,
funds and bureaucracies? Almost all that has been discussed for years in
countless sessions within the framework of the North-South dialog has hardly
any genuine relevance for the people in Latin America. Asia and Africa. It

is intellectual humbug. empty words without the political cosmitment which

is necessary to transform ideas into action.

The absence of concrete results from the North-South dialog can be traced to
three main causes.

First. problems of developing countries are not primarily a question of
international economic relations. To blame the "injustice" of the present
world trade structure or the international currency system for hunger.
unemployaent. poverty and disease in developing countries indicates a
disregard for the real onset of economic development--improvement in education.
increase in productive investments. modernization of agriculture. promotion

of private enterprise.

Naturally. fluctuat ions in raw material prices and foreign currency proceeds
are complicating the creation of a sensible developmental policy. Only a

few farsighted developing countries have been better able than others to

cope with these problems, perhaps by accumulating foreign currency reserves

in good years. perhaps by early diversification of their production and export.

whatever measures may be implemented in international development, they can
only make modest or marginal contributions to the economic development of

the Third "acid. The essential effort must be made by the respective govern-
ments. the leadership and the population of the individual developing countries.
Rot even a high amount of developmental aid, opening up of markets. stabiliza-
tion of proceeds or a massive transfer of technology can cover up this fact.
[Economic development is not possible without the firm desire for progress.
without hard work. without savings and investments. International resolu-
tions are no substitute for an inferior development policy or the lack of one
and an insufficient mobilization of the population.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Secondly. the political will in industrial nations has been paralyzed with
regard to substantial aid for developing countries if sacrifices are
required. This applies to public financial assistance as well as to one-
sided trade policies and concessions. 0n the contrary. many developing
countries are increasingly looked upon as competitors. at best as partners.
There is no willingness to put in any effort if it is at the expense of their
own advantages.

Thirdly. the group of developing countries is characterized by growing
heterogeneity. At the present time. it includes such countries as Kuwait.
with the highest percapita income in the world. or Brazil. which is in ninth
place along “industrial nations" after Italy. on one hand. and numerous very
poor countries. like Bangladesh. Upper Volta or haiti. on the other hand.
countries which are leading a marginal existence.

The percapita income of the richest developing nation is 100 times as high
as that of the poorest ones. The structure of agricultural. industrial and
mining production varies just as much as their exports do.

Consequently, it is practically impossible to find a sensible common
denominator for the diverging interests of more than 100 developing countries
in their dialog with industrial nations. Agreement exists only in one area:
demands on industrial nations must be formulated in such a manner that in the
process each developing country somehow benefits from it. Hith this motto.
however. developing countries are undermining their own credibility.

in an effort not to abandon the unity of the group in spite of internal
differences. industrial nations are frequently presented with demands only
because they meet the condition of concensus within the group. when these
demands. which are frequently unacceptable or practically unrealistic. are‘
rejected by industrial nations. the solidarity of the group is simultaneously
reenforced. That may also explain why in recent years developing countries
repeatedly insisted on certain demands. although it is certainly doubtful
that they could derive any economic benefit from them.

This applies also to the integrated raw material program and the joint funds.

Both are considered the test of the new world economic order. although in

1977 agricultural products and mineral raw materials amounted to less than

60 percent of nonpetroleum exports by developing countries. compared with

90 percent in 1955 and 80 percent in 1967. This indicates that they are still
using the same arguments they used during the 1950's and 1960's, and they are

obstinately clinging to them although. considering the mere number of--mostly

tiny--countries. the dependence on raw material exports is overrepresented.

In view of such a political constellation. demands by the group of developing
countries should not be taken seriously. Likewise. the institutionalized
North-South dialog--at least in its present form--should not be allotted a
prominent position in our foreign relations structure. who remembers today.
barely 2 years later. anything about the Conference for International Economic

ll

FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cooperation or the results of this conference. for instance the "special
action" of $1 billion. which was celebrated as a great success. particularly
for the ac; but. in the and. it was nothing more than a bookkeeping trans-
action in the budget of a number of developing countries?

It is possible that industrial and developing nations will celebrate a victory
if. as should be assumed. during UNCTAD V a compromise can be made with regard
to the joint fund. But it. too. is only a palliative. The joint fund con-
tributes practically nothing to the solution of the great. really disturbing
developmental problems during the coming yesrs--malnutrition. population
growth. underemployment. illiteracy. disease and migration from rural to urban
areas.

Developing Countries Important Factor in World Economy

The world economy is changing its direction toward a new order independent

of the international conference palaver in UNCTAD and the United Nations.
This change is taking place quietly. without fanfares. Nevertheless. every
attentive observer cannot help but notice that a small group of developing
countries is steadily moving into the limelight of the world economy and
claiming a corresponding role in world politics. The changes that are occur-
ring in front of our eyes are certainly not the new world economic order. the
approach of which was feared during the last b years by critical observers.
The world market as a regulator has not been abolished. There is no world
planning authority for the production of raw materials or for investments.
The international capital market is playing a larger role than it ever did
before. Private direct investments in developing countries by industrial
nations have not stopped. although the volume is stagnating.

The new world economic order. which will come about during the 1970's and
1980‘s has. above all. two distinct characteristics:

--a growing share by developing countries (including oil countries) in world
trade.2 gross world product and industrial world production;

--far~reaching control by developing countries over their own mineral resources
and other resources or. to put it more generally. greater economic autonomy
and more rights of participation in discussions concerning international
economic relations than these countries had ever before.

It is true. the weight of developing countries in the world economy has
increased. In spite of it. in 1975 their share in the gross world product
was no more than 21 percent (compared to barely 18 percent in 1960). The
American economy with its 215 million people still produces more in goods
and services than all the developing countries combined with approximately
2 billion people.

The decisive factor. however. is the different trend: in comparison to
industrial nations. the economic growth in developing countries has accel-
erated. whereas during the first half of the 1960's. the increase in the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

gross product of developing countries was barely more than in industrial
nations and between 1966 and 1972 it rose by more than 60 percent Easter.
since 1973 the rate of growth has been more than three times higher than
in industrial nations (6.5 percent annually in comparison with only 2.15
percent annually for industrial nations).

There are. above all. three reasons why the rapid growth in developing
countries is expected to continue during the coming years :

--the slowdown in the population growth will be negligible. It will have

to contribute the strongest impulses for growth. it mass unemploylent and
hunger is to be avoided;

--aside iron the very poor countries. developing countries succeeded in
increasing the proportion of savings and investaents in the gross product

to a level which is comparable to industrial nations (approximately 20 percent).
with this a major restraint was removed;

"finally. most of the developing countries could develop certain resources.
for instance mineral resources. agricultural or industrial products. in such
a manner that continued economic growth can be built upon it.

Increased weight in the world economy by developing countries is not synonyaous
with a decrease in the gap of living standards between North and South.

[hiring the last quarter century the percapita income in developing countries
rose at best as quickly as it did in industrial nations. approximately 3

percent annually. It is not expected that it will change substantially during
the coming decades.

Format ion of Regional Developmental Poles

In this connection. it is only decisive that today--in contrast to 25 years
ago--the developing countries represent an important factor in the world
economy and that this weight will be steadily increasing. This process will
coincide with an increasing economic and political differentiation among
developing countries. It will further weaken the cohesiveness of the Group
of 77. The split of the Afro-Asiatic group is an indication of this. At
the same time. however. the question must be asked what do countries like
Korea. Singapore. Iran or Taiwan. on one hand. and Afganistan. Nepal. or
Bursa. on the other hand. have in couon economically. Consequently. it is
not without cause that lately the question has been asked whether sooner or
later certain Latin American and Asian countries. for instance Argentina.
Brazil or Korea, should join the 0800.

with regard to the future structure of the economy. this signifies the forma-
tion of regional developmental poles. in contrast to the so-called unity stag

developing countries. which will aove to the background. Tomorrow's world
economy will be determined thrc- gh a nultipolar net of developmental focal
points in which--in contrast to 10 or 20 years ago-ma number of developing

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

countries will play an indispensable role. In Latin America, thanks to its
potential in human resources, space and natural resources, Brazil is the most
important developmental pole. Smaller Latin American countries are more

and more pulled into this current. It is only a question of time when Brazil
will surpass the production capacity of national European economies. In
Black Africa, Nigeria. at least since 1973, (insures the undisputed role as
a regional developmental pole. With vigor and self-assurance it is striving
to become the first industrial and economic power in Africa. Just as
irresistibly. the neighboring countries, with which it forms the West African
Economic Commaity, are attracted by its magnetism.

In the Middle East, Iran is the only country with the necessary resources and
people to rise and become a regional economic power and, simultaneously--
parallel to the Gulf countries-“become an island with relatiVe prosperity
among developing countries. In contrast to Nigeria. however, Iran combines
a powerful economic potential with a high percapita income. In Asia, China
will Proliferatc more and more as the dominating economic factor during the
next two dccndcs- Besides the colossus of China. the group of the five
ASEAN countries will of necessity develop into an antipole, unless it wants
to unilaterally become dependent upon China. Korea will reach the stage of
development of an industrial nation no later than 15 years from now.

New International Division of Labor

"hat is the significance of such a multipolar developmental achmae for the
world economy, for industrial nations and for Europe?

With regard to the world economy, it offers greater stability and resistance
against economic fluctuations. If countries like lran, Saudi Arabia, Brazil
or Benezuela had not continued their developmental projects from 1976 to
1977 and, in part, contracted enormous debts on the international capital
market, the economic recession in industrial nations. particularly in Europe,
would have been much more severe. It would have struck. above all, capital-
goods industries, two-thirds of the products of which are destined for
developing countries.

Similar to the 1960's, when the dominating role of the United States in the
world economy was weakened by the European and Japanese economic powers which
were gaining in strength, since the middle of the 1970’s a new shift in
strength has taken place in favor of new industrial nations. The vitality

of the world economy no longer depends only on the trilateral net of United
States--EEc--Japan; rather, to a gradually increasing extent, their economic
situation also depends on decisions about prices, production, investments

etc in new developmental poles in the world economy.

This is shown by the significance which industrial nations attach to increases
in oil prices. The oil price, however, is only one world economic factor.
although it is the most visible and delicate one, which today is autonomously
determined by developing countries and which can be used by them to wield a
considerable influence on economic, technological and even political develop-
ments in industrial nations.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At least as far-reaching with regard to consequences is the enormous number
of decisions which governments and enterprises in new industrial nations
have to make about industrial investments. In the industrial structure of
the world. they affect changes whose significance cannot be fully anticipated.
Modern industrial plants are put up quickly in countries without any or
with only brief industrial experience. for instance, in Iran. Mexico or
Venezuela. not to mention Korea. Singapore. Taiwan or Brazil. These plants
do not only make products in typical. labor-intensive sectors. such as
clothing. shoes. optics. Increasingly. industrialization in developing
countries is also spreading to areas which ewen a few years ago definitely
were the domain of the industrial nations. such as steel. shipbuilding.
petrochemistry. aluminum. machine construction and fertilizers.

in several sectors. new capacities were established almost exclusively in
developing countries. Industrial nations are satisfied with improving
existing production facilities or. under pressure from developing countries.
they are forced to shut down capacities. This is the case with regard to
shipbuilding. textile. clothing. shoe and leather industries. petroleum
refineries and steel. Traditional industrial nations are establishing new
production capacities only for technological products of high quality. for
which the demand is increasing in industrial nations and also in developing
countries. Examples are the building of nuclear power plants and airplanes
and engineering capabilities in general.

As a consequence. a new international division of labor between industrial
and developing nations is taking place--and since the beginning of the 1970's
the tempo has increased sharply. The industrial nations are specializing
even more than in the past on the development of new products. new procedures
and production methods. The developing countries are abandoning their
traditional position 0' exporters of raw materials and agricultural products.
Their share in world exports of raw materials and agricultural products

has been decreasing steadily for 20 years. whereas their share in world
exports of finished goods is increasing (5.7 percent in 1963. 8.3 percent in
1976).

In this process. the countries of the Far East and Latin America have an
indisputable lead. At the present time. they produce approximately four-
fifths of the finished-goods exports of developing countries. According to
estimates by the ﬂorid bank. the next few years will see no substantial
changes in this dominating position by the Far East and Latin America.
although the countries of the Middle East will push their way into the world
market with their energy-intensive products.“

Industrial nations reacted with considerable panic to this challenge of a
changed international division of labor. which is an essential component

of the new world economic order. Their ability to restructure their indus-
tries seemed limited. Employers and employees pressured their governments
to avoid or at least slow down releases which were caused by the developing
countries in several sectors. As a consequence. more or less effective

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

protective measures were introduced everywhere against imports from
developing countries; they were most effective in the area of textiles and
clothing.

More than all UNCTAD declarations. trade policies have thus become the real
test of the will of the industrial nations to realize a world economic order
in which developing countries do not only want to produce and export
complementary goods (like coffee. tea. tropical wood) but also those which
during the last 50 years were the reserve of industrial nations: industrial
consular and capital goods.

The dgsire of developing countries. contained in the famous declaration of
.lmn. is understandable; by the year 2000 they want to increase their

share in the industrial production of the world to 25 percent: through
voluntary reshuffling of capacities. The sceptical. yes. even negative
attitude of the industrial nations concerning this declaration is politically
also understandable. It is understandable that the industrial nations

accuse the developing countries of wage dumping. accusing multinational
companies of Job exports. It is understandable that protectionism. tradition-
ally a domain of agriculture. is suddenly spreading to industrial products
and is. above all. directed against the new industrial nations.

Nevertheless. the worldwide restructuring process is inevitable. Japan.
perhaps because of its extremely high dependence on foreign trade. understood
this sooner than Europe. It does not hesitate to "sacrifice old" areas.
such as textiles or shipbuilding. in favor of future sectors. such as
electronics. machine and equipment construction.

Structures in Europe appear more hardened; there is less willingness for
accommodation. Fixated. they are staring at increasing imports of textiles.
steel or shoes. and they are forgetting that they are--still--produced with
European. Japanese or American machines. that Korean or Brazilian industrial
workers are simultaneously becoming buyers of high-quality industrial '
products from industrial nations. Finally. even today industrial nations

are still exporting four times as many industrial goods to developing countries
as they are buying from them.

The decisive question of the world economic order is not whether industrial
production will be restructured worldwide but how this process can be
accomplished as smoothly as possible.

Outlook

Criticism of the institutionalized ﬂorth-South dialog should not be mis-
interpreted as a rejection of e--sensible-developmental policy.

On the contrary. Europe can only survive in a symbiosis with the countries

of the Middle East. Africa. Latin America and Southeast Asia. It is not

Just an accident that in recent years foreign policy activities of the EC
turned especially toward these countries: the lame agreement. the Euro-Arabian

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

dialog and the BC-ASEAN foreign ministers conference are the three most
important indicators of this policy.

also during the next two decades. Third Norld nations will remain among the
priorities of European foreign policy. Nevertheless. more attention than

to date will be paid to greater differentiation end accommodation of mutual
interests end political affinities.

New industrial nations will increasingly be accepted as equal partners,
cooperating with them on an equal basis. They no longer need any public
financial aid; however, they do need open markets on a reciprocal basis and.
above all. a liberal supply of investments and technical know-how.

host of the countries in Black Africa and South Asia will remain the real
problem during the next two decades. They still need massive public assistance
and support during the race betwoen population growth and food production.

The main concern in these countries is still the satisfaction of basic needs.
such as food. housing. water. Nithin the framework of the Lone convention.

the EC is contributing considerably to the increase in agricultural production
in these countries.

Because of the extent to which Europe contributed to developmental policies
in a concrete and exemplary manner. and by treating developing countries

as partners. Europe can afford not to react positively to every demand of

the developmental bureaucracy during the institutionalized North-South dialog.

The bodies of the North-South dialog cannot produce much more than declass-
tions. at best it can come up with political alibi actions. such as the
joint raw material fund or the Conference for International Economic Coopera-

tion Special Action. They certainly will not create the new world economic
order.

FOOTNOTES

1. The following meetings were the most important ones within the framework
of the worldwide North-South dialog: Sixth UN Special General Assembly.
New York. April 1974 (cf. 3A 13/1976, p D 277 ff); Seventh UN Special
General Assembly. New York. September 1975 (cf. EA 21/1975. p D 579 ff);
Second UNIDO Conference. Lima, 1975 (cf. BA 14/1975, p D 373 ff); Confer-
ence for International Economic Cooperation (KIHZ), Paris. 1975-77 (cf.
EA 5/1976 p D 126 ff); UNCTAD 1V. Nairobi. Hay 1976 (cf. Ea 16/1976.

p D 601 f); Negotiation Conference for Joint Funds. 1977 and 1978; UN
Plenary Committee, 1977-78; Conference for code of conduct for multi-
national enterprises and technological transfers. 1978.

2. 18 percent in 1968. 25 percent in 1976.

J. The Horld Bank expects the following average increases in the rate of

growth: industrial nations 4.2 percent annually. developing countries
5.7 percent.

17
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

6. Prospects for developing countries 1978-85, Washington. 1977.
5. cf. EA 16/1975. p D 373 ff.

COPYRIGET: 1979 Verlng (our Internationale Poltttk Gab". Bonn

8991
CSO: 3103

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

[’5 NATIONAL SECRETARY CALLS FOR 'IREAK NIT“ STALINISN'
Perle LE MWBL OBSERVATB‘UR In French 22-28 Jan 79 p 100

[Article by Gilles Hertinet. National Secretary of the Socialist Party:
"Breaking with Stalinisn")

[Text] is it possible on the one hand to cone out in favor of pluralisa,
[political] give and take. self-nanagenent. and on the other hand declare one-
self to be fully in support of the CPSU [Co-unist Party of the Soviet Union].

That is the issue which the French Col-uniats can less and less evade. The
tine has passed when one though slow. gradual but continuing liberalization
of Soviet society was likely. The hopes horn of the 20th Congress. of the
denouncing of Stalin's crises and the liberation of thousands of prisoners
are way behind us. He have rather soon seen the limits to possible changes.
Budapest, the elinination of Khrushchev. Prague, the new freeze under
Breehnev.... Ilere end there the systea could accept to a small dose of lib-
eralisI (e.g.. the Yigoslavia at the end of the 1969's or present day Bun-
gery). but it has retained allergic to any for. of denocrscy. The Col-mist
Party's hegeaony lust not ever be brought back into question. Anyone who
allows sone pluralist or other to be established is inediately turned over
to the secular arts. that is. to the Soviet Amy's general staff.

After believing the Khrushevisn, people vented to believe in Eurocoauunisn.
Since the USSR and its satellites were not changing fundsnentelly. the
Hestern columns for their part were going to change. Hadn't they protested
against military intervention in Czechoslovakia? Didn‘t they condenn the
arbitrary arrests and the interning in psychiatric institutions? Shouldn't
one patiently wait for the Hestern co-uniets to loosen one after the other
the bonds still t’yi_ng the. to the Soviet world? However, the fact is that
this evolution has itself cone up against a stuﬂling block. Nhile building
up a discourse. which superficially at least is beconing further and further
renoved free Brezhnev-style reality, those parties-minly the French one-
are f irnly maintaining their adherence to tha cos-unis: "caep" and in the
aajority of cases are aligning thesaelves with the USSR's international
policy. They are not denying that there are "regrettable practices"

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

("flaws" according to Georges Harchnis), but they still how to the absurd
assertion (and a profoundly anti-Marxist one) according to which those prac—
tices are grafted onto a "genuinely socialist" base.

All communists, of course. do not reason in that way. Those who bring back
into question the "the untimodel" are relatively numerous. But let us see
what their status is within the organization. Not so long ago they considered
themselves teh visible part of a powerful liberal tendency. Today, they have
to acknowledge that the lenders on whim they counted are displaying a peculiar
prudence. The dialiectics of "liberals-dissidents" which developed in the
USSR and which Alexander Zinoviev so well described is showing up again within
the French Communist Party. The "liberals" are capltulating and the "dissi-
dents" withdrawing. It is true that the apparatus was obliged to modify its
methods somewhat but at bottom it remains faithful to its logic. It is dif-
ficult for a Stalinist party to cease being so.

One must not only note that 25 years after Stalin's death the system has still
not become democratic. it is important to ferret out the reasons for this.
Yes. why has it been possible in Spain to move from Prancoism to parliamentary
democracy and why isn‘t initiating a process that would lead from Stalinism
to democratic socialism successful in the USSR?

As for Spain, the explanation is simple. There was an antifascist opposition
and there was also and above all a bourgeoisie which had become modernized and
which no longer needed the old Franco-style apparatus. Real social power has
rid itself of a burdensome political power. In the USSR and in societies of
the some sort. nothing like that can occur. There does indeed exist a social
power but it is merged with the power of the state. The bureaucracy does

not only occupy a hegemonic political position in it: it also dominates the
whole economic apparatus and the entire cultural life.

Neither the workers not the peasants nor the intellectuals have the right to
organize themselves freely. And if the technical cadres. the "specialists,"
are materially well treated. it is because they form the most dreaded social
stratum. The hureaueracy's attitude towards them recalls that of the French
monarchy towards the rising bourgeoisie. It needs them, it seeks to in-
tegrate them but with a deep distrust of them for it is from that direction
(and from that of the army) that one can see relief approaching, at least in
an initial phase: People capable of governing instead of these who hold

the power today.

"Specialists" at first glance are not champions of domocracy. Nevertheless,
the events of l968 in Czechoslovakia showed that they could be persuaded to
ally themselves with the traditional intelligentsia and with the working
class and that the foundation of that alliance was precisely the overthrow
of the hureaucracy's power. Of course it was a matter of exceptional cir-
cumstances marked by a powerful popular movement. But how can one imagine
decisive changes in the countries of Eastern Europe outside of exceptional

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

circumstances. outbursts of greater or lesser scope? In the neanwhile.
"disaidence" is attempting to create the embryos of future civilian society
(clandestine publications, parallel teaching, a renaissance of national cul-
tures, support for the initiatives to organize labor. etc.). In that it shows
up more as a rupture than as a revision. And it is that rupture which the
Hestern con-unist parties (which simply. and often tinidly. want to be revi-
sionists) have the greatest difficulty in accepting.

Everything appears to then as though the establishment of "socialisms of a
totalitarian nature: in one-third of the planet stems only fro. special his-
toric circumstances, different national situations and errors committed by the
leaders of the parties involved. A socialisn "flying the French colors" will
naturally avoid those errors, but its final objective is very nuch the sane:
The establish-ent of a classless society without any contradictions in which
each individual will be the master of his own destiny and will receive

according to his needs. This is why the old 19th century nyths picked up by

Marx (this is the weakest part of his work) serve to conceal the huge gulf
separating French pronises from Soviet truth.

To one wanting Union of the Left again to become a reality, the anhiguity
could not be maintained indefinitely. One thing to hope for is the develop-
nent of peaceful relations with the USSR and with the countries of Eastern
Europe. Another is to consider that the leaders of those countries have

the sane goals as we do. Not only are the goals not identical but rather

they are totally contradictory. The French communists will definitely have
to make a choice.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "1e Nouvel Observateur"

8096
CSO: 3100

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

COHBAT HELICOPTERS EQUIP AIRCRAFT CARRIBR'POCH'
Paris AIR & (108308 in French 20 Jan 79 p 27

[Text] A combined exercise opened off the coast of Toulon early this week,
in a routine maneuver of part of the Mediterranean fleet, involving the
aircraft carrier "Foch,“ together with helicopters and crews of the 1st and
5th Combat Helicopter Regiaents (use) of the ALAT [Ground Forces Tactical
Support]. which are based in Phalsbourg and Pan respectively. Over a period
of 3 days, three Puaas. three Alouette 111's. and four Gazelles of the 5th
Rﬂc, plus three Puaaa and three Alouette 111's of the let RHC. operationally
manned by a total of some 100 officers and noncomissioned officers of

ALAT (including sons 30 ground technicians) under the orders of the Sth nnc
commander. have executed a series of deck-landings and lift-offs (about 50
per pilot), as well as "touch and go" sequences on the flight deck of the
aircraft carrier "Foch.” The object of those operations is to acquaint
train and familiarize the pilots of these units (and especially the 5th RHC,
assigned for this purpose to the coananding general of the llth Paratroop
Division) with tactical assault helitransport operations free a mobile naval
platform.

The accompanying photographs taken by Michel Issac are representative of this
large scale participation by ALAT helicopters in a naval exercise. Also
aboard the "Foch" for this exercise were the first three anti-surface warfare
and Lynx ASH [Anti-submarine warfare) helicopters delivered officially to
Flotilla 31? based in Saint-Handrier. He will analyze this exercise aore in
detail in our next issue. in which we will also discuss the coming of the
Lynx to our navy.

22
.FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Upper Photo: Aloueztc III in hangar.
Below: Four folding-blade type Gazelleo.

COPYRIGHT: Air 6 Cosmos. Paris, 1979
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

MODERN COMBAT TOPOCRAPNICAL HEASURENENT DISCUSSED
Paris ARNtES D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Jan-Feb 79 pp 66-67. 79

[Article by Gen Jean Anbieri in the column "Military Problems": "Modern
Topography in the Artillery")

[Text] 0n the battlefield of the future. the fluctuation of
combat. the rapid evolution of situations. the extension of
our forces and the nobility of our units will necessitate
great speed, indeed instantaneousness. in the execution of
the topographic work required for the positioning of our
guns and target-acquisition equipment.

Because of these contingencies. the topographical linking up of units and
teams is practically ruled out. and it becomes necessary to take direct action
to place equiplent in relation to the basic geographic grid.

Concept of Modern Topography

Consequently. each basic team--a forward observer. an RATAC [expansion
unknown]. a reconnaissance officer. an artillery officer--must have the neces-

sary means to be able to determine instantly its position and that of the
targets. and a fire direction.

Moreover. to be able to begin firing effectively from the outset. that is.
without prior adjustment or control. due to the enemy's mobility and thus the
fleeting nature of the targets. these means must permit the topographic posi-
tioning of the various teams and the locating of targets with the precision
required for the initial firing. ‘

 

'The author. Gen Jean Aubier. was a native affairs officer in Morocco from

I951 to 1956. After a period of service in indochina and Algeria. he per-
formed various instructional duties at the Artillery School. he was commander

of the 17th Army Regiment and then the llth Army Regiment. He is presently
deputy commander of the Antiair Ground Forces of the Air Defense Command.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1hr runrdlunieu of pnuitluns and targets must he Pnnwn precisely within 20

meters. and the fire directions must he obtained within l mil for the guns and
within 2 mils for the target-acquisition equipment.

Such precision implicitly ensures the topographic cohesion of all of a regi-
ment's teams.

in the near future. the following modern topographic instruments will permit
a regiment to obtain such instantaneousness and precision: the laser tele-
meter. the land navigator, the second-generation gyrotheodolite. the pocket
electronic calculator and the helicodist.

At the same time. the Military Topographic Support Network (RATH) will provide
valuable aid in helping teams determine their coordinates.

The Laser Telemeter

The forward observer will be equipped with a laser telemeter. which will pro-
foundly alter the accomplishment of his mission. in fact. it will permit him
to locate any fixed or moving target instantly and without error. without
needing a map. when we recall that an experienced observer. currently equip-
ped with his field glasses. compass and map. and having 3 minutes in which to
locate an unexpected target on an average terrain. commits an error of over
100 m. we realize the remarkable progress that the laser telemeter brings to
gunfire. it measures distances of from 100 to 20,000 m with a precision
within 2 meters. Due to an incorporated fire-direction system based on a
magnetic compass. it measures bearings with a precision of within 2 mils.
Lastly. it gives the elevation with a precision of within 0.5 mil.

Thus the laser telemeter gives the observer. instantly and with the requisite
precision. the polar coordinates of any target: distance. bearing and eleva-
tion. it can easily be seen why the adjusting types of firing become useless
under these conditions. all the more so because the ballistic and aerologic
data will be known with the same precision. due to the Hiradop radar that
measures initial velocities and to the Sirocco meteorologic radar.

But it also locates-~and in the same way--bursts on graze and high-burst shots.
it therefore offers the possibility--when needed and particularly when all the
initial firing conditions are not interlinked--of positioning the firing
instantly and with great precision by means of a single series of two or four

shots. One then proceeds to shift the burst center once the telemeter has
located the bursts.

Lastly. the apparatus permits the rapid and precise execution of many ballistic
or topographic operations. as follows:

Monitoring an auxiliary ground or air target (high-burst shots). to determine
residual or total corrections;

Firing on moving targets. by extrapolation;

Ballistic or topographic linking of observation posts with batteries when
firing without a map;

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

All kinds of topographic operations, including beaming. hearing. trilntero-
tlon and intersection. On this basis. it can be used in the rear area for the
topography of the firing positions.

The laser teleseter can be operated easily and rapidly. and does not require
any adjustment. It can be employed on the ground by s single operator or on a
future type of artillery observation vehicle. for which the designation aux-lo
has been selected.

The Land Navigator

To be able to start the initial firing. the forward observer must also know
his position and a reference direction instantly and with the ease precision.
These two elements will be supplied to his by the land navigator.

This instrument. counted on a wheeled or tracked vehicle. consists of a
"north-finder/direction-retention" gyroscope assembly. a system to measure the
distance covered. and a computer.

Once the vehicle comes to a stop. the instrument displays the cartesian
coordinates of the position. as well as a reference direction.

its operating principle is as follows:

When the Vehicle is started. the apparatus is given an initial setting. with
the precise coordinates of the point of departure and an initial direction
being fed into the cosputer. by using either the north-finder or a gyro-
theodolite for that purpose:

While the vehicle is in motion. the gyroscope detects the changes in direction
and feeds them to the cosputer. the odometer supplies the computer with the
distance covered in each direction. and the computer continually cosputes the
coordinates on the basis of the data it receives.

The precision obtained is within l.2 oi‘: 3': :5: .aitial north-finding opera-
tion. within 0.5 mil per hour for direction retention and within 15 meters
in planioetry after 10 he have been covered.

Hhile the vehicle is underway. the precision is improved in planisetry

through a resetting of the land navigator by stopping when coming to positions
whose coordinates are precisely known. as for ens-pie. positions of the
hilitary Topographic Support Network. That operation is completed in about

10 seconds.

The land navigator will also be part of the equipment on the vehicle of the
officer in charge of an RATAC team. especially the vehicle of the battery
range officer.

For the range officer. it will be specially valuable when bringing a battery
into position suddenly. with the battery already in motion. In fact. as soon

26
FOR OPFICIAL USE OSLY
.FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

as the "tank alert" firing order is received. he immediately has precise topo-
graphic data: the coordinates of the place where he will bring the battery
into position. and a reference direction. to start the initial firing. More-
over. one goniometric operation of the land navigator permits placing the
battery guns in a precise direction.

This capability to start the initial firing in case of a "sudden" positioning
of a battery hy iay or by night is all the more interesting because of the

fact that in a future conflict the accelerated pace of the naneuVer will
require the batteries to change position much more frequently than in the past.

The Military Topographic Support Network (RATM)

Re have undertaken to equip the territory of France with a network of topo-
graphic points deterained with a precision of within 5-10 a. designated as the
Military Topographic Support Network. These points are readily identifiable.
easily accessible and certain to be maintained. They are closely related to
[main] routes. as they consist of intersections. bridges. etc.

Their average density is one point per 2 square kilometers. which corresponds
to an average distance of about 1.500 a between points.

All of the maps with a scale of 1:50.000 published by the [GM [National Geo-
graphic lnstitute] show the RATM as far as the network has been completed.

They contain. on the front side. an overprint in violet representing all the
numbered points of the RATM. and on the back a listing of the coordinates of

those points to the nearest meter, with a sketch that permits then to be
identified.

All the regiment’s teams can thus determine the coordinates of their position
very easily and with great precision. most of the tine through a single beam-
ing. Moreover, the RATM permits the operator of the land navigator to do re-
settings in planimetry as often as needed.

The Second-Generation Gyrotheodolite

At the present time. the reconnaissance teams of our batteries are using the
wild Cok-i first-generation gyrotheodolite to bring their guns into position.
ﬂiis apparatus is very precise (within 0.2 mil). but requires a relatively
large amount of time. 20-30 minutes. to operate. That amount of time is not
compatible with the speed that future operations require.

Mow second-generation gyrotheodolites have just been developed which. thanks
to automation. provide the same precision in less than 3 minutes.

instead of oscillating freely around the north direction. their gyroscope no
longer oscillates. and [instead] there is a measurement of the directional
forte produced by the earth's speed of rotation on the gyroscope's axis of
rotation. This force. measured by a small incorporated computer. is a func-
tion of the deviation existing between the direction of the gyroscope's axis
of rotation and the north direction. and a measurement is taken of the value
of the return torque toward the north.

, 27
ron omcuu. use omx
These new automatic gyrotheodolites are perfectly suited to the requirements
of modern topography and should replace the present ones when the right time
comes.

The Pocket Electronic Calculator

The packet electronic calculators carry out very rapidly (in a few seconds)
all the numeric calculations that once required considerable time.

Our reconnaissance teams are now equipped with the HP-JS calculator. which
permits the following operations:

Arithmetic calculations (the four types of operations);
Logarithmic or exponential calculations:
Trigonometric calculations (direct and inverse circular functions).

Besides doing routine calculations, it permits all kinds of problems of topo-
graphy to be solved in seconds. Each procedure for determining points or
direction is described on a separate calculation program card.

The helicodist

The helieodist is employed at the level of the army corps artillery that has
two sections.

intended to provide the standard ground-to-ground artillery rapidly with the
precise coordinates of a large number of points in a very broad zone. the sys-
tem uses a helicopter-borne tellurometer and several tellurometers on the
ground.

The tellurometer (HEB-201) measures the distance between the helicopter-borne
set and the responding sets stationed on the ground.

The measurement of the distance between a point P whose coordinates are
desired and two known points A and 8 permits the triangle PA! to be resolved
by trilnteration. using a pocket electronic calculator.

The system has a range of 50 km. The precision of the distance measurements is
approximately within 0.5 m and that of the coordinates supplied is within 3 m.

The artillery section includes a command team. a helicopter team. four teams
on the ground and two calculating teams. it receives the following missions:

As a complement to the network: this mission consists of supplying a number
at topographic points based on the needs indicated by the artillery: this kind
of action that permits the operators to complement their topographic equipment
is the section's normal mode of action;

28
'FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
yon omcm. use om

Providing points for routes: this mission consists of providing certain
routes with topographic points needed to reset the land navigators:

Eutohlisheent of a network: this operation. which is characterized by a large
nueher of points to be determined. requires considerable periods of tile for
the selection of points. the topographic work to be done and the dissemination
of the results.

An artillery section equipped with a helicopter-borne set and three or four
telluroeeters on the ground can determine in 2 hours around ten points within
a zone 30 kn wide at the front end and 20 km deep.

The artillery regieent. when thus equipped with eodern neane of topography
including the laser teleeeter. the land navigator. the gyrotheodolite and the
electronic calculator. supported by the helicodiat of the ar-y corps artillery.
and benefiting from the Military Topographic Support Network, will in the near
future be perfectly capable of executing all the topographic work entailed in
positioning and directing the firing and target-acquisition equipment. as well
on the locating of targets, with the speed and precision required for effec-
tive initial firing. which will be the rule in a future conflict.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Revue des forcee arleee francaises. "arnees d'aujourd'hui“

5366
C50: 3100

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FRANCE

BRIEFS

MR BASE PROTECTION-4M Air Force has taken charge of the mission to pro-
tect its air bases and of using ground-to-air defense material (“Crotale"
weapons. 20~Ia double-barreled cannons). The implication is that this
will give rise to a reorganization of the protection units and an increase
in their total strength. At first. without increasing total strength in
spite of the new changes. personnel will be Eomd three ways: disbanding
a battalion of the Engineer Air Corps: taking away 5 percent of the
strength of the GEMS [Maintenance and Repair Groups for Specialized
Aviation Equip-ant]: progressively withdrawing the inducted men from

the feeder organisations. In the second place, with the arrival of the
mterial. a budget increase of 1,000 positions spread out over a 3-year
period is currently under study. [Text] [Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French
13 Jan 79 p 30) 9376

SPACE DELEGATIOR To PRCnA French delegation cowosed of a representative
free the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, soae industrialists, and the
director of CUBS [National Center for Space Studies] Yves Sillard. will
go to China in very early E'ebruary do discuss prospects oi long'tera
space cooperation in the realsa of science. industry. and conerce. This
visit is the result of the agreeaent reached on 6 Decedier 78 in Peking
by Mr J.‘ P. Capron who represented the French industrial Hinistry and

Hr Ye. director of the Rational Couission for Science and Technology

for the Peoples Republic of China. This agreement provides for the
study of possible exchanges between the two countries. including econoaic
and consercial. so that China can master space technology. It concerns
telecomnications satellites and direct television. earth observation
satellites. and rockets. especially the possible use of the "Ariene"
launch vehicle. Since China has already chosen the United States to
develop its systea of space teleco-Iunications, Prance hopes to interest
China in other projects, especially direct satellite television. This
has already held the attention of the delegation from Chinese Radio-TV
that visited 6858 6-11 Sep 78. [Text] [Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French

[3 Jan 79 p 37] 9376

650: 3100

30
"5‘08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

ITALY

PCI'S name 08 cnmA-VImAM-CAMODIA IHBROGLIO
Turin LA STAHPA in Italian 20 Feb 79 pp 1. 2 Ln

[Interview with Gian Carlo Pejette. POI "foreign ninieter." by Lenberto
Purno in Rene on 19 February: "'He Cell for beijing 'ro withdrew en a
Preeiee to Negotiationem]

[Text] Mr Gian Carlo Pejette. you received the Vietna-eae edeeeedor to
Italy Sundey. "hat ia the PCl'e petition end what initiative ie it tek-
ing to facilitate a aolution to the bloody crieie between China and
Vietnae, two eocieliet countriee‘l

The PC! "foreign ninieter." whoee tile ie taken up with continue]. eu-it
eeetinge with Chiarononte and Luce Pevolini and telephone converaatione
with Segre [all PCl officiale]. hie "deputy" who ie in Perie, weighed hie
enewer aefore replying: "he we have elreedy done. and an I believe we
will do tonorrow. ‘l'ueedey. with an official directorate document. I nuet
expreee our clear opinion. It in dangeroue for world peace. and in
patent contradiction to ideological referencea and internationeliet tra-
ditione. for differencee anong eocieliet countriea, even when they are
eerioue. to be dealt with in waye other than negotiation end reepect for
mutual independence. He will cell for the withdrawal of Chineee troope
ae a preeiee to negotiatione." Pejette continued. "Thin ia the eignifi-
conce of our approval of Ilonoi'a eppeel to the United Nations and elee
ite requeet to the ltelian Govern-ent to nehe e useful contribution in
that forul.“

[Queetionl One geta the diatinct feeling that the Chineae inveeion of
Vietnam took the PC! by aurpriae. However. let ua pureue the point: th
did the PC! not ceneure Vietnan'e inveeion of Cenbodia the way it ie new
condoning thia ettech by China? to thin perhepe e reeult of your link
with the USSR in the context of workere internationalien? (queation enda]

"we new the ewenta in Ceebodie ea e tregedy." Glen Carlo Pejetta replied.
being careful with nuencee. "Re have elreedy eoid explicitly that the
rebuilding of thia country and the healing of the wounda inflicted on it
by a painful experience and by the conflict which followed not take place

31
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

without any restrictions on its sovereignty. It is up to the Cambodians.
within their country‘s full independence. to rebuild it. decide on its
regime and adninistar it. In other days. we in no way nade our solidarity
with Vietnae in its struggle against Anerica dependent on links with
Moscow. Ne behaved similarly in hanoi when. only a few weeks ago. our
delegation recalled the points of the PCI'a theories referring to non-
lnterfarsnce in other countries' internal affairs. the principles of
peaceful cooperation and the principles of internationalisn with full
respect for each country's sovereignty."

[Question] Pajetta. the reel fact renains that this sovereignty is
strictly linited in the socialist world: first in Hungary and Czecho-
slovakia, now in Cambodia and Vietnan. There is a new war between two

socialist countries. The nyth of socialist revolutions which avert ware
and solve all problems no longer holds water. [question ends]

Pajetts made a gesture of bitterness. He replied: "Reality is harsher
than lyths. For this reason we have chosen the way of knowledge. of
calling things by their right name and tackling then with the necessary
realism and courage."

[Question] To recapitulate. Pajetta: The PCI calls for the withdrawal
of Chinese troops from Vietnan. How does the PCI view the problem of
Cambodia. which has been invaded by the Vietnamese with Soviet support

and which has undeniable similarities with the Chinese invasion of
Vietnam?

[Answer] Our position is as follows: That no one should look on Caabodia
as a zone of influence and no one should use it as a these of instrumental
propaganda. These countries. and I an speaking of Vietnam. too. need

help. econonic relations and technical cooperation. For this reason it
is a coemiteant which does not concern Italian communists alone but also
Italy and other states. [answer ends]

While we were winding up the nesting Senator Chiarononte, the PC! No 2,
burst into Pajetta's office: "Hanoi announces victory," he said breath-
lessly. "The Chinese are withdrawing. But there is no confirmation as
yet." Despite the official equidistance. the PCl's choice along China.
Vietnan. Cambodia and the USSR seems obvious.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Edltr. LA STAHPA S.p.A.

C50: 310‘

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OPPIOIM. USE ONLY

SPAIN

BRIEFS

arms WAR cumin-m am has s var chest that enables it to deposit so
much as 5,000 pesetss per day to the account of its imprisoned nowhere.
Obtained by means or holdupe and ”revolutionary taxes" from businesses,
the money has been deposited in numbered Swiss accents. Eexg [Paris
mm am in French 12 m: 79 p 33]

080: 3100

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY