APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDP02-00080R000100030014-2
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030014-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.1an L/8311
6 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030014-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[) are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGI‘I' [ANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSHIP 0P
MIERIALS ”PROM- IlSREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATIOH
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
LR No.
W vast/8311 -W

. Pulsar-s5 mumm- Nsu sod Mdvrss
Joint Publicstioos Rssssrch Ssrvics
1000 Korth clsbs Rood
Arlington, Virginis 2220!

u. Sossssﬂs. Ousshsdos Nun sod Minn

As sbovs

IS. Ss'plo-uuy Nous

. bsuscu

This saris]. report contsins intonation on the dovelopucnt snd productivity
of tho sutonotivc snd trsctor industry. chosicsl industry snd chsnicsl
uchincry output; slsctronic snd prccision cquipucnt; Ictsllurgy sud
Ictslvorlting cquipusnt: construction equip-cut snd building utorisls.

suns: Ass su. o Osscdsusn

Autosotivc Industry ﬁstslvorking equip-sat
Agricultursl Hschinsry Boono-ics

Chssicsi Industry

Construction

Construction mtsrisls

Construction Equip-ant

Electronics Industry

llctsliurgy

In. [Conﬂicts/MM ‘l’u-s

"c. CWT! Field/Ga" 2C. SC. 7‘. 11's 13c. 13's 13". 1319 )3“

Y Avsulshluq Stun-0M
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Lilitsd “or of

Copies Avsilsblo Pros: JPRS

 

soon-us.» Iasv. s~ n cubs-Doc nun-On

run '0“ IA? ll IIMODUCID
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ 831.].
6 March 1.979

TRANSLATIWS 0N USSR INDUSTRIAL AFFAIRS
(POUO 3/79)

CONTENTS PAGE
CNDIICAL INDUSTRY AND RELATED mUIMNT
Cheniration of Netionel Bconony Discussed in Book
(PIANIROVANIYE KIIIHIZATSII NARODNOGO
mzY‘stA.1978)OOCOOOOOO0.000.0..OOOOIOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO 1
CONSTRUCTION. CONSTRUCTION HACRINERY. AND BUILDING IIATDRIALS

Hotel for Poreign Olympic Judges Under Conetruction
(0. Kedrenovakiy; NA STROYKAKN ROSSII, Nov 78)......... 6

MW

Lead and Zinc Byproduct Extraction Advances Detailed
(A. P. Sychev. et. el.; TSVETNYYB MAL“. Dec 78)”... 13

Nickel Induetry'o Uaete-Pree Production Proapecto Evaluated
(T. V. Gran’; TSVETNYYB HETALLY, Dec 78).............. 18

Chelyabinak Electrolytic Zinc Plant'a ﬂute-Free Production
Effort. Detailed
(8. P. Hetveyevn; TSVITNYYB NEPAL“. Dec 78)........... 2!.

Haste-Free Technology Introduced et Poburhekiy Nickel Plant
(8. P. Konilitoyn. et. el.; TSVETNYYB METAL“.

DOC 78)eoeeeeoaeoeaeeeeaeeeoeeeeeeoeqoeeaeeeeeeeoeeeeee 31

[notes of Valueblt Conetituente in Copper Refining Reduced
(N. P. Shubin; TSVITNYYE METAL“. Dec 78).............. 39

Effectiveneaa of Refining in en HID Trough
(D. I. Dondarev. et. al.; TSVETNYYB METALLY. Dec 78)... 46

MWING EQUIPHM

Pirat All-Union Conference on Product Reliebility
(V. Louchev; VOPROSY uomxl. Jan 79)............... $1

- a - [III - ussn - 36 rouol

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CHEMICAL INDUSTRY AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC [55466]: 338.986 (674-57)
CIIBHIZATION OP NATIGML ECONOMY DISCUSSED IN BOOK I

Moscow i‘uNIROVANIYB KRIHIZA'I’SII NARONOGO KROZYAYS‘WA in Russian 1978
signed to press 1 Jan 78 pp 1-7

[Annotatiom Table of Contents and Introduction of book edited by
I. V. Rekhlin]

[Excerpts] Title Page:

Title: PWIROVMIIYE KllIHIZATSII NARODNOGO KUOZYAYSTVA (Planning
the Chenizstion of the National Scone-y)
Publisher: IOIiniya

Place and Year of Publication: Hoscow. 1978
Signed to Press Date: 1 January l978
Nuwer of Copies Published: 2.900
Nudaer of Pages: 223

Annotation:

The book deals with the group of problems involved in planning ehesization
as one of the lost inortsnt directions in scientific-technical progress.
It states the lethodologicsl problsns of planning new chemical products and
processes at all stages of their design and use. as well as at different
levels of the hierarchical system (enterprise. sssociation. sector); it
describes the methodology for drafting comprehensive intersectoual plans
for ehenizotion of the national econo-y.

The book will be useful for a broad group of workers in enterprises and
organisations of the chenicsl industry. as well as for teachers and
students at 1702's.

1
FOR ORIGIN. US! DULY
PO". OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table of Contents

Intmduct1onssaseeesessssseeeeseaeessesas

PART 1. NETNODOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF PLANNING CNEHTZATION PROCESSES

Chapter 1. Planning a Unified Technical Policy for Che-instion . . .
Chapter 2. Comprehensive Stage-Type Planning of Cheaiution . . . .
Chapter 3. Comprehensive Intersectorial Planning of Chemization . .

Chapter la. Planning Chemization on the Basis of Cowreheneive
Naterislnalsnees...................

Chapter 5. Planning the Need for Equipment for Chemization . . . .
PART 2. PLANNING CNENIZATIM 0P TNE SECTORS OP TNE NATIONAL ECONOMY

Chapter 6. Problems of Economic Substantiation of the Development of
Chemiaation of Capital Construction . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 7. Planning the Chemization of Agriculture . . . . . . . .
Chapter 8. Planning the Chemiaation of Everyday Life . . . . . . .
PART 3. EwNONlO-NAWENATICAL NETNODS IN PLANNING CNEHIZATION

Chapter 9. Using Mathematical Nodal Study Nethods to Plan
Chemizstion......................

Chapter 10. Planning Chemization on the Basis of the Intersectorial
Balance........................

Chapter 11. Economic-Nathemstical Model Study of the Optim-
PlanningofChemization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Chapter 12. Using Economic-Statistical Methods in Planning
Chemixstion......................

Introduction

The core of the party's economic strategy at the present stage and in the

23
62

72

105
119
165

159

173

196

207

long-range future is. as was emphasized at the 25th CPSU Congress. a further
increase in the country's economic power. expansion and radical updating of

the production capital. This poses tremendous tasks for the sectors that

must satisfy the growing demand for metals. fuel. energy. chemical products.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICKAL USE ONLY

timber and building mntcriols.* 0n the basis of this. accelerating and
increasing the efficiency of chemizotion of the national economy becomes
particularly important.

Chemization of the national economy means introducing. in conformance with
the plan. chemical materials and chemical processing methods into all spheres
of physical production and everyday life. on the basis of an accelerated
growth of the chemical industry and the origin and development of new sectors
of it.

Under today's conditions. the process of chemization is made to of elements
such as the development and improvement of the major sectors of the chemical
industry--the material basis of chemization; continuous development and
introduction into all sectors of the national economy of new. highly effi-
cient chemical processes and materials; the utmost development of chemical
and related fields of science and technology. as the determining factor in
the creation of new and improvement in the quality of existing materials.

as well as the intensification of production processes. Chemizstion should
be regarded as a unique means of increasing food and raw material resources
on n scale that is essentially not achieved by other means.

There is n group of strategic. social. technical and economic factors that
bring about the accelerated development of production and the use of chemi-
cal materials and products. as well as putting industrial processes into
operation on the basis of chemical methods. This process is to a certain
extent objective. for it is brought about by the action of the economic
lows of socialism.

If one traces the history of the development of world technology and manu-
facturing methods. it can be established that the creation and rapid growth
of practically all new sectors are inseparably bound with the use of
improved chemical materials and processes. A number of economical indus-
trial processes developed earlier are also implemented on the basis of
chemization. The invasion of polymers into technology and everyday life,
swift in its rates and scale. perhaps constitutes one of the most‘essential
factors in the fundamental conversion of the material-technical basis of
modern production that has begin.

The appearance of new chemical methods and materials has not only come about
through the requirements of technology. In a broader concept. this process
occurs due to the effect of the socioeconomic conditions of human life.

Increasing efficiency and accelerating chemization are integrally bound and
depend increasingly on improving its planning. The urgency of solving this
problem is caused not only by the rapidly growing effect of introducing
chemical products and industrial processes on the rates of scientific and

Q
"liaterialy XXV s"e7.da KPSS" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress]. Moscow.
Polltlzdat. 1976. p 1.2.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

technical progress in the consumer-sectors. a change in the qualitative
structure of production and many extremely important national economic
indicators, but also by the intensive expansion of the scale and sharply
increasing complexity of the structure of the demand for chemical products.
the shortage. not yet overcome. of some chemical materials and the need to
select the most efficient ways to ease it and the change in the nature and
directivity of the interrelations between the consumer-sectors and the
producer-sectors of the chemical output of the CBHA member countries. etc.

Hhile in the initial stages. planning the development of chemistry and of
chemization was based on the frontal development of the entire chemical
industry and other sectors producing chemical goods. in the last decade,
because of the growing comlexity of the economic and industrial relations.
there is increasing importance in comprehensive plans for specific purposes,
specifying the carefully worked-out coordination of the efforts of all the
participating organizations. At the same time, a great deal of experience
has been accumulated in the production cooperation of many ministries and
departments with the chemical industry, in order to execute these plans.

Practical experience shows that in the process of planning the development
of the sector it is impossible to take into consideration the entire aggre-
gate of factors determining the national economic efficiency of a certain
specific decision, as for example. the all-round chemization of a sector.
At the same time, the departmental approach to chemisation of a sector is
useless and one-sided. Therefore. the disparities arising between the
interests of individual sectors should be overcome in appropriate plans for
the development of the chemical industry and chemization of the national
economy.

Successful compilation and execution of the cowrehensive plans for chemiza-
tion depend to a great extent on a clear understanding of their directivity
and economic content. of the problems solved by them and of the methodology
and organization for working them out. Under today's conditions, however,

a unified understanding of the content of the comprehensive programs and
plans has not yet been achieved, and the actual definition of "comprehensive
program" remains quite debatable.

In order to increase the substantiation of the plans for chemization. a num-
ber of requirements must be taken into consideration in the process of work-
ing them out. Particularly included among them are:

Ensuring the priority of national economic interests and a major orientation
toward solving problems facing the economic system as a whole;

Raising the degree of comprehensiveness of all the planning calculations
made at various levels and stages, and this assumes more complete coordina-
tion of the plans for chemiaation with analogous developments in the remain-
ing directions of scientific-technical progress and with other economic

1.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

processes. achievement of balance in the plans for the use. production and
import of chemical products and greater coordination in the use of various
chemical materials in individual sectors. revealing the best proportions
among the interchangeable chemical and nonohemical types of resources. etc.;

Reducing the periods for drawing up the plans and ensuring the possibility
of working out different variants and high-quality corrections for the
planning decisions with a view to taking into accomt more fully the con-
ditions of the period being planned.

This book is the first attempt to state the methodological and practical
problems involved in comprehensive planning of chemieation as one of the
most important directions in scientific-technical progress. An adequate
planning system should be in accordance with chemisation. So far. however,
in the practical work of planning there is still no system of indicators
that regulate completely enough the process of introducing chemical materials
and chemical technology into the national economy. .As a result, there may
be a certain lack of correspondence between the planning of the production
and the consumption of the chemical goods. In this connection. particular
attention is paid in the monograph to working out a system of such indi-
cators, to the possibility of using the interaectorial balance and economic-
mathematical and statistical methods to improve the planning of chemization,
and to the methodological problems of creating comprehensive plans for
chemization at different levels.

The book was written by a collective of authors. The individual chapters
were prepared by:

Gabidullin. V. N.--G:ap. 7.
Ioffe, V. him-Ch». 11.
Krichevskiy. I. Ye.--01ap. 12.
Palmerovich. D. ﬂ.--Chap. S.
Parksheyan. Kh. R.-Chap. 3.
Rabin. H. G.--Chap. 10.
Rakhlin. I. V.-lntroduction. chaps. l. 3, lo.
Sidorova. N. A.-Chap. 6.
Sokolov, 0. S.--Chap. 7.
Pedorov. K. G.--Chap. 2.
Shchukin. Ye. P.--Chap. 9.
Yanvarev. V. A.--Chap. 8.

COPYRIGHT: lzdatel'atvo "Khimiya". 1978

12151
080: 1821

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONSTRUCTION. CONSTRUCTION MACHINERY. AND BUILDING MATERIALS

HOTEL FOR FOREIGN OLYMPIC JUDGES UNDER CONSTRUCTION
Moscow NA STROYKAKN ROSSII in Russian No 11, Nov 78 pp 56-59
[Article by O. Kedrenovskiy. chief project architect)

[Text] The hotel couple: of the USSR Sports Committee [Sportkomiteta] for
housing foreign referees during the Olympic Games is being built on Lenin
Prospekt in quarter 19. southwest. It will be well connected in transporta-
tion respects with the Olympic village and the stadiua ineni V. I. Lenin

in Luzhniki.

The choice of the location of the hotel was dictated by the effort to have
an architectural accent at the location on the prospekt [boulevard] where
the perimetral brick buildings of the end of the 1950's have been replaced
by the so-called free planning using fully prefabricated panel houses. In
addition. in the near future construction is to be completed and public
amenities provided over the broad territory inside the quadrangle formed

by the Lenin Proapekt, Ukal'tsova Street. Vernadshiy Prospekt and Kravchenko
Street. This space. which is a flood plane included in the gathering area
of the Ranenka River has just been built up with modern residential and
public buildings on Vernadskiy Prospekt. it has been planted and well arranged:
a cascade of ponds has been built. After completion of the construction of
the hotel and also the "CU athletic couple: which is planned alongside. the
entire territory will be converted to a city park.

The complex is located deep within the site. 80 meters from the thoroughfare.
Considering the existing relief, a study was node of the number of the
terraces dropping in the direction of the park zone. On one of them 3 to 6
meters below the Prospekt level, the hotel buildings are located. on another,
at the Lenin Prospekt level, there is a reception area with a large parking
area for automobiles and buses connected to the local side access to the
Prospekt. A broad pedestrian bridge and also stairs and a ramp lead to the
main entrance on the first floor.

The hotel building is made up of three independent parts-the basic building.
a restaurant and conference hall with a press center connected to each other
by the first-floor access hall.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The basic 22-story building extends along the Prospekt. In the central
section the riaalites are clearly expressed. This solution gives the building
the required plasticity, it will be successfully combined with respect to
style with the l9-floor residential towers distinctively shifted in plan

view.

The plain lobby of the hotel is located on the first floor of the high-rise
part. It has a registration desk, administration offices. portiers,
service office, currency exchange office, a postal substation, and shops.
A four-passenger elevator and two cargo and passenger elevators and also a
large distribution hell were designed along the axis of the entrance.

In the base-ent there is a stall lobby with entrance into which the auto-obiles
and buses will drive. A barber. cloakroom. reatrooes, administrative and
nnnagelaent facilities are located there.

The second floor has been set aside for the directors, the medical aid station.
the donestic services coebine. the reading roo- for the hotel personnel.

0n the standard floors there are 531 coefortable roses. including 160
sin...¢ roe-s, 191 double rooms, 48 triple roses, and 32 senidelux rooes.
They will sleep 750 people. There are facilities for service personnel,
roses for drying and cleaning clothing and footwear.

The halls are used floor by floor with alternation by floors as snack bars.
television guest rooas or automated gene roses, the corridors with residential
rooms are well insulated free the noisy elevator and floor hallways.

All of the rooms are equipped with nodern bathrooes in the standard execution
applied in all of the Olympic hotels under construction. In the antirooes.
there are built-in storage closets. and in the roses, in addition to the
usual furniture, there are built-in window seats.

The hotel roofs are designed to be used. All of the passenger elevators will
provide access to the roof. Open solarium and areas under shade are provided
here for rest and exercise. 0n the roof level on the Iain facade side there
is a glsssed in training roo- which can also be used for billiards and table
tennis. It will be possible to equip a sunner buffet and bar in this area.

The building is crowned with a five-story tower which houses the nachine rooms
for the elevators and various engineering facilities. This raised portion

with a lighted sign Olimpiady-BO [Olympics-1980] will lend distinction to
the entire silhouette of the building.

The three-story structures of restaurant and the conference hell are adjacent
_ to the basic building on the parking facade side.

In the basement of the restaurant which is connected to the underground
loading platforl, there are storage rooms. refrigeration chanbers, a number of
auxiliary shops and also a dining room for the hotel personnel.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Placement of Olympic Projecta within the Structure of the City (See Journal
No 1. 1977): l--Sporta structures in Luzhniki: ell-purpose hall (No 2, 1977);
ASU-Oliwiade [Olyupica Autonated Control Syatee] building (No 8. 1978); 2-
Olyupic projecte in Imylova: the ell-purpoee hall (No 3. 1977), the hotel
coupler (No 6. 1978); 3--'rhe eporta couple: on the Hire Procpekt (No 4, 1977);
4am: a11-purpoee hall in Khinki—Khovrino (No 5. 1977); S-‘1'he Olynpic
village coupler: the raster plan (No 6, 1977); the aporte center (no 7, 1977);
the service center (No 8, 1977); the adlinietrative center (No 9. 1977); the
cultural center (No 12. 1977); 6-';'he aporta construction complex in Krylat-
ekoye: the bicycle path (No l, 1978); the bicycle track and archery fielde

(No 2. 1978); 7-'l'he equestrian eporte bane in Bittey (No 3. 1978); 8--‘l‘he
nain preee center (No lo. 1978); 9--'rhe televiaioo and radio complex in
Oetankino (No 5. 1978); 10—4138“ soccer and track and field events on benin-
grad Proapekt (No 7. 1978); lluPlenerneya equeetrinn aporte baae Ole 9. 1978);
12--1nternationa1 poet office on Horace Highway (No 10, 1978); 13-ﬂotel

for foreign refereee.

Key: (e) Hytiehchi (g) KryJatekoye
(b) Izaaylove (h) Leningrad Proepekt
(c) Balaehikha (i) Khinki-Khovrino
(d) 81 ttey (j) Oatenltino
(e) Hichurinekiy Proapekt (k) Sokol'niki
(f) Luzhniki (1) Mira Proepekt

The plan View of the firet and second floore of the restaurant building
having freight elevatore, aervice and front eteire in identical. Each of
than he ita own kitchen unite. dining and banquet roe-e which cut a totel
of 600 people. The third floor in an engineering teen.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

I J z
fill-3-

"Elllllltlﬂ

  

 

Floor Plum of ch. ﬂotel Couples: r-Ptru floor; baSecond floor;
Inlenuuunt; “neonfercncc hall; III-"Hotel.

10
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Floor Plan of e Stenderd Floor of the llotel for Foreign Refereee:
l--Reeidentlel rooee; Z-onuxiliery fecilitiee end eervice pereonnel
rooee.

Thie divieion of the reeteurent into two independent perte. eech with
ite own coeplete production cycle will note it poeeihle if neceeeery to
keep one floor for people living in the hotel end by ueina en independent
entrence, open the other for the reeidente of the city.

In the hue-cot of the conference rooe en entrence hell with clonhrooe.
buffet end hethrooee ere plenned; on the firet floor there ie e foyer con-
nected to the hell of the hotel. e viewing roo- for 500 people. the facility
for e preeidiu. end on the eecond floor. e preee center with internetionel
interview eree.

In epeciel reepecte the cowlex ie e fr-e-penel type building. lte fecedee
will he executed froe the eunderdized eounted cereaic concrete penele feced
with light gleee tilee. 'l'he windowe will heve wood-eluinue freeee: for the
firet floore there will he claims windowe; for the ecreene on the helconiee.
eheete of competed eluinul. The heeenente of the building end, in pert.
the welle of the lower floore. will he feced with poliehed grenite. The
claim. etructurel eluente will eleo be ueed in the top in the fort of
ehede over the utilised ereee of the roofe.

Along with treditionel leteriele. weeheble wellpepere of veriouu colore.
eynthetic ruu. precioue verietiee of wood her-uniting with eodern furniture
will find epplicetion in the interior decoretion of the room end corridore.
The elevetor helle will he feced in neturel etone. The ceilinge will be de-
coretive-elu-inue end ecouetic ceilinge uein; Abigren tile.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The greeteet ettention will be given to the finieh on the nein loby of the
hotel which ie 5 letere high with open gelleriee on the Ieeeenine. The
toluene will be covered with white marble. the pernpete of the neezenine.
with thinly sewn trevertine. end the reer well. which ie the beckground for
the eopporte of the portier end hioehe will be covered with fu-ed oek; the
eupporte theeeelvee will be node of fumed oeh with ertificiel leether. The
floore will be of nerble.

in the reeteurent neteriele ere need which give the interiors coefort end
intieecy. The colwwne ere feced with trevertine. In contreet to the reeteu-
rent. the conference hell end foyer will be in e eevere etyle.

The deoign of the hotel wee developed at work-hop No 3 of Moeproyeht-l guided
by Lenin Price Leureet in Architecture Ye. Stone. The euthore were erchitecte
0. Kedrenovekiy. P. Klokow, engineere Yo. Kelyedin. 8. Kriwoehein. end

I. Zhukove.

The hotel will be built by conetruction ed-inietretion No 32 (chief H. Peliee,
eection chief G. Gerehvel'd) of Hoeetroy-7 Truet of the Order of Lenin
Glevnoeetroy. The etrwcturel elenento will be inetelled by conetruction
edeinietretion No 119 of the Pro-lontexh Truet.

At the preeent tine the otroctoree for the 16th end 18th floore. the eenitery

engineering end electrotechnicel equiv-cot ere being inetelled. The finiehing
een «eve begun work.

COPYRIGHT: Irdetel'etwo “Soveteheye Roeeiye". "he etroyhekh Roeeii". 1978

10835
CSO:1021

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’l’lCIAl. USE ONLY

NETALLUROY

LEAD AND ZINC DYPRDDUCT EXTRACTION ADVANCES DETAILED
Heecov TSVBTNYYB HBTALLY in Rueeien No 12. Dec 78 pp 2-5

[Article by A.P. Sychev. Ye.P. Seginbeyev end 1.”. lel‘hove: "Leed and Zinc
lnduetry lerovee Utilizetion of Rev Neteriel"]

[Text] At enterprieee of the leed end zinc induetry e greet job in being
done on iuliilling the decree of the 6980 Central Connittee titled "Regerding
the Hort of ?erty Orgenieetione of the Uet‘-Kenenogorek Leed end Zinc end
Ielkheeh Mining end hetellurgicel Coebinee on Mobilizing Collectivee for the
Achieveeent of High Indicetore for the Thorough Utilizetion oi lev Heteriel.”
The beeie of redicel inprovenente in the utilieetion ot leed end zinc rev
neteriel hee been the ieprovenent oi technologicel proceeeee in ell for-e of
convereion. In the 10th Five-Veer Plen period coneidereble cupitel hee been
eernerhed for the redeeign end retooling of exieting enterprieee of the leed
end :inc eubinduetry. vith the renovetion end nodernieetion of equipeent.
vhich vill neke it poeeible et e lover coet to increeee the output of non-
ferroue Intele, to increeee lebor productivity end to reduce the lone of netel.

At the preeent tile 18 eleeente end 60 kinde of coenerciel producte ere ex-
trected iron leed-end-einc rev neteriel. Extrection in netellurgicel convereion
equele on everege. in percentegee: 95.71 Pb. 9£.34 Zn. 83.b3 Cd end 86.88 3.

An exemple oi the echievenent of high reeulte in the thorough utilieetion of
rev neteriel ie the Uet'-Knnenogorek Leed end Zinc Coebine. vhere zinc. leed.
euliuric ecid end rere netel production heve been coebined eucceeeiully. end

e cloeed eyetee hee been creeted for the croee proceeeing of eenifiniehed pro-
ducte in the zinc end leed brenchee. In producing coenerciel oxygen, nitrogen
end ergnn ere eleo trepped. At thie coebine ere extrected elnoet ell conponente
oi the rev ore erriving (or proceeeing end of the induetriel producte iron
other plente. end 26 kinde of commercial products are produced.

Very high extrection oi leed, 97.65 percent, hee been echieved et thie coebine.
The level of extrection of zinc (96.56 percent) end cededun (9l percent) in
eleo high. elthough the coehine is behind the Chelyebinek Zinc Plent vith
regerd to theee figuree.

13
'08 OEPlCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

Conducive to the echieveeent of high results hes been the inproveeent of
processes for tuning leed sleg. end ieproveeent oi the indicetore oi the
eeelting section on eccount of the processing in eheft furneces oi higher-
quslity sinter. produced with e sinter plent eeploying blesting iron below.

As the result of the introduction of hot preleeching of leed cekee with the
precipitetion of impurities (roe solutions. the extrection of zinc hes in-
croeeed by 0.2 percent, end thst of csdeiue by 0.1 percent. The eestery of
one-step leeching of estte with counterflow weehing of sinc cekes hes reduced
their yield by 8 percent end hee increesed the estrection of sine froe rew
ore by 0.15 percent. end of cedeiue by 0.3 percent. The use or eutoeetic
loeding control hss increseed the efficiency of Heels furnecee 3 to 4 percent.

A leeding plece eeong sinc plents for the degree of thoroughness in the
utilisetion of rew esterisl is held by the Chelyebinsk Electrolytic Zinc
rlent. Here heve been echieved the highest indicetore eeong doeestic sinc
plents for the extrection of sine (96.83 percent) end the thoroughness Eector
for the utilisetion of rev eeteriel (95.7 percent).

A key trend in ieproveeent of production efficiency end of the thoroughness

of utilizetion of rew leed end sinc ore hes been the ieproveeent of technology
end the enlistment for processing of ell industriel products end production
weste.

A specisl plece seong rew eeteriel resources hes been held by eveileble re-
serves of sleg (roe eheft eeslting of leed. The cepecitiee of sleg-processing
plents heve grown coneiderebly in the Ninth end 10th Pive-Yeer Plen periods.
For ere-pie. e high-cspecity sleg sublimation plent hes been constructed end
put into service st the Chi-Rent Leed Plent. In 1977. 86 percent of the

sleg tron ongoing production vss processed in en ShVU [sleg sublieetion plent].
In the process of eestering the plent. there wee ieproveeent in the quslity

of the sublilstes produced in terns of their sinc content. In the first
qusrter of 1978 sublieetee conteined 56.3 percent sine. According to the
know-how geined by the Ryestsveteet Plent. the operstion of en ShVU hes shown
thst it is possible to cerry out the process using neturel gee without the

use of e solid reducing sgent.

The sleg eubliletion plent et the Uet'-Kenenogorsk Lend end Zinc Coebine hes
been reconstructed. The eeetery of e eixer-eccunuletor hes been conducive

to reducing unscheduled downtiee of the plent. to reducing cycles. to pre-
venting the pouring of eette into the iurnecs. end to stsbilislng its operetion.
lecsuee of the ieproveeent of the technology for processing sleg. the indicstors
of the SW" hove been “proved end the extrection of zinc in sublinetes hes been
increeeed. equeling no.5 percent in 1913. but such reesins to be done for

the purpose of stebilising the operetion of the plent.

At the Achisey Polyeetsls Coebine there hes been en increese in the cspecity of
the "eel: section end the coeposition of the heels burden hss been sltered

(the percentege of sleg hss been increesed). es the result of which the ex-
trection of zinc in Heels oxides hes increseed end equeled ebnut 89 percent

in 1973.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE OHLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bxiating nethode of proceaeing alag do not eolve the problem or complete ex-
traction of copper and noble uetala from it. For the purpoae of aolving the
problem of the thorough utilization of eleg, UKSTeK [Uat'-Kanwnogofak Lead

and Zinc Conbinel in conjunction with VNIltevetnet [All-Union Scientific Re-
eearch lnetitute of Mining and Non-Perroue Metallurgy] hae developed a method of
proceaeing it without waete. including the "eel: proceee end negnetic concen-
tration of the clinker. while producing aublimetee which will be bound for the
zinc production procaaa for iron concentrate containing copper end noble metele
end euitable for utilization in lead production. and of a noneagnetic clinker
fraction repreeenting raw material for the production of building materiela.

The effective proceeeing of aintering end ehaft enelting duat containing rare
and trace elenenta hae been conducive to a coneidereble extent to improving the
degree of thoroughneea of the utilization of raw material in lead production.
Separate proceaeing of a portion of thie duet hea been arranged for at almost
all plante of the eubinduetry. In epite of the fact that it hea been carried
out for a long tine. the degree of extraction of rare netale from it ia etill
ineufficient. It in poaeible to correct the eituation by a core reaaonable
dietribution of rare elenenta over intermediate producta.

0f great importance for ioproving the thoroughneee of the utilization of raw
material hea been the introduction of oxyelectrothermel anelting of lead con-
centratee ("Kivtaet-Tes"). which. together with improving the extraction of
lead and zinc. will conaiderably improve working eanitation and health con-
ditione and will lower harmful environmental effluenta to health atandarda.

At the preeent tine the "Kivtaet" technology hea been mastered at the lrtyehek

Poly-etale Combine. For the purpoee of proceeeing copper-and-einc concentratea.
the intent ia to redeeign the ”Kiwtaet" unit at thie combine. to increaee ite

output and ensure maximum extraction of zinc and utilization of eulfur-contein-
ng gaeee.

The intent in to introduce oxyelectrothermal emelting of raw lead ore with a
"Kivteet-Tas" unit at UKSTeK. the Dal'polimetall Aaaociation and the llektro-
toink Plant.

At VNlltavetmet etudiea and teata on an induatrial ecele have been made of a
new method of proceaaing etotege battery ecrap--the KEPAL method. Thia eethod
includee mechanized aeparation (concentration by eink-float aeparation) of
atorage battery ecrap with the eeparation of chlorine and metallurgical pro-
ceaaing of concentration producte with the high extraction of metala. It
aatiafiee modern require-onto for working conditiona and environmental pro-
tection.

baeed on teet reeulte. a eection for proceeeing etorage battery acrep hea been
planned and ite conetruction hea begun at the Leninogorek Polymetala Combine.

The degree of thoroughneee of the utilization of raw material in zinc production
ie deter-ined primarily by an efficient eyeteo for proceeeing zinc cakee.

15
FOR OIFICIAL US! ONLY
At UKSTsK. cakes froe internal production and a portion of Leninogorsk cakes
are processed by the "eel: nethod. an important disadvantage of which is the
production of a copper-bearing clinker poor in copper. gold and silver content.
Host pronising is the hydrosetallvrgicel sethod of processing sine cakes. which
lakes it possible to extract all v..uable cosponents in the closed cycle of
nine and lead plants.

Horkers at the Leninogorsk Zinc Plant in conjunction with associates at V“!!-
tsvetset have developed and carried out hydronetallurgical processing of zinc
cakes free current production; this has been responsible for a three-percent
increase in the extraction of zinc at the plant. and a 6.1-percent for cadaiun.
with the startup of the high-temperature leaching section for zinc cakes. all
:akas {rozdcurrent production will be processed and old dunps will gradually

e uti is . -

In 1976 at Vhlftsvetnet was developed and mastered on the industrial scale a
technology for coabined hydrosstallurgicsl processing of zinc cakes and sub-
lilatsa for the Alnalyk Zinc Plant. A project for redesigning the leaching
section has been carried out for the purpose of introducing this technology
for the entire saount of rinc cakes free current production and of sublinates.
The capacities of Real: furnaces which have been freed will be utilised for
the purpose of processing slag from old dumps at the Chinkent Lead Plant.

The introduction of coebined hydrosetallurgical processing of zinc cakes and
eublinates to the full extent at the Alnalyk Zinc Plant will inprove the ex-
traction of zinc. cad-dun. copper and noble metals.

An analysis of the operation of lead and zinc enterprises has shown that they
have at their disposal great resources for improving the thoroughness of the
utilisation of raw laterisl. Testifying to this prissrily is the considerable
gap in figures for the extraction of Istals for individual plants. Por excaple.
the extraction of lead in refined lead. subliaates and Iatte is 2.85 percent
lower at the Chi-tent Lead Plant than extraction in refined lead at UKSTsK.

The extraction of sinc fro. raw ore at the Chelyabinsk Zinc Plant is consider-
ably ahead of figures for other plants.

Enterprises have not been utilising to the full extent their opportunities
for reducing the loss of satals and for utilizing sulfur from exhaust gases.

In recent years the purification of exhaust gases has been ilproved at lead
and xinc plants. Por example. URIHeZ bag filters have been put into service
at the Chi-tent Lead Plant and electric separators for cleaning roasting gases
at the Chelyabinsk electrolytic Zinc Plant; construction has been coapleted on
new sets of gas purification facilities at the Ust'-Kananogorsk Lead and Zinc
CbIbine; and dust trapping systems have been expanded at the Chi-ksnt lead and
Ielovo zinc plants.

Together with the construction of new gas purification facilities. luch
attention has been paid to iaproving the level of utilization of dust trapping
units; as a result. the residual dust content of process gases free key con-
version processes is being reduced gradually and significantly. but the

16
POR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

residual dust content of gases is still high at enterprises such as LPK
[Leninogorsk Polynetals Combine]. UKSTsK and cusz [Chinkent Lead Plant].

In evaluating as a whole the possible ways of reducing dust and gas effluents
and of achieving healthier air in the areas of location of lead and zinc plants.
it should be nentioned that for the purpose of a full solution to this problen
it is necessary to introduce new metallurgical processes (“Kivtset," dual-
contact. etc.), to redesign and expend dust trapping and gas purification
systems. and to build units for sanitary prepurificstion of gases.

The lexinun utilization of all resources at hand at plants of the lead and

zinc suhindustry. for reducing the loss of valuable components of raw ore.

the introduction of new metallurgical processes and the iaproveeent of existing
ones. the modernization and consolidation of equipment. and the aechanirstion
and sutooation of key and ancillary processes will be conducive to solving

one of the eaior problems assigned to the country‘s non-ferrous letallurgy
industry by the 25th CPSU Congress. that of further ilproving the efficiency

of the production of non-ferrous Istals and the thoroughness of the utilization
of raw material.

COPYRIGHT: Izdatel'stvo Hetellurgiya. TsVETNYYB METALLY, 1978

8831
050: 1821

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALLM

NICKEL INDUSTRY'S WASTE-FREE PRODUCTION PROSPECTS EVALUATED
Hoscow 18W! MALL! in Russian No 12. Dec 78 pp 7-9

[Article by TN. Gren': "Prospects for Greeting weste-Pree Production in the
Nickel lnduetry"]

[Text] The ssjor vests in netellurgicel processing of sulfide end oxidized
nickel ore is represented by slsg. rsletively nild sulfur gesee froe pyro-
sstellurgicsl conversion processes, end ssline dischsrge fron hydro-stellurgicel
sections.

ﬂeets-free production of nickel can be crested on the besis of improving the
operetion of existing plente end by using new wests-free processing systems.

In the 0883's nickel industry the first weste-free enterprise hss been crested—
the Pobuzhskiy Nickel Plsnt. where ferronicksl is produced fros oxidized nickel
ore by slectrosnelting. efter which it is concentrsted by blasting in converters.
The usjor uses of nickel end iron conteined in the rev ore is extrected in
co-erciel ferronicksl. The slsg produced is crushed end it is ell hended

over to e construction orgenisstion for utilisstion. In addition, totel re-
cycling of weter is cerried out st this plent.

This exssple hss desenstreted the fundesentel fessibility of setting up new
enterprises with s vests-free technology in the nickel industry or in con-
struction.

Is it possible to isprove the technology of existing enterprises. in order thst
they eight opsrete without dune or by producing then to s sinisun? Por this

it is necessery to consider wsys for end the fessibility of elisineting or
utilizing gsses. slsg end industrisl weete.

The following ers the nejor weys of rsising the level of utilizetion of sulfur
Eros exhsust geese Eros eetsllurgicel production:

1. Rsising the concentrstion of 80 in these geses end ensuring uniformity
of gee stress values end constency of the $02 content over tine. by:

18
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OllY

Developing and introducing at existing enterprises new processes and metal-
lurgical technology equipment. e.g.. continuous conversion unite. eutogenous
smelting units, etc.. producing concentrated sulfur gas (10 to 20 percent 502).

Iaproving existing processes end equipment. such as by using improved sprayers
in converters, involute. for example. which will make it possible to raise

the concentration of so in gases to six percent; sealing ore roasting and
electric stripping furngcee. packing gas flues, end enriching the air with
oxygen when converting end roasting in fluidized bed furnaces (in these the
content of 80 in gases is raised to about 8.0 percent); installing heat re-
covery boilers after the metallurgical units, 'instead of thinning exhaust gases
with air for the purpose of cooling them.

2. Using chemical methods of enriching gases poor in 802, for the purpose of
subsequently processing them into acid or elemental sulfur.

3. Using high-temperature or catalytic methods of reducing 802 with natural
gas to produce elenental sulfur.

0. Building end putting into service new sulfuric acid capacities. as well as
units for the byproduct derivation of elemental sulfur from gases.

Long-term plans for development of the subindustry call for raising the

utilization factor for sulfur at enterprises which process sulfide ore to
90 to 93 percent. which will be able to be considered a solution to the problem

of utilizing the sulfur from gases at these plants.

The problem 0: processing low-sulfur gases at Ural nickel enterprises which
work with oxidized ore has still not found an intelligent solution because of
the low concentration of so in them, since more than 60 percent of the sulfur
is found in low-content sin er and shaft smelting gases, for which now only
one engineering solution has been able to present itself-~neutralieation.

Duly slag in the nickel and cobalt subindustry represents a coaplex multicom-
ponent silicate system. containing rock-forming components with an admixture
of moderate amounts of non-ferrous metals and sulfur.

All slag in the nickel industry comes under the heading of acid slag, and
its modulus of besicity is less than one.

Slag arrives at the dug) in a liquid-nolten state or in pelletieed form.

The physical and chemical properties of this slag make it possible to use it

as a promising raw material for the production of building materials and pro-
ducts. such as mineral wool, cast stone products and cast slag ballast. Pellet-
ized slag, being an already considerably crushed product, can be used also as

a filler for mortar and concrete.

of the useful properties of this slag. mention should be made of its highly
uniform composition as compared with natural materials used in the silicate

industry.
19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following represent proeising trends in the utilization of slag:

a) Production of mineral wool products (increase Iron 0.3 to 0.6 percent of
all slag produced in the subindustry).

b) In pelletired torn. for filling nine workings (increase fro- three to four
percent to nine to 12 percent).

?) As ;:ubble for construction and landscaping, and for producing binders
cement .

d) For the production of slag pyroceranica.

As already sentioned. a promising way to utilize slag is to produce cement from
it. The production of binding materials iron nickel industry dulp slag has
been studied by the Leningrad Ares Institute of Standard and Experimental

Design (LenZNIlEP), the Leningrad Construction Engineering Institute. the Lenin—
grad Branch of the USSR ASiA [Acadesy of Builders and Architects], the Role
Drench of the USSR Acadealy of Sciences. the Noril‘skproyekt Institute. etc.

Studies have shown that slag crushed to cement fineness, when hardening promo-
ters are added to it (line or menu). can serve as a binding material for
the fabrication of building products. Hardening of these products must take
place in kilns or autoclaves. The concrete types produced have a mechanical
strength of 300 to 1000 kg/cmz.

Research and testing along this line are continuing. For example. at the
present time the Rash Nickel Plant and the Yuzhuralnikel' (Iodine in con-
junction with building institutes are conducting tests on the addition of slag
to the burden in the production of clinker at the Sukholozhskiy and Novotroitsk
cement plants. At the Gipronikel’ Institute [State Planning and Scientific
Research Institute of the Nickel, Cobalt and Tin Industry] research work is
under way on the electrosmslting of rev sulfide ore into slag suited for the
production of cement to be used in the preparation of foundation concrete.

For the purpose of solving the problem of the utilisation of crushed dusp
slag for the production of cement. organizations of the USSR Gosstroy must
develop engineering specifications for the production of binding materials
tree this type of raw material and for the production of building products
fro. them.

with a favorable solution to the probles of the production of slag cement
based on binders. it is possible to utilize as much as 60 percent of the dulp
slag formed in the subindustry.

The USSR Academy of Sciences Role Branch has done extensive research on the
production of cast stone products from liquid-molten slag and has demonstrated
its suitability for pouring large blocks (up to one ton). as well as products
of nedium and small size (up to 60 kg). As much as 10 percent of the slag
for-ed in the subindustry can be directed for these purposes in the future.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In 1975 at Cipronikcl' technical and economic estimates were made for arranging
for the processing and utilization of nickel dump slag, which showed that

this type of arrangement would be highly effective. and the period for paying
off the capital investment would equal about two years.

In the future a solution will also be found to the problem of elininsting
industrial discharge. The most complicated thing here is the processing of
saline industrial discharge which contains, in g/l, as much as 60 Na'", 90

SO ‘ and 20 01'. Every year many thousands of tons of valuable chemical pro-
du ts—sodium sulfate and sodium chloride--are wasted with these. At the
present time a technology is being developed for producing comercial products,
such as sodium sulfate, chlorine and alkalis, from saline industrial discharge.

A more radical solution is represented by the develop-ant of a processing
system for the electrolytic refining of nickel which would not produce saline
discharge. This is possible in principle, and studies along this line are
under way.

Refining of raw nickel can also be arranged for by the carbonyl method. Able
to serve as an example of an enterprise with s waste-free technology is the
new INKO refining plant put into operation in 1973, which uses a high-pressure
carbonyl process.

The major raw material for this plant is the metallic fraction from the copper-
nickel matte processing section. In addition, nickel concentrate and conercial
products from electrolysis sections are processed at the plant. The raw material
is melted and blasted in rotary converters with oxygen blasted from above.

The raw material for the carbonyl process is metal granules containing, in
percentages, 72 Ni, 18 Cu, 3 1's, 1 Co and 5 s.

It can be concluded from the above that, for the purpose of converting existing
nickel plants to a waste-free technology, it is necessary to complete research
on the enrichment of low-content sulfur gas, to increase dramatically the scale
of production of sulfuric acid, to make arrangements for sulfur production, to
develop and introduce a technology for processing saline discharge with the

production of co-ercial salts, and to make arrangements for the total utiliza-

tion of slag.

An analysis has demonstrated the fundamental feasibility of in the future con-
verting existing enterprises which process nickel sulfide ore to a waste-free

technology .

The further development of the production of nickel must be based on the use

of new processes making it possible to utilize raw ore completely. The highest
figures for the thoroughness of the utilization of raw material are provided
by combination systems in which hydrometsllurgical processes prevail.

The Hekhanobr Institute [All-Union Scientific Research Institute of Hechanicsl
Processing of Minerals] has developed a process for concentrating Noril'sk ore
while producing a rich nickel concentrate and separating a considerable portion

21
POP. OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

of the iron in an independent pyrrhotine concentrate, from which nickel is also
to be extracted. For the purpose of processing the pyrrhotine concentrate.
Gipronikel'. Gintsvetmet [State Scientific Research Institute of Non~Perrous
Metals]. NGHK [Noril'sk Mining and Hetallurgical Combine] and a number of

other organizations have developed an oxidative autoclave leaching method.

which makes it possible to produce a rich nickel sulfide concentrate contain-
ing ll to 12 percent Ni and elemental sulfur as a separate product. Almost

all the iron will be concentrated in ferruginous dump ceilings. A demonstration
has been given of the basic feasibility of processing them into high-quality raw
material for ferrous metallurgy.

At Giproniksl'. on a laboratory scale a waste-free technology has been developed
for sulfuric acid leaching of sulfide products. which makes possible the utiliza-
tion of all components aczording to the following system: non-oxidative lique-
tion smelting into matte; dissolution of the matte in circulating sulfuric acid;
processing of the hydrogen sulfide thus produced into elemental sulfur; oxida-
tion and hydrolysis of the iron with recovery of the acid formed to dissolve the
matte; processing of the sulfide precipitate of non-ferrous metals with the
derivation of a concentrate of precious metals. cobalt. nickel and iron; and
production of iron pellets from the hydroxide.

By this system are produced nickel. cobalt and copper briquets, iron oxide
pellets or gas reduction iron. elemental sulfur and a concentrate of platinic
metals. The extraction into finished products. according to laboratory data,
equals: nickel 97.5 percent. copper 97.6 percent and cobalt 96.9 percent.

Possible is a variant of this waste-free technology which includes carbonyl
processing of a sulfide cake (obtained as the result of leaching) containing
nickel. cobalt. platinoids and iron residues. The finished products will be
nickel pellets. autoclave copper (as a powder, briquets or rolled metal).
high-purity reduced iron. and special materials with a ferronickel and copper-
nickel base.

- The Cipronikel' Institute in conjunction with a number of other organizations
has been conducting other research aimed at increasing the thoroughness of

the utilization of raw material and at creating waste-free processing systems
on this basis. Under the heading of this work come autogenous forms of smelt-
ing raw sulfide ore which produce concentrated gases. continuous conversion.
smelting in furnaces with an immersed jet. into ferronickel, etc.

Under way at the present time are a fair number of processes making it possible
to create a waste-free processing system for an enterprise for the purpose of
processing sulfide ore. These include autogenous smelting with the production
of sulfur or sulfuric acid and the total utilization of slag, oxidative auto-
clave leaching of a pyrrhotine concentrate with utilization of tailing iron and
sulfur. continuous conversion of matte (also with utilization of the sulfur).
and carbonyl refining of raw nickel. It is possible to use a hydrometellurgical
systea for processing raw sulfide ore after further improvement of this system

on a semi-industrial scale.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Inortent lactate in the creation of new mote-free technologiee are represented
by the need to develop nethode of utilizing ierruginoue tailing. end of pro-

cessing eleg. which not be solved in conbinetion in investigating. planning
and ilpleunting new proceeeing eyetm.

COPYRIGHT: Izdetel'uvo Henllurgiye. TSVBTNYYB METALLY. 1978

8831
080: 1821

23
'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"3‘“me

CHELYABINSK ELECTROLYTIC ZINC PWT'S ”STE-Pm PRODUCTION 2mm DETAILED
Hoecov TSVBTNYTB "RALLY in Russian ho 12. Dec 78 pp 6-7

[Article by 8.1’. hatveyeva: ”The Chelyabinsk electrolytic Zinc Plant on the
Day to Haste-Tree Production")

[Text] The Chelyabinsk electrolytic Zinc Plant works aeinly on concentrates
derived from copper-end-zinc ore fron the Urals. The distinctive features
of Ural concentrates are: a reduced content of zinc and cadaiua. a high con-
tent of iron. copper and sulfur. a high degree of dispersion. end a high per-
centage of water soluble cowounde. The content of zinc in concentrates at
Ural concentration plants does not exceed 50 percent, and in concentrates at
the Cayeltiy and Uchaly concentration plants. ‘5 to 66 percent.

The high iron content in concentrates and its close structural relationship

to zinc are the reasons for the low solubility of zinc in ronsting products;
this draasticslly coaplicatee hydro-stallurgical processes. increases the

output of zinc ions. conplicetes their processing. and increases the consuaption
of fuel and auxiliary asteriela. but the plant hat achieved notable success

in recent years in inproving the thoroughness of the utilization of rev aeteriel.

The successes of the plant's teas have been the consequence of the syste-
vhich has been forned for organizing production. representing a coabination
of technical. organizational. econoaic and sociopeychological aeasures. This
systes eabrscee ell subdivisions and services of the plant vhich in one way
or another have been promoting the efficient utilization of raw asterial.

The folloving are the main lines along which the thoroughness of the utilize-
tion of rev uterial is being iaproved:

1. Improvement of extraction by the use of advanced technological processes
and iaproved equipaent. by the aechsniration of labor intensive jobs. by the
autoaation of the aonitoring and control of technological processes. and

by iaproving working conditions and production standards.

2. Bnlisting in the processing of natal-containing asteriale production
vaate. also. including froa duaps of past years. as vell as waste froa other
non-ferrous aetsllurgy enterprises and allied industries.

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. leprovelent of product quelity by reducing the eeeocieted netels in pro-
ducts end by eegregetlng then into con-odity products.

0. Introduction of environ-entel protection neeeuree.

Roseting is one of the east ieportsnt fores of conversion in the production
of zinc.

The construction end nestery of e highly eechenieed etorege fecility for con-
centretee hee nsde it possible to convert to conteinerieed trensportetion of
concentretee. there hes been e coneiderebls reduction in the loss of concentretee
on the wey end in the perfornence of loeding end unloading operetions. end

lebor costs for these operstione heve slso been lowered.

The key trend in the inproveeent of the roesting process itself in recent

yeers has been en intreese in the unit cepecity of "fluidized bed“ furneces

es the result of using oxygen. The efficiency of roseting furnscee hes been
reised 35 percent. there hes been e considereble reduction in the content of
sulphides in roesting products. end the direct extrection of sine hes increeeed.
A reduction in the output of zinc cekes hes nsde it possible to process in
eddition cehee fron reserves fron pest yeere.

llprovenent of the design end of the utilieetion of electric seperetors hee
reduced loreee of velueble coeponente with geese in the roeeting conversion
process to 0.02 percent of the totel zinc cherge.

The utiliretion of oxygen in roesting zinc concentretee end the reconstruction
of sulfuric ecid production by converting existing eyetees to the eyeten of
duel contect end internediete ebeotption heve been responsible for positive
results with regerd to nestery of the processing of geses with s high so con-
tent, with e corresponding growth in cepecity without increesing the n r of
opersting personnel. This hes been conducive to improve-ent in the extrection
of sulfur into sulfuric ecid end to heslthier eir.

One more systen wee redesigned eccording to the duel contect systen in 1977.

It hes been opereting in the eutotherlsl node with high retings. The content

of SO2 in exhsuet geees hee equeled e totel of 0.01 percent with 99.6 to 99.8
percent conversion. Pull conpletion of the redesign of sulfuric ecid production
is plenned in l979.

The incteese in the percentege of Urel concentretee in the row esteriel being
processed hes served es en inpetue towerd nodifying the eyetees end nodes of
leeching roosting producte end cleening solutions.

Studies Iede in conjunction with Vﬂlltevetnet [All-Union Scientific neseerch
Institute of Mining end Non-ferrous hetellurgyl heve delonstreted the feesi-
bility of elploying e one-step leeching systen end counterflow weshing of zinc
cekes.

Up until recently. cleening copper end cedeiue tron solutions wee cerried out
er the plent in two oteps. using entilony seltu es ectiveting edditions. with

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
a fairly low consumption of zinc dust (about 34 to 35 kg/ton of zinc). This
did not provide the required degree of thoroughness for cleaning solutions
and did not provide for separation of the cenent deposit derived into copper
and cad-inn.

In l976. in conjunction with VNIltavet-ot, wee introduced a three-step syste-
for cleaning sinc solutions of ispurities. with the separation of the najor
amount of copper into copper cake in the first cleaning step. The quality

of neutral solutions was thereby isproved.

the content of ispurities in the cleaned solution was reduced considerably.
which is obvious fro: the following data, in ng/l:

1975 Five Ionths. 197?
Cu 0.10 0.06
Cd 2.73 1.1
Ni 0.63 0.26
Co 1.8 0.63

There has been a reduction in the output of copper-and-cadnius cake and the
content of cadniun in it has been increased. which has made it possible to
improve the technology for processing copper-snd-cadnius cake while producing
connercial copper cake.

The lestery of three-step cleaning has created an opportunity for introducing
a xenthate-free ayaten for separating cobalt. According to this system. the
concentration of cobalt takes place during the cessntationsl precipitation

of cadsiun. and cobalt is separated fro. the process with solutions for the
production of hydrous zinc sulfate. The use of expensive and highly toxic
ethyl zanthate is cospletely eliminated and losses of zinc and cad-dun are
reduced.

Conducive to ilprovesent in the thoroughness with which raw naterial is being
utilised have been isproveeent and intensification v: the "eel: process for
zinc cakes. The high content of iron in then (27 to 30 percent) has caused
intense slag incruststion in Heel: furnaces. Since 1975 oxygen has been
supplied to furnaces. and the output of furnaces has reached 96 to 95 tone

of burden per 2b-hour period. The full effect fros this noasure can be gotten

only after elininating the slag incruststion phenonsnon.

In the conversion process for Heel: oxides there has been a considerable re-
duction in the loss of zinc and of cednius. especially. with lead cakes. as
the result of the introduction of oxidative high-tenperature preleaching of
the lead cake and continuous "inverse“ leaching of the "sol: oride.

Much useful work has been done in the conversion of rare netala. The nost
ilportant are the selective precipitation of rare Intels, the use of s lore
active reducing agent. and inprovenent in the electrolysis of indiul. As

n result. the extraction of indius fron Heel: oxide during the last five

26
’03 OFFICIAL USB 0th
I08 OVPICIAL 088 ONLY

years has been increased by more than 5.0 percent. and at the present tine
it is 10 to 20 percent (absolute) higher than at other dolestic sinc plants.
All indiun is being produced with the State Sable. of Quality.

A coabination of industrial engineering neeeuree carried out in the electro-
lysis section (installation of additional electrolytic cells. eechenieetion
of cleaning sludge froa cells. etc.) has aede it possible to iaprove the
quality of rinc precipitation. to reise the yield of metal in pig sine. end
to reduce losses of it in dross end eelting loss.

The results of the plant’s work on ieproving the extraction of valuable cos-
ponente are characterised by the following date. in percentages:

Extraction 1971 1973 Five aonths. 1978
Zn 96.0 96.66 96.88

Cd 90.62 90.66 91.36

In 71.0 75.3 76.38

5 88.16 88.67 88.89
utilization of sulfur 92.56 96.66 93.57
Thoroughneas of utiliza-

tion of sulfur 96.7 95.6 95.57

Universally recognized is the national economic importance of processing pro-
duction waste end of developing end introducing waste-free technological pro-
cesses. This objective has becone the detersining one in the plant’s work.

The inprovelent in the quality of roasting products and intensification of the
Heel: process have ends it possible to set up the processing of cakes fro-
duapa of past years. The processing of sludge fron cleaning facilities has
been set up.

A production system has been developed and introduced for processing chenicel
industry waste containing 60 percent zinc in carbonate fore.

In conjunction with the Giredaet [State Scientific Research and Planning
institute of Rare Metals]. an original eyates has been created for processing
senioonductor laterial waste. including the extraction of indiul. selling is
being extracted by the sorption lethod iron indiun production waste.

The plant is close to creating a waste-free production process systee.

Measures for the ilprovelent of the thorough utilization of raw laterial have
been carried out by the plant in close alliance with environmental protection
objectives.

based on the revision of all technological processes. the opportunity has been
created of elininating the disposal of aetal-containing solutions into the
sewer systel and of utilizing the. in technological processes. As a result.
the total disposal of contaeinated waste has been reduced considerably. and
purification facilities put into service in 1976 have been only 60 to 50 per-
cent loaded.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In operation at the plant are three cloaed water circulation ayateaa: in

the aulfuric acid production proceae; for the purpoae of ertinguiahing the

elag in the "eel: furnace: and for the purpoae of central cooling of the

zinc electrolyte. :acycling of vater haa been introduced in Iany aectiona.

The total circulation of vatar at the plant aquaia 96.5 percent. Only 3.5
percent of the water ueed for technological neede ie diepoeed of after preliuin-
ary thorough cleaning to the canine: pereiaeible concentratione. for reeervoira
for buaineae and everyday purpoaee.

The plant could convert to loo-percent recycling of water. if a favorable aolu-
tion were found to the problel of cleaning chlorine fro. vaete water.

In recent yeara the plant haa been greatly involved in thie problem. in
cooperation vith TaNlIolovo [Central Scientific Raeearch lnatitute of Tin].
Kaeeehhanobr [Kazakh lnetitute of hechanieation of Proceeaing]. the Azerbaydzlan
88R Acadeay of Sciencee lnatitute of Petrocheedcal Producte. the Oral lnatitute
of ﬂood Technology. and the Chelyabinah branch of VODGYeO [All-Union Scientific
Reeearch lnatitute of Hater Supply. Severage, hydrological Structuree and
Hydrogeology]. but there haa ae yet been no autceaa in developing an efficient
eyetee for the eeparetion of chlorine with the utilization of chloride pre-
cipitatee.

Conducive to healthier air have been the redeeign of eulfuric acid production.
ilprovelent of the eyetel for removing-duet fro. natallurgicel production pro-
ceee gaaee. the introduction of unit-by-unit overhauling and the eealing of
equip-ent. and etrict Ionitoring of the obaervence of technological cyclea.

In the purification of gaaee free the drying of lead end zinc cakea. and in
the unit for producing hydroua eulfete in fluidized bed furnacee. percuaaioo-
type ecrubbera (SUD‘a) have been operating eucceeafully. the uae of which haa
Iede it poeeible to reduce the content of precioua duet in theae gaaee fro.

l to 2 g/ne3 to 0.1 to 0.2 gin-3.

A high degree of reeoval of Heel: oxide haa been achieved with be filtere.
The duet content in ethauet gaaee hae not exceeded 12 to 17 Igloo .

A highly difficult problem haa turned out to be the purification of induction
furnace gaaee in the renelting of zinc. Hith the introduction of rotary cy-
clone duet eeparatore in thie convereion proceae. all metallurgical production

gaaee will be eubjected to duet reanval.

The ilprovenent of product quality haa aleo had a conaiderable influence on
inprovenent of the thoroughneea of the utilization of rev aaterial.

The reduction in the content of inpuritiea in co-erciel products (cf. table)
teetifiea to the great job done by the plant'e teal along thie line.

An objective evaluation of the plant'e job in improving product quality in
repreeented by the output of producta with the State Bablee of Quality.

28
903 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
In 1976 80.3 percent of all products bore the noble- of Quelity. end in 1977.
81.73 percent.

Reduction in Content of Ispuritiss in Co-ericel Products. in Percentegea

Type of Product Zn ed

1976 1977 1976 1977
Clinker 1J9 1.02 - —
Lead cake 8.85 7.68 0.22 0.17
Copper cske 8.13 6.51 0.6 0.32
Cleaned solution.
"/1 " - 2e13 1e63

Successes in improvesent of the thoroughness of the utilization of row neterisl
st the plsnt have been due not only to the growth in the technicsl level of
production. but slso to the precise formulation of organisational work.

The plent has ude extensive use of information on the know-how of domestic and
foreign sine plants and enterprises of allied industries.

A cooperative analysis is regularly node of all technological indicators of
plants, the reasons are found for the plant's lagging behind with regard to
individual indicstors. end messuree are developed for eliminsting the leg.

Questions relating to technologicsl discipline and to reducing the lose of
valuable components are discussed in daily selective operstions meetings
with section process engineers. In compulsory monthly meetings of shift
foremen for all production processes end of section process engineers. a
detailed snelysis is usde of the month's work results, with-reports by
forenen and process engineers. and suggestions for isproving figures are
discussed.

Questions relsting to reducing the loss of valusble components and to improving
the thoroughness of the utilisation of raw msterial have found reflection in
system for paying workers. in a milieu of socielist conpetition.

The plsnt extracts from complex multicomponent rsw msteriel 12 elements snd
ll types of products. The cost of producing byproducts equels 23.0 percent
of the totsl output of conercial products.

But the plent's opportunities for improving the thoroughness of the utilization
of row uterisl hove been far from exhausted.

The following are the not important objectives of the 10th Five-Your Plan
period:

Hestery. with an experimental unit. of s technology for processing comercisl
copper-and-sinc products from Ural concentration plants. The solution to this
importent probles will expend the plant's raw uterisl bsse conoidersbly and
will increase the extraction of copper and zinc for the subindustry as s whole.

29
'03 ORIGIN. US! 01“.!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Completion or the radcoign of tho sulfuric acid production proccaa. by convert-
ing all oyotou to tha ayato- of dual contact of gaaaa with intamdiotc ab-
oorption.

Construction of ona Iora Haal: furnace. for tho purpoaa of enabling the pro-
curing of all current cakoa and cake. (to- dulpa of put yaara. with a
growth in the production o! zinc.

Inprovount of oyotcu for procoaains zinc eaten and Haul: oxidao.
liodornitation of filtering equip-Int in hydrolotallurgical uttiona.
Improve-Int of the latching technology. and other uuurca.

COPYRIGHT: Itdatal'otvo liotallurgiya. rsvmm man. 1978

8831
630: 1821

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

HBTALLURQY

unc: 669.263.052
RASTE-PRBB TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCED AT POBUZHSKIY utcxnt PLANT
Hoacow TSVBTNYYB HBTALLY in Rueeian No 12. Dec 78 pp 9-13

[Article by 8. P. Korniliteyn. V. D. Linev. A. Ye. Burochkin. B. P. Oniehchin,
and V. A. Nechiporenko: "Adoption of "ante-Free Proceee at the Pobuahekiy
nickel Plant"!

[Text] The Pobuahekiy Nickel Plant (PNZ) in Kirovogredekaya Oblaet went into
operation in 1973. receiving ite raw neteriale fro- e local oxidized nickel
ore body. The plant employe reduction alectroenelting of the ore into
ferronickel in place of reduction-aulfiditing enelting of are into matte,
which in traditionally utilized in thie country.

Selection of the enclting proceee proceeded from the poaeibility of increaeing
conpreheneivaneee of ore utilization by the coemercial recovery of eubetan-
tiel quantities of iron in addition to nickel and cobalt. A poeitive in-
fluence wee aleo exerted by euch factors an the poeeibility of total elimina-
tion of utilization of ehort-eupply metallurgical coke. proceee einplicity.
and the poeeibility of producing etack gaeea which do not contain aultur
dioxide. that in. producing leee environmental pollution.

The proceae employed at PNZ (rigure l) includce the following: preparation
of matariele for emelting end charging. roaeting the charge in rotary tube
furnacce. enelting of the hot matte in large-capacity electric furnaces.
ladle refining of the obtained crude ferronickel from eultur with molten
code, then (ran eilicon end chromium in a vertical oxygen converter with
dinaa (acid) lining end from carbon. phoephorua end reeiduel eilicon. eulfur
end chromium in a eimilar converter with magneaite-chromite (haeic) lining.
After the product in poured into 30-50 kg ingota. the metal ie reduced with
ferroeilicon end aluminum. toor ore of the following content. in percen-
tagee. ie proceeacdz<l hi. ~63 Sioz end 22.5 Pa.

The refined ferronickel should contain not more then 0.10! Si. C. Cr, Cu
(each) and 0.062 S and P. The chemical composition of the actually obtained
metal and apecification requirenente are contained in Table 1, from which

it ie evident that product tron PNZ exceeda epecificetiona in Si, c and P
content and meete epetiiicetione in s and cr content.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

a 1.

tool Compoeition of PNZ Commodity
It. 2 (numetetor - eccordins to

nicel Specifications 58-3-59-75,

linetor - ectuel content)

1. Pertonickel
2. Refined

3. Cerboo

A. foundry

5. Grede

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 1. Diagram of Processing of Oxidized Nickel Ore at the Pohuzhskiy

Key:

Nickel Plant

Tube rotary furnace
Bucket car

Ore heating furnace
Ladle with aolten soda
Slag car

Converter with "acid"
lining

Converter with "basic"
lining

Ladle with aolten soda

Casting Inchine
Ore

Lieestone
Anthracite dust

 

13.
16.
15.
16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
26.

Magnetic separation residue
Sand

Crushed rock

Slag

Ferronickel

Magnetic concentrate and
secondary waste

Slag to building materials
production

Soda slag

Magnetic separation
Magnetic concentrate to
converters

Slag residue to ore storage

Oxytcn

It is important to note that the content of trace inpurities in the terro-
nickel which are harmful for steel-aking (Sn, Sb. Pb. Zn. and other!) is
two thirds to half that in grade 1 steel scrap utilised in steel-aking.

At the present time the following, in percentages. is being recovered iron

ore refined into ferronickel at PNZ: 85 Ni, ~70 Co and 50 Fe.

Nickel

recovery is sore than 102 (aha.) higher than at Ural plants smelting ore

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

into aatte. An estimate of comprehensiveness of utilisation is given for
the average ccnposition of vnz oxidised nickel ore (Table 2) for two cases:

snslting of this ore into ferronickel and matte process smelting. obtaining
eetellic nickel and cobalt.

Table 2. Results of Calculation of Comprehensiveneaa of Utilisation of
Ore at P“:

mavens"

Outlaw-an .. .... .. as as 10 13a

 

Key:
1. Process variants 6. Production of refined ferro-
2. Recovery nickel
3. Comprehensiveness of ore 5. Production of metallic nickel
utilisation. 1 and cobalt
6. Production of foundry ferro-
nickel

 

Installation of an efficient dust-trapping system was provided at PNZ.
Tube furnace gases are dry-cleaned. while gases from the electric fur-
naces and converters are scrubbed. Tube furnace dust is return-cycle.
Table 3 contains figures on the gas scrubbing system employed on the

principal metallurgical equipment. their present achieved uorking ef-
ficiency. and composition of waste gases.

In all cases gases ejected into the atmosphere contain less than 0.3 g/nm3 of par-
tinhncs.whicb is lower than the maximum allowed by health standards.

The plant operates with fully recirculating water supply and has two

water cycles: conditionally pure. and dirty. In the first cycle (85! of
the entire water balance) water used to cool the conponents of metallurgi-
cal furnaces and installations (cooling water jackets and coolers of
electric furnaces, electrostatic sprayers and tuyeres of converters.

oxygen station equipment) is cooled in a cooling tower prior to recycling and
is subjected to chemical softening and stabilization. The second cycle
services the wet scrubbing systems. All water contaminated by nickel-con-
taining dust is collected and sent to a thickener. The upper dreinoff from
the thickener, after cooling in the cooling tower. is recycled. The lower
drainoff is clarified in settling ponds and then cooled, while solid sus-
pended msttsr is collected in these ponds and periodically (once every

34
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. PM Gas Scrubbing Systems and areaical Composition of Gases
Bjocted Into the Atmosphere from the Principal Metallurgical

Equipment

 

    
 

l

 
  

l...- ”.7

m
III- esp
3...”.2311‘331‘.

     

 

 

.s-m 04-». a.”
-:3 canton-saunas were“. a mans-emu sew-s.
Key:
1. Metallurgical equipment 7. Electric smelting furnaces
2. Gas scrubbing process 8. "Acid“ refining stage con-
3. Gas scrubbing efficiency. 1 verters
5. Composition of gases. 2* 9. "Basic" refining stage con-
5. 802 (according to figures verters
of the State Scientific lO. Cyclone dust separators,
Research Institute for In- electrostetic precipitstors
dustrial and Health Gas ll. Sprinkler-containing gas
Purification) duct, vet scrubber. turbulent
6. Tube furnaces gas scrubber, steam trap

12. Sprinkler-containing gas duct.
turbulent gas scrubber, steam

P— trap
In the numerator - concentration in-

terval. in the denominator - average
values

—-——-————_

2 or 3 years) removed. in the suuer. and fed to the start of the process
to be refined together with ore. Thanks to the closed water circulation
cycle. additional fresh water is required (7.1: of total consumption) only
to replace evaporation losses.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Elimination of discharge of harmful pollutants into the air and water made
it possible to locate the plant in the center of a settled, fertile fare-
ing area. Since the plant has been in operation there has not been recorded
a single instance of adverse effect by the metallurgical production on the
ecology of the plant's environment. '

The work force at PNZ. together with specialists from the Gipronikel' In-
stitute, have expended a considerable effort to increase metal recovery
end to develop a waste-free technology.

Study of the nickel requirements of the nation's economy led to the neces-
sity of designing end installing a process for producing new grades of
ferronickel with increased carbon. silicon and chromium content, and cor-
respondingly increased the number of customers. It is preferable to utilize
carbon ferronickel to produce a large number of grades of low-and medium-
slloy steels, while foundry ferronickel is extensively employed in machine
tool building for producing high-quality iron castings (see Table l).

The process for producing new kinds of ferronickel has made it possible
either partially or totally to eliminate oxygen conversion and acidification
and requires only additional soda treatment. This results in a 7-202 in-
crease in recovery of iron and a 0.6-1.1 increase in nickel and cobalt
recovery, and in addition operating costs are reduced. Utilization of
silicon, carbon and chromium sharply increases the comprehensiveness of

ore processing (see Table 2), which reaches almost 762 with utilization of
ferronickel to produce foundry metal.

Efficiency of production at rat has improved substantially since installation
of the process for refining secondary nickel-containing metallic waste in
oxygen converters. The process takes place sutogenously with the excess
heat in the acid-stage converters, heat generated by the oxidation of
silicon and chromium. from 95 to 962 oi the nickel and more than 702 of
the iron is recovered as comedity output. The volume of processing of
secondary materials can reach 352 of the crude ferronickel by weight with-
out disturbing process conditions. In practical terms consumption of
secondary metal waste has steadily decreased from 1973 through 1977 (from
22.5 to 7.92). and the plant sees substantial reserve potential in this
regard. we must note that in processing such nickel-containing waste in
matte converters at other nickel enterprises, the iron is entirely lost.

A magnetic separation unit was installed and put into operation at the

plant in 1977 for final recovery of ferronickel inclusions trapped in con-
verter and soda slags (Figure 2).

The magnetic concentrate. recovered with the aid of a magnetic disk, over-
head electromagnet and an electromagnetic sheave, contains 1-32 N1 + Co and
is returned to the converters for processing. while the separation rejects
are utilized in ore electrosmelting. replacing a portion of the limestone.
The introduction of magnetic separation and complete cycling of converter
and soda slags made it possible to increase start-to-finish recovery of

36
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

1

 

Figure 2. Converter Slsg ﬂsgnetic Seperetion Process Diegree

Key:
1. Slsg 7. lisgnstic product
2. Jew crusher 8. Roll crushing slit
3. Overhead electronsgnet 9. Screen
6. Metal screp 10. Blectroesgnetic dru-
S. loathed-roll crusher ll. Magnetic products
6. Electronegnet sheeve 12. Rejects

 

Ni 4- Go by 1.0: end to reduce irrecovereble losses of these netels by 0.81.
At the present tine full-scele testing is in progress on finel processing

of a portion of aolten converter slegs in electric ore seelting furnsces,
bypessing eegnetic eeperstion.

In 1977 the plent begsn production of construction crushed rock end send of
electric melting veste slsgs. Slegs conteining 0.06% Ni, 10: Fe. 522 $102
and 22% Geo in eolten fora ere hsuled to the sleg yard. As it cools down.
the slag layer is sprinkled with aster. which csuses it to creek end split,
so thet the pile csn be worked with excevetors. Jew crushing end screening
the slag produces good-quelity crushed rock for roed construction. con-
i‘oreing to 0081' 5578—65. snd send. The neterisl is of the following site:
-70+40 en; ~40+20 u: ~20+5 an. end -S I. Since this unit went into opers-
tion ell sleg produced in electric ore seelting hes been utilized. follow-

ing processing. in construction. Since thet ties the production process st
PNZ hss been precticelly totelly veste-free.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R ONICIAL USE ONLY

Hiniaei required capital outlaye helped achieve ouch a rapid incorporation
of eiag proceeeing with a comparatively eiuple equip-eat and proceae
arrange-ant.

According to atudiee conducted at the Leningrad Conatruction Bnginaering In-
etitute and confined by the operating perforaanca of a aeai-full-ecale
unit with an output capacity of 80 tone per day. tenant of grades 160-200
in obtained when the aleg ie ground to -0.05 I and with the addition of
15-202 activating agent (portland talent. line, etc). Approxinately
600.000 tone of cement can be produced annually froa PNZ elege. At the ease
tile remaining ferroniclrel inclueione can be recovered by nagnetic or air
eeparation in the proceae of grinding the elege.

work ie to be continued in the following areaa in order to achieve further
increaee in the coeprehenaiveneae of utilization of raw uteriale and to
increaae plant profitability:

increau in iron recovery. primarily by increeeing the percentage
there of foundry farronickal production;

the eearch for vaya to obtain ueeful eaployeent of cobalt contained
in the ferronickel;

organization of ceaent production based on electric nelting elage;
recovery of ferronickel inclueiona from the elage.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATEL'STVO "MWYA". "ram MALLY", 1978

302:.
050: 1021

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mum

uoc: 669.33.052
posses Ol’ VALUABLB OONSTHUBN‘I’S IN 60?sz 821'!ch REDUCED
Moscow TSVBTNYYB METALLY in Russian No 12. Dec 1978 pp 19-21

[Article by N. P. Shubin: "bosses of Valuable Couponents Reduced at
uralelektroeed' Oosbine"l

[Text] A campaign to reduce losses of valuable conponents at all stages

of production. nore conprehensive utilization of raw naterials and develop-
ment of production without waste has becone one of the leading trends in
efforts to inprove the econosic effectiveness of this enterprise.

Efforts by the codine's work force are concentrated in the following areas.

lsprovesent in the process of beneficiation of Guneshevskaya ore. At the
end of 1976, after the ore was played out at the Pyshninskiy Nine. the

concentration mill was fully converted over to processing of Guneshevskaya
ore. which sharply differs in character fro. the ore previously processed.

The people at the cod’ine. working together with scientists fro: the
Uniproned' Institute. designed end in 1977 incorporated an isproved process
of concentrating Gunishevskaya ore under full water cycling conditions.

The diegrs- in Figure 1 includes bulk flotation. fining of bulk concentrate.
with subsequent separation of copper and iron sulfides end Isgnetic separa-
tion of bulk flotation residue.

Following are the ore flotation reagent and process figures:

Size yield - 0.075 -. percentage of ore . . . .. . . . . . .60-65
Size yield - 0.074» -. percentage of bulk concentration . . . . . . . . . . .85-90
lutyl xanthate consuuption. g/ t:
bulk rougher flotation . . . . .. . .. . .3540
ch.ck (10“c1m .00....0000060000025.”
copper check flotation . . . . . . . . . . . 8-10
Foaming agent consumption. g/ t:
bulk rower flotation . . .. .... ....l$-20
ChCCk f1°‘.t1°n sesossseoeessseooe 5.10

Line consusption on copper concentrate second cleaning flotation. kg/t...6-S

 

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

 

Figure 1.

Key:
1. Ore 10.
2. Grinding 11.
3. Bulk flotation 12.
6. Concentrate 13.
5. Reoidue 16.
6. Pirst cleaning flotation 15.
7. Magnetic separation 16.
8. Hasnetite concentrate 17.
9. Final rejects 18.

60

Guneshevskaya Ore Concentration Process Flow Diagram

Second cleaning flotation
Mine backfilling

Bulk concentrate

Vining

Copper rougher flotation
Check flotation

Residue (pyrite concentrate)

Concentrate (intermediate product)
Copper concentrate

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

In order to increase extraction of iron from bulk flotation residue, an
improved PBH-PP-90/ZSO separator (with senicounterflow bath) was instalied
in place of the existing PEN-2 magnetic separators.

During the period of testing the new process arrangement. the following
were obtained fron ore containing 1.15: copper, up to 72 sulfur and 31
fe304: copper concentrate with 22.61 copper. with 88.25% copper recovery;
pyrite concentrate with recovery of ’50! S. and iron concentrate. with
recovery of >612 Pe.

If we consider that the mill's final rejects are used as cheap nine backfill
material. the existing process of concentration of Guesshevskaya ore may
constitute a positive example in the development of waste-free production.
The process was adopted without capital outlays and without substantial
rearrangement of equipment. which nade it possible to put the new process
into operation in a very short period of tine.

Setting up production of refined nickel sulfate. Prior to adoption of
the new process. in the production of copper sulfate nickel was recovered
in copper-nickel salts and crude nickel sulfate, which were shipped to
nickel plants in the form of production process railings.

The people at the cosbine came up with a process of obtaining cosmercial
nickel sulfate of grades NB-l and "8-0, according to COST 2665-73, fro-

crude crude nickel sulfate containing (percentages): 18 Ni; 0.5 Cu; 0.1 Fe;
0s2 "280‘s

The process of obtaining refined nickel sulfate (Figure 2) includes the
following: washing out crude nickel sulfate from sulfuric acid, dissolving

it (concentration Ni 100-110 g/l), cleaning copper and iron from the

solution with separated chalk. and solution filtration. Cake fro. the
filters, conposition, in percentages: 9.0 Ni; 0.5 Cu; 0.1 Fe; 80 (CeOO3+
Ca05)) is shipped to nickel plants. and the refined solution. following
acidification with sulfuric acid to a concentration of 2-5 g/1. is evaporated
(nickel concentration 200 gll), crystallized (at 26-28’0) and, following
centrifuge separation from the mother liquor. is shipped to the customer.

The mother liquor (120-135 g/l Ni), after 20 cycles, is flame-evaporated to
obtain nickel salts. which are shipped to nickel plants. Colmercial produc-
tion of refined nickel sulfate began in 1978.

Adoption of an installation for processing refining furnace cobbings by the
flotation method. Formerly copper and the noble metals in refining furnace
cobbings were shipped as production waste to copper smelters for further
processing.

Recovery of copper and noble metals from the cobbings was unsatisfactory,

particularly in processing refractory chrome-magnesite cobbings.es a
result of difficulty in earketing them.

61
FOR Offlctkb USE ONLY
I08 0F?IC!AL USE ONLY

 

Vigure 2. Process Flow Diagra- for Obtaining Refined Nickel Sulfete

Key:
1. Crude nickel sulfate 10. Acidification
2. Hashing ll. Evaporation
3. Condensate. steam. air 12. Crystallization
6. Dissolvins 13. Centrifugation

5. Separated chalk. steel, sir lb. Nickel sulfate

6. Copper and iron resoval 15. Mother liquor

7. Filtration l6. Plane Evaporation
8. Cake for nickel plents 17. Nickel salts

9. Solution

 

The people at the conbine designed and instslled a system of concentrating
refining furnace cohbings by the flotation Isthod (Iigure 3).

62
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 3. Proc... Viou Di.gr.- of Conc.ntr.tion of R.Eining Ehrn.ce Cobbing.

Key:
1. Cobbing. 6. Conccntrot.
2. Crushing .nd grinding 7. Ci..ning flototion
3. Pirot copper rougher 8. chcck flot.tion
flotation 9. Copp.r conc.ntr.t.
b. R..idu. 10. Pinol rejoct.
5. Second copper roughor
flotation

 

Following are cobbing. Elot.tion rcogent and procoo. figurcoz

Size yteld — 0.07‘ I, : .o.............7$
autyl x.nth.t. conou-ption. g/tx
first rougher flototion ..............240
.ccond rougher flotction .............180
cmck (lot.t1°n C...............I.I...120
Pin. oil conounption. glt:
f‘f“ 1’00;th flu.” "on ..............‘s
.CCOM {ouwet ‘10:.6‘0“ o............30
Check (10“:ton .0................o...30
Line concu-ption in firct rougher
flot‘tton. s/t .0....o........o.......l-z

when the cobbing. concontrotion proc... an. in full operation. ch. obtoinod
copp.r conc.ntr.t. cont.in.d >251 cu with r.cov.ry of >901 Cu.

R.fining furnace cobbing. .r. pr..cnt1y b.ing procc..cd .6 ch. plant on .
r.gui.r b..i.. .nd th.y .r. .djuoting the proc... to optimal conc.ntr.tion

63
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

ﬁgure A. Kednogorek Converter 81a; Concentration Proceae

It :
ey 1. Slag 9. Butyl xanthate, 20 alt.

2. Three-ate” crushing pine oil 20 g/t

3. Grinding 10. Second copper rougher flota-

lo. Siting tion

5. Butyl xenthate. 100 s/t 11. Pirat recleanins

6. Pine oil. 30 slt 12. Second recleanins

7. Pint copper rougher 13. Hagnetic aeparation
flotation 16. Copper concentrate

8. Concentrate fining 15. Iron concentrate

16. Iinal rej ecta

 

conditione. At the aane tine they are atudying waya to proceea other
metallurgical vaete naterial by the flotation lethod.

Adoption of all the ehove-emnerated neaanrea at the coﬁine haa nade it pooo
aihle to achieve excellent indicea in ore concentration. to net up addi-
tional production of pyrite concentrate. to increaae finiehed topper yield,
and to aet up production of refined nickel aulfate.

At the present tine aavinga of nore than 600,000 rublea have been achieved
tron adoption of theee neaeurea. and aavinp will increaae to 800.000 rubles

when equip-at to obtain refined nickel anlfate. etc in producing at (all
designed capacity.

6‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
I’OI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of interest are the reeulte of full-ecaie teata on Mednogorek converter

ales concentration by the flotation method (Piaure 6), conducted in 1966
at the Pyehee Concentration Hill.

A. a reault of these full-ecale teete, 765 tons of ale; wee proceeaed, con-
taining (percentages): l.5 Cu: 2.2 8: 45.5 Fe.

when the eieg was ground to 882 eize 0.076 an. and with a hutyi xenthete
coneueption of 120 alt and pine oil conaunption of 50 alt. they obtained
a copper concentrate containing 12: Cu, with 72: copper recovery. and iron
product (without recleenins) et 50.32 Fe, with 62.22 recovery.

It uould evidently be expedient to proceee loceily, at concentretion lillo.
eeteliursicel production ueete of thie type on hend at enterprieeu.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO "HBTALLURGIYA", "TOVETNYYB HBTALLY”, 1978

3026
080: 1821

65
FOR OFPICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MALLUROY

UDC: “9.7158621.”

EFFECTIVENESS OP ”FIRING IN AN HID nova!
lbecow 13m run-mt in Ruaaian No 12. Dec 78 pp 66-68

[Article by n. l. londarev. I. V. Shvetaov, and V. n. hiahchenko: "In-
veatigation of Bffectiveneae of Refining in an mo Trough")

[Text] Degeaaing of nalte ie extenaively eaployed for obtaining eeai-
finiahed producta of aluninula alloye. however, etatic (without forced
lining) degaaaing of large quantities of natal in e nixer ie insufficiently
effective aa a reault of the effect of netalloatatic preaaure.

hploynent of active mixing of a nelt during degassing in a nixer nakea it
poeeible to achieve a auhetantial decreaae in poroeity voluae. In partic-
ular. typical poroeity valuea VP in 01 alloy 5‘0 - die-eter ingota are

equal to 0.2-0.3, and no appreciable decreaee in gee content (G) in ohaerved.

The reaulte of an inepection of ingota coat with eaploylent of etatic
degaaaing (nunerator) and with refining by traditional aethoda (denoainator)
ere ea followa:

“’W.... .. ... .y

(2) f. “0,...'~‘... .0“ .e.’ '9'. w
(3) When a m m m "
$.31... . M m 1." I.“

' 33‘ m 37" T3!

Key:
1. Macroetructure. pointa 3. Ultxaeonic oecillationa attenuation
2. c. «2/100 g fator. db/ca

 

Mixing takee place not ao auch due to an increaee in the aaea tranafer of
hydrogen during love-eat toward the aurface by the lower layere of the aelt
ae it occura ea e result of flotation of oxide inclueione containing
hydrogen bubblea of a negative radiua of curvature. M a conaequence of
non cauhte renewal of oxides. which include Iolecular hydrogen. in a eherp
decraeae in poroeity voluae ae e reeult of conaiderebly decreaaing the nuher
of cent-a of pore generation.

66

FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It was previously shown that in the process of static degassing. oxide
inclusions are "activated" in the lower layers of the taelt,1 that is.
molecular hydrogen is released in the capillary channels of nonnatallic in-
clusions. This takes place under conditions of reduced pressure and the
decrease in hydrogen solubility caused by it. to values lower than gas
content in the inVestigated melt body. A conperison of hydrogen (ll) content.
porosity a and grain size (d) of ingots obtained with employment of
traditions refining methods in e uniting-casting unit. static degassing

in a eixer and degassing with forced sixing with a gas-dynamic poop

(60") confine the phenonenon of "activation" of oxides in a salt during
degassing (see table).

Quality of 540 - Diameter 01 Alloy lngots Refined by Different Hethods
(typical values)

 

Key:
1. Refining 6. Sane. with gas-dynastic puep
2. Traditional mining
3. Static degassing 5. Points

 

One ioportant consequence of "activation" of oxides is appearance in the
salt of additional pore forsation centers. which leads to a decrease in

the critical hydrogen 4“ :‘ent values. below which porosity does not develop.
with an identical volume of porosity in degassed setal. it is essential to
achieve higher degrees of gas removal than in undegassed natal. Porosity

of undegassed setal proves to be somewhat greater than degassed setal with
identical hydrogen content. it would seem expedient2 to perform refining

in such a sanner that additional centers of pore generation do not fore in
the aetel. Dispersed oxides remaining in the salt, which do not contain
solecular hydrogen. behave during hot working as noml intermetallide solid

phases. and defects are not for-ed in the ingots and in deformed semi-
manufactures.

One of the possible ways to improve the quality of castings and deforeed
sesisanufactures is refining in an ehd trough with eeployuent of metallic
gas absorbers and suitilayer filtration through gauze filters. for con-
perison with other refining 'methods we cast 5‘0 - diameter ingots of m.
alloy at a rate of 26 III/sin at 700%: (ingot mold height 180 I) with the
selt processed in an mhd trough (Pigure l). A gas absorber was placed in

the trough channel. following degassing. the melt is filtered throudl e
gauae filter. .

In
roe orncut use can
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

 

Pigure i. Ingot Ceeting Diegru

Key:
1. hixer with eelt Io. Spout with filtering device
2e HID trough Se IMO‘ ”1d
3. Peeeege with degeeeing 6. lngot

___dexi.te

The neit nee prepared in e gee furnece. treeted with (luau in en electric
nixer. fod through the Ihd trough peeeege into e epout end then through I
epour plug into e dietribution ecreen eitueted in the ingot hold. The neit'e
letelloetetic heed et the level of the epout. provided by the Ihd trough.

rune to 0.5 I. The trough peeeege conteine e degeeeing device. the prin-
cipel couponent of which ie e getter.

e - reletive elongetion
end reduction.
6 - epecii’ic viecoeity:
( ) -- refining
by treditionel eerhode:
(m) — refining in

ended trough;
o - 6,4: - o

 

 

ﬂ 0. “I d”
‘1'

Figure 2. inﬂuence of Refining in en HID Trough on Pleeticity of lngote
____gg_neveted ‘l'eepereturee

m ‘
roe omcm. use om
FOR iii-'FICIM. IliiH (WIN

A peculiarity of the dynamics of movement of the melt in an inclined mhd
trough lies in the fact that the lower layers of the melt in the trough are
displaced upward by means of electromagnetic forces. while the upper layers
displace downward under the effect of gravity; this intensifies interaction
between melt and getter due to repeated contact. Redistribution of hydrogen
between molten metal and getter ensures extremely low and hydrogen content
in the melt. The achieved degree of degassing can be varied across a broad
range by the quantity of getter and its surface area. At the same time, as
hydrogen passes from the melt into the getter, the latter partially dissolves,
with its content in the melt increasing to 0.012. The degassed melt. under
a metallostatic head up to 0.5 m. enters the filter device. the principal
component of which is a double-layered gauze filter with 0.6 x 0.6 mm mesh.
The results of comparative examinations of ingots attest to the high ef-
fectiveness of refining in an shd trough:

nun——

 

(l) Nos-Wan [Mime-menu. m. 0.92. it “sternum. (6)
(2) I’m-III... .1”:.'." a—o OJ-OJ ltraaosasumusoaepu(7)
3) lurk-nu {fa-$3- I 0.1-0.3 'ausmpssmru‘yaassss (8)
0 - . - . . a . .
‘153.5ax.§.?5:§£é’:5§a1?"m3§”-M'“"333"? ..... w -.
Key:
1. Refining 6. Mscrostructure
2. Traditional 7. Large-grain zones
3. In an dud trough 8. Uniform. globular
6. Points 9. 1 point - no etching; 5 points ..
5. Relative maximum etching

10. The numerator contains results of
determining hydrogen by the first
bubble method, and the denominator -
by the vacuum heating method

 

One important feature of degamclng with a metallic getter is the removal

of hydrogen without its transition to a molecular state. which excludes the
possibility of "activation" of oxide particles and an increased tendency

of the melt toward vaporization. No porosity was detected with deep etch-

ing of test imots. A no less significant advantage of this method '5 the
fact that one obtains a uniform structure which does not require the em-
ployment of additional modification with master alloys. The getter, dissolving
in the melt. gradually passes into the crystalliring ingot. mus there oc-

curs continuous modification of the melt. which has greater effectivenesz.
than modification in the furnace and mixer.

in plastic characteristics, at hot working temperature (Figure 2a. b), in-
gots with refining in an dud trough possess a clear superiority over
traditional methods of refining. The increase in plasticity is connected
not only with a decrease in gas content but also removal of oxide inclusions
during filtration through a double 0.6 x 0.6 mm glass gauze filter.

A9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Summarizing the above. we can note that refining in an mhd trough by the
getter degassing method and multilayer filtration is a promising trend
in seeking to solve the problem of increasing metal purity. Refining in
an d1d trough is equal in effectiveness to degassing in e mixer and can
be recon-ended for extensive con-erciel adoption.

FOOTNOTES
1. B. I. Bondarev. I. V. Shvetsov, G. V. (merepok, et al, in the book
"Hetellovedeniye i tekhnologiya legkikh splevov" [Physical Metallurgy
and Technology of Light Alloys], Moscow, Naulte, 1976, pp 24-29.

2. V. I. Yakovlev, G. A. Belakhontaev, B. I. Bondarev, et a1. TSVBTNYYB
METAL“, No 1, 1974, pp 64-67.

COPYRIGHT: IZDATBL'STVO “METALLURGIYA", "'l‘eVB‘l‘NYYE METALLY“, 1978

3026
C80: 1821

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'IﬁTMMIlRK [NU iii)" I I’HEN‘I‘

FIRST ALL-UNION CONFERENCE ON PRODUCT RELIABILITY
Moscow Vili’ROSY EKONOMiKi in Russian No 1. Jan 79 p 27

[Article by V. Logachev: "Reliability of Manufacturing Processes and Im-
provement of Product Quality"!

l‘i‘cxtl The First All-Union Scientific-Technical Conference on the Problem
of Reliability of Production Complexes (using the machine building branches
as an example) was held in Ufa in September 1978. organized by the All-Union
Council of Scientific and Technical Societies. the USSR Council of Ministers
State Oomittee on Standards. the USSR Ministry of liigher and Secondary
Specialized Education. the Bashitir CPSU Oblast Cosmittee, the Central Board
of the Scientific-Technical Society of the Machine Building industry, and
the liaahkir Oblast Council of Scientific-Technical Societies, at the Ufa
Aviation institute imeni S. 0rdshoniitidse.

Pam-Hi on the following topics were discussed at the conference: forming of
quality and reliability indicators for products and manufacturing processes;
reliability of a production complex as a complex dynamic system; standardiza-
tion in the area of reliability of production systems; comprehensive evalua-
tion of level of technological reliability; methods of quality and reliabili-
ty control; metroiogical aspects of.the problem of reliability, etc.

The “Principal Directions of Development of the USSR National Economy in
1976-1980" and the lav "On the State Plan of Development of the USSR National
Economy in ”76-1980" devote considerable attention to improving product
quality and reliability and increased production efficiency. Production
ran-plexus. which are designated for manufacture of products at all stages,
should ensure stable formation of all product paraseters, that is. possess
a high degree of reliability. Soviet science and production have achieved
rci’lnln results in ensuring reliability of technological or production com-
plexes. Advanced manufacturing processes are extensively utilised. various
types of control and monitoring of production are used to improve quality
and stability of manufacturing processes. and automated production control
system as well as comprehensive product quality control systems are being
incorporated. New areas have been developed: evaluation of technological

reliability of equipment. strengthening technology. and technological suc-
tension.

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

Nevertheless such still releins to be done in this area. The manufacturing
process as a cosplex dynasic systes has not been exasined f role the position
of reliability. There is a lack of eethods of optisieetion of this process.
and frequently costs rise when securing a high degree of reliability of
manufactured producta. Methods of determining standards and predicting
reliability indices for process equipment have been insufficiently elaborated.
aethodu of testing production coaplexes have been standardized. and there is
no elaborated systea of eanufecturing process reliabil‘lry control.

The conference considered the following essential for successful accosplish-
nent of the tasks of speeding up scientific and technological progress and
on this basis increasing productivity. improving quality and reliability of
sachine building products: in detersining principal directions in the area
of increasing reliability of production complexes. a recon-endation should
be given to the USSR Acadeay of Sciences, USSR Council of hinisters State
(iomittce on Standards and the State (Do-ittee of the USSR Council of
Ministers on Science and Technolosy. branch ainistries and agencies to per-
form research studies for the purpose of optimal resolution of scientific
and technical probless in the area of reliability; it should be race-ended
that the USSR Council of Hinisters State Cos-ittee on Standards draft
directive saterials and methods recon-endatione determining elaboration and
adoption of standards on reliability of production complexes in uchinc
building. Branch ministries and agencies, base organisations and leading
institutes. with participation of reliability services at enterprises and
scientific-technical society organizations should be instructed to drau up
a set of standards and technical-standards docueents pertaining to calcula-
tion and evaluation of the reliability of production cosplexes in develop-
ing new manufacturing processes and operations: optisization of engineering
decisions on the basis of criteria of reliability of production coaplexes
and product reliability; production coeplex reliability control; prediction
of reliability of manufacturing process equiplent and production coeplexes;
evaluation of the physicochelicsl state and stresses on surface layers of
aachine parts; standardization of tests for reliability of production com-
plexes; strain hardening in sachine building; collection and processing of

intonation on operational reliability of production coaplexes and produced
itals. etc.

comment: ladatcl'stvo "Pravda". "Voprosy eitononihi". i979

3021:
(250: "$21

$2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY