I I
THE THIRD IIIW’: ITRLV’S NEH POLITICRL MD
16 JRNUBRV 1979 1 OF 1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 5/8224
16 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 5/79)
THE 'THIRD WAY': ITALY'S NEW POLITICAL ROAD

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010031-5
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
U are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
motion was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PROCUREMENT 0? run. NATIONS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recommended that the .1983 number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Regrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, 0.5. Government Printing Office, Washington, n.c.
201002.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available through Bell a Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster, Ohio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
I.“ N a
-l0

s "It

     
  

_ 3. Recipient's Accession No.
pe

is January 1979

I. seducing chesluuue kept.
o.

    
      
     
     
    
   
 
   
 
    
   
 
       
  
         
    
       

TRANSLATIONS 0“ WESTERN EUROPE. (POUO 5/79)
The 'Third way': Italy's New Political Road

. Paloma. ngaaiulles Nuns and Adana

Joint Publications Raseerch Service
1000 North Globe Road ,
Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

 

  

n Swami-g ngseluuea Nae: and Ada".

As above

I9. Supple-term News

. Absuacu

  

The serial report contains political/economic intonation on west Europeen
energy. finance and trade policy utters es well es developnents and trends
in the doctrine, programs and prohlene of the ujor commist parties.

including their relations with cos-mist parties outside the Nest Buropean
area. '

   

  

. ry 'ﬂdl and

 

ecu-eat Analysis. e. Demipms

    
       
     
     
    

Political Science _lnternstione1 Affeirs _Luxenbourg
Sociology _Austria ___Netherlends
Propaganda _lelgiu _Nolvay
Econoeics _Canada _Portugal
Energy _cyprus __Spain

Industry _0enmark _5veden

‘rrade _Pinland _Svitzerlend
Finance _Prance _‘l'urkey

___0reece _Unired Kingdom

Iceland west Gemny

Litaly

"L Heuilicte/Opeeoteded Tens

      
 
 
   
     

m. cwnraumm 5c, 50, 10
l Availabiluy Staten-C

For official Use Only.
Li-itcd Nut-her of Copies Available From JPRS.

  
 

   

21. No. oi Pogo

0..“ 10'0"” II‘V. 0"" ‘1'” '0‘“ MAY as .FP‘WC‘D A UICOWOC NIH-"l
TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(POUO 5/79)

THE 'THIRD HAY': ITALY'S New Pouncau. ROAD

Coursurs

ITALY

Philosophical, Ideological Precepts of the "lhird way‘
(Various sources. various dates) ................

Definition of "third Hay', by Alberto Asor Rosa
Analysis of "Ihird llay'. by Lucio Colletti
Socialist Perspective. by Francesco De Martino
Norberto Bobbio Controversial Viewpoint, by

Norberto Bobbio
Ilplications for Social Deoocrecy, by Norberto Bobbio
Social Denocratic Response. by Giuseppe Saragat
Ugo La mm Interview, by Pausto De Luca
Eugenio Scslfsri Editorial

Leftist Scholars Search [a "third way' to Economic Recovery
(L'EUROPEO, various dates) ...

The-es of "third Hay'
'Socialist Hodel' Controversy
Socialists Versus the South
New 'Idea' of Socialis-
,_
Party Leaders Assess "third Hay' to Economic Recovery
(II. SOLE-2k ORE, various dates) ..

Fabrisio Cicchitto, PSI. Pabririo Cicchitto Interview
Pietro Longo, PSDI, Pietro bongo Interview

Luciano Berca. Pct. Luciano aarca Interview

Valerio Zenone, PLI, Valeria Zanone Interview

Ugo La Halts, PRI, Ugo La Halts Interview

Piero lessetti, Dc. Piero Bassetti Interview
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

PKIIDSOPRICAL, IDBOWGICAL "ROMS 01’ m 'I'HIRD HAY'
Definition of "third Hay'
Rout LA 32903311“ in Italim 23 Aug 78 p t
[Article by Alberto Aeor Rose: “Between berlinguer and Craxi..."]

[Text] The inportance of the interview given by Enrico Berlinguer to

LA “mum hes not yet been fully evaluated. heny prefer to set: the PC!
[Italien Co-Iunist Party} for an accounting in purely ideologicel terns.
deeending e little lore or a little less lenieise. an the case nay be. as
if—for a big neas organization. which hes a long history behind it and
which today hea southing like 1.7 million eaters—an ideological revie-
ion were something that could be done by having a group of intellectuals
eit down around e little table or by none of edicts fro- its central
co-ittee. rather than a proceae of continuous traneforlation through a
controntation with reality and with other political forcee.

He s .apect that the fact that the debate keeps slipping back to that ebetrect
“GOA081C‘1 terrain is one way of pushing aside the noet inportant and the
newest political aepecte oi Berlinguer's reeerke which. in my opinion, are
above ell two. 1. The state-cut pertaining to the strategy of the histori-
cal coeproniee which is defined es the effort to create a coherent demcrstic
conetitutional ironwork within which-wetter the clinination of the prejudice
ageinet ednitting the commute into the country'e gourmet-diverse
political and sociel forcee could completely recite their respective parts,
ﬁxing and unnaking elliancea according to their poesibilitiee end according
to logic. within a contut of national solidarity. The suspicion to the
effect thet the historical conpro-iee would signify a privilepdelliance.
within the edninietrstion as such, between the PC! end the ac [Christian
Dnocretic Petty] thus can be ruled out. A hietoricel and criticel look
back at the past, which. as in all aditioue speechee. serves to revive

eleo a long-range strategy, within which the "third solution“ and "uro-
Coa-unise“ are closely tied together.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this way. Berlinguer at the same time again proposed the most urgent issue
(the issue of the administration as such) and the most long-lasting and most
significant issue (the prospects as to what comes after. the Judgement on
capitalism. the idea of how socialism can be shaped up specifically on the
basis of the political and social processes currently under way). And he
again proposed these issues in a problematical and open fashion. something
which is rather unusual among our politicians. something that looks like

the nicest invitation to open a serious debate on all of the basic issues

of left-wing pa] tries in Italy and Europe.

I confess that I am still rather startled by the reactions from a portion of
the present socialist leadership group to the Berlinguer interview. For any-
body who. as I do (and I will try to explain that better later on), can see
the full importance of the socialist issue. it is cause for growing perplexity
and preoccupation to discover that there is a tendency underway to resolve

the most serious and profound ideological and strategic problems with gestures
of intolerance and ostentatious downgrading. It is however comforting to
know that many voices of socialist intellectuals have been raised in an effort
to view the Berlinguer interview in the only serious wsy possible-which is

to discuss it; I might be permitted at this point to recall that the wide

gap between cultural and theoretical debate, on the one hand, and practical
politics. on the other hand. is one of the most immediately recognizable

signs of moments of incipient crisis in the presence of the socialists in
Italy.

Berlinguer heavily emphasizes the peculiarity of the Italian situation and in
equal parts blames it on the political presence of the Catholics and that of
the communists ("in Italy we have a Catholic issue with absolutely peculiar
features and we also have a communist issue with just as peculiar features");
but. at the same time, we can see very well that the Italian communist strat-
egy for the development of democracy and the democratic transition to social-
ism assumes a precise historical meaning only within a "definitive European
choice" and becomes something more profound and something more lasting than
a simple tactic to resolve the congenital ills found in the Italian crisis.

Here we however have a problem which consists in the difficulty of placing
the "Italian peculiarity" within the European context where it runs the risk
of representing a highly circumscribed and particular situation, difficult
to generalize in political and perhaps also social terms. It suffices to
think here, on the one hand, of the rather more relative weight which a
Catholic issue has in Europe and, on the other hand, the theoretical and
political weakness of many of the forces which in western Europe call them-
selves communists. the most conspicuous among which, after the PCI-that is,
the PCP [French Communist Party]-is at this very time fighting a battle
against the expansion of the Common Market. under a slogan such as "Live in
Your Own Country," ”Produce Preach," which. behind the incredible chauvinism
and peasant attitude of this formula, seeks to conceal the almost absolute
lack of prospects.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

hy impr xssion is that. on the road of Buroco-unism. the Italian con-mists
are destined to run into the socialist issue in Europe. just as. by the way.
the European socialists. stepping down from Burope into Italy. will be in-

creasingly obligated to meet with and compare themselves to the PCI's Euro-
comaunism.

But this of necessity again. as far as the twists are concerned, brings
up the problem of the unity of the left. in a somewhat preliminary fashion.
and. hence. first of all. the problem of relations with the socialists. be-
cause. if these relationships do not work. if this unity is not brought about.
then the entire line of development of democracy and of the social forces as
well as the line of the conquest of power. as outlined by Berlinguer in his
interview. will be all tied up in knots. On that store one could very calmly
admit that the Italian co-nnists. over the past 2 years. have not always
been as clear as they should have been.

But there is no doubt. as some people have been saying for a number of years.
that relations with the socialists and possibly with all those forces of the
left. which are interested in the development of that dialog. will not make
any progress if they move within the short range of tactical solutions. no
matter how important they may be at the time.

This is the topic complex which herlinguer proposes, outlining for the
Italian comnist a search for a "third way." "which is demanded by the

impossibility of acquiescing in today's worldwide situation : a worldwide
situation, mind you. not just simply the Italian situation.

The simplest and most frequently repeated objection to that point in the

rasrks sade by berlinguer is that he is making a statement without giving
it any content. But is this weakness to be found in Enrico Berlinguer and
the Italian co-Inist alone or does it not extend to the entire Italian and

European left. to the point of becoming a distinctive feature of this his-
torical moment?

If ever, Berlinguer can talte the credit for having put his finger on it or,
if you prefer. for having pulled the skeleton out of the closet; but once
the problem has been stated clearly. why not honestly admit that we are
facing a vertical crisis in what Claudio Nepoleoni calls the highest system
and the demand for a global requalification of all of the traditions of the
left in the face of the problem of government power in Europe?

If it is true that we are in a transition phase. such a transition is cer-
tainly not first of all a transition from capitalism to socialism but rather
a transition from an insane and rather secular [centuries-old] political-
conceptual apparatus of analysis. judgements. categories. and values. to
another apparatus which is bound to be just as We and just as definite
and articulated but, in a certain way. different from the preceding one.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sonc socialist intellectuals. who becanc involved in the debate. revived the
idea of the project draft. I nus: say that I on not precisely thinking of
that when I an talking about the culture‘- and theoretical debate. The
(socialist and comnist) drafts have been presented to us but neither one
of then turned out well nor. in my opinion. could they turn out well: the
essence of the draft as a natter of fact does not consist in selecting a
series of guiding ideas according to generally tenable criteria. in collect-
ing then in a little book and than publishing than.

The "Manifesto" is less inportant than "analysis" and ”criticise" and it

still tones or should cone afterward. We are short of ideas as to our future
prospects and we are even deficient in the identification of values. not be-
cause we have little capacity for guesaing but because. in spite of everything.
we still know too little about the real ferns of governnent power. about the
way the econony works right now. about the tie-in between the terainology

and languages through which the diverse forces express themselves and gather
together-wand in response to every social explosion or economic crisis that
breaks out. we once again. all of us here. find ourselves expressing our
astonishment.

I will not be the one to deny the importance which the instrunents of the
respective (socialist and co-aunist) traditions can still furnish us: but
I an beginning to ask myself whether. in the long run. we eight not need a
store profound cultural revolution in order to express the needs which the
"third way." outlined by Berlinguer. necessarily introduces into the equa-
tion. On that day we will have to ask ourselves what the tern "left” eeans
in Europe.

Analysis of "third Hay'
Rome L'BSPRESSO in Italian 10 Sap 78 pp 10-13
[Article by Lucio Colletti: "Stop! You Cannot Cut Lenin's Beard Any More"]

[Text] 1. In October 1977, no more than 10 IO‘I'IUB ego. the newspapers pub-
lishcd the text of a letter free Berlinguer to the bishop of Ivrea. The
letter amounted the revision of Article 5 of the Charter at the coming

PCI congress. In addition, it contained a very significant statement of
principle. The PCP-Berlinguer declaredo-is not only a "lay" party but it ‘
is also a "nonideological" party. '
It is not always easy to interpret comnist documents. In this case, how-
ever, the assertion could not trigger any doubt. The PC! was not denying
Marxian. But it refused to accept it as its "ideological creed." It did

not entrust its identity to that but rather to the political program. Hith
respect to the ideologies. it had loved itself to a different plane.

I.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "SK ONLY

It was clear what the basic implications of the letter to the bishop of
Ivrea were going to be. This was more than just a revision on Marxism. It
was a profound modification of the nature of the Ce-aunist Party. On that
last point. as a matter of fact, it declared itself to be a "nonideological"
party and ideological creeds thus decline to a private matter. The party
behaves toward the ideologies the way the lay state behaves toward the
religion. It is above then and outside of them.

2. It seems to me that there is no doubt that the Berlinguer interview in
LA REPUBBLICA of 2 August marks not only a stop in that direction but a
definite step backwards. The interview undeniably represents a reaffirms-
tion of the Leninist nature of the PCI. Berlinguer declares here verbatim
"The lesson which Lenin taught us. in working out a true revolutionary
theory. seems to mate be entirely alive and valid." If one really believes
that all of this is compatible with the assertion as to the "nonideological"
nature of the PCT. then it will be necessary to rewrite the dictionary of
the Italian language, assigning a new meaning to all words.

I am just going to skip over the political motives behind this ”hardening"
(and on the benevolent lack of attention on the part of newspaper reporters
and comentators. in not wishing to stress it). The fact that seems to as
to be rather grave is not that the PCI is Leninist or non-Leninist. The
grave fact here is that from here on in we no longer understand anything.
Is the PCI Leninist or is it not Leninist? Is the party ideological or

is it nonideological? Anybody who wants to derive an answer to these ques-
tions from the various official documents will find this to be an impossible
job. The PCI enters and leaves ideology the way each of us steps into and
out of his bathtub in his own home. It is difficult to imagine how all of
this night be reflected in the minds of the simplest militants or what the
rink and file could conclude fron that. The one thing which, it seems to
me. is clear is that we are dealing here with a defect of democracy:
whether democracy also implies the duty to talk clearly and to make oneself
understood by the people.

3. The Berlinguer interview has produced a response from Craxi. Or, to

put it better, the "competitive" spirit displayed in recent tines by the

PSI [Italian Socialist Party] have produced berlinguer'a response; the
latter, in turn, produced a response from Crani. In the interview, Ber-
linguer-~in addition to reaaeerting the validity of Daimler-cue up with

a rather scornful evaluation of the "cultural confusionisn" of the socialists.
In replying to his. Craxi pointed up the other tradition of the worker move-
ment. the social denotrstic and social-liberal tradition, moreover adding

the criticism which the mate-burg woman and the lienshewiks levelled against
Leniniam.

Anybody else would have said: This is the way things usually are run. Not
sol Craxi did not quote Marx but instead quoted Proudhon. This indeed is
the end of the worldl Some people shouted about the mammission of the

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"nature" of the PSI. Some people said that Craxi had cut "the beard of the
prophet" and that he wanted to make an attempt upon the "peculiar" ideological
tradition of Italian socialism. Result: 10 months ago. the Pct could pro-
claim itself to be a ”nonideological" party; today. the PSI. which had not
been that for more than 20 years. instead must declare itself to be a 'Harxist”
party. These are the mysteries of Italian politics. Just 10 months ago, the
biggest leftwing parties tried to cast off the fetters of ideology; today,
the entire left is instead bubbling in that broth. Marx or Proudhon?

but these (fictitious) battles are not the real thing. be Martino rises in
defense of the Marxist foundation of the PSI. If our memory does not deceive
us. it was he who guided the PSI toward unification with the social democrat.
He was co-secretary of the unified party, together with Tanassi. Now nobody
realizes that this unification was brought about on that "foundation."

lo. The PCI cannot stand the ter- "social democracy." That is its privilege.
The only objection which one might raise once again here is this: if it
wanted to. it could understand. Well. let us see. The PCI accepts plural-
ism, the plurality of parties: not only of parties prepared to march toward
socialism, but also of those going the other way. Let us assume that it

and the coalition of parties prepared for this switch prevail in free elec-
tion. The PCI will come to power. It will--1et us seems-adopt measures
nationalizing the bank and the big corporation; it will put limitations on
agricultural properties. This will mark the beginning of the transition.
After several years. however, the coalition guided by the PCI is beaten at
the polls. Parties opposed to socialism now come to power. They return to
private control what had been nationalized. This roughly is what happened
in Great britain and Sweden. In theory (in practice I have my doubts that
this would happen in this way), the PCI would find itself in the same condi-
tion as the social democracy. where would the difference be? The moment

the PCI declares itself to be in favor of a plurality of parties and in favor
of respect for the principle of the majority. the moment it does that, it is
already a social democracy. Is there any room for Marxism and Leninisa than?

The PCI objects that the social democracies confine themselves "to managing
capitalism." One could also reply that they changed it, quite a bit; so
much so that the Marxist-Leninist categories no longer bother us. But, let
us go on. If, when forced into the minority, the PCI leaves the administra-
tion to the parties that want to return everything to private ownership. than
it, likewise. will be accused of merely having "managed" capitalism. If, in-
stand, it refuses to yield power. we will once again be facing the dictator-
ship of a single party.

If we are to believe the declarations of principle, then the PCI today already
no longer contains anything beninist. But it is also true that it no longer is
social democratic either. It is not that, for two reasons: one of these
reasons is the international link and the other one is the internal party
system. The latter. nevertheless. is not Leninist. Lenin did recognize

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

currents. It is only Stalinist although it features an enormously sweetened
Stalinism (how could one otherwise explain that anybody who starts to talk

in the Central CoaInittee right away declares hinself to be in agreement with
the secretary general?).

5. Since'l956. the PC! has loved to present its ideological position state-
ment in terms of great "creativity," profound "hard work,"and progressive ‘
theoretical "discoveries.” This is supposed to be a grandiose "work in pro-
gress." It brings up big names, somewhat by chance. but nevertheless unapar-
ingly: Machiavelli and Cavour, Vice, Marx and Lenin. Labriola, and Gramsci.
The illiteracy of the press often echoes 1t-But my impression is different-
For the past 20 years, the PC! has very slowly been moving toward a revival
of the discussion en the basic principles which prevailed at its birth. It
is thus moving under the weight of a serious historical defeat: the failure
of "socialism" in the Soviet Union and in all of the countries of the East.
It is thus marching backwards. What it should discover is already plain for
anyone to see. Its travails only spring from the difficulties and from the
need for having to make a decision. It is not by chance that the really
"new" thing which the PCI has produced is merely the impossible accumlation
of Leninism plus social democracy.

In his interview, Berlinguer spoke of the "third way." hot "real socialism"
and not even social democracy. But history is impious. There is no such
thing as the "third way." It does not exist in reality and it does not even
exist as a theoretical model. There are no ideas worthy of the name which
would today lend substance to an alternative to the system prevailing in the
industrial countries of the Heat. Anybody who is not trying to fool himself
must realize that, in spite of the many kilogram of congress theses pre-
sented by the PC! since the Eighth Congress, the way in which the "new-type"
socialist society is to be built remains a mystery. How will the economy
be regulated? ﬂow will the market and the plan be reconciled? How will in-
come be distributed among the streta and classes? How and to what extent
will political pluralism imply economic pluralism?

Sometimes it see-s that the Italian communists do not want to drop the idea
of "breaking out" of the system. But, beyond that system. there is only
”real socialism." Anybody who does not feel the desire to embrace it had
better not waste his time figuring out an alternative "to the" system but
should rather devote hilself to the much more important task of finding
alternatives "within the" system. That is the road of reform. But the
Italian left could really embark upon that road (and this is also true for
the P61) only on the day on which it has the strength to emerge from the
fog of ideology.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Socialist Perspective
Rona LA REPUBBLICA in Italian 8 Sep 78 pp 1.2

[Article by Francesco De Martino: "Only The Right Gain ms The Polsnic
Between Craxi and Berlinguer")

[Text] With this article, Francesco De Martino enters
the ideological and above all political debate between
the socialists and the comnists.

I would like to try to handle the by no means new debate, which has broken
out within the left and in the PCT-with my feet firnly planted on the ground
and I would like to try to avoid following the steeple of those who are not
miserly in their judgements and condennations of those who dissent.

I still ask myself what the political purpose of what has been defined as

a sooner offensive really was, an offensive which began inedistely after
the success of the socialists in electing their man to the office of presi-
dent of the republic. in other words, the interview given by party vice
secretary Claudio Signorile who very clearly asserted the lack of legitina-
tion on the part of the co-unists when it comes to joining the alternative
adninistrstion. The party secretary's remarks on Leniniem opened up my
other probleas and involved the very concept of socialism itself.

Nobody wants to believe that there was a need for revealing that the 30cm-
ist party rejects beninism because that has been and remains beyond discus-
sion. at least from the 1957 Venice Congress on. The political leaning
therefore was a different one and consisted in a challenge to the Italian
communists to rennin Leninist and from that to underestinating the so-called
Burocomnunism it was only a short step and that step was taken during the
television debate a few days ago when Craxi himself asserted without
euphemisns that Burocouunism was nothing but an articulation of the pro-
Soviet commnist novement. The political implications of such a judgement-
if the words have any neaning at elk-are obvious. '

That the col-mists are not yet c'.ear on problems that are not secondary
and maintain noteworthy ambiguity in choosing between the pest and the pre-
sent is something that turned out to be quite evident from all of their posi-
tions. The Berlinguer interview in LA REPUBBLICA was an example of that.
when he tried to reconcile the historical demand for legitimacy. for the
Livorno split, and Lenin's revolutionary theories, with the present posi-
tions of the Communist Party and its choice in favor of a Western-type
democracy. The PCT was certainly going to be criticized on account of that
ambiguity. But one cannot ignore the fact that the discussion not only in-
volves an observer intent on safewarding the entire heritage of the past
but is also aimed at promoting a revision process.

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAI. USE ONLY

It scene to no that. among the nany offimtiona which are debatable and
worthy of criticise. there is one which is or great and positive inportence;
here it is: "For us. on the other hand (I would like to emphasize the words:
on the other hand. that is to say 'in contrast to Lenin') deaocracy (includ-
ing the ae-called toraal froedenc which were initially won by the bourgeoisie)
is a value which historical experience deaonctratea to be e universal and
peraauent value and which, consequently. the working class and the commiat

parties adopted as their own end nust assert also within the context of tho
construction of a socialist society.“

This declaration hes coach in cocnon with the one that was rude by the Social-
ict Party at the 1957 Venice Congress when the universal value of liberty
asserted itself above all through the inpetua given by Nomi for the vigorous
criticise oi the Soviet political aycten. And the big step forward. needed
to overcome old dopatic positions. was the reaffirnation o! the inevitable
relationship between liberty and aocieliaa which only a aechanicel and de-
terministic concept of Marxian could cloud and which the historical charact-
eristics of "real socialise” had entirely wiped out.

Given these premises, the problen of the Italian worker noveaent and of the
left. as I see it. is no longer the problea of bivorno in 1921 but rather the
prohlen of the times during which the Kautaky-Lenin polenic broke out between
social democracy and Bolaheviaa. The problan is quite diﬂerent and consists
in a search for a type of aocial. econonic. and political orsnniration which
will guarantee nexima equality and liberty. This is the context within
which we face the topic of the third way. between bureaucratic collectivisa
and capitnlian. between the Soviet syctea and social deaocracy. the letter
understood here no longer in the original etyaological sense of a duocratic
socialise but rather in the historical version of the 20th century. that ia

to say. in the acceptance of the capitalist ayetoa, even if only to iaprove
it and renew it.

He must ndnit that we are all very far behind in the cultural and political
developaent of that third way and we are even acre behind in the development
of doaocratic transition acthods. we do not really know to whet extent the
private ownership of the Icons of production mat be renamed. how the pro-
ceas of economic develop-cut should be directed, and how one can reconcile
the need for a central guide. indispensable in any planning effort. with the
antihureoucratic deacnd oi socialise. and how a socialist aerket could func-
tion.

In- connection with this I aunt resind Luciano Pelliceni that the usefulness
of e socialist market was sustained by the Italian economist Pietro barons,
that it was picked up again by Sandro Petrucciona in mo orrmo about 20
years or so ago. when. without any his noise, it led to scathing that was
also a theoretical elaboration: besides it was recently supported by no in
on article in AVAN'III This socialist aarket surely demands a certain de-
gree of treadoa for the conaunera and the producers but crust the latter

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

necessarily be private or can they also be socialized [nationalised] organs
of the econony? The ccntrnlism of the plan and of self-nanagement are the
terms of the problem and they are far from resolved also because we lack
any kind of concrete experience and because the Yugoslav experience cannot
be adopted in view of the profound diversity of that country's political
system.

On these and sieilar topics-“not to mention the very tinely topics of the
economic crisis and the government progrenue debate within the left would
be a healthy thing while the terrain which has been chosen belongs rather
to historical investigation which. I would not say, does not have any pol-
itical value of its own. but which can become rather distracting if it is
used to judge the current behavior of the party.

The "new thing" to which the PSI, but not only the P81. can and must aspire.
that new thing resides in the reality of our time and it makes little sense
to quote Prudhon against Marx or all of the others when one could cite, in
order to have a political guideline and a modern doctrine of socialism
which would not be statist. which would not be bureaucratiaed. which would
not be authoritarian. but which would always be socialise, that is to say.
offering maxim liberation of nan from any oppression or any economic.
social. and material limitation.

He met recognize that a discreet confusion of ideas has energed in the
course of the debates. Outstanding personality did not hesitate to suggest
the construction of a social democratic party; others talked of a third way
without specifying it; still others, such as Riccardo Lombardi, expressed
very correct considerations on the uselessness of bitter debates about the
antecedents and about the nature of socialism, very such different from
those maintained in Craxi's remarks but at the same time they justify and
approve the letter.

Pluralism certainly is very valuable but it is also necessary that we have
clear ideas and avoid confusion at least on the nature of a party. Nor are
we are going to suggest that Italy. although it is an industrialised coun-
try in the Rest. has features of its own and is still full of great and
profound contradictions and inequalities. with entire geographic areas
caught in a situation of bachwardness, with a particular political system;
it is not enough to go back to the examples of mythology to understand the
reason for this; it is necessary to pursue the investigation to the and.
amid the reality of social relationships. within the unequal economic struc-
ture, within the grand idea and cultural currents which sprang from the
Risorgimento and even further back. One of these is socialism which never
yielded to Croce's philosophy of ”liberating liberty" but which firmly Iain-
tained that there cannot be any full and real liberty if we do not eliminate
the material conditioning factors depending not only on misery-which can
also be overcome under a system of modern and mature capitalism—but also
on social inequality and the existence of economic power concentrated in the
hands of private owners or the bureaucracy.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The present-day problem ere even sore urgent. how could one foil to realize
that the increeoingly bitter. opperently doctrinoiro dobete between PSI end
the PC! constitutes e serious threst to the policy of netionel unity? worries
elong those lines have been expressed by verious politioel exponents end ere
considered to be quite reelistic. Politics hes its origin end experience hes
teught us how the dynesice of positions which are essuud eonehow turn out to
be eutosntie. 1 do not intend here to put enybody'o intentions on triel end
I reedily believe the leedere of the Sociolist Petty when they eseert thst
they do not intend to creete e crisis in thet policy. But things cen elso
heppen by theuelves. in spite of the best intentions; this is why it is
necessary to correct end noderete. in tine, those directions which enteil

the risk of leading to serious breshups.

The ectord between the denocretic forces end. first of ell. between those
on the left. is todey more then ever neceesery if we went to eeve the coun-
try from the crisis which continues to beset the stonoey end the inotitu-
tiono. In view of the grewity of present probless end the no less erduous
probleso of e socielist society to be built in the Rest. e diecuseion on
the doctrine of the pest enteils the risk of distrecting us end helping
little in establishing the individuelity of parties which lo nenifeoting
itself in the fects of politicel life even sore then in ebstroct discussion.

Let no one forget the sisple truth thot e breehup on the left will only help
the right end the moderates end in Itsly todey that would render isposeible
eny polity of progress end perheps eny denocretic policy.

Norberto lobbio Controversiel Viewpoint
turin IA STAHPA in ltelien 1 Sep 76 p 1

[Article by Norberto Bobbie: "Comnies, Sotiel Deuocrscy, Sociolisen
there Is No Third Rey"!

[Text] If there hes ever been on egreesent in ltely along ths end
socielisto. it woo only e negstive one: en sgreesent to dieegree. In
other words, on sccorduwith verying sotiwetione—on whet one not reject
or, better. on whet one side end the other publicly declers it not reject.
The two poles of socieliss. such so it reelly is. or. sore precisely. such
so it is precticed end such so it is prscticeble—which. nerk so well, does
not seen thet it is successful-«hose two poles ere Lsninies end sociel
desocrecy. All of the other breeds of socieliou-«nd it done not setter
whether they ere only vsmely outlined or whether they hove been plenned
down to the eeelleot detsilwbelong to the cetegory of future possibilities,
thee to to soy. they ere possible (sons of then ere however downright il-
poesible).

Hell, the only point on which the co-unists end the oocislists seen to
have egreedust lesst until the lstest develop-eat in the polemic whose

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

outcoee we cannot as yet foresee-“has involved the double rejection. the
"act of taking one‘s distance fron ...” Naturally. the comnists always
dissociated thensslves iron social democracy and the socialists were care-
ful to preserve their distance free Leninisn. But the eonunists do dis-
sociate th-Me‘Ives free Leninism although they take great care not to fall
into the area of abhorred social denocracy; the socialisu in turn-oas they
keep their distance fron social democracy— are struggling hard to reeove
the suspicion that they night be falling into the area of the just as nuch
ebhorred Leninisn.

So far there has been continuous testimony as to this double negation on

both sides. They have just about become an obligatory topic. The nonent
a conunist pours or is forced to pour water on the revolutionary fire. he
must urge his conversation partner not to confuse hie with a social deno-

crat. Berlinguer stated quite authoritatively in the well-known interview:

"we want to achieve here. in Western Europe. a social. scononic setup. a
state setup but no longer acapitalist systen. a systen which would not
copy sons of the socialist experiences so far and which at the same tine
would not boil down to digging up again the experiences of the social deno-

cratic type."

No matter how great the variety of opinions nay be aeong the socialists. the
party's official text. the ”Draft." after having explained. in a paragraph
devoted to the countries of the ﬂeet. why their socialise is not ”our soc-
ielisn" and after rejecting Leninise. states precisely that "our socialise"
is not that of European social democracy either because "the aspiration
of guaranteeing the state direct control over the process of accumulation
and the main invest-ant decision was generally alien to those experiences.”

Anybody who would confine himself to recording sieilar ritual declarations.
on the one hand. would, on the other hand. he tenpted to conclude that. if
the accord on the double rejection is sincere. then the comniets and
socialists could easily arrive at agreement also on the canon road to be
followed. Certainly. if the dissociation of the mists from minim-
which is one of the two opposing poles-were as great as the dissociation
of the socialists froe social democracy. which is the other pole, then the
two nowing forces would already have net half-way. at the point at which
the "third way" would open up to both of then. As for the rest. nerlinguer
talked about a "third solution" in the above-mentioned interview, while

so far several anong the nest creditable socialist leaders have also been
talking about a ”third way." about a ”new way to socialism."

But in the light of the poleeical tension existing batman the two parties.
a debate which has becoae increasingly bitter in recent days. everybody can
realize that. in spite of the declarations of principle, the half-way neat-
ing did not cone about. There are two possibilities here: either this
third way does exist but both sides do not see it in the same manner. Or
this third way does not exist. In other words. the commute and the

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socieliste continue not to sent, to be dietentnelthoueh the tensor declere
that they ere no longer orthodox Leniniet while the ‘etter stete thet they
heve never been orthodox eociel denocretsnend nowedeys eppeer ferther ewey
from each other then ever beforenbeceuee. eech side for itself. hes not
covered the entire wey necessery in order to switch free the old roed to
the new roed or beceuse thet new roed simply does not exist?

To justify the choice of the third wey. both sides-mend this likewise is e
tether strense comn feeture enong these two helf-brothere-oelweys edopted
the sene erminent: the "peculierity" of the ltelien cese. Recently there
hee also been telk of en "enonely" but in e positive sense. so if beins
enonelous were a virtue. l am sorry ebout thet beceuee of our love of
hoeelend but, with respect to countries to which we ere linked by en inter-
netionel economic cooperetion pect end tonorrow perhepe else by e politicel
unificetion pect. the peculierity of the ltelien ceee (snoeely, yes, but
neaetive) consists only in our beckwerdness: as e eetter of feet. we nuet
never forget thet we ere the honelend of the eefie. of bleck-nerket lsbor,
of government corruption end bis tex evedere, of the nest eheneless petron-

nge end the nest inept bureeucrecy. end finelly. the nest widespreed. the
nost ruthless. end the noet sordid terrorise.

Now. blessed with thet euch peculiarity, how doee one becone the hietoricel
booster of e new socielisn never seen before. how does one evoid retrecing
the steps of those who heve gone before ue; fevored by so nuch enonely.

how ten one try to give lessons instead of tekine then, eeeueing the his-
toricel took of the teether rether then the best pupil; to as thin scene
difficult, very difficult, to steep. To no this does not so ouch look like
e theoreticel effort which would require e culturel tredition quite different
free the one on which we cen count. even though it is nost respectable. end
e quite different clerity on idees. but rether en ect of theoreticelly un-

justified end precticelly. 1 feet, entirely fruitless intellectuel preemp-
tion.

Personelly, I en inclined to believe thet this third wey done not exist
enywhere end thet it would be e nisteke due to en understendeble but not
irrepressible self-love. once the roed of beninien hee been clocked end
hence cen no longer be repeeted. es the conuniste theneelvee would heve
us believe, thus turning one'e beck rether diedeinfully upon the roed juet
trevelled. even though it ney be inconplete end full of obstecles, e roed
just trevelled by the Europeen eociel denocreciee. insteed forcing oneself
to figure out new solutions. tether then eekins the euch note neritorioue
effort to follow those who heve gone before us. Is the outcone of eociel
denocrecy (which should neturelly be eocielisn) not guerenteed‘l But it it
always better to follow e roed whose succeee is perenteed, tether then
the roed which is guerenteed to be unsuccessful es deeonetreted by history.

The best proof to the effect that this third wey does not exist. in ny op-
inion. ie thet the perenptory neture of the rejection of reeds considered

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

impracticable is not paralleled by just as clear an indication of the new
way. And for the rest. brilliant declarations aside. what can one cell the
practice implemented so far by the two major parties on the Italian left if
not social democratic. under the moat benevolent of assumptions? I say
"under the most benevolent of assumptions" because. to tell the truth,
when it comes to the practice pursued by the most progressive social demo-
cratic parties. to what can we compare the left-of-center government.
which we have already experienced. and the historical compromise, which
has only been proposed so far. if not. to an expedient. in the ease of the
former. and to a retreat. in the case of the letter?

After so many castles in the air. perhaps it is necessary new to begin to
realize that by the term "social democracy"-in contrast to cot-minim. but
not in contrast to Loninism—we are referring to a method and not to a goal.
It therefore makes no sense to juxtapose social democracy against comniem
which, on the contrary. indicates a goal and not a method. Its antithetical
term is. if ever. Lsoinism because. when you talk of Lsninism. you talk of
a method of struggle. a strategy. rather than a new society model. But if
this is so. then I frankly do not see how-after excluding beninism which
is inapplicable in advanced societies and which at any rate is so different
from the Russian version or from the Chinese version so as to be simply
beyond comparison-«he Italian worker movement could fail to join in the
grand river of social democracy. renouncing the fascinatingbut incomprehen-
sible plan of making a place for itself. probably destined to gather a cur-
rent with rather weak force and with a short run.

COPYRIGh‘I‘: 1978 aditr. LA STAHPA S.p.A.
Implications for Social Democracy

Turin is 5mm in Italian 3 Sep 78 p 1

[Article by Norberto Bobbie: ”The Democratic Ray"]

[Text] The communists and also most of our socialists are accusing the
social democrats of not being able to overcome capitalism (and this accusa-
tion has been made repeatedly also recently. following Crami's article in
venues». Capitalism as a matter of fact has not been eliminated
either in those countries in which strong social democratic parties have
been at work for some time. That does not change anything on the fact

that the accusation is extremely superficial and it once agair. shows how
much passion prevails over reason in political debate.

If the term "social democracy" still has a meaning and is not used. as
often happens in the Italian left. as an epithet. it refers to the ideol-
ogy according to which a goal-socialismncac and mat be attained to a
method. which is democracy. I do not see how it could be defined in any
other way. Anybody who thinks he can define it in some other way should

ll»
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

step forward. I really doubt sometimes that this definition is correct
and I sometimes think that somebody holds the secret of a different defini-
tion (which however I cannot imagine).

The fact is that both of the major parties on the Italian left-which never
miss an opportunity to make solemn declarations on their assolute faith in
democracy. on the rejection of the road of revolution. on the inevitability
of socialism and democracy. on respect for all those basic principles which
enable us to distinguish a democratic society from an autocratic society-
appenr rather infeetidious, the counnists always. the socialists. until a
short time. almost always. when they are considered to be social deeocretic
parties. If you want to offend them, just tell them that they have become
”sociel-democratised": if you want to procleim their decadence or their
degeneration. then say that they have undergone an inexorable process of
"social-democratization." But. without proof to the contrary. I stick to
the current definition which has historical tradition on its side.

Once I admit that. by social democracy. one must understand socialism through
democracy. it follows that a social democratic party (regardless of whether
it calls itself such. it merely suffices that it render homage to the rule
of democracy) must subject itself to the first condition required for the
operation of a democratic system-which is majority rule. This implies that
this party. in order to march toward socialism. must above all win an abso-
lute mejority of the seats in parliament.

It does not take a very profound knowledge of the history of countries in
which socialist or co-snist parties have existed. even for a long time
(parties which. no matter what they may call thmelves. have included the
goal of the socialist society in their program) to know that an absolute
majority of the ants in parliament is something which very few left-wing

parties in democratically-run countries have so far been able to obtain and
none of them, including the Swedish social democratic party. managed to

hold on to that eajority for a certain period of time. This did not even
happen in France so far which nevertheless is a country with a long social-
ist tradition and a strong worker movement. It has not happened in Spain
and in Portugal both of which have just emerged from a long period of pol-
iticel and economic oppression. It has so far not happened and it does not
seem destined to happen in Italy in the near future. Rather. in Italy. any-
body who would even entertain a fleeting thought of a left-wing alternative
is urged not to entertain any illusions. to have patience. and to concen-
trate. if ever. on a long-range program.

Somebody ought to explain to me how a certain democratic left-«seeming that
is is sincerely democratic and therefore believes that. to put a government
program together. one not have a majority of seats in parliament-«ensue
to be so easily neuseated by social democracy and to accuse it of not being
able to eliminate capitalism when. in order to begin to defeat it. it should
have a majority which it does not have and does not even seem to be close to
having.

15
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY
POR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

Instead of criticizing a hypothetical method of social democratic government.
which has not yet been put to the test and which. not yet having been put to
the test. cannot be accused of having failed. the Italian left and a large
portion of the European left should ask themselves why, in spite of the

now centuries-old anticnpitalist propaganda by the socialist parties. at
first. and the communist parties later on. the latter has not yet managed

steadily to convince the majority of the citizens. in almost all countries,
that capitalism is a system to be torn down.

The thing is all the more surprising since the Catholic parties, in words.
also professed to be anticapitalist. During a recent debate on the need

for wiping out capitalism, a Catholic also spoke up and maintained that

"the Christian Democratic world cannot be insensitive to the problem." If.
in spite of so many liquidators. capitalism still exists. if in spite of the
fact that the communists. the socialists. and the Christians of the most
varied faiths continue to vituperate it, that capitalism, in the democratic
countries, precisely in those countries where it is freely vitupsrable, man-
ages to hold the left-wing parties at bay and to domesticats the Catholic
parties. then that means that capitalism is a system which does not easily
allow itself to be liquidated through the democratic way.

What is the reason for the obstinate resistance of a system which many dis-
dain and which all left-wing parties have been claiming is moribund. I do
not know how many times? That is the problem. Somebody might suspect
rather maliciously that capitalism resists becauss-at least in the demo-
cratic countries-mast of the adult citizens. those who vote. prefer it to
the opposite system. But I do not even remotely want to assume that they
could be naive or cynical. I confine myself to making a simple observation:
even where the left-wing parties can freely unfold their own propaganda and
organize their own members. a majority for socialism either does not exist
or is very small (it is never overwhelming, even when it does exist) and it
has at any rate always been ephemeral. (To avoid easily predictable emotion-
al reactions. 1 am not talking about the biggest capitalist country in the
world where a socialist party does not even exist.)

But it seems to me that one may derive a warning from that observation.

Would it not be healthier for a democratic 1eft--that is to say, for a

left which wants to achieve socialism through persuasion and not through
imposition--to try to understand why the moribund does not die. why. in-
stead, upon every apparent relapse, it flourishes again. and expands and
generates imitators (generally bad ones). instead of reproaching the inept
social democrats (the so well remembered "social traitors") of not yet having
killed it?

here is the moral of the story: Social democracy does what it can. It does
what it can. within the limits of the democratic methods which it declares
it wants to follow. It does what its political strength permits it to do.

something which, in a democratic country. generally is measured by its
else

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

election strength; this strength so far has not been great. it has not been
lasting, and it has always been heavily opposed. Anybody who accuses it of
not being capable of overcoming the capitalist systea and of having confined
itself. even where it was successful in forming homogeneous administrations.
to correcting it (thus peraitting it to survive), is not realizing that ha
is subtly revealing his own intolerance for the democratic aethods and his
own lack of confidence in the validity of a certain method for the attainment

of a certain goal. But. then. why continue to shout all over the place that
democracy and socialism are inevitable?

To conclude. anybody who continues to accuse social democracy of not being
able to defeat capitalism should tell us very clearly whether he wants
socialisn also without democracy (and only in this way would he be consis-
tent) or whether he would. at least for the moment. be satisfied with that
little bit of socialism which, in an advanced capitalist systea. is coapat-
ible with democracy. Tertiua non datur [There is no third possibility] .

It seems to me. that in Italy. comnista and socialists. instead of con-
stantly accusing each other of betraying socialism or democracy. should in-
stead began to realise that the third way between Leninism (or the betrayal
of democracy) and social deaocracy (or the betrayal of socialism) is only
an idea of reason or. worse, a product of imagination and since both sides
proclain their unaltersble faiths in democracy. let them, within energy,

' intelligence. and faith—and possibly, by cannon accordo-puraue the only
possible road which in fact is practiced .in the democratic countries.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Editr. LA STAKPA s.p.a.
Social Democratic Response
Turin LA STAMPA in Italian 6 Sep 78 pp 1. 2

[Article by Giuseppe Saragat: ”we Social Democrats—Debate on Bobbio's
Thesea"]

[Text] The two articles by Norberto Bobbie. "6min. Social Democracy.
Socialism." the first of which has the subtitle "The Democratic Hay" while
the second one is entitled “There Is .No Third ﬂay," state the problem of
socialism in a serious and courageous fashion. Almost half of the world--
the USSR and the developing countries-«ubscribe to Harries-minim or
downright, such as China. to Harriso-Leninisa-Stalinism.

This century's history proves that Leniniam and Staliniam have little to
do with harxiam. Marx hypothesized about a society without classes and
without a state. The dictatorship of the proletariat was to resolve once
and for all the enigma of history by creating a society of free men not
subjected to any form of alienation (Retro-dung) and hence not subjected to
any form of power. obviously including the nutter one power fora, that is.
political power.

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the very act of creating a society of free men. the dictatorship of the
proletariat would eliminate the coercive power of the state. Revolutionary
violence--thc midwife of history—would therefore undergo rapid deceleration
by virtue of the sinulteneous dissolution of all political power.

Capitalism and the state disappeared in the very act in which human society
forever became an absolutely free society. This is not a matter of examining
how much of Usgelian theology is contained in that generous utopia of Herr.
The important thing is that Marr' utopin was translated by Lenin into polit-
ical terms so as completely to turn it upside down. State capitalism hes
taken the place of private capitalism in the USSR; and the classes have been
replaced by the regime of the bureaucratic ceste (the bureaucratic state is
defined by Marx in one of his first writings as the priest-state); in place
of the reign of liberty. a permanent dictatorship, which not only oppresses
its citizens but which extends its hegemony over the satellite states. has
taken hold.

The most dangerous tensions which can erupt in a terrifying thereonuclear
war do not exist between the USSR and the democratic countries of the "eat
but rather within the er-aa of the conmist states the-selves: the USSR
against China, Vietnan against Cambodia, etc.

All over the world and especially in Asia and Africa and in Western Europe.
the destabilizing action of the USSR is felt continuously.

It follows from this however that, while fascism and nazism are the most
putrefied cadavers of history. Leninism is alive and extends its action
more and more all over the world.

It may be a good idea to note here that, apart from the countries that

are under the direct influence of the USSR, with armed violence, such as

the satellite states. the other countries, which are exposed to the Leninist
«nation are countries which have never experienced liberty.

And the first of these countries is the USSR itself. here are the wise
words of Benedetto Croce: "we must not forget that. through its revolution,
Russia has not broken with a regime that enjoyed liberty. nor has it seam,“
a kind of liberty that is less than what it had before; instead,
after a long incubation of ideas and spasmodic revolutionary attempts, it
made the only revolution which it could make—and that was not the revolu-
tion of England in the 17th cmtury, nor the revolution of Prance in the
18th century, nor the revolution of Italy in the 19th century-rend those
who were most familiar with its real conditions could already detect the
emergence of forces which were involved. And only the future will tell us
how its people will develop in the future. as is quite obvious. and it
would be superfluous to say here in what way we would hope that it would
develop because this is of no importance and. in any case. it is isplicit
in the way in which we conceive human life and its history and its ideals."

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Croce was a liberal but we social democrats are fully in accord with his
on his cautious approach and on his judgement of an event in a country
which never experienced liberty and on his hope for the future. And we
are fully in accord with Norberto Bobbie who asserts that, in western Eur-
ope. there is no socialise that is different iron that of countries such
as Sweden. Norway. Great Britain. and today Heat Gereany.

'rhe tern "social deeocretic” in Italy today is worse than a disparaging
epithet. A well-known feature writer at L'UNITA replied to a colleague,
who asked his: why he was so tough on the social democrats: “Because they
exist." lie could not have been any nore specific.

We deeocretic socialists think that overcoeing capitalise can and not be
ecconpliehed with deeocracy and not against denocracy. we know what soc-
ialise without denocrecy is: it is the worst fore of capitalise. it is
state capitalise.

Hhat, then, is deeocratic socialise? there is a law of tendency which, in
the nost advanced countries of the Western world. leads first. of all to a
positive response to the social problem involving the working class. The
democratic socialist noth is the nest authoritative interpreter ofthat
tendency; that novenent. in those countries. has nenegsd to solve the pro-
blee of hoees for everybody, of hospitals which are not just aid stations,
of schools which guarantee the right to study, at higher levels. for the
nest deserving.

The nore a society evolves. the nore grows that stratum of specialized
workers who in that society sake up the najority of the population. The
problem of capital. as the eneey to be beaten. evolves within the problem
of a constant struggle for the best and nost equitable distribution of in-
coees among all citizens.

The spirit that springs froe adhesion to the values of liberty. democracy,
and social justice favors the developeent of the labor union noveeents
which increasingly places the worker in a position where he can effectively
negotiate on his contract with the eeployer. The characteristic features
of capitalise change, leaving rooe for the entrepreneurial spirit which
lust not always be identified with that of the capitalist. In that progres-
sive earch toward a relationship that would be continuously eore favorable
for the workers in their dealings with capital. we met identify the objec-
tive ained at a society at whose lieits the identity between the narket
econoey end capital could be attenuated and. in the and. would disappear.

That, in any case, is the road followed by the big deeocratic socialist
parties of the west.

An abstract socialist society scheee cannot help but be utopian. The inpor-
tent thing is to defend those values of social justice and political liber-
ty which in our opinion are indispensable. In any case. for us denocretic

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

socialists. there is no other way. no way other than the way of denocrecy
and of ever greater social Justice. It is therelore at least a chency
thing to outline the society we went in absolute terns and without reser-
vetions. Others can do so; we cannot. by the way. not even Marx did that;

those who asked hin for specific statensnts on that point. he told in reply:
"I have no recipes {or the kitchen or the future."

We have a constitution which sprang from the resistance and which says the
following in its first article: "Italy is a denocratic republic based on
labor. Sovereignty belongs to the people who exercise it in the forms and
within the limits spelled out in the constitution." Article 3. Paragraph 2.
says: ”It is the task of the republic to renove obstacles of an economic
and social nature which. in tact lilitiug liberty and equality among citi-
zens. prevent the full develop-ant o! the hum individual and the effec-
tive participation of all workers in the country's political. economic. and
social organization." Finally. in its first paragraph. Article Io aeys:
"‘rhe republic grants all citizens the right to work and promotes the condi-
tions which will sake this right ettactive." This last article however hes
renained a dead letter. we have hundreds of thousands of uneeployed. es-
pecially among the younger generation. The fault lies with all parties that
have been in power and those of the opposition which tor so any years prec-
ticed the policy of the lesser evil. Today. the discussion is wide open
and it is to be hoped that the errors of the past will be corrected.

in his book ”Storia dell'ltelie partigiana" the author-who is not a soc-
ialist historian but a historical socialist. Giorgio Bocce-concludes with
his teacher's words: “I! we really want to find a synthetic and comprehen-
eive characteritation of the historical significance of the hasistucs and
or the relationship between the Resistance and the present tine. than let
us not talk of a Resistance that was exhausted or even betrayed or that
failed but let us instead talk in term of a Resistance that is inconplete.
here we understand inconpleteness itself as an ideal which is never coe-
pletely realized but which. nevertheless. continues to nourish hopes and

to arouse anxieties and energies for renew .“ The teacher quoted by his-
torian Giorgio Bocca is Norberto Bobbie.

Not only we deaocratic socialists but all responsible politicians in Italy-
discovering that the ideals of the constitution and those of social justice
are never conpletely realized-«lust be greattul to Norberto bobbin for having
sustained our hope with his two articles and for having aroused the renewal
energy necessary for the realization of an Italian society that will be ever
nore just and lore civil.

mm: 1978 Mitt. LA SMA S.p.A.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ugo La Malta Interview
Ross LA “PUBBLICA in Italian 5 Sep 78 pp 1. 2

[Interview with Ugo La lialfa by Faus'to De Luca: "La Malia Considers Break
Between Italian Consist Party and Italian Socialist Party A Disaster"]

[Text] "If. on the other hand. the process of recaeting
the two parties is a serious one, then they can arrive at
a coanon prograa and at the alternative of the left." The
things which Lana says are more important than the denial
of Leninien. There is no ”third way." It is necessary
for the left to experience the Italian problem with the
approach of the Rest and of nodern history. Rona. At
this point in the discussion between the socialists and
the comniats. we needed an arbiter. Soaebody who. if
possible. would create a little bit of clarity. saying
whether Berlinguer and Crari are correct. two sen who.
although fron different positions. keep hoping for a
"third way" between the socialist of the Best and social
democracy or whether Norberto Bobbie is right; he says
very drily that there is no "third way." He turned to
Ugo La Halfa who always believed in a way to save

Italy so as to enable the country to achieve the con-
ditions of the advanced industrial societies.

[Question] Now, Hr. La halts. would you like to tell us what the third
way is?

[Answer] I read here that the Catholic University of Milan has decided on
a 6-day study conference on advanced industrial society. The socialists
and the cousunists will talk there. Eat this big talk happens at a tine
when modern industrial society is seriously colpronised.

[Question] In other words. this will only be an academic affair?

[Answer] There is mob of the academic world in the discussion and the
important thing here is to restore things realistically.

Modern industrial society has been coepronised ideologically because the
left has pictured it to the assess as the new and crude version of cap-
italise. And it has been conpronised politically because, when it cones
to reforning a society with spontaneous develop-ant, this has not been
done and now the ilportant thing is to refer. a broken-up society.

[Question] Craxi admitted that your criticisn-regarding the insufficient
understanding of the left for the problsls of industrial society—is well
founded.

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] That admission seems to no to he a positive thing provided we do
not now get lost in ideological clouds, disregarding real problens.'

[Question] Tell us what the ”third way" is or what your way would he to
turn Italy into a nodern, socially less unequal society which would preserve
political democracy.

[Answer] When I read in the writings of two socialist authors, such as
Giorgio Ruffolo and Luciano Pellicsni, that their recipe is self-Isnagenent
with [economic] planning. then I feel very worried. Self-management has
been the pet project of Francois Hitterrand. I carefully read the document
put out by the French socialists and I found it entirely devoid of real con-
tent, I found it to be entirely illusory. Not with regard to planning, nat-
urally. but with regard to self-management which signifies the exporting of
the neans of production. Just think what shape we would be putting the
railroads, the steel industry, the chemical industry, etc., in. We would
have the defects of capitalism and of collectivisa. together.

[Question] What can you say about Yugoslavia where they have self-nanagenent?

[Answer] They developed that fornula to have a model different fron the
Soviet nodal but it is still in a totalitarian society.

[Question] It seems clear to use that, as far as you are concerned, there
is no way different from capitalists.

[Answer] This is where we lust understand each other. When you separate
the world among the countries of real socialism and the capitalist countries,
you are really forcing the issue and you forget what the left has done in
Sweden. in Great Britain, and in the United States. Do they not have a

left in those countries? Did the left only support capitalism? Let us be
serious. The left in those countries has corrected the systen. ls Sweden
a capitalist country? Is Great Britain? And America?

[Question] To us, frankly, it seems that the answer is yes. To you, Mr.
La Halts, does it not seen a little bit chancy to deny that American is a
capitalist country?

[Answer] Naturally, I do not deny that; I am not saying that they do not
have capitalism there. But I do say that they have had Roosevelt; I say
that the most specific thing for the purpose of correcting the capitalist
system came to us from the American nodal.

[Question] And European socialism did not produce anything good?

[Answer] In ay view, Latin socialism did not learn anything. Hitterrand's
solution is a false solution. If Kitterrand had won, he would have reduced
France to the status of Italy. Instead, Sweden, Great Britain, and recently
Germany have had a left which was up to the tasks of history .

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] In whet sense]

[Answer] In the sense that it hes schieved run enployeent end thet it has
spreed culture end prosperity neon; the vest eesses without breeking society
up. here then in terns oi sociel deeocrecy I would speek here of e left
which hes neneged to treneiore cepitelise in e refereed society.

[Question] 80. there is no "third wey?"

[Answer] No, there is not. the world is divided into two parts: the
countries oi "socielisn such so it reelly is" end the countries where cep-
itslisn. in its sociel ferns. is corrected by the lett. the countries of
"reel socielien" ere the depressed countries (end Here wss terribly wrong
on thet); the countries of developed end reioreed society ere the countries
of the Rest. Then there is e tetegory oi countries quite by theeselwesn
those which heve neither reel socielise. nor e returned society. end they
ere the Lstin countries which, due to underdevelopeent. ere running the
risk of getting "reel sooielise."

[Question] Hhet use ten there be in the discussion currently underwey
along the left?

[Answer] It would be useful it we were to becoee convinced thet we lust
live our problens es westerners. 'l'het eekes es think of the Chinese, of
the experience I hsd there. I think thet Crexi. who is so enti-Leninist.
would elso be heppy to nest the Chinese.

[Question] Why? the Chinese ere not Lsninist?

[Answer] When you telk to e Chinese, he will tell you thet he is inspired
by “no end else by Lenin. But that is not the point. "by ere we so ef-
fected by the influence which Lenin end Stelin bed on Bessie end not the
influence which they hed on Chine? He ere struck in the USSR by whet the
Chinese cell sociel ieperielise or heseeonise; we ere struck by the eilitery

esteblistueent. by the power gees. There is no such thing neon; the Chinese.
They ere going their wey in order to set out of their underdevelopeent but

they do not confront us with inediete power probleee. such es the USSR does.
This is why beeicelly we ell heve e little bit of synpethy tor Chine.

[Question] Let us get beck to Itely. Did you understend whet Zectesnini
vented to soy when he telked of the ”revolutionsry areduel neture” of the

Dc [Christien Denocretic Petty]?

[Answer] I did not understend thet. Nor did I understend why Andreotti,

in his erticle. telks shout "bosses" with en evident concession to deessosy.
The polemic in Itely so fer hes sterted iron the ideology of mderdewelopnsnt.
He have foiled to understend thet one one pluck the feethers of cepitelise

but one cennot destroy it.

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. US! ONLY

[Queetion] Horn, Mr. La Helin. only the Republican party gete away clear.
I! thinge are thua. why hee the m [Italian Republican Perry] renained
nunarieally eo enall?

[Anewer] we have been equeeted in between three ideologiee oi underdevelop-
nent. It hee been eaid that ley culture in deed. But I would like. to eel:

Anendole if, instead, lay culture have not won. now thet everybocy ie toning
around to our poeitione. saying that one cannot nationeliea everything. thet

it ie neceeeery to eeva the narket. thet wagee are not an Independent vari-
able.

[Queetion] the PC! hee nede aone ideological revieione and hee engaged in a
big pretrial revieion. le Crexi correct when he aehe thet ell of thie be
puehed to the final coneequencee. to e new ideological charter?

[Anewer] Conuniete and eocieliete can nova cloeer together on the epecific
ground rather than on ideology.

[Queetion] Do you ehare the eccueetion oi ”adventurin" which hee been nade
againet Crexi?

[Anewer] No, but I can detect the danger thet the diecueeion night rennin
only ideological. lle night then arrive at conclusion which would be enher-
reeeing eleo for the eocieliete. when Lana eaye that wagee are not an inde-
pendent variable. thie ie nore inportant than the denial of Leninien; it in
noreover the denial of Leninien. He can ask the co-uniete to be loyal to-
ward denocracy but on that. I believe, we have no doubte.

[Qucetion] Do you think that Berlinguer ie in trouble in hie party?

[Anewerl I an not in a poeition to expreee judgenente on internal nattere
within the P01. iron the outeide. however. I night aek nyeeli whet the con-

eequencee night be for Italy if e Steliniet were to take herlinguer'e place.

[Question] Ie there eone foundation to that eemption?

[Anewer] I would not eey no. I coneider the variablee in Italy'e future.
and on the international level we keep wondering about Yugoelevia after
‘rito.

[Queetionl Can the PSI and the PCI nave cloeer together?

[Anewer] I! the recanting process in real, not inetruental and not con-
petitive. what le the final outcone? Not a breakup. which would he a die-
eeter for Itely. but the canon program.

[Queetion] Hence. the alternative of the left?

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPIOIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Yes, the slternstive o! a eodern. western left and a way out of
the emergency.

[Question] But a phase or oonpetition between the PSI and the PCI is already
underway and perhaps wes inevitsble.

[Answer] The problse is whether it will last too long. The consequences
could be cetestrophit for the solution oi Itelisn problees.

[Question] “hat is the proving ground before the congresses o! the big per-
tiee next year?

[Answer] We have it before us. It is the edeinistretion's 3-year plan. A
serious point of departure. I hope thet the left will understand the situa-
tion such as it really is. we elresdy said that, i! the plan is rejected.

or of it is iepleeented piece-eel. we are reedy to pull out of the eeJority.

Eugenio Seelieri Bditoriel
Rosie LA REMILICA in 1te1ien 10-11 Ssp 78
[Editorial by Eugenio Scelferi: "Your Excellency Is Cross With he”)

[Text] There is no third wey between social denoerscy end leninise. Ror-
herto Bobbie wrote in LA arms. There is no third way between enemies
and refereed capitalise, Le Helfe echoed his in LA museum. using s
more eppropriete terminology. Ideology is en encud’rence end a pretext.
adds Colletti in L'mntsso. end the problee is thet of reforn. I was
thernIore not wrong when I wroteo-co-snting on e recent "text" by Crexiu
thet we ere witnessing a vigorous liberal-socialist revivel, even though
that assertion eerned ee more then one rebuff.

Ideology is a super structure; it serves to echeneticiee reelity end above
all to give the people sieplified objectives. It serves to enable us to
are fron knowledge to action. But in the long run it because teleodistic,
it fevers the bureaucratieetion or ideas. In the end you have to give it
a push end bring it down.

We are thus eeerging tron ideologise on the left. And the PCI is likewise
moving cautiously in the seas direction. It is slower than the others be-
cause, nore then in the case of the others, its history is intertwined
with ideology and. nore than in the case of the others. it has a use fol-
lowing which it euet take into eccomtnbut the direction of earth is the
sens. The beerd of the prophet—or the prophetenis being cut by every-
body, with scissors or rezore. And what cones efter thet'l

The reel problem-d take the liberty of repeating-do to figure out whether
the left-wing alternative is inside or outside the cepitelist systel. Le
Melts cites Roosevelt es en exenple of greet reionisu. this is e good

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI’PIOIM. USE ONLY

oxooplo ovon though tioo hoo oooowhot rodioonoionod ito offoct. Ho night
odd horo tho nooo oi Stoiiord Crippo who porhopo ohongod tho otructuro of
Inglioh copitolioto ouch ooro thon Roooowolt oonogod to do with Morioon
copitolioo ond with tho "Morioon woy o2 lilo.”

Ho cannot ooy tho oooo thing ohout tho oociol dooocrocioo of continental
Buropo. rhooo in tho Scondinowion countrioo mind in onvironoonto thot
on too oitioront iron ltoly'o to oonotituto o uooiul oodol. In Goroony,
Bolgiuo, ond hollond, oociol doooototic odoiniottotiono-in oiiico for o
long tioo in oooo color-did not produno ony opprociohlo toioro or rodio-
tribution of tool powor. woolth. ond tho quality of lifo. Io Bohbio hoppy
with thot? Dooo Stonhoio oooo to him to ho o bottor inotitution thon
Portolongono‘l Do tho lowo on hiring "rodioolo" for civil oorvico joho
oooo to him to ho on oxonplo oi oociolion ouch no it io poooiblo? Dooo
tho powot oi tho Cox-ooh Control Bonk oooo to hi: to ho o oodol o! oolight-
onod oopitolion? no ohould bo ooro coutiouo ond ooto corolul in looking

ot tho iocto ond ot hiotory boioro oxoopliiying it with oo ouch ooli-
ooouronco.

But lot uo got hook to tho Roooovolt cooo which in oony woyo io vory il-
luotrotiwo.

Ho cooo to hio Hhito uouoo ot tho hoight of tho wotot otoro thot hoo owor
hit Mot-icon ond intornotionol copitolioo. no triod to bring it undo: con-
trol (ond, wo night ooy in poooing, ho ouccoodod vory littlo). am By
limiting ond. in cortoin roopocto. "toptoooing" tho guorontooioa which hoo
noturoo with Jottoroonion donocrocy. During thooo yooto. tho ‘bulwotk oi
rooiotonoo to Nooticon guorontuiot liborolioo woo Suptono Court which. ooo
by ono. throw oll oi hoooovolt'o hig tofu-o lowo out. tho blow Dool woo
diooontlod pioco hy pioco oo o rooult oi thooo rulingo. . Only tho 880 on!
tho TVA ourvivod. how con ono ooy thot horicon copitolioo woo roiorood
by o M808 [Notionol Coo-iooion {or Couponioo ond tho Stock kchongo] or
by o Fund for tho South?

l on not toying thot thooo oro littlo thingo (but hoto. in Itoly. thoy woro

of littlo or no uoo to no). But I do ooy thot ovon occooiono howo circum-
ocribod ond opocific ond cortoinly not inioctod by idoologion oro unpropoo-
oblo horo in Italy-01f hondloo with ootiouonooo cod rigor-without tho oup-
port ond tho oonvincod conoonouo of tho woot populor oooooo. Ihoro oto
thtoo roooono for thot: (l) bocouoo Itoly io not tho contor but tho poti-
photy of tho oopiro; (2) bocouoo tho populor clooooo hovo for o contuty
boon hoot owoy from tho inotitutiono and thorotoro hovo tho hohit of rohol-
lion rothot thon rotorn; (3) bocouoo Itoly hoo novor hoo o otrong ond

byword-looking bourgeoisie. copohlo oi govotning by poyioguoo o clooo-
tho ptico for govorning.

out how con wo obtoin tho conoonouo of tho populor clooooo in ordor to to-
tor: copitoliolo‘l Arc wo witnoooing tho liroolo of tho opplouding otMo

26
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ONIOMI. US! ONLY

in the equarea or ltaly in reaponee to the announcement that the governaent
will quickly pace e law protecting tree coapetition? Or the announceaent
that censor will have the power to out the ooapany oonnectiona between the
benke oi Peaenti and ltalceaenti [Italian Cenent Coneny]? Dr between nu-
togi and Hontedieon?

Priende: We are on the wrong track. Personally I never venerated any
prophet and thie ia why I look with a certain degree of worry at the reel of
thoee who, having declined the verb in their youth. today try to peer then-
eelvea off ea the teachere of intellectual libertiniea. but I would not
like theee operatione of high ideological "Barbary" to imply any exceaaiwe-
ly concrete ohjectivee. The "new philoeophere" are pleaaing the bankcre
along the Atlantic Coaat a little bit too auch. Soaehody hee eeid that
United Statee anbaeaador Richard Gardner had a piece of writing by Proud-
hon translated for hinaelf and that thia hae hacone hie bed-tine reading.

To turn Italy into a aodern. lay. "reiorned" country we met nake an effort
' covering aevetel generationa and requiring nany aecriIicea. All of no NI:
neke that effort. But we met eey: for the cake or what. to get where.
And it will be difficult to get there with guaranteeian (ea the llooeevelt
ceae teachea ua) hecauae. to rotor-I. you have to infringe upon aoraa "guar-
antec.‘

Deer Bohhio. I agree with you: there is no third way. But the road that
you outline certainly ie not enough; it nowea neither the ineginetion. nor
noral aentinenta; it done not tranafora rationality into action. Thie ia
why very few will nova on that road. with the great joy of thoee who con-
eider even you to be a dangeroua euhvereive.

5058
C80: 3106

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

1891'!” 3010“” SEARCH FOR "l'IllRD VA!’ ‘10 ”IONIC Rm"!!!
‘l'holoo of "third Uny'
mm L'mm in ltolion 29 Sop 78 pp 18-21

[Tort] Tho dohcto no to tho oxiotonco. or nonoxiotonoo. of 3 “third my"
hoo onmod tho hoot trolno of tho Itnlion Lott ond io to on owor grotto:
oxtont orouoim tho poooiono or ovon tho hoot-duootod oootor of public
opinion. Dohoting tho topic of tho ”third wny" onounto hutcolly to ookinc
uhothor thoro io n viohlo third oodol in Addition to tho two man oxiot-
in; in Dar-opontho nodol of rotor-ca ohpitoliol (Nordic oocinl (lo-corny)
on! tho lcdol of ”ronliood" cooinlioo (tho con-union of tho countrioo or
hotorn Mopo).

In tho prooont iuuo L'mm io oponin; o dohoto on thio topic. which in
of ouch not oignificonco. Tho porticipnnto in tho doboto will ho Luciono
Polliconi. oooioliot politicol thooriot all political con-ontotc: for our
nowcpopor. who owiooo tho oi: min thonoo thot hovo boon dovolopod to
(into with roopoot to tho “third wu." horhorto Bobhio. tho not authoriti-
tivo oocicliot philooophor in Itnly: Lucio Collotti. in tho torornont of
hrxiot otudioo in Itolys Ulhorto Corroni. conuniot on! wotoooor of
politicnl ocionco ot tho Uniworoity of Ron: mi Clnutlio Potruocioli. co-
oditor of L’m‘l‘A. In our noxt ioouo wo ohnll puhlioh othor contributions.

including uticloo by Giorgio Ruﬂolo ond Lucinm afoul.

lloniic oocinl dolocrocy? Bowiot coo-union. or o plunliot
oconony cm oolf-unoaonont? Quootiono oro hoing ookod.
can thoro io controworoy within tho ltolion Lott rowing
emi'o ohift in pooition nnd Polliconi'o 'oocioliot

Int-Rot. "
(By Lucinno Polliooni]

i. Uithin tho Itnlion Lott thoro io incroooiu mono-o thot tho oo-collod
"ronliud oocinliol" con no longoo: ho roprdod on n pooitivo rotoronco point
for tho into: Ion-out. It nwthim. tho ouct oppooito io two: tho
80'1” D401 oorvoo oo'o guido on to whot ohould oyotoloticnlly ho ovoidod

28
1’03 OPPICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if one wiehee to preeerve erd develop plurelietio delocrecy. 'l'hie view ie
eupported by the highly eignificent eteteeent eede recently by Berlinguer
to the effect thet the iteiien couuniete fevor e "third eolution"--one
different both free the eociel deeocretic eolution end m. the Soviet
eolutlanndeepite the feot thet he eilulteneouely reeffireed the Leniniet
chereoter of the PCI [Itelien Conuniet Perty].

2. Ineeeuch ee even Crest hee epoken of e "third wer.“ it cen perhepe be
eeid. et the nreeent Ioeent. thet the two principel ooeponente of the
ltelien lebor eovelentunotwitheunding the lively poleeic in which they
ere engeged-oere loving in the eeee direction elthough et different epeede
end elnns different roede. Sore intellectuele of the eocieliet eector
(notebly Bobbio end Colletti). however. rule out the poeeibility thet there
out be e ”third wey.”

3. i‘roe e eethodologicel etendpoint. the line of reeeoninc used by Bobbio
end Colletti ie not objeotioneble. ‘i‘wo Iethode of for-inc the collective
will ere poeeiblet the deeooretic eethod end the euthoriterien eethod.

Pro- e eubetentive etendpoint. however. it eeele preleture to eey it ie
iepoeeible to heve e Iodel of eooiel orgenieetion thet to not in oonforeity
either with cepiteliee or with conuniel. Nevertheleee. thie ie the hypoth-
eeie on the beeie of which the Swedieh eociel deeocrete. the French eociel-
iete end the Itelien eocieliete ere opereting.

u. A third eolution ie poeeible only on one condition: thet e eyetee of
production eubetentielly different fro- hoth the cepiteliet end collectiviet
counterperte be euooeeefully conetructed. At the preeent etege of our
knowledge. thet eyetee of production would eppeer to be 'eelf-eeneueent.”
Such e eyetee involvee e) retention of the eerket econom b) trenefer of
the eeene of production iron wivete hende (or tron the etete) to the workere
collectively: end c) eeteblieheent. within the production enterprieee. of the
lecheniee of repreeenution. in order thet the mere will be elected by
the producere.

5. Retention of the casket econoey ie Juetified on the beeie of two enu-
eente. The firet ergueent in of e technlcel neturen elielnetion of the

eerket would eeen elieinetion of the inetrulent thet ie indiepeneeble for
the retlonel ellocetion of coerce reeomcee. ‘i'he eecond le of e politicel
netiren elthough it ie etill ineuti‘iclent. the exietin; plurelity of
econoeic oentere ie en eeeentiel condition for the phyeicel operetion of

the eyete- of colpetitive deeooreoy.

6. In conclueion. e me me cepitelietio plureliee to eooieliet
plurellee eppeere poeeible only through eoclelieetior. of the arket. inee-
ouch ee hietory ehowe thet wherever the nrket hee been elieineted. deeoc-
recy end freedo- heve been etifled by the reeultent hireeucretic eonopoly
of reeourcee. Thie doee not exclude the yoeeibility of imtitutin; eoonolic

planning for the purpoee of reguletinc the overell developeent of eociety.
eetebliehin; certein beeic guidelinee. end interveniu wherever ecoooeio

end eoolel iebelencee ere woduced.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

m5§x0| "1 I“... W‘eeee"
[By Norberto Bobbio)

Uith reepeot to Point 1hree I cennot help but be pleeeed thet it inoludee
en eckncwledpent of the fect thet the debete cc to whether e third Iodel
of eooietyueitueted eoeewhere in between eocieliee ee currently preotioed
end cepiteliee--doee or doee not exiet ehould be regerded ee eeperete {roe
the debete n to whether or not there in e ”third my" between the violent
conqueet of power (Leniniee) end the deeooretio prooeee (the couree followed
by the eociel delocretio pertiee). we ere deeling here with two different
probleee which ehould not be oonrueed with eeoh other. {or thie contueion
given rice to the lieteken belief thet whoever deniee the exietenoe of e
"third wey" ie in effect eeinteinin; thet the only poeeible elternetive to
eooieliee ee currently preotioednto "reelined' eocielieeuie cepiteliee.
An ere-pie of thie inference ie the cbeervetion eddreeeed to Ie by Scelferi
when he wrote in the 10 Septeeber ieeue of LA RIMBLIOA thet the dietinotion
between ooeeuniee erd cepiteliee in core to the point then the dietinotion
between Leniniee end eooiel deeooreoy. \fhereee the letter coeperieon
eeeuece thet the two dietinctione ere interchenseeble. the truth ie thet
they ue subject to two dieeieiler oriterie end therefore cennot be con-
pered the one with the other. 'ihe i'iret of the two dietinctione reletee

to the etreteciee thet the lebor loveeent cen edopt in order to ettein ite
own objectivee. whereee the eecond reletee to the obJectivee to be etteined.
mere ie no reeeon to eeeuee thet it only two etretegiee ere poeeible there
cen likewiee be only two poeeible cheotivee.

Nevin; eeid thie by my of cleriticetion I euet poee e eecond queetion. one
which to no leee ieportent in connection with the preeent dieoueeiom ”lhet
ie the releticnehip between e given etreteg eui e given objective?" In
other worde. once it ie cede cleer thet etretegy end objectivee ere two
eeperete queetiou we not detereine whether the choice 01' etretegy will

eleo influence the choice of cheotivee. ‘Ihoee who denounce ecciel denocreoy
{or hevin; eucceeded only in ieproving cepiteliee rether then elieineting it
eppeer to believe thet once the deeooretic wey hee been ohoeen the Iexieul
objective etteineble by the lebor eoveeent in en inyroved vereion of cepital-
iee. It eeeee to he thet enyone who detende thie theeie con reech only one
logicel conclueicm thet the denocretio eethod euet be ebendoned. Ie euch
e ceuee-end-etteot reletionehip ineviteble? ‘i'het ie the queetion. I
pereoneliy do not believe euch e reletionehip ie ineviteble. even though

in prectice there hen been. until now. e reletionehip between the cepebility
or the politicel pertiee thet heve ected in ecoordence with the rulee oi'
deeoorecy. on the one head. end the meervetion of the cepiteliet eyetee

on the other. Only in e etrictly detereinietio eenee. however. ie eonethin‘
ineviteble eieply by virtue of the feet thet it exiete. Preoieely beceuee

I do not believe thie reletionehip ie ineviteble I Ieintein thet to deny the
exietence of e “third wey“ in no wey ieyliee e deniel of the poeeibility of

e dieeieiler objectiven thet ie to eey. the poeeibility of e third eodel.

30
?OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

it rollowo tron thio pro-loo that tho ooaroh for a "third aodol" in pot-
tootly ooapatiblo with tho affiraation that a "third way" dooo not oxiot.

i an thorol‘oro in virtual apooaont with thooo who aro attoapting to dooign
thio now nodal. ond 1 aaintain that tho loot appropriato diroction to thko
in thin attoapt in that of oo-oallod "colt-aanagoaont" oooialioa. 0n the
othor hand. I do not boliovo that it in poooihlo to givo a quick "yoo" or
”no” rooponoo to thio ptopooal without firot aaking a wory thorough invooti-
nation of all tho pouihlo oonaocuoncoo. and without taking into account
and rofutincnnot Juot with thoorotical uni-onto but with oonoroto
oxaaploonoll of tho poooihlo obJootiona. “no auuoot ono poooihlo obJootion,
wo know only too woll how difficult it ia to: tho liaitod fora of doaooraoy
now oxtant in our roopootivo ocuntrioo to function. Inaoauch ao oolf-
aonogoaont io primily tho oxtonoion of tho doaooratic oothod to all aootoro
or oooioty. boginnin‘ with tho ooonoaio oootor. it io my to toroooo that
tho ditticultioo attondant on ito iaploaontation will inowitahly incroaoo.
In othor wordo. it will ho noooooary onoo again to rookon with tho toourront
"dowoaratio illuoion.” that io to oay. with tho holiot that it ouftiooo to
giwo individualo a voico in ordor to fora a oollootiwo will. 0n tho ooh-
tzary. howovor. thio ahotraot ontity known ao tho ”oollootiwo will“ io a
pmon thoorotioal oonoopt. In tool lito thoro an on any individual
opiniono on a givon quootion oo thou-o aro iniiwidualo inwolwod. and it io
only through tho prooooo of counting tho votoo and dotoraininc tho IaJox-ity
opinion that thou individual opiniono axo ablo to produco a final dooioion.
'I'horo io no point in oonooaling tho fact that thio conflict of iniiwiduai
proforonooo will not ooaoo--and indood io probably dootinod to inoroaoonit
tho proooduroo for tho doaooratio forlation of a ocllootiwo will aro
oxtondod to tho aroa of ooonoaio dooioiono. Gonorally opoaking. in tor-u-
latim piano for oolt-aonogoaont oooialioa ono no longor opoako in tor- of
political partioo. will tho partioo ho involwod or will thoy not? It thoy
aro to ho inwolwod. what will thoir function ho? And it thoy on not. what
now aothodo will ho oaployod to aoooahlo tho individual proforonooo?

Boyond thio I do not moon to so, howowor. I on oxtx-oooiy intorootod in
tho dowoloplont 0! than ooncoptl. known it in ay {in boliof that in tho
limt of tho outragoouo oolwiuct dioplayod on a daily haoio by tho 'Loador-
Stato" of "roaliood" aooialioa. aooialiaa io taood with tho ilporatiwo of
"rotora or porioh.‘ I holiowo. howowor. that thio rotora roquiroo ocaothing
quito ditforont fro- tho om-owor-liyttly troataont aﬁodod by a caution-
nairo.

Corroniu "‘iho Only way“
[By Uaborto Corroni]

Any otrotogy oaployod by oaturo oooialioa ohould dotinitoly oriont ito
oritioioa oi' oapitalioa not only “with a wiow to“ oaancipatinc tho workoro
but aloo "on tho hooio ot" thoir dooiroo and tho gonoral intoxoot of tho
nation. In tho loot. thio otratog hao alwayo boon doprivod of ono of ito

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

conetituent oleeento. Spocifioelly. tho otretosy of the oociel donocretio
pertioo hoe concentreted ell ito offorte on the objective of e gonerel
crlticioe of cepitelioo. end the otretogy of tho Loniniot pertioo heo
further cooprooood thie obJootivo lnto the conflnoo of e nerrow eooterien
doctrine. it ie oignificent. however. thet oolf-critioioo heo been unre-
eittin; within the oociel dooocretic Left. eo hove likewioo been the ettoopto
et roforo within the oeJor oooouniot pertioe. It io o oign thet eny “third
m” out in foot be constructed entirely by coobining roooluto oritioioo
of cepitolioo with uncoeoing oupport of politioel denoorecy. 1b deny the
uoofulnooo of. end need for. thio third woy oooeo to lo todey to be quite
difficult. 1b deny the pooeibility of thio third wey is therefore to loed
the lebor oovooont book to the old entithoticel optiono thet hevo ceuood
the oplit in ito renkon either liticel dolocrecy with cepiteliol (end
the iepliod euthoriterien throetror oooielioe without politicel deoocrecy
(end the iopliod ebendonoent of tho liberterien eiee of oocielioo).

A Doeocrecy Booooee ”Subworolvo”

In reelity. thio entinonyufrooon into the old entitheticel ooncepto lebelod
”liberel” end ”8teliniot“--heo been refuted by the trondo of tho contoopo-
rery ere. Cepiteliee ie eurevetin; the burden of ito rule by doeonotreting
ito intolorenoo of doooorecy (witnooo the otetoeonte node by the kiletorel
Connieeion with roopect to tho ”ungovornebility“ of deeocreoy) end by
diopleyin; ito roourgont euthoriterien tendonoioe. lbr ito pert. "roelieod
oooielieo" io dooonotreting how difficult it in for thet oyoteo to function
in ectuel prectioo without oottin; in notion proceeooo of redicel donocreti-
oetion. with roopect to mropo. it ooooo obviom thet only profound chencoo
of e oocielietic neturo ere oepeblo of putting political dolocrecy on e fir-
footing by twining the workoro lnto eooocietion with it. end thot only by
diooovoring ito ormic link with politioel doeocrecy will oocieliol be eblo
to hove ito genorel oritioioo of cepitelioe ecceptod eo pecticel end effec-
‘1'.o

it the theoreticel lovol there in eboolutoly nothing to invent the mceoooe
of oocielieeticn of the ooonony fra- com forwerd in cedonco with tho
procooe of dooouetio choice in indoctrielieod ccuntrioo where the workere
oonotitute e eeJority. or to prevent the prectico of doooorecy {roe leni-
footing fully ito ”oocielieing" end "oubvoroive" content. I ebeolutoly do
not believe thet the acuity of contooporery freedo- ie tied to tho
privete ownorohip of the eoeno of production. nor thet the efficiency of e
oocieiiet oocioty nood be dependent on bureeucretioetion. Ihoevor boliovoo
the century io continuing either to think in term of e “governed" doloc-
recy--e deeooc-ecy with e pernnont cloeve‘e between thoee who govern end
tho governed-oor to conceive of eocielieo eo pure govoruontelioetion.
once egein tho diocuooion in being out in term of “pelooliboreliu” end
'oeloooouunloo.” doopito the feet thet the world heo We

with roopect to the oconooic eodel of the ”third wey" we do hove motel
beoic criterie which on be deduced in next fro- whet boo gone before. In

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

tho firot plooo. oocioliootion io not govornoontoliution (“ototiootion”)
ond lo thoroforonot ono ond tho Moo tin-«inoculation: tho brookup

or oonopolioll ond fulfilloont by tho uorkoro of thoir rooponoibilitioo.

in tho ooocnc ploco. ono ouot toko into ooccuntnin plonning on ooonony

thot io in procooo of ocoioliootionntho inotitutiono ct politicol doooorocy
u Moll no tho dooixoo ond intorooto of tho citioonry om tho pluroliotic
chorootor of tho contoro ct ooonolio onc lobor union octivity. In ohort.
tho chongoo in tho coobinoc plon-ond-oorkot oyotoo will likooioo bo oubJoot
to tho throo-uoy control of ociontitic criticin. politicol docioion-nking,
on! tho otticioncy thot io roquirod for oocnolio dovolopoont. Oonooquontly.
thoro io ovory roucn to boliovo thot tho rcrool gnu-onto" ootobliohod by
low-and likouioo tho sunrontooo of individunl ond collootivo politicol
muo- --will in no roopoct bo olilinotoc. hoot ilporunt of oll io tho
foot thot tho plon {or ootobliohoont of tho now oocioty will rouin on "opon
plon": thot in to ooy. it will bo noithor tho proocripticn or o politicol
potty (o ”toko it or loovo it” oituotion) nor o doctrinoiro progn- but
rothor on mlytic. dooocrotic om oxporioontol otructuro.

Vo oro ot o oroooroodo. Tho dirootion in which copitolion io toxins uo
could lood to o oonotruouo opproooion of Inn by ntoriol thingo on! by oonoy.
roducing hi: to o coo-on lovol in o ouoitioc oooioty thot io oynicol.
violont on! intolloctuolly dopododuo oooioty in Ihich culturo. Art on!
ooionco thoooolvoo ooy longuioh. In tho contoxt of Mopoon oiviliootion
tho lobor oovooont hoo tho opportunity to initioto o non. hiotcric ond
noblo oltotnotivo by con-yin; out o rovitolioin; oction thot io moo moo
dog-u ond io conittod to o oolution of tho tool problou o! huoon boingo
ond of notiono. 'nuo oction uould nourioh not only o promonvo chow in
oociol rolotionohipo but oloo o choral rooponoibility ond colloctivo opirit
on tho port of individul hunn boinp who will bo intolloctuolly woolthyl
in ohort. o conunitorion civiliution in which tho ootoriol chon¢oo oro
oupportod ond wioncod by tho univorool north of (too iuiividuol hmn

boinp.
Gollottiu mot-o Ion't Any

[By Lucio Collotti)

Tho “third voy" not only dcoo not oxiot in octuol foot but dooo not. ot tho
prooont tioo. oxiot ovon oo o "thooroticol lodol." mu txuth hoo boon
odoittod vory 0-me by honcooco Do httino. doopito tho toot thot ho in
on odvocoto of tho ”third tony." "It not bo oclunulodgod.‘ ho wroto in tho
8 Soptoobor icouo of MBSLICA. ”thot oll of no on hair; {or bohinni in
tho cultml ond politicol oloborotion of thin thin! on. uni ovon Ioro oc
in tho oloborotion of tho doooorotic procoduroo of tronoition. No cloor
dotoroinotion hoo boon lotio on to Ihot oxtont. or whothor. privoto ownmhip
of tho ooono of production ohould bo pro-mod; or boot tho mod for control-
iood diroctionniniioponooblo to ony kini or pinning-won bo roconcilod.
with tho ontiburooumtic otricturoo of oociolioll or how I. oocioliot Iorkot
could function." u you con ooo. ovorything io otill up in tho cit doopito

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I-‘OR (WPIGIM. "SF. "MIN

tho root thot owor oinco tho Eighth Ounsrooo in 1956 tho POI hoo boon
producing volunoo ond voluooo or ”congroooionol“ trootiooo in which it hoo
ottooptod to 31V. oubotonco to the “third woy"! if it in truo. howowor. co
suun ooid. thot "o ohoot of popor will toloroto onything." it in oioo
truo thot no nrooontiy doiinootod. tho proJootod third woy in ct ono mi
tho ouo tilo chaotic. «an. ovorburdonod with dotoil ond indotinito.

l oioo howo ooriouo doubto oonoorning tho 'oocioliot plon.” ot looot incomr
oo it ploooo ito truot in tho concopt of colt-amount. 'iho prooont-doy
induotriol ooonoly io boood on gimtio ontorpricoo (otool. oloctrio powor.
lining ond oo forth). ‘lb ontruot tho cdwiniotrotion of thooo ontorpriooo

to ”coir-amount” cool. to no to bo toohnioolly inpocoiblo ond cooiolly
dioootrouo. not to Iontion tho toot thot colt-amount coon to tond
ultiutoly to ourovoto ono of tho worot ovilo of odwoncod inductriol
cociotioou tho tondonoy toword oorporotiwioc.

i boiiovo thot tho inoontivo to cook o third my otooo tron ono booio orror:
tno orror of onco min ottooptin; to oot o gooi thot hiotory hoo dooon-
otrotod to bo utopion ond illuoory ond thot woo outlinod o contury ogo in
tho origin-ll Morxiot crouch. tho oxporioontounuooion cod min... oliko-o
of oovorol docodoo prowo thot ovon whon priwoto ownorohip of tho noon: of
production io booioolly oboliohod tho honiot moan: io otlll not tulfillod.
For tho foot io thot lobar for moo hu not boon oboliohodu tho oocioi
divioion of lobr.r hu not boon oboliohoda tho oocinl olooooo hovo not boon
obuliohodi oonoy hu not boon oboiiohod: ond tho ototo hoo not boon
oboliohod.

Bocouoo thooo who cook o. third woy would oloo iiko to obtoin oil thooo
thing; without howing to rooort to tho oxtrooo oooouroo uployod by tho
Ruooiono ond tho Chinooo. it io no wondor thot tho ”third woy” trootiooo
and plono-odoopito tho foot thot thoy hovo kopt no any oincoro pooplo
buoy {or no long o tioo-ohowo not yot olorsod ml tho otuo of noro
«mm thinking."

Thoro to m poooibility of 'oooioiioitu" tho loom of production. ‘Iho only
oocioiiution poooiblo io ”ototiution.“ “satiation.“ howowor (thot io
to coy. rigid ond intogrotod plonniu) ontoilo tho ono-porty oyotol ond
miiticoi totoutorionioo. not to nontion tho foct thot plonnim of thin
typoo-oxcopt in tho "tokooﬂ‘" otoaoo of induotrioliootion in undudowolopod
oountrioo--io occnuicolly dioodwontoaoouo. oubJoct on it in to bottlonocko
and nuivo dyoninctiono.

Tho Summon Lott ho- tor oclo tllo undorotood thlt tho loot yrocticoblo
oyotoo io thot of tho omcollod ”nixod ooonony": thot io to coy. on
ocunoqy conoiotilu of two ooctorouono public ond ono privotonbound
togothor by vorlouo form at cool-ionic plonning. Thio oyoton (which in tho
cuuroo odoptod by tho Ioro yropooolvo at tho Uootorn oociol donocrocioo)

would oppoor hswovor to bo inouﬂ'iciont for tho purpoooo of our country.
whoro too Iony individuio dooiro ot ony out to "oocopo" tro- tho oyotoo.
ovon if thio quito oinply loono oxcoodiu tho bounds of canon oonoo ond

fulﬁll.

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1he obJection reieed by these individueie ie eiweye the me: if you do
not "eecepe" you reeein e prieoner of cepiteliee. Not only in the dietent
vleion of theee individueie defective: they cennot even dietinguieh whet
to clone et hend. mel-eyetee eoononiee ere no longer pure cepiteliet
econneiee. In the ﬂeet. perticipetion by the etete in the econoey hee
onenged eeny thinge. It hee. eoreover. eltered the exietence of the greet
leee-beeed politioel pertiee end eleo thet of the lebor unione (euffice it
to note the ohenged cherecter of todey'e collective lebor contrecte).

A very greet deel indeed releine to be done. eepecielly in e country where
dieequilibriue preveile to the extent thet it doee in Itely. He euet etill
etruggle egeinet the privete intereete. both ierge end eeell. who erect
their tribute froe society. The hietory of reform. however. deeonetretee
thet they not only heve never been put into prectice but heve never eotuelly
been prepered end etudied. reflecting the feot (end it in e fect) thet
prepering e progre- of reforee ie not neerly ee eeey ee gelloping over the
wide open epecee of ideology.

Petrucciolin An Abetrect Concept
[By cleudio Petruooiolil

It in e etren‘e end dieturbing fect thet the diecueeion now teking piece
in uftiet circlee tend. to be confined within the bounde of “ideology”

(I uee the tern in the negetive eenee ettributed to it by hen) end there.
fore rune the riek of eveporetins into en ebetreot controverey without
heviu prod ced. end verified. e concrete enelyeie of the problem

it ie dieturbing beceuee unleee this error in corrected the Left will
eppeer to be leu. not eore. eble to cope with end to overcoee the proceeeee
eet in notion by the crieie end to eolve the eonueentel probleee thet

derive froe theee proceeeee.

'dhet ie the centrel queetionuthe centre]. theoreticel end precticel quee-
tion-owith which the Left end the lebor lovelent ere confronted? it ie how
to coebine in e plen. end in aoverneentel ection. profound chengee in the
orpniretion of the ecomey end in eociel reletionehipe. on the one hend.

with the protection end reinforcelent of e deeoce‘etic end perlieeentery
politicel eyetee thet wili 5uerentee end hroeden individuel libertiee end

piureliee.

The conviction thet thie in now the centre]. queetion in beeed not no euch
on inferencee of e conceptml neture ee on en eminetion of the current
eituetion in our country. on e correct eppreieel of the ecope of the
netionel crieie end the internetionel crieie. end on the threete end
ettecke thet heve been directed minet the govern-em. end deeocretic
inetitutione.

it ie certeinly eignificent thet the Itelien Left hee been eroueed--by the
herd reelitiee of the current eituetionnto deel with the eoet ieportent

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

question (e question es yet unresolved) in the long end veried history or
the struggles end conquests of the lebor sovesent.

it is signifimt beceuse it seens thet the tortuous course on which our
country finds itself is one thst requires en exceptionsl effort. erd
beceuse it seens thet the left is spproeching this tesk with greet strength
end en intense fighting spirit.

If we understsnd ell these espects of the situetion. eoreover. the seeroh
tor the ”third wey'ni‘or e third solutionubecoses sore precise end sore
socurete. It is not e question of leunching into sorelistic dissvowele of
sooiel desooretio experience end Soviet experience (which heve both been
fully studied end oriticelly evelueted) but rether of ecknowledgiug thet

if the goel is to trensi‘ors society pregnticelly end guerentee the existence
of e desocrstic politicel systes. then it will eveil nothing-to repeet the
verious ettespts to do so thet history. both pest end'present. hes recorded
for us: ettespts lecking either in the first espeot (the trensforsstion of
society) or in the second (the deeooretio cherecter of the pcliticel systee)
or. indeed. in both especte.

The reel discussion ooncerning the "third wey" is ststed in these term.
not es Bobbio hes steted it. nesely by directing his ettention exclusively
to the politicel systes. which is neoesserily either desocretic or not
desooretic. wheress our ettention is directed not only to the politicel
systes (which should be desocretic) but elso to sociel reletionships. which

"should” be chenged.

At this point in our history i believe the sein effort should be directed
towerd eeking e detersinetion es to the chsnges of en econosic end sociel
neture thet sust be esde. inessuch es there is elreedy very substsntiel
sgreelent thet the politicel end institutionel orientetion to be sdopted
should be besed on the republicen constitutionuthe fruit of the entitescist
revolution.

Retention of the serket--thet is to sey. e serket econosy--is strongly
recon-ended, es is likewise the systes of "self-ssnsgssent” (the trenster
of ownership of the seens or production to the workers es e group). It is
ispossible for enyone to consider (end irriesd no conunist does) eholishing
the serket end replecing it with nstionelisetion of ell the seens of
production together with centrelised plenning with respect to the utilise-
tion of resources end with respect to the detersinetion of econoeic euphe-
ses. (In the other hend. experisents in "self-eenegesent" could still be
cerried out end evelueted. but it is certeinly ispossible to regerd the
"self-unegesent" option es the overell enswer to the cosplex ecomsic end
sociel probless thet sust be solved.

Given the present-dey level of developuent of the productive forces or

society. given the suhstentiel influence exercised on the econoly by
govern-entel intervention em! governsentsl ection. dad given the level

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ochiovod in tho ovo iution of the prooooooo of i‘inonoiol concontrotion ond
internotionnl econooic integration. it ooou to no thot tho cruciol point io
to ootoblioh, ond utosunrd. o ”delocrotio odllniotrotion of tho ooonoly.”
Thio obviouoly dooo not noon olilinotion of the lukot but rothor the
ruliution that it will bo inpoooiblo oithor to ovorcono the orioio or to
ottoin the obJootivoo of inorooood production ond «ploy-out. inorooood
Juotico ond inoronood efficiency by relying on tho "troo" ploy of tho
opontonoouo ooohoniuo of tho mkot.

'Socioliot hodol' Controveroy
Niion L‘BUROPB) in ltnlion 6 Oct 78 pp 16-20

[mt] The deboto on the oubjoct at tho “third W" hen proved to be no
'i‘looh in tho pon" (u oono hod fared). lnitioted thio ouuor in the ton
of two intorviewo roopoctively by Nico Borlinguor nnd Bettina Crud. tho
deboto hoo tux-nod out to be oolowhnt Ioro ooriouo till oubotontiol tho.n o
noro poilticol ond oulturol polonic of tho typo thot io chuoctoriotic of
tho ouuor ooooon. Thin intorprototion io oubotnntiotod by tho ooriouonooo.
the continuity. ltd tho outhoritotivo noturo of tho contribution. thot hove
boon udo to tho doboto. 'i'ho quoot for o third wcyo-o it” other thon the
two olroody oxtont in Moo (oociel do-ocrotic upitoliu nnd burooucrotic
couunion)--rop\rooent o chcllengo which the boot nitric of tho Loft hovo
shown they no willing to occopt. in tho conviction that this io tho ton-tin
on which tho foto of politicol plunlioo. ond tho rote of tho {roe mkot.
will be docidod.

Following tho contribution- by Bobbio. Corroni. Collotti 3nd Potruccioli.
which it printed lut week. L‘tUROPm now wolconoo tho contribution-
oubaittodnon the one topicnby Giorgio Ruttolo. oocioliot oconollot ond
preoidont of Southern Pinonco: Luciono Conant. writor. on econolic hiotory
and oocretor to Antonio Giolitti in tho we; end Ilioolo Cococo prooidont
of the 181?! lnotitute for the Study of Intunotionol Boloticno] ond Ienbor
or the Control Gouittoo ot the 931 [1mm Social-t Party]. 11:. dobcto
will continue in tho coping woeko with additional outhoritotivo contribu-
..10M0

Borlinguor rennin: foithful to Lonin. ‘iho diopute
concerning the "oociolist nodol" io bocoling increa-
lngly hush in tono ond io involving politicionn.
intellectuolo. oconolioto ond hbor unionioto of
ovory ohodc of opinion.

Cocnco: Who Hill Be Able to “Self-How" Pint?
[By Nicola Cococo]

Juot no any opook of Marx and lanin without ovor hovilu rend the. (or so
it its ollogod). oo do we oonoe thct nny opook of the market. of econolic
pluralio- ond of col-petition without howing o cloor undorotnnding of tho

Iooning of thooo tor-o.
37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As Gelbreith elso enpheeised recently in Role. in those sectors of the
econony which ere of etretegio ilportenoe to developeent there is todey

no genuine econolio plureliee. there is no genuine coepetition. end there
le no freely functioning necheniee for setting prices. Phenolene such es
the "sliding ecele" of eutoeobile prices thet hee been in use iron 1973 to
the present. end the certele of the steel cospeniee (es well es those of
other eeotore) thet heve been orgenieed precisely with the blessing of the
no. ere increesingly the rule in this nrket end will seen to be contre-
dictory only in the eyes or those who ere etill etteepting to explein thee
eccording to the textbooks 01' cleseic eoonoeice. Those who heve followed.
end enelyeed. the profound chenges teking piece in internetionel cepitelien
know thet ite crieie ie ceueed in lerge leesure by contredictions thet heve
suddenly eppeered within its structure es e result at the struggles weged
by the lebor novenent. elthough there ere other contributory ceueee.

The inebility of cepiteliee to provide e neeeure of growth cospetible with
full eeploylent. or en eccueuletion of cepitel oonpetible with the thrust
of the lebor union Iowelenta its inebility to reduce the gep between rich
end poor. either et the netionel level or et the internetionsl level; its
inebility to bring under politicel control even the lost mndnentel deci-
eione teken by the eultinstionel corporetione; end its inebility to provide
the citizenry. end youth in perticuler. with new veluee different tron
those thet relete to eoney. violence. drugs end conepicuoue coneunption ere
obvious eyeptons of the crisis of cepitelienne crisis thet ie to be inter-
preted es en inebility to echieve certein objectives end not. of course. es
e prelude to e collepee which could very well be deferred to e dete (er in
the future or. in feet. never occur et ell.

So we cone to the crux of the problem to there e ”third wey“ to echieve
the goel of eupereeding cepitelise? In ey opinion Bobbio is correct in
eeying thet there is no “third wey" in between the deeocretic wey end the
violent, euthoriterien wey while ending thet there oen be. end probebly ie.
e “third model” of society: e Iodel different both now the eociel deno-
cretic Iodel end iron the eoviet nodel. If thie be true. whet we not do
ie design-and teet-othie Iodel without stopping to quibble over how new
heirs Lenin hed in hie beerd. while et the eele tile eckmwledging the {not
thet together with Mao. Lenin reeeine the greeteet revolutiomry of our
century. for elthough they deprived their people of the bourgeois i‘reedoee
they heve et leeet reduced the incidence of hunger. illiterecy. intent
eortslity end uneeploylent to e fer greeteo' degree then heve the politicel
leaders of other nonilriuetrielired countriee thet heve reinteined the
outwerd for-e of theee bourgeois undone.

It releine to be proven--eepecielly eince the events in Chile--thet it is
possible. in the developing countries. to conetruot e lore Just society
while et the one tile ulnteining ell the bourgeois freedom. In the
cue or the industrielized ouuntriee. however. it ie only too obvious thet

Leninlee hee only hietoricel eignificence.

38
FOR OWICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘l’lCML USE ONLY

Let us therefore bsse our diecuesion of the nodel of e socielist society
for en industrislised country on the preeisee thet heve now been eccepted
by the entire Left. to wit: retention end extension of the bourgeois
freedom; the denocretic wey. rether then the euthoriterien weyt plurelise
of politicsi pertiesu lebor union eutonoeyc eoceptence of rules of behevior
thet ere epprcpriete for s free internetionel econonyt end retention of e
privete sector of the ecomey. whet then will renein to be discussed?
Quite e bit. but by no teens everything.

First end forenoet there is the role of the crest privste corporetions. both
netionel end nultinetionsl. Even if self-“meant is sble to do s greet
deel to ilprove deeocrecy end efficiency in the sesller enterprises. it is
herdly eppliceble to Fist or to hospitele end benks. horeover. self-
nenegeeent suet cope with corporetivisr-the worst evil of edvenced indus-
trisl societies. minet this beckgound the hypothesis of eelf-eenegesent
socieliee (in which 1 personelly believe) hee still not been developed to
shy extent. Before underteking this teek (st leeet in Itely) it lust be
denonetrstedo-by restoring the deceyim edifice of the public enterprises--
thet the equetion ”public enterprise equels inefficiency“ is not true. The
govern-eat pertiee heve e heevy responsibility in this regard. but there
ere eleo theoreticel end espiricel shortcoeinse on the pert of the left.
beceuee it is not yet cleer how illiustriel socielisn cen function without
lsrge public enterprises (whether they be wore or less socielieed) thet
ere efficient end thet exercise e leadership role with respect to the greet
prlvete ennopolies. especielly in the stretegic sectors of the econoey.

So long so the Left epproechee this question tron s defensive position. so
is the ceee todsy. every theoretical dehete end every effort to construct
e de-ocreticelly plsnned sncielist ecomny in en environsent of freedon.
well-being end plurelisn will resein eerely good intentions. horeover, we
ssy properly esk those who (such es Pelliceni) eseert thet the arket ie
the beeie of plureiiss. of conpetitive deeocrscy end of individuel freedonu
"whet eerket?” ile ney elso resind then of the my ceeee (tron the
msinicen Republic to Chile) in which the serket «dosineted by the sulti-
netionels-ofsiled to defend either plursllse, or denouscy. or medal.

Cefegne: He Are Not Even mropeene
[By Lucisno Cefegne]

i shell eeke four obeervstione with respect to Pelliceni'e six points. The
first obeervetion is thet I believe there is no ”third wey" but thet there
is e ”third nodel": specificeily. the enercho-liberterien Iodel of e
society. The second ohservetion is thet thie nodel is unique in thet it

is different in cherecter fro- either Usetern cspitelien or conunist
stetisn. both of which origineteduend ere governedo-in en olicerchic
unner. The third obesrvetion is thet to speek of e third sodel cennot in

em wey serve es justificstion for esteblishing inpossible equidistences
between denocrecies (however isperfect these deeocrscies my be) end

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVI-‘ICML USE ONLY

euthoriterien tnteliterienieee. or for leeeening our vigilence in defence
of the deeocretic veluee thet heve been ecquired end in defenee of the
reletively delicete eechenieee of deeocrecy. The fourth obeervetion ie
thet it would Ieke no eenee to etteept to preeent the concept of e third
Iodel ee e eolution to the current ltelien crieie.

Seeking, end identifying e “third mdel" in the context of en enercency
eituetion euch ee thin doee. however. provide e very veluehle indicetion of
thoee nethode thet ere ‘ecoeptehle.'° end thoee thet ere ”unecceptehle.“ for
uee in etteepte to eureount the crieie.

I ehell begin with ny firet obeervetlon. To epeek of e third wey eervee to
focue ettention on e problen with reepect to Iethcde of pvernlent end
eethode of politicel ection. ‘l‘hoee ouch ee nohhio end Colletti who deny--
ee reprde the pertiee end governeente of eocieliet inepiretion. hroedly
epeekingnthet there cen be e “wey” of aoverneent end politicel ection
different {roe the reforeiet end deeocretic wey of the Veetern eociel
deeocreciee end the euthoriterien end toteliterien wey of the hetern
coeeunieee ere quite correct. ee Pelliceni. loreover. perceivee in eekin;
hie third point.

The diecueeion of eodele. on the other hend. ie en ebetrect diecueeion of
the generel phyeicgnoeiee of verioue eyeteee of ecomeic. politioel end
eociei oraenieetion-oe diecueeion thet in independent of the politicel
forcee in ection todey end independent of the inetrueente which theee
eyetene heve et their diepoeel to echieve their obJectivee. In thie ceee
it ie even poeeihle to diecuee the queetion without eny reference to the
exieting eeteriel end eociel coeponente of theee eyeteee.

I believe thet the *third eodel'--ee thue conceived-«lace exiet in the
tredition of the lehor eoveeent end further thet it ie the enercho-lihertero
ien eodel. which ie founded on the principle of eelfoeenegeeent end on
renuncietion of the hiererchicel end euthoriterien etructuree which. on the
contrery. the col-inlet for-ale eervee to unify. etrengthen end cenereliee.

There in no doubt thet eilliom who heve looked with fevor upon the eocieliet
concept eince it we firet publicised heve ”envieioned" the eociety of the
future in theee teree rether then in teree of e generel 'etetieetion.”

The Initietive Coeee hoe Below

we ehould however hewere of eecrihing to thin eodel the eeee politicel
iepllcetione ee thoee of the other two. for it ie entirely different in
cherecter. The reforeiet ection thet in poeeihle in the context of e
cepiteliet eociety. end the revolutionery ection thet ie deeimed to effect
coeplete etetieetion (end likewiee the euheequent euthoriterien ection
deeigned to eeteblieh the epperetue to edeinieter the reeultent ”etetieed“
eoonoey) ere eccoepliehed through the intereediery of politicel oligerchiee
end ere upreeeed lergely in the fore of directivee headed down frce ehove.
regerdleee of whether or not the decieion wee teken in eccordence with
deeocretic proceduree.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The principle of eelf-Innegenent ie of e different neture. however. Self-
eenegelent ie not eonething thet out be dicteted. for otherwiee it in e
fiction devoid of vitelity end without eny future. it not either be initi-
eted eponteneoueiy front below or be developed through the eediue of conflict
end direct nemtieticn.

It ie cbvioue thet the direct role pleyed by the treditionel politicel
orgenieetione in inplenenting e nodel of thie type hee been eherply rede-
fined vie-e-vie the role they pley in connection with the other two typee.
in thet theee orpniutlone can eeeiet end defetli e nponteneoue proceu but
cennot teke the piece of thet proceee. Thin fect obviously eleo hee iepli-
cetione in the eree of politicel hietory.

My third cbeervetion ie thet e eodel of thie type cennot be adopted end
followed if it ie interpreted ee being equidietent fron the other two
eodele. There in e tendency todey in “Itelien coeeuniet' circlee to weigh--
on if on two belenced pent of e eceleenthe defecte of Soviet coeeunien end
thoee of weetern ecciel refornien.

To do co in to perpetrete e greet deception. It in e deception beceuee on
the one eide of the ecelee you heve oppreeeion. regieentetion end neee
externinetion eccoepenied by eociel pine thet ere inferior-«not euperioru
to thoee echieved by leetern reforeiee. while on the other eide you heve.
et the very woret. exoeeeive eelf-eetiefection with linited eucoeeeee thet
ere leee eteble then generelly believed.

The difference in enoreoue end nuet be treeted eccordingly. In the one

ceee whet you heve ie the continuetion of e trend of long etending: in the
other. en ineufficient fulfilleent of proliue-oif you willo-thet hee
nonetheleee teken piece in the light of dey. ‘l'he preemption thet the new
eodel would be ”equidietent" fro- both of the ebove in e deception. ncreover.
beceuee eny ection by the treditionel pertlee of the Left to did. fecllitete
end protect e eelf-nnegeeent novenent would be teken in continuity with
treditionel reforeiet ection (which ehould. in euch cue. be continued end
euitebly edepted) end would not conetitute e hreek with the letter.

0n the contrery, euch notion in eupport of e eelf-nnegenent loveeent would
in feet involve e ‘reedJuetnent of eighte" with reepect to none of the
orientetione of the treditionel reforeiet ectionuorientetione (euch u the
netionelitetion of individul enterprieee) thet hive been edopted even by

the conuniete u intereediete obJectivee in line with the ultilete objective
of tote]. ”etetinetion.”

A eeif-Ienegelent eoveeent. nor-cover. eppeere poeeible (elthough with greet
difficulty) u e continmtion of the traditional reforeiet ection in let-ket-
ecnmny countriee.

Leetly. ny fourth obeerveticn. For eole tile now the notion hee been
geining ground within the Itelien Left to the effect thet the current
netionei crieie reflecte not e lore beckwerd. but tether e are edvenced.

61
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

otago viva-Vic tho root of tho ilwiuotrioiiood world. and that in Italy it
will thorotoro bo poooiblo to atago a proviow of tho tor-ulna of tho futuro.

ho Third hcdol

Thoao who aro thinking olcng thooo iinoo aro. in an idoologicai aonoo. trit-
ling with an illuotriouo prooodontn that of Lonin. who in his day had
doocribod harlot Ruooia aa ”tho woakoot link in tho chain of iaporialioa'
and thorotoro o. vioblo baao tron which to bogin tho world rowolution. i can
only any that to loco oight of tho dittoronco botwoon Ruoaia and ltaly (in
torn of oioo and intornational otatua) ia a torn of “italooontrioa‘ which
io rathor parochial and partakoo oonowhat of Iogalcaania. 0n tho othor hand.
thin to not tho rirot tiao that wo ltaliano hawo boon rovoalod to pcooooo a
vocation for ‘prooainonoo.’

It io a acnowhat ncro ooricuo iattor. howowor. to forgot that bonin’o world
rowolution ondod thoro. in Ruaoiauand ondod tho way it diduprociooly

booauoo it woo bogun at tho “woakoat link." Nothing good owor cocoa m-
‘woakoat linko." '

Tho Italian orioio will not bo oolvod by noano ci‘ a third nodol. It will bo
cclwod only in concort with induotrial naropoo-with tho {crooo ond voluoo
thot roprooont tho Nority opinion thoro. ‘i'ho 'third Iodol.“ howowor. in
not on oapty concopt mwidodo-uwi to tho utontnthat it dowolcpo into a
rotoronco point for a ccnoroto. conatruotiwo advanoo by tho rotorliat torooo
or incuotrial unopo.

A hropo. that io. whooo atruoturoo wo Iuat otill roclaia by organizing at
long laot. in aocordanco with thio rotor-int chol. our chaotic and inorti-
ciont nixturo ct corporato minim. public waato anti antiaooiol wolfar-
ioo--tho ”rough drotto“ of tho baaio olononto of that rotorniaa (a otrong
labor union aovonont ccuplon with high wagon an otticiont oooial oootn‘ity
oyotol; uwi a policy of full onploynont).

Rurtolon without a Conconauo ‘i'horo can Bo llc Plan
[By Giorgio Mob]

hcdorn oocialion nuot roconoilo two inporativoa: tho that for donoorati-
ution. an oxprooood in tho dooiro of tho pocplo to play a diroct rolo in
coking tho dooioicno thot inwolwo tho-t and tho nocoooity of cohoront plan-
ning in ccnnoction with tho dovolcpnont of oocioty.

Convontioml window oayo that thooo two iaporatiwoo aro contradictory. and
that any ottonpt to roconoilo thon ia tho can on looking for on “ant tho
oiso of an olophant.“ An analyoio of tho way in which oooial oyotou (and
in gonoral all advancod oyoto.) dovolop convincoo uo. howovor. that thooo
two inporntivoo aro strictly conplonontary. In fact. tho dovolopnont of a
occioty involwoo an owtonoivo diffuontiaticn c! ito oocial otructuro and

62
FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oloo ontoilo tho ”plonning" or thot dovolopoont. Thio plonnins rocuiroo
o conoonouo on tho port or divoroo oooioi groupouo conoonouo which. won-

ovor. con ho ohtoinod only through grootor oquolity in tho diotrihution or
woolth ohd in tho diffuoion of mwor.

‘l‘ho propooolo mntoinod in tho oooioliot plon Iuot ho intorprotod in thio
oonoo. ond in portiouiu: thooo thot roioto to: o) tho dittuoion of politi-
col powor. by dooontroliution of tho onto otructuroon b) tho doloorotiu-
tion or ooonooio powor. tho introduction or for. of doooontic control
And of oolf-nnocolont: c tho dovolopwont or coopontivo ond oooociotiwo
Iothodo of odniniotorin; tho oooiol oorvicoo ond oulturol octiwitioo: ond
d) plonnina thot io proporod dowocrotioolly with poxticipotion by on tho
flutoliotic Juriodiotiono of oooioty. ond thot will Ioko uoo of tho lot-hot
of o cox-hot thot io rogulotod ond colpotitivo. not ono thot io rogulotod
And climpoliotic) u ono of ito huio linotrulonto.

‘l'hio in tho oouroo thot tho oocioliot plon hoo propoud. It io. to ho ouro.
tho ontithooio of tho Loniniot Iodol ohd oloo of tho oonototo {on in which
thot mdol woo ilplooontod. moly tho oyotol of hurooucrotic oollootiviol.
It odoittodly you for hoyond tho oocioi doooontio oxporilonto. owon tho
ooot odvoncod ond trilliont or which (oo for ownplo tho Swodioh oxporioont)
ono to o holt ot tho throohold of ooomnio powou'. It io no occidont thot
ovon tho Swodioh oocioiioto hovo plocod tho prohloo or induotriol donaooy
ot tho contor of thoir now proud-o.

Why. thon. io thoro on ouch okoptioioo with round to tho "thixd woy'? 1b
ho out-o. it tho “third woy" io o tor-uh of convonioncono roody-Iodo dowioo
to roconcilo tho two oppooitoo. Pol-o ond Brothhov. in o him of ooloctio
and mtic Iinootronoo-it io o wuto of tin ovon to oonoidor it. If.
howowor. it io tho vioion of on oplitorion ond dommtic oocioty whoroin
domaocy dooo not otop with tho ottoinlont or o roprooontotivo politicol
oyotoo ohd wontooo for tho voriouo froodolo (thingo whisi m oocrooonct
ond wot ho prooorvod) hut io oloo dovolopod ot tho ooonooio ond oocioi
lovol. thon nonkly I do not ooo how onyono con roJoct it and yot continuo
to coll hiloolt o oocioliot (which of couroo io not nocoooory in odor to
ounivo). Gollotti’o invitotion to oocopt tho ”ion of tho toctory" dooo
mt ohock no, but I holiovo thot to do oo would ontoil 'oooopin; ml
oociolioo.” no for tho oooond orguoont. which contondo thot ouch o oocioty
hoo "novor boon noon.” it oppooro to no to ho o Ioooogo "of littlo ouh-
otonco.” For it warm hon ovor hod o. porticulor oriontotion. I holiowo
it hoo olwoyo boon oriontod toward thing which ot tho Iolout woro "not
ooon.“ Vhon it woo originolly ooinod. ovon tho old odnnitiou to ”got your
root on tho yound' Iuot howo ooonod to our oncootorouoo thoy owuna fro-
ono troo hunch to omthoruto ho o foolioh utopio.

‘l'ho "Koroon' Mot

No ono. of oouroo. ony loncor holiowoo thot tho plon of o oocioliot oooioty
io on intrinsic tooturo of tho ovolution of hiotory. lbw do holiovo.
howovu. thot hold oolutiono oxo poooiblo for tho trooondouo prohlooo mm

(03
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the world todeyueolutione thet ere egeliterien end deeocreticuend thet

it ie therefore worth while to continue the etruule. whereee e future
world eheped in eccordence with the neocepitelietic end eultinetionel eodel
n!‘ Singepore or South Koree (where the lewe or the rectory end or the
eerket ere fully respected) eeeee to be neither deeireble nor even poeelble.
Socieliee ie of couree only "poeeible": it ie not en "eeey‘ couree to teke.
to e leerned nen once eeid. however: "The world in like e plete oi‘
oyetereu the ehelle thet ere eeey to open ere eepty.“

Socieliete Venue the South
Hilen L’ruzom in Itelien 3 Nov 78 DP lei-us

[Text] Following the poleeic thet hee teken plece
within the Left on the eubJect oi’ uniniee. Vittore
Flore proponee. in the eneuing interview. e debete on
the eubJect of the reletionehip between the Sooieliet
ehii't in poeition end the “Southern queetion.”

The Journeliet end euthor Vittore Flore. eon of
romeo more. ie one of the principel inheritore
of the “Southerniet” treditione emi culture.

The proceee of criticel revieion within the Left hee (to the extent thet

it hee been ooepreheneive end in depth) for e coneidereble tine now been e
eteedy proceee conditioned by the inflexibility of the reel intereete
involved end by the very preeence or the politicel pertieeo-the PSI end the
POI-which ere in coepetition with eech other. The Left. however. ie etill
e prieoner of en objective eituetion thet hee e perelyeing influence. Juet
no it wee in the ieeediete poetwer periods thet ie to eey. the debete
coeee to e helt Juet ehort of deeling with the ”Southern queetion.‘ The
influence of the epeciel intereete linked to the duelietio etructure of the
econoey chokee of! the debete every tine it touchee on propoeele to chenge
thet etruoture.

l ehell cite. et leeet briefly. two eignli‘icent booke (one by e eocieliet.
one by e counniet) thet fell within the ecope of ny obeervetioma ”Quele
eocielielo" [Uhich socmim]. by Norberto Bobbin. end 'Quele demcreeie"
[which Deeocrecy7]. by Giueeppe Vecce. me etudy or politice mueetionebly
hed need of lbbbio'e cleer end lucid explenetion of the problem of needn-
end eocielieeuproblen of which the Left (end ell the demcretic forced)
eeeelngly beceee ewere 60 yeere eiter the "herch on Bone” end which Guido
eelogero epproprieted (in en erticle in the «mains m 8m) fro- the
preceding liberel-eocieliet eleboretione end iron the pole-lo with
Benedetto Croce concerning the pouibility-oor iepoeeibilityuoi‘ reconciling
the term "Juetice' end ITrenton."

he i eelted Bobbio in en "open letter” eddreeeed to hie in "mm. ehould
not theee eleboretiom. in order to be incieive todey. teke into eccount

(ole
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the current etructurel end politicel level of the Southern problee. which
m- the due of ”Unity” to the present tier-with the burden of the peet
behind it--hee been en underlying recto! in the developeent. end in the
crieee, of our eociety'!

l eeked the eeee cueetion of Veooe (who todey ie increeeingly ettentive to
thie wey of etetina the problee) during e debete in hole thet wee doeineted
by other ccncerne c! e theoretioel end preoticel neture. l eeked hill
”tour-bend on en enelyeie of the developeent ci' cepiteliee. the hietcricel
fore of which hee ultieetely been identified with the divieicn between
North end Southndo you not explicitly cone to reoomiee thet we euet deel
tiret eni toremet with the 'Southern queeticn.‘ which eeene thet we euet
enelyee the ohengee thet heve teken plece in Itelien end Mpeen eociety.
whereee in your book. deepite ite entidopetic tenor. you etop Juet ehort
of the problee end do not deduce the coneecuencee oi‘ thet problee in the
epheree or culture. politice end lebor unioniee? um ie the neture oi'
the obetecle thet diverte the diecueeion et thie point? Likewiee. whet ie
it thet prevente the workim clue of the North. the ruliu cleeeee. end
public opinion i‘me 'peroeiving' the South en en Itelien cueetion end
ecoordinsly tekin concrete end coherent ection. leeving eeide clichee

both old end new? Ie the reletionehip between deeocrecy end eocieliee--
the new etretegic plen thet euet neceeeerily be beeed on the eoveeent oi'
the eeeeeeuextreneoue to the probleee poeed by ’Southerniee'?”

to it eeeier to dieouee ianiniee end Stelinieencr even the inveeion or
Ceechoelovekie or the dieeent in the Soviet Unior-then the preeent etetue
of the ”Southern cueetion." which in e continuing contredicticn (the
"Gordien knot" of the torcee of the hit) in our country?

The unpopuler teek initielly devolved upon the einoritiee. 'nodeyuprecieely
in the eoet ecute period of crieie--the eeee-beeed pertiee ere bout by the
very problem thet were eneiyeed by the criticel einoritiee end by intel-
lectuele who hed ccntinuelly been coepelled to deel with the objective
pcliticel eni orpnieetionel poeeibilitiee of their pertiee-men euch ee
Selveeini. aceeelli. Greuci end henni. the leet-neeed ct whoe (et leeet
on the beeie of hie tenoue book on "i9th Centuryiee") could heve been
included in your cent of Ientcre elomide Antonio iebriole end ﬂodoltc
liondoli‘o. All the revieiomuincludinc thoee of Gobetti. mm. the
regicneiiet end republicen eutomeiete. end the entiprctectionieteuorigin-
eted lone ego. end their euthore choee ee e eolid toundetion the link
between the hietoric torntion of the econoeio etructuree ed the develop-
eent or the cleeeee end eociel etrete together with the woo-min;
politicel end imtituticnel etructuree.

No Merciful Veil

ﬂiowriogrephy hen. even care recently. confined the theeie of the
incepecity of reforeiete end nxieeliete elilte to eolve in e poeitive Inner
the crieie or the exieting eyetee--ite ultinete oriele. which hed ite origin
in lorld Her I end which Giolitti wee no longer in e poeition to eolve.

66
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIAL USE ONLY

th ovorlook tho ochloo' thot nocurrod ot Llworho? Tho ooololloto cannot
drow o norcltul voll ovor tho put of tho PSI on! Pct. for ooclolln woo
dofootod on tho loouo of tho contronty of tho "Southorh quootlon." orun
1t woo oollod ot tho t1oo--tho "pooooht quootlon," which ohould howo boon
tho torroln for tho hlotorlo oltornotlvo of tho olllohco botwoon wotkoro of
tho North ond pouohto of tho South thot woo propoood by Solwoulhl ot tho
turn of tho contury. It to proclooly by tum tho dlocuooloh book to tho
Mvorho «Mon at 1921 thot wo will bo oblo doﬂnlt1woly to {too curoolvoo
ﬂ‘ol tho orroro ooulttod 1n tho put. Ho con. Ioroowor. ook ouroolvoo
th1o quootlom Do tho hlotorlcol polltlcol oohdltlonouhotlcml ond lntor-
hotloholuthot pldyod o commotlvo rolo ond ultlutol oponod tho door
for tho dlototoroh1p botwoon 1919 ond 1922 otlll oxlot olbolt 111 o qulto
dlfforoht oontoxt)‘

H111 wo bo oblo to rooolvo tho cmoht ooolol ohd polltlcol crlolo of tho
oyotoo (ond of tho how oqutllbrluu) by noon of o rohowod 'coopronloo”
obtolnod non; tho worlouo concornod 1ntorooto through tho lntorlodluy of
tho uJor Ion-bond porttoo’ Io 1t ohough to ovold o opllt to: tho ohort
ton or Ioroly Iltlpto tho o1tuotlohuto prooorvo tho oyotolnor ohnuld
tho otruoturo of tho auto bo chon‘od? how on tho old (And how) dootobl-
nun; 1051c of tho ontl-Southornlot nodol of oooncllo dowolopooht bo
dootroyod?

1:: Mo dlologuo with Gluooppo Vooco which woo publlohod prollnohtly 1h

11. mutrmo. Rlccu'do Iolbordl contondod thot tho roplocolont for tho old.
now dlou‘odltod. myth of tho ‘dlctotorohlp of tho prolotorlot" could woll
bo tho lyth of tho un1ty of tho Lott. whloh would ocooxwdln‘ly odopt o
couch pray-on. Tho vol1d1ty c! ouch o plon. howovor. 1o lopoLrod ot tho
wory outoot. Oomlno nutty-much oo tho unlty loncod for ot dlﬂmnt
porlndo 1n hlotory by anon. by houndl. by Pomlorl. by boulo. by lbhtoldo
by tho "Now Lott" do 1htorprotod by Stofono Null 1:: tho {1111“, ond
finally by Giorgio Anondolo (who couood o moor wlth hlo propoool {or o
olnglo potty of tho worklna cluo)--Iuot lnowlubly bo boood on how ond
dittoront clooo-orlontod olllonoool thot 1o to on. now ond dlftoront
w1th roopoct to thooo propoood ﬂrot by sun-1:11 ond lotu- by mil-cl.
Thlo lo truo prlnrlly bocouoo tho hoturo of tho cluooo hoo chungod. but
oloo bomoo tho porolotoht pp botwoon North on! South oorvoo to lntonnfy
tho dlftoronco botwooh tho 1htorooto of tho workoro and wax-Ida; clan of
tho North. on tho oho hond. ohd tho pouonto ohd loborm of tho South on
tho othor. uployod ond unooployod ollko.

Tho working cluo ltoolf hon undorgom o Mao. ond tho lnnnonco of tho
pouontry hoo dll1h1ohod u o rooult of only-ouch. lnduotrlollutlon and
tho oxodua m. tho oountryoldo 1nto tho cltloo. whorooo tho influonco of
tho urbon um. cluooo hoo lacrooood. Tho pom of tho urbon buroou-
crotic oootor hu lucrouod onormuoly 1n tho South. Tho clm-orlontod
Lott-«yon thot oopout wh1oh to not roccanlood wlthlh tho hlotorlc

portloonhu promtod .10” thut oro llluoory ohd 1h ony ovont log
boh1nd tho how rool1ty. wh1oh 1h tho South uood to bo culod tho “urban

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VCR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

queetion"--e deeignetion euthenticeted eo clemrouely by the ewente in
Regain. the unity of the Left. therefore. on be echiewed only through
poiiticel end eociel uniticetion of the North with the South. A Left thet
reile tn eeke e clue-oriented enelyeie--thet ie to eey. en enelyeie of

the new contredintione. of the eociel teneinne in the urben end eetropoliten
ereeeuwill be uneble to toreulete e new etretegy of elliencee without
deepening the differencee between North end South.

An ellience of the working cleeeee cf the North with the urben eiddle
nleeeee of the South (which ere of uneteble deeonretic orientetion) poeee
probleee thet ere difficult or eolution--euch lore difficult then thoee
which the Southerniet eocieliete had to tece when the torcee ellied with
protectioniee. corporetiwiee (irduetriel end eaerien). end etete eccieliee
were weeker.

Since 20 June 1976 the problel hee eeniteeted iteelt in the tollcwiu
tereel The greeter eeeeure of public epprcvel ebteined by the PCI,
whereby the eociel coepoeit‘icnot the perty wee broedened. hee hed the
effect or perelyeine concrete ection deeicned to benefit the South-action
which neceeeerily involwee eedieticn or the contreeting epecit‘ic intereete
involved (end. we digit edd. the contreeting wegee eerned) in contention
with the eueterity progree. the tight epinlt intletion. elli eftnrte to
nurteil unproductive public expenditure. contrery to eoee ecccunte. it ie
the owerell politicel end encnoein eitueticn. rether then e deceitful
Hechievellien policy. thet hee eotiveted the PCI to reech en egreeeent
with the other greet perty of the eeeeee. the no [Chrietien Deeonretic
Perty]. which hed elreedy been coepelled--while lexieelly erpceed on the
Right to Index-etc eectore end to united end bettle-herdened econneic end
finenciel torceento deel with probleee reletim to econoeic Iedietion
end deeocretic etebilieetion.

ﬂee the Coeproeiee of 191016 e ”Southerniet" Ooeproelee?

when It broeder-beeed eociel bloc or eltermtiwe hietoric bloc (euch ee
propoeed recently by Riccerdc lonberdi) or e reforeiet ellience (euch ee
propoeed by Pebrieio Cicchitto) ie poetuleted it ehculd be borne in lind
thet euch e bloc or ellience would give riee to the nu kind of problele
thet eroee in the tint pcetwer periodnprobleee which the lee-beeed
teeciet resiee etteepted to reeclve in the wey we ell kmw (or ehould
perhepe etudy once epin). when we epeek of en 'hietcric ccepnoeiee"--
whether we eccept it or reJect it--we euet an beck et leeet to ite hietori-
oel predeceeeor. the ”Selerno cceproeiee." end the eonercny thet helietti
wented in 194010. See thet e "Southerniet" ehii't in pceition? in ehcrt.
how an the eccieliete help to urewent the Left tron inheriting the clip:-
chic ccrporetiwieee end pcliticel trenei‘oreieeuthe hietoric evil of the
entire ltelien politicel eyetee end therefore not of the South elcne?

Socieliete end comniete mdment en experience 30 yeere ea: thet mould.
however. hewe taught the eoeethim end dour-wee to be etudied m- en
hietnricel etenipoint. In 1950 the PSI wee {eced with en ieportent decieion

48
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

concerning the Southern Developsent Nnd. e proJeot thet wee linked to the
efforts in behelf of free trede. The socislists voted in Perliesent egeinst
the fund. end the cossunists did not seke up their sind until the lest sosent
(Di Vittorio wee in fevor of the fund). Ultisetely. however. even the
sooieliste. sided by their oulturel end politicel uturity. revised their
position-and thet wee when. together with the plenner'e. Southernies "re-
entered the house" of the socieliste. which wee elreedy rich in trsdition
end where e few individueis hed kept the lesp of criticise burning. ‘ihe

not subsequently sede s reelistic chenge in its position with respect to
polioies--snd speoisl intervention-4n behelf of the South. ee profound
chenge: were seenwhile teking piece in the dosestio situetion end the world
s tuet on.

less end the Shift in the lsbor Union Ibsition

These chenges in position-which sede e cosson etretegy poseible--proved to
be insufficient. however. not only for the reeeons I cited previously but
eleo becsuse the discussion concerning the South hes in scse eepecte been
restricted in scope. despite the feet thet the structursl neture of the
crisis (the NorthoSouth isbelence end the Southern Itely-Burope dueliee)
necessitetes coherent decisions thet cennot be postponed. Lucieno Less hes
gpne such ferther. however. beginning with his interview in u. REPUBSLICA
srli concludiu with his interview in the Seturdey 26 August issue of L’UNITA.
in which he repests the cossitsent ends by the trede unions st the Elm
[Universel kpoeition of Rose] to becose e force for chenge: e force
cepeble of utilisingnthrough the sedius of its own besic decisionsnits
own resources to give work to the unesployed. Indeed. Less bed the intel-
slctuel end politicel honesty. in his first seneetionel interview. to recog-
nice the emr of regerding the cost of lebor es en independent verieble.
wherees RIMSOITA hed hsstened to polesiciee egsinet Sereoeno's report et
the Levente i‘eir concerning the inflstion of costs (less's invocetion of
culture wee seorcsenct. but the sore sttentive of the ”Southernists” never
stopped tslking ebout it).

But why resind the socielists of these things? Sisply beceuse the FBI is
finelly on the right tree]: with the “Sooislist Plen.” by virtue of its pro-
South content. wherein full esploysent. develop-sot of the South end
reconversion of production ere no longer seperete (end sepereble5 objectives
es in the pest (even in Crui's book "Costruire 11 future“ [Build the
Future] the subJect of the South wee not neglected). The specificity-«roe
the stendpoint of politicel history--of the "Southern question" todey cospels
yet enother politicsl decision of netionel sui ampeen significence.

1n the ”Socielist Plen“ the future of the South is viewed in reletionship to
the extresely tepid evolution of science end technoloyuen evolution thet
hes led to s new type of internstionel specielieetion. to s new division of
lsbor. end to new "regionsl" isbelsnces. In view of the denger posed by
elienstion cf the South. whet should the role of the PSI be? It is not
sorely e question of not repesting the error slreedy cossitted in the post-
Uorld Her 1 period with respect to the southern peesents end the South. nor

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is it serely e question todey (elthough it is urgently necessery to do so)
of opening up the systes to forces thet still pley no role in econoeio
developsent. The problen extends beyond the borders of Itely. end I
believe the PBI's opening to Mops ls besed on these truths.

All thet reseins is to cell the Socielist Perty's ettention once egein to
the tredition of socielist Southerniss. which hed es its leeding theoreti-
oien end egitetor Geeteno Selvesini end es its stsnderd-beerers lbs-sea
Flore. Cerlo Levi. hilio Lussu. Rocco Scotellero end Henlio Rossi lbris.

Selvesini wee eble ideelly to chersoterise the PSI ee e “Southernist” perty.
It wee with eeple Justificetion thet following the events of 20 June Asor
Boseuteking the pleoe of the greet soholer i‘ros holfette [Selvesini]--wrote
thet the PCI should nske itself the spirituel heir of Ionin end ‘i‘ureti. The
socielists cen reopen within the left the discussion concerning Selvesini.
not so such bsceuse he geve birth to s cu-rent of thought thet hes been
"unjustly neglected": nor even in en effort to convince Asendole. Inporini
end Gerin thet the sen i‘ros holtette wee neither en illusinist. e sorelist.
en individuelist nor e lsy prophet weering the "seek of e rstionelist"
(--Gerin); nor even (elthough it is en isportent problee) in en effort to
explein to us the ressone for Grsnci's (en! subsequently Giorgio Asendolefs)
leek of generosity towsrd the an who hsd pleced in their heads e new end
toreideble lever for overturning the eystee through the eotion of the only
two potentielly revolutionery forces--the workers end the peseente--but
first end fore-0st bsoeuse the coeprehensive perception of history on which
conteeporery politicel culture should be bssed--the perception of the
'oentrelity of the South”--dsrivee dynseioelly tron Selvesinl‘s teeching.

Selvesini wee the first euthentic discoverer of this "centrelity." end this
tect expleins the verious steges of his ection within end outside the
Socielist My; whether he wee conbetirg protectioniss end peresitiss (in
this he wee not elone) or fighting for genuine rotor-s thet would restore
the netionel equilibrius (oh. these pseudoretorss of ours, the pride of the
Left. which ere besicslly snti-Southernistl). or whether he wee fighting
for universel suftrege. e seculsr school systee or republicen eutonoqy. his
sin wee elweye to elisinste problen that had e degeneretive influence upon
the working cless end thet prevented it iron pleying e unifying. netionel
revolutionery, role. It is therefore not entirely true thet he kept his-
self eloot Iran the society of the lessee. The ”Southern question"--the
centrel probles with respect to the equilibriuss thet hsd grsduelly been
esteblished on the heels of the duslistic institutionel. econolic end
clsss structure-would be resolved only by e clue-oriented elternstive
thet would likewise be e stete-oriented end power-oriented elternetive.

1 should like to teke this opportunity. however. to eepltseise strongly the
veins of Selvesini's concept of the perty. Selvesini explored firsthsnd.

in his perty's thought end in its ection, the negstive end scercely creetive
ispect of its sdsinistretive structure. its incepscity for overell lender-
ship. end its orgsnieetionel end culturel bsckwerdness.

50
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A i'erty without Petronue

Reviteliceticn of the Sooielist Perty is likewise the object oi‘ e very
heeted debete both within end outside the perty. Are we reelly convinced
that the current fervor should be directed towerd specific obJectives. end
that this reviteiieetion should without feil begin in the South? Are we
convinced thet the "wey" or socieliee eust necesserily be Southernist
(without postponing. to ease tile in the neer future. the discuuion con-
cerning the sociel forces thet will be eble during the trensition between
old end new terse of rule to detersine the innovetive thrusts thet will be
neceseery in order leeitisetely to expend our influence)? And ere we
convinced thst the dresetic end dengercus cherecter of the Southern situe-
tion will enteil en excepticnel politicei ettort end en uncoeprceising
perty thet is purged of letter-dey petrchege ebuseeue perty thet will
any the benner of e rewitelieed scientific culture. e perty thet will
heve treined cedres in the North end in the South. e perty thet will heve
en oraenieetion ccnsonent with the diseneione of the territoriel probless
end the problem reieting to the eutomsiee end to the deeocretio exercise
of locel power. regionel power end the power or the stete--en orgenieetion
coneonent with the dilensions or euroeocieliee. which will be eeeningless
unless it hes the support or the Southerniste? Is it possible thet the
PSI. with its rich end creetive culturel heritage. will renounce the
struggle for South-oriented plennin; to serve es the besis for semeeent
of the econosy?

comxcnr. 1978 Binoli mitore

10992
60! 310“

51
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

New 'Idea' of Socialism

Hilan L'EUROEEO in ltalian l0 Nov 78 pp 26-33

[Composite article: "A Third, Fourth and Even Fifth Hay"; passages in slant;
lines are emphasized in the text]

[Text] /ln short, what kind of society is best for the future? The left

debates the matter in the light of Craxi's "socialist aodel." but the more
questions are asked. the more divergent the answers become. Here are the

latest.

[Whoever has followed attentively the many and authoritative contributions

on the thene of the "third way" published in L'EUROPEO will have noted that
three positions are finally emerging. The first categorically excludes the
existence of a "third way" besides the two already present in Europe (the
managed capitalism of democratic socialism and the bureaucratic kind of com-
munisa of the Eastern countries): in this group. Noberto Bobbio and lucio
Colletti have become the foremost and clearest theoreticians. The second
position is held by those who are convinced it is possible to chart a third
way and who seek to do so mainly by proposing a more thorough debate on self-
manage-eat: they are generally socialist intellectuals whose task it is to
use their talent for analysis and poltical management especially in the area
of self-nanogeaent thenes expounded by Luciano Pellicani. The third position,
finally, is generally that of the coauunist intdlectuals, whose position is
sunnarized by a coamunist, Giuseppe Vacca: it is necessary to set forth a new
"idea" of socialisa. This is the very point addressed by the socialist eco-
nomist Francesco Forte, the political scientist Piero Melograni and the Chris-
tian Deaocratic economist Siro Loabardini./

Francesco Forte: the Risk of Another Noocapitalism

The debate over the "third way" is certainly nebulous. Even Berlinguer. who
finds fault with it, describes it as not the "third" but the "fourth” way.
Indeed. he stated in a speech given recently before a large crowd in Geneva
that the way of socialism to which his party aspires “is not that being fol-
lowed in Russia and the Eastern countries. but neither is it the one being
followed by the denocratic socialist parties of Europe.“

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus it seems at first glance that besides the Berlinguerian way there are at
least the ways of capitalism. democratic socialism and Soviet coilectivism.

Of course. Berlinguer knows how to count. though not up to four. I presume
that the insistence upon calling "the third way" the solution advocated by
italian communists is due to a precise method of expropriation and reappro-
priation. Actually, what is ca.lod "the third way" in this case is the inter-
mediary solution that runs between state collectivism on one hand and the
capitalist mercantile system on the other. as it does between the so-calied
people's democracy of the USSR (which is really the party in power acting

for the people) and the parliamentary democracy of the Host, in which free-
doms were formally guaranteed but not the economic conditions that would make
these freedoms accessible to all. The "third way," then. is nothing other
than the doctrine of socialists of various tendencies: democratic socialists,
self-management socialists. libertarian socialists and just plain socialists.

Now Berlinguer is taking over. a bit late, the term "third way" for his con-
munists. This is nothing new. The Soviet Union calls itself a socialist
rather than a communist country because the word sounds a lot better and
because they can keep opponents from using it. Thus. for the Soviets. demo-
cratic socialists are not a variety of socialists but false socialists, even
socialist fascists.

The experience of northern social democracies (in the Scandinavian countries,
Holland, Great Britain, Germany and Austria) is thus depreciated as being a
variety of capitalism and is essentially identified with it.

Berlinguer declared in his Geneva speech that he does not equate the experience
of the social democracies and that of the Soviet Union's October revolution:
the latter is the standard. Obviously, he does not count for much labor's
struggles or union rights, nor the cooperative movement thought out and

built by northern labor and democratic socialist movements. Nor do social
security and free public education amount to much except for the highest
classes and the training and retraining of labor; nor does progressive tax-
ation. ner unemployment benefits tied to a minimum wage in these countries,

nor anything "democratic socialists" have achieved through reforms where they
have been long in power.

For Berlinguer, there is not even any basic importance in the laws on public
ownership of land and the nationalization and municipaiizatien of enterprises
in key sectors of public services and for the control of economic power, as
the northern "democratic socialists" have achieved in theory and practice.

it seems that all that counts for rather little for socialism as it has been
and is being practiced in the Soviet Union (where unemployment is not admitted
to). Democratic socialism is dismissed as an appendage of capitalism, and
whenever socialists do not go along with the communists. they are given this
label out of meanness er irresponsibility.

53
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

And what is sold about the Moldner plan. which the Swedish democratic socialists
now present as an organic development of their gradualistic action? This plan
is intended to achieve labor participation in big business through stock invest-
aents under the control of union savings; in the long run this may coincide
with the self-management model as well as fulfilling the democratic socialist
aethod of gruduaiist reforms and basic democracy.

Given this attitude of darlinguer and his intellectuals, there are those who
have reacted by saying. "the third way. then. doesn't exist." I think this
is a mistake. There does exist a Berlinguer model of a peculiar stamp that
was conceived by catholic communists even before it was established in theory
by Eurocoamunlsts, and it is dangerously pervasive in our country. it is
supposed to spread gradually by means of the historical compromise. it has
presumably been understood in slightly different ways by the two parties to
this coaproaiso. Taking. for example, the feudal system (which is more than
an oxaeple), a systea with two vertiees of power, namely, the emperor and the
pope. will have these vartices come into conflict at some point.

The political essence of the medal is "consociative democracy" rather than
conflict. in econoaics it is extreae associatlvisl. sector plans and links
between banking and heavy industry (which is one of the keys to future conflict).
For culture. it is dogmatic domination of intellectuals through the purchase

and controlling public subsidy of centers of instruction. research. inforaation
and culture, their takeover by conformists and the purge of heretics. Austerity
rules everything.

The death of More was an important event for this "third way," which assigns
a great role to the majesty of the state and to the state's superiority over
the individual. We can say. therefore, that this model already has its first
aartyr (however tragically involuntary) and its first hunt for heretics (which
is going on ostentatiously).

The economic, political. cultural. "consociative" and "concerted" aspects give
the model consistency and coherency in admirable doses. This goes against the
deaands of democracy and pluralism, which admit both private economic forces
(and differences in wealth) and elections, with freedom of the press. asseably.
association, labor organising and pertinent liaitations. Party union vigilantes.
placement of party representatives on factory councils, mutual inter-party
concession of run-off elections to local government bodies in order to rule
the state in an "associated" government. the elevation of ideologising and
subjection to political power, which seeks to penetrate the universities,

the mass media, the top levels of public corporations. etc., these are means
for controlling a consensus and escaping direct control by the voters and

the "liberal" clerics of culture.

The Scotti "bill," which is intended to legislate strictly the whole wage
structure by forbidding a sliding scale for piecewerk. night and holiday
differentials. overtime pay, etc., is an example of the new model of the
third way. it is. more or less, the law of to each according to his needs.

Sb
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

So too. however, are the decidedly bureaucratic and collectivistic socterial
plans, which are also amply discretional.

The third way blocks capitalism and sends it to a slow death, if by capitalism
we mean an economic market system that depends on competitive private enterprise.
But at the same time, this third way encourages, protects and rather strengthens
capitalists because it provides a fixed link between banking and industry

that subsidizes those who side with the people in power.

The third way has a certain economic rationale of its own. although a purely
relative one. and a potent attraction. The book "The New Economics" by H.
Rathenau. a German economist and technoerat, who postulates it based on the
German experience in the first world war and the monetary crisis, was not
only read with admiration by the Soviet communists, whose sector plane it
inspired, but it has also had its devotees in Europe for many decades: a

vast number of bankers, technoerats and intellectuals. in it was that system
of cartels among businesses. agreements between banks and businesses and the
rationalized ties between private and state capitalism that is the essence of
the third way and the economic basis of the historical compromise.

in a time of uncertainty. a highly organized world may have its fascinations.
it satisfies especially the aspirations of someone who has struggled for a
long time (first in exile and then in the opposition) and who now hopes for
peace and the proud security of those who have arrived, if not fully. at
least at a high station. From this standpoint, this model and the diffuse
aspirations that have attached themselves to it could be called not the "third
way" but the "third age."

Giuseppe Vacca: Provided Labor Is No Longer A Market

Socialism is not a /model/ of society (a determined means of production,
unique governmental forms. etc.) but a [historical precessl. the transforma.
tion of capitalist society into communist society. Its itinerary is set forth
by the /contradictions/ of capitalist society. Its purpose is set by the
characteristics that the protagonists of the transformation /may/ assume.

The whole process is guided, basically, by a unique motivating idea: the pos-
sibility of organizing economic and social life according to the /will/ and
the [awareness/ of workers of all types in free association with one another.
What makes it possible is the creation of new kinds of [political power/ by
the workers, power that is indispensable both for overcoming the classes that
oppose this and for reorganizing the whole society in such a way that [labor
is no longer a market/.

The principle of all the contradictions in capitalist society is basically
the [reduction to a market] of any form of productive. working or creative
activity. The worth of socialism makes itself felt, therefore, to the extent
that the market characteristic of labor /withers away/ ("labor" is taken in

a very broad sense here) both in present socialist societies and in areas won
by the workers within capitalist societies.

55
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

if we begin with these siaple ideas. which. however. constitute the scientific
nexus of Marxian. the "third way" is a metaphor. as good as any. to say that
with respect to recent experience we are looking for a new and broader defi-
nition of socialise. This is happening not because the ground covered so far

is insignificant or teaches us nothing but because in the very act of furthering
labor's emergence from its status as a aarket the "ways" that have been fol-
lowed till now have produced obstacles greater than those overcoee.

This is no minor thing. Free the develop-ant of whole continents. for which
capitalism had negated any prospect of progress. to the achieve-ant of secure
and dignified labor (although marketed). to the winning of fundaaental social
services (insurance. health, schooling. a kind of woaen's liberation. etc.).
labor has nade great strides both in the "state regulated capitalise" of the
west and in the countries that have "achieved socialise." if we look at it
from the perspective of world history. the "banishaent" of capitalise in one
way or another began at least 60 years ago. However. in all its variants.

it has been accoepanied by new ways of organizing labor as a aarket rather
than liberating labor on the decisive field of production. But this is what
all forms of freedom and unfreedon, in the final analysis. must lead to.

in the context of world history. the road that has been traveled by the workers'
and socinlist aoveaent is still directed by the hegemony of capitalist means
of production: it is straitjacketed but has not been dealt a aortal blow.

To look for a "third way" means proposing to attack the eneay on this point.
and not just to cow-it a willful and utopian act but because a coaplex his-
torical develop-eat has reached a stage that calls into question both the
production and political models of capitalist societies that are developed
and more or less "nanaged" and also those of "achieved socialise."

Given the resources and needs. in today's world, of the peoples .
of whole-continents (prinarily "third" and "fourth" world) it is possible to
say "enough" to the old /rate of exchange/ between developed and backward
countries. and the old balances are no longer possible. in the coaing decades.
the world will not undergo another cycle of /unequal development] without the
destruction of entire peoples and the barbarization of developed societies.

The "managed” capitalism of the welfare state of various deuocratic socialist
types has become. since the l930's.,the Iain protagonist in a 50-year drone

of new and more seriously unequal development in the world. "Achieved socialise"
has not succeeded in breaking this pattern eithen because it does not ally

itself practically with the working class movement of the advanced capitalist

countries and does not seem able to ally itself generally with the liberation
movements bf underdeveloped nations.

Therefore, not only a new way but a new /idea/ of socialism appears necessary.
A debate should be opened on the essential role bf [political delocracy/ in a
new socialist experience that will finally succeed in changing the relation-
ships in production. It would not be hard for we to indicate why there are

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR nVVlOIAL USE ONLY

many original elements in our country's general and political experience of
the last decades that can contribute to such an anhitieus renewal of socialism.
However. I an out of space. Hence i must be satisfied with a preamble on the
"big systems,“ thus disappointing the readers‘ expectations, perhaps. and
certainly falling short of incisive political discourse.

Picre Nelegrnnu Socialisn Yes. But Democratic and European

The present debate on socialism has a very concrete and practical aspect.

it is contributing to the renewal of the ltaiien left and to separating it
further fron both Leninism (the violent conquest and exercise of power) and
the Soviet nodei. The present debate. however. is still too abstract. it
is seeking "the ideal model" of socialism and ignoring the facts. It speaks
of three models (Soviet, democratic socialist and self-managing), but in no
case has an adequate examination of the existing reality been made.

i) The Soviet model. This model is generally criticized out of ignorance

and fear. Yet it would be possible to explain to the workers in the street

and factories how and why they would be the oppressed class in the USSR.

Also. the middle classes should be told that they are dominant in the USSR

but with privileges proportionate to the poverty of the environment. After

50 years of socialise and despite the immense quantities of raw materials
available. the USSR has a gross per capita product equal to that of impoverished
Greece and lower than that of Italy, which is low in natural resources. Re

are not talking about comparisons with the most efficient capitalist states:

a West German hes the combined income of three Soviets; and a Frenchman.
that of 2 1/2. True. there are inequalities in the capitalist states, but

the fact is that even greater and more shameful inequalities exist in the USSR
and the other socialist states. lhoever has studied the facts of Soviet life
knows this well. On the other hand. the left is silent, compared to what it

could say. It is afraid. it does not study enough, and it does not under-
stand how much some ideas it'now believes in have contributed to the material

and spiritual failure of the Soviet state.

2) The self-managing model. In this case. too. any discussion should start
with the facts as they are. In Yugoslavia, some forms of self-management are
already being put into practice. How do they work in terms of productivity

and efficiency? Do they allow decisions to be made quickly and, when neces-
sary, secretly? Luciano Peilicani has great faith in self-management. However,
he has not yet answered the question i asked him last June in the journal
MONDOPERAIO: can a multinational corporation be self-managed? 1 don't think so.
Meanwhile, though. I see multinationalitation as a phenomenon that is. willy
niily. extending itself everywhere (even to the USSR and China) and that we
must come to terms with.

3) The democratic socialist model. This seems to be the only acceptable model.
however. it is not a simple model because the practical solutions it offers

may be infinite. it says in the dictionary that democratic socialism "pursues
gradual reforms within the existing political orders." But the possible com-
binations of reforms and existing orders are immense. Democratic socialist
experiments have been very diverse in appearance but have had in fact an impact

57
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on history with results that have been at times sufficient, optimum or disas-
trous. The democratic socialist experience of the French Popular Front must

be renounced or. better, not renounced completely but studied in order to
understand what must absolutely not he done. The Swedish democratic socialist
experiment. fortunately. has been rather different from the French in both

form and results. Nonetheless. in 1077 the Swedish voters preferred to sus-
pend it. Let us not stray so far afield and take a look at italy. in the

last 20 years. the government has adopted many democratic socialist measures.
hhat have been the results? The proliferation of public corporations has
favored parasitism. The nationalization of electricity has been concluded

with an entirely unsatisfactory statement of earnings. The labor law has
contributed to paralyzing the labor market and even hurting the workers.

in recent years. "contestatien" in italy triumphed over democratic socialism
precisely because socialism was producing rotten fruit. Now that "contesta-
tion" has been defeated, the left can attempt a new democratic socialist policy.
but which one?

Nor can the "model" or programs ignore the facts this time. either. The facts
say that Italy belongs to the European community. If it wants to stay in the
Community and remain a democracy, it must set aboat becoming efficient and
modern, like France. the PRC, Holland and other countries where democratic
socialists have come into the government without becoming foolish.

For more than 60 years the italian left has been dreaming of the end of capi-
tallsm. For more than 60 years it has been collecting defeats. It may be
objected that for decades, tee. ltalian capitalism has been taking its knocks.
True. but by a curious coincidence it has been operating with these very enemies
on the left. if we look closely. though. the coincidence is not surprising
at all. for there is an indissoluble link between industry and labor. In a
broad sense, one may say that capitalism and socialism belong to the same
culture. Contrary to what many belive, neither the Mussolini era nor that

of the Christian democrats represented the triumph of capitalism. The Mus-
solini regime was the expression of the middle classes and not of modern

big business. 1 have documented this in a book published by Longanesi in
l972: "Mussolini and the lndustrialists." Except for the reconstruction
period, when De Casperi collaborated with Einaudi, even the Catholic poli-
tical class has always affirmed that its culture was foreign to that of
modern capitalism.

aerl inguer and his Catholic counselors are proposinga "historical compromise"
with this political class. They are proposing it for many and complex reasons.
it is not to be excluded that they may feel that both cultures. communist and
Catholic, can find room for agreement in their aversion to modern capitalism
and liberalism. We may suspect that the very formula of "austerity" proposed
by Berlinguer and his Catholic counselors indicates not a transitory economic
policy (necessary to put production and consumption back in circulation as
seen as possible) but a real, true "value" of the new society: austerity as-

58
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OYFIOIAL USE ONLY

renunciation of consumerism and the "pomp" of the world. as the Soviet model
of society does. for that matter.

The traditions of democratic socialism favor a radically different historical
compromise from Berlinguer's. The democratic socialist left can still make

a pact with what remains of modern capitalism in Italy in an atteept to seek
a way out of the present crisis. As in any deal, both parties will give and
take. if tho deal is defined clearly, millions of ltaiiens will subscribe to
it: they still want to work. create and live better than their ancestors.
Austerity will not be popular any more.

Sire Lombardini: But No One Has Said Who will Govern

The debate on the third way has cultural contents and political motives. The
political motives have, predictably adulterated the "cultural" discussion.
Actually. it has developed along two main lines: an illuministic historical
context and a purely ideological one.

Past experience leads Bobbie to recall that there are only 2 reads: the
Lenlnlst, which shows a sufficiently homogeneous experience. and the democratic
socialist, whose political structures and historical experience are not homo-
geneous. The democratic socialist total variety of experience is possible
precisely on the basis of an illuministic conception. according to which the
quest for more advanced social structures is "always" possible in a democratic
parliamentary context. The choice between the two ways.and the a priori
exclusion of a third way is already implicit in this conception.

i think we can take for granted that at a certain level of development any
social structure cannot be considered advanced if it does not conserve and
develop the values of democracy. 0n the other hand. the support of the left,
an increasingly ambiguous term. however. cannot be said to be necessary (let
alone sufficient) to guarantee either the permanence of the democratic system
or its development towards more advanced social structures. "hat is needed

for an unequivocal discussion of these themes is first to isolate primarily

by analysis of the economic system, the historical reasons for which the
present system can go into crisis and out of this crisis bring forth a system
that bears some resemblance to the emerging ideology and that must result

from an interaction between the understanding and valuation of the historical
process and so may be considered socially more advanced. A historical analysis
free of iliuministic prejudices, besides creating a crisis for the bipolariza-
tion of the "two ways." shows that it is impossible to resort to either of them
in the case of ltaiy because of their peculiarties and the new problems that
historical development presents, as l sought to explain in my article in RINAS-
CITA of 29 September. Maybe no third way exists; but then there is something
missing. which is a hypothesis that can certainly not be accepted as the "hype-
thesis of labor."

Others arrive at the third way with essentially ideological arguments (in par-
ticular Cicchitto; see his article in the 7 October issue of GIORNO). The
third way would then be a political choice. There is a third socialist way
and a third communist way; these products will be offered to the voters. who

59
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

may then choose. Cicchitto lacks a serious analysis of the crisis of the
present economic system. overcoming which crisis will bring about irrever-
sible modifications in some essential characteristics of capitalism insofar
as the mechanisms of accumulation and the relevance of public demand (social
services) are concerned. whence it becomes possible and necessary to shape
ahead of time by means of political decisions the kind of development that
in capitalism is generally left up to the marketplace.

Let me make something clear. When we talk about the crisis of capitalism.

we are not saying that a cruel revolution or some other kind of breakup is
inevitable in the political and social system. The present structural crisis
may succeed in gestating a new social system. Since it is a matter of realizing
how irreversible the modifications are that are being made in the structure

of power. it is unthinkable. at least in situations like ltaly's. that the
present crisis will be solved through a bipartisan political system. as I
attempted to explain in my article in LA DISCUSSIONB of 25 September. Can

the new system still be considered a capitalist one? After all, it must

take over the business functions of a mortally wounded state capitalism

and replace the action of the marketplace with planning. i hold. rather,

that it can no longer be considered a capitalist system because the direction
of development is no longer determined by the marketplace. and the accumula-
tion of capital is decided responsibly by the collective. This is a semantic
question that is not irrelevant to ideology but which should not be prejudiced
by considerations of present processes and planning.

The discussion of the third way is ideologically motivated. it is highly
desirable that the parties regain their ideological identities. The arti-
culctcd convergence: that are necessary practically to overcome the structural
crisis can be put in real danger by ideological entropy. which reduces poli-
tics to pure pragmatism. One cannot fail to worry about the ideological
recovery (or fall?) of a party (the PSI [ltalian Socialist Party]) destroying
the possibility of articulated convergences. Not so much for the equivocal
political position of the Socialist Party. which uses various arguments to
exclude a government with the communists because the latter are still Leninist
(nor do i think Craxi expects_ his invitation to the Communist Party to
change its ideology as it would change its clothes to have the desired effect)
and detests the alliance with the DC [Christian Democratic Party). which is
considered a conservative party (a judgment. moreover. that contrasts in Cic-
chitte's article with his evaluation of the center-left experience). So much
for the political prospects as they now appear.

l have always hoped for a strengthening of the PSI, which I consider a condi-
tion of maintaining a cultural and political articulation indispensable for
our country. but if this strengthening takes place on account of the success
of Craxi's strategy, our democratic system will be put in serious danger.

Let us imagine the political situation that would prevail after elections
that gave the PSI 6 or 7 more points but pushed the PCI towards, shall we
say, somewhat more "radical" positions. A PCl-PSI government becomes impos-
sible; a Dc-PCI alliance becomes unimaginable. The return to the center-
left would not be accepted, and with reason, by the PSI. Only a government

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVIICIAL 088 ONLY

lad by tho PSI with CD participation would raaain. But you don't havo to
look vary for to ace that ouch a governaant would certainly not ba up to
govaznéng the country. and it is not difficult to iaagina what tha proapacta
uoul o.

COPYRIGHT: 1973 Riaaoli Bditoro

8782
CSO: 3104

61
FOR OFYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ITALY

mm mom M8888 "mm RAW 10 ECONOMIC mm
Fabriaio Cicchitto. P81

Milan ll. sou-24 OR! in Italian 20 Sap 78 pp 1. 2

[naport on intarviaw with Pabririo Cicchitto. had of tho "I acoooaic
action. by Claudio Alo: "l'hia la tha PSI'a Bconouic Switch-«Afton- tha
ldaological Ranovatioa Startad by maxi")

[Text] Rona—It haa baan axactly 2 aontha now that tho aidat-ar aaaay on
pluraiiaa and Laniniaa writtan by lattino Craxi haa baan undar diacuaaion
by tho Italian. and not only tha Italian. intolliaantaia—a diacuaaion that
haa frequantly aaauaad haatad ovartonaa in loftiat circlaa. rayiviu iaauaa
of idaology, intarnational tiaa. and tha co-onality oi ahcaatry batwoan
col-miata and aocialiata. Craxi haa fraquautly cootaatad tha intarprata-
tion sivan to hia articla by my who no in it an idaological and policy
switch by tho "now" 931 [Italian Socialiat Party]. it aay vory woll not
be a awitch. but cartainly tha boarda of aoaa vanarablo ancaatora hava
bun ainiiicantly croppad. without. howavar. having auccoodad in untaoslin;
tho ideological aatting.

Much raaaina to ba daiinad in thaory. but it it tha ”now" PSI'a autira
praria which taoat nooda to ba variiiad, ita approach in practical torn to
tho avar-iucraaain; problna poaod by an induatrial aociaty to which tha
great political partiaa hava. for tha noat part. raaainad atrauara.

Dcauins tha i-portauca of thia practical approach to ba anything but aacoodary

wa praaantad Fabrixio Cicchito. hand of tba PSI'a acoooaic aactim, aavaral
aubatantiva aconoaic quaationa. to which. tha Socialiat Party haa not yat
fully rapliad.

Ho did not axpcct. in thia scour. to roaolva all the knotty baaic iaauao of
a party in comlaiva aovanant with haavy clouda yet to ba diaporaod. But
tha raplioa givan no by tho 281 rapraaantativa, wall lacad though thay wara
with iina diatinctiona, ahadiua and, at tilaa. obacuritioa. provida a
baaia for purauin; a dabato that is o! moutionablo intarut to tha
idcntification of tha "paw” P81.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The following points. for axespla. which.we have greatly summarised. appear
to us especially significant:

The PS! resains fundseentolly an expression of the working class end of the
democratic middle classes. It is the interclaaa nova-ant and the confusion
of roles between the right and the left which give rise to the ambiguities
of language end the contusion of concepts. Precisely because of this. end
because of the coeplexity of a class structure in an industrial society. the
fundanentel political problee for the socialists is the creation of e
reforsing alliance that reflects this pluralistic structure. That reforming
alliance would allow for a free enterprise systen whose objective would be
an innovative response to the crisis. end which would be "tested against

the objective of gradually sodifying the international division of labor.
expanding the productive base into new technological sectors. end in sum.
capturing new serkets and technologies for Italian industry.”

The P8! is for a democratic transformation of the present social structure.

and ot the present stage fights "for reforss in the capitalistic system."

A socielistic society could accoseodete a plurality of divarsely regulated
enterprises.

The "Iarketplace" must be deeythologised. in thet today. with the development
of sonopolies and oligopolies. the marketplace is highly ssnipulated.

Paredoxically. therefore. only a policy of regulation can restore its
function as an effective social and sconosic baroseter.

The enterprises to be expropriated are those that pervert economic power
into hegemonic political power which bypasses democratic institutions and
closes true avenues of freedos for citizens and for nonhegsmonic enterprises.

Pres enterprise remains a hypothesis to be forsulated and tested in practice;
until then. it is but a theoretical concept.

The "new" P81 is clearly positioned within the sphere of European socialise.

considering it counterproductive to seek mutually exclusive social democratic
or Soviet alternatives.

Following is the text of the long interview:

[Question] Hr Cicchitto. in a recent interview clarifying his essay on
Leninisu. Craxi said: "We are ailing at a democratic and free socialise
that will edsit all those who labor for a living as well as these leaders

in private enterprise who work not only for themselves but also for others."
This is unquestionably an interesting state-ant which contradicts. however.
the predoeinentiy class concept of politics supported until now by e PSI
that has been tied. at least in principle. to the harxist tradition. Can
you state whether. and to what extent. the "new" P81 has overcome the class

concept. and what free enterprise-as indicated by Craxi-—can be accepted
in this party?

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] i am very pleased to respond to the questions of 26 ORE, taking
them--correctly, l believe--to be not a qualifying examination of socialism
for admission to the economic world. but rather an invitation to clarify our
objectives, immediate and long-term. without ambiguities of language. It is
in fact desirable for a party representative to say the same things to the

newspapers of different orientations, as are, for example. 26 one and RASSBGNA
SINDACALE.

I shall reply first to the question as to whether or not we remain class
conscious. The Socialist Party remains fundamentally a party expression of
the working class and of the democratic middle classes.

The interclass movement. the confusion between the roles of the left and

the right. is at the root of the ambiguity of language and untidy definition
of concepts.

An open dialog means a clarification between parties and roles. Naturally,
we are aware that the class structure of an industrial society is very
different from and more complex than the two-sided one of a close-knit group
of axoloitsrs and a massive proletariat prophesied more than 100 years ago.
For a party like ours. whose objective is to transform the social structure
in an egalitarian and democratic sense. the fundamental political problem

is to find the way to a reforming alliance that reflects this pluralistic
structure.

In the reforming alliance being hypothesized by the Socialist concept,
there is room for a free enterprise whose objective is an innovative
response to the crisis. and which is commensurate with the objective of
gradually modifying the international division of labor. expanding the
productive base into technologically new sectors, and, in substance.
capturing new technological and market areas for Italian industry.

This type of free enterprise would pursue these production-base-broadening
objectives through government contracts for public works designed to achieve
specific objectives. and clear. nondiscretionary procedures. In my opinion,
the requirements of "innovation" and "assistance" are binding on the private
and public sectors alike.

Frankly. as things now stand. I think the innovative aspects of free enter-
prise are neither in the majority nor prevalent.

Free enterprise exists, however, and it can be recognized by our party without
reciprocal ambiguities.

[Question] It would seem. reading the "new gospel" of the PSI, that the

marketplace would stay but capitalism must go. Luciano Pellicsni wrote
in AVANTII, "I have never identified the marketplace with capitalism."

Craxi said in his essay: "Democracy presupposes the existence of power

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

centers (economic, political. religious, etc.) in competition with each other."
De Martino. however. has objected. "After the death of Engels. only Berstein
refused to accept Marx's doctrine. end reached the point of admitting the

need of a private economic syeten. This. however. can never be the position
of the PSI."

Would you. Mr Cicchitto. state now to a confused citizen whether the PSI
is for or against capitalise; for or against the marketplace: whether it

accepts private enterprise within the scope of pluralism, end with whet
economic and social functions?

[Answer] The P8! is for the desecratic transformation of this society. In
our proposal we have clearly stated that it is possible, even in a socialist
society. to hypothesize a plurality of enterprises governed by diverse
regulatory schenas. In the first place. the question of the marketplace
needs to be deeytholegired. I don't know whether the earketplece so
angelified by liberal polanics has ever existed. what is certain is that.
today. since the developeent of oligopolies end monopolies. the market is

highly eanipuleted. I need hardly explain to the publishers. editors and
readers of 24 OR: the extent of the discretionary powers enjoyed by the large
enterprises in the manage-ant of pricing policies.

without effective government intervention. loreover. the marketplace is unable
to resolve three basic problems. end can only accentuate their distortive

effects: the structural iabalancee (example. southern Italy). unenploynsnt
and social inequalities. Unfortunately. in Italy we have a spurious
Keynesienisn, converted into a policy of welfare and doles.

This is not a good reason. however. to exhune Von hieee.

Paradoxically. therefore. only a policy of econoeic planning can restore
to the marketplace its function as an effective social end econoeic
barometer, provided planning is accompanied by a set of policies designed
to create the conditions of equality end of security for ell scone-1c
entities. end provided it is backed by entitrust legislation, the value of

which should certainly not be overestimated but on the other hand should
not be cast aside.

[Question] Let us further clarify the marketplace concept. Pellicani

has written: “Hhsn I speak of 'eocialist nerketplace' I refer to a market-
place that has been socialized. and indicate regulation and self-management
es the two pillars of socialization of the marketplace." He immediately
adds: "As regards the procedure for achieving that nerketplace. I have
repeatedly reverted to the Heidner plan. which provides for the expropriation

of the large capitalistic enterprises. of the econoeic high ground. by the
collectivity of the workers."

Could you now explain in understandable terns whet enterprises. according
to the PSI. would be exproprieted, and under what conditions and principles
they would be self-naneged? "hat. in effect. are the roads to be traveled?

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] In my opinion. to build a new kind of socialist society-
qualitatively different. that is. from the Eastern ones which the PC!
[Italian Communist Party] regards as aocialistically structured with
elements of liberalism in the superstructure. but which the PSI regards as
nonsocialistic. and as rather the negation of socialism and. in certain
respects. the most insidious enemy of the socialist endeavor in the West.
where many who favor transforming this society associate socialism with the
Eastern experience and recoil from it horrified-the enterprises to be
expropriated are those that pervert economic power into hegemonic political
power which passes over democratic institutions. dictates the operative
terms of government officials and creates a "corporate power structure"

that denies the real freedoms to the great mass of the people but also to
other enterprises-the nonhegemonic ones.

In drawing up the socialist proposal. we started. in what concerns enter-
prise. from a basic perception of reality. Experience has shown that. even
within an authoritarian environment, there is more democracy in a private
enterprise in which there is a strong union presence than in a government-
owned enterprise where the unions and workers are deprived of freedom on the
premise that they possess a certain governing power which is administered
for them by a party which "substitutes" for them at all levels.

Our proposal. in not only referring to the present phase. which consists of
a struggle to reform the capitalist system. but in also trying to delineate
a socialist model. provides for the coexistence of numerous types of
enterprises: private enterprises. cooperatives. nationalised enterprires.
self-managed enterprises. all fitted to a marketplace that is regulated by

a democratic program. both as regards its objectives and its processes. which
is the result of a democratic political struggle. Socialism. in our View. is
not a society pacified by conformism. This is why we make use of a somewhat
terrifying adjective when we speak of "a conflictual democracy." a term with
present as well as future validity.

Dissent. the possibilities of alternation and of alternatives. all brought
into play on a democratic level. are. in our view. equally valid factors in
today's society as well as tomorrow's. It may be said. and it is true. that
a nationalized enterprise can exercise hegemonic political power. For this
reason. to attenuate or eliminate this risk. we consider it necessary to
specify programmed objectives. on the one hand. and to institute industrial
democracy within nationalized enterprises. in which representatives of the
workers. technicians and employees will monitor the conformance of the
conduct of management policy to the planned objectives. Self-management

is a hypothesis yet to be formulated and tested. An enormous amount of

conceptual writing exists on self-management which is difficult to reduce to
a formula. I cite Rosenvallon's book and especially its preface by Giorgio

Ruffolo. I wish only to add that self-management is an objective. namely.
that of the total socialiaation of economic power. which can be tested under
a specific condition. Considering its experiences as a whole. in factories

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(putting aside issues concerning parties in the workers' noveeent) and in

the exercise of power from the bottom. the laboring class has fulfilled an
important role in its opposition to entrenched traditional power. to exploite-
tion. This role has been denied then at tines. in the experience of the
working classes of sons European countries end in the United States. by e
corporetivism present even among the masses. however. the hypothesis of

a working class beconing a general class that evolves new levels of produc-

tivity has not been fully verified. The concept of self-nenegement is based
on this potential.

This potential must be demonstrated in practice; otherwise. it remains a
theoretical concept.

In my judgnent. following a general developnent of culture. type of work and
qualifications. soae sectors of the working class are capable of carrying
out this experiment and establishing an entirely original relationship with
employees. technicians and management. This is the "new working class"

of which Mallet spoke. Mallet conceived of a working class of this type in
terms of great magnitude.

Experience. however. tells us sonething quite different, namely. that there
has not yet been a development of tne working class from a eere sociel
force of opposition to a general class in the above sense. This is why we
speak of a nultiplicity of types of enterprises end we distinguish between
industrial democracy end self-eenegeeent.

[Question] We have talked of the search for a new model of socialists.
which in reality has yet. to be defined. Could you tell us. at least in
outline, the major points that would differentiate it tron German social

democracy. which seees to have reached an optimum working arrangement with
capitalism?

[Answer] Va are bound to German social democracy by its dedication to
detente. which draws it into continual attacks by the forces of Sense and
international reaction. by its capability for realizing a very advanced end
effective system of social services. by its solidarity with the labor
union eovemsnt. and by its endeavors. which have not yet been entirely
successful. toward instituting industrial democratic forms within the hard.
compact reality of German capital. In this sense. the idyllic representation
of the German reality. contained in your question. seems a bit forced. we
do not entirely agree with "banning the practicing of one's profession"
[bsrufverbot] because the fight against terrorism. which eust be conducted
mercilessly. must not, however, be converted into a fight against dissent.
The leissez-faire that has characterized their economic policy has not
prevented a very high level of une-ployment. we know for a fact in this
regard that the SPD [Social Democratic Party] is engaged in a very close
review and tense debate to revise its position. Let me add also that what
most differentiates us fro. the SP1) is the fact of the widely different
situations in our two countries. which is reflected in our respective party

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lines. Germany is a country split in two by the Berlin well. At the same
time. it does not have the territorial imbalances that characterise our
country. All of this places our political problems. ideological options and
economic policies in different contexts. In any case. we are clearly
positioned within the European socialist sphere. to which we contribute

our ideas and our history. We consider the search for a way that is neither
social democratic nor soviet-tha latter requiring not only ties with the

0333 but also an affirmation of the superiority of this form--to be entirely
counterproductive.

This confirms the validity of the ideological end political debate that we
have opened with the PC! to construct here in our country a dialectic based
on the alternative wherein the left need not. because of its differences.

apply to tle nc [Christian Democratic Party] for legitimization in order
to govern a western industrial socialist society.

[Question] Expropriation of the enterprises, economic planning. controls

on investments; in substance. dirigisme. And this at a time when the 3-year
plan calls fur a resumption of investments and employment with strong private
support. With reference to Craxi's statements. Guido Carli has written:

"One might ask whether a country that captures almost 70 percent of the
financial resources produced annually and determines their ultimate
utilization satisfies the conditions for pluralism." we ask the same thing:
Hunt we go further or can we remain at this level and still satisfy the
requirements for pluralism?

[Answer] The problem is not only quantitative. but also qualitative. It
is precisely investments and employment which are not evident in the 3-year
plan. Us have been very clear. There must be a cutback in government
spending and restrictions on salary increases.

Even considering the fact that labor cost computations are heavily weighted
by the inclusion of executive ealaries--which many economists. including
Sylos Lebini. view as an internal distribution of profits-there can be no
doubt that the basic problem today is not one of redistribution of revenues
but rather of revitalizing their accumulation.

having said this. however. your questions need to be reversed. w111 the
containment of salaries and the availability of greater financial resources
for enterprise guarantee resumption of investment and employment? There was
a "belt-tightening" in 1966-67. but there was not resumption of investment.
will there be an effort to modify the country's productive base and structure,
or will we limit ourselves to a restructurization of what now exists? Let
us consider the problem in its European aspects, and assume the present
international division of labor continues. Do we expect to resolve the
country's industrial problem while maintaining unaltered the structure and
traditional weighting of the various industrial sectors, by gambling on
devaluation, on the intelligent foreign exchange maneuvers implemented to

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

date by the Bank of Italy. on the labor black market and decentralization of
production. without modifying the real productive structure?

Doctor Cerli and lb SOLB~26 ORB pose sharp questions but are very frugal
with answers.

[Question] In a hypothetical socialist regulation of the economy. many of

its institutional aspects would naturally have to be revised. As recently

as in the last few days. you have again postulated the need for unified
government of the economy. How would you structure this "unified government"
and how would you resolve in this context the problem of the regions. which.
although today they represent a useful and democratic decentralization level.
would become a discordant and retardant element in the economy-governing
maneuver. especially because of their widespread lack of capital?

[Answer] Actually. we posed the problem of a unified government of the
economy in the face of the incredible fact that Minister Pandolfi had been
left on his own to draw up the 3-year plan. as a result of which it had

been reduced to a unilateral. mutilated document. With regard to what I
consider a triumphant revival of "feudalism" insofar as concerns organization
of the government--a revival involving everyone to some extent. from the
government to the parties. from Confindustria [General Confederation of
Italian Industry) to the large enterprises and labor unions-it seems to me

that the government. especially with respect to the economy has reached
the limit.

Each ministry is now a castle complete with guards and drawbridge. This

raises the issue of concentrating in a single ministry the responsibility

for managing economic policy. with its consequent onus and honors. To the
contrary we will. in fact do. have an orgy of sectorialies. to the sectorislism
of parliament. which permeates even this legislature (the success of the

expression "sectorial plane" has served to enable it). is added that of the
executive.

A single “government" of the economy could foster a tighter bond with the
regions and organic unity in the economic policy-governing maneuver. The
regions have assimilated many of the flaws of the nation. the government

and parliament. They too. in our hypothesis. need a single center. Democracy
is not achieved. in fact. by confusedly proliferating centers of power. but
rather by rigorously diminishing and controlling them.

The present fragmentation at national and regional levels fosters discreteness
and arbitrariness in government. In our view. we have been very clear as
regards the 3-year plan: Sacrifice must he demanded of all. even including

a cutback in government expenditures and a containment of salaries applied
equitably; and tax incentives must be used in a very different manner than

in the pest. With regard to the latter we have set out to formulate a new
proposal for the fight against tax evasion and for ways of expanding the

tax base in case a new tax increase becomes necessary.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Italian economy, however, is not in need of a deflationary "freeze" nor
of a purely quantitative revival of production. The essential need is for
programmed territorial (southern Italy) and regional investment planning.

On this basis, we are prepared to assume our responsibilities and our share
of the unpopularity and to take on anyone seeking to engage in games of
one-upmanship or corporetist practices. Italian enterprise, in its dealings
with the labor unions must come to terms with two basic issues.

It is not true that the sliding wage scale and government expenditures are
exclusively the responsibilities of the left or of the labor unions. Govern-
ment expenditures else comprise very substantial transfers of funds to
enterprises and the policy of doles to which Ingres referred some years

ago as the organic expression of the Christian Democrat power structure.

The sliding wage scale agreement was precisely an agreement between two
parties: the labor unions thus obtained the automatic recovery of a sizable
portion of lost purchasing power. Business enterprise, however, was not all
that innocent and helpless when it concluded the pact, since especially the
large enterprises obtained a substantial reduction in the incidence of
management-labor conflicts. The problem today is this: The unions, in part
also because of the sliding wage scale agreement, see their traditional

contract negotiating areas being reduced. If they do not regain negotiability
of some contract issues and some of their lost power, the danger of wildcat
strikes looms dangerously, even more so since wages in some categories have
been leveled to a point that is degrading to professionalism, to say nothing
of the marked disparities between categories. Labor must acquire the power
to shape national economic policy and specific social reforms.

Enterprises must address the issue of industrial democracy, that is, of
factual confrontation on investment policy. This can be achieved, however,
not in the present vacuum, but in the framework of a major economic planning
Operation designed to qualitatively transform and to modernize our industrial
structure, which will require forms of confrontation within a social

context that differs substantially from the present one. This is the

terrain on which the innovative wing of the world of enterprise can test

its strength.

Let me provokingly recall the contribution made a year ago by the young
industrialists, precisely in the area of labor participation in enterprise.

In this context, we socialists speak, on the one hand, of industrial

democracy and, on the other, of a labor mobility, to be achieved through a
labor agency, that will make necessary job transfers possible, not through
primitive mechanisms but rather through procedures designed to assure workers
of continuity of employment, and to assure enterprise of a greater flexibility,
based also, however. on a redesign of the work management system in view of

the undeniable crisis of Taylorism. All of this can be accomplished on the
basis of an ambitious operation, which must start immediately, of change

and of modernization of our basic economy. Only by this means, and not

70
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

through deflationary “freezes" nor purely quantitative "recoveries." can
we cstch up with Europe based on a msrketing capability of our own.
Otherwise. we will simply go from the dollar economy to that of the mark.
with the added consequence that whereas we ere now importing inflation.

tomorrow we will be adding to our own unemployment a measure of foreign-
induced unemployment.

[Question] As regards the PSI's connection with labor: Until now. end
especially since 20 June. the PSI has been playing leapfrog with the PC!
in pursuit of an ultreleftist consensus end at tines covering lebor's most
unacceptable and corporativist positions. in open contrast with the demands

of an economy that is on the verge of collapse and burdened with an enormous
mess of unemployed.

Does the "new" PSI intend to continue this pursuit of s consensus st ell
costs. or will the socialists accept their share of electoral unpopulsrity

with a view to a genuine recovery of the economy. as the two major parties
hsve already done?

[Answer] I don't see where the two major parties have accepted this there
of unpopulsrity with a view to economic recovery. The two major psrties
have acquired a certain unpopulsrity because behind a front of nationsl
unity they have. since 20 June, created a kind of preferential axis without
managing to achieve an economic recovery and to introduce elements of change.
Todsy. es a result, they are seeking to recover consensus by accusing anyone
who criticises or ststes the facts of beet-rocking. We socialists. from
this point of view. have been and still are being subjected to a crossfire.
The foot is that the government of national unity hes proven to be no better
then the left-center ones. This generates tension and crisis in the labor
union movement. the more so since many Catholic and socialist union leaders
recall their autonomy during the period of left-center governments and are
blsming the conduct of the communist labor leaders as judged from a political
viewpoint. In any case. your question gives an erroneous impression of

the PSl's economic and labor union policy, which has been very specific:
Sacrifice, on the one hand. and labor union power, on the other. must be
directed to the resumption of investments and employment.

Putting all cards on the tsble. the real problems are of another sort.

In the first place. this channeling of sacrifice has been lacking until

now because of the government. significant sectors of the world of enter-
prise, and Confindustria. In the second place. we must admit the limitetions
of our internal mechanism. He can express s party line and seek consensus on
it. But we have neither the mechanisms of Christian Democratic interclass
power nor those of the PCI's centralised democratic power to "bring into
line" those factory workers who dissent. If business enterprise desires

to achieve a general consensus of the masses. it can still play the csrd of
the historic compromise: It is possible for those sectors of enterprise
most interested in the revival of subsidized capitalism to gain, within s
short time. a substantial sdvsntage.

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The new socialist party line, in a hypothetical alternative, aims at a new
reforming and "productive” alliance. This alliance could accommodate the
kind of enterprise to which I have referred in my answer to your first
question.

Pietro Longs. PSDI
Milan IL SOLE-26 one in Italian 23 Sep 78 pp 1. 2

[Report of interview with Pietro Longo. deputy secretary and head of Economic
Affairs of the PSDI. by Claudio Ale: "It Is Rather the Public Sector which
Should Be £xpropriated-According to Interview With Pietro Longo (PSDI)
Following Clarification on Socialist ‘Switch'"]

[Text] In the current far-reaching debate among the leftist parties. the
beards of many venerable ancestors have been unceremoniously cropped;
however. this esthetic operation has not always been transfigured into a
substantive change. Lenin and Marx have been discussed. Prudhon has been
dusted off. but the viewpoint from which the complex problems of a nation
midway between capitalism and welfarsism are being examined remains hazy and
distorted. Some clarification of many points at issue still unresolved by
the left. and especially by Craxi's PSI [Italian Socialist Party] which. more
rapidly than the others. seems to have opted for ideological changes, were
provided by the long interview granted to IL SOLE-26 033 by Pabrisio
Cicchitto. However, the majority of the questions regarding the way in

which the socialists. and the left in general, intend to resolve our country's
major economic problems remained inadequately answered. The leftist parties
are still divided among the several approaches (utopian and others) being
proposed and which include: the overcome of capitalism. a reform of
capitalism, the finding of a "third way." and. more pragmatically. adoption
of the road already being traveled by the large European social democracies.
The letter road attracts the Italian social democrats, who have recently
resumed courting of former PSI members. although more much more on an
ideological platform than on one of practical interpretation of economic
issues. This was confirmed to us by Pietro Longo. deputy secretary and head
of the 9801's [Italian Social Democratic Party], whom we interviewed in

the party headquarters. The headquarters is papersd with proofs of the new
posters that will shortly invade the country's streets in preparation for the
European elections: a flight of stylized swallows-or so it seems-each
bearing the colors of the flags of the nine EEC countries-evidently headed
toward a social democratic victory.

"Our view of PSI's current ideological process." said Pietro Longo. "is
definitely positive. Our socialist friends have lately arrived at a point
of ideological parallelism with the European social democracies. we were
already there and so we have somehow met. However. the parallelism does

not hold for their economic analysis. And the reason is simple, even on the
basis of a reading of the interview with Cicchitto. I must say that not all
of the inferences have been deduced that must be derived from the premises
themselves and from the political choices that even Crami'e party have made."

72
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Do you mean that the social democratic option. to the extent
it may have really been adopted by the PSI. presupposes a more decisive
choice. a more European one. in economic matters as well?

[Answer] Yes. In the PSI's recent party line. there is notable clarity in
regard to certain. let us say anarchic. political choices. but that clarity
and rationality are lacking in its analysis of the errors of a certain kind

of stats-controlled capitalism and of communism. Let me explain. I think
that a critique of many leftist values and myths and of the PCI in particular.
such as that started by oraxi. can hardly fail to result. almost automatically.
in s rediscovery of the values of a free market. corrected. of course. so

as to ensure a maximum of social justice and the safeguarding of the general
interest under the system.

[Question] Marketplace and free market are terms that are not always under-
stood to have the same meaning. "hat is the meaning of free market for the
social democrats?

[Answer] In a somewhat echolaatically synoptic manner. I could define it

as a method of organising economic life that depends on the free interaction
of the desires of the various social components. be it in the determination
of investments or in that of salaries. provided. of course. as I have already
said. that in a democratic system the freedom of the market must be oriented
on the choices of collective interest made by political forces and on the
principles of social justice that defend the weakest categories. The

latter include the consumers of monopolistic products. It is a system that
must be free of dirigisms (the antechember of state-controlled capitalism)
and of primitive liberalism. and that has a basic orientation provided by

a political class that acts as guarantor of the existence of the system and
of the absence of distortions such as monopolies. state capitalism or.

it must be said. the abuse of power by some social groups. whether majority
or minority.

[Question] This seems to be an ideal market. which in Italy has probably
never existed. and much less today.

[Answer] Well. we certainly are in a system too unbalanced toward the public
sector. But this is due in part to a faulty private enterprise. which has
sought and continues to seek profits outside the marketplace. which has
wanted and continues to went a subsidized economy. And this degeneration

has been aided and abetted by a phenomenon that is typical of a country like
ours which has had neither a protestant nor a capitalistic revolution. and
where Catholicism has deeply rooted two concepts of sin: sex and money.
Thus. both activities must be clandestine. In this sense. we consider
European socialism a broadly protestant one and much more organic to a
marketplace economy.

[Question] Pellicani says. "I have never identified the marketplace with
capitalism." what is your view?

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] Theoretically. there can he a narhatplace without capitalism.
But if we add to the narlustplecs the concept of initiative. there will
always be a parallelism between the two concepts , and hence a presence of
capitalism. We accept the marketplace and the presence of capitalistic
forces within the marketplace.

[Question] The socialists have explained. at least theoretically. which
enterprises they would expropriste. which ones would you expropriate?

[Answer] In the present Italian situation. even some public enterprises
should be expropriated. Unfortunately. there is the risk that eons of the
private ones would also be involved because of unresolved. congenital
weaknesses in some private productive sectors.

[Question] The socialists rsconend taking the road of self-management,
at least partially. what is the P801 position?

[Answer] I think we are at a stage where some groups could be self-managed.
testing new fornulas that might yield positive results. Clearly, however,

self-management can only be an insert in a pluralistic system that has been
well articulated.

[Question] In conclusion then, and using a terminology that is in vogue:
Is there. in your view. a "third way"?

[Answer] No. For us. the road to be followed is that of the European
social democracies. The rest is opportunistic polemics—use of tactics.

Luciano berca. PCI
Milan II. sow-24 0113 in Italian 29 Sep 78 pp 1. 2

[Report on interview with Luciano Barca, head of the Economic Planning and
Reforns Section of the PCI. by Claudio Alo: "This Is the Marketplace
According to the POL-An Outnoding of Capitalism without Elimination of
Private Enterprise"]

[Text] Rome—The polemic triggered by Bettino Craxi's disruptive midsumaer
ideological assay has not yet been exhausted—a polemic that is undoubtedly
stimulating but which. as Ugo La Halts points out. has not yet descended
from the level of lofty systems for dealing with the basic problem of our
society. From the practical viewpoint, it has remained sterile. In-en
effort to contribute more practicality to the yield of this extensive
debate. which to date has remained predminsntly theoretical, II. SOLE-26
OR! is interviewing representatives of the major leftist parties on the ways
in which their respective postulations would modify an econonic cyst-s
considered by them to be outmoded and in crisis. On 20 September we
published an interview with socialist Cicchitto, and on 23 September an
interview with social democrat bongo.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today we report on a long interview on this topic with Luciano Bares. head
of tho Bconeaic Planning and Reforms Section of the PCI [Italian Com-unis:
Party]. The interview unfolded on an entirely different plane from that on
which the socialists have been maneuvering until new. It is clear that.

as was Mr Berca's evident intention. no direct polemic thrusts emerged

from this interview. The polemic with the PSI [Italian Socialist Party]
continues nevertheless. and it is substantive.

The PSI starts from a delineation of ideological positions and ends up
their prisoner. focusing on them to tho point of being unable to find a

practical ccmproaise enabling it to act in some way and modify tho country's
present situation.

The PCI. instead-~and this emerges clearly from tho answers given to us by
Mr Barcs--focuses above all. and in tho first place. on this practical
compromise. aiming for a gradual approach to an ideal model considered more

as a point of reference than as an objective of difficult. if not impossible
achievement.

"Our point of departure." says Berca. "must be an objective estimate of the
economic situation and the processes actually in progress. If we went to

keep our feet firaly on the ground. we must admit that the factors in the
structural crisis that capitalism is experiencing have been undergoing change
in this country, thanks in part to the political makeup of which the PCI

is a component. By changed factors I mean. for example. the rate of infla-
tion. balance of payments. the fact that Italy succeeded in its undertaking.
which at first seemed destined to fail. and increased exports to over

26 percent. in current lire. of the gross national product and to 99.2 percent
of imports. This is clear evidence of the profound innovativeness of the
processes put in motion. thanks above all to the policy of national solidarity
being pursued by the PCI, and to the ability to govern being shown by the

working class. Yet. these results nevertheless conceal profound contradic-
tions, structural problems.

"Some results in particular. though obtained. have in no way augmented the
system's ability to guarantee full domestic employment and to avoid the
perverse alternation of inflation-stagnation cycles. It seems to me, at this

point. that the political and ideological debate could gain a great deal of
substance if we started from these facts, from an effort to interpret them,

and tried to find an answer to the problems uncovered. In this way, the
specific weights of the various leaders would be measured not by their
ability to cite forgotten authors. but by their ability to find in certain

authors a method. not just formulas or dogmas, capable of providing guide-
lines for research tied to the problems of today."

[Question] In sum. practically speaking. you are saying that outside of
some situational improvements, rather than structural, recently achieved. the
capitalistic system, and especially ours. continues locked in a profound

crisis. and that the practical way to extricate it must therefore be studied.
Is that correct?

75
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL [[88 ONLY

[Answer] Yes. This crisis. however. is not entirely economic. 0n the
contrery. it is a crisis of the society as a whole. which requires. therefore.
for its resolution. s serious refers process.

[Question] The PSI has also postulsted that enelysis in more or less the

sue terns. however. speaking practically. end not just ideologically. do
you consider that the new leadership of the PSI hes responded adequately
to the necessities inherent in this analysis?

[Answer] I believe that the PSI is unquestionably underestimating the

crisis end the dress of the options which. erroneously chosen. could

destroy in 6 months the results that heve been achieved. This has led some
eocieliste--this is sy impression—to the conviction that the esergency hes

in some way been resolved or at least greatly attenuated. and that we have
reverted to the hypothesis that underlay the badgodeeberg decision in 1960.
eccording to which the capitalistic systes was seemed to be capable of
guaranteeing a surplus in some way. which could then be subjected to reforeistic
ndministrstion without endangering the surplus by the reformistic. essentially

redistributive. measures (which are distinct from structural reforsistic
assures).

I believe the difference between us end the socielists in the value we
”01m to the watchword "austerity" is that we interpret susterity to mean
the need for the working class to take charge of the eccruel process; take
chsrge. that is. of producing the surplus. confronting in new terms.
coepletely recast. the same probless that were confronted by the bourgeoisie
when. with Seith and Ricardo. they procleised austerity a weapon to be used
against the westefulnees of the rentiers and the lords of feudalism. When
I say confront the same problems in a different manner. I seen that else for

the working class the term austerity signifies a transformation of the struc-
ture. beeed on a different set of values.

[Question] Does the PSI therefore. in your view. propose only a kind of
blend reformism that is not sufficient to resolve capitalism's profomd
crisis?

[Answer] I think the most recent phase of the debate within the PSI indicates
a fallback to s more stimulating phese contained in the socialist plan. in
which there wee more of a reformist conception. I say this even though

at that time I myself polemicired egainst the content of the plan which.

in my view. failed to resolve basic problems such as the relationship between
economic planning and the marketplsce.

[Question] but how do you commute propose to overcome this capiteliem:
by profoundly reforming it or by eliminating it sltogether?

[Answer] Our objective is to get rid of cepitelism. However. e process of
long-range reform emerges fro: a compromise with the forces of moderation

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
e FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and with capitalist enterprise itself. Hhst the working class requires and
nust obtain at the moaent it takes charge of the process of accrual. however.
is that this process not be directed toward the goal of personal gain. as
occurs with the capitalists and employees of capitalism. but rather toward
values that interest the working class: those of freedom. justice and the
satisfaction of those essential needs being neglected by the marketplace.
Obviously. there is ample room for autonomy in the accrual process for those
capitalist enterprises that do not oppose these goals.

[Questionl You say that the working class has come of age and has taken
charge of on accrual process whose objectives are the various values that
interest the workers. However. you have also criticized a certain socialist
postulation which is basically rediatributive. Does it not seem to you that
certain union initiatives. recent ones at that. although locally rather than
centrally directed. have followed for the most part. if not exclusively.
radistributional lines. ignoring the more general problems?

[Answer] I believe the institutional scope of unionism cannot avoid first-
hand encounters with the problem of redistribution. and that a union should
be put on notice of having gone too far or of having gotten too involved

in the larger aspects of economic policy. I want to note clear that, with
this. I am not defending all of the demands and all of the policies of the
various units of unionism. However. the error of redistribution must be
ascribed nainly to those political forces--first to the at [Christian
Democratic Party]. then in great part to the PSI. and, for its share. to
the P801 [Italian Social Democratic Party]-—which have made of the Italian
nation a nation of subsidies and welfare. whose budget is characterised.

not perchance. by an exceedingly high level of monetary transfers to families
and business enterprises. To take charge of the accrual process means

breaking decisively with this state of aubsidisation and confronting the

relationship between the government and the economy on the basis of enhancing.
and not suppressing. the creation of wealth.

[Question] Recapitulating. Hr Berta. you see. on the one hand. an emerging
working class which takes charge of producing a surplus. devoted however.

to achieving different objectives; and on the other hand you see ample
capacity for eccounodating private enterprises which subscribe to. let us say.
a pure, traditional type of capitalism which. however. does not oppose
socialized ends. In the overall hypothesis of the marketplace. how would

the two forces be merged?

[Answer] In the first place, we insist that pure capitalism dues not exist
in the West and much less in this country. Practically. therefore. we are
referring to a particular kind of state-controlled capitalism. and
especially to the various characteristics that this state-controlled
capitalism might assume. Now. from this viewpoint. the real problem to be
confronted is indeed the merging of economic planning with the marketplace,
which is still unresolved. In this respect. I believe we are all in

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

agreement that the present socialist country models are not applicable. but
it is also true that no one has yet come forth with another model that
works. v. are advancing our own conception of this merger. which envisions
not a type of programing that denies the marketplace and its survival, but
a type of programing that—and I am pleased' to note-that Cicchitto has
adopted our formula—would work through the marketplace and would confront
the crises of economic planning and the marketplace together.

what is the hypothesis on which we are working? That of no longer thinking.
contrary to liar: and in accordance with Jean Baptiste Say, that supply
automatically regulates dasand and market outlets. That of getting away. in
sun, from the traditional schemes of dirigisme in which the wishful thinking
of the left-center remained entangled—those schemes which interpret economic
planning always and solely as planning of supply. We, instead, believe in
economic planning that addresses demand centers as well, that relates to
both poles of the marketplace.

[Question] Is there not a danger that dirigisme, in exasperation. nay
suffocate the marketplace entirely?

[Answer] No. I'll inediately explain why. Government intervention on

the side of demand could give rise to a sort of monopoly, with its

inevitably attendant dangers. Keeping these dangers to a minimum. however,
allows national decentralization to play the part seemed in it by a
multiplicity of local institutions. This means, in other words, a revitalise-
tion of the marketplace through intervention by collective consumers,
institutionalised or not, alongside the individual consumer, in the sense

of a conunity organized to resolve the collective needs, which are fulfilled,

in turn, by transforming them into economic demand to be placed on the
market.

[Answer] In my estimation, a demand in which collective needs represents a
significant factor, would result in a qualitative change in the demand
itself, thus requiring a reconversion of production, a more fundamental one
than the one in course. This gives rise to two alternatives: 1) this
reconversion is brought about entirely by private capital and without
creating employment problems. in which case government intervention becomes
unnecessary; or 2) this reconversion requires substantial funding and
assistance in various forms by the government and poses problems of labor
mobility, in which case the government must intervene to ensure that the
facilities thus provided are actually devoted to the objectives laid don
in the planning guidelines.

[Question] ncnce, the "PCI marketplace" also would amply acco—odate private
enterprises. without exclusions? Let me explain my question further:
Cicchitto has said that the PSI would expropriate those large enterprises that
convert their ecmomic power into hegemonic power. Pietro Longo has said,
half seriously and half facetiously, that the P801 would upropriate some
public enterprises. which enterprises would the PCI expropriate‘l

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I think that at this time the working class should direct its
efforts to the battle against any further expropriations requested by
enterprises in crisis or financial trouble. The principal. if not the sole.

objective must be that of increasing the efficiency of the existing public
enterprises.

[Question] The impression exists. however. that the unions are continuing
to press not only for tho perpetuation at all costs of existing public
enterprises even when the serious financial state of the government makes
it inadvisable (as in the case of EGAM [Agency for the Management of
Mineral and Metallurgical Concernsl). but are also fighting to bring into
the public sector what is left of business failures in the private sector.

[Answer] Our point of view in this regard is very clear: In the first
place. we must legally make public property of that which is in fact public
property by reason of its having been paid for out of the taxpayers' money.
In regard to refusal of permission to shut down. and especially in the case
of SCAM, we cannot afford. within the framework of tidying up government
fundings and transforming them into "paying“ enterprises, to exclude even
transfers from the public to the private sector, where this would help

bring order to an agglomeration of diverse problems totally devoid of any
vertical or horizontal coordination. It must be equally clear. however.

that the PCI is opposed to assumption by the government of these sectors in
decline. leaving to private enterprise those under development and being
subsidized. of course. through the low prices charged them by the public
sector. If there is to be a correct relationship between economic planning
and the marketplace. the rules must not be partially applied. putting them
aside when it is a matter of salaries and the sale of raw materials by the
public to the private sector.

Valerie Zanone. PLI

Milan IL SOLE-26 one in Italian 3 Oct 78 pp 1. 2

[Report on interview with Valerie Zanone. secretary of the PLI. by Claudio
Ale: "Does the PLl Really Like the Socialist Switch?-Not Very Much. But
Marriages Are Not Made Between Close Blood Relatives. Says Zanone"]

[Text] Through a series of interviews with the representatives of the
leftist parties. Cicchitto of the PSI [Italian Socialist Party] on

20 September. Longo of the P801 [Italian Social Democratic Party] on the
23d. and Dates of the PCI [Italian Communist Party] on the 29th--IL'SOLE-26
ORE has tried to shift to a practical plene--that of the problems and
economic structures of an industrial society-the wide-ranging debate being
carried on in almost exclusively ideological terms--en attempt which. as
was to be expected. has been only partly successful.

At this point, nevertheless. it has seemed to us to be of interest to extend
the debate to the PLI [Italian Liberal Party] as well. not because it is

79
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

leftist (although ll‘n secretary Zanone spoke, at; the April 1976 party congress,
of a "positioning of the PL] between the 00 [Christian Democratic Party] and
the 961"). but mainly because it has recently shown growing interest in the
val. with which it seems to agree at times.

This interest was confirmed by the substantially positive evaluation accorded
by Mr Altissimo. deputy secretary and economic head of the Liberal Party.

to our newspaper's interview with Fabrizio Cicchltto. "In Cicchitto's
words." said Altissimo. without. however. pretending that they were totally
devoid of obscruities. "there is. nevertheless something new which.

because it is European. tends toward the liberal."

To clarify some aspects of the present position of the liberals with

respect to the socialists, and of the PLI's views with regard to the current
problems of our economic system, we addressed some questions to Valerie
Zanonc. secretary of the party.

[Question] Hr Zenone. referring to the clarifications imparted recently
by the socialists in regard to the economic aspects of their ideological
switch. would you explain to us what it is that unites the "liberal" of
the Phi with the "liberal" of the PSI. of which Altissimo has also spoken?

[Answer] The answer is very simple. Liberals and socialists can understand
each other without perplexities. The congress of international liberals

has just concluded in Zurich. This year it discussed as its central theme the
role of s free market economy in liberal democracy. The final resolution of
the congress stresses the role of a free market economy in respect to economic
ctriciency. political freedom, equality of opportunity. social justice

and international solidarity. The sociality of the marketplace distinguishes
liberal economic policy as much from the capitalism of the "indispensable"

as from socialism. However. Altissimo has rightly observed that some

elements of conformity with a European logic are to be found navigating the
river of Cicchitto's interview.

[Question] To be exact: Which elements?

[Answer] There is the recognition of the complexity of the social system.
which requires a pluralistic political framework and a policy of detente

among the dynamic forces of production. There is the two-fold rejection
of state capitalism. such as that of the "nonsecialist" Eastern regimes.

and of state welfare and patronage developed during 30 years of Christian
democratic government. The mistakes of the left-center must have taught
something. The socialists at that time took as their first battle flag

the nationalization of the electrical industry. The idea of inaugurating the
period of resources with the formation of a new public entity was for the
christian democrats a wedding invitation. Now. Cicchitto's recall to the
reality of the present structure of the marketplace in Italy appears
provocatory, after 15 years of welfare and patronage politics. Napoleoni
also recognizes that the reality to be evaluated and confronted today in

our country is not a capitalistic society in full. or even adequate.

possession of its operative means, but father an atypical form of corrupt
capitalism.

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cicchito is thus induced to seek entrepreneurs responding to certain character-
istics as allies of the working class in a policy of reform. But in describing
these characteristics he actually portrays the normal conduct of an autonomous
entrepreneur in a market system not weighted down by improper burdens. The
socialists exhort the supporters of laisaez-faire to not "angeliciae the
marketplace." I agree. However. laymen (socialist and liberal) should not
consider the marketplace as a reincranation of the devil.

[Question] The PL! has always set itself up as the last bulwark in the
defense of the marketplace. not to say of capitalism. against the attacks
of Marxist doctrine on private property and on freedom of initiative. New.
today the socialists criticize Lenin. but do not deny Marx. and. unlike the
communists. speak of expropriating some enterprises. accentuating certain

dirigistic aspects of control of the marketplace. ﬂow are you able to
reconcile your past with this present?

[Answer] It is not quite clear what enterprises the socialists would
expropriate. The guidelines given by Cicchitto could, at their limits. be
applied to all the large enterprises. which. after all, are to a great
extent public or publicly controlled through the government. There is in
the interview a reminder of the need for antitrust legislation. All they
need do is dig out of the files of the chambers the proposals made in this
regard by the liberals in the 1960's. Nor is it clear how expropriation

of the large enterprises would of itself reduce their hegemonic positions in
the productive sectors in which they operate.

From the liberal viewpoint. rather than expropriate and nationalize. it
would be more effective to provide a boost to technological progress so as

to better articulate the organizational tidying-up process of the enter-
prises und to develop an industrial relations policy that promotes democratic
participation procedures within establishments.

[Question] Hr Zanone, am I mistaken. or has the PL! always been opposed to
economic control planning. which the PSI. instead, seems to see as a
"revitalizer" of the marketplace?

[Answer] The economy of the marketplace must be regulated by suitable
public actions. not by a total absence of intervention. The price of total
economic planning is the loss of freedom. without even so much as the
benefit of any greater effectiveness in the solution of the problems.

The Liberal Party is for planning that coordinates any public interventions
and creates for autonomous entities and private operators a climate of
security and equality of opportunity.

However. even in regard to planning. many utopias of social engineering show
the facial wrinkles of Allina. the magician. Liberal cultural policy aims

today not toward collectivity planning for the society of coming years. but

81
FOR OFFIrnI "SE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at a method of articulated, flexible solutions which can be tested against
factual data. This is perhaps the great difference. The left builds

projects for the future, while liberals seek the most suitable method for
usranteeing that today, and "in future," each operator and each citizen will
a freer to pursue his own planning.

[Question] Self-management: This is one of the points on which you have
stated you are not in agreement with the PSI. why?

[Answer] After studying the theses of the French socialists on self-
management, Aron commented: "It is a beautiful concept. It is too bad that
one doesn‘t know what self-management actually consists of." For that
matter, even Cicchitto speaks of it as "a hypothesis yet to be formulated
and tested," and falls back on a definition of the working class as a
"general class," which from my point of view is entirely nebulous, or is
contradictory to the concept of a pluralistic and conflictual democracy.

However, I do not wish to understate in the least the theoretical and
political scope of the problem. To this topic of democratic participation
and apportionment of decisionmaking powers, both in the body politic and in
business enterprise, I have dedicated a modest number of past hours of
study, a trace of which is reflected in the definition of the word [for]
"joint management" which I wrote some years ago for the Bobbie and Metteucci
"Dictionary of Politics." Industrial democracy is an element of social
democracy which the western mixed economies cannot elude. The liberal

camp is also able to build on a base of concrete experience. It has before
it now, in fact, a documented study, precisely on this topic, by the Swiss
radicals, who are part of the international liberal movement. But there is
still a long road to travel to arrive at practical proposals for intervention.
Possibly, liberals and socialists can find a way to travel this road

together. But we are different. Marriages are not made between close
blood relatives.

Ugo La Halfa, PEI

Milan IL SOLE-25 ORE in Italian 6 Oct 78 pp 1, 2

[Report on interview with Ugo Le Halfa, leader of the P81, by Claudio A10:
"The 'Third Vsy' According to La Malta--Corrsct, Not Condsmm, a System
Still Valid 0n the Whole")

[Text] Rome-Hhen, at the beginning of September, at the height of the
ideological polemic triggered by Bettino Craxi's midsummer assay, we decided
to interview some leftist party representatives on the practical aspects of
this dispute being carried on in terms of quotations and interpretations of
venerable ancestors, the idea had also been gleaned from an article by Ugo
La Halfa. Ideological clarifications-said the leader of the PR! [Italian
Republican Party] more or less, introducing himself into the debate which

at that time was becoming more heated between the communists and socialists-
are important, "but the practical conclusions one expects to draw from these

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

clarifications are even more important. It is of little value to declare
oneself ideologically Western, if when it comes right down to programming
practical action, one places himself outside the Hestern orbit, without even
a minimal basic understanding of the problems." He look to the parties and
the unions--La Halfa continued, in effect-for this decisive choice:
"determine the policy that will combat the crisis and put us back into
Europe, or persist in a policy which alienates us more and more from Europe.
In the first alternative, the debate will have yielded a fruitful harvest.
In the other. it will have served to nurture any interest but that of the
recovery of the Italian social structure." Convinced, as we also were, of
the importance of this challenge, we asked socialists, communists and social
democrats for clarifications on the way in which they intend to go from
ideologies to realities. fron scholarly quotations to a precise and concrete
indication of the practical schemes by which their respective party lines

would modify the structure of an economic system which they consider to be
more or less in a state of crisis-e verification, in sum, of the actual
feasibility of a "third way."

After hearing Pabrizio Cicchitto for the PSI [Italian Socialist Party].

Pietro Longs for the PSDI [Italian Social Democratic Party]. and Luciano
Barca for the PCI [Italian Communist Party], it seemed to us to be of interest
at this point to review with Ugo La Halfe himself the results of this effort
to bring down this debate from its exalted heights of grand systems.

[Question] Hr La Melfa, do you feel that, after more than a month and a
half of polemics, explanations and dotting of 1‘s, the left as a whole, or

any one party within the left, has come up with an alternate economic system
to the present one, of a capitalistic type?

[Answer] My impression is that the ideological debate, instead of contributing
to the clarification of positions. has only rendered them more vague and
confused. The only point reached seems to be that of an ideological rejec-
tion by the socialists of all tendencies, of Leniniam, and a reaffirmation

by the Communist Party of its consideration of Leainism as a constituent
element in its political and cultural history.

In other words, totaling up the results, the confused ideological polemic
of the last several weeks as a whole reveals only that the Communist Party,
insofar as concerns Italy, rejects the Soviet model as well as the European
social democratic model, and, proclaiming the outmoding of capitalism.
whose crisis at this time it considers insurmountable, intends to lay down
a third way, concerning which, however, it provides no indication whatever.
The Socialist Party, or at least its major faction, also proclaims
capitalism outmoded, and rejects the Soviet model, but does not accept the
social democratic model, which has been brought into being in the northern
countries, but which has not actually meant the outmoding of capitalism.

It assumes as a model, for the outmoding of capitalism, the self-management
doctrine formulated by French socialism in the footsteps of the experiment

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

carried out. with unfortunate results. in Yugoslavia. Thus. we have a march
by the Communist Party toward an undefined third way and a parallel earth
by the Socialist Party toward a third way founded on self-management.

[Question] A march along two trails which in reality end up nowhere?

[Answer] In my opinion, the proclamation by both parties. of the objective
of outmoding capitalism, and the criticism they level at the northern social
democracies, of having remained in the orbit of the so-csllad capitalistic
system, are nothing more nor less than a true utopian abstraction driving
from the fact that our leftists have not carried out a critical and cultural
analysis such as would enable them to understand the real problems of the
society in which they operate. The northern social democracies have
operated in a more advanced industrial society than ours. and have under-
stood the economic and social advantages that can be derived from a dynamic
capitalism. Our leftists. instead. are imbued with an extremely aged
Leninist or Harriet ideological patrimony. unsuited to the real conditions
of the Italian society. and was unable to understand (as was. for that
matter, the be [Christian Democratic Party] itself). the transformation that

Italy was undergoing, around the 1960s. from a predominantly agricultural
society to a modern industrial one.

Instead of working together with the dynamic thrust of such a society. in the
manner of the large northern social democracies. our leftists destroyed it.

and weakened and deteriorated its structure to the point of today's grave
crisis. The crisis of the capitalist system is not an objective crisis. as

the leftists want to have us believe. It is the product of political

action that is being decreed by an antiquated ideology which is inapplicable

to modern industrial societies. The paradox lies in the fact that they
proclaim a crisis in a system which. through their own errors of incomprehension
of the realities. has been almost irresponsibly led into that crisis.

[Question] Is it your view. in sum, that there is no third way?

[Answer] The third way, in my opinion, lies in correcting ideological and
political positions. not in declaring a system outmoded which can. through
a suitable policy be restored to full vigor. If. in order to outmode

capitalism, we were to perpetuate the same old errors of political and union
conduct. we would not go from an outmoded capitalism to a batter society.
but from an outmoded capitalism to a South American type society.

From this viewpoint. the Republican Party, and certain elements in the PSDI,
lean more toward the thinking of the northern social democracies than do the
PSI and, of course, the Pct. It is not formal designations that characterize
affinities between political forces, but rather the nature of their respec-
tive political and cultural concepts and the substantiveness of their

actions. Thus. the more a party rejects the experiences of the European and
northern social democracies. the more it retards economic and cultural

progress in our own country. relegating it to the fringe of the more
advanced industrial societies.

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Mr Le Helfe. the various leftist party lines provide a more or
1... detailed end more or less concrete conception of what the "nerketplece"
means to each of then. end of the part that could be reserved in that
marketplace for private enterprise. In your view. is there e minimal

common denominetor among these conceptions that could. hopefully. contribute
to the solution of our country's economic end eociel problems? -

[Answer] No. I cannot seem to find in the positions expressed by the various
party representetives e clear, coherent view of the policy thet should be
pursued in the coming yeere. when we were at the height of our "economic
mirecle." that is. during the 1960s. we knew thet this "miracle." based as
it was on en entirely spontaneous development, could not fully resolve the
problems which are still being so widely discussed today. Reeliting that
their resolution required a substentielly greater volume of investment

and a well-defined channeling of that investment. we et thet time proposed

a prograsning of objectives to be achieved. and e national policy for the
channeling of returns on those investments toward the echievement of those
objectives. He proposed, that is. a timely policy for controlling the
distribution of revenues that would not open the way to an increasingly
corporetist competition for ecquisition of an ever greater share of national
revenues, and that would not reward the expension of individuel consumption
over public consumption. The marketplace--thet is to say. the system of
public and private enterprise es s whole-~would have adapted to these
parameters. If the policy guidelines had been clear end definitive, it
would not have been difficult for enterprises to invest beyond treditionel

areas, which would heve evoided what has happened in cities like Milan end
Turin.

Automobile manufecturers could have built more buses then privete vehicles.
Construction firms could have built more schools or hospitals then villes or
seaside end mounteinside estates. The leftists end the labor unions.
fighting against a revenue policy, destroyed the very basis of e progrenming
policy. to which they have continued. however, to give empty lip service.
The DC remained indifferent to the issues raised by the republicans, end
today we are paying for this hostility or indifference.

[Question] In regard to programming: The PSI speaks of it es an element
which. "paredoxicelly." can restore to the marketplace its "function as an
effective social and economic barometer." "if it is accompanied by a set of
policies designed to create conditions of equelity emong economic elements,
and if it is supported by antitrust legislation."

The communists speak of it. instead, as a "revitalizer of the merketplace,"

especially if progrelnlng is applied not only to supply but also to demand.
What is your position on this issue?

[Answer] As I pointed out, at the beginning of the 1960s we formally
proposed a program based on a revenue policy. And since a revenue policy
cannot be carried out without the concurrence of labor, I, as finance

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

minister in 1962, formed a Programming Commission in which representatives

of private enterprise and of the three labor unions were invited to take
part. The working class did not participate hegemonically in that commission.
but it did participate on an equal basis with the other social components.
The purpose of that commission was to work out the guidelines of an economic
policy and of a revenue policy. which could then be submitted to parliament.

That commission was put to death. In the years since. the confrontations
between the forces of the state. of enterprise and of labor have taken

place everywhere. including the streets. accompanied by continual strikes.
except in an appropriate institutionalized forum. In the extreme seriousness
of today's problems-unemployment, recession, absence of services in vast
sectors-one sees the result of a demagogic, pepulist policy. If we wish to
resolve these grave problems. we must take a new road-of austerity and
rigor--and not continue traveling the same old road of rhetoric, strikes

and so-called social undertakings which, in reality. conceal a mean and
misarly spirit. with nothing whatever to contribute to austerity.

[Question] The socialists would expropriete the large enterprises which
seek to transform economic hegemony into political hegemony. The communists

say "no" to any further expropriations and would concentrate solely on
making the existing public enterprises more efficient. The social democrats

would even erpropriate some public enterprises. "hat would Ugo La Halfa
expropriate?

[Answer] I view the socialist idea that there should be further expropriations
as highly bizarre. The public enterprises are in such a disastrous state

of disarray that we should bitterly regret having made them public. However,
bed management of the economy has placed many private enterprises in serious
economic and financial straits as well. The issue, as I see it, is not one
of public versus private enterprise. The issue. in my View, is that of good
management of enterprise. which in turn depends on good management of the
economy as a whole. 131 [Industrial Reconstruction Institute] was a great
institution which, until some 15 years ago. had functioned in an excellent
manner. I remember the years when the English and the Swedes came to study
its structure and operation. And IRI is still a great institution. But
after so many years of mismanagement of such an institution by the political
forces, no Englishmen or Swede would want to study it. The same can be said
of ENI [National Hydrocarbons Agency], IMI [Italian Credit Institute],

ICIPU and so on. The policies of the three great parties (DC, PSI, PCI) and
of the labor unions has caused the degeneration of institutions which were
models of technical and administrative operations. A kind of metastasis

has struck the Italian public and private structures, which we must try to
cure while there is still time.

[Question] Yes. Mr La Malfa, but the question was, "what would you expropriate?"

[Answer] I think I would expropriate the political class.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] Sir. the socialist "new deal" is liked by the liberals and by a
considerable sector of the christian democrats. It was also liked. in the
beginning at least. by the social democrats. Do you like this "new deal"?

[Answer] we like parties and persons who understand the subject we have had
this opportunity to discuss. For instance. we like Lass when he said that
it had been a mistake to deal with wages as an independent variable. We

did not like socialist Benvenuto end Catholic Carniti when they criticized
this assertion by Lame. we like the communists when they don't want any
further netionaliretions. We don't like Cicchitto when he thinks there

can be more netionalisstions in Italy.

It is on the basis of substantiveness of economic, financial and social
policy that slinements can be formulated at this time. An important test.
in this respect. will be the Pandolfi plan. we have welcomed its rigor and
coherence as a new realism in Italian politics. He shall slins ourselves
with the forces that support its integrity and its rigorous application.

We shall oppose the forces that will try to water it down or smasculate

it. The substance of political action interests us. rather its forms,

and we will accept party lines as instruments for achieving planned
substance.

In our view, if austere objectives cannot be achieved under the present
formula of national solidarity, they will be difficult if not impossible to
achieve under any alternative formula, and what concerns us is the question:
What future does Italy have in the event this extreme effort toward national
solidarity fails to achieve its objectives and the three great parties
continue the policies that have so profoundly disrupted Italian life.

Pisro Bassstti, 06

Milan IL SOLE-24 ORB in Italian 8 Oct 78 pp 1, 2

[Report on interview with Piers Bassetti, parliamentary deputy and first
assistant to the ac Economic Section head, by Ernesto Auci: “The Italian

Hay in Progress--‘Hork Within a Political Synthesis Devoid of Ideological
Schamatism,‘ Says Piero Bassetti"]

[Text] Hilan-Throughout the ideological polemic that exploded last summer
among the leftist parties. the DC [Christian Democratic Party] has remained
a mute spectator. True, the Dc is not qualified to speak for Marxism or
Leninism. However. as the governing party, the DC could very well have
said something while the leftist forces and lay parties sought. confusedly,
to determine the practical aspects of the society we must build.

Must we maintain the present capitalistic system, possibly reforming it? 0:,
must we take giant steps along a road leading to the creation of a socialistic
society? And if so, which read: that of the Western social democracies, or

87
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPTCIAI. USE ONLY

the Soviet one? Or should we try (as the communists assert) a third way
that is neither reformist nor collective? And then what, practically
speaking. are the short- end intermediate-term knots to be untied to get
the transformation of our economic and social system underway in the
desired direction?

To ell these questions. the DC as a party has not given a global answer.

At times. its representatives have tried to smooth the rough edges of the
heated debate by pointing out the dangers to which it was subjecting the
government's efforts. On the whole. the DC has constantly maintained the
position of a political mediating force. thus implicitly reesserting its
self-assumed fundamental role at the center of the Italian political system.

A at that does not elaborate grand strategic plans, but rather confronts
concrete problems pragmatically. endeavoring to manipulate political

syntheses capable of resolving the real problems and restore operation of

the machinery of accrual and economic development: this is the central

idea which Piero bassetti. parliamentary deputy and first assistant to the
heed of the ac Economic Section. has expressed in a book-length interview which
will shortly arrive on the shelves. entitled '"The Uncomfortable West. the

Dc After Hero, and the Italian Crisis." and which nassstti eunarized for

us during a long conversation. basastti. a little over 2 months ago.

resumed the office of president and chief executive officer of the family's
principal enterprise, Bassetti. Inc.. without, however. reducing his political
activities in parliament and in the party.

[Question] Hr Rossetti. why have you returned to the firm?

[Answer] I must make it clear that I have not disengaged from politics.

My major business obligation stems. on the one hand. from the special
requirements of the firm. which must embark on a delicate phase of reorganiza-
tion and recovery. especially in the international field, and. on the other.
from the present political juncture. which demands a greater dedication by the
manager class to the practical problems of management. For that matter.

I have never thought of politics in an abstract sense. I don't believe there
should be a division of responsibilities among industrialists. management

and professional politicians. And I have always engaged in politics with
the idea of putting certain concepts into practice. In short, I have not

confined my efforts to the fight for regionalism; I have actually become
involved in the setting up of the regions. I: is not a matter. therefore.

of my abandoning politics. nor of a disillusionment with politics. and there
is no contradiction between a major business undertaking and the more general
responsibilities which the manager class is called upon to assume.

{Question} however, in the face of the blossoming of strategic programs.
ar'. above all. in view of the debate as regards optimum systems, which
can nevertheless serve a useful purpose in helping clarify the ultimate
objectives of day-to-dsy political activity. the DC has maintained an
absolute silence. Don't you think the DC should become more involved in
this area?

88

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] I don't believe the DC should propose a developmental model of

its own. What. then. should we do? Should we issue an ideological document
and risk accontueting the existing divisive elements? Or should we draw

up a program of readjustment and development? But for this there is the
government, which is moving with great expertise. The Italian problem today.
in general terms. is clearly that of effecting a change in the dominant
social bloc. The bourgeoisie can no longer hold its own. the proletariat

is not yet ready to replace it. end the middle class is a reality that no
one seems able to pull together. For this reason, the reel problem is to
succeed in effectueting political syntheses of the demands of a composite
but fragmented society, in such a manner as to guarantee the stability of the
system. The policy synthesis accomplished in parliament. which has given
life to the present emergency majority. is therefore destined to last a

long time yet. because it has the objective of assuring the equilibrium of
forces necesssry to restore to operation the accrual process. Certainly,

a parliamentary coalition is not the same as the birth of a new social bloc.
But this bloc will not spring up soon. and the political class will have to
continue. for a long time yet, implementing new syntheses without disrupting
the general framework, that is, without forcing the attempt to give birth to
s new social bloc that doesn't exist in the country's makeup.

[Question] These are reasons. as I understand it, for the DC not wanting to
advance a social plan of its own. But, end even if we add the desire not to
exacerbate the ideological encounter. the 06 can hardly withdrew from the

search for innovative solutions of many civil social issues, beginning with
the economic one.

[Answer] There can be no doubt that a program of research must be under-
taken on various issues: programming. which must be applied to demand as
well, and not solely to supply as is being done today with regional plans

that are taking on more end more the aspect of ideological monuments than

of practical instruments for management; those services whose efficiencies
can be improved only through joint management (and joint management seems

very well suited to the organization of service enterprises, although it
seems hardly applicable to the majority of manufacturing enterprises). Once
again, in short, this is not the time for lofty programs. The reel challenge,

to which the manager class must respond concretely, is that of the manage-
ment of our resources.

[Question] 0n the issue of enterprise. in the arena of which the recovery
of the accrual process must be concentrated, the no can hardly avoid

expressing clear ideas and. above all. it cannot avoid the pas: mistakes
that have made of the governing party the grand patron of parasitic and
subsidized industry.

[Answer] Let us be clear. We must have fixed points around which to search
for viable political solutions. These basic objectives are. in my opinion,
three: supranationality, in the sense that a choice of the European option
must be irreversible; regionalism, to break up any attmepts at bureaucratic

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

management by the center; and making room for the other institutions of a
civil society. In the face of these objectives. the ac must be an open party.
providing. not prefabricated solutions for all problems, but rather a
capacity for mediation and synthesis in the handling of them all.

[Question] Specifically. however. enterprises need movement in order to
be assured of free spaces for maneuvering?

[Answer] The renewed attention being given to enterprise is a positive

fact. But what are the characteristics of our industrial system? In Italy
we have a mixture of special systems. In the first place, we cannot overlook
the fact that we are but a province in the great Western empire, and that

we must therefore accept the logic of multinationals, favoring those that

are based in Italy-a logic that is based on economies of scale and
utilization of research. In the second place, there is a system of medium
enterprises which operate on the marketplace on a competitive footing and

for which the logic of coaparativs prices is more important than technology.
These are the truly capitalistic enterprises for which the maintenance of
competitiveness in the international markets is the predominant factor in
their success. He can include in this sector also the majority of enterprises
with state participation, whose management philosophy needs to be profoundly
altered. True, there has been a degeneration into patronage, but the basic
error to be corrected lies in that the Ps'e [State Participations] have

been called upon to play a domestic role in sectors where enterprises must
remain strictly and solely international in scope. what would the political
class say if the Ps's, instead of investing in the South, started investing
internationally? Is it not true that 3N1 is the only public group that still

operates because it has. if not a multinational, certainly a supranational
structure?

Finally, there are national enterprises. especially small ones, which operate

in entirely special domestic conditions. such as Prato. Carpi, Castelfidardo.
etc.

The political class must therefore guarantee the existence of this mixture of
various modes of production. And the formula cannot be solely that of the
liberals, that of the socialists, or that based on self-management. All
three of these instruments must be used pragmatically.

[Question] Is there. therefore, a third way. and is it the one Italy has
been traversing these several months?

[Answer] I think that is exactly right. We are in a less homogeneous
country than other Western ones. and to manage it we must find new and
innovative solutions. without ideological schisms.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Editrice Il Sole-24 Ore s.r.l.

9238
CSO: 3104 END

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY