APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010026-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010026-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8219
12 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
FOUO No. 619

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010028-1
NOTE

JPRs publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first.line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Horde or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been suppliedasappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items-are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGULATIONS GWBRNING WRSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED REREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0? THIS PUBLICATION 8! RESTRICTED “80??!an USE ORLY.
7. Aunt-mu I. 5""... ( Gum" u.. n For.
. o.

  

c——.-.-

 

. Palm-neg Ute-mum". Mae and AJJMII l0. p'.|¢€‘/‘J|kr‘¢t\ L'n-l .\u.
Joint Publication aaeeerch Service
1000 North Globe R0“! ll. onluet’Gtam .\o
Arlington. Virginie 22201
n Spoeeomn‘ Omen-ewe. Home and Mdme I). type el lope“ e P001“ !
Coveted
Ae ebove
‘. I

 

l5. Suppleoeemy Neon

M. Mame“ u

The report contains intonation from African end epecialized West European
publicatione end radio on political, economic. end sociological developments.

)7. In Verde end Dene-eel Auiyeie. "o. Deuvlpeen

l
I
-l
Politicel Science _Llnter-Africen Aff. Lanna __Ruanda l
Soc iology insole Ji— Guinea __Sao Tome and |
Economics __Benin _x___ Guinea-Bison: Principe '
Culture (Social _Botevene :Ivory Coast LS enesel
Sciences) ____8urundi __Kenye _Seychellcs
Technological _Cneroon __Lesotho ___Sierra Leone
_Cepe Verde ___I.iberie __Sooalia
_Centrel African _X_ Madagascar __South Africa i
Empire _Halaui __5vazilnnd :
_Chad _Hali _‘l‘enzan ia ‘
_Coooro Islands _Mauritiue Luge ‘
x :COngo Luau-biotic __Ugende
__DJ ibouti __Nenibia _Upper Volta
x __Equatorial Guinea __Niger __Znire .
m Heunlwu/Opce-l-IMM Tet-a :gﬂgzp la :::E:::: __Zaubie
__Ganb ia _Rhodesie

m. comm inn/0cm 02.50.56.”

Ithulmluy Scum“ 21. .\o. oi Puc-
I-‘ou urvuzw. use (my. Limited Number of "°'-" 33

'°"‘ "'" “ ""' "”‘ runs seen an at ntnooucco ""°"“ °‘ "" "'
TRANSLATIMS 0N SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
rouo No. 619

Conn-:N'rs
man-11mm Mums
Briefs
FRO loan ROAD
Ghana-Benin Trade Relations
mom
Briefs '
UNI‘rA Bcnuucle Control Clai- Denied.
Belgian Technical Mission
00100

nature Economic Prospects Said To Be Gloom
($m‘ 33081.3“ mm, 29 'OV 78) Cocoooosoeoo

31mm. GUINEA

President mcies' Abuse of Population Detailed
(cmazo 16, 12 Nov 78)

GHANA

Br to to
Ghanaian-British I'm-ode

GUINEA

Skepticism on Toure Overtures in the Value 0: Petty Congress
(Sennen Andrienirado; JBUKB AFRIQUB, 6 Dec 78) .......
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010026-1

' you orncw. use ONLY

COMBM‘S (Continued)
GUINEA-EMU

Popular Apathy, 'Bourgeois' Tendencies Mar Develoment
(hunceie Sundae; JBUNB MRIQUB, 6 Dec 78) .......

MADAGASCAR

Briefs
USSR Airplanes

WIQUB

Briers
1979 anger Reduction Proapecta

8m

Opposition leader Rape Senshor Government
(Abdeulnye wade Interview; APRIQUB-ASIB,
11.2“ no 78) I.OOOOOOIOOIODOOOO'OOOOOOOOIDIOOCOOI.

Briefs
Togelese Econonw Index Rising

'..-
.'

- b -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00880R000100010026-1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

INTER-AFRICA” AFFAIRS

BRIEFS

FRO LOAN T0 BOAD--leue. 22 Dec (REUTER)--Under an agreement signed on
Thursday in Lone. the FRO Development Society. which is based in Cologne,
granted a line of credit of 6 million German marks (approximately

1.15 million CPA francs) to the Heat African Development Bank (BOAD). The
money is to he used to help finance industrial and agreindustrial projects
in the neuter states of the was: African Monetary Union. [London REUTER
in French 1213 GMT 22 Dec 78 PA]

GHANA-BENIN TRADE RELATIONS--Trade between Ghana and Benin is on
the upswing. Working within the joint cooperation commission,
the two countries have frequently engaged in joint efforts over
recent years. The Ghana State Transport Corporation began ope~
rating an international highway transport service on 2 hovenber
1977, with three departures weekly from Cotonou (Tuesday, Thurs-
day, Saturday) and three from Accra (Monday, Hodnesday, Friday).

[Text] Paris mncnas moncaux er monmsws in French 1
Dec 78 p 3222] 6182

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ANGOLA

BRIEFS

UNITA BBNGUBLA CONTROL CLAIM DBNIED--The Angolan charge d'affaires
in Lusaka, Mr Andre Miranda, flatly denied rumors to the effect
that the National Union for Total Independence for Angela UNITA
controls large sections of the Benguela rail line. Replying to

a news report by a BBC TV crew which spent some 4 months in An-
gola, Mr Miranda stated that "these reports are nothing but wes-
tern propaganda; UNTTA does not control a centimeter or even a
millimeter of the rail line," he added. "Insofar as I know, the
railroad is running from Lobito to the Zaire border. Our people
are well organized and they will not allow something called

to control a single segment of the Benguela line." Mr Miranda
also branded as ”false" a report that muTA leader Jonas Savimbi
was in Angola, stating that “the Angolan people would not let
Savimbi operate out of Angola." Mr Miranda's denial was addres-
sed to reports by BBC TV reporter Mike Nicholson, who arrived in
Johannesburg on 25 November and who claims to have spend 110

days with UNITA troops in southern Angola. [Text] [Paris MARCNBS
TROPICAUX ET MEDITERRANBENS in French 1 Dec 78 p 3336] 618T

BELGIAN TECHNICAL MISSION-~A Belgian party of experts will spend
the week from 29 November to 6 December in Angola "to lay the
groundwork for Belgian aid" to this country, the Foreign Minis-
try announced in Brussels. The idea, according to that source,
is to provide the first concrete results of last September's
visit there by Belgium's top diplomat, Mr Henri Simonnet. The
mission includes officials from the ministries of Cooperation

and Foreign Affairs, as well as experts on roads and port instal-
lations. Belgium has already made a commitment to help Angola in
the expansion of its port at Lobito. [Text] Paris MARCHBS TROPI-
caux er neonmweaus in French 1 Dec 78 p 3336] 6182

C80: 6400

2
FOR OPFXCIAL USE ONLY
Mill ill-'FIiIlM. US]; ONLY

CONGO

FUTURE ECONOMIC PROSPECTS SAID TO BE GLOOMY
Paris JEUNE AFRIQUE in French 29 Nov 78 pp 98. 99
[Article by Sophie Bessie, “The President Issues a warning]

[Text] Economic difficulties become more and more worrisome.

However. exhorting the people to work will not solve the
problems.

"The Congolese countryside looks barren and deserted," said President Yhomhi
Opango on 13 November after a tour of the country's major regions. He was
commenting once again on the stagnation of agricultural production.

The problem is not a new one. Authorities in Brazzaville frequently bemoan
the seriousness of the situation in this vital sector of the economy; a sector
which is even more important because prospects seem scarcely brighter in
mining. hydrocarbons and industry. Within the last few years. authorities
have already encountered seemingly insurmountable problems.

The current president announced his intention to bring relief to the economic
picture when he took office after the March 1977 assassination of Harien
N'couabl. Although several steps have been taken. such as the creation in
October of a stabilization fund for agricultural and forestry products, they
have produced no tangible results. There is still a deficit in the trade
balance in 1978. Food imports are increasing at an alarming rate. In 1977
they reached 10 billion francs CPA. or 20 percent of the total purchases from
foreign countries. This was a serious drain on the country's.reserve cash.
Potassium has not been mined since July 1977 because of the disastrous floods.

The development of petroleum. which was supposed to solve all those problems.
has been a disappointment. in the early seventies good prospects created a
sense or euphoria: in 1972-73 the simultaneous rise in production and in
prices hinted at possibilities of development on a grand scale and an
ambitious plan was developed. By 1975. however. production had diminished.
Disiilusionment grew year after year. Anticipated investments were revised
downward and authorities were confronted with the hard realities which they
had momentarily forgotten because of the mirage of petroleum manna. In 1977
the volume of export diminished by 32 percent and development by 25 percent
in comparison with 1976.

3
Hlk OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Favorable Climate

Nevertheless. the Congo is far from being the least fortunate country on the
continent. Climactic conditions are relatively favorable for agriculture.
Forests. which cover 60 percent of the land, are an important resource: wood
production, which had reached 500,000 cubic meters in 1977, could easily attain
2 million cubic meters a year. The country has good roads. which will be
improved by the realinement of the Congo-Ocean railroad. The percentage of
people receiving education is the highest in black Africa.

Hhat, then, is the cause of this apparently irremediable slump? In truth.
everyone has known [or a long time Just what the impediments to the economy
are. Since the magic spell of petroleum has lost its power, these problems
have come to the forefront again. Because agriculture has been the "poor
relation“ in every development plan since independence, there is now a growing
shortage of food and agricultural exports. After having been almost entirely
neglected, agriculture was hoisted to a priority position among other priori-
ties in 1975. however, this sector has so deteriorated during years of
neglect that a reversal of this trend is almost impossible.

Gloomy Future

"budget-devouring" public officials have put development expenses on a short
allowance. Also, it is common knowledge that a disastrously inefficient
financial administration of national enterprises has monopolized a large part
of public finances. In the area of agriculture, where the government holds
65 percent of the cultivated land, reorganization is promised regularly, year
' after year, yet diligence and efficiency have not yet been imposed.

One of the best.examples of this situation is the Sta-CONGO, a sugar-producing
complex with a 150,000 ton capacity. Present production barely manages to
fluctuate around 2>,CCG tons a year. Current repair needs now require some
six billion francs CPA and the government has asked for foreign aid to start
the repairs.

Other types of agricultural exports have decreased over the last few years.
The situation was slightly improved in 1977: the volume of coffee exports
increased by 23 percent over the 1976 figure, sugar exports increased 16 per-
cent, on the other hand cacao exports remained at the same level, but the
enormous rise in world prices caused them to double in value.

Hood production seems also to have gotten out of its rot and has shown pro-
gross in the first half of 1978.

The mining and industrial sector. by its own admission, continues to decline.
Unless there are new discoveries, petroleum production will not exceed 2.5
million tons per year from now until 1982.

Although there are a few timid signs of improvement, future prospects are
gloomy. in spite of predictions that the Congo would produce all its own food
by 1978, the goal is still far off even though several large projects have

b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
mm "I’FICIM. llBli (ININ

been set in notion. These efforts are hampered by existing structures,
limited investment in rural sectors (most foreign investment is concentrated
in mines and transportation) and lock of qualified administrators.

when will there be a real reversal in the economy? For the moment we must
wait until the authorities do something more than declare intentions and
issue exhortntions. The people. vno do not see on improvement in their

financial situation or in the quality of their daily lives, are not eager to
respond to such government directives.

COPYRlGll'i‘: qunc Afriquu GRUPJIA 1978

9161
080: 4600

5
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
GOVERNMENT USE ONLY

EQUATORIAL GUINEA

PRESIDENT HACIAS' ABISE 0? POPUMTION DETAILED
Madrid CANDID 16 in Spanish 12 Nov 78 pp 59-61.
[3er Son, what would you do if I gave you my sun?

I would shoot King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia three times. Then I would

rip their hearts out and leave their bodies in the jungle to be eaten by
all the predatory animals.

Hith this unusual conversation with two of his sons, according to Spanish
teacher Teodoro del Valle, Macias Nguema, president for life of Guinea,
began a few months ago one of his classes on "political instruction" for
all of the children in the country. These required classes are given
every Saturday of the year by the Guinean Chief of State.

The Guinean dietator's insults against Spain and its highest institutions
are invariably the leitmotif of all of his public statements. Meanwhile,
the Madrid Government appears to be turning the other cheek with its
efforts to renew cooperation agreements with the Macias Government that
expired on the 1st of November.

If this is accomplished, it would mean that the Equatorial Guinea

dictator would receive some 800 million pesetas in aid. The money would

be used to repair the Data airport runway and to acquire three c-m Aviocar
from Spain to replace all of the Equatorial Guinea Air Lines (MOE) planes-

three "Convers"--given to them by Spain 10 years ago and which are completely
unserviceable today.

01' course, this time Macias will have to wait. This is what a special mis-
sion from the Foreign Affairs Ministry told him last week. The group was
sent on an urgent and difficult mission to Data to explain to the
Equatorial Guinea leader that Spain could not send the airplanes nor pave
the runways at Beta and Malabo by 1 November, the date on which the
previous cooperation agreement expired. Spain now has a Parliament and

any expenditures are controlled by it.

COW"? USE MY
C(NHRNNHN'I‘ [BK ONLY

The special visit to Guinea by the diplomats led the Defense Ministry to
dust off the old plans for evacuating Spaniards from the former colony.

According to Foreign Ministry sources, there was a very real danger that
Macias would kidnap the diplomats or take some kind of reprisal against the
SO-odd Spaniards living there when he learned that LAGE would have to
stop its flights, because of the existing dangers. until Spain completely

renovated the airplanes and resurfaced the runways at the Beta and Halabo
airports.

PSOE Opposition

For the latter reasons cited above. Spain's Iberian Air Lines, whose weekly
flight to Guinea constituted the former colony's only tie with the ﬂeet,
was about to stop all flights to Guinea in early November.

"If we continue the flights," a company official told GAMBIO 16. "it is
because the Spanish Government is paying this airline‘s huge deficit, it
is overlooking the unpaid bills left by Hacies' ministers and they have
assured us that the runways will be resurfaced.“

The Foreign Ministry's special mission, however, did not tell Macias that
the vote in the Chamber of Deputies on assistance to Guinea will be very
controversial, even though in the end it will be approved because the

UCD @emoeratic Center Unio_ﬁ7 and the AP Ifopular Alliance7 have a majority
in Parliament. The P505 /_Spanish Socialist Horkers Part 17 a few weeks ago
was recomending that diplomatic relations with Macias' Guinea be severed
"since any aid that Spain might give that country is not helping to improve

our relations, it will not reach the people and, on the contrary, it helps
to maintain a tyrant in power."

The socialists are right according to Amnesty International, the Human
Rights league and the Council of Churches Ecumenical Council, organizations
that are tired of preparing reports on the constant violation of human
rights by the Equatorial Guinealdictator.

This situation has converted the former colony into an extremely poor and
deserted country. In the opinion of Guinean writer Donato Ndongo, "10 years
of absolute power by Macias have led to a decrease in cacao production of
from 50,000 tons to 3,000, to a decrease in coffee production of from

8,000 tons to 1,000 tons, to the departure of 160.000 Guineans, to the
jailing of (0,000 people and to the forced labor of 30,000 others.“

0f the nearly 400,000 inhabitants living in the former Spanish colony at

the end of 1968 (the date it gained its independence), the most optimistic
estimates indicate that the combined total of people left on the mainland
(Rio Huni) and on the island (Fernando Poo) is no more than 80,000. "Entire
cities on Rio Huni have disappeared," says Jose Maria Odena. another priest
who was expelled after 8 years in Guinea, "because the inhabitants have

left everything and fled to Gabon and Cameroon." "Those who have stayed
behind." adds physician Sanchez Salvador, "have become uacias' slaves."

7
covsamm'r use ONLY
GOVERMBNT [BB ONLY

(in other occasions Macias Nguetna's nilitia haVo expelled the people. “A
year ago when Buendi. the director of the central Bank of Guinea, attempted
to flee to Switzerland with the nation‘s revenues." Teodoro del Valle
recalls, "Haolau jailed him first and then exacuted him. Not satisfied.

days later his militiaaen were raiding the town where Buendi lived. burning
homes and killing those who could not escape."

Pregnant, No Less!

The Guinean leaderﬁ obsession with ruling a large population has led him

to the incredible extremes of promoting prostitution among his people.
including young girls 10 and 11 years old. "Since the people are leaving."
said the recently expelled teacher. " last year he said that he did not want
to see any woman over the age of ll who was not pregnant. Gowrnnent
officials and members of the Fans tribe. to which the president belongs.
have taken adVantage of this statement to haVe sexual relations with

women of the remaining tribes."

Hissionery Jose Maria Odena recalls similar episodes. ”Not long ago." he
said. "he paraded a group of pregnant women through the streets of Santa
[sable and on another occasion he said that any woman who worked in the

goVernment but did not want to get married was a whore. hale governnent

employees were ordered to haVe several wives so that they could increase
their number of children."

Luis baguena believes that the radical drop in agriculture production cannot
be explained without keeping in mind the expulsion of the Nigerians.
"when Spain colonized Guinea." he expalined. "there was no work force so

that Nigerians had to be hired. In 1968 when Guinea gained its independence.
there were on Fernando Poo 40,000 Nigerians as opposed to 20.000 natiVes.
Macias. who is no fool. realized that they could organize an uprising so

he lads life miserable for then until they left."

Slave Gangs

"To replace then," we were told by a Guinean who did not wish to be

identified, "Macias Nguena converted Guinea into a concentration camp and
he sent his militia and the National Guard to arrest 30,000 Guineans on
the mainland so that they could work as slaves."

"since many of them did not want to leave their houses and wives in Rio
Muni and owe to Fernando Poo to cultivate cacao." Jose Haria Vines

continues, “the National Guard arrested at machine gun point. loaded then

on trucks and without allowing then to say goodby to their families they
were sent to the island."

Since the country is still bankrupt, the Equatorial Guinemdiotator has
instituted forced labor so that everyone works in the fields. "On certain
days." Jose haria Odena states, "the post office, the telegraph office,

the various ministries and even police headquarters are empty because Hacias
has ordered the workers into the fields to clear stubble with nchetes."

3
caveman-r us: out?
GWBRNMENT [BE ONLY

Mot eVen his closest: advisers are immune from this treatment. “when he
calls a minister in for a business ﬂeeting." Jose Maria Odena tells us,
"the official is required to work for 2 hours on his farm before he meets
with him. Any minister. military officer or high level government official
who falls from grace has an even worse time of it because Macias. before

executing them or releasing them, has them confined for several months
working without pay on one of his private farms."

The Forbidden City

"is anti-people and anti-middle class policy has antagonized everyone.
Macias Nguema, according to all the sources consulted by this magazine,
has no friends in the country. Even his own ministers hate him and many
of them are only waiting for an opportunity to flee the dictator's grasp
as the Minister of Labor recently did when he fled to Cameroon.

"Those who have not lost a brother. have lost a friend, their mother or
father or have been publically humiliated," a Guinean exile who did not
wish to be identified told us to sullnarize the situation of terror and hate.
"He liVed better under King Malabo's rule 50 years ago.“

"His personal guard is composed of relatives trained by Senen Ochoa. one
of the principal Cuban military advisers in Guinea." Teodoro del Valle
told (201810 16. "because Macias does‘not trust anyone."

"Since he always expects to be attacked," Manuel Amilibia adds. "he has
forced farmers to cut down trees along a 30 meter stretch next to the
roads he travels on. lle has taken all rifles from the homes and he has
also taken all weapons away from his own militia whom he does not trust."

The oddest aspect of all of this is, however, the ”forbidden city" of
Santa Isabel. "Since his fear of being killed is almost a viceral
reaction." says Teodoro del Valle. ”he has evacuated two-thirds of the
city of Santa Isabel near the presidential palace and has built a fortress

around it. Only Macias and his Pan supporters are permitted inside the
forbidden city." '

Fearing an invasion of Fernando Poo since an attempt has already been made
by a group of fools, President Macias has not set foot on the island for

In years. "Ilia home,” continues Teodoro del Valle, " is an enormous bunker
that was built in Malambo. his tometown, by the Spanish mmpany of Escuder
and Galiana. To reach the home from Data, one must go through 17 police
checkpoints and the areas surrounding the Palace extending for several
kilometers around it have been evacuated under pretest.”

Honey Kept in Wardrobe

Macias. says missionary Jose Maria Vines, like all Fans belongs to the
Society of the leopard and other similar sects. "These individuals," he
explains. "tend to dress in leopard skins and they use the claws to destroy

9
covsnmmwnss my
“(NHRMRNT [Bl-2 ONLY

their human victims which are chosen for their intellectual ability Oi
their dexterity and skills. Once their victims are dead they eat some

of their organs in the belief that they thus acquire the victims spirit
and his virtues.“

Hacias also keeps his wealth and part of the treasury in Halambo. "Since
Guinea Central bank Director uuendi attempted to flee the country with the
nations revenues, the Equatorial Guineandietator keeps than in his home
where he has ordered that all 100, 500 and 1,000 okuele bills (the ekuele
is worth as much as the peseta) be sent to his hone." Manuel Anilibia said.

Only coins were left at the bank of Guinea end that is why when Spaniards
want to .cash a check they take seweral tags along. "On most occasions,"
says Ahilibia. "he returns with empty sacks because the bank. on Macias'
orders. does not make payment even though the ekuele is not worth anything
outside the country."

Therefore. to avoid being robbed by the President of Guinea. many
Spaniards living there-who do not even number 60 according to the most
varied sources from that countryn-prefer to keep their honey at Mme.
"lberian Airlines. for example," says Father Jose Maria Vines, "when we
left Guinea was beginning to refuse checks drawn on the Central Bank and
it kept its money in a wardrobe in its Iain office."

Food Brought by Colonists

or course the Guineans do not miss the money. After their independence.
Macias Nguema prohibited the consumption of "food brought by the colonists"
including milk and bread and he suggested that the people eat what had
been eaten centuries before: “yucca. dogbane and fried plantains."

The President does not exactly practice what he preaches and, according
to Teodoro del Valle, ”he is adicted to all the vices and food of
colonist society, as he calls them. and from time to time he asks Spanish
mnlnines that still maintain ties with Guinea to buy for him Rolex.

gold pens and the latest European styled suits and shoes.”

when he visited China a year ago, where he equated Spain with a shoe,"
ﬂannel Anilibia said. "he ordered lolo. his official tailor. to make him
2!. suits that he could wear at receptions and official ceremonies."

however. the ban on food introduced by the colonists is a real one
throughout the country. This ban has given rise to a huge black market
for essential goods. Those who profit Eros this trade are basically the
covernnent Iinisters and the Spanish businessmen with ties to Macias.

A bottle of 'l‘res Ccpas cognac. for example. sells for 60 pesetas in the
Canary islands while in the former Spanish colony it sells for 5.000 ekueles.
"The sale of one of these bottles." says Teodoro del Valle. "allows a
Spanish company to pay a Guinean worker. who earns 3.000 ekueles. and still
have money let t over.“

10
m1 158 MY
GWENMRN‘I‘ {BI-2 ONLY

The Spanish buuinusmnen who haVu Nacinu' blessings not only deny that they
are making money on the black market but they also maintain, at least some
of then. that they are fed up with Macias as well as with the Foreign

Affairs Ministry which has not had full diplomatic relations with Guinea
for a year.

"The Foreign Affairs Ministry." said an employee and relative of one of
the owners of Encoder and Galiana, ”today does not provide any protection
for us here in Guinea much less for the repatriation of our property if
that title ever comes. Macias knows this and he teases us about it. he

considers us to be his boys. his servants when he harrasses every chance he
Botaeﬂ

There are also those who say that the Equatorial Guinean dictator is not
short of reasons since the Spanish Govarnnent has not coeplied with any of
the economic agreementa it signed with its former colony. Nevertheless.
Hacias has a very peculiar way of filling his nation's coffers. which are
actually his personal property. He kidnaps Spaniards and then asks for

a ransom and he also inposee arbitrary fines. To date the Foreign Ministry
has done nothing to curtail these activities.

Having had enough of Macias. at the end of July the last six missionaries
in Guinea arriVed in Spain. Among them was Jose list-la Odena. They had
been in prison weeks before and their religious order had to pay lo million
ekueles so that they could leaVe the country. "The charges which led to
our imprison-em.” Jose Maria Odena says, "alleged that we were Spanish

spies and that we took advantage of the natives' confessions to obtain
Guinea's secrets.”

A month earlier the last group of nuns was repatriated. In this case

Hecias' reason for imprisoning then and asking for a ransom was that they
were spying for Spain under orders from Queen Sofia.

The teachers sent to Guinea by the Foreign Ministry under a cooperation
program found the-selves in a sieilsr situation. Macias. who saw spies
everywhere, would free tine to tine suggest to his students of ”political
instruction” that they watch the teachers but not attack then. If the
teachers were caught in acne wrongdoing, it was to be reported to his: and
he would be responsible for seeing that "justice" was done.

The wrongdoing which Hacias was looking for occurred when teacher Rafael
Gueri attempted to help a Danish woman whee Gabonese authorities had given
per-ission to enter their country. "That is why." Gueri recalls, "I was
put in jail for lol days. Even children 2 years old were thrown in jail and

beaten until they died. 1 was released only after the Spanish Government
paid 2| Billion ekueles.”

Colonists Names

Father Jose "aria Vines found hilaself in a sinilar situation several years
ago. lie was thrown in jail. he told CANDID 16, because he was baptising

1].
(WWW IS! MIX
GWERMRNT 158 ON LY

natiVes with namus used by the colonists. he would have to pay
l.S ekuelea to obtain his release.

Businessman-farmer Manuel Milibia was fined, according to his story.
“because he met with one of haoias' ministers without a tie although he
had been working on Lhaciaﬂ farm." However. a few months ago another
businessman received an even greater surprise when he was fined

200,000 ekuoles on his arrival at the Halabo airport because he was
carrying. slums wrapped in a newspaper. "To Hacies' political police,"
paid the businessman who preferred to keep his identity a secret. "the
corpus delecti was the newspaper in which the shoes were wrapped because

they saw it as clandestine Spanish propaganda being almaggled into the
country."

However. the Spaniards are lucky because they can complain. Those who
cannot do so. according to the Anti-Macias Front (FAN). are the 10.000
who have been killed or haVe disappeared during the 10-year regime of the
Equatorial Guinean dictator.

The Fan's latest report. made public on 12 October. the 10th anniversary of
Guinea's independence, contains a list of 533 people for whom there is
available concrete proof that they were tortured and murdered by the
regime of the former Spanish Public Horus employee. Macias Nquema.

Among those included on the list are 29 ministers and high level officials
and the 160 ans professors. reporters, doctors and government workers.
This leads us to conclude that repression primarily has been aimed at

the nation's best trained people.

"The list is not complete." says Manuel Amilibia who liVed in Guinea for
37 years and-is now exiled in Spain. "ﬂy friends who numbered over 500
are all dead and most of their names do not appear on the nu list."

in addition to everything else. the docusnt contains a frightening
section: the names of 37 children and women who were tortured and killed
by Macias' militia in reprisal for the alleged crimes comitted by their
parents when the dictator could not bring to “Justice."

Beaten to Death

‘hia account is reaffirmed by the attitude of a great number of the
minean exiles in Spain who refused to make any statements to CAHBIO 16
recount! their parents or brothers and sisters were still in the former
$,-.mish colony and "hacias would unleash his wrath and insanity on them.“

r-e vml came for the 10,000 people whom some sources say died at the hands
on hacias not before a firing squad or by hanging but rather as a result
nl being beaten. "In June 1977," said Spanish priest Jose Maria Vinas who
we. expelled from Guinea several months ago. "I was in a Macias jail for

5 c aye. i met seven political prisoners that were near death. Each day
can one was beaten 50 times with a stick.“

12
mar [82 MY
GWRRMBN'I‘ 153 ONLY

“It is only natural." says Luis baguenta, "that in Guinea the people not
only die because they are beaten but also because they are hungry.

Because without a minimum of supplies. which Macias does not have, 6,000
prisoners cannot be kept in jail.“

whether death results from beatings or starvation. the killings in Guinea
are not a thing of the past. On 12 October Macias Nguena ordered 32
Geineans executed to comments the 10th anniversary of that country's
independence. Anonr. those who were killed. according to CANBIO 16's
sources. were National Guard Lt Jose hero, former chief of the San Carlos
(new bubs) military outpost and reporter Severe hotc who studied at the
Church of Madrid's School of Journalism.

Those "he Remain

Things being as they are. it is not unusual that a few months ago the P50:
asked one of its deputies, Hanuel Marin to be exact. to conduct a thorough
investigation of the Guinea problem so that the subject could be discussed
in the Chamber of Deputies. The goVernment. which initially asked that
the latter be discussed behind closed doors "because of the possible

reprisels against Spanish citizens still in the for-er colony." finally
managed to avoid a debate by invoking "reasons of state."

The deans of Spain's diplolatic service felt that action of this nature
by Spain could be interpreted by the young African nations. that are
sensitive about the foraer European colonialist powers, as a form of
aggression by Spain against a former colony and it could undermine the
gains node by Spain at the khartoua Suit with respect to Spanish control
over the Canary Islands.

Despite everything, the opposition is poised and ready to fight because
the 9808 favors a radical curtailusnt of aid to Macias. ”Everything that
reaches Guinea." says teacher ‘i'eodoro del Valle. ”bacon“ hacias personal
property. The Chinese and Russian food has It a d e its way to Gabon and
Cannon in exchange for foreign currency. Teaching materials donated
by Spain haVe found their way to the ministers libraries or are sold to
the public in stores owned by the President. The medicines donated by the

Congo. Lybia. Zaire and Spain have become the object of speculation by
uinisters and other high ooverment officials.”

"whim hunge: and disease are taking their toll of the population."

concludes Teodoro del Valle. "the gama globulin donated by the European
countries is sold for 2.000 ekueles on Fernando Poo and only on sooeene's
recouendation.“

ht Col Leis baguena also does not understand. ”A Ionth after we left Guinea,

Macias asked for coney to pay the national Guard and we asked hie
to provide us with a budget."

13
m use elm
(«NHRNMNN’I‘ mu HNM'

According to the sourcou consulted by cmuo 16, thuro are no more than

50 Spaniards still left on the former colony and this inqudoa 1mm
maintenance crow and the workers of tho Socudor y Gn‘linnn. Nouo. Ton.
Flcitas. Smoka, Cabaniuos and San Cristobal oononniua, the only ones
loft in Guinea. ”I really do not know," oonciudea Father Jooo Maria Odena,
"why we are stin thorn. Unless we have been ordered by tho Motions to
stay thorn to offuut the oomunist inﬂuence of tho Cubans. Soviets and
Chinese.”

COPYRIGHT! 1978 CANDID 16

859‘)
6808 M10

1!.
caveman- usz out!
FUR (WI-“ICIM. "5H "NLY

6W0“

BRIEFS

GHANAIAN~BRITISH TRADE--Trado botwoen Ghana and Britain for the
first three quarters of 1978 cane to 173.7 million pounds. Bri-
tain bought 92.3 million pounds worth of goods from Ghana, and
sold Ghana 81.4 nillion worth, thus putting Ghana 10.9 million
in the black. Cacao headed the liot of Britain's buy: at 77.8
million pounds worth. Ghana's purchases from Britain consis-
tod prinurily of machinery and transport equipment (42.2 million
pounds worth, 15.8 million of that for highway vehicles), apo-
cialized naohinea (10.8 million) and niuoollanooun other equip-

nont (3.1 nillion). [Text [Paris mamas moucwx er musk-
RANBBNS in French 1. Doc 7 p 3322] 6182

C80:£b00

15
FOR umcm. use 031.?
mu UFPICIAI. [USN UNLY

GUINEA

SKBP‘I'ICISM ON MR8 own-um 1N m am 0? PAR” CONGRBSS
Paris arms armour in french No 935 6 Dec 18 pp 110-112
[Article by Sennen Mdrianiradoa Where-Hes Been No Overture")

[Racerpte] no surprise in the 11th Congress of the
Democratic Party of Guinea. The regise continues es
is. napprochesent with Prence is confined.

'Hhene person is a dictator, he continues to be one.“ This terrible of-
ficial statesent was node by an African head of state after the 306 [Deso-
cratic Party of Guinea] congress. which closed in nonskry on 22 November
1978. One of several ways of noting the tisidity characterising President
Ahsed Sekou Toure's decisions with regard to political prisoners. If there
wore any releases. they were accouplished under cover. secretly. at randcs
stops by those eilitary trucks that were said to have relessed e few nass-
less prisoners on the streets of Conakry st night. About 60. eccording to
soon sources: about 20. according to others.

NeVertheless. that too congress hed given rise to hopes. adaeduled for
Septeeber end postponed until Noveeber (free 17 to 22 Noveeber). it oo- .
incided this year with the celebration of a seeory: the attack by Portu-
guese mercenaries end Guinean opposition ushers against conekry. on one
certain 22 Hove-her 1970. lspecially the diplomatic overture initiated

by Aheed Schou Il'ours on 18 March 1978. at Monrovia. on occasion of his
spectacular reconciliation with his peers leopold Seder unmr (Senegsl)
and Felix nowhomt-Boigny (Ivory coast) should find its consecration. this
tine. in a libereliretion of the regies. according to sssurances.

before the congress. soee friends. sen in the confidence of President 8e-
kou 'noure. told us: “You news-en are the ones who bring up a bit of scan-
dai each ties and thus prevent Sekou fro- taking positive decisions! by
describing his as a dictator. you enclose his in e trap. Sekouﬁbure is
not a son to bend before the wishes of neveeen.‘ Others added: "lou shall
see. 8ekou Tours cannot Ishe decisions all by hiuelf. lie hes pmoed
condo-nation by associating the people and the party in then. we con

16
ran omcm. use oxw
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY

pronounce meeties only by associating the people and the party in then.

1he 11th P06 Congress will be the opportunity for that.“ App. 'Mtiy. the
opportunity was missed. 111a nest spectacular decisions did net even strength-
en the dipionatic overture. with the exception of sons kind words for France
whose president wiii be in oonekry free 18 to 23 Daceeber.

Moreover. the 11th poo congress pieased the Guinean president's detractors
more than it reassured his old friends. Even the torsion observers had to
be satisfied with being given on ovation in the 28 September Stadium in
Conakry. sdqard Paure. the personal envoy of the French head of state ,
was honored by the accolade of President sekou Toure. but he could see in
his host only the ”inflexible hero” of the first years of independence.
Andrew Young. who was sent by the Merican president. ieft ﬂashington on
19 Noveeber. according to the white House con-mique. "to represent his
country in the festivities earkinq the 20th anniversary of Guinea's in-
dependence.“ miie. officially. the Conakry festivities were the “eon-
aoeorative euprossions of the great victory of the people over. the act

of inperiaiist and Vortuouese aggression on 22 Novesber 1970." Aeerican
discretion or diplomatic biunder. that kind of incongruiiy in concern seem
to limit still here the mderstandinq that say be had abroad of President
Sehou 1‘oure's 'dipioeatio offensive.“

comment: Jeune' Afrique 0101?th 1970

10,002
030: 4000

1?
sou cvrzcnu. csi oxtv
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GUINEA-8183M!

POPHMR APA‘I‘IIY. 'WMOIS’ mummies MR DEVEIDPMBN’I‘
Paris am APRIQUB in French No 935,6 Dec 78 pp 109. 110
[Article by Prancois Soudan: "Old Wounds”

l‘hextl The success ot the socialist experiesnt in
the land of Luis Cabral does not rule out divisions.
1he resuption ot activity by the arsed opposition
has cone along to emphasise this.

On Saturday l8 November, while leating through the tew pages et the the
daily newspaper N0 91mm. ottioials and radars ot the PAIOC (Atrican
Independence Party ot Guinea md Cape Verde] had the inression ot re-
living a bad dreaa. A migue issued by the political bureau ot the
party announced. in tact. that tor the tirst tine since 1976. violent con-

frontations had just put rm [People's Arasd Revolutionary Forces) soldiers
(ace to tace with 'groups ot art-ed rebels“ in the Bissalanca region. not
far from Bissau.

it is true that these uncontrolled elements. tor the nest part tormer Gui-
nean auxiliaries ot the Portuguese Any who had been re-tersing secretly in
southwestern Senegal since 1974 and who were violently hostile to the
nxcc. had atteapted trequent raids just to the beginning et 1976. Since
then. tellowing the agreements entered upon between Dakar and Dissau. it
was believed that Senegal had put an end to their activities. 'lhe Sene-
galese Any had even arrested sheet 300 ot those opponents and mac
lrront tor the Struggle tor the National Independence ot Guinea] (a rival
nationalist liberation tront ot the P5160) had to close its ettices in
Dakar and disuntle its training casps on the border.

"Angelaniution'

ln (act. the region of the Cass-ance River. between Ziguincher and Nelda,
in southern hugelmhere several hundred ot the 20,000 Guinean auxiliaries
had taken refuge. is difficult to control, because it is covered with bush

18
for owner.» ass ext?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

that is very dense at times. 1horofore. small groups of diehards were able
to form up again and to make raids again. starting in September 1978, against
the border posts hold by the man.

no problem of rehabilitating the soldiers used by the colonial any is also
one of the most critical obstacles that the young republic has had to tackle.
After disarming then. the Guinean authorities have preferred, up to new. to
organize then and to incorporate then “under supervision” in economic acti-
vity by seans of agricultural production cooperatives. Undoubtedly the
PAIGC has seen reasons for being on its guard. The miscarried attempt

at a nilitary coup d'etat on 11 March 1975 against President Luis Cabral

(in coordination with the attemt by Gan Antonio de Spinola. in Portugual)
wae instigated by African former noncomissioned officers of the elite coa-
Iandos of the colonial only.

men. is Guinea-bissau going to be talked about again in terms of insecurity
and underground covenants? Can it be that this small country with 550,000
inhabitants is slowly in the process of becoming 'hngolanized“? Per sev-
oral years now. we had become so accustomed to seeing, in those 36,000
square kilometers of islands, of tall grass and of interningled swamps the
site of an experisent. of an original nodal of socialist development, fas-
cinating and measuring, that the dull crackling of firearms produces some-
what tho effect of a cold shower. But there is no country free from con-
flicts anddivisions. Why would Guinea-Bissau not follow the rule?

At this yearend and inspite of these border skirmishes. Bissau is cals. So
calu even that a pronounced feeling of boredom floats along the broad
mango-lined avenues. Everything seen to be plunged in lethargy. This
prolonged slumber of the 60,000 inhabitants of the capital steps. however.
free a siaple explanation: passive resistance. ‘i'hat is the second problem
up against which the PAIGC leaders have been running for the last 4 years.
Although it is. in fact, true that, before t9 October 1974. the party con-
trolled alnoet three-fourths of the country, it was very far from having
sobilized the sejority of the urban population.

Halt-and-See Policy

Marked as much by the severe repression of the Portuguese as by the statue
of "assisted' to which they were reduced by the econouic repercussions of
the presence of the colonial any, the inhabitants of Bissau, just like the
inhabitants of Sale or Bafata. have taken refuge in a couplets wait-and-
see policy, nixed with fear and distrust. ‘i‘his reticence is less evident
at present then inediately after independence. But it is still there and
the PAIGC -- which. fortunately, has not chosen a violent solution of the
conflicts -- is counting greatly on the tireless activity of its rank-and-
file col-sittees (the Tabancas) to succeed in overcoening than.

more is also a cosplesentary explanation for the wait-and-see policy of
the city-dwellers: the ties uniting the lower aiddle class in the cities

19
mu armcm. use nxm
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

to the PAIGC leaders most of whom have come from the same social class.
Some persons within the party are beginning to criticise this new leader-
ship caste. born of a merger of these two groups.

During the mird PAIGC Congress. in November 1977, the hardcore of the
party attacked the ”new masters.“ A delegate pointed out that the watch-
word published as a large headline in NO Plum for 25 November 1975
”when a leader begins to think about ensuring his future . he has lost his
revolutionary spirit" had hardly been followed actually.

of course, Luis Cabral drives his black Peugeot-504 himself and the minis-
ters enrn officially only the equivalent of 2.500 French francs (125,000
CFA [African Financial Community] francs a month, but there are many who
believe that all the Pamc cadres are far from being above all suspicion.

111a most violent criticism are expressed within the party's youth move-
ment. The Amilcar Cabral African Youth (JMC) does not hesitate to state
that the middle class in office has found its "natural trends“ again by
opening up the country to the Nest economically and politically. The

bote noire of these young dissidents, Francisco Mendes, principal com-
nissioner (prime minister). was killed in an automobile accident on 7 July
1978. The members of the JAM; hope that his successor. Joao Bemado Vieira.
fresh from a cum: military academy. will know how to change the direction
of what they call the "rightist course" of Guinea's policy.

In fact. it does not seem likely that the hopes of these radicals can be
mterialised.- An important turn was taken in 1977, when Guinea-Bissau
called for international aid to relieve the dramatic effects of the Sahel
drought. ninety percent of this aid came from the ﬂeet. especially from
the Scandinavian countries and from the United States. ince then. there
has been a succession of Western and Arab investments. France, the United
States. Brazil. Kuwait, Saudi Arabia. Portugal (140 Portuguese cooperation
personnel are working in Guinea-Bissau) are participating in the country's
recmstruction.

Rural Population Support

The PAIGC leaders are counting greatly on the support of the rural masses
for the success of their experiment. ‘l'heir successful achievements are un-
deniable in the field of rural develOpment. For the first time since inde-
pendence. Guinea-Bissau has met its rice needs.

Armed opposition. internal conflicts, wait-and-see policy of the city-
dwollers: accordingly, Guinea-Bissau is not free from problems. Even
if the picture of a pilot laboratory end‘of a courageous cooperative so-

cioty often drawn of this small country in the extreme west of Africa has
to suffer from this.

COPYRICJI'I': Joune Afrique GRUPJIA 1978

10.0‘2
C80: 4400

20
NR OFFICIAL USE: ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MADAGASCAR

BRIEFS

USSR AIRPLANES--Antananarivo, 26 Dec (REUTER)--TARATRA. the Malagasy informa-
tion agency. reported on Tuesday that two "Antonov 12" cargo planes arrived
at Antannnarlvo-Ivato International Airport and that the planes will be placed
at the disposal of Malagasy officials for 1 year. The agency stated that
each of these planes can transport 12 tons of merchandise. Observers

believe that the planes nay primarily be used to relieve the crowding at

tho autonou0us port of Tanatave, the country's most important co-ercial

port, where over 4,000 tons of merchandise are reportedly waiting to be
distributed. A "Yak 1.0" airplane. a Soviet gift to Malagasy President

Didier Ratsiraka, was expected to arrive in Madagascar on Tuesday afternoon.
[Text] [London REUTER in French 1340 GMT 26 Dec 78 PA]

(:80: 6600

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN IWI’IGIM. USN "NLY

unannuque

BRIEPS

1979 SUGAR PRODUCTION PROSPECTS~~-Mr Antonio Almoida Mates, Mozam-
biquo'e director of Poroign trade, any: that the outlook for his
country's sugar crop is better for 1979 than it was for 1978.
Production plan quotas for the current year have been not for

all refineries -- except for Sena Sugar -- which would indicate
that they will be not for 1979 as well. This means that Mozam-
bique will be able to boost its exports to around 100,000 tons.
The 1978 plan quota of 85,000 tone was not not, since the Marro-
meu and Sena Sugar plants stood idle. [Text] [Paris means
moncwx B‘l‘ nannnknmssus in French 1 Doc 78 p 3336] 6182

050: 6400

22
FOR OFFICIAL ”SE OXLY
I’Oll OPI‘ICIM. "8!! ONLY

3mm

OPPosl‘l‘lOﬂ mm MP8 amnion oovnnmm
Paris “Biotin-A818 in French 11-26 Dec 78 pp 19-22

[Interview with Senegalese Deaocratic Party leader Abdoulaye "ads by Sea
38.000

[Text] [Question] The situation prevailing in your country. both on the
econoaic and the political level. is a source of some concern for all
Senegalese. Can you give us your party's view of this situation?

[Answer] 11‘s eeonoaic and financial situation of Senegal is hardly bril-
liant. Already in 1977-1978. treasury difficulties had caused the govern-
nent to block 20 percent of the equipsent credit allocation to each ainistry.
You can imagine the repercussions on the functioning of public dapartasnts.

while the trade balance deficit was 23 billion in 1975 and ‘0 billion in
1976. it reached the record figure of 80 billion CPA francs this year. As
to the balance of payaents. the deficit was about 27 billion in 1977 and

a figure of about 60 billion is expected for 1978.

On the doaestic level. we note a very clear trend toward a drop in the gross
national product. above all in the fan sector. and inflation which is a
source of concern in view of the wage freese. All of this. as you can
isugine. ashes the life of the workers and the laboring leases difficult.

Under these conditions. it is easy to understand why the budget presented
to on shows a lack of sincerity. Out of an estiaated eauipaent budget of
35 billion francs. only 2 billion were allocated as an operations budget.
and the country had to borrow 33 billion-«practically all to pay debts.

for of this sun. only 5 billion represent new expenditures. ‘l‘o this oust
be added a foreign indebtedness of 186 billion francs and fiscal pressure
of almost 20 percent.

As to the aeosures designed to‘ iaprovc the treasury position. not only are
they unpopular but they are but a drop in a giant bucket: At aost they
would yield three and a half billion in a year while the treasury needs

23
m ore'tcm. use may
F0" lWPIiTIM. mm "NM

6.5 billion every south to pay governsent enployees. its representatives in
the parsstate sector. and obligations falling due. The contradiction is in
fact insoluble. since. taking other resources into account. the sonthly
deficit falls little short of a billion and a half.

0n the political level. it is not exaggeration either to say that the party
in power. the P8 [Socialist Party] is in decline. and is supported solely by
the personality of Songhor. The crisis it is experiencing is very profound
and is illustrated by the expulsion of lisbscsr as. the forser sinister of
finance. who is charged with being the cause of the present difficulties.

To speak the truth. it is a nutter of echoes of the struggle against the op-
position. in which babacar be was the main tool. for with the support of his
party. he was supposed to use the state budget to cosbst us. There were

three stages in this struggle. In 1976. in an effort to hault the expansion
of our party and prevent us free holding our first congress in Ksolsch. the
PS waged a so-calied caspaim of desolishsent which cost. it is said. two

billion francs. in this connection. the space devoted by the only national

daily. the newspaper LB somt. to this operation. will ressin in all our
neaories forever.

1hen the elections were held. which cost. one suspects. a great deal of noney.
out before that. the PS had to pursue a goodwill policy designed to create.
out of whole cloth. a political-business "bourgeoisie” supporting the re- ,
gine. An irony of feteo-with the elections over. seas of those who profited
froe the liberaliss of babncsr be to purchase expensive buildings or vehicles
are now being pursued by the new sinister of finance.

[Questionl however. this econonic situation has deeper causes. what in your
.view are they?

[Answer] Obviously. the PS will tell you that the drought is the cause of
all these ills. Indeed. it say have played a certain role. but a large part
of the responsibility therein falls to a govern-ant which. after independence.

never had a precise overview of our econosy. its potential and the difficul-
ties which night possibly appear in its path.

In our party's progras. priority is given to an agricultural plan with the
develop-eat of crops designed to achieve self-sufficiency in foodstuffs
rapidly. This presuses a water policy on a national level. If such an
orientation had been pursued. we would have been less dependent for food

on foreign countries today and the effects of the drought would have been
less harsh.

To this sust be added the errors in planning. Can you issgine that our de-

velopsent plnns are isplesenred so percent. and in addition. their financing
is estresely problensticsl. because it depends. to an average extent of

alsnst so percent. on foreign funds. and thus on psraseters beyond our con-
trol.

2b
30:: iir'f'lLMl. use 051.?
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

i know very well that a nuaber of African countries are pursuing mre or less
this case peth. But we do not share this vision of developsent. Rather we
are seeking balances such as that between food production and consusption.
independence in the food sector for fnsliies. villages. and regions. produc-
tiun of our housing with local resources. instead of isporting everything and
seeking to rebuild iiuropo in Africa. Obviously. all of this presuses such
independence of spirit and a revision of the value scales.

To achieve our goal. one seat also speak of waste. You can have no idea of
its scope since independence was achieved: unrealistic projects aborted.
swindles of every ltindnonly possible thanlts to incoqietence and indiffer-
ence. and collusion with shady businessnen. ‘ihis waste has cost us very
dear. not to nention that it has led to the disillusionsent of the people
who daily receive prosises of Jobs and who see that nothing cones of it.
‘ﬂms the responsibility of the governsent lies at the base of the situation.
There are countries which have experienced weather probless cosparsble to
those in Senegal but that has not prevented thes iron Iansging well. fros
being foresighted and advancing along the path of developaent.

[Question] would you agree with us that in order to achieve this. the
comtries in question node a clear political choice. consistent with their
national interests?

[Answer] Yes. a political choice which scans first of all relying on one-
self. We in the P08 [Senegalese Desocratic Party] have absolutely no inten-

tion of basing the devolopsent of our comtry on foreign aid. or what has
cone to be called that.

l on certainly not preaching notional self-sufficiency. but i believe that
it is necessary to court on such peraanant resources as the labor force and.
sore generally. local house and other resources.

[Question] when it coses to the world sector. your party has since its
sstablishscnt been oriented in particular toward the peasants. Yet your
progras calls for the elisinotinn of ea....-.l...'elon such as the oscao
[National Office of Cooperation and Assistance for Develop-eat].

[Answer] Pros the viewpoint of the govern-ant in 1960. the OCA. which becass
the cons. and then the oncno, was supposed to take the place of such trading
coapanics as the soon [Heat African Trading Oospsny] or the one [french
Conway of West Africa] to guarantee the distribution of grain and thus ob-
tain the profits foncrly earned by the old colonial cospanies. The con-

cept of the office thus was the result of seesingly correct reasoning. but
only seesingly so.

The principal criticisl we would sake of the oscan is that it has hecoae a
nechaniss for exploiting the peasants. This body purchases peanuts fro-
the peasants at a very low price in cosparison to the world sarltet. resells
the. and pockets tremendous profits. which enables it to have a larger

25
ran omcw. use est?
Hm ill-'l'l'ilél. Ill"; "NM“

budget than the state in good harvest years. This credit. inetead of
serving as a fund for stabilising peasant incone. goes into the general
budget to pay esployees. in the final analysis. s favorable international
price never benefits the peasant but the sovernnent esployee. for this vast
mchioe enploys a nultitude of seribblers paid l2 soothe of the year. while
the peasant earns his incotse only once a year. at harvest tile. it was not
until last year. as a result of a virulent caspaian waged by the ")8. that
the price to the producer increased.

Thus the oucen is a sechaniss for exploitation and transfer free one social
category to another. what we want is to return to the peasant the product
of his lnhor. The elimination of the ouceo would be a brutal nathod. and in
reality there is no question of elisinatioo pure and sisple. we would retain

its function as an aid to the peasantry and we would also develop its role
in the distribution sector.

in fact. the prices of consuser goods in the interior are too high. The
root of a saclt of cesent alsost doubles between Dakar and listen or betel.

lie think that in this connection the oncan has a role to play. and conse-
nueotly. certain functions of this body will be retained or indeed developed.
Parallel with this. we sust also place stress on the cooperatives. which
exist at present only in none. putting an end. naturally. to the principle
of joint liability for debts. which is such today that if a peasant fails to
repay advances to the state. the entire cooperative is required to pay for
his. llow those with the heaviest debts are usually the political officials
who cannot be touched. who borrow and salts the peasants pay for then.

lQueationl Let us return for a accent to the sore pressing probles. After
the transport worlters' strihe which coeplerely paralysed the country for

2/. hours. how do you explain the loss of popularity the P3 suffered with
this social stratus. which has always supported the reuse?

[Mower] It is true. until a still very recent period the transport workers
were an effective bulwark of the resins. because of their nobility. they

are indispensable to the PS during the elections. since they usually see

to the transportation of party sesbers to the polling places and. when one
realizes that some of the villages are 10 or 20 hiioeeters free these sites.
ene can clearly understand what they lust seen as a support for the party in
power. This is the reason that credit facilities for the purchase of vehicles
were rude available by the forser sinister of finance. in order to build sup-
port for the P8.

But this was a shortsighted policy. for the transportation sector in a
country in the process of develop-eat is extra-sly sensitive and becowes
saturated very quickly. as the long lines in front of the "seceos." the
factories and the warehouses indicate. 'l'hus today the transport workers

find the-selves in difficulties. since the products transported have not in-
creased at the nose rate of growth. Transport workers who have ude pay-eats
for years are ready to let their vehicles be repossessed. for their paralysis

26
Fort .wricm. use ONLY
HM urncw. Illik ilﬂlﬂ

costs dear. as do repairs. Thus you can currently buy a vehicle which costs
between S and lo slliion two or three years ago for a third of its price.
After having repossessed a nusber of vehicles. the lending financial body.
which found itself in possession of onuuerahle vehiclea of which it had no

way of disposing. is now begging transport personnel to take thee baelt on
new ters contracts.

l’arallel to this. there are certain practices which the truckers have con-
doned. in particular the ”auto clinic." This is an establish-eat where
each owner of a vehicle oust subnit it to a technical inspection against
payeent of nuns ranging froe o to 20 or'30.000 francs. But in the view of
easy senegalese. this is nothing but a liafis affair. a new plot to exploit
then. for the cospany playing the role of the "vehicle doctor" would be a
business-an in or closely linked with the governnent. They have soreover
set up vehicle parts shops beside the "clinics." so that those receiving

"orders" will not have to go far. and there is even to be a depart-ent for
purchasing “condo-led“ vehicles. ‘

0n the other hand. the transport workers feel concerned and involved with
the general situation. which has greatly deteriorated. in any case. this

strike. which succeeded 100 percent. represents a serious indication for the
regise.

[Question] tron what you say. if one assesses the situation. one could pre-
euse that the opposition has a chance of winning power.

[Answer] Quite so.

[Question] Under such conditions. what does the P03 plan to do with a view
to unity of the leftist forces. end what neans are available to it for doing

so. in view of the fact that it is accused of representing a royal opposi-
tion'i

[Answer] lie would obviously have liked to achieve unity of all the leftist
forces for the building of a new Senegal. but if we had waited for such unity.
we would still he at the point of discussing the sex of the angels. For

this reason. we plunged into the struggle while launching an appeal to other
forces. But we nurture no illusions and we are not seeking unity for its

own sake. we do not think it would be politically wise to establish unity

for the sole purpose of dislodging the Socialist Party and dividing up the
Iinisterial posts.

he one urges unity. but unity based on a progras. In particular. we oust
rench agree-cot on deuocracy. the nultiparty systen. and respect for free-
doen. for we have a profound co-iteent to these things.

Because we do not favor the seizure of power by violence. but rather a
deeocratlc advance which is parliaeentary as well. we are accused. or
rather we were accused before the elections. of constituting a royal

27
PO]! t'Ft'liilM. USE 08L?
FOR urt-‘tcm. "SH ONLY

opposition. New experience has ehown that we haVe changed neny thinga in
Senegal without any blood bring ahed. in our circlea. we believe that Sene-
gal ia capable of change by the deaocratic aethod.

mere are those who do not believe so. because. they aay. there ia no good
faith on the part of the adveraary. Ilach is entitled to hie analyaie and
underatending of the adveraary'e notivee. And believe no. we are not naive.
we know that had it been up to the Socialist Party. oura would never have
won 18 deputien' neata in the loot electiona. although thie figure doea not
truly represent our etrength.

we participated in the elections and we canpaigned honeatly. lied we won the
electiena. we would have been governing Senegal today. New at far ea 1 know.
a "royal oppoaition" never cache to wrest power free the eevereign. Aloe. i
think that thia aally hae to do with our party'a early yaara. which wea ele-
underatood the'. if i an to judge froa what the varioua oppoeitiona eay new.

Now if we wi-. power. rcneaber that we never aeid that the P08 would govern
Senegal all ~llone. And further-ore. if it coaea te cadrea. alongaide each

vs official we can place one free the PBS. Thou who read what we write ltnow
that the res plane to guide the comtry in conjunction with all coepeteat.
honeat and co-ittad Senegaleee.

[Queation] liowever. during the recent electione. you appealed to the votera
to participate en naaae. convinced that you would be able to win the power
according to the ruler of the denocratic gaae. Now the actual developeente
gainaaid thia belief and ahowed the etrength of an unofficial oppoaition.

[Answer] He were entirely aiatahen and we are willing to adult it. But
you ace. 1 begin by crediting Iy interlocutora with good faith. even if I
becooe a victil again. And you can be certain that in the future we will
talte all precautiona ao that thie doea not recur.

[Question] we would like to know at what atage your party ia. and above
all what your poaition will be on the law on political noveuenta in the
course oi the next parliaaentary aeeaion.

lMawerl Our party hae cowleted the recruiting atage and ie in the organica-
tlonal atage. for the influx of newbera literally exceeded our capacity in
thia sector. Currently. our baaic problea ie ataffing. ea well aa aetting

up the organizationa affiliated with the party. for young people. woeen.

and the elderly. The aecond goal will be airing the Iilitanta aware of
current probleaa. in particular we want then to understand what ia at atalte
in the queationa aoon to be diacueeed in the national aeee-bly. and for the.
to know that Senegal ie at a crouroada. 'l'hia ia the ltind of aupport of
parlia-entary action we will puraue in the weelta to cone.

concerning the law on ideological trenda. the PBS haa free the outaet voiced

ita opposition to the arbitrary liaitation of the nuaber of partiea and the
idea of arbitrarily labeling then. however. we believe that it ia not

28
FOR Minn». use oxtr
NR nPf‘lmAi. has any

deeirable to allow a eultitude of pertiee to be eetabliehed. in our view.
two or three partiea euffice. but we eay that at the beginning it ie necee-
eery to allow all the politically eignificant groupe to eateblieh theneeivee
ae partiee. in the eediua range. by eeene of the electione which by their
very nature polariee opinion. a reduction in the nuber of partiee will oc-
cur of ite own accord end eergere will eoreover be facilitated. Upper Volta
found a eethod involving letting all the partiee coapete in the eiectione.
allowing only thoee proving aoet repreeentative to continue to function.
‘l'hie ie one eethod out of nany.

ii aoreover. you are eeelting through your eueetion to learn what our atti-
tude toward recognition of the mo f':hei|th Ante niop'e party. currently
outlawed) will be. i would renind you that our periodical. LB oniocnm. hee
alwaye defended it. The political bureau of the P08 hae repeatedly voiced
thie eupport end eeebere of our executive eecretariet even eigned the peti-
tion deeending recognition of the noveeent.

But when it coeee now to giving the political groupe a hearing. the realitiee
are there end facte ere etubborn.

(Queetionl Since the Sheba affair. to epeeit of foreign policy, Senegal'e
diplomtic ieolation has heeoec greater. Ite poeitione on the African ecene
are increasing oppoeed hy varioue etatee . . .

[Anewcr] You are right. Senegal hee experienced eoee diploeatic difficultiee
recently.

At the Khartoun eu-ait eeeting. the Senegaieee poeition placed ue in a
einority.

Just after the Paris etatceent on the interAfrican force. our party took a
etand and tonne-nod the concept of euch a force outeide the 0A!) [Organieetion
of African Unity]. ‘i‘hie opposition wee the eubject of a reeolution paeeed
by our political button. which denounced the dangere of euch a venture. here-
over. which would risk launching an aruaente race in Africa. for if the
great powere are not for cite-pie ready to co-bat drought, they are on the
other hand ready to eupply In all kinda of weapona, even eoet eophieticated.
and even on credit. After the ideological echiel which divided Africa. we
could only regret our country'e becoeing the cauee of a new one. etiil lore
danger-cue.

lie aleo rejected the idea or creating a force to go to the aid of govern-
lento which have aceomte to settle with their peoplee.

All in nil. we were happy to ace that the Khartom einit raeeting reached
a derision coneietent with our view.

But no you know. deepite the Neto-llobutu reconciliation. Senegaieee eoldiere
are still in the Sheba. in a etateeent to the national eeee-biy. our

party protested the idea of sending our eoldiere there. lot the PS aejority

29
FOR 0"! WIN. USE ONLY
NI! OPI’ICIM. U82 ORLY

won out. following the Netn-hohutu reconciliation. we aahed that our aoldiera
be brought hone and that diplomtic relations be eatebliahcd between our
country and Angola. for it ia a paradox for Senegal to be lagging behind
Zaire end even france on thin point. we think that the preaence of Senegal-
cae aoldiora in the Shnbn now conetitutea n hindrance to the normalization

of Senegaleae-hngolen relationa.

Again on the aubjeet of the iaolation of Senegal. there ia the Sahara prob-
lea. Seceuae of ita geographic location. Senegal ahould have played a key
role in the aearch tor a eolution. Not only we thia not poaaible. but our
country ia not even n aeober of the 0M! comiaaion of five wiee nan entruated

with bringing the partioa together. 'i‘hia exclusion ia a challenge to our
diploaacy.

Now all of thin in due to the fect thet Senegal waa too involved in the con-
(Net. The Senegaleae governaent aupported the thcaea of the ”partitioniata"
in Morocco and Mauritania under the Ould Mddoh regiae. Still "1'. aerioua.
the facilitiea provided for the French Joguara. which could have talten off
from Dahar to bod: African peoplea. had the reault of placing our country in
the cyea of the African public in the cap of the aggreaaora ageinat the
people of the Sahara.

1 would roaind you however. that the PDS wee one of the firat African partiea
to eupport the Poliaario Front. aa of ice inception. in ita deoand for inde-
pendence for the Sahara. and aloe to welcoae Sl Ouali. ita firat aecretary
general. Since then our poaition on the latter haa relained the aaae. and
there ie e regular exchange between our two organizationa.

COPYRIGHT: 1970 Afrioue-Aeie

5157
(:80: “00

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFlCiAL USS OﬂtY

TOOOLBSB ECONOMY INDEX RISING-~With the sharp increase in reve-
nues from exports of phosphates, coffee, and cacao, Togo'e eco-
noay is keeping up its healthy rate of growth. During fiscal
1977, it sold 1 ,100 tons of coffee (down 3,700 tons), 9,400
tons of cacao down 3,200 tons), 7,000 tons of cottonseed

(down 2,700 tons), 1,200 tons of karite (down 4,200 tons), and
1,300 tons of palaiste (down 6,200 tons). Continuing expansion
of industrial fisheries will be furthered by the advent of the
Arab-Lybian-ovned Togo Fisheries Corporation (STAY-PBCHB), which
was founded this year. Phos hate production in 1977 case to 2.9
sillion tons (up 0.9 million 3 experts showed more diversifi-
cation, particularly those toward Bast Burcpean countries. In
industry, textile plants increased their output by 14 percent.
The Togo Ceaent Coepany doubled its production capacity to
300,000 tons yearly to handle increased exports to Niger, Upper
Volta, Mali, and Nigeria. The lone refinery, built to process
Nigerian crude, started operations in Septosber 197 . It has

a yearly capacity of a sillion tons of crude. [Text Paris MARCHBS
TROPICAUX B‘r MBDITBRRANBBHS in French 1 Dec 78 p 3313-3157 6182

08°: 5‘00 230

31
FOR OFFICIM. “SE 081.?