APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00060R000100030047-8
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030047-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE (NLY

JPRS L/8344

21 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(FOUO 9/79)
THE SIXTEENTH Am ARMY

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM00030047-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristica retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
nation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the scurce. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND RBGUIATIONS GOVERNING WRSHIP OF
HTERIALS “PRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINA'IION
01’ THIS PUBLICATION 38 RESTRICTED MOWICIAL USE ONLY.
BIOLIOGIA'NIC OA'IA
MIC!

  

II I' [III II C'

.‘runsumons on ussa MILITARY AFFAIRS. (rouo 9/79)
The Sixteenth Air Army

      

 
 

O. has-mu. Oust-nuns. Nun sad um»
Joint Pubi icetions Research Service
1000 North Globe load

Arlington. Virginia 22201

la. Wade. Out-Suns. Nels eel Mm

As above

I . Mame".

  

The report contains information on the Soviet military and civil defense

establishments. leadership. doctrine. policy, planning, political affairs.
organization, and equipment.

   

. Kay Ionic and lame: Analytic.

    
 
     
    
      
    

USSR

Military 0r4anizetions
Hilitnry Facilities
Military Personnel

In.» MOMI'WHI'UNI-Eldtd '90..

     

nu. a "\All Inn/hump

15C

   

II. -“.ll.hlllly Valet-rel

FOR OFPlCIAL USE ONLY. Limited "we! of
Copies Available Fro. JPRS

can: an! u an r. O-Il'

nus rout um! u ntnooucro mm“ """'"
FOR OFFICIAL USB and

JPRs L/8344
21 March 1979

TRMSLATIONS 0N USSR MILITARY AFFAIRS
(P000 9/19)

THE Sxxreeum AIR ARMY

Moscow ié-YA VOZDUSHNAYA in Russian 1973 signed to press
28 Sep 73 pp 1-393

[Book by 6.x. Prussakov (leader of author collective),

A.A. Vasil'yev, 1.1. Ivanov, P.8. Luchkin and 6.0. Konarov
(deceased), voyenizdat, 40,000 copies, 393 pages. The book is
subtitled: "A Military Historical Essay on the Campaign
Record of the 16th Air Aruy (lSiZ-lSiS)‘l

CONTENTS PAGE

Annotation ....... 1
For Our Soviet Motherland! ....... ..... .. 2
CHAPTER 1. In the Battle on the Volga 6
Baptism by Fire ...... ..... . ........... 6

In the Defensive Engagement at Stalingrad ......... 12

Operations of the Air Amy During the Countercffensive 31

The Air Blockade and Participation in El ilinating the

Surrounded Grouping .............. . ............ 36
CHAPTER 2. From the 'Fiery' Arc to the Dnepr ..... 52
The Preparations for the Battle on the Kursk Salient.. 52
Support of the Troops in the Defensive £ngagenent..... 55
“the Air Army in the Counteroffensive of the Front ..... 76
- a - [In - ussn - 4 P000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

CRAPTER 3.

CRAPTBR a.

CKAPTBR 5.

Heading Toward Kiev ...............................
Belov--Beloruaaie .
In the Bohruyak-Haraav Sector .....................
Preparations for the Offenaive ....................
The lobruyek Offenaive Operation ..................

In the lattiea for Liberating the Heatern Regions
of leiorueeia and Eastern Poland ...............

In the lattice for Bridseheade and Help for the
Hareav Iebela ...................................

Free the Viatule to the Oder ......................
Preparatione for Colbat ...........................
In the ViatuIa-Oder Operation .....................
In the lattIee for the Kuatrin Bridgehead .........
Over Eastern Pomerania ............................
The Battle for Berlin ...................... ......
Reedy for the Offensive ...........................

The M in the “concluding mm

Concluaion ....................................................

. b .
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
Frequently encountered abbreviations found in this work:

16th Mnléth Air Army
Arkhiv Ho sssn-Archives of the USSR Hinistry of Defense

bed--bonber air division
bsk--bomber sir corps
bso--airfield service battalion
bap--bomber sir regiment

cnc-Cavslry Hechanized Corps
“q SHc--Headquarters. Supreme High Command

isd--fighter air division
isk--Eighter air corps
isp--fighter air rsginent

lbsp-light bomber air regiment

nbsd-nignc bonber air division
nbsp-~night bomber air regiment
NKo--People's Commissarliat] of Defense

odrep--detsched long-distance reconnaissance air regiment
okrse--detsched correction and reconnaissance air squadron
okrap--detsched correction and reconnaissance air reginent
oree—-detached reconnaissance air squadron

RAB--regionsl sir base
RGK--High Command Reserve

ssd--mixed sir division

sek--mixed sir corps

SCAA-smsll-cs1iber antisircrsft artillery
shsd--ssseult sir division

shak--ssssu1t air corps

shsp--esseu1t air regiment

trep-eir transport regiment
utnp--trsining regiment

VKP(b)--All-Union Communist Party (Bolshevik)
VNOS--sircrsft warning service
VPu--suxilisry control point
NR OHICIAL USE ONLY

ANNOTAT ION

[Text] The book deacrihea the glorioue caapeisn record of the 16th Air
Array [M] during the yeara of the Great Patriotic Her.

The pilote of the 16th M defeated the Rati invadere at Stalingrad and Kurak,
in the Ukraine and Belorueeia. in the ekiea over fraternal Poland. and they

participated in the Berlin Operation. alveye fir-1y aeintainins air superi-
ority.

The aviators of the M made around 290,000 co-bat aortiee. Over 200 pilota
and navigators received the title of Hero of the Soviet Union, and note
than 27.000 evietore were preeented governmental decoration.

The book has been written on the heeie of the archival uteriala and aesoira
of the veterana of the peat war. It ia deaigned for a broad range of readere.

1
PO! OHICIAL US! 01“.?
’0! OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

FOR OUR SOVIET MOTRBRLANDl

The campaign record of the units and formations of the 16th AA during the
years of the Great Patriotic war of the Soviet Union against fascist Germany
and its satellites is wraathed in undying military glory.

Organized upon the order of the USSR People's Commissar of Defense in August
1942, on the shores of the great Russian river. the Volga. the 16th AA par-
ticipated in the great Battle of Stalingrad initially as part of the troops
of the Stalingrad Front, and from September 1962. as part of the Don Front.

During the first days of its existence, the AA had a total of 6 air divisions
and 2 separate air squadrons which had 152 combat-ready aircraft.

Regardless of the difficult situation in the air, the flight personnel of
the AA in the battle against the fascist invaders showed examples of bravery,
heroiss and profound awareness of military duty. The air formations of the
16th AA provided tangible air support to the troops of the front during the
period of the unprecedented defense of the hero city and subsequently in the
counteroffensive and defeat of the surrounded Nazi army 330.000 strong in
the region of Stalingrad.

In the summer of 1963. in the very fierce Battle of Kursk. the formations

of the 16th AA, in actively supporting and providing air cover to the troops
of the Central Front. helped thwart the plans of the enemy who was expecting
to gain revenge for the defeat at Stalingrad. The 16th AA and the air armies
of the adjacent fronts cooperating with it won the battle for air superiority.

After the defeat of the Nazi troops on the Kursk Salient, the 16th AA pro-
vided air support for the troops of the Central Front (later the Belorussian
and First Belorussian fronts) in the summer-autumn and winter campaigns of
1963-1966 on the Konotop-Kiev, Chernigov-Hozyr‘ and Gomel'--Bobruysk sectors.

In the summer of 1966. the AA which had grown by more than 10-fold over the
2 years, in close coordination with the ground forces, carried out active
combat to defeat the Nazis in the offensive operations on the territory of

Belorussia and in the eastern regions of Poland. in firmly maintaining air
superiority.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe onrcm. use our

In Jonuory-Pebruary 1965. the M participated in the offensive of the troops
of the First boloruosian Front. having provided enornous support to the: in
surrounding and destroying the one-y troops in the battles on the path from
tho Vistula to the Oder on tho Parear-Kustrin sector. Then the M aided

the troops of the front in defeating the Eastern Poneranien one-y grouping.

And finally, having received reinforcements from the Reserve of the Iligh
Command (11610. the 16th M with the forces of around 30 air divisions (over
3.000 coabat aircraft). as part of tho troops of the first Be‘oruosian Front
end in cooperation with the air sraies of the adjacent fronts. participated
in tho concluding battle. tho berlin Operation which ended with the final
defeat of Nazi Ger-any.

Thus, the aviators of the 16th M participated in bottles and engage-onus
against the one-y on tho main strategic sectors of tho Soviot-German Front.
having made over 288.000 conbat sorties (or tho campaign record.

The aviators of the 16th M. in acquiring and creatively using the experience
of tho front. constantly improved tho forns and nothods of the combat use of
the various branches of aviation and developed to perfection cooperation with
the ground forces.

They node a weighty contribution to developing the theory of operational art
and tactics of the Soviet Air Force.

The co-anders. the political workers and the party organisations of the M
unite were active proponents of the policy of the (Do-mist Party. They or-
ganized and inspired the military aviators to a sacred struggle against fos-
ciem. they indoctrinated in the personnel boldness and courage. valor and
readiness for self-sacrifice, a total loyalty to tho Soviot motherland and
hate for its one-ice. and were constantly concerned with the strengthening
of discipline and organization.

The personnel of the M possessed a strong morale and excelled in combat
enthusiasm and an unrestrained aggressive drive. The pilots and navigators.
the gunners and radio operators, engineers and technicians, the mechanics
and other specialists and the son of the aviation rear support services
honorably carried out their duty to the motherland. '

By their heroic feats. the non of the M. the fighter and assault plane
pilots. the bonber pilots and scouts, inscribed indelible pages in the mili-
tary chronicle of the Soviet Araed Forces. More than 30 flight crews re-
peated the i-ortal feats of the Russian pilot P. N. Nosterov and the con—

nunist pilot N. P. Costello. in ra-ing the may in the air and on the
ground. '

The columnists and Komsomol lembers have always been in the vanguard of
the air fighters of the M. Their number increased continuously. Over
the period from August 1962 through May 1965. 20.275 of the best aviators
Joined the ranks of the 00-min Party and 6.735 became Koasonol members.

3
P0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The heroism and military skill of the personnel in the 16th M were properly
praised by the party and govern-ant. For the emplery execution of coehat
missions of the cal-sand on the front in coehating the Nazi invaders and for
the valor and heroism shown in this. 200 pilots and navigators were awarded
the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. 3 received this twice. and 1 received
a third Gold Star. Among the holders of the Red Star were Russians and
Belorussians, Ukrainians and Georgians. Armenians. Osetians and use free
other nationalities. Kore than 27.000 aviators were awarded orders and
nedals of the USSR for silitary excellence.

The capital of our motherland. Moscow. 53 tines saluted with artillery salvos
the velorous troops of the Central. Belorussian and First Belorussian fronts,
and here in the congratulatory orders of the Supreme Comnder-in-Chief. the
outstanding formations and units of the 16th AA were mentioned 47 tines.

ﬂsny air for-nations and units of the AA in fierce battles against the fascist
invaders rightly earned the title of guards (one out of every three regi-
nents became guards). Three air formations and units received the Order of
Lenin, and 93 received the Order of the Red Banner. 61 received the Order of
Suvorov. 22 the Order of Kutuzov, ii the Order of Aleksandr Nevskiy. A the
Order of Bodgan Rimel'nitskiy and u the Order of the Red Star. Subsequently
the 16th AA hecane Red Banner.

Virtually all the formations and units were awarded honorary names such an
Volga and Stalingrad. Beltran-ch and Nezhin. Chernigov and Gonei'. Hotyr' and
Rechitsa. Bobruyslt and Brest. Prague and Hal-saw. Lodz and Brandenburg. Poner-
enian. Berlin and others (a total of 6b honorary naaes).

Many prominent leaders of the Air Force were proeoted free along the front
line aviation consnders of the 16th AA.

Heny glorious air aces laid down their lives in the battles against the
Nazi invaders. The surviving conrades-in-arns held sacred the bright usury

of the heroes who died a death of the brave for the happiness of future
generation ..

The gene fell silent.. .. Thousends of aviators upon reaching the given age
were discharged into the reserves or retired. thousands worked in the nation-

al economy and took an active part in social work and in the nilitary patrio-
tic indoctrination of the youth.

hany years after the end of the war the for-er personnel have not lost their
frontline friendship. The meetings in Hoscow and Honino in August 1967 and
1972 tined for the occasion of the 25th and 30th anniversary of the forms.
tion of the aray vere anorehle for many of the now gray-haired soldiers.

6
'0]! OFFICIAL US! 02“.?
FOR OHICIAP USE ONLY

The glorious eoebet traditions of the evietore in the 16th M ere cere-
fully preeerved end edded to by the men of the Soviet Air Force. The
heirs of the militery glory of their fethere end grendfethere poeeeee
eodern equimnt. they ere inereeeing their conbet reedineu end in close
cooperetion with the non of the freternel eocieliet eountriee vigilently
guard the air frontiers of the netione of the eoeieliet eeep, end the

peaceful lebor of our people who ere building comnien. They ere elveye
ready to repel any eureeeor.

0n the basis of erchivel deem-onto, the wire of the eilitery chiefs and
the direct perticipente in the evente as well as the personal wire of
the authors, this book briefly tells of the eir operetione and feet- of
the sen in the 16th M in the ensegeeente eyeinet the eneey on the diffi-
cult peth from the Volse to the Elbe in 1962-1965.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! OILY

CHAPTERI: mmmrmonmvoma
Baptisa by Fire

The second year of the Great Patriotic Her of the Soviet people against

the Nazi invaders began under extremely difficult conditions for the Red
Army. The enemy. having concentrated a large troop grouping on the south-
ern wing of the Soviet-Garnet! Front, seized the strategic initiative and
in the sun-er of 1962 began a asjor offensive intending to reach the Volga.
capture the oil fields of the Northern Caucasus and never the lines of com-
nunications linking the center of the nation with the south.

In the Stalingrad sector, fierce battles raged. The enemy possessed super-
iority in personnel end equipment. particularly in tanks and aviation.
Again, as in the previous year. the Soviet troops experienced the bitterness
of retreat. By the middle of July, the Nazi troops had initiated battles

in the bend of the Don. endeavoring to break through to Stalingrad and cap-
ture it.

The threatening situation which was developing in the south of our nation
caused great alarm among all the Soviet people. On 28 July 19‘2. the
People's Co-iasar of Defense (Into) 1. V. Stalin issued Order No 227 in
which he dsnanded that the enemy advance be halted by the Soviet troops at
any price. "The time has come to end the retreat. Not another step back!"
demanded the order of the motherland.

The question of creating a strong and active defense in the Stalingrad sec-
tor et that tine was at the center of attention of the Soviet tonand. The
order of the NKO of 8 August 1962 marked the start of organising the 16th
M. Haj GenAvn P. S. Stepsnov (a member of the Military Council of the Red
Arny Air Force) was appointed temporary cos-render. the reginental co-issar
A. s. Vinogradov was the military co-issar, and Haj Gen Avn s. I. Rudenko
was the deputy consender.

However. because of the deteriorating situation around Stalingrad. the or-
ganization of the new M was delayed. ﬂoreover. regardless of the dividing
of the Stalingrad Front into two (Stalingrad and Southeastern) on 5 August,
both fronts continued to be under the troop conender of the Southeastern

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAI. USE ONLY

Front. while the aviation wae under the conender of the 8th AA. At that
tine ell their attention wan focueed on repelling the aeaeult on Stelingred.

Only onl September were Gene P. S. Stepenov and s. I. Rudenko ouuoned to
Kanyehin were the repreeentativee of the ﬂeedquartere. Supreno lligh Conand
[Sq SHC]. Gene 6. K. Zhukov and A. A. Novikov. announced to the. the final
deeieion to accelerate the organization of the 16th M. Since the any
ainulteneoualy wee aleo to engage in conbat. Gen P. s. Stepenov wee ordered
to be concerned with the organizational queatione. while. Gen 5. I. Rudenko
wee to direct the operationa of the air formations end unite of the newly
organized M.

Having returned to the arny contend poet at Stalingredekiy Sovhhoz. Gen
5. I. Rudenko ordered the etart of operations of the 16th M aa pert of
the troopa of the Stalingrad Front which were under the cot-hand of Lt Gen
V. N. Cordov.

On 28 Septenber 1942, Gen S. I. Rudenko wee appointed the contender of
the 16th M.

Sergey Ignat'yevich Rudenko had great experience in life before becoming

e proninent nilitary leader. He wee born in 1906 in the Chernigov area i'..
a poor artiean fnnily. At the ege of 1°. under e Konaonol eeeignnent. he
volunteered for the aviation achool and in 1927 received the rank of lili-
tery pilot. In the following year he wee admitted to the VKP(b) [All-Union
Cot-nuniet Party (Bolehevikn. Over the yeare hie flying ekille grew. end
hie operational-tactical training and the art of controlling air unite in-
proved. In 1932. s. I. Rudanko conpleted the content! faculty, and eeveral
years later. the operatione faculty of the Air Force Acedeay ineni N. Ye.
Zhukovekiy, and wee appointed the con-ander of an air brigade. In 1936.

he received the Order of Lenin for high aucceeeee in ailitary and political
training.

At the outoet of the Great Patriotic Her. Col 5. I. Rudenko co-anded the
3lst Air Diviaion which in July had already engeged the Nazi invadera in
conbnt. In October 1961. for aucceaaful leaderehip of coabat. he wea given
the rank of eajor general aviation. He wae aubaequently the co-ander of
the eir force of the ﬂat Arny and the air force of the Kalinin Front. the
connander of the 7th Aaaeult Air Group of "<1 sac. the deputy contender of
the 8th M. and the deputy cot-lender and co-ander of the 16th M. follow-

ing it until the victorioua Hay 1965. In thia poaition hie organizational
talent wee particulerly apparent.

The entire pereonnel of the 16th M knew their comnder aa a principled
comuniet, energetic and enterprieing, etrong willed and denanding. but
nlweye tactful, reepeneive and anieble contender. In poeceaaing high opera-
tional-tactical training. boldneae and deciaiveneaa, he creetively approached
the eolution to the moat important queatione of the codtet uae of aviation.

In his work he alweye relied on the political apperatue and on the party
organize t ione .

7
FOR OFFICIAL 05:2 OﬂLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

In the postwar years 5. l. Rudenko cosmended the avietion of a military
district. he was the chief. of the Air Force Chief Staff. the commander of
the long-range aviation. and than for meny years. the first deputy commander-
in-chief of the Air Force. He was repeatedly elected a deputy of the USSR
Supreme Soviet and the RSFSR Supreme Soviet. At the 22d CPSU Congress. he
was elected a candidate meter of the CPSU Central Cos-ittee. The Co-sunist
Party end the Soviet government heve had high regard for the military acti-
vities and long service of s. l. Rudenko. having awarded his the Gold Star
of the Hero or“ the Soviet Union. five Orders of Lenin. four Orders of the
Red Banner. three Orders of Suvorov First and Second Degree. the Order of
Kutuzov First Degree. and many medals. By the Ukese of the Presidium of
the USSR Supreme Soviet of 11 March 1955 he was awarded the military rank
of ssrshel of aviation. At present the Hero of the Soviet Union. Her Avn

S. l. Rudenko heads the Red Banner Order of Kutuzov Air Force Academy imeni
Yu. A. Gagarin.

Aleksay Sergeyevich Vinogradov was born in 1900 in lvanovo-Vosnosensk. in

e worker femily. At the age of 18 he joined the Red Army and took an ac-
tive part in the Civil Her. In 1926. he retired to the reserves. During
the same year he joined the ranks of the R003) [Russian Communist Party
(Bolshevihn. In 1932. upon completing the Koavuz [Co-unist Institution
of Higher Learning]. he was again inducted into the army for political work.
During the first year of the war. regimental conissar A. S. Vinogredov held
the position of military comissar of the 60th Air Division. the 2nd Reserve
Air Brigade end then the let Fighter Air Army of He sac. Being the military
comeisser end then the deputy comnder of the 16th AA for political affairs.
he reached Berlin itself with it.

The process of organizing the 16th AA continued until 6 Septeeber. By that
time two air divisions. the 220th end 228th. had been transferred from the
8th AA to the 16th. The 220th fighter eir division (iad) included the 63d.
leth. 237th. 512th. $81st and 867th air regiments (iap) with Yak-l aircraft
end later the 291st iap with LaGG-3 (col-sender of the air division. Lt Col
A. V. Utin. military co-issar. regimental co-issar P. V. Daryehev. and
chief of staff. Col A. A. Semenov).

The 288th Assault Air Division (shad) included the 688th. 696th. 783d and
later the 285th air regiments (shop) with 11-2 aircraft (co-andar. Col V. V.
Stepichev. and from October. Lt Col 6. 0. Koserov. military co-iaser. bri-
gade consissar. l. D. Kohyakin. and chief of staff. Col 1. A. 'l'rushin).

Simultaneously free the headquarters Reserve. the 16th AA received two other
air divisions: the 283d iad consisting of the “lat. 520th. 56M and later
the 812th iap with Yak-l aircreft (contender. Col V. A. Kateyev. military
conissar. senior battalion comissar N. I.. Khodyrev and chief of staff.

lt Col A. A. Savinov) and the 291st Mixed Air Division sad) under the com-
sand of hero of the Soviet Union. Lt Col A. N. Vitruk (military comaissar.
senior battalion con-isser. P. l. Petrov. and chief of staff. Lt Col P. H.
Sedov). The letter consisted of the 263d and 2‘5th snep with 11-2 aircraft

8
NR ORIGIN. US! OIL?
FOR OIPICIAL US! ONLY

and the 10th Bomber Air Regimsnt (bap) with Pa-Z; later this regiment was
replaced by the 313th shap. The 954th shap arrived later and the division
began to be termed an assault division.

By the start of September. the AA also had the S9Gth and 970th light bomber
air regiments (lbap) with Po-Z aircraft. Subsequently they became night
regiments.

As a total by 4 September. the 16th AA had 152 aircraft in flying condition.
including 62 fighters. 79 assault planes and 31 light bombers.

The AA was based at the field airfields to the north of Stalingrad under
difficult conditions. since the zone near the front was saturated to the
maxi-um with troops and various rear bodies.

The personnel which arrived to organize the AA was seized with the noble
desire to overcome all the difficulties in the shortest tine. to complete
the organization and participate in the battle against the hated enemy.

A8 a total the air force of the Stalingrad sector (the 8th and 16th AA and
the 102d Air Defense iad) had 738 aircraft. including 133 daytime bombers.
11 night bonbers. 241 assault planes and 313 fighters. In addition to them.
this sector systematically received 150-200 long-range boebers.

The enemy aviation in the Stalingrad sector numbered over 1,200 aircraft
which were part of the 6th Air Force and the 8th Air Corps. They were
armed with the Ju-87. Ju-88 and He—lll bombers; the He-109 and “2-110
fighters and a small number of FH-l90; the ﬂs-126 and PH-189 reconnaissance
planes. Superiority in the number of aircraft in the Stalingrad sector was

on the side of the Carmen Luftwaffe. The fascist aviation had sir superior-
ity.

The headquarters of the 16th AA was organized on 15 August basically from
the leadership of the First Fighter Air Army of he sac and initially was
located in Stalingrad. The staff. the basic departments and services were
headed by Cole N. c. Belov (chief of staff). A. S. Kirillov (chief of rear
services). senior battalion conmissar V. I. Vikhrov (chief of the political
department). Eng lat Rank V. I. Rabrov (chief engineer), Lt Col A. P. Naumov
(chief of operations depart-eat). Hajs A. S. Chernyy (chief of the reconnais-
sance department). Ya. I. Hatov (chief of the communications department) and
F. S. Hukhin (chief navigator). However, by the start of combat the staff

and services of the army as yet were not fully manned and did not have suf-
ficient coordination.

Simultaneously with the arrival of the combat formations of the 16th AA. its
rear services were also organized. A certain number of rear units was as-
signed fron the 8th AA. They already had experience in servicing aviation
under combat conditions. However the organizing of the rear services was

9
POE OIPICIAL US! OﬂLY
M OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

drawn out since the other rear units could not pronptly reach the lots-
tion of the any due to the enornous overloading of the lines of comsuni-
cetions. for this reason the flight units for an extended time were served
by the rear organizations of the 8th M. This led to inconveniences and in-
terruptions in supplying the units and inpeded the carrying out of codat.

by ‘0 September. the rear services of the 16th M had 3 regionsl air bases
(the 23d. 35th and 80th m). 2 motor transport battalions. 3 head air
depots. on any a-unition depot. 2 airfield engineer battalions and 17
airfield service battalions (beo). In addition. the 78th m was also so-
signed to the rear services of the any. but this m was not fully unned
and did not have experience in servicing eir units. The rear services of
the arey had 87 percent of the established sotor trensport. 67 percent of
the special notor transport and 61 percent of the tractors. As a whole.
the rear services of the M were not yet organised. and with the start of
conbat any difficulties arose in its work.

In bccoeing pert of the Stalinng Front. the 16th M i-ediately began to
be involved in carrying out a series of combat nissions such as conducting
eir reconneissence. providing cover for the troops on the battlefield and
the crossings over the Volga. and asking assault attacks against the ad-
vancing fascist troops.

However. the M at that ties was still unable to operate at full strength.
The air divisions were undermenned end were short of aircraft. For steeple,
the 228th shad. by the beginning of Septenber. had only 33 percent of the
esteblished eircraft. The personnel coning fro. the training end reserve
reginents did not possess coﬂat experience; the units nsinteined poor con-
tact with one another end with the army stsff and the troops of the front.
and their coordination was not worked out. Nevertheless the army air regi-
nents carried out the missions set for them. The pilots upon arriving at
the new location soon engeged in conbet melting several coebat sorties per
day with the absence of the mini-slly necessary maintenence facilities and
specialists. After the sortie they helped the technicians ready aircraft
for the next one and often themselves repaired the deneged equipment.

But under these difficult conditions the pilots showed enemies of courage
and wholehesrted service to the motherland.

On 12 August. the 688th shep received the mission of attacking the air-
field at Oblivsksya where up to 100 fascist aircraft were based. The regi-
Isental co-snder soon after takeoff returned to the base due to a malfunc-
tion of the motor. and co-and wee assumed by the regimental navigator.
senior political leader H. c. Sklyarov. The attack on the messy airfield
was brillisntly executed by the reginent under $klyarov's lesdership.

Around 50 may aircraft were destroyed. The assult group returned with-
out losses.

10
POI OUICIAI. US! ONLY
I03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 17 August, the essult plenes of the 688th shep node e powerful strike
sguinst e concentration of enemy tents in the region of Abgenerovo. Sev-
ersl score destroyed end deeeged tenks reneined on the bettlefield. A sig-

nificant portion of them hed been destrOyed by the flyors from the equsdron
of Sr Lt A. I. stomets.

On 22 August. s group of eseeult plenes from the seme regiment under the
comsnd of Lt I. S. logechev wee cerrying out s siseion to destroy the
crossings over the Don st the populstit'm point of Niehniy Aketov. In the
region of the terget the esssult plenes were ettecked by enemy fighters.
Bogechev's eircreft ceught fire in the cir. Preferring desth to cspture.
Lt 1vsn Bogechov repeeted the feet of Cept Gestello. end in the burning
eircreft he creshed into the crossing end destroyed it. The pilot hero
was killed but the sission wee cerried out.

On the following dey. Cept I. P. Hotornyy. in leeding e group of six
"Yoke" of the 512th iep. in the region of Vertyechiy Perm encountered more
then 60 enuy sircreft end. regerdless of the numericsl superiority, boldly
engeged then in conbet end shot down two enemy fighters.

In the course of orgenixing the 16th M. the politics]. bodies cerried out
enormous work with the new recruits. The officers of the eruy politicel
depertnent visited the flight end reer unite where they helped in eliminsting
the shortcosings end expleined the missions of the sen in the forthcoming
operations end the requireeents of the Order of the Supreme Contender-in-
Chief No 227. Seminers were held with the leederehip of the regiments end
divisions on the following subjects: ”The Defense of the Petherlendu-A
Sacred Duty to the Hothorlend." “Not s Step beckwsrds." “Discipline of the
Red Arny." "The Feet of the 28 Guerds Penfilov Troops." end others. In the
units there were neetings of the perty end Komsoml sktiv at which co-endere
end politicel workers spoke on the course of combet end the forthcoming nie-
sions. es well so perty end Komsomol meetings where they discussed the ques-
tion of the vsnguerd role of the conunist end Komsonol in combet. The
politicel work was cerried out with perticuler effectiveness in the 288th

shed end the 220th ied where F. P. Psnkin end Toporov were the chiefs of
the politicel deperteents.

The perty orgenizstions of the M in September 1962 numbered 2.010 where

of the V100»). 1.365 cendidete members of the V00), end 6.192 Komsonol
members.

The politicel workers ectively sided the co-enders in orgenizing cosbst
and they themselves perticipeted in the coebet sorties. setting e personel
empie of coursge end heroism. The uses meetings et the eirfields before
tehing off for e mission bees-e e good tredition in the sir units.

._—-

1 Arkhiv H0 SSSR [Archives of the USSR Hinistry of Defense]. folio 368.

inv. [inventory] 6512. file 25. sheets 6. 7.

 

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tho con-union ond Knuoool unhoro lod tho ronoining poroonnol. With tho
ologon "hot o Stop hockwordo!" tho piloto ongogod tho foociot horhoriono in
conhot. Tho novigotor of tho 69bth ohop. Sr Lt H. l. hohrov. ototod ot o
looting: "I will corry out tho conhot niooiono oooignod to no no nottor
whot tho cootl if l mu dio, oy dooth will out tho foocioto doorly."
Tho novigotor of tho 783d ohop. Sr it B. Yo. Grohon'ltov. doclorod: "I will
honorohly corry out tho coohot oiooion ond will hlooo tho troil for tho
ground iorooo." At thio oo-o oooting. tho tochniciono vowod to proporo tho
oircroft oo thot thoy would oporoto roliohly. 'l'ho piloto of tho 783d ohop.
tho salot iop ond othor roginonto vowed thot thoy would givo oll thoir
ohility ond would oporo noithor forcoo or thoir lifo to dofond tho city on
tho Volgo olong with tho ground forcoo.

Sioultonoouoly with tho corrying out of conhot. tho flight poroonnol noo-
torod tho oiroroft oquiplont. thoy inprovod thoir tocticol troining. ond
otudiod tho rogion of oporotiono ond tho coohot oxporionco of tho boot
crown ond ouhunito. Rongo oxorciooo were corriod out in tho unito of oo-
ooult oviotion. Tho piloto inprovod thoir divo booting okillo. In tho oir
roginonto o coopotition dovolopod for tho title of onipor crowo. In tho

fightor oir divioiono, tho olononto of ooriol coolant ond gunnory troining
wore workod out.

Along with thin tho oir unito corriod out cxtonoivo work to troin young
piloto for coohot. Hhon tho tirot group orrivod tron tho ochoolo ond ro-
oorvo roginonto in the 512th iop. tho co-ondor of tho M donndod thot
porticulor ottontion ho givon to thoir troining ond groundod tho unproporod
piloto. ‘l’ho rogilontol co-ondor. horo of tho Soviot Union Lt Col N. s.
Corooilov ond tho roginontol oilitory co-iooor. hottolion couiooor l. H.
lionykin. spoke with ooch pilot. Thou they fonilioriod thou with tho oituo-
tion on tho front ond with tho noturo of tho niooiono to ho corriod out by
tho roginont. 'i'hc quootion of pornitting tho young piloto to fly woo dio-
cuoood ot o potty nooting of tho roginont. 'i'ho morioncod co-uniot piloto
ond tho for-or inotructoro of tho (light ochoolo l. P. Hotornyy. Z. V. Sonon-
yuk ond V. N. Hohrov woro inotructod to conduct oxorciooo ond tolko with
tho now rocruito ond to roody tho young piloto for coohot. Juot oovorol doyo
woro given for troining. but it providod tho noodod offoct. In tioo tho
young piloto hocono outotonding mtoro of oir conhot.

In the Dofonoivo lngogooont ot Stolingrod

During tho loot lo doyo of Auguot ond in tho hoginning of Soptolhor 19‘2.
tho oituotion of our troopo in tho intorfluvo of tho Don ond tho Volgo ho-
cono vory cruciol. ‘rho onony woo driving toword tho Volgo.

"Regordlooo of tho Iouuroo tohon to roinforce tho oviotion in tho Stolin-
grod ooctor. tho oituotion in tho oir ronoinod oxtro-oly otroinod." rocollod
Nor Avn S. l. Rudonko in hio hook "Dvooti Ognonnylth Dnoy" [200 Piory Doyo].
"Bnony hoohoro wore noting otrong ottoclto ogoinot our troopo ond root in-
otollotiono. Prohohly tho hlockoot deed of tho Noni invodoro in tho hottlo
for Stolingrod woo tho horhorion dootruction of tho city. For thio virtuolly

12
m ORIGIN. US! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 081.!

the entire bth Gernsn Air Force was used. In juot 1 day. on 23 August.
around 2,000 aircraft participated in the raids on the city. The air

shook from the continuous thunder of exploding boobs. The pilots of the
102d Air Defense iad and the fighters of the front fought heroically against
the eneay aviation. In 25 dogfights they shot down 90 fascist aircraft."

The situation of our troops to the southwest of Stalingrad also deteriorated.
0n 3 Septenber headquarters desanded that the forces of the left wing of the
Stalingrad front i-ediately lake counterstrikes against the may which was
baohing toward the Volga. The 16th M was given the niasion of supporting
the troops of the front. in destroying eneny personnel. tanks and artillery
on the battlefront and in the concentration areas. as well as covering the
troops and crossings against air attack and the conducting of reconnaissance.
The staff of the M worked out an operational plan.

The combat of the M started on Io Septenber with the forces of the nest
battleworthy units at that tine. the 228th shed and the 220th iaC. The
remaining air fornations and units were omitted to battle later (the
291st shed on the following day. the 283d iad on 8 Septenber and the regi-
nents of nighttine planes on 10-12 Septe-ber).

The basic strike on 4 Septenber was made by the assault planes against eneny
personnel and silitary equip-ant in the regions of Voroponovo. Kuz'nichi
and the Experimental Station Sovkhos. here particularly distinguishing
thenselvea were the groups led by the «undue of the 688th and 783d

ahap. Hajs V. 1. Yarov and h. N. Chikhalenko. The assault planes were
covered by fighters of the 220th iad. As a total during the day. the M
units executed 127 sorties. they conducted 13 dogfights. and shot down 12
enemy aircraft. The aviation succeeded in destroying and knocking out 30
tanks and 60 sotor vehicles.

In the falling days. the M, in aiding the troops of the front. node assault
attacks against enuy personnel and tanks concentrated to the northwest of
Stalingrad in the regions of Kuz'lichi. Drevniy Val and Konnyy Siding.

During the period of 5-8 September. the pilots of the M lads 688 sorties,
of which over half were to destroy eneny personnel and equiptaent. 21 dog-
fights were engaged in and 21 ens-y aircraft were shot down. The pilots of
the 283d iad on 8 Septenber began to provide cover for the troops of the
front. the airfielda. the rear installations and the town of Ka-yahin.

The battles during these difficult days were a serious testing for the just
created 16th M. The flight personnel of the aruy withstood this testing

and demonstrated total courage and nature skill in the battles against the
superior forces of enemy aviation.

The connender of the 237th iap, Haj A. B. Isayev. during just the first
days of the battles shot down five enely aircraft.

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 7 Septesbar. seven assault planes headed by squadron co-ander. Capt

P. S. ‘Jinogrsdov attacked eneny tanks and notorired infantry on the battle-
field. During the attack. the group was fired on by antiaircraft artillery
and attacked by four lie-109 fighters. Vinogradov was able to quickly turn
against the eneny and before the very eyes of our infantry-en shot dam two
eneey aircraft with strong aschinegun and cannon fire. The second element
of fascist fighters quickly took cover. Vinogradov was wounded, his air-
craft was daneged. but he brought hie group back to the airfield. For able
coabat and for herois- shown during this. Capt P. s. Vinogradov was awarded
the Order of Lenin. By an order of the N'KO he was awarded the rank of lieu-
tenant colonel. The courageous pilot soon seemed cat-end of the 694th shap.

On 8 Septeuber the conbat activity of the M was particularly intense. The
pilots of just the 29lst shed. having nade 83 conbat sorties. knocked out
31 tanks. 15 arnored vehicles. 199 notor vehicles. 25 guns and destroyed
700 enesy soldiers. the fighters of the 220th and 283d iad carried out 6
dogfighte and shot down 8 eneay aircraft.

On that day the young pilot 3. H. Gonolko carried out an unprecedented feet.
A group of 10 fighters headed by the COIIIMOI of the 520th lap. Haj s. N.
Chirva. in flying to a forward airfield. unexpectedly encountered 10 eneny
He-lll bonbers. Regardless of the fact that the young pilots had never en-
countered the eneny. Haj Chirva, in having confidence in his charges. decided
to attack the eneny. Sr Sgt Gonolko boldly dove into the foraation of enemy
aircraft and shot dmm one bonber. having expended his ammunition in the
subsequent attacks. and being wounded. the pilot decided to ran a bother.
with the propeller of his aircraft he rut off the tail asaenbly of a second
boaber. after which he lost control of the fighter and bailed out. In para-
chuting, Conolko prepared to fight the fascist pilots who also were bailing
out. One he shot in an acts-pt to resist, and the other he captured and
took to the staff of his air reginent. Soon thereafter Sr Sgt B. H. Cowlko
received the rank of lieutenant for bravery and was awarded the Order of
Lenin. In this same battle. Haj S. N. Chirva. Lt II. V. Kharitonov and Sgt
V. P. Vusikov each shot down one bonber.

0n 9 September. an aerial reusing was also executed by the squadron con-
nander of the 563d iap. s nenber of the party emission of the M. bat-

telion comiasar A. V. Aborin. In a two-plane element with Lt V. A. Oreshin.
he was covering the troops in the region of Yersovki when they were attacked
by six lie-109. In the dogfight Aborin and Oreshin shot down one Hesserschnitt.
but the engag-ent continued. Ilaving used up the a-nnition. the battalion
couissar Aborin ramped and destroyed a second Ger-an fighter. In his

damaged aircraft Aborin safely landed at his airfield.

0n 10-12 Septelber. the pilots of the M continued to attack the one-y in
the regions of elevations 139.7. 145.5. 137.2. Iorodkin Peru and Sukhays
Mechetka Bnbanluent. In endeavoring to reduce its losses. the am co-Iend
began to use large groups of assault planes under a strong fighter cover.
During the 3 days 608 coebat sorties were nsde to destroy the enemy troops.
During these days the groups under the co-and of H. G. Sklyarov. c. l.
Kopayev. P. P. Pospelov. N. I. Lunev and I. P. libishev (the 228th shad).

16
'0! OHICIM. USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. US! ONLY

as well as A. G. Nekonechnikov. A. A. Kurnikov and S. I. Vinnik (29let chad)
fought well. The aeeault planee 86 tanks. 186 motor vehicles, 20 guns and
mortars and nuch other military equipment. The fighter pilote conducted 23
dogfights and shot down 15 enemy aircraft.

On 10 September. in carrying cat a mission. the aircraft of the pilot of
the 265th ehap, Jr Lt Kleehchev. was hit by eneny antiaircraft fire. The
Nazis paid dearly for the life of the Soviet pilot. The courageous eeeault
pilot. repeating the feet of Capt Gaetello. in hie burning aircraft dove
into a column of enemy motor vehicles.

In aiding the troops in repelling the enemy tank attacks. on 11 Septenber
a group of eseult pilote from the 263d ehap heeded by the squadron com-
mander Hero of the Soviet Union, 3r Lt N. K. Karehulin. distinguished it-

self. In the region of Plodovitoye. thie group made a divebombing attack
on a concentration of faeciet tanka. The pilote eat several tanIte and

armored vehiclee on fire. they created panic in the enemy ranks and thwarted
the eneny attack.

The fightere of the 220th and 283d iad on 12 Septenber alone in 10 dog-
fighte show down 9 eneny aircraft. Capt P. N. Kuzneteov (the 283d iad)
particularly distinguished hi-eelf, and he. in maetering .the Yak-l fighter.
destroyed two faeciet lie-109 aircraft in one dogfight.

In the couree of the combat activitiee of the M, the couand and flight
personnel discovered eany tactical errore. The enemy pilote. the tactics
of when wee based on eurpriee and a conetant desire to achieve numerical
superiority in aerial conbat, ueed the fact that our fightere often appeared
over the battlefield in smaller numbare and eade mietakee in conducting
combat. The favorite method of the fascist fightere was to attack our
eingle aircraft which had become eeperated from a group as a result of the
failure of the pilot to obearve the flight formations or an equipment mal-
function. The Nazis endeavored to cut individual aircraft out of the group
and then fire on them.

The tactics of the enemy fightere was carefully studied by the pilots of
the M. New methode of aerial combat were eought out ageth the enemy
tricks. In order to facilitate the locating of enemy aircraft and increase
the possibility of eaneuvering in a dogfight. our fightere eoon gave up the
close flight formatione and ehifted over to a more fluid eyetem of two-air-
craft elenente. An element of two aircraft became the basic formation for
all the fighter combat groupe.

The commander of the 220th iad. Col A. V. Utin, and the flight pareonnel of
this divieion becaae fervent followere and propagandiete for the new tactice.
In the units in the flight analyses and later in training dogfighte. the
pilots constantly worked for the art of conducting group and single combat
in two-aircraft elements with the extensive uee of vertical naneuvere.

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

At the sens time meesures were taken to inprove the flight performance of
the fighters which did not reach the designed speed due to a number of flaws.
In particular. upon recon-endatione proposed by the M pilots. the Yak-l
aircraft. with the aid of workers from the Saratov Aviation Plant was mede
ll percent lighter. the skin was reinforced on it. end the covering improved.
As a result the aircraft begen to execute a vertical maneuver better then
the hesseraehnitt. Gen 8. I. Rudenko visited the plant and saw to it thet
the workers and designers carried out the requests of the crews.

In combeting eneny aviation, an enormous role wee played by the radio net-
work for guiding the fighters fron the ground and which was organised .‘n

the 16th M. here they used the experience of the defenders of Leningred.
The guidance network of the M included a central radio station which was
located in the erea of the army co-end post. aiv field radios of the air

divisions and regiments, es well as the guidance radios located along the
front line end in contact with the airborne fighters. The guidance radioe
informed the airborne pilots of the air situation. they guided the. to the

enemy aircraft, they su-oned the fighters from the eirfields and directed
then to the necessary targets.

For strengthening the counteractions against enemy fighters. the coo-ender
of the M demanded thet in eech iad "hunter" groups be organized consisting
of 8-10 of the most experienced pilots, and they were given the mission of
destroying enemy aircraft in the air by the "hunting" method.

In Septenber 191.2, the situation at Stalingrad remained very complicated.
The eneny aviation still had air superiority. however. this did not reduce
the combat enthusiasm of our pilots.

The 436th Seperete iap (co-ander. Hero of the Soviet Union. Haj I. l.
Kleshchev. military comissar. battalion couniesar Stel'meshchuk) fought
particularly successfully. From June through August 19‘2. the pilots of
the regiment near Stalingrad destroyed 90 enemy eircreft. In the middle
of September. the reginent. having received Yak-7 and Yak-9 aircraft. again
wee rebesed to Stalingrad and became part of the 16th M. The pilots of
the regiment always excelled in high flight training, combat mastery. maxi-
mum brevery and a constant desire for combat. Heny pilots hed downed enemy
aircraft to their score. Just during the period of the battle of Stalin-
grad, in the regiment Haj V. P. Bebkov (now Lt GenAvn and honored eilitery
pilot of the USSR). Capt A. Ya. Baklan and Sr Lte V. Ye. Alkidov and N. A.
Kernachenok became heroes of the Soviet Union. A majority of the pilots

in the regiment received high governmental decorations.

Here is how the combat of the pilots in the new iap was described by Hero
of the Soviet Union. Lt Gen Avn. A. P. Semenov. en i-ediete participant in
these events.

The fescist evietion in September was operating actively against the battle
formations of our troops. against the crossings over the Volga and the lines
of conunications on the left bank. The 43‘th iap was to counter this in
every possible way.

16
IO! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first cosbat sortie of three flights of the regisent on 16 Septeeber
was headed by the co-unist. the regimental co-ander Haj I. I. Kleehchev.
in approaching the conbat area. up to 30 Junkers and several elenents of
Mesaerscheitts were encountered. Kleehchev first with the entire force
mnde a surprise attack on the boebers. and than. having divided into two
groups. our fighters engaged the Hessereclaaitts and the Junkers. In the
first attack. Haj Kleshchev and Lt s. P. Dolguahin succeeded in each shoot-
ing down a bomber. Then the regieental contender and Capt I. A. Yakinov
set two other fascist fighters on fire.

0n the ease day pilots from this regiscnt participated in several other
dogfights. Fighting particularly well were Haj V. P. Babkov. 8r Lt H. A.
Gare: (soon thereafter he beceee a hero of the Soviet Union) and Lt s. P.
Konandenko. each of whoe increased his coabat score.

On 17 Septeeber. three flights under the «and of Capt I. I. labinakiy
took off to provide cover to our troops. having encountered a large group
of Ju-87 aircraft. they immediately attacked them, and lzbinskiy and
Karnachenok each shot down one bonber. Then two other Hesserschmitts were
destroyed and they were shot down by Sr Lt F. P. Prokopenko and Lt s. P.
Dolgushin. At the end of the dogfight. the German fighters succeeded in
shooting down one Yak which was piloted by the courageous wonsn pilot. Lt
K. Nechayev.

As a total on this day. the regiment carried out 65 sorties and destro: :3:
seven enemy aircraft. 0n the following days. the pilots of the 636th Regi-
ment also carried out a nunber of heroic feats.

As the combat operations of the 16th AA grew broader, its material and
technical support became more coeplex. Certain rear units had not yet
arrived, and the question had not been settled of transferring a nueber

of rear bodies froe the 8th AA. Horeover. eateriel was basically delivered
by motor transport through Kanyehin, and this required a great deal of time
and equipment. All of this created an overloading and even interruptions
in the supplying of the units. and at tines necessitated the resorting to
extreme neasures, including the delivery, for example, of rockets directly
from the center on air transports.

Under these coeplicated conditions. the con-and and political bodies had

to give a great deal of attention to the operation of the aviation rear
services. It was essential to organize precise operations of the MB and
bao. the repair shops. the airfield engineer battalions. and organize the
delivery of amnition and fuel, the repair of the aircraft and the supply-
ing of the crews with food. The location of the air regiments was partially
altered for the purpose of a more even lead on the rear bodies. clear con-
municationa were organized between the staff of the AA and the rear units.
and constant intonation was provided for the leadership of the rear services
on the required support for combat.

17
POP. onrcm. US! ONLY
ton onzcw. use our

Perty politicel work wee inteneitiod in the reer unite. I: wee booed upon
indoctrineting in the flight poreonnel of the neintenence unite e high die-
ciplino end feeling of Soviet petriotiee. end e roedinoee without regerd

to tine or even life to cerry out eny nieoion given by the co-end. The
Order of the no No 227 woe given to oech fighter. ﬂeeting. end eeeoebliee
were held et which they propegendieod the coebet feete of the flight pereon-
nel end expleined thet the heroic work of the rear eorvicoe wee the guerentee
for oonbet eucceeeee on tho front. The effective work of tho politicel
bodiee produced roeulte. heving teueed on even greeter petriotic upeurge
eeong tho eoldiere end officero.

In tho 357th boo. the Red Any-en. the cendideto perty eonhor V. I. Zeyt-
eev worked continuouely lot 9 deye in unloeding boebe tron o bergo. Sgte.
A. N. burko end P. 3. Meydenovich during on may eir reid on lekovhe
Stetion eew thet core with flour hed been eet efire (roe tho exploeion of
boebe. In rioting their livee. tho eon eet to unloeding tho core. Poreono
neerby hurried to help. The breve people rolled tho burning core ewey
froe e neerby e-nition dump end thereby prevented en exploeion. ‘l'he
lioutenente of tho 123d Motor 'rreneport Bettelion. A. Ye. Omit. wee lor-
telly wounded while delivering evietion fuel. The driver of the vehicle
Pvt Stedchenho wee eleo wounded. but he did not ebendon the vehicle end
delivered the fuel on tine.

Under the conditione of the intenee end very fluid coebet. when the eitue-
tion on the trout chenged frequently. eir reconneieeence eoeuned greet eig-
nificence. The eir ecoute hed to detect the love-eat of eneny troope elong
the roede before the front. diecovor troop concentretion ereee. follow the

oneny loneuvere on the bettlefield end obeervo the grouping of eneey evie-
‘10“.

Per-enent crewe iron the 283d ied end the 228th ehed were eeeigned for con-
ducting doytieo eir reconneieeence. Nighttieo roconneieeence wee cerried
out by the 970th lbep. Pereonnel fro- the 325th oree [deteched roconneie-
eence eir equedron] end the 60th Deteched bong-Renge Reconneieeence Air
Reginent [odrep of the sac] were reeponeible for operetionel eir reconneie-
eence end eeriel photogrephy of one-y dofeneive inetelletione. The crewe
eeeigned for eir reconneieeence. ee e rule, hed greet coebet experience eo
well no good tecticel end flight treining. The pilote Cept A. A. Yotreeov.
Sr Lte P. N. Nocolye end V. I. Shuin. end Jr Lt c. D. ‘rolterev becene the
boot ecoute in the 283d ied. end pilote Z. V. Zeeenyuk. I. P. Belyuk. Ye. D.
Hikheylik. V. A. Linerenluo end othere in the 220th ied.

Ae e reeult of the intenee coebet of the troope end evietion of tho Stelin-
gred end Southeeetern (route. during the firet helf of Septoebor, the cneey'e

etteepte to breek through to Stelingred without helting were repelled. But
the Nezie did not ebendon their plene. They were etill etrong end confi-
dent of their victory.

On 13 Septeebor. the 6th Cornea Any begen to etorn the city. end thie wee
eupported by hundrode of one-y eircreft fro- the eir.

18
'0! OFFICIAL USE OIL!
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The troops of the Southeastern Front were involved in difficult battles
and stopped the enusy drive with difficulty.

The fornations and units of the 16th M night and day attacked the group-
ing of Nazi troops in the region of Helaya and Bol'shaya Rossoshka. Aka-
tovka. Xuz'nichi, Konnyy Siding and hy-nok. The fighters fought the ens-y
aviation. and provided cover for the troops on the battlefield and for their
airfields. Prom 13 through 16 Septsnher. the units of the M made 605
sorties, including one-half for attacking en-y troops. Sons 21 snow
aircraft were shot down in dogfights.

In order to weaken the enemy drive on Stalingrad. the count! of the
Stalingrad Front decided on 19 Septenher to sake a counterthrust in the

direction of Gunrak and Gorodishche using forces of troops fro: the left
wing of the front.

The 16th M was to destroy the eneny weapons in front of the Pirst Guards
Any. to cover the grouping of its own troops. to neutralize ens-y aviation
at its airfielde and assist the troops taking the counterstrike. For sup-
'porting the troops. 118 fighters. 84 assault planes and 21 honhsrs were
used. and these were to carry out 630 sorties.

On 17 Septenher. the fighters of the M proviced cover for the troops and
conducted reconnaissance along the front 9f the First Guards Any. and also
flew out to intercept eneay aircraft. As a total during the day they made
180 sorties and in dogfights destroyed 15 eneay aircraft. having lost 7
Yak-l. The assault divisions readied the equip-ant. During the night the
crews of the 970th lhap neutralized the eneny aviation at the airfielda of
‘l‘uzov. Surovikino. Zryazhskiy and Ohlivskaya.

At dawn of 18 Septuher. units of the M attacked the airfields of Peskovetka
and (harsh and the eneny co-unications Junctions. and then provided air
cover for the battle fonatione of the troops of the l'irst Guards and 24th
ernies. they destroyed ensuy personnel and equipsent in the regions of the
Experinentel Station Sovkhoa. Konnyy Siding. Bol'shaya Rossoshka and
Podsohnoye Imozyaystvo [Auxiliary urn]. and also conducted air reconnais-
sance and flew out to intercept fascist aircraft.

As a total on 18 Scott-her. 363 sorties were ends. The crews of the air
army during the day knocked out 15 tanks. 109 notor vehicles. 21 artillery
pieces, they suppressed the fire of 3 batteries. and scattered and destroyed
several hundred Nazis. ln dogfights 26 enely aircraft were shot down and

2 were damaged. For us a total of 32 aircraft did not return fro. the ais-
sion; nany of the- node forced landings off of airfields.

On that day the pilots of the 688th ehap fought skillfully and unstintingly.
They received the very conplex nission of setting a snokescreen ahead of
our troops on open terrain. For this the group of assault plsnec had to
execute a dive directly ahead of the eneny troops in a zone of fierce sull-
erns. nachinegun and antiaircraft fire. The reginentel calender. co-unist

POI omci'ZL US! ONLY
I0! OHICIAL USE ONLY

Hsj K. V. Yarovoy. called for volunteers for this flight and hiualf led
the group of assault planes. The siesion was carried out. The e-oke-
screen helped the troops go over to the offensive and squeeze the fascists.
however. the airplane of Haj Yarovoy was hit and fell on ens-y territory.

Groups of assault planes froa the 696th and 783d ehap under the cover of
fighters froa the 220th iad destroyed the tanks and motorized infantry in
the region of the Bxperiasntal Station Sovkhos and Konnyy Siding. 0n the
first run. the "Ila" released rockets and then pursued the attack with
aschinegun and cannon fire. In the second run the crews flew in a circle
and for 20 ninutea attacked targets. in divebo-bing and firing on the ens-y
fron cannons and nachineguns. This cosbat was observed by the headquarters
representative, Gen Am G. K. Zhukov. who expressed gratitude to the crews
for excellent operations over the target. In the battle the pilots of the
69bth shap, Sr Lts h. I. Bobrov. I. A. Kovalev and 3. Ya. Greben'kov fro-
the 783 shep. particularly distinguished the-selves. The pilots of the

9$loth ehap. Capt A. I. baruyev and Sgt A. s. Cherezov. dropped bonbs and
released the rockets precisely on target.

In supporting the ground forces. successful actions were carried out by

the groups of assault planes fm the 210:“ and 313th shap under the cor-and
of Sr Lta Hero of the Soviet Union N. H. Karabulin and s. I. Vinnik. escorted
by pilots of the 283d iad.

In the region of the target. they encountered eneay fighters. A dogfight
broke out. While the Soviet fighters drove off the attacks of the nuaeri-
cally superior eneay, the assault planes destroyed the fascist artillery
and tanks in the region of the population point of hovsya Nsdeshda, in
blazing the trail for our infantry and aechanised units. During the attack
on the target. the pilot N. c. Nikonov was wounded in the an and leg and
his aircraft was struck. Nikonov. showing tenacity and courage, did not
leave the formation, he carried out all the attacks, he brought the aircraft
back to his airfield and landed safely. On 19 Septuaber, the pilot of the
956th shap, Sr Sgt A. P. Tinkov. behaved just as courageously.

But not only victories accompanied our pilots in the coabat. There were
also defeats. Thus. on 18 September, a group of six Ils fro. the 265th
shap being covered by five Yak-l from the 283d isd. in approaching the
target, net up with five Pie-109. Three of our fighters engaged the. in
combat, and two remained to cover the group of assault planes. At this
tine two other groups of Hesserechaitts appeared. They cut off the ele-
nent of cover fighters from our assault planes and as a result of contin-
uous attacks shown down two 11-! aircraft. The renaining four crews on
greatly daaaged aircraft crossed the front line with difficulty. The
reason for the failure was that the fighters. in engaging the groups of
eneay aircraft in coabat, scattered their forces. Also the nunsrical
superiority of the eneaty in this coebat was felt.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

In the Septenber bettlee. e nunber of other eeeentiel ehortconinge wee
diecovered in the orgenizetion of conbet ectivitiee. The young flight
pereonnel which errived fron the reeerve reginente end echoole wee not euf-
f iciently prepered for eeriel conbet. ‘l’hue. in the 220th ied, two-thirde
of the young pilute hed little experience in flying in elenente end groupe.
end were cereleee in conbet. At tinee pilote who hed little knowledge of
the eree of operetione engeged in conbet. without e teeting of their pilot-
ing techniquee. The fighters which flew out to cover the troope were not
elweye echeloned in eltitude. they were not divided into holding end ee-
eeult groupe. end in encountering enemy eircreft. ell the fightere engeged
e portion of the eneny forcee end overlooked the reminder.

The eeeeult pilote eleo nede nietehee. The extended flying for-etione
nede it difficult for the fightere to cover then end feciliteted the ec-
tione of the eneny pilote. Routine in eelecting the route end one et the
tergct nede it eeey for the eneny to orgenize eir defenee. It wee eleo e
mistake to leevo the terget one by one. without obeerving the flight forne-
tion. Frequently beceuee of the leek of forcee. for eecorting the eeeeult
plenee. fire groupe were nede up free different eir regi-ente. here the
effectiveneee of eecorting. ee e rule. wee lower then in eecorting by e
group which wee nunericelly eneller. but eeeigned fro- one eir unit.

A cereful enelyeie of the detected ehortconinge on the eteffe end e criticel
review of then in the flight unite of the erny enriched the conbet experience
of the evietore. they eided in working out new tecticel proceduree. they
encoureged the creetive thought of the co-endere end forced the ebendoning
of routine in the conbet nethode.

0n 18-19 Septenher. in eupporting the conbet of the firet Cuerde end 2m.
erniee. the 16th AA wee uneble to connletely cerry out the given nieeione.
Here the leck of forcee end the poor txeining of the young flight pereonnel
which hed no experience in fighting ene-y evietion could be felt.

Along with thie. the experienced pilote of the 436th iep in thie difficult
eituetion continued to etrike the enemy. On 18 Septuber. the reginent with
30 eircrnft node 73 eortiee end deetroyed l9 eneny eircreft in dogfighte.

The pilote of the sold iep eleo fought eucceeefully. A flight coneieting
of the reginentel contender Mej V. I. Neneehev. the reginentel nevigetor

Me] A. A. Strekhov end Sr Lt A. A. ﬂuchenko ehot down four ene-y eircreft
in dogfighte.

however. the victoriee were won et e deer price. Thue. on 18 September the
636th iep loet eeverel of ite conredee. including Sr Lt V. A. HiIuoyen. In
one of the dogfighte. the ouetending pilot. the «under of the 231th iep.
Haj A. e. leeyev, wee wounded end grounded.

21
'03 OFFICIAL US! OIL!
'0! OFFICIAL 088 MY

On 19 Septeeber. two fighter pilote iron the M. loyel to their eilitery

duty. in endeevoring to echieve the decieive deetruction of the one-y. cer-
ried out eir re-inge. Thie wee how it wee.

Six felt-l eircreft fro- the 203d ied. in covering their troope. enuged e
nueericelly euperior group of Ger-en lie-109 fightere ‘ n codet. I: the
couree of the bettle. the pilot V. N. Chenekiy. heving ueed up hie euuni-
tion. reamed e Ger-en eircreft. with hie left wing he etruch one of the
feeciet fightere end he hieeelf beiled out. Thie dering etteck by the
Soviet pilot etunned the eneey end the Neeie withdrew fro- bettle. Pilot
Chenekiy lended eefely on our territory end returned to hie unit.

A group of pilote free the 29let iep. in cerrying out the eieeion of pro-
viding cover for their troope. engeged eneey fightere in coebet. In thie
coebet. the regimtel eilitery co-ieeer, bettelion couieeer. L. I. linov.
deetroyed one lie-110 by firing hie weepone. end e eecond by rming. efter
which he lended the deeeged eircreft eefely on our territory. Mn: 1.. f.

Binov. ee the «under of the 512th iep. wee killed in e dogfight on
13 Jenuery 1963.

On 19 September. the M continued to provide eir cover end eupport the
troope fighting egeinet the eneey on the epproechee to Stelingred. in et-
tecking eneny pereonnel. tenke end ertillery in the regione of the Experi-
nentel Stetion. the Bxperinentel Field Sovhhoz end Konnyy Siding. Ae e
totel 230 eortiee were node. 30 enemy eircreft were ehot down in 15 dog-
fighte. including 15 by pilote of the 636th iep which loet one Yell-7. 0n
the ground on thie dey e good deel of eneey nilitery equip-ent wee deetroyed.

The eir operetione eoeewhet eeeed the eituetion of our troope but the fierce
bettlee eround the welle of Stelingred did not leeeen. The eir unite end
fornetione of the M during theee deye were under greet etreee. The unite
cerried out two-three eortiee per dey. end individuel pilote eede four-five
eortiee under the conditione of fierce reeietence froe the eneny fighter
evietion end entieircreft ertillery.

in order to eucceeefully croee the curtain of eneey fightere end eir defenee
weeponn ee well ee to effect oneny troope froe the eir for en extended tine.
the eeeeult plenee eede Ieinly eechcloned etrikee in groupe of eta-eight
eircreft. The lle epproeched the tergete et eltitudee of 1.100-900 eetere.
The etteclt on the terget wee cerried out by diving upon e eignel fro. the
lender or independently. depending upon the neture of the terget end ite
eize. lnitielly the terget wee fired on with rockete with eubeequent boeb-
ing with eingle boebe or boebe in eeriee. Proe e height of eround ‘00 eetere.
the crews opened eechinegun end cennon fire celculeting to pull out of the
dive et en eltitude of 50 notere. Then the eeeeult plenee eede e eecond peee
for ettecking the terget. forming e cloeed circle end thue continuing to
etteck the terget for 18-20 Iinutee.

22
'0! 0016“]. 033 0'"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Ae a rule. the fightere eecorted the eeeeult plenee to the target end

back. It became a practice to have the prelieinery appearance (10-20
einutee ahead of tile) of a group of four-eix fightere in the area of

the forthcoeing operetione of the eueult plenee for the purpoee of
"clearing" the air of ener eircreft and thereby eupport the eeeeult plenee.

[n the last 10 deye of Septee‘aer. our aviation ee before had to operate

in an extreeely difficult eituetion. ‘l'he Nerie were frenticelly driving
toward the Volga end their evietion wee etill euperior in the eir. Pierce
dogfighte occurred over Stelingred. The eortiee of our pilote followed
one after the other. Bach eortie. at n rule. inw.lved e dogfight. The
loeeee in pilote end eircreft were high on both aidee. In line with thie
eeverel of our eir regieente received new pereonnel.

What teneion and courage were required from our pilote during theee un-
forgettable deye cen be Judged free the reeulte of eeverel dogfighte con-
ducted by the fightere of Just the ‘Mth iep.

On 20 Septeeber. eeven Yelte heeded by llero of the Soviet Union. Hej V. P.
Bebkov. attacked a group of ene-y boebere end deetroyed four aircraft. Of
these two were ehot down by Haj Debhov end one each by Sr Lte P. P. Prohopen-
Ito end V. A. Luteltiy (now Hej Gen An end hero of the Soviet Union).

On 21 September. e group of 12 fightere under the col-end of Cept A. I.
Yehinov encountered 15 Ju-87 under the cover of 10 fie-109. Our pilote de-
cisively ettecked the eneey. end it loet eeven eircreft which were deetroyed
by the pilote A. l. Yeti-ow. S. P. Dolguehin. A. Ye. beltlen. A. D. Aniekin
end V. l. Cerenin.

On 22 Septeeber. eix fightere heeded by Capt l. l. lrbinekiy intercepted
German hoebere on the epproech to the front line end forced then to drop
their boebe on Ger-non troope. In e heated engagement. the enemy lost three
aircraft. They were ehut down by pilote N. A. Kernechenok. H. A. Cere-
end A. P. Shiehhin. 0n thet dey Lt ll. A. Kernechenoh we: killed. ‘l'o hie
score were 31.9 conbet eortiee end eore then 10 enemy eircreft ehot down.

The courageous ece wee poethueouely awarded the title of hero of the Soviet
Union. '

On 23 Scptcebcr. two flighte of Veke under the contend of Cept I. P. Sterodub
engaged 18 enemy bonbere and 12 fightere. The battle wee fierce. Pive.
Cchn uircreft were ehot down by the piloto V. A. Lutekiy. S. P. Konndenluo.
A. G. Kotov end I. P. Sterodub. Ileving ehot down e Pleeeerecheitt end ueed
up all hie e-unition. Cept Sterodub and e Junkere with hie fighter. Both
eircraf t exploded in the air iron the collieion.

During theee deye. the one-y fightere in e dogfight eet fire to the air-
craft of the co-ender of the 636th iep, hero of the Soviet Union Hej I. I.
Kleehchev. It wee ilpoeeible to put out the fie-ea. Kleehchev beiled out
and wee cent to the hoepitel.

23
708 ORIGIN. US! MY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

Over the period free 16 Septenber through 2 October. the pilots of the
reginent carried out ell combat sortias, they participated in 68 do. -
fighte. and shot down 82 Ger-en aircraft.

“y the end of Septuber. raneining in the 436th iap was only around one-
rhird of the pilots and the conbat aircraft. The personnel was excessively
fatigued and the aircraft required najor overhauls. And at the beginning
of October. the regieent in turn was shifted to the rear for bringing up
to scale and full strength.

The reginent's co-ander. Haj l. l. Kleahchav did not live until our vic-
tory. Late in the autum of 1942. ha perished tragically in ferrying an
aircraft under difficult weather conditions.

In the course of the Battle of Stalingrad. new nethods of coebat use and
tactical procedures of our aviation arose and were worked out. Fighter
anbushes possessed a high combat effectivenees in fighting against eneuy
aviation. The organization of the fighter ushushes was directed parson-
ally by the «under of the AA. Gen S. l. Rudenlw. In one of his orders.
he prohibited the crews used in the anbush to intercept ens-y fighters.
Only enesy bosbers and scouts were to be destroyed.

The fighter aebuehes were widely used in the any. and proved fully effec-
tive in subsequent operations. The crews always endeavored to intercept
the eneey aircraft fro. the asbush and to decisively destroying then. re-
sorting to rain when necessary.

Thus. on 16 Septeeber. the young pilot of the 237th iap. I. H. Chubarev.
flew out on a Yak-l from an «bush to intercept a I'll-189 reconnaissance
plane which at an altitude of LOGO-1.200 esters was flying over our air-
field and hiding in the clouds. With the aid of radio guidance fro. the
ground. Chu-barev soon spotted the enemy and began to close with it. At

a range of 150-200 neters the may gunner opened fire against Chmbarev'e
aircraft. Our pilot approached fros behind in a blind spot. he reached the
enemy aircraft. ra-ed it free below and knocked it down. Chunharev was
wounded in the head. but regardless of thin. landed his aircraft in our
territory. On 19 Septenber Chunbarev wee accepted as a candidate party nee-
ber and on the sense day shot down another fencist aircraft. For this he
received the Order of the Red Banner_and was given the rank of lime.

On 27 September on the approaches to Stalingrad (the Talovki region). a
German Oornier reconnaissance plane was spotted. “the flight co-snder of
the leth iap. the Keno-cl endear Lt V. Ye. Pyatov. took off to intercept
it from an anbush. Having used up his anunition. with the wing of his
aircraft he struck the tail assesbly of the reconnaissance plane. Seeing
that the Oornier was continuing to fly. the pilot Iede another r- and with
the propeller cut off the stabilizer slong with the elevator. The one-y
reconnaissance plane dove towsrd the earth and caught fire. The hero
pilot hineelf. having shown an angle of self-sacrifice. landed safely
at his airfield. For this feat the pilot V. Ye. Pyetov was awarded the
Order of the Red Banner.

26
FOR OFFICIAL 088 MY
”I OPHCIAI. I)" ONLY

In Septaebar. the acutoneaa of the ground and air aituation deaanded
around-the-clock operationa againet the enaoy. nut in the AA at that
tine there waa Juat the 970th night boaber air regieent (nbap) with Po-Z
eirciaft. 'i'hla wee not a .ough. An i-ediata need aroae to train the
crewe of the aaeault planea for nighttiea oparatione. Their ability to
attack the eneey at night eubeequantly played a eejor role.

By the end of Septedu ‘. the arey included the 27let night bomber air
divieion (nbad) (co-and". Col H. Rh. norieenko. ailitary co-iaaar,
rcgieental couiaaar V. 2. Gul'tyayev. and chief of ataff. Col 1. Ye.
Pel'daherow). and thie had the 702d. 901::t. 970th. 372d and 716th (in

Noveeber. the laat two were placed in the reaervea) air regilente with
90.2 aircraft.

The counteretrikee by the troope of the Stalingrad and Southeeatern fronta
on the approachee to Stalingrad in Septuber 1962 were of very great eig-
nificnnce for defending the city. The fliere of the 16th and adjacent
8th AA and the air dafenae aviation under extruely difficult conditione
of the air eituation provided eignificant aupport to the troope on the
battlefield. and alao drove off eneey air raida on the city.

in term of the nuabar of dogfighta and deatroyad anaey aircraft. the
237th iap further diatinguiahad itaelf. lta pilote carried out No dog-
fight: and ahot down 28 faaciat aircraft. The regieantal «under. the
conuniat Haj A. B. laayev. in eating aaveral aortiea per day. eerved an
an example of courage. valor and flying akill for the peraonnel. Alao
fighting excellently were the pilote of thie regiaent: Sr l.t l. P. lalyuk.
Lt Kolyuchnik. Sr Sgta A. I. Denieov, N. l. Kryuchhov. V. A. Linarenko.

Ya. I). Hikhaylik. A. A. Poloaenko. l. H. Chuebarev. G. V. Sheratnav. and
othera.

Bxenplea of dogfighting ware eat by the pilote of the 867th iap. the coe-
muniet and flight coriander Iogenov and the Koeeoeol eenber. Sgt A. P.
Vnkule. and in the 63d iap. by Sr Lta Ch. K. bendelieni and L. I. Ioriaov.
and Sgt Seirnov. The favorite dogfight procedure of the pilot Ch. K.
Bendcliani wee a rapid frontal attack and thie the Oar-en pilote avoided
in every poeeible way.

During the firat eonth of operationa of the l6th AA. the pilote eede 5.225
combat eortiee. of which 992 were for boding and atrafing the any troope
and eirfielda. 2.662 were for covering the troope of the front. the air-
fielde. the town of Kelyehin and intercepting eneny aircraft. 1.336 for
eacorting aviation. and 358 for air reconnaieaanca. In the 386 dogfighta
carried out. the Soviet pilote ahot down 290 faeciet aircraft. Horeover.
6 eircraft were deatroyed and «la-aged on the airfielde. aa well aa around
600 tnnko and armored vehiclea. 1.398 notor vehiclea and tank truche. 183

gone and ouch other military equipment. and eevaral thoueand ene-y aoldiera
were knocked out.

25
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI omcw. US! ONLY

The M alao auffered loaaea in the fierce battlee around Stalingrad. The
pilota of the 220th iad in'Septenbar ehot down 93 eneny aircraft but loat
91; here ‘8 pilote were killed and 16 wounded. The pilota of the 283d iad
deetroyed 10$ eneny aircraft. but the battle loaaeo were 66 aircraft (‘3
percent of the available) and 35 crew aenbera (note than 30 percent). The
higheat loeaee in Septuber were euffered by the eaaault pilota with one
conbat loaa per 20 aortiea.

0n 1 October. the fighting atrength of the 16th M included 13 night bo-b-
era. 93 aaaault planea. 120 fightera and 6 reconnaiaoance planea. a total
of 232 aircraft. in tern. of the nuaber of aircraft ita fighting atrength
had not dininiahed. All the loaaea ha been conpletely replaced by the
heroic efforta of the Soviet people who had conpleted ahifting all the ne-
tionnl econonic aectora to aupporting the needa of the front.

M of 28 September. by a directive froa headquartera. the Stalingrad Front
wae reorganized and began to be called the Don Front. and the Southeaatern
Front becale the Stalingrad front. Lt Gen X. K. Rokoaaovakiy waa appointed
the «under of the Don Front.

in October 1962. the 16th M aupported the particular operationa and counter.
atrikea of the combined arne araiea. It wee eeaential to wear down the

eneny and diatrect ita forcee fron the nain aectorn. One each particular
operation under the code nane of "Don" waa carried out by an aaaault group

of the Don Front in the Iiddle of October. In thia operation the M carried
out the following aieaiona: lt coabated enemy aviation. it deatroyed eneny
troope ahead of the front. it aided the troope of the 2m. and 66th arniee

in piercing the eneay defenaea. it carried out air reconnaieaance and de-
otroyed the croaeinga over the Don.

The aucceaaful coabating of may aviation can be eeen fro. the dogfighte
of 16 October. when the fightera of just the 220th iad ahot down nine and
hit four faaciet eircraft. The victora of theee engageaenta were the co.-
nuaiata and Konaolnol unbere Lt V. I. lvanov (he ahot down two Pie-109). Sgt
Logachev. the battalion coniaaar l. H. Hanykin. Capta I. P. Motornyy and

2. V. Seaenyuk. Sr Lta V. N. Hahrov and P. P. Ratnikov. and Jr Lta Hartynov
and I]. H. Rivltin.

The 27lat nbad during two nighta (l7 and 18 October) by bo-bing atrikea de-
atroyed eneny peraonnel and equip-eat ahead of the front of the Z‘th and
66th arniea. aa well an eneuv aircraft at the airfield of lol'ahaya Roaaoahke.

During the day operatione againat enely troope were carried out by aeaault
planea froe the 228th and 29lat ahed under the cover of fightere fro- the
220th and 233d iad. By concentrated atrikea the eeaault planea aided the
piercing of the eneny defenaea. In aubaequent aortiea they prevented the
cnetay from bringing up reeervea fro. deep within the defenaea. here the
group of aeaeult planea headed by the «murder of the 263d ahap. Haj A. c.
Nakonechnihov. fought very auccaaafully. It attacked the artillery in poai-
tiona in the area of the Expert-ante]. field Sovkhoz and Drevniy Val Siding.
The aeaeult planea lmocked out four batteriea and a large number of aoldiera.

MI nn'nen neat III-Ian
FOR OHICIAL 08! ONLY

During the day of 20 October. a group of six Yal-l from the 520th iep. under
the contend of Haj D. I. Rodin. in covering troops in the region of Iaike
Konneya. encountered at an altitude of 2.000 netera. three groups of six-
eight bombers in each under the cover of four lie-109. Lt N. V. Kheritonov
in an element with Sgt V. S. Ziberov attacked four Haeeerschnitte. and four
Yaks attacked the first group of Ju-87. The enemy boebera dove and heeded
southwest. Two tie-109 followed thee. During this tine the group of Ju-88
was preparing for boebing. Rodin'a aleeent attacked end shot down the leader
of this group. Capt A. A. Yefreeov in the eleeent with Sgt H. H. Reenikov
attacked the second Ju-88 end shot it down. The plans of the many to boeb
our troops were thwarted.

On that day the fightere of the 512th iap heeded by squadron coauender Sr Lt.
P. l’. Ratnikov fought heroically. A group of Yaka engaged 12 Meeeerechnitte
in coebat in the region of Razgulyeyevha. As a result our f ightere ehot
down six eneny aircraft and had no loeaea themselves. Victories were won

by the pilots Capt 2. V. Senenyuk. Sr Lta V. I. Ivanov. V. N. Hekerov. 0. C.
thkcyev and C. s. Dybenko. In the 237th iep. Sr Lt I. 1?. Balyuk. 8r Sgte

V. A. Linarenko. Ya. D. Hikhaylik. A. A. Poioaenko. 6. V. Sheratnev and
others fought excellently. Subsequently the pilots I. P. Balyuk and Va. 0.
Hikheylik were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Each of then
node more than 300 combat aortiea and had 17-20 victories in air engegenenta.

0n the night of 21 October. the 27lat nbed with 50 aircraft destroyed enemy
troop concentrations in the region of Bxparineotal Pield Sovkhoe. Sukhaya
Rechetkn Pnbenbent. Orlovke end Gorodiehche. The division carried out

235 eortiee.

During 20 and 21 October. the pilots of the army eede 626 coebat aorites.

On 21 October the pilots of the $l2th iep were shaken by the loss in an un-
equel dogfight of the regimental eilitary eo-iaaar. the for-er liner of the
Donets Basin. the excellent pilot, the battalion conniaeer I. H. Heeykin.

In speaking at the funeral neeting. Capt I. P. Ibtornyy said:

"I have learned from the co-ieear how to destroy the eneey. and in the
future I will attack the feecieta ae my co-iaaar did."

In the reeolution of the eeeting. the evietore stated: "The personal ex-
enple of the eilitary couiaeer will serve for us as an axe-pie of how we
eust love our motherland. how we lust protect our happiness. freedoe and
independence. we vow to avenge the blood-thirsty fascist bandite for our
comieser."

0n the same day, the couander of the 237th iap. Haj N. D. Hordvinov. was
killed in e dogfight. lie was repleced by Haj Ye. P. Hel'nikov.

On 23 October. the co-ander of the 16th AA. in observing the attache by
the assault planea on the battlefield fro- the co-and post of the 66th
Arey. noted the bold actions of the group of pilots from the 69£th ahap
headed by Capt C. P. Koatendi. The assault planes were attacking targets

27
P0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

in the region of Konnyy Siding. tho Experieontal Field Sovhhoe and Sukheya
Nechotke khanbont. and deatroyed 7 tenhe and 10 notor vehicleo. 0f the

piloto in the group. 8r Lt P. l. Seotankin particularly diotinguiohod hin-
eolf. The group norited the gratitude of the conender of the 66th Amy.

Lt Con A. s. Zhedov.

On 22 and 23 October. difficult weather conditiono liaitod air operationo.
The night aviation eade a total of 77 oortioa. attacking one-y troopo in
tho region of the Bxporinontal Field Sovkhoe where a food depot wee de-
etroyed end which vao very ooeentiel for the Neria even at that tine. Dur-
ing the day the aviation carried out 132 oortieo over the 2 daye to provide
cover end oupport for the troopo.

0n the night of 26 October. 19 ll-l aircraft end 10 Po-Z aircraft neutralized
one-y troopo 20-30 he to the northvoot of Stalingrad.

0n 25-26 October. the aeeeult planoo continued oporatione in the oane re-
giono. Nare Lt Col N. N. chihhalonko. Sr Lto N. I. Bohrov. 8. Yo. Gum'-
kov. Nero of the Soviet union N. N. Karehulin. A. I. Kadoatoav. Yu. N. thov,

P. I. Snotenkin and Lte-I. P. Bibiohov and N. l. Lunev diatinguiohed thea-
eelvea.

The equedron co-andor of the 688th ahep. Anatoliy lvenovich Kadoetoov.
particularly otood out in hie holdneoo end flying eltillo. No vae horn in
1918. Ao a youth he worked ae a nechenic at a machine building plant in
Nytiohchi. and at the ease tine otudied at an air club. Since hie 20'o he
had been in ailitary aviation. No coepletod the Bugol'o Plying School end
rmined there ea en inotructor pilot. he began hio conbet ectivity in
Nave-her lS‘l on the Kalinin Front where he proved to he an intrepid aeaault
plane pilot. In the defenoo of Stalingrad ll7 tineo he led the piloto to
attack Nari troopo and eirfioldo; the round hao entruotad the loot diffi-
cult eieoiono to hie. For the heroioa: and courage ehovn in the bettlao in
Stalingrad, he vao awarded the Ordora of the Red Banner and the Patriotic
liar Second Degree. he joined the mm in 1943.

Capt A. l. Kadoatoev died heroically on 21 February 19“. Bio aircraft vae
hit by an essay antiaircraft ohell. The pilot ainod hio burning 11-2 into
the nidot of the feociat troopo. In April 19“, he vao poothu-ouely averded
the title of Nero of the Soviet Union. and in noeory of his. the village of
podhhvatilovlta in Nirhnelonovokiy Rayon in Poneenokeya Oblaat. where he wee
born. by the vkaoe of the Preoidiu- of the RSPSR Suprene Soviet woo tone-ed
the village of Kadoatoevo. During the var A. l. Kadoatoev node 280 coﬂat
aortieo. To hio co-het ocore were 65 deatroyed tenha. 360 notor vehiclee.
16 aircraft burned up on the ground. and 6 ehot down in air coehat.

Nio co-redco-in-aran Sr Lt Yu. N. thov and Lt l. I. Libiehav eleo died the
death of herooe in hattleo for the motherland and vote awarded the Gold Star
and the Order of Lenin pootht-ouoly. Yu. N. ZyIuov received hie in July 19“

(he node 175 coder ooritoo). and l. I. Bibiahov in Auguot 1963 (he uade Ml
coebat oortioe).

28
M onxcuu. 088 OILY
M ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

The certain advance of our troops in the Don Operation forced the eneny to
haul the offensive battles in the outskirts of Stalingrad and to shift sig-

nificant forces of their aviation for fighting against the troops and avia-
tion of tho Don Front.

The foreations of the 16th M in October lads 5.718 coebat sorties. A large
portion of than was ads to boeb and atrafe ens-y troops.

In the 164 dogfighta carried out the Soviet pilots shot down 86 eneey air-

craft and destroyed 31 aircraft at airfielda. Our conbat losses were 61
aircraft.

The 812th iap (co-under Haj bohhin) fought well in October. In the 29
dogfights. the pilots of this regieent shot down 18 fascist aircraft. In
the 233d ied. Capt A. A. Yefrenov (520th iap). 8r Lt Verenayenho (812th iap).
and Jr Lt G. D. Tokarev (563d iap) particularly distinguished themselves.

in the 220th iad. Capta 2. V. Senenyult and i. P. Hotornyy, battalion coe-
niasers 1.. I. Binov and I. H. Hawkin. and Sr Lta 1.. l. Iorisov. c. s.
Dubenolt end V. N. Melterov were rightly celled the beat pilots.

The October air battles showed that our pilots had gradually begun to seize
the initiative fro: the aneay and ears and sore often the attacks of the

Red Star fighters ended in victory. And this was natural. The loral quali-
ties of the Soviet pilots were i-eaeurebly higher then the fascists. Even
in inferior nunbers. our pilots courageously resisted the pressure of eneey
aviation. The quantitative inequality in the air was coapaneated for by the
continuously increasing art of carrying out aerial coebat. by the high con-
bat tension and by the constant search for new eethoda of countering enemy
aviation. And finally, the new Soviet aircraft for my indicators were
better than the eneny aircraft. The co-ender of the 283d iad. Col V. A.
Kiteyev, at the end of September. reported to the co-ander of the air any:
"Our aircraft. the light Yel-l. not only is not inferior to the ens-y fight-
ers. but greatly surpasses th- in altitude up to 2.500 eaters both in hori-
zontal and vertical mneuvera."

And our eaaault plane the 11-2 also possessed outstanding coebat qualities.
It could attach any tergote and was little vulnerable to ens-y fire. ror
strengthening the defense capability egainet attack by eneey fighters. upon
the initiative of pilots fro. the 228th shed. on the 11-2 aircraft. the
engineers and technicians froa the air regi-anta built cockpits for air
gunners and installed aachine guns. At first aechanica and other air ape-
cialiats flew the niaaione. At the beginning of Nov-bar 1962. industry
began to deliver two-set 11-2 aircraft to the front. The losses of assault
planes i-edietely began to decline noticeably.

Over the 2 months of coebat activity, the aviators of the M learned how
to organize and conduct air reconnaissance. they worked out the eethoda

29
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY

of oporotione under nighttino conditiono. from an anbuoh and fro. otoging
eirfioldo. and they neotored air "hunting" in groupo and by einglo crave.
The flight poreonnol of the fighter unite eaatorod tho tactico of air cor
bot. Control of the fightora vee elao innroved.

The fightoro were guided to the air enemy by radio fro: a co-ond poet where
the divioion co-endor veo located. he gave the couand to take off in clear
text and than controlled oonbet.

The cover for the troopo of the front ogeinet the air oneny in October began
to be organized conaidoring the particular faeturoo of the air oituation.
The fightora covering important inotallationo were relieved in tho oir.

With each poooing day. tho non of tho AA acquired conbat experience. and

the akille of tho flight poroonnol were honed. Now. after tho ouccaeoful
operationo in Septuber and October. tho co-and of tho any and tho air
foreationo began to work for oaeeing tho oir efforta and Ialting concentrated
otrikoo egainot tho one-y.

The oporationo of 28 October can eerve ea an exonple of thie. when tho troops
of tho front liberotod Kletokeyo Station. on inportant one-y atrcngpoint.
The enemy driven out of Klatokayo hegen to bring up roaarvea and van pro-
pering for a countarottack. Por attacking tho onany raoorveo the conander
of tho AA oeoigned 92 eoeault plonao and 90 fightoro froe four divioiono.

Ao a reoult of tho unexpectedly node concentrated etrilte ageinat tho Neria.
their plan wee thwarted. The eeoeult plenoe deotroyod a large nunber of
tanks. armored and tranaport behicloe. ortillery guno and nortero. The trnopa
of the front dug in firnly on tho captured linee. 0n tho eaaa day tho coe-
nend of the coebined-er-a formations var-1y thanked tho fliore of tho AA

for outstanding coordination end reliable aupport.

Ae o reault of tho continuouo improvement in tactica and the growth of the
skill of our flight paraonnal. the faacieto began to utter oignificant looaao.
and their aviation vaa tengibly loeing superiority in the air.

At the end of October 1962. Maj Gen Av Hikheil Hokerovich Kooylth vaa appointed
the chief of otoff of the 16th AA. The non of e peaoent. he won born in 1903
in Voronezhokaya Obleot. At the age of 15 he volunteered for the Red Amy.
and a year later Joined the EXPO»). He not an active participant in the
Civil Her. Iron 1932, he continued oarving in eteff and cos-and pooltione

in the aviation. Prior to hie appointment to the 16th AA. he had been the
chief of otaff of the air force of the For Baatarn Pront. In April 190.

H. H. Koeykh voa proeotod to the pooition of deputy comander of the AA.

After the war. N. H. Kooykh in sequence woo the chief of etaff and the air
contender of a diatrict. the nilitary ndvioor to the Poople'o Republic of
China. and the inepector general of the Air force. At proaont. Lt Gen Avn
H. M. Koaykh ia retired.

30
'08 OHICIAI. 08! our
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

Operations of the Air Arey During'the Counteroffensive

The Soviet col-end which was directing the heroic defense of Stalingrad even
during the nest critical periods of the unprecedented battle was preparing
for a counteroffensive.

As s result of the snot-nous creative work carried out by headquarters and
the nilitery councils of the fronts. a plan was coepilsd for a strategic
operation which was codenaned Uran [Uranus] which was narkad by the deci-
siveness of sins, boldness of concept end enornous scope. The counter-
offensive was to be developed on a too-1c; front, and should grow into a
strategic operation of three fronts. the Southwestern. Don end Stalingred.
Strong pincer strikes were to be nade. the enessy defenses were to be broken

on the flanks of the bssic ensey grouping. end it was to be surrounded end
crushed.

The troops of the Don Front consisting of the 65th. 24th end 66th erIies
were to nake two strikes: the first free the region of Kletshaya to the
southeast end the second from the region of lachelinshsye toward Vertyachiy
for the purpose of cutting off the enely on the defensive in the stall bend
of the Don fron its grouping in the region of 8telingrad. The actions of the
troops of the front were to be supported by the 16th M.

The nest important conditions for the successful operations of the M in
the forthconing operation were the high conhat and political preparation

of the personnel and the supplying of the any with all the eaterial and
technical leans.

The staff of the 16th M carefully planned the air operations in the coun-
teroffensive. it proeptly gave nissions to executors. it organised coordina-
tion with the ground forces. it organized control over the coebat readiness
of the troops and the co-and of the air fornations, and carried out a nun-
ber of other nsasures related to preparations for the operation.

For the purposes of strengthening political works-neg the personnel of the
M in line with the pending counteroffensive. the entire political apparatus
was sent into the units. The prinsry party and Keno-o1 organizations and
the array press strengthened the propagandising of the conbat experience of
the best eir fighters. and they explained to the men the appeal of the front
military council and the orders of the any co-ander. Along the technical
personnel which was readying the aircraft and weapons for the coebat sorties.
a socialist competition was widely developed to reduce the tines for ready-
ing the conbst aircraft and repairing the fleet.

work was intensified in inducting nilitery aviators into the ranks of the
party and Konsonol. Many achieved the high honor of going into battle as
e comnist. The any political workers orgenired neetings between the

fighters and the rear workers. and in the units they discussed the orders
of the Soviet people to the defenders of the notherland.

31
P03 OFFICIAL 08! our
M OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

In preparing for the counteroffonoivo. one of the aain concorno for the
rear air aorviceo woo the creation of otockpiloa of fuel and a-unition.
For transporting then. the arny'a notor tranoport had to work at a anxi-
nun pitch. Many drivera did not leave their vehicloo for wake.

The entire poraonnel of the any repair facilitioa aa well ao opocial bri-
gadee of onginoora and tochniciana fron the unite were onloyod in rebuild-
ing aircraft that were out of co-iooion. In the unite thie work wee or-
ganized around-tho-clock. "All forcee and noana to repair the aircraft!"
Thin won the lotto under which tho Koaaoaol and party nootinga were held.

The fighting otrength of tho 16th M in October-Novuenber 1962 incroaood
ooeowhat and boom atronger. The any woo atrengthonod priaarily due to
the incroaao in tho nunbor of aircraft in the fighter and aaaault air ragi-
aonta. aa theoa had been converted to new eotabliohaanta and inatead of two
aquadrona there were three. Bach rogiaent waa to ha'vo 32 aircraft inatead
of 20. and in each flight there were two ole-onto inetoad of three aircraft.

Thio reorganization node tho rogiaenta acre viable and aharply incraaoed
their combat capabilitioo.

During thia tiae tho M received ocoroa of new Yak-1 and Yak-7 aircraft
at wall at tho Laos-3 with a 37-- cannon. Thia atrangthaned our fighter
aviation. By 19 Nov-bar the arty had 362 aircraft (including 259 in work-
ing order), with 103 aaeault planeo. 125 fightera. 93 night bo-bera. 7
reconnaiaaanco planoa and lb liaiaon planea.

1.: cm and of Noveaber. the 16th M received the n Bomber Air Corpo (at)
under the «mend of Maj Gen Avn I. L. Turkal'. The air corpe conoietod of
two bonber air diviaiona (bad) with Fez aircraft: the 223d under the con-
nand of Col 1.. N. Yucayov and the 285th headed by lioro of the Soviet Union.
Col V. A. Sandalov. The corpa had l22 aircraft in flying condition.

0n the baaia of the 325th orae. the 16th odrap wan organized with Po-Z air-
craft (co-andor Haj D. s. Sheretyuk, deputy co-andor for political affaira.
Haj H. N. xorolov).

At a total by the otart of the counteroffenoiva. the Southwootern. Don and
Stalingrad fronta had 1,350 flying codaat aircraft. 0f thia under. 308
(Po-2. 8-5 and S!) were night bonbora. The overall leaderahip for all the
air forcoe wao ontruated by lleadquartero to the co-andor of the Red Arly
Air Force, Col con Avn A. A. Novikov. who with a anall oparatione group wae
in tho Stalingrad area. In addition to the tactical aviation. certain long-
range air for-ationa were also involved in the counteroffonaive.

The Goran co-and in the Stalingrad aector by that tile had over 1,200
coabat aircraft. The one-y aviation had eonewhet reduced ita activitioa.
Thia wae explained by the high codat loaaea and the difficult weather con-
ditiona. by the incroaeed rcoiatance fron Soviet aviation and antiaircraft
weapono. on wall ao by the enuy'o fuel ahortago cauoed by aupply difficul-
tioo. Hevertheleaa the enemy aviation did not halt air reconnaioaanco and

32
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

the boebing of the battle foraetions of our troops defending Stalingrad.
the crossings over the Volga and certain rear installations.

l-‘or this reason. in preparing for the counteroffensive a great deal of
attention was given to countering ens-y aviation. This was carried out
according to a plan worked out by the any staff. both by destroying
enemy aircraft in dogfights as well as at the airfields.

By the start of November. in consecration of the 25th anniversary of

Great October. the assault planes and fighters from the 16th Miusde a
number of strikes against six close enemy airfields. For this 1.8 night
crews were assigned free the 228th shad. For covering the assault planes
and for sealing off the aneey airfields. fighters were assigned free the
220th isd. The assault planes fro: the 291st shad attacked in a single
group the Bol'shsya Rossoshka Airfield. and the cover was provided by the
283d lad. All the strikes were nade in the predawn darkness and were marked
by great effectiveness. Thus. on 2 Novenber. at Horozovsk Airfield the
pilots from the groups of Capt G. I. Kopayev and Sr Lt H. I. Bobrov destroyed
llo fascist aircraft.

Air reconnaissance also assumed great significance. This was carried out
by all the branches of aviation. In the sector of the slain strike of the
troops of the front. the eneny defenses were photographed to their entire
depth. The air scouts disclosed the system of field works and the grouping
of eneey troops. and this made it possible to determine the weak points in
the defenses and then take the strongest strikes against thee.

Along with carrying out the lissions of coebatting eneny aviation and air
reconnaissance. the units of the M fro- 1 through 19 November destroyed

the reserves of the fascist any. Basically these operations were carried
out by the 271st nbad. The night boebers not only caused losses to the
enemy, but also were down the enemy troops before the operation. During
this period combat missions were' excellently carried out by the following
crevs: pilot M. I. Gutorov and navigator P. A. Yefinov. A. S. Cavrilov

and Buynov. P. S. Ponoearev and N. K. Piven'. Plekhanov and Matveyev, ‘(e. N.
Sinsyskiy and A. P. Golovko. Charyayev and h. H. KMkhlov. and V. l. Zubov
and D. I. Yeserskiy.

"One lust aention the humble workhorses of the var," recalled liar Avn S. I.
Rudcnko about the pilots free the night bonber regi-ents. "who flew in the
light-motored Po-Z aircraft. They attacked the may without hissing aleost
a single night. They were stopped neither by the wind. a snowstorm or even
a perilous fog. There were nights when the pilots eade seven-eight sorties
each. And this see-ingly inoffensive training airplane carried up to 350
kg of Iii-be. that is. half the aeount that the 11-2 assault plane could
carry.‘

 

1 "Dvesti Ognannykh Dney" [200 Fiery Days] (Collection of Essays), Moscow.
Voyenizdat. 1968. p 125.

33
M OFFICIAL USE OIL!
m OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

With the coaing of dawn. the assault planes began operating and these
attacked the Nazi troops located in front of the 26th and 66th armies.

In Noveder up to the start of the operation the AA used for codat five
linited flying days and nine nights during which around 1.300 combat sortiae
were made (basically at night). At that time pilots fron the 6th Detached
Medical Air Squadron did good work. They carried out 96 sortiee and trans-
ported 233 wounded and hundreds of kilograms of various medicines.

The personnel of the 16th AA was seized with a desire to cause maximum
losses to the high-handed enemy. Being in a state of combat readiness

and in clearly knowing their place in combat, the pilots waited impatiently
for the start of the counteroffensive.

No days before the start of the counteroffeneiva. the air army with the
full force of bombers and assault planes was to attack the rail junctions
and enemy sirfielda. "ith ‘the start of the operation. the bombers were
assigned for attacking enemy troops and particularly its reserves in the
zone of the 65th and 20th armies. The formations of assault planes were

to support the troops of these armies in piercing the enemy defenses. and
destroy personnel and artillery. The mission of the fighters was to escort
the bombers and assault planes and provide cover for our troops and rear
installations against enemy aviation. Moreover, all the branches of avia-
tion were to carry out air reconnaissance. However it was impossible to
carry out the designated plan fully because of the difficult meteorological
conditions.

From the morning of 19 November, the army commander, Gen S. I. Rudenko, was
already at the command post of the front, where the troop co-ander, Gen
K. K. Rokossovskiy. and members of the front military council had also an-
rived.

There was a dense fog. The planned air strikes were aborted. For improving
the morale of the infantry, the troop commander decided to begin operations
using elements and individual planes. After a heavy softening up by the
artillery, the troops of the 65th Army went over to the offensive and in
fighting literally for each meter of land. by the end of the day had ad-
vanced 3-5 In.

When the weather had improved somewhat. our aviation began to support the
troops of the front. The 228th shad took to the air. Some 30 assault planes
under the cover of 26 Yak-l made a bombing and strafing strike against the
enemy. Here the group of Capt G. P. Kostandi fought skillfully.

Air reconnaissance was carried out by assault planes from the 696th and

688th shap. Here the pilots of Sr Lt S. l. Vinnik and Lt V. P. Khokhlschev
particularly distinguished themselves. with low cloudiness and poor visi-
bility in diving runs they secured valuable information on the retreat of

the enemy. The reconnaissance data were in-ediately considered by the com-
mand of the front. The pilots of the 291st shad individually and in ele-
ments also conducted reconnaissance and destroyed the retreating enemy troops.

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY
POI OHICIAL "8! ONLY

On that day because of the extra-sly difficult weather conditions (fog

and snow) great skill and courage were required free the fliers. ‘i‘hey
succeeded in carrying out just 82 coebat sorties. however the intonation
of the crews helped shed light on the course of events on the battlefield
and this was of ieportant significance for the leadership of the operation.
The fascist aviation did not operate.

During the night of 21 Novenber. the weather ilproved soaewhat and the
fliers of the AA made a bonbing and strafing attack against several ens-y
eirfields. destroying 16 aircraft on than. The assault aviation destroyed
enemy personnel and equip-eat in the regions of Verkhne-Buzinovlu and
Vuntsy. and aided in the advance of the ground forces. As a total 103
norties were Iade.

On this day. the actions of six ll-2 crews froe the 228th shad led by hero
of the Soviet Union. Capt V. H. Oolubev were an sxa-pla of conbat skill.
In approaching the fascist airfield. they were fired on by antiaircraft
guns. having neutralized the air defense weapons. the pilots attached the
airfield and destroyed eight ens-y aircraft. 0n the return the group was
attacked by fighters. In the course of the aerial coebat. our pilots shot
down one Hesserscheitt and returned to their airfield without losses.

On 22 Nave-bar, because of the bad weather. the aviation was not active.

On 23 Novenber. the troops of the Southwestern and Stalingrad fronts Joined
together in the region of Kalach and coeplsted the encirclenent of the eneey
grouping. During the day the units of the AA supported the offensive of

the troops. stacking the retreating ens-y along the left bank of the Don
some 50-60 he to the northwest of Stalingrad. In 53 sorties \JIO pilots

destroyed llO notor vehicles. 6 tanks. 5 gasoline trucks and several hundred
enemy soldiers and officers.

Four assault planes fro. the 69bth ehap led by the reginent navigator Sr Lt
H. I. Bobrov attacked a vehicle colt-i on the Peshovathawbol'shays Roseoahka
roed and destroyed up to 80 notor vehicles and 6 loaded gasoline trucks. 0n
the same day. the pilots of the 688th shap, the couuniets Sr Sgt l. V.
Gololo'oov, its 1. P. libishev and V. D. Volovihov. Sr Lt A. l. Kadoeteev,

and Capts A. A. Bondar' and c. I. Kopayev. carried out their eission ex-
cellently.

In the second half of the day of 26 hove-her. with an inproveeleat in the
weather. the 16th AA began operations with greater intensity. The aviation
in n; cuties attacked the ens-y concentration areas and its crossings on
the Don in the regions of Nizhniy Ahatov. Luchenekiy and Ceraainvsltiy.

Two groups of assault planes fro- the 688th shap escorted by fighters fro.
the 220th iad led by Capts c. I. Kopayev and A. A. Bondar' attached an sue-y
infantry colull and dispersed it. Groups froe the 285th ehap headed by the

lender Hero of the Soviet Union. Capt V. n. Golubev and Capt P. P. Pospelov
fought excellently as well.

35
FOR ORIGIN. US! OIL!
!0l OPPICIAL USE ONLY

During the period free 23 through 30 November 191.2. the beeic efforte of

the M unite were eieed et euppreeeing the etrongpointe. ee well ee deetroy-
ing one-y pereonnel end equipeent in the retreet. The region of encircle-
Ieent wee being equeeeed. Our troope ceptured the eirfielde of Ventey.
Yevleepiyevekiy. Kelech end Peekovethe with the eirereft. A nueber of other
eneey eirfielde were eleo under etteck. On 20 Move-her. our pilote deetroyed
29 eneey eirereft et Guerek end Vol'eheye Roeeoehke eirfielde.

The feeciet couend wee forced to quickly rebeee the eircreft to the weet.
to eirfielde 200-250 In ewey fro- the front of encircleeent (Horoeovek.
‘l'eteinekeye end othere). end for thie reeeon the operetione of eneey evin-
tion declined eherply. Juet free 50 to 200 overflighte per dey were noted.
eeinly eir treneporte. The operetione of eneey fightere were limited to
covering the treneporte.

On 20 November. Sr Lt H. l. Bobrov died e hero'e deeth. he wee lending n
group of eeeeult plenee free the 696th ehep. Over Bol'eheye Roeeoehhe Air-
field. hie eircreft ceught fire fro- entieircreft ertillery firing. Con-
nuniet Bobrov heeded the eeeeult plene engulfed in flenee towerd the perkinp,
oree of enemy nircreft. with e lighty exploeion eix eirplenee were deetroyed.

Regerdleee of the very difficult weether conditione. the unite of the 16th
M from 19 through 30 November cerried out 1.479 coebet eortiee. During this
37 nirplenee were deetroyed et the eirfielde. 9 Junkere were shot down in
air combat. l9 tnnke were deetroyed on the ground ee well ee 61.5 eotor vo-
hiclee end 32 gune: e large number of Nezie wee deetroyed.

M o total in November. the M node only 2.867 conbet eortiee. including
68 percent for bombing end etrefing ettecke egeinet ener troope end eir-
fielde. The pilote of the envy cerried out 32 eir bettlee end ehot down

33 eneey nircreft. end 63 eircreft were deetroyed et the eirfielde. Our
coebet loeeee were 35 eircreft.

The Air Blockade end Perticipetion in Blinineting the Surrounded Grouping

By 30 November. the eree of the encircled en grouping hed been reduced
by almost double. 0n e territory of 1.500 lee . the 6th Field Arley end e
portion of the for-etione fro: the enemy 4th Tenk Any coneieting of 22
divieione end 160 deteched unite nuwering up to 330.000 men with nuneroue
col-bet equip-ent wee being equeezed in e ring.

Our ground forcee end evietion were given the eieeion of dependebly eeeling
off the eurrounded grouping of feeciet troope. to weer it down by continuous
hlowe. oe well ee repel the eneuy ettenpte to breek through the front of
encircle-em. heving thereby prepered conditione for the coeplete elilino-

tion of the enemy. The destruction of the eurrounded eneey grouping wee
entrueted to the troope of the Don end Stelingred fronte.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ONION "8! ONLY

The a.” Suprene Co-end for relieving the surrounded 6th Arny begen
hurriedly to orgeniee e new erny group Don heeded by Hennetein. ‘l‘he Ger-en
eir treneport which et thet tine hed eround 320 Ju-SZ treneporte (with e
puyloed up to 1 ton) wee entrusted with supplying the eurrounded grouping
with everything needed for ective defeneee end e subsequent counteretrike.
According to Hitler's order. eround 300 tone of fuel. e-unietion end food
wee to be delivered to the- Stelingred region deily. The Nezie hurriedly
reedied two lerge eirfielde et ‘l‘eteinekeye end Hororovek ee the beeic sup-
ply beeee for the surrounded troope.

The men errivel of the Ger-en eir trenuporte into the Stelingred region
started on 23-25 Novenber. They flew without fighter cover in eeell groups
and as eingle plenee fron verioue directions.

For the purpoeee of countering the one-y eir treneporte. Gen 8. I. Rudenko
on 26 Hove-bet ieeued en order which defined the beeic nieeione of evietion
under the new eituetion. For intercepting end destroying the treneporte.
petrolling wee to be inetituted over the eree of the encirclenent: the eneey
transports were to be destroyed on the epproechee to it; e chein of fighter
nnbushee wee to be eet up ee well ee e network of guidence redioe end W05
[eir obeervetion werning end co-unicetione] poets; eir reconneieeence use
to be cerried out over the eurrounded troope ee well ee conbet to provide
air support for the conbined-erle erniee. The 512th iep wee ordered to

start continuoue conbeting of the enemy treneporte from the Kotluben' Air-
[tel-do

At the etert of the blockede. the teking off of the fighters end their ec-
tions in the eir were controlled by the co-end poet of the eir erny et
Kotluben' Airfield: it hed contect with ell the eirfielde end the co-end

post of the 8th M. This mode it possible et eny nonent to increeee the
forces in the eir end cerry out interection.

The fightere end eeeeult plenee of the 16th M begen to ehoot down the
enemy trensporte. however. eoon thereafter the fight egeinet then becene
more difficult. The treneporto begen to be escorted by Pie-109 end He-llo

fighters end e portion of then hed been epecielly equipped with edditionel
fuel tenke.

The nunber of flighte by the Ger-en treneporte to Stelingred begen to in-

creeee eech dey end eoon reeched 60-70 eircreft per dey. end eonetinee
loo-150.

Within the ring of encirclelnent, the Ger-en con-end ueed five airfielde
for receiving the treneporte (Bol'eheye Roeeoehke. Beeergino. Pitonnik.
(hmrnk end Voroponovo), end et theee there were up to 60 fighters which
took off to rendezvoue with the treneporte. After unloeding the eirplenee
took on sick end wounded end returned to the beee eirfielde.

it soon becene epperent thet the operetion of the eneny eir treneport

could not be dierupted by nere enbuehee by fighters end eeeeult plenee
(fighting ee fightere).

37
to: ORICIAL US! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the outset of Decenber. upon instructions fro. the representative of
headquarters. Gen A. A. Novikov. the command and the staff of the 16th AA.
with the participation of representatives free other staffs. worked out a
were ordered syeten for the air blockade against the surrounded enely
troops. The nein nission of the air ereies during the period of the block-
ade was a decisive destruction of the eneey transports.

The blockade eysten envisaged the deployment of a network of warning end
guidance stations, the creation of coebet zones around the ring of encir-
cleaent for the three air areiee. the long-range aviation and the antiair-
craft weapons of the three fronts. as well as the organizing of an air end
artillery blockade of the eirfields within the surrounded territory.

The first zone was located behind the external front of encirclenent and
was the zone of operations for the pilots of the 17th AA, and free the

end of Deceeber the 8th AA. as well as the long-range aviation. They de-
stroyed the enemy aircraft prinarily at the base airfielde. Between the
external and internal fronts of encircle-ant (the second zone). the fighters
of the 8th AA end 16th AA operated. This zone was split into five sectors
(in terns of the number of the lad). two of which were within the zone for
which the 16th AA was responsible. In the sectors. two-fighter eleeents
were constantly on patrol. while at the eirfields there were fighter and
assault plane groups on duty which could take off upon cell or "by sight."

Each sector had its own open radio guidance network end ell the equipment
necessary for this.

The third zone. 8-10 kn wide. which bordered the region of encircle-eat
was a zone of organized antiaircraft firing. and was divided into regions.

The commanders of the fighter aviation and the entieircraft artillery, in
continuously neintaining personal contact. achieved precise interaction.
with the appearance of eneny aircraft. the entiaircreft gunners nede several
sighting shots. In following the bursts. the fighters began pursuit. Then
the antiaircraft gunners set up barrage firing in front of the enemy pilots.
and this forced thee to alter course and concentrate on different things.
This facilitated the subsequent actiOns of the fighters. when our fighters
were not near. the entiaircreft gunners fired for effect. The results of
the well organized cooperation were soon felt. Our fighters and antiair—

craft gunners began to shoot down up to 30 percent of the one-y aircraft
which flew over.

In the fourth zone. in the region of the encircled grouping of fascist
troops. the enemy aircraft were destroyed by fighters. boebere and assault
planes basically free the 16th AA.

For the purpose of overcoming the air blockade, the enemy etteepted to
organize the escorting of large fornations of transports under fighter
cover into the region of encirclesent. But. due to the well organized

- 38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

spotting end werning. such convoys becese the objects of ettsch by our
fighters end suffered heevy losses. Thus. on 30 Deceeher e convoy of 17
Ju-SZ eirplenes under the cover of four He-109 in the region of Gusrek wee
ceught by four of our "hunters" heeded by the consender of the 283d ied.
Col v. A. Kiteyev. As e result of the energetic end eble ettecks. they
shot down five Ju-SZ end one Hs-109. here Col Kiteyev end Hej P. D.
Yeliseyev shot down two Junkers eech. while Heje D. I. Rodin end A. A.
Kukushkin hed one fescist nircreft to their score.

The "hunters" on 12 Deco-her fought just es successfully. As e result of
the correct elloceting of duties between the pilots end their decisive et-
tacks. Col V. A. Kitsyev. Hejs D. l. Rodin end P. D. Yeliseyev. Lt N. V.
Khsritonov end Jr Lt 1. Vs. Koetrykin shot down four Ju-SZ end three Me-
109.

PMJ F. D. Yelieeyev. the deputy coenender of the 520th iep for politicel
sffeirs. skillfully directed perty politicel work in the reginent end et

the ssne tine. es s first-rete pilot. by his personel exe-ple deeonstreted
how one nust fight the heat invedere.

The pilots of the $20th iep under the coenend of Hej s. N. ChirVe during
the period of the Bottle of Stelingred conducted 125 dogfights end shot
down 95 feecist eircreft. Moreover. 15 eircreft were destroyed on the
eirfields. For the excellent fulfilleent of coebst nissions. the regisent
becese e guerds one. The regisentel coenender He: 5. N. Chirve wee given
the Order of the Red lenner by the cos-end end pronoted to con-ender of
the eir division. During the nettle of Stelingrsd the best sir fighters
in the reginent were Hej D. I. lodin. “Sgt V. P. Vinogredov (they esch hed
8-9 victories in the sir). Capt A. A. Yefreeov end Lt N. V. Khsritonov
(eech hed 11-12 shot down eneny eircrsft to their score). end others.

Without hsving sir superiority. the Necis soon ebendoned flights in lerge
groups end begen to sore widely use the restricted flying weether. cloudi-
ness and derkness. For providing cover during teke-off end lending of the
transports. the sti col-end shifted one of its best fighter unite. the Udet
Squadron. into the ring of encirclenent.

The conbsting of this wee rether difficult. The coenend of the 16th AA
used the lethod of e continuous increese of forces in the sir bettles. The
enemy use forced either to wege long bettles with our crews which relieved
one another or to ebendon the eres of coebet to us.

For strengthening the defense of eirfields in the ring of encircle-est,
the fascists brought up elnoet ell the entieircreft ertillery of the 6th
Army. however these eirfields were soon within the resch or our ertillery
fire. The sir scouts supplid the ertillery troops with photogrephs of the
eirfields end this nede it possible to conduct precise fire egeinst then.

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
IOR ONICIM. USE ONLY

The strikes by our evietion against the enemy airfields bees-e more and
sore effective every day. Thus. on 2 Dace-bar. the pilots eat 17 sneey
air transports efire at airfields inside the ring of encircleeent. and on
10-13 Docs-bar. 87 transports. Here the fighters also fought excellently.
On 13 Deoesbsr. the 220th iad destroyed lo aircraft at the eirfields, and
on 26 Decesber the pilots of the SZOth iep. Capt A. A. Yefresov. Sgts V. S.

liberov. A. P. Konov. Kirvrsov. A. H. Hel'gunov and H. M. Resnikov set
8 Ju-52 aircraft on fire.

At the start of Deco-her, Col 1. K. Sanokhin arrived to assure the position
of deputy eo-snder of the M.

The 291st shed was assigned to the reserves of Headquarters. During 3 nonths
of coebat. under conditions of a difficult situation. the personnel of the
division. in shoving examples of courage and heroisu. esde more than 1.000
combat sortiee for strafing, having destroyed a large asount of enemy lili-
tery equip-ant and personnel during this.

in the course of the air blockade against the enemy grouping. a major role
was played by air reconnaissance. the data of which served as the basis for
calling in our aviation for destroying enemy transports at the airfields.
The air scouts during this period kept under constant control the surrounded
fascist troops which were preparing to break out to link up with the henn-
stein group. And this was done with good reason. On 10 and ll December.
the fliers discovered a large accumulation of enemy troops in the region of
bol'sheyn Roseoshke. Uvarovke end Orlovka.

On 12 December the Kotel'nikovo grouping began an offensive in the direction
of Stalingrad. The Soviet contend demanded that the 16th M intensify its
attacks against the surrounded fascist troops.

From the norning of 12 December. the air scouts detected a large nueber of
tanks. assault guns and armored personnel carriers in the region of Ksrpovka.
and behind them. infantry ready to start a breakout. The bombers end assault
planes of the M soon appeared. They made s heavy boebing strike against

the Nazi troops, they destroyed a large number of personnel and equipnent
and ecnttered then, thereby preventing the attempt by the Peulus any to
break out of the encirclement.

In the middle of December. f roe air reconnaissance date. it was learned that
the surrounded enemy troops were again concentrating for the purpose of
breaking the front of eneircleeent. These data were effirned by the inferna-
tion of prisoners. Kennstein's units at this time were moving steadily ahead
and they were separated by not more than 60-55 has from the surromded group-
inn. The 16th M was ordered to predvent the breakout.

0n the earning of 18 December. 112 aircref t took off for a concentrated
strike against the eccuulation of enemy troops at Bella Yeblonsvsye. This
force consisted of 76 Pe-Z bombers, 10 11-2 assault planes and 28 Yak-l
fighters. The Pe-Z. aircraft free the 2nd bsk. were the first over the

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

target. Their bonbing strike wss e surprise for the surrounded fescists.

s penic sterted in the eneey renks. es here end there fires broke out end
en-unition exploded.

The second wsve included esssult plsnss free the 228th shed heeded by the
commander of the 263d ehsp. Hsj A. C. Nekonechnikov. lnitislly they esdc
n diveboebing etteck. 0n the following runs. the ssseult plenes etrefed

the fssciste using cennons end eschine guns end they destroyed the srtil-
lcry. tenks end vehicles. The cover fighters. under the cos-end of Hero

of the Soviet Union Me) V. I. shishkin. elso perticipeted in the ettscks.
destroying the ensey with nechins gun and cennon fire. During the entire
day. the ssssult plsnes in groups of 7-9 eircreft continued to etteck the
eneey. scettering the personnel end destroying equipsent. The effective-
ness of the divsboebing sttscks wee very high. In suffering high cssusl-
ties. the eneey troops geve up the ettsepts to bresk out of the encircle-

went. As e totsl during the dsy the fliers of the AA cerried out 659
sorties.

On 19 end 20 Deceeber. the evistors supported the troops of the sdjecent
Stelingred Pront end together with fliers fro- the 8th AA sttecked the
tanks of the Kotel'nikovo grouping which wes edvsncing towerd Stelingred.
For these purposes the units of the 16th AA esde 112 sorties. As e result
of the intense sir coebet which developed in the region of the Hyehkove
River. the Ger-en fighters were driven froe the bettlefield. This eede it
possible for the ssseult plenee end bonbers to ceuse greet losses to the
enemy troops with ispunity. At the sees tine evistion provided support to
the troops of the 21th end 65th erlies. The fighters of the erny covered
the 2d Guerds Arly egsinst en sir ens-y, end this erly unloeded free the
trains without losses end sieultsneously begen coebet. In 2 deys. the AA
carried out 796 sorties.

On 26 December. the tenk troops of the 1st Gusrds Ar-y by e repid rsid oc-
copied the eirfields of Tetsinskeye end Horoeovsk. At the Tetsinskeye Air-
field. up to 350 eircreft. esinly trensports. were ceptured end destroyed

by the tenks. An sir supply of the troops surrounded et Stelingred becene
even more difficult for the Nexis.

In suffering such high losses of eircreft end heving lost the besic sir
transport beses. the Ger-en col-end sherply reduced the trsnsport flights
and begen to use Re-lll boebers for trensporting cergo into the eres of
encirclenent. These bombers possessed greeter renge, speed end defense
cspnbility. They elso used the long-reuse reconneisssnce plenes. the four-
motor rw-zoo Kondor. It beceee more difficult to coebet there eircreft.
But by this tine the pilots of the lGAA hed succeeded in suppressing the
resistence of Ger-en fighters inside the ring end to strengthen the block-
nde of the sirfields during the dsy end st night.

61
108 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OﬂIClM. USE ONLY

ha a roauit. tho Goraana ainoat coapiotoly abandonod the landing of tuna-
porta inaido tho aurroundod grouping. and rooortod to dropping cargo by
parachute nainly at night. Thia waa ioaa dangoroua. but at tho aano tile
tho poaaibility of ovacuating tho wounded and tho ataffo waa finally loot.
Many onony pilota bogan to drop tho cargo baforo roaching tho tono of anti-
aircraft firo. Boga with clothing. tonka with gaaolino. a-unition and food
aore and onto froquontiy fall in tho poaitiona of our troopa.

‘l‘ho Gernan piiota who left on a trip to tho region of Stalingrad bogan in
their circloa to bo caliod "doadaan." Tho officora and gonorala of tho

6th Army who had boon pornittod to ioavo tho "pot." woro no iongor dotorainod
to fly out aa thio woo too rioky. 0n ona Doconbor day. Soviat fliora ahot
down Ju-SZ airplanoa with tho atoff officora of tho J76th Infantry Divioion.
ao wall on a four-notor Kondor which carriod 32 officora. Tho co-andor

of tho ahot-down aircraft atatod that ho had flown into tho aurroundod
grouping with ordoro to bring out tho co-ondor of an infantry diviaion.

but tho couondor had rofuaod to fly and woo aoon taboo priaonor.

At tho and of Deconbor tho oiinination of tho grouping of Nazi troopa aur-

roundod in tho rogion of Stalingrad waa ontruatod by hoadquartera to tho
Don Front.

During thio poriod tho faociot co-and. rogardioaa of tho ononoua ioaaoa.
atiii continuod to aend now groupa of airplanoa to Stalingrad. Thoy on-
doavorod to brook through any obotacloa or any woothor. The boot crawa
were ahifted from tho Darlinnl’aria and lorlinunooo routoa to tho stalin-
grod ooctor. But oven thoy could not alwayo roach Stalingrad. During the
night of 1 January 1963, five Gar-an tranoporta oufforod a cataatropho duo
to bad weather conditiona on our torritory. And thoao crowa which otill
auccoadod in reaching tho aroa of tho aurroundod grouping in a najority of
inotoncoa woro doatroyed by our aviation or by antiaircroft woapona. Aa a
whole the ayatoa of our air biockodo oporatod quite effoctivoly.

in Docenbor 1942. the fornationa and unita of tho 16th M nado 6.125 aor-
tioa. Boaic attention waa givon to otrikoa againot airfielda (25 porcont
of the oortioa). air roconnaiaaanco (20 parcont), and to “froo hunting”
and the intorcopting of may aircraft (is porcont). “rho rolaindor of tho
aortioa woro carriod out to provido covor for troopa and railway inotalla-
tiona (16 porcont). for oacorting aviation (16 porcont) and for actiono
agath one-y troopa (8 parcont).

The fliora of tho any carried out 96 dogfighta in which thoy ahot down
68 fascia: aircraft. and at the airfioldo doatroyod 2“ aircraft of dif-
foront typoa. In addition, 57 tanka. 6‘ guna, 780 wohicloa and othor
nilitory oquiplont woro doatroyod and daugod. and a largo nubor of onauy
aoldiora and officora waa knockad out.

The air any in Deconbor loat 66 aircraft.

62
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
By January 19‘3. the aircraft fleet of the 16th AA had increased signifi-
cantly duo to the arrival of the 2nd bah. as well as to the receiving of
new aircraft (‘8 Yak-l and 40 11-2) by the air units. On 10 January 19b3,
the fighting force of the AA included 215 fighters. 103 assault planes.

10$ daytime boabers and 87 night boebers and 15 reconnaissance planes. as
well as 75 lisison aircraft and transports. As a total the AA had 600
aircraft and 688 battle-ready crews.

At the beginning of January 1963. in carrying out the directives of the
Troop commander of the Don Front. the cos-and and staff of the AA worked
out an air operations plan for eliminating the surrounded eneny grouping.
The plan envisaged over 500 sorties on the first day. Here. during the
night of 10 January. control of the enesy troops was to be disrupted during
the night of 10 January. Then powerful strikes were to follow by the 2nd
bah and the 228th shed. At the sees tine. the fighters of the 220th iad
were to seal off the airfields inside the ring of encirclessnt. and during
the day the daytise boeber and assault plane forces were to disrupt the
possible countersttecks end prevent the reserves froa being brought up.
These actions were to be reliably supported by the fighters and air recon-
naissance.

By the start of the operation to elisinate the surrounded ens-y at Stalin-
grad. our aviation had cosplete air superiority.

A portion of the air fornstiona of the AA was rebased to new eirfields for
the purpose of bringing then closer to the areas of forthconing coebat.
The bosbera were stationed 70-100 kn fron the front line, and the fighters
and assault planes. 20-50 kl.

On 10 January 1963. at 0805 hours. heavy artillery preparatory fire started
and this lasted 55 minutes. with dawn the fornations of the 16th AA nsde

n nnssed raid on the battle fornations of the Nazi troops. After this the
storning of their positions coenenced.

Our aviation was continuously over the battlefield. The strong explosions
of bosbs nerged with the powerful roar of artillery fire. The ens-y strong-
points and defensive works were blown skyward by the air attacks. and the
artillery batteries fell silent. The aviation operated in groups which
differed in terse of the nusber of aircraft. from several planes up to
60-70. The guidence radio network which was deployed along the entire

front and the air representatives in the troops helped the crews detect

and hit the sost isportent eneny objectives.

During the first day of the operation. the AA made 676 sorties. attacking
eneny personnel. staffs and centers of resistance in the regions of nol'-
shays and Malays Rossoshks. Baburkin. Zapadnovka and Novo-Aleseyevskiy.

All cneny eirfielda within the ring of encircle-eat worsen-pletely sealed
off free the air. The fliers of the 2nd bah fought actively, and they
carried out 198 sorties (during the period of the Iattle of Stalingrad they
carried out 1.853 sortiea). Aviation destroyed l7 tanks, lbs vehicles and

a large amount of other equip-ant. In 25 dogfighte. Soviet fighters shot
down 16 enemy aircraft and hit 9 of then.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gen P. l. Betov. troop co-snder of the 63th Artsy. hed high preiee for

the evietion operetione. In so order of 29 Jenuery 1963. he vrote: "The
crews by their bold strefing ettecks and excellent bombing of the eneey
bettle forestions end its etrongpointe contributed to the successful cerry-
ing outuof the eission of the finel defeet end destruction of the surrounded
troops.

On 12 Jenuery. the M continued to etteck ens-y troops in the regions of
Zepednovhe, Kerpovelteye Stetion. Bella Yebloneveys. in opereting in groups
of 6-9 esseult plenee end bot-here. During the dey 433 sortiee vere nsde
end such may eilitery equip-out vee destroyed.

On 13 Jenuery end on the following deys. with the edvence of the troops
of the Don Front. the forutione of the 16th M etteched enuy personnel
end eilitery equip-sot deep in the eneny defenses. At the eirfielde on
13 Jenuery the may lost 29 Ju-SZ end lie-111.

On 18 Jenuery. Lt i. F. Bibishev. the deputy equedron cos-ender of the 688th
shop died e deeth of the breve. In the region of Gunrek Airfield hie eir-
plene ceught on fire. The couregeous pilot, without regsrd for eeving hie
own life. in the burning eircreft dove into e perking eree of ene-y eir-
plenee. ‘l‘o hie score were over 100 deytins end b0 nighttiee colbet sor-
tiee. Co-uniat I. P. Bibiehev ves posthu-ouely everded the title of hero
of the Soviet Union.

In Jenuery. the fighter pilots of the 220th end 283d ied. in continuing to
blockede the eneny eirfields end etteck the surrounded enemy troops in the
region of Stelingred, ectively cerried out dogfighte end won e nunber of
victories. Thus. on 12 Jenuery. e group consisting of four YeIt-l of the
176th iep of the 283d ied. under the counsnd of Sr Lt H. I. Helterevich.

in the region of Bol'sheye Roesoshke shot down three ene-y eircreft. llere
in addition to the leeder. Lts Ceresinenho end Hikyehlenoh end Jr Lt Ordin
distinguished the-selves. On 17 Jenuery. four Yek-l fro- the 520th iep
under the conend of Cept A. A. Yefrenov in blockeding Gmrelt Airfield de-
stroyed one Ju-88. end on 19 Jenuery, four felt-l heeded by “Sgt V. P.
Vinogredov. in carrying out the seee mission. shot down two ae-lll. The
fliers of other eir reginents eleo hed victories in the eir.

After the second rejection of the propoeels of the Soviet conend to eur-
render. our troops on 22 Jenuery begen the find etege of the operetion.
the cutting up end destruction of the may grouping.

Air superiority won by our nvistion st the outset of the counteroffensive
told fevorebly on the operetione of the troops in the front. The eeeeult
plenee without obstruction could eeke 6-6 peseee et e terget, dropping
severel boobs in each pees end firing er the eneey fro: the cennons end
aschine guns. The bonbers begen to operete in groups up to 60 eircreft.

1 Arkhiv no sssa. folio m. inv. me, me 93. sheet 16.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the eecond half of January. our troopa captured the lat enuy airfield
in the ring of encircleeent. Pitonnik. and through thie the entire eupply
of the Peulue Aroy had been channeled. On 26 January the laat air trane-
port escaped fro- the ring of encircle-eat from the hurriedly prepared

field near the aettleeent of Stalingredekiy. The "air bridge” by which

the Nazi conund had endeavored to help the eurrounded grouping ceaeed to
axiet. Up to the etart of February at night individual aneey aircraft etill
appeared and they randoely dropped their cargo by aircraft. but thia wee
already the agony of the Ger-an Luftwaffe at Stalingrad.

Mar 80 N. V. Zakharov hae written of the inortanca of the air blockade
ieplenented by our aviation at Stalingrad in the foreword to the book
"Stelingredekaya Epopeya" [7hr 2;:lingrad Epoch] aa follow:

"The Battle of Stalingrad provided...practice in organizing an air blockade
for the purpoae of intardicting the eupply of the eurrounded grouping by
air. The preciae organization of the air blockede coebined with the meta-
ful offensive of Soviet troopa on the external front of ancircluent made

it poeeible to defeat the one-y air grouping created to eupport the break-
out of the 6th Any."

0n 2 February 1963 the ranmante of the enemy grouping were eliminated.

During the period of the final elimination of the eurrounded enealy grouping
at Stalingrad (January and the firet 2 days of February 1963). the 16th M
carried out 8.761 aortiee. including 6,681 for the boebing and atrafing of
surrounded eneuy troopa, 1,586 for attacking airfielda and the blockeding
of then, 1,276 for providing cover for troopa and aviation. 379 for recon-
naieaence. and 338 aortiee for "free hunting."

In 1“ dogfighte our pilote daetroyed 96 may aircraft and eat no on fire
at nirfielde.

In the courae of eliminating the eurrounded one-y grouping. unite of the M
destroyed and dauged 236 tanke. 2.£04 vehiclea. 98 artillery piecee. they
blew up 30 varioue duepa. and daetroyed or put out of co-iaeiun eany thou-
sands of Maria.

The combined-ares conend repeatedly thank-d the eviatore for the help which
they gave the troope both in the defeneive engage-ant aa well ea in the
course of the encircle-ent and elinination of the eurrounded enely group-
ing. Here in one ouch doculent.

"Order to the troope of the 66th Any of 3i January 19‘). During the dif-
ficult Auguet-October days for the eotherlend. when the aneey wee puehing
to the Volga heartland. the valoroue troopa of our em in close coopera-
tion with the air fightere of the 16th M. eteadfaatly repelled the amber-
less eneey attacks on the ground and in the air. During the period of the

65
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Oﬂ’IClAL USE ONLY

proparetiona for and encirclenant of the crack enny troops at Stalingrad.
the co—and of the 66th Aray couaidera it neceaaary to note the exception-
ally great role of the air unite and fornationa of the 16th AA vhich in
coordination vith our troopa nercileaaly deatroyed the faaciat acne in
the area of Stalingrad.

"He. the aoldiera and co-endera. are vitneaa of the heroic fate of the
aviatora of the 16th AA who are totally loyal to the nether-land and who
during the day and at night, diedaining all difficultiea. by boahing and
atrafing attache deatroyed and ground doun the eneey forcea. The nilitary
council of the any. the aoldiara. the comandera and political vorkera
expreea coaplete aatiataction with the operations of the air tighten. the
(liere of the 16th AA. and paaa on their Red Any thanlta.

"The co-ander of the 66th Any. Lt Gen Zhadov. neober of the ailitary coun-
cil. Col Krivulin. and chief of ataf! haj Gen Kornhenevich.“1

For combat excellence. courage and aaaa heroism of the peraonnel evidenced
in the Battle of Stalingrad. by the ordera of the Suprene Co-ander-in-

Chiet‘. the following air diviaiona and regiaento were turned into guarda
units:

1) The 220th iad (comander. Col A. V. Utin) bece-e the Pirat Guarda iad;
the 512th. 237th and 581at iap of this diviaion (oo-andero. reapectively.
Hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col N. s. Gerainov, Lt Col Ye. P. Hel'nikov,

and Hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col V. I. Shishkin) into the 53d. 56th and
55th Guarda iap;

2) The 228th ahad (co-nander. Col 6. I. Koaarov) into the 2nd Guarda ahad;
the 285th, 688th. 263d and 313th ahap of thia diviaion (conendera, Haja
Ye. P. Koval', H. c. sklyarov, A. c. Nakonechnikov and I. D. Borodin) he-
cane the 58th. 59th. 78th and 79th Guarda ahap;

3) The 635th detached iap (col-lander. hero of the Soviet Union Haj I. I.
Kloahchev) became the 32d Guarda iap;

6) The 520th iap (cot-sander. Lt Col 8. N. Chirva) hecaae the 56th Guards
iap; the 150th hep (col-ander. H15 U. A. Novikov) hecana the 35th Guarda
bap; the 99th hap (couander. Lt Col A. Yu. Yakobaon) heca-e the 96th
Guard'a bop; the 702d and 90lat nhap (couandere, Capt S. A. Kiaelev and
He] A. A. Henyayev) of the 27lot nhad became the Nth and 65th Guarda nbap;
the 6th Air Trenaport Regiment (trap) of the CV? [Civil Air Pleat] (coa-
nnnder. Haj V. H. Trutayev) became the 62d Goarda trap of the (WP.

At the same time, honorary nanee were given honorary nanea aa follova:
Stalingrad to the lat Guarda iad (during the period of the Battle of
Stalingrad the pilota of the diviaion in 370 dogfighta had deatroyed 335
faaciat aircraft), to the 27lat nhad (cmdet. Col H. Rh. norieenko).

 

1 Arkhiv no SSSR, folio 368. inv. 6476. file 93. sheet )6.

‘6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to the 53d Guards iep end to the 16th odrep (couender. Haj D. S. Sherstyuk);
the name Volga to the 78th Guards ehap and Don to the 58th Guards shep.

The 283d iad (contender. Col V. A. Kitayev) was given the name Itemyehin.

the 56th Guards iap received the name Altukhovo. and the 907th nbep (com-

under, Lt Col N. P. Pushkarev). received the name Gorodishche-Stelingrad-
skoye.

Many soldiers of the 16th AA received orders and medals for heroism end
courage shoem in the battles of Stalingrad. and all participants in the
Battle of Stalingrad received the medal "For the Defense of Stalingrad."

On 23 November 1962. by an Ukese of the Presidiue of the USSR Supreee
Soviet. Sr Lt A. Ya. Baklen, flight coenander of the 634th iap, received
the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for courage, heroism and valor.

Aleksandr Yakovlevich Baklen was born in 1917 in the Ukraine. As a 22-
yeur-old pilot he participated in the battles against the white Finns.

From the outset of the Greet Patriotic War, he showed himself to be a

bold and experienced fighter pilot. On some days he mede five-seven combat
sorties. he frequently entered combat against a numerically superior enemy.
In one battle he alone fought against seven enemy fighters and destroyed
two Hesserschmitts. Being severely wounded. he was still able to save his
aircraft. During the first 18 months of the war, Baklsn nade around 600

combat sorties end in dogfights personally shot down 13 enemy aircraft,
end 23 in group combat.

On 28 January 1963. for the exemplary fulfillment of combat missions and
for heroism shown in this. the title of Hero of the Soviet Union was
awarded to the best fliers of the AA, including: Capt V. N. Hakarov,
squadron contender of the 512th isp. Capt I. P. Motornyy, co-ender of
the 512th iap. and Capt 2. V. Semenyuk. inspector pilot of the 220th iep.

Valentin Nikolayevish Maker-w wee born in 1919. He began serving in avia-
tion as a young man of 18. As a fighter element co-ender, V. N. Hakerov
from the very first days of the Great Patriotic Her proved to be an able

air fighter. For a series of victories over the enemy even at the end of
1961 he was awarded two Orders of the Red Banner, and in August 1962. the
Order of Lenin. V. N. ﬂakarov joined the Conunist Party in 1962. By the
start of 1943. he had 662 combat sorties to his score, 118 dogfights, 15

enemy aircraft shot down personally and 6 as part of a group. At present

Maj Gen Avn V. N. Hekarov is continuing to serve in the ranks of the USSR
Areed Forces.

lvon Porfir'yevich Motornyy was born in 1918 in Nikoleyevskaya Oblast.

As a youth he worked as a lathe operator. he joined the Red Army in 1937
and coepleted the Odessa Flight School. He began the Great Patriotic Var
as a flight comnnder of the $12th isp where he rose to the level of regi-
ment coneander. He proved himself to be an intrepid pilot and able com-
mander. lie joined the Conunist Party in 1942. For combat skill and

107
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

courage Capt Motornyy in 1962 received the Order of Lenin and two Orders
of the Red Banner. By the start of 1963 he had eede 453 cowet sorties
and conducted 117 dogfights in which he had shot down 15 fascist aircraft.
Subsequently this score was increased. Av. present I. P. Hotornyy works
as the chief nechanicel engineer at one of the large conbines in Riga.

Zekhar Vladiairovich Seeenyuk was born in Zhitoeirskaya Oblaet in 1919.

In 1938, he conpleted Odessa Flight School. He joined the VKP(b) in 1961.
He started the Great Patriotic War as a flight comnder end ended as the
inspector pilot of an air division. As of January 1963 Capt Sensnyuk had
357 conbst sorties to his score. He had carried out 95 dogfights and
personally shot down 16 eneey aircraft, and 6 in a group. Ila received the
Order of Lenin and two Orders of the Red Banner. After the var he conpleted
the Red Banner Air Force Acad-y and later couanded a reginent and a
division. In 1958. Col 2. V. Sensnyuk died prenaturely.

0n 1 Hay 1953. the squadron navigators of the 99th bsp Capte A. P. Krupin
and A. H. Turikov. and the deputy squadron cot-antler of the 520th iap

. Sr Lt N. V. Kharitonov were granted the title of Hero of the Soviet Union
for the courage and herois- shown in the Battle of Stalingrad.

In the fierce engagements the contenders of the air formations and units
demonstrated the ability to organize and carry out involved conbat missions,
and to control their units and subunits. They served as an exanple for
their subordinates. Many of then were promoted to nore responsible posi-
tions and because proninent aviation chiefs. here are just two of then.

The contender of the 220th iad. Col A. V. Utin. entered the war as a najor,
and was in contend of an air regiaent and division. and fro- July 1963,

the V1 Guards Fighter Air Corps with which he fought all the way to Berlin.
He was awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union for personal feats and
for the exemplary fulfillment of sissions of the cos-and. After the end of

the war he contended the aviation of a district and bees-e a lieutenant
general aviation.

The co-nander of the 291st sad. Col A. N. Vitruk began the war as a major
and ended.it as a Hero of the Soviet Union and eajor general aviation.
with his faeoue 10th Guards shad he took an active part in expelling the

Nazi troops fron Yugoslavia. and for this he was awarded the title of
People's hero of Yugoslavia.

The 16th AA during the period of the Battle of Stalingrad carried out
26,656 conbat aorties. including 10,588 for boebing and strafing actions
against the Nazi invaders, 6.11.6 for providing cover for troops and rear
installations of the front, 3.087 for attacking enay airfields and block-
ading then. 4,262 for providing cover for their own airfields and escorting
aircraft, 2,402 for air reconnaissance. and 1.508 for intercepting enemy
aircraft and for "free hunting."

68
P08 OFFICIAL USB ONLY
708 Ol’FlClAl. USE ONLY

During the 5 nonths the fliers of the M conducted 820 dogfights and de-
stroyed $71 enemy aircraft in the air and 65!. at airfields. During this
period their losses were 3-fold loss.

Uuuing the designated tins. over 800 tanks and snared vehicles. up to 500
artillery pieces, nore than 6.000 notor vehicles and such other oilitary
equipment as well as one-y personnel were destroyed and put out of action.

As a result of the world historical victory at Stalingrad. there was a
fundamental change in the course of the Great Patriotic Bar and ﬂorid Her
Ii.

"in this battle." said Conrado L. l. Brezhnev. General Secretary of the
(IPSU Central Oomittse. at a seating devoted to the opening of the nonu-
ment at Homayevyy Kurgan. "not only were crack Nari troops crushed. Here
the offensive thrust gave out and the moral of fascism was broken. The
collapse of the fascist bloc started."1

Mtcr Stalingrad the strategic initiative passed fir-1y into the hands
of the Soviet Supra-o High Co-and. Our troops went over to a general
offensive which in fact continued until the war's end.

For the Soviet Air Force. the Battle of Stalingrad was a serious testing
of combat naturity and skill. It was successfully passed by our aviation.
Upon recognition of the German co-snd. the fascists lost an entire air
army at Stalingrad. The victory of Soviet aviation at the walls of the
Volga fortress was an ioportant stage on the path to the subsequent winning
or strategic air superiority.

The battle along the shores of the Volga also was of great significance
for the 16th M. The M was born in the fire of the great engagenent and
it was tempered and grow stronger. its personnel showed true heroisn and
total dedication to their fatherland. Pron operation to operation the
might of the M rose and grow stronger, its operational application was
improved and air tactics were developed.

in the course of the battle. the ooot inportant nission of the 16th M
was to provide the greatest possible aid to the ground forces, and sore
than 6!. percent of the sorties were spent on this. The basic efforts of
aviation in the defensive operation were ainod at destroying the approach-
ing enony reserves and the enemy concentrations on the battlefield as well
a» at supporting the counterstrikas by our troops. During the period of
the counteroffensive. the air formations and units of the M participated
in preparing for the breakthrough and in the continuous support of the
advancing troops. carrying out. in essence. the nisaions of an air offen-
sive. They constantly provided reconnaissance and cover for their troops.

l I.. l. Brezhnev. "Leninskin Kurson" [By the Loniniat Course]. Speeches and
Articles. Vol 2. lioscow. Politirdat. 1970. p 68.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In carrying out thoao nioaiono the flioro provided eubotantiel aid to the
troopo. having won the profound roopect of the aoldiora and co-andora.
In the courao of conbat aviation acquired rich experience in organizing
and carrying out prociao coordination with the ground forcoa.

In the Battle of Stalingrad. ainultanoouoly with the fierce engagononto

on the ground. on ortronoly tonoo atrugglo developed for air auperiority.
and for our aviation thia bocano one of the neat important eiaeiono taking
up over 30 percent of all oortioo. Regardlooa of tho nuorical ouporiority
of foaciat aviation and the eeiring of initiative by it, our aviation. and
above all the fliora of the 8th and 16th M. ouccoodod in loving fro. an
air defence to an offonaivo and to defeat tho one-y air aruda. The vic-
tory woo achieved due to tho high noral atrength of tho Soviet fliore and
their naaa horoion. to tho pro-pt quantitative and qualitative reinforcing
of tho aircraft fleet of the M, to tho bringing in of tho forcoe fron the
2d and l7th M and unite of tho air dofanee and long-range aviation into
the otrugglo for air auperiority in the Stalingrad eoctor. aa woll ea due
to tho continuouo inprovooont in tho nothoda of tho conbat uoo of aviation.
and in particular tho tactico of conducting air conbat. At Stalingrad.

the bent flying unite of faociat Ger-any were defeated.

During the concluding atage of thia great battle. tho fliers of the 16th
M, together with the fliora of tho adjacent M and the antioircraft troopa
of the Don and Stalingrad fronta. auccoaefully carried out an air blockade
of the ourroundod one-y grouping. M a rooult of thin the only air trana-
port suffered irrecovorable loaooa. and thia accelerated tho conploto defeat
of tho faociot any of 330.000 non which won deprived of tho poooibility of
roinforceuont and aupply by air.

At Stalingrad a beginning woo node to controlling aviation by radio fro-
the ground and in deploying a detection. warning and guidance ayaton for
groups of aircraft over the battlefield. Thia helped to win air auporiority
and in noro effective air oporatione against ground targota.

In the combat eupport of troopa and aviation. air roconnaiaoanco hold a
very important place. and ita aignificence grow continuouely. In poaaeao-
ing initially aeveral roconnaiaeenco aircraft. tho M by the end of the
bottle on the Volga had a reconnaioaance reginent and. in addition. uaod
nquadrono of fightora and aaoault planeo for carrying out reconnaiooanco.
This node it poaaiblo to conduct roconnaiaoance during tho day and at night
and with great frequency. Thia aupplied the nooda of the count! end tho
troopa.

In the course of conbat. the rear oerviceo of the M alao acquired great
experience. Regardloao of the ahort tine of their fornation, the roar

unite learned under difficult autu-I and weather conditiono to croeto the
necoaoary airfield network for the any and eupply coebat both in a dofonaive
operation and in a counteroffonaivo.

50
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

The victory at Stalingrad wae achieved due to the enornnue noral auperior-
ity of our troopa over the Nazi aggreaaora. All the pereonnel of our troopa.
including the 16th M. wee aeited by the use deaire. to atop the eneny and
deal hin n cruahing blow. The leading and guiding activitiee of the Con-
nuniat Party were continuoualy felt. and the party led and inapired the

men to fight againet the Nazi invadera.

The party political work which wee developed in the formation. unite and
eubunita played an enornoue role in indoctrinating thia noble patriotic
deaire. The baaic content of the party political work wee an indoctrina-
tion of a feeling of high reeponeibility for the fate of the Soviet nother-
lend and hate for faacien. ‘l'ha party called for a continuoue inproveaent
in conbat ahill and an unetinting etruggle againat the eneay up to the
point of ita coaplete deatruction.

In fierce battlea the Soviet fliere ahowed their total loyalty to the
cauae of the Leniniet party, an inflexible will for victory and nilitary
valor. Many of then died heroically in a fatal claeh with the eneny. Heny
began combat in the eky over the Volga eteppee ae inenperienced novicea and
ended the battle at nature air fightera and able co-andere.

‘l'hc coauond. political. flight-technical and rank-and-tile peraonnel of the
air unite and forutiona were tempered and united in the couree of the Battle
of Stalingrad into a aingle conbet collective fuaad together by conecioua
high nilitary diacipline.

Surging iron the fire of the battle of Stalingrad victorioua. together
with the ground forcee the pereonnel of the 16th M in February 19‘) wae
ready to carry out new cot-bat aieaione. The party'a elogan ”Stand to the
Death'" now gave way to the appeal “Forward. ‘l'o the Heat!"

51
POI! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

CHANER 2: PRO}! m “PIRY” ARC 1'0 1'!!! DR")!

The Properetione for the bottle on the Karel: Selient

In February 1963. efter the defeat of the Neoi troopo at Stelingred. by e
decioion of liq sue. the Control Front vee foreod heeded by Gen Are It. It.
Rohoeoovokiy (nonber of the Iilitery council, Hej Gen K. P. Tolegin. chief
of oteff Lt Gen H. S. Helinin). The front vee conprioed beoicelly of troopo
fro. the former Don Front end included the 16th M.

The troope of the Control Pront vere deployed between the lryenolt end
Voronezh fronto, end up to the eiddle of North perticipeted in bettleo in
tho Orel oector. in the oocond helf of North. they went over to the de-
fensive. foning the northern fece of tho Karol: Seliont.

The 16th M veo robeeed froe Stalingred in tho following fighting etrength:
tho lot Guerde ied (coo-endor. Col A. V. Utin. end from Auguot Col V. V.
Sukhoryebov). tho 283d ied (co-endor. twice Hero of the Soviet Union. Lt
Gen Avn S. P. Denieov. end fro. Decoder. Col 8. h. Chine), tho 2d Guerdo
ohed (co-under. Col 6. o. lonerov). tho 27lot nhed (co-lender. Col H. Kh.
Borioenko). tho 16th odrep end the llth Treining Regioont (ntep) (co-endoro.
Lt Cole 0. S. Shoretyuk end H. H. Kut'nin).

In Herch tho M received tho III loobor Air Corpe (co-endor. He) Gen Avn
A. z. Kerevetokiy) including tho zlolot bed (Zloth. 128th end 179th bop) end
tho JOlot bed (36th. 56th and 96th Guerdo bop). The eir divieiono voro
under tho co-end of Cole I. G. Kurilenlw end P. H. Pedoronlw. tho 299th
ohed (tho blot. 217th. 218th. ”let em! 874th ohep) woo under Col 1. V.
Krupokiy. end the 286th ied (165th. 721ot. 739th end 896th iep) under Col
1. I. Ivenov. In May. tho M received the VI fighter Air Crope (iek) (coo-
nendor. hero of the Soviet Union he) Gen Avn A. B. Y‘neohov, end fro. July
Hero of the Soviet Union. Hej Gen Avn Yo. Ye. Yerlykin) conoieting of the
237d ied (157th. 163d end 367th iep) under the co-end of Col 1. Yo. Podorov.
end the 279th ied (92d. 192d end 686th iep). under the co-end of Col 17. N.
Duent'yev. ee veil en the VI Mixed Air Corpo (oek) (co-endor, hero of the
Soviet Union Hej Gen Avn I. D. Antoehltin) oonoieting of the 221ot bed (the
8th Gnardo. 57th end 7‘5th bep) under the conend of Col 5. V. luxylov. end

the zeta ied (127th. 517th end 774th iep) under the con-end of Col Yu. H.
Borkel .

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIAL 088 ONLY

All the air for-etions hed coebet experience. but Ieny of the eir units

hed up to 50 percent young fliers free the reserve reginente in their
fighting strength. the contenders end politicel workers free the newly
arrived eir crops end divisions were experienced. energetic end enterprising
lenders. ‘rhey hed eeny yesre of experience of flight end politicel work

es well es coehet experience ecquired fro- the outbreek of the wer easinst
the Nsti invedere.

In April 1963, Col P. I. Breyho wee eppointed chief of steff of the 16th
AA. Petr Ignet'yevich [Breyho] wes horn in 1902 in e worker fenily. lie
hegen serving in the Red Army free the ego of 17. In 1927 he joined the
V00). Proe 1928 he served in the evietion. Initielly he wee e spotter
pilot end then held us“ end co-end poeitione. During the Greet Petriotic
Her he slowed froe the chief of steff of en sir regieent to the chief of
steff of en eir corps. Proe this position P. I. nreyko wee eppointed the
chief of steff of the sir erey.

At the sees time. He: Gen Av H. h. Koeylth wee proeoted to the position of
deputy co-snder of the 16th AA.

During the period of the preperetione for the bottle on the Kursk etc. to
bring the heedquerters of the AA up to full strength experienced end well
trained officers were eseigned to the poeitione of chiefs of deperteents.
on follows: Operetions Col 1. I. Ostrovskiy. reconneissence. Lt Col 6. K.
Prussekov. co-unicetions Lt Col R. D. Ignetow; sir defense Col 1. N.
Bodukhin. the eir gunnery eervice Lt Col s. A. Iesov. technicel supply
Col A. c. Doroshenko. orgeniution end lennin; Col 3. I. Plekss. end chief
of steff for not eervicee Lt Col )1. A. Golodyeyevekiy.

After rehssin; to the Centrel front end reinforcing, the AA during Herch
opereted egeinet reilwey Junctions in the Orel sector. egeinet reeds leed-
in; to the front, easinot the may reserves es well es sgeinst enemy troops
on the bettlefield. It provided cover for the bottle fonetions of our
troops end linee of co-unicetions eseinst etteck by eneey evietion end
csrried out eir reconneissence.

During Herch the sir srey cerried out 5.178 ceebet sorties. it conducted
94 dogfighte end shot down 53 eircreft: on the gromd 23 may eircreft
were destroyed es well es e lerge quentity of eneey Iilitery equipeent.

The fsscist cot-end. in endeevoring to weeken the consequences of the
nejor defects of its troops in the winter of 1962-19“ end to regein the
lost stretesic initietive on the Soviet-Genera Front. in the spring hegen
to prepere e new offensive (under the codenene of Citedel) ageinst the
Soviet troope which hsd occupied the Kurslt Selient. 'i'he heeie creeted two
strong groupinge which were to cerry out pincer strikes in the generel
direction of Kurek. In the region to the eouth oi' Orel they concentreted
over is divisione, including 6 tenlt. up to 3.500 guns end nortere end up
to 1.200 tenlu end eeseult guns. A ei-iler grouping of epproxi-stely the
some coapoeition wee deployed to the north of Kher'hov.

53
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
POI ORIGIN. 083 ONLY

The eneny grouping in the region of Oral waa eupported by the 6th Air Pleet
nuebering up to 900 aircraft. and ee a total in the region of the Rural:
Salient were concentrated 2.050 enely aircraft. that ie. two-thirda of the
aviation operating at that tine on the Soviet-Carlee Front.

The Central Voroneeh nod Southwaetern fronta by the etart of the Ger-an
offenaive had 2,650 aircraft. Thue. the overall balance of forcee in
terna of aviation wee in our favor.

The Soviet Supr-e high Co-and, having pronptly detected the aneey'e
plane. decided initially by e etubborn and active defence to wear down

and bleed the advancing eneny. and than to nove over to a counteroffaneive
and crueh ite eeaault groupinge.

The 16th M. in preparing for the defeneive operation. wee to provide
cover againet air etrikee for the troope of the front. the rear inetalla-
tione and linee of col-unicetiona. to carry out continuoue reconneieaence.
to inpede the advance of enemy troope by attaching than at their beeee and
on the way to the front. to deetroy enuy aviation at the eirfielde and
he reedy to eupport our troope in the event of enany attack.

0n the beeie of the deciaion of the contender of the M. the eteff elabor-
ated e combat plan for the forthconing operation in three vereione. pro-
ceeding iron the moat probable directiona of the nain etrike by the Nazi
troope. In accord with thie the etaffe of the air fornatione and unite
eleborated their on plane and clarified the queetione of control and
interaction with the ground forcee end between the brenchee of aviation.
At the co-and poet of the co-ander of the coabined erne any on the aain
eector an auxiliary co-end poet (9W) wee organized for the M.

The cover for the troope end reer inatellatione wee entrueted to the 6th
ink end the let Guerde ied. In addition. all the fighter unite had duty
eubunite on alert for taking off to repel one-y aviation. and when necee-
eery they could participate in full atrangth in repelling the attache.

For guiding the fightere to the aneuy aircraft and for controlling th- in
the air, radioe were eatabliehed along the forward edge. and here were
etationed reeponeible repreeentetivee of the air divieione.

bong before the operation for the aupport of the bonbere and aeeeult planee.
fighter eir fornetione had been eeeigned to than. The operationa of the

3d belt were to be eupported by fightere free the 6th iak. the 2d Guerde
ehed by the 283d ind, and the 299th ehed by the 286th led: the 6th aek hed
e fighter air divieion ea part of it.

The boeic eet'nod of providing cover for the bonbere and eeeault plenee wee
the direct eecorting of then to the target. over the target and upon return.
However. depending upon the air eituetion. it wee propoeed that a group of
fighters would be neat out ahead of tine to the area where our bonbere and

neeault plenee were to operate for the purpoee of neutralizing the eneny
fightera.

$6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

In March. the enemy aviation did not ehow any particular ectiveneee in
front of the Central Front. By the etert of April thie nade it poeeible
to ehift the baeic forcee of the 16th M to reer airfielde (80-200 In
behind the front line) for overhauling the aviation equip-ant. and for
providing colbat training and ehaping up of the young flight pereonnel.
The neceeeity of pulling back the air fornatione wee alao caueed by the
spring muddy eeaeon. when neny forward airfielde for an extended tine
becene uneuitable for the baeing of aviation.

in line with the inactivity of the troopa on both eidee at the forward
airfielde only the 283d iad and the Guerde 79th ehep and the Moth nbep were
left. They were given the following aiaeione: To repel attache by eneey
nvietion and provide cover for our troope. periodic eortiee for etrafing
upon cell froe the forward co-and poete, nighttine operatione to dierupt
enemy eoveeente and the conducting of raconnaieeance. Operational air
reconnaieeance wee carried out by the 16th odrap and a equadron of the
98th Guerde odrap of the VCR froe their own eirfielde.

In the couree of coebat training with the flight and technical pereonnel.
chief ettention wee paid to increaaing coebat ekille end eeetering the
operation of the air equip-eat. ae well ae to etudying the conbat experience
of the beat crewe. The pereonnel of the 286th iad wee retrained for the
l.e-5 aircraft wich eurpaeeed the faeciet fightere by £040 h- per hour in
speed ae well ea in terne of vertical eeneuvere.

in all the air unite and for-etione. conferencee were held for the flight
and technical peraonnel, and after which the «need of the air erey held

e 2-dey aeeelbly for the co-andere and chiefe of eteff of the air forea-
tione. At the aeeelbly reporte were heard by Gen 8. l. Rudenlno ”Our Mie-
eione for the Spring-Sue.“ Saeeon of 1963" and the co-endere of the 3d

halt. the 2d Guarde ehad and the let Guarda iad “0n the Goebat Uee of boebere.
Assault Planee end Pightere end Coordinetion Between Then."

In April 1943. the 16th M carried out 1.601 conbet eortiee. and here the
pilots cerried out 13 dogfighte in which four anally aircraft were destroyed.
while eix were deetroyed and danged on the ground. having loet four of our
own eirplenee.

At the etert of Hey. the air for-etione of the M were ehifted to the for-
ward eirfielde. where coebat training wee continued. here chief attention
wee given to aaetering the Air Force tactice and the air equip-eat. ae well
as to ieproving navigator end air gunnery training. Plight training wee
ail-ed at eharpening piloting techniquee. at inprovi‘ng teen-work in the con-
bet fornetione of the flighta end equadrone in carrying out varioue aiaeione.
end on working out the nethode of conducting air coabat. particularly group.

The young fliera learned of the colbet area and it wee ovarflown. The
personnel etudied the ground and air eneey.

55
1’08 OWICIM. US! ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The politicel depsrtnents of the stay end the eir forestions ss well so the
perty end Koeeoeol orgenizetions during the period of prepsretions for the
operetion cerried out extensive work to eobilire ell the personnel to suc-
cessfully cerry out the eissions of the con-end. The co-snders snd poli-
ticel workers expleined the situetion on the fronts to the evietors. they
populerieed the co-bet experience of the erey in previous bettlss. end or-
asnieed neetings of the young een with for-er fliers end nevigetors.

The co-end. the politiesl bodies. the perty end Konsonol orssnisstions
indoctrinsted in the personnel en unrestreined offensive drive end resdi-
ness to cerry out the net eissions et eny price.

The engineer end technicel personnel of the sir foruetions. unite end re-
psir bodies of the srey onsnized precise work to rebuild end ropsir the
evietion equip-ent. The sir specielists worked without considering the

title. As e result. the nuber of flying eirersft ruched 91 percent of the
eveileble.

The unite of the sir srey resr services in April-June 19‘3 elso intensely
prepared for the pending operetion. by its stsrt the reer bodies consisted
of 30 beo which were orgenired in five (21st. 56th. 75th. 79th end 80th)
RAB. four sirfield engineer bettelions. three eirfield tschnicel bettelions.
four heed sir depote. nine field sir repeir shops. one stetionery eir shop.
fourteen eirfield technicel tee-e. one motor vehicle shop end one trensport
eir squsdron. All the beo were 90-100 percent of full strength in tense of
personnel end two-thirds in tens of actor transport end speciel vehicles.

Hithin the bounderies of the M there were 128 sirfields (eround one-third
wes occupied by evietion) end 9 fields for the Po-2 eircreft. This con-
pletely net the conbst operetions of the sir forestions end units. The
sirfields of the fighters. esssult plenee end night bonbers were 25-35 I:-
ewey fro- the front line, end for the deytine boebers, e distence of 60-70
In. Hen-sde [cenouflsge] covers were found et eight sirfields. At e lerger
portion of the sirfields. dugoutn. cost-end posts end shelters for the sir-
creft hed been built. Two-thirds of the sirfields hed neturel ce-ouflege.

In addition to the operetinz eirfields. up to 50 du-y ones were built with
260 eircreft duuies. In the pteperetory period for the operetion. they
were ettecked by enemy evietion 61 tines.

The created supplies of fuel end susunition were sufficient to support the

conbet operetions of the M for 8-9 dsys. In eddition. there wee e 3-dey
untouched reserve.

Pron Hay 1963, the coebet operetions of the 16th M grew lore ective. All
the sir fornetions end units were involved in this. Along with conbet
prepurstions. the eruy provided cover for the troops of the front, the
Kursk reilroed junction. the esction of the Kurskwkeetornoye rsilroed

end its own sirfields. it conducted sir reconneisssnce. it destroyed eneny
evietion in the eir end et the sirfields of the Orel eir center. it sttecked

troope discovered by sir reconneissence end bombed reilroed etetions end
trscke. 56

P0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The ground forces. as a-rule. were provided with cover by sortias to repel
enesy aviation fro: a status of "airfield duty." by call free the forward
co-aand posts of the co-andera of the 6th iak and the lat Guards iad. In
none instances troop cover was provided by patrolling. This was the case.

for example. in June when the troops of the 13th Aray carried out a partial
operation. '

The cover for the railroad junctions of Kurak and Kaetornoya and the sec-
tion of the road between then was provzded by the periodic patrolling of
one or two fighter ale-ants. as wall as aorties to repel eneoy aviation
by flights. squadrons and regiments on duty at the airfields.

On our own niriields were covered by fighter elements and fours which were
constantly in a state of readiness No 1. They took off from data of the
VNOS posts of “by eye" (upon a signal fro- the regimental contend post).
when necessary the basic strength of the squadrons and ragieents took off
after the duty crews.

The fighters took off in groups of 2-3 and sore ale-ants to intercept one-y
bombers. in scheloning the flight in altitude. they tied don the eneny
covcr fires in conbat with a portion of the forces while the nain forces
attacked the bombers.

The reconnoitering of the liari troops and aviation in the basic sectors
was carried out with the intention of discovering the plans of the Ger-an
col-sand. By the Iiddle of May the air scouts in the region of Oral and
Krony had established a concentration of over 900 anaay tanks and up to
1.500 vehicles. and over 580 eneay aircraft at the 16 airfielda of this
sector. It was clear that the eneuy was preparing a strike fron Oral to
the south. In June alone. 1,660 cosbat sortiea were ads for reconnais-
sance out of the total of 6.060.

Tactical air reconnaissance was carried out during the day basically by
fighter elements and fours. Depending upon the situation and the area
of reconnaissance. the composition of the group was sometimes increased
up to a squadron. In any of the led. the best squadrons were isolated
and these were mainly concerned with recomaisaanca and were rarely used
for carrying out other co-bat nissiona. In June. fighters for the first
tine used aerial photography and this provided good results. Nithgtiae
reconnaissance was carried out by the crews of the Po-2 aircraft.

Operational reconnaissance was carried out by the 16th odrap and the
assigned crews of boabers on Pe-Z aircraft. The results of the aerial
photography were used in asking the nap blanks for the troops.

For the purpose of weakening the enemy air grouping in the central section
of the-Soviet-Gernan front and for creating favorable conditions for win-
ning air superiority. according to the plan of headquarters. during the
period from 6 through 8 May. a large air operation was carried out for the
first tine to destroy ens-y aviation at airfields located along a broad
front (up to 1.200 Ina). Six air erniaa participated in the operation.

57
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to the start of the operation. careful air reconnaissance was or-
ganised end this not only disclosed the base points of one-y aviation
but elso dotsreined tho coabet oporationel procedures. For this reason
the attecks were confined to the time when the largest nueber of eircroft
end personnel had occuoulated at the airfields.

According to tho plan, on 6 May at 1627 hours. 200 eircroft from the 16th
AA (2‘ Po-Z fro- tho 3d bet. 6‘ 11-2 froe tho 2d Guerds shed ond_tho 299th
shed. and 112 fighters fro- the 1st Guards. tho 283d and 286th isd) eede

e oaeoed attack on tho eirfiolds of tho 0ro1 Air center. At the one-y eir-
fiolds. 56 eircroft. 15 motor vehicles. 5 fuel and eonunition dumps were
destroyed and dansged. 9 firing positions of sooll caliber antiaircreft
artillery (SOAA) were noutrelixed end over 20 fires started.

The air strikes against the airfieldo yore coebined with active air coebet

over enemy territory. here our fighters succeeded in destroying 22 one-y
aircraft in tho air.

0n 7 Hey. during tho dey ettacks were lads against tho airfield of
Kulikovke (16 11-2 froo tho 299th shad end 12 Le-S free the 286th led) and

egainot tho Khnelaveye airfield (12 11-2 from tho 2d Guards shed and 1A
Yak-l fron tho 283d isd).

At tho Kulihovko airfield, regardless of tho heovy counterections of tho
SCAA end enony fighters. 16 ene-y eircroft were destroyed. The strike
against the Khnoleveye airfield woe unsuccessful.

For cerrying out ottacks on one-y oirfiolde, on 6 hey the AA lost 27 essoult
ploneo and 8 fighters, neinly for the following ressons: Surprise of the
ottock wes not achieved and the messy succeeded in readying its fighters and
SCAA to repel the raid; enemy antiaircraft weapons were not sufficiently
suppressed; the odjecont enemy eirfields were not prontply cooled off by
fighters free the let Guerds ied (they arrived lots at the torgot): the
bottle foruetion of the essault plones and the cover fighters in entering
the zone of strong entieircroft fire woo disrupted and this weakened their
defenses egeinst ens-y fighters; the interaction between the osoeult planes

end their covering fighters had not been sufficiently worked out in practice
in conducting joint air coobet.

Disconcerted by the reids froo our aviation. the Nezi co-and wee forced
to relocate many eir units into the roor, end to spread out end carefully
camouflage its eircroft.

In addition to strikes on eirfiolds end reilrond stations. the air forme-
tione end units of the AA periodically bombed end strofed enemy troops dis-

covered by reconnaissance, in making over 1,200 eircroft sortioo in June
for this purpose.

$8
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The daytime boabers of the 3d belt operated in groups of 9-18 Pe-2 aircraft
under the cover of 8-16 fighters. The bombs were dropped on the target
froe altitudes of l.300-3.000 meters from horizontal flight.

The assault planes free the 2d Guards and 299th shad nade attacks against
encey personnel and nilitary equipment in groups from 6-8 aircraft up to
2-3 squadrons under the cover of the ease number of fighters. The assault
planes operated from altitudes of from 1.300-900 meters to a dive. they
used a "circular" battle formation and attacked the targets in eleaents
or in single aircraft with several passes.

The 271st nbad carried out night bonbings of the enemy using Po-2 aircraft.
In Hay and June. it made 5,1080 combat sorties. In addition to the material
deaage these bombers had an exhausting effect on the enemy troops. reduc-
ing their aorale.

In addition to periodic attacks on airfields and enemy troop eccuulations.
the air units also attached other objectives. Thus, at the end of April
190, intonation was received on the quartering of enemy staffs, the con-
centretion of troops and the presence of enemy depots in the settle-ant of
Lokot' end at the railroad station at Brasovo. 0n S May, 50 Pe-Z aircraft
froa the 301st bad. under the cover of fighters from the 283d iad, made a
heavy attack against these objectives. Prom a aessage received from the
staff of the Partisan Hove-ant. as a result of the boeber strike, in the
nettlement of Iaokot' the building where a major German staff was quartered
was destroyed as well as the dumps and several houses in which were quartered
the German couandant's office and a troop unit heading to the front.
Around 300 soldiers and police-en. and several armored vehicles and tanks
were lost to the Nazis on that day. At Brasovo Station. a troop train was
destroyed and a fuel dump blown up. The bombers lost two crews.

The strikes by our daytime and night boabers against railroad stations and
track disrupted the transporting of enemy troops and their supply. The rail-
road section of 0rel--Olazunovka was subjected to systematic nighttine bomb-
ing. In May alone. 500 sorties were lede against this section. Operations
on the Orel--Bryansk leg were carried out by solitary Pe-2 aircraft during
daylight froe great heights. In May. up to 100 sorties were made to bomb
the stations of chiginok. Putivl' and Vasil'yevlte.

Very significant efforts of the army's fighters were required to repel the
massed raids by enemy aviation on the Rural: railroad junction.

The first raid by Ger-an aviation was made early in the morning of 22 Hay
in waves of 110 bombers of the Ju-87. Ju-88. lie-Ill and lie-110 types under
the cover of 60-70 34-190 and lie-109 fighters. M groups of the first wave

of 68 bombers under the cover of 60 fighters reached the railroad junction
and bombed it. basically by divebombing. from an altitude of 6,000 meters.

59
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

Our fighters she were notified late about the raid net the first groups
of eneay aircraft only in the area of the target where the Heeserschaitts
and Pokker-Hulfs had created a solid curtain around the boabers. Our pilots

pursued than upon the return froa the target and carried aerial coabet
against than.

Our fighters put up strong resistance to the subsequent groups of enssy

bombers. and as a result of this the Nazi pilots dropped a majority of the
boobs haphazardly. in the field or on the outskirts of the city. The last
group of the third wave were prevented from reaching Kursk by our fighters.

During this raid. 76 enemy aircraft were shot down, including 38 by fighters
from the 16th AA. 30 by air defense fighters, and 8 by antiaircraft artil-
lery. The work of the Kursk railroad Junction was disrupted for 10-12 hours.

Here are certain exanples of the operations of the army's fighters which
vere sent up to repel the raid by enemy aviation.

At 0505 hours the approach of a large group of Ger-an bombers under fighter
cover was noted fron the Budanovka airfield (the 283d iad). Then Yak-l on

duty took of "by eye" from the airfields of Budanovka. Shchigry Yuzhnyye
[south] and Kursk Zapadnyy [vest]. In climbing. eight fighters attacked
the enemy bombers while an element engaged the fighters. The attack of our
pilots disrupted the battle formation of the bombers. In benefiting from
this. Jr Lts V. P. Vinogradov, V. A. Baranov and V. P. Vusikov shot down
three Ju-87 bombers. and N. V. Ivanov shot down a FN-l90. Coebat was car-
ried out predominantly in elements at altitudes of from 3,000 to 600 naters.

During the seas tine. the squadron on duty took off from Shchigry Yurhnyye
airfield consisting of seven Yak-7 from the 519th iap of the 283 iad under
the coamand of Sr Lt V. A. Bashkirov. In the region of Kursk. our fighters
encountered a group of Ju-87 under the cover of He-IO9. Three elements of
Yaka attacked the enemy bombers and in closely coordinating they disrupted
their battle formation and shot down six Junkers. Sr Lt Beehkirov was
cliebing in order to engage the enemy fighters and at the sane time was
controlling the group by radio. Soon he spotted a Hesserschnitt which was

about to attack an element of Yaks. Bashkirov hurried to help his coarsdes
and by the first attack shot down a Nazi vulture.

0n 2 June. the German aviation made a larger raid against the Kursk rail-
road junction. About $50 airplanes participated in this raid. including
more than 420 Ju-88 and He-lll bombers and He-llo fighter boabers. as well
as around 120 He-lo9 and FH-l90 cover fighters. The enemy aircraft approached
the railroad junction fron different directions and at different altitudes.
This raid was repelled by fighters from the 16th and 2d AA. the 101st Air

Defense isd and the antieircraft artillery of the Central and Voroneah
fronts.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first wave of enemy aviation numbering 137 bombers and 30 fighters
appeared around 0500 hours from the direction of Oral and was intercepted
at the distant approaches to Kursk at a height of around 3,000 meters.
The Soviet fliers. having forced combat on the cover fighters, attacked
the enemy bombers with the nain forces. The fascists did not expect such
a meeting. having lost 58 aircraft and having dropped their bombs beside
the target, they hurriedly returned to their airfields. Only individual
aircraft broke through to the railroad junction.

In the second and third waves which followed at altitudes of 6,000-5.000
meters from the same direction at 0640 hours and at 0830 hours, there were
120 bombers under the cover of 55 fighters. Some 86 Soviet fighters were
raised against them, and by continuous attacks along the entire route of
the enemy aircraft they shot down 36 boaters. Only 55 enemey aircraft
broke through to the objective in separate small groups.

In the fourth and fifth waves there was a total of 167 bombers and ll.
fighters. They appeared from the south at altitudes of 6,000-7.000 meters
hoping thus to avoid interception at the distant approaches to Kursk. This
deception partially succeeded. Although the Soviet com-and had brought up
large fighter forces of sons 205 aircraft. they were unable to intercept all
groups of fascist aircraft. Around 100 enemy bombers still reached the tar-
get but were unable to destroy the junction. Our fighters. having tied down
the enemy cover groups. with the basic forces scattered and destroyed the
bombers in preventing precision bombing. As a result, over 70 percent of
the bombs dropped by the fascist aircraft exploded far from the mark.

How the German fliers viewed the counteractions of our fighters on that day
can be judged from the evidence of a prisoner of war F., a fighter pilot

f ran the 51st "elders Squadron. The Nazi in an interrogation pointed out

that on 2 June he had made three sorties. carrying 250 kg of bombs in each.
0n the first sortie he was unable to accurately drop the bombs due to heavy
antiaircraft fire. In the third he had to carry out difficult combat against
Russian fighters. but he was able still to drop the bomb. The third time

he did not reach the target as he was shot down by our fighters.

Regardless of the fact that for the raids of 2 June the fascist couand had
used a large number of aircraft, the Kursk railroad junction was not de-
stroyed. The junction resumed operations after 12 hours. But the losses
of German aviation during the raid were enormous. The Germans lost 145 air-
planes. including 106 from fighter attacks and 61 from antiaircraft artil-
lery fire. The losses of Soviet aviation were 27 fighters.

Our pilots fought boldly and courageously, in deanonstrsting examples of
heroism and intrepidness. During the 26 dogfights which were carried out
that day, the characteristic qualities of Soviet aviators were again dis-
closed--boldness. decisiveness. high combat skill. a fervent love for their
fatherland and a desire to vanquish the enemy no matter what the cost. here
are several examples.

6].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An element of our fighters piloted by Lt V. c. Baranov and Jr Lt H. '1‘.
Gavrilov broke straight into the formation of enemy bombers and scattered
them. forcing the bombers to release their payloads over the forest. Ilere
comnist Gavrilov entered into single combat with two Fokker-Runs and
after several attacks shot down one of them. while commmist Baranov in
fighting against the other element of enemy fighters. hit a fascist air-
craft which. in smoking. returned to its territory losing altitude.

In another instance, a group of 50 enemy bombers attacked seven fighters
from the 283d iad. This time the fascists encountered pilots who had been
tempered in the battles of Stalingrad heeded by the squadron ctr-sander

Sr Lt II. A. Neydenov. 0n the first attack he shot down a lie-110. but him-
self came under the fire of two PEI-190. and somewhat later another four
enemy fighters. Haydenov in combat had repeatedly destroyed enemy aircraft
with accurate fire, but now'he was one against six. Raving shot down another
two Pokker-Hulfs, our ace emerged the victor from this difficult battle and
in a damaged aircraft landed at his airfield. In August 1963. Sr Lt N. A.
Naydenov was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. By this time
he had made 281 combat sorties, to his score were 9 fascist aircraft shot
down personally and 3 destroyed in a group with comrades.

He should particularly note the heroic actions of the flight co-asnder of
the 30th Guards lap of the lat Guards iad. Sr Lt A. I. Gorgelyuk. Hith
the appearance of the enemy bombers. he took off from Patezh airfield at
the head of the duty flight and intercepted the head group of fascist air-
craft flying toward Kursk. He attacked first and destroyed the leader of
the group and then turned against the second bomber and also shot it down.
The wingmen engaged other enemy bombers and cover fighters. In an attack
on the third bomber. Gorgalyuk set the right motors of the Junkers on fire.
but at this moment was attacked by six enemy fighters and received a severe
wound. His face was covered in blood. Unable to see anything. he bailed-
out and landed among our troops. It was impossible to restore the vision
of the courageous patriot. In September 1963, Sr Lt A. I. Gorgalyuk was
presented the title of hero of the Soviet Union. He had made 376 combat
sorties and had shot down in dogfights 8 enemy aircraft personally and 5
in a group. At present Aleksandr Ivanovich Gorgalyuk, regardless of his
complete loss of vision, works in Moscow as a deputy chief of one of the
administrations of the All-Russian Society for the Blind. he participates
in military patriotic work and often speaks before the youth.

Along with the heroic feats and skillfull actions of our fliers. shortcom-
ings were also detected in the course of these dogfighta. Certain young
fliers. in desiring to increase their score of enemy aircraft shot down,
at times in a dogfight became separated from their leaders and engaged in
individual combat. These loners mainly became the victim of the German

flighters. At times coordination was lacking in the actions between fighter

groups. as a consequence of which our fliers engaged the enemy fighters and
missed the German bombers.

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subsequent to the daytiee raids. the cos-and of the German Luftwaffe at-
tempted to disrupt the operations of the Kursk railroad junction by night
hunhlnge. 0n the night of 3 June. around 300 different types of aircraft
were sent against Kursk. But this action was unsuccessful. The railroad
junction continued operating.

It nust be kept in nind that the raids on Kursk involved air unite located
not only in front of the Central Pront but also from airfields in Bobruysk,
Smolensk. Konotop, Poltava and Khar'kov.

Without reaching the desired end and suffering unjustified losses in air-
craft and personnel. the Ger-an command was forced subsequently to aban-
don attempt to use large air forces for actions against our rear installa-
lions. From 3 June up to the start of the Battle of Kursk, eneny aviation
did not make massed raids on our rear installations. All the daytime bomb-
ing strikes in this period against our rear objectives were made by enesy
avlntlon predominantly in small fighter groups. basically the FH-l90. Here.
due to the high state of readiness and coordinated actions of our fighters
and antiaircraft artillery as well as to the organized warning systea. the
enemy suffered great losses.

The enemy air force in May and June 1963 psrdiocally operated against our
nirficlds of Shchigry. Russkiy Brod. Behave. Zybino, Budanovka. Krasnaya
anya and others. having lads l6 raids involving around 650 aircraft. Thus.
on 16 Hay, a group of Ju-87 and He-llo boabers in a force up to ‘0 aircraft
under the cover of fokker-Hulfs attempted to attack the airfield of Shchigry
(Yuzhnyye). To repel the attack. is Yak-7 were sent up from the 519th iap.
1hese intercepted the bombers, they partially scattered then and engaged
them before approaching the target. Only individual Ju-87 aircraft and a
group of He-llO broke through to the airfield. Pursued by our fighters,
they dropped the boabs chaotically. without causing any damage to the air-
craft and personnel at the airfield. in this air battle the pilots of the
519th iap succeeded in shooting down 10 eneay aircraft. here Jr Lt s. l.
Kolesnichenko destroyed two He-llO and one FH-l90. having clearly prrved
that with skillful mastery of the Yak-7 aircraft. with the able use of its
weapons and by aimed firing from short range it was possible to successfully
light against the Ha-llO and FH-l90.

Enemy attacks against other airfields were also ineffective. Here the ac-
tive resistance of our fighters was felt as well as the low level of enemy
crew training. particularly for the wingnen. as well as the skillful dis-
pctsnl, camouflaging and sheltering of the aircraft at our airfields.

0hr aviation in Hay-June not only was fighting against enemy aviation but
also, in preparing for decisive engagements. was operating against enemy
troops in concentration areas. impeding troop move-eats, attacking rear
objectives. carrying out reconnaissance. as well as providing support to
nur partisans. in carrying out this mission, on 3 June. the flight com-
mnnder of the 96th Guards bap, hero of the Soviet Union, Sr it B. s.

63
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Bystrykh. was killed. At the head of 9 Pa-Z aircraft. he had taken off
to attack a Nazi punitive detachment which had been surrounded by our
partisans in the Bryansk forest. in the attack on the target his aircraft

was shown down by antiaircraft fire. The navigator Lt Punayev perished
with the pilot.

During the period of preparations for the :umner engagements (April-June).
the air units and forastious of the 16th AA carried out 14.309 combat
sorties. There were 363 air battles. and 308 enemy aircraft were shot down.
Moreover. 106 aircraft were destroyed on the ground in attacking enemy air-
fields. During this period our aviation also suffered certain losses in
air battles and free enemy antiaircraft artillery fire.

in asking boabing and strafing attacks against the enemy. the Nazis were
deprived of a significant amount of military equipment. weapons and percen-
nel.

The missions confronting the 16th AA in the preparations for the Battle
of Kursk were carried out.

in recalling the actions of our aviation during this period, Mar Ave S. :.

Rudenko. in the collection "Kurskaya Bitva" [The Battle of Kursk] hes
written:

"All preparations for battles on the Kursk Salient were carried out in

secret from the enemy. The following episode shows what great attention

was given to keeping our intentions a secret. On one day in July I received
a report from the chief of the intelligence department of the AA. Col 0. K.
Prussakov. Along with a map. he sent photographs which clearly showed two
small groves to the south of Oral. A large number of German tanks was hidden
in these groves. Judging from the tracks and other giveaway signs. the

enemy had endeavored to conceal about two tank divisions here.

"The tanks which had been concentrated in a small area are always an enticing
target for aviation. For this reason the thought immediately came to me of
bombing these small forests and eliminating two Geraan tank formations.

"1 immediately went to see the troop coamander of the front with my proposal.
Gen X. K. Rokossovskiy carefully heard me out and then began to reason:

'Pinn, we can make the Germans lose two divisions. 0n the other hand the
enemy will know we are aware. It will make up the losses of these forms-

tions and then conceal then in such a manner that the air scouts will not
find them however they try.’

"He went on:

64
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'For us now it is most important to convince the enemy that we are not in-
formed of his intentions. and at the same time we ourselves must know well
the grouping of enemy troops and the plans of the Razi command. And for
this we must not alarm the Germans ahead of time. But let then begin to
advance and then hit these woods from the air. Only at that time there
will scarcely be any tanks. we must pursue their movement and then cover
them with boabs.‘

"I could merely agree with Konstantin honstantinovich [Rokossovskiy]. Each
day we continued to send out scouts with photographed any suspicious areas
of the terrain. According to our calculations it turned out that in front
of the Central front by the beginning of July the enemy had concentrated
more than 1.000 tanks and assault guns. The last data of air reconnais-
sance showed that the enemy had basically completed the concentration of
the troops."1

By 5 July 1953. the fighting strength of the AA numbered 1.052 flying com-
bat aircraft. including 260 daytime bombers and 76 night bombers. 261 as-
sault planes. 655 fighters. 22 reconnaissance and spotter planes. In each
air division there were 75-95 flying aircraft (the 299th shad had up to 150
aircraft). The army had 1,028 battle-ready crews.

Support of the Troops in the Defensive Engagement

on 5 July 1963. at 0530 hours. after preparatory artillery firing and air
strikes. the Nazi troops went over to an offensive against the troops of
the Central Front making the main strike to the west of the 0rel--Kursk
railroad. This offensive was not expected for the Soviet troops. The
troops and the aviation of the front had been brought to full combst readi-
ness .

Around 0300 hours, our troops had undertaken heavy counterpreparstion fire.

as a result of which the enemy artillery was significantly suppressed and
started the softening up process later and with weakened forces.

0n the first day of the engagement. particularly fierce battles broke out
in the sector of Haloarkhangel'ak and Yasnays Polyana. Here the enemy tanks
and infantry made up to 10 attacks during the day.

The offensive by the enemy troops was supported by massed air actions. here
each raid involved up to a hundred bombers under fighter cover. In just 1
hour in the middle of the day our aviation had to combat three waves of
enemy aircraft. Flying in the first wave were up to 60 ue-lll escorted

by fighters. The second wave nuebered up to 50 He-lll and Ju-87 under the
direct cover of 20 FH-l90 fighters; it followed the first wave at a distance
of 3-6 km. Coming at the same distance was the third wave consisting of 20
bombers under the cover of 30-60 FH-l90. The bombers flew at different

‘ "Kurskaya um." Moscow. Nauka. 1970. pp 206-207.

65
10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

altitvdes. obviously endeavoring to complicate the counteractiona of the
antiaircraft weapons and to scatter the forces of our fighters. Fighters

from the 6th iak and the let Guards iad took off to fight the enemy avia-
tion.

Our assault planes and bombers initially operated in small groups against
the advancing enemy tanks. artillery and infantry. "hen the Iain direc-

tion of the attack by the Nazi troops had been established. the basic forces
of the 16th AA were committed to action.

here is what was written about this by Mar 80 K. K. Rokosaovakiy: ”The
time came to provide air support for the formations of ground troops. The
commander of the 16th AA was ordered to attack the enemy which was break-
ing through. Rudenko put sore than 200 fighters and 150 bombers in the
air. Their strikes slowed down the pace of the Nazi offensive in this

area. and this made it possible to shift the nearest reserves here. These
forces succeeded in checking the eneny's advance."1

The bombers from the 3d bsk end the 6th ask and the assault planes of the
2d Guards and 229th shad received the nission during the day of destroying
the enemy tanks. artillery and personnel operating basically in squadron-
sized groups under fighter cover. here for the first time our pilots used
the hollow-charge antitank bombs (PTAB) which burned through the armor of
the German Tiger and Panther tanks and put them out of action. An Il-Z
aircraft could carry up to 200 such bombs.

During 5 July. our troops with air support steadily drove off the rr,eated
enemy attacks. However by the end of the day on the main sector the enemy
had succeeded in driving 6-8 km into our defenses.

In fierce air battles against large groups of enemy bombers and fighters.
our fliers deannatrated examples of heroism. valor and courage. The flier
of the 56th Guards iap. Jr Lt V. K. Polyakov particularly distinguished
himself. In a battle against the fascist boabers and the escorting fight-
ers: he shot down one enemy aircraft, and himself was subjected to numerous
attacks. "is Yak-7 was set on fire. In the burning aircraft Polyakov over-
took a Hc-lll and with a blow from the propeller and right wing knocked off

the tail of the bomber. and then abandoned the damaged aircraft and landed
among our troops in a parachute.

Komsomol member V. K. Polyakov had arrived at the front during the difficult
days of the battles at Stalingrad. From the outset he had proven to be a
courageous fighter. In September 1963 he was given the title of hero of

the Soviet Union. By that time he had made 75 combat sorties and had shot
down a eneny aircraft (one of them by reaming). At present. Col V. K.
Polyskov is a candidate of military sciences and teaches at the Red Banner
Air Force Academy imeni Yu. A. Gagsrin.

1 K. K. Rokossovskiy. "Soldatskiy Dolg" [A Soldier's Duty]. Moscow.
Voyenizdat, 1968. p 219.

 

 

66
FOR OFflCIAL US! ONLY
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

oh that day. the eeeietent con-ender of the $19th iep for air gunnery
service. Lt S. K. Koleenichenko. deetroyed three eneey eircreft. During

one of the bettlee Koleenichenko noticed thet hie wingnen hed beiled out

of o hit eircreft end e feeciet fighter wee trying to fire on the pere-
chuting Soviet flier. Koleenichenho inetently ceee to help hie coerede.

he deetroyed the feeciet vulture end covered hie wingnen until he hed lended.
During the period of the Bottle of Kurek Koleenichenko ehot down 16 eneny
nircreft in eir bettlee end in Septeeber wee ewerded the title of Hero of

the Soviet Union. By thie tine he hed nede 116 conbet eortiee. On 21 Octo-

her 19‘). pilot S. K. Koleenichenko died heroicelly in the bettlee for the
motherland.

The nquedron coenender of the 53d Guerde iep. Sr Lt P. P. Retnihov. heed-
ing 8 fightere ettecked e lerge group of enemy bonbere. In the bettle
which eterted up. Retnikov end 8r Sgt Zhigelov ehot down three one-y eir-
creft. During the bettlee of Stelingred end Kurek. P. P. Retnikov nede
220 caonbet eortiee end in 85 dogfighte pereonelly ehot down 11 ene-y eir-
crort end 4 in e group. On 23 July he periehed heroicelly. end e eonth
later he wee poethueouely ewerded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

Mar Avn s. [. Rudenko in the collection "Kurekeye Bitve" hee written: “I
observed dogfighte e greet deel. but never before hed I eeen euch etubborn~
nose. drive end ouch courege from our evietore. Even our enemiee were
forced to recognize the high norel-coebet quelitiee of the Soviet fliere.
The feeciet generel Hellenthin (e perticipent in the bettlee for the Kurek
Bulge) in hie eenoire wrote: 'In the couree of thie engegenent the Rueeien
fliers. regerdleee of the euperiority of Gernen evietion in the eir. ehowed
exceptionel boldneee'."

During 5 July. eccording to the eir defenee dete, in the zone of the Central
Front. around 2,300 overflighte by eneey eircreft were recorded. According
to infornetion of Gen P. l. Breyko. there were eoeente when the enemy hed

sinulteneouely up to 300 bonbere end et leeet 100 fightere over the bettle-
field.

On this dey the fliere of the 16th AA eede 1,232 coebet eortiee, they con-
ducted 76 dogfighte end shot down 106 eneey eircreft.

There were meny exenplee of rkillful ectione. heroiee end velor by our
fliers. But eleo there were uubetentiel eietekee. Certein fighter groups
were not epreed out in wevee et different eltitudee. they petrolled over
their own territory. they preferred to engege the eneey fightere end often
missed the ene-y bombere without eny reel effect. Fighter control from the

«oenend poete of the 6th iek end the let Guerde ied wee not eufficiently
precise.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. US! ONLY

The combat of the assault planes and the boobers. sainly in squadron
groups. as was intended by the plan of operations. did not produce the
expected results in combating the large assault groupings of Nazi troops.
The actions of tho asell groups of our aircraft were easily repelled by
the many fighters and heavy antiaircraft fire on the nain sectors of its
offensive. As a result our aviation suffered high losses. The troops did

not receive proper support free our aviation. It was necessary to change
the decision.

In the evening of 5 July. Gen 8. l. Rudenko. having returned fro- the
comand post of the front where he had boon since the start of the ﬂari
offensive. carefully analyzed with Gen P. I. Brayko the shortconings in

the coebet of aviation during the first day of battle. and took a new
decision to eake concentrated strikes against the large enemy groupings of
tenke and infantry on the battlefield using a large nu-ber of bonbers and
assault planes covered by a use of fighters. In the intervals between such
strikes. there were to be continuous actions by aeell groups of assault
planes and boebers.

Very little tine reesined for preparing the first concentrated strike which
was to be node at the dawn of 6 July prior to the start of the attack by

the German troops. but due to the efforts of the staff this was clearly
organized. At 0500 hours the first to leeve for the target were the bombers
of the 6th oak under the cover of fighters who had joined the bombers over
their airfieldo. The bosbera flew in reginent colums. After the. the
assault plenea node a strong strike. As a total 650 aircraft were involved
in the f irat concentrated strike. The strike was nude against a large con-
centration of fascist tanks and notarized infantry in the region of Podolyen'
and Soborovka. here the bonbera and assault planes used high explooive.
trapentetion and antitank boobs.

For the fascists the appearance of such a large mnber of Soviet aircraft
was unexpected. The effect of their strike exceeded all expectetions.
Scores of tenko renained burning on the bettlefield and such other Nazi
military equipeent was destroyed. The one-y wee able to resuee the offen-
sive in this sector only after 5 hours.

In the following hours the forces of the M lode two other such strikes. end
between then the boebere end assault planes operated the entire dsy in
squadron groups. The representative of headquarters. Her 80 G. K. Zhukov.
end the troop col-sander of the front, Gen K. K. aokoseovskiy. approved the
notions of our aviation.

Our fighters began to provide sore dependeble cover for the troops e'gainst
eneny sir strikes. The patrolling areas were shifted beyond the front line.
and this sade it possible to intercept enemy aircraft prior to their ap-
proach to the battlefield. Clearer control was established tree the con-
eend posts of the cousnders of the 6th iak end the lat Guards iad which

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'OR OH’ICIAI. 083 ONLY

' were on the exis of the nsin strike close to the forwerd edge. At the
sense tise the deteil of fighter pstrols in the sir begsn to be strengthened.
end they were prosptly redirected to the besic groups of eneey bosbers.

0n 6 July. the flier of the 55th Guerds iep. Jr Lt R. P. Polyenskiy. in e
dogfight with two Pokker-Hulfs. hsving used up ell his e-unition. in e
frontsl sttsck with e wing of his eircrsft knocked off s wing of the ens-y

fighter end this dropped like e stone to the ground. Polyenskiy psreehuted
in the positions of our troops.

The pilots free the squedron of Cept ll. 11. Trsgubov (the 721st isp) fought
courageously. end during the dey they destroyed six enemy eircrsft. In
April 19“. Cept N. h. Tregubov wee ewsrded the title of llero of the Soviet
Union. By this tine he hed ends 611 conbst sorties. he hed csrried out 58
dogfighte end hed shot down 16 enesy sircreft personelly end 3 in s group.

During the dsy the operetions of the bonbers end ssseult plsnes were given
better coverege then before. llere the fighter pilots froe the 127th iep
heeded by Cspt P. V. Khinich distinguished the-selves. The boehsrs covered
by then cerried out their lissions without losses. Cept nuisich ssny other
tines emerged the victor in coshet with fsscist fliers end in October 19“
use swsrded the Title of hero of the Soviet Union for the 53S coebst sorties
esde end the 15 eneey sircreft shot down.

On 6 July. the enemy evistion nsde 1.162 eircreft overflights in the zone
of the Centrsl Front. The fliers of the 16th M ssde 1.326 cosbet sorties.

they cerried out 92 dogfights end shot down 113 ens-y eircrsft. The srsy
lost 91 eircrsft.

0n 7 July. the fescist troops undertook still snother series of stt Ipts to ./

breek through our defenses. in the region of Ponyrey. Ens-y evietion ssde
eround 1.000 eircrsft overflights.

The Soviet troops. in driving beck the fierce ettscks by lsrge tsnk end in-
fentry forces. held up the enesy drive. As on the dsy before. our evistion
plsyed en sctive role. 0n 7 July. sfter two unsuccessful sttecks. the eneay
concentrsted up to 150 tsnks. ssseult guns snd 1srge motorized infsntry
forces in the region of Ponyrey. prepsring for s new strike egeinst our
troops. The sir scouts proeptly detected the ens-y grouping. A hesvy
strike was nsde egeinst it even in the initinl position by our srtillery
end svistion (by the forces of 120 ssssult plsnes end bombers). According
to the estissts of the troop wonder of the Centrsl l’ront. the ens-y suf-
fered enornous losses end its ettsck wee helted.

I

. Beginning with 7 Ju1y. s chsnge occurred in the struggle for sir superiority
end the Soviet fighters seized the initistivs. Hhile during the first 2
dsys of sir conbet our losses hsd been sonswhst less then eneny losses (the
loss ratio wss 1 to 1.2). during 7 end 8 July, the fliers of the M shot
down 185 eneey sircrsft losing 89 during this.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As on the preceding days. on 7 July. our fliers showed many examples of
heroism, even to the point of self-sacrifice. The flier of the 874th shap.
Jr Sgt A. s. larnov. carried out an imsortal feat. An enemy antieircraft
shell caught his aircraft over the target. The assault plane caught fire.
Driven by sacred hate for the enemy. the courageous flier aimed the burning
plane into the midst of the enemy tanks. A crew from the 263d shap. the
pilot A. 8. Chererov and the gunner D. c. Uderman. also died heroically.

The squadron couander from the 282d iad. 8r Lt H. I. Virhunov. in escorting
our bombers. engaged several Fokker-Hulfs. and having used up all e-unition
and in endeavoring to prevent the enemy fighters from reaching our bosbers.

and a fascist aircraft. Pilot Virhunov perished in this combat. Friends

buried him on the outskirts of the village of Vtoroye Korotayevo with mili-
tery honors.

The fliers of just the lat Guards iad during the day carried out 38 dog-
fights and destroyed 28 enemy aircraft. The fliers of the 6th iak fought
just as well. Headed by Haj P. P. Kizilov and Sr Lt N. c. Butome. they

successfully attacked large groups of enemy aircraft and caused them signifi-
cant losses.

The assault plane pilots from the 2d Guards shed carried out the mission
excellently. The squadrons of Haj A. P. Chukhayev and Cspts A. A. Bondar'.
C. I. Kopayev and s. l. Vinnik destroyed 15 enemy tanks. 5 artillery bat-
teries and much personnel. Effective results were also achieved by the
assault planes from the 299th shed. Due to the skillful use of the anti-
tank bombs. the pilots destroyed a large quantity of enemy equipment. Five
assault planes led by Sr Lt D. I. Smirnov put 12 enemy tanks out of co-is-
sion. Eight planes under the co-and of Capt K. Ye. Strashnyy in one pass
destroyed ll tanks and 4 motor vehicles. The groups of assault planes headed
by Capt N. M. Karnaukhov destroyed and damaged 15 enemy tanks, 12 motor
vehicles and 3 antiaircraft guns.

The squadron cousnders Capt A. A. Bondar' and Sr Lt D. I. Smirnov in sub-
sequent battles repeatedly showed examples of heroism and courage. In 19“.
they werc awarded the titles of Hero of the Soviet Union. Capt A. A. Bondar'
on 28 October l9“ was killed in carrying out a mission and was awarded the
title posthumously. lie had carried out 261 combat sorties and had destroyed
up to 70 enemy tanks. 250 motor vehicles. 6 enemy aircraft on the ground

and 2 in the air. Sr Lt D. I. Snirnov had 90 combat sorties. and he had

destroyed 37 enemy tanks. 76 motor vehicles, 20 guns and 6 airplanes at
airfields.

0n 7 July the army was reinforced with the 236th iad (the 133d. 233d and
268th iep) under the con-and of Col Ye. Z. Tatsnsshvili.

0n 8 July the ectiveness of the enemy aviation declined somewhat (870 air-
craft overflights were counted). obviously related to the great losses
suffered in the preceding days and to the enormous tension.

70
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 9 July. the enemy after heavy battles regrouped its forces. Its avia-
tion even more reduced its activities, and in the cone of the Central Front
only 316 aircraft overflights were counted. The fliers of the 16th M car-
ried out 920 combat sorties and conducted 50 dogfights during which they
shot down 52 enemy aircraft. Our fighters continued to hold the initiative
in the air.

By this time the control of the cover fighters for the troops had been well
organized from the guidance posts. Thus. a group of fighters from the 1st
Guards iad consisting of 15 Yak-l under the co-and of hero of the Soviet
Union, Guards Capt V. N. Hakarov. arrived in the area of Khmelevoye where
the guidance redio of the division cos-ender Lt Col 1. V. Krupenin was
located. Several ninutes later up to 40 fie-110 aircraft appeared. having
received the cot-sand from the radio, Hekarov's group unexpectedly attacked
the fascist fliers. They chaotically dropped their bombload and withdraw
from battle in a disorganized manner. At the same tine to the north of
Ol’khovatks several groups of Ju-87 and Ju-88 were detected, a total of up
to 50 airplanes. Hakarov's group was i—ediately sent to this area and st-
tacked the eneny airplanes. As a result of the air combat. the eneuy lost
another five Ju—87. two Ju-88 and one 19-190. The retaining aircraft left
the battlefield without dropping their bombs. The enemy bombers were not
aided by their covering fighters.

The energetic actions of our fighters in a majority of instances prevented
the fascist aviation from bombing our troops. The bombers were forced to
increase the operating altitude to 6,000 meters, and as e consequence of
this the effectiveness of the bombing was reduced.

0n the morning of 10 July. the enemy focused all the efforts of its troops
at the boundary area between our two arnies (13th and 70th). in the direc-
tion of Verkhniy Lyubazh. The battles which ensued again asst-ed a fierce
nature and were marked by the leasing of may tank attacks and active avia-
tion operations (950 aircraft overflights were counted). The last attempt
of the enemy to break through along the Orel-Kursk highway was unsuccessful.

The air formations of the 16th M on this day made concentrated and echeloned
strikes against the enemy and covered our troops from the air. The actions
of the fliers were effective and contributed largely to our troops in re-
pelling the enemy tsnk and infantry attacks. About 1300 hours the units

of the 3d halt. the 6th salt and the 2d Guards shad consisting of 171 bombers
and 37 assault planes under a fighter cover made a heavy strike against the
enemy and prevented an attack by strong enemy forces in the region of Rasher.

The comnd of the 2d “rank Army with great satisfaction cos-sated on the
good combat work of the aviators:

“To the co-sander of the 16th M. During the day of 10 July. the aviation
made a massed strike against a concentration of enemy tanks and infantry

in the region to the north of Ponyrey. The tank troops observed the opera-
tions of our aces with excitement and express the great thanks of the tank

71
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
m OFFICIAL USE ONLY

troops to.you. We are confident that our conbot association will further
accelerate the final victory over the oneay. Let us roaind the eneny again
of Stalingrad. Rodin. Letyshev.” The coebat report of the tank any stated
that as a result of the air strike 54 one-y tanks had been sot efiro and
hit.

On 11 July and in tho first half of tho following day, tho one-y again
undertook unsuccessful attacks with limited forces in tho region of Ponyrey
and in tho direction of Degtyernyy. having encountered stubborn resistance
fron our troops which were supported by effective air operations. tho one-y
strike group lost its offensive force and by the and of 12 July had gone
over to tho dofonoivo.

Only at a price of high losses and on onsnoua effort did tho one-y succeed
in the sector of tho main strike of driving into our dofensos in several
places to a depth from 6-12 h during tho period fron 5 through 12 July.

During these difficult bottles. our aviation carried out its duty. This

is how tho operations of tho air for-etions of the 16th M during these
days were viewed by tho comnd of the 13th Army whore tho Ger-one had node
the Min strike:

"To the co-endor of tho 16th M, Rudonko. The nilitary council has asked
that we pass on to the flight personnel were thanks froa our troops for the
active support fron tho air in repelling tho one-y. Hith affection and
war-nth the non have responded to tho successful air strikes by their brothers
in ones, the glorious seas of our front. Re are fir-1y convinced that up

to the end of tho operation the fliers will courageously support tho non

of the 13th Any. Roceive our conradely nilitory greetings. Pukhov,
Kozlov."

The air for-nations of tho 16th M during tho period of tho defensive bat-
tles from 5 through 12 July carried out about 7.600 coabat sorties. they
provided great help to the troops in stopping tho onelry offensive and in
coordination with the adjacent air arnios won air superiority. During this
tins the pilots of the any carried out 380 air battles in which they shot
down 517 eneny aircraft.

Around 20,000 high explosive and frognontation boobs. nore than 23.000 anti-
tnnk boobs and around 6,000 rockets were dropped against tho enouy.

The use by the fascist co-and of large infantry forces supported by a mass
of aviation, tanks and artillery for an offensive on a narrow sector of

the front required the organisation on our side of concentrated boabor and
assault plane strikes due to which many oneny attacks were prevented end
heavy losses caused to the enuy.

In carrying out the concentrated stikes. fro. 150 to 650 aircraft were
used (the cover fighters were 60-65 percent of then). This method of
operations aade it possible for the bonbor and assault plane crews to

72
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

operate in a comparatively cale situation. since the eneey antieircrsft

fire was scattered over my groups of aircraft while the eneey fighters
were unable to put up effective resistance to the ease of our boebers and
assault planes covered by a large masher of fighters. Our aviation could
carry out precision boabing and effective firing on the targets with eechine
guns and cannons. The fighters lore reliably covered its operations.

In carrying out concentrated strikes, in addition to the direct escort.
if the situation required. strong fighter groups (20-30 aircraft in each)
could be sent into the area of operations for 5-»? minutes to clear the air
space of enemy fighters.

The air corps and divisions received their nissions. as a rule. for the
day. and made attacks considering the actions of the ground forces. The
air reginents. in having preliminary orders indicating the area of opera-
tions and the tins of the strike. prepared all the necessary crews ahead
of tine. Not long before take-off, the flight personnel was infer-led of
the situation end received specific targets. The fliers waited for the
take-off signal directly by their aircraft. and for this reason the taking
off of an air reginent tool: not sure than 10 minutes. The assenbly of an
air reginent was carried out while circling over the airfield. The air
divisions ease-bled in the region of an airfield center with the subsequent
passing through a checkpoint (m).

In the process of conbat. the elements of fighter tactics were usually
changed flexibly. As soon as it was clear that the eneuy would endeavor

to impede the operations of our bombers with a significant nueber of fight-
era. a decision was taken to for: the battle forutiona of the covering
fighters fro: three groups: the direct cover. the assault group and the
free combat group. Such a fonation proved fully effective for the fighters.
For exanple. on 7 July, a group free the 774th iap consisting of 10 Yak-l
accoepanied 7 aircraft from the 221st bad to the region of Podolyan. The
fighter formation consisted of four of the direct cover under Lt I. A.
Bonderev, a strike for and a free combat elenent under Sr Lt I. I. Rolan-
enko. In the area of the target, they encountered up to 10 Phi-190 and
tic-109 which in elenents were flying above the clouds. Having noticed

that two elenents of Fokker-Wife were closing in on the strike group, Rolan-
enko, in taking cover in the cloudiness. suddenly attacked then and fro-

a short range shot down one fascist fighter. The renainder disappeared into
the clouds in a conbat turn. Sr Lt Rolanenko with his wingnan Sgt P. I.
Pehenov during this flight carried out two other dogfighte. In acting
decisively and skillfully. Mnenho shot down three ens-y aircraft. and

his wing-an shot down one. The pilots of the strike group and the direct
cover group destroyed three other Hesserschnitts.

In February 19“, for 16 shot-down ene-y aircraft Capt I. I. Romenko
was given the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. At present Maj Gen Ave
1. l. Ilonenenko is the chief of the liigher Military Aviation School.

73
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The fighter forestion during the covering of the eoooult plsnoe consisted.
oo o rule. of two groups. the strike end the direct cover. In encounter-
ing superior forces of one-y fighters. our ooseult plonos for-nod o closed
circle end fought in close coordinetion with tho cover fighters. A group
of 6 11-2 eircreft with good treining of the pilots without my difficulty
could for. ouch e circle. Rich ottecho by enemy fighters. tho circle of
esssult plonoe sovod to their own territory.

‘l'aere were Iony moploe of the successful fighting of esooult plenee in o
defensive circle. 0n 9 July. two groups of 11-2 hooded by tho contender of
tho 78th Guorde shop. Haj A. c. Nehonochnikov. in flying under tho cover of
fighters fron tho 283d ied. over tho bottlofield encountered up to 20 I'll-190
end tie-109 which etteehod tho eoooult plsnos et tho sooent they were diving
st tho torgot. The gunners opened orgonizod fire end drove off tho enemy
sttock. Upon tho comd of Nskonochnikov tho Ils refereed into o circle.
The enemy fires node oovorol other sttecks ogsinst tho eseoult plones. but.
hoving lost three oircroft from their firo. withdrew tron bottle.

0n the solo doy o group of 16 11-2 hooded by tho co-endor of tho 218th
shop. tho strofing sniper Hej N. K. Lyoonho. under tho cover of o group

of Lo-S fro- the 165th iop woe to ottock tenks end one-y personnel in the
region of Ponyri. In the opproech of tho Ilo to tho torgot. tho group of
cover fightoro woo ottecked by six Eli-190. A dogfight ensued. During the
sttsck on the torgot. 8 other I'll-190 oppoorod over tho sssoult plsnos. The
assault plsnos formed e circle in loving to their own territory. The fascist
fighters unsuccessfully ondeovorod to ottock tho lls. In tho defensive
circle they reliebly covered eech othor'o toil. As o result of the combat.
the enemy lost three oircroft end our essoult plonos hsd no losses. The
pronpt foroing of e defensive circle by the ososult plones end the high
vigilance of the crews. their close intoroction with the fighters end the
correct control of the group provided success in conbet.

The comonders of the 78th Guerds end the 218th shop. Lt Col A. G. Kskonech-
nikov end No) R. K. Lyoonko. in 1966. were ewsrdod the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union for volor end heroism (the for-er hed node 81 conhet sortios.
the letter hsd us. hoving doetroyod o large number of vorious nilitory

equipsent end Nexis), so well es for outstending leedership of coohst by the
air unite under there.

The control of Soviet ovistion in the course of the defensive engegeaont was
concentrated in the honds of the co-eondor of the M, the coo-end post of
who- wss located in s grove 25 Inn to the northeast of Kursk. The cousnders
of the oir foruotione. in sddition to their own pornenent consent! posts,
deployed forward cal-lend posts or hod representetivos with rsdios in the
bottle formations of the ground forces. In the uein sector of srny opers-
tions e VPU [suxilisry control point] wes orgenized end this, oo o rule, woo
heeded by the deputy only co—snder. Gen K. H. Kosykh.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the decisive days of the engageeent, the M personnel showed high
norale, a fervent hate for the eneey and an unbreakable belief in the vic-
tory of Soviet em as well as unewervingsteadfastness and tenacity.

The battles in the air were fierce and wearing. But. regardless of the
fatigue and significant losses, the fliers yearned for combat in order to
defeat the enemy and take revenge for lost friends. The fighter pilots and
assault pilots had to nake up to five sortiea a day. The nighttime rest

of the flight personnel did not exceed 6-5 hours. Proe sunrise to sun-
set the fliers were at their airplanes at the airfield ready to take off
when called. The technical personnel, working almost without sleep, nade
a maxim effort to ensure the nost rapid and effective preparation of the

aircraft for the subsequent sortie and for repairing the aircraft denaged
in combat.

The non of the 16th M were aware of what was in store for our notherland
in the event that the Nazi co-and carried out its plans. For this reason

all the personnel of the M, in sparing no effort, fought like all the sen
on the front, not to life but to death.

Party political work during the days of the defensive engagement was very
effective and to the point. The officer political workers nobilized the
personnel of the army unite to excellently carry out the missions of the
cos-sand and to better support the conbat activities of the unit. Meetings
were held at the airfields before the combat aorties. The co-anders. poli-
tical workers, fliers and technicians spoke brie‘ly at the neetings under
unfurled colors of the units. in assuring the motherland and the party of
their desire to nore rapidly clear the homeland of the Nazi invaders.

The political workers, the party organisers, the Koesonol organizers and
agitators eade skillful use of the brief breaks between operations for agi~
tetion and propaganda.

The subject of the talks and information sessions was chiefly released fron
Sovinfornbyuro [Soviet Infornetion Bureau], as well as the successes and
shortconings in the conbat activities of the unit‘s aviators during the
day. The co-sunista and Konsonol members were true proponents of party
influence among the personnel of their unit. -

In eany party organizations of the subunits, party neetings were held at
which they discussed the exesplas set by the co-unists in the carrying
out of conbat eiseions, in preparing the materiel and in carrying out other
nissiona. The meetings were conducted in an active nanner and served as an

important means for indoctrinating and mobilizing the columnists to carry
out the combat lissions.

The army newspaper had a great influence on indoctrinating the personnel.
The descriotion of characteristic combat episodes and heroic feats, indi- \
vidual articles and leaflets inspired hate for the enemy, they urged the
soldiers to show heroism. courage and valor, and they glorified the night

of our army. Examples of the exemplary fulfillnent of combat missions
were inedietely made known to all the personnel.

75
FOR OFFICIAL USR ONLY
FOR OPFICIAI. USE ONLY

The political bodies and party organizations gave particular attention to
joining the 00-min Party and to the indoctrination of young co-unists.

During the period of the operation. work was also done to spread leaflets
anong eneny troops. Special aircraft were assigned for this. Leaflets
were also dropped for Soviet citizens located on tenporarily occupied ter-
ritory, and free them they learned of the true situation on the fronts.

In the course of the defensive engage-ant on the Kursk bulge. the 16th M

by its actions aided the troops of the front in halting the offensive by
the Nazi troops.

Our fliers during this period won an intense battle for- air superiority
and for naintaining it. causing the may enornous losses, prinerily in
air combat. The strikes in May against one-y airfields sonewhat weakened
the force of Gernen aviation. but by the beginning of their offensive on
the Kursk Bulge the enemy had succeeded in Isking up the losses and had
created a strong air grouping in this sector.

The significance of the air battles in the struggle for air superiority is
well illustrated by the following figures. while in March-June 1963. the
air formations of the 16th M, as a result of strikes on enny airfields,
had destroyed end damaged 127 enemy aircraft, in the air battles Soviet
pilots shot down 365 may aircraft.

Oven the several days of the defensive engagement on the Kursk Bulge.
around a thousand air battles were carried out involving the fornations
of three air arnies (16th, 2d and 17th). In these battles the ens-y lost
1.1.00 aircraft. Our losses were 1.5-fold less.1

The Air Army in the Counteroffensive of the Front

The troops of the Central Front. having ground down and bled the assault
grouping of the ens-y during the period of 8-day fierce defensive battles,
by the niddle of July 1963 were ready to go over to s counteroffensive.

The Soviet co-and had worked out ahead of time a plan for defeating the
Orel eneny grouping. The plan envisaged the launching a powerful strikes
by the forces of the Western, Bryensk and Central fronts.

The Orel grouping of Nazi troops. although suffering great losses in the
first half of July. by the start of the counteroffensive of the troops of
the Soviet Arny still represented a great force. It was supported by the
6th Air Fleet which had 1,100 aircraft. including 600 bonbers, 350 fighters

 

1 See "lstoriya Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-19105"
[history of the Great Patriotic liar of the Soviet Union 1961-1955], Vol 3.
Moscow. Voyenizdat, 1966, p ‘01.

76
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and 150 reconnaissance planes. These were based basically at the Oral and
nryunsk airfield centers. Moreover. bomber formations from airfields in
the deep rear were also employed in this sector.

Our air force in the Orel sector (the lat. 15th and 16th AA) had an almost
triple superiority over the enemy.

The formations and units of the 16th AA. regardless of the significant
losses which they had suffered in the defensive engagement. had not only
maintained their battleworthinesa. but had also increased this. The combat
skill of the flight personnel had incruuued.

The youth had undergone its first combat lesson. The engineer and tech-
nicul personnel had acquired experience in readying the materiel under the
conditions of intense operations. and as a result the army each day had
from 560 to 660 flying aircraft in its effective strength.

The counteroffensive by the Soviet troops against the Oral German grouping
started with the forces of the western and Bryanak fronts on 12 July on
the northern and eastern faces of the Oral Salient. and this created favor-

able conditions for the development of the subsequent actions by the troops
of the Central Front.

On 15 July. all the formations and units of the AA received the appeal from
the Military Council of the Central front. In the evening meetings were
held in the air regiments. At them the military aviators vowed to the
motherland. the party and the command to fight to the last drop of blood.
A! a meeting of the personnel of the 261st bad. a reply letter was approved
to the military council of the front. and this letter stated: "We will

bomb only excellently.... We will clear the Soviet land of the Nazi ban-
dits."

On 15 July. after heavy artillery and air softening up. the troops of the
Central Front went over to a counteroffensive in the Kromy sector.

In accord with the decision of the troop commander of the front. the com-
munder of the 16th AA for the period of the counteroffensive gave the fol-
lowing missions to the air formations:

L) By bombing strikes to destroy enemy personnel and military equipment on
the battlefield and deep in the defenses. This mission was entrusted to
the bombers of the 261st and 301st bad to be covered by fighters from the
6th iak and to the bombers of the 221st bad supported by the 282d iad. as
well as to the assault planes of the 2d Guards and 299th shad covered by
fighters from the 283d and 286th iad. At night this ~lssion was to be
carried out by the forces of the 271st nbad;

7) To cover the battle formations of the advancing troops by the fighters
of the 6th iek (the corps was to include the lat Guards iad);

77
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

3) To conduct reconnaissance with the forces of the 16th odrap and by
the squadrons of the 283d and 286th iad.

With the start of the counteroffensive. the AA began to provide the

troops of the front with effective air support. The air formations of the
army on the first day of the counteroffensive made three concentrated
strikes. each with the forces of from 300 to 600 aircraft and lasting 35-50
minutes against the forward edge of the enemy defenses, as well as against
the tactical reserves and concentrations of tanks and personnel. Indi-
vidual groups of assault planes and bombers operated between the strikes.
On 15 July 19‘3. the AA made 1.002 sorties. By the end of the day the
enemy had been driven out of its basic positions by our troops.

Enemy aviation, in suffering heavy losses in the preceding battles. did
not show great activeneea. Only 60 aircraft overflighta were counted.

On 16 July, the enemy put up heavy resistance and in individual areas went
over to counterattecka. Its aviation showed acmswhat greater activity. and
236 aircraft overflights were counted.

On this day the AA was given the mission of preventing the bringing up of
enemy reserves, destroying concentrations of tanks and personnel. and
thwarting its counterattacks. Por carrying out this mission. three con-
centrated strikes were made during the day. In the first (during the
periodof lZGﬁlJOO hours). 410 aircraft were involved, including 155 bomb-
ers, 101 assault planes and 154 fighters. The second strike came 3 hours
later. This involved 6&4 aircraft, including 160 bombers. 123 assault
planes and 181 fighters. The third strike was made at 1900-2000 hours with
a force of 660 aircraft. including 156 bombers, 126 assault planes and 188
fighters. Detached groups of bombers and assault planes operated in the

intervals between the strikes. As a total during the day, 1713 sorties
were made.

The troops of the front advanced somewhat and drove the enemy back from
the lines along which it had endeavored to dig in.

On 17 July the enemy continued to put up stubborn resistance to our troops
and went over to counterattacks. Enemy aviation endeavored to cover its
troops and to bomb our battle formations. As a total 291 enemy aircraft
overflights were counted.

For the purpose of thwarting counterattacks by German troops, for suppress-
ing the centers of resistance and destroying their military equipment and

personnel. the air formations of the 16th AA on this day made three strikes
by large forces, and each of these involved at least 350 aircraft. In

following up on the air strikes. our troops went over to the attack and
successfully advanced.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVPICIAL USE ONLY

How the actions of our aviation were viewed can be seen from the response
of the staff of the 3d Tank Corps. "The bosbsr and assault aviation of
the 16th AA on 17 July made five concentrated and wave etrikes in coopera-
tion with the tanks against enemy troop accumulations. The troops have
high praise for the operation of aviation and particularly the fighters
which during tho day provided reliable cover for the battle formations of
the corps. Chief of staff of the 3d Tank Corps Col Devyatov."

As a total over the 3 days of the counteroffensive the AA carried out
4.678 sorties. it conducted 22 dogfights end shot down 28 enemy aircraft.
Strong air support was provided to our troops.

On these days the Nazi troops were thrown back from the lines wich they
had occupied up to 5 July.

The initiative in the air over the combat area was firmly held by our
fighters. In a majority of instances the enemy fighters in air engage-

ments either suffered losses or did not engage in conbat and retreated to
their own territory.

On one of the combat days, the con-under of the 163d iap, Lt Col P. A.
Pologov, and the fliers Capt V. S. Bogatyrev and Sr Lts V. V. Hakarov and
Ya. i. Filimonov distinguished themselves. On the first sortie. this four-
some was guided by the ground station to 8 FH-190 and 6 Ju-88. Having
spotted the group of Fokker-Hulfs in a break in the clouds. Pologov dove
sharply at the enemy. Raving caught the enemy fighters by surprise they
were forced to turn away. Pologov caught one Pokker-Hulf which was en-
deavoring to pull out of a dive, and from a short range shot it down.
Using the sane procedure Bogatyrev destroyed two fighters. At the same
time Hakarov shot down a fourth enemy aircraft when it was attempting to
climb away. At the end of combat. Pologov, having noticed a retreating
enemy bonber below. caught it and set it on fire with a burst from his
cannon. As a total in this battle, 5 enemy aircraft were destroyed and

2 were hit. Pologov's group did not have any losses.

0n the second sortie, Capt Bogatyrev and Sr Lt Maharov. in patrolling
over the battlefield. saw a FH-l90 which was headnng toward our bomber.
The enemy fighter was hmaediately shot down. During the fourth sortie.
Sr Lt Pilimonov shot down an enemy spotter plane.

in September l9b3. Lt Col P. A. Pologov was awsrled the title of Hero of

the Soviet Union. At present we works in Sverdlovsk at one of the large
plants.

In the battles over the Kursk Bulge. the flier from the 157th iap, Lt A.
Ye. Borovykh, particularly distinguished himself. he showed great skill.
courage and velar. During the days of the engagement he succeeded in

shooting down 8 fascist aircraft. In August 19b3, he was awarded the
high title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

FOR OP?ICIAL USB 0 Y

O
POI ORIGIN; US! ONLY

In the battles over the Rural: Bulge. the flier fro- the 157th iap. Lt A.
Ye. Borovykh. particularly distinguished hiaself. Ila showed great skill,
courage and valor. During the days of the engath he succeeded in
shooting down 8 fascist aircraft. In August 1943. he was awarded the
high title of hero of the Soviet Union.

Andrey Yegorovich Gorovykh was born in 1921 in Kursk in a worker family.
Prior to the army he worked as a driver in a notor pool. having coapleted
the Chuguyev Hilitary Air School. he joined the active any in Decedar
1951. In less than 2 years, Borovykh due to his outstanding military
qualities. bscase the co-ander of an air squadron and at the same tine
joined the mm. For new combat feats in February 19105. he received a
second Gold Star and ended the war as a major in the position of the
deputy co-ander of an air regiment.

After the war A. Ye. Borovykh completed the Red Banner Air Force Acadeay
and later the hilitary Acade-y of the General Staff . and was the conander
of an air division and held other high posts. At present Col Gen Avn A.

Ye. Borovyhh is the comrander of the aviation of the National Air Defense
Troops.

The co-Iander of the honber group of the 24th bap. the comunist. Sr Lt
A. I. Tenrin, showed enornous tenacity in the battle against the enemy.
He was wounded before reaching the target. but this did not stop the courage-
oua officer. In bleeding. he excellently carried out the niasion and brought

the group back to its airfield. The courageous flier was put up for‘a
governmental decoration.

The young fliers from the 2d Guards shad attacked the ens-y troops very
courageously. showing true combat art in doing this. During the day any
crews made four combat sortiea. Jr Lt A. D. Solov'yev particularly dia-
tinguiahed himself. his comrades said: "wherever the bombs fall from
Solov'yev’e airplane and wherever he fires from the cannons aodmachine
guns. there are explosions. fire and death."

The comandere of the 157xh iap. Haj V. F. Volkov. the 367th iap. Capt P. B.
Dankevich. and the 519th iap. Haj K. N. Hurga. proved to be exemplary con-
bat indoctrinatora of the flight personnel and able leaders of air battles
from which their fliers always energed the winners. In the subsequent bat-
tles for the aotherland, Haj V. 17. Volkov in July 1956 was awarded the title
of hero of the Soviet Union. he made 236 combat sortiea. he carried out 59
air battles, and he personally shot down 15 enemy aircraft and 8 in a group.
At present V. P. Volluw continues to serve in the Air Force. P. B. Dankevich
for combat excellence was awarded many orders. At present he is a colonel
general, and the deputy comander-in-chief of the Strategic Missile Troops.

The squadron couander of the 286th ind. hero of the Soviet Union, Capt I.S.
Kozich. also distinguished himself. In one of the air battles he emerged
the victor from an unequal engagement. having shot down two German air-
craft. Capt Korich was one of the most experienced air scouts. He always

80
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
P0! OFFICKAI. USE ONLY

took on the lost difficult eissions. His squadron was the best in the

air division. Serving in it were eeny courageous scouts such as the deputy
squadron comnder Sr Lt A. P. Lipetov. the flight mdcl’ Lt B. I.
Yskushev and Lts V. c. Seeenov. D. h. Hedvedev. and others.

During the days of the counteroffensive hero of the Soviet Union the naviga-
tor of the 58th Guards shap. Haj V. N. Golubev. again won glory for ex-
pert attacks against fascist tanks. During the difficult battles for the
Kursk Bulge he reputedly led six assault planes into battle. In one sortie
his group succeeded in destroying scores of eneny tanks. There was not a
day when the Golubev six did not take off.

Victor Heksinovich Golubev was born in 1915 in Petrograd in e vorker fatally.
In 1936, he was inducted into the any and 3years later coepleted the
Khar'kov Military Aviation School. Pros the very first days of the war he
was on the front. To the coebat score of V. M. Golubev were 157 coebst
sorties, during which he destroyed and dauged 69 tanks. 875 motor vehicles.
10 fuel tanks, and euch other eilitary equipment, and also knocked out
hundreds of eneey soldiers and officers. For valor and herois- V. H.

Golubev in August 1963 was awarded the title of twice hero of the Soviet
Union. He perished on 17 Hay 1965' in carrying out his service duties.

On 19 July, the troops of the Central Front pierced the basic defensive
line of the Nazi troops to the south of the population point of Kroey which
had been organized by the Nazis in the spring. The enemy, in endeavoring
not to allow the developlsent of the breakthrough. threw its last reserves
into battle.

The air fornations of the 16th AA on this day continue to supply support to
their troops. The bombers and assault planes. under a fighter cover, at-
tacked ens-y positions, in suppressing the artillery and centers of re-
sistance. destroying personnel end equip-ant and disrupting control and
communications. The fighters of the 6th iak covered the strike grouping
of our troops. As a total during the day the array Iede 1,222 sortiea.

Starting on 20 July, the may on the Krony and other sectors. under the
blows froe our troops. began to pull back to the west and northwest. putting
up stubborn resistance on the inter-edicts lines by counteractecks. 0n

5 August the troops of the Bryansk Front, with aid on the flanks fro- the
troops of the western and Central fronts. liberated Oral. In honor of this
victory in Moscow the first artillery salute in the history of the Great
Patriotic War was eede. The summary of Sovinforubyuro stated that in the
battles for the liberation of Oral, along with the troops of the from

the air formations distinguished theeeelves, including those of Lt Gen svr
Rudenko. By 18 August. the troops of the Central and Bryansk fronts had
driven the “aria froe the entire Orel Salient.

During this time the basic efforts of our aviation were focused on aiding

the troops on the right wing of the front in developing the offensive and
defeating the retreating Nazi troxps.

81
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Eneay fighter aviation. although clearly inferior to the Soviet. on indi-
vidual days appeared in the air in groups up to 12-16 aircraft.

Thus. on 25 July. a group‘of six Il-2 from the 229th shad under the con-
nand of Haj P. c. Plokhov and covered by five La-S fron the 721st iap
headed by Capt N. H. Tregubov was attacking the retreating eneny troops.

In co-ing out of the attack. the group was attacked by 10 FH-l90. Then
another 6 FH—l90 appeared. The assault planes formed a circle and to-
gether with the covering fighters drove off the enemy attack for 20 ninutes
in aoving to their own territory. As a result of the coabat, two Fokker-
Hulf were shot down and our losses were one La-S. The assault planes did
not have any losses. The young flier. Jr Lt V. G. Sairnov. who had been
shot down in coabat after a certain time returned to his regiaant. with
an artificial lower limb he participated in the air battles in the Vistula-
Oder and Berlin operations in a La-7 airplane.

Such an exanple of the manifestation of high patriotism in the 16th AA

was not the only one. The flier from the 128th bap. Lt I. A. Halikov. lost
a leg in combat. After recuperation in the hospital. through the interven-
tion of the coanander of the Air Force he was returned to his reginent.

With an artificial leg. he first flew on a Po—2 and then renastered the Pe-2
bomber and ended the war near lerlin. he made 86 conbat sorties and be-
came a Hero of the Soviet Union.

The actions of the flight personnel in any, at times extrenely difficult
situation were permeated with the desire to carry out their nilitary duty
to the aotherland regardless of the coat. Here is one such exaaple.

0n 4 August. in carrying out a aission in the region of Bryanak. a crew
from the 57th bap consisting of Jr Lta A. H. Pogudin (pilot) and P. V.
Parshutin (navigator). and the gunners Sgts Karaa' and Kovalev was fired

on by enemy antiaircraft artillery. The pilot Pogudin was severely wounded
by sharpnel and having lost the possibility of controlling the aircraft.

he ordered the crew to bail out and soon thereafter himself, covered with

blood. bailed out. The uncontrolled aircraft spun out of control toward
the ground.

Navigator Parahutin quickly realized that with the pilot out of commission
not everything was lost for the crew. he ordered the gunner-radio operator
Karaa' to connect the controls in the required plug in the radio bay and

to control the aircraft upon his col-ands. The gunner-radio operator.

in precisely following the connanda of the navigator. brought the air-
craft into level flight and returned to Soviet territory. without being
able to lower the landing wheels, he did a belly-landing at the airfield.

A fire broke out in the aircraft cockpit when it landed. Bngr-Capt P. I.
Parkhonenko and Tech Lta L. A. Shenyakin and I. c. Zaikin dashed to help.

In working quickly and decisively they extinguished the fire and rescued
the sen and the aircraft.

82
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORL‘I

For the courage. boldness and co-snder-like self-control. the cosmender

of the AA awarded the Order of the Red Banner to the navigator P. V. Parshu-
tin and to the gunner-radio operator Karas'. while the medal "For Valor"
was presented to the gunner Kovalsv. Engineer P. I. Parkhomenko and tech-
nicians L. A. Shenyakin end I. G. Zaikin were given watches. The courage-
ous action of the crew end technical personnel was used as an example for

ell the personnel of the AA. Soon thereafter P. V. Parshutin was made a
military pilot.

During the pursuit of the retreating enemy troops, the fighters of the
67th Guards iep headed by the deputy squadron cousnder Sr Lt V. A. Latyshev
repeatedly distinguished theuelves. Thus. on 12 August the six fighters
led by him during the covering of a river crossing received a radio col-sand
from the ground to intercept a group of Ju-88 aircraft. Latyshev ordered
the holding force to engage the German fighters. and himself at the head
of an assault foursome headed toward the bombers, he cut into the close
formation and with the first burst shot down an enemy aircraft. His wing-
men handled the other bombers successfully and they each destroyed one
Junkers. As a result the formation of the bombers was broken up. They
hurriedly dropped their bombs chaotically. The cover force operated with
equal success. It did not allow the Fokker-Hulfs to reach the Soviet bomb-
era. The Nazis lost four Ju-88 and four PV-l90 in this battle.

On 14 August the consand post of the 6th iak was informed of the necessity
of covering the advancing troops against enemy bombers. V. A. Latyshev
immediately took up his sqLadron. After a short time the group had ap-
proached the front line. Coming at them was a formation of Ju-88 escorted
by FV-l90. Having split into two groups, our fighters attacked the Fokker-
Hulfe and the bombers simultaneously. The enemy pilots returned to their
territory without dropping the bombs. The advancing infantry congratulated
the air heroes. After landing the pilots were read the thanks from the
infantrymen and Gen Ye. Ye. Yerlykin who had observed their combat. In
subsequent battles for the motherland, Sr Lt Latyshev distinguished him-
self many other times. In 19“ he was awarded the title of llero of the
Soviet Union for carrying out 232 combat sorties and for destroying l7

enemy aircraft in battles. At present Sr Lt (Res) V. A. Latyshev is work-
ing in Moscow.

During the period from 13 July through lS'August 19b3, the air formations
of the AA made over 22,000 cosbat sorties. including over 13,800 for bomb-
ing and strafing enemy troops and operations against enemy rail movements.
up to 2.000 for covering their own troops, around 6,200 for escorting
bombers and assault planes, and up to 2.000 sorties for reconnaissance.

In 1.25 air battles. up to £00 enemy aircraft were shot down.1

As a result of the bombing and strafing attacks, the enemy lost a large
number of tanks. motor vehicles and guns as well as several thousand
soldiers and officers.

1 Arkhiv no SSSR. folio 368. inv. 6676, file 102. sheets 6, lol.

83
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

As a whole the 16th AA carried out its missions in supporting the troops
of the Central Front during the counteroffensive on the Kursk Bulge. In
actively countering the ens-y froe the air, the air for-stione of the AA
aided the troops in crushing the Oral Gernan grouping. Our aviation coa-
pletely captured the initiative in the air. The aneny Luftwaffe, in suf-

fering high losses. clearly lost its former air superiority and was unable
to recover it subsequently.

In the suner of 1943. the 16th AA began to use heavy concentrated strikes
against the eneay troops involving 300-600 aircraft ever nore widely. The
effectiveness of such strikes. in colparison with actions in slall groups.
was iameasurably higher while losses were such fewer. Thus. during the
actions in the period of the counteroffensive in saall groups. the losses
in the army per 300 aorties reached an average of 20 aircraft, while with
strikes in large forces the losses were 3-3.5-fold less. The ability to
organize and carry out heavy strikes showed the high skills of the flight
and technical personnel. the increase in the organizational skill and tac-
tical maturity of the commanders, as well as a further improve-ant in opera-
tional art and tactics of the Soviet Air Force.

The fighter coverage for the troops on the battlefield also became were
perfect and effective. The previously employed scheduled patrolling with

a snail number of crews during all the daylight hours. without considering
the air situation at the given nonent, did not prove effective in this
operation. The appearance of even a large petrol (of 20-30 aircraft) could
not always have an impact on ens-y air operations. Only a warning syste-
enploying eneny aircraft detection radars with the basing of the fighters
at forward airfields connected by radio with the con-and post of the con-
nander who was on the front line, an excellent knowledge of the situation.
a broader use of "free search" over enesy territory. clear control and re.
targeting of the patrols to note important groups of ens-y aviation and the
prompt increasing of forces in combat made it possible to carry out the
mission of providing troop cover note successfully.

"As a result of the Battle of Kutsk the Ger-an Air force was dealt a new

crushing blow. Over the 50 days of continuous intense battles. the Soviet
fliers destroyed over 3,700 ens-y aircraft. Nazi aviation was finally de-
prived of strategic air superiority which it had held since the outset of
the war. The initiative in the air went completely to Soviet aviation."1

Heading Toward Kiev

Proceeding from the overall plan for the liberation of the left-bank Ukraine.
Headquarters on 16 August 1963 ordered the Central Front to reach the line
of Trubchevsk. Shostka and Ryl'sk by no later than 1-3 September. Subse-
quently the offensive was to be developed on the Konotop--Kiev axis.

l"Istoriya Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 1961-19‘5."

84
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The unleashing of the train strike was planned on the llovgorod-Severskiy
sector. and was entrusted to the troops of the 65th and 2d Tank arnias.
The basic efforts of the aviation were to be aiaed at supporting then.
The staff of the 16th M. jointly with the staffs of the advancing arnies.
worked out a plan of coordination in breaking through the enemy defenses
and in developing the success. as well as in bringing the tank army into
the break and the support of its operations in the breakthrough area. For
this purpose. the 3d Tank and 7th Mechanized corps were assigned one shap
each from the 2d Guards and 299th shad. The representatives of these regi-
ments were sent with radios to the corps staffs where all the remaining
questions of cooperation were worked out in detail. The cover for the
troops on the nain sector was entrusted to the 6th isk. '

By the start of this operation. the fighting force of the 16th M included
760 aircraft. with 183 daytins bonbers. 130 night bonbers. 150 assault
planes. 263 fighters and lb reconnaissance planes.

The liberation of the left-bank Ukraine in the zone of the niddle courses
of the Dnepr was assigned to the troops of the Central. Voronesh and Steppe
fronts. the fighting strength of which included the 16th. 2d and 5th M
which had 1.650 airplanes. In this area the Germans had 900 aircraft.
Thus. cur aviation surpassed that of the Nazis.

On 26 August. the troops on the left wing of the Central Front went over

to the offensive. leasedistely after artillery softening up. at 0840 hours.
our aviation made a heavy strike involving 607 bonbers and assault planes
under a fighter cover against objectives on the battlefield and deep in

the enemy defenses for the purpose of destroying the staffs and disrupting
control. suppressing the artillery and hitting personnel and military equip-
ment. During the day two other concentrated strikes were made: at 1300
hours with the forces of 331 aircraft and at 1625 hours involving 290 air-
craft. In the intervals between these. sorties were made by individual
groups to strafe the enemy troops. By the end of the day the troops of

the front with active support from the aviation had pierced the enemy de-
fenses.

0n the first day of the offensive. the 16th M made 1.5100 sorties. including
963 to bomb and strafe the enemy troops.

1n the following days the eneny began rapidly to bring up reserves and
repeatedly went over to countsrattacks. The struggle assumed a fierce
nature. On 27 August. the-2d Tank Army in cooperation with formations
from the 65th Army. captured the city of Sevak. On 27 and 28 August. the

air formations of the army by concentrated and wave strikes by assault planes
and bombers directly shad of the advancing troops of the front and deep in

the enemy positions destroyed enemy personnel and military equip-ent and
also prevented the bringing up of reserves to the front. The air for-a-
tions of the army during these days provided tangible support to our
troops. as can be seen from the following response:

85
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"To the cos-ander of the 16th AA. Lt Gen Avn Rudenko. During this period
of the heavy offensive battles to capture 8evsk and to crush the Nazi
troops which had been brought up fron the rear and were fighting opposite
the 2d Tank Army. we received great help from our aces. The pro-pt and
heavy strikes by the assault planes and bombers helped us thwart the
eneay's plans. On behalf of the tank troops. the ailitery council thanks
you, your immediate assistant. the chief of staff Maj Gen Ayn lrayko.

the commanders of the foraations and the flight and technical personnel.
Commander of the 2d Tank Army Lt Gen Bogdanov. Ianher of the Iilitary
council Maj Gen Latyshev end chief of staff Maj Gen Preysman."

The aviation supported our troops also in repelling ens-y counterettacka.
Thus, another document fro. the commander of the 2d Tank Army states:
"The strong strafing attacks by our aviation against the counterattacking
infantry with tanks in the regions of Zaul'ye, Che-lyah. Krostovka and

Borisovo on 27 and 28 August assisted largely in repelling the enemy
counterattacks."

The following response also shows the effective operations of the assault
planes of the 299th shad: "As a result of the successfulair raids, a
significant quantity of enemy batteries, individual guns and machine guns
was suppressed, and this ensured the capturing of the defensive zone, the
population points of Hikhaylovskiy. Pushkinskiy and the defensive strong-
point at elevation 21$.b by the division. The division, due to air support,
advanced. The aviation suppressed at least 10 ene-y artillery and sorter
batteries and 3 antiaircraft batteries and destroyed and scattered up to

2 infantry battalions. The response of the infantry to the actions of the
assault aviation has been outstanding. The infantry-en. tank troops and
artillery troops thank our aces for the excellent support. The personnel
of the 169th Rifle Division sends warn greetings to all the personnel of
the 299th shad. Owl-ender of the 169th Rifle Division Col Orlov. chief

of staff Lt Col Snigin."

Prom 20 through 31 August, the fliers of the 16th AA carried out 6,153
sorties. they engaged in 68 air battles and shot down 53 enemy aircraft.

By the end of the month. on the sector of the main strike of Novgorod and
Sevsk, our troops. having encountered stubborn eneny resistance. after the
capturing of Sevsk, advanced just 20-25 km; to the south of Sevsk the troop:
of the 60th Army advanced 60 kn in a southwesterly direction. having
broadened the front of the breakthrough up to 100 km. In line with this
success, the troops of the Central Front. having regrouped the basic forces
to the left wing. carried out a counteroffensive against Konotop.

The main efforts of the 16th AA in this sector vere concentrated on pro-
viding a cover for the advancing troops of the front and aiding them by
bombing and strafing attacks. particularly in the crossing of the Deena,

Seyn and the Dnepr rivers. in destroying the crossings and carrying out
reconnaissance.

86
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The struggle against the enemy aviation was carried out basically in

the air. but attacks were also made against airfields. Thus. on 3 Sep-
tember there was a successful raid by two groups of nine from the 221st
bad against the Konotop airfield where ten enemy aircraft were destroyed
and nine damaged.

In cooperating with the ground forces. the 16th M at the start of Septem-
ber made strikes against the retreating Nazi troops on roads and cross-

ings over rivers as well as against centers of resistance. With the neces-
sity of repelling enemy counteratrikea. the air formations made concentrated
strikes involving from 100 to 160 aircraft. Thus. on 5 September a heavy
strike was made against the units of the 2d German Tank Army which were
preparing a counterattaclt in the region of Konotop, and as a result of this
the enemy lost up to 100 motor vehicles, 3 tanks and 32 guns.

The battles for the liberation of Bakhmach were particularly fierCe; here
the enemy put up stubborn resistance. The bombers and assault planes from
the army made very effective strikes agath the atrongpoints and concen-
trations of Nazi troops. 0n 9 September our troops liberated this city.

In the air the most stubborn battles occurred during the period of defeat-
ing the Nezhin enemy grouping which was covering the approaches to Kiev.
here the enemy somewhat reinforced its aviation grouping. Its bombers by
actions against the advancing troops and the rear of the front endeavored
to retard the pace of the offensive. but our fighters reliably covered the
troops. The strikes by the assault planes and bombers helped the troops
crush the enemy grouping and to capture the town of Nezhin on 15 September.

In developing a further offensive. the troops of the left wing of the Central
Front on 19 September crossed the Deana and 2 days later liberated Chernigov.

The air divisions which particularly distinguished themselves in battle by
an order of the Supreme Conander-in—Chief were awarded honorary names:
Bakhmach for the 221st bad (co-snder. Col 8. P. Butylev); Nezhin for the
299th shad (co-sander. Col I. V. Krupskiy) and the 286th iad (cot-sander.
Co]. I. l. Ivanov); Chernigov to the 2d Guards shed (commander, Col 6. 0.
Komarov).

The offensive by the troops of the Central Front continue to develop rapidly.
On 22 September. they emerged to the north of the mouth of the Pripyat’

River into the Dnepr and from a march formation began to cross this major
wnter barrier with air and artillery support. By nightfall our units had
captured a bridgehead and subsequently fought to broaden it.

In the struggle to retain and broaden the bridgeheads. the formations of
the 16th M bombed and strsfed the counterattscking enemy troops. while the
fighters repelled raids by its aviation. Here are several examples. .

87 .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1’08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 14 Septenber four La-S from the 6th iak were covering the advancing
troops on the battlefield. The group was led by the Irkut Jr Lt A. P.
Soluyanov. Fighting with him in the element was his younger brother
Aleksandr. The second element was conprised of Lt V. H. Viklyayev and
Jr Lt I. A. Yegorov. having encountered four FV-l90. the Soluysnov
brothers quickly attacked then. One Nazi was shot down by the younger
Soluyanov. after which the ens-y took cover. Soon thereafter the fliers
saw up to 25 Ju-87 under the cover of a large number of fighters and these
were heading to bomb our troops. The four Soviet fighters iamedistely
dashed into the attack and began a battle which lasted 20 ainutes. The
Lavrochkins emerged the winners. The enemy boebers did not succeed in
carrying out their mission. They dropped their boebs without ailing and
returned to their own territory. In this battle the four Soviet planes
shot down three Junkers and three Fokker-Units.

The battle score of the four valorous aces roee day after day. During
the summer offensive battles the Soluyanov brothers, Vikhlyayev and
Yegorov carried out 31 air battles and shot down 26 fascist aircraft. In
the course of these battles Lt Vikhlyayev destroyed 8 ens-y aircraft, the
Soluysnov brothers bagged 10 and Jr Lt Yegorov 6.

On 20 Septeeber. four Yak-9 under the coemsnd of Sr Lt L. K. Ryshiy took
off to cover our troops in the region of Korelets. Soon Ryshiy spotted
three groups of Ju-88. having given the coasand for the leader of the
other element Lt V. H. Oganesov to attack the second g:nup of bombers. he
rapidly attacked the second group of Junkers and from a short range with
cannon fire set a bomber on fire which exploded in the air. The explosion
also damaged the wing of Ryzhiy'e aircraft, however he. in continuing the
battle. covered his wingman and ensured his destruction of another eneay
aircraft. The Ogsnesov element attr:ked the second group of Ju-88 and also
shot down two enemy bonbers. The remaining enemy aircraft returned to
their territory.

On 21 September four La-S from the 279th iad headed by Lt H. Ye. Kirilkin
were covaring our troops. Two groups of Ju-88 appeared over the front line
at an altitude of 4,000 meters. Our four. having cliabed to 6,500 meters
and approaching from the direction of the sun attacked the enemy. The
element of Lt Kirilkin attacked the first group, and the element of Lt A. P.
Kononov. the second. As a result of the bold and rapid attacks, esch ele-
ment shot down one Junkers and the remainder retreated to the west at full
speed.

During the period of the offensive. the assault planes also operated very
efficiently. The 2d Guards and the 299th shad under the cover of the 283d
and 286th iad in groups of 6-8 aircraft destroyed the counterattacking Nazi
troops, they assisted Lne infantry in crossing rivers. and also disrupted
enemy movements. in impeding the evacuation and the bringing up of reserves.

88
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 6 October, by fierce counterattacks, the fascists endeavored to push
bak our units which had crossed the Deans and dug in on its right bank. ..
Stubborn battles cemented uith morning. Squadrons of assault planes took
off from the airfields to aid the infantry. The first six Il-2 was led by
one of the most experienced fliers from the 299th shad. Capt V. I. Salivar-
stov. Regardless of the fog and the rain, the crews reached the target
accurately. The assault planes made a bombing strike, and then from a dive
fired on the Nazis with machine gun and cannon fire. Our fliers acted with
great skill. In one sortie Seliverstov's group destroyed 7 guns, 10 motor
vehicles and eliminated many enemy soldiers. On this day our aircraft ap-
peared continuously over the battlefield. in wave after wave. Due to the
support from the assault planes, the Soviet troops, having repelled all the
enemy counterattaclts, not only firmly dug in on :he bridgehead, but also
went over to an offensive and occupied several population points.

During these days the bombers operated just as effectively and efficiently.
The air divisions of the 3d belt and the 6th ask in attacking the retreat-
ing enemy columns and troop concentrations destroyed enemy personnel and
equipment. they attacked the railroad Junctions and stations of Novozybkov,
Novgorod-Severskiy. Bakhmach and Vorozhba, and also destroyed the crossings
over the Desna, Seym and Decor rivers and annihilated enemy aircraft at
the Konotop and Novozybkov airfielde.

The bombers of the 27let nbad. in operating at night, destroyed the retreat-
ing enemy columns on the roads. they bombed the railroad junctions of Balth-
mach and Konotop. and stacked the crossings over the Deena in the area of
Novgorod-Severskiy and Iitemlym. Moreover, the night bombers transported
amnition to the Dnepr bridgeheads for the troops of the 13th Army.

Air reconnaissance was carried out during the day and at night. It followed

the retreating enemy troops. the bringing up of the reserves and the basing
of enemy aviation.

As a total during the period from 16 August through 15 October. the air
formations of the 16th M made 20,000 sorties, they carried out 350 air

battles. and shot down 336 enemy aircraft. Our losses were significantly
less.

The bombing and assault strike by the aviation destroyed and damaged up to
160 tanks. 19 aircraft. 3,000 motor vehicles. over 770 guns and mortars. and
over 13.000 enemy soldiers and officers were killed.1

During the period of the rapid offensive from Sevsk to the Dnepr, the air
army encountered significant difficulties in control and rear support due
to the frequent rebasing of the air formations. The cot-sand post of the
air army also changed its place among with them. Regardless of this, the

‘1 Arkhiv no SSSR, folio 368, inv. 6676, file 102, sheets (06, 60-61, 88-89.

89
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

control of the air formations and units in the M was not interrupted due
to the unstinting work by the personnel of the arny signal units. The
co-and post of the M had direct telegraph as well as radio couunica-
tions with the air formations. Comnications with the staff of the front
was maintained over the ST-3S. Co-anicstions with the conbined-aras ernies
was neintainsd through the co-unications center of the front. and before
the carrying out of the offensive operation direct commication was estab-
lished with the 65th and 68th sraies through the ST-35. Contact with the
staff of the Red Arny Air Torte was carried out by Baudot transaitter and
by radio. Contact with adjacent air eraies was maintained by radio. More-
over. telephone col-Imitation operated dependably with the staffs of the
Red Arny Air Force, the front and the staffs of the eonbined-aras armies.

The M received the nissions for each stage of the operation with an indi-
cation of the targets and the time of operations from the co-and of the
troops of the front. In accord with this the army staff worked out an opera-
tions plan, the forces. means and methods of the strikes were determined.
and this was i-adiately passed on to the consaand of the combined-arms
armies in the area of which our aviation was to operate.

The high pace of the offensive required the imediste construction of air-
fields on the liberated territory after the occupying of the fields by our
forces. All five airfield engineering battalions existing in the army were
engaged in preparing the airfields. For the first tine in practice landing
strips had to be built on stubble after harvesting. The airfields abandoned
by the enemy. as a rule. had been rendered unserviceable by plowing up,
mining and the blowing up of the landing strips.

The tiles for readying the airfields were maximally reduced to 1-3 days.
The airfield engineering battalions readied only the flying fields while
all the equipment of the airfields (dugouts, shelters and caused posts)
was built by the forces of the bee.

In the course of the offensive operation, the supplies of amnltion and
fuel were greatly reduced and rarely exceeded a lo- or 5-day supply. The
shortage of essential supplies. the daily consumption of them and the length
of the lines of con-unications—all of this often created very acute situa-
tions. In the new base areas until the reconstruction of the railroads
aviation was supplied by motor transport fron the supplies of the Rural:
center.

The aviation engineering service of the M during the period of the offen-
sive carried out extensive work to minimize the tins required to ready the
aircraft for coubat sortias. and particularly repeated sorties.

Along with this, the engineering and technical personnel of the air units
and the field repair bodies did enormous work to rebuild the nonworking and
damaged materiel. In August alone. several hundred aircraft and motors
were put back into service.

90
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100030047-0
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

In the work of the engineering and technical personnel of the AA there was
a constant desire to ready the material in the shortest tine and with maxi-
mum reliability. Thus. Tech Lt of the 26th bap D. I. anorozhnyy with a
group of three men repaired a bomber in 3 hours. while at that tine a day
was needed for its repairs. The technical personnel of the 2d Guards shad
during these days showed exceptional tenacity and endeavor. For example.
the aircraft eechcnic comnunist V. I. Hordvintsev on 20 July serviced 16
sorties; the electrician V. s. Ananich. and the ordnance-en Konsoaol mem-

bers A. N. ?akovlev. I. K. Rudenko and cos-unist V. s. Shirkevich worked
excellently.

Once a Pe-Z aircraft from the 3d bak was hit in carrying out a mission.
Having flown back across the front line. the bomber lane a belly-landing

in a field. The damage sustained in combat and in lending was so serious
that the plan was to be written off. however Sr Tech Lt H. H. Hogil'nyy.
after inspecting the aircraft. set to work to rebuild it. with the help

of just one mechanic in several days and nights of constant work he re-
placed the motor and a number of other parts and returned the bomber to con-
bat. For this he was awarded the Crder of the Red Star.

Below--Belorussia

As a result of the successful conclusion of the offensive by our troops
from Sevsk to the Dnepr, favorable conditions were created for undertaking
new operations to liberate the eastern regions of Belorussia.

On 15 October, the troops of the front. with air support, began an operation

on the Loyev sector to cross the Dnepr and seize a bridgehead on its western
bank.

0n the eve of the offensive by our troops. the bombers free the 3d bak made
heavy strikes against the enemy's defensive etrongpoints and the railroad
junction of Gomel'. As a result of the concentrated strike by three regi-
mental groups of the 261st bed which were led by the commanders of the 26th
and 128th bap. L: Cole A. I. Sokolov and Hero of the Soviet Union N. H.
Voronkov._as well as by the deputy division conlnnder Lt Col A. G. Fedorov,
several troop trains and station equipment were destroyed at the railroad
junction and numerous explosions and fires occurred. The operations of the
bombers were supported by fighters from the let Guards iad.

having successfully crossed the Dnepr and captured the etrongpoint of Loyev
on the following day. the troops of the front began advancing on the axis
of Rechitsa, and by the end of October. having significantly broadened the
bridgehead. reached a line 20 km to the west of the Dnepr.

During this period, the 16th AA. in supporting the troops of the front, by
using concentrated bomber and assault plane strikes destroyed eneay per-

sonnel. weapons and etrongpoints in the piercing of eneny defenses and in
the crossing of rivers. In the intervals between the strikes, the assault

91
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I
roe orrtcm. use 0qu
I
8

planes operated in small groups. in escorting our mobile troops which had
been thrown into the breech. Fighters covered the troops on the battle-
field as well as our bombers and assault planes. objectives of the immedi-

ate rear and primarily the crossings over the Dnepr and the Seth. and they
also reconnoitered the enemy.

Here is how the command of the 18th and 27th Rifle corps judged the opera-
tions of the 299th shed on 15-17 October:

I'Hith the start of the softening up process and the crossing of the Dnepr
by the first lending detachments, the assault aviation. in coordinating
with the troops. made accurately timed strikes against the main enemy
strongpointa. as well as against concentrations of personnel and their
immediate reserves. The assault planes. in making several passes at a
target, fired on the enemy infantry and made it hit the dirt. in providing
great aid to the 69th Rifle Division. As a result. units of the division
with minimum losses crossed the Dnepr and seized a bridgehead for a fur-
ther offensive. they extended it and captured a number of population
points. The enemy on the first day was unable to undertake a single coun—
terattack. The personnel from the units of the 18th Rifle Corps noted the
high ability of the fliers from the 299th shad and thank them for outstand-
ing actions and the aid provided during Ife crossing of the Dnepr and the
piercing of the enemy defensive line. Commander of the 18th Rifle Corps
Maj Gen lvsnov. chief of staff Lt Col Roasinskiy."

"The 27th Rifle Corps under difficult conditions crossed the Dnepr and
seized a bridgehead on its western bank. The success of the corps was
largely aided by the 299th shad. The good interaction and the bold and
decisive attacks by the pilots made it possible for the infantry to carry
out the set missions with less blood. The teamwork of the crews and the
officers who organized good coordination with the infantry created the pre-
requisites for the success of the corps troops. The soldiers and officers
of the infantry express their gratitude to the assault pilots who routed
the enemy for military cooperation and combat help. Commander of the 27th
Rifle Corps Maj Gen Cherkmanov. chief of staff Col Yeremin."

In all instances the bombers and assault planes as well as the fighters
covering them had to remain as long as possible over the target. The as-
snult planes. as a rule. made four-six passes. The covering fighters in

the instance of the absence of enemy fighters in the target area also
strafed the enemy troops.

On 18 October, in the region of Hokhovo. two groups of six 11-2 from the
AJlst shap led by the squadron commanders Capt I. A. Lozenko and Sr Lt

N. S. Lntshov, under the cover of fighters from the 286th iad attacked an
enemy column numbering up to a thousand men. As a result of the attack.

it was crushed and it lost over half its personnel in casualties. Capt

I. A. Lozenko in December 1963 in his 155th combat sortie died a death of
the brave and posthumously was awarded the Gold Star of a Hero of the

92
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Soviet Union and the Order of Lenin. Sr Lr N. S. Latskov was awarded the
title of hero of the Soviet Union in October 1966. By this time he had
112 combat sorties. At present he is a reserve colonel and works in a
scientific research institution.

On 20 October 1943, the Central Front was renamed Belorussian by a deci-
sion of Headquarters.

The air support for the ground forces in the carrying out of their combat
missions became ordinary and necessary not only in conducting the opera-
tions but also during periods of comparative quiet. On 31 October the
enemy with forces of up to an infantry battalion with tank support counter-
attacked our units near the population point of Lipnyaki. Upon the re-
quest of the commander of the 65th Army a group of six 11s was sent to

the battlefield. Having arrived on time. in several passes it made an
attack on the enemy which. in essence. predetermined the outcome of the
started battle. The enemy counterettsck was successfully driven off.

On 11-13 November. the troops of the Belorussian Front broke the enemy
defenses to the north of Loyev and in pursuing the enemy in a northwesterly
direction. on 18 November captured the town of Rechitss. simultaneously
reaching the Beresina River.

in the battles for the liberation of Rechitsa, the assault planes of the

2d Guards shed (commander Col 6. 0. Konsrov). the bombers of the 261st bed
(commander, Lt Col A. c. Fedorov) and the night bombers of the 271st nbad
(commander. Col H. Rh. Borisenko) distinguished themselves; by an order

of the Supreme Commander-in-chief these units were given the honorary names
of Rechitsa.

Having captured the town of Rechitsa and reaching the Bereaina. our troops
threatened the Gomel' German grouping with encirclement. Simultaneoasly
the troops of the front went over to the offensive on the right wing in
the region of Propoysk, they broke the enemy defenses and on 26 November
liberated Gomel' by a gold enveloping maneuver. By the end of the month
our troops had reached the Dnepr in this sector.

The aviation played a major role in the successful offensive by the troops
in the Gomel' sector. It made concentrated strikes in the piercing of the
enemy defenses. in the crossing of rivers and repelling counter-strikes,
it continuously attacked the enemy with bomber and assault plane groups,
and also dependably covered the troops of the front.

Particularly effective in terms of the results were the concentrated
strikes made by our aviation in the middle of November in the regions of
Prokopovich. Kostyukovka and Yeremino. where the Nazi troops were caused
very significant losses. These strikes involved from 180 to 320 aircraft.
There were three such strikes on 12 November, two on 19 November and four
on 22 November.

93
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By an order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of 26 November. the following
units were cos-ended as particularly distinguishing themselves in the libera-
tion of the city of Gomel': The 301st bed (commander. Col F. H. Pedorenko),
the 273d isd (commander. Col 1. Ya. Pedorov) and the 282d iad (commander,

Col Yu. M. Berkal'). They were given the honorary names of Goeel'. The
299th shed (commander. Col 1. V. Krupakiy) and the 286th isd (commander,

Col 1. I. Ivenov) received the Order of the Red Banner.

Subsequently the operations of the 16th AA played a major role in assist"

ing the troops of the Belorussian Front in the operations of the winter
period of l963—l9b4. Regardless of the poor weather conditions in December.
the AA as before employed concentrated strikes in piercing the enemy defenses.
Thus. on 15 December two strikes were made with 215 and 260 aircraft.

The personnel acted courageously and unstintingly in carrying out the mis-
sions. The military skill of the fliers had increased noticeably, particu-
larly among the young fliers who first sew combat in the summer. The air
battles began to be carried out on a significantly more organised level.
The army veterans remember many examples when our fliers were victorious
over the enemy not in numbers but in skill.

0n 6 October. four Yak-9 from the 273d isd led by Capt Volynkin were cover-
ing the troops in the region of Chernobyl'. while on petrol the group en-
countered eight Ju-87 under the cover of seven rv-19o. Volynkin with his
wingnan attacked the enemy fighters and in the ensuing battle shot down two
of them. while the other element turned against the bombers. Jr Lt Kendra-
shev succeeded in destroying a Junkers. This battle particularly showed
the flying skills of the elements which. in skillfully mastering fire and
eaneuvering, with a numerically superior enemy, shot down three aircraft.

On 16 October. a foursome of Yak-9 from the 248th iap headed by Sr Lt
Nechipurenko in the region of Loyev engaged four Fﬂ-l90. Under equal con-
ditions. our fliers emerged the victors from the cosbat. Due to the pre-
cise interaction between the elements and in the element, and because of
able maneuvering and accurate firing. they shot down three enemy fighters
and returned to their airfield without losses.

Particularly noteworthy and instructive was the air battle conducted on

3 November by the assistant commander of the $l9th isp. Sr Lt V. A. bash-
kirov. when he. in ferrying a Yak-7 aircraft to another airfield and carryv
ing an aircraft mechanic in the fuselage compartment behind the pilot's
protective plate. encountered a Ju-BB. Obviously it was a reconnaissance
plane. Bashkirov decided to attack the enemy and engaged it. The fascist
endeavored to escape by diving. but he was caught by the Soviet fighter.

At an altitude of 100 meters the Junkers caught fire and then crashed into
the ground.

In pulling out of the atteck.-suddenly two elements of FH-l90 dove on
Baehkirov. One of them was somewhat below and our flier was able to get
him in the sight. In an instant the Fokker-Uulf. in leaving a trail of

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

snake. was diving toward the ground. In the neantino the second elenent of
enemy fighters went into the attack. It was difficult for the Soviet pilot
on the overloaded aircraft to carry out the unequal battle with the Nazi
vultures. However. the high skills. valor and daring helped hin escape
from the difficult situation. Bashkirov reduced his speed and allowed

the attacking fighter to nova in front of him and then opened fire free
the cannon. The eneny aircraft caught fire. In order to put out the
(lanes. the German turned sharply and unexpectedly collided with hie part-
ner. Both aircraft exploded in the air from the inpact. Thus ended the
duel of Viktor Baehkirov. in the course of which the sneny was deprived

of four aircraft.

V. A. Bashkirov was born in 1920 in a worker fsnily. Prior to the artsy

he worked as a lathe operator at a plant in Vladiniri. In May 19bl he
completed flight school and soon thereafter began to fight the fascists.
During the war coununist Bashkirov carried out 281 coebat sortiea. he en-
gaged in 35 air battles. and personally shot down 19 eneny aircraft. In
February 1944, he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Pres-
ently Col (Rea) V. A. Beshkirov. in being the deputy chairman of the Chemi-
govsksye oblsst DOSAAF Couittee. carries out extensive social work in in-
doctrinating the youth in the nilitary traditions of the heroes of the
Greet Patriotic War.

On 22! Decelber. in the region of Antinovka. at an altitude of 1,000 meters,
a group of six La—S from the 721st isp heeded by Sr Lt V. H. Ztuulin, in
covering eight Il-2 fro. the 299th shed. encountered six Fit-190 which en-
deavored to attack the assault planes. The 11s for-ed a defensive circle.
Our fighters iaposed battle on the enely fliers in a vertical asneuver,
drawing the enemy up. As a result of the combat, fliers I. c. Pronyskov
and A. S. Kobisekoy shot down one Fokker-wolf each. Our assault planes
did not have any losses. Sr Lt A. s. Kobisskoy in July 19“ was awarded
the title of hero of the Soviet Union. By that time he had 316 coabat
sorties. and in ’07 air battles had shot down 16 fascist aircraft.

As a total during the period of coebst fron 15 October through 31 Decenber
191.3. the 16th AA carried out around 15,800 coabst sorties and engaged in
270 air battles. having destroyed 198 enemy aircraft. The losses of our
aviation were significantly fewer.

As a result of the offensive in the Goael'-Bobruysk sector. the troops

of the Belorussian Front crossed the Sozh River. and on the left wing

they had crossed the Dnepr. and having advanced 130 kn. had literated a
significant portion of Belorussian territory, having occupied an advantage-
one position for encircling the eneay grouping.

0n 2 January 19“, the Belorussian Front received a new mission. to start
an offensive with the left wing, to crush the Hozyr' eneey grouping, and
subsequently to advance on Bobruyek.

95
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The air foreetione of the 16th AA, in preparing for the operation. were
to disrupt the operations of the Kalinkovichi railroad junction. the sta-
tion and tracks, in destroying concentrations of troops trsins. With the
start of the offensive (from 8 January). it use to assist the troops of
the front in piercing the enemy defenses. to prevent the bringing up of
reserves end the retreat of ens-y troops from the region of Kslinkovichi
end Hotyr'. The fighters were to provide reliable cover for the troops
of the front end the operations of our aviation.

In January 1966. the weather situstion was extremely bed (frequent snow-
falls. low cloudiness end fogs). For this reason the predominant tactical
procedure for the actions of the boebers and assault planes wee wave attacks

in small groups. However under favorable conditions. massed actions were
also used.

0n 6 January. in benefiting from an improvement in the weather. the 3d
bek with the forces of 105 bombers and under the cover of 39 fighters
nsde a concentrated strike against the reiirosd junction of Kelinkovichi
end Zhitkovichi station. At Kalinkovichi, seven trains were destroyed.
The operations of the junction were helted.

The concentrated sir strike planned for 8 January in a sector of the break-
through by the troops of the front wee not carried out due to bad weether.
end only on the second half of the day did shell groupt of assault planes
and bombers begin operating against enemy artillery in firing positions.
egeinst ens-y infantry end eilitary equipment in the concentration areas.
Simultaneously the bombers destroyed trains at Kslinkovichi junction, while
the ssaault planes prevented the bringing up of reserves to the battlefield.

0n 9-12 January, the bombers in groups attacked the railroad lines of con-
munications. Assault planes supported the advance of our troops. destroying
enemy artillery end concentrations of personnel and equipment.

On 12 January. bombers from the 3d bek under the cover of fighters again
made a concentrated strike against the railroad junction of Kslinkovichi.
This tine the raid involved 17 groups of 6-9 aircraft in each (over 120
bombers), and these besically carried out diveboebing and caused enormous
losses to the enemy, having destroyed over 50 reilroad care with military
equipment. a large number of motor vehicles with troops end freight. end
having destroyed around 20 stetion structures end having set nunerous fires.
The 779th bep (conender, Lt Col A. V. Khrenchenhov) was awarded the honor-
ary name of Kalinkovichi, as perticularly distinguishing itself.

In this raid. the commander of the 55th bep, Lt Col H. A. Kritsov. died
heroically. Prom a direct hit from an antiaircraft shell in a dive, the
eircrsft caught fire end along with the crew. the regiment navigator Haj

I. I. Soeov end the gunner-radio operetor HSgt N. A. Pavlov. it dove into

n concentration of enemy trsins. After the liberation of Kelinkov1chi. the
remains of the deceased were buried with honors near the airfield of Pesoch-
nsya Buds.

96
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

H. A. Krivtsov who hailed from Nikolayevskaya Oblast at the age of 16 par-
ticipated in the civil War and fought against the white Finns. he started
the Great Patriotic war as a squadron commander. and in the autumn was shot
down in a dogfight and after recuperation again returned to service, provb
ing himself to be an excellent and strong-willed cot-ander as well as a
brave flier. And his crew was up to him.

The actions of the 16th AA had the most tangible impact on the course of

the given operation in destroying the enemy trains at the railroad junctions
and stations and the knocking of them out by systematic daytime and night-
time bomber strikes, as well as the destruction of enemy strongpoints. ar-
tillery. personnel and equipment in the zone of operations of the 65th Army.
This helped in the liberating of the towns of Nozyr' and Kalinkovichi from
the enemy on 14 January. Here the 236th iad (connmnder. Col Ye. z. Tatanash-
vili) particularly distinguished itself. and it was awarded the honorary

name of Hozyr' by an order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief.

During these days enemy fighter. sharply increased their activity, and they
endeavored to prevent the actions of our bombers and assault planes. Thus,
six Pe-Z from the 301st bed led by squadron commander Capt G. 8. Zolotukhin.
under the escort of four fighters in making an attack on a bridge to the
east of Bykhov. were attacked by 12 Hesserachmitts and 4 Pokker-Hulfs. The
numerical superiority of the Nazis did not bring them success. having lost
three aircraft in the battle with our fighters. they broke off the attack.
Here the poor training of the fascist fliers could be felt.

immediately thereafter there appeared over the target a second group of six
Pe—2 under the squadron commander of the 96th Guards bap. Maj A. I. Fadcyev.
Ten Hesserschmitts attacked them. but all the attacks were driven off. Here
the gunner-radio operator Sgt Radishevich shot down one enemy fighter. The
group of our aircraft returned to the airfield without losses. Haj A. I.
Fadeyev during the war carried out 168 combat sorties and in May 1966 was
awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union.

From 21 February. the AA air formations participated in the operation of
the 3d and 50th armies to eliminate the enemy bridgehead on the left bank
of the Dnepr to the east of Rogachev and zhlobin. They directly supported
the actions of the troops of the front, they destroyed the enemy crossings
and the enemy reserves, they prevented them from reaching the battlefield,
they covered our troops and carried out reconnaissance.

Hsny crews from the third bak during these days proved to be bombing snipers.
The squadron commander of the 128th bap. Capt F. I. Parshin. particularly
distinguished himself. Heading nine Pe-2 in a low-altitude attack he de-
stroyed in a single run the temporary bridge over the Dnepr to the south

of Rogachev, and as a result of this the Nazi troops were pressed to the
river and crushed.

Over the 4 days, the AA carried out 326 sorties against the crossings. and
this put the enemy grouping on the bridgehead in a difficult situation.
Soon thereafter the bridgehead was eliminated. Having crossed the Dnepr.
our troops captured the town of Rogachev on 26 February.

97
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USﬁ ONLY

As a total during Jenuery-Herch 1966. the eir formetions of the 16th AA
cerried out 11.600 combet sorties. they engaged in 250 eir bottles end

shot down 200 enemy eircreft. Our losses were significently less. end
nemely from the enemy SCAA fire.

In eddition to the combet during the winter period the AA eir formetione
were eleo concerned with conbet treining end sheped up the young flight

personnel which hed errived from the reserve sir regiments end from the
flight schools.

On 17 Februery 19b6, the Belorussien Front wee renemed the First Belo-
ruseien Front by e directive from Heedqusrters.

The feilure of the Operetion Citedsl of the Hehrmecht commend which
ended with the defeet of the fesciet troops on the Kursk Bulge wee one
of the most important events in the Greet Petriotic "er.

In the nettle of Kursk. the eviction of sti Germsny suffered e couplets
defect. heving lost its former sir superiority. Soviet evietiol during

the sun-er end eutumn engegenente of 19103 won sir superiority end held it
fir-1y until the end of the wer. For the 16th AA. this victory wee not

an eesy one. During just the period of the defensive engegement on the
Kursk Bulge the ermy lost e portion of its eircreft. however. heving
received replacements end heving rebuilt the eircreft fleet. it quickly.
without hslting operetions. brought its eir fornetions to e etete of combet
readiness end wes eble to perticipete in the counteroffensive of the troops
of the Centrel front end in the subsequent offensive operetions of 1963.

The role of evietion in these operetions wee very significent. end in cer-
tein instences (in the crossing of the Dnepr in the region of Loyev). sir

operations were the decisive fsctor which determined the success of troop
coubet.

During this period more edvenced operationsl end tecticel methods for the
conbet use of our evietion were born end geined recognition. These were

merked by high effectiveness end ensured the ermy of successfully cerrying
out the missions.

For the first time in the Kursk bulge. the 16th AA begun to use on e mess
scsle concentreted strikes involving up to 600 and more sircreft. As e
rule. these strikes were mede in the piercing of strong enemy defenses. in
ections egeinst the besic enemy troop groupings. end in essisting our troop:

in repelling counterstrikes by enjor enely forces. The effectiveness of
the concentreted strikes wss high.

Before en etteck by our troops. eviction softening up begen to be cerried
out (combined. es s rule. with ertillery softening up) for the purpose of
suppressing eneny ertillery. its strongpoints end centers of resistence.
as well so for disrupting troop control.

98
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE. ONLY

With the start of an offensive by the troops of the front. direct nir sup-
port and strengthened covering of the troops against enemy air strikes were
carried out constantly. This support was achieved by concentrated strikes
end wave operations by bombers end assault planes.

In the operations there was further development of the air support for
the throwing of the tank formations of the front into the breach as well
as air support for their operations in an operational depth. When neces-
sary the basic forces of the M were involved in this. One shed and one
ied were assigned, as a rule, for the air support of a tank army.

The improvement in the combat qualities of our aircraft (primarily in terms
of speed and rate of climb) made it possible for our fighters to employ
battle formations that were deployed along the front and echeloned in el-
titude. This provided greater freedom of maneuvering in air combat. The
development of the radar support system provided an opportunity to shift

the petrol zones forward end sided the earlier interception of enemy air-
craft. The improving of fighter control from the ground and in the air
with the broader use of radio made it possible to promptly inform the pilots
of the air situation, to guide them to enemy aircraft and to shift to more
important targets, and when necessary to increase the forces in combat. The

air battles became longer and more effective, and frequently developed into
air engagements.

The combat skill of the flight personnel of the bomber and assault plane
units also rose significantly. The effectiveness of their strikes against
various targets rose, and they became more accurate in terms of place and
time and more strictly coordinated with the actions of the ground troops.

The work of the staffs in planning operations improved. The control of
aviation from the forward comaand posts. as a rule, was carried out in a
more organized manner. Continuous and close interaction with the troops
and between the branches of aviation became compulsory in all cases of the
combat activities of the M.

The air scouts both in the preparations for and in the course of the bartie
on the Kurslt Bulge and in the subsequent operations promptly detected the
moves and concentration areas of the enemy troops, the defensive lines as
well as the basing and composition of the enemy aviation.

The work of the political bodies and party organizations in mobilizing the
personnel to excellently carrying out the missions of the co-and became
even more concrete. flexible and prompt.

During the period from March 1963 until April 1966. the air formations and
units of the 16th M made 96,600 combat sorties (including 25,000 at night),
with more than 53,000 for the bombing and strafing of enemy troops and lines
of communications, around llo,600 for covering the troops and repelling sir
raids, 17,600 for covering our bomber and assault aviation, 10,100 for re-
connoitering the enemy, and 1,300 for "free hunting" and other missions.

99
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY ,

In addition. more than 69,700 sorties were node to train the personnel and

for ferrying. During this ties. lore than 2.100 air battles were conducted.
during which around 2,000 sassy aircraft were shot down. Our losses were
much less. By boabing and strafing attacks. 167 enemy aircraft were de-
stroyed on the ground along with my tanks. notor vehicles, guns. rail-
road cars. depots. as well as a large nulber of Nazis.

For successful actions in the battles from Kursk to the Dnepr. the air
formations and units of the AA ten tines were col-ended by orders of the

Suprene Cmnder-in-Chief. Many of then were awarded orders and received
honorary nanes.

Thousands of officers. sergeants and privates fro- the 16th AA during this
period received orders and aedsls of the USSR.

By Ukaaes of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet in August-April 1963
and in February 1966. the air regi-ents of the M which had particularly
distinguished theaselvss were given the following decorations: The Order
of Lenin to the 53d Guards iap (co-ander, Haj I. P. Hotornyy); the Order
of the Red Banner to the 3bth bap. the 58th. 59th and 78th Guards shop.
the 30th Guards and the 519th iap (col-lenders. respectively. Lt Cola P. A.
Parfenyuk, V. D. Panfilov. H. G. Sklyarov, A. G. Nabonechnikov. Kh. H.
Ibatulin and K. N. Murga).

For successful actions and uses heroism of the flight personnel. the 563d
iap (co-lander. Lt Col V. I. Nensshev) because the 116th Guards iap and was
awarded the Order of the Red Banner.

For valor and herois- shown in the battles against the Nazi invaders, the
high title of Hero of the Soviet Union was awarded to (in addition to those
aentioned previously): )1st Ch. K. Bendeliani (posthumously), N. H. Gusarov

and P. P. Pospelov; Capts I. A. Avekov (posthu-ously). Ya. I. Andryushin.

I. F. Balyuk. S. P. Davidenko. G. S. Dubenok, A. P. Savchsnko, I. D. Sidorov
(posthumously), and P. P. Shavelev; Sr Lts H. P. Mixinov. I. A. Namenko.

S. H. Novichhov, 3. H. Rivkin. N. P. Starostin and P. S. Shenendyuk; Lt

A. I. Pedorchuk and Jr Lt H. s. Baranov.

The silitary feats of our aviators were done out of unprecedented courage
and valor and a desire for wholehearted struggle against the may until
its total destruction. The ra-ings of fighter pilots V. K. Polyakov. H. I.
Vizhunz-v and R. P. Polyanskiy. the heroic death of the assault plane pilots
A. s. Baranov and A. S. Cherezov. the bomber pilot H. A. Krivtsov and the
others who repeated the feet of pilot Costello have gone down as golden
pages forever in the history of the Great Patriotic War.

100
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US: ONLY

CHAPTER 3: IN THE BOBRUYSK-HARSAW SECTOR
Preparations for the Offensive

I‘y mid-1966. the Red Any had crushed the strong groupings of Kati troops
in the northwestern and southwestern sectors. This crested conditions for
asking a strike at the center. on the shortest path to Ger-any.

In fearing this strike, the Nazi co-and had cones-‘trated a large troop
grouping on Belorussian territory celled the Amy Group Center. end had
also for-ed a deeply echeloned defense.

For the purpose of defeating this grouping end liberating Belorussis. the
Soviet Supreae High Comand had decided to conduct an operation under the
codenane of Bsgration. For carrying it out troops from the First Belorus-
sisn Front were to be involved in cooperation with the adjacent fronts.

0n the defensive in the zone of the front stretching up to 700 kn were

the 9th (in the Bobruyek sector) and the 2d (in the Poles'ye) Gerun field
srtaies, as well as foruations free the 6th ‘l'enlt Arny. Their fighting
strength was around 65 divisions and a significant number of reinforce-em
units. The Nazi aviation operating in these sectors included air squadrons
from the 6th and partially the 6th air fleets. This was based principally
at the airfield centers in the regions of Minsk, Bersnovichi. Brest and
Lyublin. The fighting strength was 800-850 aircraft. including around 500
bombers.

The troops of the First Belorussian Front under the con-and of Gen Arn
(from 29 June Mar SU) K. K. Rokossovskiy. after the winter battles. in
aid-April 1944 began preparations for the stunner offensive.

The 16th M was also beginning preparations for combat in the new opera-
tions. At this tine its fighting strength included the 3d bak (the 261st
and JOlst bad), the 6th ssk (221st bad and 282d iad). the 271st nbad, the
2d Guards and 299th shed, the 234th. 283d and 286th ind. the 16th odrap.
the 98th okrap and the 65th okree. As a result of the continuous heavy
battles. 40-60 aircraft retained in each of the air divisions. As a total

101
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the army had 658 combat aircraft. 0n the basis of the instructions from
the commander of the AA. Lt Gen (from 11 Hay, Col Gen) Avn S. I. Rudenko.
intensive combat preparations were undertaken, and in the course of this
the combat skill of the fliers and navigators was improved and the young
flight personnel gained experience.

Due to the fact that the Second Belorussian Front turned over its zone en-
compassing the Poles‘ye on the south and the troops located in it to the
First Belorussian Front, the 6th AA of the Second Belorussian Front under

the comand of Hero of the Soviet Union. Lt Gen Avn F. P. Polynin. in
Arpil 19“, became part of the First Belorussian Front, and was put under
the comander of the 16th AA. as a member of the front military council.1

By the end of April, the 6th AA included: the 3d Guards shad (33d. 70th

and 71st Guards shap) under the command of Col 6. A. Sukhorebrikov, and

from June, Lt Col A. A. Smirnov; the 336th iad (163d. 265th and 483d iap)
under the command of Col S. H. Petrov. and from June, Col 8. P. Grashchenkov;
the 262d nbad (661st. 717th and 997th nbap). coriander Col D. A. Abanin,

and from Hey, Col P. A. Kalinin; the 72d orap and 93d okrap under the com-
mand of Lt Cols A. Ya. Gavil'chenko and K. M. Hyasoyedov. The army had 263
aircraft.

In Hay-June. after being brought up to full strength. the let Guards and
273 iad were returned to the 16th AA. In addition. the 8th iak, the lath
shalt, the 132d bad. the 300th shed and the 19th iap arrived as new units.

The 8th is]: under the contend of Hero of the Soviet Union, Lt Gen Avn A. s.
Osipenko was being brought up to full strength. Its 215th iad (the 156th,
263d and 813th iap) was under the command of Col H. N. Yakushin who had
distinguished himself in battles against fascism in Republican Spain. The
323d iad (149th, 266th. 269th and ‘Mth iap) was headed by (:01 P. P. Rybakov.
Both air divisions had a good deal of combat experience.

The loth shak arrived under the con-and of Hero of the Soviet Union Maj Gen
Avn G. F. Baydukov. The air corps had just commenced combat operations.

The 196th shad (289th. 657th and 966th shap) and the 199th shad (136th.
569th. 726th and 783d shap) headed by Lt Col K. K. Grishchenko and Col N. S.
Vinogradov had been formed from air regiments withdrawn from the front for
additional manning. The newly arrived 132d bad (co-lander. Maj Gen Avn I. L.
Fedorov) was incorporated as part of the 6th salt. The 300th shad (106th.
382d. 724th and 904th shap) under the comand of Col T. Ye. Kovalev had
little combat experience.

The 19th iap headed by Lt Col P. F. Chupikov had been fighting the Nazi
invaders from the first days of the war. The regiment was directly under
the comander of the Air Force and was manned with the strongest pilots.

1 Arkhiv MO SSSR. folio 36d. inv. 6676. files 369-350, sheet 1; file 229.

sheet 166; file 273. sheet 85.

102
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 8th ink, the loth shalt end the 300th shad which had arrived to reinforce
the any were received at the rear airfielde 200-300 kn froa the front line
and were included in the intensive preparations for cosbat. The experienced
comnders of the 2d Guards and 299th shad twice flew out with the young
fliers from the 6th shalt and the 300th shad to etrafe the ens-y troops.

In May-June 1964. Maj Gen Avn I. h. Drusov was appointed consander of the
6th iak, 001 K. Rb. Boriesnko asst-ed oomand of the 6th salt, Lt Col K. I.

Raeekazov was in contend of the 271st nhad. end Lt Col N. V. Iseyev the
273d isd.

The flight personnel was intensely trained by the deputy connender of the
M. Maj Gen Avn H. H. Kosykh. by the consulate of the corps. divisions,
regiments and their deputies for flight letters, as well as the inspectors
for piloting techniques Lt Cola K. I. Yelochkin and B. A. Horosov. Hajs

R. G. Yeasts, V. A. Vatsenko. c. P. Kostandi, V. H. Averichev. V. P.

Litvinenko. V. I. Byvshev. S. S. Harshelkovich, S. H. Belyavskiy and
others.

Gen 5. I. Rudenluo devoted a great deal of attention to iaproving the skills
of the flight personnel. In possessing greet experience end knowledge,
organizational abilities end inexhaustible energy, he personally partici-
pated in organizing the training of the flight personnel and supervised

the course of it. danandiag froa each flier high piloting techniques as
well as the coaplete mastery of air tactics as applied to the conditions
of the pending operation.

Simultaneously with flight training, tacticel conferences to exchange con-
het experience were held in all the air unite. At then they analyzed the
strong and weak points of the ens-y aviation. and recs-endations were
worked out on the tactics of air combat. the aethod of melting bombing
strikes against the eneny and their reconnaissance. Then tactical flight
exercises were held in all the air formations.

A great deal of attention was given to training the leadership. In each
air formation, 3-day courses were held for the cousndera of the air regi-
ments and squadrons. and here they inspected piloting techniques and dis-
cussed questions of iaproving the battleworthiness of the air unite. The
co-ander of the AA held a 2-day course with the con-anders of the air corps
and divisions at which they discussed operational-teticel questions in rela-
tion to the pending operation.

During the preparations for the offensive (April-June). the air unite of

the M made up to 68,000 non-combat sortiee. including around 27,000 train-
ing flights.

The officers of the air staffs carried out extensive work in the course of
the preparations. Under the leadership of the experienced and energetic
chief of staff of the M. Maj Gen Avn P. I. Brayko. the staff departments

103
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and services carried out measures to plan the combat of the air formations
of the AA in the operation, to coordinate them with the formations of the
ground forces of the front and between the air branches, as well as in the
area of air reconnaissance and navigation training.

Participating actively in the elaboration of the documents, in the daily
supervision of cosbat operations and preparations. as well as in generaliz-
ing the combat experience of the air foraations were the chief of the AA
staff operations department (:01 I. I. Oetrovskiy. his deputies and assist-
ants Col L. H. Herinov. Lt Col D. M. Trifonov, Hajs P. T. Gromadnyy, D. T.
Deryugin, P. P. Ivanov. N. G. Puzyrev and G. s. Shimanov. Lt H. P. Vssil'-
yev and others.

Intense creative work was carried out also on the staffs of the air corps,
divisions and regiments. The following officers stood out in their high
organization of operational reconnaissance work: The chief of staff Col
I. L. Vlasov and Col V. I. Colutvin and Haj s. D. Ogorodnik of the 3d bah;
chief of staff Col 1. N. Lyshenko and Hajs H. P. Zin'kovskiy and Ye. A.
Bulygin of the 2d Guards shad; chief of staff Lt Col V. P. Tokmsluov. Lt Col
A. A. Khetagurov and Maj I. P. Halyutin of the 299th shad; chief of staff
Col A. V. Ryndin. Lt (:01 L. S. Okinchits of the 283d iad; chief of staff
Col 1. H. Kuz'min and Lt Col I. I. Volkov of the 301st bad; chief of staff
Lt Col G. V. Tomshenkov. Haj H. D. Gutnichenko and Capt A. z. Gaynulin of
the 271st nbad; chief of staff Col P. A. Lukashchuk of the 211st bad; Lt
Col 8. I. Skvortsov. Capt I. S. Voykov of the 16th odrap. and others.

The chief of the army political department Col V. I. Vikhrov and the offi-
cers of the political department Lt Col D. N. PUgin. Majs I. H. Kirshkavich.
H. Ye. Yasinovs‘aiy. A. c. Zotov. and P. A. Katapayev, Capt Ye. P. Govorov
and others were reliable combat sisstants to the army connand. In the units
all the work both in the preparations for and in the course of the operations
was carried out under the leadership of the deputy army cox-lander for poli-
tical affairs Gen A. s. Vinogradov, in providing help to the political work-
ers in the political support of cadet, and in raising the organization and
purposefulness in the patriotic indoctrination of the personnel.

The political bodies and the party organizations of the units, in preparing
for combat, worked constantly to indoctrinate the personnel of the AA in a
spirit of total dedication to the socialist fatherland and hate for the
enemy. They explained the international and domestic situation of the na-
tion, the requireaents of the military oath, and they also mobolized the
personnel to excellently carry out the missions. to carefully prepare the
material and to continuously support the operations of the air units.

The party organizations of the units devoted a great deal of attention to
the growth of the ranks of the Co-tunist Party. During the first lo months
of 1966. 1,719 persons were admitted as members and candidate members of
the party. In June, the AA had 10,450 members of the VI(P(b) and 6.1080
candidate members. The cousunists cemented the ranks of the aviators
together.

1 Arkhiv no SSSR, folio 368, inv. 6512. file 8’0, sheet 372.

1010
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Prior to the offensive. aestinga were held for the leadership of the units
and the pnrty-Komsoaol aktiv. as well as party-Kouoaol matings with the
agenda "0n the Political Support for Coabat." The tasks of the party and
Konaotaol organizations were clarified. and in addition a decision was
passed which obliged the connunista and Koasoaol nenbera to set the example
and to carry out the conbat sissions excellently. As a result of the great
political indoctrination carried out by the political bodies. the offen-
sive spirit of the personnel of the 16th M was vary high.

The presence of forested areas and the saall number of characteristic land-
marks in the zone of the forthconing offensive by the troops of the front
required a particular organization of navigation support. The chief navi-
gator of the arey. Col 3. P. Lapahin. carried out a 5~day course on the
questions of air navigation for 98 co-andera (leaders) of groups. On

the terrain a couples systen of ground air navigation support vas deployed
in the for- of nuseroua radio and light beacons. honing stations and radio
direction finders. as wall as nan-lads aarkera laid out on the ground at
characteristic points. This facilitated orientation for the personnel and
the reaching of the target.

The signal troops under the leadership of Col N. D. lgnatov provided unin-
terrupted and reliable con-unicationa between :he M staff and all the air
formations and the cooperating field forces of the ground troops both in
preparing for the offensive as well as in the course of it. By the start
of the operation, the M had the 16th Signals Regilent (comnder. Lt Col
z. N. Roshal'). one signals battalion froa the Air Force reserve and the
31st Detached Signals Coupany. In preparing for the of fensiva. for the
purpose of concealing the grouping of our aviation from the eneny. control
was carried out by wire communications which were under the conned of
fian 5. l. Kholchev and N. G. Pskunov. The radio coal-unications developed
under the leadership of Haj A. V. Krasyukov and designed for controlling
aviation in the course of the offensive had 26 radio nets.

There was also auch to be done by the officers of the personnel departsent.
the special depart-ant. as well as the aeteorological and other services
which were led by Lt Cola I. H. Hikhaylov and N. V. Kundyrevich. Col Surhov.
Engr-Maj c. K. Astenenko and Engr- apt N. Z. Pinus.

The personnel of the aviation engineering service (iaa) of the any headed
by Engr-Col V. I. Rebrov did a good deal of work in preparing the asteriel
for the forthcoming operation. As a result of the work done by the engineer-
ing and technical personnel. by the start of the offensive just 2.7 per-
cent nonflying aircraft rushed in the any. Nere particularly excellent
work had been done by Bng- Lt Cola P. N. Aralovets. N. A. Alekseyev. V. H.
Lazarev and G. c. Nyrkov, Eng-Haj N. I. zhuk and many others.

The air rear unite led by Maj Gen Avn A. S. Kirillov also prepared in-
tensely for the forthconing operation. The basic missions of the rear
were: the daily support of the conbat operations of the flying units.

105
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the preparation of the forward airfields and the creation of supplies of
fuel. ammunition and food. Many difficulties were encountered in mateiral
and technical supply and in supporting the action of the air units. They
were explained by the fact that the rear bodies of the army were located
over a significant territory (300-500 km along the front and an equal dis-
tance in depth). and had a limited number of motor transport. Many types
of food had to be sought by the troops themselves, and moreover in regions
of the country which had been destroyed and burned out by the Nazis.

By the start of the operation. the rear of the 16th AA in the Bobryusk
sector had 7 rab (21st. 25th, 28th, 56th. 75th, 79th and 80th), 47 has.

46 airfield technical companies. 7 airfield engineering and 7 motor trans-
port bsttalions. 1 transport squadron. 7 head air depots. 2 stationary and
2 mobile air shops. 1 stationary motor repair shop and 0 field air repair
shops. in the base region of the 6th AA there were 38 ban. The presence
of these units were to support the forthcoming combat operations of the
army.

As a result of the enormous work done by the rear bodies. at the airfields
and at the depots of the army supplies of ammunition were created for 15-
20 days of operations and aviation fuel for 10-12 days. The food supplies
were for 25-30 daily rations. Much was done for this by the chief of staff
of the rear Col V. V. Colodyayevskiy. Lt Col A. V. Fedorov and Capt N. M.
Shopin. Lt Col 1. A. Gol'sin. Hajs H. N. Shadrin. A. P. Volokhov and others.
The immediate work of supporting the combat operations of the air units was
excellently carried out by the RAB chiefs Cols M. I. Kuzin, I. F. Ofitserov.
h. A. Vasil'yev. A. P. Oilfirsnho. N. D. Pertsulenho. H. ?. Shcherbatyuk
and Lt Col A. V. Ginsberg.

In the army‘s base area in the Bobruysk sector there were 162 airfields,
including 53 with deployed rear services, that is, almost each sir regi-
ment had its own airfield. The 6th AA had 63 airfields. For the purpose
of concealing the base areas of our aviation from the enemy. the airfield
construction department (chief. Lt Col V. V. Perevornikov. officers Engr-

Lt Col 5. H. Korolev. Engr-Capts L. L. Eberg and A. S. Hikhaylovskiy) car-
ried out extensive work to camouflage all of the active sirfields and

create dummy ones. At the 12 dummy sirfields 298 dummy aircraft were set
out along with 85 dummy vehicles and antiaircraft guns. and over 150 vari-
ous dummy structures were built. This led to a situation where over the
period from January through September 1966, the enemy aviation bombed actual
airfields only three times (and here one aircraft was lost). while the dummy
airfields were bombed 128 times. The creation of dummy airfields proved
fully effective.

The antiaircraft defenses of the AA airfields in the Bobryusk sector were
provided by eight airfield air defense regiments and seven detached anti-
sircraft machine gun companies (chief of the air defense department. Col

Ye. Ye. Bendyukov).

106
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The physicians of all specialties worked with inspiration on the ssdical
support for the units. They constantly followed the health of the avia-
tors and provided enoreous aid to the sick and wounded. In the air forsa-
tions the best organisers of the sedicsl service were Col Med Serv N. T.
Gotchakow. Lt Cole Med Serv V. l. Gorodnichev. 8. Ya. Nestseyev. B. I.
Panin. H. P. Voskreeenskiy. 6. Ya. Tavrovskiy. Hajs Med Serv c. K. Agar-
kov. s. V. Logschev. A. P. Novitskiy. N. A. Pasyuk. H. R. Freydes. L. D.
Tseytlin. 1. Ya. Zeslavskiy. I. G. Posternah. and others.

Sisultaneously with the preparations for the offensive. the 16th AA also
carried out cosbat uissions. The air units attacked soving trains and
troop accunulstions. they carried out sir reconnaissance. they covered
the troops on the front and delivered cargo to the partisans.

Pros April through June. the AA asde 6.538 cosbat sorties and by bosbing
strikes caused the enemy a good deal of dasage in personnel and military
equipment. In 84 air battles. 60 fascist aircraft were shot down.

The cos-and of the front devoted a great deal of attention to the camou-
flaging of the troops. The AA was entrusted with systematic air observa-
tion of all the roads over which the regrouping was to be carried out as
well as the troop concentration areas. The results of the observations
were ineediately reported to the cos-and of the front. The canouflsging
of the troops as well as the active struggle against ens-y reconnaissance
prevented the eneay froa guessing the plan of the Soviet cos-mud.

In the interests of the pending offensive. the staff of the AA organised
intensive sir reconnaissance. Deytise tactical air reconnaissance was
carried out by the non-T/O reconnaissance squadrons free the 283d and
286th led (in difficult weather conditions. by the 2d Guards and 299th
shed). and at night by reconsissance planes from the 271st nbad. Opera-
tioasl sir reconnaissance and the photographing of the eneay defensive
lines were entrusted to the 16th odrap. and the photographing of the ssin
defensive zone also to the 98th okrap. As a total 150 aircraft were in-
volved in air reconnaissance. including 90 on the lobryusk sector.

In recalling the preparations for the operation. the forser artillery cos-
sander of the First Belorussian Front. Mar ARt V. I. Kszskov. has written
in the book. "Osvobozhedeniye Belorussii" [The Liberation of Belorussia].
that the interpretation of the aerial photographs from just the 98th ohrap
eade it possible to establish the location of lbs artillery batteries. 99
prepared firing positions. 61 sorter batteries. 13 entisircraft batteries
and 102 separate guns. Very valuable data. particularly under the condi-
tions of forested terrain. were supplied by the staffs and the visual sir
reconnaissance which detected around 2.000 different targets. All of this

made it possible to disclose the enesy defenses rather cospletely. The

artillery received the necessary data for preparing accurate and effective
fire.

107
I08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By the start of the operation. using vertical and oblique air photograph-
ing. the eneny defenses had been disclosed to the entire operational depth.
here in the sectors of the main strikes by the troops of the front. the
enemy defenses had been photographed repeatedly. The airfields were recon-
noitered almost daily. and this made it possible to accurately establish
the basing and nuaber of fascist aviation. In carrying out reconnaissance
missions in the Bobryuak sector. the fliers from the 721st isp. Hero of
the Soviet Union Capt I. s. Kozich, Sr Lt A. P. Lipatov. Lta V. G. Semenov
and B. I. Yakushev. Jr Lt D. N. Hedvedev and others particularly distin-
guished themselves. as well as the scouts of the 16th odrap. Capts N. L.
Kavun and A. I. Rengech. Lts A. K. Knysh. A. I. Nasarov. and others. On
the Kovel' sector. the missions were carried out excellently by the scouts
from the 72d orap Heroes of the Soviet Union Majs V. G. Podkolodnov and

V. A. Smirnov (both died on 9 July 1956 in carrying out a sission). Haj

l. Ye. Velikiy. Sr Lt N. P. Ksnishchev. and others.

The scouts from the 16th odrap. the pilot Lt V. A. Yershov and the navi-
gator Sr Lt 6. P. Sobkovskiy who were awarded the title of hero of the
Soviet Union acted courageously. Each of them had over 100 successfully
fulfilled long-distance combat reconnaissance flights. They were aces in
reconnoitering enemy airfields and this was considered as the most dangerous
mission. Over 380 times the fliers appeared over the arifields photo-
graphing them. In many flights their aircraft was subjected to antisir-
craft fire and attacks by enemy fighters. But due to the courage. excel-
lent piloting techniques and able tactical actions the crew emerged the
winner and returned to its airfield

The results of air reconnaissance carried out in the preparations for the
Belorussian Operation were very valuable and were used along with the data
of other types of intelligence in compiling blank maps by the military
topographic service of the front's staff with the contours plotted on then
for the defensive lines and location of enemy weapons. These maps were
sent out to the troops of the front. For the air units they served as
target maps.

The reconnaissance department of the staff of the 16th AA and the intelli-
gence officers of the air formations carried out extensive and painstaking
work to supply the troops of the front with data on the opposing enemy.
Night and day they secured and analysed an enormous quantity of diverse in-
formation on the enemy and reported the generalized data to the command.
Huch inventiveness in the organization and execution of air reconnaissance
was shown by the deputy chief of the reconnaissance department Lt Col N. P.
Dmitriyev, the chief of the aerial photography service Haj H. P. Karpenko.
Haj V. I. Pokhil'chenko. Sr Lts S. N. Arkhipov. H. I. Zarayshiy. and others.

The 16th AA on 24 June l9b6 numbered 2.319 flying combat aircraft. includ-
ing 331 daytise boabers and 169 night bombers. 661 assault planes. 1.108
fighters. and 70 reconnaissance planes and spotters. There were 1.846
combat-ready crews. 0n the left wing of the front. the 6th AA had 321
aircraft and 248 coabet-ready crews. Both araies had superiority in num-
bers over the enesy aviation.

108
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Soviet-produced aircraft which were flown by the air units in terms of
many characteristics were superior to the enemy aircraft. The flight per-
sonnel. having gained diverse experience in the preceding engagements. in
their majority also surpassed the enemy fliers in terms of combat skills.
In the army by this time an entire galaxy of air aces had arisen and decor-

ated with the orders of the Order of Lenin and the Gold Star of the Hero of
the Soviet Union.

On 13 April 19-“, by the Ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet,
for the exemplary fulfillment of the missions of the «mad. for valor and
courage. the title of hero of the Soviet Union was awarded to Haj G. I.
Kopayev. Capte V. L. Volgin. P. A. Del'tsov. Ye. A. Hikhalenkov. N. H.
Tregubov and V. P. Khokhlachev; posthumously to Capts A. A. Bondar'. A. I.

Kadomtsev and I. A. botanic, Sr Lte H. h. Pavlov and A. A. Sviridov. and
to Lt A. s. Cherezov.

Each of them had hundreds of combat sorties and had destroyed a large quan-
tity of enemy military equipment.

Thus. the pilot-navigator of the 59th Guards shop. Guards Haj G. I. Kopayev
by this time had 230 combat sorties. having destroyed 70 tanks. 16 aircraft
at sirfields and 3 in air battles. The conunder of the air squadron of the
78th Guards shap, Guards Capt Ye. A. Hikhalenkov. had carried out 250 combat
sorties. during which he destroyed 36 tanks. 118 guns and mortars. 27 air-
craft and much other military equipment. To the score of the air squadron
contender of the 26th bap. Capt P. A. Del'tsov, were 221 combat sorties.
including 188 to destroy enemy equipment and personnel and the remainder for
reconnaissance deep in the enemy rear. The air squadron comnder of the
128th bap. Sr Lt A. A. Sviridov. had successfully carried out 205 combat
sorties for bombing and reconnaissance of enemy troops.

The holder of the Gold Star. Guards Capt Vasiliy Pedorovich Khokhlechev was
awarded this honorary title for 135 combat sorties and able leadership of

an assault plane squadron which destroyed much military equipment in battles.
The son of a poor peasant, Khokhlachev by Komsomol recruitment had been sent
to the Engel's Pilot School. lie received his baptism in fire in October 1961
on the western Front. A year later, cousunist Kholthlechev was in the ranks
of the defenders of Stalingrad and later a participant in the battle of
Kursk. the liberation of Belorussia. Poland and the defeat of the fascists
in Berlin. holding the positions of flight co-ander, squadron co-ander

and navigator of the 79th Guards shap. A courageous sniper of assault plane
strikes. Khokhlaehev showed exceptional loyalty to the cause of Lenin's
party and hate for the Nazi invaders. Without fearing death. he destroyed
the Nazi occupiers. And he taught his subordinates this. In combat he
correctly assessed the situation. he able employed maneuvers and cooperated
with the cover fighters. and in a majority of his sorties did not have any
losses in his group. During the time of the war. Guardsman Khohhlechev
carried out 216 combat sorties. he was wounded in the battles of Leningrad.
For ailitery feats he was awarded many orders and medals. After the war
flier Khokhlachev successfully completed the Red Banner Air Force Academy

109
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and lnter the Military Acadeny of the General Staff. In having great con-
bat experience and high training. for neny years he commanded the aviation
of a military district. At present Lt Gen Avn V. P. Khokhlachev is in the
reserves.

In accord with the directive of Headquarters for the operation to liberate
Belorussia. the decision of the troop commander of the First Belorussian
Front cane down to piercing the enemy defenses to the north of Rogachev and
to the south of Parichl on the right wing and with a pincers aovesent sur-
round and destroy the Bobruysk enemy grouping and then advance on Slutsk;
with the troops of the left wing of the front to check the opposing eneay.
The 16th AA was to assist the offensive of the assault groupings of the
front. having concentrated the basic forces to support the Rogachev group.

The plan for the operation was given 2 weeks before its start. and after this
the con-and and staff of the AA worked out a plan for the coabat use of the
aviation during the operation. as well as missions for each air forastion
and an operation order for the first day of the offensive. Proceeding free
the plan of the operation. the col-ander of the AA allocated the air forces
in the sectors in the following manner.

For aiding the 3d and 68th araiea on the offensive near Rogachev. the 3d bak.
the 6th ask. the 4th shak. the 6th iak. the lat Guards and 286th iad, the
19th iap and the 271st nbad were assigned; they had a total of 1.429 air-
craft. The first strike with the start of the operation was planned against
the eneny defenses using l.020 aircraft (290 daytime boabers. 235 assault
planes and 695 fighters).

For assisting the 65th and 28th armies on the offensive near Parichi. the

2d Guards. 299th and 300th shed. the 8th iek. the 283d iad and the 262d nbad
were assigned; they had a total of 897 aircraft. They planned to use 772
aircraft on the first strike.

In aiding the troops in piercing the enemy defensive zone and in developing
the success, the air formations were to destroy enemy personnel. artillery
in firing positions and equipment. to support the throwing of the mobile
formations into the breach and their operations in depth. to prevent the
reserves from reaching the battlefield, to win air superiority and carry out
reconnaissance in the interests of the troops and aviation.

As a total on the first day of the operation. around 6.900 aorties were to
be made. including 520 by the night boabers and 910 by the daylight boebers.
2.000 by assault planes and 3.670 by the fighters.

According to the order the first 3 hours after the start of the attack all
the aviation should operate according to the plan of the AA cosnnnder; than
a portion of the shed was to be transferred to operational subordination of
the commanders of the combined-arms armies.

110
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1
FOR OFFICIAL USE IONLY
I

The actions of the aviation on the second' and subsequent days of the offen-
sive were planned in accord with the instructions of the troops comnder

of the front. as well as proceeding from the situation developing in the
course of the operation.

Seven days before the start of the operation. Gen 5. I. Rudenko personally
assigned the missions to the col-lenders of the air formations. and denanded
that they carefully coordinate all questions of cooperating with the troops.
Hera also the contenders of the air formations were given target naps for

a detailed study of then by the flight personnel.

The working out of the questions of the cooperation of aviation with the
troop staffs of the air corps and divisions was conpleted in 2 days. No
days before the offensive. the niasions were carefully studied by the con-
nanders of the reginents. squadrons and the personnel. and then in the
playing out of the pending operations was conducted on nape.

Cooperation between the branches of aviation was organized according to
the principle of the assigning of fighter divisions to the assault plane
and bonbsr fornations for the entire period of the operation. The air forne-

tions (units) which were cooperating were based. as a rule. at nearby air-
fields.

In preparing for the operation. only a portion of the aviation needed for
daily operations was stationed at the forward airfields. The basic forces

of the air any were at the rear airfields. The rebasing of the aviation
to the forward airfields was carried out on 20 and 21 July. On these days
the low clouds prevented aneay air reconnaissance. and the noving of the

aviation at altitudes of 100-300 neters excluded the possibility of detect-
ing it with enay radars.

In line with the splitting of the aviation on the right wing of the front
into the two sectors. the leadership over its combat on the first days of

the operation was planned independently for each of then. For this auxiliary
counnd posts (VPU) were organized: No l to the south of Rogachev. and No 2
to the south of Parichi. At the first of these was Gen 8. I. Rudenko with

a small group of officers. while Gen H. H. Koaykh was at the second. For
each of the VPU radios were set up for co-aunications with the M cousnd
poet. with the cooperating foraatione and air scouts. and in addition a

radio center was set up with three-four receivers. Moreover the VPU had

contact with the command post of the air stay over the ST [Tteletype] and

by liaison aircraft. Gen P. i. Brayko remained in the main connd post set
up at point Krasnoye.

The Bobruysk Offensive Operation

0n the morning of 24 June 1966. after the nighttime air and 2-hour artillery
softening up. the troops on the right wing of the First Belorussian Front
began an offensive the first stage of which was termed the Bobruysk Operation.

11].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the night prior to the offensive. the 262d and 271st nbad cooperating
with the long-range aviation attacked enemy troops in regions to the north
and west of Rogachev and Otarichi. while 20 bombers from the 6th ask conse-
cutively bombed the Bobruysh airfield. As a total the forces of the 16th
AA made 313 sorties; the actions of the night aircraft were impeded by a
heavy fog.

0n the morning of 25 June. the combat actions of the AA air regiments started
in a solemn ceremony and were carried out with colors unfurled on the tarmac.
Prior to the start of the combat sorties the appeals of the military council
of the front and the AA command were read to the formation of the personnel.
Then meetings were held. The news that our troops had gone over to an of»
fensive was greeted with a great upsurge in the units. The commanders and
pilots. the sergeants and privates. the communists. the Komsomol members and
the nonparty persons who spoke at the meetings vowed to honorably carry out
their military duty.

In the ébth Guards nbap. Guards Sr Lt H. l. Gutorov said at a meeting: “The
time has come to settle the score with the Nazis for the evil deeds carried
out by them on the Belorussian land. The people are calling on us to liberate
the homeland of the enemy. He will not spare our lives and will carry out
the oath of the Guardsmen to the end." Guards Haj N. A. Osipov said: "Be-
fore the Guards colors I vow to the command of the unit that the personnel

of my squadron will honorably carry out the given mission." Then Guardsman
Cutotov and Osipov on bended knee kissed the regimental colors.

Speaking at meetings in the air units of the 6th sak were Heroes of the Soviet
Union Capt I. I. Romanenko and A. P. Savchenko. as well as other former fliers.
navigators and mechanics. The speakers vowed to honorably carry out the
missions of the command. they urged that the bombs be dropped accurately on
the enemy, and the fighters to maintain sir superiority. in aiding the troops
of the front in the defeat of the fascist barbarians. The commander of the
8th Guards bsp, Guards Lt Col G. I. Popov was the first to vow in front of

the unfurled colors that the honor of the regiment would be maintained. Simi-
lar solemn meetings were held in the other air units of the AA.

The ceremony of the military oath of the honored commanders and fliers had
an exceptional influence on all the personnel, particularly on the youth.
The junior lieutenant from the 79th Guards shap I. G. Horozov in his speech
at the meeting said: "Today is the most joyous day for me. With my crew

I am to receive my baptism in fire. My dreams have been realized. I can
now carry out my soldier's duty to the motherland. I vow to my senior com-
manders that in the struggle against the enemy I will not defame the Russian
soldiers and the traditions of the Siberians." Jr Lt I. I. Tsyplyatov (783d
shap) stated: "On behalf of the young fliers who today are going into
battle. I vow to the party and the motherland that we will not spare our
lives for clearing our sacred land." Flier Tsyplyatov and the gunner Averin
in the first combat sortie died a death of heroes. having repeated the im-
mortal fcat of Capt N. P. Gastello in the region of Bol'shaya Krushinovka.
Their fellow countrymen remembered the legacy of their comrade-in-arms and
avenged the Nazi aggressors for their heroic death.

112
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe orncm list cum

Pros the urning of 24 June. the fog and low clouds in the base area and
over the battlefield greatly iepeded aviation operations. For this reason
the planned concentrated strikes against the ens-y troops were not carried
out. Only the assault planes and fighters began to operate in elesants and
aaall groups. By the siddle of the day the weather improved and all the air
units began to carry out the eiasions set for the operation.

‘lna bomber aviation destroyed the enemy artillery end mortars in the firing
positions as well as the enemy strongpoints in the area of the 3d Artsy. The
3d bak eads two concentrated strikes with the forces of 298 aircraft. The
boebing was carried out by eleeents froa altitudes of BOO-1,500 esters in

one or two passes. Particularly ieportsnt smell targets were hit by dive-
boebing; the most effective were the actions of three groups from the 779th
bsp heeded by Lt Col A. V. Khraechenkov. Capts A. A. Anpilov and P. N. Ksyunin.

Moreover. up to 150 boebers from the 6th aak operated against objectives in
these sane regions.

The aueeult aviation by boabing and strafing strikes destroyed eneey artil-
lery in positions. tanks. ester transport on the roads and infantry in the
ditches in the region of Zazsr'ye. Tikhinichi. Rudnya-Bronskaya and in the
region of Perichi, Hikul'corodok, and Zelenkovichi. The coebat actions of
the assault planes basically had the nature of wave strikes in groups of
6-10 aircraft. The enemy troops were constantly exposed to the assault
planes which attacked free altitudes of 1,000-800 esters into a dive. snaking
up to eight passes at a target.

The fighter aviation firely kept air superiority and did not allow the fas-
cist fliers to reach the battlefield. with the appearance of our aircraft
beyond the front line, eneey aviation put up little resistance. This esde
it possible for the Soviet fighters to widely use strafing actions agath
ground objectives. Over the day only 163 aircraft overflights were noted

by the enemy; the Iain forces of the enemy aviation at that ties were oc-
cupied on other sectors.

0n the first day of the offensive, the 3d and 68th areies captured only the
first and second eneny trench lines. The offensive by the troops of the
65th and 28th eraies developed more successfully. Hith active support by
the assault planes and with dependable fighter cover the troops pierced

the enemy defenses to the south of Perichi on an area up to 30 kn wide, and

the let Guards Tank Corps which was thrown into the breach shoved 20 lea into
the enemy defenses.

The ccsssittsent of the tank corps to the breach was supported by the 2d Guards
shad. At 1330 hours the comnder of the division. in moving with a group

of officers to the cos-and post of the tank corps. st-soned his assault
planes by radio. Sole 1.0 Il-Z aircraft appeared at the designated tine over
the leading tanks. and 15 minutes later. another 35 assault planes. By their
attacks on the enemy troops, they aided the advance of the tanks.

Regardless of the bad weather on this day, a predoninant majority of the

fliers deeonstreated high flying skills and a desire to achieve victory over
the hated enealy.

113
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, eight Yak-l fighters under the command of hero of the Soviet Union
Guards Capt N. A. Naydenov (283d iad) were covering a group of assault
planes. In the target area the Ils were attacked by enemy fighters. Our
lisrs drove off all the attacks. During the 6-minute engagement, three
fascist fighters were shot down and the remainder left the battlefield.

The assault planes also fought skillfully. A group of Ils from the 966th
shsp headed by Sr Lt A. I. Rytov was attacked over the target by enemy
fighters. The assault planes rapidly formed a circle and in continuing to
strafe the target drove off the attacks of the German fighters. The air-
craft in which the gunner Sr Sgt H. I. Kostyukovskiy was a member of the
crew, in pulling out of a dive was attacked by two Pokker-Hulfa. Koatyukov-
skiy did not lose his head and, in ably controlling his weapon, by accurate
fire shot down on enemy fighter. The assault planes carried out the com-
bat mission excellently and returned to their airfield without losses.

Sr Lt B. G. Deyev (352d iap) demonstrated great skill. Over the battle-
field he shot down a German Rama FH-l89 reconnaissance plane, and for

this he was awarded the Order of the Red Banner by Chief Her Ayn A. A.
Novikov.

A high patriotic upsurge reigned among the aviators of the 3d bak. As is
known, the Pe-Z aircraft was designed for a normal bomb load of 600-800 kg.
Inspired by the desire to drop as many bombs on the head of the enemy as
possible, the crews overloaded the aircraft. that is, they carried 1,000 kg
of bombs and more. The reliability of the aircraft's design, the state of
the airfielda and the skills of the pilots made it possible to do this.

The initiators of this campaign were aviators from the 779th bap headed by
Lt Col A. V. Khramchenkov. The deputy commander of the air squadron, Sr
Lt N. I. Skosyrev. was the first to demonstrate the possibility of the

safe take-off of a Pe—2 aircraft with a payload of 1,000 kg of bombs. Capt
s. A. Pinayev even carried 1,200 kg of bombs.

The patriotic initiative of the crews from the 779th bap was quickly seized
upon in the other air regiments, where Lt S. c. Artem'yev (26th bap), hero
of the Soviet Union, Guards Haj A. P. Smirnov (96th Guards bap), and others

were the followers of this movement. Now an additional 200-600 kg of bombs
were being dropped from each Pe-Z aircraft.

On this day the aviators showed great courage and steadfastness. The pilot
from the 56th Guards iap, Lt V. P. Vusikov. in escorting a group of Ila,
made a dive at a ground target with them. During the attack Guardsman
Vusikov was wounded in the arm with shrapnel from an aitaircraft shell, but

he continued to carry out the mission. At the airfield he was instructed to
go to the medical unit, but he refused and after bandaging made another two
combat sorties on this day. The member of the party bureau of the 726th
shsp, the squadron commander Capt P. I. Borisenko was wounded in the arm
and the leg in carrying outhis mission. In losing blood and in overcoming

pain, he safely brought the aircraft back to our territory and landed on a
forward airfield.

11$ .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the first day of the operation. the air units of the 16th M nade
3.191 combat sorties. including 1.81.6 sortias for bombing and strafing the
enemy troops. 860 for escorting bombers and assault planes. 26‘ for cover-
ing the troops. 102 for air reconnaissance. 99 for "free hunting.” and 20
for bombing an airfield. During the day 6 tanks. 382 vehicles. 2 balloons.
and 96 guns and mortars were destroyed and damaged. and 7 dunps were blown
up. In the 62 air battles. 20 fascist aircraft were shot down. Our avia-
tion suffered losses basically from the firing of enemy sntiaircraft weapons.

0n the second day of the operation. the troops from the Rogechev group of
the front. in encountering stubborn resistance from the enemy, overcame
enemy defenses slowly. In the zone of the second assault group. behind

the lat Guards rank Corps. a cavalry aschanized group (cm) was thrown into

the breach. and this group began to rapidly advance in a northwesterly direc-
tion for outflanking Bobruysk.

The air formations of the M continued to support the troops of the front

in broadening the breakthrough of the enemy defenses. without allowing the
enemy reserves to be brought up and in supporting the advance of the mobile
formations. The weather was not favorable for air operations. During the
night of 25 June. the night bombers from two nbad and the 6th ask destroyed
sneny troops to the west and northwest of Rogachev and Ozarichi. they bombed
the Bobruyak airfield and conducted reconnaissance.

During the day by wave and concentrated strikes, bonbers from the 3d belt
and 6th ask and assault planes from the éth shalt. the 2d Guards. 299th and
300th shad escorted by fighters from the 6th and 8th ink. the lat Guards.
the 283d and 286th iad destroyed artillery in position. enemy troops and
equipnent in the region of Bol'shaya Krushinovka. Zebolot'ye and Zhilichi
and the region of Brozha. Gomza and lalashevichi. By destroying the cross-
ing over the Beretina River and the troop concentrations at Titovka, the
eneny was prevented from pulling back to Bobruysk. Fighters from the 6th
and 8th iak in addition to escorting bombers and assault planes covered the
battle formations of the troops on the front and engaged in "free hunting."

For the assault aviation the escorting the supporting of nobile troops was

the most difficult matter. Their forward detachments frequently moved ahead

of the enemy rear guard. and at times it was very difficult to figure out

the position of the troops. The successful. cooperation with the mobile troops
was aided by the fact that the assault planes. in knowing the situation.

could orient themselves well in the dynanics of battle and were able to recog-
nize their troops. The following episode is characteristic in this regard.

Two groups of six airplanes fro. the 2d Guasz shad under the col-land of Sr
Lts I. I. Borbatenko and N. I. Gribov had taken off to destroy enemy troops
at the point of Baraniy Rog. With the approach of the assault planes to the
consnd post of the co-aander of the lat Guards Tank Corps it became known

that the offensive of the tank units had been halted by strong enemy artil-

lery fire. The «under of the air division. in being at this connend post,

115
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radioed Guardsman Gribov to reconnoiter and locate the ener artillery in
the region of Chernyye Brody. Soon the group contender reported "He see

up to an artillery battalion on the southwestern outskirts. We are attack-
ing." By six runs the assault planes suppressed the enemy artillery in its
firing positions. Our tanks resumed the attack and alsost unimpeded captured
the population point and railroad station of Chernyye Brody.

The bosbing end strafing actions caused the enemy great losses on 25 June.
At the same time. only 77 aircraft overflights were counted by the enemy
while our aviation sade 2.737 cosbat eortiea, including 1,655 for bushing
and strafing the enesy. During the day our aviation destroyed a great deal
of aneey military equipment and personnel. In the 26 air battles. l7 enosy
aircraft were shot down.

On this day the comeuniet. the flight navigator of the 8th Guards bap, Sr
Lt P. S. Tolsachev died heroically. During bombing of the crossing at
Titovka, his aircraft was hit. The crew bailed out of the burning aircraft.
German soldiers were running toward the lending area of the crew. In ap-
proaching the land. ‘Iolmachev feined surrender, but when they wanted to
take his alive. he killed several fascist at point-blank range and then
took his own life. The residents of the village of Terhilovichi buried
him.

P. S. Tollnachev wee born in 1918 in the Dnepropetrovsk area in the family
of a railroad worker. The leader of the squadron communists had made 78
coabat sorties and had been wounded three times. Two governsental decora-
tions embellished his chest, and for courage, valor and loyalty to the
motherland he was posthumously awarded the Order of the Patriotic Her.
First Degree.

Upon the order of the Supreme Co-ander-in-Chief I. V. Stalin, on the even-
ing of 25 June. the capital of our motherland. Moscow, saluted with artil-
lery eelvoee the veloroue troops of the First Belorussian Front which had
broken through the Nazi defenses on the Bobruysk sector. In the order for
excellent coabat actions thanks were stated to the troops of the front. in-
cluding to the fliers: Col Gen Avn s. I. Rudenko. Lt Gen Avn A. S. Oeipenko,
Maj Gena Avn G. 0. Konrov, I. V. Krupakiy. G. F. Baydukov. I. Pl. Dzuaov

and A. z. Ksrebatekiy. Col'e s. N. Chirve, P. A. Kalinin, I. I. Ivenov.

V. V. Sukhoryebov and M. Rh. Dorisenko. and Lt Cole D. S. Sherstyuk and

K. I. Rasskazov.

The effectiveness of the operations of the air units in the 16th M can be
seen from the state-ants of prisoners of war: "On 26 June in the region of
Rogovoy and Corokhov, Russian bonbers, regardless of the very close distance
to the battle formations of their infantry. with exceptional accuracy boobed
our positions. As a result only 20 remained out of the 70 men in the com-
pany." "In this offensive. as never before, Russian aviation conquered the
air. Previously mainly the infantry battle formations and the artillery

firing positions had been subjected to bombing. But in these battles the
rear subunits also were not safe; it became impossible for transport to move

116
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

over the roads. The Russian assault planes and fighters continuously bombed
and straffed us with machine gun and cannon fire."

One of the prisoners of. the 616th air division stated: "On this offensive
we felt the force and night of Russian aviation. Our firing positions lo-
cated to the west of Oserane. as a result of a single pass by a snall group
of bosbers. were destroyed. The soldiers grew indignant and cursed Goebbels
who in 1941 had declared to the entire world that Russian aviation had
perished."

On 26 June. in the area of the northern assault group of the front, the 9th
Tank Corps was co-itted for conpleting the breakthrough of the sway de-
fenses. By the and of the day the corps had reached the Bererina River.
The troops of the southern assault group had rapidly advanced around
Bobruysk from the southwest. The enemy in both areas of the breakthrough
had begun to pull back its troops.

The air formations of the 16th M continued to aid the northern group of the
troops froe the front in developing its success. they supported the troops
which had encircled the aneay grouping in the region of Bobruysk. and con-
tinuously hung over the retreating Nazi troops.

During the night the ZloZd and 271st nbad in operating as single aircraft
prevented sneny traffic over roads to the northeast and southeast of Bobruysk.
They made 374 sorties.

During the day bombers fros the 3d bait and 6th salt. having made 338 sorties.
destroyed the eneny on the battlefield. along the roads fro. the front to
Bobruysk and in regions of troop concentrations in the area of the offensive
of the 68th and 3d arnies. By divebombing the bombers of the 3d bak destroyed
the crossings over the Berezina River to the east of Bobruysk and the exit
switches to the west of the Bobruysk railroad junction. The assault aviation
in group strikes destroyed the retreating enemy colums on roads and in
places of concentrations. and also destroyed the crossings over the Bererina
and carried out air reconnaissance. Sinultaneously with this, the 6th shalt.
the 2d Guards and the 299th shad escorted the 9th and let Guards Tank Corps
and the one which had been thrown into the breach. As a total the assault
planes made 858 sorties. The fighters covered the advancing troops of the
front, they supported the actions of the bombers and assault planes, and

by "free hunting" strafed the retreating enemy troops and conducted recon-
naissance. carrying out 1.373 sorties during the day.

The comnders of the air squadrons which were cooperating with the troops
were located at the observation poets of their mandate. having the neces-
sary means for controlling aviation over the battlefield. In the troop for-
mations of the first echelon. as a rule, were representatives of the air
divisions. the air spotters; they guided their aviation to the necessary
targets, Here is one of the many examples.

117
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Around midday on 26 June. the guidance radio of the 299th shad transmitted
to the comnder of the group of assault planes Maj V. l. Seliveratov:
"Humpbacks, hit the accmlation of troops and vehicles on the northern
outskirts of Oremli and along the roads to the west of the railroad."

Having made certain from the password that this was actually the guidance
station of the division, Maj Selivsrstov accepted the couand and the entire
group successfully attacked the designated target fron an altitude of 850
meters in a dive. After each pass the guidance station affirned the cor-
rectness of the actions, and after the fifth pass transmitted: "Excellent
work, go hone, a second group is to replace you.“

Particularly successful were the joint actions of the assault planes from
the 2d Guards and the 299th shed with the cm. Here the air representatives,
in having radio stations at the observation posts of the formation col-sanders,
ensured the rapid sunoning of the assault planes and the effectiveness of
their strikes against the enemy. Proof of this can be the response by the
chief of the political departnent from the lath Guards Cavalry Corps. Col

H. F. Karev: ”The aviation supporting the corps did good work. On 26 June.
groups of our assault planes and fighters continuously replaced each other
in the air, and they caused great losses to the enemy and covered the units
enemy and covered the units of the corps fron the air. From the experience
of battles as part of other fronts. we had not seen such well organized air
operations . "

Along with improving the cooperation between the aviation and troops in the
Belorussian Operation, the forea of cooperation between the bombers and
fighters also changed. They began to rendezvous not in a circle over the
fighter airfield but rather on a leg of the route toward the target. Such
a method required the clearer organisation of take-offs and the precise
observance of the time reckoning along the route. But on the other hand
the range of the bombers was increased as well as the time they could re-
main over the target.

As a result of the successful actions by the air-supported troops of the
front, the enemy on 26 June began a general retreat. Along all the roads
to Bobruysk stretched enemy troops columns with military equipment. They
became the basic objective of the operations of our aviation. At midday,
in the area of the offensive of the 65th Army. an air scout detected an
eneny colm of up to 600 motor vehicles. Its destruction was entrusted
to the colander of the 300th shad who took off with at 11-2 aircraft.
The assault planes used the tactics‘ of wave attacks in small groups. For
alnost 2 hours they kept the column under bombing and firing, having de-
stroyed more than 100 motor vehicles and a significant number of person-
nel. As a result, the column was halted and broken up.

By the end of the third day of the offensive, the troops from the northern
group had outflanked the Bobruysk grouping from the north, while the troops
of the southern group had cut off the retreat routes for the enemy to the

west. The bobruysk enemy grouping was threatened with complete encircle-
nent.

118
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

The 16th M on 26 June node 2.950 cosbat eortiae. In 29 air battles. 13
German aircraft were shot down. Our units lost 19 aircraft. As a result
of the systenatic bombing and strafing attacks against aneay troops on the
roads and the crossings over the Berezina to the east of Bobruyek. the
eneuy was unable to coepletely pull back its forces and equipnent to the
western bank. The bridge to the east of Bobruysk was damaged by nine Pe-2
from the 35th bap (the leading pilot. Lt Col V. A. Novikov and navigator
Haj H. S. Monov).

On 27 June. the troops of the front, in developing the offensive with ac-

tive air support. in sobile groups emerged to the northwest of Bobruysk
and cospleted the encirclement of the Bobruysk garrison end the eneay

grouping to the southeast of the town. A total of up to 60.000 German
troops were taken in the two encircle-ants.

During the night of 27 June and in the first half of the day. bomber and
assault plane foreatiens destroyed eneey troop concentrations in the ring

of encircle-ant and the retreating sotor columns along the roads to Opi-
povichi and Slutek.

The high pace of the offensive and the coupler saneuvering of our troops
under the conditions of the forested end svenpy terrain as well as the
retreat of the denoralised enelsy required continuous air reconnaissance.
In such a situation only by using it was it possible to establish the
location of our forward unite and discover the ene-y'e maneuvers.

At 0800 hours. the cor-sander of the let Guards Tank Corps requested that
the assault planes supporting his reconnoiter several roads. This sis-
sion was radioed to the cor-sander of eight Ila. Guards Lt V. P. Kolennikov.
he soon reported: "The BobruyskuSteryye Dorogi highway is clear. An
enemy motor coluan is swing from lobruyslt to Osipovichi. I an attack-

ing." Having leads three passes and expended all the anunition. the group
of assault planes returned to the airfield.

At 0950 hours. the scout of the 241st bad. hero of the Soviet Union Capt
N. S. Husinskiy radioed that along the highvsy from Yasen' to Oaipovichi
was moving a column with up to $00 notor vehicles. By a decision of the
air division contender. the bombers attacked the column in two groups of
ten planes near the population point of Kos'ye and three groups at Yasen'.
having destroyed a large nu-ber of anesy sotor vehicles. Here the group
of Capt F. I. Parshin distinguished itself. On 26 October 1964, the air
squadron cousnder of the 128th bap. Capt P. i. Parehin, was awarded the

title of Hero of the Soviet Union. By this the he had 210 successful
conbat sorties.

Another column soving from nortnilri to 'l'itevka was attacked by assault
planes fro- the 199th shad. The first attack by five groups of six 11
aircraft from the 569th shap was made at 0900 hours; then cane three
groups of six planes at 1500 hours. These attacks against the eneay vhich

119
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

wan endeavoring to break out free the region of Titovks to nobruyek pro-
vided tangible support to the 9th Tank Corps. As a result up to 200 ve-
hicles and a large number of enesy soldiers were destroyed. Moreover.
the aviation crushed up to 600 motor vehicles. 50 tanks and A50 carts in
the region of Dubovka.

A group of nine Pe-Z from the 26th bap headed by hero of the Soviet Union
Capt P. A. Del’tsov was sent to destroy the railroad bridge across the
Berezina at Bobruysk. end this was the only bridge connecting the two
banks. 0n the second pass by the nine planes. as a result of a direct
hit by a 250-kg bomb. one of the girders of the bridge collapsed into the
water. The lid on the bobruysk trap was banged shut. However at the
moment of pulling out from the dive. the aircraft of Capt P. A. Del'tsov
was damaged by antiaircreft fire and became uncontrollable. The crew
bailed out. Del‘tsov succeeded in taking cover in a nearby forest. but
navigator A. V. Timofeyev and gunner-radio operator V. l. Popruga perished
heroically in a duel with the fascists at the point of landing.

During the second half of the day of 27 June. air reconnaissance and other
types of reconnaissance of the front affirmed the complete encirclement

of the large grouping (up to six divisions) of fascist invaders to the
southeast of Bobruysk by the Soviet troops. Being under continuous a:-
tack by our ground forces and aviation. the encircled eneny grouping began
to concentrate in the population points of Savichi. Teluahe. Stupeni and
Dubovka and in the adjacent forests. The fascists brought up a large num-
ber of tanks. guns. motor vehicles and infantry into this region. They
undertook a series of countarattacke and prepared to break out along the
Zhlobin--Bobruysk road for the purpose of escaping free the trap. The
enemy grouping which was concentrated on a small area of terrain still
possessed significant combat strength and during the night could break out
of the encirclement. There was little time for preventing the enemy from
realizing its plans as not lore than 3 hours remained until darkness. A
heavy attack had to be made ismediately against the encircled enemy for
completely defeating it.

The troop commander of the First Belorussian Front together with the repre-
aentstives from Headquarters. Mar 80 0. K. Zhukov and Chief Her Avn A. A.
Novikov. decided to entrust this eission to the 16th AA. About 1800 hours.
Gen Arm K. K. Rokossovskiy gave the mission to Col Gen Avn S. I. Rudenko
to make a rapid and powerful attack against the Bobruysk enemy grOuping.

The time from 1900 to 2100 hours was allocated for the air operations.
The troops of the front received instructions to clearly delimit their
forward edge along the perimeter of the front of encirclement.

Upon the order from the commander of the 16th AA. 526 aircraft took off
to destroy the enemy grouping to the southeast of Bobruysk. This in-
cluded 175 bombers. 217 assault planes and 136 fighters. The air corps
and detached air divisions were given their missions personally by the
cosmender and the chief of staff of the air army. The ceananders of the

120
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

air corpe and diviaione were initially given a preliminary coabet diapoai-
tions "l-ediataly bring your fornationa to a atata of cowat readinaaa
and prepare to receive a nieeion to deatroy the anaay troopa encircled to
the aouthaeat of bobruyah.” Than the foreationa received the following
nieeiona.

"The lid belt and the 6th uh in bot-bar groupa without fighter eacort are
to deatroy the enemy troop and equipment concentrationa in the region of...
(the pointa were lieted). loabing wee to be carried out following the
leader in a flight from a horizontal flight at altitudee of 132004.600
netare in cloae aariee againet tho detected aneny concentrationa and in
long aeriee over foraata and copeea where the one-y traina. pareonnal end
equipaent can be concealed. In boebing foreeta the eleeenta are to be
for-ed widely along the front for covering the entire area of the deaig-
natad region. The groupa are to take off inediately upon readineee. It
ia to be kept in mind that at the ease tine tho eeeault planee will be
operating below and thaae are not to he iapeded. end for avoiding hitting
than when neceaaery repeated oaaeea are to be aada or the enemy bombed in
another region.

"The 6th ehek. the 2d Guarda and. the 299th ahad. in groupa o'r' aaaault planee
without f ightar eacort are to daetroy enemy troop and equip-ant acculula-
tione in the area of...(deaignatad for the bo-bera). Along with dropping
antitank boabe againat tanka and eeeault guna. cannon and machine gun fire
ie to be widely ueed againat paraonnel. Operational height froa 600 to
£00 netere before diving. The groupa of eeeault planee are to retain an
long ae poaaibla over the target. in aalting aeveral paeaea each. Hith the
appearance of boabara in the target region and with the opening of antiair-
craft fire agath the- by the analy. the eeeault planee are to auppreaa
the diacovered antieircreft pointa. It ia to be kept in aind that in thia
region the boebera will be operating aimltaneoualy at a greater altitude.

"The 283d. 286th and let Guarde iad in ale-ante and groupa of four-nix air-
creft each are to aupport the oparatione of the bo-bara and eeeault planee
by bordering the region of the encircled eneay grouping by continuoua fight-
er patrolling atacked at altitudaa tron 500 to 2,000 netere. In the abeence
of eneay fightare in thia region they are per-itted to atrafe anally troopa
and equip-ant with cannon end Inchine gun fire."1

Aa Her Avn s. I. Rudenko haa recalled. the entire aeaigning of niaeiona to
the air fornationa for the attack ageinat the nobruyak trap took juat fro-
9 to 15 uinutea. here one could feel the high readineea ea well ea the ex-
cellent organization and tea-work of the AA ataff which waa headed by the
indefatigable and active Gen P. l. lrayko and the etaffe of the air for-a-
tione.

In the second half of thia day the activitiee of anally aviation were low.
Fightere appeared rarely in elenenta and groupa of four-aix aircraft and
did not put up aerioua raaiatance to our aviation.

 

 

l Arkhiv no SSSIl, folio 360. inv. 6676, file 605, aheete 6-8; file 606.

aheete 6-7.
171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The weather favored the operations of our air units. The summer sun was
sinking to the horizon. The first bomber groups appeared at 1915 hours

over the Nazis caught in the Iobruysk trap. The encircled enemy troops
protected themselves with a hail of antiaircreft fire. The assault plane
groups which hurried up immediately began to neutralize the enemy antiair-
craft weapons. Not an hour past before the enemy antieircraft fire had
almost stopped. The bomber groups from the first run began to bomb the
detected enemy concentrations on the roads of Stupeni--Dubovka. Telusha--
Savichi and the adjacent forests. The assault planes made bombing and straf-
ing strikes first of all at the head of the enemy column (to the north of
Dubovka). where the tanks and assault guns were concentrated. The air strike
against the surrounded grouping of Nazi troops was a surprise and crushing.
Bombers and assault planes group after group approached the target area.
Certain groups formed a line in order to descend on the Nazi invaders with
all their firepower after the departure of the previous groups.

As a result of the bombing and the cannon and machine gun firing great ex-
plosions occurred at points where military equipment had accumulated and
large fires were formed. Clouds of black smoke rose to an altitude of
300-‘00 meters. Tanks and motor vehiclvs with the painted crosses caught
fire. and ammunition and loaded fuel trucks exploded. The Nazi horde was
seized with panic.

As was later learned from the data of our troops and statements by German
prisoners, during the first minutes of the air raid. as a result of the
numerous fires which broke out after the bomb and rocket explosions, a
caustic smoke spread. The Nazis in a panic thought this was a poison gas
and putting on gas masks, began to flee. Many vehicle and wagon drivers
endeavored from the woods into openings. but here they came under the cannon
and machine gun fire from our assault planes and fighters. Soee endeavored
to save themselves by driving off the roads. but here they got stuck in the
swamp or hit stumps. A portion of the enemy tanks and vehicles continued
to move northwest along the roads. but inevitably were attacked by our
aviation. Piles of destroyed and burning equipment were formed on the
roads. In hoping to escape from the fiery hell, the vehicle drivers drove
onto the railroad embankment which was 3-5 meters tall erd endeavored to
make their way along the railroad toward Bobruysk.

One hour after the explosion of the first bombs. the concentration areas
of enemy troops and equipment were covered with dense clouds of smoke and
dust and this impeded the subsequent actions of our aviation.

As a result of the concentrated strike by our aviation, control over the
enemy troops was completely disrupted. They totally lost their battle-
worthineas. Reconnaissance pilots related how horses and soldiers in
terror were dashing along the roads and through the forests. among the
trees and swamps. and how the German tanks, motor vehicles and carts moved
cheoticelly in different directions. The crazed fascists abandoned equip-
ment. weapons and plundered things and fled through the forests and copses

122
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL USE ONLY

toward the Beresine. where under the cover of the dark night they ewes
screen to nobruysk. Many of then did not reach the opposite bank and
drowned. while those who did lake it across were captured as the troops
of the 65th Arey hed .lready reached the western bank of the lererine.

Here is how Her 80 c. K. Zhukov recreated the picture of this defeat in
his book "Vospoeinsniya i Rareyshleniys" [Reeenbrances and Reflections].

"I saw how the Ger-ens were defeated to the southeast of it (lobruysk.
author's). Hundreds of boebers free the 16th Arny of s. I. Rudenko. in
coordinating with the hath Arey. eade strihe after strike against the enesy
group. Fires.broke out on the battlefield end eeny scores of vehicles and
tanks end fuels end lubricants caught fire. The entire battlefield was
engulfed in a raging fire. In being guided by it. constantly new waves of
our boebers flew over dropping various caliber boobs. The Ger-en soldiers.
as if crazed. fled in ell directions end those who did not wish to be cap-
tured were killed there. hundreds end thousands of Ger-an soldiers perished.
deceived by hitler who had promised then a lightning victory over the USSR.”

The boeb attack by the 16th AA was ended when evening fell. In the places
of the accumulation of enemy nilitary equip-ent. long after explosions rang
out and large fires flared up. As a total during the 90 minutes our evie-
tion had dropped against the eneey troops end equip-eat soee 1.127 high
explosive boebs of 100- end 50-kg caliber. 6.097 fragmentation boebe with

a caliber of 25. 10 end 8 kg. 5,326 antitank bolbs and had released 572
rockets. 27.880 cannon shells end 65.6‘0 eechine gun cartridges. The area
which had been subjected to boebing wee turned into a graveyard of ens-y
corpses end destroyed equipeent.

A special coenission with the aid of aerial photography end an investigation
established that the concentrated air strike in the trap to the southeast

of Bobruysk had destroyed end daneged up to 150 tanks end assault guns.
around 1.000 guns of various caliber. up to 6.000 sotor vehicles. up to

300 tractors end 3.000 wagons; more then 1.000 enely soldiers end officers
had been destroyed end up to 1.500 horses; about 5.500 soldiers and offi-
cers lost their units. 0n the site of the defeat of the fascist horde

such captured equipsent reeeined.

The concentrated air strike by the forces of the 526 aircraft was made with-
oug any losses due to the precise execution of the set eission by the flight
crews. their high discipline and circunepection. The high effectiveness

of the weapons used was achieved as a result of precision boebing. the
correct choice of the type of boebs according to the nature of the target

and the wide use of cannon and eechine gun fire by the aeeault planes and
fighters.

After the air raid. the troops of the 68th Arly. in going over to the of-
fensive for the purpose of liquidating the denorelired and surrounded
grouping. did not encounter organized resistance free the enemy with the

123
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

exception of individuel groups which were in reeote forests and hsd not
been exposed to our evietion. The strike by the 16th AA pleyed the pri-
mary role in the dsfeet of this grouping. As e whole. the ectione of the
eviction to destroy the enemy troops encircled to the south of Bobruynk can
be viewed es en independent eir operetion. Here the besic forces of the
9th Nesi Arly were destroyed.

All the con-enders of the eir regiments. the divisions end corps which
participated in the reid were coensnded by the Deputy Supreme Con-ender-in-
Chief, Her 80 G. K. Zhukov. Gen s. l. Rudenko wee presented e gold wetch.

Chief Her Avn A. A. Hovikov hed high preise for the ectione of the eir forne-
tions of the 16th AA. In e telegren sent to the perticipents in the defeat
of the enemy. he noted thst the sir units had carried out their mission
excellently. end thenks were expressed to ell the personnel which perti-
cipeted in the concentrsted strike.

During 27 June. the VHOS poets of the front eir defenses counted only 122
overflighte by ens-y eircreft. The sir units of the 16th AA nede 1.803
sorties.

Over the 5-5 days of offensive bettles. the troops of the First Belorussisn
Pront pierced the enc-y defenses on e ZOO-kn front, they encircled and de-
stroyed the enemy Bobruyek grouping end edvenced to e depth of up to 110 kn.
By the third-fourth day of the operetion. certein eir units had to be re-
besed behind the edvencing troops. Two operetions groups were sent out to
locate eirfielde from the erey sirfield service. Heving the necessery trens-
port and coenunicstions. they isnsdistsly exseined the sirfields ebsndoned
by the ensny, they sought out new erees end built new eirfieids using the
forces of the sirfield engineering bettelione.

Her Avn s. I. Rudenko. in retelling the conditions for the besing of svie-
tion in the Iobruysk Operetion. geve the following episode. The CH6 in
entering the breech end edvencing in the direction of the populetion point
of Steryye Dorogi, occupied the sirfield of Pestovichi. At this tile the
front line rsn significently to the eest end Bobruysk wee still in eneny
hende. For supporting the ectione of the CH6. esseult plenes end fighters
bed to lend et Peetovichi sirfield. But it use unknown whether or not the
enemy hed mined the sirfield. For clarifying the situation, eeppers were
sent out on two Po-2 eircreft. The sirplenes lended by e neighboring vil-
legc. The suppers ensuined the sirfield end not heving detected eny nines
gevc the egrsed-upon signel. Then ssverel trensports took off. They de-
livered the service personnel end the neceesery support equipesnt to the
Pestovichi sirfield. Then two squedrons of esseult plenes end bombers were
moved there. They eleo errived to support the CHO. In subsequent deys.
the sir support group wee reinforced end for sone time together with the

mobile foreetions conducted conbet in being besed. in essence. in the eneey
reer.

12‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During 28-30 June. the troops of the front. heving destroyed the remeins

of the enemy grouping which hed been routed by the heevy eir strike to

the southesst of lobruysk end in pursuing the retreeting eneny. developed

the offensive towerd Her'ine Gorke end Slutek. Considering such fevoreble
conditions for new strikes egeinst the enemy. heedquerters on 28 June ordered
the First Beloruseien Front with the besic forces to edvence on lerenovichi.
cutting off the eneey'e route of retreet to the southwest end with e por-
tion of the forces to edvence towerd Minsk. conpletlng the encircle-ent

of the Minsk grouping of Neri troops in coopereting with the troops of the
Third Belorussien Front.

The 16th AA. on 28-30 June. using single eircreft from the 6th ssh during
the night boebed the retreeting Ger-en columns in the regions of Pukhovichi

end Her'ine Corks. end prevented the move-eat of enemy troope elong the
hinek--8lutek highwey.

During the dey groups of esseult plenes Eros the 6th ehek destroyed enemy
troops to the southwest of aobruysk end on its eeetern edge. Pliers free

the 2d Guards end 299th shed ettecked eneey troops in the regions of lobruysh
end on the reeds to Pukhovichi end Slutsk; the 299th shed is esseult plene
groups ettscked three reilroed treins et Slutsk stetion es well ss eneey
troops. This helped the CH6 cepture the town of Slutsk.

The 6th end 8th iek. the 283d end 286th ied escorted boebers end esseult
plenes end in groups of six-eight fighters provided cover for the bettle

fornstions of the troops of the front. end in sddition conducted rsconneis-
sence end "free hunting."

Sinulteneously the sir forestions of the 16th AA upon instructions from the
representetive of heedquerters. sesisted the troops of the Second Belorus-
sien Front. 0n 28-30 June. the 3d bek end the 6th shek under fighter escort
destroyed the crossings neer Derezino end etteched ene-y troop concentrstions
st the crossings. on the Pogost-3ererinoo-Cherven' roed end in the regions
of Berezino. Lesbnites. Novoselki end Cherven‘. On 29 June in bombing the
bridge at Berezino. perticulerly distinguished ections were cerried out by
the groups where the leeders were the flier free the 24th bep Cept a. s.
Suleynenov with the nevigetor Sr Lt P. A. Korlenio (on 15 Hey 19‘6. he wee
ewerded the title of hero of the Soviet Union). es well es the flier from
the 128th bep Sr Lt Yu. V. Xhilkov end the nevigetor Mn) N. D. Lepehhin.

The bridge wee destroyed by e direct bomb hit. The only route of escepe

for the units of the enemy 6th Army wee cut.

The 1st Cuerds ted. in sddition to escorting the 3d bet. on 28 June etteched
en enemy motor column on the bereeino-Cherven' roed in three groups of 12
oirplencs eech. This mission wee-excellently cerried out by the groups of
the 55th Cuerds iep under the commend of Hero of the Soviet Union Guerde

Lt Col V. I. Shishkin end Guerds Cept A. D. Kucheryevyy. They crushed the
column by nechins gun end cennon fire. hsving completely disrupted the retreet
of the enemy troops.

125
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
?0R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a total. the 16th AA on 28-30 June nsde 1.683 sorties. including around
650 sortiss in the interests of the troops of the adjacent front. As a re-
sult of bombing and strafing attacks. the enesy lost a large number of mili-
tary equipment. motor vehicles and personnel. In the 29 air battles. 21
eneay aircraft were shot down. The air operations weakened the resistance
of the denotalized enemy. they prevented its retreat. they created co -
tions for the rapid advance-ant of the mobile units of the front and i _
peded the attacks of the enemy to dig in on the intermediate lines.

On 28 June. Moscow saluted the valorous forces of the First Belorussian Front
which had liberated the town of Osipovichi. On 29 June they cleared Bobruysk
of fascists. In the battles for this powerful strongpoint of Ger-an defenses.
the ground forces and the fliers of the 8th iek. the Jd bak. the 299th and

2d Guards shed. the 4th shak. the 6th ask and the 288d iad distinguished
the-selves. Thanks were declared to the flight personnel of these ferns-
tions by an order fro. the Supreme Counsnder-in-Chief.

During 1-6 July. the 16th AA. in asking fro- 300 to 700 sorties daily. car-
ried out the following Iissions: The 4th shek. under the cover of the 286th
lad. continued to operate in the interests of the 3d and 48th armies against
the battle formations and artillery of the eneey to the northeast of Osi-
povichi. against troop concentrations in the region of Snilovichi and on

the Bererino--Chsrven’ road. simultaneously assisting the lst Guards and

9th tank corps. The 3d bek attacked eneny troops which were inpeding the
drive on Minsk. The 6th isk covered the troops and aviation operating on
the Minsk sector. In the seas sector attacks were esde against eneey troops
on the roads by the night bosbers of the 271st nbad and the 6th ask. The

2d Guards shed and the 283d lad continued to operate in the interests of

the 65th Army and the CNS. The 8th iak provided air superiority in the
zone of their operations. The 6th sak destroyed the railroad stations and
hit trains between Starushki and Mikaahevichi.

Eneny aviation somewhat increased its activities; on these days 160-170 sir-
craft overflights per day were counted.

The troops of the First nelorussisn Front with air support, in pursuing
the retreating enemy and in overcoming its stubborn resistance. on 2 July
liberated Stolbtsy. Gorodeys. Nesvish and reached the region of Minsk.
having cut off the enemy's line of retreat and having created the prere-
quisites for encircling the large enely troop grouping numbering over
100.000 nen. 0n 3 July. Moscow on behalf of the motherland ssulted the
troops of the Third and First Belorussian fronts. including the units of
the 16th AA which had distinguished themselves in liberating the capital
of Belorussia. Minsk.

The success of the lobruysk Operation wss largely predetersined by the
active operations of the 16th AA. Free 2‘ June through 6 July. the AA
air units in the Bobruysk sector sade 13.786 combat sorties. they con-
dutted 161 air battles. shooting down 94 ens-y aircraft. The bonb strikes

126
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL 083 ONLY

cnueud greet loeeee for tho Neri invedere. During theee deyo juet 1.1M
eircreft overflighto were recorded for eneey eviction.1

In the couroe of tho nobruyek Operetion. the eir forntione of the 16th
M oucceeofully cerried out the eiooione confronting then.

here. for exemple. io how the conbet operetione of the 199th ehed were
viewed by the couender of the 9th 'l'enk Corpo: "The ohed from 26 through
29 June. in cooporetdng with tho tenk corpe. excellently cerried out ell

the eeoignnonto fro- the tenh troope. Due to the hold end eble ectione of
the pilote. the ohed helped the corpe check the Zhlobin-Rogechev eneey
grouping. end then together with the corpo to deetroy thie grouping piece~
noel in ite ettenpt to brook through to Bobruyok. He not perticulerly con-
nend the prociee execution of the nieoiono with tho on-tiee teke-off end
precioo boobing of the deoigneted tergoto."

Other eir fornetiono eleo received good couonto on eir operetiono froe

tho eilitery councilo of the ereieo. In retelling the coubet of the one

in the Beloruooien Operetion. Gen Ara I. A. Pliyev in the collection
"Oovoboehdeniyo Beloruooii" hee written; "In ell etegee the eucceeoful
oporetiono of the cm to e eignificent degree were eneured by the depend-
eble cover end eupport fro: our evietion.... Sm 12-16 eooeult plenee ex-
corted the covelry end tenk troopo. ouppreoeing individuel Noni centero of
reoietence elong the wey. 0n the roede, croeeinge end in other nerrow
ploceo. eir otrikee creoted blockegeo. they thwerted the plenned rotreet

of the eneey. turning the eneey into e cheotic end frequently penic flight."

In the bettleo for the liberetion of Beloruooie fro- the foeciot invedere.
the pereonnol of the M deuonotreted high norel end politicel quelitiee
end coebet onthueieoe, neeo heroioe end the ebility to deotroy the eneey.

The ectiono of the fliere (roe the 67th Guerde iep of the 273d ied cen
oerve no one of the neny execplee of the high conbet ekill end unprecedented
heroin-I. On 30 June. Guerdo Sr Lt V. P. Alekoeyev in en elenent with the
Koeeoaol member Guerde Jr Lt V. D. Berezin. in escorting boebero. encountered
eneny fightere which were ondeevoring tn brook through to the (emotion of
Pe-Z. In the eneuing bottle. Alekeeyev ohot don one Fit-190. while Berozin
begged two fightere. but. in being ettecked by on eleaent of Fokker-Hulk.
he wee eepereted fro- hie eo-ender. An enoly ohell exploded in the cock-
pit. Frognonte wounded Bereein in the hood end era. Control of the eir-
croft wee diorupted end the gunoight did not work. The flier in the deeeged
eircreft looing eltitude returned towerd hie territory. I-odietoly the two
feociot fightero dove on the otriclton eircreft end endeavored to fire on it
fro- e ehort renge. Berezin reduced opeed end forced one Fokker-Hui! to
overohoot hie end ohot him down. Then the wounded Soviet flier loaded on

1 Arkhiv no sssn. folio 368, m. one. file 353. eheete 89-90. 94-95;
file 359. mm 6. 123-130.

127
P03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a partisan airfield. There he was given medical aid. Bereain turned over
his fighter to the partisans for safekeeping and soon returned to the unit.

Such examples show the combat enthusiasm and patriotic upsurge among the
personnel of the units. In the 2d Guards shed. the fliers and gunners

who were not assigned for a combat sortie constantly asked the contender to
send them out to strafe the enemy. The young fliers from the 352d isp.

Jr Lts P. D. Volchsnko. A. P. Ksmelin and V. P. Karpeein stated: "Re are
little sent out to combat. He will be assumed to have just 5-10 combat
sortiee by the end of the war." The engineering and technical personnel
of the air units who unstintingly supported the combat sorties showed

true labor heroism.

During the period of the Belorussian Operation, hundreds of aviators sub-
mitted applications to the party and Komsomol organizations with a request
for admission to the Lenin Romsomol and the Comnist Party. As a rule
these were the best fliers. technicians and mechanics who had set the
example in combat work. In his application for admission to the party.
the flier of the 657th shap, Jr Lt H. I. Ivenov who the day before had
received the Order of the Red Banner for bravery, wrote that he would
Justify the high title of a columnist and would mercilessly crush the fee-
cist beast until its complete destruction. In all the air units a group
of coemunists and Komsomol members developed and they by their example
inspired the men to better carry out the missions. Prom 26 June through
10 August. 271 persons were admitted as members of the VKP)b) and 212
persons were admitted as candidate members in the army.

The Soviet government had high praise for the combat feats of the aviators.
By the Ukase of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet of 1 July 19“.
the honorary title of Hero of the Soviet Union was awarded to 13 famed
pilots and navigators of the 16th AA for the exemplary fulfillment of the
combat missions of the caused and for courage and valor. These included:
Capt A. A. Anpilov, Sr Lt N. H. lslahirev, Haj V. P. Volhov, Lt Ye. I.
Gubin, Sr Lts Yu. N. Zykov (posthumously). A. S. Kobissltoy and I. V. Haslov.
Lt Col A. c. Nakonechniltov. Lt A. A. Nemtinov, Capt N. A. Roshnov. Sr Lt
H. I. Rumyantsev. Lt Col 11. c. Sklyarov and Capt N. D. Sukhov. Hany in
subsequent engagements carried out a number of other feats. Some of them
are continuing to serve in the Soviet Army and are indoctrinating a new
generation of aviators.

For example. take Hero of the Soviet Union Anstoliy Andreyevich Anpilov.
He was born in a worker family in 1916 in Story Oakol. As a youth of 15
he Joined the Komsomol. In 1936, he completed the Odessa Flight School.
he received his baptism under fire in the war against the white Finns.
where he successfully made 36 combat sorties. He became a participant of
the Great Patriotic Uar from its first days and was soon thereafter the
squadron comnder of the 779th bap. He was a member of the Columnist
Party from 1963. In combat he proved to be a brave and decisive cosmender.
he indoctrinated his subordinates by a personal example of flying skill

128
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY "‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and loyalty to the motherland. During the war Anpilov carried out 193
combat sorties in a bomber and was wounded twice. he received many orders
and medals for excellent execution of combat missions. After the war he
successfully completed the Red Banner Air Force Acaduy. end contended an
air regiment end an air division. At present‘ Maj Gen Avn Anpilov holds the
position of the deputy air con-ander of a district.

The deputy sir squadron conender of the 157th iap of the 235th isd Lt

I. V. Heslov was awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union for success-
fully carrying out 285 coldest sorties. in the course of which he won 19
victories in 60 battles. The navigator of the 217th shsp Capt N. A.
Rothnov in 9b combat sorties destroyed 31 tanks, 3 aircraft in dogfights
end 49 guns end mortars. To the combat score of the squadron cot-ander of
the 218th ahsp. Sr Lt N. M. Balakirev. the deputy squadron cos-sender of the
218th shap. Sr Lt H. I. Rumyantsev. the senior pilot from the same regiment.
Lt Ye. I. Gubin and the assistant connander of the 79th Guards shap, Lt A. A.
Namtinov (on 6 October 1966 he did not return from a combat mission) were
85-106 combat sorties. while the deputy squadron contender of the “th
Guards nbap. Capt N. D. Dukhov. had 672 combat sorties.

In the Battles for Liberating the western Regions of Belorussis and Eastern
Poland

The defeat of the enemy groupings in the region of Bobruysk and Minsk led

to the formation of an enormous breach in the defenses of the Nazi troops.
Proceeding from this, on Io July headquarters ordered the troops of the right
wing of the First Belorussian Front to continue the offensive on Bsranovichi
and Brest, and capture bridgehesda on the western bank of the Western Bug
River.

0n the following day. the troops of the front. in developing the offensive.
encountered fierce resistance from the enemy on the approaches to the strong
defensive center of Baranovichi. The Nazi troops had received several fresh
divisions of reinforcements. Enemy aviation also significantly increased
its operations.

The advancing troops of the front were supported by all the forces of the
16th M. however their number in the Baranovichi sector significantly de-
clined in July. The 6th salt. the 21.2.: nbsd. the 1st Guards iad. the 299th
shed and the 19th iap during the period of 3-9 July. the 283d iad and the
300th shed on 12-15 July. and the 3d belt on 23 July were rebased to air-
fields to the south of the Poles'ye for aiding the troops on the left wing
of the First Belorussian Front and became part of the 6th AA. The 196th
shad from 12 July was transferred to the reserve of the army. On 18 July.
around 770 battle-ready crews remained for supporting and covering the troops
on the right wing of the front.

During 5-10 July. the air formations of the 16th AA. in cooperating with

the troops of the 65th and 28th armies and the CHG. continued to pursue the
retreating enemy and by bombing and strafing attacks cleared the way for the
offensive of the troops of the front.

129
F0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In aiding the troops in the defeat of the Beranevichi enemy grouping. the
2nd Guards shed and the 4th shek in small groups under the cover of fight-
ers from the 283d and 286th iad end the 6th isk. as well as single planes
from the 271st nbad destroyed enemy artillery in positions. motor trans-
port on the roads. personnel and equipment in the region of Polonechka.
Lyskhoviche. Byten' and Slonim. railroad trains at the stations of Hatseyuv
and Les'na. end destroyed the crossings over the Hyshanka River to the west
of Baranovichi. Here groups of assault planes from the 78th Guards shap
under the command of Hero of the Soviet Union Guards Capt V. L. Volgin.
Guards Sr Lts N. I. Gribov and I. B. Gorbatenko and Capt v. N. Hochalov
(on 23 February l9bs. he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union
for carrying out 135 effective combat sorties) fought excellently.

The 8th and 6th isk escorted assault planes. they covered the battle
formations of the troops, they reconnoitered the enemy positions. they
strafed the Beranovichi airfield and as "hunter" groups fought fascist
aviation.

Operational air reconnaissance was carried out by the 16th odrep in the
Brest sector and by the 72d orap on the Lublin sector.

During the decisive days of the struggle for the town of Barsnovichi. our
aviation each day made 300-500 sorties. and on 7 July. 769 sorties.

0n 8 July, having crushed the stubborn enemy resistance. the troops of
the front with air support captured the fortified area and town of Berano-
vichi, and on 10 July liberated Slonim. Thanks were declared in an order
of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief to the fliers of the 6th and 8th iak,
the 2d Guards and 199th shed, the 283d iad and the 16th odrap. On 15 July,
on the occasion of the liberatio of Pinsk. fliers from the 336th iad and
the 3d Guards shad received thanks.

Under the blows of our troops, the enemy quickly retreated to the west.
constantly fearing encirclement.

The operations of the air units of the 16th AA during this period had the
nature of an air pursuit of the enemy in the general direction of Brest.

A particular feature of the use of the assault planes in the course of
pursuing the enemy was the continuous operation against enemy troops with
small groups of planes. here a well organized cooperation between aviation
and the troops was maintained. The air representatives were in the battle
formations of the forward detachments and guided the assault plane groups
by radio. Actions by elements of "hunter" assault planes were also widely
used. Hith a favorable air situation the fighters strafed the Nazi troops
on the roads.

The AA, regardless of the frequent rebasings. in all instances maintained

air superiority and effectively supported the ground troops on the offen-
sive. According to a statement from a captured flier from the 9th Detach-
ment of the lat Assault Squadron shot down on 9 July in the region of
Baranovichi. the Germans were amazed not only by our quantitative superiority
but also by the increased combat skill of the flight personnel. particularly

130
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fighters. with which even with equal forces they did not always de-
cide to engage in air coabat. lle admitted: "Couplers superiority of the
Russians reigns in the air."

In pursuing the retreating eneay. one of the important missions of the
assault planes and fighters was to disrupt the operations of eneay rail-
road coununications. Thus. on 12 July five Ila from the 783d shap led

by Haj A. I. Sarychev made a bonbing and strafing attack against a train
between Volkovysk and Andreyevichi. The group attacked the train from the
front. having daaaged the locoaotive by nachine gun fire. In subsequent
passes the assault planes destroyed the cars. After this the group attacked
another three trains at Andreyevichi station. In a subsequent on-the-site
inspection. a cousission established that seven cars with amunition and
16 cars with other equipment were destroyed. the railroad enbanlusent was
ruined. a railroad bridge was daneged and a gasoline dump destroyed.

The 271st nbed during these days was primarily occupied with ferrying fuel
for the troops and aviation to the Baranovichi airfield. 0n just 11, 12

and 14 July. Po-2 aircraft delivered 50 tons of gasoline and 19 tons of
oil.

The heroic feats of the comaunists and Komsonol nubers served as an ex-
ample for all the aviators of the army. 0n 7 July. a group of six 11-2
aircraft took off for the region of Les'na escorted by five Yak-9 free the
56th Guards iad under the contend of the co-Iunist. Guards Capt A. A.
Yefrenov. No groups of 20 Fiﬁ-190 and lie-109 appeared over the target.
Regardless of the 6-fold enemy superiority. our fighters initiated a fierce
battle. They not only covered the assault planes but also boldly attacked
the enemy. Pros two short bursts by Yefrenov. the first Fokker-Hulf caught
fire. The con-unist Guards Lt V. G. Zhilin set a second ersy aircraft on
fire. Soon a third ens-y fighter which had been hit almost at point-blank
range by Guardsman Yefremov dove to the ground. After this the fascist vul-
tures left the battle. Our fliers re turned to their airfield without losses.

The couunist Jr Lt Galustyan showed great courage and a desire to destroy
the enemy no matter what the cost. A flight of pilots free the 171st iap
attacked a German Fla-189 reconnaissance plane. When the attacks did not
produce the desired result. Gelustyan rapidly closed in on the fascist
aircraft and with a blow by the left wing knocked off the right position
of the fuselage. The Rams disintegrated in the air. Galustyan bailed
out of his damaged aircraft.

The leading role of the «mists and Koneoaol members in the battle
situation is convincingly affirmed by the results of one combat day of the
323d iad. On 16 July the fliers from the iad shot down 11 fascist aircraft
in air battles. The co-sunists Lt Ye. A. Zharkov and Haj N. A. Krekhov
each shot down two Fokker-ﬂu] Es. The squadron party organizer Sr Lt A. N.
Kocherga and the comunist Sr Lt S. D. Durban and Jr Lt S. c. Lovyagin.
and the Konsoml ueaber Lt V. G. Kazakov each destroyed one eneay aircraft.

131
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Our fighters, in covering their troops. often conducted successful air com-
bat agath numerically superior enemy forces. Thus. on 7 July. four Yak-9
from the 269th iap (leader, Cpat V. D. Afanas'yev) encountered 20 I'll-190
traveling with a bomb load. The Soviet fighters boldly attacked them and
shot down three aircraft. Having dropped the bombs on their won troops,
the enemy fliers turned back to the west.

0n the morning of 9 July, the deputy co-ander of the 67th Guards iap.
Guards Haj V. B. boyko with his wingmsn were covering troops in the region
of Nova Hyah' and Polonka. Soon boyko saw six Fokker-Hull’s with bombs. Our
fighters without being noticed closed in on the enemy and attacked it from
behind and above. Several seconds later and one vulture had been shot down
and the remainder. not accepting battle. took cover by reducing their alti-
tude.

The Soviet military aviators carried out heroic feats and were victorious
because they possessed strong combat morale and unlimited strength, loyalty
to the coununist ideals and a highly developed feeling of responsibility

for the fate of the motherland. They were infinitely brave, courageous

and resourceful, and they had excellently mastered flying skills. They

had one aim-to destroy the hated enemy. and to achieve victory even. if
need be. at the price of their life. Hith good reason combat orders
decorated the chest of the aviators. Each air unit could be proud of its
combat traditions. the manifestation of mass heroism and valor by the flight

personnel. as well as the labor feats of the engineers. technicians and
other aviation specialists.

During active combat party political work in the units grew. The results
of the successful combat sorties and the names of the outstanding men were
inediately made known to all the personnel. In the 966th shap. 10 minutes
after the landing of the assault plane group of Sr Lt A. I. Rytov which
had received thanks from the inspector of the Red Army Air Force for able
actions, combat leaflets were set out to all the squadrons with the appeal:
"Pliers. beat the enemy as it is beaten by the crew of Sr Lt Rytov" (subse-
quently he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union).

The deputy couander for political affairs in the 59th Guards shsp. Lt Col

P. P. Podgurskiy, used a very vital form of visual agitation. The agita-
tors of this air regiment inediately after the landing of the planes learned
of the results of the pilots' sortie, and then the conditions of combat were
plotted on diagrams. and at the parking areas of the aircraft the agitators
explained in using the diagrams the skill of the pilots who had carried out
their military duty in an exemplary manner. In the evening the political
workers informed the personnel of the results of the regiment's operations
during the day. and they told of particularly distinguished aviators, of
events on the fronts, in the rear of the nation and abroad.

132
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

The army newspaper (editor. Haj V. K. Zapol'skiy. photo reporter 8r Lt

A. P. Dmitriyev) also gave great attention to the glorious deeds of the
flight and technical personnel. It published articles on the combat ex-
perience of the best fliers. the navigators and the work of the eechenics.
ordnancemen and drivers. In the units of the 6th iak and other air forme-
tions the political workers sent out letters to the parents of outstanding

men. and they organized the presentation of gifts to young fliers who had
carried out successful combat sorties.

All these measures had a beneficial effect on combat work and indoctrin-
eted the flying and technical personnel in a spirit of the glorious com-
bat traditions of the AA units.

The valor. intrepidness and loyalty of the aviators to their military oath
can be seen from the feat of the communist. the flier of the 58th Guards
shep. Sr Lt P. F. Baranov. end the Komsosol masher. gunner Sgt A. Ye.
xrnsnil'nikov. Over the target they were attacked by eight PH-l90. The
crew of the red starred aircraft skillfully end courageously drove off

the fascist attack. Two Fokker-Hulfs were reduced to fragments by its
accurate firing. But the Nazis succeeded in hitting our ll. They had to
make a forced landing on enemy-occupied territory. 0n the ground the
Guards crew for several hours was fired on by Nazi submachinegunners and
held out until the approach of Soviet tanks.

A crew of the 16th odrop consisting of the pilot Lt A. T. Lebed'. the navi-
gator Sr Lt V. A. Anisimov and the gunners Sgts S. K. Sel'nikov and I. P.
Rodin showed courage and valor. Returning free a mission, at an altitude
of 6.000 meters they were attacked by eight enemy fighters. Sgts Sal'nikov
and Rodin. in courageously driving off one Hesserschmitt. but perished in
the unequal battle. Soon both motors failed. The aircraft caught on fire.
The pilot and navigator who were still alive bailed out. The scouts dropped
onto our territory at the very front line under the fire of enemy entieir-
craft artillery. The parachute of flier Lebed' was riddled with flak and
navigator Anisimov was wounded. In landing they reported very inportant
information on the enemy to the command.

In the AA. more than a thousand fliers were saved by parachutes during the
war years. Along with combat activities the command of the air formations.
the units and the officers of the paratrooper service under the leadership
of Lt Col A. I. Khugol' constantly carried out extensive work to save the
life of flight personnel in emergency situations.

The engineer and technical personnel of the 6th shek. the 8th and 6th iak.
the 3d bak. the 2d Guards and 299th shed. the lat Guards. the 283d and
286th iad. the 16th odrap and other formations under the leadership of the
chief (senior) engineers including the deputy commanders for the aviation
engineering service Bngr-Cols H. V. Zubarev and F. s. Petruychuk. Engr-Lt
Cole P. c. Conchar. I. S. Gudkov. D. T. Dudnik. V. S. Kharov. P. I. Chernov

133
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and N. Ya. Kobel'kov, Engr-Naj A. I. Shaporenko. Engr-Capr Yeroshenko and
others, in working night and day on the aircraft and in repairing and fuel-
ing them under field conditions, continuously ensured the combat sorties of
the fliers. The mechanics of the 2d Guards shed. the communists Sr Sgt

A. A. Zaretskiy and “Sgt G. N. Pechenkin during 20 days of combat serviced
b0 combat sorties. they repaired 5 aircraft and replaced the motors on 2.
Guards Sr Tech Lt V. A. Lyskishev (the 79th Guards shsp) during a day
serviced three combat sorties and quickly repaired all damage to the air-
craft. There were many similar examples.

The chief of the airfield technical service of the 80th RAB Engr-st A. P.
Pesikov and the chief of the fuels and lubricants department Sr Tech Lt

V. G. Pacheyko invested particularly much labor and creative thought into
supporting the operations of the assault planes. The senior engineer of
the 157th iap Engr-Naj Volkov, Bngr-Capt P. i. Slyusarev. Sr Tech Lt V. N.
Aksenov (236th led) and others excelled in mastering the operating of the
Yak-J aircraft. In readying the materiel for a flight. excellent work was
done by the mechanics of the 133d isp HSgt G. G. Ochahovskiy, Sr Sgta G. s.
Dorentsev. Strelenko and many others.

A true labor feet was performed by the military drivers of special vehicles.
In the 629th bao, the gasoline truck driver Teteryuk in 8 days of work
fueled 2‘5 aircraft and transported 69 tons of fuel. in the 609th bao

the fuel truck driver communist Pedorov during an intense day of combat
fueled 50-70 aircraft. The Red Army drivers A. Nogil'nyy. D. Kuz'menko

and others carried out the missions excellently.

By 16 July. the troops on the right wing of the First Belorussian Front.
with active air support, had reached the line of Svisloch' and Pruzhany

and they continued their rapid advance. Difficulties arose in supplying
the air formations with ammunition and particularly fuel. The rear services
of the army were extended. the supply lines had been lengthened. and the
shortage of special transport was felt. In addition the Nazis had destroyed
the railroads in retreating.

Nowever. regardless of these difficulties. the air formations on the right
wing of the front were promptly rebssed behind the advancing troops and
continuously supported them. For the 28th Army alone. the 2d Guards shad.
during the period from 4 through 15 July, carried out 320 aorties for straf-
ing and 40 sorties for reconnaissance. "By their bombing and strafing ac-
tions." wrote the chief of staff of this army, Naj Gen 5. H. Rogschevskiy.
”the air division destroyed tanks. armored vehicles. artillery in firing
positions. motor transport and enemy infantry and significantly assisted
the troops of the army in defeating the enemy and capturing the town of
Bsranovichi. The operations of the assault planes and the coordination
between the army and assault division were well organized."

136
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in carrying out the missions. the pilots always showed comradely mutual
aid. Thus an element of Yaks headed by Guards Capt G. D. Toharev (116th
Guards iap). in escorting assault planes. on the way to the target en“
countered eight PH-l90 fighters. Our pilots boldly engaged the enemy.
Pilot Tokarev mat the Pokker-Hulfs with precise fire and immediately shot
down two enemy aircraft. His wingman Guards Lt A. P. Zhurevel' skillfully
covered his commander. But soon a fascist had succeeded in damaging the
aircraft of the wingnan and this forced it out of combat. Guardsman
Tokarev continued to fight alone. Other fliers Lts I. P. Galinskiy and

A. P. Tsslkovikov who were escorting atother group of assault planes
spotted the unequal air battle. These fliers had been students of the
squadron commander Tokarev. Seeing the commander in danger. they dashed
to his aid and on the first attack both shot down one vulture. The remainder
avoided air combat. The assault planes carried out their mission without
losses. Guards Lt l. P. Gelinehiy on 20 February 1953 died the death of a
hero in carrying out a combat mission.

On 10 July. the fliers of the 59th Guards shap. Guards Lts V. N. :vanov and
B. c. Rossohhin in carrying out a mission in the region of the populatiion
point of Ozernitsa were fired on by heavy enemy antiaircraft fire. The
aircraft of Lt Rossokhin. an expert pilot and experienced scout. was hit.
He had to land on enemy territory. The Nazis dashed toward the descending
aircraft. Then Lt tvanov in making a dive. began to fire at point-blank
range at the German soldiers who were endeavoring to reach the aircraft
until the wounded hossokhin could hide from the fascists. On 23 February
1965. both guards-en were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for
the excellent execution of missions.

"hen the troops had reached to the west of Pinsk in the middle of July.
favorable conditions were created for an offensive by the troops of the
left wing. The air support for the troops on the left wing of the front
was entrusted to the 6th AA which had been reinforced by formations from
the 16th AA and the RGK [High Command Reserve]. As a total on 17 July.
there were 1.535 aircraft here. In this sector the enemy had up to 670
aircraft.

Control over the preparations for the operation and the coordinating of
the actions of the air formations on the left wing of the front were car-
ried out by the member of the military council of the front. the commander
of the 16th AA. Gen 5. I. Rudenko.

On 18 July. the troops on the left wing of the front went over to an of—
fenaive. The air formations. in making wave bombing and strafing attacks
and in fighting against the enemy aviation. supported the offensive of the
armies in breaking through the enemy defenses and crossing the Western Bug.
they aided the rapid maneuvering of the 2d Guards Tank Army and the GNU

in the Harsaw sector and supported the troops in crossing the Vistula and
capturing a bridgehead. During the period from 18 through 31 July. the 6th
AA made 7.591 sorties. and as a total for July. 11,856. In the 305 air

135
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

battles. 282 fascist aircraft were shot down. and at the airfields the enemy
lost 62 aircraft. In addition. the aviation destroyed a large number of
enemy personnel and military equipment.1

In July 6.646 overflights were noted by enemy aviation in the zone of the
troops on the left wing.

At the start of the third 10 days of July. the troops on the right wing of
the front. with air support. approached Brest. they captured the railroad
Junction of Cseramcha and in executing an outflenking maneuver. on 25 July
reached the western Bug in the section of Drohiezyn and Hielnik. The Brest
Nazi grouping was threatened with encirclesent. Their resistance was
strengthened both on the ground and in the air. During the period from

22 through 26 July. fierce battles developed here. The enemy undertook
rabid countersttacka with the participation of major tank groups.

For supporting the troops in repelling the enemy tanks. the army commander
of the 16th AA on 23 July ordered the assault planes of the 2d Guards shed
and the 4th shak under fighter cover from the 286th iad. to locate the
main grouping of enemy tanks and infantry which were threatening counter-
attacks. and to destroy them. At 1930 hours. the scouts of the 2d Guards
shed in the region of Kleszczele and Cterescha detected a concentration of
German tanks. infantry and motor vehicles. Some 26 I1-2 aircraft in six
groups under the cover of 12 fighters took off to destroy them. Thirty
minutes later the assault planes made a low-altitude attack on ‘2 tanks.
several motor vehicles with antitank guns and tank trucks. as well as
enemy infantry. As a result of the strike. the enemy suffered heavy losses.
Subsequently the assault planes continued to destroy tanks in the same re-
gion.

The daytime bombers were also used in addition to the assault planes for
destroying fascist tanks. On 21 July. to the west of Grodno in the area of
the Second Belorussian Front. a concentration of tanks preparing for a
counterattack was discovered. The attack on them was made by nine groups
of seven-nine aircraft each by the 3d bak. The most effective were the
actions by three groups of nine Pe-2 from the 96th Guards bap under the
command of Hero of the Soviet Union Guards Maj A. P. Smirnov. Two groups
bombed the target from level flight and one by diving. In the estimate of
Chief Her Avn A. A. hovikov. the bombers performed excellently. The enemy
suffered great losses and its tank counterattack was thwarted.

In addition to countering enemy tanks. during the period of 22-26 July. the
assault planes and fighters of the 16th AA. regardless of the difficult
weather conditions. destroyed enemy artillery in positions and troops in
the areas to the north of Brest and Janow Podlaski, to the south of Bielsk

l Arkhiv M0 SSSR. folio 336. inv. 5220. file 80. sheets 10. 52. 62 and 68.

136
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and Klesrcsele. retreating troops along the roads of Hulka Dobrynskau
niela Podlasha. LeoscsolonSuchowola. railroad trains ot the stations of
Biala Podlaska and an araored train at Sioniatycee station. The fighters.
in addition. covered the battle for-notions of the troops and carried out
air reconnaissance.

The Po-2 night boabore from the 27let nbad during this period during the
night and doy were transporting fuel and a-unition for the Ioth Guards

Cavalry Corps and the 65th Aray. As a total they delivered 16.5 tons of
fuel and e large quantity of various a-unition.

Having repelled the fierce eneay counterattacka and having bled the onoay
in bottles in the areas of Klosscsole. ciseroacha and Vysokoyo. our troops
with air support on 27 July went over to a decisive offensive for the pur-
pose of oliainating the Brest onoay grouping. Seeing tho inevitability
of oncircloeont. tho enemy began a retreat to tho west. The deputy squad-
ron cor-andar of tho 18th Guards shop. 8r Lt V. P. Kolonnikov. who flew
out to reconnoitor on the roads to tho west of Brest detected tho aoveaent
of enemy aotor coluans with up to 2.000 aotor vehicles. For excellently
carried out reconnaissance. tho counsndor of tho M cos-ended Guards-an
Kolennikov. On 23 February 1965. for exsaplary fulfill-ant of niasions
and for tho shown courage and valor. he was awarded tho title of Hero of
the Soviet Union. by that tile he had made 130 coabat sortios and destroyed
56 tsnks, 67 guns and touch other ailitary aquipaent.

having obtained tho reconnaisssnce data, tho arly couandor organised boob-
ing and strafing attacks against the colt-1s of tho retreating Nari troops.
On this day tho most effective operations were carried out by two groups
of six assault planes from tho 78th Guards shap headed by guardsnan Capt

L. I. Yuf and Lt c. A. Lazarov. Escorted by fighters they attacked up to
300 aotor vehicles on the Hielnilt-Hutnaya road. The onoay suffered great
losses. Due to the destruction of crossings by the assault planes. its
columns were stopped. 0n the night of 28 July. the 27lot nbad boobed

these crossings end the may troop concentrations in the areas of the
crossings.

On 28 July our troops captured the city of Brest. on i-portant defensive
center of the Nazis in the Harsaw sector. The legendary Brest Fortress
was also liberated. The order of the Supreme Co-ander-in-Chiof pointed
out that in those battles along with the troops the fliers of Col Gen Avn
Rudenko. Haj Geno Avn Dzuoov and Konrov. Colo ‘l'stanaohvili, Rybakov and
Vinogradov had distinguished themselves. Conendation was given to the
personnel of these air fomtiona.

As a result of the brilliant victories of the Red Aray by the end of July
1965, virtually the entire territory of Bolorussia had been cleared of
German occupiers. On 28 July. Headquarters gave the troops of the First
Belorussian Front the mission of developing a further offensive in the
general direction of Warsaw. reaching the Vistule and Narew and capturing
bridgeheads on the banks of these rivers.

137
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 16th AA. during the period of 28-31 July. in assisting the troops of
the front. destroyed an enemy grouping to the west and northwest of Brest.

At dawn and during the day of 28 July. the 2d Guards and the 299th shad.
following their reconnaissance data. in snail groups and together with

the fighters. began to attack the surrounded German grouping in the region
of bohukaly and Kraiczew. first of all they attacked the head of an enor-
mous colon of eater vehicles. wagons. artillery and infantry endeavoring
to break through in the direction of Janow Podlaski. The covered vans and
armored personnel carriers burst into flames. The colum stopped. Many
vehicles began to drive off the road endeavoring to take shelter in the
cover of the forest and on the outskirts of population points. and many
trucks got stuck in ditches. A blockage was forsed. Pavorable conditions
were created for air actions. Each group of assault planes independently
selected its target and destroyed it with bombs and machine gun and cannon
I ire. making five-eight passes. The fighter escorts. having not encountered
an air enemy. also strafed the enemy troops.

As a total on 28 July up to 600 vehicles. over 30 guns. up to 500 wagons.
up to 900 horses and over 1,000 enemy soldiers were destroyed.

0n 29-31 July. attacks were also made against enemy columns on the roads

fro- Konstantynow to Losice. and these targets had been detected by the
courageous scouts from the 59th Guards shep. Lts I. G. Rossokhin and V. A.
fillyukov. About 600 vehicles and 200 wagons were left destroyed on the
roads. Particularly successful were the operations against the enemy colums
oa 29 July carried out by two groups of six 11-2 under the cot-sand of Ms]

B. Ye. Greben'kov. In two passes, they destroyed 45 vehicles. (.0 carts.

2 guns and up to 100 enemey soldiers.

The enemy grouping which had been surrounded to the west of Brest and at-
tacked by bombing and strafing strikes had lost its battleworthiness and was
easily destroyed by the gromd forces. A special couaission which examined
the region of operations established that our air strikes had been very ef-
fective. Stretching before the members of the couission was an enormous
cemetery of destroyed enemy military equipment.

The successful operations of the assault planes against the enemy grouping

to the west of Brest can be seen also by the responses from the cos-and of

the ground forces. Thus. on 28 July. after an attack by a group of assault
planes led by the coaaaander of the 218th shep. Lt Col N. K. Lysenko. the
staff of the 299th shad received the following telegram: "Your group of

ll 11-2 operating against the enemy concentrations in the region of

Krziczew (12 kit to the west of Brest). performed excellently. Please consend
all the crews. Col boykov." The co-ander of the 55th Guards Rifle Division
ﬂaj Gen A. P. Turchinskiy. who observed the actions of the assault planes
affirmed the exceptionally high effectiveness of their bolting and strafing
attacks. after which the units of the division captured the point of Konstanty-
now without particular enemy resistance.

138
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
\

In some instances the mere appearance of the assault planes over the battle-
field led to disorder among the enemy soldiers and officers. Thus. on

28 July. in the region of the village of Bohukaly. a group of our soldiers
and officers vas surrounded by superior Nazi forces. The appearance of

five assault planes from the 39th Guards shap at this moment caused a

panic asong tho German soldiers. The Nazis began to flee searching for

shelter. The group of Soviet soldiers took this occasion and escaped from
encirclenent.

A resident of the village of nohutaly. Viktor Nikoluk, related that on this
day he with his family of nine persons had been arrested by the Ger-ens and
the family of partisan Nikoluk use to be executed. A detail of German
soldiers had already brought them to the place of execution. At this very
moment. tvo groups of assault planes appeared. The escorts fled in terror.
abandoning the convicted persons on the road. The Nikoluk family vithout
delay took cover and avoided execution.

On 30 July. assault planes from the 299th shad under a fighter cover from
the 196th led in the region of Siedlce vars supporting units of a CNG. At
the end of the day, the following telegram was received: "To Gen Krupskiy.
The personnel of the CH6 are inspired by the excellent combat work of your
fliers in the region of Siedlce. The soldiers and officers are profoundly
grateful.for supporting them in combat. Commander of the CH6. Guards Lt Gen
Kryukov.‘

The assault planes on 31 July also operated successfully against the enemy
river crossings. At midday six Ilyushins from the 79th Guards shap headed
by Haj S. T. Borshchev escorted by four Yak-l. made a lav-altitude attack

on the crossing over the Western Bug at Tonkele and the transport vhich had
accumulated here. The crossing was blown into the air from direct bomb hits.
The path of retreat for the enemy troops vas cut. Subsequently the deputy
coanonder of the 79th Guards shep. Lt Col S. T. Borshchev. vas avarded the
title of Hero of the Soviet Union. he had successfully carried out 119 com-
bat sortieo. in so doing causing heavy losses to the enemy.

On 31 July. Moscow saluted the troops of the front which had liberated the
cities of Siedlce and Minsk-Hazoviecki. and in the battles for these the
fliers of Gene Krupskiy, Tokarev. Sidnev, Lt Col Gavril'chenko and Haj
Ukhanev distinguished themselves.

The Soviet government had high regard for the combat feats and military
service of the men of the AA. A number of air formations and units re-
ceived governmental decorations for successful combat in the operations

for the liberation of Belorussia. The 3d bak (commander. Gen A. Z. Karavat-
skiy) received the Order of Suvorov. Second Degree. and was given the
honorary name of Bobruysk: the 8th iak (commander. Gen A. s. Osipenko) re-
ceived the Order of the Red Banner and the name bobruysk: the 2d Guards

and 299th shad (cos-endors. Gena G. O. Komarov and I. V. Krupskiy) received
the Order of Suvorov, Second Degree, and the 16th odrap (commander. Lt Col
O. s. Sherstyuk) received the Order of the Red Bonner.

139
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL US! ONLY

honorary names were also given as followt: 2hlohin to the 196th shed
(commander. Lt Col K. K. Grishchenko); Mnnsk to the 233d and 352d iap
(coamandera. Lt Cola V. V. Kravtsov and l. l. Khara); slutsk to the 218th.
631st and 87bth shap (commanders, Lt Cola N. K. Lysanko. P. c. Plokhov and
H. G. Volkov): naranovichi to the 6th let. the 323d led. the 59th Guards
ahap. the 30th 67th Guards iap and the 133d iap (commanders. Gen 1. h.
Dzusov. Col P. P. Rybakov. Lt Cole H. G. 8klyarov. Kh. h. Ibetulin. A. B.
Penov and K. A. Tovstashiy); Slonim to the 199th shad (commander. Col N. S.
Vinogradov). while the 966th shep. the ﬁshth and 137th iap (commanders.
Haj V. S. Slyunkin. Lt Cole P. D. Yegorov and V. P. Volkov) received the
name Brest.

Many aviators fro: the formations and units were commended by governmental
decorations. During the period from 24 June through 1 August. decorations
were received by 591 fliers. 115 navigators. 189 gunners. 186 engineers and
technicians. 168 motor transport drivers. 70 staff officers. at political

workeis and 262 soldiers of different specialties. A total of 1.603 per-
son! e

The decorations were presented to the aviators in a ceremony. in front of
the full unit and with the colors of the units unfurled. Then meetings
were held with great enthusiasm.

Having completed the defeat of the Brest grouping. the troops on the right
wing of the first Belorussian Front commenced the battles on the approaches
to Hersaw, while the troops of the left wing reached the Vistula. Thus.
they had completely shifted their operations to Polish territory and along
with the troops of the adjacent fronts had begun the liberation of the
fraternal Polish people from the Nazi occupiers.

In line with this the political bodies of the 16th AA carried out extensive
work to explain to the personnel of the air units the historic liberation
mission of the USSR and its Armed Forces. and they explained the standards
of conduct for the Soviet liberetor soldiers abroad. In the units party
meetings were held with the agenda: "0n the Tasks of the Party Organiza-
tions in Line with the Crossing of the Polish State Frontier by the Red
Aray." The victories of the Soviet troops caused a feeling of pride among
our aviators. they strengthened their confidence in the might of Soviet
weapons and inspired them to new heroic feats.

The Belorussian offensive operation coincided in time with the opening of
the second in Western Bruope. however. regardless of the landing of the
Anglo-American troops in Normandy. a larger portion of the most battleworthy
ground forces and aviation of Nazi Germany and its satellites continued to
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fight on the Soviet-German Front where the outcome of World Her it was
determined. On 1 July 1944. on the Eastern Front the German command was
keeping 2.796 coebnt aircraft. and just about 500 in Western Europe.1
The Naris had an opportunity to strongly defend each line, and to further
strengthen the resistance to our aviation. in July. the activities of
fascist aviation alaost doubled (free 1.363 aircraft overflights in June
up to 2.580 in July).

The Belorussian operation was characterised by a rapid advance of the Soviet
troops, and this required the prompt rebasing of the air units. The bao
made a great effort to support the aviation at the new airfields. In this
situation. the servicing of the flight units was basically carried out by

the personnel of the forward cemmendant's offices which moved ahead of the
bee.

In the course of the offensive from Zhlobin to Harsaw. the air units of the
16th AA had to be repeatedly rebased and under very difficult conditions.
Thus. in July the fighters were rebased seven-eight times. the assault planes
five-six. the night boabers eight. and the daytime bombers three-four times.
The rear units were shifted accordingly. for maintaining continuous opera-
tions by our aviation. the rebasing was usually carried out by one-half of
the air formation (unit). The other at the same time continued operations
from the previous airfields.

During June the forces of the AA built 77 new airfields, of which over 60
percent began to be built 3-5 km behind the front line. 0n 1 August. the
airfield network of the AA numbered 251 airfields. but a majority of them
was not used due to the great distance from the front line. At this time
there were only 26 operating airfields as well as airfields prepared for

aviation basing with full rear services (25-100 km behind the front line).

During July. the AA carried out 6.638 combat sorties for supporting the
advancing troops on the right wing of the front. In 1‘0 air battles. the
enemy lost 115 planes and ll at airfields. The battle losses of the AA
occurred predominantly from enemy antisircreft fire.

in the Belorussian offensive operation. the air formations and units of
the 16th AA employed various methods of combat and practical procedures.
These were determined by the desire of the couand to continuously operate
against the enemy from the air on the main sectors of the offensive by the
front's troops. they were also determined by the nature of the enemy de-
fenses, saturated with a large number of weapons and requiring a high hit
density in a short period of time; by the air situation characterized by
the insignificant activities of enemy aviation but by the very strong re-
sistance by the enemy antisircreft weapons and frequently the very complex
meteorological conditions.

 

1 See "lstoriye Velikoy Otechestvennoy Voyny Sovetskogo Soyuza 19‘1-1965."

Vol 6. Hoscow. Voyenixdat. 1966. pp 125-126, 525.

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

As a consequence of the rapid advance of the troops and the necessity of
rebssing the air formations behind them. control of the aviation encountered
certain difficulties. The command posts of the AA end the air foreations
had to be continuously moved. while maintaining uninterrupted communications
with the air unite. As an average the coammnd poet of the AA remained at
one place for 5-6 days. This limited the opportunities of using wire com-
municatione end led to an increase in radio traffic. However. in the course
of the offensive there was not a single instance of a deely in the trans-
eitting of any battle orders or dispositions. Uith a brief absence of tech-
nical cosmunications. the orders. dispositions and reports were delivered

by liaison aircraft or motor transport. end control of the air formations
and units was not interrupted.

For the personnel of the 16th AA. the Belorussian Operation was a good
practical school. where they sharpened up and improved the eethods of organ-
izing and conducting air operations for the purpose of achieving victory

over a strong end perifidioue enemy. By the end of the operation. all the
personnel of the AA had acquired rich combat experience.

In the Battles for bridgeheade and help for the Hareew Rebels

At the beginning of August 1946. the fighting strength of the 16th AA was
again changed. The 6th iek. the 2d Guards shed. the 2?Iet nbed. the 286th
iad, the 16th odrap and the 98th okrap continued to be part of the army.
The 3d bah. the 299th shed. the 282d iad and the 19th iep returned from
the 6th AA. The 6th shek and 8th iak became part of the 6th AA.

The 6th shah and the 13th iak now became part of the 16th AA. The 6th shah.
under the coemand of Haj Gen Avn B. K. Tokarev. consisted of the 197th shed
(the 618th. 756th and 805th ehap: it was col-sanded by the co-uniet since
1961. the active participant in the Civil Her. Col V. A. Tiaofeyev) and

the 198th shed (the 61st. $67th and 965th ehep) under the command of hero
of the Soviet Union, Col V. l. Beloueov. The 13th iak headed by Maj Gen

6. A. Sidnev had the 193d iad (the 367th. 515th and 518th iep) under the
co-mand of hero of the Soviet Union Col S. I. Hironov (subsequently Col Gen
Avn and Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Air Force) and the 196th iad (56th.
530th and 868th iep) under the command of Col P. N. Dement'yev. The 299th
shed was headed by Lt Col V. P. Khremchenko (from September. hero of the
Soviet Union Lt Col A. c. Mekonechnihov). All the personnel of these for-
mations possessed good training and great combat experience.

In August the 16th AA had up to 1.250 aircraft. About 550 aircraft re-
mained in the 6th AA (on 5 September. the AA was transferred to the reserves
of the NqSHC).

by 29 July. the troops of the 69th Army which had advanced on the left wing
of the front had captured a bridgehead on the Vistula in the region of
Pulawy. In the region of Magnuezew the crossing of the Vistula started

on I August by the forces of the 8th Guards Army. The 6th shek. 6th and
13th ink and the 27let nbed were assigned for supporting this.

142
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At down the fightore were potrolling over the troope in the jump-off pooi-
tion. during the period of tho croooing end during the bottle on tho wootorn
benk of the river. The eeeoult plenoo by bombing end etrefing etrikee eided
the troopo in the lending end broedoning of the bridgohoed. After tho cep-
turing of tho firet line of trencheo. with tho o'nifting of tho ortillery
fire deep into tho enoey dofenooo. tho eeeeult plenoo of tho 198th ehed
under e fighter cover bogon ectione egeinot tho ertillory in the pooitiono
end the otrongpointo which were impeding the edvenco of our troopo. The

6th ohok which in operetionel torno woo under the coo-end of tho 8th Guerde
Any end 13th iek during the dey node 122 eortieo.

0n the firet dey. tho troope copturod e bridgehoed up to 15 1:- wide end
10 In: deep, end by lo Auguot hed thrown two bridgoo ecroeo tho Viotule.

During the following deyo. -iorco bottloo reged on tho ground end in tho eir
for holding end extending tho bridgeheed. Boo-y evietion from 5 through it
Auguot oherply incroeeod ito ectivitioo. Hony tinoe it endeevored to bomb
the troope on tho bridgohoed end the croeeingo over tho Viotule. Tho nu-ber

of ovorflighto by one-y eirereft during individuel deyo reechod 1000-600.
end eech dey up to 30 dogfighte occurred.

The nein took during thoeo doye for tho 16th M woe to prevent tho onooy
evintion froo roeching our bridgeheede end croooinge. Sinultenoouely it
had to eooiot the troope in extending tho bridgehoede. repel one-y counter-
ottocko end eloo conduct reconneieeence. ‘rho corrying out of theoo nieoiono
woo cooplicetod by teaporery difficultioe in tho booing of our oir unito end
in tho supplying of fuel for then. For e certein tine their coobet cope-
bilitieo were below tho copobilitieo of on-y evietion which deily node

2-3-fold nore eortioe then tho 16th M end put up otrong reoietenco to our
evietion.

During thio period in tho region of tho Hegnuouw bridgohoed. our pilote
frequently initietod eir bottloo with otrong groupo of may eircreft end
rogordleoe of their nunoricol ouporiority, oueteined victorioo ohowing
decioiveneeo end courege in thio. Thue, on 9 Auguet. 12 Yek-9 fro. the
347th iop heeded by oquodron co-ondor Cept L. I. Ryzhiy. were covering

the troopo end croeeingo over the Viotule. Some 22 one-y 52-190 eircreft
flying in four groupe eppeered on tho epproechoo to tho Hegnueeew bridge-
hood et en eltitude of 3,500 notere. Our Yoko were guided to then by the
ground rodioe. Cept Ryohiy ordered Sr Lt 1. Yo. Bolov with two elemento

to cover the etteck, end hinoelf et the hood of eight fightero ettecked the
first group of Enociot eircreft end i-odietoly in ettecking fro- the front
end froth below ohot down one Fokker-Wu“ fron e ohort renge. Then, heving
gained altitude by e coobet turn, Rizhiy with hie wingpon ettocked enother
enemy group from ebovo end behind end dootroyod enother two [IV-190. By
their docieivo ectiono our fightore dieruptod the enouy bottle (oration,
they forced it to drop the boobe ehooticelly over one-y territory end turn
beck. During the wor Cept 1.. It. Ryzhiy node 250 coobet oortioe end in 89
eir bettloe ehot down 17 feeciet oircreft. On 15 Hey 1966 he woe eworded
the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. Proeontly L. l. Ryohiy ie e colonel

end o oenior inotructor et the Hilitery Aeodeny of the Amrod end 'l‘enlt
Troopo.

163
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On that day a group consisting of 12 Yak-9 fighters under the contend of
Capt A. I. Siiukov engaged 30 Fokker-Wife in a fierce air engagenent on
the approaches to the bridgehead. In this battle in addition to Silukov.
Lt I. A. Dvurechenskiy and Sr Lt V. H. Oganesov showed brilliant skills.
They shot down three eneny fighters and prevented the one-y aviation fron
strafing our troops. Capt A. I. Silukov in Septeeber 1966 was awarded
the Order of Alexander Nevskiy. The deputy squadron comander Sr Lt V. H.
Oganesov during the war years successfully nade 290 coebat sorties and in
67 air battles won 16 victories. 0n 1‘: Hay 1906 he was awarded the title
of Hero of the Soviet Union.

A renarkable feat was carried out on 10 August by fliers from the 631st shap
under the consand of Hero of the Soviet Union Capt D. I. Snirnev and Sr Lt
B. N. Moshkov. In destroying ens-y artillery in the region of Glowaccow.
the assault plane pilots noticed that 25 Ger-an Ju-87 bombers under the
cover of lO Fiﬁ-190 fighters were turning for an attack over our battle
formations. Having correctly assessed the situation. Moshkov radioed: "At-
tack the many bombers!" Lt H. I. Pen'kev was the first to drop away from
the group. and boldly attacked the leading ale-ant of the Ju-87. Then the
entire group of our assault planes dove into the for-etion of Junkers. Con-
fusion arose aneng the fascist pirates and this was i-ediately used by our
fliers. Hoshkov and Pen'kov both shot down one Junkers (subsequently both
pilots were awarded the title of Ilere of the Soviet Union). The group of
10 fighters free the S30th iap which was covering the assault planes destroyed
8 enesy aircraft. losing just one La-S. The assault planes had no losses.
The attempt of the fascists to attack our troops was thwarted.

On 12 August, four fighters fro- the 30th Guards iap of the 273d iad led

by Sr Lt I. D. Hanonov atrived to cover the crossings over the Vistula at
the Hagnuszew bridgehead. not sore than several einutes has passed when

30 Ju-87 bosbers and 30 Fit-190 fighters approached the crossing with the
sun behind thee. The Nazi fliers probably did not expect an attack by four
Soviet fighters. But Custdsnan Manonov inediately ordered his wing-en to
close with the enany. They inediately dove into the formation of enesy
bosbers and having split it. began to settle the score with the fascist vul-
tures one by one. The rapid attacks by our fighters forced the Junkers to
get rid of their boobs far from the crossing. The battle was not easy.
Each of our pilots was fighting against several fascists. but the exceptional
daring, courage and high skills led to victory. In the course of the air
battle, flier I. D. Hanenov shot down two fighters. Sr Lt P. V. Balsykin
destroyed a Junkers and a Fokker-Half, and Jr Lt S. V. Davydov started his
combat score. lie set two fascist aircraft. a Ju-87 and a “1-190, on fire
and he hit one Vii-190. Jr Lt V. P. Vashchilltin shot down one enesy fighter.
in acting skillfully and decisively our courageous fliers carried out their
mission excellently.

Two groups of four fighters from the 352d iap led by the co-uniats. squad-
ron ceuander Sr Lt B. G. Deyev and the Kolsonol organiser. flight cousnder
Lt V. c. Kernin just as courageously engaged 27 Ju-87 bombers covered by

146
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

16 Phi-190 fighters in combat. As a result of the skillful combination of
fire and asneuvering. Dsyev and Karmin both shot down two Fokker-Hulls.

The young flier Jr Lt A. c. Klochkov also fought bravely and he shot down
two aircraft (on 18 February 1955. he did not return from a mission). The
reinforcements which arrived quickly consisting of pilots L. I. Kichkov.

c. K. Yeliseyev. A. I. Hituaov, A. I. Ptitsyn. P. s. Gurshiya, A. P. Kaaelin,
P. D. Volchenko and others completed the rout of the enemy. In this combat.
the fliers of the 352d iap (co-ander, Lt Col P. I. Khara) shot down 13
fascist aircraft without losses and the others were not allowed to reach

the target.

There were also unsuccessful air battles. Thus. on 12 August. four Yak-9
from the 515th iap led by It s. P. Pusev at an altitude of 2,200 meters
were covering the troops in the area of the Hagnustew bridgehead. Having
discovered two Pit-190 at the same altitude, Pusev began to climb. his wing-
men reuined behind. Regardless of this he decided to engage in a turning
battle alone. But when he closed in on the tail of one Pokker-Hulf, another
attacked him. In breaking off battle, Puaev began to search for his group
which had remained below. It V. G. Popov who was the deputy leader also
left the group and becaae involved in pursuing a Fokker-Hulk As a result
of the absence of control and reciprocal support. the group lost one pilot
and the flight couander Lt S. P. Pusev did not becone a victim of the enemy
merely by good luck.

In the battles over the Vistula. shortcomings also appeared in fighter con-
trol over the battlefield. The reinforcements were at times late in battle.
and in certain instances individual enemy groups penetrated the positions

of our troops. Upon instructions from the co-ander of the 13th M. 3-5 km
from the forward edge. fighter ambushea were organized and several control
posts were set up directly along the front line. and here there were com-
manders of the air forutions with radios and radars. These measures provided
the needed results.

The air situation changed significantly in our favor from 14 August, when
the rebssing of the aviation was completed and its fuel supply organized.
The air formations increased their actions, the enemy began to suffer heavy
losses and the needed help for the troops of the front rose.

On this day the fliers of the 6th shalt. the 2d Guards and 299th shad escorted
by fighters from the 6th and 13th iak and the 286th iad by continuous at-
tacks by 19 groups destroyed the enemy in the region of "arka. assisting the
troops of the 8th Guards Army in broadening the bridgehead. Simultaneously.
six groups of assault planes supported the offensive of the 70th Any. hav-
ing made 821 sorties. the fliers destroyed much enemy equipment and soldiers.
In 10 air battles. 8 eneay aircraft were shot down.

Excellent actions were also carried out by groups of fighters and assault
planes under the cousnd of hero of the Soviet Union Haj P. P. Shevelev,
Capt V. H. Beyzak. Sr Lts L. c. Koptew. P. A. Dronov and V. H. Podkopayev.

1105
FOR Oﬂ’chAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the difficult battles for the Vistula. the frontline friendship grew
stronger between the assault planes and the ground troops. At the peak of
the battles on 1‘ August a group of assault planes fron the 299th shed.

in flying over the forward edge. dropped a pennant in the positions of

the 271st Guards Rifle Regiment on which were two keys and a letter. The
pilots had written: ”These keys are from Warsaw and the fascist lair of
Berlin. We hope that you will be able to open the gates of these cities.
and we, your ‘huspback' friends. will support you froe the air." In the
subunits of the rifle regiment. the challenge of the assault planes was
received with great enthusiasm. and in their letter of reply to the pilots,
the soldiers. sergeants and officers assured them that the order of the
assault planes would be carried out.

The approach of the Red Arley to the frontiers of Nazi Germany led to a
strengthening of the offensive also among the personnel of the AA. Bravery
and skill were shown by the fliers of the 6th and 13th iak who covered the
crossings and troops on the Magnuszew bridgehead. From 10 through 14 August,
the fighters of the 6th ial: shot down 62 aircraft of the Nazi Luftwaffe.

They themselves lost four aircraft. The fliers of the 13th ink in August
carried out 85 dogfights and destroyed 77 eneay aircraft. At the same time,
among the fighter pilots there was the particularly popular slogan "Enemy
aircraft spottednshot down!"

Among the fighters which stood out in terms of the results of coabat in
August were the 367th iap (co-antler Lt Col P. B. Dankevich), the pilots
of which made l3 air battles and shot dovm 15 FH-l90 aircraft without hav-
ing any losses. The fliers of the 30th and 67th Guards iap (cos-sanders Lt
Ools Kh. H. Ibatulin and A. B. Panov) fought excellently against the air
enemy, as well as the fliers of the 19th iap (con-lander Lt Col P. F. Chupi-
kov). In carrying out "free hunting" Hajs Hero of the Soviet Union A. Ya.
Baklan and D. S. Titorenko, Sr Lts H. P. Tarskanov and A. A. Karayev, Capts
O. s. Belikov and H. N. Tyul'kin, and Lt V. A. Gromakovskiy distinguished
themselves. Subsequently Karayev, Behikov. nul'kin and Gromakovskiy were
awarded the titles of hero of the Soviet Union. The flight cot-sander of
the 176th Guards iap V. A. Gromahovskiy during the war years made 186 com-
bat sorties and in 29 air battles shot down 16 enemy aircraft. The deputy
squadron cousnder of this same regiment A. A. Karayev by February 1965 had
to his battle score 373 cosbat sorties, 75 air battles and 18 air victories.

The arny veterans will remember the feat of the air scout Lt V. S. Senenov
(721st iap). On 17 August. after carrying out his conbat mission. over the
front line he enountered an enemy Ju-88 reconnaissance plane and inediately
attacked it. He had run out of aImmition. but the enemy aircraft was con-
tinuing to travel west. Then Semenov decided to catch up and knock it down
with a ran. Approaching the enemy from the rear, he hit the left wing of
his La-7 on the tail of the Junkers which inedistely went into an uncon-
trolled dive. The Lavochkin also went out of control and the flier was
forced to bail out.

166
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Semenov landed on enemy occupied territory. 0n the second day he succeeded
in meeting up with our scouts. and a month later he crossed the front line
and arrived back in his unit. For the feat carried out V. G. Semenov was
presented a governmental decoration. During the war years. V. G. Semenov,
one of the beat air scouts in the army. made 228 combat sortios and de-
stroyed lo enemy aircraft.

Along with the successes in the difficult August battles over the Hagnussew
bridgehead. our fliers also suffered losses. Thus. on 20 August. in carrying
out a mission in the region of harka. the enemy antiaircraft fire shot down
the 11-2 piloted by the courageous woman pilot. the navigator of the 805th
shsp. Sr Lt A. A. Yegorova. Wounded and burned. she was taken prisoner in
an unconscious state and remained at the camp in Kustrin until she was lib-
erated by our troops in January 1945. Prior to military service. A. A.
Yegorova had worked as a machinist in the construction of the Moscow subway.
and from 1938. after completing the Kalinin Air Club. she was an instructor
pilot. In August 1961. she became a military pilot. Two years later she
joined the Communist Party. For military feats A. A. Yegorova was awarded
two Orders of the Red Banner. the Order of the Patriotic Her and several
medals. In May 1965. for exemplary fulfillment of the missions of the com-
mand during the years of the Great Patriotic Her and for the shown valor and
heroism. A. A. Timofeyeva (Yegorova) was awarded the title of hero of the
Soviet Union.

by mid-August. the troops of the 8th Guards Army. in repelling numerous
counterattacks and overcoming fierce enemy resistance. with the aid of
aviation not only keptbut also broadened the Mognuszew bridgehead up to
20-25 km along the front and up to 15 km in depth. In the course of the
battles on the bridgehead. the air formations of the AA in August for sup-
porting the troops made around 800 aorties by the assault planea and 1.200
by the fighters. The air regiments of the 6th shsk under the cover of fight-
ers from the 194th iad operated particularly effectively.

The air operations were highly praised by the command of the 8th Guards
Army. On 20 August the following telegram was received from it: "The mili-
tary council expresses its thanks to all the flight personnel of the air
corps which cooperated on 19 and 20 August with the army units to extend

the bridgehead on the western bank of the Vistula River and capture Glowac-
zow. it sends congratulation on Aviation Day and is hopeful that the coura-
geous assault planes in the future will mercilessly crush the damned enemy
of our motherland. German fascism. Commander of the 8th Guards Army Col Gen
chuykov. member of the mili.ary council Lt Gen Art Pozharskiy. chief of
staff Col Belyavskiy.“

This praise was not accidental. for the command and the staff of the 6th
snsk (chief of staff. Col Ya. A. Pakov and his deputy Lt Col P. Ye. Her-as)
as well as the commander of the 198th shad Hero of the Soviet Union Col V. l.
Belousov and the chief of staff Col A. P. Kopytin excelled particularly in

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the clarity of organizing the cooperation between aviation and the troops.
For successful operations the 198th shad also received thanks from the con-
nanders of the 28th and 29th Guards Rifle corps. Particularly distinguish-
ing themselves were pilots V. N. Reshetnyalt (567th shap), F. U. Shchelkunov
(618th shop). A. S. Leusanko and M. H. Yeliseyev (756th shep).

At this ties in the "arssw sector the operations of our aviation came down
to supporting the troops of the 28th and 70th armies in repelling numerous
enemy countarsttacks in the areas to the east and southeast of the Warsaw
suburb of Prags. For outstanding operations on the battlefield on 18-20
August. the comander of the 70th Army thanked the personnel of the 299th
shed. the 261st bad, the 282d and 286th iad (co-tenders. Lt Col V. P.
Khramchenko. Cola A. c. Prdorov. Yu. H. Berkal' and Lt Col 1. c. Trilevich).

From the second half of August 19“. the canpsign record of the 1st Air
Division of the Polish Army (comnder Col 1. A. Snags. from November 1961..
Maj Gen Avn) began in combat association with Soviet av.‘1tors as part of
the 16th AA. The division had been organized froe Polish patriots with
fraternal aid from the USSR. and served as the core for the development of
the Polish Air Force. It included the first iap Varszawa with Yak-l air-
craft. the 2nd nbap Krakow with Po-Z. and the 611th (in November. renamed
the 3d) shap with 11-2. As a total the division had over 100 aircraft.

The Polish air regiments made their first combat sorties on 23 August together
with the experienced Soviet pilots from the 233d iap from the Zelechow sir-
field. The combat of the air division was carried out in the interests of
supporting the let Polish Army. In September-October. the let (on 3 Novem-
ber it was renamed the 6th) Polish Hixed Air Division made up to 2,000 com-
bat sorties. The fraternal friendship bawteen Soviet and Polish aviators

was forged in the fire of the joint struggle against the Nazi invaders.

By the beginning of August. the troops on the right wing of the front (68th
65th and 28th armies) had significantly fallen behind (by approximately 100
km) from the troops of the center and left wing which had reached the Vis-
tula. The rapid evening out of the front line and the capturing of a bridge-
head on the Narev River (in the Pultusk sector) became the main mission of
these armies. The 16th AA received the mission of supporting the troops in
the offensive and in capturing the bridgehead. For this the 2d Guards and
299th shed. the 282d and 286th iad and the 271st nbsd were assigned.

in supporting the advancing troops, the air formations of the AA destroyed
enemy personnel and equipment in areas of concentration and on roads, and
artillery in positions. The assault planes attacked predominantly in small
groups upon requests from the combined-arms «and. In addition to direct
cxcorting of the assault planes. the fighters covered the battle formations
of the troops. For supporting and covering the advancing troops on the right

wing of the front, in August the assault planes made over 2,000 sorties and
the fighters up to 3.500.

1‘8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The sneny aviation in this sector showed great activity and in every pos-
sible way impeded the operations of our fliers. Thus. on 25 August. a group
of 17 11-2 from the 658th shap of the 299th shad headed by Lt 001 B. V. Viyk
was attacking eneny artillery mortar batteries in the region of Vyszkow.

On the second pass the sum antiaircraft artillery stopped firing as 12
fascist fighters had appeared and they began to attack the assault planes
when they pulled out of their dive. 0n the fourth pass two 11-2 broke

away fron the group and at this aonent were attacked by an elenent of Fokker-
Hulfs. Prom their fire the airplane of Capt I. P. Smyshlyak caught fire

and fell. The second 11-2 of Jr Lt P. V. Vichkanov was hit, but he did

reach his own territory. Our covering fighters shot down three eneny air-
craft in this battle.

Regardless of the complex situation the assault planes operated boldly and
with good results. During these days groups fron the 299th shad led by Lt
Cola N. K. Lysenko and H. c. Volkov. Hajs N. P. Hatveyev and K. Ye. Strsshnyy.
Capts H. I. Kuchinskiy. N. S. Latskov and N. V. Oparin. Sr Lts V. c.
Balanutkin and B. N. Hoahkov. Lt Ye. N. Selyanin and nany others distinguished
themselves. The fliers of the 218th, loJlst and 876th shsp always distin-
guished themselves by high conbat skills.

The results of the operations of the air for-nations of the M were stated
in the responses from the cousnd of the ground forces.

"During the period from l8 through 21 August. the 299th shad, regardless of
the difficult weather conditions. supported the advance of the 3d Guards
Rifle Corps of the 28th Army. During this period the assault planes node
nore than 300 sorties. in disrupting enemy defenses and demoralizing its
personnel. In the region of Mieczislawow the assault planes inpeded an
eneny counteratteck and helped the units of the corps throw it back beyond
the Western Bug. The fliers fron the 218th shap of Lt Col N. K. Lysenko
prevented the building of a temporary crossing. For the outstanding work
of the assault planes, I would like to state our gratitude to all the per-

sonnel of the 299th shad. Cos-ander of the 3d Guards Rifle Corps Maj Gen
Perkhorovich . "1

"The 2d Guards shad during the period from ll through 29 August nade 1.016

sorties for the 70th Army. As a result of the bombing and strafing attacks
against the eneauy, it suffered great losses in tanks. artillery. transport

and personnel. A number of instances were established when as a consequence
of the action of the assault planes, the enemy infantry was denoralized. it
took to flight abandoning weapons and equipment. The successful operations
of the assault planes to a significant degree aided the 70th Army in carry-
ing out the given missions. Cor-sander of the 70th Any Col Gen Popov. len-
ber of the military council Maj Gen Savkov. chief of staff liej Gen Lyanin."2

 

1 Arkhiv no sssn. folio 368, inv. 6476. file 268. sheet 317.

2 Arkhiv no sssa, folio 368. inv. 6476. file 359. sheets 265-249.
169

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the last 10 days of August and in Septesber. extensive work was car-
ried out by the fliers of the 62d Guards Air Regiment of the GVP. Each day
in making 60-65 aortiee. they transported wounded soldiers from the front
to the rear. to Siedlce. Brest and Pinsk.

In the course of the operations. as before great attention was given to

air reconnaissance. In that difficult situation where the air formations
were experiencing an acute lack of fuel. the AA commander issued special
warrants to the cosmsndars of the reconnaissance subunits. and according

to these warrants at all airfields the reconnaissance aircraft were supplied
with fuel first.

In August the 16th AA made 10,667 combat sorties. In 2A9 air battles, 250
enemy aircraft were shot down.

As a consequence of the increased resistance from enemy aviation and anti-
nircraft weapons. the AA suffered significant losses in bombers. fighters
and assault planes.

During the month. 5.119 aircraft overflights were noted for the enemy avia-
tion. Actually the enemy aviation made significantly more aorties as many
aircraft did not approach the front line and were not counted by our air
defense system.

The Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet and the Supreme Communder-in-Ghief
highly regarded the combat contribution of the aviators of the 16th AA. For
the shown valor in battles against the Nazi invaders and for mass heroism of
the personnel. on 19 August 1966. the following changes were effected: The
299th shad became the 11th Guards shad (co-lander Gen 1. V. Krupskiy); the
218th, 631st and 875th shap of this division became the 173d. 176th and
175th Guards shap (commanders Lt Cole N. K. Lyaenko. P. G. Plohhov and Haj
H. G. Volhov); the 271st nbad (the 23d. 66th and 65th Guards nbap) became
the 9th Guards nbad (cosmender Col K. I. Rssshazov).

The air formations and units which had distinguished themselves in preceding
battles were given honorary names: Lublin to the 6th shah. the 6th ask. the
2626 nbad and the 9l9th Air Liaison Regiment (commanders Gen 3. K. Toksrev.
Cols H. Kh. Borisenho. P. A. Kalinin. and Lt Col A. Ye. Ishutin); Siedlce

to the 13th iah. the 658th shop and the 163d iap (consnders Gen B. A.
Sidnev. Lt Col 8. V. Viyk and Haj V. H. Ukhanev); Deblin to the 197th shed
and 193d iad (commanders Cole V. A. Timofeyev and S. I. Mironov). Simultane-
ously the Order of the Red Banner was awarded to the 6th ask. the 252d nbad.
the 197th. 199th and 3d Guards shed. the 1st Guards, 323d and 336th iad.

the 8th Guards bap, the 71st Guards. the 218th, G31st and 876th ahap, the
127th. 169th. 157th, 163d. 248th and 367th iap, the 93d okrap and the 919
caps (commanders Cole H. Kh. Boriaenko, P. A. Kalinin. V. A. Timofeyev,

N. S. Vinogradov. A. A. Smirnov, V. V. Sukhoryebov, P. P. Rybakov and s. P.
Crashchenkov. Lt Gols G. l. Popov. A. l. Sevast'yanov. N. K. Lysenho. P. G.
Plohhov, H. G. Volkov. V. V. Puseykin. N. T. Nikitin, V. F. Volkov. Haj V. H.
Uhhanev. Lt Cola V. S. Hukhin. P. B. Dankevich, K. H. Hyasoyedov and A. Ye.
lshutin).

150
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

Many officers end gsnerels were ewerded Orders of the Soviet Union and
were promoted in rank.

The ranks of the aviators in the AA geined s new group of holders of the
Gold Star. By Ukeses of the Presidiun of the USSR Supreme Soviet of 2 end
19 August 1955. for exemplary fulfillment of the missions of the comeend
end for heroism end courage shown in this, the title of hero of the Soviet
Union was awarded to Col Gen Avn 8. I. Rudenko. Haj Ye. A. Aeerov. Cepts
O. s. Belikov end K. P. Zekhsrov (posthunously), to Sr Lts P. B. Bublikov
end B. N. Hoshkov, It 3. A. Lekhtin end Col P. P. Ohupikov.

For Pevel Pedorovich Chupikov. August 1966 was particularly memorable. he
received the rank of colonel end becene e hero of the Soviet Union. end the

19th iep which he conmended becsee the 176th Guards Regiment end was awarded
the Order of Alexender Nevskiy.

In 1931. es en lO-yesr-old youth. Chupikov volunteered for the Red Army.

A yeer later he wss elreedy studying in e nilitery-technical school. end
after coapleting it he moved from s squadron tschniciens to an engineer.

In 1938 he psrticipeted in the battles at Lake Khesen end was ewerded the
Order of the Red Star. In 19b0, he achieved hie dreams of becoming e pilot.
After completing the Kachs Pilot School he received hie wings. With the
start of the war end until the day of victory. communist Chupikov was on

the front. In Herch 194‘ he was eppointsd the commander of the famous 19th
inp which was manned by first-rate ece pilots. During the war years the
fliers of the regiment made eround 9.000 conbst sorties. they carried out
750 air bettles end destroyed 665 enemy aircraft. P. P. Chupikov nede around
£00 sorties end in 77 sir battles personally shot down lb enemy sircraft end
6 in e group. In the air regiment were more then 10 heroes of the Soviet
Union. The fliers of the 19th isp carried out many glorious deeds and for
this the reginent becene a Ousrds Unit end received the honorary name of
Proskurov end was awarded three battle orders.

After the wer P. F. Chupikov commended sir formations. Then he completed
the hilitsry Academy of the General Staff, he commended the aviation of e
district. end was in charge of Air force combat training. For combat feete
end unfailing service he was swsrded the Gold Star. three Orders of Lenin.
five Orders of the Red Banner, end many medals. At present Col Gen Avn Pevl

Fedorovich Chupikov continues to serve on the Main Inspectorate of the USSR
Ministry of Defense.

Like the fliers, the soldiers of nsny of the rear units also distinguished
themselves in unstinting labor. They continuously supported the air opera-
tions for the sake of victory over the hated enemy. In the course of the
Belorussian and subsequent operations. the following units distinguished
themselves and were decorated: The 80th RAB (chief Col H. P. Shcherbstyuk)
received the Order of the Red Banner; the 21st, 28th 5th and 56th RAB (chiefs
Cole H. I. Kuzin and H. A. Vesil'yev and Lt Cola V. H. Smirnov and A. V.
Oinzburg) received the Order of the Red Star. The bee slso received high
praise for their conbet work: The 265th and 464th (con-anders Hsjs R. A.

15%,
FOR OFFICIAL SB ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

Blinov end A. I. Beloueov) received the Order of the Red Banner, while

the 681st. 552d. 603d. 526th. 669th. 671st. 702d. 766th. 930th end 895th
(commanders Lt Cole P. P. Begrov end Ye. A. Ponamnrchuk, Mejs D. A. Yershov.
s. L. Lenekiy. c. H. Krevteov. c. A. Yermskov. Ye. V. Ovcherenko. B. I.
Denil'chenko. and L. L. Hendriko. and Capt V. B. Kuznetsov) received the
Order of the Red Star. Hany service-en from the rear units were com-ended
by governnentel decoretions.

During the period of the intense conbet from July through August 1965. par-
ticularly difficult for the AA rear services was the supplying of ammuni-
tion and fuel for the eir formations. Due to the lengthening supply lines
and the shortage of motor transport, evietion during individual periods

hed available very eeager supplies of fuel at the eirfields. At tines this
restricted their operetions. Supplies were delivered to the forward sir-
fields st this time by motor treneport end partially by Li-2 aircraft (e
distance of 400-500 km from the supply depots).

The AA rear unite during this tine cerried out very extensive work. Per-
ticular mention nuet be eede of the unetinting labor by the enter vehicle
drivers. For example. in the b03d bao the gss truck driver Komeonol member
Yugin in a day traveled 650 km. delivering fuel for sircrsft. Hsving re-
turned to his unit. he refused rest end iemedietely set out on a second

trip. The military truck drivers of the 503d, 429th end 702d beo. Kirichenko.
Loychenko. Boychenko. Kerstin. Laserev. l. H. Davgen'. G. P. Lebedenko. P. F.
Nesterenko, Shelestov. A. Ye. Vityukov and many others. were awarded the
emblem "Outstanding Driver" for excellent work. In each unit of the 16th

AA there were msny similar exemples of labor velor.

Due to the fact thet the troops of the First Belorussian Front during 2-month
continuous battles had edvenced 500-600 kn. their rear support had become
even more difficult. With the reeching of the Vistuls, the offensive opera-
tions of the armies in essence had been exhausted. Under these conditions,
on 29 August the troops of the First Belorussian Front were ordered by Reed-
querters to go over to the defensive along the entire front. however. for
the purposes of improving their position, the ernies of the front with sup-
port of aviation in Septenber-October in certain eress still were carrying
out pertisl offensive operations.

In the Pultusk sector, such en operetion beginning in September was carried
out by troops from the 65th and 68th srnies; they were to cross the Nerew
River and capture bridgeheeds on its western bank. For supporting these
armies. the coemender of the 16th AA assigned the 2d end llth Guards shad
end a portion of forces fron the 6th shah, end for covering the ground
troops and assault plenes. the 6th iek end the 282d end 286th ied. A nun-
ber of air fornetions was shifted to the reserves.

The troop offensive started on 3 Septeeber with eir support. During the
entire day the assault plenes destroyed artillery in position. personnel
in trenches. as well es the enemy toluene which had commenced s retrest.

152
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the day a group of lb 11-: froe the 618th shep under the con-end of
Sr Lt V. I. Yeskin. in being covered by eight Le-S. attacked ens-y artillery
20 he to the southwest of the point of Ostrow Heeowiecha. The crews. diving
from a cannon circle. destroyed two batteries and nany eneey soldiers by
boebs and cannon and eechine gun fire. Then the 6th shah with the forces

of 77 aircraft lads a concentrated attack against concentrations of enely
troops st the crossings over the Narew River. As a result. the ens-y suf-
fered great losses in personnel and nilitery equipnent.

Particularly effective operations were carried out by a group of 16 11-2

of the coeeender of the 765th shep Lt Col V. G. Zapoedra. as wall as the
groups led by the experienced assault plane pilots Hero of the Soviet Union
Lt Col A. G. Nahonechnihov, Haj s. P. lerilo and Capts H. l. burkov. L. I.
Yufe and A. F. Ioahavenov. The 2d Guards shed supported the coeeitting of
the let Guards Tank Corps into the breach and its advance.

The enemy which was threatened by the piercing of its defenses on the
Pultusk center sent aviation to this area. On 5 Septeeber in the area of
the advancing troops in 33 air battles 34 fascist aircraft were shot down.

A certain notion of the air situation can be gained by the following epi-
sodes.

Three groups of five Ile from the 78th Guards shap (leaders hero of the
Soviet Union Haj Ye. A. Nikhalenkov. Cepts N. l. Gribov and L. l. Yufe)
escorted by 16 Yake on the way to the target encountered lo FU-l90. The
cover fighters engaged than. The assault planes over the target were at-
tacked by a second group of 10 enemy fighters. A defensive circle had to
be forned and nuearous attacks by the eneey aviation driven off. During
the battle pilot Gribov and the gunners free the crews of K. s. Shibelhov
and L. I. Yufe shot down three fighters. however the fascists did not
break off but continued to constantly attack the assault planes endeavoring
to disrupt their defensive circle. And only one eleeent of ener fighters
succeeded in shooting down the aircraft of Lt V. A. Hekarov due to a dis-
ruption of fire support between the assault planes. The cover fighters at

this tine had engaged another group of Fokker-Hulfe and this also was a
mistake.

On the same day. a group of six 11-2 under the con-mud of Guards Capt
V. P. Kolennikov in heading toward the region of Pultusk encountered eight
FU-l90 which the cover fighters engaged in coebat. 0n approaching the
target the assault planes detected eneey tanks and having for-ed a circle
attacked thee. At the seas tine they had to repel attacks by a second

group of fascist fighters. Here with well organized firing by the air
gunners. at first one Pokker-Hulf was shot down and then Capt Kolennikov

finished off one other enemy fighter. The group of assault planes having
carried out the mission returned to their airfield without losses.

153
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a rule, our bonbera and assault planes on the way to and in the area
of the target maintained close battle formations creating a powerful fire
barrier against the enemy fighters. and because of this they succeeded in
driving off the enemy and avoiding losses in the air.

By the end of 6 September. the troops on the right wing of the front with
active air support. having overcome stubborn enemy resistance. reached the
Narew River, they crossed it and dug in on a bridgehead in the region of
Pultusk. In the interests of the advancing armies. during the period from

3 through 6 September. the assault planes made 1.300 aorties and the same
number by the fighters.

According to the responses from the combined-arms command. the aviation
operated successfully. In an order to the troops of the 48th Army of

S September thanks were stated to the commander of the 11th Guards shad
Guards Lt Col V. P. Khremchenho and to all the personnel of the division
for outstanding actions in piercing the German defenses to the west of
Ostrow Hazowiecha and in the battles for the bridgehead on the Narew River.

The response from the coamand of the 65th Army on the operations of the 2d
Guards shad during the period from 3 through 8 September noted: ”In the
course of combat the assault planes carried out 566 sorties. they caused
the enemy significant losses in equipment and personnel. thereby aiding the
troops in piercing the enemy defenses. in reaching the Narew River and in
capturing and holding a bridgehead. The military council of the army views
the actions of the 2d Guards ahad as excellent."

This division received a similar positive response on actions fromlOthrough
19 September from the command of the 67th Army.

The operations of the army were also praised by Mar 80 K. K. Rohosaovskiy:
"In these battles our glorious 16th AA from beginning to end held air

superiority. Only solitary German aircraft were able to make attacks. as
they say. around the corner."2

in the second 10 days of September. the troops of the 67th Army conducted
an operation to wipe out the Haraaw forward defense area of the Germans and
to liberate the "areas suburb of Praga from the Nazi occupiers. The 221st
bad and the 9th Guards nbad. the 2d and llth Buards shed. the 6th ink and
the 282d ind were assigned to support and cover the troops. The troop of-
fensive was preceded by the operations of the 9th Guards nbad which during
three nights attacked objectives to the east of Praga for the purpose of
wearing down enemy personnel and destroying military equipment.

At dawn of 10 September, the 2d and llth Guards shad began intensive air
reconnaissance in the area of operations. During the day for supporting
the advancing troops, 75 airplanes from the llth Guards shad under the

1 Arkhiv no sssa. folio 368. inv. 6676. file 269. sheet 336.

 

2 K. K. Rokossovskiy. “Soldatskiy Dolg." p 289.

154
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cover of 77 fighters froa the 232d lad node a concentrated attack against
the artillery nortar batteries in the positions and snowy infantry in
trenches in the regions of Glinki. Zelanki and Goclowek. The attack was
carried out by four groups of assault planes consisting of subgroups of
four-five aircraft. For neutralising the surviving firing positions and
centers of enemy resistance, groups of assault planes were suaaaonod during
the entire day by the VPu-of the AA cousndar. The fliers of the 6th iok
reliably covered tho troops of the 67th Array.

On the following day the offensive was continued. The enemy put up fierce
resistance to our troops. The assault planes in group attacks destroyed
enaay weapons which were impeding the advance of our troops. The follow-
ing maple shows how effective were their actions. During the day two
groups of eight planes free the 175th Guards shop under the wand of Haj
K. Ye. Strashnyy and Capt h. A. Prosvirnov attacked artillery positions in
the region of Svakarki. Cserniakow and Augustow. Soon the coo-and of the
Nth Aray received offirnation that the assault planes had succeeded in de-
stroying and neutralising the fire of four 105- and 150- battarias and

two batteries of anaay antiaircraft artillery which were iapeding the ad-
vance of our troops on Proga.

Enemy resistance intensified as our troops approached the line of forest!
covering the forward defense area of Haraaw on the seat. In line with this.
Gen 5. l. Rudenko decided to keep the eneuy troops under constant tension
in the regions of Zelanki. Nowa-Brudno. Sasks Keqy by continuous actions
of the light bombers during the night of 12 Septuber for supporting the
advancing troops. The fliers of the 9th Guards nbad during this night node
365 sorties. A staging airfield for the night bothers was equipped 10-12
Ira from the front line and the crews could lake 10-12 sorties a night.

After the night boabera and the artillery softening up process, the day-
tiae avoistion made two concentrated strikes against the enemy artillery
positions, strongpointa and personnel to the east of Press. The first
strike involved 285 aircraft. and the second 85. During the day individual
groups of assault planes wiped out enemy weapons and infantry upon call fro-
the VP!) of the AA co-ander. As a total during the day. the aviation node
933 sorties. Pros the responses of the consnders of the 60th and 76th
rifle divisions. the bonbing and strafing attacks disorganized enemy re-
sistance and the Soviet infantry captured the points of Zaahki and Utrata.

During the night of 13 Septeaber. the night bonbers continued to operate
against the may troops for the purpose of wearing than down. And in the
morning a concentrated attack by the forces of 10!. aircraft was repeated.
On this day. two groups of 35 aircraft free the llth Guards shad led by ‘
Guards '1er K. Ye. Strashnyy and A. H. Vesil'yev particularly distinguished
themselves. Regardless of the heavy opposition froa enemy antiaircraft
weapons. they destroyed three batteries and three armored vehicles. they
blew up an a-aunition dump and a fuel train, they neutralized the fire of
two batteries of field artillery and five ontiaircraft batteries. and they
wiped out hundreds of eneay soldiers and officers.

155
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

The deputy squadron commander of the Guards shep Haj A. M. Vesil'yev on
15 Hay 1946 was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for carry-
ing out 118 combat sortiee. as a result of which the enemy suffered greet
losses.

The coordinated actions by the infantry and artillery troops. the tanks

and fliers. the Soviet soldiers and Polish fighters brought success. By
the end of 16 September. the troops of the 47th Army had crushed the stub-
born enemy rasistance and captured the Fortress of Prega. a suburb of
Harsaw. 1n the evening upon the order of the Supreme Command-in-Chief,
Moscow saluted the velorous troops of the First Belorussian Front. includ-
ing the outstanding fliers from the formations end unite of Gene Komarov,
Deuaov and Tateneshvili. Cole Reeskeeov end Berkal'. Lt Cole Khramchenko
and Isayev and Capt Vorob'yev.

For successful combat. the 282d iad (commander Col Yu. H. Berkel') was
awarded the Order of the Red Banner. while the 268th end 739th iap. the
98th okrep end the 23d Guards nbep (commanders Lt Cole V. S. Hukhin. V. F.
Klinov. I. S. Tishchsnko, P. S. Leonov) received the honorary name of Prags.
The 45th Guards nbep (connnnder Lt Col A. A. Henyayev) received the Order
of Suvorov Third Degree while the 79th Guards end the 658th shsp as well as
the 721st iep (commanders Haj V. Ye. Nedel'ka. end Lt Cole 3. V. Viyk and

N. H. Koenikov) received the Order of Alexander Nevskiy.

For supporting the troops of the 47th Army. the aviation carried out around
2,500 combat sorties. including 1,100 by night bombers and 98 by daylight
bombers. 600 by assault planes and over 700 by fighters.

But the sorties by the aviators were not always successful. At times the
pilots had to experience the bitterness of defeats and the loss of friends.
In the air battles in the sky over wersew and in the battles for Prega. many
famous pilots perished. including the assistant commander of the 6th iak

for the gunnery service Haj P. P. Lunkin. the commander of the 67th Guards
iap Lt Col A. B. Panov. flight commander Lt V. P. Karpezin. the deputy

squadron commander of the 176th Guards ahep Lt M. T. Pedorov. and many
others.

Ha] P. P. Lunkin on 11 September during "free hunting" in the region of
Hareaw attacked a fascist He-lll reconnaissance plane. when the ammuni-
tion had run out. Lunkin made a ram. At an altitude of 3,000 meters. he
struck the right wing of the Heinkel from behind and below with the wing of
his own Yak. The enemy aircraft in breaking apart fell on our territory.
The uncontrollable Yak after the ram went into a spin. Lunkin bailed out
but due to arm injuries he was unable to use his parachute.

Lt Col A. B. Panov on 12 September in an air battle shot down two fascists.
But his aircraft was also damaged. Panov made a forced landing. The fighter
hit hard on the ground which was broken up by craters and trenches and nosed
into an embankment. The flier was caught in the cockpit. Nearby cavalry

troops ran up to help. The aircraft caught fire and shells began to explode.
it was impossible to save the flier.

156
FOR DEVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Alekesy Borisovich Panov wee a favorite in the reginent. Until the end of
his life he devoted all his energy to serving the beloved notherland and

in the rsgiaent he trained sore than 10 heroes of the Soviet Union. his
chest was decorated with nine governmental decorations. Guardsean A. B.
Penov lads 241 coabat eortiea. he carried out lol air battles and person-
ally shot down 1’. enemy aircraft. For outstanding leadership of the regi-
eent. for courage, valor and bravery shown in coebat against the may. A.B.
Panov poathuaously was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

Sisulteneously with the supporting of the troops. the formations of the
16th M also provided aid to the Haraaw rebels.

As is known. on 1 August 19“. upon a signal fro- the reactionary Polish
government which had emigrated to London. an armed revolt started in Vareaw
end this was led by the anti-Soviet co-aand of the Kraiowe any. The in-
habitants of Hersaw i-ediately Joined the revolt as they burned with a de-
sire to more rapidly drive the Nazi occupiers out of Poland. The leaders
of the revolt did not coordinate their actions with the cos-and of the Red
Aray and did not supply the rebels with the needed aaount of weapons and

suunition. Their main sis was to prevent the victory of popular power
in Poland.

At this time the basic forces of the First Belorussian Front were conducting
heavy battles against the essay still far free warsaw. Only by nid-Septee-
ber. when the troops of the front reached the Narew and Vistula. and also
with the capturing of the Warsaw suburb of Praga on lb September were con-
ditions created for providing direct aid to the insurgents.

By that the the situation for the insurgents in Hereaw had grown very dif-
ficult. Only on 17 September did the leaders of the revolt decide vie
London to turn to the Soviet govern-ant for aid. Somewhat earlier. on

12 Septe-ber. two representatives of the insurgents, Elena szorska and
Janina Jancezak, appeared before the col-and of the First Belorussian Front
ssking for help from the Red Artsy.

The Supreee Conander-in-Chief. having eade certain from a report by the
troop contender of the First Belorussian Front that the front was unable
at present to undertake an offensive operation to liberate Warsaw. since
the troops as a result of almost continuous 3-honth offensive actions were

exhausted. still proposed to provide whatever help possible to the insur-
gents.

The 16th M was entrusted by the cox-sand with delivering weapons, a-uni-
tion, food and taedicines to the insurgents. Our aviation for the first time
encountered the mission of assisting insurgents under the conditions of a
large city. Tactical procedures had to be found which would lake it pos-
sible to drop cargo precisely on the destination. and this was possible
only from altitudes of 150-200 eaters. Only our nighttine Po-Z bombers
could successfully carry out this mission. For this reason the mission

was entrusted to the 9th Guards nbad (co-sender Col K. I. Rasskazov).

157
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Incidentally. the English also sade an attempt to supply the insurgents
by air. During the day of 18 September. their airplanes dropped up to
1.000 cargo parachutes fro- sn altitude of 6.500 meters in the wersew re-

gion. but only 20 of then fell on insurgent positions and the remainder
reached the Germans.

The start of air operations to aid the insurgents was iapeded by the estab-
lishing of contact with then. This mission was entrusted to the 2d Guards
shad. The division commander selected the best crews and organized sorties
by individual lls. The flights were eade under the cover of fighters at
altitudes free 300 to 15 meters over the rooftops of the city. On 13 Sep-
tember. at 1630 hours. Guards Haj S. T. Borshchev free a low-level flight
dropped pennants to the insurgents in the area to the east of Harymont.

In a second pass he saw the rebels raise the pennants end salute the flier.
On this day the assault planes sede 18 sortiea end dropped 70 pennants with
the following letter in Russian:

“The Red Aray sends combat greetings to the heroic fighters of wsrsewl In
approaching the wells of Warsaw. we have been able to give you fraternal
aid. Tonight esmmnition end food will be dropped in your positions. For
this you must set out three bonfires in a triangle on Lelewel Square or

in other open places in this area. The airplanes will appear at 0930

hours. The cargo will be dropped without parachutes in special packaging.
in order that they not miss. you must locate the fires in the center of your
positions end over the entire area place people to observe the falling point
of the cargo and to collect them. The cargo will be dropped the entire
night. If you receive this note and understand everything. then at 0630
hours lay out a white sheet on the roof of one of the buildings. Our air-
planes will see this signal. Your delegates have arrived.

"Command of the Red Army at Warsaw."1

During the night of lb September. our pilots, having aede 645 sorties.
dropped 65 tons of food. 500 autonatics. 60 mortars. 6.020 grenades and
other military supplies. According to the observations of the crews. the
dropped cargo fell on the spot.

In the following days the insurgents maintained contact with the night
bombers by the established signals. But talks using signals were clearly
unreliable. Hen had to be dropped with radios. The first three para-
troopers were dropped during the night of 18 September on Lelewel Square
by the best fliers of the 9th Guards nbad. by the guards-an Capt V. P.
Starostin (he was killed in carrying out a mission on 16 October 1946).
by Sr Lt Ya. A. Lyashenko and Lt K. P. Hikhalenko. The flight commander
of the 45th Guards nbep K. F. Hikhalenko during the years of the war made
997 successful coabat sorties for bashing, reconnaissance. transporting
cargo, for dropping paretroopers into the enemy rear and for evacuating
wounded, showing valor and courage in so doing; subsequently he was awarded
the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

 

1 mm; no sssn. folio 368. m. 6476. file 359. sheets 301-302.

158
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
F0! ORIGIN. USE ONLY

The dropping of the paratroopera and cargo iron the Po-Z aircraft was
carried out fro. altitudes of not sore than 200 meters. Speciel Po-2 air-
craft were assigned for suppressing the enemy sntiaircreft weapons. In
delivering cargo to the warsaw rebels. the night fliers demonstrated aany
examples of valor and self-sacrifice.

During the night of 17 Septeeber. the crew of the 44th Guards nbsp consist-
ing of Guards Jr Lta P. V. Ovchsrov and G. P. Prokoshev. respectively. pilot
and navigator. having dropped their lead to the insurgents were returning

to their airfield. In the darkness at an altitude of 700 neters it collided
with a Po-2 aircraft from another unit which was heading out on a mission.
The airplanes struck wings and breaking up in the air began to fall out of
control. Navigator Prohoahev bailed out and landed on the roof of one of
the houses in Praga. But the pilot snagged his parachute on a fragment of
the aircraft and damaged its canopy. Ovcharov landed at increased speed.
and as a consequence of this in hitting the roof of a four-story building
sustained a severe injury to his legs. he was caught by the parachute straps
and hung unconscious until norning when with the aid of the inhabitants he
could be taken off the roof and sent to the hospital.

During the night of 26 Septuber. the navigator of a crew of a Po-Z fro-

the 23d Guards nbad Jr Lt H. A. Vetrov. is dropping cargo to the rebels was
wounded by eneey incendiary bullets. His flying suit caught fire. The
pilot Maj A. P. Sadilov after carrying out the aission nade a forced land-
ing. he extinguished the burning clothing of the navigator. he took off again
and delivered the mortally wounded comrade to his unit.

The night bombers from 13 September through 1 October trade 3,675 sorties for
delivering cargo to the rebels and for suppressing enemy antiaircraft weapons
in Varsaw. Here four aircraft and five crew use-hers were lost from ene-y
antiaircraft artillery; in addition. 16 aircraft sustained damage. As a
total the aviators of the 16th AA dropped for the Warsaw insurgents: One
65-- antitank gun. 156 lortars. 505 antitank guns. 2.667 sutonatics. rifles
and carbines. 61.780 grenades. 51.860 nines. around 3 sillion rifle and
pistol cartridges. 515 kg of nedicines. 113.5 tons of food. more than 1.000

kg of iobacco goods. 10 telephones. 1 switchboard and other military sup-
plies.

The best crews which transported cargo to the insurgents were Guardsaen Nej
A. P. Ssdilov and Sr Lt V. I. Senenov. Lts S. A. Petrov. V. s. Khromin. 1.1.

Koloeeyets. P. s. Ponomarev. H. z. Shmatko. P. S. Yasinskiy. N. K. Piven’
and others.

For the excellent fulfillment of the mission of establishing contact with
the Warsaw insurgents. the flight comander of the 59th Guards. shap Lt

V. A. Hilyukov was awarded the Order of the Red Banner and the gunner Sr
Sgt H. I. Savichev received the Order of Glory. Guards-an V. A. Hilyuiov
during the war years successfully carried out 138 conbat eorties. having
destroyed many Nazis and much Iilitary equipment. For this on 15 May 19“
he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

1 Arkhiv no SSSR. folio 368. inv. 6676. file 269, sheets 135-136.
159
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the fighters of the 16th AA. along with supporting the troops of the front,
from 13 September covered the rebel—occupied regions of warsaw agath
fascist air bombing. Ploreover, during the period of 16-19 September. fight-
ers from the 6th iak made 16 strafing attacks on enemy aircraft at the air-
fields of okence and Hodlin. and it was from here that German aviation
raided the areas occupied by the Varsaw insurgents.

The support for the Polish patriots by the Soviet fliers inspired them to
unstinting battle. however the forces were too unequal.

The Warsaw revolt at the end of September ended tragically. The leaders
of the revolt refused joint actions with the Red Army and units of the 1st
Polish Army. the comndo subunits of which had crossed the Vistula on

16 September. The leaders of the Army Kraiova surrendered to the Nazi
occupiers and then prohibited their detachments from breaking through to
meet the Polish and Soviet troops.

"In endeavoring to remain in power no matter what the cost and to prevent
the progressive development of the nation. the Polish reaction carried
out an act of unprecedented treachery against the people, having shown
their true face of an evil enemy of the workers and a servant of interna-
tional capital.”-

In September 1945. in carrying out various missions, the 16th AA made
13.034 combat sorties. In 135 air battles the Soviet pilots shot down

117 enemy aircraft and destroyed 15 on the ground.2 The enemy suffered
high losses in personnel and military equipment from the bombing and straf-
ing attacks.

At the start of September our troops had captured a bridgehead in the area
of Pultusk on the bank of the Narsw River. The fascist comand resolved

to eliminate it. On the morning of lo October. the enemy after very strong
artillery softening up threw up to 200 tanks supported by artillery and
infantry into the attack. The troops of the 65th Army had to wage heavy
defensive battles against superior enemy forces. Horeover because of the
bad weather they were deprived of air support. As a result of 2-day battles
the enemy succeeded in constricting our units on the bridgehead at a price
of high losses.

The low solid clouds at altitudes of 50-100 meters and the fogs tn 4 and
5 October did not permit our aviation from taking off.

From the morning of 6 October. the assault planes of the 11th Guards shad
made several sorties. But because of poor visibility they did not find
the targets and turned back. “No He from the 176th Guards shap piloted

 

1 "Istoriya KPSS" [history of the CPSU]. Vol 5. book 1, Moscow, Politizdet,
page 600.

2 Arkhiv no SSSR. folio 368. inv. 6676, file 359, sheets 3‘8-349, 353.

FOR osncfﬁ? USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

by P. A. Kurochkin and M. I. Pen'kov suffered a disaster in the fog. In
the second half of the day. the weather improved somewhat. For supporting
the troops of the 65th Army in repelling the fierce enemy attacks. small
groups of assault planes were sent out from the 2d and llth Guards shed
under the cover of fighters from the 282d iad. Under the difficult weath-
er conditions the assault planes made 132 eorties. These air strikes
against the advancing enemy were very timely. In suffering high losses
from the stubbornly defending troops of the 65th Army and the air strikes.
the enemy was forced to halt.

In the second half of the day of 7 October. the weather improved somewhat.
The commander of the AA sent larger groups of bombers and assault planes
under fighter cover to aid the troops of the 65th Army. These groups at-
tacked enemy troops in s series of heavy strikes end this forced the enemy
to break off the attacks. Our infantrymen. in coming out of their trenches.
could observe the air operations. A total of 829 sortiea were made. As

a result of the bombing and strafing attacks, 26 tanks. 28 guns and 87
motor vehicles were destroyed and damaged, 2 fuel dumps were blown up.

end many hundreds of enemy soldiers were wiped out and scattered. In 13
air battles, 5 enemy aircraft were shot down. The enemy felt strikes of
the same strength on 8 October. The air operations largely contributed to
the favorable outcome of the battles on the Serock bridgehead.

During thieperiod. the bombers of the 221st bad and the 9th Guards nbad
operated particularly effectively. In the battles of 7-16 October, groups

of assault planes under the command of Capt P. A. Dronov (blot shap). the
commander of the 58th Guards shap hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col V. D.
Panfilov and his guards-en Capt Hero of the Soviet Union I. A. Naumenko,
Capts G. V. Dubov and A. P. Koshevanov. Sr Lts G. I. Tvauri and B. G.
Rossokhin (59th Guards shap). S. I. Gurvich (176th Guards shap) and A. S.
Kirillov (41st shap), Capt H. A. Prosvirnov and Lt I. F. Feteyev (175th
Guards shap) also distinguished themselves. The six last fliers subsequently
were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for combat feats. Each

of them made 110-140 successfulcombetsorties and by their attacks caused
the enemy great losses.

For the more effective use of assault planes. the 198th shed was rebased
to the airfield of Hyszhow. 20 km behind the front line. The troops had
high praise for the its operations as is substantiated by the lines from
the following order: "During 7-9 October. regardless of the bad weather
conditions. thel98th shed of Col V. I. Belousov provided great aid to the
troops of the 65th Army which were waging difficult and stubborn battles
against major enemy forces on the left bank of the Narew River in the re-
gion to the south of Pultusk. Under difficult conditions the fliers con-
tInuously destroyed concentrations of enemy tanks, infantry and equipment.
showing courage and an excellent knowledge of their job. I order that
thanks be expressed to all the personnel of the 198th shed for the operations
and help provided to the troops of the 65th Army in stubborn and difficult

161
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

battles against large enemy tank and infantry forces in the region to the
south of Pulutsk. Troop contender of the 65th Army Col Gen Batov. Heaber
of the Military Council Maj Gen Radetekiy. Chief of Staff Lt Gen Bobkov.”1

For repelling eneey attacks on the bridgehead from 6 through 14 October.
under conditions of limited flying weather. the 16th M node 1,100 eortiee.
Of the 300 destroyed and hit eneny tanks, aviation was responsible for 85.
Moreover, 70 guns and such other equipment were also destroyed.

Having repelled the may attacks and having caused it heavy losses, the
troops of the 65th Army on 16 October began the battles to broaden the
Serock bridgehead. The air battles under the difficult weather conditions
during the day and at night provided support for the troops in destroying
the enesy on the battlefield and preventing the delivery of anunition.
here a decisive role wee played by the assault planes from the 6th ehek
and the 2d and 11th Guards shad.

An example of their bold and tenacious efforts could be the sortie on

15 October of a group consisting of 18 Ile free the 175th Guards shad led
by Hero of the Soviet Union Maj D. I. Smirnov for the attacking objectives
in the region of Pobylkowo Duze. Smirnov ordered that the bombs not be
dropped on the first pass but rather first to determine the objectives to
be hit. 0n the second pass the assault planes neutralized the fire of two
antiaircraft batteries and having formed a general circle, began to atrefe
the artillery sorter batteries, the tanks, eotor vehicles and infantry in
the trenches. Each crew independently selected a target and attacked it.
After the eight pass the munition had run out. A ninth pass was ends
by the group for the moral support of our troops. The enemy suffered great
losses.

Due to the effective air strikes and the offensive elan of the troops, the
units of the 65th Arny squeezed the enemy and captured advantageous lines.

The fighter aviation was covering its troops and attacking enemy airfielda.
On 16 October at dawn the comnder of the 6th iak Gen 1. H. Dzusov upon
the order of the M cot-lander organized a fighter raid on the Hodlin air-
field, where up to 35 enemy aircraft were discovered. Three groups of

six planes from the 352d iap took off under the counand of Capts B. c. Deyev
and l. Ye. Lisovskiy (both in the spring of 1945 did not return from a
mission) and Lt V. K. Korzun. From the report of the crews, ll enemy air-
craft were set efire at the airfield. 0n the following day. a second raid

was organized. As a result the Hodlin airfield was cleared of eneny avia-
tion.

1 Arkhiv no sssn, folio, 368, inv. can. file 359. sheets 4.20-1.21.

 

 

162
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPlCIAL USE ONLY

Simultaneously with the battles occurring at the bridgehead in the area of
Serock. the units of the 70th. 57th and let Polish armies from 10 October
were carrying out an offensive for the purpose of capturing the interfluve
of the Vistula, Bag and Nsrew. The 16th AA. in addition to ordinary air
softening up before an attack by our troops, fought continuously against

the enemy personnel and weapons. escorting the advancing infantry with their
fire.

The troops of the 47th Army were given great support by the assault planes
from the llth Guards shad. The flight of Capt N. I. Kuchinakiy (173d Guards
shap) appeared over the target at a moment when the enemy mortars were block-
ing the path for our troops in the region of Heliazew. The infantryaen did
not expect the assault planes in such weather. "He had already passed the
second eneay trench when the red-starred assault planes appeared over our
heads." the grateful soldiers wrote later. "The appearance of the glorious
Soviet acres over the battlefield inspired all our soldiers and commanders.
Not noticing the fatigue, we dashed forward destroying the retreating fas-
cists on the move. At this time enemy mortar batteries opened fire from

the edge of the forest. However they were not able to fire for long. Three

of our assault planes dove out of the clouds and in a dive destroyed the
German mortar troops."

The guardsmen fliers also received high praise from the command of the 70th
Army: "The llth Guards shed in close coordination with the troops. from

10 through lb 0ctober,'made 365 sorties. a portion of than under difficult
weather conditions. The successful operations of the division significantly
aided the artsy in carrying out the mission of the cot-sand. He would par-
ticularly like to note the bold. efficient and energetic activities carried
out by the commander of the llth Guards shad, Guards Lt Col A. G. Nakonech-
nikov who excellently carried out the mission assigned to him and was able
to organize proper coordination between the aviation and ground forces and

also prompt retargeting of it under the conditions of the changing opera-
tional situation."

In October, the light bombers also provided effective support to the advanc-
ing troops of the front. and they at night held the enemy troops in a fixed
position. as did the bombers of the 221st bed which made crushing attacks
against the ene-y during the day. On 15 October, the 221st bad in nine
groups of six-nine Pe-2 aircraft in each with an interval of 3-5 minutes
and with direct escort by fighters at altitudes of 2,000-2,900 meters made
three concentrated attacks on enemy artillery and infantry in the area to
the north of Harsaw. Regardless of the intensive fire by the enemy anti-
aircraft artillery. the bombers carried out the mission. On 15 October,
the division successfully made two attacks: the first with nine groups
against artillery to the north of warsaw, and the second with eight groups
against artillery in the area to the southwest of Pultusk. On 25 October.

nine groups of six-nine Pe-Z aircraft successfully boobed enemy troops at
Nasielsk station.

163
FOR 0F?[CIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the period of carrying out particular offensive operations by the
combined-arms armies the aviation was controlled over the battlefield as
it had been in the course of the Belorussian Operation. The commander of
the AA and his deputy for combat training (from October 1905. here of the
Soviet Union Maj Gen Avn A. s. Senatorov) with small groups of officers.
as a rule. were located at observation posts (or near them) of the com-
manders of the combined-arms armies. Here also were the commanders for
the cooperating sir formations. The officers of their staffs (the air
controllers) were in the troops at the observation posts of the commanders
of the corps and divisions. and in mobile formations they were in the for-
ward detachments.

The commanders of the air formations and their representatives had radios
for contracting their airfields and the aircraft in the air. Such a system
ensured precise and uninterrupted control of the aviation during the most
intense situation. Among the air controllers particularly distinguishing
themselves were Majs I. P. Halyutin (llth Guards shad). I. l. Dvornikov
(199th shad). Capt V. S. Hitin (198th shed) and others who were awarded
combat orders for skillfulcontrolof assault plane actions.

The successful fulfillment of the missions by the personnel of the 2d and
llth Guards shad. the 3d bak, the 6th ask, the 6th shak, the 6th and 13th
iak. the 221st bad. the 283d and 286th iad. the 9th Guards nbed. the 16th
odrap and other formations and units was achieved both by the able actions
of the commanders and their staffs as well as by active, informative and
purposeful political work by the party and Komsomol organizations under the
leadership of the chiefs of the political departments and deputy commanders
for political affairs: Cole V. H. Bogovitskiy. H. H. Drobinskiy, A. P.
Dergunov. l. D. Kobyekin, P. H. Tupanov. D. l. Nikulin. A. S. Nikul'shin,
F. P. Plakhott', G. A. Sherokhin and V. 2. Gul'tyayev. Lt Cola P. l.
Zhurbenko and H. N. Korolev. as well as the chiefs of the political de-
partments of the 56th, 79th. 25th. 75th. 80th. 28th. 36th RAB Cole 6. A.
Alekseyev and l. P. Rednikov. Lt Cole I. N. Ovchinnikov. S. F. Titov. Ye.
Ye. Shirochenkov and S. K. Shakhmetov. Haj P. P. Vorontsov, and others.

In October. the 16th AA. in having about 800 battleworthy crews. made
14.6b8 combat sorties. In 189 air battles. 98 enemy aircraft were shot
down and 13 enemy aircraft were destroyed at airfields.1 The enemy suf-
fered high losses in military equipment and personnel.

The fliers of many air formations proved to be experts at air combat and
bombing and strafing attacks. Por excellent execution of missions a large
number of aviators received orders. A number of air units and formations
received governmental decorations and honorary names. By an Ukase of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet of 26 October 194$. for the exemplary
execution of the missions of the command and for the valor and heroism
shown therein, the title of Hero of the Soviet Union was presented to the

 

1 Arkhiv H0 SSSR. folio 368, inv. 6‘76, file 359, sheets 663-66‘.

16‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

following fliers and navigators of the 16th AA: Jr Lt 5. Ya. Pil'chenkov.
Lts N. V. Arkhangel'skiy (killed on 14 January 1945 in carrying out a mis-
sion). 5. I. Gurvich. N. I. Pen'kov (posthumously). N. H. Rud' and N. T.
Pedorov (posthumously). Sr Lts G. V. Balanutkin. N. S. Latakov. D. O.
Miroahnichenko and A. U. Tikhov (killed on 16 April 1965 in carrying out

a mission), Capts N. l. nelavin, F. I. Parshin and V. N. Yashin. Hajs

S. A. Kuznetsov and F. V. Khimich, and Lt Col N. K. Lyacnko.

Each of them had shot down enemy aircraft. destroyed tanks. guns and other
military equipment to their score. Thus. the squadron commanders of the
268th iap D. G. Niroshnichenko and the 133d iap V. N. Yashin made. respec-
tively. 108 and 184 combat sorties and had won 15-16 victories each. The
navigator of the 233d iap s. A. Kusnetsov made 227 combat eorties and
personally shot down 19 fascist aircraft and eight in group action. The
squadron commander of the 33d Guards ehap N. I. Belavin. the deputy squadron
commander of the 174th Guards shap G. V. Balamutkin and the flight commander
of the same regiment H. I. Pen'kov made 80-100 combat sorties and each de-

stroyed 10-20 tanks. 30-40 guns and knocked out a large number of enemy
soldiers and officers.

Nnny fliers from the shed will recall the instructor of the training regi-
ment M. l. Tolstova . She helped then rapidly master the Il-s assault plane.
initially certain pilots were amazed that their instructor was a women.

But with each flight they gained respect for their instructor who had mas-
tered the armored aircraft.

Mariya ll'inichna Tolstova had been left without her parents in childhood.
After completing boarding school and working at a railroad station in 1938.
Mariya Tolstova became a student pilot and then an instructor at an air
club. In order to reach the front. pilot Tolstova agreed to become a medi-
cal instructor in a rifle division. She had carried more than 100 wounded
soldiers off the battlefield. Her military service had been commended by
the medal "For Valor." In 1963, Mariya Il'inichna was allowed to go into
aviation. and she soon was appointed an instructor in a training regiment.
For the retraining of flight personnel she was awarded the Order of the
Red Star. But Tolstova wanted a combat regiment, and at the end of l9b6
her dream came true. As part of the 175th Guards shap, coe-uniat Lt Tol-
stova carried out 62 combat missions. For combat distinction she was
awarded two Orders of the Red Banner and many medals. After damobolizing
she was willingly accepted in civil aviation where she flew until 1959.

At present Mariya ll'inichna works in the town of Kol'chugino in Vladimir-
skaya Oblast.

In a number of operations the 16th AA included over 20 air divisions (in the
herlin Operation. up to 30 air divisions). Some of them participated in

one or two operations and were then shifted to other fronts. But 12 air
divisions including the lat Guards (the former 220th). the 234th. 273d.
282d, 283d and 286th iad. the 2d Guards (the former 228th) and the 299th
(renamed the llth Guards) shad. the 221st, 261st and 301st bad, as well

165
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

as the 271st nbad (which became the 9th Guards) starting from the Stalin-
grad and Kurak battles up to the end of the Great Patriotic War fought
constantly as part or the 16th AA. They were highly battlsworthy. they
successfully carried out all the missions and were the basic core of the
air army.

One such division was the 2d Guards shad. lts personnel fought heroically
at Stalingrad and on the Kursk Bulge. and then in all operations to the Elbe.
This sir division 16 times received thanks in the orders of the Supreme
Commander-in-Chiaf. For the successful execution of missions and the mass
heroism shown by the personnel. the air division because a guards unit. and
received the Order of Lenin. the Red Banner and the Order of Suvorov. Second
Degree. it was also given the honorary names of Chernigov and Rechitsa.
Around [.000 soldiers received governmental decorations. In 19“ alone.

the air division made 6.697 combat sortias. From its ranks came 30 heroes
of the Soviet Union including the glorious gusrdsman pilots Lts Cols A. G.
Nakonechnikov and H. G. Sklyarov. )1st V. M. Golubev. c. l. Kopayev and

v. F. Khokhlachev. Capts A. A. Bondar' and A. l. Itadomtsev. Sr Lt Yu. N.
Zykev. Lts i. F. Bibishev. A. s. Cheresov and the division comnder Guards
Maj Gen Avn G. 0. Kossrov.

Special mention must be given to the native of Rostovskaya Oblsst. the work-
er machinist then outstanding flier and excellent consander. Haksim Gavrilo-
vich Sklyarov who was a comnist free 1938. Ila completed the Voroshilov—
grnd Military School as a flier in 1936, and before the war had completed
the courses for military flier-cosmisaara. The senior political worker

N. G. Sklyarov was a participant in the Great Patriotic war from its very
outset in the position of a squadron military cosssander and then the navi-
gator of an air regiment. During the days of the intense battles for
Stalingrad. he Joined the cossaand of the 688th shap which subsequently be-
came the 59th Guards shop. The personnel of the regiment trained by the
brave and totally loyal conuunist. H. C. Sklysrov excelled in organization
and combat skills. boldness and tenacity in carrying out combat missions.
For excellent execution of the missions of the cosssand and able leadership
over the shap. Guards Lt Col M. G. Sklyarov in June 1946 was awarded the
title of hero of the Soviet Union. By this time he had made over 100 com-
bat sorties and was wounded four times. After the war Haj Gen Avn H. G.
Sklyarov commanded air formations, he completed the Academy of the General
Staff with a gold medal and a diploma with honors. and he directed the
combat training of the Air Force Aviation. At the peak of his powers and
abilities he passed on in 1958.

The operations to liberate Belorusais and the eastern regions of Poland
carried out in the course of the sumaer-sutumn campaign of 1946 by the

troops of the First Belorussian Front and the other fronts in terms of
their results were outstanding victories for the Soviet Araed Forces.

The personnel of the 16th AA by their active support for the troops of the
First Belorussian Front made a weighty contribution to these victories.

166
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the period of April-October 1964. the air foraations of the 16th AA
sade 73.316 co-bat sorties. including: 22,905 by the fighters. 17.813 by
the assault plane. 20.267 by the boabers. 3.531 by the reconnaissance planes
and 1.898 by the Polish Air Division. The conbat sorties in terns of ads-
sions were distributed as follows: 9.812 for covering the troops and inter-
cepting eneay aircraft. 28.937 for boabing and strafing attacks on enemy
troops. 10.273 for air reconnaissance. 15.3b4 for escorting bosbers and
assault planes. 0.818 for actions against airfielde. railroads. bridges and
river crossings. and 6.130 for special lissions. Simultaneously up to 135
noncosbst aorties were aade (training flights. ferrying. liaison and so
forth).

During this period over 1.6 aillion boobs and rockets were dropped on the
enesy. and around 2.7 nillion leaflets in the enesy rear.

As a result of the boabing and strafing attacks, daaage or losses were caused
to: over 800 tanks. arIored personnel carriers and arsored vehicles. around
1,800 guns of field and antiaircraft artillery. more than 12.000 sotor ve-
hicles. 1.300 loco-otives. araored trains and cars. up to 60 airplanes at
airfields; 301 aanunition and fuel dusps were blown up; sany thousands of
eneny soldiers and officers were killed.

Air superiority during virtually the entire sunner and autumn caspaign of
1966 was on the side of our aviation. It was achieved not only by the quan-
titative and qualitative superiority in aircraft equipment over the eneay.
but sainly due to the high soral qualities of the flight personnel. the
increase in their coabat skills. the great activeness of our air units and
to the able use of aviation in cosbat. The assault groupings of troops on
the front were reliably covered free the air and were not substantially
exposed to eneay aviation. The AA made around 17 percent of the daytime
coabat sorties for covering the troops. In 1.227 sir battles the fliers
of the srsy shot down 1.005 fascist aircraft.

The coordination of aviation with the ground forces as a rule was close and
constant. Regardless of the significant difficulties arising as the troops
of the front advanced rapidly. the air for-ations carried out the consistent
rebasing and provided continuous support for the troops. Due to the care-
ful working out of all the elenents of cooperation. the troops designated
the forward edge clearly. while the air controllers in the battle forsa-
tions aided the pilots is quickly detecting the needed targets. The con-
tact between the assault sviation and the forward detachments of the aobile
troops was constant. The locating of the col-ander of the air arny (or his
representative) at the observation post of the colnander of the coabined-
arss arsy made it possible for him to promptly have accurate data on the
ground situation. and this ensured the most efficient use of aviation in
the interests of the troops.

Air reconnaissance which took up to 1‘ percent of the sorties. in disclos-
ing the system of eneay defenses. the troop grouping. the aviation and
maneuvers. provided great help to the Soviet con-and and helped it take
correct decisions for defeating the eneny.

167
FOR OFFICIAL USE DULY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The air army by heavy bombing and strafing attacks provided tangible sup-
port to the ground forces, particularly in piercing enemy defenses, pur-
suing the retreating enemy. repelling its countsrattacks, crossing rivers.
capturing and holding bridgeheada. as well as in wiping up encircled
groupings. having carried out over 60 percent of the sorties for this
purpose. aviation not only aided the ground forces but also in many in-
stances had a decisive effect on the outcome of combat. Thus. the defeat
of the surrounded Nazi grouping at Bobruysk was achieved in essence by the
aviation independently. The aviation played a very important role in de-
stroying the retreating Brest enemy grouping and in the struggle for the
bridgeheads on the Vistula and Narew rivers.

The effective use and the tactical procedures of air operations were
marked by a creative nature and diversity corresponding to the ground and
air situation and to the nature of the targets and weather conditions.
Concentrated bomber and assault plane attacks were widely used combined
with wave operations in small groups which had an extended impact on the
enemy. "Free hunting" became a practice for the assault planes and parti-
cularly for the fighters. The favorable air situation made it possible to
use frequently the fighters for strafing ground targets.

For the first time in the war our aviation gained experience in the actions
of the night Po-Z bombers to help the insurgents in such a major city as
Warsaw.

The rear bodies of the AA played a particularly important role in these
operations. and under the conditions of the rapid advance of the ground
forces and separation from the basic supply depots, they carried out enor-
mous and intense work to continuously support the combat of the air forms-
tions with all necessary means.

In the course of the operations. the air commanders, the political workers
and the chiefs of all levels acquired combat experience. they improved their
organization, and demonstrated an increased ability to conduct combat under
various conditions.

As a result of the party political work which was widely developed in the
air units, the political and moral state of the aviators in the AA. indoc-
trinated in a spirit of Soviet patriotism and burning hate for fascism, was
high. Combat enthusiasm and high political awareness were inherent to the
personnel. Courage and steadfastness. decisiveness and self-sacrifice in
battles against the enemies of our socialist fatherland were the main tradi-
tions of the Soviet fliers. The communists and Komsomol members set an
example of loyal serving of the Soviet people.

During the offensive from Zhlobin to Warsaw, the capital of our motherland,
Moscow. 17 times saluted with artillery salvos the valorous troops of the
First Belorussian Front. including the formations and units of the 16th AA
which distinguished themselves.

168
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

Loyalty to military duty, love for the motherland end hatred for the eneny
gave rine to intrepidneee end neee heroien enong the pereonnel of the M.
For excellent execution of the nieeione of the connend in combat againet
the Nazi invedere during the period of the emu-winter bettlee of 1944.
eevernl thoueend non of the 16th M received ordere end nedele. Thirty-
eight fliere end navigatore received the title of Hero of the Soviet "Man.
For the heroien end high orgenizetion ehovn in combat 20 air reginente. 10
air divinione end 3 air crepe were awarded ordere of the Soviet Union. 19
eir regiments. 8 eir divinione end 6 air corpe received honorary names,
while 5 air resiliente and 2 air divisions which noet dietinguiehed the-
selvee were turned into suerde unite.

169
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY

CHAPTER 6: FROM m VISTULA 1'0 THE 003R
Preparations for Gonbat

As a result of the victorious conclusion to the et-er-autunn offensive
operations in 19“, the Soviet troops in the Central sector had reached
the Vistula and had captured bridgeheads on its western bank.

By aid-January 1965, the 9th Ger-an Field Army was on the defensive in
front of the troops of the First Belorussian Front along the Vistula River
in a zone up to 235 he wide. The arty was supported by a grouping of the
6th Fascist Air Fleet nuabering up to 1.50 airplanes (200 boaters. 150
fighters and 100 reconnaissance planes) which could be reinforced with
150-200 aircraft.

The troops of the First Belorussian Front (co-sander Ker 8U G, K. Zhukov)
from Novenber 1964, upon instructions of Headquarters, co-enced prepara-
tions for a new offensive operation which together with the troops of the
adjacent fronts would liberate Poland, defeat the Nazi Arty Group A. reach
the Oder, and ensure conditions for making the final attack on Berlin.
This operation was named Vistula-Oder.

Along with the troops of the front, the 16th AA also began to prepare for
the operation.

By aid-November, the AA included: the 3d halt. the 6th shak, the 6th and
13th iak. the 221st bad, the 9th Guards nbad, the 2d and 11th Guards shed,
the 282d and 286th iad. the 176th Guards iap, the 16th odrap, the 98th okrap
and the 62d Guards trap of the GVP.

In addition, in preparing for the operation. from the Headquarters Reserve
the M received the 3d iak under the cor-nand of Hero of the Soviet Union

Lt Gen Avn Ye. Ya. Savitskiy consisting of the 265th iad (29lat, 502d and
812th iap) and the 278th iad (the 15th, 103d and 276th iap) under the con-
aand of Cola A. A. Korysgin and K. D. Orlov; the 9th shalt headed by Maj

Gen Avn l. V. Krupskiy and consisting of the 3d Guards and 300th shad
(comnders Cola A. A. Snirnov and 1‘. Ye. Kovalev); the 183d bad (the 319th.

170
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

AS‘th and 550th bap) under the command of Col H. A. Sitkin; the 262d nbad,
the lat Guards iad and the 72d orap (comnanders Cole P. A. Kalinin, V. V.
Sukhoryabov and Lt Col A. Ya. cavril'chenko). These air formations and
units (with the exception of the 183d bed) had rich traditions and solid
combat experience.

As a total the army had 2,521 flying combat aircraft. including 330 day-
time and 17‘ night boabors. 710 assault planes. 1.116 fighters. 91 recon-
uaissance planes end spotters. There were 2,160 combat-ready crews. Also
in the zone of the First Belorussian Front the Air Force of the Polish Army
was also ready for combat and this Air Force had been deployed on the basis
of the 6th AA under the coamand of hero of the Soviet Union Lt Gen Avn

F. P. Polynin.

By the start of 1945. in all the AA regiments. the young flying personnel
had been shaped up. permanent elements and groups had been organized. the
formations and battle orders had been mastered, as well as the tactical
procedures for executing various missions. Sniper crews of dive bombers
and assault planes had been trained. As a total in November-December. the
air units of the AA carried out 36,500 sorties for combat training.

At the same time the staff of the AA under the leadership of Lt Gen Avn
P. i. Brayko (after the war. having completed the Academy of the General
Staff, P. I. Brayko for many years was the chief of the Air Force Main
Staff. and is now Col Gen Avn [Ret]) carried out extensive work to plan
the use of aviation in the pending operation. The staff held a series of
courses with officers from the staffs and services of the air formations.
At them they worked through the questions of the command of aviation, the
organizing of air reconnaissance. navigator support and the service of
staffs.

At this time in the air formations basic attention was being given to instruc-
ting the flight personnel in the area of combat, organizing uninterrupted
escorting of tanks. mastering the system for recognizing our own troops and
the target indications, communications between airplanes and tanks (this was
worked out at joint practical exercises), training the officers in air traf-
fic control, the command of aviation in combat. and improving the tactics

of conducting reconnaissance std transmitting intelligence data from the air.

In November. the troop commander of the front established the formations of
the ground forces and aviation which were to interact between themselves.
After this the commanders of them were able to work out in detail the pro-
cedure for joint operations in special exercises and practice on the spot
in terms of the nature of the forthcoming action. Having received the mis-
sions ahead of time. together with their staffs they worked out the plans
for coordination for the first days of the operation. the documents of troop
control and the communications procedures.

171
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the beginning of January. the commanders of the groups of all the air
regiments traveled to the forward edge where they studied the terrain and
the disposition of enemy weapons. The final element in training the com-
manders from the groups of the assault air divisions was the commander's
personal reconnaissance conducted from the air not long before the offen-
sive for clarying the targets and the methods of action against them.

The AA command assigned fighter air formations for cooperating with the
assault planes and bombers in the following manner: the 6th iak with the
6th shah. the 13th iak with the 9th shah. the let Guards iad with the 3d
bak. the 282d iad with the 2d Guards shed and the 183d bed. the 286th iad
with the llth Guards shed and the 221st bad. Their commanders and staffs
worked through all the questions of cooperation at joint tactical confer-
ences. exercises and practical flights.

After the cosmand of the front had carried out a military game with the
commanders and the chiefs of staff of the armies and the chiefs of their
operations. reconnaissance and signals departments. on 25-27 December, the
commander of the 16th AA conducted a similar exercise with the col-anders
and chiefs of staff of the air corps and divisions. The game was carried
out using the real plan for the forthcoming operation and pursued the fol-
lowing aims: Elucidation of the missions in the operation. training in
evaluating the situation and decision taking, working through interaction
between the branches of aviation and with the mobile troops. the rebasiog
of aviation in the operation. as well as the control of aviation and the
conducting of reconnaissance. In the course of the exercise, the AA com-
sander gave practical instructions on the use of all branches of aviation
in the forthcoming operation. This was a rehearsal for carrying out the
missions posed by the troop commander of the front for the AA. The content

of the exercises conducted on maps prior to the start of the operation was
kept a deep secret.

At this time the particular attention of the command and the political bodies
was focused on the moral and political preparation of the troops for the
operation. Their presence outside Soviet territory obliged the soldiers

and commanders to observe strictest order and carrying the honor of Soviet
soliders high. In line with the brilliant victories of the Red Army, a

mood of overconfidence had appeared in certain units. In combating indif-
ference, the workers of the political apparatus explained that the conclud-
ing operations would require great tension. valor and will for victory from
all the men.

The political bodies. the party and Komsomol organizations instilled in

the aviators and above all in the communists and Komsomol members. a re-
sponsibility for discipline, the battleworthiness of the unit and personal
combat skills. The political bodies more efficiently than before along with
the staffs generalized the combat experience. they introduced new tactical
procedures and held tactical flying conferences. Heetinge were organised
between the assault plane pilots and the commanders of the combined-arms,
tank and cavalry units and subunits.

172
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At the end of December, the cos-and of the M held a rally for the best
fighters and assault planes, where reports were heard from many ace pilots
who shared their combat experience.

Great attention was given to indoctrinating the young flight personnel in

a spirit of the combat traditions of the unit. Talks were held by experi-
enced fliers, they shared combat successes, they gave comradely advice, and
taught not to fear the enemy but rather to seek him out and boldly destroy
him. In the air units in a solemn ceremony the combat planes were turned
over to the young fliers. The best fliers accompanied them in combat. and
this encouraged the youth and they boldly accepted their baptism of fire.

The greatest political importance was given to an increase in the ranks of
the Connunist Party. In January, the 16th M had 20,888 co-unists, in-
cluding 13,810 party members and 7,078 candidate members, as well as 13,692
Komsomol members.1

Political agitation before the operation was carried out in all the air
units under the slogan "Complete the Defeat of the Armed Forces of Fascist
Germany and Raise the Banner of Victory Over Berlin!"

Information about what material harm the Nazi army had caused to our state
and the atrocities of the fascist butchers on the temporarily occupied
territory evoked burning hate for the Nazi invaders.

In the 347th iap, a questioning of 65 man was cax.ied out. The replies in-
dicated that all the persons questioned had suffered from the German occu-
piers. The flight comander Lt A. I. Semenchenko wrote that during the
period of the occupation of the Ukraine, the German invaders had deported
his sister for forced labor in Germany, they had destroyed the farm of his
relatives and during the retreat had burned down the house. His brother
had died at Voronezh. In the forthcoming battles he would avenge his
brother and sister and the tortures of his relatives. The squadron com-
mander Sr Lt I. Ye. Belov stated that during the war against the German
mnsters he had lost two brothers. a third had been wounded in the leg and
was now an invalid. The Germans had burned the village down to the last
house. his mother had been killed. His father joined the partisans and
his fate was still unknown. Such questionnaires were hung up in prominent
places in many air formations.

By the start of the operation, the M rear services had 8 MB headquarters,
55 huo, 10 motor transport battalions, 9 airfield air defense regiments
and 8 antiaircraft machine gun companies, 1 air transport squadron, 8 air-
field engineer battalions, 55 airfield technical companies and other rear
units, repair bases and dumps.

In the operation the most important mission of the rear was to provide the
air units with airfields and materiel.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By aid-January the army airfield service had rebuilt or built over 70 field
airfields suitable for wintertime operations. By the start of combat. the
army had 128 airfields and this met its needs. The air defense units covered
24 airfields out of the 68 in action.

For concealing the bases of our aviation. all sirfields were carefully canon-
flaged and a network of dumy airfields was deployed. At 55 of then (inclu-
ding 28 around-the-clock ones) 818 dt-y aircraft and special vehicles were
set out. As a result over the 3 winter months, enemy aviation made 19 raids
on the duly airfields. having dropped around 700 bonbs, while not a single
bomb fell on the actual airfields.

Considering the experience of the Belorussian Operation. the contend of the
front and the M gave great attention to the airfield maneuvering of the
aviation with the couencement of operations. The planned high pace of ad-
vance required the repeated rebasing of the aviation behind the troops.

The airfield maneuvering of the aviation was designed not only for the forces
of the M. but according to the order of the troop cousnder of the front,
also to aid the combined-arms and tank armies.

All the airfields and areas of terrain ahead of the front suitable for air-
fields were photographed. The plan for the proposed basing of the aviation
provided for the following: The creation of reconnaissance teams moving with
thc forward detachments of the tank armies; the assigning of the airfield
engineering battalions and bao to the battle formations of the mobile troops;
use of the forces and Ileana of the cooperating mobile troops for help in
building the airfields; the freeing of 20 percent of the rear units for in-
nediate advancement ahead and the occupying of sirfields abandoned by the
eneay; the organization of support for the rebasing of our aviation. Bach
bao assigned to advance with the tank units was equipped with 5-day supplies
for servicing an air regiment.

The plan also determined that two-thirds of the assault plane divisions, one-
half of the fighter and bomber divisions, all the night bomber divisions and
air reconnaissance regiments should be shifted first to the new airfields.
The remaining air formations should nake combat sorties from the initial base
sirfields as long as the operating radius permitted, after which they were
assigned to the reserve of the front.

In accord with the plan, a-uunition and fuel for 5 days of operations were
transported to the operating airfields and dumps of the any; reserves for
5-8 days were organized at the army and front dumps. Considering the ex-
perience of the sutuer offensive, all the supplies were moved up to the Via-
tula. with the start of the offensive. each new airfield was to have amu-
nit ion and fuel for 1-2 days of action.

The air engineering service of the M carried out extensive work to prepare
for the operation. The basic efforts of the service were aimed at repair-
ing malfunctioning aircraft at the rear airfields and at the places of

forced landings. By aid-January only 2.7 percent of nonoperational planes

17‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

remained. The engineer and technical personnel also did a great deal of
work to teach the young fliers to operate the equipment intelligently.

The signal troops of the AA prepared very intensely for the operation. As
a total the army had around 100 signals companies and one signals regiment
as well as one air liaison squadron for serving the lying and rear units.
The signals officers improved the warning system having increased the num-
ber of VNOS posts. Enemy detection radars were deployed at five fighter
airfields. Information receivers from the air defense system of the front
were installed at all the command posts of the airfields.

The AA was controlled from a eoanmnications center in Zelechow. The radio
center of the army staff had 20 operating receivers. All air formations had
a direct telegraph hookup with the cooperating formations of the ground
forces. For controlling aviation on the battlefield. an observation point
of the AA commander was organized at the point of Dombrowo which was in
contact with the combined-arms and air foratmions. with the staff of the
AA and with the airplanes in the air. Seven air radio networks were or-
ganized for controlling aviation on the battlefield; there was one for
guidance and one for reconnaissance and five for coordinating the air forma-
tions of the branches of aviation. These measures were to ensure control
of the aviation during the operation.

The other departments and services of the AA also carried out great prepara-
tory work.

Simultaneously with the preparations for the offensive. a portion of the
forces of the AA continued combat activities. They continuously carried
out reconnaissance and fought enemy aviation. by "hunter" operations they
prevented the movement of enemy troops along roads, and also carried out
other missions of the front's command.

Due to the difficult weather conditions. the sorties were made by the best
trained crews which. in addition to the basic mission. for example air recon-
naissance. instigated air battles and strafed enemy trains and motor trans-
port. In December alone. 1,100 attacks were made against the enemy by single
aircraft and elements. including 170 attacks at night.

As a total for the period from 1 November 1964 through 13 January 1945. the
AA made 3.796 combat sorties, including around one-half for air reconnais-
sance of the enemy. In 13 air battles in December, seven enemy aircraft
were shot down. The army did not have any losses. Some 736 aircraft over-
fiights were counted for enemy aviation.

For combating the enemy air scouts. the iad were assigned zones up to 80-
100 km along the front, and each air regiment had elements on duty. The
enemy aircraft were intercepted by the divisional radars. Sometimes sortie:
were made from the signals of the VNOS posts or "by eye." Due to these
measures the grouping of our troops was not detected by enemy air recon-
naissancc.

175
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For repelling possible enemy air raids. fighter flights and squadrons were
kept ready at the forward airfields.

Air reconnaissance during the preparations for the operation were to dis-
close the system of enemy defenses and determine the grouping of enemy
troops and aviation. Over the 2 1/2 months there were only 9 days when
vertical aerial photography could be carried out. however the air scouts
during this time photographed enemy defenses along the Vistula line twice
and three-four times around the bridgeheads. The forward edge of enemy
defenses erOund the ngnuszew bridgehead were taken by oblique photography
seven times from the air. The enemy airfields were photographed from five
to sixteen times. Moreover. many other objectives were photographed. The

materials of the aerial photographs were issued as maps to the troops and
staffs.

In carrying out reconnaissance. the fliers from the 165th iap Capt A. I.
Tokarev. Sr Lts V. A. Gogolev, V. D. Gusov. N. R. Yavtikhov and Jr Lt Ye. K.
Krinitsyn. in carefully examining each clump of ground. detected the con-
centration areas of two enemy tank divisions.

Reconnaissance planes from the 16th odrap and 72d orap detected seven de-
fensive lines between the Vistuls and the Oder. they ascertained the air-
field network and the group of enemy aviation. and they photographed all
the crossings over the Vistuls and other rivers. “are Hsjs I. Ye. Velikiy
and A. N. Krivoruchenko (by the end of the war he had carried out 154 com-
bat sorties for which he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.
and he is now a colonel in the reserves). Capt V. I. Davydov (he had 163
combat sortiea. a Nero of the Soviet Union. killed in 1952). G. F. Nakhrinov
and A. l. Rengach, Sr Lts N. P. Kanishchev, 6. Ya. Kul'msnov (on 1 February
[965. he did not return from a mission), I. D. Khromov and Lt S. P. Komsrov
(by the end of the war he had 237 combat sorties and had become a Hero of

the Soviet Union) particularly distinguished themselves. Here are a few of
them.

Ivan Yefimovich Velikiy was born in 1916 in the Donets Basin in the family

of a locomotive engineer. Naving also become an engineer. he completed an
air club without leaving his job. After completing the Voroshilovgrad
Military Pilots School in 1939, communist 1. Ye. Velikiy was an instructor
pilot. During the Great Patriotic War, he participated in it from the very
first. initial1y as a military commissar, and then a squadron commander in
the 72d orap. Ne carried out the most crucial and difficult reconnaissance
missions and was one of the first pilots to photograph Berlin. In February
1945, he was promoted to the position to commander of the 16th odrap. During
the war years he made 119 combat missions. Ne was awarded many orders and

medals. At present Lt Col (Res) 1. Ye. Velikiy works as the assistant direc-
tor of a machine plant in Gatchina.

The scout Sr Lt N. P. Kanishchev was born in a pc-sant family in Kurskaya
Oblast. having completed the Krasnodar Military Air Navigators School, the
20-year-old Komsomol member Kanishchev became an instructor. In partici-
pating in the Great Patriotic War from December 19b1, he always carried out

176
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reconnaissance with outstanding results. In the summer of l9§3 on one of

the sorties his pilot Sr Lt N. Vorozhtaov was mortally wounded by sharpnel.
Spotter-pilot Kanishchev took over the controls of the Pe-Z aircraft. he
brought it back and landed safely at his airfield. For this flight he was
awarded the Order of the Red Banner. For successful fulfillment of missions
in 179 combat sorties. he was repeated awarded orders and medals. At present
Col N. P. Kanishchev is the chief air navigator for one of the military dis-
tricts.

G. F. Makhrinov. a native of Roatovskaya Oblast and a participant in the
Great Patriotic Her from its outset could be proud of enviable military
service. having learned to fly in an air club, in 1940, after completing
the Voroshilovgrad Military Pilots School. the 19-year-old pilot arrived in
the 72d bap. During the years of the war. Hskhrinov proved to be a bold air
fighter and a tenacious and courageous scout.

In May l96h. in carrying out a combat nission in the region of Brest. the
controls were damaged on his Pe-Z by enemy antiaircraft guns. Regardless

of this. communist Hakhrinov brought the airplane back to the airfield and
skillfully landed. having supplied very important information (at four air-
fields he had detected 260 enemy aircraft). Subsequently he repeatedly car-
ried out with excellent results aerial photographing of railroad junctions.
airfields. cities and defensive lines usually covered by heavy air defense
weapons. During the years of the war. Capt Hakhrinov carried out 199 combat
sorties. For the valor and heroism shown in this. on 15 Hay 19b6, he was
awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union. Having successfully completed
the Red Banner Air Force Academy in peacetime. he has connsnded an air regi-
ment and division. At present Maj Gen Avn Grigoriy Fedorovich Hakhrinov is
the deputy sir cormnnder of a district.

The air scouts for the period of the offensive were given the following mis-
sions: To provide continuous reconnaissance of the battlefield; to establish
the concentration areas of enemy reserves and their moving up to the front;
to detect the retreat of enemy troops; to discover the grouping of enemy
aviation; to clarify the state of the river crossings and the system of the
enemy's defensive lines.

The 16th and 72d orap were involved in carrying out operational reconnaissance
during the operation. while the non-T/O reconnaissance squadrons of all the
AA air divisions were to be involved in the tactical reconnaissance. As a
total up to 250 aircraft were assigned for air reconnaissance and this should
have met the need of the troops and aviation in all the major sectors.

In accord with the direction of Headquarters for the operation, the troop
commander of the First Belorussian Front decided to make the main strike from
the Magnuszew bridgehead (with the troops of the 61st. 5th Assault, 8th
Guards and 3d Assault armies. the lot and 2d Guards tank armies and the 2d
Guards Cavalry Corps) in the direction of Kutno and Poznan; the second strike
was to be made from the Pulawsk bridgehead (by the troops of the 69th and

177
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

33d armies and by the 11th and 9th tank corps) in the general direction of
Lodz; the third strike was to be made to the north of Warsaw (with troops

from the b7th Army with assistance from a portion of the forces of the lat
Polisy Army.

The main forces of the 16th AA were to support the ground forces advancing
from the Hagnussew bridgehead. This sector was assigned the 2d Guards shad.
the 6th shak and the 11th Guards shad. as well as the basic bomber forces
including the 3d bak, the 183d bad and the 9th Guards nbad. The 3d isk was
to cover the troops and crossings on the bridgehead; here the iad which
escorted the bombers and assault planes were also to operate. Thus. 15

air divisions out of the existing 21 in the army were assigned for support-
ing the main troop grouping.

The 221st bad. the 2&2d nbsd and the 9th shak were assigned to support the
troops advancing from the Pulawsk bridgehead. and the 283d iad for covering

the troops and crossings. This along with the escort fighters comprised
six air divisions.

The troop actions to the north of Warsaw were to be supported by one regiment
from the 2d Guards shad and the Air Force of the Polish Army.

By a decision of the AA commander it had been planned that 2 hours before

the start of the offensive the light night bombers would attack the enemy

staffs. More extended actions against the enemy were not planned in order
to conceal the time our offensive was to start from the enemy.

With the start of the offensive. the daytime bombers were to make heavy
strikes against the enemy artillery ahead of the Hagnuszew and Pulawsk
bridgeheads. Then they were to operate against objectives indicated by the
commanders of the combined-arms armies as well as against the enemy reserves.
road junctions and crossings.

The AA assault planes for the first 3 hours were to make wave attacks against
the previously assigned targets to aid the troops in breaking through the
enemy defense. Then the shad were to be put under operational subordination
to the commanders of the combined-arms armies and aid in developing the suc-
cess in the breakthrough of the defenses and the advance of the troops into
the tactical depth of the enemy defenses. With thecommitting of the tank

armies to the breakthrough. the assault air formations would be moved under
their commanders.

Thus. during the first 3 hours of the offensive, the control of all aviation
was to be centralized in the hands of the AA commander. With the putting of
the assault planes under operational subordination of the army commanders.
the AA was left solely with coordinating their actions and had the right of
giving them new missions. In the following days of the offensive. the as-
sault planes were also to be used for actions against the enemy reserves

and rail communications.
178 1"b

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A reliable cover for our troops against air strikes and the ensuring of the
actions of the bombers and assault planes were to be achieved by sealing off
the enemy airfields, by the action of the fighters from the 3d ink and the
283d iad against enemy aviation on the approaches to the bridgeheads. and

by destroying enemy aircraft deep in enemy territory. Particular attention
was to be given to covering the crossings and the tank armies.

The overall effort for the 16th AA as envisaged by the decision was: 3,625
sorties over the 5-6 days before the start of the offensive, 7.962 for the
first day of the operation. and 5,420 sorties for the second.

The decision of the AA coammnder was expressed in the form of a plan for
the combat use of aviation for the first a days of the offensive. The mis-
sions for the commanders of the air formations were issued 7 days prior to
the start of the offensive personally by the army commander.

The concentration of aviation because of secrecy considerations was car-
ried out 2-3 days before the start of the offensive in observing signals
security and deception.

By the start of the offensive. the AA fighters had been rebased to airfields
which were 10-20 km away from the front line. for the assault planes they

were 20-30 km away, for the daytime bombers up to 70 km. and for the night
bombers up to 20 km.

0n the eve of the offensive the troops were issued an appeal from the mili-
tary council of the front. In addition the command of the 16th AA sent out
to all the air units the following letter to the personnel:

"Comrade fliers! He are going into the last and decisive battle! We have
been entrusted with an extremely responsible mission as the most mobile and
strongest branch of forces. Comrades. hit the enemy with all boldness.
valor and harshness. Do not allow him to either move or breath either in
the air or on the ground. Under your strikes enemy artillery should fall
silent, the roads should be frozen, and the reserves should be held down and
destroyed. By your feats raise the glory of Soviet aviation even higher.
Forward for our motherland!"

With the receiving of the appeals. meetings arose in the air units ‘Jer
unfurled colors. The commanders and political workers, the fli‘rs an.
mechanics spoke with great enthusiasm. After this all the personnel, on

bended knee, gave a solemn oath to carry out their patriotic duty to the
rutherland honorably.
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY

At a meeting in the 128th bap. the sister of the Konsomol Jr Lt Ivan Pashko

who had died a death of the brave spoke. She said: "shoulder to shoulder
with many of you my brother fought for the freedom of our motherland. An
enemy bullet took away his young life. Beat the German monsters even harder
for the death of my brother end for your military friends. for the rivers

of shed Russian blood and for the tears of our women end children. I so

sure that you willlcerry the Red Banner of Victory to Berlin on the wings
of your aircraft."

As a result of the organizational and political measures carried out, all
the units of the 16th AA began operations with a high patriotic upsurge.

Several days before the start of the offensive. from reconnaissance date

it was learned that the enemy in the region of the bridgeheads had pulled
back the infantry from the first trenches and a portion of the artillery

into the defensive depth. Due to the extremely difficult weather conditions.
it was impossible to verify this information by air reconnaissance. how-
ever. on 13 January. that is. one day before the start of the operation. the
scout from the 16th odrap Sr Lt c. Ye. Kul'msnov. in making a flight on a
Yokr9 aircraft, visually from a low-level flight discovered that in cer-

tain positions the enemy had set up dummy weapons. Soon thereafter the
pulling back of the troops was affirmed by scouts from the shed.

The air reconnaissance data together with other information and the weather
conditions were taken into account. Instead of heavy artillery softening
up, there was to be an artillery strike, after which instead of an attack

by the main forces as offensive was to be commenced by the forward battalions
supported by a moving barrage.

In the Vistula-Oder Operation

The offensive by the troops of the First Belorussian Front in the Vistula-
Oder Operation commenced on 14 January 1965. 6 days ahead of the time
planned by Headquarters at the request of the Allies the troops of which

were confronted with a catastrophe as a result of the German breakthrough
in the Ardennes.

The 16th AA commenced operations at 0700 hours. Single night bombers from
the 2é2d nbad attacked enemy staffs and communications centers. Before
this airplanes from the 9th Guards nbad conducted reconnaissance with ac-
companying bombing. Due to the dense fog the night bombers made only 62
sorties. However they succeeded in bombing the staff of the 56th Fascist
Tank Corps and disrupting troop control for a certain time.

At 0830 hours the troops on the front at the Magnuszew and Pulawsk bridge-
heads after a 25-minute artillery attack rose to the attack in a dense fog,
and this to a certain degree concealed their actions and made it possible

to successfully take the forward enemy defensive positions and develop a
further offensive.

1 Arkhiv H0 SSSR. folio 368, inv. 6476. file 555. sheet 70.

180
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The formations of assault planes, fighters and bombers at this time were
on the alert. but they were unable to begin the planned air softening up
process and troop support. The fog had descended to the ground and covered
the airfields and the targets making it difficult for even the light P0-2
airplanes to fly.

The difficultyof the weather conditions can be judged from the following
episode. The crew of the 717th nbsd consisting of Jr Sgts V. A. Halyshev
and A. A. Kovtun in returning from reconnaissance were unable to spot their
own airfield in the region of Ryki in the dense fog. In trying to land
blind the aircraft struck a church steeple and was caught hanging on it.

It was only by good luck that the crew remained alive. The fliers received
contusions and were removed with the help of our soldiers and local inhabi-
tents.

For the purpose of supporting the ground forces. the commsnder of the 16th
AA permitted the commanders of the air formations, regardless of the ex-
tremely bad weather conditions. to let the most experienced crews carry out
missions. Attacks were permitted only against those targets which would be
indicated by the command of the combined-arms armies. and this increased
the effectiveness of using aviation and excluded the possibility of hitting
our own troops. In the second half of the day. the 221st bad. the 9th shsk
and the 11th Guards shad made 55 sorties to bomb and strafe the enemy troops.
but because of the fog some crews were unable to carry out the missions.
The remaining air formations did not take off. The bad weather conditions
were the cause of the loss of six aircraft.

During the day enemy aircraft did not appear.

By evening the troops of the front had broken through the main enemy defen-
sive zone on both bridgeheads and had advanced 12-18 km in depth, while the
11th Tank Corps had begun the battle for kadom.

At dawn on 15 January the troops of the front continued the offensive. 0n
the Hagnuszew bridgehead, the 1st Guards Tank Army was thrown into the breach.
The enemy, in putting up stubborn resistance. under the attacks by the troops
of the front retreated in a westerly and northwestarly direction.

Due to the bad weather (a solid cloud over 50-200 meters high. fog and snow).
the AA only in the second half of the day began operations with the most
experienced crews.

in supporting mainly the troops of the 61st and 5th assault armies, the
small groups of assault planes attacked enemy artillery, tanks and person-
nel. The fighters carried out "free hunting" and air reconnaissance. Re-
gardiees of the Fed weather conditions, the fliers having previously studied
the area of operations and the formation of enemy defenses, were able to

find the necessary objectives from scarcely noticeable features and make
accurate attacks against them.

181
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Thus, four assault planes from the 805th shap under the coamand of the regi-
aental navigator Sr Lt I. A. Sukhorukov (in May 1966. he became a Hero of
the Soviet Union. having made 80 combat sorties by the end of the war) near
the point of Berks detected around 20 ens-y tanks and over 2 infantry bat-
talions deployed in battle formation for a counterattack against the flank
of our troops. Sukhorukov reported this to the cos-tad post of the 5th
Assault Army to his corps commander. Gen 3. K. Tokerev. Then, having re-
formed the group in a circle. he attacked the enemy tanks. After the first
pass several fascist tanks were set afira by the dropped antitank bombs.
while the eneay infantry took cover. The assault planes. in endeavoring

to check the enemy and cause it greater losses. made seven passes. after
which they were relieved by other groups which had been summoned by the
commander of the 6th shak. They completed the defeat of the enemy and
supported the advance of our troops.

The commander of the 16th AA sent the following telegram to the commander

of the 6th shak: "The assault planes made an effective strike against the
one-y ahead of the front of the 5th Assault Army. and as a result of this

the units advanced successfully. May I state our thanks to all the flight
and technical personnel participating in the operations.“

The troops of the 61st Army encountered heavy enemy fire resistance from
the region of ﬂows Zelechow. For aiding the troops, six assault planes _
fro: the 58th Guards shap took off headed by regiaental comaander, Hero of
the Soviet Union Lt Col V. D. Panfilov. As a result of their attacks, the
enemy firing positions were neutralized, the troops went over to the at-
tack and captured the points of Nowo Zelechow and Podguzice.

Good actions were carried out by groups of Guards assault planes led by the
pilots A. H. Zhgulev, A. S. Zinchenko. Hero of the Soviet Union V. F. Khokh-
lachev, as well as Bogdanov. Hilyukov and Tvauri (later A. S. Bogdanov,

V. A. Hilyukov and c. I. Tvauri were awarded the titles of Hero of the
Soviet Union).

By the end of the day. the air scouts had established that the Pionkl--Radom
road was clogged with troops. motor vehicles and wagons moving west. These

data showed the beginning of the pullback of the basic grouping of ens-y
troops.

The 16th AA on 15 January made 181 sorties. including 81 to strafe the enemy;

the remainder were for reconnaissance, "free hunting" and escorting assault
planes.

Only four overflights by enemy aircraft were noted over the troops of the
front.

On 16 January the troops of the front continued to develop the offensive,
particularly successfully on the left wing of the front. From the

Nagnuszew bridgehead, the 2d Guards Tank Army was flown into the breach and
by the end of the day it had approaches Sochaczew. having enveloped the "ir-
saw German grouping from the scuthwest.

182
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 9th Guards and the 242d nbad. in benefiting from the improved weather,
began nighttime operations. By solitary aircraft they attacked the retreat-
ing Nani troops and carried out reconnaissance. having made 223 sorties.

At dawn the 16th M began operations at full strength. Its basic efforts
were focused on supporting the tank armies and pursuing the retreating
enesy troops.

In the morning the reconnaissance crews spotted the movement of enemy
columns from Cute Kalweria and Warsaw to the west. Fearing encircleaent
in the area of Warsaw. the enemy had begun to pull back its troops. From
1017 hours over 12,000 motor vhiecles. up to 160 tanks, 260 guns and 3.500
wagons were moving along the roads from Nova Hiasto. Radon and Hierzbica
to the west. .

The air scouts detected the direction and scale of the retreat of the main
German grouping in the sons of the offensive by the troops of the front.
This provided an opportunity for the comand to correctly allocate the
forces and to organise attacks against the retreating enemy colums. Here
the assault planes played a very important role. As a result of their
strikes piles of destroyed enemy equipment clogged the roads. the column
halted and favorable conditions were created for the actions of the tank
formations.

Thus, the 9th shak and the 11th Guards shad along with fighters from the
13th iak and the 286th iad supported the offensive of the troops from the
33d and 69th armies and their tank corps. Seven blockages were created by
assault plane attacks on the Pszisucha--0pocsno road during the day. The
bridge at Opoczno was destroyed by the assault planes. On the shore a
large number of enemy personnel and equipment had accumulated. The efforts
of the aviation were focused on destroying this grouping. The enemy suf-
fered great losses from its attacks. Hore than 3,000 motor vehicles,
armored personnel carriers and several score tanks were left on the roads
as well as many guns and other military equipment which had been abandoned
by the retreating troops. A large number of Katie was destroyed along with
the equipment. Here the 9th shak carried out 252 sorties and the 13th iak
made 660. In the region of Minszek. Krasskow and Dzielna. the assault planes
destroyed over a thousand motor vehicles and a large number of enemy person-
nel and military equipment on the road.

In a section of the Opoczno-Tomaszow road, as a result of actions by our
assault planes and bombers. an enemy column consisting of a large number
of motor vehicles, guns and wagons was stopped in the forest. This was
imdiatcly used by the forward tank units which were moving on Tomaszow.
From a march formation they attacked the enemy colum and crushed it.

To the west of Nova Hiasto a retreating enemy coluan came under attack by
eight assault planes from the 59th Guards shap under the comand of Guards
Haj G. c. Klimenko. When the head of the column had entered a defile. the

183
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

asrault planes made eight passes and having destroyed any motor vehicles

forced the enemy colusn to stop. Soon the approaching tanks of a forward
detachaent coepleted the defeat of this colt-n.

In the region of Bialobrzegi. Nova Hissto and Sochaczew the enemy troops
were effectively attacked by groups of assault planes fron the 2d Guards
shed under the cos-land of Lt Col V. Ye. Nedel'ko and Hero of the Soviet
Union V. D. Panfilov. Hajs S. T. Dorshchev, N. P. Vasil'chenko, Hero of
the Soviet Union V. P. Khok'nlachev and Capt H. I. Burkov. In addition
to them. Capt S. I. Zhukov, Sr Lts G. S. Kiselev, A. N. Sodorovich and
Lt V. A. Iyshevich distinguished themselves (for the successful carrying
out of, respectively, 138. 110, 102 and 113 combat sorties for staffing,
in 1946 they were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union).

The AA day bombers, having the mission of preventing the enemy from pull-
ing back to the west, aads wave strikes against enemy troop accumulations
in the region of Studsianka. Srzosa, Draewics, Tousrow. and also bombed
the railroad stations of Opoczno, Sci-snow, Zyrardow. the bridge at Rawa
Hazowiecka and the airfield of Brzostow. In the Opoczno area a strike
was nade by 20 aircraft from the 128th bap (comnder “a: H. P. Nizinov
and navigator Capt s. S. Shcheglov), by two groups of nine aircraft fron
the 96th Guards bsp' (leaders pilots Haj P. P. Subbotin with navigator Capt
P. c. Krikunov and Haj A. I. Padeyev with navigator Capt D. L. Los') and

11 Pe-Z from the 56th bap (co-sander Lt Col A. s. Khlebnikov, navigator
Haj A. P. Logvinov).

"hen the air scouts had established that the enemy troops were concen-
trating in the region if Inowlodz, in endeavoring to cross the Pilica River
and occupy a prepared defensive line on the northern bank, the AA comnder
ordered the comanders of the 3d bak and the 221st bad to destroy the enemy
troops and equipment in this area. After the bomber attack the bridge at
the point of Inowlodz was destroyed, the enemy had abandoned over 500 good
motor vehicles on the approaches to it and its troops had begun to retreat
to Tonaszew in disorder. here successful operations were carried out by
three groups of nine Pe-Z from the 128th bap (leaders Hero of the Soviet
Union Lt Col H. H. Veronkov with the navigator Haj N. D. Lepekhin and

Capt A. V. Ssrygin with the navigator Capt A. N. Toropov). four groups of
six-nine aircraft from the 779th bap (leaders Lt Col A. V. Khralschenkov
with navigator Haj A. S. Sinonov, Haj P. N. Ksyunin with the navigator
Capt N. K. Pashkovskiy, and Capt 3. H. Hamikhin with navigator Capt G. ‘l'.
Sidorov), and one group of nine from the 26th bap (co-ander Lt Col A. I.
Sokolov and navigator Haj G. D. 'l‘urayev).

The 3d halt. the 183d and 221st bad during the day made 587 bombing sorties.
As a result of the successful raids, traffic on the railroad sections of
Skierniewice-‘romaszow and Opoczno-Lodz was halted.

During the pursuit of the Nazi troops. air reconnaissance assumed parti-
cular significance. The scouts detected the direction of the retreat of
the enemy columns and aided the mobile troops in defeating the eneay.

184
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the day of 16 January the scouts of the 6th iak established the re-
treat of fascist troops free the region of Harsaw to Sochaczew. Having
obtained these data. the co-ander of the 2d Guards Tank Army accelerated
the advance of the forward detachments and cut off the enemy‘s escape
route. On the Harsaw-Sochaczew road. up to 5,000 motor vehicles piled up.
The bombers. assault planes and fighters sada a series of crushing strikes
against the halted columns. The German contend then endeavored to direct
the flow of retreating troops to the northwest. to Hyszogrod, but by this
time the bridge over the Vistule had already been damaged by our aviation.
The enemy, cospreased on all sides in this area, suffered great losses and
was crushed.

The 6th shak cooperated with the 2d Guards Tank Army, and during the day
the assault planes carried out 272 sorties. The lst Guards Tank Army was
supported by the 2d and llth Guards shad. They made 365 sorties.

'l'he fighters, in escorting the assault planes and in carrying out "free
hunting" in those instances when there was no enemy aviation in the air,
also attacked the retreating enemy colums. Thus. fliers from the 3d iak
by strafing destroyed and damaged 2 aircraft at the Donbrowo airfield, 1103
motor vehicles on roads, 8 locomotives and 17 cars. and put a large number
of Nazi soldiers out of action.

In carrying out the missions the actions of the AA fliers were marked, as
before. by courage and valor. The flier from the 805th shap Lt A. P.
Konyakhin on this day made a heroic feat in assisting his connender in
cosbat. During a strafing attack on Skierniewice station, the aircraft

of Lt V. G. Khukhlin was hit by enemy antiaircraft artillery. The flier
nade a forced landing in the region of the station. Conunist Konyakhin
decided to rescue his flight comander and his gunner A. H. Sharkov. Having
nade several circles over the place of their landing and having fired the
uachine guns at the approaching Nazis, he landed on a limited area next to
the shot-up aircraft and took Khukhlin's crew into his cockpit. Before the
very eyes of the fascists he took off and landed safety at his airfield.

On this day the troops of the 69th Arly together with the llth Tank Corps
stormed the town of Radon. "hen the sun rose the assault planes of the
9th shak under the cover of fighters from the 13th iak provided effective
support for the troops. They blazed the trail for the tanks, destroying
enemy artillery and assault guns using instructions from the ground. At
the sane time from the air reconnaissance data the assault planes were
directed to the columns of retreating enemy troops. By their heavy strikes
they stopped the movement of the colums and the tank units which had hur-
ried up cospleted their annihilation.

Pros the evidence of the col-snder of the 65th Tank Brigade Col A. V.Luk'-
ynnov, five groups of six 11-2 from the 3d Guards shad su-oned to the
battlefield by their commander Col A. A. Smirnov attacked and routed an
enemy colunn retreating along the Holisnow-Hniszek road. The enemy lost
12 tanks, 6 6-barrel mortars, around 200 motor vehicles and hundreds of
killed soldiers and officers.

185
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the evening of 16 January. the capital of our motherland. Hoscow. saluted
the troops of the First Belorussian Front. including the fliers free the air
formations of Haj Gena Avn Krupskiy and Sidnev. Cole Smirnov. Kovelsv.
Nironov and Chirva who distinguished theeselves in the capturing of the town
of Radon. The honorary name of Radon was given to the 71th Guards and 726th
shap. the 116th Guards and 367th isp (contenders Lt Cole A. I. Sevast'yenov.
P. P. Volodin. V. I. Nenashev and P. B. Dankevich).

As a total of the third day of the offensive. the 16th AA. in benefiting
from good weather conditions. carried out 3.631 sorties. the largest num-
ber of sorties in the operation. Here 1.681 sorties were node for bombing
and strafing eneey troops. and 352 were for reconnaissance.

In the 21. air battles. 18 fascist aircraft were shot down. Particularly
distinguishing themselves were the fliers of the 176th Guards iap twice
Nero of the Soviet Union Maj I. N. Kozhedub. Sr Lt N. s. Rudenko and Lt

A. P. Vas'ko (they subsequently were both awarded the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union; to the score of each of then were 200-300 co-bat sorties and
15-20 victories in the air); the fliers of the 265th iad Capt V. A. Yegoro-
vich and Lt S. P. Shpunyakov (both had. respectively. 268 and 335 combat
sorties. they had shot down 22 and 15 enemy aircraft 'end had becoae heroes
of the Soviet Union); the fliers of the 236th ied Hero of the Soviet Union
Capt V. N. Yashin. Lts N. A. Brodskiy and N. I. Fedorov; Sr Lt A. I. Lsrin
and Lt N. Ya. Blizhin of the 273d iad; Haj I. G. Vikhlyayev of the 282d

iad and Lts V. P. Listoforov. H. S. Martynov and B. A. Potaakin of the
283d iad.

The rapid actions of the mobile troops and the active support free the air
formations on 16 January led to the defeat of nunerous columa of Nazi in-
vaders and turned their retreat into panic flight.

As before air superiority remained with Soviet aviation. However. the
enemy antiaircraft artillery put up very strong resistance. and the AA
lost 29 aircraft from its fire.

During the night of 17 January. the 1st Polish Army went over to the offen-
sive. Having crossed the Vistula. in the morning with the support of the
lath Polish Mixed Air Division under the cousnd of Col A. s. lousyko entered
the capital of Poland. Simultaneously Soviet troops entered Warsaw. In
other sectors the formations of the First Belorussian Front continued to
pursue the enemy. in surrounding and destroying its individual groupings.

In aiding the troops of the front in developing the success, during the
night individual Po-2 aircraft free the AA boobed the enemy troops retreat-
ing from Narsew to the west and northwest. and the troop concentration in
the area of Tonaszow. and carried out reconnaissance. The 9th Guards and
262d nbad Isde 220 sorties.

The evening before the air scouts had established that enemy trains were
moving continuously to the west through Lodz. The traffic had to be stopped
through this junction and the retreat of the eneny troops prevented. The
comander of the 16th AA ordered the bonbers to destroy the major bridges
186
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and crossings on the enemy escape routes, as well as knock out the basic
railroad stations.

In carrying out the given missions. on 17 January the bombers had destroyed
the following: the bridges over the Vistule end Hyszogrod, over the Ochnia
River at Kutno end the trains at the Heat nods Station by the 261st bed;

the bridge over the "arts at Sierads and the East Lodz Railroad Station by
the 301st bad.

In bombing the railroad bridge at Sieredz, five Pe-Z of squadron contender
of the 96th Guards bep Capt V. P. Hel'nik with the navigator Sr Lt P. A.
Kislitsin and the gunner-radio operator Sr Ll Ya. I. Concharov distinguished
themselves. In diving one after another. the piiots dropped 22 high ex-
plosive bonbs with a caliber of 250-100 its on the bridge. The bridge was
heavily damaged by the direct hits. and traffic over it was stopped. As a
result our troops captured a significant number of rolling stock.

The highway over the Rawka River at Rawa Hozswiecka was destroyed by nine
Pc-2 led by the squadron contender of the Sloth bep Maj N. I. Kutsiy. Much
motor transport and many enemy troops accumulated in front of the destroyed
crossing on the eastern edge of the town. and the enemy was bombed and strafed
by several groups from the 25 Guards shad.

The East Lodz Station was as effectively bombed by nine divebombere led by
the connender of the 301st bad, Col 1'. H. Pedorenko with the division navi-
gator Maj I. Ye. Yakubovich. The leader of the second group of nine was
the squadron couander from the 96th Guards bap Haj A. P. Smirnov with the
navigator Capt A. A. Tsaregorodskiy. The attack on the station was made at
a time when up to 10 trains with locomotives with their stean up were there.

After then the station was attacked from a horizontal flight by three groups
of six-nine aircraft from the 56th bap. The leaders were regimental commander
Lt Col A. S. Khlebnikov, Majs G. S. Karabutov and N. I. Kutsiy with naviga-
tors Haj A. P. bogvinov and Sr Lts V. P. Zhitnik and A. s. Shutov. As a
total 9 tracks, 1 antiaircraft battery, 2 guns mounted on a flatter, 66 rail-
road cars and 2 steam engines were destroyed and many soldiers and officers
were put out of action.

At this time Heat Lodz Station was attacked by divebombing and horizontal
bombing by two groups of 10 aircraft from the 128th bep led by Capt A. V.
Sarygin and Sr Lt l. A. Malikov. and two groups of nine from the 179th bap
where the leaders were regimental commander Lt Col A. V. Khramchsnltov with
navigator Haj A. C. Simonov and Capt B. H. Hamikhin with navigator Capt G. '1'.
Sidorov. At the station 3 railroad tracks were destroyed. an munition
stack and a large number of railroad cars and fuel tank cars were blown up.
and a large number of enemy personnel were destroyed.

187
FOR “L’FICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

After bombing the bod: railroad junction ceased operating. The bombers
attacked Pobianice Station with equal success. and here the tracks were
destroyed and several freight cars and flat cars were destroyed. Bight
trains were left at the station with freight and various equipment and

these were captured by the 'troops of the front.

The 221st bed bombed a concentration of motor transport on the Piotrkow-
Leek road. having made 76 sorties.

On that day the air reconnaissance traced the direction of the movement

of the essay colums. Under the leadership of Haj A. A. Yashkin (6th
shak). the air scouts established that the remants of the enemy grouping
moving on Sochacaew. because of the capturing of the basic Varsaw-Kutno
mainline by our tank troops in the region of Blonie. had changed direction
to the northwest and were retreating in disorder to the ice crossing over
the Vistula at Hysrogrod.

having discovered the enemy's intentions. the AA co-ander ordered the 183d
bad to break up the ice in the area of Holka Psaybowska-Hyszogrod and not
allow the enemy troops to c ass to the northern bank of the Vistula. Pour
groups of Pe-Z (32 aircraft, under a fighter cover took off for breaking up
the ice. The bombers dropped the bombs on the ice from altitudes of 1,400-
1.650 meters from a horizontal flight. The boﬁer groups were led by the
deputy regimental cot-sander Lt Col A. V. Padeyev and the squadron comnders
Capt G. l. Nikitin. Sr Lt P. V. Shelukhin and Lt Slitkov. The crossings were
destroyed and the ice became unsuitable for the crossing of even small in-
fantry groups. Many enemy troops and ailitary equith accumulated in the
area of Vyszogrod. Soon thereafter our bombers and assault planes made sev-
eral strikes on them.

At this time assault planes from the 6th shak attacked the fascist troops
which were retreating from Blonie. Thus, nine 11-2 from the 805th shap

under the canned of Sr Lt I. A. Sukhorukov and escorted by six Yak-3 attacker;
an enemy coluu: of 200 motor vehicles and tanks retreating along the Blonie-
Paprotnia road. The assault planes made 13 passes; the Ils descended to a
low-altitude flight and fired on the Nazi invaders at pointblank range. The

cover fighters also fought along with the assault planes. The notor column
was crushed.

Gen Arm A. I. Radziyevskiy (during the war years he was chief of staff of
the 2d Guards Tank Army and is now the chief of the Kilitary Acade-y and
is now the chief of the Military Academy imeni H. V. Prunre) in the book
"9 Maya 1965 g." [9 Hay 1965] has written:

"I would like to say a good word about the action of the fliers from the 6th
shak. They made a strong attack against enemy columns which were extended
along the highway and broke them up. The Nazi troops were endeavoring to
make their way through the forests to the north beyond the Vistula River.
The aviation destroyed the bridge... and large accumulations of enemy troops
Earned around the crossings and the troops were destroyed by the assault
planes and bombers from the 16th AA."

188
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100030047-0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Equally successful operations were carried out by 16 assault planes from
the 175th Guards ahap led by hero of the Soviet Union Maj D. I. Smirnov.

0n the Gielniow-Opoczno highway he detected a column of up to 400 motor
vehicles1aoving in two lines and he decided to attack it. his subgroup
would attack the head of the column, a second subgroup under Sr Lt I. F.
Fateyev would strike the center. and a third under Lt P. s. Dokuchalov
would hit the tail. After the first pass Haj Smirnov reformed the group
into a general circle and gave the command for tho fliers to select a
target independently. The assault planes made seven passes and in each

of them. three-four attacks. The cover fighters of the 286th iad. having
encountered no enemy in the air. also arrafed the column with cannon and
machine gun fire. A larger portion of the enemy motor vehicles and person-
nel was put out of action.' The guerdsmen fliers Fateyev and Dokuchslov in
May 1956 were awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. By the end

of the war each of them had made 115-120 successful attacks on enemy troops.

On this day effective actions were carried out by the groups of the com-

mander of the 173d Guards shap Hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col N. K. Lysenko
and Lt B. N. Sazykin.

(bod results were also achieved by the assault planes from the 2d Guards
shad. where groups were led by heroes of the Soviet Union Lt Cola V. D.
Panfilov and H. c. Sklyarov and Haj V. F. Kokhlachev. as well as Hajs N. P.
Vasil'chenko and A. l. Zavrazhmov. Capts A. P. Gusev and A. c. lvaykin.

Sr Lte A. S. Bogdanov. S. I. Zhukov. G. I. TVauri and V. A. Tyshevich. Lts
B. D. Nikitenko, S. T. Oniskevich and V. A. Hedvedev (by the end of the war
he had over 100 combat sorties. he had destroyed a large number of enemy

military equiprent. and in May 1966 was awarded the title of Nero of the
Soviet Union).

Six [1-2 from the 33d Guards shap under the con-and of Hero of the Soviet
Union Capt N. I. Belavin carried out their mission excellently. having dis-
covered a column of motor vehicles on the Studzianka-Opoczno highway. the
assault planes from altitudes from 1.000 meters to a roof-top flight in
Several passer attacked it and halted the traffic. The units of the 9th
Tank Corps which hurried up made use of this. They completed the rout of
the column. The Nazis abandoned up to 2.500 motor vehicles on the road.

According to data from the staff of the 9th Tank Corps. the 300th shad and
the 203d iad which were cooperating with it during 16 and 17 January destroyed
up to 3.000 enemy vehicles and tanks on the roads.

The rapid advance of the tank formations which moved 30-50 km and more ahead
of the combined-arms armies of the front required special circumspection from
our fliers. in order to exclude the possibility of attacking our own troops.
the AA commander sent out the following telegram to the commanders of the

air formations: "in no instance should ground targets be attacked until the
flight personnel is certain that this is the enemy. The signals of our troops
must be carefully followed." The assault planes began to assign an element

of crews in the group which in dubious instances would descend to a roof-top
flight and having established which side the troops were on, began the attack

189
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

on the target. giving the signal to the remaining crews. Such a procedure
provided a reliable guarantee against any mistakes by the assault planes.

On 17 January. assault actions were actively carried out also by the fighter
units. Sons lb? fighters took off with bombs. Fighters froa the 3d and

6th iak during the day destroyed and damaged around 300 motor vehicles

and such other military equipaent. Groups from the 176th Guards isp led by
Hero of the Soviet Union Capt 0. s. Belikov and Sr Lt N. S. Rudenko. in
carrying out “free hunting." attacked Lowics airfield and destroyed six
eneay aircraft.

Ens-y aviation was not active. possibly because of the loss of a number
of alrfielda.

The 16th AA on 17 January lads 2.786 sorties (including 220 at night). with
'.256 for bombing and strafing eneuy troops. In five air battles. four fas-
cist aircraft were shot down. The army lost ll aircraft basically from
antiaircraft fire.

In the evening. in commemoration of the liberation of warsaw. Moscow saluted
the forsations of the First Belorussian Front and the units of the lat Polish
Aray. The order of the Supreme Commander-iu-chief stated that in the battles
to capture the capital of allied Poland. along with the troops the fliers of
Col Gen Avn Rudenho. Lt Gene Avn Bryko and Savitskiy. Haj Gena Avn Karavat-
skiy. Tokarev and Xonarov. Gels Tinofeyev. belousov. Sukhoryebov. Ratskazov.
Sitkin. Buzylev. Berhal'. lvanov and Romeyko. Lt Cola hatenchnihov, Sherstyuk
and Gavil'chenko had distinguished themselves.

The honorary none of Harsaw was awarded to the most distinguished 198th shad
(coannnder Hero of the Soviet Union Col V. I. belousov). the 765th shop. the
55th Guards nbap. the 127th and 165th isp (commanders Lt Cola V. G. Zaaosdra.
A. A. Henyayev. V. V. Puzsykin and N. V. Semsnov). All the AA aviators who
participated in these battles subsequently were awarded the medal "For the
Liberation of Warsaw."

As a total in the 4-day battles for the liberation of Warsaw. the 16th AA
carried out 6.493 coabat sorties. In addition. the 4th Polish sad aade
about 400 sorties.

The rapid advance of the troops of the front to the west required the rapid
construction of new sirfields and the rebssing of the air units behind the
troops. By 16 January the AA commander had given the corresponding disposi-
tion to certain sir formations.

And then. as soon as the forward units of the 2d Guards Tank Army reached

the region of Sochacxew and began shelling the operating one-y airfield.
fighters of the 502d isp headed by the commander of the 3d iak Gen Savit-
skiy were already taking off for there. Having carefully inspected and

fired on the airfield. a unit of fighters landed at it. while another covered
the. free the air by firing; than the remaining fighters landed. Battle

190
FOR OPPICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

against the anis was still going on around the airfield, but at the flight
field the engineer units of the tank army were already helping the aviators
fill in the pits and craters. Soon the air transports began moving in tech-
nical personnel and equipment. By the end of the day the rebasing of the

air regiment was complete and it began to cover the tank army. All of this
occurred in the enemy rear. On the western edge of the airfield, the tank
units continued to rout the enemy motorised infantry. Several hours later
the assault planes were also rebased to Sochacsew airfield. A tank battalion
was assigned to defend the airfield.

Cen Arm A. I. deziyevskiy on this question recalled that the aviation was
rebaaed to airfielda which had been captured by the tank formations before
the arriva‘ of the combined-arms armies. The 265th iad under the command

of Col A. A. Koryagin in this manner was rebsaed to airfields in Sochaczew,
Luhien and Inowroclaw. The tank troops praised the courage of the pilots
and technicians of the 16th AA who in disregarding the danger did everything
to provide cover for the tank formations from the air.

With the start of the operation, the party political apparatus of the AA con-
tinued constant work to maintain the high offensive drive of all the person-
nel. In the air units basic attention was concentrated on the execution of
orders from commanders by the personnel, at summing up the results of opera-
tions for the day, and at popularizing the actions of outstanding fliers and
navigators in combat. The names of the leading aviators did not leave the
pages of the combat leaflets and express bulletins.

In the visual agitation, special posterboards were used with the sections:
"Distinguishing Themselves_Today in Combat Here...," "The Results of the
Combat Day," and so forth where the combat deeds of the flight and technical
personnel were described. Thus the results of the successful bombing of the
railroad bridge at Sieradz by the group of Capt V. r. Hel'nik was unmedistely
made known to all the flight personnel of the 96th Guards bap. In the regi-
ment a leaflet was put out under the name “Order of the Motherland Fulfilled"
and here this feet was described in detail.

A combat leaflet by the squadron of the 812th iap described in detail how

Lt N. V. Lopatin had emerged the winner from an unequal sir battle. After
this many fliers stated that they would follow the example of Lopatin. A
combat leaftlet of a squadron from the 15th iap described the excellent work
of the air mechanics P. P. Vanguyev and K. A. Sushko the aircraft of whom
had flown over 100 hours without failures and breakdowns. The experience
of these mechanics was mentioned at a meeting of the technical personnel

and this served as an example for others.

In the course of the operation the express leaflets were widely used. They
were made up very quickly. and often the flier had scarcely landed after an
air combat and the express leaflet described his successes which had been
heard by radio. Thus. on 16 January. Capt D. N. Ashchaulov and Lt I. D.
Radchikov of the 602d iap were victorious in an air battle. The fliers had
not yet taxied up to the parking area when in a prominent place a leaflet
was already up which stated: "Glory to the courageous fliers Aahchaulov and
Radchikov who each shot down one enemy aircraft!"
191
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
IOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At tho meetings of the party and Koaaomol organizations held in the breaks
between battles they discussed the most urgent questions in the life of

the AA aviators. As before. the agitators carried out great political work.
They acquainted the personnel of the subunits with the summaries of Soul.-
fornybyuro and they described the labor heroism of the Soviet people in the
rear as well as comrades who had distinguished themselves.

In the course of the battles the aviators Joined the Communist Party. Dur-
ing the operation the party organization of the AA was increased by 595
party members and $26 candidate members. of those accepted into the party.
211 were pilots and 298 were technicians and drivers. The presenting of
party documents was carried out directly before a combat sortie at the air-
fields and no later than 3-5 days after admission. Belonging to the Com-
munist Party strengthened the courage of the air fighters.

The pilot of the 24th bap Jr Lt I. Ya. chernyy in his application wrote:

"1 wish to be admitted as a member of the VKP(b). I want to get the fascist
beast in his own lair as a member of the Bolshevik party. In its ranks I
will fight unceasingly against the enemy in sparing neither forces nor life."
Chernyy excellently carried out his combat missions and was awarded the Order
of the Red Banner for 35 successful combat sorties.

On 18 January. the troops of the front. in overcoming the fire resistance in
individual areas and in repelling counterattacks, continued to pursue the
retreating Nazi occupiers. The air formations of the 16th AA during the
night had been unable to sortie because of the bad weather, and during the
day limited operations were carried out.

In the morning. the 6th shah and the 2d Guards shed. in supporting the mobile
formations of the front. destroyed the enemy troops retreating along the roads
to Plock and Kutno. As a total they made 99 sorties. Assault planes from
the 9th shah attached enemy columns on the roads to the west of Piotrkow

and along the railroads. having made 120 sorties.

On this day the fliers of the Jd Guards shad particularly distinguished them—
selves. An element of assault plane scouts headed by Hero of the Soviet Union
Capt P. B. Bublikov detected a large number of railroad trains moving toward
Lodz in the area of Andrzejewo and Roses. Some 19 crews headed by the com-
mander of the 70th Guards shap Lt Col A. l. Kus'min took off to destroy

them. The first attack was made from an altitude of 600 meters to a roof-
top flight against the head trains and above all against the locomotives.

and then on Andrrejewo and Galkowek stations. The bombs and rockets set

four trains with military equipment and ammunition on fire. The fires and
explosions lasted more than a day. Around 30 trains with military freight

piled up in front of the stations. They all became captured material for
our troops.

192
V01 OYPXCIAL US! OllY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the improvement in the weather during the second half of the day. the
3d belt with six groups and the 221st bed with four groups bombed the rail-
road stations of Dobrzyn. Pabianics and Leah and the troop accumulations
at these points. As a total they made 86 sorties.

Very effective was the attack against Pebianice Station by eight Pe-Z from
the 261st bed under the comand of the cot-aander of the 24th bap Lt Col

A. i. Sokolov with the regimental navigator Haj C. D. Turayev. At the
mment of the attack 8 trains were at the station. The bombers destroyed
10 tracks and wiped out 2 steam locomotives. a large number of freight cars
and flat cars with military equip-eat and enunition.

During this time Dobrsyn Station was successfully bombed by eight Pe-2 from
the 210th bop led by the pilot Maj R. S. Suleymanov and the navigator Sr Lt
V. N. Nusetov. Leak Station was bombed by six planes from the same regiment
under the cot-sand of Capt K. A. Holodtsov with the navigator Capt 8. Ya.
Khryegenkov and two groups of thirteen Pe-Z from the 779th bep led by Maj
P. N. Ksyunin and Capt B. H. Namikhin with navigators Capts N. K. Pashkov-
skiy and c. T. Siforov. As a result of the bombing. traffic was halted for
several days.

The fliers of the 3d iak covered the battle formations of the troops on
the front and at the same time strafed the retreating enemy columns and
the nirfields of Rompina and bowicz where they destroyed six aircraft.

As in the preceding days enemy aviation was not active.

The M on 18 January made 676 sorties. including 220 for bombing and straf-
ing the enemy troops.

On this day the Zb-yeer-old cmlsunist assistant commander of the 618th shap
for the gunnery service Sr Lt V. V. Shishkin and the Komsomol member and
gunner HSgt A. V. Khrenov showed exceptional loyalty to their motherland.
courage and heroism. In carrying out reconnaissance their 11-2 aircraft

was hit by antiaircraft artillery at Hysrogrod. They had to land on enemy-
occupied territory. The Germans began to run up to the aircraft. The crew
of the reconnaissance assault plane. not wishing to be captured. opened fire
at the enemy soldiers using machine guns and then from their personal weapons.
killing more than 50 Nazis. In the unequal battle gunner Khrenov was killed
and pilot Shishkin was severely wounded. After the liberation of this ter-
ritory by the troops of the front. the pilot and gunner were found by their
aircraft by the inhabitants of the Polish village of Nitkowiczi. They told
how the fascist monsters cruelly tortured the Soviet flier Valentin Vasil'-
yevich Shishkin. The torturers cut 5-pointed stars on his body. they cut
off his tongue and gouged out his eyes. The patriot of our motherland
accepted the torturous death but did not surrender to the enemies. The
inhabitants of the village of Hitkowiczi transported the bodies of the
heroes to their village and buried them there.

1 Arkhiv no SSSR. folio of the 197th shad. inv. 259701. file 1. sheet 5;
folio of the 6th shah. inv. 193927. file 1. sheet 38.

193
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The courageous Soviet patriots V. V. Shishkin and A. V. Khrenov posthump
ously were awarded the Order of the Patriotic War.

On 19 January the air formations of the AA as before were confronted with
the missions of air pursuit of the retreating enemy and aiding the troops
of the front in developing the offensive. The bad weather conditions iar
peded operations of the night bombers; they made only 15 sorties.

The unsuccessful attempt of the enemy troops to cross at Hysaogrod forced
them to retreat along the Vistula to the crossings at Plock. Vloclawek and
Torun. The air scouts detected these movements. and the commander of the
16th AA ordered the 3d bak to destroy the crossings in order not to permit
the enemy to retreat.

In the middle of the day. nine groups of Pe-Z from the 3d bak under fighter
cover of the let Guards iad divebombed the bridges over the Vistula at Plock
(26 airplanes), Hloclawak (12 airplanes) and Torun (lS airplanes) from alti-
tudes of 2.600-l.300 meters. Regardless of the strong resistance of enemy
antiaircraft gunners and fighters. by direct bomb hits the highway and rail-

road bridges at Plock were destroyed and traffic over them was halted, the
other bridges were damaged.

Particularly effective were the actions of three grOups from the 128th bap
led by Hero of the Soviet Union, regimental commander Lt Col H. H. Voronkov
end the navigator Capt N. F. Starostin in bombing the railroad bridge at
Plock. The leaders of the other two groups were Capt A. V. Sarygin and Sr
Lt Yu. V. Khilkov. The fliers recorded three direct hits on the bridge.
Ten minutes previously a group consisting of six Pe—2 headed by the com-
mander of the 779th bap Lt Col A. V. Khramchenkov with the navigator Haj

A. G. Simonov destroyed there a highway bridge by a direct hit with a 250-
kg bomb.

However this was not without losses. The aircraft of Sr Lt c. N. Kolbasenho
was set afire from a direct hit by an antiaircrsft shell over the target. A
fire broke out also on the aircraft of pilot V. A. Tyapin who was still able
to turn and return to his territory. The aircraft of Lt K. V. Tsarev was
hit with two antiaircraft shells but the pilot did not leave the formation.
Serious damage was also caused to the airplanes of Lts I. A. Tabakov and

A. s. Ishchenko. Over Plock enemy fighters shot down the aircraft of flier
s. I. Bulsnov. Our fighters. in covering the bombers. destroyed two enemy
aircraft but themselves lost one pilot.

On this day 64 bombers from the 221st bad under the cover of fighters from
the 282d iad flew out to bomb troop accumulations in the region of Kolo.
But because of a deterioration of the weather conditions. they were unable
to carry out the mission and returned to their airfields.

The air units of the 6th shah in elements carried out air reconnaissance
with accompanying bombing. In small groups under fighter cover they strafed
enemy troop accumulations in the region of K010 and on the roads to the west
of Lodz. and they also attacked Lubien airfield. where 10 fascist aircraft
were destroyed. 194

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 9th shak and the llth Guards shad escorted by fighters bombed and strafed
tho railroad trains at the stations of Dobrzyn. Lash and Sierads, as well as
retreating fascist troops in the regions of Lash and Pabianice.

The fighter formations of the AA during the day covered the troops and cross-
ings against enemy aviation. they carried out "free hunting" and reconnais-
sance, they escorted the assault planes and bonhers and along the way them-
selves strafed enemy troops.

The enemy fighters countered our aviation and endeavored to bomb the forward
units of the front in the region of Kutno. As their total 76 aircraft were
counted in the air. In the air battles the Nazis lost 5 aircraft. here is
how one of these battles occurred.

Gen Ye. Ya. Savitskiy in an element with Lt H. Ye. Pivovarov took off to
look for airfields for basing an air corps in the region of Kutno. 0n the
way back they detected a group of FH-l90 loaded with bombs flying to the
east. The 2 Yahs engaged the 12 Fokker-Hulfa in combat. At this time 6
fighters from the 15th iap arrived to cover the troops. Jr Lt V. A. Kalash-
nikov. seeing this unequal battle and recognizing the aircraft of the corps
commander from the identification marks. immediately came to his aid. By
a rapid attack he destroyed one enemy aircraft. At the same time by an at-
tack from above and behind Gen Savitskiy shot down the group leader. The
fascist pilots. having lost two aircraft. turned west in a lowblevel flight
in disorder.

The AA on 19 January carried out 963 sorties. including 278 for bombing and
strafing the enemy.

On 19 January the troops of the first Belorussian Front captured the towns
of Lodz. Kutno. Tomaszow and others. Moscow saluted the valorous troops of
the front. including the fliers Col Gen Avn Rudenko. Lt Gens Avn Brayko and

Savitskiy. Haj Gena Avn Krupskiy, Sidnev, Tokarev. Dzusov, Tatanashvili,
Karavatskiy and Komarov. Cole Smirnov, Kovalev. Hironov. chirva. Timofeyev.

Belousov. Isayev, Koryagin, Ivanov, Berkal‘, Pedorenko. Pedorov. Buzylev
and Sukhoryabov and Lt Cole Nakonechnikov and Tishchenko.

Particularly distinguishing themselves were the 9th shah (commander Gen I. V.
Krupskiy). the 8th Guards and 765th bap and the 62d Guards trap of the CV?
(commander Lt Col 6. I. Popov and Hajs I. I. Gonchsrenko and V. V. Yermskov);
they were awarded the honorary name of Lodz. The 300th shad (commander Col
T. Ye. Kovalev) received the honorary name of Tomaszow.

On 20 January, the enemy pursued by the troops of the front continued to pull
back behind the Harts River. The AA in cooperation with the mobile forma-
tions continued to attach the retreating columns, the railroad stations and
and concentrations of Nazi troops.

195
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The bad weather conditions with snowfalls and poor viability limited the
operations of our aviation. Only the most experienced crews were sent out
to carry out missions.

0n the first half of the day the assault planes destroyed enemy railroad
trains at the stations of lnowroclaw. Kruszwics. Dembowec, Sierads, Harto
and Hacieszewice. troop concentrations in the region of Cielne and coluans
along the roads of Seedek-Harto and Sieradz-Blaazki.

At the railroad station of Hacieszewice. the scouts discovered three trains
and a large concentration of troops and military equipment. Pour groups of
six 11-2 took off to destroy them; the groups were led by the comander of
the 58th Guards shep Hero of the Soviet Union Guards Lt Col V. D. Panfilov.
The leaders of the remaining three groups were the guardsmen Maj A. P.
Koshevanov, 8r Lt S. l. Zhukov and Jr Lt B. D. Nikitenko. The enemy greeted '
the assault planes with heavy antiaircraft fire. In maneuvering skillfully
and neutralising the specially assigned enemy antisircrsft crews. the sa-
sault planes destroyed 70 cars with military supplies. 2 steam locomotives
and over a hundred enemy soldiers.

During the assault on the trains. Lt N. P. Gurin died heroically. his air-
craft was hit by an antiaircraft shell and caught fire. Without being able
to save the aircraft and the crew. Guardsman Gurin. in sacrificing himself.
aimed the burning [1-2 in the midst of the railway cars, causing an explo-
sion of the train.

On this day the flier of the 812th iap Lt A. l. Pilipov in a dogfight with
enemy fighters in the area of Uniejow, having used up his amnition, rained
and knocked down a Fokker-Hun, after which he bailed out.

In the second half of the day. groups of bombers from the 3d belt and assault
planes from the llth Guards shad destroyed artillery in its firing positions
and enemy concentrations near sieradz and Chojna, as well as infantry in the
trenches on the western bank of the Warts. This aided the mobile troops in
crossing the Harts.

The fighter formations escorted the bombers and assault planes and covered
the battle formations of the troops of the front. The scouts in many in-
stances, having detected troops. attacked them.

In the areas of operations our aviation encountered up to 80 enemy aircraft,
but only 8 of them were noted over the troops of the front.

On 20 January. the AA carried out 729 aorties. including 116 for bombing
and strafing the enemy; 6 fascist aircraft were shot down in air battles.

with the advancement of the troops to the west. the AA units continued to
be rebaaed to new airfields. They were aided by the 9th Guards nbad: dur-
ing the day it transported cargo and technical personnel to the airfields
of Sochaczew and Lubisn.

196
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Gen 3. I. Rudenko established personal control over the operation of the
rear bodies to seek out and build airfields and denanded that the cor-sanders
of the air formations accelerate the rebasing to the forward airfielda.

For reducing the the required to prepare the airfielda liberated by the
enesy, one or two bao were attached to each tank array. In addition one
motor transport battalion and one airfield engineer battalion were sent
into the zones of advance of the combined-eras armies. Each combined-

arms or tank army assigned 100-150 men to these battalions for earth moving
in building the airfielda.

The following example shows how the rebasing of the aviation forward was
carried out. On the norning of 22 January, the bao reached the airfields
around Poznan which had been abandoned in panic by the Nazis behind the

tank troops. A najority of the airplanes abandoned at the airfielda had

been blown up. because they could not take off because of the bad weather.
During the day the forward echelons of three air corps and then all their
flight units flew in to the captured airfielda and this made it possible

to support the subsequent advance of the ground forces fron the air. Usually
the rcbasing was led by the «undue of the air divisions at the new base
region.

The command of the M. the air conenders and staffs in this operation which
was aarked by great dynaaicness gave particular attention to maintaining close
coordination with the troops of the front. Pros the experience of the pre-
ceding operations, the col-sanders of the air fornations with operational
groups remained at the comnd posts of the comanders of the combined-arms
or tank field forces (formation cot-nanders) having traffic controllers with
comaunications in the forward detachments. This system made it possible not
only for the for-scion collaander but also the connander of the forward detach-
ment at any tine, in being in contact with the airplanes over the battlefield.
to receive inediate help from the air. Sonetines in the course of combat

for a short period of time coordination with the troops was disrupted chiefly
due to shortcolings in radio cor-unications (in particular. the radios could
not operate on the nova).

The coaasand of the M always took the most energetic measures for maintain-
ing steady control of the aviation. Gene 8. I. Rudenko and P. I. Brayko con-
stantly followed the situation and ads certain that all the air consnders
at any tine knew where and how the enemy was operating. where our troops were,
what missions were being carried out by the subordinate air units, and what
their a-aunition was. In individual instances the army consander demanded
that the cosananders of the air formations assign a special squadron which
would follow the situation of our troops and report the situation hourly.
with the separating of the aobile troops from the main forces and the loss

of comunications. the air scouts came to their aid by locating them and
restoring contact. Continuous air reconnaissance and systematic air observa-
tion of the advance of our troops facilitated the control of aviation in

such a dynastic operation and supplied the co-and of the front and the armies
with situational data.

197
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Starting on 21 January. the weather deteriorated sharply and the AA could
not carry out any combat sorties.

During the period of 22-28 January, for the same reason combat operations
were very limited. The sorties were nade chiefly to cover the troops and
for air reconnaissance. And on Just 24 January under difficult weather
conditions the AA nede 272 sorties to cover the troops and for reconnais-
sance with acconpanying strafing of the enemy.

On 27 January, the flight and technical personnel of eany sir formations
cleared the snow away from the airfields. Only 85 sorties were made to
cover the troops and 30 for air reconnaissance. On this day the crews of
the 72d orap showed great courage and skill in conducting air reconnaissance
under difficult weather conditions. It had to be established whether the
German troops were continuing to retreat toward the Oder. or whether enemy
reserves had been brought up to the front in the Poznan-Kustrin sector. Dis-
rcgnrding the solid clouds at an altitude up to 50 meters. the snowfall and
flurries. the scouts brilliantly carried out this mission. Particularly
distinguishing themselves were the crews of Haj 1. Ya. Velikiy, Capt A. D.
Stebel'kov, 8r Lt V. P. Grideeov and Lt A. s. Krupenko. In the Pe-2 air-
craft, in a snowstorn and with a complete absence of horizontal visibility
in certain areas of the route they reconnoitered a full radius in a low—
level flight. For excellent execution of the mission under such difficult
conditions all the crews immediately after landing. upon the orders of the
AA commander, governnental decorations were presented to the reconnaissance

chief. the deputy chief of staff of the AA for reconnaissance. Col 6. K.
Prussskov.

The successful activities of the air scouts would have been impossible with-
out the great work done by the technical personnel of the 72d orep who under

the leadership of Engr-Haj P. H. Khomenchuk kept the equipment ready and
trouble-free.

Over the period from 22 through 28 January. the AA because of bad weather
conditions node only 788 sorties, including 325 to cover the troops and 352
for air reconnaissance. Seven enemy aircraft were shot down in 7 air bat-
tles. Victories were won by the fliers of the 15th iap Haj V. I. Suvirov,
Sr Lt N. A. Borovskiy, and others.

The troops of the First Belorussian Front, in pursuing the defeated enemy
units. in force continued to advance to the Oder and on 28-29 January crossed
the Gernan frontier. A portion of the forces of the troops of the front was
fighting to destroy the surrounded Poznan garrison.

The AA from the morning of 29 January. dus.to the extremely bad weather con-
ditions. carried out operations only in small groups of assault planes and
fighters. The bomber sir divisions did not take to the air. The assault
planes of the 6th shank. the 2d and llth Guards shed in the first half of
the day destroyed the enemy in Poznan. Groups of the 58th Guards shsp led
by Sr Lts A. S. Bogdenov, s. I. Zhukov and Lt A. H. Zhgulev fought well.

198
' FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'l'he fighters covered the troops of the front. they escorted the assault
planes and along the way strafed the enemy. In five air battles, the
fliers of the 15th iap Haj L. N. Sliaen'. Lt P. N. Gorokhov. Jr Lt I. P.
Krivobok and A. l. Pavlikov each shot down one fascist. By the end of the
war Haj L. N. Slizen' had to his score 222 combat sorties and 18 shot-down
fascist airplanes. For this in Kay 19“ he was awarded the title of hero
of the Soviet Union.

At 1300 hours, due to the deterioration of the weather, combat sorties had
to be halted. By this time the air formations had made 266 sortiea.

During the last days of January, the troops of the front. in reaching the

Oder. crossed it without halting and captured bridgeheads in the region of
Kustrin.

In assisting the 8th Guards Army in capturing the town of Poznan. during the
night of 30 January the 9th Guards nbsd and during the day the assault
plane formations escorted by fighters boobed and strafed the troops sur-
rounded in the city and destroyed the artillery batteries which had fired
on the airfield of Kobylnica. here excellent actions were carried out by
the assault plane pilots under the col-sand of Sr Lt l. P. Fateyev (11th
Guards shad). Maj N. P. Vssil'chenko, Capt N. I. Lunev, Lts V. P. Zinenko
and c. H. Nesterevich (2d Guards shad).

The fighters covered the battle formations of the troops, they escorted the
assault planes. they carried out "free hunting" and by their fire prevented
enemy defensive works on the western bank of the Oder. They carried out 18
air battles and shot down 23 fascist aircraft. The heroes of the day were
the fliers: Sr Lt V. l. Levko (he shot down two aircraft). Capt G. s.
Leont'yev and Jr Lts hechtanov and Pedoseyev fron the 6th iak; Sr Lts V. V.
Kablukov and D. I. Suslov from the 3d iak; Lt V. P. Pozdnyakov fron the 13th
iak and others who each shot down one enesy aircraft.

in the second half of the day. the co-Iend of the front received data on a
concentration of a German tank army in the region of Landsberg. Kustrin.
l-‘urstenberg. Schiebus and Schwerin. This grouping could seriously threaten
our troops which by this time had fought their way up to 600 km. The troop
commander of the front ordered averification of these data by air reconnais-
sance. In the evening Gen s. I. Rudenko defined the reconnaissance areas and
ordered the comnders of three iak and the 282d iad during the day of

31 January using specially assigned crews from a low-level flight to care-
fully reconnoiter all the population points. forests and ravines in the
given area.

As a result of the air reconnaissance carried out under extremely difficult
weather conditions. it was established that solid columns of motor vehicles.
wagons and enemy infantry stretching kilometers in length were continuing

to retreat behind the Oder. The air scouts did not detect concentrations

of tank units. Further events affirmed the correctness of these data. The
results of air reconnaissance provided a basis for the connander of the front

199
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to take a decision to drive rapidly toward the Oder with the tank for-a-
tions and to capture a bridgehead on its western bank without halting.

The M on 30 and 31 January made 919 sorties with the bad weather condi-
tions. and these included 202 for bombing and strafing enemy troops and
222 sortiee for air reconnaissance.

The eneay aviation, having increased its activities. operated against the
troops of the front endeavoring to prevent the crossing of the Oder. A
total of 172 aircraft overflights were counted.

During 1-3 Pebruery. the troops of the front. having encountered increased
eneay resistance, waged intense battles for broadening the bridgeheads on
the Oder. and a portion of the forces destroyed the encircled troops in
Poznan and Schniedeuiihl. By the end of 3 February, they had coepletely
cleared the eastern bank of the Oder of the enemy.

The AA formations, because of the bad weather conditions (solid clouds up

to 50 meters in altitude, fogs and interaittent rain) and the softening of
the flight fields, carried out restricted operations in predominantly cover-
ing the troops on the Oder and carrying out air reconnaissance. 0n 2 Feb-
ruary, individual crews free the 3d bek took off to bomb the bridge to the
southeast of Stettin. The aission was carried out by only two crews out of
the nine. Due to the bad weather the others were unable to reach the tar-
get and bombed an alternative target. The 9th Guards nbad transported fuel
for the 7th Cavalry Corps.

As a total over the 3 days of February. the air army made 380 sortiea. in-
cluding 127 for reconnaissance and 165 for transporting cargo. In 12 air
battles the fascists lost 8 aircraft. Here Lt Col N. D. Sklyarenko, Hero
of the Soviet Union Haj V. N. Makarov and Sr Lt Kravtsov (the 283d iad).
Capt A. A. Zheleznikov (the 276th iap). Sr Lt Ye. F. Tuzhilin (15th iap)
and others distinguished themselves.

‘Hith the Soviet troops reaching the Oder and the capturing of bridgehesds
on its western bank in the area of Kustrin. the Vistula-Oder Operation was
over. It ended with the defeat of the Nazi Army Group A and with the com-
plete liberation of Poland. The army had reached the approaches to Berlin
with 60-70 ha remaining to the German capital.

in the operation from the Vistula to the Oder, the 16th M, in keeping air
superiority. provided direct support to the troops of the front and covered
then against enemy aviation. With the development of the breakthrough and
the pursuit of the Nazi troops. the assault planes and fighters of the M,
in cooperating closely with the mobile formations of the front. destroyed

the retreating enemy columns and prevented the enemy from digging in on
intermediate lines.

200
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Although the codaat effort of the 16th M was comparatively low at times due
to the difficult weather and basing conditions, as a whole the results of its
operations had a significant inset on the rapid advance of the troops of the
front. The aviation started the defeat of the retreating enemy troops. It
quickly sought out the colums and was the first to attack them, it caused
the enemy losses and created blockages on the roads, while the forward de-
tachments of the tank formations which hurried up completed the rout of the
enemy colms.

The bombing of bridges and railroad stations for the purposes of interrupting
enemy traffic on the major lines of communications held a special place in
the operations of our aviation along with the attacks on the column. Thus.
from 16 through 20 January. during the period of the greatest development of
the air pursuit of the retreating enemy, the 16th M destroyed more than 10
major bridges and crossings and over 30 railroad stations. For attacking
them the bombers and assault planes carried out 660 sorties and dropped 617
tons of bombs. The bomber formations were the basic strike force of the
army. As a result the enemy was forced to abandon an enormous amount of roll-
ing stock with valuable supplies, the organized retreat of the Nazi troops
was thwarted and this facilitated their final defeat.

As a total during the period of the operation from the Vistula to the Order,
from 16 January through 3 February 19b5, the air army made 11,193 aircraft
sorties. including 3,775 for bombing and strafing enemy troops, 1,810 for
covering the troops of the front, 1,9“ for air reconnaissance, 2,178 for
escorting assault planes and bombers (a portion of them with accompanying
strafing), 1,058 for "free hunting," the strafing of eirfields and the inter-
cepting of enemy aircraft, and 628 for other missions.

The aviation destroyed and damaged a large quantity of enemy military equip-
ment and transport, and put thousands of soldiers and officers out of action.
In the 111 air battles, 85 fascist aircraft were shot down, and 18 were de-
stroyed on the airfields.

The battle score of the air regiments during the operation increased by many
tens and hundreds of knocked-out tanks, motor vehicles, guns and shot-down
fascist airplanes. Thus the fliers of the 515th iap destroyed 3!. airplanes,
including 33 shot down by commists and Komsomol members. By the end of
the war, the air regiment had brought the combat score up to 70 shot-down
enemy aircraft. The regimental co-ander Lt Col 0. V. Gromov made 600 com-
bat sorties and destroyed l3 enemy aircraft. For skillful leadership of the
air regiment and for personal feats, he was awarded the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union.

The combat losses of the air army during the operation occurred chiefly from
enemy antiaircraft fire.

For the exemplary execution of the missions of the cot-sand in battles against
the Nazi invaders in the liberation of Warsaw, by an Ukase of the Presidium
of the USSR Supreme Soviet, the following decorations were presented: The

201
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Order of the Red Banner to the 133d and 739th iap (contenders Lt Cole K. A.
Tovetmhiy and V. F. Klinev); the Order of Suvorov, Second Degree to the
221st bed and the 273d ied (co-lenders Cole 3. P. Buzylev end N. V. Isayev);
the Order of Kutuzov. Second Degree to the 301st bed (contender, Col P. H.
Fedorenko); the Order of Suvorov. Third Degree to the 128th bep. the 233d
iep. the 618th ehap. the 776th iep and the 805th shep (co-enders Lt Cole
H. H. Voronkov. V. V. Krevtecv end I. B. Kotik, Haja A. A. Hakogon end

P. 1‘. Karev); the Order of Kutuzov. Third Degree to the 779th bap end the
98th okrap (connendere Lt Cole A. V. Imrenchenkov end I. S. Tichchenko).

The units which distinguished themselves in the capturing of the city of
Radon received the following decorations: The Order of the Red Banner to

the 176th iap (comander Haj V. N. Hakarov); the Order of Bogdan 10ml“-
nitskiy. Second Degree to the 515th end 519th iap. the 106th ehap (comdere
Lt Cole 6. V. Gronov end K. N. Marge. Haj S. K. Yefrenov); the Order of
Suvorov. Third Degree to the 518th iap end the 906th ahap (co-sanders Lt
Cole H. G. Khudokornov end P. G. Ovcharenko). The Order of Suvorov Third
Degree was also presented to the 352d lap (co-ender Lt Col P. I. Khere)
which distinguished itself in capturing the tom: of Inowroclew.

In the Vistula-Oder Operation. particularly distinguishing theneelves were
the 3d, 6th end 13th iak heeded by Gene Ye. Ye. Savitekiy. I. H. Drusov

end B. A. Sidnev. During the period of the offensive. the fliers led by
then dependebly covered the troops of the front against air attack end boldly
strafed the enemy on the ground.

Ibragin Hagonetovich Dzueov was born in 1905. At the age of 19 he volun-
teered for the Red Army. After 2 years of service he became a co-unist.
During the Greet Patriotic Var he rose from the comnder of an air regi-
ment as e najor to the contender of an air corps as a Iajor general aviation.
The 6th iek under his comend participated in the Belorussian and subse-
quent operations end for the successful execution of missions wee repeatedly
contended in the orders of the Supreme Co-ander-in-Chief. The air corps
and all of the air unite which conprieed it were given honorary naees end
were presented with orders. During the period of the war. the fliers of the
corps eede 18,656 conbet sortiea end in 1.243 air battles shot down 832
eneny aircraft. Gen 1. M. Dzuaov in May 1945 was awarded the title of Hero
of the Soviet Union for the exeaplery fulfillment of missions on the front
of the struggle against the Nazi invaders. for able leadership of the opera-
tions of the air formations and units. and for the personal combat services
and the courage. valor and heroien shown therein. At present Maj Gen Avn
(Ret) I. H. Dzueov lives in the Caucasus and participates actively in the
military patriotic indoctrination of the youth.

Boris Arsen'yevich Sidnev was born in 1911. He arrived in aviation as a
19-year-old youth. In 1931 he becene a party member. He participated in
the Great Patriotic Var free the first days. In June 19191. as the head of
a and he Fought on the Northwestern Front: a year later the ied under his
comnd was covering troops in the battle of Stalingrad. In 19“, the 13th

202
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

iak of Gen n. A. Sidnev was operating on the left wing of the First Belo-
russian Front. and subsequently on the Warsaw-Berlin sector. As a pilot

he had completely mastered flying techniques. and as a commander he was well
trained in operational-tactical terns. and he ably led the party political
work in the units of the corps. To his score were 160 combat sorties and

h eneny aircraft personally shot down. During the period of the war. under
the leadership of I. A. Sidnev. the fliers of the corps nade 11.828 cosbnt
sorties and shot down 005 enemy aircraft. In May 19‘s. Gen 3. A. Sidnev
was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union for skillful leadership

of the operations of the air corps. for personal coabat services and for

the valor and courage shown therein. After the war Col Gen Avn B. A. Sidnev
commanded the aviation of a district. At present he is in the reserves and
carries out extensive nilitary patriotic work.

In the Battles for the Kustrin Bridgehead .

After the completion of the Vistula—Oder Operation the troops of the First
Belorussian Front in February 1905 continued operations to expand the bridge-
heads in the region of Kuatrin and capture the Poznan and Schneideaﬁhl
forces. they repelled enemy counterattacka on the right wing of the front

and carried out preparations for the Eastern Poaeranian Operation.

The 16th AA assisted the troops of the front in carrying out these aissions
and waged a fierce struggle against enemy aviation for air superiority.

Hith the advance of the troops of the front to the Oder. the securing of
airfields for the AA units became such sore cosplicsted as the Screens in
retreating had blow up the landing strips. and the dirt airfielda due to
the thaw which'occurred suddenly after the snowfalls and rains had softened
and the airplanes literally stuck in the and. Certain air units which did
not have prepared airfields ahead of then lagged 100-160 kn behind the
front line. Under these conditions their coabat activities became very
difficult due to the linited range of the aircraft. when the tank and then
the coahined-araa arnies approached the Oder. the air units were unable to
provide the necessary cover and support for the ground forces.

At the same time, the eneny. in possessing a large nuaber of airfields with
man-made landing strips in the Berlin sector. concentrated significant air
forces here, and at the beginning of February undertook a desperate atteapt
to win air superiority and to increase the support of its troops. Pierce
air battles developed over the battlefield.

The nest difficult air situation developed in the first 10 days of February.
when the enemy aviation on individual days made 2.000—3.000 aircraft over-
fllghts. attacking our troops on the bridgeheads and crossings in the region
of Kustrin. As a total during the 10 days of February. in the area of the
front 13,950 overflights of enemy aircraft were counted.

203
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 16th AA. without possessing suitable airfields near the Oder. was able

to sake just 1.530 sorties. During this period Ger-an aviation seized the
initiative in the air over the battlefield.

The AA did not have sufficient forces and neens to rapidly prepare hard-
aurfaced lending strips. The troops of the front provided significant help
to the AA in preparing these airfielda. Upon orders of Her 80 G. K. Zhukov.
the conbined-arna arnies built brick and crushed rock air stripe at six
field airfielda by their own forces. In addition. equip-set of the front

delivered letal plates for five airfields and these were laid by the spe-
:18]. “1:80

But it was not eesy to rebese to the newly built airfields. since the air
units were unable to take off from the field eirstrips which had been soft-
ened by bad weather. Under these conditions. upon the initiative of the
con-under of the 3d iak. Gen Ye. Ya. Savitskiy, the nearby straight areas

of highways end roads were used for taking off. and the airplanes were pushed
here by hand. On 7 February the best treined fliers from the 15th lap of

the 278th led for the first tine used these "take-off" strips. Only by

16 February was it possible to supply the fighters with herd-surfaced air-
fields.

In the second 10 days of February. 3.150 aircraft overflights were noted for
the eneay. The 16th AA during this period was able to sharply increase its
activities and Iede 7.272 sorties. In the 285 eir battles carried out in
February. our fighters shot down 229 enemy aircraft on the approaches to the

odor. In suffering such heavy losses the fascist pilots began to avoid an-
counters with our fighters.

The troops of the front during all of February continued to wage heavy bat-
tles on the western bank of the Oder. The enemy tried at whatever price to
throw back our troops and eliminate the bridgeheeds seized by then.

Regardless of the bad weather conditions as well as the lack of field air-
fields and a sharp rise in the activity of eneny aviation, the fighters of
the 16th AA constantly carried out offensive operations and in a aajority
of instances remained the masters in the air. even with the numerical au-
periority of the ene-y. Our fliers promptly guessed the tactics of the
enemy and due to their valor and courage and to the skillful use of all the
qualities of their airplanes and their weapons. alnoat always achieved vic-
tory.

In the February air battles, nany fliers distinguished thenselves. Thus.

on 10 February Haj A. Ye. Rubakhin (3d iak). Jr Lt H. A. Babenho and Lt

N. V. Lopetin (265th iad). Jr Lt V. S. Thachenko (278th ind) and Lt V. I.
Aleksandryuk (by the end of the war he had made 252 cosbat sorties and
personally shot down 15 eneny aircraft and 4 in group actions. and on 29 June
1945. he became a Hero of the Soviet Union) each shot down 2 fascist aircraft.

206
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n ll February. the radar detected eneay airplanes approaching the cross-
ings at Kustrin. Por repelling the raids. a group of six Yak-3 on alert
from the ‘02d iap under the comand of Capt A. A. Volkov took off from Morin
airfield. having encountered ten Iii-190 and four tie-109 at an altitude of
13.000 seters over ensey territory. the attack foursome of Volkov attacked
the group of Fokker-Nuns. and the covering ale-ant of Lt K. V. Podbrutnyy
held the Nesssrschsitts. In the ensuing battle Lte Podbrutnyy and N. P.
Pryadko shot down one fascist each. The coabat for-ation of the ens-y air-

planes was disrupted and they withdrew fro. battle without reaching the
target.

0n the same day. four Yak-9 fro: the 518th iap led by Capt V. N. Korshunov
wee guided near Seelow to eight Phi-190. Upon the connand "Attack All!" the
Yaks node a surprise attack fron above and behind. and in this Capt Korshunov
and Lta c. I. Vetrov and Ye. P. Zaayatkin i-ediately shot down three Pit-199.
The remaining fascist fliers by a rapid dive retreated to the west.

On 12 February. the deputy cor-sander of the 176th Guards iap. twice hero of
the Soviet Union Maj I. N. Kozhedub in an element with Lt V. A. Cronkovskiy.
in carrying out "free hunting" on La-7 aircraft near Kustrin. at an altitude
of 350-500 meters under the cloudu encountered 13 PN-l90 carrying boobs.
Guards-an Koshedub i-ediately shot down an enemy aircraft by attaching froa -
below and behind. A second attack followed agath another Potter-Gulf fro-
s range of 100-150 esters. The ens-y fighter engulfed in dense fie-es dove
toward the ground. After this Kozhedub began to pursue a third Pit-190.
having dropped its boobs on its own territory. the fascist endeavored to
escape free the Soviet fighter in a low-altitude flight. but he was caught
and also destroyed. In initiating coabat. one of the Pokker-Nulfs which had
dove out of the clouds tried to attack Koshedub. But his teenate Ore-shov-
skiy drove off the any attack and set it afire. During the second attack
by Kozhedub. Cronkovsltiy saw another Fokker-waif below to the right. Nav-
ing wade certain that his co-ander was not in danger. he attacked the enemy
Iron above and behind and shot it down. By able actions the clean of hunt-

er fighters disrupted the codat for-ation of the numerically superior group
of Fit-190 and shot down five fascist aircraft.

This battle was watched by the co-ander of the 5th Assault Any Gen N. 2.

Berzarin. inspired by the valor of our fliers. he couended than for the
help to the troops.

In other air battles on this day, Lt I. D. Radchihov (602d iap). Ms) A. s.
Kunsnichkin. Sr Lt A. Ye. Statseoho and Lt G. P. Orlov (176th Guards iap).
Nnjs V. I. Suvirov and L. N. Slisen'. Sr Lt S. N. lbrgunov (he shot down
two aircraft). Lt N. s. berabanov and Jr Lt P. N. Oorokhov (15th iap)
e'serged the winners in other air battles.

In the air battles of 17 and 18 February. distinguished flying was shown
by: Jr Lta A. N. Zeno and V. 6. Krivolapov and Sr Lt S. P. Shpunyahov in

the 265th iad; Jr Lt I. S. Osipov and Lt c. I. Hakarov in the 278th iad;
Lta N. A. Brodskiy and N. I. Luzin. Sr Lt A. I. Chetvertikov.

205
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Cspt A. A. Kukov and Lt Col K. A. Tovstashiy in the 234th iad; Jr Lt N. Ye.
Privalov and Capt N. V. Sorokin in the 193d isd; Lts S. I. Ponoaarev and

Sairnov. Capt V. A. Bychkov in the 283d isd; Haj D. s. Titorsnko in the
176th Guards iap. and others.

On 19 February. two groups of four Yak-3 free the 233d iap under the coa-
nand of Sr Lt G. s. Akhnetov and Lt A. H. Yershov were covering the troops
to the south of Stargard. Suddenly six FV-l90s eaerged from the clouds at
an altitude of 2.500 aeters and attacked Yershov's group. Yershov turned
and in turn closed in on the enemy. In ending up between two Fokker-units
in the course of coabat. in order not to express himself to enemy fire
Yershov turned sharply to the left end reamed the tail of the fascist with
his wing bracket. The rw-iso went into an uncontrolled dive and exploded
on the ground. Siaultsneously Yershov's wing-en shot down one FH-l90 each.

At this time Ahhaetov's group engaged at first six He-lo9 and then another

four. Using the advantage of the Yak-3 in aansuvering. Akhaetov shot down
one Hesserschnitt.

In the course of the battle. four other FH-l90 showed up. and the eight
Soviet fighters had to fight against 20 fascist pilots. In the air a

noisy tangle of fighting aircraft was foreed. The eneey fighters having
gotten into a disadvantageous position dropped out of battle by disappearing
in the clouds or diving. As a result Sr Lt c. s. Akhaetov. Lts H. A.
Brovarets, N. P. Yevseyev. V. H. Kotrovskiy and Ye. V. Tsrssenkov each

shot down one fascist aircraft. and Lts A. H. Yershov and N. N. Likhov each
begged tuo. Thus. our eight fliers destroyed nine fascist aircraft with-
out having any losses on their side.

On 21 February. an eleaent of Yak-9 froa the 347th iap headed by Sr Lt

G. I. Linnik during a free search at an altitude of 1,800 asters encountered
six boabera flying toward our bridgehead st Kustrin. Their cover group which
was engaged by our fighters fell behind the boebers. In taking advantage

of this. Linnik attacked the boabers and hit one of thee. Then he set a
second eneay aircraft on fire. The reaainder dove and turned west. The
wingoan Jr Lt G. A. Chirhov caught s boaber and shot it down. The able

actions of the "hunter" eleaent thwarted the eneey's intentions of drop-
ping their boabload on our troops.

In the second and third f0 days of February. as our fighters were rebased
to the forward airfields, the air situation changed. In the course of the

air battles. air superiority which had been teeporsrily lost by our avia-
tion was restored.

During the period {roe 6 through 26 February. the AA. in addition to sup-
porting the troops of the front on the Oder and fighting for air superior-

ity. aided the troops in wiping out the early garrison in the Poznan fortress
and in the regions of Schneideeﬁhl and Stargsrd.

206
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In the course of the struggle for Poznan. our aviation with the forces of
two regioonts fron the 3d bak. destroyed the pillboxes and individual for-
tress buildings. the 11th Guards shad aided the assault groups in capturing
certain objectives. and the 9th Guards nbed by continuous boobing strikes
attacked the eneoy troops which were beseiged in the fortress. “era the
personnel had to operate against soall but important targets and exception-
slly precise boobing was required for knocking then out. The following ex-
eoples show how our pilots and navigators carried this out. On 13 February.
a group of six 11-2 froo the 173d Guards shsp under the coo-and of Capt “.1.
Ruoynntsev took off for attacking the troops encircled in Poznan. At an
altitude of 600 oeters. the group oede a trial run for locating the target.
Seeing stacks of eonunition boxes in one of the areas. the group coooender
ordered: "Attack behind so!" The boobs dropped precisely by the assault
planes caused a great explosion.

0n 14,February. the squadron coonander of the 96th Guards bep Haj A. P.
Soirnov with the navigator Capt A. A. Tsaregorodskiy received a oiasion

of destroying a broadcasting station in the fortress. Having encountered
cloudiness. they were unable to oaks a diving attack and they boobed the
target froo horizontal flight at an altitude of 700 oeters. dropping four
high explosive boobs of 100 and 250 kg. The radio station was knocked out
by direct boob hits, and the eneoy was deprived of radio communications.
Capt A. A. Tsaregorodskiy by the end of the war had 176 successful sortiea,
and in May 1946. was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

On 16 February the squadron cooosnder of the 36th bap Haj M. P. Gor'kiy

with the navigator 8r Lt H. A. hiroshnikov was to destroy a Nazi atrongpoint.
the southern gates of the fortress. The crew osde a diveboobing attack free
on altitude of 2.000 meters and by a direct hit with e ZSO-kg boob destroyed
the tower of the southern gates. The coobot mission was carried out.

On 18 February. Sr Lt Yu. Ya. Vorob'yev (the 3bth bop) with the regioental
navigator H. 8. Honey by precision boobing froo a horizontal flight blew up
an soounition duop in the center of the fortress.

In suppressing the resistance from eneoy troops in Poznan, good actions were
carried out by assault plans groups froo the 175th Guards shop under the coo-
ound of Capt H. A. Prosvirnov. Sr Lt B. N. Tikhonov and Jr Lt F. s. Shoyrin.
us well so Capt H. 1. Kuchinskiy (173d Guards shop). All four fliers. hav-
ing node 115-160 coobot sorties each by the end of the war. destroyed a large
usount of eneoy oilitary equipoent and ouch personnel. They becaoe holders
of the Order of Lenin and the Gold Star of a hero.

On 23 February. Moscow saluted the troops of the First Belorussian Front
which had captured the city and fortress of Poznan. The order of the Su-
preoe Coononder-in-Chief pointed out that along with the troops. the fliers
of Haj Gen Avn Kooarov. Col Yuhobson. Lt Cola Novikov, Lysenko, Volkov,
Leonov snd Vasil'yev. and Haj Abroskin distinguished the-selves.

207
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In eaaieting the foreationa of the 8th Guarda Any in capturing the fortreeo
of Potnen. the air fornetiona of the 16th AA cerried out 1.836 aortiee. in-
cluding 372 by Pe-Z boabera. 217 by 11-2 aaaeult plenea and 1.2105 by the

90-2 night bonbere (including 633 during the day). Ilere 558 tone of boobs
were dropped.

The reeponee free the contender of the 29th Ouerda Rifle Corpa Gen A. D.
Shenenkov ie affirmation of the eejor role played by aviation in defeating
the eneny Poznan gerrieon. "During the period from 9 through 18 February.
the air unite of the 3d belt boobed the fortification verb in the fortreae
and the epproechea to it. “the operatione were carried out very effectively
and the preciaion of the boebing vea high. During thie period the bonbere
effectively aided our unite in defeating the encircled grouping. The fliere.

nevigetora and an the peraonnel. vhich took a direct part in the operatione
nerit co-endetion."

For the exeepiery fulfillment of the nieeione of the co-and in battlee
egainet the Ger-en invedere in capturing the city and fortreaa of Poznan.
the following decorationa were preaented: The Order of the Red Banner to

the 45th Ouerde nbap (contender Haj I. F. Abroekin); the Order of Suvorov
Third Degree to the Cuerdn 23d nbed. the 58th end 175th ehep (comendera
Lt Cole P. S. Leonov. Hero of the Soviet Union V. D. Penfilov and H. G.
Voikov); the Order of Kutuzov Third Degree to the 36th bep. the 96th Guerda
bep and the 173d Guerda ehep (comndere Lt Col V. A. Novikov. Col A. Yu.
Yekobaon and Hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col N. K. Lyeenko).

On 23 February. the renke of lleroee of the Soviet Union were added to in
the erny. By an Ukeee of the Preeidiun of the USSR Supreee Soviet thie
honorery title vee added to (in addition to those previouaiy nentioned):
Cepte P. H. Kruglov end 3. K. Khryukin; Sr Lte O. I. Halov. N. P. Pieerev-
ekiy. Ye. N. Seiyanin and V. I. sherkov: Lte V. S. Cavriiov and ll. 3.

Stratiyevaltiy. Capt A. Ye. Borovykh vee awarded a aecond Gold Star of
the Hero of the Soviet Union.

As a total from 4through 26 Pebruery. the AA nede 9.621. coebat eortiea.
including 6,360 for bonbing and strafing the may.

Sinulteneouely with the fierce etruggle to retain and extend the bridge-
heada on the veetern bank of the Oder. the 5th Aeaeult and 8th Guarde
erniee fought to capture the city and fortreen of Kuetrin.

The beginning of the troop offeneive on Kuotrin wee preceded by extended
eir eoftening up of ite objectives. lieving received the nieeion to de-
etroy the etrongpoint and the fortreee of Kuetrin. Gen 8. I. Rudenko ee-
eigned the 3d belt. the 221at bad. the 2‘2d nbad and the 9th ehak to thie
target. end gave inatructione on the nethode of action. In particular.
the 3d belt vee to aeeign a group of eniper divebonbere.

208
FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 242d nbad began bonbing the strongpoint of Kustrin on 17 February.

and tho renaining air fornations on 5 March. Pros the responses of the
conbined-arns coauand. the 3d ba|t carried out excellent actions: it was
covered by the pilots of the 1st Guards iad. Particularly effective was
the attack on Kustrin on 8 March by 9 Pe-Z led by the cousnder of the 96th
Guards bap, Guards Co]. A. Yu. Yakobson. In two runs the bonbers destroyed
16 plant buildings which had been adapted by the eneny for defenses.

The aviation aided the troops in capturing Kustrin prinarily by systensti-
cally destroying all the structures used by the Nazis for defense, and during
the period of the final storning of the city it destroyed one-y infantry in
the trenches and artillery nortsrs. The continuous air strikes during the
day and at night caused the oneny enornous losses in personnel and equip-
Ient. they wore down and donoraliaed the eneny troops and accelerated the
defeat of the eneny garrison.

On 12 March 1965, Hoscow saluted the troops of the First Belorussian Front
which had captured the city of Kustrin.

The order of the Suprene Oo-snder-in-chief pointed out that along with
the troops. the fliers of Cola todorenko. Berkal'. ‘rinofeyev. Kalinin and
Fedorov had distinguished themselves in conbet.

The remants of the destroyed fascist garrison escaped to the islands in
thc interfluve of the Oder and "arts. and \lug in at Kustrin fortress.

For assisting the troops in destroying the one-y in the fortress. the con-
nander of the 16th AA gave the nission to the co-anders of the 3d belt and
242d nbad to begin destroying the fortress works and to neutralize the
enemy troops around-the-clock. “the bonbing of the fortress started on

13 March. Later the 6th and 9th shah and the llth Guards shad were involved
in this.

The sniper divebonbers usually operated in fives under a fighter cover.

M or three aircraft dove simltsneously over the target. Each diveboeber
nsdc two-three runs. carrying two loo-SOO-Itg high explosive boobs. The at-
tscks by the divebonbers on the fortress, regardless of the snall size of
the targets. were very effective. Thus. on 24 “arch Capt V. P. Mel'nik
with the navigator Sr Lt P. A. Kislitsyn (96th Guards bsp) while over the
target received a radio co-and fro- the deputy co-ander of the 301st bad
Lt Col 5. P. Sennikov who was at the co-and post of the 8th Guards Arsy:
"Strike the large house in the northern part of the fortress.” ‘l’he Snipers
ﬂel'nik and Kislitsyn on the first pass with a direct hit by a SOC-kg bonb
destroyed the target and caused a large explosion. presumably an e-unition
dunp. A group under the co-snd of Capt H. G. Voskrosonskiy also attacud
the forts of the fortress successfully.

During the night of 25 Narch under bad weather conditions. the fliers and
navigators of the 717th nbad set an example of operations against the for-
tress. Due to the good organisation. the air reginent during the night
nude 211 sorties and dropped 35 tons of boobs. The airplanes in coning one

209
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

efter another renained continuously over the target. Certain crews lads
ten combat sorties during the night. Particularly distinguishing the--
selves were the pilot Jr Lt Dorogan and navigator Lt Krylenko. Tron an
altitude of 600 teeters by a direct bomb hit they blew up an a-anition
dulp in the fortress. The co-ander of the regieent Lt Col V. Ye. Kalinin
spent a larger portion of the night in the air over the fortress. he

monitored the actions of his crews and controlled then. indicating the
objectives for the crews.

As e total the air army nade 3,150 sortiee against the etrongpoint and
fortress of Kustrin. including 389 by the daylight boabere, 2.196 by the
night bombers and 575 eorties by the assault planes. here 876 tone of
bombs were dropped. The air strikes destroyed a significant nunber of
artillery and nortar batteries. a-unition dueps and essay personnel. The
fortress was almost conpletely destroyed and burned out and the resistance

of the garrison was crushed. The troops of the 8th Guards Army took it on
29 Herch.

For exeeplery execution of the eiseions of the con-and in battles against
the Ger-an invaders in capturing the city and fortress of Kustrin end for
the valor end courege shown in this. the 661st nbap (co-sender Lt Col
V. N. Sonin) was awarded the Order of the Red Banner. end the 26th bap

(co-ander Lt Col A. I. Sokolov) received the Order of Suvorov. Third
Degree.

The basic organizers of the daylight bombing strikes against the Kuetrin
fortress were the coarsenders of the 301st and 261st bed Cole P. H. Pedorenko

end A. c. Pedorov and their inediete superior the co-ender of the 3d bek
Gen A. z. Karavatekiy.

Afeneeiy Zinov'yevich Kerevatskiy was born in 1902. he began flying in
1925. Soon thereafter pilot Karavetskiy showed unusual abilities and
flying skill. In 1936. for the exemplary military training of a unit
Comnist Karavatskiy was awarded the Order of Lenin. Col Karavatekiy
entered the war es a division conender. A year later he was essigned to
organize the 3d bak which in Harch 1953 becaee part of the 16th AA. This
corps wee the basic strike force of the AA in all the operations free the
Kursk arc to lerlin. For successful combst the air corps was awarded
several honorary mess. and was given the Order of Suvorov while its
co-nender received two Orders of Lenin. four Orders of the Red Banner.
four Orders of Suvurov and Kutuzov and neny eedals. At present Lt Gen
Avn (Ret) A. Z. Karavatskiy carried out extensive nilitary patriotic work.

In March 1955. a fierce battle for the holding and extending of the bridge-
heeds on the Oder continued not only on the ground but also in the air.

Bneey aviation repeetedly atteapted to bomb and etrafe the troops of the
front on the bridgeheeds and crossings. The fighters of the 16th AA con-

ducted en intense struggle against fascist aviation. In the air on indi-
vidual days there were 50-70 air battles.

210
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. on 3 March our fighters conducted 49 air bettles in which 37 fee-
cist eirplsnee were shot down. the heroes of the dey were the fliers of
the 6th iek. Lt V. s. Velichko won four victories in the sir, Cept c. A.
Dnnilcnkov. Lt S. l. Andreyenho end Jr Lt V. N. Dubekin eech shot down two
nircreft: the flier of the 133d iep 8r Lt N. H. Antipov destroyed e fes-
cist by e res with his Yek-B. The flier of the 3d iek Sr Lt Ye. A. Don.-
chenko shot down two oneny eircreft.

Free 5 through 8 Herch. 76 eir bettles were held in which the Nezis lost
81. eirplenee. The fliers of the 236th ied distinguished themselves in
the bettles. Lte V. s. Velichko. N. P. Yevseyev end A. H. Yershov eech
shot down three eneny eircreft. end Hej Ye. L. 0vodov. hero of the Soviet
Union Capt V. N. Yeshin. Lts N. A. Brodehiy. A. A. Kol'tsov, V. H.
Kotrovskiy, 6. A. Peshkov end V. A. Sitnikov eech destroyed two eircreft.
In the 265th isd. Lt V. P. Tinnehek end Jr Lte H. A. Bebenko. A. N. Zesno
and I. Ye. Sidorenko eech elso shot down two eircreft; in the 193d ied.
Capt N. V. Sorokin end in the 176th Guerds iep Sr Lt P. I. Heslyekov eech
shot down two eircreft. One enemy sircreft wee destroyed by Lt Col V. s.
Mukhin. Hej V. S. Beskov end Cept N. D. Dugin (on 2 Hey 1965 he perished
in carrying out e siesion. During the ties of the wet he destroyed llo enemy
aircraft end wee posthumously ewerded the title of Hero of the Soviet
Union.). end neny others. In eddition the pilots of the 265th ied, Sr Lt
M. Ye. Pivoverov end Lt P. P. Gevrilin. respectively. shot down two end
one eneny eircreft. Hej V. V. Klinov (278th ied) elso begged e fescist.
Pivoverov. Gevrilin end Klinov by the end of the wer hed eech 19-26 vic-
tories in the sir end were ewerded the title of llero of the Soviet Union.

0n 7 Herch, Cept L. I. Ryshiy with Jr Lt N. P. Bugsyev (347th isp) wes
"free hunting." In the region of Beeskow et en eltitude of 2,500 neters
they sew sis ”-190 flying to the sect. Reving climbed shove the enemy.
our fliers fron behind end free the direction of the sun surprise ettecked
the group of Pokker-Hulfs. The fescists. heving dropped their bombs on
their territory, begen to retrest to the west. The "hunters" not only
thwarted the enemy's ettenpt to boeb our troops. but in pursuing in several
attacks they eech shot down one eneny eircreft.

0n 8 March four Yek-J from the 283d ied headed by Sr Lt S. I. Pononsrev
were covering the troops in the eres of the Kuetrin bridgeheeds. At en
altitude of 2,800 esters. Ponoesrev noticed e group of 15 Ju-87 end Ju-88
under the cover of 16 Fit-190 end fie-109. lleving taken up en edventegeous
position. Pononerev led his foursone into the etteck on the bonbers. In
the ensuing bettle Lt V. P. Budilin end then the group contender shot down
u Ju-88 end e Phi-190. The bosbere dropped their boebe cheoticelly end with-
out observing the forlstion hurriedly turned to the west. Thus four Yeks
drove off s sejor grouping of eneny eirplsnes.

The intensity of the air bettlee rose every dey. 0n ll Herch there were
71. betties in which our fliers shot down 56 eircreft. Victories in the
air were won by Gen Ye. Ye. Sevitskiy. Col P. P. Chupikov. Sr Lt N. s.
Rudenko. Lts N. M. Khristinin end S. P. Shpunyekov (265th ied), I. P.
Krivobok, V. S. Tkechenho end D. I. Suslov (278th ied) end others.

21).
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 273d iad particularly distinguished itself. Fifteen fliers of the
division, including Lt Col K. A. Tsvstashiy, Haj A. c. Turov. Capts 1.. G.
Koptev. I. P. Nechipurenko and H. P. Rents. Lts N. Ya. Ilithin. G. P.
lgnatenko. and others, shot down 16 enemy aircraft. The contender of

the 273d iad Col N. V. Isayev for able leadership of the division and for
the nine aircraft personally shot down in 38 air battles and the four in
group action was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union.

Equally fierce battles occurred on 22 and 23 March. The fliers of the AA
during these t2 days carried out 117 sir battles and destroyed 110 German
aircraft. Increasing their combat score were: Lt N. V. Inpatin (265th
isd). Sr Lts H. I. Dydygin and I. c. Kuanetsov. Lts H. S. Databanov, 1. F.
chernenkov and H. A. Kuzin (278th iad). Capt I. I. Shcherbahov (for the
able leadership of s squadron and for the 13 aircraft shot down by his.
he became a hero of the Soviet Union). Lts V. I. Aleksandryuk. A. P.
Ves'ko (176th Guards iap). and many others.

On 22 March the flier of the 812th iap 1.t 1.. I. Sivko on a piston-engined.
Yak shot down a German Jet fighter. the lie-262. This happened as follows.
At 1820 hours. four Yak-9 headed by Capt V. I. Hel'nikov were covering the
troops in the region of Zehin. The fighters were flying at an altitude of
2,500 meters at a speed of 550 In per hour. Suddenly Sivko saw a powerful
sheath of flame explode below his Yak in the direction of the aircraft of
Capt Hel'nikov, and at the next instant an unusual. propellerless enemy
aircraft flew by them at a high speed and climbing. And when the fascist
began to turn, Sivko from a range of 100 meters released a long cannon
burst at him. Dense black smoke poured from the right wing of the "user-
schnitt and then it turned over in the air and fell in the area of 2ehin.1

0n the same day. two elements of La-7 fro. the 176th Guards iap led by
twice Hero of the Soviet Union Haj I. N. Korhedub and Her of the Soviet
Union Haj A. s. Kuaanichltin tool: off for "free hunting." In the region of
Seelow they encountered up to 30 Pit-190 flying in two waves. Kozhedub at-
tached the upper group of four Pokker-Uulfs free the rear with the sun be-
hind him and free a range of 100-50 meters shot down one of them. The other
man in the element. Haj D. S. Titorenko. simultaneously shot down a second
fascist. Pulling out of the attack in a combat turn. Kozhedub closed in

on the second four Phi-190 and in a lightning attach set a third enemy air-
craft on fire. Guardsmen A. S. Kumanichkin, having noticed up to 20 “1-190
below his, attacked the trailing element and from a range of 100-150 asters
shot down one fighter which fell to the west of Seelow. ais wingman V. A.
Gronakovskiy attacked a second Fokker-Hulf and also shot it down. The enemy

pilot bailed out. Thus two gusrdsnen elements emerged the victors over a
nmerically superior air enemy.

In March 1965. in the Kustrin sector our fliers carried out 303 air battles
and destroyed 213 fascist aircraft, in maintaining air superiority.

 

1' Arkhiv no SSSR. folio 368. inv. 6676, file 480. sheet 275; file 1085.
sheet 517. 212

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Over Eastern Pomerania

By the end of the Viatula-Oder Operation. the troops on the right wing of
the First Belorussian Front were extended in a front to the north from the
Vistula to the Oder. The area between the adjacent Second Belorussian

Front was weakened. The threat areas of a strike by Nazi troops from the

north at the troops of the First Belorussian Front which were advancing to
the Oder.

By this tine. the Nazi col-sand had created a large grouping of troops nun-
bering up to 35 divisions in Eastern Pomerania. They were supported by
units of the 6th Air Fleet nunbaring around 300-600 aircraft. including
sore than 60 percent fighters.

Even in lid-February the troops of the First Belorussian Front with the
support and cover of the M had to repel attenpts by the Nazi troops to
pierce the defenses of the arnies on the right wing.

The eliaination of the Bastern Foneranian enemy grouping was assigned by
Headquarters to the troops of the Second Belorussian Front and the right
wing of the First Belorussian Front. The offensive was planned to be
started by the forces of the First Belorussian Front on 1 March. The
nain strike was to be lads by troops free the 3d Assault and 61st armies,

the 1st and 2d Guards tank arnies fro. the region of Arnswalde to Kohlherg
and Kat-in.

The 16th AA received the mission prior to the offensive of neutralizing
enemy aviation at the nearby airfielda and destroying the strongpoints in
the sector of the nein strike. Then by escorting and covering the troops
of the front. and particularly the tank armies. to assist in defeating the
Eastern Foneranian grouping.

For the purpose of weakening eneny aviation, Gen 5. I. Rudenko decided to
nake a sinultaneous attack on the airfields of Finowfurt, Altdau and Stettin
with the forces of 60 assault planes and 90 fighters. According to the air
reconnaissance data. up to 200 aircraft were based at these airfields. The
strike was planned for 28 February an hour before the onset of darkness when
all the may airplanes would be at the airfields.

The attack against Finowfurt Airport was nade by 20 assault planes fron the
726th shap (300th shad). They were supported by fighters fro- the 193d iad
which were split into the direct cover group (18 fighters) and a strike
group (12 fighters). Sons 25 km from the target, the fighter strike group
fron the 515th iap, having moved ahead to seal off the essay airfield, en-
countered lO eneuy aircraft approaching the airfield for a landing. and
attacked then. Sr Lt 5. Ya. Futintsev was the first to shoot down a Fokker-
Hulf, and the aircraft like a burning torch fail in the area of ’the air
field. Then one Ju-88 approaching for a landing was destroyed by Lt A. V.
Nikulenkov. The ease fate befall a Ju-87 which was shot down by Sr Lt s. A.
Bakhayev. The many antiaircraft weapons did not open fire.

213
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At 1850 hours, the first five assault planes approached the airfield at an
altitude of 900 esters. and followed by the subsequent ones. They attacked
the aircraft parking areas. the sntiaircrsft points and the duupe. 0n the
second pass the assault planes fired at the airplanes at the parking area.
At this tine the fighters of the attack group. in dealing with the enely
aircraft over the airfield. spotted the take-off of the eleasnt of Fit-190
on the alert. Lt Nikulenkov attacked the taking-off fighter froe above and
behind and shot it down. In toning out of the attack in a combat turn. he
hit the second clinbing Fokker-Hulf. The successful sealing off of the
enemy airfield by the strike group made it possible for the direct cover
fighters to participate in the strafing of the field. They nade three
passes and with their fire dansged several parked aircraft. 0n the return
trip the fighters encountered six Eli-190 which had taken off free the Bbers-
wslde airfield. The air conbat with it was carried out by the strike group.
and here Capt A. G. Podoroshnyy and Sr Lt S. P. Pusev each shot down one
Pokker-Hulf. At Finowfurt airfield. where there were 54 aircraft at this
tine. the assault planes destroyed 15 aircraft. 3 antiaircraft batteries.
they blew up 3 enunition dumps and 2 fuel dumps. and destroyed 3 hangars.
The cover fighters damaged 10 aircraft on the ground and 7 in the air.

Our pilots did not have any losses. The coebat mission was carried out
successfully due to the farsighted decision of the cor-ender of the 300th
shad Col V. A. Tinofeyev. to the careful preparation of the crews and to
the excellent coordination between the assault planes and fighters.

The attack on Altdan airfield was made by assault planes fro: the 173d
Guards shap escorted by fighters fro. the 133d isp. It was less success-
ful since the group of He got into clouds and the order of their operations
was disrupted. Only eight aircraft were destroyed. but it was noted that
rockets hit the hangers and six aircraft parking areas.

For the attack on Stettin airfield. 18 11-2 took off free the 175th Guards
shap under the cover of fighters froa the 602d iap. but because of bad

weather they did not reach the target and they bombed Polhov airfield

where three aircraft were destroyed and they strafed enemy troops on the
roads.

The enemy. having lost 63 airplanes on the airfields and fearing repeated

attacks. abandoned these airfields and moved the surviving aircraft to the
rear.

The plan of the operation envisaged that in the sector of the stain strike
by the troops of the front prior to the offensive the forces of the M would

destroy the strongpoints of Steinberg. Klein Silber. Falkenwalde. Rafenstein.
Altenweidel and Guntersberg in order to asks it easier for the troops to
pierce the may defenses.

214
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The co-ander of the 16th AA made the following decisions: The destruc-
tion of the enemy strongpoints would be started 2 days prior to the offen-
sive of the troops of the front; the boabing and strafing would be carried
out at night by Po-Z aircraft and during the day by Pe-Z and 11-2; for
achieving the greatest results high explosive bombs would be used with a .
caliber up to 500 kg, incendiary and fragaentation bombs. as well as rockets;
the carrying out of this mission was to be entrusted to the 3d bak. the 6th
and 9th shalt. the llth Guards shed and the 9th Guards nbad.

During the night of 27 February and on 1 March, the night bombers destroyed
the strongpoints of Klein Silber and Rafenstein. Palkenwalde and Guntersberg.
having made 2&7 sortiea against them. During the day of 27 and 28 February,
the assault planes escorted by the fighters in small groups bombed and
strsfed six strongpoints, having made 526 sorties under difficult weather
conditions. On 28 February. the 36th and 96th Guards bap in groups of seven-
nine Pe—2 aircraft (instead of 57 aircraft) under fighter escort bombed the
strongpoints of Klein Silber and Rafsnstein, having dropped 38.5 tons of
bombs. A particularly accurate strike against the Rafenstain strongpoint
was made by nine planes from the 96th Guards bap led by the contender of the
301st bad Col 1". H. Fedoranko.

As a total 851 sortiea were made against the six strongpoints by the AA, in-
cluding 561 by the bombers and assault planes. These dropped more than 200
tons of bombs. All the strongpoints were destroyed. and the troops of the
front. in going over to the offensive. did not encounter significant resist-
ance from the enemy. Along the way the aviators blew up 6 ammunition and
fuel dunps. and they destroyed or damaged 128 guns, 85 motor vehicles and
much other equipment. .

The effectiveness of the air strikes was highly praised by the comand of

the ground forces.

The raids by the night bombers also produced a good result. Thus, on 28 Feb-
rusry. the 9th Guards nbad operated in the area of the 80th Rifle Corps.
Prior to the appearance of our airplanes the enemy had been shelling the
battle formations of the Soviet troops and preventing an attack on the cross-
ings over the Ina River. The enemy was paralyzed by the night bomber raids.
the firing halted and our troops crossed this water barrier without losses.

The aviators of the 9th Guards nbad merited universal gratitude on the front.
From the walls of Stalingrad to Berlin, this division was the basic strike
force of the AA under night conditions. The indefatigable night workers
under the leadership of the co-ander of the air division Guards Col K. I.
Rnsskazov almost every night flew out on a mission. sowing panic and death
in the ranks of the Nazi invaders. During the years of the war. the division
made around 66,000 sorties. Many fliers of the division had made 700-800
successful nighttime coabat sorties. To the score of gusrdsmen Sr Lte

K. P. Hikhslenko, A. P. Hartynov. V. 'l‘. Popovich and L. V. Rykov were 900-
1.000 combat sorties. They all had been awarded the title of llero of the
Soviet Union.

215
FOR OPTICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The offensive by the troops of the right wing of the First Belorussian
Front started on 1 March. The forutions of the 3d Assault Any and the
1st Polish Arly after a SO-ninute artillery and air softening up process.
attacked the eneny end by noon had captured its nain defensive zone. On
the sane day both tank arnies were thrown into the breech.

During the day the AA assisted the troops in piercing the one-y defenses.
Bonner groups free the 3d bak under the cover of the 1st Guards ied. as
well as assault planes fron the 6th and 9th shek and the llth Guards shad
under the cover of the 6th and 13th iak. destroyed eneny tanks. artillery,
notor transport and personnel in the regions of Klein Silber. Jakobsdorf.
Tornov. Temik. and Butou. After the neutralizing of the ens-y in the basic
strongpoints. the air strikes were shifted deep into enuy defenses. The
fighters of the 3d, 6th and 13th iak covered the battle formations of the
troops and engaged in air reconnaissance and "free hunting." The 16th and
72d orep undertook reconnaissance activities in the Stettin and Berlin sec-
tors.

As a total during the first day of the offensive the any nede 965 sorties,
including ‘86 for bonbing end strafing the eneny. Here a significant quan-
tity of enemy nilitary equipnent and personnel was put out of co-isaion.

In six air’battles the fliers of the 278th ied Terekhov and V. P. Timshek
end the 283d ied. Lts S. S. Yegorov. A. N. Kurov and l. I. nokhlov. each
shot down one ”-190.

The enemy aviation endeavored to bod: our crossings over the Oder and the
troops in the region of Arnswelde. A total of 149 aircraft overflights were
counted. '

0n 2 March under difficult weather conditions (solid clouds at an altitude
of 100-300 esters and snowfall) the M was able to asks only 257 sorties.
nainly for covering the troops, strafing the ens-y and carrying out air te-
connaissance. In five air battles. the fliers of the 265th ied D. N. Ash-
chaulov. V. V. Kalashnikov. and P. P. Gavrilin each shot down an enemy air-
craft.

0n the third day of the offensive. the tank troops of the lat Guards Tank
Anny by a rapid maneuver reached the area of Gross Raddow. The Nazi troops
retreated to the north in disorder. The 61st and 26 Guards tank arnies were
forced to repel counterattacks by large eneny tank and infantry forces in
the region of Stergerd.

During the day in the periods between snowfalls the AA in assisting the ad-
vancing troops of the front carried out active operations. The 3d bak, the
221st bad. the 6th and 9th shalt, and the llth Guards shad under the cover

of the 1st Guards ied and three iak in groups bonbed and strafed the new

strongpoints, nilitary equip-ant and personnel. chiefly for the 61st and
2d Guards tank snias.

216
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol-‘FIGML USS ONLY

Of the eeny successfully executed bonbings. we lust sention the destruction
of military objectives in Stargard by nine Pe-Z fro- the 96th Guards bep led
by Guards Haj A. l. Fadayev. The bombers destroyed lo plant shops and 13
other structures as well as s section of the railroad eobankeent. and de-
stroyed many loaded railway cars and enter vehicles.

As a total during the day. 1.566 sortiss were made. including 616 to boob
and strafe enemy troops.

The eneay aviation, having increased its activities somewhat. resisted the
advancing troops of the front and our aviation. Thus. six 11-2 fron the
173d Guards shsp led by Hero of the Soviet Union Capt H. I. Rulyantsev were
strafing the retreating enemy in the region of Preienwslds. The planes were
supported by four Yak-3 froa the 133d iap headed by Capt G. A. Danilenkov.
After the first run the assault planes were attacked by six PHI-190 which
were covered above by four fighters. The gunners set the eneey with heavy
fire. The Yaks imdiszely entered the combat dur to the able and decisive
actions of the fighters. one [PH-190 was shot down. Another Fokker-Hun col-
lided with our Yak and both exploded in the air. Six tines the fascists en-
deavored to attack our assault planes. but each tine they were rebuffed by
the firing of the cover fighters and the gunners. The assault planes car-
ried out their niseion successfully. without losses.

0n Ia-S March. the formations of the let Guards Tank Amy reached the Baltic
Sea to the west of Kohlberg and split the Eastern Poseranisn Gersan group-
ing. The formations of the 2d Guards Tank Aray began to advance toward
Stettin Bay. The troops of the 61st Arly after stubborn battles captured
the ilaportsnt defensive center of Stargerd.

The 9th Guards and 262d nbsd during the night of 4 March destroyed enemy
troops in the region of Stargard and along the road to Hassow and Altdasas.
During the day the 9th shsk under the cover of the 13th isk continued to
strafe the eneny troops in the sense areas.

in assisting the troops in capturing the strongpoint of Stargard. the air
fornstione in 7 days carried out 2.526 sortiea and dropped over 3.000 boobs
with a caliber from 50 to 500 kg.

0n 5 March. the AA in line with the retreat of the ene-y to Altdau and the
Oder received the mission of destroying the enemy crossings and troops on
the approaches to then. In carrying out this nission. the 9th Guards nbad
boobed Altdssln. Groups of aircraft from the 9th and 6th shek end the 11th
Guards shad during the day destroyed the crossings over the Oat-Oder to the
west of Altdaua. They stopped the retreat of the ones-y troops and then by
boabing and strafing attacks destroyed than in the concentration areas.

This day the most effective ope; ltions were those against enemy troops car-
ricd out by a group of 15 lls fro. the 175th Guards shad under the cos-and
of he) A. D. Svietunov. The leaders of the two groups of five planes were
Sr Lts H. I. Pesenko and Sh. I. Shurgaya (both by the end of the war had

217
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

110-112 coshst sorties and they had been awarded the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union). The eight cover fighters fro- the 230th iad were led by Hero
of the Soviet Union Capt V. N. Yashin. The group of assault planes in sp-
proaching the Matteusse refereed into s circle and attacked a concentration
of fascist troops an the Kublend-hohenkrug road. Having nsde two passes.
the assault planes caused the eneny greet losses.

in certain instancee. the aessult plane pilots. if this was required by

the situation. assused the nission of fighters and engaged the ens-y bosb-
ere. Thus. a group of six 11-: led by the cos—under of the 70th Guards shep
Lt Col A. I. Kuz'nin was on its way to destroy the retreating ens-y troops
in the region of Hohenkrug. 0n the way to the target. the group encountered
nine Ju-87 under the cover of four FH-l90. Kuz'nin decided to attack the
ens-y bonbers. The cover fighers engsged the Pokker-Hulfs. and the six
X1~2 attacked the Junkers. In the course of the bsttle. Lt Sanoylenko shot
down one Ju-B7. Lt Col Kuz'ain and Lt Hoiseyev each hit one aircraft. and
the reesining boshers. having dropped their bosbs on their own territory.
turned west in disorder.

On A and 5 March. the AA carried out 1,775 sorties. basically for assisting
the advancing troops in the Stettin sector. In 20 air battles. 25 ens-y
sirplsnes were shot down. Our losses were 7 aircraft.

in the evening of 5 March. Moscow saluted the troops of the First Belorus-
sian Front which had captured the towns of Stargard. Naugerd end Polsin.

In the battles for these towns. as was pointed out in the order of the
Supreme Commander-in-Chief. along with the troops the fliers of Cole Seder-
enko. Sukhorysbov. Koryagin. Hironov. Kovnlev. lsayev. Rssskasov and Kalinin
hsd distinguished the-selves.

By the end of 7 March. the troops of the front had resched Stettin lay. hav-
ing occupied the towns of Ka-nin and Gollnow.

The AA. in cooperating with the troops and independently. continued to de-
stroy the ens-y units retreating to the crossings over the Oder st Altdenn.
At the sane time the srny was sssisting the troops in the bsttles for the
bridgehends et Kustrin.

Over the 2 days. the AA nsde 2.255 conbst sorties (including 703 at night)
with bad weather conditions. end 1.292 were for bombing and strafing eneny
troops. crossings and strongpoints.

The enemy aviation unsuccessfully endeevored to resist our evistion and
troops.

The personnel of the AA. regardless of the complicating of the situation
in the sir. as before showed courege. vslor end s desire to carry out the
mission best. The fighters conducted 28 sir bsttles and shot down 30 fee-
cist aircreft. Here is one of these clashes.

218
VOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n 6 March. six Yak-3 fro- the 133d iep headed by hej Ye. L. 0vodov, in
escorting four 11-2 fro: the 173d Guards ehap for strafing. encountered 12
Fokker-Hull. with half its forces the ens-y endeavored to attack the assault
planes. Haj avodov. having ordered the elenent of Lt Kol'tsov to cover the
assault planes. with the retaining coaredes engaged the six I'D-190. The as-
sault planes led by hero of the Soviet Union Guards Capt h. 1. Kuchinekiy.
having formed a circle. with the aid of the fighter elenent drove off the
eneey attacks by the fire of the gunners. As a result of the battle. our
fighters shot down 5 Fokker-Runs without having lost a single aircraft.

The assault planes returned to their field also without losses. In this
battle. in addition to Haj Ya. 1.. 0vodov. Capt 1. a. Nechipurenho. Lt A. A.
Kol’tsov and Jr Lt V. A. Sitnihov dietinguiehed the-selves. by the end of
the war. Haj ta. 1.. 0vodov had 18 air victories to hie conbat ecore. and

for this he was awarded the title of hero of the Soviet Union.

In the following days prior to 20 March. the troops of the front conducted
intense battles in the region of Altde-n. where the Nazis created strong
bridgeheeds. having concentrated up to six divisions here.

The 16th M. in aupporting the troops of the front in defeating the Alt“-
grouping. each day nade hundreds of eorties for destroying the atrongpointa
and the crossings and for knocking out enemy weapons and personnel.

line-y troops in the region of nude. and to the aouthwest of Stettin were
bombed and strefed alloet each night by the 9th Guards nbed. and during the
day by the 6th chair and 11th Guards ehed. The 3d belt and the 221st bad on
11. 15 end 18 harch boobed the strongpoints of Altdau. Podeuch and Pinken-
walde. The fighter foraetions covered the advancing troops of the front
from the air, while the air scoute continuously supplied the contend with
data on the enemy at the front fron the southern coast of the Baltic Sea
to Puretenberg. During these days the assault planes were the lost active.

0n 9 North, a group of 11-2 fron the 173d Guards shap under the co-end of
hero of the Soviet Union Capt H. I. Rulyantsev took off for neutralizing
eneey weapons in the region of Altdan. with the approach of the planes

to the target. Runyantsev saw that two artillery batteries and one mortar
battery were firing at our troops fro. the Altda- airfield. and on the
western outskirts of the town. the trenches were occupied by infantry.
Runyanteev ordered that the discovered targete be attached. The crews dropped
their boobs and strafed with machine gun and cannon fire. At the sane rise
the group of Sr Lt V. R. Lararev destroyed the antieircraft batteries which

were putting up intensive fire. The aaseult p1anes made four passes and
carried out the nieaion without losses.

On 11 March. 12 aseault planes free the 176th Guards shap headed by Haj h. H.
hatveyev were sent to attack encuy troops in the region of Altda-e. In
clarying the target for Hetveyev. the ground radioed: "llit heliendorf."
having nade certain that the orders were correct fro. the code word. the
group of 11s boobed and etrafed en artillery battery and an acculmlation of
motor vehicles. Then the ground radio con-ended: "Hit the eaetern out-
skirts of Alta-3' One of the foureonss of 11- attached an artillery

219
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

battery located there. Then the radio transaittod: “You attacked wall.
lake the third run against the plant to the south of Altda-I.“ During this
pose the crows saw six tanks in the plant yard. M SCM batteries opened
fire against the assault planes. An entire group of tho Ila attacked the
plant and the tanks. The ground demanded: "Attack the plant again!" The
assault planes node a fourth pass.

Finally the radio sent: "Good work. tell the next groups of assault planes
to destroy targets in these some areas."

On 18 March. eight 11-! froe the 173d Guards ahap under tho contend of

hero of tho Soviet Union Capt N. H. Balakirev escorted by six Yak-3 fro-
the 133d iap. took off to destroy enony troops to the west of Altdan.

In fours the assault planes approached the target and froa an altitude of
1.000 netsrs went in for the attack. The first group hit the perinetor.

and the second headed by Hero of the Soviet Union Capt H. I. Kuchinskiy. de-
tected o notor coluan sowing from Altdasn to tho crossing. In the following
two passes, all eight planes foruod a circle and destroyed the one-y troops
and equipuont by honhs. rockets. cannon and aachine gun fire. The actions
of the assault planes were corrected Iron the observation post of the con-
bined-arao co-andar by the deputy counnnder of the llth Guards shad Lt Col
V. P. Khranchonko. The assault plones knocked out several artillery batter-
ies and any vehicles.

The fighters also fought well. On 11 Harch, lo Yak-9 fro- tho SlBth iap
under the cot-sand of Capt V. N. Korshunov were escorting 17 11-2. Pour
ﬁll-190 appeared over the target and they from the rear and above attached

6 Ila pulling out of the attack. Korshunov and hie foursose intercepted

the Pokker-Hulfs and froaa range of 100 meters froa above and in front

shot down their leader with cannon and machine gun fire. During this the
another eleaent of Pokker-Hulfs coaing from the opposite direction endeavored
to attack our assault plane froa below. Lt D. N. Vereshchagin attacked this
eleaent from above and behind and free a short range shot down the leader
which at an altitude of 600 meters flipped over and dove to the ground.

In this battle. Lt Ya. P. Zaoyntlr'n “on M-Hoguishod hiaself as he shot
down one fascist.

On 20 March. after sany-dny battles the resistance of the Nazis was crushed
and the troops of the First Belorussian Front captured the town of Altdasn.
In the order of the Supreee Conandor-in-Chief it was pointed out that in
the bottles for this enemy strongpoint. along with the troops. the fliers
of Maj Gen Avn Tatanashvili. Cole Isayev, Koryagin. Orlov and Rasaltarov and
Lt Col Nakonechnikov had distinguished themselves.

With this the Eastern Pomeranian Operation ended for the troops of the First
Belorussian Front.

The air operations of the 16th M accelerated the defeat of the one-y group-
ing in Eastern Polerania. Pros 1 through 20 March. the any node 13.£80
sorties, including 6.552 for boabing and strafing the eneoy troops. 1.397

220
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FQR OPIICIAL USE ONLY

for eir reeonneieeence end 879 for "hunting" end intercepting eneey eir-
crsft. In the 228th eir hettlee the ene-y lost 251 eirereft.1 As e totel
in Nerch the fliers of the AA eede 25.76‘ eortiee. they conducted 531 eir
bottles end destroyed ‘66 \eecist eirereft.

For the exenplery fulfillnent of the ordere of the toe-end in the Beetern
Ponerenien Operation end for the velor end eourege shown in this. by en
Uhnse of the Presidiue of the 083R Supreee Soviet the following decoretione
were presented: The Order of the led Banner to the 717th end 997th nhed
(co-lenders Col V. Ye. Kelinin end Hej A. l. Kurneteov): the Order of
Suvorov. Second Degree to the 3d end 6th iek (co-lenders Gene Ye. Ye.
Sevitskiy end I. N. Deueov). the 300th shed. the 193d end 23£th ied (coe-
nnndere Cole V. A. Tinofeyev end 3. l. Horonov end Gen Ye. z. Teteneehvili);
the Order of Suvorov. Third Degree to the 402d isp, the 765th shep end the
93d okrep (co-lenders Hej A. Ye. Ruhehhin. Lt Cole V. c. Zenoedre end K. H.
Nyeeoyedov); the Order of Alexeendr Nevekiy to the 53d end 35th Guerde iep
(coneendere Hej A. A. Pletonov end Lt Col V. I. Shishkin).

Particularly distinguishing tho-selves in the Beetern Poeerenisn Operetion
were the 6th Polish sed. the 106th ehep end the 515th iep (co-lenders Cole
0. P. Turykin. He] 3. K. Yefreeov end Lt Col 6. V. Groeov): these were
awarded the honorery news of Poeerenien.

The Bestern Pouerenien Offensive Operetion wee cerried out under conditions
which were unueusl end difficult for the troops end evietion. During this
period the troops of the First lelorueeien Front. in eddition. continued

en intense struggle in the Berlin sector for holding onto end broedening the
hridgeheed on the Oder.

The 16th AA. without helting the intenes struggle to eeintein eir superiority
and in continuously supporting the troops in the Berlin sector. under ex-
treeely difficult weether end heeing conditions wee eleo to provide effective
help to the troops on the right wing of the front in defeeting the ens-y
groupings in Eastern Po-erenie.

here the enemy hed to destroy lerge pereenent defensive strengpointe ee well
es suppress end destroy the sneey evietion which in this sector put up
desperete reeistence. Then theevietionbegen ective opsretions egeinet the
retreeting eneey troops. it destroyed bridges end crossings. end crested
blockegee on the roede end in every possible wey iepeding the retreet of

the Nezi unite provided greet help to the troops of the front.

The victory of the Soviet troops in the Beetern Poeerenien Operetion led to
the collepee of the plen of the Nexi col-end which enviseged the leunching

of a fleet etteck egeinet the troops of the First lelorueeien Front. Ae e

result fevorehle conditions were crested for the finel defeet of feeciet

Germany.

' Arkhiv no 5333. folio 368. inv. we. files 523-529. mm 6. 17.

221
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

in January-March 1965. the troops of the First Belorussian Front. in co-
operating with the troops of the Second Belorussian and First Ukrainian
fronts defeated the Nazis in Poland and Eastern Poserania and completely
liberated the age-old Polish lands of the Nari invaders. in advancing to
the closest approaches to Berlin.

The 16th AA. from 1a January through 31 March. made 68.222 coabat sorties.
here the Iain efforts of the aray (75 percent of the sorties) were aised at
carrying out missions directly for the ground forces (be-hing and strafing
enesy troops and objectives. air reconnaissance and the covering of the
troops). The troops of the front constantly felt the fire support from

the aviation both in breaking through the eneay defenses as well as in ac-
tions in the operational depth and particularly during the pursuit of re-
treating eneny troops.

The second aission of the AA during this period was to fight to keep air
superiority. The AA pilots carried out 1.033 air battles and in fierce
clashes shot down 816 one-y aircraft. Moreover. 59 aircraft were deetroyed
at eneuy airfields. Such high losses for Nazi aviation not only seriously
undermined its night but also the morale of the Ger-an fliers in the con-

cluding battle for Berlin. where air superiority was saintained totally by
Soviet aviation.

The seat isportant condition for the cosbat successes of the AA as before
was the high patriotic upsurge of all the personnel inspired by the Con-
nunist Party to nest rapidly and the Great Patriotic Var. The personnel

in the course of cosbat shoved intrepidness. heroisn and self-sacrifice.

The silitery skills of the aviators during the fourth year of the war in-
creased so ouch that they could carry out any missions under the loot diffi-
cult situation. The personnel of the air commanders who were able to con-
trol aviation under various cosbat conditions also developed significantly.
As a whole the AA was further strengthened and was capable of providing ef-

fective support to the troops of the front during the concluding operation
of the Great Patriotic "or.

222
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

CRAPTBR 5: TR! IATTLE FOR BERLIN

Ready for the Offensive

The hrillient operetions of the Soviet troops et the outset of 19‘s ended
with the encirclessnt end destruction of lerge ens-y groupings on the ep-
proeches to Berlin. Our troops were confronted with the historic nission
of coepleting the defeet of the heel erny. cepturing the cepitel of fee-
cist Berlin end victoriously terninete the Greet Petriotic Her.

For cerrying out this historic nission, the troops of the First Belorussien
Front (co-sender Deputy Suprese Cos-ender-in-Chief Her so 0. K. Zhukov) in
coopereting with the edjecent fronts were to crush the Berlin grouping of
heel troops end in e short period of tine to conquer Belin.

The cornen Con-end in the Berlin sector hed crested e strong grouping. In

the ores of the offensive of the First Belorussien front 175 kl wide there
were sore then s helf nillion troops. over 5,000 guns end sorters end eround
860 tenhs end esseult guns. 0n the epproeches to Berlin the ens-y hed crested
three defensive zones up to 60 ha deep. end eround Berlin there were externel.
internsl end city defensive perineters which hed trenches. firing positions.

centers of resistence end entitenk trenches hosed on the systen of lehes
end the Spree River.

By the start of the operetion. the troops of the First Belorussien Pront in-
cluded eight cosbined-srns end two tenh ernies es well so the 16th AA.

By the stert of the prepsretions for the operetion, the fighting strength
of the AA consisted of the 3d hek. the 6th end 9th shek. the 3d. 6th end
13th iek. the 183d (es pert of the 3d heh) end 221st bed, the 9th Guerds end
242d nhsd. the 2d end llth Guerds shed, the 1st Cuerds, 282d end 286th led.
the 176th Guerds iep (pert of the 265th ied). the 16th odrep. the 72d orep.
the 93d end 98th ohrep end the 62d Guerds trsp of the GVP.

In the course of the preperstions for the operetion. erriving fro. the re-
serve of ﬂeedquerters for the eir erny were the following: The 6th hsk under
the coennnd of He] Gen Avn l. P. shot consisting of the 326th end 33‘th hed
(connenders. Cole V. S. Lehedev end I. D. Belyy); the let Guerds iek heeded
by Lt Gen Avn Ye. N. Beletekiy consisting of the 3d end ‘th Guerds ied

223
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(comannders Col l. l. Ivanov and Maj Gen Avn V. A. Kiteyev): the ll3th
(as part of the 6th huh) and 188th bad. the 240th ied (con-Indore. Col
H. s. Pinogenov. hero of the Soviet Union Col A. I. Pushkin and Maj Gen
Avn 6. V. zimin).

As a total the 16th AA had 28 air divisions and 7 detached sir regiments

hy the start of the operation. The AA had 3.033 flying combat aircraft.
including 533 daytime boabers and 151 night bombers. 6B7 assault planes.
1.5;3 fighters. and lid reconnaissance and correction aircraft. There were
2.738 battleworthy crews in the arey. No operational field force of the
Air Force during the entire war had such a large fighting strength as the
16th AA by the start of the Berlin Operation.

in addition to the 16th AA. also involved in the Berlin Operation were the
ith AA of the Second Belorussian front on the right and the 2d AA of the
First Ukrainian Front on the left. as well as 800 aircraft of the lath AA
of the Long Distance Aviation and around 300 airplanes of the Polish Air
Force. This entire grouping consisted of 7.500 coabat aircraft. Their
operations were coordinated by the coamander of the Air Force. Chief Her
Avn A. A. Novikov.

The eneay aviation in the Berlin sector opposite our three fronts had 3.300
combat aircraft which were part of the 6th German Air Fleet as well as the
Reich Air Fleet which coabined all the Ger-an air defense forces. In the
zone of the First Belorussian front. from the air reconnaissance data. up
to 1.700 aircraft were expected. including 1.200 fighters and 300 boabers.

Although in terms of the number of aircraft the 16th AA surpassed the Ger-en
Luftwaffe by l.B-fold. however it still represented an impressive force.

The Ger-an aviation in the Berlin sector was 70 percent fighters. Many figh-
.er unite were araed with Fﬂ-l90 aircraft which could be also used as assault
planes. The aviation was based at its own Iain. well-equipped airfields.

For covering the Berlin sector. the enemy had concentrated around 370 anti-
aircraft batteries and had deployed an extensive network of warning and
guidance radars.

The Nazi Com-and endeavored to use jet aircraft and cruise aissiles against
the Soviet troops. however this equipment was imperfect and did not make
any essential changes in the situation. The fliers of the 16th AA were
ready to COIbIL it.

in preparing for the Berlin Operation. the 16th AA at the some tile con-
tinued to cover the concentration of troops. to fight against enemy aviation.
to make strikes against enemy troops and defensive objectives. as well as
carry out air reconnaissance missions.

The basic struggle on the ground and in the air during this period contin-
ued for the Kustrin bridgehead which the Nazis endeavored to eliminate no
matter what. The units of the AA endeavored to support the troops on the
bridgehead. Over the period from 1 through 13 April. for these purposes.

22‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
rou drrtcm. usx om

regardleae of the frequent foga. 1.800 eortiea were aade, 22 air battlea
were carried out and 18 eneey aircraft were shot down.

"any taeka fell on the air acoute in preparing for the operation. They
detected troop groupinga. reeervee. the baaing and nuaher of aneey avia-
tion and they eatebliehed the nature of enuy defeneea in the zone of the
forthcoeing offeneive, beginning free the Oder and up to the llba. Air
reconnaieeance we carried out with a frequency of three-five tiaee a day.
The tone of the offeneive by the troopa of the front. including Berlin.
wee photographed air-eight tiaee. and thie helped to eateblieh the eyetea
of defeneea and the diepoaition of the faeciet troopa. The enemy airfielda
were photographed alnoat daily. The aerial photographic neteriale were
need for compiling intelligence nape and plane which were iaeued to the
co-endera of coepaniee. batteriee and air reginenta.

In preparing for the operation. the any carried out 2.600 aortiee for
reconnaieeance. The air raconnaiaeance data were of great value for the
con-and and ataffe of all levele.

The «and of the M gave great attention to organizing the interaction

of aviation with the group troopa and between the branchea of aviation.
According to the plan of the operation, all of the aeaault plane foraatiena
for cooperation were aeaigned to arniee of the front etrilte grouping. For
the period of breaking through the enemy defenaea. the aeaault plane foru-
tione in operational tarae were put under the conendera of the combined-area
amiee, and with the co-itnent of the tank arniee to the breach they were
ehifted to their co-endere. Thue, all the erniee of the atrilte grouping

of the front were provided with aeaault aviation which at any aoeent could
provide then with aupport in coabat.

For the period of the operation. interacting air fornetiona and unite were
aleo detenined.

The comandera and ataffe of the air fornetiona, having obtained inatruc-
tione on the procedure for coordinating with the ground troopa and between
the branchee of aviation. worked out coordination plane jointly. Then the
comndcre of the air forntiona and unite and aleo the group leader con-
eandere travel to the forward edge for beconing faailiar with the terrain
and the diepoeition of the targete.

The combat nieeiona were given to the co-andere of the air for-atione S
dnya before the etart of the operation. The concentrating of aviation at
the operational airfielda wee carried out gradually, during a period of
10-5 daya. The ferrying flighte were carried out at altitudee of not nore
than 300 netere. The operational airfield: of the fightere and eeeault
plenca were not nore than 10-20 In behind the front line. Baaic attention
wee given to canouflaging the airfielde and countering ene-y air acouta.

225
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The control of the aviation during the operation was organized considering
the making of strikes against the enemy in direct proximity to the advanc-
ing troops so that the troops could make maximum use of their result for
advancing. particularly in breaking through the enemy defenses. For more
precise control of the aviation over the battlefield. the commanders of the
cooperating air formations were to stay at the command points of the army
commanders (corps commanders). Moreover in the sector of the main strike

6 km from the leading edge. an auxiliary command post was organised, and
the deputy commander of the AA. Can A. s. Senatorov, was sent here.

Due to the fact that large numbers of fighters were to be used for fighting
against enemy aviation in the Berlin Operation, upon the instructions of
the commander of the 16th AA. a centralized radar system was deployed for
improving their control. and this system consisted of an army and two corps

guidance centers (under the 3d and 13th iak). and each of them had two-
three radars.

The system provided an opportunity for the commander of the AA to constantly
know the situation in the air and to respond promptly to changes in it,

when necessary increasing the fighter forces where the enemy aviation showed
greater actiweness. The commanders of the air corps could more nuccessfully
fight to maintain air superiority over the battlefield.

The command, the political bodies. the party and Kemeomol organizations of
the 16th AA during the preparations for and in the course of the Berlin
Operation carried out enormous work to strengthen the morale and explain to
all the army personnel the significance of this operation. the aim of which
was the victorious conclusion of the Great Patriotic Her.

The basis of their work in the units was to indoctrinate a tactically intel-
ligent. hold, loyal and disciplined sir fighter who was ready for fierce bet-
tles against a strong and perfidious enemy.

The agitation and propaganda were organized in accord with the missions of
each branch of aviation. The fighters were required first of all to be able
to locate the enemy and destroy it no matter what the cost. At the airfields.
around the airplanes. in the dormitories and in the messes posters were hung
up with the inscription: "Fighter! Hit the enemy for sure. from a close
range!“ This appeal reminded the fighter pilot of his duties constantly.

The main mission of the bombers and assault planes was to locate the target
and hit it precisely. In propsgandizing this demand the political apparatus

and the party organizations of the 34 bak. the 6th she! and the 2d Guards
shad showed initiative.

The air formations and units held conferences to generalize the experience
of previous battles with the participation of former fliers and meetings of

the Heroes of the Soviet Union with young fliers and representatives of the
ground forces with the aviators.

226
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

By the start of the offensive. the ailitary council of the front had sent
an appeal to the soldiers and officers of the troops stating:

”The troops of our front during the Great Patriotic Her have fought a dif-
ficult but glorious path. ' The colors of our units and foraetions are
wreathed with the glory of victories won over the essay at Stalinng and
Kursk. on the Dnspr and in Belorussie, at Warsaw and in Penerania. in Brand-
enburg and on the Oder... By the glory of our victories. by sweat and our
blood we have won the right to stern Berlin and be the first to enter it.
and the first to pronounce the terrible words of the severe sentence of

our people for the Ger-aninvaders. We urge all of you to carry out this

aissi<1>n with your inherent nilitary valor, honor and glory. Forward to Ber-
linl"

The rear of the 16th M began preparations for the Berlin Operation back

in March. By that tine the rear services included nine In (6th. 5th, 21st.
25th. 28th. 36th. 56th, 79th. 80th). At the outset of the operation the
17th RAB arrived for reinforcenents. In the 10 N there were 72 bao. 9
detached notor transport battalions and 6 detached airfield engineer bat-
talions. Every 3 bao served an average of 6 sir regiments.

The operations of the M required 18,500 tons of aI-unition and 19,000 tons
of fuel. by the start of the operation. the army had. respectively. 16.600
and 15,300 tons. The lacking quantity of a-aunition and fuel was to be de-
livered in the course of the operation. For this all aided and tanker motor
transport (620 vehicles with a capacity of 920 tone) was organized into ex-
ternal supply coluns of 15-20 vehicles each and these were directly under
the chiefs of the MB. Each bao was left 11 vehicles, and the MB had free
30 to 80 vehicles. Available to the chief of the any rear services as a

reserve were two aotor transport battalions for aiding the m which could
not handle the deliveries. Such a aethod of centralized use of the actor

transport ensured the delivery of fuel and a-unition for the entire opera-
tion.

By the start of the operation the M had 162 airfields. including 8 with a
nan-made landing strip and the rest were dirt. This net the needs of the

any.

The entire personnel of the air engineer service had to note a great effort
in preparing for the operation. Due to the unstinting labor oi the young
specialists. nechanics. technicians and engineers as well as the well or-
ganized work of the entire service. the nunber of aircraft out of cousission
in the arny by the start of the operation was reduced to 6.7 percent.

In accord with the Headquarters Directive of 1 April. the plan for the of-
fensive of the troops on the First Belorussian Front consisted in tasking

1 Arkhiv so sssn. folio 368. m. 6476, file 539. sheet 21..

227
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a powerful frontal strike which would split the entire Berlin grouping into
several parts. the capturing of Berlin and the reaching of the Elbe River
on the llth-15th day of the operation. The nain strike was to be made froa
the Kustrin bridgehead by the forces of four coebined-arlss armies (47th,

3d and 5th Shock and 8th Guards) and two tsnk armies (let and 2d Guards).

The 16th M was given the following basic missions: In Iaintaining air
superiority, to reliably cover the troops of the front and the crossings;
during the artillery softening up process. to disrupt the control of ens-y
troops in the tactical defensive zone; at dawn to assist the troops in
breaking through the slain defensive zone, the emitting of the tank arlies
to the breach and their actions in depth; to conduct eneny reconnaissance.
In accord with these missions. the co-nander of the 16th M took a decision
and the staff elaborated a plan for the conbat use of aviation the brief
content of which cane down to the following.

During the night of 16 April. prior to the start of the offensive, to dis-
rupt the control of eneny troops by attacks by the 9th Guards and 252d nbsd
(120 sorties) against the staffs and conunications centers ahead of the
front of the 5th Shock and 8th Guards armies.

With the start of the offensive. the basic efforts of the M were to be
shifted to assisting the troops of the 3d and 5th Shock and 8th Guards
uraies in breaking through the enemy defenses. “are the 2d Guards shed.
the 6th and 9th shak (856 sorties) were to directly escort the infantry.
Then the eneny strongpointa located in depth were to be destroyed by the
forces of the 3d bak (336 sortiea) in the zone of the 5th Shock Army and
by the forces of the 6th bak, the 188th and 221st bad (309 sorties) in the
zone of the 8th Guards Any. The 6th and lst Guards iak, one iad of the
13th iak, the lat Guards iad, one iap fro- the 282d Division and the 286th
iad (1,098 sorties) were assigned for covering the troops and aviation in
the zone of these three armies.

Him the approach of the tank armies and corps to the battlefield, the sain
efforts of the M were to be shifted to supporting their cos-itment to bat-
tle and actions in the operetional depth. For these purposes the 2d shed
and a portion of the forces from the 6th iak (240 sorties by assault planes
and 120 by fighters) were assigned for the 9th 'I'ank Corps of the 3d Shock
Army; the 6th shak. the 3d bak and the 3d iak (respectively, 369. 180 and
937 sorties) for the 2d Guards ‘I‘ank Artsy: the 9th shak, the 6th bak and the
188th bad. the lat Guards iak, one iad of the 13th iak and the 286th iad
(600. 304 and 1.091 sorties) for the let Guards Tank Artsy.

For supporting the northern and southern auxiliary groupings of the front,
the following were assigned: A portion of the forces from the 2d Guards
shad and the 273d iad (I60 and 176 sorties) for the 67th Array, and the llth
Guards shad and the 282d iad (392 and 206 sorties) for the 69th Artsy.

228
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The nission of conbeting eneny aviation in the air was entrusted to: the
3d ink in the zone of the 5th Shock Army and the 2d Guards Tank Amy. and
to one ied of the 13th ink in the tone of the 8th Guards Army and the let
Guards Tank Aray. In addition. the 240th ied was assigned for conbeting
eneny aviation by free hunting for enemy aircraft and destroying then.

As a total on the first day of the operation. the 16th AA was to carry out
8.126 sorties, of which 3.991 were to be nade by the assault planes and
boebere and the remainder by the fighters.

Since the front was to start the offensive 2 hours before dawn, upon the
decision of Headquarters in addition to the two nbed of the 16th M. the
night operations would involve the light night bombers of the 6th M for

participating in the air softening up process and the heavy bonbers of the
18th M for air support of the troops during darkness.

Thus, the basic efforts of the 16th M. in contrast to actions in other
operations. were aimed at nexiaul support of the ground troops directly on
the battlefield in order in the shortest ties to crush the strongest tacti-
cal eneaay defenses standing on the path to Berlin.

Up to 90 percent of all the forces of the M were to be used in the sector
.of the main strike to be launched from the Kustrin bridgehead, and for sup-
porting the nain strike grouping of the ground forces. Only in this Ianner
would it be possible to ensure the successful start and subsequent develop-
ment of the offensive of our troops.

More than 70 percent of all the forces of the M (20 air divisions out of
the 28) had been assigned for strong and continuous air support of the tank
arnies and corps in this operation, since the crucial role had been given

to the actions of nubile fornations. Precisely they would be the first to
break into Berlin.

The presence of a sufficient number of fighters in the M asde it possible
to assign entire air fornations for countering ene-y aviation in addition

to covering the ground troops. Such a decision led to the rapid defeat of
Nazi aviation.

The plan for the combat use of the 16th M was worked out only for one day,
since it was assuned that the nain zone of ens-y defenses would be broken
on the first day of the operation. Subsequently the air fornations were

to operate in accord with the decisions of the command of the front and
the situation.

By aid-April the formations and units of the 16th M were fully prepared
for the operation.

The M in the Concluding Battle

Prior to the start of the offensive of the troops of the First Belorussian

Front against Berlin, on 16 and 15 April the battalions of the divisions in

the first wave carried out a reconnaissance in force and this nede it pos-

sible to clarify the troop groupings and the configuration of enexsy defenses.
229
Units of the 16th M during these 2 days, in supporting the troops, attacked
the eneey weapons and infantry in the main defensive zone, they coabated its
aviation and carried out nunerous reconnaissance missions to clarify and
adjust the available data. On 14 and 15 April, the M carried out 1,152
sorties, including 170 for bonbing and strafing the eneay troops, and 250
sorties for air reconnaissance. The fliers of the army carried out 68 air
battles and destroyed 38 ens-y aircraft.

The reconnaissance in force confused the Ger-an cot-sand. It took the actions
of the reconnaissance units as the unsuccessful start of a general offensive
by our troops. '

The combined-eras armies of the shock grouping of the front went over to
the offensive at 0500 hours on 16 April Moscow time after air and artil-
lery softening up.

The air softening up of the offensive involved light bombers from the lath

M. During the first half of the night they suppressed the destroyed enemy
weapons and troops ahead of the front of the arnies launching the main strike.
As a total they nade “0 sortiea.

During the artillery softening up, 109 aircraft fron the 9th Guards and
242d nbad attacked the enemy staffs and comunications centers in the nain
sector.

With the troops going over to the attack, the operations of the heavy night
bombers of the 18th M comencad against the strongpoints in the second zone
of eneay defenses. For 1.2 sin-ates the defenses were subjected to continu-
ous strikes by 763 bosbers' which dropped 88b large-caliber boobs. Here the
average density of the bomb strike in the area of the targets was 50 tons
per km .

With dawn the 16th M began operations. however a sorning fog covered many
airfields and did not make it possible to carry out the planned concentra-
ted strikes. Visibility did not exceed 1,000 meters and for this reason
only the assault planes operated in sasll groups during the first hours, in
suppressing and destroying enay weapons and Room on the battlefield. But
even these linited operations provided help to the advancing troops. Thus,
around nidday units of the 80th Rifle Corps of the 5th Shock Army fell under
heavy artillery fire from the region of Diedersdorf and were forced to stop.
Sunnoned by the consander of the 198th shad Col V. I. Belousov who was at
the comand post of the rifle corps, the first to arrive were nine assault
planes under the comnd of Capt Sorokin and having for-ed a circle, sub-
jected the German artillery batteries to uninterrupted attack. The subse-
quent groups of assault planes finally suppressed the essay fire. Our troops
moved forward and captured the enemy positions.

Later the coauander of the 80th Rifle Corps wrote: "The 198th shad played
a major role in ensuring the success of the rifle units. The assault planes
cleared the path for the infantry, in destroying and suppressing the enemy

230
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

firing points and artillery. Often they operated 300 aetars away free our
advancing troops. in cospletely suppressing enemy resistance. The groups
appeared quickly and prosptly over the target."

For the purpose of continuous support of the advancing troops under the
conditions of bad weather, Gen Rudenko decided to allow the assault plane
groups returning froe aissions to land at any airfields of the M which
were not covered by fog. to take on fuel and a-unition there and again
take off for attacking the ens-y. The new targets were indicated to the
assault planes in approaching the combat area. The cousnders of the air
formations were also given the mission of carrying out continuous weather

reconnaissance and with the slightest ieprovement in it to send out air-
plane groups for combat.

Regardless of the difficult weather conditions. the continuous attacks of
the assault planes neutralized the enemy weapons and pinned enesy infantry
to the ground, clearing the path for the advancing troops. The bombers

attacked the more distant objectives such as eneny strongpoints. highway
junctions and reserves.

A participant in the battle for Berlin. the former coemsnder of the Mist
bad Col A. c. Pedorov in his book "be Poslednego Starts" [Until the Last
Take-Off] thus describes the actions of the bombers on that day:

"The 241st Air Division sortied to support the offensive of the 5th shock
and 8th Guards armies soon after the ending of the artillery softening up.
Some 72 Pe-2 aircraft and around 100 fighters from the let Guards iad took
off. An impressive and stirring picture!

With a deterioration in the weather on the way the colm of nine split

up into elements and continued ahead. 0n the approaches to the designated
targets. we fell under heavy antiaircraft fire. Eight airplanes sustained
damage and four of then dropped out of the formation. But the remainder con-

tinued on and dropped their bombs on the target. The divebombers carried
out their eission....

"0n the way back to groups of nine Pe-Z came under attack by Pekker-Hulfs.
The Guards fighters hurried to help. Particularly good were the actions
of the group led by Haj Ya. Varlov. Lts Ol'kin. Solo-in. Postyna and
borisenko each destroyed one f ighter, and Lt lvsnov shot down two.

"in the sec end half of the day. the division made a new attack against the
strongpoints. In beginning his dive at the target, the airplane of Lt K. V.
'l'snrev was hit by enemy fighters and black smoke trailed the aircraft. Ile-
gardless of the con-snder's order to leave the foraation and return under
cover to the airfield. pilot Tssrev made one other pass on his burning air-
craft and in the dive covered the target in bombs. At this moaent the navi-
gator hero of the Soviet Union 8. Ya. Fil'chenkov was severely wounded by

the explosions of an antiaircraf t shell. Lt Tsarev turned back to his ter-
ritory and with enormous risk approached the Oder. Soon thereafter he landed

23].
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the aircraft on a small field which 30 minutes previously had still been

in German hands. The first to jump out was the gunner-radioman A. Krivoch-
enkov. he and the pilot pulled the navigator out and moved him away. There
then followed an explosion which destroyed the remnants of the aircraft."

After midday the weather improved and the intensity of attacks by tactical
aviation began to rise. At 1500 hours. over 600 airplanes of the M were
still in the air. The air formations extended their actions with full
force endeavoring to carry out the designated missions.

The troops of the front in the main sector during the day broke the first
defensive zone of the enemy and reached the second. the Seelow Heights.
where they encountered stubborn resistance. During the peak of the battle
the assault planes of the 9th shak led by the deputy cot-sander of the 33d
Guards shap Hero of the Soviet Union Haj N. l. Belevin. in supporting the
offensive of the 8th Guards Army. dropped by parachute into the position
of its battle formations four meter-long keys similar to the historic keys
from Berlin which were presented to the Russian troops during the Seven
Years "er of l756-l762. Each of them carried the text: "Guardsmen friends,
forward to victory! we are sending you keys from the gates of Berlin!"
They symbolic keys had been manufactured by workers at the Leningrad Plant
imeni Kirov and were sent with the order: "Open the gates to Berlin and
thereby accelerate victory over Nazi Germany!" This combat appeal caused
inspiration and a new influx of forces among the advancing units.

For intensifying the strike of the attacking troops the co-ander of the
front decided to commit the tank armies to the engagement without waiting
for the defenses to be broken by the combined-arms armies. The basic ef-
forts of the 16th M were focused on supporting the actions of the troop

formations as well as the combined-arms armies fighting in the area of the
Seelow heights.

Here all eight divisions of the army's daytime bombers as well as the 6th
and 9th shalt began operating with full force. The bombers destroyed the
strongpoints and road junctions, having made around 1,200 sorties during
the day. The assault planes suppressed the weapons and destroyed personnel
in the enemy's defensive zone. They made around 800 sorties. The bombers
and assault planes provided tangible support for the ground forces. In
particular, the crews of the 3d balt dropped 350 tons of bombs on enemy
strongpoints. Pliers from the 9th snak destroyed and damaged around 90

artillery weapons and 70 motor vehicles. they blew up 9 dumps and destroyed
a large number of Nazis.

At this time the 2d and llth Guards shad were operating on the right and
left wings of the front for supporting the troops of the 3d shock and 69th
armies. They destroyed enemy artillery and mortar batteries, other mili-

tary equipment and personnel in the zone of the offensive of our troops.
having carried out 530 sorties.

232
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hith an isproVeeent in the weather. enesy aviation began to put up strong
resistance in the air and endeavored to boob our troops and the crossings
over the Oder in groups of 15-20 Pokker-Vulfs. During the day the any
warning systen counted around 600 enemy aircraft in the air. however the
attenpts of fascist aviation to reach our troops were unsuccessful. The
fighters intercepted the enesy aircraft over their territory due to the
excellent work of the radars and the guidance centers.

Hith the start of the offensive by the troops of the front. successful cos-
bat operations were begun by the 13th isk led by Gen 3. A. Sidnev. 'l‘he fliers
of the corps during the day carried out 68 air battles and destroyed 62 fee-
cist aircraft. The fighters of the 283d iad won 62 victories. Three Ger-an
airplanes were shot down by llero of the Soviet Union Capt N. A. Neydenov.

and two each by Haj Chaplinskiy. Sr Lts V. M. Oganesov end I. D. Thachsnko.
Lt V. Ye. 'l‘ret'yakov and Jr Lt c. A. Chirkov. The co-endar of the 347th

iap Lt Col P. B. Denkevich. llero of the Soviet Union Haj V. A. Beshkirov.

Hejs A. A. Yefrenov and V. l. Shuin. Capt V. U. Korehunov and many others
eech destroyed one enemy aircraft.

The fliers of the 3d iak also achieved great successes on the first day of

the operation. In 63 air battles they destroyed SO fascist eirplanes. Here
is one of these clashes.

A flight of Yak-3 from the 291st iap under the consand of Sr Lt A. V. Ivenov
was covering troops in the region of Alt Friedland and Seelow. Soon there-
after it was targeted fron the ground to an eneny group numbering up to 25
fighters flying at 500 teeters lower. end it inediately attacked the- free
behind. Sr Lt A. V. lvanov and Jr Lt S. H. Sokolov i-ediately shot down
one Pokker-Hulf each. The new group of Soviet fighters which had hurried
in also engaged the enemy aircraft and, having destroyed several fascists.
and did not per-it then into the combat area of our troops.

On this day the fliers of the 176th Guards iap (co-ander hero of the Soviet
Union Col P. P. chupikov) particularly distinguished thesselves. and they,
in carrying out free hunting over the very point of the offensive of our
arsies, in the area of Seelow. Huncheberg and Bernau. carried out 10 air
battles and destroyed 16 Fokker-Wife without losing a single aircraft.

The guards-en Capt Kornev, Sr Lt N. s. Rudenho and Lts V. V. Alekeeyev and
K. K. Bnchilo each had two victories in the air.

The counnder of the 5th Shock Artsy Gen N. E. Berzarin. in observing the
air battles of our fighters. toward evening sent the following telegram
to the conned of the 3d iad: "I would like you to contend the fliers of
your corps who fought excellently under difficult weather conditions in
supporting the troops and the crossings over the Oder on 16 April 1945."

On 16 March the fliers of the 236th iad also fought successfully. In 8 air
battles they shot down ll Ger-en aircraft. liere 8 victories were won by
the fliers of the 133d iap Capt l. P. Nechipurenko, Lts S. S. Grolov, S. S.
Yegorov. V. c. Lazarev and V. A. Sitni‘sov. Jr Lts V. P. Ceydukov and H. V.

233
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPlCiAL USE OﬂLY

negtyarev. The first day of the operation was completed with the same re-
suit by the fliers of the 286th iad. Distinguishing themselves in battle
were the commander of the 721st iap Lt Col 1. G. Trilevich and his fliers
Capts A. s. Kobisskoy and A. P. Lipatov. Sr Lt A. K. Bomko. Lts A. P. Isayev.
K. s. Kolyahkin. I. K. More: and V. G. Samenov.

All in ell the fliers of the 16th AA conducted 160 air battles and shot
down 165 enemy fighters. Our combat losses were less.

At the end of the day the enemy sent iive cruise missiles and four Ju-88
aircraft filled with explosive against ground targets. but they had no in-
fluence on the actions of our troops.

As a total on the first day of the operation. the 16th AA carried out

5.342 combat sorties. including 2,521 for bombing and strafing the troops,
2,610 for covering the troops. aviation end combating enemy aviation and

Zil for air reconnaissance. This was the largest number of sorties by the
army in a single day in the entire war. Around 80 percent of all the sorties
were carried out to support the main grouping of troops on the front. Some
1,500 tons of bombs were dropped on the enemy.

On this day the personnel of the army worked under great stress. As an
average each bomber crew made more than 2.4 combat sortiea. over 2.1 for
the assault plane and 2 sorties for the fighter. Since with each sortie
the number of battleworthy crews in a unit always declined somewhat. many
fliers and navigators had to make 3 or even 4 sorties a day. The large
number of sorties required very intense work at the airfields from all the
technical and service personnel.

As a result of the battles on the first day of the offensive. the main strike
grouping of the front advanced 3~8 km. The Seelow Heights. the key position
in the second defensive line. remained with the enemy.

in the evening, reports arrived from air reconnaissance on the movement of
large troop columns from around Berlin toward the front. Around 200 11-5
aircraft from the 18th AA were sent out for attacking them at night. The
movement of the columns was disrupted. At the same time the heavy bombers
continuously operated against the strongpointe and battle formations of the
enemy troops on the Seelow Heights. in carrying out around $70 sorties.

0» 17 April, the troops of the front continued the offensive. fierce battles
broke out in all sectors. At a price of great effort the troops of the armies
in the main attack grouping broke through the 2d defensive line. they captured
the Scelow heights and advanced 6-13 km during the day.

In the morning the AA. because of fogs and low solid clouds which limited
visibility to 500 meters. were able to support the troopoffensive only in
small groups of airplanes. The planned concentrated attacks against enemy
defenses on the Seelow heights were not carried out. In the second half of
the day the weather in the center improved somewhat. but further south as
before remained extremely unfavorable.

234
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The AA bonber corps hsceuse of the ebsence of visibility were uneble to

terry out their eiseions. The 29 boebere of the 6th belt which took off for
e sission did not reech the tsrget end were forced to turn beck. The ections
of the 3d belt. the 9th shek end the llth Guerde ehed were lieited to just
severel eorties for veether reconneiseence. The desire of the sir co-enders
end the personnel to terry out the set nissions wee high. but the bed weether
grounded the eirplenes.

of the bosbers. only crews free the 188th end 221st bed eede it through to
the coebet eree of the 3d end 5th shock ereies. In seell groups they nsds
severel strikes egsinet eneey ertillery in the region of Hriesen. Dieders-
dorf end Lieeen end egeinst strongpointe in Alt Rosenthel. 'rrsbnie. Gelsdorf.
heving ends 129 sortiee.

The eeeeult plenes froe the 2d Guerds shed end the 6th shek. in supporting
these erliee. ends 68 sortios destroying ens-y ertillery end infentry on
the psth of our troops.

Our fighters during the dey cerried out 35 sir bettles egeinet ens-y evin-
tion end destroyed 66 ensay eircreft. The fliers of the 6th end 13th iek
eech hed ll victories in the sir. 8r Lt A. P. Piletov end Lts L. N. Deein
end N. P. Kevketekiy sech shot down two eircreft. The col-sender of the 176th
inp Nero of the Soviet Union Lt Col V. N. Nehrov. Sr Lte V. I. Alekeendrov.
A. P. Clonedin, x. N. Kreeitskiy. V. V. Pete-kin end I. I. Khokhlov. Its

A. A. Vinogredov. N. A. Divkov end A. P. Yerosinin. Jr Its A. c. Zekherov.
Kelinin end others eech destroyed one eircreft.

Nsny eir bettles developed with nt-ericel ens-y superiority. Nuch courege
end skill wee required in order to echieve victory under these conditions.

At the end of the dey the consumer of six fighters iron the 30th Guerds iep
Sr Lt A. P. Piletov, in escorting eeseult plenee. received intonation fro-
ths guidence redio thet et en eltitude of 2,000 neters to the eest wee e
lerge group of eircreft. Soon he sew up to 50 bosb-leden Fokker-Volts in
the sir. Neving left two fighters to escort the eseeult plenes. Piletov
ordered the reneining two eleeents to etteck the eneey heed-on end from the
flenk. for the ens-y this etteck wee e surprise. In the ensuing bettle
our fliers destroyed four fescist fighter boebere. The reminder, heving

disrupted their forution. turned beck. The ettech on our troops wee not
cerried out.

On the use dey, two feecist eircreft were shot down by the precise bursts

of the fenoue Soviet flier twice Nero of the Soviet Union Hell I. N. Koshedub.
During free hunting in en element to the west of the Oder. I. N. Koshedub
encountered up to 60 Flt-190 eircreft which were flying eech with bonbs.

In climbing ewsy fro- thee he turned end et unim- speed ceught up with

end etteclted fro- behind end shove the trelling eirplene which i-edietely
exploded in the sir. The feeciets were confused and our fighter group which
hed errived. in teking edventege of this soeent. in en inetsncs disrupted
their bettls forution. On the wey beck I. N. Koahsdub ceught enother fokker-
Half end shot it down et point-bleak renge.

235
70’. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’ICIAI. USE ONLY

In addition to Nej I. N. Koshedub. on 17 April. victories in the eir were
also won by his coeredes in the 176th Guerds Reginent 3(er I). 8. Titorenko

end A. s. Ku-enichkin. Cept N. I. Sevin end Lt S. V. Kreeerenho. eech of
when destroyed one Fokker-Vulf.

By the end of the wer. Me: I. N. Koshedub hsd eede 330 neebet sorties. he
had csrried out 120 eir bettles end destroyed 62 fescist sirplenss. holding
first plece eeong Soviet sees in terns of the number of eneey eircrsft shot
down. The notherlend highly preised his coebet feets. On 18 August l9”.
he was ewerded the title of thrice Hero of the Soviet Union. Col Gen Avn
l. N. Koshedub continues to serve in the Air Force.

In describing the erhoic deeds of our couregeous evietors. we cennot help

but nention those who elong with the fliers end their co-enders forged the
victory end inspired the air fighters in the AA to defeet Ger-en fsecise.
These were the chiefs of the politicel depertlents of the forestions includ-
ing the deputy couenders for politicel effeirs Cole V. s. Akieov (1st Guards
ied). N. D. Anen'yev (3d ielt). A. P. Dergunov (3d belt). H. H. Drobinskiy
(llth Guerds shed). A. S. Ioshelev (282d led), D. I. Nikulin (6th iek).

A. s. Nikul'shin (13th iek). A. V. Firkin (9th shek). P. H. Tupenov (6th
sheh). H. P. Chuyenov (301st bed) end a. A. Sherolthin (283d ind). Lt Cole

I. I. Diper (3d Guerde shed). P. I. Zhurbenko (9th Guerde nbed). N. G. Herin
(286th ied). V. V. Reut (193d ied), N. K. Pedorov (23ﬁth ied). A. A. shibenov
(241st bed). end others. In being conetently in the sidst of the assess.

by ell for-s of politicel work they nobilited the personnel of the eir for-
netions to cerry out their duty to the notherlend in en exeeplery esnner.

0n the long end difficult peth to victory. the ceuenders were constently
sided by their besic deputies. the chiefs of steff of the eir fonetions Gen
1. L. Vlesov (3d belt), Cole I. V. Vesil'yev (6th iek). I. ‘1'. Voinov (3d
Guards shed). P. c. Yemkov (9th shek). P. S. Ivenov (llth Cuerds shed).

P. s. Kieelev (13th iek). I. H. Kuz'ein (301st bed), 8. V. Roeenov (Zélst
bed). S. Ye. Roeenov (273d ied) end Ye. A. Pekov (6th shek). Lt Cole V. s.
Doliyevekiy (let Cuerde ied). H. P. Krotov (283d ied). V. V. Herltov (236th
ind). L. S. Okipchite (283d isd). G. A. Ponoeerkenlw (286th ied). G. V.
Toeshenkov (9th Cuerds nbed). end others. Bech chief of steff wss the right
hand of the cousnder in orgenising end controlling coebet. Their ectivitiee

were slweys esrked by unflegging energy. creetive initietive. preciseness
end efficiency.

On 17 April. the units of the 16th AA due to bed weether esde only 885

sorties. including 228 for betting end strefing eneny troops. Sons 273
eircreft overflights were counted for the ens-y.

On 18 April. the eein shock grouping of the troops of the front, heving over-
come the evening before the second line of enemy defenses in the eree of
Uriezen end Liebbeniechen. continued to develop the offensive to the west.

Along the entire front the enemy put up fierce resistence throwing its re-
serves into bettle.

236
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I0! ONICIM. "8|! ONLY

During the night 255 heevy bosbere fros the 18th M egein ettecked eneey
reserves eoving up to the front. At this tine two nbed free the 16th M

were etteching enesy troop eccusuletions in neking 130 eorties during the
night.

in the eorning the fog end low clouds with rein ee well es the eeohe heng-
ing over the bettlefieid prevented sir operetions. After eiddey the weether
leproved end the M units intensified their ectivities.

The Nexis elso sede use of the better weether. They threw ell the eir forces
into fighting egeinet the edvencing troops. Boeber groups eppeered in the
eir end these endeevored to breeh through to the bettle forsetions of our
troops. Strong berriere of enhy fighters were thrown up in the peth of

our evietion. During the dey the redere recorded eround 700 overflights of
enesy evietion. Pierce bettlee developed in the air.

The boebere of the M begen operetione in the second helf of the dey. The
crews of the 3d belt in groups of seven-nine eircreft fros eltitudes of 1.200-
l,800 setere. under the cover of the let Guerde ied. destroyed enesy strong-
pointe eheed of the 5th Shock end 2d Guerds tenk ersiee. end elso neutrelired
enemy troops in the regions of Huncheberg. Purstenwelde, Tiefensee end

Nerzfelde. The fliers eede l30 sorties end dropped 90 tons of bosbs. The
bosbers lost three crews.

The l88th end 221st bed provided subsrentiel help to the 69th Arsy. They
etteclted ens-y ertillery betteriee. tenlr concentrations end sotor vehicles
end infentry on the peth of our troops. Their ections were highly regerded
by the co-ender of the 69th Any Col Gen V. Ye. Kolpeltchi who sent the tele-
grete: "0n behelf of sy troops I would like to cor-end the bothers of Cole
Puehkin end Busylev who were opereting in the eree of Alt Helisch. Altreedorf
end Debberin." The bombers of the 221st bed in cerrying out the siesions
encountered the strongest resistence of ens-y fighters end entieircreft end
suffered heevy losses. Seven crews did not return to their eirf’ielde.

During the dey the eeeeult plenee of the 6th ehek supported the 5th Shock
end 2d Cuerds teak ersiee end etteched eneey troops in the region of Geeel-
berg. Sternebeck. end Streueberg. heving cerried out 393 sorties. The 9th
shelt destroyed tenhe. ertillery end infantry concentretions in the eree of
Buchow. Arenedorf end Listen. supporting the edvence of the 8th Cuerde end
let Ouerds tenk ersies. In edditlon. the esseult plenee ettecked Streueberg
eirfield were eight enely eircreft were destroyed.

The 2d Guerde shed in seen groups sided the troops of the 67th Amy in the
stubborn bettlee for the etrongpoint of Hrieren. end elso supported the
troops of the 3d Shock Anny. "hen the 9th Guerde Tenk Corps on the norning
of l8 April reeueed the offensive in the region of Xunersdorf. it encountered
heevy fire fro- the eneey. It wee ispoeeible to save further. At 0900 hours
three groups of six Ils free the 2d Guerds shed under the cos-send of llero

of the Soviet Union hej V. F. lhohhlechev eppeered over the bettlefield.

Upon the request of the col-sender of the tenlt corps. the fliers by redio

237
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

were retargeted to the artillery and mortar batteries inpeding the advsnce
of the 23d Tank Brigade. The assault planes reformed into a closed circle
end divebombed the designated targets. In carrying out five passes. they
suppressed the enemy fire and destroyed nany Nazis. As a result the brigade
crossed the water barrier without losses and made it possible for the entire
tank corpa to successfully cross the Priedlerdsrstrom River. As a total
during the day the 2d Guards shad carried out 256 eortiea.

The assault plenes of the llth Guards ohad attacked enemy troops in the
zone of advance of the 69th Army in making l99 aorties. here very able
actions were carried out by eight guardunen under the cos-and of Hero of
the Soviet Union Haj D. l. Smirnov. They destroyed artillery and uortar

batteries and enemy personnel in the region of Alt Haliseh, Niederesar and
Altzesdorf.

As a total during the day the shed destroyed to tanks and assault guns. 109
guns of field and antiaircraft artillery. 618 motor vehicles. they blew up
7 ammunition dumps. and suppressed the fire of 7a batteries. In addition
to this the fascists suffered heavy losses in personnel. In eir battles
the assault plenee destroyed 8 rV-l90 aircraft. From the enemy fighter

and entiaircraft fire the assabult planes lost 9 crews during the day.

Some 11 [1-2 aircraft were hit. but a majority of their crews soon returned
to the units.

The fliers of the AA in the fierce battle against German aviation on
18 April cerried out 162 air battles and destroyed lSl enemy aircraft. This
was one of the heaviest combat days.

in these battles the fighters of the 3d iak played the basic role. During
the day they carried out 833 sorties and in 84 dogfights shot down 76 enemy
aircraft. For the corps the results of the day were a record for the entire
period of its participation in the Great Patriotic Var. During the day each
pilot averaged 3.7 combat sorties. This meantthatmany of them had to take
off for e conbat mission 6-5 and more times and in virtually every sortie
cngsgc in air battles with the enemy.

Capt S. N. Norgunov and Sr Lt I. G. Kuznetsov particularly distinguished
themselves. They each shot down four enemy eircreft. Capta V. V. Kalishni-
kov and Ye. P. Tuzhilin and Jr Lt V. s. Thachenko each destroyed three enemy
aircraft. Two fascist airplanes were shot down by Haj V. S. laskov. Capte
K. S. Vakulenho. A. A. Karayev. N. I. Savin and A. N. Sithovskiy. Sr Lts

N. A. lorovakiy. N. V. Borodin, V. V. Kablukov. H. Ye. Pivovarov. N. S.
Rudenko and D. I. Sualov. Lts I. c. Vannikov. N. I. Dydygin. I. F. Krivobok.
H. N. Nikhin, K. V. Podburtnyy. L. V.Prikhod'hoand V. N. Yerinskiy, Jr Lts
S. V. Badenow, A. A. Neaterenko and N. P. Nikonov. After the end of the
var Haj V. s. Baakov was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. he
had carried out 293 combat aorties and had won 15 victories in the air.

238
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nero ere eeverel coebet epieodee. In the middle of the dey the elenent of
Lt V. I. Alekeendryuk (176th Guerde iep) in Le-7 eircreft wee carrying free
hunting in the eree of Nuneheberg. At en eltitude of b.000 Ietere. the
fliers encountered eround to Fokker-Hula with boebe flying under the cover
of {our Neeeerecheitte. Our fightere. heving the edventege in height. eud-
denly ettecked the cover group fro. ebove end behind end i-edietely ehot
down two may eircreft. The other eneny elelent quickly eeceped end eben-
doned the plenee it wee eecorting. In asking use of this. Alekeendryuk
ettecked the leeder of the Fokker-Nun group end set his eircreft on fire.
The bettle fornetion of the Ger-en plenee wee dierupted end they turned
beck. Thue. two guerdeeen. in melting skillful uee of their edventegeoue
position. ehot down three eneoy eircreft end did not ellow the reeeinder

to reech the one of our troops.

In the second helf of the dey the corps reders detected up to 35 eneey boob-
ers end eeeeult plenee treveling towerd the eenbet eree of our troops. At
thie tine six plenee free the 63d iep were in the eir neerby. The group
co-ender Sr Lt l. G. Kurneteov led the fightere to en interception. In
hiding in the clouds. our fliere by e eurpriee etteck dierupted the eneey
bettle (erection end forced it to drop the boebe on its own territory. In
the course of the bettle the group cot-under end the fliers I. P. Cherenkov
end N. 'l'. Gribkov shot down four Geruen eircreft.

Soeetine leter the epproech of over 30 one-y eircreft wee spotted. For

intercepting the. Gen Sevitekiy reised 40 fighters. By hold etteche they
prevented the Nezi evietion free reeching our troope. Lte s. N. Horgunov
end A. F. Vee'ko eech shot down two eircreft in thie bottle. In Hey 1%6
the toner wee ewerded the title of hero of the Soviet Union. During the

wer he hed eede 236 coebet eortiee end in 68 air bettIee hed shot down 22
eneey eircreft.

On this day four fighters fro- the 602d up under the «mud of Lt It. I.
lshkhenov dletinguiehed theneelvee. In the region of Trebnitz. they en-
countered eight Fokker-Hulfe end imdietely ettecked then. In the first
etteck Iehlthenov shot down one I’M-190. Then es e result of e 5-minute dog-
fight he end Jr Lt N. H. Khristinin eech deetroyed one other enemy eircreft.

After this the Nezi fliers one by one dropped out of the bettle end took
cover in the here.

The (liere of the 6th iek. in supporting eeeeult plenes. on 18 April cer-
ried out 21 eir beetles end destroyed 27 enemy eircreft. Here three eir-
plenee were ehot down by Lt N. A. lrodekiy. end two eirpIenee were destroyed
by Lt Col Kh. H. IbetuIin. Neje N. F. Kuzneteov end H. P. Rents. Cept A. I.
Chetvertkov. Lts Akulenho. Yu. ‘1‘. D'yechenko end N. F. Yeveeyev, end Jr Lt
R. H. Dnvydov. ‘l'he equedron co-ender of the 30th Guerde iep Ne) H. P.
Rents leter wee ewerded the title of hero of the Soviet Union. During the
wer he cerried out 2‘6 conbet eortiee end in 56 eir bettlee pereonelly shot
down 18 enemy eircreft end 5 others in group ection.

239
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Four planes from the 30th Guards iap headed by regisental co-snder Lt Col
Kh. H. lbetulin were covering assault planes to the west of Hriezen. At
an altitude of 1.200 asters. our fliers encountered up to 80 ”-190 travel-
ing in groups of 8-10 aircraft. A asjority of the: was carrying boabs under
the wings. In taking advantage of the fact that there were many aircraft
in the air and that this circumstance nade it difficult for the eneey to
assess the existing situation. Lt Col lbatulin attacked the Fokker-Rolfe
and inedietely shot dom one and then a second one-y aircraft. The other
nan in his eleaent Jr Lt P. N. Danisov also succeeded in shooting down one
Nazi flier who tried to reach the tail of Lt Col lbetulin. When their fuel
was gone. our fighters dropped out of battle and returned to their airfield.

0n the ease day, Lt A. P. Lyakishev at the head of four fighters froe the
273d iad, in escorting S ll-2 in the region of Koeelberg. saw around 70
“4-190. 1000-500 esters below thee. lie inediately attacked the leader of
one of the groups and set his aircraft on fire. Lyakishev's example was
followed by hie comrade Lt V. Ye. Kitayev and Jr Lt P. F. Nikulin. and they
both shot down one Fokker-Half. Our fighters and assault planes and no
losses in this battlc.

Capt A. l. Chetverthov. in heading eight Yak-3 from the 234th iad in as-
corting assault planes. encountered up to 30 Fokker-Wife and 20 Nasser-
echsitts near Streusberg. and engaged the. in a fierce air battle. Our
fighters shot down 9 eneey aircraft without suffering losses.

The fliers of the 13th is]: also fought successfully. In 60 air battles
they destroyed 25 fascist aircraft. The contender of the 176th iap Hero
of the Soviet Union Lt Col V. N. Heltarov won hie next battle in the air.
The six Yak-3 led by his in the region of Seelow at an altitude of 3,000
aetere encountered eight Pokksr-Hulfs and engaged then in col-bat during
which Halterov and Haj Yafimv each shot down one enely fighter.

As a total during 18 April. the 16th M under the conditions of variable
weather carried out 6,032 sorties, including 1,560 to bomb and etrafe the
enesy troops and objectives.

Regardless of the fact that on this day the enely lost 50 airplanes. there
were many shortcoainga in the action of our fighters. In the evening the
contender of the 16th M was forced to give the following order to the con--
sanders of the 3d and 13th iek who had directed the combat against new
aviation in the air: "Baeny aviation is using the tactics of reaching our
troops froa the east at a low-level flight. Our fighters are flying in
small groups at great altitudes and this prevents the countering of the
enesy aviation. Consider this and organize the struggle against eneay
aviation in accord with its tactics. The fighters aust be stacked in
such a manner that the lower wave is at an altitude of 500-1.000 esters and
drops to a low-level flight over its own territory." Subsequently the
fighters began to position their battle foruationa at altitudes free 1000-

5,000 meters. the amber of interceptions of enemy aircraft rose and the
cover became more reliable.

260
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On 19 April the troops of the front continued to wage offensive battles and
during the day broke through the third defensive line of the enemy in a
majority of areas. 0n the flanks the assault groupings of the front. hav-

ing encountered strong resistance fron the ones-y, advanced slowly to the
west.

During the night the light Po-Z boabors free the 9th Guards and 242d nbad

fought against one-y troops and tho strongpoints of its defenses. hsving
carried out “I. sorties.

In the earning. because of bad weather conditions (local fogs and the ab-
sence of visibility). units of tho 16th M took off in snall groups. Avie-

tion could provide active support for tho troops of tho front only by said-
day. when tho weather had inprovod.

The 3d bak, in supporting H' . ‘th Shock and 2d Guards tank snies. in ll
groups node several attacks against the strongpoints of Grunthsl. Hissental
and Hernsuchen. destroying weapons and personnel as well as the concentra-
tion of notor vehicles at the point of Trans, having node 90 sorties. Sons

60 bosbers from the 188th and 221st had destroyed enemy troop concentrations
in the region of Schenefolde and Kagol.

The assault planes of the 6th shak on this day fought in groups of 6-10
airplanes against the strongpoint of Strausberg. artillery in firing posi-
tions and against enemy troop concentrations in the zone of advance of the
sane araies. The 9th shak. in supporting the troops of the 8th Guards and
1st Guards tank armies. in groups of 8-12 airplanes attacked concentrations
of tanks, personnel and artillery positions. as well as the airfields of
Furstenwalde and Petershagen. where 5 I'll-190 eircrsft were set on fire.

As s total during the day, both corps carried out sore than 950 sorties

and destroyed loo tanks. assault guns and aruored personnel carries, 1.2
artillery pieces and around 360 notor vehicles.

On this day the troops on the right wing were supported by the 2d Guards
shad and the 6th Polish sad which carried out around 380 sorties. They
destroyed concentrations of any troops and artillery in positions in the
regions of Bad Freienwslde. "risen and werneuchen.

The llth Guards shad provided great help to the troops of the 69th May
in cspturing the strongpoint of Alt Halisch. The infantry and tanks of
the 25th Rifle Corps which were advancing in this sector encountered heavy
one-y fire. Aviation arrived to help from another area and this consisted
of 21 assault planes led by the co-ander of the 173d Guards shop hero of
the Soviet Union Lt Col N. K. Lyssnko. With the approach of the assault
planes. our artillery troops and infantry by the exploding of shells and
rockets indicated the location of fascist tanks. artillery and infantry.
The assault planes, in descending to low-level flight. for 30 ninutes at-
tacked the Nazis in making five passes. 0n the lost pass the crews saw
our infantry rise up and love forward without encountering firs. At the

261
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOB OFFICIAL USE ONLY

sane tise the contender of the air division who was observing the actions
of his assault planes radioed Lt Col Lysanko: "Excellent work. go hone.
the infantry has gone over to the attack." Having promptly profited fros
the actions of the assault planes. the troops captured the strongpoint of
Alt Halisch without obstacles. The subgroups of assault planes were led
by Hero of the Soviet Union Capt M. l. Runysntsev. Sr Lts V. S. Gsvrilov
and V. I. Sharkov. Their actions were supported by 14 Yaks from the 517th
lap. As a total on this day the 11th Guards shad sade 160 sorties for the
troops of the 69th Arsy.

On 19 April enesy aviation continued to put up stubborn resistance. Its
activities re-ained high. During the day up to 570 aircraft overflights
were recorded. The German Co-and was endeavoring by ell forces to achieve
success in the air at least in the soot threatened sectors. But it was
unable to achieve this.

In addition for cosbating anauy aviation on the approaches to Berlin the
comnder of the AA brought in the 260th iad. The division had a great
influence on the successful repelling of the large eneay aircraft groups.
The division was under the cal-and of Hero of the Soviet Union Maj Gen Avn
6. V. Zinin. After the war he held various positions in the Air Force.

At present Col Gen Avn Zinin heads the Military Acedeny of the National
Air Defense Troops.

The air battles on 19 April did not stop until late in the evening. Our
fliers in 156 engagesents destroyed 112 Goran aircraft showing examples
of combat skill in this.

Again the fliers of the 3d iak distinguished thesaelves. In actively
searching for the one-y in the air. they carried out 89 air battles and shot
down 68 fascist aircraft. Here two victories were won by Haj S. I. lhhovskiy.
Sr Lt D. A. Shuvalov, Lt P. P. Savitskiy end Jr Lt V. I. Sasoded. Three
enemy aircraft were destroyed by each of the following fliers of the 15th
lap: Cspts A. N. Sitkovskiy and Ye. P. Tuzhilin, Jr Lt V. G. Prokhochik.

The reginent conanded by Lt Col N. V. lsekov shot down 19 eaauy aircraft
over the day.

Many air battles occurred with a numerically superior enesy. however they
inevitably ended in a victory for the Soviet fliers. Thus. the group of
the 176th Guards iap of 6 airplanes fought against 30 Pokker-Uulfs. In
the course of the battle, Hero of the Soviet Union Naj Ye. A. Ararov. Sr
Lts V. A. Grenakovskiy. A. G. Grenov. G. S. Hirnov and A. Ye. Stetsenho
and Lt P. A. Gerashchenko each shot down one enasy aircraft.

The fliers of the 6th iak successfully covered the troops in the main of-
fensive. They intercepted enesy aircraft in the air and in 30 engagements
destroyed 19 fascist fighters. Lt A. P. Groaov on this day shot down three
enemy aircraft. and Capt V. S. Yeliseyev. Sr Lt A. P. Pilatov, Lts N. Ya.
lllizhin. B. N. Voloshin, A. c. Zakharov, Lobechev and Jr Lt s. s. Kozuvitkin
each shot down two.

252
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

On this day six Yak-3 fro. the 116th Guards iap headed by reginental con-
sander Guards Haj V. I. Byhshev fought skillfully. To the west of Seelov.
the fliers encountered 16 Fokker-Hulfs and in a fierce battle with the.
destroyed 4 aircraft. Victories were won by the guards-an Capt N. A.
Neydenov, Sr Lt V. s. Gorhan'. Lt a. P. Tselkovikov and Jr Lt P. P. Klepach.

As a total on 19 April. the air for-ations of the 16th M carried out
6.398 sorties, including 1.968 for bonhing and strafing ens-y troops and
silitary installations and 236 for reconnaissance.

On 20 April. the troops of the front. in developing the offensive in the
central sector. from a eerch foreation broke through the external defensive
perineter of Berlin and initiated battles in its northeastern outskirts.
The long-range artillery of the front made the first selvos against the
fascist capitel. The historic stoning of the city had started.

The 16th M continued to support the troops of the front. particularly in-
tensely in the second half of the day when the weather improved sonewhat.

The sain efforts of the any were directed at supporting the advance of
the sohile formations.

Prior to the dawn of 20 April. the light hodurs of two nbed of the any
destroyed the ene-y strongpoints in Grunthel. Tespelfelde. lleinersdorf.

Hoppegerten and Furstenvalde. they carried out reconnaissance end scattered
leaflets, having ends 538 sorties.

Hith norning the actions of the best trained crews of the 6th bek conenced.
Pour groups of nine Tu-Z ends a heavy strike against the artillery positions
west of Stettin, that is. in the tone of the Second Belorussian Front which
on this day also went over to the offensive. In the second half of the day.
the bonhers of the corps. in assisting the troops on the left wing, de-
strayed the strongpoints of Purstenvelde end Kalkherger. On this day they

sade 152 sorties, and the fighters escorting then free the let Guards isk
node 150.

The 188th and 221st had. in supporting the troops of the 69th Amy, attacked
the one-y artillery and nortar batteries and infantry in the region of Trep-
lin, Diedersdorf and at the points of Rosengarten and Biegen. As a total

96 bothers sortied and also 85 fighters from the 286th iad for covering
thee.

During the period from 1600 to 2000 hours, the divisions of the 3d belt at-
tsckod the may strongpoints of Neuenhagen. Blmherg. Altlandsherg, Beeskov.
Demnits and the northwestern outskirts of Frankfurt an der Oder. The boebers
operated in groups of 6-9 aircraft fro- a horizontal flight at altitudes of
1.200-2,200 esters. They node 179 sorties, while the cover fighters of the
1st Guards isd made 127.

263
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Haber eortiee this day were ends with bad weather. For certain young
crews. these conditions were unbearable and they returned without being
able to reach the target. The reasining crews in showing high flying
skill and tenacity nsnaged to reach the objectives precisely and destroyed
then accurately.

The assault planes of the 6th ehak continued to cooperate with the 2d
Guards Tank Arny and the 5th Shock Any and supported their offensive.

In small groups they strafed ens-y troops and their weapons and disrupted
traffic on the railroads in the area or' Strawberg. Herneuchen. Ilunberg.
Altlandsherg. and letsow. The assault planes of the corps during the day
made 376 eortiee. and the fighters free the 6th iak. around 350.

The 9th shak. for supporting the 8th Guards Any end the 1st Guards Tank
Arny during the day destroyed enuy personnel and equipnent. it prevented
moves-eats in the regions of Herzfelde. Puretenwalde and Biegen. and also
attacked Kalkberger airfield where seven Gernan airplanes were knocked out.
The fliers of the corps made 169 eortiee and the fighters escorting then
from the 13th iak made 97.

The crews of the 2d and 11th Guards shed in groups of 5-9 aircraft attacked
troop concentrations and railroad lines in the regions of Grunthal. Bernau,
Altlandsberg and Arensdorf, Treplin. having ends 298 eortiee. Fighters from
the 6th ink and the 282d iad which were covering the assault planes made
around 260 eortiee.

As a total the assault planes of the any during the day destroyed ll tanks,
50 artillery pieces, 319 notor vehicles. 102 railroad cars and 2 st'ean loco-
motives. Moreover. they shot down 5 ”-190 in air battles.

During this day. a group of 16 Il-Z airplanes from the 175th Guards shap
led by the deputy squadron contender Sr Lt I. F. Fateyev carried out the
mission excellently. For 65 ninutee the assault planes continuously at-
tacked eneny infantry and artillery in the region of Debberin. The guards-
lnen fliers Inade eight passes. they suppressed the fire of three batteries
and destroyed a large nulber of Nazis. Fighting particularly well were the
experienced assault plane pilots. the flight con-anders I. I. Shurgaya and
Jr Lt P. S. Slyrin. as well as the pilots Sr Lt 0. V. Hoiseyev, It A. H.
'l‘eslenko and Jr Lts K. A. Halin. P. I. thevskiy and H. I. Rogulin. In
ending each pass at a maximum low altitude, they fired from a low-level
flight point—blank at the fleeing fascists. After such a crushing strike

by the assault planes, our infantry and tanks broke into the point of Deb-
berin and captured it.

Toward evening. 15 11-2 airplanes escorted by ll. fighters from the 30th

Guards iap led by Maj H. P. Rents took off to strafe enemy troops. In the
region of Blunberg. they encountered up to 60 Pokker-Uulfs. The eneny air-
craft were traveling toward the front line in a column of groups of 10 in-
tending to boob our troops. Having such a great numerical superiority, the
Nazis decided initially to attack our assault planes. Our fighters hurried
to the defense of the Ila. In a brief but fierce air battle. the Soviet

246
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fliers shot down 5 Pokker-Hulfs and reliably covered the assault planes.
The commander of one of the fighter groups Guards 8r Lt A. P. Pilatov died
in a mortal clash with the enemy. The regiment lost a renarkabls flier.

a courageous air fighter and a good comrade.

The communist flier of the same air regiment Haj N. P. Kuznetsov showed
great valor. In the battle started up with the fascist fliers he shot down
one Pokker-Hulf. Then with the propeller of his aircraft he struck the
stabilizer of a second flighter and it immediately dove to the ground. In
the collision Kuanetaov sustained severe contusiens and the aircraft was
damaged. He had to land near the enemy trenches in no—man'e land. The
Germans dashed to the aircraft endeavoring to take the flier prisoner.

But our infantry by an attack drove off the Nazis and saved Kuenetsov.

During the day the fighters of the arsy, in covering the troops and escort-
ing the bombers and assault planes. conducted 122 dogfights and destroyed
90 German aircraft. Out of this number the fliers of the 3d lak shot down
35 airplanes. the 6th iek got 33 and the 13th isk 16. In the battles Haj
N. P. Rents. Capt c. K. Yeliaeyev. Jr Lt Kurnetsov and Jr Lt A. Kh.
Kamaltedinov each destroyed two enemy aircraft. and Capts V. N. Beyzak,

L. c. Koptev and A. I. Nitusov. Lts V. P. Vaehchilhin. A. s. Gerssiaov. A.
M. Glushko and many others each got one. The fliers of the 30th Guards iap
fought particularly well; they destroyed 15 aircraft.

The 16th AA during 20 April made 6.054 sorties. including 1,828 to bomb
and strafe the enemy.

For controlling the air units moving in the area of the fascist capital,
two checkpoints had to be deployed: the Eastern to which was sent a group
of staff officers of the AA headed by Gen A. S. Senatorov. and Northern
headed by Gen B. K. Tokarev. The commanders of the air groups. in going
on their missions. were to report their route to the checkpoint and receive
permission for bombing (strafing) the objective. In the event of a change
in the situation in the area of Berlin. the checkpoint sent the groups to

a holding area. or to alternative or newly arising targets. Such a system
was very essential, particularly under the conditions of poor visibility
of the targets, and proved fully effective. Horeover. the numerous posts
of air spotters who were on the roofs of houses helped the fliers locate
targets by radio and by light signals. On 21 April the troops of the front
cut the Berlin Circular Highway, and by the end of the day had entered the
outskirts of Berlin and had started battles in the city itself. Thus war

had arrived to the streets of that city in which it had been conceived and
prepared.

During the night of 21 April. 553 heavy bombers of the 18th AA attacked

the defensive centers. the troops and military equipment on the eastern
outskirts of Berlin. The 9th Guards and the 262d nbad bombed enemy strong-
points to the northeast of Berlin and its suburbs of Buch. Pankow and
Konnigsdorf. as well as destroyed enemy troop concentrations near Pursten-
walde. During the night the division carried out 176 sorties.

245
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the day. because of poor visibility. the aviation operated only as
elements and individual aircraft. The army bombers could not sortie at all.

During the day the assault planes of the 9th shak prepared to attack
Frankfurt an der Oder. but due to the difficult weather conditions only

15 crews could carry out the mission. Fliers of the 2d Guards shad in

the second half of the day made 25 sorties against enemy artillery batteries
and infantry in the northwestern suburbs of Berlin.

By the evening 33 assault planes from the 6th shak under the cover of fight-
ers from the 6th iak from an altitude of 600 meters in flights attacked the
central part of Berlin and its suburb Priedrichsfelde. The fliers encoun-
tered fierce antiaircraft fire but the flak exploded above them and the
aircraft were not damaged. Enemy fighters were patrolling over the city.
but did not engage in combat. Probably because of poor visibility they

did not notice our assault planes. Fires and explosions broke out in the
city.

Enemy aviation rarely appeared over the battle formations of our troops.

On 21 April. the 16th AA made only $39 sorties, including 219 for bombing
and strafing troops and objectives. In the air there were 13 air battles.
in the course of which ll enemy aircraft were shot down. He had no losses.

Over the 6 days of the offensive. the troops of the front with the active
support of the aviation broke through all three defensive lines of the
enemy. they overcame the external defensive perimeter of the Berlin forti-
fied area in the sector of the main strike and commenced the battles in
the suburbs of the city.

The fliers of the 16th AA during the period from 16 through 21 April made
19,250 combat sorties. Of them 75 percent were for the direct support of
the troops. In the air 628 air battles were fought in which the enemy lost
575 aircraft. Air superiority was firmly held by our aviation which created
an advantageous situation for the troops. The enemy was deprived of an op-
portunity to make effective air attacks against the battle formations of

the troops and the rear. The strikes by our Air Force increased the over-
all degree of the fire effect on the enemy. This result was achieved at

a high price. During these days the AA lost several score aircraft. How-
ever many crews returned to their units.

On 22 April the troops of the front in the sector of the main strike. having
entered the limits of Berlin. broke the internal defensive perimeter and_
began battles for the districts of the city. The troops on the right wing
successfully advanced. in enveloping the fascist capital on the northwest.
0n the left wing the troops developed the offensive for the purposes of
cutting off Berlin from the Frankfurt-Cubes enemy grouping.

266
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
° won orrtcuu. use can

Enemy aviation did not show much activity. Obviously the enormous losses
suffered by it in the preceding battles had begun to tell.

In line with the necessity of the most rapid cospletion of the encirclesent
of eneay troops to the west of Frankfurt an der Oder. the 16th AA was
confronted with the mission of strengthening the support for the arsies

on the left wing of the front at the ease tise saintaining the chief forces
in the Berlin sector.

In accord with this during the night of 22 April. the 9th Guards and 242d
nbad destroyed enemy troops and its ailitery equipment on the autobehn and
railroad between Purstenwalde end Jakobsdorf end in Frankfurt an der Oder.
During the night the divisions made 860 sorties (averaging 5 cosbet sorties
per crew end this was a maxim effort for the operation).

The divisions of the 3d bak, having begun to support the troops of the 33d
and 69th armies. in the second half of the day made two attacks each against
the strongpointa and enemy troops in Frankfurt an der Oder. having carried
out 266 sorties and dropped 196 tons of bombs. The crews attacked without
cover. as solitary aircraft and in elements. since they had to travel a
significant portion of the route in the clouds. Bombing was carried out
free a horizontal flight from altitudes of 500-l.600 meters. Over the tar-
get the bombers encountered entisircraft fire. M Pe-Z airplanes were shot
down and some sustained danage. The bosbers succeeded in blowing up several
a-unition duepa and causing many fires.

In the evening the contend of the 69th Army sent a telegram with thanks

to the fliers of the 3d bak for the active support of the troops in the
battles for Frankfurt an der Oder. As a result of the heavy air strikes
the enemy resistance had been weakened. 0n the following day the fortress
city was captured by our troops.

At the end of the day. three groups of 9 Rd from the 3d belt escorted by
32 fighters free the let Guards iad bombed central Berlin froea an alti-
tude of 2,400 meters. An explosion of great force and several fires were
noted visually. Over the city the crews were fired on by entisircraft guns
but there were no losses.

Bombers from the 6th bek with six groups of 9 Tu-2 under the cover of 57
fighters from the let Guards isk also bombed central Berlin and dropped
97 tons of bombs. including 27 of a caliber of 1.000 kg. M airplanes
were lost by the corps from heavy entisircraft fire.

The 188th and 221st bad in groups in 3-9 airplanes and singly under fighter
cover from the 286th iad during the second half of the day attacked enemy
troop concentrations and military equipment in Frankfurt an der Oder. They
made 170 sorties and the escort fighters suede 96. From information of the
co-and of the ground forces, in the area of the targets many fires broke
out. and a significant number of enemy firing positions was suppressed.

Our infantry expressed thanks to all the fliers who had attacked objectives
in Frankfurt an der Oder. _

267
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OVFICIAL USE ONLY

The assault planes from the 6th shak in groups of 6-12 aircraft under fight-
er cover fros the 6th iak attacked the regions of railroad stations and

snesy troops in central Berlin and carried out 152 sorties. and the fight-
ers sede 218.

The 9th shak escorted by fighters fros the 13th iak operated in ssall groups
against enemy troop accusuletions as well as against motor and rail transport
in the suburbs of Berlin such as Treptow. NeukBlln. Johanistal, Adlershof

and in the region of Buckow. Storkow and Bseakow. The assault planes car-
ried out 665 sorties and the fighters 260.

When our troops had reached Berlin and the battle for the city started. the
situation on the ground becase more cospliceted end even more dynamic.

Since it becase ever more difficult for the aviation to deter-ins the objec-
tives ahead of rise. Gen S. l. Rudenko gave this right to the cosmanders of
the shed who were stationed at the command posts of the rifle end tank

corps. Due to this the cooperation between the aviation end troops is-
proved.

Thns the 66th Tank Brigade of the lat Guards Tank Army. in fighting in a
forward detachment. reached the suburb of Berlin Ulenhorst and encountered
heavy enemy resistance. It counterattacked continuously. endeavoring to
crush the brigade before the arrival of the main forces. Aviation gave the
tank troops a helping hand. Groups of airplanes called by the air represen-
tatives of the 3d Guards shad began to attack the essay artillery and the
counterattecking tanks and infantry. With such support the tank brigade

drove off the attacks and held the occupied positions until the approach
of the main forces.

The crews of the 6th and 9th shak during the day dropped 6,300 bosbs of up
to 100 kg in caliber, they knocked out such different equipsent and destroyed
a large number of Nazis.

The 2d Guards shed. in supporting the 3d Shock Army, in ssall groups de-
stroyed enemy troops and trains in the regions of Berlin of Tegel, Spandau.
Siemenstedt and Charlottenburg. having made 77 sorties. Sr Lts s. I. Zhukov
and c. s. Kiselev, in leading the groups of assault planes from the 59th
Guards shep, attacked enemy troops around Berlin and here destroyed a train
and a field artillery battery. A group of 11-2 from the 79th Guards shed
headed by Sr Lt V. A. Tyshevich destroyed two heavy artillery batteries. up
to 60 railway cars and 20 enclosed trucks.

The 11th Guards shad continued to support the troops of the 69th Arsy and
attacked enemy troops and weapons in the regions of Briesen. Bad Searow,
as well as the eastern regions of Berlin, having node 121 sorties.

The fighters of the AA on 22 April covered the troops. they provided the
bombers and assault planes with escort and the boxing in of the area of
their actions, and they carried out free hunting and reconnaissance. fliers
from the 3d iak conducted 13 air battles and destroyed 10 enemy aircraft.
Fliers from the 6th iak in four battles shot down two airplanes.

268
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The 16th AA on 22 April carried out 3,86‘ sortios. including 2,115 for bomb-
ing and strafing enemy troops and objectives. Two-thirda of all the avia-
tion forces supported the troops advancing in Berlin and its suburbs and
those wiping out the Frankfurt-Cuban enemy grouping.

On 23 April the troopa of the front on the right wing continued the offen-
sive. enveloping Berlin on the northwest. The main strike grouping was
fighting for the lost city defensive perimeter and in individual areas had
broken into the central part of tho city. The troops of tho adjacent First
Ukrainian Front had successfully advanced to Berlin. outflanking it free
the southwest. The city woo in a semicircle of the two advancing fronts.

The combat of tho 16th AA was restricted by the bad weather conditions.
The chief efforts were aimed at supporting tho left wing of tho front and
at night at demoralizing actions against nerlin.

During the night of 23 April. the crews of two nbad of the AA bombed the
suburban areas of berlin. Troptow and Neukﬁlln. tho Corlitz Station. tho
airport and the western part of the city. dropping leaflets along the way.
A total of 398 sorties were made. however duo to tho oxtromoly bad weather
in 86 aorties the fliers could not fully carry out tho mission.

For this reason the bombers began to make their sortios only in tho second
half of the day. The 261st bad after 1800 hours with individual aircraft
and in small groups without fighter cover bombed the road junction. the
railroad station, troops and crossings over the Spree in Beeshow. The
crews made 89 sorties and dropped 65 tons of bombs. As a result tho high-
way bridge os Boeskow was destroyed as well as a large number of buildings
and railroad track. Over the target the bombers were fired on by heavy
sntiaircraft fire. One crow did not return from the mission.

After the raid of the 261st bad. bombers of the 188th and 221st bad at-
tacked these same objectives. They made 90 sortios. they destroyed the
pontoon bridge over the Spree and stopped motor transport traffic at the
road Junction in Beeskow. During the day the assault planes of the 9th
shah and fighters of the 13th iak also attached the troops and trains in
Beeakow. They made. respectively. 63 and 30 aorties and caused the enemy
significant losses.

The 2d Guards shad during the day. in supporting the 3d Shock Army. strafed
troop concentrations and trains in Berlin and in the region of Sandhauson.
Kresmen. having made 76 aorties. while the fighters of the 6th isk made

90 sorties. At 2000 hours, 22 assault planes froo the llth Guards shad
under the cover of 36 fighters from the 282d iad attached the bridge over
the Spree to the south of Furatenwalde. The bridge was heavily damaged.

The fighter formations during the day carried out 60 air battles and de-
strayed 25 enemy aircraft. Lt V. c. Yermokhin. a flier from the 265th isd.
won two air victories. One aircraft was shot down by the commander of the
176th Guards isp hero of the Soviet Union Col P. F. Chupikov. by Hajs V. V.
Klisov and L. N. Slizon'. Capts N. D. Dugin and l. I. Shcherbokov. by Sr

Lt Serov. by Lts A. A. Lazarov and I. Ye. Sidorenko. by Jr Lts I. I. Zhsdom.
N. P. Pryadko and many other fliers.“9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The formations and units of the 16th AA on 23 April carried out 1.586
sorties. including 761 to strafe and boob enemy troops.

On this day. prior to the start of the decisive battle for Berlin. the
appeal of the silitary council of the front to the soldiers. sergeants.
officers and generals was read in all the air units. It stated: "In front
of you, Soviet knights. is Berlin. You should take Berlin and take it as
quickly as possible in order to keep the one-y off balance.... To the
storning of Berlin! to the cosplete and final victory. cosrades-in-arasi"

Late in the evening of 23 April. the capital of our motherland. Moscow.
saluted the troops of the First Belorussian Front which had pierced the
deeply echoloned ens-y defenses on the Oder and had broken into the capi-
tal of Gersany. Berlin. By an order of the Supreme Colmander-in-Chief.
along with the troops of the combined-ares fornatione. mentioned as par-
ticularly distinguishing thensslvas were the flight personnel of the 16th
AA under the cos-and of Col Gen Ayn S. l. Rudenko and Lt Gen Avn P. I. Bray-
ko. including fliers from the air forsations of Gene A. z. Karavatskiy. Ye.
Ya. out the railroad bridge across the Spree at Beeskow. The assault planes

made 350 sorties. and the fighters covering the. from the 6th and 13th iak
made around 320.

On that day the 2d Guards shed operated under the orders of the coenand

oi the 7th Guards Cavalry Corps in the area of Kresnen. Schwenebeck and
Nsuen. and made 60 sorties. It successfully attacked one-y artillery and
troop concentrations on the path of the advancing units. The assault plane
groups were led by the experienced experts of strafing attacks Maj G. G.
Klinenko. Gspts 1. Ya. Aydarov. V. H. Tudushin and N. I. Lunev. Nero of the
Soviet Union Sr Lt G. I. Tvauri. Sr Lts A. .. Zhuglev. V. A. Hilyukov. A.
I. Stefanovich and N. Ya. Yakovlev.

The 11th Guards shad under the escort of fighters from the 282d iad de-
stroyed the retreating colusns of enesy troops to the south of Fursten-
waldo. and destroyed the crossings across the Spree in the ease region.

in the estimate of the con-and of the division. successful operations were
carried out by the groups of assault planes led by Gspts B. N. Hoehkov and
l. N. Pronin. Sr Lts hero of the Soviet Union G. V. Balanutkin and I. P.
Putcyev and Lt N. N. Feaenko. as well as the crews of Jr Lts D. V. Borodin
and N. R. Hal'kov. The assault planes sade 130 sorties.

The fighters of the AA covered the troops and their assault planes. and as
support for the forthconing Salute Air Operation. units of the 3d iak at-
tucked the airfields of Uilhelastadt. Neuruppin and Dahlgow. At nidday

lb Yak-9 fighters headed by the commander of the 812th iap Haj H. V.
Vlasov strsfed the airport of Uilhelnstadt at which 20 PH-l90 and 7 Ju-87
had been discovered. At the airfield five airplanes were set on fire and
several were daasged. The raid was a surprise for the ens-y. The antiair-
craft artillery did not put up resistance.

250
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At 1600 hours two groups of 8 Yak-9 free the ease regisent led by Capte
Nsl'nikov and Lavrikov end one group if 8 Yak-3 fros the 602d isp sortied
to strafe the airfield of Neuruppin. 0n the way to the target they en-
countered two groups of eneay fighters and were forced to engage thee in
cosbat. As a result they did not reach the set airfield and strsfed an
alternative target. The attsck on Neuruppin sirfield had to be repeeted
the following dsy.

0n the seas day. fighters free the 265th iad successfully attacked Dehlgow
airfield and they set six enesu aircraft on fire.

The fliers of the 3d isk. in eddition to attacking airfields. covered the
troops and carried out free hunting in the Berlin region. here in as eir
battles they shot down 26 ens-y aircraft. losing just one. Sr Lts V. A.
Grosakovskiy and A. P. Kryshsnovskiy both shot down two fascist aircraft
while the cosssnder of the 812th iep Haj N. V. Vlaeov. A. l. Nikishin end
Copts V. l. Nerkulov end N. s. Pavlushkin. Sr Lt N. K. Denehik.Lts P. P.
Gsvrilin. N. c. Norya and P. T. Shcheglov. Jr Lts l. N. clasov. K. P.
Holibozhko. V. l. Nikolayev end others each shot down one. The fighters
of the corps also ssde l6 strafings of ground tsrgets. As a total during
the dey they sade S96 sorties.

The fliers of the 6th isk during the covering of the troops and strafings
shot down 9 Fokker-Hulfs. here Lts N. V. Kudrynshev (he shot down two
eircraft). A. P. Lyakishev and N. c. Hirshin. end Jr Lt N. T. Zelenin dis-
tinguished the-selves.

DuringZé April, regardless of the bad weether. the for-stions of the 16th
AA csrried out 2,365 sorties. including 1,081 to strsfe and bomb the eneey
troops. In so eir battles. 36 fascist eircraft were destroyed. The ersy
lost 3 eircraft.

0n the following days the resistance of fsscist avietion began to weaken.
having lost a nusber of eirfields in the Berlin area and in suffering snore-
ous losses in flight personnel and eircraft, the Nazis were deprived of the
opportunity to continue the struggle against Soviet aviation on the former
scale. The number of sir battles declined.

On 25 April the armies of the asseult grouping of the front continued to
wage fierce battles in Berlin itself. encountering fierce resistance every-
where. At sidday the troops of the 47th end 2d Guards tank arsies to the
west of Berlin linked up with the troops of the First Ukreinien Front. Thus
the encirclenent of the fascist lair of Berlin by the Soviet troops was
conpleted.

The formations of the 16th AA on 25 April carried out the Salute Air Opera-
tion nseed thus in honor of e rapid victory. The sin of the operation wss
to fecilitate the ections of the ground forces in destroying the enesy
grouping in Berlin. By heavy air strikes there was to be the destruction
of the basic defensive strongpoints, the troops were to be sttecked and
control parslysed. The plsn wse worked out by the AA co-and and staff.

251
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The first strike against the enemy was made during the night of 25 April.
Some 112 heavy bombers from the 18th AA dropped 90 tons of bombs on the
center of nerlin. At the same time the military objectives of the city
were bombed by the night bombers of the 16th AA which made 616 sorties.

During the day our fliers bombed the fascist capital twice. The first raid
was made during the period from 1300 to 1600 hours, and it involved ‘13
bombers and 483 fighters. The second raid was made 5 1/2 hours later by
forces of 267 bombers and 323 fighters. Participating in the operation
were the bombers of the 3d and 6th bet, they bombed central lerlin and
carried out. respectively. 293 and 158 sorties. The 188th and 221st bed
attacked the southwestern areas of the city and made 85 end 16‘ sorties.
The bombers flew to the target in regimental groups with a short time
interval in the columns of nine or the elements. Bombing was carried out
from horizontal flight from altitudes from 800 to 2,000 meters. As a total
around 600 tons of bombs were dropped.

The 1st Guards iak supported the 6th bat. and made 181 sorties. The 1st
Guards iad and the 282d iad covered the 3d bek, and carried out 196 and

95 sorties. The 286th iad escorted the 188th and 221st bad having made 192
sorties.

In addition to the direct escorting of the bombers. the boxing in of the
area of combat by the fighters was also organized. The fliers of the
260th iad in carrying out this mission made 162 sorties.

The crews had to fight under difficult conditions. The center of the city
was very smoky and the cloudiness impeded bombing. The enemy antieircraft
artillery put up fierce fire. many of our aircraft sustained damage and
feur bombers were shot down. The enemy fighters endeavored to resist our
aviation. but they were promptly intercepted by the cover fighters and not
permitted to reach the bombers. And only during the second raid were three
groups from the 183d had attacked without success by 10 Fokker-Hulfs.

in supporting the bombers and endeavoring to keep enemy fighters from them.
the fliers of the 240th iad carried out 10 air battles against the numeri-
cally superior enemy and destroy 9 PU-l90. Two of these planes were shot
down by the flier of the 900th isp Capt Golovschev. The divisional commander
Gen Zinin in an element with Haj Skupchenko fought against six Pokker-Hulfs
and shot down one of them. and Skupchenko hit a second one. In the follow-
ing sortie. Gen Zimin along with Col hikolayev and Hajs Ye. H. Svitnev and
Skupchenko set four enemy aircraft on fire in strafing Kledow airfield.

On this day the 3d iak carried out 12 air battles. Your enemy aircraft were
destroyed by Capt N. I. Savin, Jr Lts 8. A. Kuydin, Togozhkin and A. h.

Rekayev. The fliers of the let Guards and 282d iad shot down seven Fokker-
Uulfs.

Some 10 minutes before the first bomber attack of the 16th AA against
Berlin. 20 Yaks from the 3d iek led by the commander of the 812th iap Haj
H. V. Vlssov sealed off the Neuruppin airfield where there acre 32 German

252
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

aircraft. Our fliers arrived at the target by surprise and in two esaault
groups led by Capta A. T. Tiahchanko and V. I. Hel'nikov by diving froa
altitudes froa 1,000 to 150 meters attacked the aircraft at the parking
areas. The cover group led by Capt I. V. Pedorov. not encountering the
enemy in the air. also strsfed the enemy aircraft on the ground. At the
airfield four aircraft were destroyed and ten daaaged. Here Capt A. T.
Tishchenko distinguished hisself along with Lt A. D. lvanov and Jr Lts

P. H. Kisalev and M. Ya. Laykin. Our fighters did not have any losses.
The regiaentsl navigator Capt A. T. Tishchenko later on was awarded the
title of hero of the Soviet Union. he carried out 351 combat sortiss and
in 83 air battles shot down 16 fascist airplanes. Col A. T. Tiahchenko.
having become a candidate of military sciences. for many years carried out
scientific and pedagogical activities at the Red Banner Air Force Academy
issni Yu. A. Gagarin: he is presently in the reserves.

The attacks by Soviet aviation against the center of Berlin were very ef-
fective. In the city there were scores of large explosions of ammunition
and fuel dumps. "any military objectives and governasntal buildings were
destroyed. The enemy suffered great losses. The battleworthiness of the
enemy troops was significantly undarained.

The successful fulfillment of the Salute Air Operation was achieved as a
result of concentrating the air efforts on carrying out one major mission.
Due to the careful organization and competent leadership of the actions
of the air formations and to the precise and courageous execution of the
combat aissions by the personnel and their commanders, the operation was
completed. in essence. without losses and with high results.

In addition to carrying out the air operation. the 16th AA on 25 April
continued together with the ground forces of the front to destroy concen-
trations of enemy troops surrounded to the southeast of Berlin and in the
Hendisch-Buchholz area. For this the commander assigned assault planes
from the 9th shak and the 11th Guards shad. They made 626 sorties. they
dropped about 7.500 bombs on the enemy and destroyed scores of tanks, 255
sotor vehicles, 19 gunsandmuch other equipment and personnel. The 2d AA
was also involved in destroying the Frankfurt-Cohen enemy grouping.

As a total the 16th AA on this day made 2.979 sorties. Of this number,
two-thirds of the sortiea were made to bomb Berlin and to provide fighter
cover. The fliers of the AA carried out 27 air battles and destroyed 20
German aircraft. During the day the army lost 16 aircraft.

0n the evening of 25 April. the capital of our motherland Moscow saluted

the valorous men of the First Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts which
had completely surrounded the Berlin enemy grouping. Along with the troops.
the order of the Supreme Commander-in-Chief also noted the fliers of the
air formations of Gene Ssvitakiy. Komarov and Cole Isayev and Turyhin.

On 26 April. the troops of the First Belorussian Front. in using the re-
sults of the concentrated air strikes against Berlin, began to stors its
central regions. The enemy put up stubborn resistance going over to num-
erous counterettacks.

253
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
’03 OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The Nazi aviation endeavored to bomb the battle formations of the troops
of the front and it carried out reconnaissance.

During the night of 26 April, 576 heavy bombers from the 18th AA again
made heavy strikes against enemy troops and military objectives in the
central regions of Berlin, Simultaneously the 262d nbad of the 16th AA
destroyed the strongpoints of Arensdorf and Altschadow and attacked troops
on the roads having made 100 sorties.

with the start of the storming of the central regions of Berlin, units of
the AA changed over to operations in small groups. The smoke from fires.
from the exploding of bombs and shells rose to a height of up to 2.000
meters and greatly worsened visibility over the city. Only the best sub-
units and even individual divebomber crews were sent out on combat missions.
The air situation on 26 April was also complicated as a consequence of the

extremely unfavorable weather conditions including low clouds which at times
reached the ground.

The following examples show how difficult it was for our fliers to operate
in such a situation. The 261st bad in the morning received the order: "Be
ready to bomb precise targets in Berlin using the best sniper crews." And
only after 1700 hours was it possible to send out several small groups and
individual crews for destroying artillery in firing positions in the regions
of Ruleben, Reichsportfelde and userstrasse.

Four Pe-Z led by squadron commander of the 26th bap Haj R. S. Suleymanov.
in approaching the target under these difficult conditions. reformed in a
single line. The crews made three trial runs under entiaircraft fire in
order to locate the artillery and only after this did they succeed in hit-
ting the target.

The commander of the second group of four Pe-Z. Capt K. V. Kalugin. regard-
less of the antiaircraft fire, made five trial passes at an altitude of 600
meters but did not discover the target. The groups of hero of the Soviet
Union Capt P. H. Hizinov and Sr Lt Yu. V. Khilkov could not get through to
their targets. 0n the way they fell into a dense overcast and were forced
to turn back. The crew of Lt s. N. Hintsev became separated from the group
and had a difficult time reaching the first nearest fighter airfield where
he landed. Only by the end of the day did the groups of the squadron com-
wander Maj P. N. Ksyunin and Lt I. G. Tsvetkov succeed in attacking artil-
lery in firing positions around Reichsportfelde and the Heerstresse rail-
road station. here they exploded an ammunition dump. As a total during
the day the bombers of the 3d bak made only 32 sorties.

The assault planes of the AA began their combat sorties to support the ground
forces only in the second half of the day. The 9th shah in groups of eight
airplanes from the 3d Guards shad under a fighter cover from the 13th iak
attacked enemy troops surrounded in the region of Hendisch-Buchholz. and
made 73 sorties. During the period from 1700 to 1800 hours the fliers of

256
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the llth Guards shed. having made use of a temporary improvement in the
weather. made a concentrated strike against the same enemy grouping near
Usrmsdorf. The enemy troops suffered great losses. By an order of the
AA commander 2l crews returned from the mission due to the halting of ac-
tions against this grouping.

The fighters covered the troops. they escorted assault planes and carried
out reconnsissanca, making 63$ sorties during the day. Due to the bad

weather conditions, the intercepting of enemy aircraft was difficult, and
in addition its fighters in every possible way avoided meeting our fliers.

During the day only one air combat was carried out and it ended without
result.

As a total on 26 April. the 16th AA made 1.244 sorties, including 653 for
bombing and strafing enemy troops and military objectives.

During 27 and 28 April. the armies of the First Belorussian and First
Ukrainian fronts waged fierce battles endeavoring to split the Berlin

enemy grouping. 0n the right wing the troops advanced successfully toward
the Elbe. To the southeast of Berlin the armies of both fronts by joint

efforts continued to compress the ring of encircle-eat around the enemy
troops.

During the night of 27 April. the crews of the 262d nbad basically carried
out reconnaissance with the incidental bombing of enemy troops in the re-
gion of Schwedt and Neurrupin. During the night they made 112 sorties.

On 27 and 28 April the AA bombers. because of bad weather. could not make
combat sorties.

The fliers of the llth Guards shad. in aiding the advance of the troops of

the 69th Army. on 27 April from 1300 to 2000 hours in 11 groups under the
cover of 60 fighters from the 282d isd destroyed enemy troops surrounded in
the region of Schwerin. hermadorf and hunchehof. They carried out 89 sorties.
they dropped around 900 bombs of different caliber on the enemy. they de-

stroyed 13 guns and 92 motor vehicles. they neutralized the fire of lo bat-
teries and wiped out much personnel.

On this day units of the lst Polish salt fought successfully. They made
227 sorties.

By the end of the day it became known that the German Command, having lost

all the airfields in Berlin and nearby. was using the main promenade in the
Tiergerten Park which had a concrete surface for the taking off and landing
of airplanes. Upon orders of the AA commander. four outstanding crews from

the 9th shsk were sent there immediately and by direct bomb hits they damaged
this airstrip.

One hour before darkness the sniper divebombers from the 3d bak led by the
regimental commanders hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col H; n. Voronhov and

255
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

(:01 A. Yu. Yahobeon, trade a repeat attack against this last hazi "airfield"
which had been prepared for the event of the flight of the fascist govern-
ment. Additional damage was caused to the landing strip. Subsequently
fighters from the AA patrolled constantly over it and the assault planes
mnde periodic raids.

On 28 April the weather further deteriorated and only assault planes from
the 6th shah operated agath the enemy troops. In snail groups they made
several raids against accumulations of enemy personnel in the regions of
:runeberg and Lewenberg. making 23 sorties.

ln order to bring the aviation closer to the supported troops. on 28 April
the 515th iap and the 193d iad were rsbased to Tempelhof airfield. At this
time battles were still occurring around the airfield. The first to appear
over the airfield were the regiaentel con-lender Lt col 6. V. Gromov and hie
wingman Lt Yu. 1‘. D'yechenko. In approaching the airfield they were fired
upon by enemy antiaircraft artillery. But this did not intimidate our
fighters. Dropping to a low altitude flight. they landed. Then the Nazis
hogan to fire on the airplanes from mortars. The Soviet artillery troops
neutralized the enemy fire.

0n the same day operations were started from the Berlin Schonefeld airfield
by the 347th and 518th iap of the same division under the comnand of Lt Cole
I'. B. Dankevich and N. G. Khudokornov. The rebasing of one of the air
divisions fro- the 13th iak of Gen B. A. Sidnev directly in the thick of
combat to the eirfields of Berlin was a bold and extremely necessary neaeure.
This immediately facilitated the providing of a cover against air strikes
for our troops fighting in the city and to the west of it.

As a total the units of the 16th M on 27 April nsde 809 sorties. and just

93 on 28 April. Of them 160 sortiee were made to boab and strafe enemy
troops.

During 29 April, the Soviet troops waged fierce battles for the central sec-
tor of Berlin which had been turned into a strong systen of centers of all-
round defense. The armies on the left wing togther with the troops of the
First Ukrainian Front squeezed the ring of eneirclement and defeated piece-
meal the Frankfurt-~Guben enemy grouping.

On this day the resistance from enemy aviation again rose. In the Berlin
region fascist airplanes repeatedly appeared in sun groups endeavoring to
attack our troops. During the night solitary Ju-SZ transports endeavored
to deliver cargo to the grouping sealed off in Berlin. During the day the
air defense posts counted 366 overflighte by memy aircraft, including 46
at night. This was the last hopeless ettespt by the Nazis to aid their
troops by aviation. ,
The hasic efforts of the army were aimed at assisting the troops on the
right wing of the front which had advanced to the Elbe.

256
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

During the night the light bosbers of the 9th Guards nbsd destroyed a con-
centration of sunny troops in the regions of Falkentsl. stsnberg and
Gruneberg. and carried out sir reconnaissance. ssking 191 sorties.

In the first half of the day. the 6th shak. in supporting the troop
offensive on the right wing. destroyed eneny artillery batteries. nili-
tary equip-ant and personnel as well as trains on railroads in the regions
of Zedenick. Lindow. Gruneberg and Palkental. Assault planes during the
day carried out 192 sorties and the fighters escorting then made 197.
Groups of Ils from the 198th shad led by Cepts A. s. Krillov end Skorik.
Sr Lt Bondarenko and Lt Kovalenko operated excellently against the essay
troops. The col-sand of the 80th Rifle Corps cornended thes.

Very effective were the actions of the assault planes fros the 2d Guards
shed in the zone of advance of the 7th Guards Cavalry Corps. Particularly
distinguishing itself was a group of 13 crews heeded by the cot-ander of
the 58th Guards shsp Hero of the Soviet Union Lt Col V. D. Panfilov. It
successfully neutralized the enemy firing positions around Neuschleise
which were impeding the advance of our troops. The groups of Haj N. P.
Vasil'chenko, Capta N. I. Lunev and s. T. Oniekevich. Sr Lts A. S. nogdsnov
and c. H. Nesterevich also fought well. On this day the air division nade
M sortiea. For the excellent work of the assault planes the cos-lander of
the cavalry corps conended the fliers of the 2d Guards shed.

Particularly difficult for the assault planes was the support for infantry
in the central areas of Berlin in approaching the enemy centers of resist—
ance. The threat arose of naking an air strike against our own troops. In
these instances the assault planes began to use trial runs. At this ties
the Nazis hid in the shelters, firing stopped end the advancing infantry
could capture the center of resistance. Such a sisulating of attacks. for
exasple. was successfully carried out by the troops of the 9th shalt. In
groups of 8-12 airplanes they "attacked" the may in the Tiergarten Perk.

Toward evening 107 bosbers from the 3d bak in 12 groups under the cover of
55 fighters fros the 1st Guards iad made a heavy strike against weapons and
troop concentrations in the strongpoints of Guten Gerundorf and Gross Huts
which were holding up the advance of the troops from the 61st May. The
crews encountered fire fros the fascist antiaircraft guns and certain air-
craft were damaged. Bonbing was carried out from an altitude of l,000-l,500
sisters fros a horizontal flight. As a total the bombers dropped 90 tons of
bombs. and as a result of this great destruction was caused to the strong-
points and the fliers spotted three Isajor explosions and many fires.

On 29 April the fighters of the srsy engaged in 67 air battles and destroyed

b6 enemy aircraft. losing two of their own in this. The superiority of our
fliers in the air was couplets.

The largest number of air victories this day was won by the fliers fron

the 3d isk. In having as their basic mission the countering of eneuy avia-
tion to maintain air superiority. the fliers from this corps were continu-
ously on the search. Having spotted fascist aircraft. they were intercepted

257
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

and destroyed. During the day the fliers carried out 39 air battles and
destroyed 33 enemy aircraft. Haj S. I. Haltovskiy and Lts V. I. Aleksandryuk
and I. D. dechikov each had two victories in the air. Capt P. I. Haslyskov,
Sr Lt 6. S. Mirnov. Lts V. I. Batov and N. A. Nel'nichenko. Jr Lts N. I.
Voronenko and N. N. Levchenko and others each destroyed one fascist air-
craft.

On this day the 9th Guards iap particularly distinguished itself. This
unit was famous for numerous air victories over the enemy on many fronts.
The regiment had started its heroic history during the difficult days of
the defense of Odessa. In 1962 the fliers of the regiment as part of .the
8th AA defeated the fascists in the Battle of Stalingrad. Later the regi-
ment fought on the western Front and during the Berlin Operation became
part of the 16th AA. During the war the fliers of the regiment destroyed
558 Nazi aircraft. In this regiment were 26 Heroes of the Soviet Union
Including twice lleroes A. V. Alelyukhin (he shot down 36 aircraft). and
Amer-Khan Sultan and P. Ya. Golovachev (each destroyed 30 aircraft). The
commander of this regiment of outstanding ace pilots was the Mce Hero

of the Soviet Union Haj V. D. Lavrinenkov (now Col Gen Ava) who during the
war won 35 victories in the air. On 29 April the fliers of the 9th Guards
inp Haj Amet-Khan Sultan. Cspts R. N. Tarasov and H. S. Tvelenev. Sr Lt

I. D. Belokudrenko. and Lts V. K. Devyatov, N. H. Kalachik and G. D. Pukhov
shot down seven fascist aircraft in air battles.

As a total on 29 April the units of the 16th AA made 1,603 sorties. in-
cluding 506 to bomb and strafe the enemy troops and military objectives.

On 30 April the fierce battles continued in Berlin with their former strength.
The troops of the front occupied district after district. At 1425 hours
Soviet troops raised the Victory Banner over the damaged Reichstag. The
battle for Berlin had cone to an end. By the end of the day the remnants

of the Frankfurt-Guben enemy grouping put down their arms.

The activeness of enemy aviation declined sharply. The fascist fliers mere-
ly conducted reconnaissance or timidly endeavored to provide air cover for
the grouping surrounded in Berlin.

During the night of 30 April. individual crews of the 9th Guards nbad pre-
vunted the movement of enemy troops along highways and railroads to the
north of Berlin and also dropped leaflets over the city having carried out
67 sorties.

Some 108 bombers from the 3d halt in groups of 6-9 aircraft from altitudes
of 900-1,300 meters bombed the enemy troop accumulation surrounded to the
southwest of Potsdam as well as the Rhinow Railroad Station. Some 70 tons
of bombs were dropped on the enemy. At midday Slo assault planes from the
9th shah attacked this same surrounded enemy grouping.

The 6th shak. supporting the advance of the 61st Army and the 2d Guards
(:avulry Corps. in groups in 4-12 airplanes and escorted by fighters from
the 6th iak destroyed enemy artillery and mortar batteries, tanks, motor

258
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
vehicles and concentrations of personnel in the regions of Rachel. Prieseck
and to the northwest of Berlin. The assault planes carried out 212 eorties
end caused the enemy troops heavy losses. The commander of the 197th shed
Col 1‘. Ya. Kovalev and the fliers free the division were thanked by the com-
nender of the cavalry corps Con V. V. Kryukov. The division had also re-
ceived a good response on successful operations in the preceding days fro.
the conander of the 9th Guards Tank Corps Gen N. D. Vedeneyev.

The 2d Guards shed on this day supported units of the 7th Guards Cavalry
Corps. The fliers of the division destroyed enemy troops and trains on
tracks to the west of Rethenow. They made 98 sortiee.

The fliers of the let Polish sek also were active. During the day they
successfully carried out 248 combat sorties.

The fighters of the AA. in carrying out their nissions. did not neat enemy
aircraft in the air.

During 30 April the AA nude 1,358 sorties including 464 for bashing end

strafing enemy troops end ailitary objectives and 159 for air reconnais-
sance.

0n 1 and 2 Hey, the troops on the right wing of the First Belorussian Front
continued to pursue the retreating enemy. By the end of 2 Hey, the forward
detachments of the 61st Army linked up with American troops on the Elbe
River. In the center as a result ofetubborn battles the enemy grouping
surrounded in Berlin was split and destroyed piecemeal by the troops of

the front. 0n the morning of 2 Hey. the connander of the defenses of the
fascist cepitel surrendered to our troops and>::on the request of the command
of the First Belorussian Front signed the ord to the Berlin garrison for
surrender. The ease surrender of Nazi troops and officers started. The

Soviet troops had completely captured Berlin. The Prenkfurt-Guben grouping
was eliminated.

On these days Gernan aviation only rarely appeared over the city. During
the night of 1 May 10 air transports dropped cargo to the surrounded garri-

son. During the day groups of 0-6 Fokker-Hulfe several times passed over
Berlin.

The units of the 16th AA on 1 and 2 Hey continued to provide support for
the formations on the right wing of the front. they destroyed the groups

of fascist troops which had broken out of Berlin and they conducted recon-
naissnnce.

On both nights the 9th Guards and 262d nbad operating as single aircraft
prevented enemy novenente along the roads to the southwest of Neuruppin,
and in addition they carried out air reconnaissance and dropped leaflets.
The fliers of the division made 101 sorties.

259
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The bouhers of the M during these days did not receive any missions and
were kept on the alert.

The assault planes of the 6th shak during the day of 1 May supported the

offensive of the 2d and 7th Guards cavalry corps. in destroying artillery
and sorter batteries in firing positions. and a concentration of infantry
and motor vehicles to the southeast of Noyahtadt. here the assault planes

carried out 128 sorties and the covering fighters free the 6th is]: nade 91.
The cousnder of the 3d Guards Cavalry Division contended the fliers fro-

the groups of the navigator of the 618th shsp 8r Lt 0. Z. Orekhov and the

squadron commander Sr Lt G. A. Panteloyev who distinguished thenselves in
these battles.

By the end of the day of 2 May. 16 crews from the 6th shak upon the order

of the co-and of the 67th Army sortied to strafe eneay troops which were
breaking out of Berlin.

0n 1 May the fighters of the M continued to cover their troops and support
the operations of the assault planes. They carried out ll air battles alf—
destroyed 7 ﬁll-190. Here two fascist aircraft were shot down by Hero of
the Soviet Union Capt V. N. Yashin (233d iap). The consander of the 176th
iap hero of the Soviet Union Lt V. N. Hakarov. Capt K. S. Vakulenko. Sr

Lt F. H. Kostikov. Lt c. A. Pashkov and Jr Lt A. I. Odnoblyudov each shot
down one aircraft. These were the last clashes with the Nazi fliers in the
air. 0n 2 May and in subsequent days there were no encounters with eneay
aircraft for air battles. The flight comander of the 63d iap Sr Lt P. N.
Kostikov was later awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. During
the period of the war he lads 233 successful combat sorties and in 67 air
battles personally shot down 15 eneny aircraft and 11 in group actions. At
present he is a lieutenant colonel (reserve) and works in Hoscow.

Behind the advancing ground forces, certain fighter fornations of the M
were rebased to airfields to the west of Berlin. at the sane tine that Nazi

troops continued to reaain in the city and its surroundings. Because of
this a difficult situation developed at tines.

in the morning of 2 May an eneay group numbering up to 3,000 soldiers and
officers with tanks and assault guns broke out of Berlin and endeavored to
make its way across Dahlgow airfield to the west. With the appearance of
such a threat the airplanes of the 265th iad based at Dahlgow airfield
took off and Inoved to the Uerneuh3he airfield. The headquarters personnel
of the 3d iak, the 265th iad. the 462d and 609th bao as well as the techni-
cal personnel of the flying units upon the alert took up an all-round de-

f «mac and engaged the eneny grouping which was breaking out. blocking its
path to the west. In the second half of the day several artillery batter-
ies and 12 tanks arrived at the scene of the battle for supporting the
aviators. and then infantry units from the 125th Rifle Corps moved up and
together with them the personnel of the 3d iak continued to fight the snowy
until the end of the day. The fliers of the 3d iak made 168 sorties in

260
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

supporting their comrades by strafing attacks. As s result the enemy group
was crushed and here 379 German soldiers and officers were destroyed and
1,650 were taken prisoner.

The second Nazi group surrounded in the forests to the west and southwest
of the Hehnsee in small groups on the morning of 2 Hey reached the region
of Stsnsdorf and Guterfelde where the staffs of the 13th isk, the 283d ied
and the b7lst and 681st bso were located. Also based there were the 56th,
116th Guards end 176th isp. The enemy was endeavoring to break through in
a southwesterly di rection, but the personnel of the air staffs and units
blocked its way and initiated a stubborn battle. The fliers of the 13th
isk made bl sortiee to strefe the enemy troops which were breaking out,
destroying them with cannon and machine gun fire and with bombs. During
the day the aviators were sided by the rifle unite and toward the end of
the day by joint efforts the enemy was crushed. In this battle 477 Nazis
were killed and 1,288 were taken prisoner. However the battles in the re-
gion of the sirfields of the 3d and 13th iek with new groups of Nazi soldiers
fleeing from Berlin continued still on 3 and 6 Hey.

0n 1 Hey. the 16th AA made 670 sorties. and on 2 Hey there were 311; this

included 392 for bombing and strafing enemy troops and 171 sorties for air
reconnaissance.

Soviet Russia celebrated the taking of Berlin with a mighty salute. In
honor of the victorious soldiers of the Red Army 26 artillery selvos from
324 guns resounded over Hoscow. The order of the Supreme Commander-in-
Chief of this great victory stated:

"The troops of the First Belorussian Front under the cosnand of Her 50 Zhukov,
with the aid of troops from the First Ukrainian Front under the command of
Her su Konev, after stubborn street battles have completed the defeat of

the Berlin grouping of German troops, and today. Hay 2, completed captured
the capital of Germany, the city of Berlin, the center of German imperialism
and the seat of German aggression...

"in the battles for the capture of Berlin, distinguished service was shown
by...fiiere of Chief Har Awn Novikov, Chief Her Avn Golovanov, Col Gen Avn
Rudenko, Col Gen Avn Krssovskiy, Lt Gen Avn Savitskiy, Lt Gen Avn Beletskiy.
Haj Gen Avn Tokarev, Haj Gen Avn Krupskiy. Haj Gen Avn Karsvetekiy, Haj

Gen Avn Skok. Haj Gen Avn Sidnev, Maj Gen Avn Dzusov, Haj Gen Avn Konarov,
Col Stalin....

"In commemoration of the victory won, the formations and units which most
distinguished themselves in bottles for the capture of Berlin are to be
presented for awarding the name of Berlin and for decorations....

"For outstanding combat I would like to coaunnd the troops of the First
Belorussian and First Ukrainian fronts who participated in the battles for
the capture of Berlin.

261
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Eternal glory to the heroes fallen in the battles for the liberty and
independence of our notherland!

"Death to the German invaders!
"Supreme Conander-in-Chief Mar 80 I. Stalin."

The defeat of the Berlin grouping of Nazi troops and the capturing of
Bcrlin by the Soviet Arny narked the conclusion of the military defeat of
fascist Germany and the end of Nitler'a New Order in Europe.

From 3 through 8 May. the troops of the First Belorussian Front continued
the offensive in s westerly direction. destroying the isolated Nazi groups.

The fornations of the M during 3-5 May conducted limited operations. Only
as before air reconnaissance was continuously carried out for the retreat-
ing remnants of the broken Nazi army which were endeavoring to nore quickly
surrender to the Anglo-Americans. On 3-5 Hey. the indefatigable scouts made
117 sorties.

The defeated eneny aviation did not appear in the air from 6 May.
Beginning on 6 May. the 16th M did not receive any nissions.

0n 7 May the troops of the front along the entire area reached the Elbe
River. The Berlin Operation had been victoriouely concluded by the troops
of the First Belorussian Front.

0n 8 May, 18 pilots from the 515th iap carried out the last nission given

to then in the Great Patriotic War. By direct escort they covered the flight
of the English, American and French nilitery delegations from Stendahl air-
field to Berlin. The fighter group was led by the regimental navigator Haj
N. N. Tyul'kin. In May 1966 for combat feats he was given the title of hero
of the Soviet Union. During the war he successfully carried out 251. combat
sorties and shot down 15 enemy aircraft in 66 air battles.

At the end of the day in the Berlin suburb of Karlshorst, the representatives
of the German Supreme Couand signed the act of unconditional surrender of
thc Cernan Arned Forces. This ended the Great Patriotic War of the Soviet
people against the Nazi invaders.

in consummation of the complete victory over fascist Germany, on the next
day. 9 Hey. Victory Day, the capital of our motherland Moscow saluted the
vulnrous troops of the Red Army. the ships and units of the Navy which had
won this brilliant victory with 30 artillery salvoe from a thousand guns.
This salute was the greatest of all during the entire Great Patriotic Her.

Aviation in the Berlin Operation played a very najor role in defeating the
Nazi troops. During the period of ll. April through 5 Hay 1965, the 16th M
carried out 37.565 combat sorties. and the bombers supporting it from the
18th and lath M made 3.679 sorties. Of this number 19,669 sorties were
made for bombing and strafing enemy troops and military objectives. 7.9“

262
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY -

for covering troops and rear installations. and 2.957 for air reconnais-
sance. Thus. a majority of the air sorties was carried out for the pur-
poses of supporting our troops in the operation. The army carried out

9.502 sorties for escorting its boabers and assault planes. and 33 sortisa
for the dropping of leaflets. The daytime bonbers during the operation made
6.164 sorties. and the night bombers 4.317; the assault planes nade 8.603
sortiss and the fighters 20.581. The Po-2 night bombers operated under

the greatest stress and as an average during the operation they made each
27 combat sorties.

In the course of the Berlin Operation the fliers of the stay. in coabating
eneay aviation. carried out 989 air battles end shot down 760 eneay aircraft;
46 airplanes were destroyed at airfields.

The fliers of the Polish Air Force also fought in a close combat association
with Soviet fliers. In the course of the operation they successfully made
865 aorties. they destroyed much nilitary equipsent and personnel and shot
down 17 fascist in air battles. The Polish aviators aade their silitary
contribution to the overall cause of fighting the German invaders.

The attempts of the Nazi air command to put up any organized resistance
whatsoever to our glorious aces appeared powerless. The Soviet aviators
in the last battle endeavored to make as many coebat eortiea as possible.
As a whole the number of combat sorties per loss (the basic indicator for
the survival of the airplanes and personnel) in the Berlin Operation, due
to the increased combat skill of the flight personnel and the art of the
air commanders increased significantly.

The Nazi troops which comprised the Berlin garrison of many thosands of men
were continuously, night and day, under attack by the red starred bombers.

assault planes and fighters. The Nazis suffered heavy losses in personnel

and equipment and the persons who remained alive were morally depressed.

In no other operation of the Great Patriotic war had the struggle in the
air been so decisive and fierce. This can be seen from the large number
of air battles. particularly during the first days of the operation. and
in the enormous losses of Nazi aviation in aircraft and flight personnel.

The battle for Berlin was the most important concluding operation of the
Soviet Army in the Great Patriotic War and one of the largest strategic
operations of Horld Her II. In it the Soviet people and their army under
the leadership of the Comaunist Party demonstrated to the entire world
the invincibility of the socialist state. This operation clearly mani-
tested the superiority of Soviet military art over the military art of
fascist Ger-any.

The Berlin Operation was characterized by the use of large air force
groupings. Of them the 16th AA was the largest in terms of the number of
aircraft. Regardless of the great scale of use. the command and staff of
the 16th AA successfully handled the planning and leadership of combat for
8 air corps. 10 detached air divisions and 7 detached sir regiments.

263
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

The basic feature in the combat use of the 16th M during this outstanding
operation was the massing of air efforts for carrying out the most inportant
missions. Thus. at the outset of the operation, up to 90 percent of all
the forces of the M was ained at direct support on the battlefield for

the main assault groupings of troops fighting from the Kuetrin bridgehead.
~0ut of the 28 air divisions. 20 were assigned for supporting the two tank
armies the successes of which largely determined the outcome of the entire
operation. Prior to the starting of the stoning of Berlin, for air strikes
against its central area, more than 1.100 aircraft were used at night and
almost l,500 aircraft during the day; of this number 70 percent was bombers.
The principle of the massed use of aviation was also maintained in carrying
out a number of other missions.

Air superiority in this operation was on the side of our aviation. em! it was
firmly kept until its conclusion. This was predetermined by the qualitative
and quantitative superiority of Soviet aviation over enemy aviation. More-
over the combat skill of our flying personnel was much higher than among the
fliers of the Nazi Luftwaffe. Our fighters shot down 6-7-fold nore aircraft
in air battles than they lost themselves. here also were felt the enormous
losses of enemy aviation suffered in the preceding battles on the Oder.

l-‘or this reason the Nazi aviation was routed during the first 5 days of the
operation basically in air battles. The fliers of the 16th M during these
days shot down 78 percent of all the enemy aircraft destroyed during the
operation. Due to the air superiority of our aviation. the ground forces

as well as the assault planes and bombers were reliably protected against
enemy air strikes. and the fighters acquired a freedom of operation and
could even strafe enemy troops on the ground.

The most isportant mission of the M during the entire extent of the Berlin
Operation was to support the actions of the ground troops. and this had the
form of an air offensive. After the air softening up process carried out
before dawn. 90 percent of all the sorties were aimed at the direct support
of the troops with the start of the offensive. to supporting the cousitment
of tank formations to the battle and their actions in the operational depth,
as well as to destroy enemy reserves which were being brought up. This
provided an opportunity to give very substantial aid to the combined-arms
and tank armies of the front. here is how the combat activities of the
supporting aviation were viewed by the cot-send of the let Guards Tank Army:
"The 9th shak which cooperated with the let Guards Tank Army during the en-
tire period of the Berlin Operation carried out its work excellently.
Katukov. Popel' and Shalin." The col-sand of the 5th Shock Army and the 2d
Guards Tank Army which was satisfied by the decisive and bold actions of
the fliers from the 6th shak in their response also gave an outstanding
evaluation to the results of their combat activity.

During all the stages of the operation the M widely used concentrated strikes
made by major air groups codeined with wave operations with ' seller groups.
They attacked the enemy usually in direct proximity of the forward units of
the front. Hhen the weather conditions did not permit the making of concen-
trated attacks. small groups were employed and these continuously attacked

the enemy from the air. During the period of the storming of Berlin. in a
majority of instances the basic type of help for the troops was concentrated

266
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
'08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

attacks over an area by large groups of bombers and assault planas. but

such strikes were not always possible because of the difficult situation
on the ground.

The actions of the 16th AA in the operation were carried out in close co-
ordination with the ground troops. This was achieved by the assigning ahead
of the of air formations to the combined-arms and tank armies. by the porn-
anent locating of tho commanders of the air formations at tho cos-and posts
of those armies. and by tho presence of air representatives and controllers
in tho fornations and units which were being supported by tho aviation.

During tho street battles of Berlin. the maintaining of tactical coordina-
tion between aviation and advancing troops was extremely complicated chiefly
duo to tho difficulty of identifying the targets. Iiowovor aviation did
everything possible to provide laximm help to the troops in defeating tho

Nari garrison. Even the trial "attacks" by assault planes helped the troops
in capturing individual defensive works.

In the Berlin Operation tho control of aviation was organized considering
the rapid assigning of missions to tho formations and units as well as con-
tinuous leadership of their combat. Regardless of tho operational subor-
dination of a portion of tho air forces to tho co-anders of the combined-
arma and tank armies for a certain time. control by the M cot-sander over
these air formations was completely maintained. When necessary he had the
opportunity of rotargoting these forces for carrying out other missions hav-
ing notified the combined-ares conander of this.

One of the new measures in the area of the control of aviation during the
operation was the centralized use of radar. This system was the most in-
portant means for monitoring the air situation. and this contributed to
the more organized and effective coobating of German aviation in the air.
The use of this system in the Berlin Operation for controlling aviation
marked the beginning of the centralized use of radar subsequently.

The victorious conclusion of the Berlin Operation was predetermined by the
enormous moral-political upsurge which was felt by all the ooldioro and
officers of the Soviet troops. including the aviatc:s of the 16th M.

The high patriotic upsurgeof all the personnel was a result of the great
and daily work of the co-aand, the political apparatus. and the party and
Komsomol organizations of the M. In the concluding battle it was particu-
larly important to ensure the vanguard role of the co-uniats and Romach
members in carrying out the combot missions. And this was achieved. of
all the enemy aircraft shot down in air battles during the entire operation,
98 percent were destroyed by columnists and Komsomol members.

The increase in the ranks of the Columnist Party was proof of the high po-
litical maturity of the personnel of the M and their correct understand-
ing of the importance of the concluding operation. In April and Hay.

1,153 persons were admitted as members of the VKP(b), and 838 persona become
candidate members. and 290 persons joined the Komsomol.

265
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

The fliers. nevigetors end eir gunners. the engineers. technicians and
junior eir speeielists. the teen end officers of the reer services of the
16th AA honorebly cerried out their duty to the notherlsnd end set exenplee
of heroism, nilitery skill end unstinting labor in the united desire to more
rapidly coeplete the defeat of fseciet Ger-shy.

The Coqunist Perty end the Soviet govemnent properly preised the feats

of the svietors in the skies of Berlin. Three formetions end 15 units of
the 16th AA were everded the honorery nene of Berlin. including the fol-
lowing: The 3d beh (col-lender Nej Gen Avn A. z. Rerevetskiy). the ISM

bed (eel-under Col N. A. Sithin). the let Guerds isd (co-ender Col V. V.
Sukhoryehov); the 367th. 373d end 560th 'oep (co-endere Nejs D. N. Slivko
and N. D. Postnov. Lt Col 5. P. Prikhod'ko); the 661st end 997th nhep (con-
unders Lt Col V. N. Sonin end Hej A. I. Kuznetsov); the 567th. 618th. 805th.
906th end 9‘5th shep (comnders No.1 3. K. Svirs, Lt Cole I. I. Kotik end

N. H. losnikov. m3 1. N. Kerneukhov and Lt Col I. K. Shebekov): the 176th,
368th. 518th end 776th iep (conenders Nejs V. N. Hekerov end A. G. Zhulin.
Lt Col N. G. Khudokornov. end Haj A. A. Mekogon) end the 93d okrep (co-under
Col K. H. Nyesoyedov). The honorery ns-e of Brendenburg ves given to the
319th. 654th end 650th hep (co-snders Lt (:01 N. G. Sutyegin, Nej N. Ye.
Oetreyko end Lt Col A. A. Vdovin).

For velor. eourege end the exe-plery cerrying out of the missions of the
comlnnd. the following fornstione end units of the 16th AA were given decor-
ations: The Order of Lenin to the 2d Guerde shed; the Order of the Red Den-
ner to the 6th end 9th shah. the 13th iek, the 9th Guerds nhed, the 198th
shed, the 128th hep, the 65th shep. the 55th end 56th Guards isp; the Order
of Lenin. Second Degree to the 262d nbed, the 3d Guerde shed. the ZSZd.

283d end 286th ied; the Order of Kutuzov. Second Degree to the 3d ink end
241st bed; the Order of Suvorov. Third Degree to the 6th and 36th hep. the
33d, 59th, 70th. 71st end 79th Guerds shep. the 30th end 67th Guards iep.
the 15th. 165th. 291st. 517th. 721st, 739th end 812th isp end the 98th okrep;
the Order of Kutusov. Third Degree to the 56th hep. the 63d isp, the I76th
Gunrds end 27bth isp; the Order of Alexender Nevskiy to the 64th Guerds

and 776th isp. to the 919th oops [Deteched Army Signele Regiment] end the
6th oeep [Deteched Airfield Service Regiment].

For the exemplery fulfill-eat of the missions of the con-end end for velor
and heroism shown in this by the um“ of the Presidium of the USSR Supreee
Soviet the honorery title of Hero of the Soviet Union use sverded. in eddi-
tion to those eireedy mentioned, to the comnder of the 6th isk Haj Gen
Avn I. N. Dzusov. the colleender of the 13th iek He: Gen Ave B. A. Sidnev
end to the flight conender of the 98th okrep Sr Lt V. I). Orlov.

On 15 Hey 1966, the title of hero of the Soviet Union was sverded to: Lt
Col N. V. Pedorenko. Nejs Ye. Ye. Ankudinov, V. A. Verkholentsev, I. I.
Kobyletskiy end I. P. Yelovoy. Cepte V. S. Detyeyev. P. P. szr'kov. A. I.
Lebedev. G. S. Heleshenkov, A. D. Henukyen, N. D. Mishenov, N. I. Popov,

c. S. Kholodnyy end S. S. Shcheglov. Sr Lts V. R. Buchevyy. Ye. I. Goneherov.
D. V. Dashidte, H. S. Kelel'chik. V. R. Lezerev, D. I. Lehedev. V. A. I.eont'-
yev, Ye. D. Hikheylik. O. V. Noiseyev, A. D. Ossdchiyev. G. I. Puchkov.

266
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

V. V. Udachin and A. N. Rheritoshkin, Lts D. I. nisyayev. R. 'i'. Husheylo.
I. l. Nechipurenho. I. A. Perminov and V. A. Sorokin. Jr Lts S. ‘1'. Vagin,
I. Ya. Halin. G. N. Shatin and HSgt G. P. Alehseyev.

On 2 June 19b5, a second Gold liero' s Star was awarded to the commander of
the 3d iak Lt Gen Avn Ye. Ya. Savitskiy.

Yevgeniy Yakovlevich Savitskiy was born in 1910 in Novorossiysk in the
fasily of a railroad switchmsn. He began his working life as a worker

in a cement plant. At the age of 19 he was sent by the Koasomol to the
Stalingrad Military Pilots School and upon completing it he worked there
as an instructor. he was a member of the 0950 from 1931. On the eve of
the war he contended a fighter air division in the Far East. At the be-
ginning of 1962. he was transferred to the combat army to one of the air
divisions defending Moscow. Here he participated in air battles and began
hie combat score of shot-down fascist airplanes.

Soon thereafter he was assigned to organize the 3d iak. Ye. Ya. Sevitehiy
served the entire war with this unit, defeating the fascist invaders in the
battles in the Kuban'. over the fields of the Ukraine and in the skies of
the Crimes. in liberating Belorussia and raised. and then right up to Bar-
lin. In March 1963. Col Ssvitskiy was awarded hie first general's rank.

In May 19“. for personal feats and exemplary fulfillment of the missions

of the contend he was awarded the title of Hero of the Soviet Union. During
the war Ye. Ya. Sevitskiy made 216 combat sorties. he personally shot down
22 fascist aircraft and 2 others in group action. During this time the
fliers of the corps led by him destroyed 1,653 enemy aircraft.

Gen Savitskiy was always where the situation was most intense. being a
flier of superior class and an excellent air fighter, he possessed unlimited
boldness and valor and through his personal example he inspired the fliers
of the corps to heroic feats. In understanding the situation excellently
as well as the questions of the use of aviation. he always sought out new
methods for fighter action which provide a victory over the enemy. “is
talent as a flier and military leader was most apparent in the Vistula-
Oder and Berlin operations where the personnel led by him in fierce battles
caused enormous losses to fascist aviation and reliably covered the troops
of the First Belorussian Front. At present Her Avn Ye. Ya. Savitskiy is
the deputy co-ander-in-chief of the National Air Defense Troops and an
honored military pilot of the USSR.

1n conmemoration of the outstanding victory of the Soviet Army in the con-
eluding operation. all the personnel of the 16th AA on the behalf of the
Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet was awarded the medal "For the Cap-
ture of Berlin." Many fliers, gunners, navigators. engineers, technicians
and Junior air specialists. officers and men of the rear services who dis-
tinguished themselves in battles were decorated with orders, including
three persons who received the Order of Lenin. (.59 who received the Order
of the Red Banner and 8,865 persons who received other combat orders.

267
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONCLUSION

During the hard years of the Great Patriotic Her the 16th AA fought a
difficult but glorious and heroic path from the Volga to the Elbe. Formed
in August 1942 during the peak of the Battle of Stalingrad. the AA in close
coordination with the ground forces participated in all the major operations
which determined the outcome of the struggle against the Nazi invaders
(Stalingrad. the Battle of Kursk. the Belorussian, Vistula-Oder and Berlin
operations).

During the period of the war the AA grew in size and strength immeas-
urably. At Stalingrad it had around 300 combat aircraft, and in the con-
cluding Berlin Operation its aircraft fleet now numbered over 3,000 modern
aircraft.

One of the most important prerequisites for the successful actions of the
Soviet Armed Forces during the operations of the Great Patriotic Var was
the winning and firm keeping of air superiority. In waging an intense
struggle against Nazi aviation, the 16th AA along with the other AA car-
ried out this mission.

The victory of the Soviet Air Force over Nazi aviation was determined by
its continuous quantitative and qualitative growth. by the greater combat
skill of the flight personnel and the art of the air commanders. and by
the labor successes of the Soviet people who with inexhaustible energy
supplied the front with superior military equipment.

In all the operations of the Great Patriotic War the primary mission of

the AA was to provide maximum air assistance to the ground forces in the
fight against the Nazi invaders. The fliers of the 16th AA carried out
this mission. In all operations the largest number of sorties was made

for direct troop support. In suppressing enemy weapons, the aviation
blazed the trail for the troops on the offensive, it destroyed retreating
cncmy columns. it helped repel Nazi counterattacks, it reliably covered the
troops against air strikes and carried out air reconnaissance at night and
during the day. '

During the years of the war the 16th AA made around 288,000 combat sorties.
In this 3.700 enemy tanks, armored vehicles and tractors. up to 10,000 ar-
tillery guns and mortars, around 40,000 motor vehicles and much other
268
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

military equip-ant were destroyed and damaged. In addition the enemy suf-
fered enoruous losses in personnel. The fliers of the M carried out
6.100 air battles in which they shot down 5.175 eneasy aircraft. Moreover.
766 Nari airplanes were destroyed in raids on many sirfields.

In the fierce clashes with the enemy. thousands of conbat friends and con-
radee died the death of the brave. Eternal glory for the aviatiors who
fell for the liberty end independence of our motherland. Their names will
always live in the memory of the grateful Soviet people.

"During the years of the Greet Patriotic "er the Arned Forces of our
motherland covered themselves with undying glory." said the USSR minister
of defense from the roatrum of the Zloth CPSU Congress. ”...Not only our
contenporaries but also future generations eternally will rember end
honor the heroic Soviet soldier who saved the world fron fascist enslave-
slent and who ensured liberty. independence and social progress for the
peoples of «any European and Aaian nations."

This noble nission of the Soviet Armed Forces reusins unforgettable today

when the Soviet Union is firmly and consistently carrying out a policy of
peace.

In reaersbering well the lessons of the previous war. the Soviet Aruod
Forces created and directed by the Cowiet Party are vigilantly guard-
ing the peaceful labor of our people and are always ready to carry out
their patriotic and international duty.

COPYRIGHT: Voyenizdat, 1973

10272
080: 1801 DID

269
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY