APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPO2-00000R000100030021 4
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R0001000300214

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI‘IU; L/83IU

7 March 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOUO 10/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM000300214
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
ether characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[} are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered inonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODOCBD HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSBHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED POROPPICIAL USE ONLY.
n. u. .. N... J. I -' -. A ........ .-‘..
zi'l'nclet‘QGIAPMIc can I m .0935 l-/ 8318 - eupcm u x
I. In ran \ Ilk epon are ,
7 March 19 79

twsunons 0N umcmrcs AND omcnaous oaucs,
(P000 10/79)

a.
9. I'rrhI-m‘ (Mun-Mum Mn and Adult"- I0. Pmmt/Ta-k/Iovh linu Nu.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road H. ContaclIGuM No.
Arlington. Virginia 22201

 

     
         

       
      
   
 
   
 
 

  

l1. Vessel-nu “gamut-on Name and Mullen

 

l1 Type 0! Report a Prqu
Coveted

A: above

IS. Smlcuuuy Notes

I6. Alvuurl.

  
      

  

The serial report consists of translations from the world press and radio
relating to law. law enforcement, illicit traffic and personalities concerned
with narcotics and dangerous drugs.

I . Key lads and limo-lent Analysis. 70. Dclctipton

Narcotics

Drug Addiction

Lav (Jurisprudence)
Law Enforcement

m. Mean! oeu/Opn-Ended Tet-s

Dangerous Drugs:
Drug Control
Drug Traffic

We. cosm FieH/Gcoup 5K. 60. 61‘
u. t‘vailahnlny gnu..." I - can" Class “in 2|. 80. ul Panel
For Official Use Only. "W" ‘- . 70

Limited Nunbe: of Copies Available From JPRS. " if?" II" In m -
NC A('
commune". tour. [-711 run to“ my DE IEPRODUCED ‘ V,CM,°¢ ....l.lll
FOR 'OPPICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/OI
7 March I

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS

(9000 10/79)
CONTENTS

ASIA
BURMA

Briefs
Ken; ‘mng acroin Seizure
Youths Jailed for Heroin
Hohnyin Heroin Seizure
Mandalay Jails ‘No for Opiua

J APAN

Briefs
clelpdovn on Insgsvakai
Drug Snuggler An‘ested

NAMYS IA

Drug Help Center To Increase Its Intake
(NEH STRAITS TIMES, 31 Jan 79).

Traders on Dru. charge Freed
(NEH STRAITS TIMES, 5 Feb 79)

Number of Drug Abusers Said To Increase Daily
(KIN KHOK RIMO, 9 Jan 79)

Drug Supply Center Uncovered. 'Inportsnc' Suspect Arrested
(KIN KHOK RIMO, 5 Jan 79).................................

Briefs
Opium Seized
Indian Youth Sentenced
250 Grams of Iteroin Seized
103 Pounds of Horphine Seized
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OONIEN‘I'S (Continued)

Heroin Seized
Drug Possession Established

PAKISTAN

Opiu-a Rules bended to Curb Abuse
(MLUCHISTAN TIMES. 29 Jan 79)..

Briefs
Plan To End Opiu- Addiction
Opiul Haul st Airport
PHILIPPINES
Briefs -
Herihusns Plantations
Major Narcotics Distributors

SOUTH KOREA
Briefs
Drug-Linked Crimes
Use of Nsrcotics

TIIAILAND
Thai Paper: Too Many Drug Traffiekers Escsping Pro.
Prison
(mm-n1; BANGKOK POST, 12 Feb 79)...................

Four in be; Irons st ﬂeroin Trial
(THE AUSTRALIAN, 6 Feb 79).

'Blind Dete' in the Jungle
(BANGKOK POST, 3 Feb 79)

EASTERN MOPB
YUGOSLAV [A

Pall Sowing of Poppies Declined Drestieslly in 1978
(Editorial Report).....................................

-5-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

OONTBNI'S (Cont tuned)

LATIN AMERICA
BRAZIL

Briefs
Cocaine Traffickar Captured

CNI LB

Briefs
Police Crackdown on Trafficking

COLOMBIA

Defense Hinistry on Antinarcotics Activity
(IAIN, 17 Peb 79)..aas.eeaoaeoeeoeeaooeooeeoaeeaeoeoaa

“use Drug Seizure in Antioquia Department
(APP, 23 Peb 79)ooonoose-000.00....aoioooooeococoa-0.00

Briefs
Discovery of Cocaine Laboratories
Ruse Narcotics Laboratory
Cocaine Seized
Cocaine Seizure
Harihssna Plantation
Cocaine Laboratory

COSTA RICA

Br iefa
Narco tie a Direc tor ' s Rea igna tion

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

Briefs
Dru; 'l‘raffickers Arrested

ECUADOR

Briefs
Drug Traffickera' Arrest

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued) Page
PERU
Briefs
Fight Assinst Drug Traffic 32
PIP Intensifies Drug Cslpsign 32
Drug Seizure 32
‘l‘rsffickers' Arrest
VENEZUELA
Briefs
Cocaine Neal 33
NEAR EAST AND MRI}! AFRICA
ISRAEL

Drug Abuse in In? To Be Dealt Hith Severely
(Rani Iii-on; “A'ARETZ, 22 Dec 78) 3b

SUI-SAHARA" AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Police Intensify Anti-stihusna Campaign
(Schslk vsn Schslhryk, Jan van Hyk; DIE TRANSVALER.
19 Jun 79) 35
WESTERN EUROPE
FRANCE

Briefs
Toulouse Drug Arrests 37

NORNAY

Detectives' Chief Attributes Rapid Theft Rise to Addicts
(Svein Dybing; ARBBIDERBLADET, various dstes).......... 38

Coverment 'ro Tighten Phone “rapping Rules in Drug Cases
(APTENPOSTBN, 20 Jan 79) (.6

-d-

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
1”“? OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

SPAIN

Co-entsry Notes Greater Dru; Usage in Spain
(ABC. 13 Dec 78)....ooopooseaooeooooooeeooeo-oaaeoocoo

Drug Enforce-em Effort for Las Pol-as in 1978
(Jose Vera Suarez; YA, 16 Jan 79).....................

Ilaahish Ring Arrested in Galicia
(LA VANUARDIA. 18 Jan 79)............................

Briefs
Drugs Stolen Pros Pharaacy
Drug Arrest Figures
Morphine Stolen Prol- Pharmacy

SWITZERLAND

Pair Involved in Hashish Transport Sentenced
("DIE ZUERCiIER 22111116, 20 Jan 79).....................

Pair Sentenced for Transporting Heroin
(N308 ZUERCIIER ZEIWNG, 25 Jan 79).

TURKEY

Heroin Sent- for Analysis Switched Hith Soap Powder
(HURRIYB‘I‘. 26 Jan 79)..................................

Narcotics Squad Seizes 80 Kilos of Powdered lhshish
(HURRIYET. 27 Jan 79)..................................

Heroin Dealer. Italian Girlfriend Robbed in Istanbul
(CUNAYDIN, 26 Jan 79)

“EST GERMANY

Eric is
Drug Dealer Imprisoned

YOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

mac TUNG $3011! SBIZURE--Keng Tung, 31 Jam-The con-pander of the Keng Tung
township narcotics suppression squad, Subinspector U Ohn Kyaw, and a party
on 30 January seized 90 grams of heroin from 0 Rye Aye of Pon-hton ward,
Tschilek, and U Aik Lar of Nawng-hpa ward, Keng Tung. The seizure was made
in Nawng-Ithit road, No 3 ward, Keng Tung. 0n the same day, Subinspector

U Ohn Kyaw and his squad raided the residence or' Dew Na Mu Khane notorious
heroin dealero-in No S ward of Kong Tung and seized 270 grass of heroin and
30,000 kyats obtained from heroin sales. [Text] [Rangoon MATAUM in
Burnese 10 Feb 79 p 5 BK]

YOUTlis JAILBD FOR BENIN-dungeon, l3 Febu’i'hsketa township court No l
chaired by I) Tun Lwin today sentenced Haung mung Hyint, 19, of Thomson
Yeiths street; Ali, alias "in Hyint, 20, of 32d street; and Illa Min, alias
Hin Min, 19, of Kyongyi road, to 8 years' inprisoment each, and hung Gyi,
alias Ah Kwi, 20, of Lamdaw; hla Tun, alias "user, 19, of Ha-ugon Lankye;
Haung Haung Sein, 20, of 24th street; and “sung Sein Kyin, 19, of Zlet
street, to 6 years' imprison-eat each, under Section 6.3 of the Narcotic
Drugs Law. The court also ordered that the Hercedesulicense plate 3-2616--
used in the transportation of heroin be confiscated. The case was that at
midnight on 22 April 1978, a security patrol of ward people's council be-
cue auspicious of a group of youths in the Mercedes car parked at the
corner of No 5 Answer ward, Thaketa township lo 1. Hhen the car was
searched nine small cketa of heroin wrapped in paper and weighing about

1 tical [.036 pounds were found hidden under the back seat. Hhile arrange-
ments were being made to send the car to the police station, the youths
drove away but were apprehended near the Yacht Club at In a lake. [Text]
[Rangoon mm P1311111! N32!!! in Burl-ass llo Feb 79 p 5 III!

momma IBM!!! SEIZURB--Hohnyin, 10 Peb--Acting on intonation, Suhinspector
U Khin Haung Kyi and a police squad, together with ward councillors, yester-
day raided the residence of new chit Hyaing in Thai ward, Hohnyin's region
No l, Kachin state. and found over 10,000 kyats worth of. No It heroin and 80
eapty penicillin bottles from Shank Pyin of She “we ward, Lsshio. [Text]
[Rangoon manner: in Dumas 17 Feb 79 p lo BK]
HANDMAY JAILS m FOR OHM-Mandalay, 1 Feb--Handa1sy Northeast township
court No l with U Khin Houng as chairman and U Tun Scin and Dav Ohn Kyi as
numbers today found Haung Soc Soc, 25, son of U Khin Haung Shae of Haulnse
conpound in Handalay's Seiktyamahi ward, guilty as charged under Section
6.3 of. the Narcotic Drugs Law and sentenced him to 7 years‘ inprisor-ent
for possessing 900 kyats worth of heroin. The case was brought to trial
after the heroin suppression squad of Mandalay led by Inspector Nyunt She
found a "Burplex-c" vitamin bottle containing 900 kyats worth of heroin
during its raid on the residence of Maung Soc Soe on 18 August 1976. Simi-

larly, Township court No 3 with U Haung Houng M as chairman and U Nyo Law
and U Than mung as members today handed down a 5 years' imprison-em sen-

tcncc to mung thin Maung, slias Haung Haung, son of 0 Lu of Yadsnabon
Khawasu ward, as he was found guilty under Section 6.3 of the Narcotic

Drugs Law for possessing s snall amount of opiua. [Text] [Rangoon norm
mum N821}! in Buruese 8 Feb 79 p 6 K] '

cs0 : 5300
BRIEFS

CLAHPDOHN 0N INAGAHAKAI-Tokyo. 13 Feb KYODO --The National Police Agency
launched an operation Tuesday to annihilate the influential criminal
organization inagawakai. By forming a special investigative center. the
agency intends to drive the underworld syndicate to the wall, availing
itself of uneasiness among gang members following the arrest of their
leaders. In a clampdown that began at the turn of the year, police have
apprehended four gang leaders and 66 members on charges of opening gamb-
ling houaes, using violence and trafficking in arms and stimulant drugs.
Three Japanese swords and 25 grams of amphetamines valued at about

8 million yen on the black market have been seized. The four leaders now
in custody include Hirotaka Yokokura. 37, head of an Inagawakai affiliate
in Shinagawa Hard. and Yoneo Iwata. 39. chief of another affiliate in
Yokohama. Inagawskai, based in Atami. Shizuoka Prefecture, has 91
affiliates and a total membership of some 4,500 throughout the country.
It is on good terms with the nation's largest gangster organization, the
Yamaguchiguni based in Kobe. [Text] [Tokyo KYOGO in English no time
given 13 Feb 79 0"]

DRUG SHUGGLER ARRESTED-~Narita. Chiba Pref.. 15 Feb KYODO--Customs and
narcotics agents Thursday announced the arrest of a Chinese traveler

on charges of smuggling 984 grams of stimulant drug with a street value
of 300 million yen from South Korea. Arrested was To Chun-hung. 39-year-
old clothing dealer. of uong Kong, who arrived at Narita airport on

13 January from Hong Kong via South Korea. His nervous attitude aroused
suspicions of customs officers who searched him and found the stimulant
drug hidden in his suitcase. To said he was asked by a Chinese acquaintance
in Hong Kong to carry the stimulant drug from South Korea to Japan at the
end of last year. The acquaintance promised to pay him $1,500 for the
job, To told the customs. To said that he visited Seoul at the beginning
of January and received the drug and traveling expenses from the Chinese.
he was to hand the drug to him at a hotel in Akasaka, Tokyo. [Text]
Tokyo KYODO in English no time given 15 Feb 79 OH]

CSO: 5300
[RIB HELPCENI'ERTO INCREASEITS mm
Kmla Inmpur NEH STRAH'S TIMES in English 31 Jan 79 p 8

[Ix-x37 [POI-l. Tun. --'m Cantu tor the
Beinhiliution of Addict- it :05
incremiiainuhiq bythoendot
the you. It is uno 0 ed to admit
more people AM t2; _ one new you":
‘91.?" mu. up. amid Jmnm.
mu. mlbﬁul a... M "‘2',
'mn mm" MdihcnmJOIn

the «cm was u- ,
3.2.... u a name mm $.23: m“

«not
It in not known A. m” m' ,
mm 10.10an an

25

MM.

"'0 but not. than mama“. Mm"
m 9 lo mind": mmxmwmr
uvgp at 00 W hurrah-mm
no," an. m M d N.

0 *0 n m u
Wmmhrblg W “.th it'll)-
.........,.... wwm‘a“

u u a a on
Conne- shroud 3...!“

M rmmm
cum m a min: a
In. for m ‘yur.
non thou won

a coin iud can: on
Joe“ (or mun.“
In men was ma;

building $.63“ '0;
in Kan m:
and up 0! a co-
m hue mm.
TRADERS Oﬂ mus CHARGE FREED

Kuulu Lumpur NEH STRAITS TIMES In English 5 Feb 79 p 11

M7 ... m. w...
In. -‘l\vo Conn ac no.
wwwa'wm .‘..“f"'“"... mamw'
mmwwmmnmm.
'my mm M mm not. cut 1
o e! Mo? «.1313 'n‘umm!
.335 mm

. lo chow
mun-3mm mumnautg

It“; Wm. 00. m GMM‘agm m

“are: with M no with In on m
l1." mumm «Wcumm

to mu he know no
con-1M do whorubuu o! the.

bum.
mm o Wit.
Imhllutmr. ml
NUMBER (P DRUG ABUSERS SAID T0 INCRE'ASE DAILY

Malaysia KIN KNOX RIMO [KIN IGOR DAILY HE'S) in Chinese 9 Jan 79 p lo

lArticle: "Investigative Report of National Anti-Narcotics Association
Points Out Drug Abusers Increasing Daily; Over 20,000 Arrested in Last 8
Years; Overseas Alone Over 600 Arrested")

[Text] (Kualn Lunpur 8) According to the investigative report by the Na-
tional Anti-Narcotics Association. since 1970 a total of 23,551 drug abus-
ers have been arrested. This includes dealers and storers of drugs. At

the some time, up to last year a total of 662 drug abusers have been ar-
rested abroad.

The nation's drug users have been increasing daily. Judging by the number
of people arrested for drug abuse both at home and abroad and those enter-
ing hospitals to give up drugs, the nation's drug problem is becoming aore
serious every day. From 1973 to 1978 the number of people going to prison
or the hospital to give up drugs reached a total of 18,325, and if hospital

equipment were improved, there could be an even greater number of people
entering to give up drugs.

Drug users arrested in the country could receive a complete medical cure
before being sent to places [or drug abstention. The nation's drug ab-
stention centers, from 1975 when they were opened to the present, have al-
ready received 2,169 people to give up drugs.

The association indicated that a total of 662 Malaysians were arrested
abroad [or drug abuse, of which 302 were in Singapore, 115 in the Nether-
lands, 69 in Oermny, and 36 in Belgium. Malaysians arrested in other
comtries include soon in Australia, Austria, the United States, Brunei,
Demrk, England, Finland. France, Greece. Italy, Japan, Maghreb, Syria,
Thailand, liong Kong, and Switzerland.

9282
080: 5300
DRUG SUPPLY CBNI‘BR UNCOVERHJ, 'IHPORTAN’I" SUSECT ARRESTED
Hnlnysia KIN IMOK RIMO [KIN KHOK DAILY NEWS) in Chinese 5 Jan 79 p 12

[Article: "Ambush at the Indian Village of Hu-ehi-pu-lan-lu by
P'o-te-shen Police; Drug Supply Center Uncovered. One Suspect Arrested,
Drugs Seized")

[Text] (Sen-chou, Pa-hsi-pua-jsng, ‘0) After more than three months of
open and secret investigations and step-by-stop tracking, the P'o-te-shen
police recently announced it had closed in on and successfully uncovered
a drug supply center in the Indian village of Hu-chi-pu-lsn-lu, arrested
an important suspect, and seized heroin worth approximately 2,000 yuan
and a set of drug taking equipment including small knives, candles, and
soae snall plastic bags for packing drugs, completing a glorious achieve-
”at.

The arrested suspect was a 27-year-old Indian youth. described by police
as a notorious top drug dealer who sold drugs exclusively in P‘o-te-shen,
Lu-ku, Tan-na-nei-la. and "such-pang. The police say this is the biggest
and most inportant drug case to be uncovered recently by police in P'o
County. The drugs seized by police filled tour packages and 65 small
tubes. According to what the chief of P'o-te-shen police. Assistant Police
Superintendent Kso-iu-knn-ni has revealed, several months ago the police,
on receiving accurate intonation provided by the public, proceeded at
once to carry out an investigation of all clues surrounding the suspect.
In the course of this investigation, the police learned that the suspect
regularly frequented the Penang and Pi'te area in Northern Malaysia to buy
drugs and smuggle then to Hu-chi-pu-lan-lu, then pack then into small
tubes and sell then to addicts within the country. he said that despite
the dealer's cunning scheme of hiding the drugs in a house in the Indian
village of Hu-ehi-pu-lan-lu surrounded on all sides by pig sties and
stinking pig unure. thinking that he could in this way avoid police in-
vestigation, the web of the law is after all not easily evaded.

lie said that after the investigative work of the police was completed,
five police orficers under his leadership and with two other police
sergeants; Au Ssu-ean and hen Ne-fei. last Friday evening at about 8:00
stole over to the abovomcntioned drug center and surrounded it. At that
time. a few addicts were going in and out of the center, but the police.

in order to avoid alerting them to their presence, waited a long time near-
by until the suspect had turned on the television set and was engrossed in
watching color television before they approached in a group and arrested
the suspect. After conducting a search, the police discovered to their
surprise on opening a wooden lid on the back of the television set that

it cohtslned the abovenentioned drugs. Besides this the police also dis-

covered in an emptied box, a pack of wrapping paper and drug-taking equip-
”ﬁt.

he told how. when the drug dealer was arrested, his face turned pale and

his body shook ceaselessly, obviously exceedingly frightened, because all
the evidence was present.

The chief of police disclosed that iron last my when he took office up

to the present the police have in all parts of Po-te-shen County success-
fully apprahended l2 drug dealers and 32 addicts who had emitted a number
of crimes. After the capture of this major drug dealer. the police also
seized some sddicts' anteriai which can aid in the investigation of sunny
crininal cases which have taken place in the county. lie added that be-
cause the police have eliminated nest of the drug dealers and drug users

in the county. order there has been greatly improved.

9282
CSO: 5300
BRIEFS

OPIUH SBIZBD--Taiping 12 0ec--A£ter receiving reliable intelligence reports,
the Tsiping police set up a roadblock at “sin-lu-k'ou on the afternoon of
7 Deccabor to intercept a southbound bus from Penang. An old man was
arrested with 31 and a half pounds of opiun. All the passengers in the
bus were brought to the police station for questioning and then released.
The bus was detained. The head of the Taiping police district said that
after receiving reliable infer-ation at 4:00 pn on 7 December, a road-
block was sat up at Ping-yi Road, "sin-lu-k'ou, 7 miles north of Taiping.
Around 7:30 pn, a southbound bus use stopped for inspection. An old non
carrying 31 and a half pounds of opium in a paper bag was arrested. The
can, about 65 years old. was fro- Penang. According to police, he was
paid $200 for carrying the illicit drug tron Penang to Yi-pao. [Text]
[Selangor m was nun news in Chinese 12 Dec 76 p 11 1001.

lﬂDlAN YOUTh SENTENCBD--Yi-pao lJ Dec--An Indian youth was sentenced to a
3-year jail ter- and six lashes by the district court after he adnitted
to illegal possession of narcotic drugs. A Chinese youth, who was with
the suspect at the time of arrest, pleaded not guilty and was acquitted
because of insufficient evidence presented by the prosecutor. The
defendant is Hs-hai-na-lao, 27, and the codefendant is huang T'ien-chi,
27. The indictnent said that they possessed 8.63 grass of heroin found
in a stall at Je-lan-ssu-lang at 7:65 pl, 18 August in violation of the
anti-narcotics law. it was learned that a police squad led by Ou Ching-fu
raided the aforesentioned place. At the time of their arrival, the
defendant was Opening the door of the stall. A thorough search yielded
two plastic tubes in a pair of trousers in a chest. Laboratory tests
proved that the substance in the tubes contains the store-entioned anount
of heroin. The defendant had asked for leniency because he was engaged
and will get married next year. [Text] [Selangor KIN KHOK DAILY NEHS

in Chinese 16 Dec 78 p 12] 1004
250 GRMS 0P IIBROIN SEIZEDuYi-pao 2 Decu'l‘he police here raided a residence
at Hen-mo-yusn early this morning and seized 21 packages and seven vials
of heroin weighing a total of 250 grams. A middle-aged couple were
arrested. Hi-eo-tsai, deputy police head of Pi-zui Province in charge
of criminal affairs, said at a press conference that at 12:30 am a group
of policemen led by Lin Kuo-yao, were deployed around a residence at
Hen-mo-yuan. A middle-aged Chinese man was seen coming to the house on
a motorcycle. he was approached by the policemen, and ordered to open the
door. A woman inside the house answered the knock. As soon as she saw
the man and the policemen, she went back in the house without opening the
door and attempted to escape through the back door with two plastic bags.
she was captured by the policemen who hid behind the house. Hi-ao-tsai
said that the two plastic bags contained 21 packages and seven vials of
heroin weighing altogether 250 grams. The middle-aged Chinese couple
were arrested. According to Hi-ao-tsai, the seized herein is worth
$10,030 at market price. He believes that the two suspects had been
peddling narcotic drugs in the neighborhood for sane tine. This case

is under further investigation. Another residence on Ta-he-yuan Road
(without house number) was raided at 10:00 am yesterday by a group of
policemen led by Lin Kuo-yau. Thirty-three vials of heroin weighing
about 2 grams were seized, and a 25-year-old Chinese male suspect was
arrested. A bundle of marihuana, a pair of scissors, and some seaweed
were also seized. [Text] [Selanger KIN Klimt DAILY news in alinese

3 Dec 75 p 12] 1001.

103 POUNDS OP MORNINE SEIZEDuPei-hai 28 New-A squad of policemen from
Ya-lo-shih seized 103 pounds of morphine, valued at $5 million, from a
giant truck which travels frequently across the border between Halaysia
and Thailand. The truck, an escorting sedan, and one Burmese and two
Chinese suspects were detained. The above illicit drug was seized at

11:00 am today on a highway at W-ms-lan village, P'ao-k'o-ti-msng-su-se-li,
Hei-pei-chia. The suspects, the truck and the sedan were turned over to
the Pei-hai police station. The fresh fish in the truck was later auc-
tioned by the Pei-hai police. At a press conference held this morning

at Pei-hai, ﬂa-chih-ao-ms, assistant police chief of Penang in charge of
criminal affairs, pointed out that this seizure was one of the largest
made by Va-lo-shih police.‘ The 30 cakes of morphine seized, of which

29 are large and 1 is small, can be used for 3,089,806 injections. It

was learned that the detained Burmese truck driver, ’05 years old, came from
Sung-ks. he was aided by a minese, (.0 years old, who one from Ta-shan-
chiae. The driver of the sedan, 35 years old, is from ‘ra-nien-ta-man
Ru-ya-na-ya, Shuang-hsi. According to a spokesman of the police depart-
ment, at 7:00 pm yesterday 11 police officers and detectives were sent
from Va—lo-shih in three groups to Pa-tung-wu-sha on the Malaysia-Thai
border. The police followed a truck loaded with fish and an escorting
sedan for nearly l00 miles before the arrest. The spokesman for the police
department added that the police did not make the arrest until the convoy
stepped, and two men on the truck were about to move a package from the

10
truck to the escorting sedan. The aorphine was found in the package.

The drug is believed to be snuggled into Nalayais frost Thailand.

Concerned authorities are tracing the source of the drug and investigating
the possible ways of its disposal in Malaysia. [Text] [:hlaysia, KIN
xwox DAILY news 29 Nov 78 p 1] 100a .

"EROIN SEIZBD--(Pensng 27) The Penang Central Anti-Narcotics Bureau last
night in another glorious achieVeInent successfully seized about 2 pounds
of heroin with a street value of 6.000 guan, arrested two suspected drug
dealers and impounded a motorcycle used by the suspects. Pron what has
been learned, at 7:60 last night two detectives under the Central Anti-
Narcotics Unit upon receiving reliable intonation went inediately to
Nata-men Harbor to wait in ambush, and sure enough saw two furtiVe youths
loitering about the area. When the agents of the Anti-Narcotics Bureau
appeared and went forward to identify thenselves, the two youths guiltily
turned heel and fled. The two detectives pursued then and succeeded in
catching them 100 yards away. They found on then two plastic bags of
heroin. According to the head of the Central Anti-Narcotics Bureau
Na-ha-li-wen [transliteration] the two packages of heroin, weighting about
2 pounds and worth about 6,000 yuan on the local market, were enough for
[92,696 injections. The drugs seemed to have Just been snuggled in from
a neighboring country. [Text] [Malaysia KIN KNOK RIMO [KIN IGJOK DAILY
NW5] in Chinese 28 Dec 78 'p l] 9282

DRUG POSSESSION ESTABLISHm--(Kuantan a) Three Chinese nationals of
Kuantan including two sales and one female were accused today in the local
court here of possession of drugs. One of the defendants confessed to the
crime and was sentenced to 6 years in prison and six lashes. The other
male and female defendants will be retained for official inquiry on

9 June. The three defendants are Huang Chih-ch'iang. aged 20, a clerk
residing at Pen-p0 Ya-lo-ya-ka [transliteration], Nan Shu-nei (Hen Lai-
chung), aged 65. resident at Pen-p0, M-yi-ssu-mi Road [transliteration].
and Ch'en Ya-hua, aged 28. residing at Pen-p0, Chisn-lao Road. The first
and second named defendants are son and mother. The charge states that at
10:30 as: on l2 October of last year in a room at 3059 Tun-yi-asu-uai Road

[transliteration] they illegally possessed 9.28 grams of heroin, thus vio-
let ing the 1952 law on dangerous drugs. [Excerpt] [Malaysia KIN KHOK
RIMO [KIN KNOX DAILY mm in Qllnese 9 Jan 79 p l] 9282

050: 5300

ll
OPIUH RULES AMENDED T0 CURB ABUSE
Quetta BALUCHISTAN TIMES in English 29 Jan 79 p 4

[Text] The Government of Baluchistan in order to curb the malpractices in
sale of opium and also to stop indiscriminate use has amended Heat Pakis-
tan Opium Rules. 1956.

According to the amendment the opium vendor or licensee now shall see opium
not more than 12 grams to only he registered addktaon production of opium
ration cards. The addicts would be medically examined by the District
health Officers and Medical Superintendent Quetta or Drug Abuse Advisory
Centre. Quetta who would prescribe the quantity of opium to be dispensed
to then.

The public and opium addicts in their own interest have been advised to

obtain the application from form Local Excise and Taxation office or and
get themselves medically examined and registered as juitions in all the

provinces. Opium addict by the District Health Officer or Medical Super-
intendent. Civil Hospital Quetta to obtain the ration card.

The annual medical examination would let them know regarding their state
of health.

According to previous regulations in all the provinces. opium was obtain-
able fros the government licenced opium vends upto two tolas by anybody
without any restriction. This system was found to be defective as it was
being misused and created illicit trafficking and indiscriminate use of
opium.

650: 5300

12
3R1 BPS

PLAN To run OPIUH amazon-41131:. Jan 30: Govern-ent will launch a
couprehensiva progress-e for the eradication of opiusn addication in the
upper parts of Ishkousan Valley in Northern Areas. This was stated by
Major General Mohamed Aslaa Shah. Martial Law Administrator Zone '5'
while replying to a ueleolse address given in his honour by a large
gathering of the public on Sunday. He was accompanied by Hajor General
Mohamed Shoaib, Adviser Psychiatry, Pakistan Army. Sahibsada Raoof Ali
Khan. Chaimn Pakistan Narcotic Control Board. Conissionar and resident
Hr Abdul Qayun Khan. he said President Hohauad Ziaul llnq has assured
all possible facilities for the eradication of this menace. [Text]
Peshawar KHYBER HAIL in English 31 Jan 79 p l]

OPIUH HAUL A'r AIRPORT--Karachi, lo Fab—~A police drugs squad today seized
61. pounds of opium in a raid at Karachi Airport, customs officials said.
The drug, worth 60,000 rupees (7,250 dollars) on the local market, was
found concealed in suitcases. No arrests ware i-ediately node.

[rut] [moon 11m ‘0an peoruz's DAILY in English 6 Feb 79 p 3]

080: 5300

13
BRIEFS

MARIMUANA PLANTATIONS--Constsbulsry operatives swooped down on seven mari-
hunne plantations in seven provinces in northern and central Luzon yester-
day and uprooted a total of 7.942 usrihusna plants. The narihusns plantations
were discovered in Benguet, Kalinga, Apayao. La Union, Mountain Province,
Nueva Bcijn and Pampanga,according to C01 Beinvenido Felix, chief of the
Constabulary Antinarcotics Unit. The biggest plantation was found in Mexico.
Psapanga. where a total of 5,000 nsrihusns plants were uprooted. Authorities
are examining reports that eone of the narihuana plantations were being Ei-
nsnced by aliens. [Manila FEBC in English 2330 GMT 15 Feb 79 0m

MAJOR NARCOTICS DISTRIBUTORS-The Constabulary Antinsrcotics Unit reported
yesterday the arrest of three of the biggest narcotics distributors in metro
Manila. The three. (Francisco Reyes), (Rosito Bastillo) and (Alfredo Lopez),
were arrested during s raid on their hideout in Santa Cruz, Manila. [Manila
FBBC in English 2330 GMT 20 ?eb 79 OH]

080: 5300

16
BRIEFS

DRUG-LINKED CRIMES-«Crimes related to heap and other habit-forming drugs
have been decreasing over the past several years, it was announced yes-
terday. According to the health-Social Affairs Ministry. people who
soaked. dealt in or brought heap in secret decreased to 683 last year
free 639 in 1977 and 1,660 in 1976. The ministry has node legal con-
pleints against 363 people anong the total 671 who were caught by the
sinistry's control due to illegal handling. smoking and cultivating
habit-ﬁrming drugs and heap. Ministry officials said that though the
drug-related criainals had decreased owing to stricter control and en-
lighteneent coapeigns. problems had been appearing among youngsters as
they made use of industrial adhesives and other chemicals for hallucinat-
ing effects. The officials said the sinistry would seek ways of setting
up legal provisions to restrict eisuse of industrial chenicsls and legal
narcotics. [Text] [Seoul THE KOREA TIMES in English 8 Peb 79 p 8)

USE OF NARCOTIcs--‘l'he nunber of persons arrested or booked on charges of
using narcotics. including asrijusna cigarettes, decreased drastically
recently. the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs said yesterday. Accord-
ing to the ninistry. the nueber of pot-smokers which was on a rapid increase
a few years ago started to decline free 1977 when the Marijuana Control

Law was enacted. In 1976. 1,660 cases were recorded. But the figures
decreased to 639 in 1977 and 683 last year. respectively. Users of narco-
tics also decreased fron 904 in 1970 to 92 last year. The ninistry esinly
attributed the decrease to the governsent's positive control policies such
as blocking the distribution channels of help or narcotics and strengthen-
ing of progrsns for youths against heap-slashing or the use of habitual
drugs. Meanwhile, a total of 671 persons were found using habit-foruing
drugs last year, the Ministry of Health and Social Affairs said. Among
than. 363 were arrested and 64 arrested without physical detention. The
violators included 1083 pot-snokers and 96 users of habit-forling drugs.
[Text] [Seoul Th3 KOREA HERALD in English 8 Feb 79 p 8]

(:90: 5300 ‘

15
m1 raven: mo new mac mrncxzas escarmc mos PRISON
bangkok mmcxox POST in English 12 Feb 79 p' 6 an

[Editorial: "Enough of the One 'lhat Got Away"]

[Text] Catching drug traffickers is hard worlt. It requires patience,
painstaking inquiries of often involving [phrase as published] interna-
tional police forces and drug enforcement agencies, and a large measure of
determination and dedication because the men who are chasing drug traf-
fickers are up against tough odds, not to mention all the protection that
can be brought with the money available to those in the drugs trade. Over
the years, and particularly in recent times, the achievements of our drugs
suppression police have won worldwide acclaim.

"hat a pity that our efficiency in catching drug offenders is not matched
by an ability to keep these people safely under lock and key once they
are caught. Last week yet another person serving a sentence connected
with drugs managed to escape from a Thai prison. And it is a case of yet
again [as published] because other and bigger fish have made their escape
in the past. Every one of these escapes is bad news all round: It is bad
for the morale of the police, it is bad for our international reputation,
and it is bad for society because it means that someone who should be in

jail is free, perhaps to resume the activities that had put him in jail
in the first place.

Though this newspaper disagrees with the use of statuary punisment for
any offence and believes that guilt can only be decided in a court of law,
it recognises the frustrations the police must feel when a convicted man
escapes and we can appreciate why it is that the police here so frequently
urge the use of stmaaary powers vested in the prime minister. The deter-
rents facing those involved in drugs are twofold. First, there is the risk
of being caught, and in this respect the police are increasing that risk;
secondly, there is the knowledge that having been caught the punishment will
fit the crime. It is here that we are falling down, because if the drugs
offender comes to believe that he has a good chance of escaping the full
measure of his punishent, then crime can be seen to pay and the odds

come down in favour of the criminal.

Prime Hinister Kriangsak has demonstrated that his goverment wishes to
do all that it can to wage war on drugs. If the efforts of all those who
' are waging that war are not to be negated or eroded and if their enthusiasm
is not to wane, something will have to be doneuand urgently--about en-
suring that the nasty fish that are caught remain in the net.
16
5.6.30... 202...... .

i=2. 3 2.3.5.2.. 2.2.9...

3... .53... .5 E. .
s . «n.3,. . n
s81... .85....

2:... 2:?

732503.... 1.3.3! 5
=3 3:... u. 50... 2:52....
3!». . .o. 35.... .3051...

.3... 5.... 5:83" a.

q.”- =.... 2.88.1 $359.3“.

.5. _. .e at.

a. $7.3... 00:23:...
8.3.... not... no.6... 2..
9.3.6.. .3. 2!... 35.5. a...
3.... 499‘ .8. :3 56:8...
32: = 3:8 8...?

> .83.. B... 9.3.. 1....
5......59 a... .53? o 5....
:8 .383...

4... 253...... £24 2......
7... .2. :2... G3 533......
5...: 3. ‘32.: 8 p. 5. :7.
a... on :8... .3.— .

8.1.3.. I... .2... 2..
33...... 28k in: :8 63..
8:3 tux-3...... I. a! ‘18....
I... 9:... .3 052:... .3
0.4.5.

.9. 33. 323...... i...

24...... 3 0.8g .. 2....
.533 3...... D E .5...
The four drug suspects. with their legs in chains, at the Criminal Court
during their preliminary hearings yesterday. From left--Paul Hayward,
Kitti (Noi) Imsap, warren Fellows and Willian Sinclair. All four pleaded

not guilty to charges of possessing 8.4 kgs of No. 4 heroin with intent
to sell.

CSO: 5300

18
'BLIND MTE' I" m JUNGLE

Bangkok MNCKOK I‘OST in English 3 Feb 79 p 3 BK

[Text] The day had begun normally enough. An informer had come in with a
report that a drug caravan was coming into Thailand with a “big" assign-
ment of narcotics. These reports were not unusual, regularly conning into
the narcotics suppression centre at a rate of two or three a month. but
most of the time the reports prove to be groundless and unreliable.

A squad of police scouts was rounded up to check on the report. This in-
cluded two American Drug Enforcement Agency officials. Bangkok Post cor-
respondent Subin Khuenkaeo managed to persuade the reluctant officers to
allow him to go along with the team.

This is his report of what proved to be one of the biggest narcotics raids
in recent years.

The 10 of us left the Third Region Border Patrol Police headquarters in the
morning by car, travelling from Chiang Mai several hundred kilometres to
the sleepy town of Chiang llai and on to the border district of llae Sal.

He were now within the ill-famed Golden Triangle. a loose tern used to de-
fine a large area including parts of Burns, Laos and Thailand from which
some 700 tons of opium are produced each year, all of it going into the
illegal markets of the world.

The date was January 24, 1979.

we left the car and began an arduous trek along hot, dusty tracks into the
northern jungle, all the while climbing steadily towards Doi Pha H'. about
three kilometres from the burnese border and a spot where the tug caravan
was reported to be heading.

Finding a good vantage point, we settled down for a long period of waiting.

not really expecting very such to happen and realising that the chances of
actually intercepting a caravan were pretty slim.

l9
Nothing happened all through that day and night so we moved camp to higher
ground the next day to continue our vigil. this tile. right on the sumit
in order to get a better view of the surroundings.

He Isade camp again and posted sentries to keep watch on likely trails in
the nountainous and thickly jungled terrain.

Then followed another long, aonotonoua wait. with all of no keeping our
eyes peeled for any sign of aovecaent on the mountainside.

Then an excited hilltribe guide ran into the coop. lie had heard sounds of
what night have been a convoy coming close to our basecamp.

Silence

He hurriedly struck cup and spread ourselves out to cover as large an area
as possible. Meanwhile, absolute silence was observed. for to be spotted
now would have ruined the whole operation.

About 20 minutes later. a ﬂea tribesatan appeared in view with a shotgun
slung on his'shoulder and about five metres behind hits a caravan of lules
in single file followed. There were about 50 mules in the convoy.

There were only about five guards walking alongside the caravan at inter-
vals of about eight rules or so apart to keep the mules from breaking ranks.
But at the end of the line there were about 10 guards all carrying assorted
firearns. shotguns, carbines and “(67's.

After crossing the ridge of Doi PM Hi the caravan descended to the bottoo.
Police then radioed for reinforcements from base at the same tine the 10 of
us on the spot silently watched the caravan move on.

About an hour later two 3?? helicopters with a cmplenent of about 20 men
arrived one at a tine some distance apart. The first landed about 200
metres fron where we were crouching and is-ediately pulled up after un-
loading the troops for fear of being shot at.

Suddenly, shooting erupted and all hell broke loose. The second helicopter
alighted on the opposite flank and left in haste like the first one. The
exchange of gunfire lasted for about 20 minutes and then ceased abruptly
just like it started.

The police waited for about 10 minutes before closing in warily and case
across a thatched shed and a large tent. The shed was apparently the
heroin factory because drug-aanufscturing equipment was found in it. The

fireplace was still smoldering. The tent was the living quarters because
of clothes and cots found in it.

20
The heroin-producing cquipnent consisted of n his cauldron on the fireplace.
basins, flasks, drms. etc. At a level n little lover than the factory
site was s sull stream, clearly the voter source for the factory.

Nobody was found at the factory site. It was couplete'.y enpty but for en
1116 suteuaatic rifle. e carbine. s .38 pistol with a Bangkok licence number.
mueition snd several spent cartridges.

Part of the rsid force went in hot pursuit of the fleeing traffickers and
the rest renained to guard the cusp and the evidence. Drugs left behind in
the shed consisted or 118 kilogrmes of high-grade heroin and oorphine in
63 bags of "Double Lion" brand heroin and 67 bricks of "999" brand uerphine.
According to the police they were all of high-grade quslity.

cso: 5300

21
FALL some 0? POPPIES DBCLINBD DRASTICALLY IN 1978

[Editorial Report] In a report on fall sowing, Skopje NOVA WA in
Macedonian on 8 February 1979, page 10, gives the following information on
the sewing of poppies in Macedonia: Fall sowing of poppies (in hectares)
for the past 5 years-~197lo-3,706; 197540.817; 19764.861; 19774.8“;
19784.3”. The article states that, although it is one of the main fall
induatrial crops, the area planted in poppies has varied greatly in recent
years, decreasing by 57.1 percent last year. 'lhe reasons for this are
giVen as the decreased purchase price for the seeds and the relatively low
price for the poppy capsules. The fall crops are aown on a minimum area.

mainly in the gardens of individual producers.

C80: 5300

22
BRIEFS

OOCAINE TMFPICKBR CAl’l‘UllBD-olleliodoro Leite Neto, 29-year-old former police
investigator, was caught rsdhsndsd yesterday by personnel of the Federal
Police Narcotics Department with ll grams of cocaine in his possession. lle
was dismissed iron the stats Public Security Secretariat forces in 1971

by virtue of institutional act No 5. Also seized from his ranch located in
Porungabe were:

a precision scale, a notebook listing names and other per-
sonal mica-ems. [Sso Paulo 0 BS‘rADO 03 8A0 PAUID in Portuguese 26 Feb 79
p 17 FY

(:50: 5300

23
BRIEFS

POLICE CRACKDOUN 0N TMFFICKINC--Hore than 200 drug traffickers and common
criminals have been arrested by the police on Pacific Coast benches and put
at tho diapoaal of the court». According to police nunrcru. these arrests
were made between 6 January to l5 February in the area between Las Rocas de
Santo Domingo and Hirafloreu. The San Antonio police personnel under Capt
(Carlos Gonzalez) have been reinforced by Santiago police personnel to carry
out this crime prevention campaign during the sun-er season. According to
police uonrcee. coat of those arrested cane iron Santiago and other parts
or the country to the vacation area. This crime prevention canpaign will
continue until the end of the beach season. according to police sources.
[Text] [Santiago Domestic Service in Spanish 1200 GMT 16 Feb 79 FY]

050: 5100

2‘
DEFENSE MINISTRY 0N ANTINARCOTICS ACTIVITY
Buenos Aires LATIN in Spanish 2200 GMT 17 Feb 79 PA

[Text] Bogota. 17 Feb (LATIN)--The Colo-bisn military forces announced
today having shot down a 0.5. plane. presuaably involved in drug snuggling.
over La Cuajira. l.000 kn north of here. on the Caribbean coast. This is
the first plane shot down since unauthorized planes were expressly pro-
hibited iron flying over La Guajira Peninsula last November as part of the
govern-cat's Operation Eagle to stamp out drug traffic toward the United
States.

The occupants of the plane escaped. according to the Defense Ministry
coenunique. which reported the seizure of 1.151 bags of pressed narihuana.
the discovery of 2 smashed u.s. planes. and the capture of a ship and 36
Colombians and 7 foreigners. the latter alnost all 0.8. citizens. The
government considers ha Guajira the principal earihuana production and
snuggling center.

The connunique said that on l5 February troops of the Rondon Air Force Base
close to Portete bay (Uribia) shot down a ”.8. plane. The plane had been
destroyed by fire when it was found. lts occupants apparently managed to
flee.

0n ll February aray troops found a seashed two-engine light plane with
license no. AK-003218 on La Teta Hill. near Uribia. its three occupants. all
0.5. citizens. were injured. Another plane. a twin-engined Cessna with
license no. N-III-EP. was seized by troops and its crew. 0.8. citizens

Paul neraan nick-an and Achniu Veraoroy. were captured the following day.

On the sane day U.S. citizen Bob Sparor and Cuban Jose Lagos. crew of a
light plane with license no. "-560, which crashed into the Santa Marta
marsh. gave the-selves up in the town of cienega.

0n l6 February a naval ship captured an unidentified ship with eight crew
seabers on board. The ship was transporting 300 bales of pressed narihusna
off Pajaro Point.

The cos-unique included all activities carried out between 10 and 15 february
and reported. in addition to the seizures and captures listed. the confisca-
tion of 6 rifles. l6 revolvers and 25 cars of different types.

£50: 5300 25
“068 DRUG SEIZURE IN ANTIOQUIA DEPARTMENT
Paris APP in Spanish i623 GMT 23 Feb 19 PA

[Text] Bogota. 23 Feb (AFP)--it has been learned here that Coloobian
authorities today seized 500 kg of cocaine and to tens of marihuana as

well as three planes used to transport the drug in Turbo, Antioquia Depart-
aent. 0.8. citizens and Colo-bians are among the 20 persons arrested by
the arny and police.

The authorities also discovered a clandestine airport from which interna-
tional drug rings operated.

According to official circles. this has been one of the hardest blows dealt
to these rings. and the amount of cocaine gives an indication of how success-
ful the operation was.

This operation is part of the offensive that President Julio Cesar Turbay's
sdainistration launched early this year against the drug aafia. particularly
in Guajira region. on the border with Venezuela.

According to the source and Judging by the huge amounts of drug seized today
in Turbo. the drug traffickers are apparently trying to settle in other areas

of Colombia.

(:50: 5300

26
BRIEPS

DISCOVERY OF COCAINE LAIORATORIES--Popayan. 18 Feb (EFB)--The secret police
today reported the discovery of a cocaine-processing laboratories and the
arrest of 10 persons. Detectives confiscated 20 kg of cocaine and almost

75 pounds of dry cocn leaves. In another military action on Colombia's
northern coast. sore than 1.000 bundles of sarihuana were confiscated today
and 7 foreigners were arrested. The foreigners were aboard a U.S.-registered
plane that was to take the drug to the United States. [Madrid BFB in Spanish
0266 GMT l9 Feb 79 PA]

"068 NARCOTICS LASORATORY--Popayan (Coloubia). 20 Feb (EFE)--The largest
drug processing couples in Latin America was located by authorities today
in southwestern Colombia. The modern couples. furnished with 0.5. equip-
sent, was used to process cocaine paste fros Bolivia. Peru and Ecuador.

A base for international drug peddlera. the Police Narcotics Department
reported that there were 10 laboratories to process narcotics and sodern
landing fields. in a direct blow against the drug traffickers. the police
confiscated 2.000 kg oi cocaine valued at $2 million. The coeplex was in
Bolivar Municipality. Cauca Province. [Madrid BFE in Spanish 1503 GMT

20 Feb 79 PA]

COCAINE SEIZED--Bogota, 22 Feb (EPB)--Colombian customs officials today
seized 10 kilograms of cocaine valued at some $7 million. The drug was
found in the suitcases of two smugglers at the Eldorado Airport. The
drug cane from Peru and was being taken to the United States. [Hadrid
EPE in Spanish 0222 GMT 21 Feb 79 PA]

(nmAlNE SEI20R£--Hedellin. Colonbia--The P-2 seized cocaine valued at 30
million pesos during a raid in the eastern sector of the city. According
to confidential sources. the drug was found in the Hanrique District and
two persons presumably involved in drug traffic were arrested. So far

the authorities have not revealed the identity of those arrested. [Bogota
CADENA RADIAL SUPER in Spanish 0000 GMT 23 Feb 79 PA]
MRIIIUMIA MMATION--Popsyan, Colombia-4 large narihuana plantation has
been discovered by P-2 and Department of Administrative Security agents on
a far- called Bl Cabin located in Corinto. Cauca Department. Five persons
were arrested in a raid on that form. All five individuals were sued and
had been shipping uarihuena for several months. The value of the aariheana
crop was estimated at 8 million pesos. The group of saugglara was headed
by Luisandro Sanchez, a criainal with a long record who was wanted by
several courts in Colombia. [begets Radio Santa Fe in Spanish 1730 GMT

26 Feb 79 PA]

comm MlORA‘lORY--Popayan, Colo-bir-Police and F-2 agents have dealt
another blow to a cocaine smuggling ring by seizing a aodern cocaine proces-
sing laboratory. The laboratory was found in a raid on a house in Corinto.
Cauca Depart-em. Cocaine worth 12 aillion pesos was found in the laboratory.
ho persona found on the prenises were arrested and held for investigation.
Their names are Claudio Restrepo Hartinec and Leonardo Antonio (Coeds) .
[nogots Radio Santa Fe in Spanish 1730 our 26 Feb 79 PA]

a

080 . 5300

28
BRIEFS

NARCOTICS DIRECTOR'S RESIGNATION-~Narcotiee director Jorge llideigo has
announced that he has presented his resignation to public security Vice
Minister Enrique Honteaiegre. lie said that he had been called by the
Vice Minister to explain s statelent made to a news organ that was not
appreciated at all by Honteaiegre. indulge said that his resignation will

be effective as of 28 February. [Text] [San Jose RADIO RELOJ in Spanish
1200 (3141' 22 Feb 79 PA]

cso: 5300

29
BRIEFS

DRUG TMPFICKBRS ARRESTBm-Santo Domingo. 22 Feb (LATIN)--Leat night the
police seized S kilogram of cocaine and arrested Agustin Diaz and Antonio
Luis .louc Gomez. both Dominican citizens. and 0.5. citizen Robert Michel.
The drug was discovered on an Iberia aircraft arriving iron Panama and
Guatemala. [Buenoa Airea LATIN in Spanish 1557 GMT 22 Feb 79 PA]

(180: 5300

30
BRIEFS

DRUG TMPPICKBRS' ARRES'rnGuayaqun, 15 Feb (EFB)--Interpol agents have
captured a drug gang aade up of Ecuadoreans Hernan Cueva. Segundo Canaan.
Isaael Canessa, Felipe Rivas, Jose Raymndi and Ruth Ruiz and Panasonian
Gloria Coco. According to local newspapers. Col Luis Alfredo Santilla,
who is stationed on the border zone with Peru. is also involved in the
drug trafficking activities since he lent the gang any Jeeps to facilitate
the transport of the cocaine froa the border to Guayaquil. Interpol also

confiscated B kg of pure cocaine. [Madrid B?! in Spanish M25 GUT
16 Feb 79 PA]

C50: 5300

31
BRIEFS

PIGllT AGAINST DRUG TRAFFIC--The police attache of the Coloabian Embassy
has met with the chief of the Peruvian Republican Guard to discuss mutual
cooperation in the fight agath illegal drug traffic. The Colombian
official emphasized that cooperation is essential to carry out this fight
effectively. [Lima Domestic Service in Spanish 1200 GMT 14 Feb 79 PT]

PIP INTENSIPIES DRUG CAMPAIGN-41w Peruvian Investigative Police [PIP]
will intensify the nationwide campaign against producers of basic cocaine
paste and drug traffickers. To this end. special teams of agents of the
Narcotics Division will operate permanently in areas of greater drug
activity, such as lluanuco. Huanacavelica, Huanscayo, Cuzco and the
dep1rtments of northern Peru. A high-ranking PIP official indicated that
the teams will consist mainly of agents that have taken the drug course
given by instructors of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA). The
course taught the agents highly rated techniques for the discovery and
fight against drug laboratories and traffickers. He said that PIP has
the agents and mechanisms to curb drug trafficking and to dismantle drug
gangs which are increasingly using advanced methods in their illegal
actions. The personnel will be traveling permanently to the aforemen-
tioned departments. where it is presumed there are laboratories processing
the basic paste. [Text] [Lima BL COHERGIO in Spanish 12 Feb 79 p 1 PA]

DRUG SEIZURE--Lims, 14 Feb (EPE)--It was announced here today that Peruvian
police have arrested a band of drug traffickers. Police seized 60 kg of
cocaine which they expected to sell on the U.S. market for $9 million.

The operation involved four Latin American countries. The leader of the
band was Francisco Orozco, a Colombian. The band was composed of two
Colombians. one North American, four other persons whose nationalities are
still being investigated, and several Peruvians. The police also seized a

considerable amount of weapons and cash as well as vehicles. [Madrid EFE
in Spanish 0613 GMT 15 Feb 79 PA]

TKAFPICKERS' ARREST--Lima. 19 Feb (AFP)--Police have arrested six drug
traffickers, four Peruviane and two Colombians, and confiscated an undis-
closed amount of basic cocaine paste. The drug traffickers, whose names
have not been released. are members of an international drug gang. The two
Colombians were also involved in the counterfeiting of Peruvian 5,000 sole

bills. They apparently used the counterfeit bills to pay for the cocaine
paste. [Paris APP in Spanish 2120 GMT 19 Feb 79 PA]

32
BRIEFS

COCAINE HAUL--Cnnndlnn Donald ("elulndcn) has been arrested by agents of
the Narcntlcs Dlvlslon of the Technical Judlclnl Pollcc. Tho traffickcr
was currylng l and [/2 kg of cocalne valued at over 200.000 bollvnrcs.

He sold he brought the drnu from Santa Cruz. Bollvln. [Caracas RADIO
CONTINENTE NETWORK ln Spnnlah 1000 GMT 22 Feb 79 PA]

33
DRUG ABISB IN ID? T0 38 Dmlﬂ' WITH SEVERELY
Tel Aviv llA'ARETZ in Hebrew 22 Dec 78 p 1

[Article by Roni Rinon: "Soldiers Failed to Hit the Target Seven Times Out
of Eleven on a Tank Range"!

[Text] A Court of Appeals verdict has just revealed that at tank maneuvers,
soldiers hit the target only four tines out of ll due to the influence of

drugs they had taken. A soldier who was sentenced to a jail term of 12
nonthsusix of active aentence--because he had smoked hashish and to a

jail tens of lO months--four of active seatenceuon account of drug por-
session has submitted an appeal against the accumulation of punishment.

The court judges, Colonel Joseph Harish, Colonel Dov Levine and Colonel
Yitahoq Zaq have rejected the appeal and have upheld the punishment.

In justifying the verdict, the court states that though there is a njor
problem of drug abuse among civilians, drug abuse in the ID? is even more
dangerous and has to be totally erased. Imagine: a tank unit, assigned
to hold a line of defense, is broken through. Our survival is threatened
because soldiers rested in the tank's shade and smoked hashish till they
were numb. At the above target practice, only four out of ll cannon shots

hit the target and the judges stress that such failure in a tank unit is
disastrous. If one tank unit nissed the target, because one of its nea-

bers was under the influence of drugs, not only is the life of this per-
son endangered but the lives of the entire tank crew are jeopardized.
"hat is more, not only is this particular unit in danger then but also
( o‘entire tank division which is supposed to cooperate closely.

The judges of the Appeals Court stated also that they are using this oc-
casion to instruct and urge the courts to enforce the law, in all its

severity, in cases of drug possession, drug use-and especially against
drug pushers who are responsible for the illness of many.

8696
850: 6805

36
POLICE INTENSIFY ANTIHARIHUARA CAMPAIGN
Johannesburg DIE TRANSVALER in Afrikaans 19 Jan 79 p 2

[Article by Schalk van Schalkwyk and Jan van Hyk: "Harihuana Dealers Cone
to the End of the Rope“l

lTextI This year the South African police started out with quick action
against marijuana dealers and already in the course of the past 2 weeks
they have found and destroyed 30 tons of it in Transvaal and the Free
State.

More than 25 tons (the greatest concentration yet found in the southern
low veld) have been destroyed and yesterday evening more than 23 sacks of
of marijuana were canfiscated between Picksburg and Fourieaburg in the
free State.

There the police also arrested a black aan and confiscated a car and a
pickup van.

Thus far, the narcotics bureau of the police at Ladybrand. under the command
of Capitain Eric de Pres, has already confiscated 38 sacks of marijuana

and five vehicles belonging to suspected smugglers. all this in the course
of this week.

Five black men and three black women have also been arrested. One of those
arrested will also he charged with murder after earlier this week a black
constable was reportedly run over three tines by a vehicle outside of
Pouriesburs. The constable later died from the injuries.

Col P. u. Sies. a detective detach-eat officer of the Free State Police.
stated yesterday that Captain Du Prez and one of his sen stopped a delivery
van at 0215 hours on the road between Picksburg and Fourisaburg.

1he driver succeeded in jumping out of the vehicle and running away in the
darkness. There were more than 23 sacks of marijuana in the delivery van.

A few moments later a so-called escort car was stopped by the police and a
black man arrested.

35
0n Hedncnday and yesterday some 150,000 marijuana plants were uprooted and
burned at the Swartfontein state plantation near Hitrivier. A plot of

ground consisting of more than 2 hectares was found among other small
plantations.

The plants were growing luxuriantly as they were fertilized with artificial
manure and plants up to 4 feet tall were found. Sometimes it took three
policemen to pull out some of the plants.

According to Capt Bill Aily. chief of the narcotics bureau in Nelspruit
and Capt Johan Pouche. of the Hiddelburg Police. this is the biggest con-
centration of marijuana ever found in a single raid. Both said that the

plantation. having a sales value of more than 500,000 rand was the biggest
that they had ever come across.

Two helicopters of the South African Air Force and 30 policemen had to be
employed to destroy the marijuana at Swartfontein. Because the marijuana
was planted between spruce plantations it could not be destroyed there and
had to be taken by helicopter to a different area.

Last week. members of the narcotics bureau began their periodic cleanup

carpaign in the Burgersfort area. About 70,000 plants have been destroyed
there.

7964
C50: 5300

36
BRIEFS

TOULOUSE DRUG ARRESTS--After a three months' investigation, the narcotiCs
brigade of the Regional Judiciary Police Service of the department of Neute-
Garonne has Just put an end to an important traffic between Toulouse and
Paris in hashish and LSD coming from Morocco and the Netherlands. Out of
forty persons interrogated, both in the Midi-Pyrenees region and in the
capital. twenty have just been put under commitment. Police seized 90 kg

of hashish and 1.200 pellets of LSD. The organizers of the traffic used
special channels. recruited free all social classes: educators. employees.
students. unemployed persons. to run a shuttle service between the source

of supply and the users. The fourth French city in population. Toulouse
occupies an identical rank among the cities blighted by the drug traffic.
Every year the narcotics brigade of the SRPJ [National Service of the Ju-
dicial Police] succeeds in seizing one-third of the drugs on the regional
market; but the users sometimes substitute other sources of supply, such as
burglarizing pharmacies-80 of which have been broken into in one year.

The products of theft are sold to users of the hardest drugs. such as cocaine
and morphine. [Text] [Paris LE HONDE in French 31 Jan 79 p 40] 9367

C80: 5300

37
DETECTIVES' cum ammurrs mm mm RISE m motors
Oslo ARBEIDERBLADET in Norwegian 22. 23, 26 Jan 79
[Articles by Svein Dybing]

[22 Jan 79 p 3]

[Text] "it is the drug addicts who are behind the rise in break-ins and
theft: from private homes and businesses in Oslo. That is addicts on
hard drugs like heroin who need up to 2000 kroner a day to provide them-
selves with enough drugs.

"it is the fences, those who freely buy stolen goods, who are the cancer
in this picture. The fences. often so-cailad good citizens, make it
almost impossible for us to clear up break-ins and thefts,” criminal de-
tective chief Sten Grindhaug told ARBEIDERBLADBT in connection with the
almost 100 break- ins reported to the police over the weekend.

The criminal detective chief said that they no longer treat break-ins
and thefts as isolated cases. They are almost always connected with
narcotics. pornography and prostitution.

Host of the breaks this weekend occurred in private homes. Thieves are
apparently becoming bolder and often strike in broad daylight. This was
the case on Karl Staafs Vel in Ulven this weekend. AMEIDERBLADET has
learned that at least three different residents living on this street
were visited by thieves while they were on short shopping trips.

Private homes all over the city were involved. The desk officer at the
criminal police division said that except in one section of the city it
did not appear that the thieves had followed any particular pattern in
the break-ins.

An Oslo school was also visited by unwelcome guests this weekend. That
case looks more like vandalism than anything else.

38
The same can be said of the break-in at the ARBEIDERBLADET editorial
premises on Youngstorget. Several editorial offices were torn apart by
people who had gained entry by forcing the main entrance. The way in
which cabinet doors and drawers had been pulled open suggested despera-
tion. The haul there amounted to two or three portable radios.

"Everything indicates that drug addicts are behind these break-ins. Just
remember that some of them need 1000 kroner a day for heroin and other
costly hard drugs." chief Sten Grindhaug said to ARBEiDERBLADET.

"These are the people responsible for most of the break-ins in Oslo
today, the ones who rob old people and drunks. Hhat else can these ad-
dicts do? Hhat they get at home or from the social assistance office is
nowhere near the amount they need to buy drugs with. Therefore they
break into homes and steal."

"hat can be done about this?

"First of all the people of Oslo should acquire proper locks for their
doors. People can get tips and ideas free if they go to the criminal
protection division in the new police building.

"however the most important thing is to arm ourselves mentally. Those
who are responsible for the fact that so many break-ins and thefts are
never cleared up are the fences. in this context these people are like
cancerous growths. They include representatives of all wmlks of society.
we must learn to regard fences as the criminals they really are.

Another problem is that fences get off much too lightly in court today.

"And it is a fact that the break-ins and thefts in this city must be
seen in close connection with increased drug abuse, pornography and
prostitution. These are all part of the same thing."

Pornography?

"The Swedish police bitterly regret that they did not come down harder
on the sale of pornography in the past. More liberal attitudes led to
sex and porno clubs popping up all over Sweden -- just as they did in
Denmark. And the police in Sweden are finding out that in the wake of
sex clubs comes increased prostitution and the sale and abuse of hard
drugs.

”while in the past we had harmless single cases on the drug market with
someone going to Copenhagen and coming back with a batch of hash for
sale on the street this kind of activity has been taken over by crim-

lnal syndicates. And now they are dealing in heroin, furs. jewelry.
cars, pornography and prostitution. This is already happening even in

39
Norway. The problem with us is that so many of our citizens are too
naive. They are lulled lnto false hopes that ‘it can't happen herel'

"Growing abuse of hard drugs. an increasing number of break-ins. in-
creased sales of pornography and a growing prostitution problem demon-
strate that we have good cause to sound the alarm." said criminal detec-
tive chief Sten Grindhaug.

[23 Jan 79 p 9]
[Text] Lawyer Urges Drug Reduction clinic for Addicts

it is high time the authorities took the consequences of the fact that

a number of young drug addicts must commit crimes every day to get the
1000-2000 kroner they need for buying drugs.

After 20 years of experience with these problems it appears that the
health authorities have become resigned, quietly accepting the fact
that it is preferable to write off some of these young addicts rather
than to help them.

"i am glad about criminal detective chief Grindhaug's statements in
ARBBIDERBLADET concerning break-ins and addiction but at the same time
i am afraid his view may obscure the real problem." said superior court
lawyer Tor Erling Staff.

in an interview with ARBEIDERBLADET he advocated setting up reduction
centers where drug addicts could be given decreasing doses under public

supervision.

"The amazing thing about chief Grindhaug's statements to ARBEIDERBLADET
Monday is that he intends to deal with criminalized addiction mainly by
installing burglarproof locks on the doors of upright citizens. That
obscures the real problems, problems affecting a significant number of
the young people around us.

"we won't get anywhere until we make an effort to break the vicious
circle in which young drug addicts find themselves today, a circle main-
talned by the social system.

"For what actually happens? It is quite true as the criminal detective
chief says that some hardcore addicts need between 1000 and 2000 kroner
every single day to be able to get enough drugs. This involves primarily
young people who are not working and who have no other legal source of
income. The only way they can get money is by breaking and entering,
robbing people or by embarking in prostitution. Or they can get into

the sale of narcotics. In other words they sell drugs to others in
order to get enough money to cover their own needs.

40
”No matter what they do they are commiting illegal acts and sooner or
later they are caught. brought to court and sentenced. The sick drug
addict receives one sentence after another, becomes more and more crim-
inallsed. he becomes even more degraded and feels increasingly angry at
or indifferent to society.

”it has been my experience that this is wrong and that it only helps to
increase the problems to impose the sanctions we do on young addicts.

"i feel we must take the consequences of the dependence these addicts
have and the fact that they will stop at nothing in their efforts to
obtain money for drugs. He must take the consequences of the fact that
they are cooniting crimes every day.

"i don't know how many times clients have come to my door to beg for
help in getting drugs legally. Of course I have no way of doing that.

After such an attempt the consequence is always that the addict commits
a criminal act out of desperation.

"i regard society' s restrictiVe attitude toward young drug addicts as
cynical. One minute we say. 'No. we can' t help you.‘ The next, when
the addict helps himself society swoops down to punish him.

"The health officials appear to have given up. There is good reason to
ask whether they are not deliberately following a course that they know
will lead to the downfall of some of the young addicts."

Hhat do you feel the health authorities and other responsible people can
do?

"Accept drug addicts as sick people. Set up centers where addicts can
come at any time, even when they are high. Centers that have expertise
available and that can give heroin and morphine addicts reduction doses."

What about the already existing treatment centers for drug addicts?

"They are part of the carrousel in which addicts exist. First of all we
don't have enough treatment centers. There are always long waiting lists.
0n the carrousel we find motivated addicts who get tired of waiting and
commit crimes along the way. And then the fact is that as long as he

has an unserved sentence hanging over him, the treatment centers won't
accept him!

"i have several clients right now who are on this vicious carrousel.
Clients who have lost their treatment places during the long waiting
period. Clients who would love to go somewhere like Hov i Land but who
won' t get a chance to because of the crazy drug rehabilitation system."

61
[21. Jan 79 p 23]

[Text] Physician Barns Against Legailsing Drugs

"Doctors who think they can help drug addicts by writing out so-called
decreasing dosages should be warned. All experience shows that attenpts
at public supervision and the prescription of decreasing quantities of
drugs have failed.

"Several of those who have died on the street are young people who had
been receiving drugs legally.

"Against that background superior court lawyer Tor Erling Staff's pro-
posal for the establishment of public reduction centers is no less naive
than criminal detective chief Sten Grindhaug's proposals. He wants to
solve the problems by supplying the doors of honest citizens with burglar-
proof locks."

Acting chief physician ﬂelge Haal from the State Psychiatric Center for
Children and Adolescents made these remarks to ARBEIDERBLADET.

"when we talk about reduction we first have to know who and what is in-
volved. The group on speed. that is stimulants such as amphetamine. is
not physically dependent on the drug and has no need for gradual reduction.

"in Sweden they have tried maintenance clinics and polyclinlcal reduction
of drug dosages under public auspices. The results were poor. Among
other things it turned out that young people receiving speed legally com-
mitted just as many -- if not more -- crimes than others."

What about the group of addicts on morphine, who do become physically de-
pendent?

"in the United States they have tried reduction programs under supervision
for this group. The substance used is methadone. This has also had some
usage in Norway. Because some doctors lost control over prescriptions

we have just about given up the use of methadone here.

"The experiences in the United States have been very poor. There metha-
done from health authorities has become one of the most important sources
of illegal drugs. In addition methadone is one of the substances often
leading to fatal drug overdoses.

"In other words I can’t see any good arguments for setting up reduction
centers, as Tor Erling Staff proposed."

what about the heavily addicted people we have in Oslo who must conmit
crimes to get several thousand kroner a day for drugs. is that better?

42
"i think the reputed physical dependency on these drugs is greatly
exaggerated and i feel it is wrong to say that a person must become a
criminal. a prostitute, etc. i don't believe there is any inner compul-
sion based on a chemical dependency that forces people to do these
things.

"The kind of addicts we are talking about here cannot be helped just by
removing them from drugs. This is a question of young people reacting
to their total life situation. Young people who have felt like losers
at home, at school and on the job.

"i haVe no illusions about quick solutions. 0n the one hand we know of
no treatment program that is effectiVe for eVeryone and on the other hand
social conditions. with rising unemployment among young people and cut-
backs in the health sector. are just getting worse.

"Incidentally our studies have shown that things are going better for
our addicted patients than many people think. Experiences from Dikeman.
Neven Farm in bergen and the State Drug Clinic in Nov i Land show that
at least half -- and up to two-thirds -- of the patients can break away
from their drug dependence. There are new treatment methods that seem
promising even for those people with whom regular institutions often
fall. We have collectives such as Sollia in Norway and the Hassla col-
lective in Sweden. in addition there are new therapeutic conmunitiea in
the United States. ﬂoiiand and Sweden that have proven to be effective.

"The possibilities for treatment are far from exhausted. 0n the other

hand treatment mechanisms cannot solve the problems singiehanded. livery
single one of us must do that by trying to create a more humane society."

6578
C80: 5300

‘3
GOVERDHENT 1'0 TIGITEN PHONE TAPPING RULES 1N DRUG CASES
Oslo AFTBNPOSTEN in Norwegian 20 Jan 79 p 36

[Text] Requests made by the prosecuting authorities for wire taps in
drug cases and court authorizations for them will have to be reported
Immediately to the attorney general. At the end of each quarter police
chiefs uust send the attorney general a report on phone taps in their
district. information must also be provided about the implementation and
results of the taps.

Thoee are the nain features of the instructions in the wiretapping law in
narcotics cases which the goVernment approved at the cabinet meeting Fri-
day. The law -- which ls temporary -- has been extended for 2 years.
expiring at the end of 1980.

The attorney general who must check to see that the law and the instruc-
tions are carried out properly will now have to send a quarterly report

to the Ministry oi Justlce on the wire taps that have been carried out.

The ministry can request more detailed information about the handling of
cases involving phone taps.

The instructions, which will go into effect as of 1 March 1979. will in-
sure satisfactory work routines in handling such cases. Recordlngs of
conversations that have no bearlng on an investigation must be destroyed
lunmdiately. Other recordings nus: also be destroyed as soon as they
are no longer needed in an investigation.

6578
C50: 5100

46
OWENTARY "MES GREATER DRUG USAGE IN SPAIN
Madrid Mac in Spanish 13 Dec 78 p lol
Mrticle: "Ileroin Is a Quick, Short Race Toward Death"]

[Test] Madrid (from our editorial staff)--lleroin--the drug called
"horse"--is considered one of the narcotics with the highest mortality
rates. me cause is its sped a1 addictive power, which forces the
user to increase the dosage progressively. It is. in short. a fast
race in which the only finish line is death.

lleroin is obtained from opium through a complicated laboratory
process. Out of l kilogram. approximately 10 percent is extracted
as morphine and out of that. also in a lesser percentage, laroin.
The great volme of opim that must be processed to get one or a
few doses of "white horse" markedly increases its price. ‘l'hus,
besides being the most dangeroas, it is the most expensive.

Currently in Spain, 1 gram of heroin costs l0,000 to 20,000 pesetas,
and in many cases a single gram is not enough for the addict.

Potential Market

The considerations we have just pointed out aru necessary when
explaining. in a general way. what the situation is today in our country
in regard to this narcotic.

Spain ceased to be simply a way station for "white horse" sane time

ago. Little by little the amounts of heroin "diverted" or rather
"invested" by the traffickers began to create a potential market

in which the masher of addicts multiplied. Thus, in the shadow

of the "major traffic"--the one which carries the "white poison"

from the Far Bast to Americana few groups of "camels" (traffickers)

were established. more or less organized, which could count on a widely
guaranteed territory of consuers of marihuans and other minor drugs also
known as "soft."

65
However, the Spanish police did not stand around with their arms
folded. In the last 15 or 16 months there have been frequent breakups
of rings dealing in this traffic; on some occasions shipments of up
to 10 kg of heroin were intercepted.

with the entrance routes becoming more difficult, the product's
price increases on the "black markets," forcing the addict to find
other sources of income to obtain it.

Attacks Among Addicts

lhe drug's price increases once more, while the big traffickers try
to avoid complications end do not want to risk their "business
dealings" by setting up a "widescale" distribution service in

our country.

This situation makes the relatively scarce heroin on the national
market coveted by many people.

There are attacks among addicts to obtain the minimal subsistence
amounts. That is how a young married couple died in Madrid on

5 September. And the "horse" is diluted by "cutting it" with other
products to obtain larger amounts, which does not than lower the
price. It is believed that this is how another youth also died in

our capital on 9 September: from injecting himself with adultereted
heroin.

However, it cannot be said that the traffic has decreased because of
this. In spite of all the efforts, the amounts of heroin that cross
our borders and remain here inotead of following their traditional
path are constantly increasing. "hat is happening, unfortunately,
is that the doand is growing.

11,937
080: 5300

46
DRUG ENFORCEMENT EFFORT FOR LAS PALHAS IN 1978
Madrid YA in Spanish 16 Jan 79 p 18
[Article by Jose Vera Suarez]

[Text] Lns Palmss--During 1978 more than 1,000 persons were arrested by the
Special Dru; Group of Les Pslmas for involvenent l" the traffic and consumption
of drugs. Also during the year just past the inspectors of the Central Police
Corps associated with this group seized more than 70 kg of asrihuana, 20

kg of hashish, more than 2.000 doses of LSD and some heroin, not counting
6,297 doses of different pharmaceutical drugs and 5.966 prescriptions. used

to obtain drugs in the pharmacies.

In this annual report. where the Special Drug Group has done a very fine job
in its efficient struggle against drugs, one must emphasize that in addition
to the figures that we have just given sons 73 kg of narihuans, 1/2 kg

of cocaine. about 10.000 doses of pharnaceutical drugs used as narcotics.
etc. were discovered. These figures alone reflect the increase in police
activity in the struggle against drugs. The number of persons arrested has
been considerably increased. In the period of only 5 years the number has
grown from 130 to 1,000, and the figure for 1978 is also double the figure
for 1977.

In addition to the purely police activity, it is necessary to emphasize also
in this report the beginning of the Provincial Commission for Combating

Drug Addition. as well the work carried out in various parts of this province
in tasks related to the topic of drugs. Another objective which has not yet
been crystalized and which is of vital importance for the province is the
desired rehabilitation center for drug addicts, although it is believed that
during the present year it will become a reality.

In this constant struggle against drugs a planning office has a part. It is
connected with the Special Drug Group. There is also the recently inaugurated
Polyvalent Planning Center. which contenplstes treating the many consumers

of the most diverse drrgs in the Province of Las Pal-as.

b7
Drug Cultivation Prevented

There ia an unhappy anecdote through which the reader can get an idea of the
danger that drug addiction repreaenta for thia city. Laat nonth, Deceaber
1978, inapectora of the General Police Corps of Lao Palnaa, connected to the
Special Drug Group. arreated two individuala who had on then 2 kg of

Iarihuana aeeda. The aeeda were to be planted in the center of the ialand of
Gran Canaria. apparently a region coneidered very suitable for ice cultivation.
The planting. if it had taken place. would have covered half a hectare.

Alao during thia year which haa juat paaaed the Special Drug Group of Lao
Palnaa broke up an international organization devoted to the cocaine traffic.
The GI: [Special Drug Group] wee tipped off that the irench Mafia was planning
to take up reeidence in Gran Ganeria in order to traffic in hard druga. After
on intenaive vigilance concentrated on auapicioua individuala the arreet of
all the Ienbera of thin organization waa node poaaible. with the eeizure of

lore than 2 kg of cocaine, felae documentation and two million peaetae
in foreign exchange.

12.116
680: 5300

68
matsa RING ARRESTED IN GALICIA
Barcelona LA VANGUARDIA in Spanish 18 Jan 79 p ’43

[Text] La Coruna, 17 Jan--'ihe largest organization of drug traffickers
which had been operating in Galicia has been broken up by a joint action of
the Regional Drug Group of the Judiciary Brigade and the Brigade of Civil
Security. with inspectors on the rolls of the police stations of Vigo, Santa
Eugenia de Ribeira and Villa Garcia de Areas.

The eight nenbers of this organization have been confined in the provincial
prison at La Goruna. by order of the judicial authority. The police operation
had begun last September. with the arrest of ﬂannel Gone: Fernandez, a resi-

dent of Cornazo-Villa Garcia de Arosa, a member of the organization who had in
his possession 7.5 kg of hashish.

Later the police conpleted dragnet operations in different Galician cities. in
one of which 1.5 kg of the use drug was seized.

Later it was divulged that the drug was being brought into Galicia through the
Rise Bajas. principally through the coastal localities of Boiro. Aguino.
Ribaira. Puebla del Garaninal and Villa Garcia de Arosa. In the light of the
investigations that had been carried out, the eight ate-hers of the east
iaportant organization in the hashish traffic were identified and arrested.

This is the most inportant organization detected in Galicia up to new. The
arrested persons are as follows:

Suspected Drug Traffickera

Ricardo Kargalet Barral. a resident of Boiro; Ramon bojo Agrelo, a resident of
Boiro; Jaise Monteagudo Marquez, alias "Ji-y." a resident of San Rogue-
Villa Garcia de Arosa; Jose Hosquera Aragundi. a resident of Aquino-Santa
Eugenia de Ribeira; Antonio Vigueira Cardalda. alias "Gachito." a resident

of Trabanca-Badina, Villa Garcia de Arosa; Julio Jose Ramon Rodriguez Docanpo.
alias "Julio e1 Turco" and "Larsa," a resident of Villa Garcia de Arosa.

Also arrested were Hernogenes Caldas Machin, alias "Tito." a resident of Villa

Garcia de Areas. and Jesus Maria Felipe Romero Duran. alias "Suso el Sordo."
also a resident of Villa Garcia.

‘9
Free. the investigation it has been learned that Ricardo Hargalet wee in
charge of buying the haehieh wholesale. for which he nde frequent trips to
Morocco. He turned the drug over then to Jaine ﬁonteagudo, who was the one
who snuggled it through custom. hidden inside the tiree of his car. when
they returned to Gelicia they hid the "Ierchandiee" in the hose of Ramon bojo
Asrelo. in Boiro, and it wee hia Job to prepare it for distribution and enle
in small quantities. The sale was carried out by the other were of the

organization. who uorked on conieeion. Apparently some of the suspects had a
high econonic poaition.

12.116
(:80: 5300

50
BRIEFS

DRUGS STOLEN PRO! PHARMACY-,4 large amount of morphine, cocaine chloride
and several kilograms of pure. pulverized opium, as well as 30
amphetamines, 3 ampules with a total of 200 cc's, and 10 ampules of
bisulfate of quinine is the loot taken by a pair of youths in a robbery
of a pharmacy located at 9 Boix y Horst Street in Madrid, according

to police sources. Juan Ignacio Nogueira Bermejillo, age 21. and
Bncarnacion Gutierrez Hernandez, 22, both of Madrid, emitted the
robbery at about 0230 yesterday morning, after breaking the glass

in the pharmacy's front door. In doing so, Juan Ignacio Nogueira cut
his left hand in several places. The arrest took place just as the
two youths were about to make their getaway, so all the drugs were
recovered. Given the state in which the two youths were f mnd,

they were taken to the district First Aid Station, where they exhibited
signs of withdrawal and were subjected to the first detoxification
treatment. Juan Ignacio Nogueirauaccording to the police--is a
repeated morphine addict. A few months ago he managed to escape

from the Alonso Vega psychiatric hospital and has gone through

several sanitsriuns "for chronic morphine addiction in an acute
state." lie also has a backgrmd of illegal possession of weapons

and was charged by the Special Court of Dangerousness and Social
Rehabilitation. [Text] [Madrid YA in Spanish 17 Dec 78 p 22] H9”

DRUG ARREST PIGURBSuSome 8,500 persons were arrested this year in
connection with the traffic in and use of drugs, while the number

of arrests in that area last year was 297. These figures were furnished
at a press conference held in the Civil Government Building by the
territorial comission in charge of the study of drug-related problems.
This counission will go into operation in January in some sites
allocated by the municipal government of Madrid and located on Fucar
Street in the Arganruela district. The program includes a drastic
plan of coordinated action on the sources od drug supply in the
schools, information and orientation, and the promotion of centers and
services for detection, treaulent, social reintegration and training
of specialized personnel. The members of the emission to do all
this work are 62 persons, distributed into work groups by situation,
sociological and assistivc aspects for treatment and rehabilitation,
education, training and legal aspects. The organization backing

the omission are the Ministry of Health, Spanish Red Cross, the

51
Provincial Deputy's Office, the myor's Office and the Civil Government.
The members of the emission present at the conference said that
although the masher of arrests for drug traffic and use can be determined.
it is practically impossible to provide real date on use. because there
are no statistics on the number of users. The members of the emission
said that the use of hard drugs comes about by way of alcohol, tobacco
and the so-called soft drugs such as narihuana. about which they

said positively that although until recently it was thought there

was no dependence on it, it has been proven that it creates an
addiction. [Text] [Madrid Kl. PAIS in Spanish 23 Dec 78 p 19] 11937

WINE STOLEN non PHARMACY-diode (Cecsres), lo Jam-Righty-three
vials of morphine and other narcotics were stolen from a pharmacy in
this Cacores town. According to preliminary investigations. it

seems that a group of criminals specializing in this type o! robbery
broke into Francisco Echevarria's establishment and took 83 vials

of morphine. two of opiu: and various -ounts of other narcotic drugs.
It is presued that they might be the perpetrators of similar robberies
in other parts of the province of Cacerss. The incident has been
brought to the attention of the Guerdia Civil. and the suspects

are believed to be the occupants of a white SEAT 133 car with Selenenca
license plates. [Text] [Barcelona u VANGUARD“ in Spanish 5 Jan 79 p 23]
11937

080: 5300

52
PAIR INVOLVED Ill WHISN TRANSPORT SENTB'CKD
Zurich NEUE ZUERCRER ZEITUNC in Ger-an 20 Jen 79 p 17
[Article by «an: "Drug Traneport Reniniecent of a Detective Filn"]

[Text] On Friday evening, the hearing before the Second Criminal Diviaion
of the Zurich Superior Court dragged on until 9:30 pn--an indication of
the lengthineae end coetlineee of the proceedinge againet the 26-year-old
Engliahnan David "rare and the 28-yeer-old leraeli Elchanan E. For all
that, Switzerland ie only a eecondary locale--at leaet for Heare. 0n the
traneport from the Oenabrueck City Prieon to the Zurich hearing, he wee
eacorted by federal Cemn police.

Heere and E. had been arreeted on 26 January 1978 in the Zurich Hotel.
On 27 April. Switzerland extradicted Heere to the Federal Republic, after
the (irat trial before the Zurich Diatrict Court had been caepleted.

Divergent Opinione Regarding the Degree of Puniahnent

Since Heere now wee aleo ruled guilty of having kept ll grane of cocaine
in a Zurich eafe depoeit box, to which both he and E. had had acceee, the
Superior Court unconditionally increaeed the penalty fro- 3 to 6 nonthe'
inprieonnent. Piguratively, thie ie probably only one cog in the vbeele
of juetice, in which Heara finda hineelf. eince in all probability he
facee a long-tern priaon aentence in the PRC. The Zurich Dietrict Court
hed eenteneed Heare nerely for poeeeaaion of nine forged identity papere.
Re thue wee aleo guilty of receiving atolen goode, eince theee papere
could only have come into hie poeeeeaion through a prior crininal offence
(coenitted by an unknown party).

The eecond defendant had been eentenced by the Dietrict Court to 2 ll2
yeare of penal eervitude. In the appeal proceedinge, the dietrict
attorney had called for a eentence of 8 yeare of penal eervitude and a
fine of 350,000 trance. The Superior Court eentenced Elchanan E. to

1 1/2 yeare' ilpriaonnent and granted hin release on probation. ﬁe could

SJ
thue heve been releeeed fro. pretriel detention-which by that time

hed exceeded 1 yeeruif inedietely efter the peeeing of judpent the
dietrict ettorney hed not filed e centonel eppeel to the Superior Court.
The dietrict ettorney thue effected e provieionel continuence of detention.
The following eccount expleine why there ie eo greet e divergence of
opinion enong the euthoritiee involved in regerd to the degree of punieh-
lent.

With 2.8 Tone of Ileehieh on the.lligh 8eee

Thie triel wee the reeult of evente which undoubtedly would heve coneti-
tuted euiteble neteriel for e detective file. There ere ell the cuetonery
ingrediente: Shedy bueineee treneectione, erne deele, girl friende, die-
tinguiehed hotele. end Athene, Pireeue, Meterdu end Lebenen ee e picture
poetcerd beckdrop.

The etory begine in the lete eu-eer of I977 in the officee of e Pireeue
ehipplng conpenv. At the price of $86,000, e couple of men ecquired

the "Sonje." en obviouely decrepit notorehip, which wee by no neene rejuv-
eneted by being renened ”Seehoree." The requieite crew wee hired. in-
cluding Ceptein Leecelle end the firet mete. Cherbel. who went by the eliee
of Rizk. After e 5-week triel. the Aurich Regionel Court (Lower Sexony)
recently eentenced Leecelle to 7 yeere' end Cherbel to 9 yeere' inprieon-
ment.

The ehip firet celled et the port of Lineeeol on Cyprue, where it rode et
enchor fro. 26 to 28 Septenber 1977. The veeeel then put to eee egein.
ellegedly bound for Serdinie, but ectuelly heeding for the coeet of
Lebenon. llere, in the night of 29/30 Septeeber, two fiehing boete turned
up. from which in thn derk 90 eeclxe (2.880 kilogrue) of heehieh end 80
kilogrue of heehieh oil were treneferred to the "Seehoree."

Drug Beet in Dietreee et See

Apperently. the deetinetion of the ”Subaru" wee buoy T55 off the Dutch
ielend of Texel. where the cergo of epproxinetely 3 tone of nercotice wee
to be treneferred egein. however, the "Seehoree" never got there. The
veeeel found iteelf in dietreee. According to the crew, the boet tool:
weter end there wee engine trouble. The ceptein epperently wee not quite
up to the teek of newigetion end the voyege took longer then expected.
Food ren ehort end eince the crew could not be fed heehieh efter ell. the
"Seehoree" finelly hed to put in et the port of Men. when the beet wee
inepected by cuetone officiele, the drug treclter dog got wind of the
heehieh. An inveetigetion wee leunched end on the beeie of the initiel
reeulte the Pederel Criminel Police Bureeu eeerched for lieere.

In the couree of the inveetigetion. it wee found thet et the tine of the
beet purcheee in Athene, Elchenen a. hed remitted epproxinetely 300,000
frence fro. hie Shdee benk eccount to Heere end enother middlemen.
No lueineee Friende

In view of the findinge of the police end the courte, there ie no doubt
thet Heere wee the wirepuller in thie heehieh deel. Although he continuee
to deny hie involvement. the Federel Republic will prebebly put hie on
triel in April. Approxi-etely 8 yeere ego, Heere wee inveetigeted in
Cenede in connection with drug offeneee which-wee he hineelf concede»-
involved 3 to lo tone of haehieh.

The perticipetion of Richenen 5. ie herder to prove. lie hee been on
friendly teree with Heere for teeny yeere end the two men were bueineee
pertnere. They clein. however, thet they were deeling only in reel
eetete, entiquee end jewele. E. euepected thet Heere wee involved in erue

deele with cliente in Lebenon: but he cleile not to heve hed eny knowledge
of nercotice deele.

E. doee not deny heving renitted the ebove-nentioned 300,000 frence et the
requeet of Heere. But he cleine he never received eny inforeetion ee to
whet the money wee intended for end thet he never euepected thet he wee
finencing e lerge-ecele nercotice treneection; for e bueineee friend of
Heere' thie reeittence wee nothing unueuel, he eeid.

The dieegreenent concerning the degree of punieheeent ie beeed on the di-
vergence of opinion ee to whet to neke of Ede cleine. The Zurich
Dietrict Court, which eentenced E. to 2 1/2 yeere of penel eervitude,
inputed to him et leeet contingent eelice eforethought. Likewiee, in
celling for e penelty of 8 yeere of penel eervitude, the dietrict ettorney
proceeded from the eeeueption of crieinel intent. However, in the opinion
of the Superior Court, the requieite evidence wee not produced. The court
nerely cherged E. with negligence: lie feiled to obtein sore deteiled in-
fomtion ee to the purpoee to which the noney relitted at the requeet of
Heere wee to be put.

A Lucretive l‘riel

Thue the nexin- penelty wee l yeer of ieprieoment. Due to the con-
currence of eeverel crilinel ecte, it wee pernieeible to increeee the
penelty by helf. In peeeing e eentence of l 1/2 yeere' inprieonnent, the
Superior Court went up to thie limit.

Sven though the triel ie lengthyuee wee nentioned ebove--. the etete
certeinly doee not cone off e loeer. The court fined Heere 5,000 end S.
40,000 frence. In order to eneure peynent of theee finee end of the

court coete, the court decided to collect fro. Ede end Heere' bent
ecceunte 80,000 end 60,000 frence reepectiyely. Heere kept en eccount
with in Zurich benk, which ehowed e belence of epproxinetely 600.000 frence.
Fifty percent of the helence reoeining efter deduction of the finee end
coete mentioned will be confieceted, einceuwell-Ieening coneideretion

55
notwithotondlna--thto money van unluwfully ocqulrod through drug and
on. deals.

One could odd horn that even from a criminoloslcnl point of View the
"flnonco contor Sultxorlnnd" hno Ito good polnto. Since Moor. and B.
were doing buolnou horn, 1t. woo poulblo to nrroot tho- ln Zurich. And
that the oft-noltgnod bank secret to no obotoclo to tho invooctgntlon of
art-ﬁnal not. to ohoun by this oxonplo.

8760
680: 5300

56
PAIR SWORD FOR “SPORTING mom
Zurich N30}: ZUSRCMER ZEI'I'UNC in German 25 Jan 79 p 25
[Article by emr: "Meroin Trip ande in the Penitentiery")

[Text] On 19 Auguet 1977. while carrying two euitcaeee containing 6.6
kilograme of heroin (retail price approximately 6 to 7 million france).
the preeently 26-year-old Frenchwomen Marianne U. and the Zlo-year-old
Spaniard Joee C.--en route from Bangkok to The liague--were acreeted by
cuetome officiale at the Zurich airport. lt wee the eecond largeet
quantity of heroin thue far eeized in Switzerland.

In view of the magnitude of the crime. the Buelach Dietrict Court een-
tenced the woman to 9 yeare and the teen to 9 1/2 yeare of penal eervitude.
The appeal efforte of Marianne H.'e defenee couneel paid off. The Second
Criminal Court reduced the eentence from 9 to 6 yeere. (The eppeel of
her accomplice Joee a. will be dealt with later.)

The verdict of the euparior court wee baeed above all on an expert
opinion eubnitted by the medical director of the kheinau Mental Moepital,
Dr Rudolf Kneb; the court took into coneideration a alight to cedin- di-
minution of reeponeibility, placed reduced emphaeie on the motive for the
offenee and rewarded the prompt confeeaion by Marianne H. Thanke to her
cooperation, the police were able to arreet the main cliente, a married
couple in Madrid. and to identify Chineee drug dealere in the Netherlande.

Sufficient Heroin for 90,000 lnjectione

The euperior court wee not quite at eaee in paeeing the eentence. it
emphaeized the epecial aepecte of the caee of Marianne it: Thie eentence
ehould by no meane be coneidered a departure from the practice of penalty
aggravation. For the defenee couneel. the partial eucceee will probably
be marred by the defeat of another petition of hie, nnely to poetpone
the execution of the eentence and to order out-patient therapy inetead.
Even a eupportive expert opinion did not help him in thie reepect.

S7
Mong other thinge. hereh eentencee ein et checking the edvence of the
heroin treffic between Aeie end Europe. Ae lete ee 1971, not e eingle
grem of heroin wee eeieed in Switcerlend; in 1972. 649 grene were eeized;
in 1976, 5.7 kilogrue; in 1975. ee much ee 21.! kilogrelne; in 1976, 16.“
kllogruee end in 1977, 17.75 kilogrne. Ae regerde the dengere of heroin,_
not euch need be eeid. "within e few deye. it producee peychologicel

end phyeiologicel dependence eccoupenied by repid hebituetion end corre-
eponding increeeee in doeege end tolerence." The 6% kilogrune of heroin
would heve been eufficient for 70,000 to 90,000 injectione. i.e. euffi-
cient for keeping the eddicte of entire dietricte eupplied with heroin
over en extended period of tine. Md heroin-releted deethe occur elloet
deily.

Feteful Act of Kindneee

Even though Herienne U. hereelf ueed druge only eporedicelly end ie not
eddicted. the court did not give credence to her clein thet ehe hed not
been ewere of the deveeteting effecte of heroin. For e wueen holding e
univereity degree cennot eeriouely pleed euch ignorence.

0n the other hend, the euperior court eccepted the pereonel motive. ‘l'he
tempting pey (8.000 frence) for the drug treneport. the trip to the Fer
Seet end the ecco-nodetion’ in firet-cleee hotele certeinly conetitute e
motive. but not the eoet ieportent end only one, ee the Buelech Dietrict
Court hed eeeuned.

In Hedrid, where ehe hed been living end working eince the end of l97lo,
Herienne H. in the epring got to know e nerried couple. the Oerciee. Very
quickly. e cloee friendehip developed. lien who. ehe hed lived with in
London end Hedrid hed huilieted end dieeppointed her. After thie nege-
tive experience, ehe velued the friendehip with the Gerciee ell the acre.

The court eccepted the opinion of the peychietriet: "She clung to thie
reletionehip end ected unconeciouely--ignoring end denying fecte inpeiring
the friendehlpo-on the beeie of e defective ethicel-norel ettitude; by
doing the couple enuobjectively very dubioue--good turn, ehe wented to
buy the reletionehip." Thie purcheee of the Gerciee' friendehip wee the
key element. when the couple repeeted their offer concerning the trip

to the Fer Eeet, Herienne 9. could not eey no.

In Chineee Clutchee

The Gerciee introduced to the defendent e certein Joee 0. who wee to be
her trevel coepenion. ln Auguet l977, the foureooe treveled to liollend
to eee the chineee drug deelere who defreyed the trevel expeneee. 0n

7 Auguet 1977, heving received pertinent inetructione, iierienne end Joee
’flew fro. Brueeele to Bengkok: they were eccapenied by one of the
Chineee, Min, who geve the neceeeery directione. In the Preeident Hotel
in lengkok. two Theie hended the- the two euitceeee conteining the

$8
heroin. Him then lef t then in the care of a certain John and flew ahead
to Zurich. in order to await there the arrival of the two carriero.
According to the plat, they were ouppoood to continue the journey to The
Rogue by train.

Marianne ii. wao eopecially qualified for thio tranoport job: A trained
tour guide, ohe opeaho four languageo fluently, in contraot to her accou-
plice Jooe G. liven though the two carriero had willfully placed the.-
oolveo in the clutcheo of tho Chinooe drug dealoro, they were by no Ileana
defonoolooo. In The liaguo--bofore tho takeoff for Bruooelo-cand in
bangkoh. there would have been oufficiont opportunitieo for eocaping the
"watchdogo."

iiarianno 9. could have oocapod oven at the Zurich airport. At that point,
however, ohe wao already liable to prooocution and would have been wanted
by tho police. The defendant had paoood the cuotoao inopection and waited
for Jooo c. in tho concouroo of terninal 3. however, through hio nervouo
conduct 0. attracted tho attention of tho cuobono officialo and waa aub-
jected to inopoction. Although Harianno ii. oaw thio happen, ohe followed
a cuoto-o official back to tho cuotouo ooction. Robodyunot even tho de-
fendantoc-oaw Hill, who wao ouppoood to be at the Zurich airport.

A Sheltered Daughter

The fact that it wao aerely in their capacity ao carrioro that the defend-
anto belonged to the drug ocene wao not conoidored an exonerating circu-
otanco. for tho word "aorely" definitely not be put in quotation aorta.
The carrioro create-ofor tho out part for noneyo-the preconditiono and
tho baoio without which the drug traffic in Europe could not develop.

Neither her background nor her education could keep the petite defendant,
who had never been in conflict with the law, out of the penitentiary.
Marianne ii. and her brother grew up in lieu. In educating their children,
her parento were guided by the otrict moral and religiouo concepto of
Jewioh tradition. harianno firot attended a lycee and oubooquently a
Catholic private ochool, iron which ohe graduated with high honoro. Pro-
1971 to 1973, ohe wao enrolled at tho Straobourg Tourioa Acadoay to be
trained ao a tour guide; after her graduation, oho worked for oole tine
in that field.

After ohe had oettled down in liadrid, Marianne it. gave language leooono.
She developed a liking for spanioh folk auoic; fired by rouarkable ubi-
tion. ohe tranolated thio proponoity into action, the vioiblo, legible
and audible oxproo'oion of which were a book ("chantoz, Peuplo d'zopogno,"
publiohod in Pario in 1977) and four radio broadcaoto for France Inter.
Since oho received oupport from her parento, the fact that ohe did not
make much aonoy in Madrid wao not overly iaportant; on the other hand,
Harianno ‘1. may have been eabarraooed by the fact that at the age of 25
ohe wao otill living to oooe extent at tho expenoo of her parento.

\

59
According to the paychiatriat, eeveral striking characteriatice aanifeeted
thenaelvaa already during the defendant'a adoleecence. Ila concluded that
the deacribed develop-ental dieturhancee and pereonality traite are "lapto-
aatic of an infantile, emotional-torn pereonality retardation haeed on

a hyaterical neuroaia. The defendant's greet eenaitivity to confine-out
repeatedly becue apparent during the pretrial detention. However, in the
opinion of the peychiatriet, thie eeneitivity doee not jeetify the what].-
tution of therapy for incarceration. According to Paragraph (96 of die

Cri-inal Code. depraaeione arieing during detention can be treated through
ahort-ter- psychiatric hoapitaliution.

8760
680: 5300
HEROIN SENT FOR ANALYSIS SWITCHED WITH SOAP POWDER
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 26 Jan 79 pp 1,15

/Tcxt7 'rhrec and a half kilos of pure heroin worth approx-
Tmately 5.5 million lurkish lira, which the Van High Criminal
Court sent to the Istanbul Institute of I orensic Medicine, was
exchanged for 25 lira worth of soap powder in the Tophane Parcel
Post Office. Five officials of the post office, accused of
taking the heroin and substituting soap powder, were held
yesterday in the Criminal Court of Peace.

Post Office officials Nazmi Unal. Zafer llhan, Mustafa Kugu,
Cemalettin Kakki Ozguzel and Cemal Yc-ilbulut were sent to
Sagmalcilar, and a case calling for a sentence of at least
15 years was begun against :hcm. They rejected the charge.

Officials said that the Van High Criminal Court had taken

40 grams of the heroin and sent it to the Gendarmerie General
Command, and that if this precaution had not been taken the
affair would not have come out.

Six Also Arrested in Van

It has been announced that while the Van High Criminal Court
was charging the six suspects arrested with8 3. 544 kilos of
heroin in a car, their lawyers requested analysis of the
heroin. It was first sent to Ankara l-orensic Medicine, whence
a report was issued stating that it was pure heroin. Then

the accused objected and asked that it be analyzed in the
Istanbul Institute of Forensic Medicine. The Court decided

to send 40 grams of the heroin to the Gendarmerie General
Command. The remaining 3.5 kilograms of herein was sent

by plane to Istanbul.

Zafer llhan of the Tophane Parcel Post Office received the
heroin, which arrived at Yesilkoy Airport Post Office in

61
nylon bags inside a cloth sack. Post Office Disbursement
Officer Mustafa Kug u turned the heroin over to the Forensic
Medicine Receivingg Officer.

Soan Powder from the Nylon Baa

Chemist Mukaddes Altinbas and laboratory workers Mehnet Emin
Yigit and Hasan Gui, employees of the Forensic Medicine
Narcotics Division- opened the package which was sup osed to
contain the heroin. When the experts examined the w ite powder
inside the three nylon bags, they determined that it was soap
powder. The report which the Istanbul institute of Forensic
Medicine sent to the Van High Criminal Court stated that the
white matter inside the nylon bags was soap powder. Upon
receipt of contradictory reports from Ankara Forensic Medicine
and the Istanbul Institute of Forensic Medicine, the Van High
Criminal Court decided that the 40 grams of heroin sent to the
Cendarnerie General Command should be analyzed.

The heroin requested from the Cendarmerie General Command was
brought by special plane to the Istanbul Directorate of
Forensic Medicine. In this analysis the material which
arrived turned out to be 100% heroin.

Changed in the Post Office

Determining that the 3.5 kilos of heroin had been changed
between Van and Istanbul, officials conducted a secret invest-
igation, as a result of which they learned that the package
had been opened in the post office. In the investigation

it was determined that when post office official Mustafa Kugu
delivered the heroin to Forensic Medicine Receiving Officer

Celal Gumushan he wrote on the package, “There are rips in
the bag".

According to the charge resulting from the investi ations,

the post 3office officials opened the package, emptied out the
heroin in the nylon bags and put soap powder of the same color
into the bags. During this operation they cut the strings on
the bag, afterwards fastening them by tying knots at the
severed places.

The investigators have stated, "We are trying to find out if
they exchanged the heroin for soap powder at the request of the
accused in Van or for their own profit."

9403
C80: 4907

62
NARCOTICS SQUAD SEIZES 80 KILOS 0F POWDERED HASHISH
Istanbul HURRIYET in Turkish 27 Jan 79 pp 1,7

[Text7 Narcotics Police teams have seized 80 kilos of first
quality hashish, having a market value of 10 million Turkish
lira, which had been put in Special compartments of six
suitcase: to be sent abroad. Huseyin Sarikaya and Bahri Genc,
described as the owners of the heroin, were arrested.

When one of the suSpects, Huseyin Sarikaya, began to come and
go in areas producing hashish and to engage in frequent con-
tacts in Istanbul, detectives of the Narcotics Division began
the operation. During the operation, which was carried out
by following him from a distance, Huseyin Sarikaya was seen
with Bahri Genc, a maker of purses and suitcases, whereupon
his house at 11 Cami Street in the district of Beycegiz was
also put under surveillance last Wednesday. Detectives, who
maintained this surveillance for days, said that the two
smugglers brought six empty suitcases to the house the night
before last. Teams from the Narcotics Division staged a mid-
night raid and seized 80 kilos of prime quality powdered hashish
in sacks which had been placed into specially constructed
compartments in the suitcases. Obtaining the hashish, the
police arrested Huseyin Sarikaya and Bahri Genc. Under
questioning the two said, "We were going to take the hashish
out of the country and sell it. We would thus have sold for
ten million lira hashish which we bought for 25 million,

and gotten rich. Then we had dreams of changing our way of
life and starting a purse and suitcase factory."

Narcotics Division officials stated that the investigation
has been intensified, the sellers of the hashish are being
sought, and the two persons arrested would be turned over
to the court after questioning.

9403
(ISO: 4907
63
HEROIN DEALER, ITALIAN GIRLFRIEND NABBED IN ISTANBUL
Istanbul GUNAYDIN in Turkish 26 Jan 79 p 3

£Tcx£7 In a raid which Istanbul Narcotics Division teams
made two days ago on a hotel in the Sishane district, a man
named Halil Ceker was arrested with his Italian girlfriend.

In the state-eat made at the Directorate of Security by Halil
Ccker, who was caught with heroin worth 75,000 Turkish lira

during a search of his person, he said that he was a heroin
addict.

When the beautiful Italian girl Mari Pannini learned that her
Turkish sweetheart would go to jail, she refused to leave his
side. The young girl wrapped herself for a time around her
boyfriend and was separated with difficulty by the police.

Narcotics Division Chief Naci Yurtman stated that the young
man named Halil Ceker had been engaged in selling heroin for
some time, was also being sought by the Bursa Directorate of

Security, and that the decision had been made for his arrest
in absentia.

Officials also announced that the Italian girl arrested in
Halil Ceker's room would be sent to Italy.

9403
C50: 4907
BRIEFS

DRUG DEALER Di?RISONED-Nureuburg~-The Nurenburg-Fuerth Regional Court

today sentenced a 33-year-old Tunisian drug dealer to 10 years imprisonment.
This highest sentence for drug offences brought to an er.J today in Nurenburg
a drug case in which a 32-year-old Tunisian dealer was shot by an American
special agent in anken in October 1978. The accused had 725 grams of
heroin in his possession, which the prosecutor believed would have netted
him m725.000. (Hamburg on in German 1825 Off 9 Feb )9 [.0]

C50: 5300 END

65