APPROVID FOR NIL-“I: ROOT/0210.: CIA-RDPOZ-OOCGOROOO10001COCO-O
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010056-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE (“LY

JPRS L/8249

29 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFlCIAL USE MLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010058—8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Ileadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Cover-meat.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND REGUIATIORS GWERNING MERSlllP OF
”TERMLS ”PRODUCED stun: REQUIRE MT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOR 3! RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
7. Amber“) 3. :nlounm‘ Oussiuuoa Kept.
o.

O. Palm-in; Omen-issues Nsne sod Address )0. Paoieel/Taskl'ork lieu No.
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North 010“ Md II. Convert/Gust No.
Arlington, Virginie 22201

I]. Sponsous. Oussiralion Name sad Miners '3. Type cl KO”! a Period
Covered

IS. Supplement; Notes

1 . Abusers

As above

This serial report contains information on energy. fuels and related equipment;

fishing industry and marine resources; aster resources. minerals. timber. and
electric power.

arm-eel Ana ans.

Natural Resources
Electric Power
lousy

Energy Conservation
Fisheries

Fuels

Hinerals

Tilber

water Supply
”5- Idennlieu/Opee-Esded Teas

snowmen/cw 5c. 10. 210. 2c, so. 2r

II. Avulab-luy Saunas

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. Limited Number of
Copies Available From JPRS

 

s on. any” lair. 3-"!

rusronuunrsrneesooucro ”“°"°‘“"”'"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 13/824

29 January

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR RESOURCES
(rouo 2/79)
CONTENTS
guacmc mm m m mum

Problem Solving in the Introduction of New Equipment
(Yu. A. Gebliye. et. al.; DIBRGBTICHESKOYE
STROIm'S‘l'VO. No 10. 1978)..........................

Supplying Agriculture With Electric Power Equipment
(In. N. Zerobyen; umormm, Nov 78). .. . .. . . . . . .

FUELS AND RELATED WIPHENT

Utilization of Fixed Capital in Gas Industry Drilling

(R. I. Popove. V. n. Chernynk; EKOBIOKIKA GAZOVOY
PWSELWOSTI. No 11. 1978)........................

Factors in Role of Coal in the Long-Tern Fuel-Energy Belence
(A. S. Aetckhov; mm, TOPLIVOuDOS‘rIZMIYA
I PERSPBICI‘IW, I977).................................

Methods of Calculating Heterieln-Intensiveneee in Fuel
Industry Revieved
(V. A. Busrov. et. el.; mourn uaovov
WWI. No 11. l978).......... .
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POUIR AND POWER EQUIPHBRT

UDC 658.589.011.46
PROBLEM SOLVING IN THE IhTRODUCTION OF NEH EQUIPMENT

Hoscow ENERGBTICHESKOYE STROITBL'STVO in Russian No 10. 1978 pp 86-87

[Article by Candidate of Technical Sciences Yu. A. Gabliya, engineers A.

B. Rubinshteyn. I. A. Kirtbaya. 2. A. Ovcharov. V. V. Yoresenko. L. C.
Nikolaichev, L. A. Kostrovl

[Text] The existing procedure for the developnent of technical documentation
with respect to new equipsent. the nanufecture. testing and introduction of
experisental nodels. the preparation and distribution of the corrected tech-
nical docunentstion to the enterprises for use sanufacturo and introduction,
the organization of ms manufacture and introduction. the consideration of
the efficiency fro. the introduction of new technical solutions (neterials.
products, structural elements. mechanisms, technology. attach-cots, equip-ent.
and so on). the procedure for sorsl and eaterial incentive of the organiza-

tions have a nuber of significant deficiencies. the basic ones of which are
as follows:

1. The absence of deep. comprehensive discussion and analysis of new technical
proposals on a high scientific and technical level with the participation

of representatives of all of the organizations which detersine the results

of the inplasentation of a given technical solution on various levels and the
organization of its use introduction into production in the initial stage

of for-nation of the plan with respect to the new equip-ent.

At the present tine the inclusion in the plan and the discovery of financing

with respect to a particular topic depend quite frequently on the persistence
of the author (a group of authors). -

The asount of assay allocated for the develop-cot. nanufacture and introduction
of a new technical design, as a rule. is not confined by exact ceiculations
in accordance with the existing standards (even with a defined safety sargin).

As a result. significant .ounts of honey are taken out of state circulation
and frozen.

2. The cmecutive organizations frequently are not involved in the discussion
of the topic in advance and becose coparticipents in the operation autonatically.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Even if they are informed in advance on the necessity of participating in
the work. they are not provided with clear data not only on the problem as
a whole. but also specific functions and also complexities which can arise
when implementing the stated goal.

The given operations do not find the necessary reflection in the plans of

the coexecutive organizations for the topic. The work is as a rule suddenly
thrust upon them with all of the consequences of an emergency nature arising
froa this. Accordingly. the coexecutive organisations try will all possible
means to decline responsibility for the performance of work that they have

not agreed on (and sometimes agreed on). referring to the absence of technical
or organizational possibilities, materials, equipment. the presence of stressed
inhouse plans. and so on. As a result. further work on the new solution

is slowed and extended over a prolonged period of time. and sometimes it is
even stopped altogether.

The absence of serious collective analysis. personal responsibility for the
topic and a prospective schedule for perfornance of operations becomes the
cause of the fact that orders for materials. equipment and aachinery are not
compiled by a clearly defined time; that is, at the time when it is necessary
to begin work all of the coexecutive organizations (including the supply and
planning organizations) are only beginning to prepare for execution of the
design. meeting with difficulties in obtaining the necessary materials.
machinery.and so on not provided for in advance by the planning agencies and
for which the required limits are absent.

3. Frequently it occurs that an experimental model of the product (structural
design) has already been manufactured, and it does not appear possible to
introduce it inasmuch as there is either still no technical documentation or
it arrives with a great delay. As a result. the time for the introduction
of new machinery or a modified version of it is extended unreasonably. and

the machinery becomes obsolete.

6. As a result of the absence of the required responsibility on the part

of the participants. cases have been observed where the technical documents-
tion is incompletely corrected and therefore it is not accepted fully by the
next executive agents which frequently leads to a delay in operations.

5. The existing system for calculating the planned efficiency and bonuses

for performing work on new techniques or equipment is far from perfect. The
total expenditures on the operations with respect to the topic and the total
savings proposed in the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering for payment of
bonuses for the introduction of a new technical design have not been properly
indicated. that is. the total expenditures in all phases of the develop-eat.
manufacture and introduction of the new equipment can exceed the total savings
proposed for the payment of the bonus. and the bonus will still be paid (for
example. the total expenditures have amounted to 200,000 rubles. and the
savings. 100 thousand rubles; the total bonus paid is 10 thousand rubles.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In addition. there is no clear regulation of the bonus distribution among

the coexecutive organizations considering the specific contribution and

degree of compleaity of the work performed by each agent. This sometimes

leads to the fact that bonus is paid to all the people who have participated

in any way in the indicated work. In this case the bonus totals are comparable
to the total received by the basic organizations.

6. The USSR Ministry of Power Engineering has no single active agency to
control the work of introducing new techniques for equipment. The scientific
and technical council does not participate actively in this work. No one
bears responsibility for extremely slow introduction.

It must be noted that this situation is reflected also in the course of
socialist competition inasmuch as the obligations assumed by the coworkers,
divisions, brigades and organizations on the part of operations on new
equipment are acquiring a formal nature. For example, the obligation is
assumed to complete and produce the technical documents 10 days ahead of the
planned time. The obligation is satisfied, the documents are sent for
investigation to the confirming (coordinating) instance or plant (trust).

and the document stays there for an undefined time without review. As a
result. compiling ths document ahead of time loses any meaning. The analogous
situation also occurs in the case where a plant has performed its work ahead
of time, and the introducing organization does not realize this gain in time.

Thus, in the final analysis the obligations acquire a formal nature, and
socialist competition is dealt a moral loss.

In implementing the historic resolutions of the 25th Congress of the CPSU
and being guided by the principles and conclusions contained in the speech
by L. I Brezhnev at the December (1977) Plenum of the Central Committee of
the CPSU and also the Letter of the Central Committee of the CPSU, the

USSR Council of Ministers, the All-Union Central Trade Union Council and the
Central Committee of the All-Union Lenin Young Communists League "0n the
Development of Socialist Competition for the Fulfillment and Overfulfillment
of the l978 Plan and Intensification of the Struggle to Improve Production
Efficiency and Hark Quality," the collectives of the VCPIiNII Institute,
Energoset'proyekt. the Zapsibelektroset'stroy and Tsentrstroyelektroperedachi
Trusts, the Ivanovo Machine Plant. the Domodedovsky Metal Structural Element
Plant of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering include a report on the
scientific and technical cooperation and socialist competition. These col-
leczives are appearing as the initiators in the movement "for each new tech«
nical solution, a personal accounting" ("for each new technical solution, on
effective complex introduction system").

Problems of the Movement

1. The maximum reduction of time from the beginning of the development of
technical documentation to the mass introduction of a new economic, advanced
technical solution (the technical idea).

- 3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

2. The maximum reduction of the cost of operations with respect to introduc-
tion in all phases.

3. Improvement of the efficiency of socialist competition in the collective
and its naxinum specification.

4. Ensurnncc of the possibility of performing extra plan operations and the
achievement of savings of capital and labor expenditures as a result of it.

5. Obtaining additional savings from capital expenditures. materials and
labor expenditures as a result of reducing the times for the introduction
of new technical solutions.

6. Improvement of the responsibility of the leaders and executive agents
for the operations in all phases of introduction.

7. Improvement of the guarantees with respect to the selection and inclusion
in the plan for new equipment of effectively urgent and economical (advanced)
new technical ideas.

8. Improvement of the planning role in the performance of the operations

with respect to the new equipment and the creation of a united controlling
agency.

9. Improvement of the role of the scientific and technical society.
10. Exclusion of unfounded expenditure of state means allocated for bonuses.

ll. Bringing order into the method used in determining the bonuses and en-
surance of conditions under which the actual participants (organizations)
in the given work receive the bonuses (moral and material).

Organizational Structure of the Movement

By resolution of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering. above all the
chief organization for coordination of all operations with respect to an
area is designated (for example. the Energoset'proyekt Institute deals with
the problems of electric power network construction). In the future the
introduction work will be divided into the following stages.

Stage 1. The annual collection of proposals with respect to the new technical
solutions, mechanisms. attachments, and so on from the scientific research
and planning and design organizations, the enterprises of the construction
industry. the construction and operation and maintenance organizations have
been organized (a list of organizations and request form and also the sub-

sequent formulation of the presented materials are prepared by the Ener-
goset'proyekt Institute).

The working (permanently active) connission made up of highly qualified
specialists from all of the coexecutive organizations is created. All of the
mu OFFICIAL USI'Z ONLY

members of the working camsission constitute part of the construction section
of the expanded scientific and technical council of the Bnergoset'proyekt
Institute. The operating commission considers the incoming proposals.
selects the basic ones and prepares then for investigation at the scientific
and technical council where the results of preliminary analysis are investi-
gated. Por a more detailed study of the proposal. the working commission
invites its authors to the scientific and technical council.

1n the expanded scientific and technical council an analysis is made of all
of the proposals with respect to new technical solutions presented by the
organizations for inclusion in the plan with respect to the new equipment
of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering, and the plan for the basic and
auxiliary topics is approved. Estimates are compiled for all the topics
(basic and auxiliary). and the times for their execution are determined in
accordance with the existing normative documents (that is, the planned costs
and times are noted). By recommendation of the scientific and technical
council of the institute the basic topics are included in the plans for
financing operations with respect to new techniques and equipment of the
USSR Ministry of Power Engineering for the next year, and the materials are
transferred to the scientific and technical council of the USSR Ministry of
Power Engineering.

The scientific and technical council of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering
hears the topic presented by the scientific and technical council of the
Energoset'proyekt Institute and in case of approval (with the required cor-
rections) a recommendation is made to the GPTUS to include the indicated
topics in the ministry plans for the next year. The materials must be
presented to the GPTUS in the third quarter of the current year.

The indicated topic is agreed on with the leaders of the main administrations
to which the coexecutive organizations of each topic are subordinate (they
sign the personal account). The coexecutive organisations for the topic
designate the responsible executive agents (with indication of the complete

list of executive agents in accordance with the given topic from each organiza-
tion).

The main production-technical administration for construction approves the
presented plan with respect to new equipment and the personal account for

each topic is opened up. The personal accounts are approved by the minister
(deputy minister) of power engineering and electrification of the USSR.

In order to realize control of the course of the operations with respect to
the topic, the representative from among the inspection agencies is designated.
In the case of necessity, the emissions to the various administrations of

the ministry are entered in the personal account (for example, the Glavsnab,

and so on). After the minister signs the personal account, the indicated
commissions acquire the form of an order.

Before presenting the personal account for a new technical design for approval
to the ministry. it is presented for signature to the party committee secretar»
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the chairman of the local committee and the secretary of the committee of
the All-Union Young Communists League of the USSR Hinistry of Power Engineering

Copies are made of the personal account which are distributed to all of the
coexccutive organizations and the scientific and technical councils. the
party, local committees and the committees of the All-Union Lenin Young
Communist League of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering. The original
is transmitted to the minister's inspection board for review of the course
of performance of the operations.

Phase 2. After receiving the approved personal account, the planning organiza-
tion develops the socialist competition. it develops the creative plans with
respect to early compilation of the technical documents.

In accordance with the adopted socialist obligations. the planning organiza-
tion develops the technical documentation ahead of tine. As the completion
of the development of the technical documentation approaches. the next
organization (plant or construction trust) is informed in advance that they
have been prepared for the beginning of their work phase.

The developed technical documentation is sent to the plant and to the trust.
The document on early sending of the technical documentation to the next
executive agent is forwarded to the monitoring agency--the minister's in-
spection board. The personal account indicates the early performance of the
work by the planning organization. Uhen questions arise at the plant, the
planning organization gives it operative assistance on the order of a creative
author's review.

The group performing the work ahead of time proceeds with the development of
the next topic with respect to the basic plan for which'financing has been
provided by the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering, and so to completion of
the entire thematic plan. After execution of the basic thematic plan and
informing the scientific and technical council of the Bnergoset'proyekt
Institute of this (if there was one topic, then after completion of it) it
is recommended that at the expense of the saved time the given group begin
the preparation of the technical documentation on one of the topics of the
auxiliary plan for which financing has not been provided from the state
budget in the current year. The group proceeds with the development of the
indicated topic, informs the coexecutive agents of this so that they will
prepareforits execution in all phases. The sequence of this work is the
same as in the stages of execution of the basic plan. After completion of
the additional work and informing the minister's inspection of this. data is
entered in the personal account on the execution of the plan and the savings
of state resources achieved in doing this.

If in addition to preparing the documents for the product (structural element)
it is necessary to develop (or modify) a machine (attachment) for introduction
of the product into the practice of electric power network construction,

the development of the required technical documentation and the manufacture
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of the experimental Industrial model are carried out considering that the
mechanism will appear in the experimental section of the route (or test ground)
simultaneously (or with minimum delay) with the structural element or product.
This is necessary in order that the product be tested or be subjected to
experimental industrial introduction without delay.

Phase 3. The manufacturing plant plans the production of the experimental
industrial models of the product or machine in advance. 0n development

of socialist competitior in the brigade (shop) the collective aims at over-
fulfillment of the plans with respect to mass production,the creation of

the intermediate product and time reserved for the manufacture of the new '
product.

After receiving the technical documentation with respect to the new decision,
the plant provides for early manufacture of the product (machine) and shipment
of it to the next organization. A copy of the shipping document to the user ~
is presented to the minister's inspection board where the actual times of .
performance of the operation and its cost are recorded on the personal account. ~
if a number of topics are being developed, the sequence of performance of the
operations, including theemtra-planoperations, is retained.

Phase 4. The construction trust also plans in advance the performance of .
operations with respect to the introduction of new technical designs. it
provides for the socialist competition and the machine fleet (trust). directing
the work of introduction. the basic goals of which are overfulfillment of .
the planning indexes. the creation of the stock of components and time re- -
serve for experimental and the experimental-industrial work on the new :
technical design. After obtaining the required technical documentation for
the experimental product (mechanism) the.construction trust informs the
inspection board of the minister and the shipping organization of this and
proceeds (calling on the designer and plant representatives if necessary)
with the performance of this phase of the work. The course of these opera-
tions is monitored by the responsible representative of the customer (power
system). The document establishing completion of operations (in accordance -
with the existing requirements) is approved by the customer and is sent to

the minister's inspection board.

The effective technical-economic indexes are reflected in the document.

It is also indicated whether a new solution to the mass introduction (limited
or with any correction to mass introduction, and so on) is recommended. It
is desirable that if possible specific objects of introduction be indicated
in the area of activity of the power system during the current year and the
proposed times for correction of the technical documentation with respect

to the given objects by the design organizations (which ones are specifically
indicated). The experimental-industrial introduction ends with this phase.

Phase 5. The minister's inspection board informs the scientific and technical
councilof the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering of completion of the experi-
mental-industrial introduction of the new technical design into construction
practice. The scientific and technical council sums up the planned and

actual expenditures of time, means and materials. defines the cost benefit
achieved and prepares proposals for the administration of the USSR Ministry

of Power Engineering with regard to rewarding the participants and coexccutive
organizations with certificates (diploaas. pennants) and noney prizes (a
defined percentage of the money savings achieved in the given phase of ex-
perimental-industrial introduction). All of this is reflected (after ap-
proval by the administration of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering)

in the personal account. Simultaneously. the scientific and technical council
of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering designates the required indexes

with respect to savings, the achievement of which must be ensured by the
coexecutive organizations (on making the transition to mass introduction

this list can be supplemented), after which they will be paid a bonus for
introduction of the new technique or equipment (by the system existing at

. the present time).

The savings indexes are designated beginning with calculation of the required
excess over the income of the government for each expended ruble. For ex-
ample, the total expenditures with respect to the topic in all introduction
phases (the development of technical docunentation, the manufacture of the
experimental-industrial model. nass manufacture, experimental-industrial
introduction. mass introduction. correction of documentation with respect

to specific objects of introduction) have amounted to 2b6.000 rubles. The
scientific and technical council has designated a cost benefit index of

5 (that is. it is necessary to obtain 5 rubles of savings for each ruhle
expended by the government). Thus. in order to receive a bonus (the final
sum) for the new equipment the coexecutive organizations must present documents
confirming that savings have been obtained which are equal to 266.000

rubles x 5 - 1,230,000 rutles. This total can include the previously obtained
savings in the experimental-industrial introduction phase.

when designating the total required savings the scientific and technical coun-
cil detersines in advance the percentage bonus with respect to the saved total
and the percentage distribution of it among the participants in the work.

Out of the total bonus (final bonus) the total bonus paid previously after
completion of the experimental-industrial introduction phase can be subtracted.

In addition, the scientific and technical council of the USSR Ministry of
Power Engineering must develop a system of penalties for the coexecutive
organizations which have not met the given deadlines when performing the
operations planned in their phase.

Phase 6. After the documents reached the scientific and technical council

of the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering confirming the achievement of the
given indexes with respect to cost benefit, a study is made of the problem of
paying the final compensations and the forms of moral incentive to the
participants in the work; then the sums are found with respect to intro-
ducing the new technical design. The proposals of the scientific and tech-
nical council are considered and approved by the adninistration. This is
also entered in the personal account for the topic after which it is closed.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

At general meetings of the collectives everyone is infonsed of the decision
of the ministry administration, and the bonuses, certificates diplonas.
pennants. and so on are passed out.

by the totals for the year (considering the entire thcnatic plan with respect
to the new equip-ent) the USSR Ministry of Power Engineering determines the
best organizations with respect to introduction of new technical designs.
which is taken into account when sunning up the results with respect to
socialist coupetitian(with respect to all divisions of activity) among the
collectives. "hen an organization achieves excellent indexes with respect

to introduction of a set oi topics, it would be highly desirable to send it

s congratulatory letter of appreciation (to the brigade, the division. the
collective as a whole) signed by the ninister (deputy minister). the party
committee secretary. the chair-an of the local collittee and the secretary

of the con-ittee of the All-Union Lenin Young Colnunist League of the USSR
Hinistry of Power Engineering.

COPYRIGHT: lzdstel'stvo "Energiys", "Energetieheskoye stroital'stvo". 1978

10865
CSO:1822

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL?
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ELECTRIC POHER AND POWER EQUIPMENT

CUPPLYING AGRICULTURE HIT" ELECTRIC POWER EQUIPMENT
Hoscow ELEKROTEKHNIKA in Russian No II, Nov 78 pp 1-6

[Article by Ya. N. Zarobyan, Deputy Minister of Electrical Equipment in-
dustry USSR: "Most important Tasks in Supplying Agriculture Uith Electrical
Equipment"]

[Text] The role oi the electrical equipment industry in raising the effect-
iveness oi iarm production is substantial: it forms the scientific-technical
base for electrification of agriculture, and consequently. determines the
electrical equipment ratio and the productivity of many types of work. in-
cluding quite-labor intensive work, in animal husbandry and poultry farming.
plant husbandry and fuel operations, reclamation, and irrigation.

In the years preceding the March 1965 Plenum oi the CC CPSU, which mapped
out the course of action oi iurther upgrading agriculture on an industrial
basis. our sector did a great deal of work to develop and strengthen the
rural electricity base. The attention of scientists, engineers, workers,
and production organisers was focused on problems of developing and assim-
ilating a large complex of electrical equipment intended for agriculture,
the creation and expansion oi productive capacity to produce them, in order
to increase deliveries of electrical equipment. especiully complete sets of
equipment to meet the needs of farm production.

The conversion of animal and plant husbandry to an industrial basis, increased
production of equipment for the processing, storage, and rational utilisa-
tion oi iarm goods, and also equipment for feeds production--all of these
required that workers oi the sector create, develop, and deliver special
electric engines capable of operating under difficult conditions in farm
facilities. also various sets of devices to run such specific processes as
the making and dispensing of feeds, maintaining parameters of the micro-
climate, cleaning the facilities and recovering production wastes, processing
and storing iood, feed, and seed grain, processing vegetables and potatoes,
storing fruit. supplying water. and so on. It is sufficient to note that

the number of electric engines on holkhoses and sovkhoses has increased by
6.8 times over I965, reaching a total of ten million with an overall capacity
oi 53 million kilowatts. while a number of electric units serving techno-
logical processes has risen sevenfold, reaching 1.7 million with a total

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

capacity of 12 million kilowatts. To this should be added the large number
of special devices for radiation and illumination. also special electro-
thermol units such as electric heaters and heating units. water heaters.
infra-red radiators. tubular heaters. and so on.

At present. agriculture is getting 228 types of electrical equipment. in-
cluding £53 designed for farm use (in 1965 such equipment was not being
produced. in 1970 there were 50 types. and in l97S--130 types).

The use of new types of electrical equipment is helping to substantially
boost effectiveness in farm production. Thus. the set of electrical equip-
ment to run technological processes in livestock complexes accommodating
[08.000 and 50.000 hogs and [0.500 head of cattle makes it possible to re-
duce labor outlays to 1.5 to 2.0 man-days per quintal of pork and 2.5 to

3.0 man-days per quintal of beef. The economic effect per complex is 900.000
rubles. Sets of non-contact control devices to regulate the microclimate

in livestock and poultry facilities help to raise egg-laying capacity by

6.6 per cent and livestock weight gain by l0 per cent. The economic effect
of adoption is 1.260 rubles per device. Sets of electrical equipment to
regulate technological processes in large-scale hothouse combines and sel-
ective breeding centers makes it possible to boost crop yields by l5 to 20
per cent and to reduce labor outlays by 2.5 by 2.8 times; the national econ-
omy effect from the use of such equipment is 260.000 rubles on three hectares.
The use of OSPO-Z type irradiaters in livestock farming helps to boost the
weight gain of young animals up to lb per cent. and the economic effect

per unit is 30 rubles.

The average annual economic effect from the adoption of new types of elec-
trical equipment in agriculture comes to about 80 million rubles.

The July l978 Plenum oi the CC CPSU focused the attention of the industrial
ministries on the necessity of further strengthening efforts to intensify
agricultural production on the basis of comprehensive mechanization and
electricificstion. Horkers of the electric equipment industry drew a single
conclusion from the decisions of the Plenum and the report given there by

CC CPSU General Secretary and USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium Chairman Comrade
L. i. breshnev: it is es-ential to critically evaluate the results of what
has been done. to concentrate efforts on overcoming a number of shortcomings
holding back the rise in the power-to-worker ratio on kolkhoses and sovkhoses.
on resolving tasks with respect to improving the quality and reliability of
electrical equipment for the iarm.

It must abOVe all be admitted that for a number of reasons electriciiication--
a powerful factor in boosting agricultural effectiveness--is still not being
fully utilised. Despite the fact that in the past ten to 12 years the con-
sumption of electricity in agriculture has risen almost fouriold and today
exceeds 80 billion kilowatt hours. the power-to-worker ratio on kolkhoses

and sovkhozes is substantially lower than in such comparable sectors as light
and food industry. Clearly. electricity is not being utilised in sufficient
volume directly in technological processes. On most farms. the level of

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

electrical mechanization is too low in such operations as the cleaning of

animal and poultry facilities. the making and dispensing of feeds. and so
I)" a

To n certain extent all of this can be considered the consequence oi the

fact that farm production's electrical equipment needs are not being fully
met. According to data of the Ministry of Agriculture. Soyussel'khostekhnika.
and the Ministry of Land Reclamation and Hater Resources. agriculture does

not have enough electric engines of up to IOO kilowatts capacity. especially
of the sises 7. 8. and 9 to run farm machinery and mechanisms. switches and
automatic switch-offs designed to be impervious to dust and chemicals. electric
heaters. water heaters. lighting fixtures. large vertical electric engines

for pumping stations. special sets of transformer substations of up to 5,300
kilovolt-amperes capacity. 110 and 35 kilovolts for outside installation, and
other equipment.

Thus, it is the priority task of our sector to meet agriculture's need for
electrical machinery. equipment. automation devices, wiring and cables. and
other products.

This task must be resolved on the basis of improved quality indicators of
equipment and compliance with operating specifications. During the 9th
Five-Year Plan. the sector concentrated on boosting the quantity of electrical
equipment for agriculture; now. we must focus on raising durability and re-
liability. There are substantial unutilised reserves for this.

The effective utilisation of electrical equipment in farm production depends
largely on the level of organisation of the engineering and operational
service. Frequently because of staff limitations as veil as the very small
number of specialist electricians being sent to the farms, many oblasts and
most rayon farms lack an operations service. because of the low level of
operation. electrical equipment and apparatus being utilised on the farms

go out of commission long beiore they should. and in some cases are wearing
out. The rate at which electric engines are going out of commission through-
out the country as a whole exceeds 20 per cent. annually causing 200 to 300
million rubies of loss to the national economy. And most of the breakdowns
are occurring in agricultural processes.

Electrical equipment industry workers have already undertaken a number oi
measures to raise the operational reliability of the electrical equipment
designed for agriculture. The collective of NIPTlEﬂ [Scientific-Research.
Planning-Design. and Technological institute of Electrical Machine Building].
for example, has developed a built-in temperature shield for asynchronous
engines. These devices reliably protect electric engines in cases of pro-
longed overload. improper processes of start-up and braking. frequent
switch-ans. phase cutoff. Jammed rotor, high environmental temperature. and
breakdowns in the cooling system. For the first time. the complex has
successfully resolved the problem of temperature protection: asynchronous
engine-temperature-sensitive element-protection device. Electric engines
with the built-in temperature device have nhown high effectiveness in oper-
ation. The annual national economy effect for 100.000 asynchronous engines
equipped with the device comes to one million rubles.

12
!OR OFFICIAL 082 DIE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The task now is to speed up the adoption oi series as engines with in-lemp-
erature protection. To do this it is necessary to supply them with sets of
thin leads. posistors. and relays. Further perfection of electric engines
for agriculture involves improving other design applfcations. the use of
new electrical equipment materials and tougher paint and varnish coatings.

By decision of the board of the Ministry of Electrical Equipment industry.

a special display "Electrical Equipment industry for Agriculture" was opened

in the Electrical Equipment Pavilion at the VDNKh [Exhibition of Achieve-

ments oi the National Economy]. The purpose of the exhibit is not just to

show products but also to organize the exchange of ideas with farm special-
ists. to take account of their criticisms and suggestions on further improv-

ing the quality and reliability of electrical equipment supplied to agriculture.

The ever-increasing demands on quality indicators in electrical equipment.
dictated by the very technology oi [arm production. point up the necessity

of providing complete sets of adjustable electric drive and automatic control
devices. Such devices. developed on the basis of standardised circuits and
designs using blocks based on noncontact semiconductor elements and logic
circuits, must play a special role in the technical retooling of agriculture
and the organisation oi production-line methods in farm output.

Special lighting. sources of ultra-violet and infra-red radiation. and el-
ectron-ion technology devices--all llo types of new products developed in
the current five-year plan for agriculture--must conform fully to specifica-
tions of operation and environmental consideration.

Collectives of electrical equipment enterprises must speed up the develop-
ment of a number of new products for the electrical mechanization of veget-
able iarming. plant husbandry, and livestock raising. For example. the

Lutsk Electrical Equipment Plant imeni XXV S"yesd KPSS is supposed to supply
all sets of electrical equipment for regulating technological processes in
Angara hothouses and sets of electrical equipment for grain treatment and
storage centers; Ardatov Lighting Equipment Plant is supposed to supply lamps
for huthouses: plants oi the Soyuselektromash [All-Union Electrical Machinery
Production Association] are to supply single-phase electric engines for micro-
climate regulation systems.

it is essential to speed up the industrial production of new types of elec-
trical-heating equipment. standardised electric-heating units with improved
technical-economic indicators. heat-pump units. electric steam generators

of I60 to £00 kilowatts capacity. water heaters with heating elements of the
enclosed type with ceramic insulation. and new designs of infra-red radiators
to warm young animals and birds.

Considering the observed rise in farm output and taking account of reduced
farm population, plans call for doubling the power-to-worker ratio in (arm
production by l980 (compared to 1975). and raising agricultural electricity
consumption to lJO billion kilowatt hours. By the end of the llth Five-Year
Plan. integrated electrical mechanization of technological processes in live-

stock and poultry raising should be completed. and automation of farm
productlon should be well underway.

13
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The introduction of integrated electrical mechanization in farm production
will yield a substantial economic effect. Calculations show that integrated
electrical mechanization of processes in livestock raising, compared with
partial electrical mechanization reduces labor outlays by 15 to 20 times

per quintal of hog weight gain and by four to six times per 1,000 eggs.

The level of electrification in farm households will rise substantially,
approaching the level of household electrification among the urban popula-
tion. Plans call for more extensive adoption of household and cultural
electrical appliances, also partial adoption of floor-installed electric
ranges for the preparation of food and electric water heaters with tank
storage.

in 1978-l985. the electrical equipment industry will have to develop and
assimilate the series production of new types of electrical equipment, appar-
atuses, and devices for agriculture. These are to include sets of trans-
former substations of 63 to 630 kilovolt-amperes capacity and sectionalizing
points for networks of lO kilovolts based on equipment already in production,
a standardized series of small-size sets of 10 to 35-kilovolt power switch~
boards of modulus design with cast insulation of epoxy compound, and sets

of devices based on integrated microelectronic elements for use in electrical
distribution networks intended for farm use. It is also necessary to dev-
elop and assimilate the series production of a high-frequency standardized
electric engine of [00 to [20 watts for shearing, vine-cutting, and tea
picking machines, hand-held tools for vegetable farming, orchard raising,

and livestock raising.

To create an artificial climate in livestock facilities, plans call for
developing and assimilating the production of a series of electric heating
units with axial and centrifugal fans of five to [00 kilowatts. Plans-
call for developing new electric water heaters and lighting equipment to
radiate young animals and birds, and electric-heat storage devices to be
switched on during hours when energy system loads dip to warm the water and
air in livestock sections.

in the llth Five-Year Plan there will be a sharp increase in volumes of
production of power transformers and power switchboard sets, transformer
substation sets, voltage switches, cable and wiring, heaters, and other
electrical equipment. This will require workers of the electrical equip-

ment to mobilize all of their efforts and to effectively searcn for internal
reserves. To resolve the tasks set forth by the party, a number of enterprises
will be remodeled and substantially enlarged. These include the Baku Electrical
Machine Building Plant imeni L-letiye Komsomola Azerbaydzhna, and the
Elektromashina Plant in Ulan-Ude, which are to produce electric engines for
agriculture. A new electric heating equipment plant with special planning-
desigd and technological offices and an experimental facility producing
products for agriculture is to be built in Namangan. The plant will produce
large-capacity storage water heaters.

The systematic approach to the development and assimilation of new electrical

1‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equipment by organizations and enterprises of the Ministry of Electrical
Equipment industry In collaboration with the Ministry oi Agriculture. the
Ministry of Land Reclamation and Water Resources. Ministry of Machine
Building for Animal Husbandry and Fodder Production. the Ministry of
Tractor and Agricultural Machine Building. and Soyuzsel'khoztekhnika will
make it possible in the lOth and llth Five-Year Plans to substantially
boost the supply of highly-productive electrical equipment to agriculture
and raise the level of integrated mechanization and automation of [arm pro-
duction to a new stage.

COPYRIGHT: ladatel'stvo "Energiya". "Elektrotekhnika" [976

6856
680: 1822

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC 658.152.1:622.2b

UTILIZATION OF FIXED CAPITAL IN GAS INDUSTRY DRILLING
Moscow EKONONIKA GAZOVOY PRONYSNLZNNOSTI in Russian No II. 1973 pp 3-12

[Article by M. I. Popova and V. M. Chernyak. All-Union Scientific-Research
Institute of Scone-ice. Organisation of Production. and Technical-Econosic
Research in the Gas Industry: "Analysis of Utilization of Fixed Productive
Capital in Drilling in the Ministry of Gas Industry"]

[Text] The "Basic Directions of Development of the USSR National Bconony

in 1976-198 " sets forth this task: "Substantially raise the level of util-
ization of fixed capital. Forshlate and inpleaent a couple: of aeaaures
designed to raise the output-capital ratio in the various national economy
sectors, enterprises. and organisations” ("Materialy XXV s“yezda KPSS"
[Materials of the 25th crsu Congress], Moscow, Politizdat. 1976, p 168).
This task is especially vital in the drilling of oil and gas wells. the

aost energy-intensive_subsector of the oil and gas industry.

Since 1972 nest of the operational drilling for gas has been done in the
Ministry of Gas Industry. In this connection. it is of interest to examine
the utilization of fixed assets by drilling enterprises within the Ministry
of Gas Industry in a five—year period.

The value of fixed productive capital in Ministry of Gas Industry drilling
rose by ‘7 percent between 1972 and 1976, caused by a 31-percent increase

in the volule of ninistry drilling during that period and the fact that a
larger nuaber of new rigs were put into production (see Table 1). Most of
the volune increase (60 percent) was due to intensive production factors.
The fact that growth rates of the value of fixed productive capital ran
ahead of rates of increase in voluaes of drilling was due chiefly to the
acquisition of costly drilling rigs. also the organization of new drilling
enterprises in reaote regions of the Far North and Central Asia. The lat-
ter helped to increase the value and proportion of buildings and facilities
in the structure of fixed productive capital.

because the drilling enterprises are engaged in production directly at the
gas fields. production buildings constitute only a slall share of their
fixed assets. But in I976. the share reached 9.9 percent in the Ministry

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

3:25.533 can 9—89 .3

«Shannan—93:0: ...N nag—3:90 uuoauanuu. .3
noun—nagging .o~ 3.35.300 an. banana-a 2332.0 ”caisson“ .o
68309—03»: .2 H33 Judi—«:00 3.. 355.: .w
Bowman: .3 «Inna-£008 03.5 .s
Ema-30320. .2 nouuuzog .o
Suﬁ-8.38.5 .3 .9533 .n
Susana . woman...“ .3 9.3303 ...
8833.535 .3 3.3:..— uo 3.0.3.3: .n
583an .3 30:- o>uuoav8a v8.3 ~38. .u

$5265 .8 mo .9335: .3 nouuuuoooz J "as.

”J k 0.6 0.: an an a u

no

a.» g o.‘ 33“ n.“ =3— 0.“ .83 6.0
a
8

a.” a.“ 8n 5 if AHNV

8n 3‘ .h :3

8n :9: .h “f AONV

an
. .
C.

a; ..B a... 8.: u... .a ..o
«.8 843 «.8 8.: ..u

as: a; .

8. a: ...»:
8. ..B .ugiannv
... .3: a8 8.5 at:
.58.: ... at: .8 88a 62.: 188.33

a a a... .2 . «.3 I»: t
a... 8 .28 RR 0.8 3! new 28 u...

«a 88 «.8 2.! ..s. an: «.9 38: ...
... SE a... 88 of .8: a... ...

l'.’ I.»

as 38
B. 85 88
...o .... ... I o. 8. 8. 83.61.:
... o. «.3 «a ..3 .8. «... . as. o . .... «a 8. .8. an... . .83
a." .8 o; a.» ...! 2.5 .... «IN .6 a. .5 88 8— .38 .a I:
... .8 a.“ .2 «.k 8»: 9.8 8.2 ... 3 .8 ... 8: .8 a: if: 80828.3
...u z» 3 .8 9.9 89 ..U 8.. - .3 ‘ Eu NB 8. g ....S.
... Q. ...o n. s... Eu ...... #8 - .... ... 1! 88 .2 .8. ...: . .CC
... a: «d ...: as: u... at: ..o pd Q.» 9.. 83 .8. g ...!h
a; a... 8n ..8 g 98 8.: inﬁll-.133
..a 5 o... ..x. 2-. 3.. a as ... 5 ... a .98 a... I:
o.« n: ...2 ..F 8! a... s «.o a“ 8 0.. .l 8. 88 aka-...! Ans
..« 8. “.3 «In .... .8: a... a... ... o.» a «.8 s 8. 5n .. I:
ﬁn 8. 9.. R. ..R g «.8 88. a; ..n .8 9.. 8.... 8a a. ...f 3.3
.8 a: 8.
In 8.
8.8

 

a

a

a

8n
8

E N:

a; g h.’ .30 a.“ a: v.~ .2 OJ

u 3
I: o

8.

H:
3

DE.

‘-

.03

    
         

     

. My. .... 5. ”55 . ”We. 5. . 3 . u... 5
III. u “08 Any
gﬁ'nn‘lt ..“0 I! “I“ "
.lsd... :rlaiwruwui
_ I... all. .38 Hanna.“- ulaaa. 1g

washes...» 9.3.3.5 mo Handgun 033.68.. voxum no «hauoaum :— 0.3-...

17
P08 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR 0F?IC|AL USE ONLY

of Gas Industry. or 1.4 percent more than in 1972. This tendency is
characteristic of most of the associations in the ministry. In Ukrgazpron
[Ukranian Gas Industry Association]. Usbekgazprom [Uzbek Gas Industry
Association], Turknengazpron [Turkmen Gas Industry Association], and
Stavropol'gasprom [Stavropol' Gas Industry Association]. for example. the
value of buildings rose by 2-2.5 times during that period.

In a number of associations the increase in the value of buildings is due

to a substantial rise in drilling volumes and the development of new areas;
this brings about expansion of existing production service bases and addi-
tional construction. In 1976. for example. buildings amounted to 31 percent
of the fixed productive capital in Tyumengazpron [Tyusen' Gas Industry
Association]. At the same time, the value of buildings and facilities in
Konigazpron [Komi Gas Industry Association] came to 3.6 percent, because
this association makes use of the services of a centralized service base
operating independently.

The proportion of facilities among the fixed assets of the Ministry of Gas
Industry in 1976 came to 13 percent. Moreover. Turksengaaprom accounted
for 20.7 million rubles (30 percent) of the ministry's 23.1 million rubles
of facilities. This is due to the fact that the item "facilities" includes
the value of wells whose construction has been completed but they have not
been transferred to the gas field administration's balance because the
field has not been prepared.

In the ministry's other associations the value of facilities among the
fixed capital structure ranges between 0.2 and 6 percent.

The specific nature of drilling operations accounts for the substantial
share of the assets side of fixed capita1--operating machinery and equip-
ment. In the five years their value in the ministry rose by 63 percent.
asoanting to 102.9 million rubles in 1976.

And the value of the assets side of fixed capital is rising more rapidly
than the number of drilling rigs. 8etween 1972 and 1976 the number of
drilling rigs in the sector rose by 31.3 percent. while their value rose

by 33 percent; this was due to the use of more powerful and costly rigs,
also a rise in the number of spare units of equipment.

In Stavropol'gasprom. for example, despite the fact that the volume of
work in 1976 declined by 12 percent coapared with 1972. the value of fixed

productive capital rose by 65.8 percent and the assets portion rose by.1.7
times.

There was no change in the quantity of drilling equipment. but because of
the sharp increase in average well depths (from 807 meters in 1972 to 2,680
meters in 1976). rigs of the 80-80 8rD type were replaced by more powerful
and costly ones of the Uralmash 125-88 type.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ln Tyunengazpron. the aaount of drilling equipnent rose practically four-fold
in the five years. the volume of drilling rose by 5.2 times. while the value
of the assets portion of the fixed capital only doubled. In that region.

the drilling equipment inventory has been replenished by inexpensive rigs of
the 311—80 332 and 30-75 BR!) type and rigs for structural-prospecting and
continuous screw drilling.

In some of the ainistry's associations, rates growth in the value of fixed
productive assets are running considerably ahead of growth rates in drilling
operations. due chiefly to the fact that the drilling equipaent is not be-
ing utilized rationally. In Ultrgaapron. for exanple. the rig inventory
increased by 66.7 percent and their value in the fixed assets structure rose
by 86.5 percent. while the volune of drilling rose only by 26 percent.
Drilling rig utilization deteriorated in the association. confined by the
change in the turnover ratio of drilling equipment, which rose fron 1.5 in
1972 to 2.1 in 1976. In addition, the association carries a large anount
of non-conponent equipnent on its books. far sore than it needs. Hith 6S
rigs. fixed assets include 265 and puaps. 507 diesels. and 217 steas boilers;
this accomts for the excessively high value of fixed productive assets.

In Konigaspron. the value of fixed productive assets rose by 20.5 percent

in the five years, while the assets portion rose by 56.6 percent. The drill-
ing volts-e rose by 36.5 percent. but the average well depth in 1976 increased
to 3.703 seters (co-pared to 3.290 in 1972): this required the acquisition

of sore powerful rigs. The drilling equip-ant inventory also changed. In
1972 the association had 26 rigs; in 1976 it had 35. The nuaber of rigs

rose by 34.5 percent, diesels by 75 percent. and rotors by 83 percent.

Turksengaspron inproved its utilization of drilling equip-eat. In the five
years, it increased the value of drilling operations by 76 percent just
by selling fuller use of rigs.

The proportion of transport nachinery in the ninistry's fixed assets in
1976 case to 10.2 percent. In regions where drilling is scattered and lo-
cated far away free production bases. the proportion of transport sachinery
is higher than the subsector average.

For example. in Xuban'gaaproa and Thrknengaspron the proportion of transport
nachinery case to 12.7 and 21 percent. respectively. Konigazpron and Stav-
ropol'gazproa spent practically nothing on transport aachinsry. because

they are served by specialized enterprises.

The utilization effectiveness of total fixed assets is evaluated by the
output-capital ratio. This indicator. which sunrises all production-
econonic perforlsnce. depends on many factors. To deter-ins the extent to
which certain of then influence the output-capital ratio. use is nade of
factor analysis (A. I. Perchik at al.. "Ispol':ovaniye osnovnykh fondov
burovykh predpriystiy gasovoy pronyshlennoati. Nauchno-ekononicheakiy
obzor" [Utilisation of Fixed Assets of Drilling Enterprises of the Gas
Industry. Scientific-Econonic Survey]. Moscow. W112 gazpron. 1976. No 10).

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Fl)“ ()I’FICIAI. USE ONLY

The influence of certain factors on the output-capital ratio can be
determined by the following formulas:

increase in rig productivity

0.

0 0
AE ' _1___:£5}___1_ ' ‘T""3$E"'T'
Q Ktu ° C + F30 Ktu ° C + F80

rise in turnover ratio

me

0 0
M -ﬁ——3.r——.r——".P——r
K Kt“ ° C + P‘o K ° C + F80

t0

increase in value of drilling equipment

0. Q.
_+r ' far—'7' ;
C + F.° Kt“ C + P80

t0

reduction (increase) in the value of other fixed productive assets
0
f ' “T'--S$E--1- - -1---1JL-v-.
0 K ‘ C + P C + F.
tu so

where

0; . 0: represent the specific volume of drilling operations during
p p the accounting and base periods. respectively. rubles per rig;

Kéu . K:u represent the turnover ratio in the accounting and base
periods;

6'. c' represent the average value of drilling equipment in the
accounting and base periods. rubles;

Ps0 . on represent the specific value of other fixed assets in the
accomting and base periods. rubles.

These factors exert differing influence on the output-capital ratio (Tables
2. 3).

In the period being analyzed, the output-capital ratio for the ministry
vas stable-l.33 rubles per ruble of fixed assets.

An increase in output per rig in drilling led to a 23-percent increase in
the output-capital ratio in 1976 cospared with 1972 data, due chiefly to
increased drilling output per rig and the increase in the volume per meter
of drilling because of the increased depths and labor-intensiveness of
drilling operational and exploratory wells.

20
FOR OPIICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 2.
of Gen Induetry

Dynamics of Indicators of Fixed Productive Assets in the Ministry

I... Ina-mu «nu-u gunmen-u «em I.

________(2.)_.(1) ._

 

01’ #chﬁli

(12) 9::‘% .

l e on him
i more manua- am
new mu

( 6 mun-name:
I yuan-“Quen-

(% M"

I m ‘
cm." W
(2°) '=':-:.::.-.°' - M“ w
(21)

(22) :..-.'::'.*.:.-‘:;. .-:.7

III"!
3-.-
more

”I

"I.

ll! II.)
I.‘

N
In.

”I
IOIJ
1.9

:w,’

”1.9

 

no 0 Mumshu‘.
,un, e on. chug

£13; 0 M I." I
16 '5'... our“
15

M“.

 

IIJ “I

“J
NUJ

em
“.3

Indicetore

Hinietry of Gee Industry

Konigezpron

Kuben'gezprol

Stavropol'gnpron

Orenburggeepron

Hmong-sprout

Ukrgezpro:

Urbekgnrpron

Turbengnrpron'

Value of drilling
operation. in «tinted
prieee. thou-undo of
rubles

mammal.

".1 we! I“! III”

IQ‘II ”I? I!" I” "U
”M u" an 3" II.

”I.

".0 II.‘

“J W

“.0 0-,?
m.’ MI

"0*. Mint. Mung-NH...

——-—_——_—_ - _
M. mu. m. "It. In. W. “no mean. 5‘. Im.I“I'. W. I'll. “J". "mam
———————_—_

Ia’l III I‘ll:
’30 ca II“

an O“ OI“
III! II?

‘J 7.3 ".0
M' u

”.0 SI.3”J
n m m- pn um

10

turn-.- here'- ne-n-e- Yip-Iot-

W .‘N g ”"93“,”

W

m
”I.

I” I”

I” "9‘
“I III

I"! ”I!” MI "I

run
.8.

on III” m5 IN"

«a tum-mum“

I! a D I.
OJ 0..

t.

8 ﬂ C I I B I
0.! D.’ an 9,. II.’ 3.0 30.3

2.8 "J 0.. I.I I.I 8.! 3.0 3.. I.O

”,8 '1" WJ 3",! a... m, “.8 ICJ 80.3
no. I. ~Ill" I~ animus-mo

00.0 “I IN.‘ III.‘ “.4 M3 ”.0 m0 “.0 IIIOJ I‘d" O

9‘! “I ‘0 mm “J M‘ ‘Iﬂ ”3.. ”.7 ”I “1.0 “I
m0 ”,0 II... 83.! m3 HIM IU.‘ I“ [6.8 IIO.I V5.1 IWJ

12.

13.
1‘.
15.
l6.
17.
18.
19.
2°.

21.
22.

21

Value of fixed productive assets,
totel. thouunde of rubles

Including:

Drilling equipment

Other

Huber of rigr:

0n book.

In drilling

Turnover retiu

Average value of drilling equip-
ment per rig on booke, thou-
eende of rubles

Volume of work per rig in drill-
ing. thousands of rubles

Velue of fixed productive aenete
per rig in drilling. totel,
thousand. of rubles

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3. Change in Output-Capital Ratio. Rubles/Rubles

 

 

 

-..-_-——.—.__—_—

(1) Mum... (2) WMM~.__

 

 

1972 r. 1976 m A] l u. I 0/, Ialc 10f

_ _..... ..... _..._—_._.___§.9_
(4) Msna-asnpoa ' 1.30 1.30 0.00 0.31 -o.12 -0.06 -0.13
(S) Ramsmpoa 1.36 1.37 . 0.0! 0.01 -0,10. -0.12 0.2:
(6) ”whereupon 1.67. 1,46 -0.22 0.26 0.39 43.52 -o.2s-
(7) L‘raspouonraanpou - 3.20 1.01 4.60 4.42 0.0:. -I.u . 0.02
(8) gpeudypmmpol 1.02 1.06 0.04 0.63 -0.48 -0.04 ~0.0'l
(9) Maresnpeu 1.11' 3.20 2.12 -0.07 0.11 0.24 1.84
(10) hex-salmon 1.30 1.47 -0.51 0.18 4.49 -0.14 -0.06
(11) noon-came 2.20 1.46 -0.75 0.34 -o,so -0,sa ~0.01
(12) upmnmnpoa 0.77 0.00 0.03- 0.19 ' 0.04 0.00 .0.20
Key:

1. Association 7. Stuvropol'gsspron

2. Output-capital ratio, total 0. Orenburggazproa

3. By factors 9. ”mangazpron

&. Ministry of Gas Industry 10. Uk'rgazproln

5. Konigaepron 11. Usbekgszproe

6. Kuban'gsrpron 12. Turknengazpron

Factors causing changes in prices of drilling equip-eat. drilling rig turn-
over. and also utilization of the inactive portion of fixed assets have a
negative effect on the output-capital ratio.

Factor Afx reduced the output-capital ratio by 0.12 rubles/ruble. This
circumstance indicates worsening rig utilization. The rig inventory in-
creased by 31.3 percent from 1972-1976. while the work load in the drilling.
process rose by only 12.3 percent; this is due to longer well construction
tine owing to the considerable anount of time the rigs are in the derrick-
erection stage, undergoing testing. or being moved fro. one site to another.

The increase in rig value had a negative effect on the output-capital ratio.
In 1976. for era-pie. factor Afc reduced the output-capita1 ratio by 0.06
rubles/ruble cospared with 1972. The rise in the average value of the
drilling equipment is also due to the large above-nonnative stocks of equip.
sent "in dispersion" [v rossypi]. "ith a 31.3-percent increase in the nun-
ber of rigs on the books. the nuber of sud pumps increased by 45 percent.
totalling 989 versus requirements of about 660. There was a substantial
increase in the number of diesels-4.5 times more than needed. The number
of steam boilers lore than doubled. The practice of keeping above-normative
stocks of equip-ant "in dispersion" led to a higher average value per drill
rig and. as a result. reduced output-capital ratios.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

A Ski-percent increaae in the value of the inactive portion of fixed aeaeta
—-Al,,o--cauaed the output-capital ratio to decline by 0.13 rublea/ruble. 10
none extent the negative influence of thia factor in due to the creation of
new drilling enterprises and the extended acattering of the drilling opela-
Ham. front, leading to the neceaaity of additional building and facility
vvnutruction, uhoae value increaaed by Isl percent. At the aane tine. addi-
tlonnl automotive tranaport had to be acquired.

In the Ninth Five-Year Plan. the value: of drilling in Kuban'gacpron.
Muvvopol'gazpron. and Ukrgazprol declined; it rose in Turk-engacpron and
1yunvngnzprom. There was an analogoua change in the output-capital ratio
In these aaaociationa. due to the influence of the rig productivity factor
Ar : It was negative in Kuban'gazpron. Stavropol'gacproa. and Ultrgazpron.
4:13 positive in Turknengazpron and Tyunengatproe. horeover. in Stavropol'-
gmpmn the negative influence of thia factor in due to a 3.3-fold increaae
in the labor-intensiveneaa of drilling operationa becauae of the increaaed
well deptha: in Uhrgazpron and Kuban'gazproa it in chiefly due to the de-
terioriation in extenaive and intensive utiliution of drilling equiplent
during the drilling proceaa: ln Ulrcgazpron. deapite a aubatantial reduc-
lion in drilling deptha the schedule apeed roee only alightly, while in
Kuhan'gazpron it even declined by eight percent. At the use tine. thie
factor had a negative influence on the output-capital ratio in Uzbekgazpron
us well. where the volune of drilling increaaed. 'l‘hie ia due to the fact
that a 70-percent riae in drilling vaa accowanied by a 2.5-fold increaae
in aaaeta over the name period. The increaae in the value of drilling in
Tyuncngazpron and Turk-engarprol in due to a alight inprovenent in the
utilization of drilling equip-ent, as a reeult of vhich the drilling equip.
nent turnover factor dfx had a poaitive influence on the output-capital
ratio.

In Kubon'gazpron. however. the positive influence of thia factor vae not due
to any inprovenent in equip-eat utilization at all atagea but reaulted

merely fron the fact that 16 riga vere ruoved froa the enterpriae'a balance
sheet in 1976. naking it poaaible to reduce the turnover ratio artificially.

ln Koalguzpron. Ukrgazpron. and Uzbekgazpron the negative influence of the
drilling eouipnent turnover factor to due to the fact that deapite a sub-
utuntial increaae in the rig inventory (3%. 67. and 70 percent. reapective-
ly). the voice of drilling either did not increaae or elae increaaed to a
leeaer extent.

In all of the niniatry’e aaaociatione, except for ‘lyt-eogazpron. the average
value of drilling equip-eat dfc reduced the output-capital ratio; thia vaa
due to higher pricea on drilling equipoent. increaaed volu-ee of drilling
under couple: conditione. and greater deptha. 'l‘hia influence. noreover.

val atrengthened by factora relating to the enterpriee'e perfornance: In-
adequate utilization of drill rig capacitiea. the preaence of large anounta
nf above-nornative atocka of equip-eat. and othera.

23
FOR UFPZCIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The factor is nininua in Stavropol'gszpron--l.lb rubles/ruble. In
connection with the transition to the drilling of 3.000-ncter wells. light-
weight rigs were written off and the inventory was replenished with costly
rigs oi the Ural-ash-lZS type. while the total number was retained; this
raised the average value per rig.

in Tyuaengszproa. this factor caused the output-capital ratio to rise by
0.26 ruhles/ruhle; this was due to the acouisition or light-weight and
relatively inexpensive rigs oi the BU-IS BR type The output-capital ratio
was negatively influenced by the specific vrluc of the inactive portion of
fixed assets. The coin reason for this. as was noted. was the creation of
new drilling enterprises and the expansion of existing ones. Analysis makes
it possible to deter-inc the basic directions of increasing output-capital
ratios in the subsector. tore-oat along which is inprovenent of the utiliza-
tion of drilling rigs in all stages of well construction.

COPYRIGHT: Vaeaoyuznyy nauchno-isaledovatel'skiy inatitut ekonoaiki.
organizataii proizvodstvs i tekhniko-ekonouicheskoy infornatsii

v gazovoy pro-yshlennoati (VﬂllEgazpron)

6856
C50: Blb£/0$21

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

FUELS MD mm mm

FACTORS Ill mu 0? con. II! THE WG-11!" FUEL-MG? MCI

Moscow DISPGETIKA, TOPIJVO .- DOSTIZHENIYA I PERSPEKTIW (Power Engineering.
Fuel .. Progress and Prospects] in Russian 1977 pp 45-49

[Excerpt fro- article by Doctor of Econoaic Sciences, Professor A. s. Astakhov]

[Text] The general trends of the technical-econe-ic developeent of under-
ground coal lining on the basis of the iaproveoent of existing technological
aethods must be regarded as not very preeising. The econooic effect of the
technical ilproveaent of the existing coal aining technology in recent
decades has been expended largely on the co-pensation of the unfavorable
dynenics of lining-geologic factors (increasing depth of lining. etc.). The
quality (grade and ash content) of ained coal has systeeaticelly deteriorated
by eeasure of the introduction of existing kinds of technology. The capital-
output ratio of the lining industry is steadily increasing. By and large.
the trends of the technical developoent of the industry have been eore exten-
sive than intensive. It least be nphasiacd that the capacities for the
develop-em and expansion of lechinery. based fundaaentally on Iodern coal
aining technology. probably will be exhausted before the end of this century.
For these reasons radical changes of the very principles of the technology of
coal aining and coal utilization are now an urgent problea. in outlining the
contours of underground lining during the first 25 years of the 21st century,
continuing on the basis of the inproveaent of present technology is incen-
ceivable. Further-ore, unfortunately, the specific outlines of future
technology cannot yet be clearly drawn. Tue new technologies. hydraulic

coal aining and underground gasificetion, vhich have been tested to sane
(although different) extent, are exceptions.

The Soviet Union produced 9.2 lillion tons of coal by the hydraulic (ground)
oethod in 1975, coapared vith a total of lore than 100 aillion tons in 1952.
hydraulic lining is being used in the Donetsk and manetsk basins. There
were seven hydraulic lines and three hydraulic cooplexes in operation in
1976. lork was conducted in a wide range of lining-geologic conditions in
thin, ooderately thick and very thick level. sloping and nearly vertical
seals. Many different systas have been tested and are being used under a

25
'0! OFFICIAL 052 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

variety of conditions for mining and aechanization of stripping. preparatory
and transportation operations in the nine. New hydraulic mines are being
planned and built. Thus, from the standpoint of raining operations the
hydraulic method has been adopted on an industrial scale. in the meantime

work continues on research and develop-ent for the purpose of iaprovlng
hydraulic mining technology and systems.

The basic technological advantages of hydraulic raining are related to con-
tinuity. low labor and simplicity of the technological process. There are
considerably fever “junctions“ of different processes in hydraulic raining
than in the traditional methods of lining. which sharply reduces the ntnber
of miners required. Hydraulic lining processes readily submit to automation
and remote control and are promising in this respect. The hydraulic method
does not require the presence of people and nachinery at the cutting face.
Therefore roof bracing is not necessary in most cases. The coal slurry can
be transported by gravity flow at angles of inclination exceeding 3’. The
slurry can be transported in a continuous flow frets the cutting face to the
drying plant or consuler. The use of hydraulic transport requires sub-
stantially smaller transportation excavations (including loading facilities),
and this reduces the volt-e of the corresponding capital mining Operations.
Other obvious advantages are the great flexibility of the hydraulic coal
cutting process at the cutting face and the fact that it is better adapted
to tectonic changes of the sedimentary formations within the shaft, which
often involves serious probleas when traditional long-wall technology is used.

The hydraulic aethod also has significant advantages with respect to labor
safety in the sine. Hydraulic lining has a 2-3 tines snaller rate of indus-
trial injury than ordinary mining technology. This is related to the fact
that there are no liners at the cutting face and no rolling stock and
machinery in preparatory and transportation excavations. The dust content
of the air in hydraulic lines also is extreaely low and does not exceed
0.25.0.5 mg/a’. Finally. by virtue of the low labor factor, the total need

for liners in underground operations is substantially reduced by the hydraulic
method.

The economic advantages of hydraulic coal aining stem from its technological
advantages. in connection with fewer basic and auxiliary operations and a
reduction of their labor factor labor productivity at operating hydraulic
nines in 1975 reached 63 tons per an in the Donbass and us tons per nan
(and up to 195 tons) per month in the luzbass, or 1.3-2 times higher than at
highly nechanited lines using ordinary coal mining technology. The operating
hydraulic mines have a 10-1.“ lower cost (including lo times lower for
hydraulic transportation) than ordinary mines in the same basins under
similar conditions. and the basic cost per ton of coal mined is 25‘ lover.
0n the basis of planning data of large nev hydraulic mines. the economic
indices can be ilproved significantly in the near future. The planning
indices of these hydraulic mines are better than those of nines using
ordinary technology. The specific capital investments of a line with an
annual production of 3.5-0 million tons are 18-25 rubles/ton, coapared

26
m MICK“. US! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with soofubtes/ton. the volume of nining operations is l70.000 n'. conparcd
with 42 f”? e.volune of construction operations for plants and facilities

is 400,000 a’, celpared with 760,000 a . the monthly labor productivity per
coal liner is 144 tons. coapared with 58 tons. the cost of the coal is 3-l.5
rubles/ton, coaparcd with 6.6.5 rubles/ton. the "reduced" cost is 6-7 rubles
per ton, compared with 10. electricity and fuel censunption is 1.5-2 times

higher than in ordinary nines, but the amount of expended nateriels is
smaller.

it is iaportant to note that the hydraulic method has been tested and proved
in a wide range of lining-geologic conditions. The best indices were achieved
in noderate and thick seals, but the technical-econoaic indices are better
even within seams than those of traditional technology. The process can be
used in all coal seals with an angle of inclination greater than 2’. leak
roof rocks and swelling soils (in about 30\ of the coal scans in the Donetsk
basin) Iiait the application of the hydraulic aethod. The hardness of the
coal and the fracturing of the coal scan exert a strong influence on the
uachinery used for stripping and preparatory operations, and fracturing can
increase the productivity of the hydraulic coal Iining process by a factor
of 8. For hard coal and weak roof rocks it is advantageous to use aechano-
hydraulic extraction of the coal and rocks and reinforce-ent of the work
space, or hydraulic washing after loosening of the coal sean. instead of
hydraulic cutting of the coal and control of the roof by conplete collapse.
By and large. the following can be said regarding the range of conditions
under which the hydraulic lethod can find effective application:

the range is, in principle. quite broad;

hydraulic technology offers just as aany different technical decisions and
systems for different mining conditions as traditional aetheds. and there-

fore the extensive application of this lethod should be preceded by exten-
sive research and developlent of sufficiently differentiated decisions;

hydraulic coal cutting has great advantages over lechanical cutting under
coaplicated tectonic conditions of stratification;

hydraulic transport of the nine lass can provide a better solution for two
difficult probleas of the conte-porary Donbass, naaely a reduction of the
volume of expensive capital aining operations and the eliaination of labor-
consuning aultilevel systeas with different kinds of transportation fro. the
shaft.

Hydraulic lining is a relatively new aethod and has great prospects for
technical perfection. The pressure of the stream fro- the nozzle can be
increased to 150-200 kg/ca' for hard and soft coals. lays of speeding up
mining under various mining-geologic conditions will involve prelininary
softening of the coal sea. by forcing water into the seal through special
drill holes. hydraulic cutting of coal by leans of thin streaas at a pres-
sure of up to $00 kg/cn’ and aetheds of breaking up rock with a hardness of

27
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up to 8-10 by aeans of pulsating high- and superhigh-pressure (up to 8.000
kg/cn2 and higher) streams. also appear to be promising. There are great
prospects for the inprovenent of relate-controlled and progranmed self-
propelled (rolling and walking) water guns and for the development of auto-
aated self-propelled hydraulic nining Iachines. pifficult problems nust be
solved in the area of the autoaation of hydraulic transportation. aore
efficient dehydration of coal slurry and clarification of the water at the
surface. However. there can be no doubt that the perfection of hydraulic

aining along these lines will be successful. which will even further expand
its range of effective application.

Underground coal gasification differs fundamentally from all other cool
aining technologies. The experimental and industrial development of this
nethod has been in progress in the USSR for nearly a half century. Five
underground coal gasification plants. producing about 1.5 billion n’ of gas
annually, hava operated in the Moscow suburbs, in the Donetsk and Kuznetsk
basins and in Angren (Uzbekistan). In spite of the long period of develop-
ment. however. notable progress has not yet been achieved. either in the
developnent of reliable process technology. or froa the standpoint of the
quality of the gas obtained and its economic indices.

The econooic indices that haVe been achieved at demonstration plants are
worse than the design indices and have not been coapetitive with nines. even
under the best conditions. The caloric content of the gas produced by burn-
in; coals with vastly different natural caloric contents (from 2,700 to
6.500 kcal/kg) usually does not exceed 800-050 kcal/m'. The unsatisfactory
indices were related basically to the instability of the technological pro-
cess and to extremely low capacity indices of the plants (froa 28 to 160.000
tons of conventional fuel annually). Under these conditions. and in a
country with vast reserves of cheap natural gas. underground coal gasifica-
tion was ignored and is usually not regarded as a possible coapetitor of
current coal aining technology.

At the same time. gasification is cheaper than the production of synthetic
gas from coal on the surface.

Host of the potential advantages of underground coal gasification. it is
believed. can be realized only after the caloric content of the gas that is
produced is increased significantly and the process is aade lore stable
(experiments in these areas have not yet produced positive results). Better
indices can be achieved. perhaps, by using oxygen-enriched blasting for
gasifying deeper scans. deposited under heavy overburden. If a stable
technological process. capable of producing higher-caloric gas than the
traditional technology. and using solid coal, can be developed. the following
potential advantages of underground gasification say be attainable:

the complete elimination of paid labor under underground conditions;

a substantial reduction of the volume of lining operations and their siaplifi-
cation (the construction of all facilities of underground gasification plants

costs only 1/5 of the total basic funds. whereas this figure is about 2/3 at
m nes);

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the feasibility of the coaplete autonation of fuel production;
inprovenent of boiler operating conditions;

the convenience of using the gas as household fuel (if. the caloric content
exceeds 4,000 kcal/n’).

There is reason to assuae that if the technological process can be developed
and the capacity of the plants can be increased sharply the econolic indices
of underground gasification night be coapetitive with traditional coal aining
netheds. end the establish-mt of fuel-chesical industries on this basis
light improve thee: even more. But speaking of the future of underground coal
mining in the 21st century. it is. perhaps. hard to envision anything such
different frora the existing technologies, other than underground gasification
or geecheaical "drilling" techniques, which are analogous to it.

The following general principles. on which the coal lining technology of the
first quarter of the 21st century cannot but be based, way be fonulated as
a generalization of individual research efforts of the experts: the organi-
zation of completely autoaated underground processes; assenbly line techno-
logy and naxilm auteuation of the entire syste. of processes; conplete
extraction and processing of all useful products, deposited along with the
coal or extractable therefrom; minim- inpact on the environment as a result
of the developoent of "effluent-free" technology. One can inagine a coal-
fuel-chenical coupler, using a closed cycle for the extraction of coal and
for its conversion to energy. oil and chenical products. as the basic type
of plant that will eeploy these technological principles. The success of
deep coal processing technology and transportation of the products will
determine to a great extent the scope of the developsent of coal mining and
the exploration of new frontiers in coal lining.

Of course, the final decisions will depend on the specific, as yet largely
unpredictable prospects of Soviet and world power engineering. However, the
"coal version" of power engineering is deserving of pro-pt and celprehensive
develop-ant. since it is one of the most probable trends in the foreseeable
uture.

COPYRIGHT: Unknown

7 872
050: 8144/0320

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
VON OFI’IUMI. "SI-1 ONLY

FUELS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT

UDC 662.6/7:658.Sll.2
"£19008 0? CALCULATING HATERIALS-lﬂTEﬂSIVENESS IN FUEL INDUSTRY REVIEHED
Hoscow EKONOHIKA GAZOVOY PROHYSNLBNNOSTI in Russian No ll. 1970 pp 12-21

[Article by V. A. Bugrov, V. I. Potapov. and Ye. P. Bochkov. VBIIKTEP
of USSR Gosplan: "Detersining the Hateriels-Intensiveness of Fuel
Extraction")

[Text] The historic 25th CPSU Congress posed the challenge of sharply
raising the efficiency of public production. This is the scat important
part of our overall econonic strategy in the current phase of building
cos-unisn. Reducing the natariels-intensiveness of production is one
of the ways to solve this problem. In the accountability report to the
25th party congress L. I. Brezhnev pointed out: '1he country's needs
for energy and raw asterials are continuously growing, and their pro-
duction is becoling sore and sore expensive. Therefore. to avoid an
excessive increase in capital investsent we lust work for sore rational
use of resources. which includes reducing the saterials-intensiveness

of output, using cheaper and sore efficient saterials and using thee
econosically."* Although the sectors of the fuel industry have coapsr-
atively low aaterials-intensiveness (petroleua and gas extraction are
capital-intensive and the coal industry is labor-intensive). an analysis
of their aaterials-intensiveness is interesting priaarily free the point
of view of finding intersectorial proportions for develop-est of the
fuel-energy couples. Because the share of the Eastern regions in fuel
extraction is steadily growing. which seans that shipping distance is
also growing. a co-parison of saterials-intensiveness with due regard
for expenditure of saterials to transport the fuel (which accounts

for roughly half of the total freight traffic of the country) is very
isportant.

Because developsent of the fuel and energy sectors takes about 28
percent of capital investsent in industry. it is also isportant to
cospare the ssterials-intensiveness of capital construction in fuel

 

* "Materialy XXV S'yezde KPSS” (Materials of the 25th CPS" Congress).
Moscow. Politisdat. 1976, p 63.

30
FOR OFFICIAL ESE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

extraction. Thus we nust find a technique for determining the aaterials-
intensiveness of extracting and transporting different types of fuel in
operations activity and capital construction.

It is vell-knoun that the lateriale-intensivenees of output is described
by the ratio of nateriala expenditures to production of output for a
corresponding tine period.

The following nethods are used to determint naterials-intensiveness:

1. relating naterials expenditures to output in none-
tary fora (rubles per ruhle of gross or net out-
put):

2. relating expenditure of nateriala to output in
physical neasureaents (ten per ton);

3. relating laterials expenditures in physical
terns to production of output in aonetary fora
(tons per ruhle of gross and net output):

6. relating naterials expenditures in aonetary
fora to production of output in physical terns
(rubles per ton).

The Methodological Instructions of USSR Gosplsn for working out state
plans for develop-en: of the national scone-y recon-end using the ratio
of materials expenditures (without depreciation) per ruhle of coelndity
(gross) output as the index of efficiency of use of asterisl resources
for the seetors of physical production. associations. and coabines.

In those industrial sectors that produce unifora types of output. calcu-
lations of the efficiency of use of asterisls are also nade for the pro-
duction of output in physical terns.

Considering the broad assortment of materials used in the extraction
and transportation of particular types of fuel. relating asterisls ex-
penditures in tons to the voluae of fuel in natural terns. that is.
tone. is not only econoaically inexpedient but also not feasible. es-
pecially if us consider the different heat of burning of the types,
grades. and varieties of fuel.

Because of the breadth of assortsent of saterials used vith relatively
low expenditure nor-s for then it in also inadvisable in practice to
relate asterisls expenditures in physical terns to extraction and
transportation of fuel in physical terns.

The difference in the heat of burning of particular types of fuel and
also for cool by basins. deposits. and grades lake the index of aa-
terials expenditures defined as the ratio of aaterials expended in
sonatary fora to production of output in physical terns incoapatibls.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE OKLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore. of all the nethods considered for calculating the materials-
intensiveness of the extraction and transportation of different types
of fuel. the only acceptable one may be considered to be calculation
of asterisls expenditures in monetary fore (without depreciation)

per ruble of growth in net output.

it should be observed that calculating the laterislsointensiveness of
production of output per ruble of net output is not envisioned by the
nethodologicsl instructions of USSR Gosplan. However. deternining
this index would reflect the nsterials-intensiveness of production
sore correctly because it makes it possible to preclude the influence
of expenditures of past (enbodicd) labor on its results.

Table l below shows a cosparison of the average nateriels-intensiveness
of extraction of the prisary types of fuel. natural gas. petroleun.
and cool. and changes in these figures over tine.

Table l. Haterials-lntensiveness of Extracting Natural Gas. Patroleus.
and Coal in 1970 end 1975 (natural gas in 1970 - 1002)

1970 1975
Puel A B A I
Natural Gas 100 200 175 189
Petroleus 138 200 212 29‘
Goal 288 228 275 e 220

Key: (A) Tor Gross Output:
(3) Per Net Output.

Auxiliary esterisls. containers. fuel. energy. and the like. that is
those objects of labor expended for the technological. general produc-
tion. and econosic needs of the enterprises. as well as tools.
furnishings. and special devices and icons not classified as fixed
productive capital under current procedures are included in saterials
expenditures.

Materials expenditures uere calculated by sultiplying their share of
the prise coat of fuel extraction by its full prise cost.

The share of these nsterials expenditures ves detersined on the basis
of report figures and their share in other sonatary expenditures.
which are about ‘0 percent for petroleus and natural gas extraction.
was detersined by analyzing actual figures for 1970 and 1975.

The share of saterials expenditures in ”other financial expenditures"
for open-pit coal extraction is 60 percent. while for underground

coal lining it is 30 percent: given the existing ratio between open-
pit and underground coal lining (oneethird and tun-thirds respectively).
this also averages 60 percent.

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Materials expenditures for geological exploration were included in
other materials expenditures not distributed by elements in petroleum
and gas extraction.

Analysis of Table 1 shows that the materials-intensiveness of natural
gas and petroleul extraction calculated for growth and net output
shows a tendency to increase. while for coal it stays the sane in the
calculation for net output and decreases by five percent when calcu-
lated for gross output. The greatest increase in the level of
materials-intensiveness of extraction in 1975 conpered to 1970 figures
is observed for gas (75 and 89 percent calculated for gross and net
output). while the increase is slightly less for petroleum (5b and 67
percent respectively).

Despite the stabilization of the level of naterials-intensiveness in
coal extraction calculated for gross output and the slight decrease
when calculated for net output. the overall dimensions of the sateriele-
intensiveness of coal extraction continue to be highest. exceeding the
figures for petroleum and natural gas extraction by 1.3 and 1.57 times
when calculated for gross output in 1975. Hhen calculated for net out-
put in 1975 the laterials-intensivenesa of coal extraction is 1.21
times higher than the corresponding index for natural gas. but 22.6
percent below the sateriels-intensiveness of petroleum extraction.

Considering that the prices for particular types of fuel are not cos-
parable and that their heat of burning differs. we believe that the
method of calculation based on the ratio of materials expenditures in
sonetary for- per unit of a standard fuel should be considered sore
correct. This sethod offers an opportunity to cospare the naterials-
intensiveness of extracting types of fuel that differ qualitatively
by heat of burning. The following coefficients are adopted for con-
verting natural fuel into standard fuel: 1.63 for petroleum. 1.17
for natural gas. and 0.7 for coal.

The materials-intensiveness of extracting natural gas. petroleum.
and coal in 1970 and 1975 when calculated per ton of standard fuel
is shown in Table 2 below.

Table 2. Heterials-lntensiveness of Extracting Natural Gas. Petroleus.
and Coal (without depreciation. satsrials-intensiveness of natural
gas extraction in 1970 - 1002).

Fuel 1970 1975
Natural Gas 100 175
Petroleus 230 330
Run Coal 080 850

A cospsrison of the figures in Teble 2 for 1975 with the figures in
Table 1 for 1975 for gross output shows that the difference in the

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL IISH ONLY

level of materials-intensivenesa of coal extraction is 3.0 times
greater than for natural gas and 2.0 tines greater than for petroleum.

The reason for this is a flaw in existing average USSR prices for
natural gas. petroleum. and run coal which sets the average USSR price
for run coal much higher than the price for natural gas and petroleum
while its heat of burning is significantly lower.

If the prices for these types of fuel were nntched to their heat of
burning. the relationship snong the materials-intensiveness of the dif-
ferent types of fuels when calculated for gross output and atandard
fuel would be almost the sane.

However, considering the higher consumer value of petroleum and natural
gas when compared to coal. the differing efficiency for the consumer
of using these types of fuel. different trends towards change in prime
cost. specific capital investment. and calculated expenditures. and
also the level of world prices for petroleum. the ratio of prices for
petroleum, natural gas. and coal should take these and other factors
into account.

The flaws in existing average USSR prices for natural gaa. petroleum.
and coal. and the special features of the formation of net output with
a high share of wages in the coal industry and high profit in the
petroleum and gas industry, make the index of materials-intensiveness
figured for net profit ill-suited for compariaon.

Because the prices for the particular types of fuel today do not cor-
respond to socially necessary labor expenditures. the only acceptable
method that makes it possible to put the materials-intensiveneas of
the different types of fuel in compatible form is calculation per ton
of standard fuel. This method also ashes it possible to determine the
comparative materials-intensiveness of extraction and transportation
of fuel. but this does not preclude the necessity in the more distant
future after refinements of the price formation system of making the
calculation for gross or net output. But in this case the quality of
the fuel must be considered in the price when calculating materials-
intensivmness (especially for particular deposits). The quality fac-
tors that must be considered are potential content of light petroleum
products. sulfur and paraffin content. and quality of directly dis-
tilled fractions of gasoline (octane rating) and diesel fuel (cetane
rating) for petroleum. fraction composition and sulfur content for
natural gas. and ash content. huaidity. sulfur content. and the trans-
portation factor for coal.

Following the same methodological principles. we must calculate the
materials-intensiveness of fuel transportation. which will make it
possible to determine the total materials-intensiveness of extraction
and transportation with due regard for transportation of the fuel to
canoumption regions.

3‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

it should be observed that the sectors of the fuel industry have low
materials-intensiveness of extraction but high capital-intensiveness.
whereas the coal industry also has substantial labor-intensiveneas.
This is a result of the high level of materials expenditures to build
fuel industry enterprises.

Therefore. it is important to calculate materials-intensiveness not
only for the extraction and transportation of particular types of fuel
but also for capital construction. The calculation of materials-
intenslveness of the extraction and transportation of fuel taking into
account depreciation deduction; for fixed productive capital answers
this problem. However. considering that elements such as wages with
deductions for social insurance. the profit of construction organiza-
tions. and the like are also reflected in fixed productive capital. a
direct calculation of the naterials-intensiveness of capital construc-
tion should be considered note correct. We should observe that the
share of materials expenditures in total capital investment for the
development of the gas extraction. petroleum extraction. and coal
extraction industries has hardly changed at all over time. Thus. in
the Eighth Five-Year Plan the share of material expenditures in
construction and installation work for the extraction of natural gas.
petroleum. and coal was. respectively. 59.8. 56.6. and 56.1 percent;
in the Ninth Five-Year Plan the figures were 52.6, 56.2. and 56.7 per-
cent. and in the 10th Five-Year Plan (according to calculation) they
will be 61.8. 51.6. and 59.6 percent.

The share of materials expenditures with equipment in direct capital
investments in the development of the gas extraction. petroleum ex-
traction. and coal extraction industries in the Eighth Five-Year Plan
was. respectively. 68.9. 65.9. and 68.0 percent. while in the Ninth
Five-Year Plan the figures were 66.3. 65.0. and 70.9 percent. and the
10th rive-Year Plan (according to calculation) they will be 69.8, 66.2,
and 71.6 percent.

The increase in the share of materials expenditures including equipment
and direct capital investaents in the coal extraction industry when com-
pared to petroleum and gas extraction results from a higher level of
equipment use in coal extraction.

At the same time. of course. as the scale of fuel extraction increases
an ever-larger part of newly introduced capacities will be used to main-
tain the level of fuel extraction already achieved. For this reason

we believe it is more correct to calculate the materials-intensiveness
of capital construction not for the absolute growth of petroleum ex-
traction but for newly launched capacities.

Table 3 below illustrates this point. From Table 3 we can see that the
materials-intensiveneas of fuel extraction calculated for capacities
being introduced by all types of fuel is considerably lower than the
calculation for absolute growth; with the same general trend toward

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

change in this figure, the trend has a "softer" look when calculated
for capacities introduced as coapared to growth in extraction.

Table 3. Heterials-Intensiveness of Capital Construction in the Sectors

of the Fuel Industry (materials-intensiveness of natural gas in 1966-
1970 - 1001)

1966-1970 1971-1975 1976-1980
Indexes c P c G P c c P C
For Absolute Growth

Haterials-Intsnsiveness in
Direct Capital Investment:

without Equipment 100 76 238 104 94 163 77 142 161
um: Equipment us 113 529 121 136 385 111 206 393

For New Capacities

Haterials-Intenaiveness in
Direct Capital Investment:

Hithout Equipment 63 38 126 36 33 99 32 62 101
Hith Equipment 66 56 259 39 68 235 65 60 26

 

Key: (6) Gas; (P) Petroleum; (c) Coal.

In the Ninth Five-Year Plan there was a slight drop in the materials-
intensiveness of capital construction, but. according to calculations.
it will rise somewhat for all types of fuel in the 10th Five-Year Plan.

The reduction of materials expenditures for operating activity and
capital construction to a single comparable type deserves attention,
because only when this is done can we make sufficiently complete judge-
ments about aggregate materials expenditures for fuel extraction and
creation of the material-technical base for fuel production. Because
we lack such a technique, the authors used a procedure based on calcu-
lation of adduced expenditures. For complete comparability in capital
construction we took only materials expenditures in direct capital in-
vestment, including equipment, using a single efficiency coefficient
of 0.12 for all sectors of the fuel industry. while materials expendi-
tures in operating activities were taken without depreciation deduc-
tions because a consideration of then would have caused us to count
materials expenditures twice in capital construction. Moreover, owing
to difficulties in identifying materials expenditures for capital re-
pair of fixed industrial productive capital. these expenditures were
not taken into account.

The calculated materials-intensiveness of extracting natural gas,
petroleua. and coal in the country for absolute growth in extraction
and new capacities calculated against standard fuel is given in
Table 6 below.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table i. Calculated Hatcrlals-lntensiveness of Extracting Natural Gas.
Petroleum. and Cool in 1970 and 1975 (natural gas in 1970 calculated for
capacitieu launched - IOOZ).

_ "_ indexes __u___ Natural Gas Pctroleun Coal
Calculated for New
Capacities
1970 100 108.2 676.0
1975 77.5 ll}.l 638.0

Calculated for Absolute
Growth in Fuel Bx-

traction
1970 210.1 183.5 830.0
1975 185.5 228.5 636.0

with the increasing scale of open-pit coal extraction the Calculated
naterials-intensiveness for absolute growth in coal extraction in 1971-
1975 dropped by 23.6 percent. while the incorporation of highly produc-
tive gas deposits made it possible to reduce naterials-intensivenesa in
natural gas extraction by 11.8 percent when. at the sane tine,it was
increasing by 25.5 percent in petroleum extraction. These trends caused
changes in the ratios anong calculated naterial-intensivenesa for abso-
lute growth in natural gas. petroleum. and coal fros l:0.87x3.95 in

1970 to l:l.23:3.b3 in 1975. The sans pattern is observed in the calcu-
lation for capacities launched. except that the ratio anong calculated
naterials-intensiveness figures for natural gas. petroleum. and coal

in 1970 was l:l.08:6.7b and in 1975 it was l:l.b§:5.65. The change in
the ratio of calculated asterials-intensiveness figured for absolute
growth in fuel extraction and capacities launched is linked to a change
in the proportion of launched capacities being used to asintsin the
existing level of extraction of various types of fuel. In this respect
natural gas is in the best position.

Thus. a comparison of different nethods of calculating the aateriala-
intensiveness of extraction of natural gas. coal. and petroleua sn-
abled us to establish that calculation per ton of standard fuel is
sost acceptable. we propose that this technique be used to calculate
naterials-intenaivenass in operating activity and capital construction
and the naterisls-intensiveneas of different sectors of the fuel
industry.

It is better to calculate the naterials-intensivsnsss of capital
construction for capacities launched.

lnprovenent in the development of prices for different types of fuel
will nake it possible to change from calculating asterials-intensivenas
per ton of standard fuel to calculation of natariala-intensivenass per
table of gross or net output.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Trend analysis of the mtcrialn-intennivcnoun of the extraction ol
vorioun types of ﬁne! for the country an a whole has resulted in the
Identification of trends and changes in this index.

COPYRIGHT: Vaeuoyuznyy nnuchno-lnnledovntel'nkiy inititut ckononiki.

orannizatnii proizvoduva itekhiko—ekono-icheukoy inform-eta“ v gummy
pro-yuhlennooti (Wllﬁpzprou).

11.176
680:8146/0520

38
FOR 077101”. US! MY