APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00060R000100010041-4
FOR OFHClAL USE O‘ILY

JPRB L/8234
19 Jmuary 1979

TRMSLATIONS ON TELECOWICATIONS POLICY.
ESEARCH MD DEVELOPPENT
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
U are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

PROCUREMENT OF PUBLICATIWS

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recs-ended that the JPRS number. title, date and
author, if applicable. of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Regrts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service. and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
0.8. Coverment Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.8. Government Printing Office. Haahington, n.c.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author. personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell 5 howell, Old
Mansfield Road. Wooster. olaio, “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Clebe Road. Arlington, Virginia 22201.
NILW
MI"
7

 
     
     

”m“
JPRS L/ 8234

9

. 'epm no

19 Jenna 1979

  

MSLATIONS 0N TELECOWUNICATIONS POLICY. RESEARCH
AND ozvammu'r, (FOUO 2/79)

0. Peeler-leg ngeeleenen kept.
a.

l0. Hektt/Teahl'oeh Unit No.

Connect/Gnu! No.

  
      
  

  
   
  
  

Omeeiaadea Nana aad Mduae

Joint Publ icationa Research Service
1000 North Clebe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

H. Ipoeeerh. Ouaiaaelee Diane and Mellon

  

       
   
 
     
      
    
        
    
 
   
 
       

): 1’! 0‘ Re & Pet‘ed
05:.“ 9°“ .

Ae above

  

‘l'hie eeriel report contains translations from the world preee and radio
releting to worldwide political. econo-ic and technical developments in
teleco-unicetiono. computers. and satellite cornunicetione. Coverage will

be worldwide with focus on France. Federal Republic of Germany. United Kingdom.
Italy. Japan. the USSR. People'a Republic of China. Sweden. and the Netherlanda.

 
 

Couputere

Setellite Co-unlcatione

Electronics and Electrical Engineering
Telecommunications

l'elenetry

"L Wine/Operbded True

m. cam run/c... 093. c. r. 173. 223
e Hallie: ace-eat

For Officiel Uae Only.
Limited timber of Copies Available From JPRS.

M '70.“ "O”,

 

taco-roe 0.08%. ’ |
ITALY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 3/823‘

19 January :

TRANSLATIONS ON TELECOMMUNICATIONS POLICY,
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT

(rouo 2/79)
Coureurs

sun-mu AFRICA

Brief-
ADB Telecou-micationa Loon

085%

Mution or mectrongaetic Compatibility Conditim in .
the Oftmution of Radio Relay Line Con-traction
A. I. Kelinin, V. A. Slag-shin; mosmz', Sep 78).

Complex Deterninetiou of Tolerance for the Parameters of
a te Color meleeuting Channel

I. a. Domain, A. x. Imam-av; momma” .' 18)
wzsrnuwamume

'Telki ' Counter Developed by cam of Turin
Giuliono Pen-ten; L'EIROPBO, 2h Nov 78)
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CAM

BRI BPS

AD! TWCATIONS LOAN-4‘“) loan. mounting to 10 million unita of
account, or approxinately 2,857 million francs CFA have been granted by
the Arabl Development Bark (MD) to Gabon following on agreaaent signed
on 5 December in Abidjan at thie inetitution'a headquarters. Theae loans
will be used by the Gabon Office of Post and Teleconnnnicatlona to finance
a telecmunlcationa development project in Port-Gentil, Franceville,
Hoanda, Mjole, lanberene, cyan, BitIn, Pouila and hula-Mouton, as well
an to roodel and increase the Libreville telephone network. these loans,
which are guaranteed by the Gaboneee government, are fifth in a aeriea of
AD! granta to Gabon, now totaling nore than 23 million unita of account.
[Textll [Paria "“0188 TROPICAUX 31' $0le in French 22 Dec 78

p 3510

080: 5500

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

USSR

unc 621.396 .403

EVALUATIOI W mommtc OMA‘I'IBILI'H CONDITION 1!! m OPTIMIZATION
W RADIO RELAY mu communion

liaacow tumcoynz' in Iueaian No 9, Sep 78 pp 1-7
[Article by A. 1. mum and v. A. She-chin, aubnitted an. 1973]

[rm] The article publiehed below deele with the pro-
plene of technical and economic optiniration of the con-
atruction of radio relay linee whoae diecuaeion wee
etarted in [I], particularly the poeaibility of mov-
ing the conditione of electronagnetic coqatibility
(we) when the energy paranotere of the radio relay
equip-ent are lowered to veluee which would allow

to naintain the required quality indme of the radio
relay line channele.

Introduction. The advieability of the technical and econonic optiniution
of the conetruction of m [radio relay linen] ie deternined by the fact
that new generatione of radio relay equipment will be created excluaiwely
on the beeie of eeniconductor devicee and integrated circuite [1]. One of
the noet inportant aepecte of optinieation ia the reduction of the levele of
eignale fro. radio relay equip-eat interfering with other co-unication eye-
tene working within the ease frequency range.

The following kindeof interference are poeeible in ehared frequency banda
allocated for ayetene of fixed ground co-unication and co-unication aye-
tene with the we of artificial earth eatellitea (182) [2]: between geoeta-
tionery co-unicauion or broadcaeting tsz and radio relay etatione (ans);
between us and gromd etatione (23) of co-unication or broadcaeting eyetene

uith the nu of tst; between us of territorially eepereted m and between
ans of the an. m.

then 182 with highly elliptic orbits are ueed, the interference in ineigni-
ficant becauee of the nail probability of the effect of interference caueed

by the narrowneee of the radiation pattern of the ans antennae and the high
rate of the 182 noveoent with anall angular altitude.

2
[OR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interference Between Geoetetionery 152 end R118. The Redio Conunicetion
Reguletione [2] eetebliehed the nexinun pernieeible effective “Glued 9°"
er tron 11118 in the direction of e geoetetionery orbit ee lo? we within the
frequency renge of 1-10 611: end 45 can within the renge of 10-15 611:. At
the ee-e tine, the nexinun effective redieted power of en m nuet not be
nore then 55 dlﬂ.

Coneequently, if in the proceee of the optiniretion of the conetruction of
en m. it will prove to be precticel to reduce the redietion power even by
8-10 d3, then the eirborne receive '1 of 182 wil1 be elnoet conpletely pro-
tected egeinet interference frown d8. Thie will renovc linitetione iqoeed
on the configuretion of the R111. conetruction end in neny inetencee ney leed
to e noticeeble reduction in the conetruction end operetion coete of 11118.

Let ue deternine the reletion of the noise power to the power of the ueeful
eignel et the output of the receiving enteme of en IRS under the eff t of
the redietion of en airborne tsz trenenitter with power flux deneity for
en cxtrene ceee when the nearin- of the directionel pettern (m) of the R118
receiving entenne ie oriented towerd the 182.

The propegetion of the interfering eignel tehee plece in the conditione which
ere cloee to the free epece conditione, therefore, the power of the interfer-
ing eignel et the output of the IRS receiving entenne

» (1)
p -nk (z) (1)
Key: 1. 182 a 4: and '

2. [IRS
where 1182 ie the length of the weve redieted by the eirborne tremitter
of the 182; cm ie the gein of the receiving entenne of the ans. The power
of the uteful eignel et the output of the receiving entenne of the as not
exceeded in the couree of ‘1' percent of tine of the woret nonth ie

P,(7)-£’.9'Ll£:.;°_‘:'° V’(7).- (2)

where P1 in the power delivered to the m trenelitting entenne with gein
61 R1153 7(1) ie the velue of the ettenuetion fector of the free epece field
for the ueeful eignel not exceeded in the couree of ‘1' percent of tine; R ie
the length of the III. intervul.

:eeu-ing thet A182 '14:”. on the beeir of formlee (1) end (2). we ehell
ind

P“ =1 4: ”R: 3
P4”) P10. ppc WU) ( )

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

According to [2], in the frequency bands l.7-2.535; 3-8; 8-11.7; 12.5-15.0

Gila allocated for joint use by ground communication systems and cos-aunication
systems via :32, the maximum permissible power flux density in the frequency
band of lo km, when the angles of arrival of radiation over the horizontal
plane are less than 5°, l1 1 - ~(lSlo-l68) dBHImZ. Considering that the pass
band of receivers in modern radio relay systems and cos-sunication systems
«sin :82 is approximately equal to 100 Pills and assuming that I'll - -lSO dim/m2,
we find from (3) the maximum permissible value of n I 10'n Ill-2.

since the value of I’m/P26) changes at random in time, the power of noise in
the channels of the line caused by interference is also a random function of
time. In acccrdance with the m [International Radio Consultative Cos-it-
tee] RecomndationdJ], the norm for a permissible increase of the average
power of noise per minute in the channels of a hypothetical standard line
due to the influence of all sources of interference is 1000 p" in no more
than 201. of time and 50,000 pH in no more than 0.01% of time of any month.

For modern m, 11,450 km and according to avera ed curves of statistical
distribution of vcr) for the frequency of I: ca: {6] we have ”201) a 0.63

(-6 as). «0.011) - 5.1.7 x 10-2(-27 as). Consequently, in the case of the
usual parameters of radio relay equipment P - 10 ll, 61 - 10" and n -
10’n H/mz, from (3) we have Pan/P2007.) - k8 ' 10'6(-5§R§l), and 9234/72
(0.01%) I 1.58 ' 10'3(-28 dB). Let us consider that the frequencies of the
useful and the interfering signals coincide and their spectral characteristics
are approximately identical. 0n the basis of [5.6] it is easy to find that,
in transmitting multichannel telephony, the noise power in radio relay
systems with a capacity of 600-2000 channels caused by interference from 182

will exceed 200 pH in the course of 20% of time and 38,000 pH in the course
of 0.011 of time.

IA! us assume that in the process of the optimization of m construction
it was found practical to reduce R to the limit values given in [l] and to
lower the energy parameters of the equipment by approximately 20 dB. The
limit value of R for the frequency range of 6-6 an: is approximately 15 km,
while "201) a» 1 «0.011) I 0.ll03 (-15 d3) [1]. 0n the basis of formula
(3) and works [5,6 , we find that the power of the noise in the mu. channels
caused by interference from the Isz will exceed 750 pl! in the course of 207.
of time and 19,000 pH in the course of 0.011 of time.

The obtained figures indicate that the conditions of the fulfillment of the
m Reconuendations [3] for the noise level in m channels under the effect
of radiation from 182 in cases of shortened intervals and average levels of
signals lowered by 20 db turn out to be approximately the same as for the
intervals of the ordinary length and the existing Parameters of radio relay
equipment. The only difference is that, in the case of intervals of the
usual length, due to great time-dependent changes in the level of the useful
signal, the determining norm is the norm for the level of noise exceeded in
the course of 0.0l1 of time, and in the case of shortened intervals and low-

ered energy parameters of the equipment -- the norm for a level of noise ex-
ceeded in the course of 20 1 of time.

I;
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Interference Between us end Ground Sterinne of Couunicetion Syetene Ueing
m. the power of the interfering eignel Pm 23(1) et the output of the re-
ceiving entenne of the :9 free 333 exceeded in the couree of '1' percent of
tine cen he expreeeed in the general one ee followe:

P0 0. 1’
p (7):“ I um: . 3c "c
"3° 1w p; X

XPivd?) 1'3c(?ao‘ac) "imm-

(’0)

where It“ ie the dietence between the us end the 28; 62 25 ie the gein of the
receiving entenne of the 28; 12 UP) ie the ettenuetion due to the DR of the
trenenitting entenne of the ans e e given velue of the erieuthel engle if et
the ans; P32 ( Q23. 423) ie the ettenuetion due to the DI! of the receiving
entenne of t e 28 er the given veluee of the eri-uthel engle 4323 end the
enguler eltitude A 23 et the 28; V H ”30) ie the velue of the ettenuetion
fector for the interfering eignel at wded in the couree of '1' percent of tine
end dependent on a". Am, geogrephic end clieetic conditione elong the
route between the us end 28.

Let us coneider thet the conditione of the redio were propegetion elong the
1282-28 route ere cloee to the free epece conditione. Then the power of the
ueeful eignel et the output of the receiving entenne of the 28 will he:

Plum “moment: (5)

P In
1” 'wk’w o

where 1'1 I in the power of the eirhorne trennitter on the 182; 61 132 ie

the gein o the tremitting eirhorne ent ; R132 ie the length of the
182-28 route. coneequently, et Am - its:

”seem Puaamﬁuu‘
PW: Pumamcskz ( )

xfzvc(?)F§c(?eo5:c) Vim")

‘i'he retio of the power of the interfering eignel fron the 28 P (1') exceeded
in the centre of 1‘ percent of tine et the output of the receivﬁ‘u entenne of

the ans to the power of the ueeful eipel P20“) not exceeded in the oouree of
1' percent of tine

P-um ”136°1me
—'——--.—— x
mm name R}. "‘m

V3. m
Xﬂdmix) vain . (7)

 

5
not orncm. us: our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where P1 28 is the power of the ZS transmitter; 61 as is the gain of the
translitting antenna of the 25: V" 23(1) is tho value of the attenuation
factor for the interfering signal from the 28 exceeded in the course of 1'

percent of time, and Plnﬁsuf) end F22“ 923, A 28) denote new the attenu-
ation due to the ON of t e receiving antenna of the ans and transnitting an-
tenna of the 29.

Let us evaluate the values of (6) and (7) by examining two extrene cases.

1. The attenuation of the level of noise due to the DR of the antennas ie
enall. Moreover, the Iutual interference of the RRS and 25 shove itself at
large I", when the variance of the tine-dependent changes in the level of
the interfering signal is considerably greater than the variance of the
changes in the useful signal even at the ordinary lengths of the m. inter-
vals. Consequently, as a first approxinetion, it is possible to disregard
the tine-dependent changes in the useful signal at the output of the receiv-
ing antenna of the RES, assuing in (7) that V(‘l‘) - 1. In this case, for
identical attenuation of the levels of the interfering signals due to the I)“

of the antennas under the effect of interference fro. RRS to 28 and fro. 28
to RRS, we shall find the relation of (6) and (7)

Piaimks’mvlmm

X,=- ——————,-
P: "a 0: Imp: ac 0: acR’Vi ac (7)

(8)

Let us estimate the value of x1 on the exaaple of using the 6 ca: band for
transmitting signals free a 28 to 132 and the 1. ca; band for transnitting

from 182 to 28. For these bands, it is possible to take the following aver-
age values in (3):

HI“) 31’. G. mac-10'.
Ian-.3320 than”: 400. P13: a:
IBIO’ BBC, “-4 - 10’.

Rm, -4 - 10‘ KM. Russo Kl.

Then we have 7
V (T)
X—SblO’ "'° .
' Viacln (9)

 

Even if we aasunc that

V-m(7)lV.sc(7)= .

6
you orncm. use om!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

than we obtain from (9) that the ratio of the power of interference to the
power of the useful signal at the output of the receiving antenna of the 28
is by 33 db higher than the value of such ratio at the output of the receiv-
ing antenna of the RRS. Consequently, there will be the sane difference in
the levels of noise in the channels caused by the interference. In real con-
ditions, the difference will be still greater at any 1‘, because with the main
mechanisms of the appearance of interfering signals (diffraction and distant
tropospheric propagation of radio waves) the relation

Vunc (DIV-sofa) l.

2. The attenuation of the levels of interfering signals due to the on of
antennas is great, i.e., Plug?) <4 I and P2 ( ([723, A; )(< l. The
mutual interfering effect between the R38 end 5 becomes noticeable only at
small RH! when it is possible to disregard the tine-dependent changes in
the levels of interfering signals and consider that their propagation takes
place in conditions close to the free space conditions (Vii ma?) I V" 25

('1') - 1). Assuming that the attenuation of the levels of interfering signals
due to the antenna DR is identical under the effect of interference from RES
upon 28 and fron zs upon RRS, we shall find that the relation (6) and (7)

x‘ (T)- P301 PVC Ruin: V’U’)
”1 ”C3 amt: P: 3c out” .

 

(10)

As was nentioned above, at R if 50 km for the frequency band of 6-6 Gila, V(20‘L)
- 0.63, «0.011) - 5.47 ~ 10'2. Therefore, for the same values of P1, 6, ans-
Pl 132, 61 122, P1 23, 61 25 and R132, from (10) we have X2901) I 8.102,
X2(0.0l%) - . Consequently, even in the course of 0.011 of time, the ratio
Pan/P2 is one-fourth of P2“ 25/92 zs,. although [3] sets the norm of 50,000
pH for the permissible value of noiae due to the effect. of interference in
the course of 0.011 of time, while the pernissible level of noise for 28 at

a constant value of the ratio 1’“ 28/92 zg must be at least less than 1000 p".

The above figures indicate that the energy parameters of mod-:n radio equip-
ment are very far from optimal from the viewpoint of its EMS with 28 mi-
cation systems via :32, because the situation of interference and, consequently,
the necessary territorial separation of IRS and 28, are determined by the
radiation of has no matter how they are arranged in relation to the 28.

Of course, this situation cannot be considered justifiable. In fact, due to
the special characteristics of the systems of communication via 182, the
levels of useful signals at the inputs of 28 receivers cannot be increaseed
substantially without a considerable impairment of the technical and economic
indexes of these systems and impermissible increase of the level of inter-
ference from airborne transmitters to ground coununication systems (see above).
At the same time, it is quite possible to lower the energy parameters of re-
dio relay equipment if the length of the ﬂu. intervals is shortened appro-
priately. This will lead to a considerable improvement of the as conditions

7
FOR ontcw. use om:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

between us and 28. For example, the lowering of the energy parameters of
radio relay equipment operating in the 6-6 ml: band by 20 db and the short-
ening of the lengths of the ma. intervals from 50 to 15 km results in the
following values:

Xl=l2»2v:ppc (DH/530(7);

i.e., this lakes Ch interfering effect of the RRS on 23 and zs on RES approx-
imately identicall. The necessary territorial spacing of the RES and 25
will be reduced considerably in this case.

If the attenuation of the levels of interfering signals due to the antenna
UN is great, then decrease of It“ will be defined by the relation

RI”, Plann-

If the attenuation of the levels of interfering signals due to the antenna
W is small, the decrease of R" will be even greater because the rate of de-
crease of. the attenuation factor VH0) with distance, for emle in the
sons of distant tropospheric propagation of radio waves, does not excted

0.1 dB/b [a].

Interference between the us of Territorially Spaced m. and Between RRS of
the Sane m. Interference between an. of approximately parallel direction
can occur between the nearest RRS of these lines. Since a considerable at-
tenuation of the levels of interfering signals is observed in these cases
due to the DI! of the has antennas, the interfering effect becomes noticeable
only when the distances between the R38 are sufficiently sull. when
ll“ are stall, it is possib e to disregard the time-dependent changes in the
power of the interfering signal P2“ and to consider that its propagation
takes place in conditions close to the free space conditions.

Considering for the sake of simplicity that the energy parameters of two
territorially spaced RBI. are identical, it is easy to find that the ratio of
the power of the interfering signal at the output of the receiving antenna
of the m ’2! to the power of the useful signal chr) which is not exceeded
in the course of ‘1' percent of tine does not depend on the power of the trans-
litters and the gain factors of the trans-sitting antennas and is equal to

A. fawn-pm
Inm- ﬁWU} ' (11)

1. It should be considered that in the course of 0.011 of tine the permis-
sible noise level in the m channels due to interference is 50,000 pH, and
in the course of 201 of ties -- 1000 pH [3]. Therefore, the value of X;
(0.01%) I 4.6 . 10'2 is quite permissible and is equivalent to the value of
X2(201) - 2.2.

8
103 orncmL us: out?
F011 OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whore FZUPI), 1'2( $2) donotc tho attenuation of power of tho lntorforing
oignol duo to tho 010 of tho tranonitting and racoivins antonnao at tho valuoo
of tho aainuthal ansloo ‘91 and (P: at tho location point of tho ooutco
of intorforonco and at the reception point.

Manning that I’m/02(1) to equal to a certain pomiooiblo valuo [Pm/P2
('r)]”m““bl.. vo find tho following tron formula (11):

Rumum’gt'ﬂ ' (12)
V", anII’
Key: 1. pcnaiooiblo ‘ ’(mma)

Ao vno nontlonod above, at R o 50 to: in tho froquoncy band of 6-6 611:, V001.)
- 0.63. V(0.01'L) - 6.47 ' 10'2, thoroforo. from (12) no ohall dotornino tho
mini-tn poniooihlo valuoo of 8.420%) and “(0.011) in Inn at which tho norm
for tho lovcl of noioo in channolo cauood by intorforonco aro fulfillod:

[3" (woman's "ﬂy-ﬂu}... ,
I,” [Pal/mom... (13)

 

R. (0.0l°l.,)--al.l2 - 10’ X

X F‘:I)F‘°:’ (1‘)
Vl”:n-"':‘oom\”m

Shortening tho m intorvalo approximatoly to 15 k- loado to tho valuoo of
«201) z 1. «0.011) - 0.163 in tho 4-6 on: hand [1]. 'i'hon, on tho baaio
of fomlo (12) vo obtain

 

[mm )=15 _£mwm__,
° mam»... “5’
R.(0.0|'!.)m 1.05 - [0’ x
X MIMI!» . (16)

 

Wyn/moons»...

It can ho ooon from tho conparioon of fonulao (13), (15) and (1b), (16) that.
all other thingo boing oqnal, by raducing tho longtho of tho m intorvalo
fro. 50 to 15 Its. it io poooiblc to roduco tho valm of RH(201) to approxi-
natcly coo-fifth, and tho valuo of “(0.011) to one-tooth. Conooquontly,

it io poooihlo to incroaoo ouhotantially tho donoity of tho m. notvork op-
crating in tho oano froquoncy hando.

9
Iron ontcm use ONLY
When the anglea (p and ‘92 are enall,beceuee of the email attenuation of
the levele of interfering eignnle due to the DN of the antennae, the inter-
fering effect of eone m. on other an. could ehow iteelf even when the die-
tancee a“ between then are great. A typical exanple of euch nutual inter-
ference in the ceee of a two-frequency plen ie the interference between the
firet and fourth ms of the eane m, which nekee it neceeeery to build the
linee in a "zigeag" manner [6]. In thie caee, at I!“ z 311, the variance
of rendon time-dependent changee in the level of the interfering eignal ie
a decieive factor. In evaluating the relation P If; ae a firet approxima-
tion. it ie poeeible to dieregard the fading of t e ueeful eignal and write

LLT;F’(1.)I"(?;)V3(T). (17)

where Pm“) ie the power of the interfering eignal exceeded in the couree
of '1' percent of time. Coneidering that Pawn/P; ie equal to a certain per-
“18815“ V0108 [Pm(T)/Pz]p.m1“1m.. from (17) we ehall find the required

value of the product
F’(?.)""(e.)m ——L" ”371'?" :--._ as)
I

lie is ehown in [7], normalized I)" of antennae in the region of the nain lobe
can be approximated to a good approximation by the relation

 

F’ . . l
(9) = . Hm. . (19)
where (Po ie one-half of the width of the main lobe with reepect to half
power. On the baeia of fornulee (18) and (19), we find the required valuee
of the anglee between the naxinuae of the on of the antennae of the firet
and fourth has and the line connecting then under the condition that (Pl --

4’2"?

 

I
= ——L_V' I) _
9 v. 1/ “Fulﬁl/ﬁled L (20)

According to [6], [P ('l')/P2] rnieeible - 10"7 for '1' - 20%. heat ue evalu-
ate the valuee of “301m: 1. intervele of ueual length (R - 50 In, R“ I
150 Ru) and ehortened intervale (R - 15 ha, I!“ - 105 he). Let ue name that
the line rune above a enooth epherical earch eurface, and the height of the
antennae h wee eelected in euch a way that, with average refraction condi-
tione, the receiving antenna ie in the firet interference Iain, i.e.,

, 3‘“;
2....-£*.+-V__'.'.’S_, (21)
so. 2

where n9 - 8500 Ice ie the value of the equivalent radiue of the earth with
average refraction conditione. At R - 50 he and It“ - 3R - 150 he. the

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

appearance of the interfering signal will be caused by distant tropospheric
propagation of radio vavss. The value of VH(20%) depends on the equivalent

distance Rug-.3!“ “'JV'Juvho and at R - 50 km for the frequency band
14-6 cm. according to [a], we have vnaoz) - 7.07 ~ 10-3 (-43 at).

If R - l5 kn. then R" - 3R - 65 km, and the interfering signal occurs chiefly
due to the diffraction of radio waveearound the earth's surface during in-
creased refraction. For the saooth spherical surface of the earth, at the
values of h defined by fornula (21). and typical paraneters of statistical
distribution of the vertical gradient of the dielectric per-eability of the
air. according to the aethod of [6], we shall find that VMZOX) - 0.316 (-10
db) for the (0-6 Gil: frequency band.

A in l (20) that
."m 3 n [P’N(2o%)/P2]:Ion"10‘7.

we shall obtain the required values of the angles (P- 1.59 (Po at R I 50 Ins
and Q‘- 10.26 (90 at R - 15 h. Consequently, in order to maintain the
some value of trauma/92] rlissible when the intervals are shortened, the
necessary value 0. angles is 2.7 times greater then for the intervals of
usual lengths. Since the length of the intervals in the above exaaple was
shortened 3.3 tines. the required value of the relation [rm(zai)/rz],.m,
will be ensured at approximately the sane linear deviation of the location
of the internediate ans from the arc of the great circle passing through

the first and fourth us as in the case of intervals of usual lengths.

It should he nentioned that the assmption made in the above era-ple regard-
ing the absence of fading of the useful signal places the 0 4f intervals
of usual length in more favorable conditions. In fact, at ltrge a, due to
increased variance of random tine-dependent changes of P2, the probability

of exceeding (1’ IP2) 1 “,1 will be detereined not only by random growth
of P2", but alsgnby :3‘ .aecr:ase of P2.

Conclusion. The above evaluations show that by reducing the lengths of m.
intervals and by lowering the energy paranoters of radio relay equip-ant to
values ensuring the necessary quality indexes of the line channels, it is
possible to improve the conditions of electromagnetic compatibility of m
with other cot-unication systens operating in shared frequency bands as fol-
laws: 1. Practically complete elinination of the interfering effect of R38
on airborne receivers of co-unication systens using I82 on the geostationary
orbit, and, consequently, elimination of linitetioufor the configuration of
RR]. construction. 2. Considerable reduction of the interfering effect of
RRS radiation on the receivers of the 28 of co-unication systens using 182
to a level co-Iensurable with the interfering action of radiation of the 28
on the has receivers, and. consequently, the requirenents on the frequency
and territorial spacing of ms and 28. 3. A considerable lowering of the inter-
fercnce level between territorially spaced m, which makes it possible

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to increeee by any folde the deneity of the an network opereting in the
one frequency bend.

‘l'he ebove poeeihilitiee of inproving the EMS conditione ere pertitulerly in-
portent for retionel utiliretion of the 2-8 on: frequency bend. where the
condition. for the propegetion of redio vevee ere noet fevoreble.

l.

2.

3.

So

6.

7.
a.

D ihi iogrephy

lelinin, A. 1., end Sheuhin. V. A. "Problem of the Optieiretion of
Redio Reiey line Conetruction," ammosvuz'. No 3. 1978.

"Reﬂe-ent redioevyeri“ [Redio Co-unicetion Reguletione]. Horton,
Svyer', i975.

”Ilekoundeteiye 357-2 m" [357-2 m Recmndetion]. Goneve, 197a.
"Otchet 338-2 M" [338-2 m Report], Geneve. 19710.

lorodich, 8. V. “Iekerheniya i ponekhi v unogokenni'nykh eietenekh re-
dioevyui e cheetotnoy nodulyeteiyey" [Di-tortione end Interference in
Mltichennel Radio Commicetion Syetuu with frequency Hoduletion],
noecw, Svyer'. 1976.

"Inrhereno-tekhnicheakiy eprevochnil: po elektroevyeti. Redioreleynyye
iinii [Engineering end Technicel llendbook on Teleconunicetion. Redio
Reley Liner], noecov, 8vyet', 1971.

Otchet 390-2 m" [390-2 m upon]. Geneve, 1974.

"Otchot 560 m" [560 m Report], Geneva, 1976.

comma: Irdetel'etvo "Swer'," ”Blektroevyu'," 1978

10,233
CSO: 5500

L2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ODILY
FOR OPPICIM. USE ONLY

uoc 621.397.837

cum: WM?!“ 01’ TOMB roe m PM W A CW come
mm custom.

Moscow BWROSVYAZ’ in Russien No 9, Sop 78 pp 22-30

[Article by It. a. Domain end A. K. Kusterev, published es s letter for
discussion. suhnitted 17 Her 1979]

[Text] Introduction. In the process of operetion, the pereneters of the
color television chennel (Tm) fro- the source of the progree up to end in-
cluding the television receiver ere hound mdeviete tron their reted velues.
Sons of then, for exenple, colors of the glow of the picture tube luninophores.
heve devietions which ere stetic in neture end occur in the process of pro-
duction. Others chenge in the process of trensnission due to unstehle oper-

etion of the equip-set. Thus, the perenetere oi the color television chen-
nel cen he considered ss rendon velues which heve stetic or dyne-ic devio-
tions iron the reted welues.

Chenges in the chennel perueters leed to ineccurete reproduction of color
in the television liege end to the eppesrence of other distortions which in-
peir its quality. In order to ensure e definite quelity of the color inegc,
rendcn devietions of the chennel perensters nust be within certein linits.
Such linits, i.e., tolereoce for possible devietions of verious perensters
iron their reted velues, ere estehlished es s result oi e coqronise' between
the quelity of the has end the coqlenity of the equip-sot which lust en-
sure Operetion with s prescribed tolerence.

In my works sons of which ere discussed in [l]. tolerences ere estehlished
without consideretion of both prohehilistic cherecterietice of rende- stetis-
ticel end dynenic devietions of the perensters iron the reted velues, end
sinultsnsous eppeerence of werious distortions. Very often tolerences ere
estehlished on the hesis of production possibilities of nenufecturing TV
equip-eat end the experience of its operation [2]. In sons works. for em-
ple. those discussed in [3], etteqts ere Iede to work out verious generel-
iced criterie for the quelity of the color inege in which veriOus distor-
tiomwith Icnown velues ere present. But these works ere fer fro- coupletion
end their results cennot he used for the deter-inetion of tolerences.

L3
'0! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus, up to now there in no single approach to the procesaof normalization
of the parameters of the TaTV channel. in thin connection, general princi-
plea have been developed for determining tolerances with conaideration for
poesible simultaneous changes in all parameters of the channel.

All types of distortions in the color image and, accordingly, of the para-
meters causing these dietortions are divided into three groupa. The mani-
festation of the distortions 11’ individual groups and their perception by the
viewer are different. Due to this, different approachea are used for estab-
lishing tolerancee for the parametera of the three groups. This made it
poesible to simplify the complex solution of this problem.

The concept of the grouped channel parameter has been introduced. It in an
aggregate of various parameters and characteristics of the channel whose de-
viations from the norm, regardless of the place of their orgination, lead

to the appearance of distortions of one kind in the TV image. An overall
tolerance for the entire channel is determined on the basis of experimentally
established permieeible valuee of distortions for each grouped parameter.
Then, this tolerance in distributed over individual sections of the channel
with consideration for the technical and economic factors.

The Composition of the TaTV channel and the Quality of Its Output Image.

In setting the norms for the parameters of the channel, we shall proceed from
the fact that the quality of the color image on stationary color television
receivers must correspond to the subjective evaluation of no less than It
points, and in portable sets -- not any lower than 3 pointo according to

the 5-point scale of the m [International Radio Consultative Connittee],

5 being the higheat evaluation. Thin in an acceptable compromise between

the desire to eneure a high-quality image and the requirements for the com-
plexity and costa of the equipment.

A real TsTb channel may contain various numbers of sections (Figure l): ASK
~~ studio equipment complex; VT? -- telecaating transmitter; P -- receiver;
NLS -- land comnication line (cable, radio relay); ‘1'? -- television tranc-
mitter; 81.3 -- satellite coununication line; PU -- receiving device; R ..
low-power repeater. The siwlest TeTV channel consiste of three sections,
namely, asr-m-r. It is poesible to have a case when a TsTV channel con-
tains nine sections (ASK-"Ls-TP-SIS-PU-m-m-R-P). The ASK-m-P sections
are the main ones, while others ensure only the relaying of a complete color
TV signal.

It is natural that the quality of the color TV image at the output of a TsTV
channel will depend on the compoaition of the channel. The more relay sec-
tions in the channel, the more distortion there in in the video signal, and,
conaequently, the more inferior is the quality of the image. ,If attempts
are made to ensure the quality of the output image of the moat complex chan-
nel corresponding to a etationary receiver (not any lower than lo points),
then the tolerances will be very severe, which will require the development
of expeneive equipment. Moreover, the quality of the output image of a chan-
nel without relay sections will not be realized by TV receivers.

1.10
M OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’PICIAl. USE ONLY

 

2
: 1. b. ‘1'?
2. 5. 81.3
3. 182 [antﬂctal earth 6. 61.8 [hypothetical co-untcatton
ucelutc] 11m]
7. m
8. P
9. PI!
15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, when eetabliahing tolerancee, it aeema practical to proceed from
the pretence of a hypothetical TaTV channel of average complexity (Figure 2).
In it, the hypothetical communication line 6L8 nay coneiat, for example. of
a land radio relay or cable line of a total len th of 2500 km and a hypo-
thetical atandard aatellite communication line to]. In thia caee. the qual-
ity of the output TV image of a channel more complex than the hypothetical
channel will be eomewhat inferior than the quality eat for the correaponding

typee of receivere, and in the caee of a aimpler channel, it will be enaured
with a margin of safety.

Thua, tolerancee for the parameters of a TeTV channel must be aelected in
such a way that, for a certain percentage of time (let us say. 801), the
quality of the color image of not leaa than 6 pointa and 3 pointa would be
eneured at the output of the hypothetical channel for the atationary and
portable TV receivera. reapectively.

since the channel in calculated from the condition of obtaining a quality of
4 pointa on etationary receivera, a quality of 3 pointa will be obtained for
portable receivera only at the expenae of great tolerancea for the parametera
of the receiver. Therefore, firat it ia neceaaary to eatabliah tolerances
for the parametera of the TaTV channel with a etationary receiver. and then
tolerancea for the parametera of a portable receiver.

Claaeification of Diatortiona in a Color Televiaion Image. Diatortiona of
the color TV image may be divided into two claaaea which we ahall term con-
ventionally aa achromatic and chromatic.

Acromatic diatortiona ehow thenaelvee in the color image in the aame way an in
the black-and-white TV image and are connected chiefly with errora in the
acanning and eynthaaia of the image. This group aleo includea brightneaa
noiaea. Varioua achromatic diatortiona, their cauaea and poaeible platen

of their origination are ahown in Table l. Chromatic diatortiona, in turn,
can be divided into two characterietic groupa which are chiefly connected

with errora in color reproduction in amall and large areaa of the image.

Small areae can be conventionally coneidered to be aectiona with a minimum

aize of up to 8-10 image elementa, and large areaa -- aectiona of over 8-10
elements.

We shall term color diatortion of amall image areaa aa heterogeneoua diator-
tion. Although they ahuw themaelvea as changes in the color, theae dieter-
tione ahould not be treated as diaturbancea in the fidelity of color trana-
mieeion. The concept of the fidelity of color tranamiaeion iteelf refera,
atrictly apeaking, only to the reproduction of color in large aectione of the
image. Heterogeneoua diatortiona are perceived by the viewer not aa inac-
curate reproduction of colora, but as various defecta leading to the deteri-
oration of the overall quality of the image analogoua to achromatic dietor-
tiona. Theaa are chrominance noiae, color edging, etc. Thia aleo includea
drawn out prolongationa which could occupy large areas, but, by the nature
of their perception. belong to heterogeneoua diatortione. The latter ahow
themaelvea in a color picture independently from one another and are dynamic
in nature. The data on varioua diatortione are aummarited in Table 2.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    
  
  

Nature of Sectiona of Chen-
diatortiona el where paran-
eter deviationa
naaibl

 

 
 
 
 

diatortion: (grouped etero uhoae changea
channel error) cauae diatortlona

ho

     
        
   
   
    
    

     
  
 
  
   
 
 

   
   
  
  
  
   
 
 

 
    
 
   
 
   
    
  
  
 

  
   
  
   
  
 

 
  
    
  
  
  
  
    
  

   
    
   

  

1 Coordinate Scanning nonlinear- ]
itea, etc
2 Diaturhancee of in- MyI-etry of inter- ? ASK, P
terlaced ecanning laced acanning
3 uneven aharpneae Aperture Distortiona
over the ecanning of the canera and pic ’
pattern field ture tuhea
6 Repeated inagea Hatching.3cho eignala
S Black-and-vhite Pulae interference
dota and etrohea
6 Brightneaa noiae Ratio of Brightneae
aignal to fluctuation
noiae in 0.3-6.0 Ml:
hand
7 Moving lov-frequen- Ratio of aignal to
cy interference background noiae 63!. “so
8 Unaatiefactory re- honuniforuity of mm: " m, 1’
production of anall [anitude-fre uency
detaila and aharp characteriatic in 0.
brightneaa changing 6.0 m: frequency
9 Pine grid ' nigh-frequency inter ”
ference
10 Gradational Nonlinear diatortion "

   

coefficient of the
brightneae channel

 
   

Diatortione of color in large areaa ahov thmelvee aa dieturhancea in the
fidelity of color tramiaaion. Due to varioua cauaee, colon in the inage
could change in different uaya, and the reaulting diatortiona in color trana-
niaaion nay intenaify or weaken, or even coqenaate one another.

The grouped paranetera vhoae deviationa fro. the rated valuea cauae diator-
tiona in color tramiaaion are lieted in table 3. Diatortiona in color
trananiaaion ariae aa a reault of changea in the pare-etera and character-
iatica of the trananiaaion channel and deviationa fro. the rated valuee of
color aignala at varioua pointa of the channel.

The ‘l'a'l'V channel haa two nain groupa of aignala which correapond to the
color coordinatea in two color ayatena. na-ely. the ayatena of the receiver
and the trananiaeion channel. Conaequently, it ia poaaihle to iaolate tvo
grouped para-ate". ‘l'he firat one includea varioua typea of diaturhancea
leading to independent changea in the aignala correaponding to the color co-
ordinatea R. c, B in the ayaten of the receiver, and the aecond para-eter-

1?
ma omcm. use on!
Typee of heterogeneoue
color dintortionn

(grouped chennel error

Chroninence noine

Dincontinuoun colored

fringe

Colored drown out

prolonget ionn '

Colored edging

Pertinl or totel

eheence of color in
nnell inege ereen

Difference in the re-
production of edjncent
linen or groove of

linen

 

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Tobie 2

 

General chennel perenetere

Sectione of chennel

whone chengee ceune dintortione where devintionn of

Retio of the hrightneee eignel
to fluctuation noine in the
chroninence chennel

Differentiel phene

Differentiel gein

Pluctuntion noine in the chro-
ninence bend

Achlh nonunifornity in the chro
ninence bend

Hie-etch of VCh [high frequency
chnrecterinticn of predintor-
tion end correction

Differentiel phnnc

Trennient chnrncterietic
in the eree of low end eediun
frequencien

Hie-etch of predictortion end
end correction with reepect to
video frequency

Ineccurete netching of rentern

Trennient cherecterintic in
the ernn of high frequencien

Timing diecropnncy between the
hrightnenn end chroninnnce
nignnln

rrnnnient chnrecterietic of
the chroninencn chennel
(color nherpnenn)

Hinnntch of the direct end de-
layed nignnln

Difference in the eeneitivity o

the heedn of the video tnpe
recorder

pereeotere erc pon-

ASK, P

ASK, GL3, VIP, P
Sean

ASK. P

ASK, r
m, cm, m, r

ASK, P

leedn to chengen in the nignnln corrnnponding to the color coordineten DR.

Y, ”I in the nynten of the trennninnion chennel.

ceune dintortione which ere dynenic in neture.

1B
roe orncm. us: ONLY

Chengen in the nignnln
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Table 3
General channel parameters
whole changee cauae dietor
tione in color trenenie-
niaeion
Mp ituda o t e aignal of
primary color
Anplitude of gem-predic-
torted eignal of prinary
color
Value of protective inter-
val (level of black)

      
  
  
     
  
 

  
  
 

 
  
  
  

 

Sectione of chan-
nel where devia-

tione of para.-
t re a e -- aih

Nature of
dieter-
tion

Grouped channel
he paraneter

         
 

     

1 Color coord n-
atea R. G, B

  
      
     
      
     
         
   
     
      
       
   

  

  

‘rrananiaaion Characterietic
of channele of prinary col
ore froe light to light

Nonunifornity of color over
the raater field
Spectral characteriatice of
the aaneor of main eignale

Prilary colore of receiving

tube

2 Color coordin- Alplitude of the brightneea

ataa DR' Y, eignal

n. Anplitude of the color dif-
ference aignal

Changea of ouch para-etere an the pri-ary colore of the receiver and the
apectral characterietice of the eenaor of color eignale cauae dietortiona

in color tramiaaion vhlch are, chiefly, etatic in nature. It ie poeeihle
to conaider that deviatione of theee two paranetere reeult in conatant errore
in the reproduction of all colore in the inage (but different for different
receivere and eenaore) with the exception of the reference white color. The
latter will not change if the correct color balance ie nintained both in

the receiver and in the cancer of the aignala.

It ia aaeu-ed that the color ayaten of the receiver ie realised in the cancer
of eignale. If it ie not no, then it ie neceeeary to ermine the deviatione
of both apectral characteriatice and output aignala free the rated valuee in

the coordinate eyaten of the eeneor and to introduce a third grouped paran-
eter.

Theoretical Study on Separate Bffecta of Changer in the Pare-euro of the
raw Channel. when breaking the overall tolerance for a grouped paraneter
into individual para-etere, it it neceeaary to know what diatortiona occur

in the 1"! image due to changea in only one paraneter vhen all renaining paran-
etere are unchanged. It in relatively ainple to etudy thin theoretically

for the perenetera vhoee deviationa fro- the rated valuea ceuae dietortiona

in color trenenieaion (table 3). Diatortione of colora occurring during

19
Iron omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

varioue changes within preacribed limits of acne parameter of thie group can
be repreaented in the form of spatial areaa in a color epace, and the poa-
aible changes in the chrominance can be repreeented in the form of varia-
tion aonea in the chrominance chart [5, 6]. It is aufficient to plot such
variation aonee for eeveral (reference) chrominancea.

The effect of changee in individual parameters cauaing herteregeneoua diator-
tiona can alao be atudied theoretically. however, in thie caae, it ia more
expedient to repreaent the obtained computation date not in the form of
changee in the chrominance, but in the form of diatortiona of varioua teat
aignale (for example, in the form of tolerance aonea for traaaient, pulae.
and other characterietica).

The determination of permiaaible diatortiona of the color TV image can be
done only experimentally. Since the quality of the image dependa on the pre-
sence of diatortiona of all three groupe in it (achromatic, heterogeneoua
color diatortiona, and diatortiona in color tranemiaaien), permiaaible dia-
tortiona ehould be determined when they show themaelvee aimultaneoualy in

the image. however, it ia very difficult to do thie due to a large number
of poeaible combinationa of the valuea and typea of varioue diatortiona. It
ie more realietic to find permiaaible diatortiona aeparetely for each group.

Since the dietortiona of the three groupa ahow themaelvea in the TV image in
in different vaya, the viewer, paychologically, perceivea them aeparately.
For example, achomatic and heterogeneoue color diatortiona are perceived by
the viewer ae varioua defecta in the image. and diatortiona in color trena-
miaaion -- ae incorrect reproduction of colora which he evaluatee by the re-

production of colora familiar to him (for example, the color of fleah, the
color of vegetation, etc).

Simultaneoua manifeetatien of diatortiona of all three groupa can be Intimated
approximately if the criteria for the evaluation of the quality of the image
in determining permieeible diatortiona are aomevhat higher than thoae accepted
above for the reaulting quality of the image. Inetead of the evaluationa 6
and 3 for etetionary and portable aeta, it ie poeaible to take the evalua-
tione of 6.2 and 3.5 pointa, respectively.

Permiaeible valuea of achromatic diatortiona in a color image can be eatab-
liahed by the eame method aa for the black-and-vhite image, or to borrow them
directly from the experience of black-end-vhite televiaion.

Permiaaible valuea of heterogeneoua color diatortiona are found experimentally
aeperately for each type of dietortion (for each groupeu error ahovn in

Table 2) during aimulteneoua changea in all parametera cauaing thie diator-
tion, i.e., which make up the grouped parameter. For example, the permiaaible
value of the diatortion "diacoatinuea colored fringe" (Table 2) muet be eatab-
liehed mhen the folloving overall paremetere of the channel deviate from the
norm aimultaneouely: differential pheae, differential gain, fluctuation noiae
in the band of the chrominance eignal, irregularitiee in the ACth in the

20
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

band of the chrominance signal, and the mismatch of the chatscteristic of
high-frequency predistortion and its correction. Tolerance values for the

appropriate overall parameters of the channel are obtained directly from the
experimental data on permissible distortions.

Permissible distortions of color transmission can be determined through sub-
jective evaluation of the quality of color transmission by the viewers on
real subjects when various distortions of colors are introduced into the
image. In order to create them, it is not necessary to change simultaneously
all of the overall parameters of the channel listed in Table 3. For example,
distortions in color transmissions can be created by linear transformation
of three color signals [7]. During such transformations, there will occur
changes both in the chrominance and in the brightness of the image. Changes
in the overall brightness of the image. Changes in the overall brightness
of the image can be disregarded because, firstly, it is not the goal of tele-
vision transmission to reproduce the absolute value of the brightness of the
scenery and, secondly, changes in the brightness during real transmission
progress slowly and can be eliminated to a certain degree by the viewer by
means of the control devices which are at his disposal.

As a result of subjective evaluation of the quality of color transmission,
permissible variation zones must be obtained on the chrominance chart for
the selected reference chrominances and for each quality class. With any
changes in the parameters leading to the appearance of distortions in color
transmission, each of the reference chrominances must not go beyond the limits
of the zone established for it. It is sufficient to find the zones of permis-
sible variation for four points of reference chrominances, the reference
white color and chrominances which are close to the chrominances of the pri-
mary colors of the receiver. Such zones for two evaluations of quality were
determined experimentally [8.9].

Determination of Tolerances for the Overall Channel Parameters. As tolerances
for the overall parameters 1-5 of Table i, it is possible to take tolerances
for analogous parameters of black-and-white television. Tolerances for the
parameters 6-10 must be refined with consideration for the peculiarities of
color television.

Tolerancesfor each of the grouped parameters of Table 2 and parameters 6-10
of Table l are established, as was mentioned above, through experimental
determination of permissible distortion. The combined effect of all grouped
parameters causing heterogeneous color distortions is taken into considera-
tion by using the evaluations of 0.2 and 3.5 units as a criterion of the image
quality during a change in only one grouped parameter.

During simultaneous independent changes in the overall parameters of‘group l
of Table 3, the values of color signals BR, 36, and 33 will fluctuate. As

a result of this, the point of the color reproduced on the screen of the
picture tube will fluctuate in the color space within the limits of a certain
spatial zone. If we assume that the changes of the three color coordinates
follow the normal laws, then the surface of equal probability density in the

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

color space limiting the tone within which the fluctuating point of the given
color is located with prescribed probability will be an ellipsoid. This el-
lipsoid of scattering can be easily calculated for prescribed tolerances for
changes in the grouped parameter and the probability of the penetration of
the point of wrong color within the ellipsoid; The major axes of the ellip-
soid are parallel to the axes of coordinates R, c, B. Analogous computation
for the grouped parameter 2 of Table 3 will also yield an ellipsoid of scat-
tering in the color space, but with aajor axes directed along the axes of
coordinates DR. Y. D3.

The spatial scattering zone of the color point as a result of simultaneous
independent changes of both grouped parameters can be found by convoluting

the two deteruined distribution laws. The resulting ellipsoid obtained through
convolution is projected onto a unit plane of the color space, which gives

the zone of the possible variation of chrominance-in the chromincnce chart

in the form of an ellipse of equal probability density. This operation is
performed for all four reference chroninances. The summation of various errors
affecting the fidelity of color transnission is shown in Figure 3.

 

Figure 3

Key: 1. Matrix
2. Frequency modulator
3. Limiter of signal of color

subcarrier
4. Frequency detector 10. Amplifier of gamma-predistorted
5. Amplifier signal
6. Matrix: amplifier ll. Level of black color
7. Genera spectral characteristics 12. Primary colors
8. Transmission characteristic 13. Color of the object
9. Amplifier of fundamental lb. Reproduced color
signals

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY

The operationa described above make it poeeible to find the dietribution of
the reaulting chroninance error, i.e., the cone of poeeibla chrominance vari-
ation for the preecribed tolerancee for grouped paranetere. However. in order
to determine the tolerance. it ie neceaaary to eolve an inveree problen.
nanely. to break down the reeulting error into grouped errore. ‘i'hie can be
done by the trial-and-error nethod when the reeulting tone of poeeible chro-
ninanco variation ia found having been given the tolerance for the grouped
parenetera. Tolerance for changee in each of the three color coordinatee
(eignale) for two grouped paranotere of Table 3 out be aelected in euch a
way that the ellipeee of poeeible chroninance variation for all four refer-
once chrominancee would not go beyond the linite of the eetebliehed eonee of
pennieeible variation and would be ee cloee to then ae poeeible.

Tho eetabliehed tolerancee for grouped parenetere are broken down in en
analogeua Ianner into individual general parenetere. In thie cue. the data
on the effecte of changee in individual paranotere on color tranenieeion are
ueed.

Breaking ‘rolerancee into General Paranatere by the Sectione of the channel.
It ie mathematically difficult to perform thie. It ie poeeible to eolve an
inveree problem. namely, to determine the reeulting tolerance by the known
tolerencee for invividual eectiene. The emulation lawe of tolerancee can

he found theoretically or on the baeie of experinentel data. Tolerancee for
individual eectiene are eetabliehed by eelection in euch a way that the ob-
tained reeulting tolerance would coincide with the overall tolerance for the
entire channel. in eo doing, it ie neceeeary to coneider the econonic factor.

for example, a lone eevere tolerance ehould be preecribed for a televieion re-
ceiver. and a more eevere tolerance for ASK.

The calculation of reeulting tolerancee for heterogeneoue color dietortione
are often done by enpirical arithnetic or quadratic lawe of euetion of
diatortione of one kind. In individual inetancee, both the eritluetic and
quadratic euuatione are ueed("internediate" law), i.e., the eo-called 3/2
law. For differential phaee dietortione, the author of [10] euggeeted to

divide by VT the reeulte of the conputation of the overall tolerance with
the nu of the quedratic law.

Table l.

nun..- .c on M! :‘rw-eeem e

£41mautuue ma- re

 

3n“
(nu-pound

m :53 i (ﬁlﬂljg)

 

(2) Ali-animator- :4 *3 :6
In

3'2 *3 36.5 :4 t9

(3) Kuepanunun t4 :8 25 til

 

Key: 1. Sanction law 6. Tolerancee for the differential phaee. degreee.
2. Arith-etic for channel eectione 6. 61.3
3. Quadratic S. ASK 7. m 8. P

23
ran orncuu. use om
‘hble lo given an example of the reeulte of breaking the overall tolerance into
a differential phaae (3:15 degreee) by the aectiona of the I‘m channel for
varioue aulnation lave.

Table lo ehova the dependence of the valuee of tolerancee for individual ecc-
tione of the channel on the emulation lave. In thia connection, it ie necee-
eary to continue work on the determination of eunation let. for varioue die-
tortiona.

The euuaation of tolerancea for paraaetere affecting color tranenieeion can
be done by the quadratic lav, aince it vae aeeuned above that the diatribu-
tion of errora fro. the fluctuatione of the paranotere of Table 3 at the chan-
nel output ie nor-a1. ‘l’hie lav can aleo be ueed in determining the reeulting
tolerance of a eection by the preecribed toleranceefor individual aeeenbliee,
unite. and other ole-onto of the eection.

Bibliography

1. Deryugin. N. 6.. and Kuatarev, A. K. "Determination of Per-iaaible Dia-
tortione of Chroninance in Color Televiaion." mu moo I “EVIDEN-
IYA [Cine-a and Televieion Engineer], No 2, 1967.

2. "technical Performance 'l'argete for a PM. Colour Televieion Broadcaeting
Chain." m RADIO AND ELECTRONIC BMINBBRIM, Vol 30. No lo. October 1969.

3. Cofayren. 0. V., and Yepifanov. N. I. "Evaluation of the ‘N Inge Qual-
ity by the Set of Raranetera," “MIRA RINO I “WORM“, llo 6, 1976.

6. more [International Radio Coneultative Coulittee]. "Require-ante for
the Characterietice of Television Channele Ueed for International Con-

nectione. .Report 686-1, XIII Plenary Aaeenbly (Geneva, 1971;."

S. Ruetarev. A. IL, and Deryugin, N. C. ”Btfecte of Random Signal Changer
in the Color TV ‘rranaliaaion Channel on the ﬁdelity of Color Reproduc-
tion," mosvuz', lio II, 1965.

6. Deryugin. II. C. ”Effecte of Changee in the Frequency Characterietice of
Hodulatore and Diecrieinatore on Color ‘rranenieeion in the seem Syeten,"
momma No lo, 1969.

7. Deryugin. N. 6., and Kuetarev. A. K. "Changee in Color ‘I'ranelieeion

During Linear 'l‘ranaforuation of Color Signala.“ mm KIM I TELEVI-
DZNIYA, No 2, 1973.

8. Deryugin, N. 6.. and Kuetarev. A. K. "Deter-ination of Penieeible Die-
tortione in Color Il'elevieion.” 112mm RIP!) I WINNIYA, No 2, 1967.

9. Kuetarev, A. K.. and Deryugin, N. C. "Pernieeible ChroIinance Variation
with Invariable White Reference Color," annual nno I ringworm,
No 10, 1969.
2b
to: OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPHCIM. "8! ONLY

10. Kopylov. P. H. "mutant“! Distortion. in Color rolovluon." 3m-
rmsvuz'. Ito 3, 1968.

comma: Inducl'uvo "swash" ”Blokcrowyu'," 1978

10. 233
080: $500

25
Iron ontcm. as: on!
M OHIO!“ "8! ONLY

ITALY

"rmmc' mu DBVBIDPBD 3‘! 0831.1 0! runs
Hilan L'EUROPBO in Italian 24 Nov 78 pp 154456
[Article by Giuliano Perrieri: ”the Oowuter Taken the Floor“)

[Text] Turin. hump-”It aounde like a Ger-en voice." one peraon eaye.
Another eaya. "llot at all; I eay it'a the voice of a aoutherner." Still
othere ”Dieturbieg." ”lnhuen.“ “Attractive but dietubbing.“

‘l'heae are aooe of the co-ente gathered at tendon anong a group of peraone
who vere lietening to. for the firet tine. the voice of an electronic
calculator. It ie a talking coquter. reading the written word. The

voice ie warn, full; it no longer hen the Ionotonoua tone that characterized
the firat talking nechinea attewted (except for acne ayllabic interruption
and brief periode of ”confueion“ in the vowela). but what in atriking ie
that the Iachine haa within iteelf. in an internal atorehouee, hundreda of
”eounde." which an auch are neutral. Iut it in he. the cowuter. uho givee
tone, neening and war-nth to the eentancea through a aeriea of nchanicel
operationa. The raw Iatarial in the calculator co-ee fro- nan. lt ie the
Inchine that nakaa the dialog "tau-n.” And therefore. an one hearer eaid
juetifiably. it ia “diaturbing.”

The calculator uea developed by ‘l'urin'e 611.1 (The Center for Telecommica-
tione Reaearch and laboratories. one of the forward-looking Italian reeearch
centera) and it no atudied by a nultidiacipline teen headed by electro-
acouetic engineer Giulio liodena. la thin a firet? In it a toy or an in-
etru-ent with a future? ﬂow doee the talking calculator work? Hhet pro-
blenn were aolvad in order to develop it? And whet will ita uaee be?

Naturally. there ia nothing new in the world. In ancient Syracuae. a
talking atatue uarned the people in tinea of energency; and, after all.
today in any natione the telephone alarn adviaee ue with a voice (”2t ia
7 o'clock. eir”) without the need for an operator on the other end of the
line. But in both theae caeea there in a "trick": Within the atatue of
Bpheeue a no waa hidden who wee ewloyed by the tyrant Dionyaiua to
frighten hia aubjecta; the voice on the telephone alatl ia nerely recorded.

26
roe OFFICIAL USE OILY
NR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ln l79l a Hungarian baron. von Kewelen. invented a talking machine that
tried to reproduce the vocal cords. the lungs and man's oral cavity with
bellows and wires. In 1937. the "sechanical speaker" was built by kiss:
and in 1939 the Voder voice denonetretor was built by Bell Laboratories.
but in each of these cases it is still men who makes the machine emit the
desired sounds and "words”--by controlling the air stops in the Von
Kempelen apparatus with his fingers and operating the others electrically
through a keyboard and pedals.

The scene changed radically when in the postwar period science was able
to utilize electronic calculators. To break down and store syllabic
groups was relatively easy and nachinea of this type multiplied. But as
the proverb says. "The way out is easiest." The difficulties began after
the threshold was crossed. Machines that read letters and translated them
into sounds not only produced a rusbling monotone that was tiresome and
annoying (this would bethe least of the probleas) but had the defect of
not resolving the elenentary probleas of understanding the aessage: "if
I hear otmnrtnmrmr." Professor Cecceto says jokingly. "I don't
understand whether the reference is to an adulterous woman or one who has
many precious stones. ..” These linitetiona bordered on' the "games depart-
ment" of studies on talking machines and some decades passed without
revolutionary develop-eats in the sector.

As we said. the main characteristic of the new Inchine is its ability to
give phrases cadence and "tonality." for exalple. to take into account the

proper degree of suspension in a question which is to cone later. ﬂow was
this arrived at?

"The preliminary work was that of the linguists." explains Engineer liodena
(and he mentions Professor Bertinetto. of the University of Turin). "hho
studied for us the rule of structure of the Italian language. They estab-
lished that. from one point to the following point. a phrase with a certain
nunber of syllables. so many punctuation elements (co-as. etc) and certain
pauses of separation between words. necessarily involves a kind of ‘tone’
and 'breeth' that are characteristic of the melodic progression. After
the linguists (and naturally also physicians and psychologists) finished
their work. it was up to us, the experts in electroecoustics and in calcu-

lators. to translate their results into numerical values. the only ones
the computer understands."

In other words. the talking colputer scans with lightening speed (in-
finiteainal fractions of a second are enough) the entire "nature” of a
sentence from beginning to end. the punctuation points and breaks between
the words. The result of the calculation automatically determines that
the computer will choose. from among a certain number of alternatives. the
right tonality with which to proceed with the reading. Regarding reading
per se. this is done with ”stored” sends (the first part. resolved sone
time ago. of the problem. even here the ‘Nrin achine. however. has in-
novations. in the sense that the current principle of syllable division
was replaced by stored sounds based on groups called "diphonics." ‘I'hese
nuaber 150 and each is coqosed of a vowel and one or more comonsnts
preceding it.)

27

FOR OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

'ﬂiin I» certainly an Italian first which outstrips the excellent predecessors
(carefully studied by «sum which mentions them with respect) such as the
"mechanical reporter" by Cevcsto at the University of Milan. and the ap-
paratus realised in the University of Padus electronics laboratory. Is
this also a world first? "He are alined on the world scale." says engineer
Pierino Tonetto. CSBLT co-director. He adds. "at the better end of the
scale." This is considerable for a nation with Italy's research deficit.
even though it is only experimental. But as the English say. it is also
an "understatement": Those who have seen the "best" of the American navy
and air force (which are giving careful attention to these studies) main-
tain that the Turin triking machine is better.

Uithin limits. Because it has them. The CSBLT computer needs. for example.
s "prepared" text with little indicators that coach it (otherwise it would
read all the words flat). Improvements can be made. and this is already
done in connection with the fluency of reading tones. It does not yet

have a scanner for the analysis of any written text (this will come). And
naturally it is not being produced commercially (but the "exploitation" of
the prototype is not a matter that concerns CSBLT. which is a research
center).

To what use will it be put? Emotionally, the advantage that strikes one
at first is that of freeing the blind from the slavery of Braille. Those
who cannot see can buy a book. a weekly magazine. a daily newspaper, and
put it into the machine to hear its contents.

in less dramatic terms. but economically and numerically much broader. the
talking calculator will be useful to us all, particularly through employment
over telephone lines: Par bank reports. on the weather, on daily news
(which can be obtained from a telephone number it is true. but through the
use of recorded tapes that are replaced after intervals of time; instead.
the calculator would instantly include every new event and would be able

to continually give up-to-date. clear replies ct the precise instant when
the user calls upon it).

Furthermore. the new computer will give us a verbal report of information
contained in the encyclopedia and the library and reports from data centers
where other macroscopic computers function. Today all these reports are
handled by the "high priests of the calculators" and they can be collected
by the small number of the elite who possess a "terminal" on whose screens
the reports appear. in the future. with the substitution of the new talking
terminal for the textual terminal. a few coins will be sufficient so that
anyone. from a small town and without going elsewhere. can have available

to him the most minute and up-to-date information from the great university
centers of knowledge (at least in theory; in practice, certainly. the problem
of "coded“ reports will have to be solved. These are the reports that

rightly or wrongly are withheld from everyone so that they can be reserved
for privileged categories.)

28
’0. OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE 03L?

An Additional Service

And what about the ethical aspect. the perennial (but always drslstic)
question of the danger that the machine will “replace” nan rather than
serve him? This was raised recently at Paris in an international sysposiue
of specialists on the subject "The Coaputer and Data Control." He dealt
with the problea separately. in a talk with Professor Ceccato which goes
beyond the Turin calculator.

But as far as the CSBLT aachine is concerned. it lust be said ia-ediately
that the question has less weight. This is not a question of the ato-
boab or genetics. which can be used for good or for evil (after all. that
line is also valid for the invention of the knife) but for an important
and linited discover. Tonetto says, "He plan only to supply the most
useful and least costly services that will aultiply contacts between sen."
it is significant that the Turin aschine evolved. beginning with the tele-
type. with techniques that liait the pareseters of aesorization to the in-
dispensable (and "poor aeaory" leans use of sasll and therefore cheap cal-
culators). Engineer Scagliola. another source in the group. adds: "At
first information was transaitted orally; it aultiplied with the advent of
printing. That the calculator today can make the page talk cannot frighten
people: On the contrary. it can only bring then closer together."

29
you omcm. as: am:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

COPYRIGHT: 1978 RIZZOLI EDITORS

END
6036

cso: 5500 30
FOR omcm. use ONLY