APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-00880R000100010010-8

I .IMIDDU 40,0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010010-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE MLY

JPRS L/8203

5 January 19 79

TRANSLATIQ’IS (II LATIN AIERICA
(FOUO 1/79)

U. S. JOINT MUCATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE GILY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010010—8
NOTE

Jl'lls publications cuntain information primarily fro. foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transnissions and broadcasts. Materials froo foreign-language
sources are translated; those i‘roo English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and uterial enclosed in brackets
[] are suppl led by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each itea. or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was su-arised or extracted.

Unfamiliar nnaes rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or nalec preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as gpropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical es within the body of an
item originate with the source. Ti-es within items are as
given by source.

‘lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Goverment.

COPYRIGIT MUS AND REGUlATIONS CWEINING WISH" OF
MATERIALS ”PRODUCED “BIZ!!! REQUIRE THAT DISSBMDIATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION 3! RESTRICTED MUFFICIAL USE OHLY.
_ ‘ 53‘“ °“““"°‘

It? olle .Pedod

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Clebs Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

 
  

    
 
 

The serial report contains articles on political and sociological develop-ents
in nsjor areas of Latin Aasrica. as reported primarily fro- l.stin Aurican
mspapsrs and periodicsla. It also includes intonation on major sepents
of Latin Nasrican econoay. geography. culture. and ethnography.

 
      
     
 

Political Science

 
   
   
   
 
  

Sociology _
Econoaics __lsrbsdos _lionduras
Culture _lolivia _Janaica
Ethnology _Bratil _llexico
Technological _CI|ile ._licara;ua
Geography

 
     
  
 

 
       

_Cuba __Peru
II I, m I I I __Doninican Republic _‘l'rinidad-‘rsbsgo
m h” t... __lcusdor _l1ruguay
_Bl Salvador _Venezuela
Gate-ale

       
 

m. court sun/an SD. so, at
' run"!

For Official Use Only.

Linked Iii-her of Copies Available Fro. JPRS. W“
1.. . .3 '

amoss s 1» memo: IODIO-ON
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRB L/8203

5 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(9000 1/19)

Coureuts PAGE

AIGII'I'INA

CUM

Videle'e Speech Viewed on finely. Unifying
(Sergio Com: LA OPINION. 26 Nov 78) .

writer Points to Conformity of Church. Politicel View
(Rodolfo Pendolfi; LA OPINIOII. 26 Nov 78) ...............

Cola-nut loflecto on Junte'e Three-her Rule
(Rodolfo Pendolfi; LA OPINIOR. 27 Nov 78) ...............

Beagle Conflict Jeoperdim Stretegic. Economic Interute
(Sergio Caron: u OPIIIION. 5 lov 78) ....................

Co-eacuv axe-1m Situation ot 0.8. Skyleb
(Gilberto Cebellero Alneyde; mm. 22 Dec 78) ..........

10

13

18

- I - [III - LA - 144 F000]

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OPPlCIAL USE ONLY

ARGENTINA

vmm's srrnca “MD AS uncut. immune
Buenoe Aires LA OPINIOti in Spanish 26 Nov 78 pp 10-11

[Article by Sergio Ceron', passages enclosed in slantlinea printed in
boldface]

[Text] Fitness. decisiveness and, at tines. bluntncss. These are three
of the words used by observers to describe the nessaga given to the country
last Thursday by the president of the nation. Lieutenant General Videla
was thus fulfilling his obligation to give the Argentine people s clear
explanation of his thinking. at the risk of his political capital drop-

ping to irreversible levels in the gradual deterioration observed during
the last few weeks.

As pointed out in this sane coluan by LA OPIﬂION last Sunday. the fact of
the latter is that the nilitary govern-ent's insge was passing through an
unbra which could be characterised in this lumen/"slowness in the hand-
ling of political 'tining,’ indecision. polenica with respect to retire-
nent and the naning of collaborators, iailure to nest expectations in
various sectors which required tactical rectification of the outlines of
political econony."l

Apparently, the president recognized the need for reestablishing direct
co-unication with his people. he succeeded in--and this is a good sign—
arousing general interest. thanks to the snnouncenent of his nesaage
which. according to the 802105 AIRES am in its editorial on Friday.
I'aroused as such interest in private bones and public places as if it were
an inportant football gane.”l Even allowing for the subtle vein of British
hu-or discernible in the conparison. we nust agree that it is a suitable
sophisn for the neaaureaent of a politcal ”rating."

Unsat isf ied Concerns

"any unsatisfied concerns which were inciting public opinion to deeand
an explanation fro- the nan who. despite the legal points that govern power
relationships, continues to be. perhaps because of political tradition.

1
FOR OPPICIAL USE MIX
70R ONICIAI. ”8! ONLY

the neat authoritative epoheeaan of the National Reorganization Proceee.
above all becauee in recent tieee too eany voicee have been heard, which
cane free the interior of thie proceee and which dieeeninated contradic-
tory and at tieee antagonietic inagee. lt wae logical. than. for confu-
eion and diecouregeeent .to infueo. the Argentinee who were. noreover.
eubjected to the action of the peychological factoriee which were advanc-
ing without reeietance over terrain free fro- obetaclee.

The aggravation of the conflict with Chile. the accueulation of bitter
criticiene of eocio-econonic policy. the expreeeione of alarn—eone well-
intentioned. other. auapect--froe political figuree on how the proceee
wee going and. finally. the alereing outbreak of a etrihe which repeat-
edly paralyzed the national railway network. were factora which created

a negative enbience. There were too my concerne on the part of the
people which were not given eatiefactory anewere.

Finally. on Thureday. Lieutenant General Jorge Rafael Videla poked hie head
into the honee of the Argentinee. The eerenity. confidence and aplod’

with which he read hie neeaage were noted by obeervere. Ae LA mien etated
in ite editorial yanterday,/"In any event. he did not eechew the tone

which habitually ie ueed for blunt repliee."/

The straw agreee with thie count by naintaining that Preeident Videla'e
worde /"ehould in large neaeure eerve to put an end to the tall: about
indecieion and tiredneee in hie goverment. so long an hie worde are
backed by action, to the degree that the new cabinet takee care of ite
nany problene. Preeident Videla will nova hie ehip out of the region of
the doldrune."/ In other worde. the preeidentiel neeeege arrived juet

in tine to halt the deterioration in hie goveruent'e ilage. however.
worde are not enough to etrengthen and reinvigorate the inege. It ie
neceeeary that authority be exercieed and that euch exerciee of authority
be perceived. without a ehadow of doubt. by the people. Thie ie a reepon-
eibility which not only concerne Lieutenant General Videla but alao the
Kilitary Junta which. cowbined. ie the at. total of political authority
and eharee the reeponeibility for the conduct of the hatinnal Reorganize-
tion Proceee. It ie clear that the poeeible failure of one of the tea-bare
of the Junta will have an inpact upon the othere.

Definitione

The epeaker clearly etated the general outline of the proceee. repeatedly
eet forth by hi- during hie govern-eat. Theee are the principal elenente
of the Proceee:

«The political objective of the Proceee ie to find aﬂenocratic eolution
which ie lasting] in tine.

«Toward thie end. the mad Porcee are preparing to formulate a political
propoeal which will reach /"all eectore and factione that are ready to
ehape a pluraliet and etable denocracy within the frenework of a nodern
Argentina."/

2
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE QNLY

--Thnt proposal will be based upon two necessary elements: /"dialog to
enrich it and participation to nsterislize it."/

At the sane tine. the president of the nation described the three sec-
tors which for various reasons are opposed to the naterialisation of
those proposals. He listed then as follows:

--/£litist groups' which are ignorant of the national reality and the
asst tragic world experiences.

«Sectors which are betting on an [electoral outconel. lacking the sup-
port of a solid civilian-nilitary convergence.

--/Pervenus/ who sin to disorient the Arned Forces by attenpting to
enlist then in denagogic or populist positions.

Lieutenant General Videla succeeded in transnitting the enotion and
authenticity of his words to his audience when he announced his decision
not to convert his govern-ant into an autocracy and his ssbition to share
authority /" with the Arned Porces. with the non who are representative
of the sectors end factions which sake up our society and with the Argen-
tine people. the ultinate benefactors of this Process."/

It is evident that the president of the nation is certain of the fact that
authority in a conplex co-unity such as Argentina is shared. The Arned
Forces. political parties. business-en. unions. the Church. intellectuals.
scientists and technicians. along other sectors. are participating in
authority. Only the sun of a najority of those factions of authority can
insure the success and historical viability of a political plan. However.
what Lieutenant General Videla and his conrades of the Military Junta
should understand is that in order to aobilise the fornidsble latent ener-
gies of the Argentine people it is necessary to propose to then a national.
significant. inaginative. bold and at the sane tile realistic national
strategy. The definition of their objectives and the proposal of an
action plan to attain then will pronote adherence to the proposed policy
which the Arled Forces intends to present to the country shortly for
consideration and analysis.

we are on the threshold of another era like that of the '80's. There is
even a synbolic and Iysterious analogy between the dates and the expecta-
tions for develop-ant, progress and greatness. However. the possibility
of that threshold being crossed by Argentina depends upon ourselves. our
lucidity. our generosity, our dedication to the cannon good and our bold-
ness. For if it is true that the winds of heroic deeds are blowing in
the country, it is necessary that we be prepared to live in /"a state of
heroic deeds."/

The responsibility of a ruler is not at odds with dynanisn in action; nor
is caution at odds with drive; even less is wisdon at odds with imagina-
tion.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL 083 ONLY

The nilitary government has everything it needs to propose a strategy

of greatness: the aspirations of 25 eillion Argentines and the condi-
tions of the world situation which offer a temptation and a challenge.
To the degree that the ailitery government in in harmony with events and
does not proceed contrary to the facts of the situation. it will have the
keys to political dynamisn. And if it in capable of marching in atep
with the rhytha of that dynanisa. it will obligate all the social forces
to fall in line behind it. Then. neither fears nor suspicions will be
justified in the face of the opening of the dialog nor the perspective
that through participation the representatives of the civilian con-unity
will be incorporated into the government.

foreign Policy

As regards foreign policy. once again the virtues which have character-
ized the president's handling of this sector surfaced: good sense. reapoo-
eibility and awareness that it is necessary to exhaust all possibilities
before resorting to an armed confrontation. It is not solely and sinply
a question of the amount of blood [spilling] i-plicit in such a confron-
tation but also the frustration-at least the partial frustration--of the
most intelligent and effective policy which Spanish-speaking nations can
evince in South America: a policy of gradual and irreversible integration.
and with the attainment of that policy the prepration of the conditions
for a frank and prageatic understanding with Brazil to form a solid packs
age of interests vis-a-vis the rest of the world.

Clearly. knowledge of these objectives of Argentina's continental policy
cannot serve Chile as a pretext to make an effort to penetrate regions
which historically have been subject to national sovereignty. "or were
there gray areas in this sector in the president's message: /"in the same
eanner that we lust not lack caution in arriving at an equitable solution.
we muat not lack the decisiveneas necessary to affirl our sovereignty.
should the need ariae."/

These sober words were few in number; however. they were clear. It is to
behoped that the addressee is able to understand their profound signifi-
cance.

also. on the subject of the already stale legal proceedings involving the
coepetible utilization of the Upper Parsna's resources. the president's
speech was sensible and crystel clear: /"ln the final analysis. our posi-
tion is simple: we eust find a just balance aeong the interests of the
three countries."l

The braeilian foreign minister. Antonio Azeredo da Silveirs. stated (see
CLARIN. 25 November 1978. p 2) that Vidsls's statements are /"perfect.
even conciliatory."/ After this remark. he stated that he had not en-
countered a eingle word which did not eats good sense.

notwithstanding the volubility which in recent years has characterized
the actions of the ltamsrsty titular. his reaction gives no cause for

b
'0' OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL I!!! ONLY

optinisa over the resolution of differences concerning Corpus end. in the
finsl enslysis. serves to give en exect nessure of President Videls's
speech. -

An lungs of Coherence

Two other positive factors coebined to restore coherence end solidity to
the inege of the silitsry governsent. The first involved the stetenents
nsde on the sens dey. ‘l'hursdey. by the Amy co-snder in chief. Lieutensnt
Generel Roberto B. Viols. to diplossts who were holding e reception for
his.

Subject to the rigidity of e questionneire. obviously Viole did not tske
up all the questions thst the president wss to discuss hours leter. How-
ever. his speech cleerly shows s politicel viewpoint exactly like thet
expressed by Jorge Rsfsel Videle. the use concern over guiding the coun-
try in the direction of denocrecy end svoiding the influence of elitists
or dessgogic factors which could inpede the forwsrd novenent of the
Process.

A dsy leter, Adnirel Arnsndo Lesbrwschini wss to elley the concerns of
Selte news-en. when he wee sslted his opinion of the stetus of the
Netionsl Reorgenisetion Process. he ststed thst he sew progress being nede:
however. he added thst /"whst is isportont is to refrsin fron giving sec-
tored or pertisl opinions."l And in connection with the problens ssso-
cisted with the leegle end Corpus. he elected to refer to whet hed been
seid 2!. hours esrlier by the president of the nstion.

Both speechsaniols‘s end Lssbrwschini'sncontributsd to reinforcesent
of the issge of coherence end retionslity dissesineted by the speech of
the president of the republic sod. doubtless. to consolidstion st the sens
tile of the Arled Forces es s function of euthority.

One sspect of Videle's speech reneine to be considered. The president
rsfrsined fron entering the sinefield of s polesic with the growing wsve
of criticises sgsinst his sinister of scone-y. The rsilwsy strike. which
s dsy efter its occurrence evoked s count by the provicsri genersl of
the Arned Forces. Honsignor Victorio lonsnin. is s syrpton which induces
one to reflect on the possibility of considering ”fl :xibility" in the
rigid direction given to econonic policy in its soc'sl espect. Above ell
beceuse both of these occurrences in s wey represent two ends of the spec-
trus: thst of the lsbor novesent. influenced by tenor-sting currents. end
thst of Monsignor Domain. cherscterised by its sdhcrence to formles of
conventionel thought within the frsnework of fections existing within the
Church. "hen the spectru- of sectors criticel of s politicel orientetion
is so brosd. the ineviteble duty of e ruler is to reflect on the visbility

of the policy in question.
COPYRIGHT: u OPINION. luenos hires. 1978

8163
cso: 3010 5

M OFFICIAL IISI OIL!
’0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ARGBNTINA

HRITBR POINTS 1‘0 COVPOIIHITY 0P CRURCH. POLITICAL VIEHS
luenos Airaa LA OPINIOII in Spanish 26 Nov 78 p 10
[Article by Rodolfo Pandolfi]

[Text] There aust have been few historical occaaiona on which the state-
nents of the Argentine Bpiacopate have had greater i-ediata and note
profound significance in the totality of national life. The Catholic
Church haa attained a universality in ita teaching which by far excaads
the nunber of its faithful and which has an inpact on all aectora. In
large part. this situation is due to the fact that the Church has increas-
ingly achieved a firn inurralationahip between the exposition of transcen-
dental truths and their contemporary leaning.

The whole world knows that the Catholic Church. in than days, listens
carefully before offering an opinion. it listens and interpreta the
signs of the present reality without allowing itaelf to be pressured
either by old or new triunphalisn.

The latest docuent of the Episcopateulihe the texts which have been
elanating since 1976--nay have attained even greater diasenination because
of suspension of the public activities of the varioua political partiae.
The business or union aactora. although they have the national interest

in nind. axpresa the concerns raised by Argentine problem in different.
concrete sectora. The political parties are asking an effort to represent
overall strategic alternativea of a national kind. as they do not bring
together citizens on the baaia of their belonging to a union but rather
on the basis of the objectives they share. however. although the suspen-
sion of their activitiea haa been interpreted in a flexible way. which
thus par-its the expression of nultiple thoughts. the political parties
by definition-«e partieaucannot “Oi-O a teaching function like that
carried out by the Church.

Above and beyond these co-ents. there is no observable contradiction
between the Church'a thinking and the voices which have been raised
recently fro. various currents of public. union and businesa opinion.

6
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In this connection. four subjects can be cited:

a. The conflict between Argentina and Chile over the Beagle channel situ-
ation. All sectors of opinion have stated that they are in favor of peace;
however. at the seas ties. the various political forces-~perhepa with the
sole exception of the group heeded by Alvaro Alsogeray~~are advocating

a policy of firmness in the defense of national sovereighty.

b. Socioecononic policy has generated anxiety in ell sectors of opinion.
Independent of the value judgnents which say be aade with respect to the
edainistration of Martinez de Roz. it is indisputable that this edninis-
tretion. in e Ienner of speaking. is "in the eye of the store."

c. with shades of difference, ell the exponents of national thought feel
that the tine hes cone for deeper political debates which are called for
by the present situation. Lieutenant General Juan Carlos Onganie hin-
self cited the rieks of a prolonged depoliticizetion process.

d. All the political forces of the country have shown the-selves to be
fir-1y against subversion; end they acknowledge the eerit in the govern-

lent's having eradicated it, although sole of the: are eating procedural
observations.

In the following table a coeparison ie Iade between the recent statements
of the top leaders of radicalisl, Ricardo Belhin and Raul Alfonsin. and
those of a group of citizens lads up of Peronists. popular conservatives,
Allendists, Christian Deaocrets. socialists and connunista. however, if
the question is linited generically to those four points. including what
is being done to the econolic sector by the existence of a generalized
nalaiee but without giving an opinion about the therapeutics to be used.
the spectrum would be conplenented by the opinions of develop-entalisn and
of personalities such as Francisco Henrique and Rafael Martinez Raynonda.
The ease thing is happening with respect to the broadening of the politi-
cal sector, a thesis with which Arturo Frondizi is in egreenent. although
he does not. of course, propose the sane solutions as radicalise.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

:.u¢0uuou ausu an nu nu .mhcuuaoo
aka :0 .uOuooo Add Baum unequa-
oa» not an: on nu oonI~o«> .quD

u« noun: cu uoluuuxu on» onwaaon:

:..aoauau«uaau aquauauom no
auqouuxd ans-«o oAu ads» ouc- nous»
.030. cu gods: .ao«uo:u«o suave a
Anaaa-unouu unouaauoa-a wagon. on:

:.uuoou Andaman:

gun) rnuuoun a cone nu luau
Iqauuu on .nduanuu vouniuuoanu
huge an: noun: .adam ualoaoon

oAu mo couuu>0u I On gang-u
Iuwoa> u905uua vooooua vanes. 03:

2.55A1uuoou van spayed:

an a: 0» cans“... Canaan saucy
taboo on» undonsonou uaonuwa .aaouu
unauouoa annoyanua an. Hanan-0a no
auwuoa on» nuance-I auﬂuwu anal on:

nave: ovadnuom
.OHuoo ououualuh .ouaddn<

caucunc coon .oacqudnq¢ Hana .quA
cacao» nunuoub .Houuun ovnwaooa

.:o«ouo>n:¢ vuuoouvcuo and
a>cn In unalﬁho>ou unovoun
on» no uquI nova-ohm any:

        

                

:.»uauoolov ouucosu
use no auovwnooaoo
ou huuusou 0:» cu
ouaouuau anon» on»
you gonna. ozu o»
chsuou nvdsono 03”:

  

:.>uou00lcv

uo uuoaoa unknown“ no:
nuaoauua .uquuauuaasa a
nu .nouuoouo uou away «an:

      

  

:.ouooav
aoua ouaoulswvoa
van Haul» osu «sun:
on. oouuuouuado nu
0.5.0.5 hhucooo 0:»
no annoyancw on» o»
knouuuoo ow un...:

      

  

:.¢unoun«aaao

hues» you noun: can: vacuav
nous: cucuuoc on» new an.
o>onn .Ouaauouaov Ia um:

            
        

    

  

:.»uo&«0u
uo>o. voauunauuv
no ouwua on» us no:

and I0uuol< uwuud
an 00-05 and: 03:

Handcud< H518

unnuon cahoowz

ao«.uc>a:m

ouowuooau

Iowan-m
noouuunom

bonnet
oulonoou

auuuuaoo
cannon

10R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R Oﬂ‘lClAl. USE ONLY

Bxpreeeed in this manner. there in little doubt about the eubjecte which
are of greeteet concern to Argentina.

but it ie the totality of the eituation and the totelity of opinione
about the eituetion which are reflected by a new and vibrent eector
through the word of the Bpiecopete. In the eignificant text of 19 haven-
her there ere obeervatione which cannot be read careleeely:

Pirat. Sinc. it could not be otherwiee. for natural and eupernatural
reaeona. the Epiecopate exalte peace end recalle in thie connection the
word of the holy fathera: “Pence ie the ac.» of neeeianic wealth."
Peace will never be en etrong that it need not be fortified by preyer."
the Epiecopete etatee.

The concept of peece ie interpreted both on the doeeetic level and on the
foreign level. with an obvioue ellueion to the Argentine-Chilean conflict.
however. it ie in thie latter eenee that the worde of St Auguetine heve
epecial neening: "Peece ie trenquelity in order." The quotation ie clari-
fied with a peeeege free the Iloly Bible: "Pence ie the work of juetice."

After thet. the Epiecopate enalyeee the content of peace ae e work of
juetice.

Second. The Epiecopate aleo reflecte the people'e econoeic concern which
in ehered. noreover. by the pertieene of the preeent Proceee. In reeffir-
nation of the Church'e eociel doctrine. the text etetee: "lf nan lacke
the eeeentiale beceuee another tekee thee froe hi: or doee not give hie
hie nhere. thie leck ie the product of injuetice; and peace ie ehettered."

Third. The Epiecopate aleo nekea reference to the need for perticipation.
After recalling the Apoetolic Letter. Octogeeiee Adveniene. of Paul VI.
it etatee: "when een feela that he in alienated froe everyday life or
doee not actively participete. he euffere. if the eituetion ie brought
about beceuee eoeeone illicitly prevente hie froe doing eo.”

Fourth. The Church etrongly urgee reconciliation and forgiveneee. At
the ease tine. it offere thie clarification: "Since we heve lived through
then. we are very euch aware of the evente which eucceeeively conetituted
a painful expreeeion of thie greduel deterioration in our country:
netionel deeencuentro [Tdiecord]. the lack of greet ideele. the need

for authority and. en the culeinetion of thie dieintegretion of the
Petherlend. the violent outburet of terrorien and orgenieed eubvereion.
which were orcheetreted in eeny inetancee by ideologiee of varioue kinde.
principally Heniet in origin. all of which are contrary to the Chrietian
ethic of our netion. thet wee forged with ideal of juetice end freedoe.”
”He heve euffered thie gredual proceee and the heerte of Argentinee heve
filled with pein over the bloody fight which hae broken out. whoee deep
wounde will not be eeeily eteunched." Propoeale concerning a new and
ieeginetive legel eechaniee which eneuree the viability of the juridical
order end concerning edequate infomtion about epieodee deriving free
the antieubvereive caepeign. ere et the heart of the eccleeieetical docuIent.

COPYRICRT: u OPlhION. luenoe Airee. 1978
8163 9

cso: 3010 m onrcm. use OIL!
'0! OHICIM. 088 ONLY

WWII“

ooumsr renters on JW‘M'S THREE-M W
luenoa Airea LA OPINION in 8paniah 27 Nov 78 p 12
[Article by Rodolfo Pandolfi]

[Text] In a nonth. three yeare will have gone by eince then-co-ander

in chief of the any Jorge llafael Videla addreaeed a dramatic aeaaago to
the country and a direct. final warning to the governoent of label
Poron. Three tenpeetuoua. elaoat iapoaaihle yeare have paeaed aince
then. The republic energed iron the war againat aubveraion to face an
extreaely difficult international eituation. without an opportunity to
even catch ite breath. In one doubta that in alnoat all eectora. the
governent'a relationa are coaplicated. dangeroua. agitated. There «no
to be no peace in thia proceaa which waa launched to aecure peace.

In the final analyaie. how can the terna of the equation be exactly etatedf

Everything conaidered. year'a end ia very near-othe end of the fiacal
year. one could anoet aay-oand it ia probably worthwhile to aaha a hand
court of the factora to etrihe the balance.

1. Three yeare ago. aubvaraive banda were atill capable of engaging in
a veritable nilitary battle in the very heart of Greater luenoe Airea and
were at the point of bringing about a deep cleavage in the nornal etruc-
ture of the country. with the aeiaing of iaportant poeitiona and a large
aaount of war naterial. They auffered a deciaiva defeat in liontre
Chingola. fro. the war-naking atandpoint; and it wee there that if not
the beginning of the end at leaat the end of the beginning took place.

Today. aubvereion hea dieappeared free a nilitary viewpoint. although it
ia enough for two bold pereona at any tine to carry out a terroriet att.
Sectione of the coutry were bloodied in theae three yeara. which were
narkad by epiaodea auch ae the boabinge of the federal coordination and
ainiatry of defenae officee and by eaeaaainationa auch aa that of Paula
unbrwachini. At a terrible coat. the entire coutry became aware of
the nature of terroriet aubvereion whoae beginning ten yeare ago waa
recognized by very few aa a hallucinatory aign.

10
M OFFICIAL US! OIL!
M OWICIAL US! ONLY

2. however. not only heve the eubvereive bende diuppeered fron e
nilitery viewpoint but eubvereion hee ceeeed being e politicel elterne-
tive. The few reneining eubvereive eectore which could ettenpt e poli-
ticel noveeent ere doing eo in the greeteet ieoletion. There in enell
doubt thet the eituetion hee coepliceted fluid co-unicetion between
the govern-ent. unione. pertiee or univereity etudente. However. there
ie even leee doubt thet the unione. pertiee end univereity etudente--to
epeek of three eectore which in none wey could be victine of infiltre-
tion etteepte-oere rejecting terrorien like the plegue.

3. After heving loet ite nilitery end politicel bettlee in the republic.
nubvereion nede en effort to operete through internetionel preeeure. It
ehould be recognized thet in e very hereh wer eituetion of the kind Argen-
tine experienced it wee ineviteble thet unjuet incidente occurred which
everyone regrete. Thoee incidence were need by the eene pereone who
publicly boeeted of heving eeeeeeineted Pedro lugenio Arenburu. her-en
Quijede or Arturo Nor loig. for exenple. to nention only three notorioue
ceeee.

leceuee of e conplex coebinetion of circunetencee, including the tone
which prejudice cuetonerily given to objective evente. it in true thet
out of good feith or bed feith. with infornetion or ebeolutely uninfoned.
beceuee of peculier politicel celculetione or beceuee of frivolity. hon-
eetly believing thet they were contributing to the inprovenent of the
eituetion of the Argentinee or thinking thet they were her-ling Argentine.
de-ocretic politiciene with greet preetige in urope end the United Stetee
epoke out in e highly energetic nenner with reepect to our country. Even
internetionel orgeniutione whoee n-bere hed pereonelly experienced the
terroriet offeneive heetened to enit totelly unproductive judgpente.

h. At the beginning of the yeer. but perticulerly during the leet few
nonthe. the etete begen to put the finiehing touchee on control of the
eituetion ee regerde the undeeireble effecte of the entieubvereiwe c.-
peign. An in the cue of eubvereive terroriee. it cen be noted thet the
ieoleted incident in elweye poeeible. however. the evolution wee eo
nerlned thet it eeceped none of the netin or internetionel obeervere.

5. Iron thet point of deperture. the Proceee with renewed force eterted
to chenge the inege which hed been creeted ebroed. During hie recent
trip to the country. the forner co-nnder in chief of the levy. Adeirel
bilio admrdo Heeeere. eteted thet hie ectione hed contributed to the
definitive ieoletion of the llontoneroe. Sociel dcocretic pertiee which
hed nhown th-elvee to be nindful of the denuncietione nede by the eub-
vereive eector begen to codify their pointe of view. Aleo. beceuee of
the influence of Alerico Chioldi. but in recent tine. epperently. beceuee
of the dynenic ection by Adelrel Meeeere ebove ell. the eociel d-ncretic
eector edopted e new criterion with reepect to Argentine. During the
lnternetionel Socieliet Congreee in Vencouver. requeete to ednit liontoeeroe
ee nenber obeervere were rejected (it ehould be rubered thet the
Peleetine Liberetion Orgenieetion in en obeerver et the United Ietione).

11
M MICK". 08! “LY
M OHICIAL US! ONLY

The top Spenieh eocieliet. feline Goneelez. differentieted between reec-
tionery dictetorehipe end eituetione genereted ee dihee in the fece of
eeditioue ectivity.

6. leced by the internetionel eituetion preeented in connection with the
border litigetion with Chile-on eector in which the etetenent of the
Iritieh Hinietry for foreign Affeire reinforced the Argentine viewpoint-
the country geve evidence of e decieive predilection for unity in the
preeence of en eeergency whoee cutcoee coutinuee to be unforeeeeeble.
Moreover. it ie true thet the eltemtivee of thet queetion heve die-
oriented eectore of public opinion: however. thie hee not dininiehed the
uneni-ity on erieting pointe of view.

7. The cowtry'e econoeic eituetion continuee to be e eubject of ooleeic.
concerning which any obeervere neintein the: ell the reeulte ennomced on
26 lurch 1976 heve not been etteined. hevertheleee. elthough criticieee
ere fer froe extr-e. we ehould keep cleerly in nind the next-an point of
econoeic end financiel dieorgenieetion which the country hed ruched three
yeere ego.

8. In the educetionel eector. the proceee wot through couple: end. on
occeeion. contredictory etegee. Including the interi- eppointlent of
Cenerel Albeno llnrguindegwy. four nen with different etylee (Druere.
Cetelen. herguindeguy end Llerene) hed to techie theproblele enieting in

e eector which in the reel etretegic huen reeerve of the comtry. ‘l'he
leet debete on eeverel boob edopted in privete religioue inetitutee
coopele we to r-e-ber thet extr-e ceution ehnuld be need with reepect

to opinione which ere offered occeeionelly outeide the integrel context in
which they ehould be coneidered. The ideologicel celpeign egeinet eub-
vereion. et thie etege of effeire. requiree the uni.- precieion in
nerhenenehip to evoid even the euepicion of ueggeretione. Thin new or
ney not be the ceeex the Cetholic hiererchy. unreover. hen the judgnentel
fectore for coneideretion of the problee. ho werning ie totelly pointleee
when the entire country res-here how eubvereion wee introduced et verioue
educetionel levele. however. it will be ueeful to eleo rnenber thet there
were thoee who two yeere ego denouced the dietribution of e ”eubvereive"
text in e nuber of churchee to be eung precieely et thie tine of the veer.
it wee the liegnificet.” the worde intoned by the Virgin fiery before the
Annuocietion thet ehe would fulfill ell the propheciee.

comma: LA "III“. Iuenoe “In. 1970
81‘!

C50: 3010

12
M «new ”I our
M OWIClAl. US! ONLY

m ”H.161“ JBOPARDIZIS STRATEGIC, some mum
Iuenoe Airee IA OPIIIIOIl in Spenieh S llov 78 pp 10-11

[Article by Sergio Coron: "l’eredoxee end Reflectione et the and of the
Second Stege of llegotietione Hith Chile"; peeeegee encloeed in elentlinee
printed in boldfece]

[Text] Diplonetic oheervere eteted et the end of the week thet the eitue-
tion in the diepute between Argentine end Chile wee peredoxicel eince both
govermente were weiting for e reply fro- the other to eeperete propoeele
thet precticelly croeeed einulteneouely. A ceble fro. Sentiego on Iridey
eeid thet the Argentine Preeident. Jorge lefeel Videle, hed eent e note to
hie colleegue. Auguetotinochet, in enrich he propoeed direct negotietione-o

preembly et the higheet level end in perenptory teneo-to reeolve differ-
c“..e

‘lhe foreign ninieter fro. ecroee the Andee, her-u Cubilloe. tented with
reportere end eetineted thet 6 nonthe of tellte hed exheueted the poeeibilio
tiee for e direct underetending. In hie jud'ent. the finel ect ehowed
thet /"there to egreenent on one pointe end diugreenent on other.”/ In
coneequenee. he ineieted in coking the route ehown by the note eent by hie
foreign liinietry to Sen hertin Pelece. in which he propoeee en eppeerence
before the lnternetionel Court of Juetice in he liegue or recouree to
nedietion I"by e friendly goverI-ent choeen by cuon egreenent."/

‘lhe chileen Oppoeition

In an. Santiago ie not betting down 1 centineter fren ite originel peei-
tion. It ie in dieegree-ent with everything thet neene enelyting the
border problu in the light of reeeon end friendehip. fir-1y greeping en
ewerd thet Argentine regecte ee ebueive. An ewerd thet. without coneider-
ing Argentine feelinge end netionel pride , proceeded by neene of decieione
thet inplied interference in Argentine ereee thet it never coneented to
eutnit to eny erbitretion. ihie ie the ceee of the ielende eitueted eouth
of the ”h-er eree” which includee only Picton. Lennon. end Iueve telende.

13
M ""01". 03! on!
M OWICIM. USE ONLY

0n the other hand. Chile quickly agreed to all the terne. ee a conplenent
to. and for the ocononic integration and the nutual defenee of, ite Ant-
arctic. whereby it can obtain direct benefite fron Argentine goodwill. A
characteristic of the diplonecy fron acroee the Andea hee been to content
to arbitration when the lende in diepute had legally belonged. up to that
tine. to eoneone elee.

To expect that Argentine would accept recouree to the Court of Juetice ie
not very reeponeible when it ie realised that there are cloee relatinna
between that organisation and eeverol nenbere of the arbitrel tribunal,
whoee nanifeet abuee of power led our country to declare ite decieion null
and void.

That would leave the eubjcct of nediation by a friendly country. The head
of the Argentine delegation to Hind c-ieeion lo 2, Gen Ricardo Btcheverry
Ioneo. on being interviewed by the huenoa Airee preee, agreed that that

wae e poeeibillty, without expreeeing an opinion on ite real viability.
hmver. he obeerved prudently that "the i-portant thing would be to locate
eoneone who in note qualified than I who could explain the difference between
nediation and arbitration, becauee they are not the one."

Vieit by the King of Spain

The caning vieit by the King and Queen of Spain hee not ceaeed to provoke
the inegination of reportere and analyete. to the extent that eoneone had
to aelt Btcheverry honeo whether nediation could energe an e coneequence of
the viait. The reply was obvioue: it ie a queetion that in outeide of the
authority of the Argentine negotiator and on which it ie not for hin to re-
epond for reaeona of political prudence. lot ie it poeeible to find any
epecific reaction at the higheet levele of the goveruent. In any caee. in
the event that after appropriate enalyeia the conclusion ie reached that
nediatlon ie acceptable-mot arbitration or an erbitral award-cit would be
difficult to chooee e nediator nore euiteble than the Spanieh Crown.

In the iiret place. beceuee i do not perceive that the nether country hee
intercete at etahe in the area ee obvioue ee Great Britain. which through.
out ite hietory hae known how to eubordinate ite judicial epeculatione to
the epecific practicality of ite on conveniencee.

In the eccond place, becauee the natione of lliepanic origin. iron the tine
of their declaration of independence. accepted the bordere eetabliehed by
the Spanieh court for ite coloniea. lhleee, of couree, there were later
ceeaione of territory by legal proceee and not by force. The archivee of
the pcnineula percent a rich atore of precedente on thin eubject.

Pacific and ”fecifiet”

At all eventa. it ie ueeleee to epeculete on thin eubject until it ie
poeeible to proceed further on the baeie of the deciaion that will be

1‘
M omcm 08! MT
NR OHICIAI. US! ONLY

tsken in this regerd by the Argentine Covert-cut. in when it is iepossible
for the internetionel public, if it hes carefully followed the progress of
the interdict end its recent end roote historicel beckground. not to recog-
nise e greet count of goodwill end pecific spirit.

And here it is necessery to insist once nore in the difference between e
pecific Ien end s pecifist. ‘l'he for-er is nonviolent, one who will secri-
fice everything, except the sefety of his loved ones end his dignity to the
ceuse of peece. The letter, on the other hsnd, will secrifice everything,
absolutely everything. in order to flee responsibility end the understend-
ebly huen feer of suffering the consequences of violence. The Argentine
is pecific.

At the sue tine. no Argentine writer hes ever written geopoliticel texts
to justify the expension of our frontiers. 0n the contrery, e csrtein
frankly universeliet culture behind our becks hes led us to secrifice
territories inherited fro. the mother country end therefore unquestionebly

our petri-ony for e friendship thet st tines hes hed its only reel echo in
our heerts.

The pest is enlightening end it should help us to evoid felling into fecile
opti-ien; but in no wey should it be e weight thet inhibits the i-eginetion
in projecting into the future. And uhet we ere trying to do here is i-egine
e forIule thet will per-it us to overcome yesterdey's differences in order
to vigorously build e tonorrow.

The world is nerching towerd regionelisetion. towerd lerge geogrephic.
huen, econoeic, end perheps politicel coecentretions. Seen fro. this
perspective. the leegle conflict see-s to edd up to e ridiculous trifle.
Nevertheless. whet is et steke is sonething nuch core then territoriel
jurisdiction over some isles. Stretegic. econouic. end geopoliticel in-
terests of enornous significence ere et eteke. And for Argentine e letter
of dignity end self-respect. in eddition. since it cennot retreet fro. the
oceenic division principle dicteted by history end by sole-n treeties thet
Chile end the erbitrel tribunel heve ignored.

Sterting with this principle, everything is possible. One cen i-egine such
e brosd cooperetion end integretion between both countries thet it could

even seen the first step towerd the unity of the netiens of the southern
cone. which in turn could be built on such s solid foundetion es to sttein

the old dre- of boliver end Sen Hertin, continentel unity.

For this, generosity end cleer sight end further. consciousness of the reel
historicel interests of the llispenoe-ericen notions is necessery.

Cheuvinist Power Plent?

I csnnot resist the telptetion to restete the title of the note published
on Hednesdey. the let. in CIA!!! by lnrique Alonso. lt deels. of course,

15
M OFFICIAL US! ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the Iteipu hydroelectric coupler in the woke of the ennouncenent thet
lrezil end Pereguey decided without werning co reiee the nuber of turbinee
to 20 free the 18 provided for previouely end repeetedly endoreed by their
experte end politiciene.

"The unileterel edventege thet lrezil eeeke-aininieing the energy-genere-
ting poeeibilitiee of Corpueo-ie in turn,” eeye Aloneo, "et verience with
the none of the cannon good. which ehould ei- for the optimum uee of the
hydreulic potentiel in ell ite different levele end felle.”

1n hie intereeting co-entery ny colleegue edde thet Cerloe de heire Hettoe.
the lrerilien generel, propoeee the creetion of eeven regione of culti-
netionel integretion throughout the length of hie country. One of theee
includee l”the eouthern pert of into Groeeo. weetern Perene. eoutheeetern
Pereguey, end the hieionee region of Argentine."/ Thue. if thie geopolit-
icel concept were epplied, Iteipu would heve e preciee nieeion. einiler to
thet cerried out by the lruilien "bendeirentee" of the coloniel ere: to
he the edwence guerd for the expeneion of the enpire'e frontiere.

Hhile the Argentine Poreign Hinietry cleerly neinteine thet the chenge de-
cided on by the Iteipu pertnere rewiwee the whole queetion of the conpeti-
bility of thet d. with the Corpue dc. curiouely the greeteet criticie-
hee cone fro. the lreeilien preee. The editoriel of the 10m no msn.
of Jl October neinteined: "The new revieion of the bileterel lteipu egree-
lent. ennounced officielly yeeterdey hy Breeil end Pereguey ie deetined to
he e controvereiol decieion cepeble of eltering the politicel credibility
of lreeil."

And it edde leter: /"!or the lreeilien Covert-eat the inn-treble tinee
thet foreign Hinieter Meredo do Silveire reitereted thet lruil would never
increeee the number of turbinee did not letter. 0n the 20th of thie nonth,

in the eol-n cer-ony opening the divereionery chennei of the lteipu.
Preeident Oeinl hineelf lentioned the nuber of 18 turbinee twice."/

The following dey 0 cmeo egreed with ite colleegue end et the eeee tine
gewe the following reflection: /"'i'he Corpue hydroelectric project eleo ie
of intereet to Bruit, ee it will furnieh greerer opereting flexibility to
lteipu. mue en ewentuel Argentine withdrewul froI thet project would not
benefit ue.”l

0 tsuno IE SAD PAUID expreeeed ei-iler opinione er the conclueion of e
co-entery with the effir-etion thet the epieode /"eggrevetee the teneion
elreedy exieting between lreeil end Argentine. which it not to the inter-
eet of eny of the I-ber etetee of the liver Plete beein.”/

‘l‘herc ie no doubt thet Argentine nuet reconeider ite poeition. And the
firet eepect thet ehould be enelyeed ie whether. efter Yecyrete, Corpue
ehould heve priority in the execution of the lerge infreetructure projecte.

16
M OFFICMI. OS! OIL!
'01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

There are any and very reepectahlo voicea that denand. in the intereet of
a eolid national etrategy, coneideration of the Middle Parana and the
Denejo canal projecte for priority attention.

Unity in Divereity

At the end of a week of evente. reporte. and ruore of great inteneity. the
Preaident announced hie cabinet. In the epieodue that accompanied the
change--in which a vice uee of tine wae not oheerved, different for the
military eenaihilitiee than for the civiliano-the unity of action of the
aned forcee wae definitely confined. It ie a unity that-oand it would
he inegenuoue to conceel it--doee not fail to ehow that there are differ-
encee of opinion on how to iocue on the eituation. ‘l'he purpoae of the
lunch Videla had on Wednesday with the three co-andere-in-chief wet with-
out doubt to ahow that the apirit of unity had not been hrolten and that the
proceaa had regained ite nouentu.

at the ease tile, Mb Amndo La-hruechini had a particular intereet in

eupheeieing. ae he did in the uorning. that /"the haeic docuente of the

National Reorganiution Proceee have undergone no changea with regard to

the degree of participation by the Navy in the preaent proceea."/ and that

thie eervice /"ie' working to eneure that thie proceee will go forward and
II

heed-e dyn-ic . .

why ia it ilporiant (or the country for oilitary unity not to he fractured?
Becauee the future of Argentina dependa haeically on the netion'e nobilicing
iteelf around a plan that integratee all eectore of eociety. Thin objec-
tive can hardly be achieved if the ened forcea. which on 26 liarch 1976
rcprceented the [act redouht againet anarchy and dieeolution. do not con-
eorvc unity of action. No ie a aubetantial ootive for oakm poeeible

a convergence with the civilian population that will vitalite the energiee
of the nation.

mum: La Opinion. 1978

9015
cso: 30l0

17
M OHICMI. 08! OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

CUM

WM? mars 8110“!“ or 0.3. am.“
Havana "m. in Spaniah 2130 an- 22 Doc 78 PA

[PIIISA MTIIA apacial (aatura by Oilharto Caballaro Alaaydax "no Tragic
Skylab Piaaco")

[font] lha announca-nt that tho Unitad Stataa ia abandoning oﬂorta to
aalvaga tho arratic ”Skylab" orbital atation, laaving it to [all on our
haada. undaracoraa tho inoﬂiciant way in which thia apaca projact waa
concoiwad.

Thia lirat and only habitablo 0.8. apaco atation waa, during ita daya of
glory. a aynhol or what ao- IJJ. aciontiata triad to proaont to tho world
aa Ilaahington'a aupraaacy in apaca. built at n aatrono-ical coat or owar
$2.6 billion. ”Skylab" (aby laboratory) rocoivad throa groupa of aatro-
nauta botwoon 1973 and 1976 within ita tona of Itll ad aophiaticatod
aqulpaant. Latar abndonod. it baco- a "phnton ahip" orbiting aarth
ovary 93 ainutaa at an initial haight of ‘35 ntara [aa rocaivadl and at
lowar haighta during aubuqnant yoara.

According to 0.8. apaca roaaarcb plan. Skylab wan to roaain nomad and
in orbit for 10 yaara aitar tha throo liaaiona wara coqlatod. During
that tiaa. aciantiata oi tho Iational Aaronautioa and Spaca Ablaiatration
(INA) wara auppoaad to hava had tho opportunity to inatall a now propul-
aion rochat which would offar two poaaibilitioa: To booat it into a
highar orbit. or to guida it back to oarth toward an ocaan or unpopulatod
araa.

nowavor. ma'a plana failad raaoundingly. and tho hnga aaaa, with a 35-
ntar langth. 7-aatar diutar ad a woigbt of IS tona. hogan to tﬂla
nd loaa altitnda.

0.8. tacbniciana and aciantiata hova orchoatratod a caqaign for nntba
to roduca worldwida ioara about tho proopocta that a ahip oi ouch aiao ‘
could (all on an. citiaa in a rain of ataol particlaa. Ialarancoa wara
aada to orbital comctiona. poaition changaa and, lataly. to a long-
uaitod apaca ahnttla that would carry a propulaion rochat to Skylab to
ataar it toward ita daatroction without riah to unkind.

ll
'0! OFFICIAL 088 on!
POI OFFICIAL 038 ONLY

hovever. it ie iepoeeible to per-enently conceel epece fieecoe during
our tine. by eid-Deceebor. the etetion'e orbit hed dropped to 360 be

end no». iinelly. Preeident Jeeee Certer hoe been forced to ennounce
whet the «hole vorld ham Nobody cen eeve 8hyleb.

Moordin; to NASA. the enorloue leboretory vill plu-et into eerth'e
et-oephere betveen July end Septedaer of next yeer end. when it die-
integretee. between ‘00 end 300 (repente will fell to eerth over on
eree 3.500 b loop end 130 In vide.

“here vill they fell? All countriee loceted between the equeto: end
letitudee so degreee north end eouth-oeleoet ell of Latin Morice.
“rope. “rice. Aeie end pert of North Merino—ere cendidetee for the
duperoue reiniell. According to M. the omntriee on the reentry peth
ceo be given only e 1-hour wording. "Mover. we will unite plene for
quick Ieditel eeeietence to thoee effected." e weehinstoe epoheeeen
ennomced in e euppoeedly reeeeurin. tone.

C80: ”10 m

19
M OMCIAI. 08! our