APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOz-OOOGOROOO‘I00010058-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPKS L/8251

29 January 1979

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
FOU0 No. 452

U. S. JOINT PWLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. linterials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforsmtion was
processed. where no processing indicator is giVen, the infor-
mation was sumrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion marlt and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the scarce. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PRWUREMT 0F PUBLICATIWS

JPIS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22151. In order-
ing, it is recouended that the JPIS number. title. date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current JPRS publications are announced in Government Rearts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the lionthlz Catalog of
0.5. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents. 0.5. Government Printing Office, Hashington, D.C.
20602.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names.
title and series) are available through Bell 6 Howell, Old
Mansfield Road, Rooster. Ohio. “691.

Correspondence pertaining to matters other than procurement
may be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
aaauocanmc can . umn No.
ms U825:

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, HISSIUJ. AND SK‘ACE DEVELOPMENTS,
F000 No. 452

O. Paloma; Oa‘aaiaauon Rep.
No.

. Fulani“ Quaint“- Nana aal Mina l0. Proku/‘I’aak/Vock Uah No.
Joint Publication Raoul-ch Service

1000 North Globe Road W Comm/Gnu No.
Arlington, Virginia 22201

II. Spooaaaia‘ Ouaolaalloa Ila-a aal Man» l3- 3" o: Rayon a Puwd
nu

Aa above -

“nu aerial report contain infomtion priurily fro- Prcnch major daily tum-papers

and particant specialized journala on Punch nuclear, niaaile, and apaca technology. -
roaoarch and develop-cot.

France

”upon-

Aaronautica

Hiaai laa '
llucloar Tachnolm I

m. Wino/Ono“ Tana

m. comm tun/um. 160, 181:. 19?, 223

ability am
For Official Use Only.
Linitcd Ila-be: :22 Copies Available From JPRS.

 

'0. “VI.” ""9!

“KO-'9‘ CODIVN'
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/BZ!

29 Januar:

FRANCE: NUCLEAR, MISSILE, AND SPACE DEVELOPMENTS
rouo No. 452

CONTENTS

HEU Pro a Ratablishmnt of lbteorological Satellite System
Pierre Iangereux; AIR 8. COSMOS, 2 Dec 78) ................

Details on Missile Beginnnt Provided
(J. 6. Michel Patenotre; m, 23 Nov 78)

nuclear Attack Submarine Under Construction
(m acosnoe, 30 Dec 78)

Indioactive Haste Vitritication Plant Discussed
(Xavier Heeger; 1.3 ms, 27 Dec 78) ......................

Details of Mopean Space Agency's 1979 mdset Rovided
(Pierre unscrew; m acosnos, 23 Dec 78) ...............

Mobile Telenetry Station for Ariana Tracking Delivered
(Pierre lnngereux; AIR 8: 008108, 23 Dec 78) ...............

Mechanical Qualification Tests 0: APPLE, mm 2 Reported
(AIR :5 cosms, 23 Dec 78)

Briefs
Ariana llotor renting
Intelsat Maritime Satellite Decision
FOR OPFICIM. USP. ONLY

UEU PROPOSES BSTMLISWI' 0F METEOROLOGICAL SATELLITE srsm
Paris AIR 5 COSMS in French 2 Dec 78 p 52
[Article by Pierre Longereux]

[Text] The assenbly of the Western European Union ("30), which held its
26th regular nesting in Paris on 20-23 Novesber 1978, adopted tvo resolu-
tions concerning European space activities. One concerns applications
satellites (recs-endation 326) and the other, neteorological predictions
by satellite for civil and military use (reconnendation 328).

The latter reco—sndation is particularly ilportant since it proposes nothing
less than establish-ent of a European organization, Euro-teat, to be rue
sponsible for exploiting operational civil meteorological satellites and
setting up a European systen of military seteorological satellites possibly
linked to M10 [North Atlantic Treaty Organization].

Establish-mt of Euroutsat Organisation

The "EU assenbly notes "that it is of vital iaportance to establish-eat of
seteorological forecasts in Europe to be able to have available appropriate
data related to conditions on the surface and upper atmspheric layers above
the North Atlantic. North Africa, and Central Africa“ and it is convinced
that it is tine "to urge users (national neteorological services of European
countries) to go to the operational phase of aEuropean lieteosat eysten."

For this reason the nu "encourages the European aeteorological services
and institutes to establish an organization responsible for launching the
operational phase of a European systen of neteorological satellites.

Euroaetsat. sinilar to the Tenorary Eutelsat systen set up by the European
Posts and Teleco-unications administrations."

Meteorological Satellites in Polar Orbit

The uau also deeply regrets that "the systel covering the North Atlantic has
been reduced to four stations and that Anerican ncteorological ships have

been replaced by Soviet neteorological ships." lt directs the attention of

1
FOR OWICIM. USE OKLY
the member countries to "the necessity for obtaining more reliable. yet
profitable. meteorological information about the North Atlantic as well

as North and Central Africa by increasing the number of observation posts

in those regions. the North Atlantic in particular. by installing a network
of ocean buoys. automatic meterological data gathering by specially equipped

aircraft. and setting up a system of meteorological satellites in polar
orbit."

Military Neteorological Satellites

The "EU is also "aware that it is not possible in Europe, for political
reasons" (because of participation by the neutral countries. Sweden and
Switzerland. in Heteosat) to have the same meteorological and oceanic
satellites shared by civil and military agencies. as is the case in the
United States. It nevertheless "considers it necessary that Europe pro-
vide itself with a system of military meteorological satellites."

Under these conditions the N30 reco-sends that the Union's Council "give
its active support to setting up. for purposes of defense. a system of
meteorological satellites. possibly linked to the American national satellite

program and that of NATO. and combined with an appropriate network of mobile
ground stations."

The assembly also recounds that the "EU council ”invite the member countries
to test the presently existing meteorological coordination at the military
level by undertaking more frequent exercises to verify the implementation

of the recouendations formulated by the meteorological group of the NATO
military couittee."

Establishment of Norlwide Teleco-unications Networks

In another field the USU council is to "call upon the European Space Agency
(BSA) to study the establishment of a more highly developed worldwide tele-
communications network capable of gathering. at one and the same time, the
data from meteorological satellites. teledetection satellites. and environ-
mental surveillance satellites” for the purpose of forestalling the great
scourges of mankind. such as drought, famine. natural catastrophe. pollution.
and energy shortage. or at the very least to deploy the resources enabling
the effects to be attenuated.

The "Eu also calls upon the BSA "to study the feasibility of constructing a
small prototype of solar satellite to provide electricity.”

The "EU asks the BSA to provide the funds necessary for these two studies.
and to provide. at the next meeting of the Agency's council. information
on the status of the developnnt project complementary to the Spacelab
orbiting laboratory.

The "EU council is in addition called upon "to elaborate a policy defining
the media and long term objectives of the SSA as well as their financial

inact and to have drawn up a long term budget assuring the existence of a
study group responsible for defining a coherent program.”

COPYRIGI‘r: Air 3. Cosmos, Paris, 1978

11.706 2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETAILS 0:! 1118811.! “Gm PROVIDED
Paris 1’»! in French 23 Nov 78 p 15

[Article by Lt J. 6. Michel Patenotre: "Doing One's Military Service in
the 3rd M [Artillery ResinentP']

[Text] The 3rd Artillery Regiment. installed in the Heilly
canp in the heart of the chalky Che-pane. was in 1973 the
first rsai-snt equipped with nurou tactical nuclear ais-
siles. “the najor part of its personnel-400 out of a total
of l.lOO-connists oi draftees. a situation unique in the
world as regards draftees' participation in the leaning of
nuclear weapons.

Furthermore. the very special character of these weapons does not tram-
tiae the young gunners who serve in the 3rd M. Carrying out interesting
duties and being entrusted with responsibilities is en excellent way to
lake the ties so fast. especially since Hailly is 40 kilo-stern fro-
Chalons-sur-Harne or Troyes. town big enough to offer diversion. "The
only criterion which leads us to eseign a duty to regular personnel rather
than to recruits." Lieutenent Colonel Mareau. second in co-snd. tells us.
"in training tine. There is really just one exanple—the m vehicle
crew. in which the necessity of lengthy crew training prevents the draftees
tron having a place. Everywhere else. end especially in the nissions of
equipnent and installations security. which ere priority ones in peacetime.
they take part as enlisted nen or non-co-issioned officers.”

At the Sane Rhyth-

Yok. a asgnificent leauce shepherd. enters the shed where the special
rut-mu equip-ant is kept. exposed; he goes aroud each vehicle and ends
by discovering a nan. when he attacks and does not let escape. An order
rings out; Yol: releases his prey and returns docilely to sit at the feet
of his handler. Gunner Schwartz. When the dog group was created." he
tells us. "I volunteered to hecone a dog handler. for I already had exper-
ience in training ny own Conan shepherd. Yok and I have lived at the

3
ton onxcm. use 0qu
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

aaee rhythn eince I took hie in charge at Suippee: 1 day out of 6, we do
eurveillance rounde of the eoneitive tone, and the rut of the tine goes
for training and care of varioue kinda." This duty in absorbing. but doee
not prevent weekend leaves. for one of the eix dog hendlere takes charge
of all the aninale on weekende.

Gunner Schwartz doea not coeplain about his lot: "One done not expect the
eaee thing free a eilitary dog an e 'civilian' dog. but the training lethod
in unique. and I will have learned eonething." he telle ue.

The Technology Scared Ila a Little

The nignala by which the order to fire arrives are of very epecial iepor-
tence, and the radio eete are their eaaential carriere. Each of then hee
receiving end transmitting equip-ant and a generator eat. and operatee
with relative autonomy. eerved by a regular-army nonco-iaeioned officer,
two operatore, end a draftee operator-driver. "At the beginning. the
technology ecared us a little," artillery eergeant Pariea. operator. ad-
unite. "but prectice. the uae of .what we learned in the elenentary techni-
cal certificate achool. and eepecially what we have had to teach to thoee
who have taken on their dutiee after ua. have given ue confidence." he
adeita that when he arrived in the 3rd BA 10 nontha ago. he did not think

that he would be a nonco-ieeioned officer today and have euch reeponei-
bilitiee.

To a Thoueandth of a Degree

The precieion of the inpaet depende on the precieion of the ehot'e atarting
poeition, which ie not difficult to underatand. ‘l'o coeprehend the con- ‘
atrainte which thin entaile in note difficult. Bach PLUTON battery coe-
priaee, in addition to two firing eectiona and one PC [Control Station]
aection. a reconeiaaanca eection. whoee nieaion in to indicate to each

gun the place where it ie to net up in firing poeition. and than. once

the poeition in net. to datereine ite poeition and orientation ae exactly
an poeeible.

Gunner'rhoeaeein ie a gyrotheodolite crew neeber: with hie inetruent. he
euet know how to datereine the «both of a point with a precieion on the
order of one-dwueandth of a degree. hie chief recognitee that he hea
incoeparable ekill. hedeetly. he pointe out that "in civilian life. 1

en eaployed by e aurveyor." .

he hae becoee a nenco-ieaioned officer. but thia doee not intereet his;
he refera the uae of precieion inetrunente and perfection of neaaureeent
to officering dutiee—why not?

Theae ere three exemplaa of drafteea to when very real reeponeibilitiee
have been entrueted.

I;
1'03 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In 1 day, 1 met at least 10 of them whom it is impossible to talk about
here. Doubtlessly a highly technical regiment, as the PLUTON regiments
can be. Is it richer in jobs which some like to call "noble?" More proh-
nbiy, each person finds, when he does his military service, the satisfac-
tion which he wants to take the trouble to seek out. and is entrusted with
the responsibilities which he knows how to show himself worthy of.

There is also an effort by the officer corps. but as Lieutenant Colonel
Prevot. chief of staff. says: "when are assigns interesting duties to the
draftees, they are very aware of them and take it to heart to do a good

 

A PLUTON vehicle of the 3rd RA in firing position

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FUN lll'FLLlAl. USE ONLY

 

Artillery sergeant Pariss. radio operator

 

Gunner Thomassin 13 a gyrotheodOIICG crewman.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 — "TAM' Magazine des Aruees

11267
C50: 3100

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NUCLEAR ATTACK SUBHARINE UNDER CONSTRUCTION

Paris AIR 6 COSMOS in French 30 Dec 78 p 91

[Text] The first nuclear attack submarine of the French Navy 1
construction by the DCAN [Naval Construction and Weapons Direct
Cherbourg. The accompanying photograph, taken in Cherbourg on
1978, shows the hull of the first "SNA" [nuclear attack submari
pletely assembled and the first assembly units of the second "S
right). The 4th Plan, running from 1977 to 1982. calls for the
tion of four such attack submarines. This program is the respo
the DTCN [Naval Shipbuilding Technical Directorate]. The subma

be armed with torpedoes and also with Aerospatiale's oncet S!-
that fires from under the surface.

 

COPYRIGHT: Air & Cosmos, Paris, 1978

cs0: 3100 7
FOR OFFICIAL us: mm
FOR orncm. [Isa ONLY

RADIOACTIVE WASTE VITRIFICATION PLANT DISCUSSED
Paris L8 MONDB in French 27 Dec 78 p 10
[Article by Xavier Weeger]

[Textj Since 28 June of this year the first industrial-scale
continuous vitrification plant for continuous processing of
nuclear wastes has been in operation at the Marcoule Center
for Nuclear Studies, in the Card. Managed by COGEMA (The Ge-
neral Nuclear Materials Corporation), it has been in operation
for sore than 2,200 hours, and has turned more than 50 cubic

meters of dissolved fission products from spent fuel reprocessing
plants into glass.

Reprocessing, during which most of the "unburnt" uraniun is re-
covered and plutonium is produced, yields liquids which are
highly charged with dissolved or suspended wastes. These par-
ticles are extremely radioactive, and emit such heat that the
solutions have to be kept in special holding tanks, where they
are constantly.cooled and stirred.

Storage of that sort can only be temporary, although it can be
kept up for a very few decades. The hard fact is that it is
altogether out of the question to use this kind of storage for
products whose level of radioactivity will remain potentially
hazardous for hundreds of years (see LB MONDB 15 March). Hence
the intensive efforts now under way all over the world in
search of intermediate (several decades) or permanent solutions
to the storage question.

In the opinion of a good many international experts, vitrifica-
tion is, right now, one of the most promising solutions around,
and France, where the Atonic Energy Commission teams have been
working on the problem for more than 15 years, has sonething of
a head start in the field. The German Federal Republic and
Great Britain are in fact keenly interested in the French pro-
cess. The Marcoule vitrification plant (A.V.M.) is the first
installation of its kind in operation anywhere in the world.

8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The purpese of vitrification, as of other processes of the same
type, is to "trap" fission products and trace amounts of heavy
elements, including uranium plutonium, and the other trans-ura-
zUJm1elements which reprocessing has not completely eliminated,
inside an atomic structure strong enough to resist attack from
them or unythinu else: the idea, briefly, is to imprison these
substances inside materials that will withstand water, tempora-
tuxe changes, etc.

The initial studies conducted by the AEC centered on synthetic
crystallized minerals such as feldspars or artificial mica.
They very swiftly ran up against a twofold difficulty: experi-
menis made it clear that they would have to develop as many cry-
stall’zed materials as there were substances to be I'fixed."
This would, among other drawbacks, have posed very large prob-
lems when it came to processing on an industrial scale. Fur-
lhcrmorc, these substances, despite their intrinsic hardness,
presented very large surfaces for exchange with the outside (it
is through such surfaces that stems might migrate; therefore
it is imperative to keep them as small as possible).

Very quickly, the French teams explain, they discovered, in the
course of these experiments with synthetic minerals, that mate-
rials of a vitreous type (which appeared as by-products in the
preparation of the synthetic minerals) -- in which the atoms

are not arranged in a regular geometric system, as the crystal-
line substances are -- offered the most promising features. Spe-
cifically, their exchange surfaces with the outside are small,

they are very strong, and their characteristics alter very lit-
tle with age.

To prove this last point, the Marcoule teams set up artificial
aging experiments, some of which subjected glasses to massive
flows of radiation, and others in which large amounts of radio-
active substances with short half-lives were incorporated into
the glass. In the space of a few weeks, these glasses were
subjected to as much radiation of all kinds as the” would nor-
mally get in several centuries. Some of the Harcoule glasses
which were "doped” with cerium thus achieved an age greater than
10,000 years. The purpose of these experiments was to study
phenomena which can occur: possible crystallization, what he-
comes of gaseous helium “manufactured" by alpha radiation (over
1,000 years, each liter of glass ”produces“ around 100 cc of
helium -- measured at atmospheric pressure -- only a few frac-
tions of which actually escape from the material).

The great stability of glasses is explained primarily by the
fact that the elements to be isolated, fission products and
heavy elements (known as actinides) are not merely surrounded

by the material; they actually become part of it. Two pilot
plants built at Marcoule, called 'Gulliver' (which ran from 1961

9
FOR omcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

to 1905) and "Piver' (1909 to 1973) Cave the teams a chance to
try out various sixes for the special glass they were after.
(Shut down in 1973, the Piver plan is going to be brought back
into service shortly for vitrification tests on solutions of
fission products from reprocessing of fuels free the Phénix
fast breeder reactor.)

The glasses produced by A.V.M., the first continuous process
plant, contain around one-third of the elements from the solu-
tions to be vitrified; the rest consists essentially of silicon
and borates, which are responsible for the formation of the vi-
treous system. Other elements (sodium and calcium chiefly) are
added; their role is to 'open up" the vitreous systen so that
the foreign bodies can get into it.

The A.V.H. is a relatively small plant. The central cell, where
the main operations take place, covers only a little over 100
square meters of floorspace, and is 3.5 meters high.

In the initial phase of operations, the solution for vitrifica-
tion moves continuously, at a rate of around ‘0 liters per hour,
into a slightly tilted cylindrical "calcinator,'I which revolves
at a speed of 30 rpm; the calcinate left after evaporation of
the volatile products flows by gravity into a metal melting fur-
nace, heated by induction and kept at a temperature of around
1,20006, where it is mixed, little by little, with fritted glass
containing silicon, boron, and the system modifiers. When the
furnace is full, about every 8 hours, on the average, the glass
plug inside the furnace is melted. The 100 to 150 kilos of mol-
ten glass flows into a steel container. After three pourings,
the container is sealed with a welded cover, cleaned under a

jet of water at high pressure, then removed from the cell and
transferred through a special airlock into a transporter which
puts it into a storage pit that is cooled by circulating air.

It can stay there for several decades.

As in all nuclear installations of this kind, which handle highly
radioactive materials, a number of devices take care of recover-
ing all gaseous effluents or dust, and recycling or filtering
them.

The A.V.H.'s central cell is shut up behind thick walls of rein-
forced concrete with lead-glass windows. It is designed through-
out so that all routine operations such as maintenance or emer-
gency situations such as accidents can be carried out by remote
control or robot handling. The installation, which was to all
intents and purposes operational at the beginning of 1977, got
its first delivery of radioactive solutions only in the summer
of 1978. The Center used that tine for a full dress rehearsal
of every imaginable situation. The furnace plenum must be re-
placed every l,200 hours: the first operation was perforned
without difficulty in mid-Novenber.

10
FOR OYYICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The Marcoule experts are very confident of the design of their
process and of the future of their plant, which cost some $00
million francs and employs 18 people. Within the space of a few
months, it has vitrified 50 cubic meters of solutions of fission
products, representing more than a year of production for all

the reactors on the site. The teams are already at work on com-
pletion of installations at the vitrification plant at La ﬂague,
where two or three lines of the same design as the one at Mar-
coule will complete the new reprocessing installations. The
glasses turned out there, containing waste from light water reac-
tors instead of those Ero- graphite-gas reactors, will be markedly
more radioactive. To sake sure that the internal temperature of
the glass blocks does not rise too high (which would lead to de-
vitrification), they will most probably be stored for 4 or 5
years in water before being buried in pits like the ones at Mar-
coule.

6182
C50: 3100

11
FOR OF?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DETAILS 0? EUROPW SPACE AGENCY 'S 1979 BUDGET PROVIDED
Paris AIR 6 COSHOS in French 23 Dec 78 pp 60-101
[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The 1979 budget of the European Space Agency (BSA) aeounts to a
little nore then 3 billion francs in funds for disbursement and about 2.6

billion francs in cos-itnents for program underway.

The 1979 budget of the BSA in fact provides $60.3 HUC [nillions of account-
ing units] (or 3,056,900,000 nillion francs) in funds for disbursement and
(026.7 me (or 2,£Ol,300.000 francs) in fund co-itnenta. This year (1978)
the ISA had available S76 "00 (3,256,700,000 francs) of funds for disburae-
nent and 762 we (6,195,300,000 francs) of fund conitlenta for its activ-

ities.‘

More than 80 percent of the funds for disburse-eat in the 1979 budget have
already been approved by the ESA Council and the directing co-ittees for
European progress.

The funds approved up to the present concern the Heteosat eetaorological
satellite prograe, the telecomnications satellites (res and HARECS A a b)
and telecomnications technology satellite (ASTP) program, the Ariane
[Ariadne] launcher prograa (including utilization support). the Spacelsb
orbiting laboratory progress, and the Barthnet network. In connection with
the urthnet network of ground receiving stations for the date free the
Anerican teledetection satellites, a resolution by the Council is enabling
this progran, which is new optional, to continue, but it is planned in the
near future that the Earthnet progras Hill becoee a mandatory ESA prograe
in which all the ale-bet countries will participate.

i'liditor'a note: The 1978 and 1979 funds are not directly coeparable because

the value of an accounting unit has changed. In 1979 the accounting unit is
worth 5.65612 francs (except for the budgets for the Ariana and the expenses
of Rourou), while in 1978 the accounting unit was vorth 5.57962 francs.

12
FOR OFFICIAL OS! OILY
FOR OFFICIAL "SB ONLY

Budgets Not Yet Approved

Among the on-going programs for which funding has not yet been approved by
the Council (in whole or in part) there are the Spacelab utilization pro-
gram.thehgency's general budget. and the scientific programs budget.

The BSA Council. which met in Paris on 12-13 December 1978 did not succeed
in approving the 1979 funding of the general budget and the scientific
progress budget. Italy taking exception to the rule used by the SSA for
conversion of currencies (which penalizes countries with high inflation).
Failing to obtain the unanimous vote required for approval of those budgets
in toto the ESA thereforehad to resort to the procedure of "douziemes
provisoires,"* as had already been the case during the entire year 1978 for
the same reasons. The Council thus approved 3.‘ "twelfths" for the general
budget and 3.2 "twelfths" for the scientific programs budget, corresponding
respectively to 36.8 "DC and 14.1 HUG (the "twelfths" being calculated upon
the basis of funds authorized in 1978 under the heading of direct expenses.
which were respectivly 129.88 HUC and 52.88 HUG for those two budgets). The
total amounts planned in 1979 are 7.16 uuc for the general budget and 77.8
"MC for the scientific programs budget.

It is hoped that a formal decision on the budgets not yet approved will be
reached at the next meeting of the-BSA Council which will be held in Paris
on 27-28 February 1979.

New Programs

In addition. the ESA has also planned on 25.3 “NC (143 million francs) in
funds for disbursement and 201.6 WC (1,138,700,000 francs) in co-ltmemta
for new programs. some of which have been approved and some not yet approved.
but whose budgets have not been adopted. These concern the res phase 3A
programs. the Sirio 2 satellite program. the direct television satellite
project (H-SAT or its successor). and the first European demonstration mis-
sion (0H1) aboard the Spacelab. There may possibly be added the supple-
eentary development programs for the Ariane launcher and the Spacelab.

which are going to be submitted to the next meeting of the Council.

The Council at its December eeeting gave a favorable reception to the SSA
proposals concerning European projects for further development of the Space-
lab and teledetection. This project contemplates. in particular, placing
experieents aboard the Spacelab and construction of a European teledetection
satellite equipped with a radar with synthetic aperture and using a plat-
form of the SPOT type or one derived from that of the French satellite.

3|”douzieaee provisoires." literally "provisional twelfthe," is the pro-
cedure whereby the Agency, in the abeenceof an approved budget, is author-
ized to spend each month one twelfth of the total expended under the pre-
ceding year's budget.)

13
’0! OFFICIAL 082 ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sirio 2 Satellite

The BSA Council at its December meeting approved the European tcs phase 3A
operational telecomunications satellites project and the Italian Sirio 2
scientific satellite project which have now become Agency programs. How-

ever. the final pattern of participation in these new programs has not yet
been established.

The scale of participation in the Sirio 2 program should be decided at the
next BSA Council meeting. Italy. which is proposing this project. will
participate to the extent of 74.95 percent and will guarantee an additional
Italian contribution of 4.3 percent in the event that the contributions of
the other member countries are insufficient. Switzerland and the United
Kingdom have also agreed-u-subject to goverment approval-~to participation
in the Sirio 2 to the extent of 5.40 percent and 1.83 percent. respective-
ly. France and Germany had also contenplated participating in the program
to the extent of 6.11 percent each. Provisional participations of the
other member countries are as follows: Austria and Spain. 0.61 percent each;
Belgium. 3.30 percent; and Denmark. 2.08 percent.

The total cost of the Sirio 2 program is now estimated at 21.16 HUG (119.6
million francs) but some estimate that it may reach about 60 we. The fund-
ing covers only the development of the satellite and the expenses of main-
taining the program. As a matter of fact Sirio 2 will have the benefit.

in the spring of 1981. of a free launching by the European Ariane launcher
which will serve to launch the macs a maritime telecouunications satellite
and to test the SYLDA Ariane double launch system.

Pour ECS Satellites

The decision concerning the scale of contributions to the £08 phase 3A pro-
gram is supposed to be reached at the next meeting of the teleco-unications
directing co-ittee which will be held in Paris on 1-2 Pebruary 1919. But

the December Council meeting has enabled the price for launching the program's
satellites with Ariane launchers to be fixed right now: the price of a
single launching (one satellite) is set at 24.“ HUC (135.6 million francs);
the price of a double launching (two satellites) should be lower than that

of a single launching.

Under these conditions as soon as the resolution concerning this phase 3A is
approved by the program's directing co-ittee it will be possible to execute
the agreement between BSA and the acting Eutelsat organization responsible
for exploiting the ncs satellites for the account of European posts and
telecommunications administrations. The zcs program now comprises four
satellites-36 l-b-which will be launched between 1981 and 1983 by Ariane
rockets and constitute the first European space co-unicationa network.

ll;
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0.2!
n-sar Deferred

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0n the other hand the ESA has put off until the next Council meeting its deci-
sion concerning construction of a European direct television satellite. The
principal interested member countries. France and Germany, have not been

able to agree on the satellite's mission:

Bonn wants to develop right off

an operational satellite whereas Paris up to now is proposing to construct

an experimental satellite first.

The Council has concluded that the H-SAT

project study effected this year by the Preach-German Eurosatellite group
had been properly managed but it was necessary for the two most concerned
countries to submit a new joint proposal to the next Council meeting. In
the meantime limited funds (300,000 accounting units) have been provided
to maintain the project team.

Funds for disbursement (C?) and cemmitment funds (0!) of the BSA for 1979

Status

Programs under-
way (budgets
approved)

Programs under-
way (budgets not
approved)

Program

Heteosat development
Heteosat exploitation
Heteosat 2 (launching ma)
Telecommunications. phase 2
scs satellites

HARECS A satellite

HARECS 3 satellite
Technology program (ASTP)
Spacelab program

Arlene launcher development
Arlene utilization support
Earthnet network

Aerosat remainders (program abandoned)
Spacelsb utilization (PSLP)
Agency's general budget
Scientific programs budget

Total programs underway (exluding domestic taxes)

New programs
(budgets not
approved)

80$ phase 3A program

Sirio 2 satellite

Direct television satellite (H-SAT)
an 1 Spaceleb mission and possibly
Supplementary Ariane development
Suppleaentary Spacelab development

Total new programs

Editor's note:

1 accounting unit (1979) - 5.65612 francs

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSHDS, Paris, 1978

moo
cso: 3100

15
ms orucm. use our

Funds

0? . CE
11.5 2.2
8.2 5.6
3.2 3.6
16.6 6.6
31.8 18.9
17.0 8.3
10.8 6.1
3.6 6.6
117.1 90.5
163.0 100.3
20.0 0.6
6.9 5.2
0.2 0.3
5.6 2.5
71.6 166.6
77.8 26.2

“0.310106%.1 HUC

25.3 HUG 201.6 HMO
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WBILE HWY STATION P08 ARIA“! TRACKING DELIVERED
Paria AIR 6 COSMS in French 23 Dec 78 p 61
[Article by Pierre Langereux]

[Text] The Starec fire (Sl'ni group) has delivered, to the Toulouae Space
Center of the CUBS [National Center for Space Studiea], the Stella 35 no-
bile teleoetry etation intended for the tracking network. in South Anerica.
of the Ariene [Ariadne] rocket (photo).

Constructed in record tineuleto than 10 loathe following notification of
contract avardnthe Stella 35 in a atation tranaportable over the road 'or
by railway or air. It will be initially inetalled near Beleu, Brazil,

to conplete the netvork for reception of band 5 (2,200-2.300 aegahertz)
telenetry eignale of the Guiana Space Center of the CHIS. It will operate
along with the other three telenetry “Adm-Stella ‘S—elao conetructed
by Starec. which will be inetalled at fixed locatione in Preach Guiana
(Cayenne and Iourou) and in Brazil (Natal) ae down the line etatione of
the tracking network.

The Stella 35 nubile telanetry etation ie equipped uith an antenna lo uetere
in diaeeter loveable in elevation and ari-uth, vhoee gain in greater than
35.5 decibele and vhoae quality factor in equal to or greater than 10.5
decibele per degree Calvin up to 2.5 degreee elevation; the directional
preciaiou ie better than 0.3 degree (root lean square value). The anten-
na operatee in left or right circular polarization in accordance with four
tracking nodee (objective deeignation upon the epheaeridee drua automatic
tracking with eeperation neaauring receiver. or nanual ailing by poaition
or velocity). It ueee the eaae prinery eource and eeparetion aeeauring
eyate- aa the lO-eeter Stella 63 antenna. The Stella 65 antenna

vae conatructed with Starec aa general contractor and participation of
CS!!! (eervo eyetee and conaole bay) and Bell Telephone Manufacturing Cou-
pany of lelgit- (eeparation neaeuriog receiver).

16
ron orncm. use on!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

AIR 6 COSWS, Paris, 1978

1?
POR onxcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MECHANICAL QuALIPICATION TESTS 0? APPLE. HETEOSAT 2 REPORTED
Paris AIR 5 COSMOS in French 23 Doc 78 pp h2-h3

[Text] The nechanical qualification tests of the payload which will be
launched by the European rocket, the Ariane [Ariadne] at the time of the
third test flight firing (L03) planned for May 1980 have just been concluded
at the Toulouse Space Center of the ONES [National Center for Space Studies].
These tests were performed upon dynaadc mock-ups of the satellites which
will constitute the payload. These satellites in their launch configura-
tion were placed upon a powerful electro-acouatic exciter (170 kilonewtons)
which subjected them to longitudinal and transverse vibrations correspond-
ing with the principal flight stresses. The tests were performed by tea-a
from SOPEHA [Co-pany for Specialized Environ-ental Testing Services] for the
account of the European Space Agency (BSA) with participation by teams from
European. Trench. and Indian projects responsible for different parts of
this payload.

The 103 payload. installed in the nose of the launcher. in fact comprises
three satellites mounted one above the other (and upon the equipment coepart-
seat of the rocket at the top of the third stage). These are. froa bottoa
to top in the photo opposite):

«the Ariane Technological Capsule (CAT) of about 200 kilograms used for
all test flights;

«the first Indian experimental telecommunications satelliteu-APPLE-wf
about 620 kilograms built by the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO);
and

“the second European meteorological satellita--HZTSOSAT 2-of about 700
kilograms built in France by AEROSPATIALB [National Industrial Aerospace
Coapany] and Hatra for the account of the BSA.

The mm and HZTBOSAT 2 will be the first two satellites placed into
geostationary orbit by the new European launcher. The Ariana will first
place the two satellites (and the CAT) into a transfer orbit of ZOO-36.000
Itiloeeters inclined at 9.5 degrees which will then be transforaed into a
circular orbit at the geosynchronous altitude by the apogee motors of each
satellite. The CAT. in contrast. will ra-ain in the transfer orbit.

18
M OHICIAL US! ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

The three satellites of the L03 payload separated: HETEOSAT 2 stabilized

by rotation; APPLE (solar panels deployed) stabilized about three axes;

and the CAT capsule. This is the first illustration of the Indian arPLE
satellite.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 COSMOS, Paris. 1978

11706
680: 3100

20
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLl

BRIEFS

ARIANE MOTOR TBSTINC--The CNBS [National Center for Space Studies] and

88? [European Propulsion Company] have concluded their inquiry into the
causes of the explosion which occurred on 28 Noveaber at Vernon. Department
of Bure. during the bench test of the Arisne [Ariadne] rocket third stage
motor. The inquiry disclosed that the explosion was due to accumulated
hydrogen gas around the ester. This has led to modification of the bench's
torch which normally burns the hydrogen to prevent dangerous accunulation of
the gas. As for the cause of this abnormal accumulation of hydrogen. it

is said to be due to the delay (0.b second) in ignition of the notor. That
delay is itself caused by the hydrogen gas injection in the vicinity of the
igniter. This device, now elininated from flight actors, is still used on
the bench teat eotor. Additional tests are nevertheless going to be per-
forned with a flight motor to determine the operating aargins of the sys-
tena providing the ignition sequence. But this is not going to hinder con-
tinuation of the tests of the rocket's propulsion units; the next bench
firing of the third stage propulsion unit in "battleship" configuration
thus remains planned for 20 Deco-bar. [Text] [Paris AIR & COSMOS in French
23 Dec 78 p 63] 11706

INTBLSAT HARITIHE SATELLITE DECISION-The Board of Governors of Intelsat has
postponed until its next meeting in the end of January 1979 its decision con-
cerning installation of an additional payload in three Intelsat 5 satellites
for naritiae liaisons (in addition to the international liaisons provided

by these satellites). However. funds have been allocated to Ford Aerospace.
constructor of the Intelsat 5 satellites, in order to retain this option
until the next nesting of the board. Let us renenber that nost of the coun-
tries which use naritina telecommunications by satellite (except the United
StateS). Joined in the Pre-Inmarsat Joint Venture, recently expressed their
preference for a nixed systen conprising three European HARBCS satellites
and three Intelsat S satellites equipped with a naritine frequencies channel
to replace the MARISA? satellites of the network now exploited by the United
States. Consat General Corporation. principal stockholder in the HARISAT
systen. has proposed to the Joint Venture a hybrid HARISAT 2 systen utilizing
the {our LEASAT satellites leased iron the 0.5. Navy and two HAchs satel-
lites. Comsst General Corporation is to present its project at the next
lnnorsat nesting to be held in London this week and to the next meeting of
the countries of the Joint Venture planned for aid-January at Brighton.

Great Britain. [Text] [Paris AIR & COSMOS in French 23 Dec 78 p 43] 11706

C80: 3100 BHD
21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONBY