APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDPO2-00080R00010004MB4-7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8418
25 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS ON USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
PHYSICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY

(FOUO 24/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

lleadlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli~
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNINO WNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCE') HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROEFICIM. USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mas 149418
25 April. 19‘

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

PHYSICAL SCIENCES. AND TECHNOLOGY
(1000 24/79)

Cou'reu'rs
CYISRNB‘I‘ICS. COMPUTERS AND Am'nou rmmowcv

Computers in Expert-ant“ Physics
(A.N. Vyotavltin; V381?!“ maul NAUK SSSR. No 1. 1979)..

Activities at Institute of Autmtion and Bleetronetry
(Yu. Yo. Neotorikhin; VBS‘I'NIK AKADEHII NAUK 8581!, No 1.

1919) ooooooooooo-ooooottoooooooo.ooooocooooooonoo000....o

GEOPHYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

'AIR 6 cosms‘ Ruperto on 'Snlyut-G' Mission Operations
(Sarge Borg; All! 6 COWS. 7 Apt 79) .

PHYSICS

Genoration and Utilintion of Pmrful Nanoaecond Pal-en.
A Scientific Continuation

' (G.A. Manta; VBSTNIK MD!!! “MI! SSSR. No 2. 1979)
PUBLICATIONS

Organizing the Operation of a Computing Center '

(LA. Orlov; ORGANIZATSIYA mm WCHISLITEL'NOGO
TSENTRA. 1978) ...........................................
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNBTICS, mums AND ANIMATION TBCRNOLOG!

UDC 001.812
COMES II EXPERIMENTAL Paroles

Moscow mm mm: nun 8883 in Russian lo 1. 1979 pp 53-61
[Article by A. N. Vystavkin. doctor of technical sciences]

[Text] Ihe growing scale and sophistication of experimental physics and the
uninterrupted upward trend in the amount of information gained during exper-

imentation have led to the need of automating experiments with computers and
numerical methods.

One of the first automated experiments that were computer-sided in the
research centers of the Division of General Physics and Astronomy, IBSR Aca-
dew of Sciences, were radar studies of the planets. These experiments began
in 1961 in the Institute of Radiotechnoloy and Electronics, supervised by
acudemician V. A. Kotel'nikov. In 1965-1970, the first automated diffracto-
meters for monocrystals were developed in the Institute of Crystallography
under the guidance of academician B. K. Vaynshteyn. In 1968-1972 the first
automated systems for spectral studies in the suhmillimeter range were built
in the Physics Institute imeni P. l. Lebedeov and the Institute of Radiotech-
noloy and Electronics. Today in the research centers of the Division of
General Physics and Stronoaw there are upwards of To large and small systems

for automating experiments. Unquestionably. this is a notable success. all
the more so in that nuerous systems are original developments. Even so.

many more automated syst-s are needed.

Study of the operating experience with the systems for automating experi-
scnts built in our country and elsewhere shows that one of the main effects

of their application is shortened times in conducting the cycle of measure-
ments and processing their results. For example. the flow and volume of

information in spectral inwsstigati ns and studieshof electrophysical pro-
perties of semiconductors are 10-10 bits/s and lo -lO bits per workday;

these times were reduced by a factor of 10 to 30. that is, instead of One
to three years in conducting the cycle of studies, only from one to several

months is required.

'ihcre are times when experimentation is simply not possible without automa-
tion. For example. in radar studies of planets digital filtering and signal

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  
              
        

 
  
 

N94 .5“?
ofeﬁﬁ-‘Oﬁﬁif‘gl
l's'ﬂiﬁ'e’hﬂe“
‘oeua‘vxnm

 
 

/
«x. a
as

Fig. 1. Structure of peptide structure obtained, inter-
preted and displayed on a graphics plotter using an

autouated systen

processing on a coaputer, data can be obtained concerning distances to the
planets to a precision of hundreds of neters and concerning planetary velo-
cities to a precision of several centimeters per second immediately after

reception of the

echo signal. that is. in the real-tine mode. This is im-

portant in refining the epheneris tines and stuwing the properties of pla-
netary surface and atnosphere; the data acquired in the real-time node are

necessary to the

Another example:
earth from space

landing of interplanetary stations.

investigation-4w physical methods—of natural resources on
(these studies are being done by the Institute of Space

Studies, the Institute of Radiotechnology and Electronics and other insti-
tutes of the LBSR Academy of Sciences). 'me computer processes and dis-

plws in conventional colors images of the different parts of the earth's

surface1 .

 

1 See: a. z. Sagdeyev, mm as sssn, No 3, 1917.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A system for automating crystal growth for laser application, in the
Physics Institute imeni P. l. Lebedev. maintains the electric power fed

into the crystallatimtioﬁ unit in accordance with a given lm in time to
within a precision of 10- . 'ihe system affords crystal homogeneity that

is practically ideal for the given application; this makes it possible to
build new high-capacity infrared crystals. The systems for automating

crystallographic investigations, developed in the Institute of Crystallo-
graphy, can form and interpret the diffraction patterns of crystals con-
tained in a cell to a precision of hundreds of stems in different posi-
tions. Hg. 1 shows the structure of the peptide crystal. A X-ray dif-
fraction pattern of this crystal. its interpretation and the image of the
structure were obtained with a computer.

Apart from the automation system it is not possible to rapidly control the
hundreds of element-panels of the ”TAN-600 radiotelescope in the source
tracking mode; without automation systems it is also not possible to con-
ceive of the functioning of facilities built in the Physics Institute for

studies of laser thermonuclear fusion and so on.

'Ihese examples tell us that the computer can rapidly and precisely control
a facility for information flows up to 107 bits/s, as well as process large

data files (106-408 and larger) in a multiplicity of operations.

Today virtually all research in general physics and astroaoaw calls for
automation. Roughly speaking, these investigations can be divided into

the following groups:
space study of the earth, the solar system and deep space

land-based studies of the sun, near-earth and near-solar space and the pro-
pagation of radio waves and laser radiation in the atmosphere

astronomy, radio astronomy and radar astronomy
plasma physics
spectroscopy and crystallography

laboratory studies of' solid-state physics. low-temperature physics, physical
and quantum electronics, hydrodynamics. thermodynamics and so on

Specific requirements on automation develop in each of these groups. An
analogous situation exists also in chemistry. in biology. in earth sciences
and in other fields of knowledge.

The heavy demand for automating scientific investigations, as well as the
need for working out a unified approach led to the automation of scientific

studies taking shape as an autonomous scientific discipline. Finding deve-
lopent in it are both methods of investigation and measurement in different

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Q FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

fields of science and a nuwer of mathematical subdisciplines; there are
alsdsuhdivisiona in automation dealing with the designing and building of
system for automating scientific experimentation and developing new methods
of investigation.

Designing automation systems is preceded by an analysis of the process of
scientific investigation. As we know, the following stages can be distin-
guished in scientific research, in particular, in experiments]. physics:
formulation of the goal of the investigation; literature search and review;
choice of the model of the phenomenon or process under study; theoretical
analysis and modeling of the phenomenon or process; experimental. design;
experimental preparations (designing and fabricating the parts and assem-
blies of the experimental setups and producing materials and structures
with new properties); monitoring parameters and states and control of the
experimental setup; conducting measurements (acquisition, accululation and
storage of measurement data); data processing, reduction and display; inter-
pretation of measurements and their comparison with the model and formula-
tion of conclusions; ‘and docusentation of data and conclusions and place-
ment in archives (reports, publications and data banks).

These stages may overlap, be conducted in parallel and be repeated. but in
some volt-3e they are present in am investigation. The computer can be
assigned, to a significant extent. the performance of functions that are
amenable to formalization and, thus, to progra-ing. This amounts to most
of the stages enumerated, save for those stages associated with goal formu-
lation, choice of model and interpretation of results-atages that are heu-
ristic by their very nature, that is, thq rely on the investigator's intu-
ition. Still, even at these stages the computer can render much help, by
rapidly supplying the necessary information and assisting in displaying the
results of the investigation in the desired fora.

If one considers that the investigation stages interrelate, one faces the
problem of the integrated automation of scientific research. that is, the
automation of virtually all research stages.

Besides the stages listed. thought lust be given to controlling investiga-
tions (monitoring the course of scientific reseach studies, recording the

labor and coaputing salaries, recording the consuption of material values
and so on). which can also be automated.

Domestic and foreig: experience shows that it is preferable that the pro-
blem of integrated autaation of scientific investigations—when there is
a large number of tasks diverse in type and size--be solved on an institute-

wide scale (or on the scale of a group of allied institutes), with the help
of a multilevel. hierarchical. multicomputer measuring and computing cas-

plex. A generalised block diagram of this complex, oriented for an insti-
tute specialising in general naysics or an institute in which physical methods

of investigation predominate, is shown in Pig. 2.

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'Ihe following principles are embodied in the complex:

setting up a fairly high-capacity measuring and computing center (ICC), on
a shared-time basis at the highest level, consisting—when there is a large
volume of computations-wt several large computers equipped with the re-
quired set of information display devices, special data input/output

units, external memory, devices for effective interaction of investigator
with computer and so on

building unified subsystems for automating the lower level,,oriented for
groups of investigations (for general physics and astronomy these groups
were enumerated above) and capable of functioning either autonomously as
well as Jointly with the sec, that is. with data transmitted between levels
over comunication lines or via a magnetic carrier (punched tape, magnetic
tape and magnetic disk); and lower level subsystems for automating indivi-
dual installations or groups of installations in a laboratory (division)
are built on the basis of small computers (minicomputers or microcomputers)

optimal distribution of tasks and Motions by levels (kinds of investiga-
tions or their stages, programing, storage of programs and data and so on)

use of level-homogeneous computers that are also program-compatible between

levels, unified modules and blocks and development of homogeneous software
on the modular principle

'Iheee principles optimally correspond to the organizational structure of an
institute that handles a multiplicity of diverse problems and permit the
highest operating sconouy and reliability of the complex to be attained,
the use effectiveness of all its components; also, these principles provide
for the possibility of the stagewise introduction and development of the
complex (expansion, upgrading and modernization).

Complexes of this kind are being constructed at present (not considering
institutes with a nuclear physics specialization) in the Institute of Radio-
technolog and Electronics, the Physics Institute imeni P. N. Iebedev and

the Engineering Physics Institute imeni A. F. Ioffe, lBSR Academy of Sciences;
they are proJected, further, in several dozens of academy centers.

Choice of the type and makeup of interfacing equipsent between experimental
setups and laboratories devices with the computer is one of the primary tasks

in building multicomputer and single-computer system for automating scienti-
fic investigations. Of all the existing system for interfacing a process
with a computer. the CAMAC system (came: Computer-Aided Measurement, Auto-
mation and Control) is the most Fowler international standard; it has the
highest operating speed and universality. 'lhis then served as the basis for
its selection as the primry standard in building interfacing equipment in
the centers of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 2. Generalized block diagra- ot nulticonputer. hierarchical

measuring and computing couple: for auto-ating scientific inves-
tigations in an institute specialing in general Wsics

Key: 1. Measuring and coIputing couple:
2. Large couputing unit (large computers with standard peripherals)
3. Interace
10.1w output subsyste-
5. Automated designer's work station
6. Subsystem for teninals
7. 1b large experimental setup
8. Buffer subsystem
[Key concluded on next page]

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USS ONLY

[Key to Fig. 2, on preceding page, concluded]

9. Subsystem of input with carrier

10. Image input subsyste-

ll. write unit

12. Experimental setup

13. CAMAC crate with microcomputer

lb. Minicomputer

15. cmc crate

16. Minicompute'r

17. Laboratory subsystem with microcomputer
18. Special processor

19. Autonomous subsystem, including dispatch subsystems
20. Laboratory subsystems with minicomputer

Conceptually. the we system consists of the following. Specialized
functional modules are built to control individual parts of a facility
acquire interaction fron measuring inetrusents and sensors and output
information to facilities not incorporated in the computer (oscillograph,
graphics plotter and so on). The modules are built up in relation to the
task and are inserted into a sectionaliaed frame (crate) interfaced with
a computer. Up to 25 regular or the corresponding nusber of double. triple
and other sizes of nodules can be inserted into a MC crate. All the
nodules are connected into a unified data highway. ihe dinensions of the
nodules. the nuber and order of the connections, the pover supply and
strength of the electrical signals and the commands are standardised; this
permits the nodules of different manufacturers and unified progress to be

employed.

Experience in developing the CAMC equipment and the automation system
based on the cause in the Institute of Radiotechnology and Electronics,

(883 Acadasv of Sciences. in the Institute of Automation and Electrometry.
Siberian Division. [3811 Academy of Sciences. and in other institutes showed
that the base set of nodules ensuring a wide range of experiments in general
phyucs is not too large-oho-SO types. Incidentally. it differs appreciably
from the set of nodules for investigations in nuclear physics.

Multicomputer complexes that have the came equipment as the loveblevel
subsystems lend themselves naturally to organizing the interfacing of these
subsystems with the ncc under the cause standard. for which only the inter—
facing nodule is added to the crate. he CANAC equipent optimally should
be used also for unifying into the multicomputer complex computers of dif-
ferent types in cases vhen for some reason computers differing in standards
are used in the institutea.

 

2 See: m. Ye. lesterihhin et al, swarms. so h, 1971..

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

A large volume of won [:1 required in developing and putting together thc
complex nortware support. Software is constructed Just like the complex--
by the hierarchical nodular principle. The standard software that is part
of the computers is used to the fullest; it is supplemented by system soft-
ware for intercomputer interfacing and for working with the CAMAC equipment,
software of the shared-time system. the intonation retrieval system, the
design planning system, as well as the extensive applied software for solving
specific theoretical and experimental problems and operations research tasks.

Advances in systems for automating scientific research is bringing on the
scene new research methods. In particular, a transition is projected from
the simple breakdown of routine and creative functions (stages) between
computers and the investigator to the fruitful interaction of investigator
and the automated system (interactive mode) as the research proceeds.

The first steps in this direction have alreathr been outlined. By way of
exasple, we can mention the dialog system of spectral studies in the sub-
millimeter range, based on a fourier spectrometer3. We know that in spec-
tral measurements in the submillimeter range ming thermal sources, the
investigator deals with low radiation energy; this requires a long signal
buildup time. Extending the range of test frequencies and increasing reso-
lution and the signal-to-noise ratio in this situation involves a large
increase in the measurement time-up to dozens and hundreds of minutes.

Envisioned in the system is the selection of the appropriate ratio of fre-
quency interval, resolution and signal-to-noise ratio based on preliminary
measurement of the signaloto-noise ratio when there is a zero interfero-
meter path difference and based on measurement of a scanning interferogram,
with the recording of the appropriate scanning spectrum. These two stages
and the selection of the above-mentioned parameters are executed in the
interactive mode. After these procedures are carried out, the working
interferogram is recorded; it is then transformed into the spectrum in the
automatic mode. As a result. the experimental tine is shortened by 10-15
times.

He presented an example of the interactive mode in selecting the appropriate
levels at which the experiment was conducted (planned). The interactive mode

can be altered also when the experimental findings are being processed. Ex-
emplifying this is the processing of spectra recorded with a submillimeter

diffraction spectrometer (Fig. 3). After the computer executes the fourier-
transformation of the spectrum and displays its plot, from the fourier com-

ponents the experimenter identifies and sends to the computer a cosssand to
isolate the interference component caused by the interference of the radia-
tion between the sample faces. and transmission averaged over the interference

 

3 See: A. l. Vystavkin et al, “MIA, lo 2. 1978

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

period. by discriminating the rhite noise of the receiver (more exactly,
its high-frequency components .

A9911 cation of the described method of processing measurement data and the
date of the interactive mode of its realisation significantly extends the
potentialities of diffraction spectroscopy and speeds. by a factor of ten.
the processing of the spectre measured.

The interactive mode is suitable also at other investigatory stages; it op-
timlly measures up to the process of scientific investigation.

The dialog of investigator and automated system is a method of organizing
the interactive mode. The appropriate software and hardware are necessary
for an effective dialog in the system: convenient keyboard. graphic and
other inmrmati'on display devices, accessories for entering marks on the
alphanumeric files. graphic and video images and so on. Year by year, these
devices are developing and improving.

Besides the above-listed stages of scientific investigations in introducing
automation, there is one more: program preparation and debugging. Uh...
organising the interactive mode. it is very important that the investigator
master programing and dialog techniques (without program-er participation).
since it lets the investigator modify the experimental conditions directly
during the investigation; when specific tasks are programmed, the investi-
gator can apply procedures based on Wsical features and so on. Il'hat is
vhy it is necessary to shorten and simplify the stage associated with pro-
grassning. For example. this task was successfully solved in the series
2200 Hang minicomputer. 'ihe computer uses a. quite powerful language,
HANG-BASIC and simple program debugging means in the dialog mode. with an
indication of the location and kind of errors. The dialog is much simpli-
fied in that the his main instructions in the programming language and the
20 arithmetic operations and the built-in mnctions are actuated by press-
ing the right key. Just as in a pocket or desktop calculator. The other
instructions. as usual. are formed letter by letter. learning the mini-1n
set of instructions does not take much time. Also, it does not need to be
memorized, since it is entered on the keyboard. Obviously, this experience
must be taken into account in the future when developing new minicomputers.

Interest lies in systems that will provide for the possibility of monitor-
ing the process of investigation and remembering by the investigator of
departures from the adopted program or some general rules. accmulatio‘n of
research experience and its presentation in convenient form in later studies,
analysis of the effectiveness of the interactive mode and the possibilities

of its improvement and so on. Research in building these systems has only
Just begun.

 

1‘ See: '1'. M. Lifshits et a1. mm. ‘.’ol 12, No 3, 1977-

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

__.1

   

      

O.“ 0.“ O.“ 030 0..“ ' '

0.0” (6) M‘I.

a

0.“

,Pig. 3. Transmission spectm. coaputed spectral
components and transmission coefficient of Bil-x8”:
specimen

Key: 1. Initial spectruv
2. ll'ransaission

3. Interference component
lo. Relative units

5. Absorption coef cient
6. Have m-ber. of

Another source of new research nethods that are computer-sided is conputa-
tional physics-4 new division of mathematical physics. concerned with dev-
eloping numerical Iethods as applied to theoretical physics and the process-
ing of the results of physical experiaents. One primary direction in the
advances in conputational physics is the counter experiaent (or numerical
nodding”. which is an investigation-dieing a computer—of a mathematical
model of a phenomenon. process or device. It significantly replaces a real

physical experinent in those instances when the experinent is costly. pro-
tracted or relatively inaccessible. The cosputer experinent. nrzeovru

is easily controlled and affords broad variation of conditions and the safe
realisation of critical resinee.

Finally. the validity of a model unquestionably is verified in real condi-
tions. but this verification after detailed investigation of the nodel by

S

 

See: A. A. Sansrskiy and Yu. P. Popov. PRIMM. No b. 1975.

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

computational methods becomes much less laborious and requires much less
time than the full investigation of the phenomenon or process with a real
obJect.

it appears natural to merge computer and real autosated experimental setups
into a unified complex. by providing for recourse to the real obJect for
comparing the consequences from the model studied with numerical methods,
and also to secure additional information with the goal of correcting or

modifying the model. This approach is already in use in investigations
of processes in plasma. ion scattering in crystals and so on.

ﬂew approaches and concepts relying on numerical methods and applied to
the description of physical phenomena are to be anticipated. Just as fourier
analysis. Green Nnctions. Feynman diagrams and other mathematical methods

led. each in its time. to new physical concepts and made possible a fuller
understanding of the fundamentals of given physical phenomena. the new

methods of computational physics will promote an even profounder penetra-
tion into the principles of nature. As applied to physical experiments.

the new concepts must permit constructing a model of a physical phenomenon
capressed in term of computational physics and represented by the appro-

priate algorithm. naturally. with the optimal division of functions
between the real and the computer experiment.

Prior to automating scientific investigations. Just as prior to an autono-
mous discipline, there are technical and organizational problems. in addi-
tion to purely scientific problem. Constructing automated system-wand
they are now needed by the dozens and hundreds--calls for a unified. sci-
entifically substantiated approach. At work developing this approach is
the Council on Automating Scientific Research. along with the complex of
scientific-organizational measures in this field in the IBBR Academy of
Sciences. As noted above. OAMAC was adopted as the standard in the acadeav.
A program for designing and building systems for automating scientific in-
vestigations was developed by the USSR Academy of Sciences in collaboration

with the Ministry of Instrument Making. Autontion Squiment and Control
Systems.

Special subdivisions in many academy institutes have been constituted in
solving problems of automating scientific research. Specialists on auto-
muting scientific investigations at wort: in these subdivisions must possess
the research techniques in their fields. have training in computers. applied
mathematics. mathematical modeling and so on. The Council on Automating
Scientific Research is holding schools and conferences to exchange experi-
ence and upgrade the qualifications of specialists engaged in automating
scientific investigations. Still. the specialists are few in masher; their
training needs to be organized in institutions of higher learning. Some
institutions of higher learning have taken these steps. but this is still

far from enough. In addition. it is advisable to hold courses on the appli-
cation of computers to scientific investigations for students who will be

future physicists. chemists. biologists and specialists in other sciences.

11
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Carrying out these actions v! 11 faster the fastest possible advances in

efforts to automate scientific investigations in centers or the USSR
Acadew of Sciences and other depart-ants. including in institutes special-
ising in physics.

COPYRIGHT: Isdatel‘stvo ”ﬂanks”. "Vestnik Akadeuii nauk 888R”, 1979

10123
080: 1870

12
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CYBERNBTICS, COHPlﬂ‘BRS AND AUTOMATION TECHNOLOGY

UDC 001.812

AC'I'IVIIII A'i‘ INSTITU'E 0P AUTOMATION MID 21.3mm
Moecov VIEW MM! NAUK 8883 in Russian llo 1. 1979 PP 3-11

[Article by Yu. Ye. hesterikhin. corresponding member of the 188R Acadesu
of Sciences and director. Institute of Automation and Electrometry]

[Text] ‘ihe Institute of Automation and Blectrometry,
Siberian Division of the teen Acadew of Sciences. was

founded in 1957. The institute's scientific activities
center on developing and building model problem-oriented
systems based on CAMAC [computer-aided measurement.
automation and control] standards for automating scien-
tific investigations. study of the theoretical principles
of memory and optical processing of intonation and re-
search into the physics of nonlinear vaves.

he Presidiu of the i883 Academy of Sciences gave a
hearing to a paper by the director of the Institute
of Automation and Electrometry. corresponding member
of the [381! Acadew of Sciences to. Ye. Institute.
relating the work of the institute.

Paper by Yu. Ye. lesterikhin

The aim of what the Institute of Automation and Electrometry is doing in
automating scientific investigations is greater effectiveness and higher
quality of scientific inquiry by the direct incorporation of computers in

research procedm'es and the maximum use of caputer potentialities at all
stages-4mm gathering experimental information to constructing a mathe-

matical model of the phenomenon under study. its prime direction of vork
at the institute in this field is carrying through the program of building
model problem—oriented automated systems based on a unified system archi-
tecture and unitized general-purpose hardvare and softvare. In other
words. solutions are being found to problems of constructing system in
which a model architecture (unified for all areas of experimentation) is

merged with a model aggregation of units (unified for a given kind of
experiment).

13
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Today an adequate approach to this problem involves broad application of

progran-controlled highway type modular system corresponding to the inter-
.national CAMAC standards. These systems are sets of widely varying autono-

mous devices-meme modules unified in design and modes of information
exchange: using them. it is easy to configure programble structures for
automating sophisticated experimental and process facilities.

Development of CANAC equip-ant. conducted by the institute Jointly with the
Special Design Office for Scientific Instrument-Making. Siberian Division.

lBSB Academy of Sciences (the nomenclature of general-purpose CAHAC modules
now numbers about 100 designations). served as the foundation for solving

problems in automating the most widely varying experiments (from biomedical
to nuclear physics)--in s frequency range of tens of kilohertz for contin-
uous type experiments to hundreds of negahertr. for pulsed type experiments.
And the "orientation" of the system toward a defined class of experiments
was achieved by a very limited set of supplementary modules. For example.
automating studies of phenomena in the electrical explosion of conductors
called for two modules like these: an analog-to-digitsl converter, for
recording a process at a frequency of 200 Mix and a high-speed memory.

Largely. how effective automated complexes are is detersined by the "global"
system architecture—the character of interaction between the systems that

directly serve the experimental setup, the productive computers processing
the information and the intelligent terminals-mautomated work stations of

the experinenter, designer and so on. In deciding what model structure to
select. one must weigh the state of the art in computer engineering: depart-
mental dispersion in computer manufacturing and. as s consequence. computer
standards irregularity; the scattered distribution of ”materialized experi-
ence“ (software support) for coaputers of different types and so on.

Work by institute scientists into the system architecture of automated con-
plexes led to development of a new type of communication system--a unified
highway type interchange system (0160 [unifitsirovannaya msgistral'naya sis-
tcma obnenal). This is s high-output machine-independent channel executed
under the MC standards. Computers of the principal types built in cm

countries have been unified in the institute into a single complex. based
on the channel: no computers. ASV'I‘. ”41030. w-Iooo. "-6000. Yes-1010 and

Elektronika-loo). along with specialized single-purpose graphics input/output
devices and systems functioning in-line with the experimental setup.

Experience in recent years lent support to the usefulness of the proposed

architecture. along with the hardware and software devices of automation
that have been built in handling wide-ranging tasks in science and nanufac-

turing.

The proposal of the 0881! Academy of Sciences was passed at a conference of
presidents of the academies of sciences of socialist countries (1971)—-to

build nodel couplexes for auto-sting scientific investigations by unified
combination of a variety of computers and by interfacing with experimental

setups using program-controlled modular systens under CWO standards.

lb
’01! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Model CAMAC program-controlled modules

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mnoam moanemommup mm
(1) aeromruwoonmm one am

Dunc-mew u-vo
( 3) Wuhan-o 39m

13

)

 

Inplonontotion block disgru- for three-level syote- of automated
inventisstiono in the Institute of Autustion and Electronstry.

Siberion Division of 1881‘ Academy of Sciences
Key: 1. “odd. woolen-oriented S. ﬁolosrsphic urchins

system 6. Terminal of sutosuteo
2. MO [Unified 11th W vol-t ststion

Interchsnse System] 1. Miniconputcr (8M, "-1000. $6000)
3. Couputor csntcr (produc- 8. lehet graphics plotter-encoder

tive counters] [Kev concluded on next page]
'0. Couputer (Yes. 91-10030.

Beau-6)

16

POI OFFICIAL US! ONLY

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Key to Figure on preceding page. concluded]

9. Delta display

10. Karat microfilming unit

11. Laboratory-workshop

1?. Minicomputer (as. 14400, 3-100!)

13. Crate...Crate

1h. CNMC [Computer-aided measurement, automation and control]
15. ObJect

Systems developed by the Institute of Automation and Electrometry. Siberian

Division of the [883 Acadesly of Sciences. based on the model structure, were
adopted as base problem-oriented automated systems.

Further. Yu. Ye. lesterikhin characterized the investigations by the Insti-
tute of Automation and Electrometry into optical processing of information.

The scope of interferometric applications grew much larger with the advent
of coherent radiation sources and electronic computers. Denis Gabor's dis-

covery of the interference method of image formation helped in the observa-
tion of interference effects when light reflects from any scattering obJects.
Lasers substantially simplified interferometer design; experimentation was
fully auteuted with the aid of electronic methods of intonation process-

ing.

A laser displacement meter. a laser gravimeter and a laser flowrete meter
were designed and built in the Institute of Automation and Electrometry,
based on laser interferometers (as part of the program of scientific research
”Designing and Building user Devices for Information Sensing and Process-

ing. under the coordinating Plan, Siberian Division. LBSR Academy of Sciences).
These devices are intended for measuring lengths in physical experiments,

determining changes in gravitational acceleration and in studying turbulence.

The IPL-lo laser displacement meter can measure distances to 60 m with a
relative error of 5'10‘7. 'l'he instnlment's operating speed is adequate for

measurements when a test object is traveling up to 0.3 Isle. The IPL-lo has
a digital readout and can function in automated experimental systems. The

instrument found application in the assembly and certification of the refer-
ence reading system of a machine tool for making parts weighing up to 250

tone. the maximal dimensions of the two control parts, 5 m in length. coin-
cided to a precision of 0.02 am. The high metrologic characteristics in com—

bination with desim simplicity and convenience in operation place the IPL-lo
device on a par with the world's best models.

Operation of the laser grawimeter is based on the ballistic method of deter-

mining gravitational acceleration. These measurements are taken by computing
the path and time of fall of a test mass as the minimun over two intervals.

The test mass in the instrment is a corner reflector falling freely in a
tube under vacuum. A laser displacement meter is built into the instruent

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ronn ormm ts: ONLY

to mcnnurc the path intervals. A rubidinn standard (whose frequency drift
does not exceed 5'10" 1 a day) is used as the time reference standard.

Staff members of the Institute of Automation and Electrometry and the Insti-

tute of Earth Physics imeni 0. Yu. Shmidt, [838 Academy of Sciences. using
this instrument. measured gravitational acceleration at the support base of

the world gravimetric network in Potsdam, as well as in Singapore and Paris.
Similar measurements were made in Novosibirsk, Moscow, Tallin and 'Ibilisi.

The outcome of these measurements was the control ti; of the 138R gravimetn‘c
network to the world network to a precision of h-no‘ . work done by the

Institute of Automation and Electrometry in laser gravimetry has gained
high recognition in our country and abroad.

Our measurements in the International Bureau of Heights and Measures (Paris)

showed that the laser gravimeter, designed and built in the institute, today
is the most precise and most productive instrument of its kind in the world.

It turns out continuously up to 5000 measurements a day; they are processed
by a minicomputer on a real-time basis with the experimental setup. For com-

parison, we can state that several tens of measurements a year can be made
with the I. Sakumi gravimeter (Paris).

The LADO-l laser doppler velocity meter was built as a result of scientific
cooperation of the Institute of Automtion and Electrometry and the Karl Zeiss
Jena People's Enterprise (008). The determination of the doppler frequency

shift in light scattered by impurity particles in a flow of liquid or gas
was postulated on the basis of instrument operation. Laser radiation is

focussed in a given region of the traveling medium. The doppler shift in
the scattered light beam is discriminated by optical heterodyning.

The instrument is built with a two-frequency circuit with shifting of the
carrier beam frequency by a known amount; this permits simultaneous measure-

ment of the magnitude and direction of two orthogonal components of the
velocity vector. The range of the velocities measured is 0-80 m/s; measure-

ment accuracy is 0.03 percent for an averaging time of l s. The volume over
which the velocity measurement is averaged is several tens of microns; this

affords the possibility of measuring velocity in boundary layers.

This instruaent is made up of a laser. optical assemblies. an electronic
signal processing block and a precision coordinate-measuring stand. The

instrument can position, with precision, the measured volume relative to
three orthogonal coordinate axes within the limits 1003;100:200 mm. The

main area of application for the LADO-l laser instrument is experimental
hydrodynamics and aerodynamics. Manufacture of a series—produced instru-

ment model is proposed for CEHA countries.

The step that follows in applying interferometry for investigating flows is
designing and building a doppler photographic reading correlator. This

instrument must function at very weak scattering levelst to units of
photons.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Mobile facility for measuring gravitational
acceleration '

Broad use of laser measuring devices goes far in ensuring progress in scien-
tific experimentation and in industrial technoloy.

Concluding his paper, Yu. Ye. Nesterikhin highliyxted studies at the Insti-
tute of Automation and Electrometry on the physics of nonlinear waves.

Very marked progress in studying nonlinear phenomena was recorded worldwide
over the past 10-20 years. This progress was due. in large part, to the

[general advance in investigating mam-body problems and to developments in
computer engineering that permit numerical experiments to he conducted with

a large number of nonlinear equations.

Studies into probl- oi‘ the physics of nonlinear phenomena were conducted
by a group of theoretical physicists at the Institute of Automation and
Electrometry.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

IADO-l laser doppler velocity meter

A study was made into the problem of the parametric turbulence of waves

originating when they are excited by an external homogeneous electromagnetic
field, for example when magnons are excited in ferromagnetic materials by an

electromagnetic fieldrin the UH? range, when sound in crystals is excited
by laser radiation and so on.

Decay processes leading to formation of a wave spectrum in terms of frequen-
cies and directions of propagation are fairly strong in plasma. general”
speaking. Plasm turbulence was shown. in contrast to hydro‘b'namic turbu-
lence, to be severely anisotropic and nonstationary; its spectrum is singular
and is concentrated at lines and surfaces and even in individual points in

wave vector space.

Couettc flow serving as the example (flow of fluid betveen coaxial cylin-
ders, one of which is rotating), a stumr is underway dealing with the initi-

ation of hydrodynamic turbulence.

As early as 19103:. academician L. D. Landau proposed that the initiation of
turbulence can proceed stage by stage: as the velocity of laminar flow in-

creases. stability losses occur and a periodic flow vith a certain frequency
originates; then stability loss again ensues, additional motion at a differ—

ent frequency not comensurable with the first starts up, then——flov at a

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

third frequency and so on. To verity this hypothesis, in the institute a
facility was built; with it. the flow rate of a liquid was neasured with the
laser doppler velocity meter and in experinental real-tine data were fed into
a computer operationally performing the statistical processing of the data,
for exenple. conputing the pairwise autocorrelation velocity function. the
power spectrum and so on.

As the experiments revealed, 1.. D. Landau's proposal is valid only to the
third critical velocity. Beyond that, instead of notion with new periods
there ensues notion of an intenadiate type. when spatial periodicity is
preserved to a significant extent; however, the tenporsl periodicity breaks
down end the frequency spectrus proves to be not discrete, but continuous.
Apparently. in this experiment the "strange attractor" effect—intensely
under stw by nathenaticianso-vas realised. It turns out that regions

with elongated trajectories (attractors) not containing stable points and
limiting cycles can exist in the phase space of system with three or more

degrees of freedom. At present detailed experinentel study of the strange
attractor effect in Oouette flow is underway.

Discussion of paper

After Yu. Ye. Nesterihhin's paper was delivered, the floor was given to
corresponding neﬁer of the (3811 Academy of Sciences Ye. P. Popovnchairnsn
of the comission of the presidiun, IBSR Acadew of Sciences. that has been
looking into activities at the Institute of Auto-etion and Electronstry.
The reorganization of the institute one years ago, related Ye. P. Popov.
yielded good results: automation was dovetailed in with nodern physics,
leading to the achievements that were recounted in the paper.

Original general-purpose system have been developed on the basis of CAM“
standards. ‘lhe institute's achievements has won world recognition in the
area of software support associated with the develop-ant of these syste-s.

Particular nention lust be lads of the graphical display equipent built
here. with high resolution md automatic recording devices.

Studies on automation of scientific investigations are going on at the insti-
tute at a very high level and can yield an even broader outcone-in the
autoaation of designing in the nest wide-ranging sectors of the national

econoey .

The Institute of Automation and Electrometry has accuulated such positive
experience in organising inter-industry design offices. These design offices

are administratively under the enterprise, but as to scientific methodology
the institute directs then. This kind of link between institute and industry

did much to promote the broad realization of the achievasents end the results
of investigations into manufacturing.

Acadeaicians A. M. Prohhorov and I. A. Pilyugin and corresponding nessber,
LBS}! Acadexy of Sciences A. F. Bogonolov spoke at the session of the Pre—
sidiun of the USSR Acadesw of Sciences.

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The president of the IBSR Acedeey of Sciences. acadenician A. P. Aleksandrov.
spoke forcefully of the importance of the institute's studies. especially

in desiming and building systeu in accordance with CANAC standards. This
made -it possible. he said, to sharply improve the equipping of our insti-
tutes engaged in physical. biological and even economic investigations.

'ihe systems built by the institute for interfacing experimental facilities
and computers. new in production in our country by various depart-eats, make

it possible to build very flexible computer structures in Acadew of Sciences
institutes that have a variety of computers. Here is an example: the system

for nuclear studies that verc to he conducted in cmnhuilt in the Lenin-
grad Institute of Nuclear mysics imeni B. P. Konstantinov--proved to be
very effective. Soviet devices in accordance with CAMC standards were
interfaced rapidly and without difficulty with Swiss, British and hench

facilities. so that two days after arriving at cm. Soviet specialists
co-enced measurements. Another example lies in the system of automation
for KATA! [radiotelescope of the USSR Acadew of Sciences].

Summing up the discussion, V. A. Kotel'nikov. vice president. 1883 Academy
of Sciences, and academician. took note of the contribution of the Insti-

tute of Automation and Electrometry to designing and building systems under
CAMAc standards. The work that the institute is doing in auto-sting scien-

tific investigations is very vital, in particular, for academy institutes,
and this vorh must go on. Unquestionably, the institute has found its call-
ing and must not change the direction of its investigations. .

Resolution

In the resolution passed by: the Presidium of the [BSR Acadew of Sciences,

approval was given to the scientific and scientific-organisational activities
of the Institute of Automation and Bleetrometry. Siberian Division, {88R

Academy of Sciences. The primary directions of the institute's scientific
activities were confined: studies on automating scientific investigations

based on a model highvw type computer system Md CAMAC standards; inves-
tigations into the theoretical principles of meaory and optical processing

of information; stuw of physical effects for deceloping new principles of
measurements and measuring devices: and investigations into the physics of
nonlinear waves.

The Presidiul of the £881! Academy of Sciences also approved the activities
of the institute in developing new, more improved fares at introducing scien-

tific innovations into the national econaw.
commit: Iadatel'stvo "Hunks". ”Vestnik Akademii Haul 8883". 1919

10123
080: 1870

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

GBOPRYSICS. ASTRONOMY AND SPACE

'AIR 5 COSMOS' REPORTS ON 'SALYUT-G' HISSION OPERATIORS
Pnrie All! a COSMOS in French 7 Apr 19 pp “-65
[Article by Serge Berg: "Obaervatione, heintenence on Board '8alyut-6'"]

[Toxtl Sena 1.0 operotione to repair and replace defective aateriele and
equipment were conducted by tho "Soyuz-32" crew during the firet month
on board "Salyut-6". according to IMSTIYA on 25 March.

Sane of the repaire. which were tar-ed ”preventive eaintenance." were begun
on aoon oe Vladimir Lyakhov end Valeriy Ryuin arrived at the orbital
etetion; the othere were nede after the ”Progreee-S" freight treneport ehip
had delivered replacenent parta.

Thue, for example. a back-up ca-era wee brought by "Progreee;$“ because the
on-board tel-wieion eyeten. which had been ueed exteneively by previoue

crewa, ehowed eigne of failure. Similarly. the ehower atall curtain wee
changed.

But the neat important operation—and the longeet (eoverel daye)--coneiated
of neutralizing a fuel tank in the propuleion eyetem. in which the neabrane
wee damaged: the aeebrane eeparatee two perta of the tmk. one containing
noneyuotrical dinethylhydrazine and the other-~coepreaead nitrogen. The

"Solyut" atation hee three of these tanks. and consequently it wee poeeible

to totally upty the defective tank without hindering the functioning of
the station.

The defect in thia membrane had already been noted by nieeion controllere
and coenonaute [Kovelenok and Ivanchenkov] S nonthe ago. Only after a
number of simulatione in ground laboratoriee could the procedure to be
followed in orbit be eetabliehed.

The operatione began on 16 March. Firet of all, the crew rotated the
“Soyu2-32"-"8elyut-6"--"Progreee-S" coeplex along ite longitudinal axie
in order to create an artificial microgravity; the centrifugal force thue
created nade it poeeible to eeparate the combuetible frou the nitrogen.
Port of the fuel could then be pumped into one of the empty tanhe on
"Progreee.“ But the caplete evacuation required more than a week; the

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

proceee wee beeed on the property of the epece vecum to "such" all tracee
of hydrazine that could be found within the tank (which wee vented to open
epece). With the evacuation conplete. the tent wee refilled with coepreeeed
nitrogen. The operation laeted lO deye: it wee completed by "7 her-ch.

Surveying Over Chine

0f ell the experinente e great deal of ettention wee given to theee teking
place in the ”Splav" end "Krietall" furnaces. which handled Soviet exporieente
for 3 deye before the French-Soviet "Blue" experiaente began (cf. AIR 6 6083403.
No 759). The Soviet preee hee eupheeized the intereet in obtaining by fueion

very pure gleee to be ueed in the Ianufecturing of optical fibere for tele-
ce-unicet ione. . . .

Berth obeervatione continue to occupy en important place. end the Soviet
preae wee particularly pleaeed to deecribe the work conducted over the
USSR-Chine“ border region: obeervetione of the Peeire. the Lake leykel
area. the region where BAH ie being conetructed....

Ryuein end Lyahhov know theee ereee very well. One wae bore in Koeeonol‘ek-
ne-Aeur. and the other did hie Iilitary eervicc in the extrene Per Beet.
Tine end again they flew over theee regione in e 111-136 epecially equipped
for flighte of coeeoneute eeking cbeervetione under the euepicee of the
"Prirode" (neture) pregrn. Reeponeible for theee flighte ie Soviet teet
pilot Nikoley Stcpanovich 2ateepe. The couree ueuelly flown wee: Hoecow-
lrkutek-Kheberovek-Vledivoetoh-Keechetha-Duehenbe-Aetrekhen'-Hoecow.

Ryuein end Lyekhov. who have already epent l eonth in orbit. inetelled on
board the etetion e "Yelena" ga-e teleecope. which wee deeigned to record
the flow of glue radiation end electrone; they heve eleo conducted the
"Piton" and ”Biogravietet" experinente, which dealt with plent growth.

Proe new on the two cononeute can conunicete with one another ueing the
"Kol'teo" (ring) welkie-talhie eyetee. And finally. the coeeonaute eede
poeeible yet enother epece "firet" on 26 Harch: thanke to e televieion
receiver delivered by "l’rogreee-S" and inetalled on board "Salyut-o," the
firet televieion picturee freu earth were viewed in orbit. Free new on
there will be two-way conunicetione through televieion.

COPYRIGHT: AIR 6 oosnos. Perle. 1979

C50: 3100

25
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI ORIGIN. 088 ONLY

PHYSICS

"DC 621. 38

NATION AID UTILIZING. C mm. macaw W18”. A ”WIPIC
MONICA?!“

Moecov Milt mm: m can in Rueeian no 2. 1979 pp 37-46
[Article by Doctor of Technical scienoee o. h. lleeyete)

(Text) ‘l'hie oc-unicaticn ie devoted to the technique of nanoeeoond pulaaao
vhoee output variee tron negawatte to termtte or nore with pulae length
tron tenthe to hundrede o! nanoeeconde. we began inveetigaticne in thie

field et the M Polyteclmical lnetitnte in 1957 to iumtigete the develop-
aent of electric diachargee in varioue dielectric nedien in liquide. eolide.
gaeae and in a noun.

At the and of the lOSo‘a and beginning of the 1960'e. intereet in theee in-
veetigatione increaeed eepecially due to the need to utiliee powerful nano-
eeocnd palace in a one: or new areee oi' phyeicen to generate poverrul
laeer eaieeicn puleea, for input and diecherge of charged particlee in
acceleratore (opacifically. in an accelerator with acute: bee-e). for in-
veetigetione in nonlinear optioe. in nuclear phyeice (to euppiy power to
apark ad atreaner chalbere). in hiﬁ-epeed photography and co co. nineti-
getione of powerful nulcaeoond wieee. carried out at lone): Polytechnical
lnetitute. contrilnu to a eigniiicent degree to rapid develop-eat or acne
oi the neaed tielde. to: eagle, nethoda or indirectly pcleed inetallatione
developed by our group were need in creation of powerful ruby laeere. epark
and etreaaer Me. in inveetigaticne on nonlinear optice. in inveetiga-
tion or nanoeeoond x-rey polaae and eo on. A eonogreph,‘ devoted to the
technology or poveriul nanoaeoond puleee, vac publiahed in 1963.

M rectore can be neued ahioh arouaed the great intereet in thie field or
technology and ita rapid progreae. uret. thie vaa inveetigation of high-
epeed proceeeee which occur due to the enact o! etrong electric and negnetic
tielde within a very ehort tine; eecond, the energy of powerful nameeomd
polaee can be converted to electron or ion energy. to elactroaagnetic radiation

 

'0. h. Vcroh'yav and c. A. aeeyate, "hmiha tonirovaniye vyeckovol'tnykh
nenoaekundnyhh inul'eov" t‘l‘he Technology or Shaping nigh-Voltage Nemeecond
Nleael, Ioeoov, 1963.

26

YO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL ”8|! ONLY

anarqy c! dinoront rango -- (rc- x-ray to ini'rarod -- and alsc to all!-
radiaticn onorqy by using various physical onsets.

 

V

riguro 1. Mao-shaping Circuits: a -- disgra- c! aquaro-wavo
pulss lcnaticn with aqlitudo 00/2; h - diagram
with dcuhlo atcraoo lino: Do -- prolininary vcltago
c! atcraco linoo ls l! -- switching ola-sntt 2 -- wsvo

inodancs c! lino

The prohlao aonsrsting powerful nanosecond pulaoo is one of the t onrla of
invoatiqaticna of tho “saw-Garront lloctrcnica Inatituto (188) c; tho

aihorian Dapartasnt of tho um Maddy c! aciancoa. rocontly croatod at
'l‘cask. Varicua physical and anqinoorinc prchloas rolatod to tho mo of
pcwortul nancooccno pulaoa aro now hoing aclwod in my sciantitic institu-
tions of tho ccuntry: at tho Instituto ct Atclic mom iasni I. V.
xurchstcv. in a nuhsr c! lshcratcrios ct tho thyaics Instituto iasni r. u.
nobodsv of tho 088R Mad-y ct sci-secs, at tho Instituts of moloar Physics
of tho sihorian Dapartasnt of tho om Madam c! Scioncoa. at tho Instituto
c! Autcutica and lloctrclstry ct tho sihorisn Mart-ant of tho 0881!
heads-y of Scioncos. at tho mum Dhyaica matituto of tho 0881! M

c: Bcisncoa. at tho Joint lnstituto tor Mloar loss at Duhns, at tho
mr'hcv thysicctschnical Instituto c! tho Ukrainian 8R Acsdoqy c2 aciancsa,
at tho uningrad Icisntific Roaaarch Instituto ct Inoctrcphyaical Apparatus
insni 0. V. Yarrow. at tho has): Pclytochnical Inatituto aw! so on. Any
laboratory inwclwod in plaasa physics or lasor or nucloar physics ossontially
now utiliaoa tho tochnclcoy ct pcwortul nancsoccnd pulsoa to coo cr ancthor

docroo.

'l'ho aisplost circuit for gsnoratinq pcwartul nancaoccnd pulaoa is proaantod
in Piguro l. a. It is tot-ally sinilar to ordinary pulaod squiplsllt circuits.
mo atcraco linss aro first charqu tc vcltaco no. u is a switching slsnsnt.
as which spark caps aro uaad. x! tho load rosistanco R is oqual to tho
charactoriatic wavo inodanco c! this lino 2. a squad-vows pulao with awli-
tudo 00/2 and with lsngth oqual tc dcuhlo tho wawo travol tics in tho storaqo
lino can ho canoratoi. 'lho onorw riao and docay tins in tho pulso is actor-
ainsd by tho tranaiont prccsassa which occur in tho switching sls-snt.

27
'03 OPPXCKAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

A circuit with doublo otorago lino. which poraito gonorotion of a voltago

two timoo groator than in tho provioua circuit, in prooontod in Piguro l, b.
‘l‘horo aro difforont aothodo of puioo convoroion, apocifically, ahortoning

tho pulao front and puloo longth. oinco a oguaro-wavo puloo with ohort

longth and with ohort front longth io con-only uaod. 'l'ho dovico which
ohortono tho puloo front io callod a oharpanor. whilo tho dovioo which
ahortono tho pulao longth io callod tho cutting olaoont. Tho cutting olonont
and oharponor aro nonlinoar rooiotoro whooo valuo io high for oono timo and
than docroaooo alnoot to taro vary rapidly within a nanooocond and oonotiaoo
in fractiono of a nanooocond. Variouo typoo of aparh gapa or forrito olononto
ara aoot froguontly uood ao nonlinoar rooiotoro.

Ono of tho Iain problou in gonoration of poworful nanooocond pulaoo in tho
prohlon of oo-utation. h diaohargo in difforont Iodia -- in a vacuu.
gaooouo Indium liguid and aoootiaoo in a oolid -- ia uood for coauutotion.
Conutating goa-dioohargo arroatero aro widoly uood. Tho tiaa during which
tho puloo onorgy rioo ocouro froo coro to tho oaxilua valuo ia callod tho
conutation ti-o. Thio tiIIo dotorlinoo tho uininun poooiblo puloo front.

For gao-diochargo conutatoro with low curront valuo in tho pulao (up to
10‘ A). tho oomtation til-o t); io calculatod from tho homo-ﬂair“ apark
”601:

A
"I - (31" t

whoro p io gao prooouro, 2 lo tho oloctric fiold intonaity and h io a con-
otant which charactoriroo tho gapo. with fixod voltago in tho opark gap.
tho valuo of I, to conotant: thoroforo. tho tiao tk will docroaoo with an
incroaoo of proaouro. Iocauoo of thio. tho nitrogon. air or othor prooouro
in thooo opark gapo ohould not ho loao than lo at. with pulao front longth
boginning at nanooocond.

Procooooo rolotod to tho inortia of chmnol oxpanoion begin to play a oig-
nificant rolo with a largo incroaoo of curront. 1'ho channol ia unablo to
expand rapidly within a ohort tiaa and to incroaao ita conductivity. 1horo-
foro. tho prohlon ariooo of how to achiovo high valuoo of curront with ohort
rioo tino. M aothodo of oolving thio probloa woro propoood at Isa so an
SSSR.

the firot notinod, collod avalancho conutation, conoioto in the fact that
a largo mwor of oloctrona io crootod aimltanoouoly in tho opark gap upon
application of an alootric fiold. Each of thooo oloctrono. locatad in a
aufficiontly high oloctric fiold. croatoa an oloctron avalanche within a
ohort tin: ono oloctron loodo to fox-nation of Iilliono and ovan hundroda
of millions of oloctrono within a vary ohort tin and tho curront in tho
goo incroaooo vory rapidly. ‘rhuo, tho apark channol io oli-inatod and,
mroovor. oxtroaaly rapid procooooo occur which par-it a roduction of tho
rioo tin to tontho of a nanooocond. morinonto ohwod that currant riao

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ratee up to 1014 Va can be achieved during avalanche oo-utation. Moreover.
higher pulee recurrence frequenciee (up to 10‘ lie or eore) are achieved with
avalanche mutation.

me eecond eethod propceed during development of the avalanche comtaticn
method conaiete in injecting electrone from an electron eource directly into
the gae. It the value or the injected electron current in high. the ehort
col-utaticn tine and the high rate or current rlee are achieved even without
avalanche nultiplication of electrona under oonditione or an independent
epace diecharge. The device which operatea on thie principle in celled an
injection thyratron. he la known. the olectrcna or ordinary thyratrone
appear due to cathode heating. here the electrone are injected through the
cathode from the outeide. m- pernite total control of the device: not
only of ewitching it on. but aleo of ewitching it of! rapidly and etopping
electron injection.

thie device. propoeed in 1969. wee very ueerul {or dirrerent purpoeee.
epecitically. in powertul gee laeer eguipeent. however. there ie one defi-
ciency in the injection thyratron. he econ an the electric field in the
gee decreaeee. the electron drift rate decreaeee during conutation and the
conutetor will have high reeidual reeietance. Thle eane problee exlete in
eperk gape with avalanche mutation. it correct thie deficiency. a gee
euet be ueed in which high electron drift rate ie eainteined in low electric
tielde. [or exaeple. Iathane hae thie property. The dependence of the
electron drift rate in nethene on 8/1: (tigure 2) ie einilar in nature. At
a/pﬁ’l Vocn'1 - ug’l. thie rate ie earl-um (on the order of 107 tale).
although it ie coneiderably leee than 105 ave in ordinary gaeee. Thie
artect per-mite a reduction or the reeidual reeietance or the injection
thyratron by eeveral tectore.

now reeidual reeietance and high current riee rate nay aleo be achieved in
eperk gape with large nmer or eperk channele. Many channele can be formed
in eolid-etete. liquid and gee eperk gape. h co-utator with air epark
channele. developed at 1P1. in water which oomtate current of 150 la within
O ne. ie shown in vigure 3. Hethode or igniting up to lo channele in e gee
at voltage tron 0.5 to 3 U! have been developed at 183 so m 3333. In thie

caee the tine between ignition of individual channele coeprieed unite or
nanoeeoonde.

Storage linee are ueed to etore energy. M typee o2 linee ere ueually
eeployedt etrlp linee -- two etripe between which a dielectric ie placed.
and coaxial linee -- two coaxial tubee between which a liquid dielectric ie
ueually located. the can ehaw that the current related to the width of the
etrip or die-ate: or the tube ie proportional to 315. where 3 ie the elec-
tric field inteneity and 8 ie the dielectric pereeability of the ineuletion.
Coneeguently. 8 and 3 of the ineulation euet be increaeed to increaee the
current (by wing. (or axe-ple. dietilled water in which 3 - 81) and the
dieeneione or the etorage elemnte mt aleo be increaeed. men the energy
of the etorage eleeente reechee nillione or tene o! eillione of joulee. the
etorage devicee acquire enorlloue dieaneione and their coat increaeee eharply.
Moreover. ditlioultiee related to generation or ehort puleee appear (the
larger the dieeneione. he eore ditricult it ie to generate ehort wevee).

29
POI! OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

      

lllolkI-voolo

rim 2. Dopondonoo o! Dinoront Goo Drift noto on Ratio of
llootrio l'iold mtonoity I: to an Prouuro p: 0 --

Argo--Cﬂ4lﬂ "C02

 

liquro 3. Hultichonnol Diochorgo in Rotor

morotoro, tho probloa of finding now otorogo dovicoo oriooo. lho ilportonco
of thin promo: 1. illuotrotod by tho following owlo. It in known that

1 mm: (3.6 m) or ordinuy olootrio onorqy oooto oovorol kopoolu. Not lou
thon l Iillion ruhloo not bo opont to produoo tho oono povor in o nonooocond
qonorotor. 'thorotoro. o ooorch for nothodo tor soot otticiont convoroion o!
ordinory olootriool onorgy to poworrul short onorqy hoo boon oonduotod for o
long ti- in tho loot divoroo loborotorioo.

tho of tho oolutionl to tho dovolopod situation io to an inductivo onorgy
otoroqo doviooo «Id cnrront onto“ in thou. mono invootigotionl on boinq
oonduotod octivoly ond ouoooootully at tho Inotituto or Atooic Morgy inoni
x. V. mrdutov undo: tho ouporvioion o: Modnicion Yo. P. Volikhov ond at
tho Sciontitio March 0! Bloctrophyoicol hpporotuo honi D. V. Yotronov ot
uninqrod. m prohlol of producing vory high pulood onorvy in tho [illi-
ond limoocond bond- hoo boon oolvod thoro. m 183 so AN 888’. jointly
with tho '11.): Polytomnlcol Inotituto io oolvinq tho problon of onorqy
otorooo in inductonco and oonvoroion of it not only to niorooooond. but oloo
to nonooooond olootron boon. It to not yot poooiblo to cowlotoly oolvo
thio prohlu, but puloo gonorotoro hovo olroody boon dovolopod which ponit

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

energy etorage in capacitors at low voltage, then pumping it to the inductance,
after which the current is sharply cut off, usually due to explosion of the
conductors. Solution of this problem became possible due to development of
new current choppers, as which a set of a large number of copper micron con-
ductors is used instead of the metal (oils used previously. The use of these
conductors paraite a multitold increase of the current cutoff speed and con-
sequently of pulse amplitude. These effects are used to develop small pulse
generators with voltage of 0.6-l.5 NV. Electron accelerators are being
developed on the basis or these generators.

A pulsed cocelerator with electron energy of l HeV and current up to 20 kn.
developed at 182 so an 885R end the musk Polytechnical Institute. is shown
in Figure 4. Several of these accelerators are operating at institutes of
the USSR Acadesv of Sciences.

 

Figure d. "Puchok in" Electron Accelerator With Inductive
Intermediate mercy Storage Device and Hicroconducting
Current Chopper

The disedvantage of current choppers in the tons of exploded conductors in
their one-tine use. A nw conductor must be inserted to generate a new
pulse. Usually several minutes are required for preparation and replace-
ment of the chopper. 'ﬂueretore, these generators are not yet able to
operate in the large-tregmncy pulae node. In this regard the injection
thyratron which was discussed above opens up interesting possibilities.
current tutor! in it may occur due to stopping electron injection.

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U88 ONLY

'lhe following experiment wee conducted to check the poeeibility of current
cutoff. A volteqe of 330 xv wee fed to en injection thyretron. The current
of the injected electrone cocprieed 18 kit. The current in the thyretron
iteelf wee 150 to. After the electron current wee etopped in the injector.
the current in the thyretron wee etopped ee well. 1n. cutoff time of current
of 150 ha oouprieed epprorieetely 200 ne.

HoweVer, it ie difficult to uee en injection thyretron ee e current chopper
in the preeenoe of en inductive etoreqe device due to develop-mt of inete-
bility in the thyretron pleene. an. electric field in the epece gee die-
cherge pleene of the thyretron increeeee etronqu during current cutoff. It
eleo leede to inetebility of the epece diecherqe end forution of e diecherqe
chennel. 'lb eliminete thie inetehility, the electric field met be reduced.
for erewle. by increeeing the dietence between the thyretron cethode end
enode with fixed volteqe. nut um leede to e decreeee of current which
puape the inductive etorece device. 'lherefore, qeeeoue nedie uuet be found
in which the dieoherqe current, proportionel to the electron drift rete,
will be greeter in well electric fielde. lt wee noted above thet methane.
the uee of which MY be very ueeful. hee thie property.

 

figure 5. Printe of :lectron Beer: of Different Type

One of the aoet eignificent trende in the uee of powerful nenoeecond pulee
equipmnt ie .e‘“ uee in heevy-current nenoeecond electron ecceleretore.
The firet inveeticetione in thie direction were conducted independently in

32
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
the USSR and in the United States. A group of research associates at 18!: so
AN 8881! developed the first heavy-current nanosecond electron accelerator in
the 0881! in 1.967. This was preceded by alnost a decade of Investigations on
powerful nanosecond pulse technology and study of the discharge in a vacuu-
duc to the effect of high-voltage nanosecond pulses. The investigations led
to the discovery of the phenonenon of explosiVe electron eniseion, consisting
in the fact that the nicroscopic points on the cathode explode due to the
effect of the autoelsctrcn enission current. A natal-plans transition is
forned in this case which contributes to sharp asplification of electron
current. The electron currents nay be extrenely high -- up to hundreds of
thousands and even nilliona of anperes.

Explosive electron enission is used in heavy-current electron accelerators.
There are three types of these accelerators. liret, an accelerator which
permits ensration of a focused electron bean. For exanple. current density
up to lo Ala2 has been achieved at the Institute of Atonic Energy insni

I. v. Kurchatcv and at PIA” [Physics Institute ineni P. N. bebedev of the
USSR Acadeny of Sciences].

Second, an accelerator for generating large-area beans. A wide electron
bean can be produced and discharged into the atnosphere with the existence
of nany enissicn centers on a large surface. For exasple, beans with cur-
rent up to 20 kA and area up to l n3 for to; laser pulping have been achieved
at 188 so AN SSSR.

Third. beans of tubular shape can be produced in accelerators by using diodes
with intersecting electric and nagnetic fields. Prints of three different
types of beans produced in accelerators of Isa 80 AN 3332: a -- an annular
been 6 cn in diamter with current of lo hA and electron energy of 600 kev;
b -- a flat bean lo on wide with current density of lo A/cnz. tk - 25 nsy

and c -- a focused bean with current density of 5-106 vaz, are shown in
Figure 5.

Development of powerful nanosecond electron bean equipsnnt strongly stinulated
the possibility of using than in theraonuclear fusion. These investigations
are being conducted at a nusber of organizations in the USSR and prinarily at
the Institute of Atoaic mergy under the supervision of 1.. I. mdakcv and at
the Institute of Nuclear Physics of the Siberian Depertnsnt of the USSR
Acadeny of Sciences under the supervision of Corresponding Hedaer of the

USSR Acadeny of Sciences 0. D. Wutov.

Three high-voltage stands of the IS: so AN 353]! for production of nanosecond
pulses having voltage greater than 3 IN and current up to 500 RA, which will
be med to conduct various types of investigations related to the effect of
these pulses. are shown in figure 6.

The use of high-voltage nanosecond pulse eguipnent pernits solution of the
problan of niniaturizetion of high-voltage devices. It follows from Figure 7
that the electric strength of insulation increases strongly with a decrease
of pulse length, that is, high electric field intensity can be achieved with

33
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL U58 ONLY

 

Figure 6. liigh-Vclteqe Bundle for Nenoeecond Pulse ﬁsts

short length. mis penits solution of the problem of miniaturization of
high-voltage devices. a: this besis, e series of essentielly new x-rey
epperetus hes been developed under the supervision of V. A. 'l‘sukerlen end

N. I. Koeayek during the pest aw yeers st the no aurevestnik. uplosive
emission oethodes ere used es the electron source in then. me tunde-sntel
reseerch of uplosius electron eeission end the eutoeeission processes which
stieulete it, cerried out by out group et monk, by G. N. Pursey et Leninqred
University, end elso by K. I. Yelineon et the Institute of indie mqineerinq
and Electronics of the U58)! Medea of Sciences end by v. N. Shrednix et

the Leninqred Physicotechnicel Institute ineni A. !. Ioue of the USSR
Acedeqy of Sciences. contributed to the success of: this work.

The weight or the x-rey epperetus now produced is 8-10 tines less then ordi-
nexy epperetus. these X-rey devices ere used ectively in flew detection,
specificelly. to x-rey gee end oil pipelines. to celihrete redietion detec-
tors, in udicel prectice end so on. Development end introduction of these
nenosecond x-rey epperetus denotes e reel revolution in x-rey tedusoloqy.
They ere now being sold in ell m countries end elso in the United stetes.
West Gunny. mglend. Jepen end other cepitelist countries.

34
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

figure 7. Woe of Blectric Strength of Different Hedie on
Puleebenqth: lneir,p-10etm.d-Im 2-
dieleotric weter eurfece. d - 3 a: 3 -- vecuun. d -
- 0.5 u: d -- trmefor-er oil. d - 1.2 u

The enell overell dieeneione end the poeeibility of producing high outpute
rake powerful nenoeecond electronic accelerators exceptionally pro-icing
for production purpoeee. aperilente conducted et :3: so AN sssn ehowed
that euch proceeeee ee hardening polyeeter peinte end eterilitetion of
eicroorceniene proceed with identicel eucceee upon expoeure to both conti-
nuoue end nemeeoond pulee been with high pulee recurrence frequency.

'lhe ”sinus-4" ecoeleretor, which hee everece output of 6 kw. pulee recurrence
frequency of 100 I: end pulse length of 20 ne, ie preeented in figure a.

An inetellntion for ueing powerful an? puleee with recurrence frequency of
100 a: hee been developed in joint work of run. the Applied Phyeice lnetitute
of the 088R hoedeely of Sciencee end 183 so an 8883. It inch e powerful
nenoeeoond pulee generetor, e diode for eheping e tubuler electron been. e
reeonetor end eolenoid. lnveetiqetione to produce powerful 5H! enieeion
puleee Ming heevy-current electron bee-e were begun jointly in the 1970'e

by the Applied "voice of lnetitute of the 0353 hcedeey of Sciencee end by
rum. Theee inveetigetione leid the beeie for the lerce cycle of reeeerch
which hee now received internetionel recognition.

Powerful nenoeecond electron been equip-ht nede it poeeible to obtein new
fundenentel reeulte in nucleer phyeice. eolid-etete phyeice. in gee- end
vecmn-diecherqe phyeice end eo on. for exeqle. the firet inveetigetione
of the effect of powerful been on ion cryetelline dielectrice end gleee
were perforned et the Mk Polytechnicel lnetitute end the :8: so IN 8853
due to the uee of heevy-current ecceleretore of 18! ee eerly ee 1969. meee
inveetigetione peuitted the detection of euch phenonene ee brittle feilure
of ion cryetele. eeniconductore end glee” funde-entnl pleene lunineecence
heving tecpereture independence; high-energy conductivity during the effect

35
l’OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Figure 8. “sinus-d" Electron Accelerator of 18! so A8 8559.

of an electron beam and so on. One can state that a new trend related to
study of phenouna caused by formstion of e degenerated electron-hole places
whose density is up to 109 times higher than that in stationary irradiation
in ordinary eooelerators, occurred in irrediation physics of dielectrics.

'mus, powerful nanosecond pulse equipment now finds application both in
various physicel investigations and in solving a number of production pro-
blems and its capabilities are far free exhausted.

A discussion was held after C. A. heeyate'a report.

Academician .i.. V. Geponov-Grekhov pointed out the unique capabilities of
euperhigh-pouer pulse generators to create high-frowncy eeission. Talking
about the scientific trends developed at the Institute of heavy-Current
Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, A. v. Geponov-Grekhov euphasired
that main efforts are concentrated here in developasnt of purely electron
beans and, moreover, developnent of accelerators is being carried out for
specific applications. The Applied Physice Institute of the USSR Acadeny

of Sciences is cooperating effectively with the Institute of heavy-current
Electronics. specifically in the field of sat—enission application.

L. I. Rudekov euphesired in his talk the iwortance of extensive development
of the problem of producing euperpoverful emission pulses, being carried out
under the supervision of G. A. Hesyats at the Institute of Heavy-Current
Electronics of the Siberian Deparwont of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

36
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l1. s. Rsbinovich noted the inportant role which the investigatione of the
scientific collective headed by G. A. Ilesyate played in the work of run

in laser technology and development of poverful an! generators. Approxi-
Iately loo ditterent accelerators developed at different institutes are now

operating in the USSR. There is already an acute need for industrial pro-
duction or accelerators for various purposes.

Aoadeeician Ye. P. Velikhov talked about the cooperation oi’ the Institute of
Heavy-Current Bleotronics of the Siberian Department of the USSR Acadew oi'
Sciencee and the Leningrad Scientific Research Institute of llectrophyeicel
Apparatus insni D. V. Yetrenov in development of a seriee of accelerators
for different purpoees. One of these accelerators is already produced by
industry. -

The President o! the 0888 MM of Sciences Acadenician A. P. Aleksandrov
authorized the discussion. He turned attention to the fact that alnoet
identical accelerators are now being developed at different institutee for
ditterent production purposes and expressed the opinion of the need to
coordinate ettorte in this iield. Raving noted the great successes of the
recently created Institute of heavy-Current Blectronics of the Siberian
Department or the USSR Acedesy of Sciences in working out the problee of
superpwertul nanosecond pulses, A. P. Aleksandrov wished then further
sucoese in developnnt of this Wt trend.

COPYRIGHT: Indetel'stvo "Nauka'. ”Vestnik Akadeeii nauk sssn". 1979

6521
630: 1870

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PUBLlCATIONS

ORGANIZING THE OPZMTIGI OF A CWUTING CENTER

Moscow ORGANIZATSIYA RAM? VYCHISLITBL'NOGO TSBNTRA (Organizing the Opera-

tion of n Conputing Cantor) in Russian 1978. signed to prooo 11 Jul 78.
pp 1-6. 186-191

lAnnotntion. foroword. introduction. Appondix S. bibliography. and table of

contents fro- book by I. A. Orlov. tndotol'otvo "Enorgiyo." 28.000 copioo.
192 pogco]

[Tout ] ”NOTATION

Tho purpoooo {or toning conputing contoro. thoir iunctiono. and organica-
tional otructuro oro diocuoood in tho book. Aloo diocuoood oro oucotiono
of otondarditing nothodo. procoduroo. ond tho oporttiono ooquonco ot tho
conputing cantor. which oll turn out to bo baoic for achieving onooth and
oyotonotic conputing contor oporationa. Procouao of proparing. controlling.
and prucoooing intonation nro roviowod. no in tho principle of organining
conputing cantor oporationo.

Pluch attontion io dovotod to tho noon- and nonauroo instituted to cronto con-
ditiona for not: offoctivo conputor utilization. In thio contont. quantiono
of tho tonporoturo rongo within which oonutora oporoto. diotribution and
oupply or cloon air in tho conputor roon. control of noioo and vibration.

ond powor oupply of tho conputor oro conoidorod.

Tho book io intondod for otudanto of tochnicnl high ochoolo who. through
their vocation. aro tied to tho oorvicing and utilization of coqutoro that
torn port of a counting contor.

MAC!

Tho prcoont tour for otudonto of technical high ochoolo io intended for tho
couroo on orgonizing tho oporation of a oonputing contor. which conoo uodor
tho opocialty aroa of oloctronic conputoro. inotrunonto. and dovicca. Con-
oidoring tho oito of tho book and tho gononl diroction of tho couroo. tho
outhor did not undortako to turn thin book into a roioronco volt-o with

dotailod oxplanotiono of oil poooiblo nothodo and procoduroo of organizing
and corrying out oporationo of a cowuting contcr. Nor did ho dolvo deeply
into tho oroa of coin; tho oquipncnt and nothoda for aoouring ito oiioctivo

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ()NIN

utilization. The purpose of the book is to discuss the solution of all ques-
tions from a general (and sufficiently complete) point of view and. above
all. to create in the reader a proper understanding of how all basic work of
a computing center should be conducted in principle and what the general
forms and rules are for its organization and execution. Many of these fans
are now practiced at our leading computing centers. although there are also
those ingenious and useful methods found in the practice of foreign comput-
ing centers race-ended in the book for our acceptance.

The level of development reached by computer technology demands a correspond-
ing level of organisation in its utilization. Only in that case will it be
possible to obtain a truly well-adjusted end efficient operation of a com-
puting center in all its branches. It is thus even more important to train
young specialists into whose hands the future of our technology will be
placed.

INTRODUCTION

The urgent tasks of further developing science end technology in our country
and of finding the fastest (end the most efficient) solution of scientific.
engineering. and economic problems arising as pert of these tasks gave rise
to the formation of computing centers. rather than a simple desire to
increase the efficiency of using digital computers and to improve the condi-
tions of servicing them. National and foreign experience in manufacturing
and applying computing technology shows that the most promising direction in
solving such problems is the integrated utilization of a large number of dig-
ital computers used within the framework of a computing center. which in
final form represents a unified network of computing centers.

The complexity and multifaceted nature of the problems posed leads to the
necessity for maximum utilization of digital computer capabilities and to an
intimate. creative collaboration of specialists in a whole line of disci-
plines. The most favorable conditions for such cooperation and effective
utilization of digital computers are possible within the framework of comput-
ing centers equipped with digital computers of various classes. and by con-
centrating large numbers of specialists with appropriate qualifications in a
single place.

But the cmuting center is not just a collection of computers and experi-
enced specialists: it is a comlex mechanism. where there should not be sepa-
rate cetegories such as computers. progran-srs. modelers. and so forth. but
instead should be a unified. functional team. with a common plan. rule. and
rhythm directed toward an effective implementation of the link between cus-
toner and computer.

Nevertheless. today. when computers are equipped with a well-developed

library of subroutines and a system for automated programming. preparation
of problems for solution on the computer still remains a laborious and _
costly process. One of the reasons for this is that the necessary forms and

39
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

rules for regulating the work of the besic work groups at the conputing cen-
ter end for assuring nutuel understanding sarong then (end with the customers)
in working out conplen progrens heve neither been sufficiently worked out nor
are they being enforced rigidly enough. It is eesy to insgine how. under
these conditions. the chsin linking custoner end cosputer. whose links are
precisely sodelsr. progre-er. end operetor. is lengthened. It is therefore
necessery to eeteblish stricter control of the entire process of prepering
end processing infer-scion in e coeputing center. for which there should be
provided et eech of the centers en eppropriete digest of rules end proce-
dures. thet is. en esteblished fore (stenderd) for orgenising the work of the
nodeler. progresser. operetor. end so forth. down to the nechsnicel utilize-
tion of the cosputer itself. Only in thst ones will e cosputing center
becoee en integreted. well-belenced nechenisn.

By stenderdieetion is neent the eeteblishnsnt of strictly defined fares for
docusentetion. generel rules end order for the execution end submission of

work in ell subdivisions of the coeputing center. This is e neceesery pre-
requisite for reeliting control over the operetion of the conputing center.
end consequently else for the opportunity to increess its efficiency.

Locking such stenderds. the lenders of the computing center find it is ispos-
sible to eveluete precisely the tine for execution of one or snother opere-
tion. end those who perform en operetion frequently heve only e vegue ides
sbout this letter. cerrying out their obligetions in eccordence with their
own conception of sethods end spheres of operetion.

The existence of eppropriete stenderds for the work of personnel end equip-
ment nekes it possible for the leedership to estinete properly the levels of
expenditures. detes. end speeielist steffing necessery for the efficient
operetion of the conputing center. end to introduce chengee into the existing
systes of progre-s in order to eeteblish eppropriete control. Leedership hes
to hsve the opportunity to evelute the true landing of the squipnent end
personnel end. consequently. determine the nest efficient node of operetion
of the entire computing center in view of sveilsble resources.

of course. the took of precise stenderdiestion of the entire operetion of
inforsstion processing in e cosputing center is coepliceted end collides with
e whole number of problene. which Iekes it ispossible to solve it exsctly.
The current incomplete chenge of cosputer generetions. the eppesrence of
ninicosputere thet heve considereble cepebilities. the introduction of Iulti-
progre-ing cospnters end cosputers with tine division operetion. end.
finally. the successful developnent of devices thet receive infornetion
directly fron text or es the spoken word. these ell prove end will continue
to prove to heve e significent influence on the for- in which cosputer opere-
tions ere orgenised st s conputing center. In view of the leek of edequete
experience in the utilieetion of ell these modern cosputere. s certsin enount
of tine will be required in order to crystellise s more efficient structure
for cowuting centers end for the ferns for orgenieing the work in these cen-
ters before it will be possible to speek of truly stenderd ferns end struc-
turee.

60
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPFICIAL USE ONLY

At the one tine. operational experience at leeding conputing centore under
all thou conditione than that it ie not only poaeible but neceaeary to

booo ell work on otrict and conpletoly defined rulea for organization and
procedure. which nnke pooeible not only ehorter tine apane for certain oper-
etione hut aloo oubetantial increaae in the quality of execution. It io pre-
cioely the etricter etenderditation of the current operating for-no at o con-
puting center that hoe to be the haoio for sore efficient utilitetion end

the platforo for nore euccaeoful develop-em and aoeiniletion of future
developnento. In thin. the otenderdlution of the oporeting oide of infor-
netion proceeoing has to be booed on o technological foundation which. in ito
turn. «undo the iglooentation of ebeolutely preciee and detailed rulee.
Only tho oloultaneouo eatietence of otendardited nethodo for uoing equipnent
end provioion of an effective operation naho pooeihle the creation of e truly
integrated. well-balanced nechonion. the noet efficient for. of inplenenting
the link between cuotoler and computer. both in the prooent end in the future.

’41
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

   

 

5 i
e . a ., ..
Am! 2‘ a 5 ° 5
g a S E a
' A x x x x _
is 2 a 3 a
._ x x x g -

1:00 3731
:m cm

mo 33!!

     

(8)
(3)
(9)
(10)

.I
WON}:

353*. m-
w;

 

scam
(0-00 (11)
LVNO
(coca (11)
mm
man”
(0139) (11)
new
(030’) (11)

62
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: CIA-RDP82-00850R000100040054-7

I 2.8.3:! 0 nah-Maire) _ Anny . «ﬂu...
_ u Salty: 0 akmea» £9) Anny «3.4.8
A

v9.1.9“
5.. pw-ﬁxgleh raw—Jinn”) an: .«nwwkuu.
tag. i. . .
. Lap :an raw? ac .ﬁ.
n :3 such

a ouvoiauzgg . ..
a: Lrnwau. 31$

                                  

. a.» ma.<.§.X§

«3 a3. X82 XS“

3 82 x :8. S“
82 x. 8: on
«— 82 Vtgu x 9‘

3.. RB. X8323. 9.0 Ella .08 3 9.958.»: . ..

. . £5 5!. 23 .mmn%
.« .80qung no Ulric-a Ellie-13.23.84.— g
a.» g..X§.X8~ a: ¢ g 9. 0.833 Andy g
«#4. 8n. Xnvanéh v; may 2...“. cal-ICU. 5. go: :3 6%

8.: .3323qu e“... A 3129.3 5.: 1:83.31»: 23 «3.18
e.« 3825
n _ Qanb

  

gag—3:3 x2323:

(.3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-ROPOZ-OOOSOROOMOOMOOSA-T
up; gmﬂmﬁ__ I 9.3

280»

SS .38.

8d BaxauXB... 826»
23 .88.

8.. 8332an 82.8
§.X8:X _ .2 g

«.5 98.xsnxﬁf A v.83»
amﬁmﬁ as ”am...“
:8. §.x§ SS .88.

8.x a8.X3o.X~oz 5:3
25 58.

Q. 5.X2_.X§= SEQ
. a 2d 83%

an. X82 x 8... . . a 23.8
FOR ONIOIAI. USE ONLY

Key to Appendix 5

1. Bquipeent code cueber

2. Me end conceition of oquipnent

3. Power required. in kilovette

5. Heat generated. in kiloceloriee per hour

5. Flow of eir through equipeent. in cubic netere per hour
6. Overell dineneione. in I

1. Aree required for eervicing. in equere netere

8. Proceeeor

9. Interconnect «itching cebinet

10. Operetin; unory equipeent

11. 11881!

12. GDP.

13. Polieh People‘e Republic

16. Kultiplex chennel

15. Kegnetic tepe etorepe

16. Hegnetic dru etorege

17. Dionounteble negaetic diec etorese

18. Penenent negnetic diec etorese

19. "emetic cerd etorese

20. Control device {or necnetic tepe etorege

21. Control device for nesnetic diec end drue etorese
22. Input device for reedin; punched cerde vith 388R
23. Punched tepe reeder

25. Punched cerd output device uein; 388K

25. Alphenuleric printer ueins BSSX end beecd on en Al'ePU 128-5 device
26. Gupta-plotting device uein; e plotter with 388K
27. Greph-plottinp device of roller type

28. Input-output device {or elphenuleric end .reph inforletion ueing e
cethode rey tube with 338!

29. Renate terlinel for input-output 0! cl benuuri info.
cethode rey tuba with 338‘ P c union “in:

30. Printer with 388! beeed on the mam-zoo device
31. Dete preperetion equip-eat

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

BIBLIOGIAPHY
Prinory

l. Brondon. o. 10.. “argonizing tho Oporotion in o Computor Contot." Hoo-
oov. Sutiotiko. 1970.

2. Anon. "Software Syoto- for Conpntoro of tho Unifiod Sorioo." Mouton.
Stotiltilu. 1976.

3. Anon. “tho nos Oporoting Syotom for tho Unitiod Sorioo." rioocov. Sto-
tiotikn. 1975.

lo. Potoyov. A. Yo.; Roytnon. A. L; Potoyovn. 'r. P.; at. ol. "Application
Progromo in tho Softworo Syoton for tho Unifiod Sorioo Coopntoro." Hoo-
cov. Stotiotiko. 1979.

5. Khrynkin. N. s. "Conpnting Contor Bqnipnont." )loocov. Stotiotiko. 1972.

6. Rotnikov. 6. V.; Ob‘voktov. Yu. 8.; Crochov. V. I. "Dooign ond Supply
of Conpnting Contoro hood on n Uniiiod Sorioo of Conpntoro." Hoocov.
Stotintikn. 1977.

Supplonontory

l. Bnymnov. G. 01.; Tolluctovo. I... M. ”Plonning ond Accounting for Opera-
tiono of Computing Pocilitioo.” Hoocov. Stotiotilln. 1976.

2. Divnogortoov. c. In; Ymohin. V. H. "Syoton ond Equip-out of Intel-notion
Exchongo in tho Conpnting Contor Notvorko.“ Hoocov. Swoz'. 1976.

3. Ivonov. V. A. "Dotonining tho Throughput Copohility for Oporotiono ot
Computing Contoro." Hoocov. Bhononilu. 1975.

la. lloyngol'd. s. I»; ntoltobin. V. l. ”Orgonizotion and Opcrotion of Con-
pnting Focilitioo,” Hoocov. Stotiotiko. 1976.

5. son-m. V. V. “0n tho Qnootion of Bvolnoting tho Probohility of Brroro
in Doto Produced by Conpnting Contoro," in tho hook "ltuoricol Conpnto-
tionol ‘rochnology ond Progro-ing." Hoocou. Sovotohoyo lodio. loouo 7.
1972.

6. Sonivino. V. 8. "Botinoting tho Quolity of Functioning of Antontod
Control Syotono." BkonoIikn. 1973.

7. Orlov. l. A. "Ponndotiono of Comntor Tochnology ond Orgonizotion of
Colputing Oporotiono.” Hoocov. Bnorgiyo. 1976.

8. Lopohin. 6. H. "uporionco in Orgonising tho Oporotion of Computing
Contoro." Loningrod. 1381?, A811? oorioo. 1975.

9. Volkov. o. it. "Piro Protoction o! Conpnting Contoro.” Hoocov. Stroyit-
dot. 1973. ‘

10. Anon. "rho Dooignoro loforonco Book. Noioo Protootion." edited by Yo.
Yo. Yndin. Hoocov. Stroyitdot. 1974.

CONTENTS Pogo

Pretoco 3

Introduction ‘

Choptor l. tor-notion of Computing Contoro 7
56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1.1 Purpoooo for formation and baoic functiono of conputc-
ing cantoro
1.2 Organizational otructuro of computing contoro

Chaptor 2. 8aquonco of Oparationo at a Counting Cantor
2.1 'rho Valuo of otandardo for dirocting conputing cantor
oparationo
2.2 Hothodo uood by modal daoignoro in thoir work
A. Choico of toninology
l. Analyoio of procoduroo and docunanto
c. Purpooo and nuboring of docuoonto
D. Standardizing of block diagrano
B. Liot of baoic oporationo
2.3 Proparation and oxocution of prograao
A. 'l'ha oyataa of conputor ooftvaro ao a noano for
proparing and oxocuting programa
I. Uoing tho liot of baoic oporationa
C. Standardizing logic analyoia
n. Proparation and azocution of programa
B. noculonting tho progra-ing ayato-
2.‘ Tho work of tho oporator
A. Intorior arrangomont
3. Accounting for nachino tiao
C. work at tho toninal
D. Contro1 functiono
2. Library organization

Chaptor 3. Rochanical Oporationo of Intonation Procoooing
at tho Computing Cantor

Rocoiving tho input information

Proparing initial data

Procooaing of information

Proparing output documouation _

‘l‘ha oifoct of oovoral factoro on information procooo-

m

Gonoral ruloo for phaood control of infornation

A. locoiving and control of input don-onto

l. Tranofor of information to nachino nodia

C. lotoring conditional-parlanant infornation

D. Procooaing of data in tho conputor

8. Control and output of information

3.7 Savoral quoationa concorning tho dotormination of
raliability otatiotico for infornation procaooing

3.8 Soquonco of uocuting computational work at a comput-
ing cantor

H UFUUU
O MOUNH

Chaptor 6. Houuroo and ﬂoano for Aoouring Bfficiant Utiliza-
tion of Digital Water.
6.1 ‘rochnical maintononco of digital computora

47
FOR OFFICIﬁL USE ONLY
6.7

6.8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A. Routine preventive neintenence

l. Servicing equip-en:

c. Queetione of developing eoftvere eervice

Effect of utilitetion conditione on the throughput

of e digitel conputer

Storege conditione for cerriere of interaction

Cooling the «outer end dietributing eir in the

coquter roon

A. Cooling the conputer

B. Dietribution of eir in the computer roo-

Keene for providing cleen eir in the conputer roo-

Air-conditioning ee en effective neene of neintein-

ing opereting tenpereturee of the conputer

A. Heene for eir-conditioning the counter tool

I. Syetene for conditioning end cooling eir

C. Syeten diegren for conditioning end cooling eir

D. Stendby equipnent

Heene of noiee euppreeeion end vibretion control in

e coeputing center

A. Meeeuree for lowering noiee end vibretion in e
eoquting center

I. Controlling operetionel noiee in e counter roo-

Pover eupply. lighting. end fire prevention in e con-

puting center

Appendix 1. torn No. 1: "Report of Brrore Diecovered end of
lnfornetion Controlled on e neily Beeie in e Conputing
Center”

Appendix 2. Liet of Control Operetiono in Proceeeing infome-

tion

Appendix 3. mm of Brrore Arieing in Proceeeing Infomtion
et e Conputing Center

Appendix o. leeeone for the Appeerence of Brrore in the Proc-
eeeing of lnfornetion et e Computing Center

Appendix 5. Reference here for Eerdvere of Colputere in the
Unified Syeten

Bibl iogrephy

comzm: Indetel'etvo "Bnergiye." 1978

6938

080: 1870 END

43
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY