APPROVED FOR RELEAOE: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOS-00000R000100040038-1
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040032-1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS [/8396
12 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
(FOUO 3/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH {SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040032-1
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines, editorial reports. and material enclcsed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line or each iten, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfanilisr names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed In parentheses. words or names preceded by s ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but haVe been supplied asappropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poll-
cics. views or attitudes of the 0.5. Governucnt.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING ONNERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED FOROFEICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

J'PRS L/I
12 April

TRANSLATIONS 0N PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

(Pouo 3/79)
CONTENTS
MILITARY
Briefs
Troop Shifts Noted
economc

Hi0 Wants annnene Intermediaries for Trade With Taiwan
(snow: mom sum, 3 Feb 79)

China, HEB Sign TV Satellite Developent Agreenent
(Pierre unscrew; AIR 3. COSMOS, 210 Feb 79) ......

Briefs
Japanese Patent Oti‘icisls' Visit

Volvo Truck metory
Japanese Spinning Bquipmnt

SCIENCE AND TERROR!”

Television Broadcasting Vie. Satellite Described
(mm “mm, at 78) OOOOOUOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOC

-a° [III-CC-BOSG'I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPI’ICIAL USE ONLY

MILITARY

BRIEFS

ROOF SHIFTS norm-arm Vietnamese have placed their Cam Ranh Bay base
at the disposal or a Soviet that made up or a missile launching cruiser

and some electronic spy ships, thereby posing a threat to the Chinese
coast. The elite [Uhinese division that was reinforced by a powerful

antiaircrai‘t unit racing on; Kong has been redeployed along the rough
coastline of Guangdong Province. Special protection is bein afforded
the mouth or the Pearl River and Guangzhou harbor. [feats] m1:
mans Am in French 26 Mar 79 p 3§7

(:80: 15200

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

PRC HANTS JAPANESE INTERMEDIARIES FOR TRADE WITH TAIWAN
Tokyo NIKKAN ROCYO SHINBUN in Japanese 3 Feb 79 p 1

[Text] With PRC Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping'a visit to the
United States, the chances for peacefully moving toward
reunification with Taiwan have improved. According to in-
formation from informed sources on 2 February, PRC gov-
ernment personnel have requested Japanese trading com-
panies to try to connect a pipeline between PRC and
Taiwan. Specifically, it is said that Nissho Iwai was
asked about a relay trade to handle exports of Taiwanese
chemical products and raw materials to the PRC. This
move, it seens, is based on a decision that, although
normalization of Sino-American relations has created a
political framework for reunification with Taiwan, it
would be appropriate and would promote reunification if
the PRC. as a moderately developed country, were to pro-
ceed with China's internal task of the four moderniza-
tions by maxing use of the strength of Taiwan's remark-
ably developed economy and not by relying only on the
economic strength of Japan and the United States.

Taiwan chemical products have been produced by a national company (China
Petrochemicals) with the technical cooperation of the very large American
firm UCC (Union Carbide). Consequently, these products are of high quality
and are cost competitive. This. it seems, is the reason for the PRC
request.

The PRC is buying petrochemical related equipment in the form of equipment

to break down ethylene and facilities to handle derived products. Immense
plants capable of producing as much as 1.6 million tons yearly have been pur-
chased from Japanese and European makers; but. even after their completion,
these plants are expected to be operating no earlier than 1982. There is.
consequently. a growing need for Taiwan products which have surplus export
capability.

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Since the long term trade agreement. the relative importance of equipment (or
the Shanghai-Baoshan steel mill and matters related to petrochemicals have
overshadowed all else in business talks on plants. The Baoshan steel mill

ls scheduled to be completed in 1980 at the earliest; and. as a stopgap
measure, the volume of Japan's steel exports to the PRC exceeded the volume

of exports to the United States. This background. too. seems to lend impetus
to business talks of this kind. but Nissho lwai has taken a cautious approach.
saying that "there are still many questions unresolved." They recognize. how-
ever, that the PRC's needs are growing and they do not deny that positive
developments in business negotiations could be possible if only an objective
situation is established. It is said that footholds not only for Taiwan
exports to the PRC but for PRC exports to Taiwan as well have been started
among the ethnic Chinese in Hong Kong and that Japanese firms have also been
asked to cooperate in this. Reportedly, not only Nissho Iwai but other
trading companies as well have been sounded out on a relay for electronics.
steel and other things in which Taiwan is strong. Among Japanese economic
circles as a whole there is a very hopeful feeling that it would be delight-
ful to be able to contribute to a thaw between the PRC and Taiwan and. there-
fore. the spotlight is on the people of Taiwan to see which way they will go.

COPYRIGHT: Nikkan Kogyo Shinbunsha. 1979

9111
080: 4105

3
son OFFICIAL use ONLY
CHINA. NEE SIGN TV SATELLITE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
Paris AIR & COSHOS in French 25 veb 79 p 35

[Article by Pierre Langereux: "China Negotiates With “DB for its Direct-
Broadcasting TV Satellites")

[Text] The German aerospace firm Hesserschnitt-Eoelkow-Blohn (H33) has quite
unexpectedly succeeded in concluding an agreement in principle with China for
develop-eat of the Chinese national direct-broadcasting television satellite
systea.

The agreeaent was signed in Peking on 15 February 1979 jointly by Vice Premier
Pang Y1 and H33 officials who. on this occasion and for space matters, were
representing the Eurosstellite conscrtium of HEB (63 percent of the stock).
the French firm Aerospatiale (63 percent) and the Belgian company ETCA
[Aerospace Engineering and Manufacturing] (16 percent).

The agreement is still only a "letter of intention" but it is "fire and
exclusive." It authorises HBE--theoreticslly acting on behalf of Eurosatellite-
to develop. construct, and launch China's direct-broadcasting TV satellites.

As part of the arrangement, H38 is prepared to transfer technology to the

Hiddle Empire's industry.‘ The exact size of the future system still has to be
determined, but preliminary discussions covered sole 10 direct-broadcasting

TV satellites. The first-or the first three-are to be built in Germany and
then Chinese industry will assume a progressively greater role in the con-
struction of the remaining satellites.

The agreement also states that the Chinese satellites will be derived directly
from those satellites HEB develops for German or European requirements and

that the launch vehicle used to place them in orbit will be the same (hence.

in principle. the Ariane launcher). Moreover, the timetable for development
of the Chinese TV satellites will follow the timetable for German or European
satellites but with a 1-year lag so as to launch the first Chinese TV satellite
before the and of 1983.

h
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This nmnns the German or European direct-broadcasting TV satellite program
would have to start in the next 3 months in order to successfully launch its
first satellite during the second half of 1982.

This is an urgent project. In fact, a large Chinese delegation is scheduled
to visit China in 6 weeks for detailed negotiations on ways and means of
carrying out the project.

In other words, the manufacturers involved-~8urosatellite-and their govern-
ments, mainly France and Germany. should be prepared to negotiate with the
Chinese by late March.

Difference Between Faris, Bonn

Consequently this leaves little time actually for the French and Germans to
reach a governmental level agreement. An industrial level agreement already
exists within Eurosntellite, providing Aerospatiale's assumption of the prime
contractor role is not further challenged! These issues must certainly have
been on the agenda of the 22-23 Franco-German su-ait meeting between President
Giscard d'Bstaing and Chancellor helmut Schmidt. Yet there is no assurance
that they were settled to the satisfaction of the two parties who each lay a
claim to management of the operations.

At the restricted cabinet meeting of 20 February, the French government did,
of course. agree to continue study of a national direct-broadcasting TV
satellite. This project will also be discussed at the 7 March meeting of the
ministerial space council.

Germany, however, has also prepared a national project-the proposed TVSAT--
and states it is prepared to develop this system, alone if need be, for German
requirements and for export, particularly to the Scandinavian countries--
Nordsat project--where there is a market for 8 to 10 satellites over a lb-year
period beginning in 1984-1985.

France Caught Short

France was unquestionably caught short by the German move in China. HDB's
breakthrough now allows Germany to act alone in developing its own satellite
and the Chinese satellite. 0r cooperate with France, but by insisting upon
German leadership of direct-broadcasting TV satellite projects in exchange
for French collaboration in the Chinese satellite contract and the use of
Ariana launchers to place them in orbit.

This is a deserved setback for French space export policy. France very likely
muffcd its chance by not allowing its space industry to negotiate directly,
and with the necessary governmental backing, with a prospective customer like
China.

Let this setback be at least a profitable lesson for us in the future.

COPYRIGHT: AIR & COSMOS, Paris, 1979
8041 5

C 0: 0
S 310 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY

ECONOMIC

BRIEFS

JAPANESE PATENT OFFICIALS' VISIT-~The government has decided to actively
assist the Chinese Goverment in making necessary preparations for the
introduction of a legal system under which industrial ownership will be
granted to foreign firms in China. The decision was made by the Patent
Office on 7 March. According to the decision, a delegation led by Kumagaya,
director of the Patent Office, will visit China in April to assist China in
making legal arrangements such as enacting a patent law, setting up an ad-
ministrative organization and training patent examiners. The Patent Office
plans to admit Chinese officials in August or September for patent adminis-
tration training. Final details will be worked out when the delegation
visits China. The Patent Office delegation's forthcoming visit to China

is in compliance with the request made by a delegation of the Chinese State
Scientific and Technological Commission when it visited Japan last December.
The Japanese delegation will consist of 15 to 16 members, including Director
Kumagaya and other officials of the Patent Office and the chairman of the
boards of directors of the patent organizations: The Japan Institute of
Invention and Innovation, the Japan Patent Information Center, the Patent
Lawyers Association, the Japan Patent Association. The delegation will
visit Beijing and other places from 2 through 7 April during which it will
meet with Chinese officials. [Excerpts] [Tokyo NIHDﬂ KBIZAI SHINBUN in
Japanese 8 Her 79 Morning Edition p 3 OH]

.._ ..—~-- .— _.-.__.. ----- ‘

VOLVO TRUCK FACTORY-~Vblvo, the Swedish automobile company, is currently
working on an agreement calling for the construction of a truck factory in
the PRC. The deal would be worth one billion French francs. The plant

would produce 50,000 trucks per year. [Text] [Paris VALEURS ACTOBLLBS
in French 19 m: 79 p as]

JAPANESE SPINNING EQUIPMBﬂI--M1teubishi Rayon and Mitsubishi ShoJi have signed
a GOO-million yen-worth contract with the PRC to export 18,000 spindles of
secondhand acryl spinning equipment to China. The contract was initiated

by a delegation of China Woolen Textile Company during its visit to Japan

last September. [Tokyo NIKON KBIZAI SHINBUN in Japanese 5 Feb 79 Morning

Edition p 8 OH]

cso: 1.105 6
son onrcm. use ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

IdLEVISION BROADCASTING VIA SATELLITE DESCRIBED

Beijing HANGKONG ZHISHI [AERONAUTICAL KNOWLEDGE] in Chinese No 10, Oct 78
pp 13-15

[Article: "Direct Television Broadcasting Via Satellite"]

[Text] In July 1977, in the northeastern United States, the mountain
streams became torrents, the rivers 0\nrflowed their banks and the streets
of Johnstown, Pennsylvania, were a vast expanse of water. This was the
third such disaster of this century. However. this time relief work was
carried out more smoothly because communications lines were kept open by
satellite.

The Red Cross workers in the disaster area quickly set up a small antenna

1 or 2 meters in diameter (Fig. l) to transmit radio signals into the air.
It was like there was an ear in the sky listening intently to what was
happening there. Actually it was not only a sensitive "ear" in the sky,

it could detect faint signals and transmit the signals long distances loud
and clear with a powerful "voice.” It was an experimental communications
satellite the same as other stationary communications satellite also
traveling in a 35,800-kilometer orbit. Why say it was stationary? That

is because it made one revolution around the earth in 26 hours, just the
same as the earth's period of rotation, therefore in relation to the earth,
it is said to be stationary. This communications satellite could receive
faint signals from many different places on the ground, amplify the signals
and retransmit them. At the same time, its radiation power was high and
the small ground antenna could pick up its transmitted signals. "hat
accounts for such high ability? Originally it had two large-area solar
panels ‘mich extended from both sides (Fig. 2) and kept it pointed at the
sun and constantly illuminated by the sun. The electric energy produced
was quite high, reaching a thousand watts. and therefore it could raise

its radiation power.

Several years ago. to transmit signals to com-unications satellites, it
was necessary to set up large antennas, transmitters and other equipment.
It took at least several weeks to set up. with the new generation of

'7

FOR OFFICTAT. IRE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

high-power comunications satellites. it took on a new look. The ground
antenna could be made smaller. The l or 2--..eter antenna mentioned above
is an obvious example. Recently an even smaller antenna has appeared.
Its transceiving equipment is also very small and it can be packed into
an ordinary briefcase (Fig. 3). It is extremely easy to use. Open up
the briefcase. pull out the antenna. pick up the microphone. and in less
than a minute one can comunicate by satellite with somebody else with
the same equipment. The communication distance may be short or long.
several kilometers, several tens of kilometers. several hundred kilome-
ters. or even several thousand kilometers. One can comunicate anywhere
within the "line-of—sight" of the communications satellite (Fig. la).

Though the briefcase is light. it generally cannot be considered suitable
for warfare. And so a backpack satellite comunicntiona device arose to
meet the need. It weighed only 1.3 kilograms (Pig. 3) and was battery-
powered. The user could contact a cormnand poet far away or across the
sea via satellite. and could also contact aircraft. ships, tanks or
ground stations with the same device.

Some people suppose future satellite consunication devices could be made
in the form of a watch to be worn on the wrist and you could coasunicate
with the person you want to contest at any time. Sure, this is a scien-
tific fantasy. However in the rapidly developing electronics technology
of today and with the effort of scientists, scientific fantasy can become
reality.

Direct Television Broadcasting

In large urban centers. tall television towers are a common sight. They
stand high and can be seen from far away. The higher the television
tower, the farther is its broadcasting range. Hmevcr. due to various
reasons. television towers cannot be built too high. Therefore. to
broadcast television over long distances. there is no other way but to
use the mic: awave relay method. Microwave relay towers are erected at
r’gh ele 'ations at certain intervals and the broadcast is relayed from
one to the other. Even so. there are still some places. especially
remote or mountainous places. where there is no way to where it is very
difficult to erect microwave relay totters and so they still cannot get
television reception. Therefore. using satellites to broadcast tele--

vision is extremely advantageous.

As early as 1966. the Olympic Games in Japan were broadcast via satellite.
Nevertheless at that time. television picture signals taken at the scene
had to be transmitted by cable or microwave transmission towers to distant
satellite ground stations. i'herc. large antennas 30 meters in diameter
directed high-power beams carrying the television signals to the satellites.
After they were relayed and amplified. the signals were sent back to earth.

8
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Nil OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Satellite ground stations in other places also needed large antennas 30
meters in dianeter to receive the information from the satellite. after

which the information was sent by cable or microwave transmitting towers
to local television stations where it was rebroadcast. Though television

via satellite could be broadcast worldwide or nationwide. it could not
net away from using microwave relay towers and the problem of remote

places without television reception mentioned above still could not be
Sluin‘tl .

la the last lo-odd years there has been great deVelopment in satellite
communications technology. the nost obvious areas are triaxial attitude
control of communications satellites has been realized. collapsible
large-area solar panels have been developed. the electric energy avail.
able for satellites has been increased. and the power which could be
transmitted to earth has also been increased so that small antennas
could directly receive the television information transmitted by satel-
lite. A few years ago. lndia leased an American experimental communica-
tions satellite and conducted experiments on educational television for
the rural areas. The results showed that with snail antennas they could
directly receive television programs broadcast by satellite. it was an
extremely effective means to popularize education and raise the cultural
level of the broad mass of villagers.

Direct television broadcasting via satellite has also brought good tid-
ings for the sick. with a small antenna on the roof of the ambulance
(fig. 3). the altendonts can report by satellite to the hospital on the
condition of the patient at any time along the way so that all the first
aid preparations will be ready. when there are puzzling aypptoms and

it is necessary to seek the consolation of outside doctors. there is no
need to bother them. to subject them to the strains of travel or to make
then cover excessive distances to come and consult. instead. they can
be asked to conduct their examination. enquire into the patient's con-
dition and conduct discussions by direct television broadcasting via
satellite. each in their own hospital. and come up with an effective
course of treatment. this not only can greatly save hnsan and material
resources. but even more important. gains tine and is beneficial to the
patient.

in calling scientific and technical conferences. technical experiences
exchange conferences. and so forth. it is also best if a whole bunch of
people from all over don’t have to get together in one place. but can
read papers. exchange experiences and carry on discussions in local
conference rooms with direct television broadcasting via satellite.

Data Relay
To take full advantage of the effectiveness of computers. it is best to

link conputers from various places into a network. ﬂow can computers
be linked into a network economically and effectively? It can be

9
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ran OFFICIAL USE ONLY

accmpllshed via satellite. The present sethod is to trons-it via satel-
lite ground stations. As a further step. an antenna over 1- meters in
diaseter could be set up on the roof or next to the computer roo- to link
up with other ensputers directly via satellite. In this way the computers
of a departsent. set up separately in various places. can all. operate at
full capacity day and night. It would not get to the point where the com-
puter in one place would be all booked up while the work load of another
computer elsewhere would be underfilled and there would be idle tine.

if we are to use satellites to link computers into networks. we must solve
the problem of high-speed large-capacity digital cmunications. The
present speed of digital colssunications is 9600 bits of inforsation per
second. it takes 7 hours to coapletely transmit one roll of conputer tape.
if the trunsnission speed of digital inforsation were raised to 1.5 nil-
lion bits per second it would only take 3 sinutes to conplete the trans-
mission. Therefore future cmnications satellites will use new high-
frequency wave bands for digital consunications.

The first cos-unicat ions satellite launched by space shuttle is planned

for [980 (Fig. 5). The solar panels on this satellite will he very large.
able to generate I700 watts. Present cnsnunications satellites use the

lu6 gigaherts frequency band. the sane wave band used by ground microwave
communications. Therefore. to avoid sutual interference with ground micro-
wave cunnunicstions. soot satellite ground stations have to be set up in
interference-free areas far froo their subscribers. The higher frequencies
“2-” gigahertr.) used by the new cos-unications satellites do not inter-
fere with ground sicrowave comnications and the ground stations can be
set up near the subscribers for the conVenience of the subscribers. in
addition. the higher frequencies can carry sore intonation. Their coo-
nunications capacity is not as crowded as the 6-6 gigaherts wave band
mentioned above. This coonunications satellite also uses a lower frequency
wave band (2.2-2.3 gigaherts) to track space shuttles and low-orbit satel-
lites. This comunications satellite also plays a role in tracking satel-
lites and relaying data iron space. it receives information translitted
from space shuttles and satellites and retransmits it to the ground.
Satellite tracking stations set up on the ground can only track 15 percent
of a satellite's orbit but if this co-unications satellite is used for
tracking. it can track 80 to loo percent of a space shuttie’s or satel-
lite's orbit.

The nations of the world are vigorously developing systea for direct
television broadcasting via satellite.

In April l978 Japan launched an experimental satellite for direct tele-
vision broadcasting. Best Gamay has also started work on direct tele-
vision broadcasting via satellite. China's territory is vast and so

direct television broadcasting via satellite is even sore necessary for
us.

10
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

W

Fig. 1. Small nntcnnn linked with comnicntions satellite.

nun-Q"

Fig. 2. A connunitotions satellite with fairly high radiation power

11
M OFFICIAL 158 CLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

Pig. 3. Direct reception of satellite-broadcast television progress
(lower left); satellite co-onicetions transceiving equiplent
on the ground can fit in a briefcase (lower right); bsckpsck-
type satellite eomnicatione equipeent (upper right); satel-
lite conunieetione equipment an ambulance linked with hospital
via satellite (upper left)

'n'eil Illﬂ

i EEEEWEi

"IE-QIIIIIIIIEF
IIIINIIIIII III" TJ

.ll Ill-Ill!
III!!-

 

mmuun-ouuuu

Pig. 6. Co-unicntions range of conunicetione sstellite
ma OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

pace shuttle launches comntcottono a:

13
M OFFICIAL [BB ONLY