APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000100030029-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030029-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JI’RS L/SJZG

9 March 19 79

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PEDAGOGICAI. FOUNDATIONS
OF A COMMANDER'S ACTIVITIES
BY
M.I. D’YAcHENKo, YE. F. USIPENKOV
AND L. YE. MERZLYAK

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030029-8
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original infatuation was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the U.5. Government.

COPYRIGiT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING WHERSNIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODL'CED HEREIN REQUIRE MT DISSENINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
‘0”! 'l

       
     
 

  
  

    
 

 

 

arson oocuutmmou It-uw we- 2. '- mm. m»... n. "' “1
nor JPRS MB 326
C. '1‘. W DUN-“o ‘ 00.04 on. ._.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PEDACOGICAL POUNDM‘IONS 0P A COMMANDER'S 2 ﬂgzgh 1979 __ '
ACTIVITIES ‘
”._- ._. K

   

& Mum Men-nun In. m

nchenko. Ye. P. 001 enko, L. Ye. Herzl ok

 

. m cogs-law lune and Menu Io. mummy“ on n. "-—
Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Glebe Road u. cm so one; on '-
Arlington, Virginia 22201 on
m
ummme».w nrmummawcS-‘o—a ._.-
As above

II.

II» W In”
PSIKHOWO-PEDAGOGICBZSKIYE OSNW DEYATEL'NOSTI KOHANDIRA, Houcov, 1978 ‘.

“Winn-um“

This report contains a ctudy oi the activities of a coneMer to improve the
effectiveness end quelity of work involved in strengthening Iilitary discipline,
refining military training and improving the moral. political and psychological
training of unit and subunit personnel. The sociopsychological and individual

mental factors in the eta-sender's formation of the personality of a fighting -
nan and military collective ere examined.

WWW em

USSR Personality Political training
Military Individual Moral training
Training Collective Psychologicel training

uW'luw-e

comma-wen. 51, ”.136

lthmm “WWW...“ iLhﬂ'lI"
For official Use Only. Linited uucussmro 87 __

Vueber of Copies Available Free JPRS. a. Men-«m m» a. rm
WCLASSIFIED
“M”. s.- m on pm. omen-u mu- m «H»

GM "VII-”I
W s! w-

—-.
FOR O'ﬂ’ICIAL USE ONLY

am L/aazs
9 March 1979
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL FOUNDATIONS
OF A COMMDER'S ACTIVITIES .

Moscow PSIKHOLOGO-PEDAGOGICHESKIYE OSNOVY DBYA‘I'BL'NOS'I'I

KOMANDIRA in Russian 1978 signed to press 30 Nov 77 pp 2-10,

28-31, 74-80, 115-12‘, 14l-14S, 165-166, 175-191, 218-234.
253-295

[Annotation, table of contents, excerpts from chapters 1-8,

chapter 9 and conclusion from book by “.1. D'yachenko,

Ye. P. Osipenkov and L. Ye. Herzlyak, voyenizdat. 50,000 copies,

PAGE

295 pages]

Cou'rturs
Introducc1°nloootI.0"..0I....0..0.0Io...DOD...OOOOOOOODOODOIIIOOOOO. 2
Chapter 1. The Special Features of a Camnder's Activities......... 5

1. The Content of s Cos-ander's Activities................... 5
Chapter 2. The Personality of s Subordinate and Its Formation
by the Co-snder......................................... 7
Appendix to chapter 2. Progrss to Study a Soldier's
Character................................................... 10
Chapter 3. The Comwer's Role in ”nation of the Hilitary
Collective............................................... llo
Appendix to Chapter 3. Progra- for the Study of the
Hilitary Collective......................................... 15
General Conclusions........................................... 20
Chapter A. The Cosnander's Surety of high Military Discipline....... 21
- a - [III - USSR - 4 P000]

[11 - 053: 7000]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

Chapter 5. Formation of Soldiers' Combat Mastery by the

mweroooaasooaaeeaaoaooasoooaaoeooooesooaassoaoaaeeso

Chapter 6. The ﬂoral-Political and Psychological Training of

Per.onne1aaoootoassosooooeosaaeeaoeseseeaoaeasoeeoaooeeoa

Appendix to Chapter 6. The Program for Moral-Political
and Psychological Training of Personnel.....................

Chapter 7. The Commander-Leader and Organizer of the Colbet
Activities of Subordinates...............................

Chapter 8. Organizing Lessons on the Combat and Political
Training of Soviet Troops................................

1. Combat Training Lessons...................................
2. Political Training Leesona................................
3. The Coamsnder's Lesson Critique...........................
Chapter 9. Development and Formation of a Commander's Personality...
l. The Basic Traits of a Commander's Personality.............

2. Pormation of a Commander's Personality in a Military

schoolaaasoooesaaceoeaaaaeeoaaooeeseoesaoaaaaaeeseoooaaa

3. Refining the Training of a Commander During Practical
Bork in a Unit..........................................

Conclusion...uu...”no.u”..."no.”on....o........uo....uo..

Footnotes............................................................

Original Table of Contents...........................................

- b -

POX OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Page

23

23

31

35

37
38
50
51

83

63

73
78
81
83
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PEDAGOGICAL
FOUNDATIONS 0? A COHANDER'S
ACTIVITIES

PSIHOLOGO-PEDACOCICHBSKIIE OSNOVY
DZYATBL' "081'! MIRA

H. I. D‘yachenko, Ye. P. Oatpenkov,
L. Ye. Herzlyak
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Annotation

[Text] The activities of u co-ander to ieprove the
effectiveness and quality of work involving strengthen-
ing ailitary discipline. refine military training, and
to improve the novel-political and psychological train-
ing of subunit [podrazdeleniye] and unit [chast'] per-
sonnel are studied in the book. It examines the socio-
psychologicel and individual Iental factors in the
co-ender's {creation of the personality of a fighting
lean and a Iilitary collective and controlling their
activities under the conditions of Iodern war and when
organising colhat and political‘ training in peacetime.

The work illuainates the special psychological and
pedagogical features of e couander's activites and
proieseional qualities and show the influence of train-
ing in a unitary school and of practicol work in

troop units on the {amnion of his personality.

The book is intended for contenders and political

workers, teachers, and students'in highs: Iilitary-
political schools and in the pedagogical faculties of
military academies.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE OILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In troduc tion

119ch m 99999.19: Party a!“ miss quweeselese csnsmueLa__ttentto_n___on _
strengthening the defensive capability of our country and improving the

Armed Forces. "He can report to the Congress that we have done a great

deal in this regard." cc General Secretary comrade L. l. Brezhnev noted

in the Report to the 25th CPSU Congress. "Supplying the Armed Forces

with modern armaments and military equipment has been improved. as has

the quality of the combat training and the ideological tempering of the
personnel." 1

Training of the comand cadres. the backbone of the army, is of primary
significance. without leaders who are trained in the moral-political.
military. technical, and psychological-pedagogical sense. it is impossible
to create and strengthen a modern army.

V. l. Lenin attached enormous significance to the questions of training,
indoctrination. selection, and assignment of cadres.

The founder and leader of the world's first government of workers and

peasants placed unremitting attention on the political and military indoc-
trination of military cadres and the improvement of their organizing role

in troop units. At his initiative problems of training comanders were
discussed at meetings of the Party CC and the Council of Peoples' Counissars.
Vladimir ll'ich Lenin actively participated in the preparation of the documents

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which formalized the system of selection. training. indoctrination. and
assignment of cadres in the Red Army. Personally meeting with comanders,
V. i. Lenin gave them advice and counsel on improving combat mastery and
strengthening the political and moral state of the Red Army soldiers.

Great attention was devoted at that time to the class selection of students
assembled primarily from working and laboring peasants. along with strength-
ening the party layer among them.

Fulfilling V. I. Lenin's behests, the CPSU and Soviet government continually
demonstrate concern for the training of officer cadres. "the party.”

the CPSU Program points out. "wnl unswervedly concern itself with the
training of command. political. and technical army and navy cadres absolutely
devoted to the cause of communism and selected from among the best repre-
sentatives of the Soviet people."2

Scientific and technical progress raised the demands for comand cadres.

for their political, business-like, psychological. and moral-combat qualities,
assigned new tasks involving their training, indoctrination. and professional
preparation. The Soviet comander combines high political consciousness with
good professional training. the ability to proficiently solve problems in
military affairs with the skill of employing modern command and control
methods.

Being a creatively thinking specialist, the Soviet commander masters that
method of thought and the scientific analysis provided by Marxism-Leninism.
And, this is only proper. Based upon a foundation of Marxist-Leniniat
methodology and profound understanding of the laws of social developen't
alone. a comander can correctly understand the objective laws of modern
warfare and the special features of training personnel for active conduct
of combat operations and the conditions for successful supervision of sub-
ordinates' activities in peacetime and in wartime.

In the CC CPSU Report to the 25th CPSU Congress. L. I. Brezhnev emphasized!
”The modern supervisor must organically combine within himself a party
attitude with profound competence. discipline with initiative and a creative
approach to business. Also in every sector a leader must take into
account the sociopolitical and indoctrinational aspects as well, be sensitive

towards people. towards their needs and desires, to serve as an example in work
and in everyday life."3

Requirements placed upon officers also stem from the general regulations of
our party as applied to leadership cadres. The Soviet comander must pri-
marily be absolutely devoted to the party and people. actively and consistently
implement CPSU policy. serve the motherland in a model manner. and be its

model of high discipline, execution, initiative, and independence. Commmist
moral substance. internal control. the readiness and ability to accurately
carry out orders, honesty and truth, will and organizational cabilities.
fineness in decisions and actions. the ability to organize and submit people

to his will. to guide them to accomplislnent of the assigned mission in any

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
situation-without such qualities the activities of a military leader
are meaningless both in peacetime and in wartime.

The motherland entrust: an officer with its most valuable and dearest
possession--people who must be trained and indoctrinated and, in the event
of war, led into battle. Forming in comanders the scientific methods of
indoctrinating and training troops is a vital task. Considering growing
requirements the party has embarked upon organization of the training and
retraining of military cadres and is doing everything necessary to improve
their theoretical level and the depth of their knowledge concerning modern
achievements in the field of military science and technology. as well as
the theory of leadership and comand and control.

Soviet officers possess a high military-technical culture. In addition
they must have a large reserve of general scientific, psychological. and
pedagogical knowledge.

Thus. ideological conviction, high moral and psychological qualities, the
demandingness upon themselves and their subordinates, military organizational
capabilities, general culture, creative thinking, and tactical, pedagogical,
and military-technical preparedness-ware the requisite condition for a
comander's successful activities.

A characteristic feature of today's Soviet Armed Forces officer corps is

its youth. At the regimental level, young officers--the commanders of
platoons, companies (batteries), and subunits at that organizational level--
make up two-thirds of the total supervisory staff. Along with acquiring
the experience of life and service know-how, they must continually improve
their scientific knowledge, with military psychology and pedagogy occupying
a large place here.

The significance of psychological and pedagogical knowledge increase: in
connection with the fact that, at the present time, the general educational
level of first-term soldiers and sergeants has significantly increased.
Horking with people has become, on the one hand, easier and, on the other
hand, more difficult as well. Easier because they more rapidly assimilate
and more fully understand that which they are taught. But, more difficult
because their range of thinking has expanded and their desires are multi-
faceted. An officer mst be not only well trained in the political and
military-technical sense but must also be a good psychologist and skillful
pedagogue in order to correctly structure the training and indoctrination
of his subordinates.

Military schools are continually refining the training of future officers.
The quality of their moral-political, psychological and pedagogical training
is improving. All of this work must be improved in the future as well.

The main thing is to insure that the party possesses an even broader reserve
of excellent theoretically-mature military cadres.

Marshal of the Soviet Union 0. F. Ustinov, member of the CC CPSU Politburo
and USSR Minister of Defense, stated in his speech at a scientific and

l.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

practical conference of supervisory political workers from the army and
navy! “in recent years significant work has been done in the Soviet Army
and Navy to improve the selection. assignment. and indoctrination of cadres.
The progression of young capable officers to basic command. political, and
engineering-technical jobs is being actively accomplished. These officers
possess high theoretical training. but do not always have the requisite
practical experience.“

Life in troop units convincingly shows that certain difficulties are noted
in the work of young officers. primarily in the sphere of indoctrination
and leadership of subordinates. They are not always able to find the
individual approach to subordinates and they sometimes lack the skill of
influencing the consciousness and feelings of the soldiers.

Further refinement in comanders' work with collectives des-‘r\'--s special
attention. "Labor collectives.” Article 8 of the new USSR Constitution
states. ”develop socialist competition, facilitate dissemination of leading
work methods and strengthening labor discipline, indoctrinate their members
in the spirit of comnunist morality. and Concern themselves with improving
their political consciousness. culture, and professional qualification."
This statute from the USSR Nndamental Law also is fully relevant for
military collectives, which are called upon to increase the combat mastery
of the troops and to direct the efforts of subunit and crew personnel towards
skillful collective actions when operating combat and training equipment.
The collectives develop amongst the troops bravery, decisiveness, spiritual
stability. and the ability to maintain combat activeness and indefatigable
will for victory under the most complex conditions. Thanks to the example
of co-workers and the high standards of comrades, each soldier will learn
to be principled, center, will, character. and moral-political qualities,
and more profoundly recognize his responsibility to the socialist homeland.
All of these qualities in the soldiers are formed by the goal-oriented and
consistent activities of commanders. political workers, party, and Komsomol
organizations. The ideas of collectivism fill the work of officers with
lofty meaning and are inspired by high social goals.

This book is addressed to the largest detacluaent of Soviet officers--subunit
contenders directly involved in the indoctrination. education, moral-political.
and psychological training of personnel. It is designed to provide them
assistance in studying the foundations of military psychology and pedagogy

and in practical work.

The authors express gratitude to Lt Gen 1. A. Hagonov. Col V. S. Vinnikov,
Col P. N. Simchenkov, and Col H. P. Shmelev for valuable advice and recom-
mendations to improve the book.

Chapter 1, The Special Features of a Commander's Activities

1. The Content of a Counander's Activities.

[Exccp ts] At the present the CPS!) firmly requires that Soviet supervisors
”introduce modern methods of organizing production and labor in accordance

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

with the requirements of scientific and technical progress."5 The party
instructions fully apply also to the military organizer and leader--
the Soviet army comander.

Under contemmrary conditions when the army is receiving the most complex
combat equipment and armaments, con-anders at all levels are faced with

new tasks of insuring the combat capability and combat readiness of units
and subunits. They must not only be able to skillfully assimilate armaments
and combat equipnent, new means and forms of conducting combat, but also
possess mastery in indoctrination, educaticn, comand and control. and
leadership.

Leadership of personnel and their political and military indoctrination
require of a commander correct explanation of immediate and long-range goals
of his work, a comprehensive evaluation of the situation in the subunit or
unit, making decisions. and seleczing ways to implement them. Evaluation of
the situation and the decision stem from comanders' understanding of the
tasks assigned by the party and the government to the Armed Forces, from
analysis of the political and moral state, discipline, military training,
and combat readiness of personnel.

Since combat equiment and armaments presuppose the coordinated activities
of military collectives, command and control is a necessary prerequisite for
success of troop activities. Rally applicable to military affairs are the
characteristics Provided by K. Marx to controlling social labor. ”All direct
social or joint labor accomplished at a relatively large scale,” he pointed
out, "requires to a greater or lesser degree control which establishes coor-
dination between individual operations and accomplishes the overall functions
arising from the movement of the entire production organism as opposed to
the movement of its independent organs. The individual violinist controls
himself. the orchestra requires a director."6 Problems of improving control
were examined at the 26th and 25th CPSU Congresses as an integral part of all
CPSU activities. Great attention was deVoted here to questions of a lead-
er's style, to the culture of control apparatus operations. It was noted
at the 25th CPSU Congress that an important condition for the success of a
party supervisor lies in the Leninist style of work. ". . .The leninist
style," it was stated at the Congress, "this is a crea-ive style, a style
that is the anathema of subjectivism. one permeated with the scientific
approach to all social processes. It presupposes high demandingness upon
oneself and others, it excludes self-satisfaction, and opmses any manifes-
tations of bureaucritism and formalism.”

These party instmetions apply fully to the leadership activities of all
categories of comanders and staffs. USSR Minister of Defense Marshal of
the Soviet Union 0. F. Ustinov, speaking to the graduates of the military
academies, stated! ". . .Ouring independent practical work graduates

must steadfastly assimilate the art of troop comand and control. . .
demonstrate thoughtful initiative, elevate their ideological-political

and military-theoretical level, and make a substantial contribution to
improving the quality of combat and political training, troop combat readi-
ness and strengthening military discipline."8

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Skilll‘ul troop colmand and control is the legal responsibility of every
ofiicer. The Internal Service Field Manual of the USSR Armed Forces
emphasizes that the cosmonder is the ”organizer and supervisor of the
training and indoctrination of subordinates.“ Therefore. he is obligated
"to continually refine the methods of unit and ship (subunit) comand
and control! steadfastly work to develop his organizational capabilities
and to improve methodological skills: study and implement everything new
and progressive which facilitates improving the effectiveness of training
and indoctrination of subordinates. . ."9

The fundamental content of a compander‘s activities boil down to accomplish-
ment of the following important functionsl

--organizationall

--polititral-indoctrinationall

--military-pedagogicall

«military specialists!

--adninistrntive-housekeepingi

"leadership in daily service.

Hunter 2. The Personality of a Subordinate and Its Formation by the Commander

[Excerpts] indoctrination and training of troop from the point of view of military
psychology and pedagogy are a complex and lengthy process requiring. from
military leaders high culture. enormous effort. varied knowledge and

skills. great tact. self-control. benevolence. and the ability to control
people's activities.

iiere each chief is called upon to creatively construct the training process.
assist subordinates to form high combat. political. and psychological

qualities. and to support and encourage innovative efforts. manifestations.
and activities of personnel.

“Speaking of indoctrinational work." L. l. Dreshnev noted at the 25th CPSU
Congress. ”one cannot avoid mentioning the enormous role played here by the
Soviet Army. Youths join the nilitary family. lacking experience from the
school of life. out. they return from the army as people who have already
gone through the school of self-control and discipline who hails received
technical and professional knowledge and political training."1

Such a high evaluation of the role Soviet Armed Forces play in ideological-
political and military indoctrination of the upcoming generation is supported
by thr- creative activities in this sphere by all links of officer cadres.
Soviet comanders demonstrate a guiding sense in their service and indoctri-
national practice and have the ability to distinguish the progressive from

7

M OFFICIAL USE OMY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the obsolete. the creative from the trite. This expresses not only their
high professional preparedness. but also an approach to facts. events. and
phenomena from a position of Marxist-Leninist dialectics. In actuality

all of a comander's service activities are a continual creative process

in which he himself learns to seek out the new and to indoctrinate subordi-
nates with the same desires. An officer's creativity is impossible without
creativity on the part of the entire collective which he leads. It is
subordinated to a single coal-"elevating the moral-political and combat
readiness of the troops.

SUViel. commanders base themselves on the premise that each subordinate
is. -l Irrsonality with its own internal world and multifaceted qualities
which influence training. service. and mutual relations with others.

bl-uly of all the properties and qualities of a soldier's personality acquired
hemhtened significance in modern times. Professional selection and assign-
ment of servicemen. fonnation of important qualities. distribution by special-
ties. solution of problems of compatibility and harmony in crews. sections.
and so on all are insured to a significant degree due to the comanders'
profound knowledge of their subordinates. A scientific approach to indoc-
trination and education of the troops considering the fundamentals of
nuiitarv psychology and pedagogy open up vistas in indoctrinational work

to control the formation of personality and aceomplisllsent of the individual
approach.

The classics of Harxism-lcninism attached enormous significance to the study
of the qualities. traits. and special features of people. In order “to operate
with any chance of success.“ K. Marx wrote. "one must know the material on
which the interaction is based."1

Devolopinr. this. V. l. Lenin in the new historical situation pointed out‘

"To live in a [thick of things./ To know /moods./ To know/everythinsd

To understand the masses. To know the approach. To win Iabsolute/ trust.
An important pedagogical problem in troop units is the study and analysis
durum; training and indoctrinational work of the age. psychological. demo-
graphic. and other special features of subordinates. Knowledge of subordinates
and their profound study is the service responsibility of comanders and chiefs.

“12

The studv brains from the day the young man first arrives in the subunit

and continues durinr, his entire service in the army. it can be accomplished
also durinr, short-duration work with subordinatesl during temporary duty.
when auronplishing temporary missions. and so on. During comprehensive
study of the troops officers can use such methods as discussion. observation.
experiment. generalization of independent characteristics. analysis of the
result of activities. analysis of biographical intonation. and others.

From the multiplicity of means at his command the commander selects those
which give the best results in a particular situation. Studying subordinates
commanders and political workers see the prospects of their work. its goal.
how to elevate and develop the moral-psychological and combat qualities of
everv soldier as high as possible.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USP. ONLY

The main thing forming the basis of a comander's study of subordinates
is analysis of the special features of their activities and deeds.
Analyzing the personal qualities of the soldiers. military leaders
consider in their practice all intonation about subordinates! their

education. general development. variety of training. service. and social
activities.

being broadly informed about each individual from the subunit entrusted
to him. a comander can more profoundly understand the special features of
the personality of each one and more accurately note and take measures

to psychologically and pedagogically affect the military collective.

Along with overall traits servicemen possess individual features that
differ one from the other. Therefore. one and the same sethod of indoc-
trination. education, and leadership which provides a positive effect
when used for one subordinate may not provide the anticipated results
when used with another (sometimes when used with the same subordinate

but under different conditions). Consequently. a commander Isust take note
of the special features and differences in subordinates any time he is in
contact with them. in all lessons. during daily service, when eaploying
encouragement and taking disciplinary action. The know-how of leading
connanders shows that the registration of individual and other special
features of subordinates pemeates their entire training and indoctrina-
tional work and is an important principle of all their activities.
Comanders are especially attentive and tactful with young soldiers.
Soviet officers are guided in their activities here by V. l. Lenin's
instructions that young people “mast be assisted in every way. looking
upon their errors with as such patience as possible. attempting to correct
them gradually and predominantly through the use of /persuasion/. . ."13

The consuander is not always able to personally catch the many important
details in the mood and conduct of subordinates. Therefore. in his peda-
gogical activities he uses the know-how of warrant officers [praporshchik]
and sergeants and relies upon the Komsomol aktiv. Heanwhile. taking into
account individual and age features of subordinates does not mean being
indulgent and making allowances. A comander who allows leniency in rela-
tionship to the troops and frees then of the difficulties of military

serVice voluntarily or involuntarily hinders them in overcoming their
deficiencies.

Conanders must also attentively be concerned about all subordinates on

a daily basis. The combination of high demandingness in accordance with
regulations with deep respect for personal worth is the Iain element in

the relationship between the military leader and subordinates. The
officer who has the ability to give accurate and clear instructions. who

can achieve their unconditional execution. and. when necessary, who listens
to the subordinate and takes his opinion into account enjoys special respect.

POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Appendix to Chapter
Program to Study a Soldier's Character

The study and registration of the age. psychological. demographic. and
other special features of subordinates during combat and political training
are an important service and pedagogical task of subunit contenders.

The study of the troops is a specific system of methods. procedures. and
means.

it is advisable for the platoon (company) comander to follow the following
sequence in studying a subordinate's personality.

General information about the soldier.

1. Rank. last name. first name. patronymic.

2. Year. month. and date of birth.
3. Place of birth and call up for military service.

1.. Type of activities prior to coming into the army (student in a school.
tekhnikum. vuz, specialty. time and place of work. Participation in co-Iunist
labor brigade. Worked and studied. Came from another military unit.
Military W1. institution. reason for transfer and other information).

5. Education and general intellectual develowent (world outlook. level
of reading aptitude. suitability for general-political. military-memoir.
technical. and natural science themes. and so on). Speaking developaent

(vocabulary. style. emotionality. ability to express himself in writing
and orally).

6. Nationality.

7. Social-class origin (from the family of a servicemen. employee. uorker.
nember of the intelligentsia. kolkhoz worker).

8. i'arty status (Komsomol member. CI’SU member. CPSU candidate member.
non-party. when accepted. and to on.

9. General physical development (health. childhood illnesses. how often

subject to sickness. uhich sports is he good in. what results have been
achieved).

10. information on parents and close relatives (place of residence. type

or activity. specialty. honorary ranks and special deeds perfomed for the
motherland. Father. mother. brother and sisters).

10

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
ll. Family status (unmarried. married. number of children. wife's job.
address).

12. Living conditions and upbringing in the family.

13. Brought up without parents (children's home. boarding house. relativen.
guardians). ’

Personality trend and motives of a soldier's conduct.

1. Dominant goal-oriented nature. fundamental requirements. interests.
Views. inclinations. ideas. convictions. traits of personal positions.
Motives for conduct when serving. during training. and during everyday life.

2. Attitude towards assimilating his silitary specialty. (responsible.
indifferent. negligent). Manifestation of initiative and creativity. of
independence. Successes in combat and political training. Fulfillment of

socialist pledges. Attitude towards encouragement and reprimand by the
comander.

J. Attitude twards service activities. How does he stand guard watch and
perform internal service. Attitude twards different housekeeping work.

how his initiative and creativity demonstrated. Attitude towards the preser-
vation and conservation of armaments and equiment assigned to him. Organi-
zation and discipline in labor. Hhat types of labor does he prefer.

1.. Successes in combat and political training. what disciplines is he lost
of all attracted to and why. Determine in detail interest towards reading.

what does he read. fiction. popular science. natural sc‘ence. military-memoir.
or predominantly trivial literature. and so on.

5. what does he dream about and what does he intend to do after service in
the army (study. work. or both).

6. what does he do on leave (free time). where does he go. who does he meet.
where and how does he relax.

Mutual relations with other servicemen.

1. Position in the collective (does he use his authority. how is this

authority determined. manifestation of altruism and egoisl. Degree of
conformity).

2. Relationship to comrades in the collective (does he value the opinion
of the collective. is he indifferent to comrades. Hho does he pal around
with and what is this friendship based on. and so on).

3. Mutual relations with young considers.

a. Mutual relations with officers (comanders. political workers. senior
chiefs).

11

NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
S. is he satisfied with his position in the collective and what position
would he like to occupy.

6. Does he value the honor and t:aditions of his submit and unit.
7. Mutual relations and contact with comrades and friends outside the unit.

a. with whom does he maintain contact and how often does he write to
parents. relatives. and friends.

9. Manifestation of military comradeship and mutual assistance.
Special features in the manifestation of character and temperament.

l. Clearly-expressed traits of character (in regards to those around him.
comrades. training. labor. service. specialty. and to himself. Perserverance
and ability to work. Force and trend in character).

2. Volitional traits of character (goal-oriented nature. self-possession.
courage. steadfastness. valor. decisiveness. initiative. independence. and
so on).

3. Discipline and execution (the ability to subordinate himself and to
subordinate others. to carry out orders and give them. Relationship to the
demandingness of young comanders and officers. carrying out the training

and service regime in the unit! does he adhere to the regime. does he violate
the regime intentionally or through negligence. is he able to carry out the
agenda in the time alotted).

a. Enthusiasm for types of sports with military applications. Achievements
during training periods.

5. Training work. Adherence to the agenda. organization. the ability to
independently work. to control himself. ability to mobilize himself for
training. for taking tests).

6. Expression of temperament (ability to work. mobility. sociability).

7. Predominant mood (happy. sad. Stability of mood. what causes a change
in mood).

8. Negative character traits (mistrust. narcissism. conceit. extraordinary
sensitivity in injury. noncritical attitude towards himself and comrades.

maximalism. unstable evaluations. stubbornness. imitation of standards
disseminated to a circle of comrades).

9. Relationship to moral and material stimuli.

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OH‘IC 1M. USE ONLY

Capabilities and progress.

1. Mental and physical capabilities. Progress in colbst and political
training (predominant evaluations. identical or not identical progress in
various disciplines).

2. Capabilities in the study of a particular ailitary specialty (special

features of attention and interest in equipnent. arcanents, neaory. thought.
expression. Quick and good senory).

3. Level of creative thought and nature of the deValopIent of the types

of memory (studies mechanically or thoughtfully. does he master the drills

of preliminary nelorization. how fast and good is his nenory. ease in presen-
tation. individual special features of sentry).

la. kelationship to lessons and military training (does he assinilate the

nilitary specialty with interest or without interest, attitude toward evalu-
ations).

Social activeness.

1. Relationship to social life, work. and activities of his subunit (does
he value it. does he have initiative, is he indifferent. does he relate
negatively. does he do nothing and try in every way to avoid it).

2. Participation in life of the collective (does he have a regular task!
secretary. bureau aember. agitator, member of the editorial collegiula or
Lenin Room council, innovator. and so on. Does he carry out specific
tasking. Does he not do anything and does he have no social tasks).

3. interest in the life of the country and international events (he continually
reads newspapers. periodically does so. does not read at all. Listens to the
radio and watches television. and so on).

0. Participation in mass-cultural and lass-sports work (likes to organize
and himself continually participates. Passably participates. Organizes the
leisure and everyday life in the subunit. and so on).

5. Participation in preparation and disseaination of political information.
lectures, talks in his subunit.

6. Motives for activities in social work (strives to put his ideals into
practice. to increase his political level. Concerns himself more about deo
fending his own rights or those of his comrades. Does he work just for the
visibility. Does he frankly strive to better the work of the party and

Koasonol organization. Desire to continually be out in public with other people).

General psychological-pedagogical conclusions.

1. Basic strong points and deficiencies in the soldier’s personality.
Reasons (internal and external) for shortcomings (indoctrinational conditions

13
POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
in the army and prior to the army. illness. absence which determine
capabilities and skills in work).

2. Determination of the vital psychological-pedagogical tasks facing

counanders. ways for further indoctrinational and training work with the
soldier.

The program for the study of personality allows a comander to make con-
clusions and notes on the trend, character, abilities, temperament, views
on life. inclinations. and interests of every subordinate.

It is important to keep in mind that the program is not a sham. It is

an example and can serve only as the initial reference point for creative
study of subordinates.

As the program is put into practical use, it is not mandatory for the
commander to find answers to all points in every section. It is sometimes
sufficient just to answer several of them in order to come to the correct
conclusion as to the entire section. This will depend on the comander's
know-how in working with subordinates and his skill in using psychological
and pedagogical skills in service practice.

Chapter 3. The Commander‘s Role in Formation of the Military Collective

[Excerpts] The officer's profession "€01!“ the 1511“? to subordinate P90?“ :0
your will and to mobilize than to accomplish difficult missions. deeply
analyze the military situation. foreseeing the progress of events. to
make responsible decisions under any conditions and under compressed
suspenses. demonstrate initiative, and to embark on a reasonable risk.
This requires a firm knowledge of the principles and methods of political
and military indoctrination. the foundations of Soviet military pedagogy
and psycholosi'. and skillful implementation of them in practice. The
study by a comander or political worker of the psychology of a collectiVe
subordinate to him is a complex task and its successful solution depends
upon reliability in personnel command and control, the force of the indoc-
trinational effect on the soldiers. and the moral state of the subunit.

In order to solve the problems of leadership. indoctrination. and training
it is important for a comander to understand not only the psychology of a
soldier's personality but also the psychology of the collective--the situa-
tions, moods. opinions. interests. and the mutual relationships inherent in
individual groups of subordinates and the subunit as a whole.

”. . .Develoment of the individual." K. Marx and F. Engels wrote. ”is

stipulated by the development of all other individuals with whom he is in
direct or indirect contact. . ." "

Military service is a collective matter. Young people joining the service
are sent to subunits in which they will occupy a particular position and
will fulfill specific responsibilities. Facing them are tasks whose accom-
plishment requires coordination and careful joint work. Although the troops

ll.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

possess special individual features and differ from one another. their
combination however for joint activities gives rise to general mental
phenomenal the emotional atmosphere in the subunit. cannon interests.
feelings. traditions. habits. sympathy. antipathy. authority. and so on.

The mutual influence of the troops on each other occurs in a military

subunit as a result of direct contact. There is mutual denandingness.
following the example. exchange of experience. information. opinions.

moods. imitation. psychological contamination. suggestion come into

play in a collective. The desire arises in each soldier for self-confirmation.
to occupy an authoritative place in the life of the subunit (leadership).
evaluations of the conduct of comrades and self-evaluations are formed.

and relationships are established with connanders and activists.

The collective usually exerts a mobilizing influence on personality and
elevates its capabilities. Even simple contact in the process of labor.

as K. Harx noted. "elicits competition and a unique impetus o; vital energy. . .
which increases individual productivity of each person. . ."1

The commander oust take into account that the unique psychological atmosphere
which arises and exists in his subunit and the moral climate exert great
influence on the efficiency of overall activities. the level of harmony.

of discipline. the effect on work and personality of each soldier.

A good psychological mood in the subunit. boldness. conviction. mutual
understanding. respect for each other. benevolence. mtual demandingness.
comradeship. friendship all are necessary prerequisites and the conditions
for harmony and coordination in the overall activities of the troops. And.
on the other hand. friction. conflicts. unhealthy opinions. a suppressed

mood. and psychological division sharply reduce the results of activities
and the indoctrinational capabilities of any collective.

Creation of collectives possessing the high level of readiness for combat.
discipline. training. and cohesion is an important task in the training-
indoctrinational and organizational work of a coenander.
Appendix to Chapter 3
Program For the Study of the Hilitary Collective
1. General Information on the Collective and the History of its Formation

1. Name of the subunit.

2. Type of subunit (group)! battalion. company. platoon. section. party
group. sports team. hobby group.

3. Distribution of personnel by year of call up for military service.

a. Number of persons in the collective!

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

a) by age (18. 19. 20. 21. 22. and older)!

b) by party status (CPSU members and candidate members. Komsomol members.
non-party)!

c) by nationality (Russian. Ukrainian. Belorussian. and other nationalities)!

d) by type of work prior to call up into the army (school students. university
students. workers. and others).

5. Social and class origin (from a family of workers. kolkhoz workers.
employees. intelligentsia. servicemen).

6. Information on parents and family (having a mother and father. having
only a mother. only a father. no parents. bachelor. married. with children).

7. Other brief information on the collective from the moment of its
founding until the present.

11. Preparedness of the Collective

Types of Activities

Military Training

Political Training

Social Bork

Troop Unit Service and
Conformance with Regulations

Mass Sports work

Mass Cultural Hork

     
   
   
    
    
 

Group kmw-how. level of knowledge. skills. and abilities in a particular
type of joint collective activity are determined.

Evaluation of preparedness is graded on a four-point system and must reflect
the level of subunit preparedness in the given sphere of joint activities.

111. Motivation of the Collective

The goals. requirements. interests. and ideals of the collective. Subjects.
objects. relationships which are more valuable for the collective. The
collective's understanding of the significance of its activities for the
society and the Armed Forces. The level of collective efforts to achieve
high results in training. service. discipline. and combat readiness.

Unity and coordination in the overall and individual motivation of the

troops of a given collective. Evaluating the group psychological qualities
is done on a four-point systan.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USP. ONLY

Sequence The Collective's‘horal and Psychological

l Subunit activeness. its creatiVe goal-oriented
nature

2 At what level are found the positive spiritual
requests and interests of the troops

3 How does the collective rate its efforts and
affairs from the point of view of the moral
code of a builder of comnisa

h Manifestation of honesty. colradeship. friendli-
ness. benevolence. joint experiences

5 The stability of the collective's faith in its
capabilities

6 The level of social activeness. Consideration
of the interest of the larger collective

7 The respect of the nenbers of the collectives
vho are doing everything for the sake of
overall success

8 The desire of the collective's troops for
mutual contact and the exchange of inforlation

9 The collective desire to interact and to coop-
erate with the collectives from other subunits

10 The presence of hopes on the part of the troops
to labor and rest collectively

ll The role of the party and Konsouol aktiv in the
life of the collective

12 The business-like qualities of the collective's
aktiv

13 Respect of comanders. support for their re-
quirenents providing them assistance

14 Is the authority of the activists selected

by the society being put to use

 

IV. Organizational unity of the collective

l Honesty in fulfilling the requireaents of regu-
lations and in mutual relations
2 The capability of the collective to independently

and creatively accomplish various training
and service missions

3 How does the collective correct errors in the
actions and efforts of individual soldiers

lo how does the collective conduct itself in
conplex and difficult situations

5 How does the collective surmount the consequences

of failure in the achieveaent of the overall
goal
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100030029-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Sequence The Collective’s Moral and Psychological
Atmosphere

6 Hon does the collective coordinate general and
individual interests

7 The number of microgroups. their motivation and
mutual interaction

8 Traditions of the collective

9 Hilitancy of the party and Komsomol aktiv

 

V. The intellectual unity of the collective

1 Nays the collective solves various problems
and accomplishes missions. Rapidity in
developing the overall line of attack
2 Mutual understanding when accomplishing
collective missions. Presence of a canon
language in the collective
Can the collective achieve a unity of
understanding and find a unanimous solution
when discussing the conduct of specific
individuals
I. How correctly does the collective evaluate
changes in training. service. and daily
situations. Is new conduct rapidly elaborated
5 Does the collective have a united and precise
opinion of its capabilities, achievements, and
shortcomings
6 How does the collective evaluate its place among
- other collectives
7 How are critical cements from caurades, the
aktiv, and comanders evaluated and accepted

Is.
0-)

V1. The emotional unity of the collective

1 Presence of a good. elevated, bold overall tone
in the collective
2 The presence of benevolence in the mutual relations

among the servicemen. of a mutual cohesion among
each other, synpathy

3 Is there a desire for collective emotional exper-
' iences, for daily phenomena
1. How are the successes and failures of the troops
in training, service. and personal life looked
upon
18

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00850R000100030029-6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       
   
   
   

Does a general mobilizing mood exist in difficult
service situations

6 Is there a mutual position and benevolence in
relationships between microgroups
7 Dissemination of sympathy and friendship

between troops

VII. Volitional unity of the collective

1 Is the collective in a position to mobilize
all forces, to surmount difficulties and
carry things through from start to finish

2 The ability of the collective to independently

establish collective goals and cohesively
achieve them

3 Rapidity and awareness by the collective when
asking a decision, fimess in decision
accomplislnent

I; The capability of the collective to subjugate

the manifestations of its own feelings when
the interests of the matter so require

5 The possibility for the collective to work
at length and under stress to accomplish
the assigned mission

6 Timeliness in the identification and use of

reserves by the collective to overcome diffi-
culties

Generalization of the results and conclusions about the collective being studied

For an overall characteristic of the collective the counander rates each
index (motivation. organizational. intellectual. emotional, md volitional
unity of the collective) in the table below and computes the total and the
average score for its developental level.

Overall numerical results characterizing the collective

Characteristics of the Collective I

. EValuation of the collective qualities
in points (from a four-point system)

    

HotiVation eoeassoeaossseesoosooe
Organizational unity . . . . . . . . . . . .
Intellectual unity soosoeoeooeoso
Emclon‘l unity oesooooseosaoseos
Volltion‘l unity sesssseeoeseoeso

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

General conclusions

Considering the overall data (Section I). mparedness of the collective by
activity type (Section II). and the average score for cacl. subsequent sec-
Lion in the table, the comandcr provides a brief qualitative evaluation

of the subunit of troops as a collective and its sociopsychological stability.

For example, the collective possesses good preparedness in combat and
military training (a score of (a), average social activeness (3). and a well-
established mass cultural and sports program (6). Service activities and
fulfilling requirements of regulations, discipline. organization. and co-
hesion--3. The collectives motivation is evaluated as average (average

score from the table 3.6). Organizational (3.5), intellectual (3.7).

and Volitional (2.9) unity of the subunit-"average. and emotional--good (3.8).

The subunit is characterized as having a high level of develoment as a
military collective (average 3.56). Its basic indicators (combat and political
training) are evaluated as good.

Having determined the basic shortcomings inherent in the collective and

the mutual relationships in it. the co-aander notes the way to make it
cohesive, the way to form the positive qualities and traits of the soldiers,
how to vitalize work to overcome the negative moments in the life and activ-
ities of the subunit.

The pedagogical requirements for studying the troops and troop collectives
can be reduced to the following.

1. Study of the Personality of soldiers and military collectives must lead
to an increase in the quality of their education. indoctrination, moral-
political, and psychological training.

2. Study of the troops and military collectives mst be accomplished in
parallel with and mutually related to the indoctrinational effect on them
and supervising their activities.

3. An integrated approach to tI-e indoctrination of subordinates must be
done in a planned manner, systematically and in a goal-oriented way during
combat and political training. during service, uhen accomplishing various
preventive maintenance and administrative duties. during days and hours of
rest. and within and outside the subunit.

In. Both the specific traits of personality (positive and negative) as well
as personality as a whole should be studied. as should the collective as a
unified, combat, harmonious, goal-oriented. and developing organism.

20
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Chapter la. The Commander's Surety of High Military Discipline

[Excerpts] Adherence to specific forms and rules of discipline is res nsibls for
accomplishment of missions in various spheres of social life and activ ty.
Depending upon the special features of the regulated relationships.

missions. and functions of collectives and groups of people. various forms

of discipline exist! labor. sports. training. party. military. and so on.

Especially precise and strict discipline is required in the army. This
is due to the special features of military organization and by the nature
of the combat training and combat missions accomplished. by the varied
conditions in uhich the activities of personnel take place. and by the
necessity for the study and practical employment of armaments and combat
equiment.

Discipline and organization are the vital levers without which the ideo-
logical desires of the party and its decisions cannot be implemented.

"in order to be victorious. . . requires iron military discipline. The
individual who does not understand this understsnds nothing of the condi-
tions for maintaining worker's power. . ."16 affirmed V. l. lenin.

Vladimir li'ich profoundly substantiated the necessity for strict discipline.
cohesion. and organization of party ranks. basing their significance on

the very essence of the Communist Party as the vanguard of the working class
which leads it to the “‘3‘ mi.” a. he in: it. "the strictest discipline
is necessary in the army" 3 especially.

Party discipline is inseparable from state. labor. and military discipline.
The party program and regulations. as well as its decisions. oblige com-mists
to be ardent supporters of adherence to socialist legality and morality.

to set an example of comnist attitude towards labor. to preserve and multiply
public social property. Hithin the Soviet Armed Forces. party and state
discipline organically combine irreproachable adherence to the requirements
of the military oath and military regulations. of the orders and instructions
of commders and chiefs. and the example in fulfillment of all military
obligations. The instructions to CPSL Organizations in the Soviet Army and
Navy state that their main task is implementation of the requirements of the
(‘i‘SU program whereby "the Soviet Armed Forces will be a precise and cohesive
organism. have a high degree of organization and discipline. accomplish the
missions assigned by the party. government. and people in a model fashion.

and be prepared at any moment to give a decisive rebuff ti imperialist
aggressors." Consequently. Party. state. and military discipline in spite
of its varied aspects and manifestations has a unified ideological foundation.
a unified goalnto facilitate in every way possible the cause of the organiza-

tional developnent of communism in our country and the guarantee of its strom
defensiVe capability.

Finn military discipline is a vital condition of high combat readiness and
the combat capability of the army. Only on its basis can the requisite or-

ganization of the troops. their combat mastery. continual readiness to accom-
pl ish the assigned missions. and high controlability be insured.

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Under the modern conditions of the organizational developnent of the Soviet
Armed Forces. the significance of Soviet military discipline has grown
significantly. Discipline to a high degree is now necessary. This is
stipulated by the complexity of military affairs. by the appearance of new
combat equilment and weapons and by mechanization and automation of military
affairs. Maintenance and employment of various weapon systems. .mplex
instruments. vehicles. and mechanisms require an exceptionally high troop

labor discipline. responsibilitv. proficiency. constant attention. and self-
discipline.

Strengthening discipline and organization in subunits and units is necessary
ior effective personnel comand and control, everyday service. indoctrination
and education of the troops. and the cohesion of military collectives.
Military discipline greatly determines the proper functioning of all military
command and Control systems. their individual organs and responsible persons.
and guarantees precision and coordination in the activities of all servicemen.
its maintenance at a high level is one of the principles of Soviet military
organizational deVeloilnent.

Soviet military discipline is required under all of the conditions of service-
mens' activities in peacetime as well as in wartime. Heamhile. in wartime
its significance. special obligation. and categorical nature of requirements
grow a great deal. in addition. the party learns to look upon discipline not
only as the strict and accurate adherence to established norms. rules. and
order. but also as the ability and capability of each individual under any
conditions to find the best variation of his conduct which would be most useful
to society as a whole. Discipline encompasses both the mutual relations of
subordinates with chiefs. seniors with juniors. as well as the relationships
between chief and seniors and subordinates and juniors. plus the contacts and
ties between servicemen without subordination or seniority.

Military discipline plays a great indoctrinational role. Obliging servicemen
to accomplish specific requirements. regulating their activity. it influences
not only the external conduct of the troops. but also their thought. sense.
will. laminates thereby the development of the necessary qualities and habits
for specific. goal-oriented. socially useful conduct.

An iml-vrtant circumstance is that military discipline assumes subordination to
the will of the comander who is expressing the will of the state. as well as
In the requirements of military regulations and of the oath. Therefore.

one or it'. most fundamental requirements is strict adherence to the rule

of subordination established within the Armed Forces. The obligation to
S'llmrdin-iti' oneseli and subordination are the foundation of mutual relation-
ships unthin a military organization.

Th" urouine Significance of military discipline requires that all officers
clearly represent its independence from the qualities of personality. of
the eollectiw. of the supervisor. as well as a knowledge of the missions,
ways and means. and forms and methods for its consolidation. An explana-
tion or the special features and traits of Soviet military discipline is
requir-ui for specific solution of these problems.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. USE ONLY

chapter 5. Formation of Soidiers' Combat hastery by the Comander

[Excerpts] The Soviet Armed Forces have been supplied with new complex combat equip-
ment! missiles. varied armored equipent. computers. and so on. Success

in assimilation of this equiment. its accident-free operation and effective
combat employment greatly depend on the way things are set up in subunits

and units to form combat mastery. Also. possession of combat mastery is a
fundamental condition for increasing the moral-combat qualities of the troops
and their combat and psychological tempering. The conmander must consider
that new combat equiment requires not only profound specialization but also
a certain amount of standardization as far as the mastery of the troops is
concerned. Each crew member has his own responsibilities. but each must be
prepared to replace his comrade in combat and to successfully operate within
the collectiVe. From this stems the necessity for all officers to continually
refine methodological mastery. to study and more skillfully implement in
troop unit practice everything new and progressive in education of servicemen.

and discover effective ways for further increasing combat capabilities and
thr combat readiness of subunits and units.

The significance of combat mastery grows even more as the combat equipent
and weapons develop and become more complicated. Under contemporary cond i-
tions it is necessary "to achieve that leVel of troop training in which each
soldier masters to perfection modern weapons and combat equimsent.” noted
Marshal of the Soviet Union D. f. Ustinov. USSR Minister of Defense. at a
scientific and practical conference of supervisory army and navy political
uorkers. ”But. this too." comrade D. f. Ustinov continued. “in and of itself
still does not determine high combat readiness. Our superiority alvays was
and remains the superiority in ideology and consciousness of people and their
high socialist patriotism. He must more steadfastly indoctrinate each indi-
vidual with a conscious attitude toward overcoming the realistic complexities
of combat training. having in mind the lamentable tmth--the more difficult in
training. the easier in combat. More attention nust be placed on a further
strengthening of combat discipline and the maintenance of firm adherence to
established order in subunits. units. and aboard ship."l9

Chapter 6. The ﬂoral-Political and Psychological Training of Personnel

[Excerpts] The experimental changes which have occurred in the-cans and character
of the armed struggle placed new demands on the soldier's personality and

on the military coilectiVe. as well as on the missions and methods of their
training. A: the present time the mission of moral-political and psycholog-

ical training of personnel is evolving for the successful struggle against

a strong technically well-equipped enemy possessing nuclear missiles and
other means of mass destmction.

hilitary leaders always strive to colprehensively prepare their troops
for combat operations. when accomplishing moral-political and psychological
training they considered. first. the special features of the influence of the
combat situation on the psyche and conduct of the troops and. second. the
conditions for successful accomplishment of combat missions and the Very
manifestations of moral and physical qualities during combat.

23
POI! OFHCIM. USE ONLY
'ﬁuunbat readiness is that amalgamation of the troops' technical equipment.
their military training. their moral-political. psychological. and physical
tempering. organization. and the readiness of each Soviet fighting man to
perfonm a feat in the name of fulfilling their ailitary duty to the mother-

land."20 underscores Marshal of the Soviet Union 0. F. Ustinov. USSR Minister
of Defense.

Solution of all the problems of moral-political and psychological training
for Soviet troops is based uion the methodological positions taken in the
classics of Marxism-Leninism concerning the role of the moral factor in

tle armed struggle. V. l. Lenin briefly expressed these positions! "in
any war victory in the final analysis is dependent upon the spiritgtl state
of those masses whose blood is being shed in the field of battle.“

ﬂoral‘pulitical and psychological training in the Soviet Armed Forces is
based upon Marxist-Leninist teachings on war and the anay. on the positions
of Soviet military science and doctrine. on the conclusions of general and
military psychology concerning personality. concerning the collective and
activities. and on the principles of indoctrination and education formed
by Soviet general and military pedagogy.

During lessons on Firing Training

l. Accomplishment of exercises on firing under varied and complicated
comiitions. Creation of interference so as to make lessons similar to
the conditions in a combat situation. Night firing in any weather. on
new terrain. with a change in the target situation. and so on.

2. Firing guns. tanks. mortars. and machine guns in the interVals between
combat formations and from beyond the flanks. and an offensive beyond shell
bursts.

when accomplishing field firing exercises target presentation occurs in
varied combinations so that personnel independently solve firing problems.
demonstrating activeness and agility in destruction of targets depending
upon their importance .

h. In order to exclude sham in the organization and the conduct of firing
each gunner must change his firing position. sequence of target display.

location and direction of target movement. and ways of illuminating targets
and the terrain .

5. During the lessons it is advisable to set up external interference

for trainees; drills are often conducted in individual protective equipment.
in conditions of poor visibility and weather. various obstacles and barriers
are set up in the trainees path. their movements in time are restricted.

and so on .

0- “he" firing it is unpertant using a variety of methods to gradually
increase the trainees' speed of movement (speed of the vehicles). decrease
the time that the targets are displayed. simultaneously display several

26
FOR.0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
[OR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

targets at different ranges. change canouflage methods, display targets

at the ooauent "the enemy” employs Sire power and when Various barriers
and obstacles must be surmounted.2

7. A drill in firing from a snail-am and other weapon against uaoving
neck-ups of aircraft and enesuy landing forces.

During Technical Training lessons

1. when preparing equipnent for lessons the troops are taught to accuse
pllsh the notes on technical preparation of trucks, combat vehicles. BHP
or tanks for accoauplishnent of the couabat uiasion.

2. Demonstration of independence by subordinates when studying equipment.
For exausple. the comander. having explained a particular instrument or
aggregate. requests that the troops thuselves find the operating principles
of the equip-eat. having provided the requisite tile for an answer to be
formulated and diagram studied.

3. To solve problens involving training on correcting Ialfunctions. one
method used is colpilation of an operational nap which will sake it possible
to insure a high level of activity by the troops under the couple: conditions
of conbat training activities and detersine the level of developent of
aental qualities at the given stage of training.

6. Durim the initial driving training period overcoaing psychological
stress when behind the wheel is of great difficulty. haven in practice
is the corresponding routine for reloving the stressl the driver takes
his hand off the steering wheel on field roads at low speed and in low
gear. This convinces him that the vehicle will continue in a straight
line even without his touching the wheel. In the future it become the
noruuu for the driver to make various manipulations of the steering wheel.
without taking his attention frous the road.

5. To gain qualities needed to successfully drive combat vehicles

under coupler terrain and situation conditions. as well as for skillful
surlounting of various obstacles and barriers is achieved through selection
of routes requiring great stress in vehicle driving and accouplislnent of
exercises on driving after undergoing great physical loads.

6. Creation of an intensity in physical and mental stresses during driving
lessons in the coupler situation of nodern «chat is facilitated byI

flrlm blanks from automatic weapons and Iachine guns. firing signal rockets.
detonation of duuuy charges. laying smoke along driving routes and creation
of fires along the route! ”contamination” of the atlosphere outside the
coaubat vehicle using training contaminated materials simulators. and setting

up along she route obstacles such as choke points that vary in character
and size. 3

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
7. in order to overcome the fear of water on the part of personnel
when cmnhnt vehicles are driven through water barriers lessons must be
held on such subjects as scuba diver training. swiming. jumping into
the water. as well as introducing different types of interference as

practical conbat vehicle driver training is in progress under vater and
via deep fords.

During Physical Training lessons

1. Conduct lessons on applied sports contests (forced marches and
sultiple event contests).

2. Set up fire corridors as well as sectors containing ruined buildings
and rubble used by the enesy. introduce sudden noise and visual effects.
dumy charges. smoke pots. bright flashes of light. sirens. and broad-
casts of taped combat noises.

3. Drill the servicemen in overcoming obstacles after significant
phys ical labor and nervous stress (cross country. forced march. physical
training en route. and training classes on attack and self-defense).

Io. Use drills in cross country ski trips on broken and hilly terrain at
great distances (from 20 to 30 he and more). including individual sectors

containing loose and packed snow. in a thaw. in gas Iasks. and protective
clothing.

5. Practice mountain climbing and boxing which develop a contempt for

danger. bravery. care. quick thinking and reasonableness. reasoned risk,
and the will to win.

During lessons on Protection Against weapons of Mass Destruction ﬁlployed
by the Probable Enemy

1. Using simiation of the external features of a nuclear blast and its
consequences--fires. dasaged combat equipment. destroyed defensive structures.

roads. bridges--create training conditions closely approximating a combat
situation.

2. During operations in snail groups isolated from the unit place the
troops in a situation where comnications have been lost and other such
consequences of an enemy employment of a nuclear weapon.

'3. when checking individual protective equipent practice staying in an
area with a known concentration of enemy trainin contaminant simiators.

1.. When studying radiation reconnaissance instruments place the radioactiVe
substance near weapons and food.

5. Practice in the employment of means and routines to defend against weapons

against mass destruction. aviation. tanks. and other modern combat resources
at special and integrated lessons and exercises. Use of training simlators

26
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
for enemy contaminants and use of individual protective equipment when
extinguishing fires and tlamable substances.

6. Systematic drills with extended or interrupted Hearing of individual
and collective protective equipsent. Under such circumstances the troops
form the ability to confidently accomplish combat missions under conditions
of sharply reduced information obtained via normal coulunicstions channels.

7. Overcoming sectors of terrain ”contaminated” by simlated enemy contaminants
while wearing individual protective equiment.

8. At exercises conducted when the enemy employs incendiary weapons. train
personnel to operate without a reduction in combat activeness and offensive
tempos. rapid elimination of the consequences of the employment of incen-
diary equilnent and reestablislmlsnt of the combat capability of the subunits
and units.

During Tactical Training Lessons
1. Conducting field lessons and exercises on unfuiliar terrain. each
time in a new, complex situation.

2. Muster at a different time of day and night using the forced march
and accomplishment of combat missions.

3. Accomplishment of varied tactical missions at reduced strength. All
trainee activities here are developed from missions and norms. both at full
as well as at reduced strength.

Io. Hide employment of simulators which the conander uses to influence the
trainee through the corresponding inputs which affect the formation of the
correct representation about a real combat situation and creates conditions
favorable for developing psychological qualities in them.

5. Systematic build up of mental and physical loads at lessons in the field.

6. Running in tanks on a complex tactical background. These measures make
it possible to refine combat mastery' decisiveness, courage. emotional and
volitional stability, and other psychological qualities.

7. Employment of combat hand grenades at field lessons and during exercisesl
throwing combat grenades creates for the trainee a state of mind very similar
to that which arises in actual combat.

8. Organization and conduct of lessons with simltaneous accomplishment of
missions on tactical. firing. and technical training. on protection against
weapons of mass destruction employed by the probable enemy. topography.
cosasunications. and physical training.

27
FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

0. iivvrvumlnp, water lmrrivru stint (with mlulll‘nciit and with wenpons)
under the conditions ot a tactical situation with employment of smoke

screens and simlations which make the lessons approximate combat opera-
tions.

10. it is important when training soldiers to not only simlate the

external picture of combat. but also to create a complex situation which
vitalizes activities.

This is achieved by reasonable employment of varied inputs for training
and observation. memory. thought. and expression.

ii. A variety of tactical lessons based on input contents. terrain con-

ditions. weather. the nature of physical conditions. duration. and links
with other training subjects.

12. Conduct of exercises with field firing where the troops. under realistic
terrain and time conditions. gain practical experience in working out all
activities as in actual combat! they completely equip a position. fire
using combat cartridges. shells. and rockets. At certain exercises life-
like dunnies suddenly appear in the trenches.

(in the whole research conducted and generalization of know-how from a
number of exercises makes it possible to confirm that the following are

conditions for successful accomplislment of moral-political and psychological
training tasks during military labor!

"conscious attitude of the troops towards the missions and drills being
accompl ishedl

"gradually intensified difficultiesl
--insuring success in practical activities:

"modification of the missions and situations typical for the given
specialty in combat!

"encouragement of the troops.

Moral-political and psychological training tasks are effectively accomplished
when the personnel during tactical. firing. physical. and special training

are required to overcome difficulties and obstacles similar to those which
might be encountered in actual combat (succeeding on the basis of possible
stress motives. fatigue. fear. doubt. and so on). Otherwise there will be
coaching and useless external activeness on the part of people without their
internal efforts for themselves. without the desire to increase their prepared-
ness for combat. which decreases the influence of labor on personality. Ac-
tivization of the soldiers' high motives and cooprehensive explanation for

them of the goals. conditions. and tasks of the military labor increase its
indoctrinationai force.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
it is especialiy'important to deVelop in the soldiers a conscious attitude
toward combat activities. an understanding of the goals and reasons for a
possible war. of our superiority over the enemy. Conviction that they are
right. the clarity of the war‘s goals. trust in their combat equipent and
weapons gives birth to heroism in the Soviet troops. Refinement of combat
readiness is an uninterrupted process. Such are the dielectics of the
development of military affairs. Therefore. all comand cadres strive in
their service activities to elicit in the troops the desire to look upon
even the best results as the foundation for achievement of even higher
indicators.

Practice in troop units and research show that preliminary formation of
soldiers' psychological readiness for actions in a complex situation accel-
erate the transformation of the defensive reactions and stress which ini-
tially involuntarily arise into controlled activeness and facilitate the
elaboration of conscious self-controlled activities. Running in of tanks.
overcoming water barriers by tanks along the river bottom. combat firing

over the head of our troops. throwing grenades. and operations on conditionally
contamined terrain serve as examples.

Each component of the Armed Forces has its own ways and means of introducing
controlled elements of risk and danger into troop activities. They stem

from the special features of how the equipsent is built and how it is
operated.

A reasonable question arises! how many times must a person be placed in

a dangerous situation before he receives the requisite psychological tem-
poring? Studies have shown that two-three repetitions of dangerous situations
significantly reduce negative'reactions on the part of a majority of soldiers.
in two units this was observed in 96 percent of the personnel. Additional
drills were only necessary for a few individuals. Presence in a dangerous
situation given an unfavorable outcome and insufficient readiness strains

and undermines a person's state. In this instance longer duration use of
varied measures is required before he becomes adapted to the complex situa-
tion and develops the ability to control himself.

In every case where troops are placed in complex conditions (running in of
tanks, throwing combat grenades. and so on). serious preparatory work.
explanation of the sequence of events. demonstration, running drills. and
instilling confidence in success are necessary.

In one unit lectures and talks were given on the battle against tanks during
the Great Patriotic war prior to the tanks being run in over the personnel.
At the range the soldiers' attention was directed to the vulnerable parts of
a tank painted in white and the area for destruction using guns and machine
guns were marked with a painted strip. After engines were started the troops
listened to its operation from different distances at full and partial rm.
Each soldier was given a chance to crawl under the tank that had its engine
running. Several soldiers had to repeat this twice. Then the successful
activities of a preprepared subunit were demonstrated and. only after all

of this preparatory work. was the exercise with the tanks running in over

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the mrsonnel conducted. Observations of specialist training show pro-
longed I'xt'mltion of monotonous tasks and an extremely large amount of
variety negatively impact on the quality of their training. in the former
instance they lacked flexibility and creativity in a new situation, while
in the latter they lacked firm consistency and precision in their actions.
The combination of Variety and repetition of complex combat training tasks
and the conditions under which they are accomplished effectively develops

stable psychological structures. i.e. generalized methods of activity and
readiness.

Naturally. exercises and field firing which require adherence to the
established sequence of combat operations. accomplishment of time norms.
and simultaneous creative manifestation of readiness for complex activities
provide the most favorable possibilities for this.

in this connection it should be stated that the problem of making the training
situation approximate combat activities is solved in a different way by
Soviet silitary psychology than is the case for bourgeois military psychology.
Foreign psychologists steadfastly recomend naturalistic reproduction of the

consequences of a nuclear explosion. even if the people in so doing receive
serials injury.

Mutilated armaments. dun-lies. "bloody" objects. and the like are tossed onto
the training field. Personnel are often placed under conditions of depriva-
tion. for instance. long periods without food and water. Such a naturalistic
approach to training cannot provide positive results.

Soviet military psychology demonstrates the capability of successful forma-
tion of combat qualities in the troops through construction of psychological
models of combat. without resorting to representation of the horrors of
nuclear missile war.

The fourth trend is comprehensive vitalization of self-education and the
desire on the part of the troops to become skillful. steadfast, courageous.
and prepared at any aoment to enter the struggle against the aggressor and
achieve victory over him. and to develop within himself the qualities required
to do so. The work done by the troops to improve their combat training and
readiness for active combat operations supplaents other trends in moral-
political and psychological training. and it increases the results obtained.
In this instance self-education requires a knowledge of the essence and
special features of moral-political and psychological qualities and the

means and methods of developing them. Therefore. exercising tact. we met
assist the troops in recognizing the pluses and minuses of their activities.
to point out what needs to be done and how it should be done so as to overcome
shortcomings and to develop and strengthen readiness for war. It is important
here to form in the fighting men the military-patriotic idea which he follows
in life. The ideal can be the norm of conductucourage. bravery, adaptability--
or specific character--a political leader. an outstanding military leader.
comander. political workers, or otlichnik in combat and political training.

30

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Each person has his own hero and tries in every way to be Just like him. "
said a student at the Tambov Military School. "My hero is N. V. l-‘runze.

I copy him in every way. This is an outstanding individual. He was also
a talented military leader. I very such like his modesty. kindness. and
responsiveness to the couon people. I as developing such qualities in
myself' bravery. courage. honesty. discipline. This will assist me in
serving and accomplishing my responsibilities.“

it is also useful to focus military collectives on socialist pledges and
the personal efforts of the soldiers to develop discipline. courage. principles.
and decisiveness to support public opinion.

Playing a positive role as the soldiers work on aelf-develoment is their
profound understanding of the CPSU and Minister of Defense requirements
made on Soviet soldiers and the requirements that thus result for specific
tasks of personal activities in subunits and units.

The develomnent by the troops of a desire to make themselves ready for war
is stimulated by an awareness of the know-how accumulated by participants
in the Great Patriotic liar.

These then are the vital trends in the moral-political and psychological
training of Soviet soldiers.

Employing varied training and educational means. organizing military labor

in a goal-oriented manner. it is possible to develop in the soldiers high
moral-political qualities. character stability. and establislnent of imediate.
conscious. and active combat operations. as well as the psychological readiness
to effectively manifest in combat all of his capabilities. qualities. knowledge.
skills. and abilities.

Appendix to Chapter 6

The Program for Moral-Political and Psychological Training of Persoan

ﬂoral-political and psychological training is directed towards formation of
personality and of the collective considering the requirements placed upon
them by modern combat. new weapons. and combat equ ipaent.

Accomplishment of moral-political and psychological training requires
goal-oriented use of Varied measures to influence the motives of the soldiers'
conduct, their mental processes and states. their ideology. and the moral
character and psychology of the collective. The result and goal of this
training is the general tuning of the personality and of the collective

toward the conduct of selfless and skillful combat operations and high
moral-political. combat. and psychological qualities.

the moral-political and psychological training program for personnel

1. Formation of the motivation and the motives for troop conduct in
accordance with the requirements of the conditions of war and combat:
military-political convictions and views. military-patriotic ideals and
positions. hate towards the imperialist

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

positions. hate towards the imperialist aggressors. and so on. Applica-
tion of high social motives in troop activities including stability and
viability (the sense of the military duty. of collectivism. and so on).
Development of the force and conviction of character. its moral. intellectual.
emotional. and Volitional traits--discipline. courage. valor. decisiveness.
independence. vigilance. honesty. veracity. initiative. observation. and
others. Developnent in the soldiers of the capability to successfully
operate. experiencing stress. negative emotions. feelings. fatigue.
Intensification and maintenance in the soldiers of a continual moral-
psychological readiness for active and selfless combat operations.
Training personnel for the moral-psychological turning point connected
with the conversion from a peaceful situation to combat operations.
Developing in the soldiers and sailors the belief in the combat might of
the Soviet Armed Forces and the armies of the Harsaw Pact. trust in the
power of his weapons and the capabilities for successful accomplishment of
combat miss ions when the probable enemy employs nuclear weapons.

2. Formation in the soldiers of emotional-volitional stability. self-
control. and to be mentally prepared to accomplish a combat mission.
Refinement in servicemen of the conscious mental processes considering the
influence the flow of modern combat has on them. Development in the soldiers
of the qualities. sensations. perceptions. attention. notions. imagination.
memory. thought. and speech necessary for successful employment of combat
equiment and weapons and accomplishment of combat missions!

a) in the field of sensations--insuring the preservation of the high sensitivity
of sense organs under combat conditions. their rapid adaptation for work given
a sharp change in the direct conditions for the soldier's accomplisment of

his responsibilities--the unfavorable effects of loud noises. low or high
temperature. and so on!

b) in the field of perceptions-development of accuracy and rapidity in

the perception by the soldiers of spatial. time. and other characteristics
of combat. the correctness of what the eye sees. the readings of instruments.
the development of observation!

c) in the field of attention--increasing stability. transfer. and distribution
of attention in a complex situation. its preservation and concentration on
the necessary objects in combat. Development of voluntary attention and
attentiveness as traits of soldiers' personalityi

d) in the field of notions and imagination-accumulation by the soldiers

of various types of models which reflect the special features of combat
where modern weapons are employed. Developeent by the soldiers (considering
the specialty) of reconstructed and creative imagination. of the capability
to foresee the results of one's actixf' iesi

e) in the field of memory-~developoent of a memory readiness. the rapidity

and accuracy in reproduction and employment of knowledge when undergc ing stress.
fatigue. and negative feeling.”

32

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1‘) in the field of thought and speechndeveloment of the capability

for correct explanation of combat missions. planning. and their creative
accomplishment. Refinement of a goal-oriented nature. rapidity. flexibility.
and accuracy in thought. Developent in the soldiers of the elements of
tactical thought. Formation of an accurate representation and comprehension
of the commander's instructions in a complex situation. Assimilation of

military language. correct speech formation in a report. in information and
data transmitted by a chief.

3. Refinement of military mastery considering the requirements of combat!
development in the troops of knowledge. skills. and the ability to effectively
employ combat equipment and weapons in a complex situation. in overcoming
sectors of contaminated terrain and protection against weapons of mass
destruction: imparting the combat skills of flexibility. stability. and
endurance. Training for skillful operations under the varied situations

of modern combat (offensive. defensive. meeting engagement, withdrawal).

The Moral-Political and Psychological Training Program for the Coluand Element

1. Fomation of the motivation of an officer's personality and high motives
of his conduct considering the requirements of combat activities. Develop-
ment of organizational. pedagogical. propaganda. and technical capabilities.
Indoctrination of moral. emotional. and volitional character traits!
self-possession. courage. decisiveness. independence. initiative. depth and
flexibility of thought. and so on. Arming comanders with knowledge con-
cerning mental states and the conduct of subordinates in wartime conditions.
on the reasons for stress. frustration. fatigue. fear. and panic. and ways
to overcome and avert them. Developnent of comanders' preparedness to
conduct the moral-political and psychological training of subordinates. for
accomplishent of specific combat missions under the conditions of contemporary
warfare. as well as reestablish of their combat capability after battle. in
the event of loss and failure. Indoctrination of a moral-psychological
readiness to lead the submit or unit under wartime conditions.

2. Refinement of the sensations. perceptions. attention. memory. and
imagination of a comander considering the requirements for his activities
in combat: insuring the dynamism of mental processes. the reliability of

their functioning given a heavy informational load and a different type
of experiences.

3. Refinement of a commander's thought qualities‘ precision. accuracy.
flexibility. and rapidity of thought operations. criticism. independence.
depth of thought. ability and the skills to correctly and rapidly explain
the mission. evaluate the situation. and make decisions. Developent of

creative tactical thought and the elements of operational-strategic
thought in co-anders.

1.. Formation in commanders of the moral-psychological readiness to super-
vise the activities of subordinates as they employ their combat equipment
and weapons in varied theaters of military operations. when conducting

33

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPTICIAL USE ONLY

various types of modern combat. Arming commanders with the knowledge of

psychology of the probable enemy and the ability to supervise combat
nun-mum". Llikhw, thln myvlmlogy into account.

5. Developnent of a comand voice. accuracy and emotional-volitional
saturation of the verbal order. the ability to use the personal example and
word for a positive effect on the mental states and combat activities of
subordinates in various combat situations.

Subunit and Unit Moral-political and Psychological Training Program

1. Strengthening the ideological. political. and moral-psychological
foundations of high combat spirit, discipline, cohesion. and mobility

of a subunit and unit through goal-oriented accomplisl’anent of all component
parts of the columnist indoctrination of Soviet troops) improvement and
maintenance of a healthy moral-psychological atmosphere in the unit and
subunit, of a social activeness on the part of personnel, trust in victory,
emotional enthusiasm. the general desire to achieve high results in training
and service. readiness for friendly. harmonious activities under wartime
conditions. Formation of a high political-moral state of the personnel
through develoment of firm moral-political and combat qualities and in-

f luence on the sociopsychological phenomena and processes occurring in a
subunit and unit. Exclusion from the life of a unit and subunit of con-
flicts, incidents. and violations of military discipline. Rallying
military collectives on the basis of the requirements laid down in military
regulations. Development of a healthy social opinion. positive moods. and
combat traditions. Development of the capability for the subunit and unit
to successfully accomplish complex tactical missions. Formation of the
skills of collective actions.

2. Formation of mutual relations and mutual interaction between the
troops of the subunit and unit in accordance with the requirements of war
and combat. Strengthening readiness for mutual aid, mutual assistance.
for selfless actions for the sake of accomplishing the combat mission.

Assignment of soldiers by specialties considering their capabilities.
InSuring mutual interchangeability and accomplisment of the combat missions
at less than full strength. Increasing class ratings. Concern about the
psychological cohesion of the troops who make up crews and other subunits.

'3. Development in the subunit and unit personnel of unity in the manifestations
of social and situational motives of conduct, will. thought. and feelings

when accomplishing training and service missions. Develoment of unity of

will between commanders and subordinates. Increasing the authority of
comanders and political workers. Refinement in the style of leadership

of the activities of subunit and unit personnel.

This is the basic content of the moral-political and psychological training
program for Soviet soldiers.

310

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Due to the unique nature of the combat operations and of the equimsent in

the inventory. as well as in training and service conditions. there are
several special features in the content of the moral-political and psycholo -
ical training of personnel and missile subunits. in W0 [Air Defense Forces?
and WS [Air Force]. airborne units. for submarincrs and sailors aboard
surface vessels. tankers. and so on. Therefore. it is advisable to deVelop
the trends and specific tasks of moral-political and psychological troop
training for the Various branches of troops and components of the Soviet
Armed Forces. and within thusuthe troops with the more important specialties.

The more specifically conmanders and political workers understand and take
into account specific requirements of combat for the activities and manifesta-
tiont. of the psyche of the troops of a particular component of the Armed
Forces and branch of troops. the more accurately the tasks and means of
moral-political and psychological troop training will be determined.

The moral-political and psychological training programs compiled haVe been
approved within a number of formations [soyedineniye] and units. Feedback
from cosmanders shows that programs aim and orient them to more complete

use of lesson content and the various forms of work for moral-political and
psychological training. The programs facilitate planning and more specific
determination of the task and the means for general and direct moral-political
and psychological training. accomplishment of the tuning and mobilization of
people for proper accomplishent of the tasks assigned. and organizing the

activities of specialists taking into account the requirements of modern
warfare.

Commanders noted that proposed programs guide them toward the study of the
special features of the qualities and the degrees of preparedness of the
troops for combat. towards the surmounting of deficiencies in their activities.
Programs assisted comanders to explain and assign specific moral-political
and psychological training tasks to subunits and to individual subordinates.
as well as assisting in vitalizing the self-indoctrination of the troops in
moral and psychological qualities required in modern combat.

Chapter 7. The Contender" Leader and Organiser of the Combat
Activities of Subordinates

150mb] Regardless of the type of war. combat mi ions at a complex situation camot
be accomplished without the goal-oriented activit es of personnel. One mast

not forget here that man was and remains the main factor in achieving vic-
tory. regardless of how new the equipnent in the inventory. Specific goals
in war are achieved by these very direct. active combat operations and the
practical employment of weapons and combat equipnent. V. l. Lenin stated
that. in war. "the one who comes out on top is the one with the best equip-
uent. organization. discipline. and best vehicles . . - 3'26

l‘ombmt activities are a type of military activities under the conditions of
combat and war. As opposed to other forms of activity it is goal-oriented
towards accomplishment of a combat mission. If a soldier at the front is
not participating in combat against the enemy and is not employing combat

35
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY

equiilnent and weapons. then his labor (for example. work in a hospital.

In a repair shop. and so on). even though it has great social and military
nlgnii‘ic-anve. in the narrow sense of the word is not coabat activity.

combat activity is the system of combat operations carried out against the
enemy with the aid of weapons and combat equ innent. its special features
are more clearly manifested in a situation which results from a bilateral
planned armed struggle (the presence of opposition on the part of the enemy).
In other words. combat activity is a process of achieving the goals of the
armed stmmle by using primarily weapons and combat equipnent against the
enemy. It can take the form of individual and collective (group) actions.
as well .15 the actions of the con-antler 1....ling the personnel.

individual and collective activities in combat have their special features.
the knowledge and cons ideration of which play an ilportant role in a
commander's work. The following are vital elenents'

"exceptional social significance!

--Variety of goals and results of the activities (destruction of enemy
personnel. destruction of his fortifications. equiment. seizure of terri-
tories. and so on):

“practical employment of such resources as weapons and combat equimenti

nth.- special nature of the target-an eneuy putting up active opposition.
his conhat equipsent and weapons and so on!

«the extreme nature of the conditions under which the service-ens’ activities
take place (danger. surprise. the occurrence of overloads and tasks which
eXcoed individual and group capabilities. and so on);

"extreme intensity of psyche functioning. unusually high stress of moral.
physical. and intellectual forces)

“requirement to combine a high leVel of conscious troop self-control and
simultanmuls influence on their conduct from the comander's side.

Several unfavorable changes in the activities of a particular service-an
«.nn occur under the difficult situations of modern combat!

first. reduction and fluctuation in the effectiveness and reliability of
actions accomplished)

sm-ond. disruption of the relationship between fundamental and secondary
actions. manifestations of errors and poorly controlled conduct. predominance
ui' sham over creativity}

third. loss of mental stability. occurrence of various negative emotions
and changes. even to include gross disorders of the psyche!

36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol‘PIClAl. USE ONLY

fourth. a let down in combat activeness. violation of consistency of action.
manifestation of refusals. and gaps in work.

it is understandable that the question of moral-political and psychological
conditions for overcoming and preventing these changes in the process of a
comander's supervision of the combat activities of his subordinates is
acquiring such an important role. Therefore. Soviet military cadres are
comprehensively studying the nature and special features of modern warfare.
the change in methods and forms of conducting combat operations in connec-
tion with the appearance of new weapons. ways and trends in improving for-
mation and unit combat readiness. refining troop connand and control.
achieving a truly scientific control of all links in the army organism.

Chapter 8. Organizing Lessons on the Combat and Political Training
of Soviet Troops

lmccmml The coin: watery of a soldier is forged during daily combat and political
training lessons. Connanders employ the principles and methods of troop
indoctrination and education. organize the activities of their subordinates.

and form moral-political. combat. and psychological qualities in them.

There are no trivialities here. everything here is important. The pre-
requ.site for the success of these lessons is to permeate them with a
spirit of socialist competition. and achieve on the part of each soldier

a conscious attitude towards assimilation of his military specialty.

combat equiment. and weapons. The effectiveness of a cornander's training
and indoctrinational work depends upon specific determination of its goals.
explanation of contemporary requirements made on personality. on the
collective. and on the moral-political. psychological. and combat qualities
of the fighting men. Each includes military-political and special knowledge.
stable motives. skills in action. and the ability to control oneself.

The vital qualities of a fighting man (courage. independence. and other!)
contain the understanding of their essence. conviction. habits. and know-how
in moral and volitional conduct.

Therefore. the following are required for goal-oriented formation in the
fighting men of the moral-political. combat. and psychological qualities
during combat and political training lessons! explain their essence and
significance. elicit and strengthen positive motives in their manifestation:
accumulate in the fighting men know-how in the manifestation of the qualities
as complex combat training missions are accomplishedl vitalize the desire on
the part of the personnel to develop the requisite qualities within themselves.
The combat and political training lesson system in its general form consists
of continual cycles repeating each time at a higher level which include evalu-
at ion of the situation. explanation of the missions. planning. organization
of the execution of plans and decisions. and analysis of the results achieved.
its practical accomplislnent occurs on the basis of a combination of various
means of influence on the personality of the fighting man and the military
collective lconviction. stress. demonstration. demandingness. and so on) with
the aid of organization of their activities and creating conditions for more
intensive manifestation of their high combat and moral qualities.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POli OFPICIAI. USE ONLY

llere even a clear recognition of the higher goal of military activity.

its ideological content. and great social significance can be a reliable
internal foundation for courageous. steadfast. brave. innoVative. and vigi-
lant conduct on the part of the fighting man both in peacetime and in wartime.

1. Combat Training Lessons.

The education and indoctrination of the troops is accomplished simltaneously
during the combat training process and knowledge. skills and abilities. and
moral-political. combat. and psychological qualities are formed.

For example. execution. organization. attentiveness. and other qualities
are developed along with skills in operating as part of a subunit and
rapid and precise accomplish-int of drill routines during the process of
drill training.

Physical training is aimed at indoctrination of volitional. physically
devoloped. and tempered fighting men capable of overcoming great physical
and mental loads during decisive and intense operations in combat. Agility.
strength. speed and accurate reactions. bravery. and self-possession are
devoloned during the physical training process.

The goal of firing training is to teach each soldier. sergeant. and warrant
officer to skillfully assimilate his weapon under various conditions and to
independently find and skillfully and rapidly destroy a target by fire.

This type of training develops the ability to control yourself and your

own actions and forms steadfastness and bravery. independence and confidence
in one’s own strengths and in one's weapon.

The study of the probable enemy's weapons of mass destruction and incendiaries
develops decisiveness. bravery. self-possession. initiative, and self-help and
creates correct representations of the special features of conducting combat
operations and confidence in the ability to accomplish combat missions. as
well as the effectiveness of measures to defend against the enemy's weapons
of mass destruction and incendiaries.

During tactical training lessons skills obtained are refined and new knowledge,
skills. and abilities are acquired in firing. drill. physical. special and
other types of combat training. Operating during lessons in the field under
conditions close to actual combat. the fighting man will learn to accurately
fire. conduct combat in a complex rapidly-changing situation. and to coordinate
with comrades as weapons are employed and overall combat training missions are
accomplished. Also tactical training more effectively facilitates indoctri-
nating the troops with activeness and initiative. agility. stability. bravery.
the will to win. observation. military cleverness and guile. a sense of
military comradeship and friendship. and discipline.

Combat training exerts an effective influence on formation of moral-political.
combat. and psychological qualities of fighting men given the conditions of
goal-oriented organization of their practical activities considering the

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE ONLY

requirements under contemporary conditions for combat readiness. vigilance.
training. and discipline on the part of personnel.

The moral and psychological prerequisites for rapid introduction into the
combat situation are created during this goal-oriented. thoughtful. creative.
intense. and conscientious military labor and the know-how required for
successful collective employment of weapons and selfless combat operations
is accumlated. Under conditions approximating combat to the maximal. the
functional capabilities of the soldiers‘ psyche are established. their
moral-political and psychological readiness for combat is consolidated.
emotional and Volitional stability is developed. and the skills of collec-
tive combat work are formed. Hell-organized and skillfully-conducted field.
flying. and naval training allow servicemen to experience mental states and
feelings close to those which arise in a combat situation. Here the troops
will learn to think without committing mistakes. to imagine. to recall. to
operate equiment. to control themselves. to control their weapons. to
interact in a complex situation. to become [tactically convinced of the

capabilities of accomplishing missions under the realistic conditions of
modern war.

Accomplistnent of combat training tasks exerts a greater influence on the
accumulation of the mental. emotional. and Volitional know-how of the troops
required for success in combat the better the preparations for their accus-
pllshment are conducted. especially combat training planning.

Planning. Combat training in units and subunits is planned on the basis of
the orders and directives of the USSR Minister of Defense. the directions of
the comander in chief of the ground forces. the programs and regulations of
the Armed forces. manuals. and firing and training courses. Planning insures
evenness and high quality training of units and subunits and their readiness
to effectively operate when accomplishing various combat missions.

Combat training planning is a complex and creative process requiring of
comnders and staffs at all levels profound analysis of the nature of

modern combat. the use of the foundations of military pedagogy and psychology.
as sell as careful consideration of the level of training and combat cohesion
of subordinate subunits and units. the availability and condition of equipsent
and armaments. training facilities. Vehicle resources. allunition. and the
fuel and other supplies required to support combat training.

The following should be considered as the basic principles of planning under
contemporary conditions!

"maintaining high combat readiness in troop units!

--a columnist goal-oriented nature. unity of education. indoctrination.
moral-political. and psychological training)

"educating the troops in those areas required in wartime in a situation
that approximates the actual combat activities to the maximal

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“insuring the high field training of the troops and subordination of all
training subjects to tactical training as the foundation of this effort!

“consideration of the special features of a theater of military operations
and the level of training of officers. staffs. and troop units!

“adherence to methodological consistency in training through building up
knowledge and skills working from the simple to the complex!

“coordination in the training of officers. staffs. units and subunits.
all branches of troops. and special troops in accordance with missions.
subjects. and periods of training!

“conducting cos-sander and especially demonstration and methodological
lessons with officers and sergeants prior to working out the same drills
with the personnel and with subunits and units!

--nnlty of the training methodology for personnel. subunits. and units.

Prior to beginning to compile a combat and political training plan or

lesson schedules. comanders mast critically analyze accomplishent of
training tasks in the past. Determine if earlier established goals have
been fully achieved. make a principled evaluation of shortcomings and defi-
ciencies. and determine positive aspects of the training organization and
methodology. A principled nature and the political maturity of comanders.
political workers. and staff officers must manifest themselves in objective.
critical evaluations of their own activities and of the work of subordinates.
A person who has a developed sense of responsibility will correctly evaluate
goals achieved in the training of specific specialists and of the subunits

overall and. in the event of necessity. will take energetic measures to
eliminate shortcomings.

It is necessary when compiling training plans and lesson schedules to be
strictly guided by the principle of systematism and consistency in training--
lt is impossible to move to the next subject unless you have worked out the
training problems from previous themes with the troops as required. in order
to improve combat training quality planning documents should be compiled so
that each supervisor has time to study the equipaent and develop a plan for
the lessons or exercise. and the soldiers be allowed to productively use the
hours of self preparation.

beginning his planning. the commander diligently studies the unit calendar
plan for the month. notes the days where garrison and guard service duty and
administrative tasks are scheduled for the subunits. and fsmiliarizes himself
with the training facility schedule. He then computes the training time for
the math and by weeks for each company (battery. independent platoon) and
determines the theme of the lessons based on tactical and firing training.
vehicle driving. and other educational subjects. Here working out of themes
from all training subjects is closely tied in with lessons (exercises) on
tactical (special tactical) training.

(00
FOR OFFICIAL US! 0"“
FOR OH‘ICIAL USE ONLY

The battalion combat training plan not be ready 3-!. days prior to the
beginning or the following month. An extract from the battalion combat
and political training plan for the week is provided to the company.
tron-hat training in the company is planned on the basis of these documents.

The company collander plans the company combat training. The lesson

schedule compiled by day and hour for a week for each platoon is the funda-
mental document in the company reflecting the entire training process. when
planning the company comander must demonstrate creativity taking into account
requirements for field training. the training level of the personnel. and the
local conditions under which the training is to be conducted. The company
conmander has been given the right to determine the number of hours to work
out training problems within the time limits allocated to the theme. without
changing the number of lessons called for in the program

Planning combat training in the company. the company col-Imdel' mustl

1. Consider the results of company combat training for each training sub-
ject for the past week.

2. Study the battalion combat training plan (weekly extract) and determine
the training missions for the upcoming week.

1. Define in coordination with the battalion cousander's instructions the
sequence for working out the themes and the number of hours for each of them.

la. Determine the norms subject to being worked out.

5. Substantiate the training problems for comander. instructor-methodolog-
ical. and demonstration lessons with sergeants and compile a schedule.

in addition the company comander comiders the days that the platoons or
the company as a whole has guard duty. bath and housekeeping days. days on
the gunnery range. firing range. small-arms range. and training fields. and
days when lessons are held with platoon commanders and sergeants.

when compiling the schedule. the company col-lander is guided by the following
basic principles'

-- insuring high combat readiness of company personnel and of field training)
"consistent training of subordinates working from the simple to the complex:
«the interrelationships between training subjects:

--consideration of the poorly-assimilated problems and their inclusion in
the lesson schedule for the following weeks

«conduct of individual training and indoctrinational work.

Is].

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY

Triteness cannot occur in a company consander's activities when compiling
the schedule. The sequence of his work on this question can vary. This
depends upon the company coasander's know-how, on his knowledge of his
subordinates and the leVel of their training.

Houever. as practice shows. the following are included in the work sequence
for a majority of company counandersl

"compilation of an extract from the battalion combat training plan (these
number. number of hours for the theme. and so on)!

-- wrap up of the results of company combat training by each training
subject (or the past week!

“preparation of an extract from schedules (days the company pulls guard
service. comanders' lessons. use of training fields. gunnery ranges.
training areas. and sports buildings (halls):

“study of the content of the themes in the combat training program!
--compilation of a list of hours by training subjects per day of the week!

--selection of literature and textbooks.

The schedule must be compiled no later than Friday and posted in the subunits
so that the personnel are aware of the schedule for the following week.

This. the company comander plans the combat training in the company based
upon an extract from the battalion combat training plan within motorized
rifle subunits. The lesson schedule is the basic planning document in the

company.
[Preparation for conducting lessona.l Careful organization and
preparation of lessons is a vital responsibility of coamanders and

it includes'

--personal training of officers!

use lection of the lesson area (terrain sector)!

--devolopment of the plan (lesson plan) for conducting the lessons!
“proper ing the personnel and logistic support.

Ito-sanders obtain initial data as to the methodology of conducting lessons.
their content. and logistic support during instructor methodological and
demonstration lessons which are conducted by the senior chief. however.

comanders' personal preparation for conducting the lessons is a basic
condition for successful achievement of training goals.

62
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Let's examine as an example the nanner in which a contender prepares for
lessons on tactical training. Preparing to organize them. he must!

«determine the theme. goal of the lesson. and content of the training
problems stiwlated in the schedule!

«pay attention to precision in setting up and ways of solving the indoc-
trinational missions during the lesson!

«study corresponding sections of Combat Regulations. instructions.

methodological textbooks. as well as the organisation. armaments. and tac-
tics of the probable enemy!

«think through the volume and sequence in which the training problens
are to be worked out!

«develop on the terrain the entire process of the lesson. having determined
where and in what sequence to develop the training problems. and envision

the possible variations in the operations of the designated “enemy" and
neighbors!

«establish the signals for control ”of the enemy” and means of designating
the fire of small-am weapons. artillery. and Iortars!

«compute the time for developing the training problems. for the critique.
and for moving the subunit to the lesson location and return!

«compile the plan (lesson plan)!
«prepare himself for the lesson critique!

«prepare the personnel intended to play the role of the ”ener" for the
forthcoming lesson!

«organize the self-preparation of the personnel!

«select corresponding examples from the Great Patriotic Har experience and
from troop exercises and determine when to input them into the lessons.

[Selection of the lesson areal (terrain sector). Selection of a suitable

area (sector) of terrain is an important problen when preparing for a
lesson. The terrain area is selected and prepared depending upon con-
tent of the theme which the lesson is to cover.

A terrain area (sector) near the unit location is selected for a. tactical
drill lesson. The terrain area (sector) must insure the capability of mm
a maneuver. various reformations. and other operations and is selected so that
the supervisor can always observe the trainees.

63

I703 OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

To train on offensive operations. a terrain area. (sector) is selected

which will permit sequential deployment of the subunits into combat forma-
tion during their movement to the depth for an attack from the march. a

line hidden from ”enemy" obscuration is selected for the transition to

the attack. the subunits move to the attack in 511! and IMF. and a maneuver

is also made for the purpose of approaching the "enemy“ flank and rear area.
when training for defensive operations. the terrain must be adVantageous for
hidden disposition of the subunit. especially fire resources. careful organi-

zation of the fire system. and observation of the advancing "one-y” combat
formations.

Prior to the initiation of and during the lessons the selected terrain area

(sector) Inst be equipped with foxholes. trenches. comnications trenches.
and various obstacles.

Determining the sequence for working out the training problems. the lesson
director on the terrain must decide how and with what to designate the
"enemy," where at that time the training subunit and the neighbors will be.

and denote the volume of engineer operations required prior to and during
the lesson.

The comander compiles the plan (lesson plan) for conducting the lessons
after refining the sequence of working out each training problem on the
terrain and the instructions from the senior chief.

IDeveloment of the plan/ (lesson plan) for the lesson. The col-ander's
personal work in preparation for the lesson includes compilation of a plan
(lesson plan). The plan is the supervisor's working document which briefly
reflects the content of the lesson and the sequence for studying the problems
to be worked out. The plan is approved by the direct superior. The plan
allows the supervisor to confidently conduct the lesson without leaving
anything out and insuring the necessary sequence is followed throughout the
entire lesson. The form that the plan takes can vary depending upon the
nature of the theme and the problems being worked out. The plan must be
precise and specific and it must clearly determine the goals and

training problems. in addition. it lust insure that the plan can be easily
used under any conditions.

A correctly presented time delineation for working out each training problem
is of great significance for successful achievement of the training goals
of the lesson. Effective use of training time requires from the comander
great skill in the organization and conduct of the lesson. Every minute
must be strictly calculated and used. The amount of training time to

work out a particular training question is determined by the degree of its
importance and the level of training of the soldiers and comanders. In
addition. one Inst take into account the necessity to repeat actions when
conducting tactical drill exercises. it is natural that working out the

most important and labor intensive training problems also requires a great
ammunt of time.

M

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OHICIM. USE ONLY

The plan is usually compiled on paper with a diagral of activities accou-
panying the text.

We present a variation of a plan previously used to conduct lessons uith
platoon personnel.

”Approved"
Cmder. lat HSR
[notarized rifle company]

(Rank , signature)

1977.

 

rum son A racncu. Imam; Lesson
um nu: 3rd usv [motorized rifle
platoon], 1st HSR (Date)

Theme 7. Platoon in an offensive.
Lesson 1. Tactical Drill (daytile).
Training Goals!

1. Work out the coordinated actions with a platoon on the offensive.
2. Teach platoon counandets to control the section during Iission accouplistnent.

3. Refine the individual training of the soldiers on the offensive. Indoctri-
nate in then initiative. agility. bravery. psychological stability. and the
capability to handle prolonged stress of will when accomplishing the lission.

Tinet 3 hours
Place! Training field) area -- Tankovaya Bill.

Handbook and Textbooks! Field Manual of the Ground Forces (platoon. squad.
tank). PD 10. 143-50. Appendix In Colbat Training Nor-s for Motorized Rifle
~Troops No 2, 63 No 10. ll. 13. 16--Tactical Training. and No 6 and 10--
Protection Against the Probable Enuy's Weapons of Hass Destruction.

logistics! Organic amanents and accessories} DTR--3l flags-4o pair! targets
(machine gum-a. waist figure silhouette-6. head and shoulders-~03

signal shells-41 blank cartridges--603 explosive charges-53 special
Processing sets--organic.

65

so: OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Training Problems and
Alloted Time

1. Lesson organization--
20 minutes.

2.
transition to the attack.
Deployment into combat for-
mation and movement to the
forward line. Surmounting
obstacles--30 minutes.

a) first element' dis-
mounting, deployment into
precombat formation.

b) second element! deploy-
ment into combat formation
and movement to the forward
line.

   

Movement to the line for

FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram of
Platoon Actions

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. Check personnel attendance,
appearance. and logistic
support. Move the platoon

to the lesson area. While

en route teach the platoon
coordinated actions when
repulsing air raids and when
deploying into precombat and
combat formation. In the
lesson area announce the theme
and goal of the lesson and use
check questions to check the
soldiers' knowledge of regula-
tions'

--a soldier's responsibilities
on the offensive!

--the section offensive front
and the intervals between
soldiers.

-2. Announce the training problem,
briefly describe its content and
sequence. Introduce the train-
ees to the tactical situation
and begin to work out the train-
ing problem by elements.

a) during the approach to the
dismount point work at norms
No 2 and 10 for tactical train-
ing. bravery and readiness for
selfless actions in combat work
out norm No 2, agility-morn

No 100 ‘

b) achieve precise actions when
deploying into combat formation.
work out nor- No ll--for tacti-
cal training (agility). At

the end of the period for work-
ing out this element accomplish
norm No 7--on tactical training.
which develops in the soldiers
initiative, agility. and
bravery.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram of
Platoon Actions

 
  
 

header' 8
Act ions

    
   
  

 

c) using a drill to achieve
precise and correct actions
when surlounting barriers
along the path made. in so
doing accomplish norm No. 13--
on tactical training. which
develops stress. bravery, and
initiative. when working out
this norm use explosive charges
making conditions approximate
a combat situation with the
elements of danger and risk.
Repeat the entire problem in

a complex. hold a partial
critique.

3. Announce the training

n- problem and briefly explain
on the actions of the personnel.
to Drill on working out the prob-
a lem by elements.

a) achieve simultaneous
throwing of grenades by the
entire section, a loud "hiarrah"
in destruction of the enemy by
fire pointblank and by bayonet
and rifle butt.

b) when working out this ele-
ment stress precision in
accomplishment of comands by
the trainees. adherence to the
established interval between
soldiers when moving to the
attack, the ability to fire on
the move, and maintenance of
fire coordination between sol-
diers and squads.

c) monitor to see that the
armored personnel carrier moves
behind the combat formation at
a distance of up to 500 meters
from one shelter to another and
that it fires on the move, work
out the norm. Using a signal
denote the enemy counterattack.
Give the platoon the command to
take an adVantageous line and
repulse the counterattack by

:01

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram of
Platoon Actions

 
   
 

Leader' s
Actions

     
   
 

fire while in place. Use a
signal to stop the counter-
attack and then give the sig-
nal for the platoon to attack.
Hold a partial critique.

lo. Announce the training
problem and briefly explain

the actions of the personnel.
Drill in working out the
problem by elements.

a) with the established sig-
nal demonstrate the enemy re-
treat. call up the BTR, mount,
and pursue the retreating enemy.
During the mrsuit pay attention
to readiness to fire through the
firing ports.

b) set up pointers to aark off
the contaminated sector and to
explain the sequence of actions
when surmounting contuinated
sectors. Work out norm No 6--
on protection against the prob-
able enemy's weapons of mass
destruction, which will facili-
tate indoctrination of mental
stability. and the capability
for prolonged stress of will.
Upon leaving the contaminated
sector the platoon as part of
the company moves to second
echelon (reserve) of the battal-
ion and undergoes partial
special processing. when work-
ing out the given problem
accomplish norm No 10--protec-
tion against the probable
enemy’s weapons of mass destruc-
tion, which will facilitate
indoctrination of initiative.

hold a partial critique.

5. Point out the theme and

the lesson goal and demonstrate
how it was achievedi

«note the characteristic
positive and negative aspects
of the soldiers' actions)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Diagram of
Platoon Actions

Training Problems of
Allotted Time

  

«point out ways of ell-ina-
ting shortcomings noted!
«provide an example of skill-
ful actions of a platoon during
tho Great Patriotic Hart
”announce the evaluation of
each sect ion!

"assign a task for self-
preparation for the next
lesson.

Comander 3rd HSV

 

(Rank. signature)

197 .

 

After compiling the lesson plan the leader presents it for approval.

[Preparation of personnel and logistich when preparing for a lesson a
leader must envision supplying everything required for the lesson based
upon the theme and training goals. logistics items might include! training
hand grenades and mines, training and blank cartridges. explosive charges.
signal and illumination cartridges, training smoke and toxic smoke grenades.
targets. mock-ups and pointers. resources for conducting partial special
processing. radio-controlled targets. mock-ups of firing resources and combat
equipsent. simlated training Contaminants. and signal flags. when con-
ducting night lessons one also requires signal lights. lighted pointers.
night vision devices. targets with male flash simulators and other devices.

The logistics are determined in each case by the requirements of a particular
lesson as well as by the assigned ceilings deteruined in the established
manner. All of the logistics ltes-s mst be prepared prior to the lesson.

Practice has established that a tactical lesson with a squad on an offensive
combat theme on the average requires! targets to designate the enemy} head

and shoulders~-2. waist figure silhouette-2. and figure targets--2l grenades-oi.
explosive charger-2. and flags--2.

The simlation must be designed to insure a high quality and worthwhile
lesson.

The leader holds a lesson (instructional session) with the personnel
assigned to play the "enemy.” at which he specifically points out where,
when. and with what target to designate the ”essay." what signals to send

‘9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

up and targets to take down. when. where. and how to simulate fire. and
so on. Communications can be accomplished using visual signals. radio.
wire. and other methods.

Such a method of preparing personnel for a forthcoming tactical lesson
greatly facilitates successful assimilation of the material for the
forthcoming lesson and more thoughtful accomplishment of the drills and
methods of action being worked out.

Senior comanders must provide comprehensive aid to subordinates. especially
in those instances when young comanders who do not possess sufficient
methodological know-how are preparing and conducting the lessons. During
the lessons they are obliged to provide methodological counsel to the

young commanders. and if necessary. to also provide assistance in com-
piling the lesson plan.

2. Political Training Lessons.

Political lessons are the fundamental form of ideological-political indoc-
trination of soldiers and sergeants. They are conducted from training plans
compiled by the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy during
the entire training year. The content and tasks in the political lessons
are determined for each training year by the USSR Minister of Defense and

by the chief of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy.

During political lessons the troops acquire and expand their knowledge on

the domestic and foreign policy of the Commist Party and the Soviet state.
on the state and social structure of the Soviet Union. on the organization.
function. and missions of the Armed forces. and on the requirements of
military regulations and of the oath. At these lessons troops more profoundly
understand the character of the international situation. the special features
of modern war. the significance of continual troop combat readiness. and
recognize the personal responsibility to defend our motherland.

Conversion of knowledge into convictions is an important psychological-
;uslagogieal condition of increasing the indoctrinational influence of polit-
ical lessons on the troops. Conducting political lessons. commnders take
into consideration that profound assimilation of political lessons develop
in the troops political consciousness. a sense of duty. will and character.
and mobilize them to model accomplishment of orders from chiefs. to excellent
study of weapons and equlpnent. and the assimilation of them.

Through their entire content and very organization political lessons

are designed to indoctrinate the troops with a conscious and zealous attitude
toward accomplishing the requirements of the military oath and regulations.
or the orders of commanders and chiefs. and of the principles of coal-mist
morality. The duty of comanders. political workers. and group leaders

is to steadfastly struggle for a high methodological level of political
lessons and for their viability.

50

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
3. The wmmdor’a lesson Critique.

Using all news, forms. principles. And methods of education and indoctrination.
organizing the military labor of the troop collective in a soul-oriented manner,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

of Great October's conquests. At the initiative of the leading units in

the Armed Forces components. they are actively participating in the All~
Army Socialist Commtition for successful assimilation of modern weapons

and combat equiment. Struggling to accomplish the high socialist pledges
made. the Soviet fighting men are refining combat mastery and strengthening
discipline and organization. Comanders and staffs. political organs and
party organizations are demonstrating concern to see that combat and political
training meets modern requirements and that every minute of training time is
used. that every mission is accomplished honorably and with high quality.
intense work seethes everywhere--during tactical exercises. at airfields

and tank ranges. at missile sites. on sea cruises.

In accordance with the CC Cl‘SU Decree “0n the Sixtieth Anniversary of the
Great October Socialist Revolution" and the instructions of the Minister

of Defense and chief of the Main Political Directorate of the Soviet Army
and Navy linked with it. active organizational and ideological work among
personnel. workers. and employees directed towards preparation for the
jubilee has been unfurled in military districts. groups of forces. in the
fleets. in formations. units. and aboard ships. in military educational
institutions. and in production collectives. The CC CPSU Decree is being
studied throughout the entire political training and party education system.
Assimilation of the ideological riches of this party document and accomplish-
ment of its requirements will serve the cause of mobilizing all troops for
successful accomplishment with maximum effectiveness and excellent quality
of the missions of this training year and accomplishment of the socialist
pledges made in the honor of October's Sixtieth Anniversary. It will make
it possible to vitalize the struggle for the leading formation in the Armed
Forces. for successful assimilation of modern weapons and combat equipnent.
and improving vigilance and the combat readiness of units and ships.

Combat and political training quality and effectiveness greatly depend upon
the level of organizational work by comanders and staffs. by political organs
and party organizations. on their high standards and principles. and the
ability to use the mighty force of socialist competition.

it should be underscored that analysis and evaluation of a soldier’s
actIVities here cannot be restricted to that provided by perceptions and
control only of the quality of training task accomplishment. Based upon

a number of what would appear to be significant manifestations. an experienced
comander will compile for himself a clear representation of the steadfastness
of a subordinate in achieving an assigned goal. his agility. confidence in
his own strengths. capability of demonstrating initiative and decisiveness.
and on the capability of his successful accomplislnent of a complex combat
mission in modern combat.

ll critique presupposes profound analysis of the life and training of the
military collective and of each serviceman in particular based upon a number
of trends. Considered here are‘

"the level of assimilation. employment. and operation of combat equipment
and armaments:

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPl’ICIAl. USE ONLY

"improvement in the political and cultural level. participation in
nan-cultural. social. and sports work!

«state of military discipline. contact. appearance. and military bearing:
«adherence to the requirements of the noral-aesthetic plan!

«the cohesion of the military collective. comradely nutual assistance.
accomplislnent of patriotic initiatives. and so on!

e-accomplislsnent of the daily agenda. correctness in standing guard and
internal service!

--indoctrinational effect of competition!
«determination of the places for the platoons. companies!
«insuring publicity and comparability of competition results;

«aural incer: We (both in the form of moral encouragement. as well as
criticism):

' «assignment of tasks involving coapetition organization at the subsequent
Btﬂﬁes

The critique is a viable resource against any kind of sluggishness and
self -satisfaction in work and prevents let downs in the work of couanders
themselves.

The distinguishing principles and traits of a critique clearly manifest
themselves at critiques of combat and political training lessons. For
example, commanders underscore the positive aspects and reveal shortcomings

in the activities both of the entire subunit as well as of individual soldiers.
Revealing the causes of the deficiencies. they point out ways to eliminate
them they establish group and individual assigments and drills. they orient
the people towards mutual assistance. and call upon the party and Komsomol
organization to strengthen individual work.

The indoctrinational influence of lesson critiques is significantly elevated
if the comander analyzes and evaluates the demonstration of moral-combat and
psychological qualities of the subordinates. In order to consolidate the
successes of a soldier who excels during lessons and facilitate develoment

of the personal qualities which manifested themselves as the training mission
was accomplished. the cosmander recognizes that individual during the critique.
establishes him as an example, thanks him or provides other encouragement.

Comanders at critiques often pose individual questions to subordinates in
order to check and consolidate knowledge and develop their thinking. This
activates the attention of the subordinates and increases their interest
in the measures being employed. Answering questions. they generalize and
refine their observations and learn to make conclusions and evaluate aetions
in the light of coder-n requirements.

53

PO! ORIGIN. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A critique of the actions and conduct of soldiers develops in then the
ability to critically evaluate their own achievements and shortcomings

in training. size up reasons for the errors made. increases the desire to
improve mastery and to form high moral and psychological qualities.

A profound and detailed critique elevates the responsibility of the soldier
to accomplish his service responsibilities and consolidates moral-combat
and psychological qualities. Soldiers at such critique.- are convinced

that not a single error escapes the attention of the conander. Therefore.
their conscious desire during every lesson to operate strictly in accordance
with regulations and giving full effort grows.

It is also necessary upon completion of lessons to also hold a critique
with the leaders that conducted it. Such a critique in its own way
is comander's training. its goal is to point out to subordinate chiefs
all positive and negative aspects of their activities at the lesson and
assist them in developing and multiplying the good eluents in their
pedagogical work. To achieve this a critique must be objective and com-
prehens ive and assist each comander in correctly evaluating his actions.

The significance of a critique is elevated if a comander is guided by
such principles as a goal-oriented approach. objectivity. perspective.
achieVement of an indoctrinational effect. and mobilization and organiza-
tion of subordinates to accomplish new missions.

The activities of subordinates must be continually monitored and the
subordinates carefully studied in order to have an objective critique.

As practice shows. results achieved in studying and monitoring depend

on many factorsl the depth of the analysis of the activities. attention

to the fine points. discovery of the coherence between conduct and the
demands of regulations and instructions, and so on. in other words. viable
monitoring is possible only given a scientific approach to its organization.

One beninist requirement involving checking on execution is that information
obtained during such a check must be accurate. trustworthy. without em-
bellishment and without unfounded acrimony. V. l. Lenin pointed out the
requirement to comprehensively find out if there were successes by enter-
prises or state organs in actual fact! ”what are these successes exactly?
"are they been proven? Are there any white lies. boasting. intelligent
promises ('it is going fine.’ 'a plan has been compiled.’ 'forcag have been
put to work.’ 'we now guarantee it.’ ’undoubted success'. . .)7" 5

Characteristic of a comander's system for monitoring is the desire to
study the profound processes occurring in the life of the troops. the degree
to which they have assimilated combat equiment and weapons. the aoral state
of the subordinates as they carry out their service. especially the combat

watch. during exercises. when accomplishing combat training missions. and
80 on.

in light of what has been said it is advisable to adhere to the following

conditions for effectiveness in monitoring and studying subordinates during
lessons:

5!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OPPICIM. USE ONLY
«continually observe the soldiers’ conduct and actions!
--continually check on execution of assigned nissionsl

"coil upon all direct chiefs. as well as the secretaries of party and
Koasoml organizations. to nonitor and to struggle for lesson quality!

"Ionitor and study!

--supervise the study and monitoring process not only to discover short-
conings. but also to find lessures to correct then.

He present an example of a lesson critique conducted by an experienced
conander.

I 1. Personal preparation of those who conducted the lessonll
«knowledge of the material!

"ability to control themselves in front of personnel!
"ability to use the lesson plan:

"couand voice}

“knowledge of the counandsl

~applicability of the denonstrationt

«denandingness upon hinself and subordinates. Ability to maintain a high
degree of organization and discipline during the entire lesson.

I II. lndoctrinational nature of the lesson‘/

--precision in determination of indoctrinational goals and training problens.
level of organization of subordinates' activities.

Im. Lesson methodology”

«lesson structure:

“logical link with the past exercises
"sequence in working out training problems:
--accessibility and clarity of presentation!
"ability to vitalize a soldier}

o-educat ional clarity!

55

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL use ONLY
"questioning and testing methodology!

«the link between theory and practice!

"reinforcement of material covered (based on the training problems and
overall):

«individual approach during the lesson!
"discipline at the lesson)

«ability to quickly f ind and correct shortcomings!
«use of soldiers in their second year of service:

--correctness in announcing evaluations on the activities of individual
troops and of the subunit.

I W. Logistic support for the lesson.’

IV. New methodological drills demonstrated by the lesson leader./

IVI. Conclusions and evaluation./

IVil. Rays to correct shortcomings noted and mobilization of personnel
for new achievementsJ

Such a lesson critique sequence is not hackneyed. Thus. it is necessary
during a critique of training processes on tactical training to pay attention
to the fundamental requirements of regulations and orders relative to the
given lesson. confirm certain decisions at tactical lessons and exercises
through use of examples from the experience of the Great Patriotic liar and
from troop exercises and to point out the superiority of our science.
technology. troop organization, and the methods and form of combat operations.

It is important here to critique daily within sections and crews. Practice

shows that the section (crew) conmander usually briefly reports which lesson
themes. missions. and norms were worked out during the day. what socialist

pledges were applicable. and how they were accomplished. He then takes up
the following points!

--assimilation. employment. operation. and maintenance of combat equiment
and armaments)

"improvement of the political and cultural level)

--who competed withwhom and who were the victors of the day)

--thc state of troop discipline. conduct. appearance. and military bearing)
"adherence to moral and aesthetic norms of conduct:

56

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

«analysis of the competition's indoctrinational effect!

«the section's assignment for self-preparation! to whom and on what must
special attention be given. who among the leading soldiers provided practical

assistance to what individuals and on what problems! encouragement of those
who excelled.27

For indoctrinational purposes it is useful to determine the conduct of the
soldier who made errors and had shortcomings during lessons. The conander
in this instance compares the actions of this soldier with the successful
activities of another soldier during these lessons. For example. a machine
gunner from one section was not sufficiently careful and lacked the requisite
initiative when operating on the terrain. The officer did not miss this.
The platoon comander during the lesson critique pointed out the energetic
activities of a machine gunner from another section and used him as an
example. The officer underscored here that the successful actions of the
soldier on the terrain would permit him to be victorious in combat. There-
fore. during lessons it is necessary to painstakingly and with initiative
accomplish training missions. This conclusion by the chief stimulated in
his subordinate the desire to measure up to the individual who excelled and
show him a practical way to achieve success.

Schedules of competition progress in which daily evaluations are posted

are used in a number of subunits. Sergeants report to the platoon col-lander
on the accomplishent of individual pledges for the day and then all per-
sonnel ouster. The eValuations posted in the schedule are announced to

the troops. Thanks to this each soldier sees the results of his actions
and the successes of others.

During the platoon critique the cot-lander places special attention on
assigning tasks inVolving organization of the competition for the next stage.
especially on accomplishment of the norms for the combat training missions
by soldiers. sergeants. sections. crews. and so on. During company critiques
the matter usually concerns platoon socialist pledge accomplishment.

It should be noted that competition results for the week are usually su-ed
up by company comanders at a meeting of all personnel. Competition results
for the month. as a rule. are suaaned up at a general meeting of the personnel.
accompanied by discussion and decision making. Company comanders. their
political dewties. and party organization secretaries give reports.

Summing up the results of the competition. counanders. political workers.
and party organizations determine those who require assistance from leaders
capable of providing it. In many instances training otlichniks and the
commanders from leading subunits themselves demonstrate their readiness to
pass on their knowledge and know-how to anyone who requires it.

Summing up results provides an opportunity for creativity and initiative and
makes it possible to develop on seedlings of the new and of the progressive
on a greater scale while. at the same time. preventim undesirable phenomena.

$7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hull-organised sunning up of socialist competition results plays an
important role in insuring its publicity and the comparability of results.
practical repetition of know-how. comradely mtual assistance. and. in the
final analysis. positively impacts upon the achievement of high results in
combat and political training and higher combat readiness.

The right to sum up combat and political training lies with commanders.
with party and Koasomol organizations actively participating therein.
They have been called upon through joint efforts to demonstrate high
demandingness for the qualitative aspect of all lessons. as well as to
demonstrate a party principled nature in determining their results.

The commander reveals the reasons for success or failure of the subunit
and of individual soldiers taking into account the objective state of
affairs.

Analysis of the training process and accomplishment of combat training
missions. the evaluation of the activities of subunits and individual
subordinates will teach them to learn lessons from what they do. to more
profoundly understand the significance of decisiveness. bravery. a goal-
oriented approach. coordination. self-possession. and creativity.

shunning up serves not only as a means for correcting errors made and
consistent implementation of intended measures. but introduces organization.
a goal-oriented approach. and precision in the activities involving leader-
ship of a subunit and uniti it facilitates the preservation in a commander's
pedagogical practice of everything progressive. new. innovative. and creative.
it also facilitates analyzing results of these activities and makes it
possible to objectively evaluate and note ways for further refinement.

Thus. sunning up combat and military training mobilizes personnel to
achieve new, higher results and serves as an important link in a commander's
activities as an indoctrinator and leader.

chapter 9. Develoment and Formation of a Commander’s Personality

l. The basic Traits of a (Demander's Personality.

[Text] A comnder's activity places high demands on his personality. V. I. Lenin
saidi ”. . .in order to centre . it is necessary to be competent. it is

necessary to completely and precisely know all conditions of production.
it is necessary to know the technology of this production at its modern
level. it is necessary to have a kmwn scientific education."28

This Leninist position was again confirmed at the 25th CPSU Congress. The
Sumary Report of the CC CPSU notes that the modern leader must organically
combine in himself a party nature with profound competence. discipline with
initiative and a creative approach to affairs. There is no doubt that our
Armed Forces possess officer cadres dedicated to the party and the people and
trained in a political, military. and technical sense. Unswerving develop-
ment among the officer cadres of a beninist style of work. without which

58

FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

formation in them of high moral-political and col-sand qualities is im-
punailnlu. Imam-ea especially vital under the conditions of the stormy
progress in military affairs and uninterrupted complexity of the missions
of Soviet military organizational development.

The Leninist style in the work of officer cadres is characterized by such
basic traits as comnist conviction and party principles. a scientific
approach. competence and proficiency. a high degree of responsibility for
the assigned task. independence and initiative. a sense of the new and

the ability to see the prospects for developent. the correct selection

of cadres and checking on execution. demandingness combined with sensitivity
towards people. and a critical attitude toward the results of one’s work.

In his multifaceted activities a comander must combine the qualities of a
qualified military specialist. leader. indoctrinator. and teacher.

A comander's activity calls for increased demands for motivation. character.
abilities. and his other qualities. for mental processes and states. know-
ledge. skills. abilities. The effectiveness of a counander's activity is

in direct proportion to the ideological and professional motivation of his
personality. inclinations. interests. and a love for his cause. If the
leading vital goals and motives of a comander's conduct are to be found

in the course of military service and he possesses high readiness for it.
then this positively impacts upon the entire process of his leadership.

Success in leading personnel. their indoctrination. and their training
depend upon the mental. organizational. and pedagogical qualities and abilities
or the comander.

intellectual processes and qualities play in a comander's activity no less
a role than do motivational, volitional. and emotional processes and qualities.

The qualities of the mind (depth. breadth. critical nature. and so on) and
mental capabilities of a military leader aid him in more profoundly under-
standing assigned tasks. evaluating the progress and results of overall efforts.
and selecting methods directed towards its refinement. A commander must pro-
ject the development of the individual and of the collective. that is clearly
perceive their future form and qualities which will guarantee success in
individual and cosmon military labor. Only on the basis of high mental de-
veloilnent. especially imagination and thought. is it possible to coordinate
and compare activities. know-how. and manifestation of qualities at the
beginning and at the end of common labor and introduce corrections in a timely
manner into its rhythm and sequence.

An officer's organizational qualities and abilities in the structural sense
include! the ability to correctly evaluate the capabilities of people.

to organize their harmonious joint work. correctly build mutual relations
with them. manifest resourcefulness and rapidity in orienting oneself in
life’s situations. and demonstrate demandingness and stability. independent
mentality. directness. sincerity. optimism. and conviction. They themselves
are a unique synthesis of mental. motivational. emotional. volitional. and

59

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
other traits of a leader's personality. Primarily reflected in them
are the special practical features of leadership activities and their
direct motivation towards rational use of the material resources of people.
The military leader with their assistance more fully utilizes and
mobilizes all capabilities in order to achieve goals and missions of
overall labor.

The pedagogical qualities and capabilities of a con-lander which influence
not only the level of unit and subunit readiness but also on his personal

achievements in the sphere of indoctrinating people. manifest themselves
in a somewhat different way.

They include in a complex interest and love for indoctrinational work.
pedagogical imagination. thought. memory. pedagogical tact. the ability

to pass on knowledge. and to form in people high moral. business-like.

and psychological qualities. A leader's success depends on the ability
to implement the principles of indoctrination and education and correctly
employ their methods. The comander who possesses pedagogical qualities
and capabilities more specifically determines goals and means of indoctri-
nation. education. and leadership foresees the indoctrinational conse-
quences of decisions made. more profoundly studies and considers the special
features of the individual and collective psychology of his subordinates.
more rapidly finds the correct approach to them. skillfully builds mutual

relations with them. and influences their mood. opinion. and attitude
toward duty.

Mental. organizational. and pedagogical qualities and abilities are found
in combination and. in essence. are the general condition for a comander's
effective activity.

Literature concerning a leader's personality proposes that it be divided
into its general features (motivation. preparedness. and sociability).
specific qualities (practical and psychological intellect. tact. social
energy. critical nature). and the unique individual traits stipulated by
temperament. age. and other causes.

Other authors underscore the role of a leader's ability to create
favorable situations. take into consideration status. worth. norms. expec-
tations. motivations for a person's Conduct. and their mutual interactions30
The significance of unity of ideological-political. business-like. and
organizational (administrative and leadership) qualities. as well as high
culture and comunicative traitsndecisivenesss fairness. self-control.
psychological tact. civil courage. and others. 1

Generalizing know-how in comand and control during the Great Patriotic liar.
Army Gen 5. P. Ivanov writes that the typical traits of a leader which
have proven themselves are! precise and clear assignment of missions con-
sidering the capabilities of each branch of troops and executive qualities!
demonstration of initiative by a subordinate within the framework of the
missions assigned to him! constant desire on the part of senior chiefs to
vital direct intercourse with subordinate commanders! continual and viable

60

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
monitoring of execution in combination with continual practical assistance

to a subordinate! firm will and steadfastness of conlnanders at all levels
in sunnounting obstacles standing in the path of accomplishment of the
assigned missionl knowledge of enemy strategy and tactics and of the
capability of his combat equipent. and therefore. constant readiness to
take ggfective measures to counteract the eneny and achieve his destruc-
tion.

Consequently. a military leader at the peak of his position then.
when he possesses the requisite knouledge and qualities as an organizer
and indoctrinator. uses authority and makes correct decisions.

During training and indoctrination work with students it is very important
to have in mind the prerequisite for successful leadership of the indoc-

trination and education of subordinates referred to as [the readiness/
for collnander's activities.

Readiness for a specific type of activity is the goal-oriented manifestation
of personality which includes its convictions. views. attitudes. motives.
feelings. volitional and intellectual qualities. know-how, knowledge. skills.
abilities. motivations. and the mood for specific conduct.

Such readiness is achieved during ideological. moral-political. professional.
and physical training. and is the result or comprehensive development of

personality taking into account the requirements generated by the special
features of the activity.

Study of the activity of various categories of comanders allows us to make

the conclusion that their readiness to lead is expressed in the special
military-professional developnent of all stable personality qualities (moti-
Vation. character. abilities. and so on). of mental processes. education.

and states which have been actualized for specific moments in strict accordance
with the requirements of the missions. place, conditions. and time.

General and military psychology discuss two forms of readiness for activity!
general long-term readiness and temporary--a state of readiness (mood).

The former determines the potential capability of accomplishent of the
given mission with the very best indicators. However. its accomplishment
also depends on readiness at the given moment. i.e. on the state prior to
beginning to accomplish the mission--the mood.

The latter reflects the special features and requirements of the forthcoming
situation. As opposed to it long-term readiness is a stable systee of impor-
tant professional personality qualities (positive attitude towards the pro-

fession, organization. attentiveness. self-possession. and so on). its know-

how. knowledge. skills. and the abilities required for successful activity
in many situations.

61

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

l'ositive traits of temporary readiness are! relative steadfastness.
earrt-amndnnce of the structure to the optimal conditions for goal achieve-
ment. and viability ur the influence on the activity process.

The following are accepted as material qualities of long-term readiness!

the correspondence of the struccure to the content and conditions of
professional activity. ease in the actualization and inclusion in mission
accomplishment. elasticity. and the combination of steadfastness and dynamism.

Both forms. or types. of readiness are in combination. Temporary readiness
is the functional cutting edge of long-term readiness created each time
which elevates its viability. The origin of readiness as states depends
upon long-term readiness. In turn. temporary readiness determines the
situational productivity of thought. imagination. memory. skills. knowledge,
and all activity. Long-term. stable. and situational. temporary. readiness
facilitate successfully beginning practical implementation of the assigned
goal. effectively demonstrating knowledge. know—hou, and personal qualities.
preserving self-control. and retuning one's activity given the appearance
of unforseen obstacles. Both forms of readiness improve attention. and
memory and prevent the occurrence of stress in dangerous situations.

A passive attitude toward the mission. ineptitude. indifference. and the
absence of a plan of action and the intent to completely use one's powers
hinders the manifestation of both types of readiness. A lack of readiness
leads to inadequate reactions. errors. discoordination between the require-
ments of the situation and the functioning of mental processes. and to a
reduction in the capabilities of surmwnting difficulty and successful
mission accomplishment.

A readiness for a coinander's activity. in our opinion. is simltaneousiy
both a system of qualities as well as a state of mobilization of the per-

sonality for active and successful fulfillment of responsibilities linked
to a commander's activity.

Long-term and situational readiness of a comander to lead personnel
includes various components‘

--cognitive (knowledge. creative thought. imagination. and so on):

--emotionai (a feeling of responsibility to fulfill an officer's responsi-
bilities. confidence of success in serving in troop units)!

--motivat ionai (the requirement to successfully fulfill one's functional
responsibilities. interest in the officer's profession. the desire to
achieve success and to show one’s best side);

--voiitional (the ability to control oneself. concentration on fulfilling

responsibilities involving leadership the capability to divert one's
attention from interfering stimuli. to overcome doubt. and fear).

62

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

None of these can be called fundaental and all the others subordinated

to it. They continually and mutually intertwine. However. depending upon
the «'ircumstmu:es of the at'tiVity. leVel of personality development. speciiic
situation. and mental state. one of the components of the structure of a
commider's readiness to lead personnel. can be the determinant of all
of his activities. keadiness does not accomplish the transference of
qualities and know-how and does not lead to a simple actualization of them
under new conditions. Required each time is the thoughtful work of a
commder. profound penetration into the mission or situation. and com-
plete mobilization of all forces. Thus. the readiness of a con-lander

for leadership increases the effectiveness and reliability of his
activities.

An important task of the training and indoctrinationsl work in school is
format ion and maintenance of the readiness of students as future comdeu.
Students must profoundly and comprehensively study military affairs.

acquire firm knowledge of the employment of weapons and combat equipment.
steadfastly and stubbornly prepare themselves for successful leadership

oi subunits and units under the complex conditions of a combat situation.

in addition. a comander is a military intellectual possessim a military
and general education. erudition. and culture. All these special features
of his spiritual intellect are reflected in precise and logical thought.
the orderly nature of emotional and volitional manifestations. concentra-
tion. punctuality. and kindness.

2. Formation of a Comander's Personality in a Military School.

Thu.- personality of the student and his readiness for leadership are formed
in a military school by the influence of the entire training process. prac-

tice. the probation period. and as a result of surmounting various diffi-
culties and contradictions.

During the training period the future comander assimilates the requisite
knowledge. acquires the necessary skills and abilities. accumlates the
know-how of leadership activities. and vitalizes the positive motives of
his conduct. ile forms an interest in the profession of an officer and
stores up hinh professional. volitional. and intellectual qualities.

Many factors influence the formation of the future comandet in the school!
strict adherence to regulations. military rituals. mtual relations with
comrades. the student collective. the personal example of the teachers and

commanders. and the teaching of social. military. and general scientific
discipline.

l‘onmxpu-ntly. the development of a student‘s personality is a complex.
mltifncotml. and dynamic process v'ose success is primarily insured by
the organization and planning of activities. by active accomplislIIent of
specific missions. by creation of conditions whereby the best qualities
can bu demonstrated. and by the influence of the collective. Without
creative labor in the collective it is inpossible to successfully form

63

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

an individual. Labor in a military educational. institution is training.
service, assimilation of a dystel of scientific knowledge. accomplishment
of various assignments. and participation in the life of the student
collective.

The example of a leader. chief, and pedagogue exerts material influence
on the formation of a student's personality. Student's are attentive to
the conduct of their mentors and imitate them. Military school comanders
and teachers must serve as a model for the students in the ideological sense.
in adherence to the norms of comnist morality. and in accomplishent of
military regulations. If a comander inCorrectly uses disciplinary rights.
then this; approach might be adopted by the students. Therefore. indoctri-
hating the future officers with command qualities and laying the foundation
of positive character traits. the teacher himself must be a model military
leader. The party highly values experienced military leadership cadres.
tmsts their creative capabilities. and nurtures and indoctrinates them
carefully.

-$ov'u-t comanders and teachers in the main know their job well. possess
educational methodology. actively participate in social life. and attentiwly
and carefully relate to the students. Therefore. they deservedly use the
great authority and respect of their students.

in this connection at the present time selection of officers to serve at
a School involves special consideration not only of the level of their
military and special training. but also their capability for pedagogical
activities and their leadership qualities.

The logic of consistent comprehension of problems encountered requires
detailed analysis of two trends in the formation of a future commander's
personality’ during the process of adhering to military order and when
conducting lessons in various disciplines. The rules for strict adherence

to regulations also exerts great influence on the students. but they do not
imediately become their internal property and requirement determining con-
duct. Not all of them early in training yet profoundly understand the
simxificance of consc ientiousness. unswerving obedience to chiefs. and

other aspects of military service. A full knowledge of their responsibilities.
and understanding of the requirement to honorably and diligently study, and

to serve come to many students during the process of the long and goal-oriented
Nlucation and indoctrination in the school.

Eur-ounterinn their first difficulties in a combat situation in the field
and the high training and disciplinary requirements. some students lose
confidence, give in to sporadic moods. and seek elimination as a way out.

Hlu-n asked the basic reasons why some students do not wish to study at the
sc'honl. more than no percent of the f irst-year students responded that the

reasons were initial difficulties in military service and the rigidity of
military discipline.

66

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Many first-year students achieve good and excellent results in training.
are firmly convinced in the correctness of their choice of the officer's
profession. and strive to comprehensIVely prepare themselves to carry out
the complex responsibilities of a colander. in spite of difficulties.

The novelty of the conditions and the content of the activity. as well

as the special way of life. require of the young student great stress

in moral. mental. and physical forces and the deVelopsent of new skills.
habits. and qualities known through their reformation as personality.

Here. for example. is what one student says about his service! "I am in

my third year. I have become familiar with army ways. I am not encountering
the difficulties which I met when taking my first steps. The way to success
was not easy where military discipline was concerned. I had to work hard.

and even had to change my character in order to accomplish the requirements
of the comand element and teachers."

There are instances where young students violate procedures established
at the school. They still lack organization. self-control. conscientious-
ness. and the ability to subordinate their will to the will of the coalsander.

As experience shows. the gathering of the youths in the school and the first
steps towards military service have special significance in successful for-
mation of a future comander's personality.

"when I entered the school. I had many questionst how do the students live.
who are the commanders and teachers. what equipent and armaments are now
in the army inventory." one student says about his first impressions.

"He were divided into subunits and began to become acquainted with the
school. In the school mseum I learned that V. l. Lenin is an honorary
student and commander. I wanted to more rapidly begin to study in order
to prove the correctness of my choice of a career. In the living quarters
and classrooms we saw comfort. cleanliness. and order which favorably
impressed us. They showed us the pool. the ”In. and other facilities.

I was seized by a sense of personal responsibility to the people and to
the state for fulfillment of my duty. i sensed my own worth."

Such an impress ion about the first moments at school gave this student
confidence and facilitated successful accomplislnent of the training program.

military rituals create a positive capable mood. they familiarize one with
life, traditions. and everyday pace of the school. They elicit and support
within the students a responsible attitude and interest towards military
service, towards the chosen profession. This is achieved through familiar-
ization with armaments and combat equiment. through popularization of the
best examples of combat mastery on the part of senior students. by ceremonious
meet inns dedicated to the beginning of the training year. by the graduation

ceremony for young officers on Red Square and at monuments of revolutionary
and combat glory.

or important significance are the mutual relationships between students.
furnishing support to each other where required. the concern about a comrade.

65
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The atmosphere of true comradeship protects the students from egotism
and conceit. against indifference and self-satisfaction. An objective
social opinion stimulates their activity and mobilizes them to achieve
high indicators in training and service.

The deVelounent of the personality of student X. who entered the

school after service in troop units, was unique. The requirements of
combined-arms regulations. accomplishment of service lissions. standing
watch and guard duty, and other responsibilities formed specific character
traits in him. However. a new period in establish-ent of a future comander's
character began for the youth at the student stage of life. More specific
demands began to be made in school on the young man and they regimented
his training and service in a new way. It is understandable that the
student initially was confused, the confusion caused by inability to
regulate his activities and direct his conduct in accordance with the
specific principles and tasks of military-professional activities.

Fearing difficulties. student X petitioned to leave the school.

The platoon comander carefully read the petition. talked with teachers
and the student's comrades. and called the student in for a talk. All
of student X's arguments boiled down to the followingl "i do not want
to be a burden." ”i can't handle higher mathematics." "I can't stand
theoretical mechanics." "I am unable to become a real con-ander.” His
supervisor, understanding the student's state and realizing his difficul-
ties. nonetheless attempted to instill confidence in him.

"look at yourself. comrade student.” the officer said. ”Our platoon is
excellent. You mean that we are unable to help anyone? i have chatted
with your teachers. They believe in you. . . ."

Student x remained in school. ills comrades who were training otlichniks
were often with him during self-preparation time. The teachers treated
the student with great understanding. The platoon coamander began to work
closely with his subordinate during lessons and during the evening.

it goes without saying that the turning point has come and gone and time
has passed. However. what a hopeful time for the student and for the
platoon collective! Student X began to successfully study subsequently

and was assigned a job as demty platoon commander. lie completed school
with an excellent rating.

Friendly and conscientious accomplisMent of training assignments by the
student suiunit and achievement of success during the educational process
are of important significance in the develoment of a spirit of collectivism
and formation of a healthy opinion in a collective. A. S. Makarenko said
that the life of a collective must be replete with the joy of labor stress
and yesterday‘s successes. when a student platoon achieves specific success.
this is an achievement of the entire collective and an expression of the

interest on the part of all to see that each student conscientiously
fulfills his duty.

66
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A situation is created during the first days of service which facilitates
the development of demandingness upon each other among the students. The
first encouragement and critiques are usually accepted properly by the
students and touch their senses. motives. and attitudes. heanvhile.

encouragement opens up a broader vista for developent of initiative
and cohesion of the student collective.

Thus. the following are required to form a student's personality as

a feature officer during the process of following the rules of military
orderl

--profound and clear understanding by all students of the significance
and essence of the rules of military order and discipline)

"accurate. active. strict actions which correspond to regulations where
accomplishment of all service and training responsibilities are concerned:

"the high daily demandingness of the couander and teacher on student con-

duct. monitoring them. and elimination of all inaccuracies. errors. and
deficiencies in their actions!

“the personal example of the cousander or teacher in accurate fulfillment
of all rules of military order and discipline:

«the work of the student aktiv and irreconcilable condemnation through

the public opinion of the student collective of all violations of military
order and discipline.

The teaching of social. military. and general scientific discipline plays
a great role in the formation of a student's personality and his readiness
to lead a subunit.

Analysis of the programs at many military schools shows that formation of

a student's personality as a future subunit comander to a certain degree
stems from the study of all subjects. especially military and social dis-
ciplines. Each subject reflects certain aspects of a cousander's activity
and its specific aspect. Thus. courses on party-political work. Pedagogy.
and psychology mainly look upon the role of the «under as an indoctrinato
and teacher of his subordinates. The programs on tactical (special tactical
firing. and technical training and the study of Soviet Army regulations
examine the functions of the military specialist. leader. and organizer.
This position is natural and objective since in-depth study of the different

aspects of a commander's activity in the final analysis reveals the entire
complex of an officer's complex work.

in addition. there are capabilities when teaching any subject to form the
qualities of a contender and his readiness to lead subordinates.

67
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thus. lessons on social disciplines are structured taking into account
the students working out a party approach to a solution of all service
problems. the ability to scientifically evaluate life's phenomena. and
the formation of pedagogical. propaganda. and organizational qualities.
Questions concerning inculcating students with the methodological skills
to conduct political lessons with soldiers and sergeants are posed and
solved in the schools for this purpose. They are taught to organize
days off with subordinates and to improve pedagogical mastery during
their probation period.

it has become a rule in the schools that teachers of party-political
work, military pedagogy. and psychology teach students to compile plans
for mass political work and lesson plans for conducting political lessons.
talks. and political briefings. Students from senior classes are called
upon to give political briefings with the junior students and with the
soldiers in support subunits. All students actively participate in
creating visual agitation, training aids. setting up Lenin Rooms, and
giving lectures and reports to the local population.

This approach to teaching social disciplines and conducting training and
indoctrinat ional measures at the school significantly elevates the effective-
ness of efforts to form a student's personality as a future con-ander.

A reasoned system of attracting students to carry on mass political work
creates an additional stimlus towards profound assimilation of the con-
tent of Harxist-Leninist theory and the skills of its propaganda and
facilitates formation of columnist views and convictions.

for a commander's activity students mst assimilate general scientific
knowledge in mathematics, physics, and other disciplines which not only
expand outlook and develop intellect but also make it possible to more
profoundly study combat equiment and weapons. The applied nature of
teaching these disciplines significantly increases students' interest in
them and facilitates a growth in their professional mastery.

Students in school form such qualities as independence. courage, self-control,
valor, and confidence. In combination they determine the personality of a
future comander, his ability in extreme situations to curb the manifestation
of negative mental states on the part of subordinates.

The student is in a position to effectively fulfill the functions of a
military specialist after assimilation of the program of individual study
which is conducted during the initial military service period and the first
semester of training. Students at this stage study the responsibilities

and actions of personnel and develop practical abilities and comand skills.
This task is also established for subsequent education. Its goal is to
teach the students.future subunit commanders. to assimilate the personal
weapons of the entire subunit in a model fashioni teach the students, future
BTR. BSII'. trucks. and tanks: to skillfully operate under conditions in which

68
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

the enemy employs weapons of mass destruction. and so on. Teachers in

the process of teaching weapons. drills. and firing rules indoctrinate

the students with confidence in their own efforts and the desire to do

the exercise as well as possible and develop the ability to control oneself
when firing and when operating in a complex situation. Teachers work
individually with trainees who become afraid.

For example. the firing training teacher. in order to form within student
a confidence when firing his automatic weapon. gave a visual firing demon-
stration. The supervisor took the student under his personal control.
he strived primarily to develop his confidence in handling the weapon.

in his presence the student executed the first drill in individual firing.
doing so with an excellent evaluation. This made a great impression on

the young man. In the process of multiple drills the comander was not

only able to instill confidence in student 3. but he also destroyed the
psychological barrier of fear. After one month the tutor's ward accomplished
drill No. l at night and received an excellent evaluation. He subsequently
accomplished all exercises at the good and excellent level.

Durim his probationary period in troop units the student was called upon
to give his subordinates an inspection. It should be noted that the results
in this subunit fluctuated sharply. However. the inspection exceeded all
expectationsuthe evaluation was excellent.

individual talks with the persoan from the subunit showed that the con-
fident firing of the subunit commder-student B--exerted an influence on
an overwhelming majority of the soldiers and sergeants.

His confidence in success was reinforced by his high individual training
in the subject. This undoubtedly impacted upon his ability to control his
conduct and facilitated the entire subunit receiving high results.

Tactical training. during which a co-Iander's demandirgness. steadfastness
in accomplishment of decisions made. will. and initiative are developed,
exerts great influence on the formation of future consander's personality.

creating a worthwhile situation during tactical lessons. teachers require
that students playing the role of conander demand from subordinates accurate
and rapid accomplislnent of assigned instructions. demonstration of steadfast-
ness and initiative. and a search for the best Deans of getting their deci-
sions and instructions to subordinates.

Leadership is the activity of a comander directed towards achievement of
the goals facing subordinates based upon full and comprehensive consideration
of all conditions and resources available. Therefore. it is very valuable
for every student to prepare himself well for independent accomplisrment of
the functions of leadership and to acquire the skills and ability to control
the conduct of subordinates under various conditions of military activity.

69
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

A majority of the officers graduating from our schools has good theoretical
training. However. some graduates have not properly assimilated the metho-
dology of conducting lessons. do not have the skills to command a subunit.
and have not assimilated the forms and methods for educating soldiers and
sergeants.

The talk with former student Sr Lt K is very noteworthy in this regard.

"I was assigned as a platoon commander.” he recalls. ”I rapidly assimilated
my functional responsibilities. It was a help that I had been deputy pla-
toon comander in school. However. it took a long time to get the knack

of conducting lessons. I had to work hard. I turned to senior comrades
for assistance. Therefore. I would like to advise today's students to

more effectively use their probationary period in the troop unit."

Actually. we have often had occasion during these probationary periods
to observe students who know the theoretical material well. but who are
unable to conduct a lesson in a methodologically-correct manner.

For example. here is a report concerning one probationer! "Methodolog-
ically he did the preliminary work correctly but used the new material
timidly. without confidence. incoherently. the student does not sense

the audience and has weak methodological skills.” This is how an experienced
comander characterized the work of a probationer.

A critique was conducted during the probationary period once and was attended
by all probationary students and the regular platoon commanders. 'ihe officers
related how to properly develop the problems on a given theme and shared
know-how in preparing and conducting lessons.

Timely aid helped the probationer to more quickly gain confidence in himself.
He began to correctly employ the theoretical knowledge gained at the school.

A skillfully conducted comprehensive critique has great indoctrinational
value. It assists students in not only seeing their own lapses and errors.
but also in finding ways to correct them. It develops in them a sense of
responsibility. self-control. and aids in refining their mastery.

A critique is also training. Here it is necessary to show the probationer
the positive and negative aspects of his actions and to assist him in correctly
evaluating the lesson he presented.

Here is a characteristic example. Checking a lesson on firing training con-
ducted by one student. the subunit commander conducted the critique as follows:
"you know the material. you are able to organize the lesson. but you demonstrate
insufficient demandingness.” The critique ended on this note and. naturally.
was of little help to the student.

The probationary period in a troop unit became the basic criterion for

evaluation of the quality and methodological training of the students.

their knowledge. skills. and abilities in training and educating subordinates.
70

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It also creates conditions more favorable for refinement and consolidation
of the probationers‘ practical skills and formation of the student‘s per-
sonality--that of a future subunit commander.

During the probationary period the student practices accomplishment of
all officer responsibilities-~from political and indoctrinational to
administrative and housekeeping. During this period the formation of
the necessary skills and abilities is more intensively accomplished.

The indoctrinational goals of the probationary period are primarily
achieved through its careful organization and inclusion of the students

not only in executive, but also in organizational activities. It goes
without saying that one must not let favorable capabilities for the for-
mation of a commander's personality as a whole escape. Thus, it is useful
during a probationary period to use the measures of political and indoctri-
national work to develop an indoctrinator's skills! publishing wall
newspapers and combat leaflets, political briefings. conducting a thematic

evening, organization of amateur art concerts. and conducting talks with
the soldiers in the unit.

The ways and means for using the teaching of various disciplines and the
probationary period noted are intended to clearly show the students the
conditions of their forthcoming activities. allow them to acquire commander's

skills, and develop in themselves independence and the other qualities re-
quired of a subunit leader.

Successful development of a student's personality requires unity and coor-
dination in the work of all indoctrinators and a daily review of the new

tasks and long-range requirements placed on an officer's activities in
troop units.

Unity and coordination in the work of leaders. indoctrinators. and
society manifest themselves in correct understanding and employment of
indoctrinational principles. means. and methods. This can be achieved
with timely assignment and explanation of the tasks of forming the per-
sonality of an officer and of a collective, asshmilation by all indoctrina-
tors of the theory of education and indoctrination. the revelation and dis-
cussion of shortcomings in training and indoctrinational work, and the
generalization and propaganda of leading pedagogical know-how.

It should be underscored in this connection that it is very important for
an academy and school to have a program for the formation of a graduate's
personality compiled on the basis of generalization of inputs from troop
units and data from faculties and sections. Being in their own way an
exlnunded specified goal of indoctrination. it will facilitate haproving
the quality of training commanders. political workers. and engineers.

Certain general prerequisites and conditions for forming the future commander's
personality in a military school can be reduced to the following requirements.

71
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

First. attention to the military-professional selection and military-
professional motivation of the student.

Selection of students in a number of schools involves study of the moral-
political qualities of the candidates. their theoretical and physical
preparedness. individual psychological features. and health.

Selection usually begins with a military medical commission determining
the health and overall physical development of the entrants.

Special attention during the selection is devoted to a study of the moral-
political qualities and the level of military-professional motivation of
the candidates. as well as a consciousness of military tradition and nature
of professional motivation (level and stability of the desire to study at
the school and to serve in the troop units which it supports). Such

study methods include familiarization with the personnel folder, a talk
with the candidate. observation. and research using special questionnaires
and forms.

The range of methods of studying the individual psychological features of
applicants is being expanded--interview. observation. self-evaluation.

and the use of special tests (separating rings. adding figures with change-
overs. a maze. compasses. numerical tables to check memory. the established
objective laws. numerical relationships. and so on).

In the event data obtained using such methods are insufficient to make a
conclusion concerning the professional suitability of an applicant. several
schools use a simulator method of observation which in a short period of
time makes it possible to reveal a candidate's professionally important
qualities that are required for future activities.

Second. it is necessary to insure the active conscious activities of the
students. Ideas and views introduced into their consciousness become con-
viction only as a result of comprehensive analysis of their content and

a great deal of mental activity on the part of the students in order to
assimilate them. Convictions are more effectively formed through inclusion
of perceived knowledge in a system of already founded information. relation-
ships. and ties. Only given such conditions can students determine their
inner attitude to knowledge and creatively employ it in the process of
activity.

Third. it is necessary at all lessons and during all measures taken to

not only influence the intellect. but also the feelings. motives of conduct.
and will of the students. Passion. emotional saturation. and the mode of
speech of a commander or of a teacher. a brilliant impressive example and
profound link to life all exert great influence on the emotional and volitional
sphere of students.

fourth. influencing the students. it is umportant to consider their views.
convictions. requirements. interests. mental states. extant know-how. and
individual special features.

72

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An individual approach and consideration of students' sociopsychological

special features raises the effectiveness of all educational and indoctri-
national work in the school.

Fifth. it is important in the formation of personality to insure unity of
word and deed. theory and practice. The world outlook and convictions of
students are formed not only under the influence of knowledge and mass
political work. but also under the influence of the entire systa of life
and service in the school. And. if one thing is said in words to the stu-
dents and something else is done in practice. then this negatively impacts
upon the formation of their personality.

Sixth, the student collective. its structure. the authority of the aktiv.
cohesion, and the desire to provide assistance to the comand element and
to teachers in their work to train highly-qualified officer cadres.

Thus, formation of a comander's personality in a military school requires
not only arming the students with knowledge. skills. abilities. "Id the
know-how of an officer’s activity. but also broad mobilization of the

conscious processes, motives of conduct. feelings. will. developent. and
world outlook.

3. Refining the Training of a Commander During Practical work in a Unit.

Developnent and formation of an officer's personality and his readiness
to lead is a complex and prolonged process. Education in a military
educational institution although decisive is not the concluding stage in
the establislnent of a commander. His real ideological tempering occurs
during work in troop units. in the process of activities involving educa-
tion, indoctrination. and leadership of personnel.

Harshal of the Soviet Union 0. F. Ustinov. USSR Minister of Defense. at a
reception in the Kremlin in honor of military academy graduates emphasized

”that conclusion of the academy is only one stage on the way to the heights

of military mastery. A great distance lies between knowledge and abilities.

At a new more difficult stage of service--independent practical work--

graduates must steadfastly assimilate the art of troop couand and control. . ."33

Refining the training and qualities of a comander occurs thanks to the
accumlation of service know-how. lessons during com-ander's and Harxist-
Leninist training. and assistance from senior chiefs. Practical work
and training in a unit guarantees the further ideological-political,
professional. and methodological growth of every officer.

A comaander's personality and training are refined in accordance with modern
requirements at exercises. training and methodological meetings, comander's
lessons. drills. and when accomplishing tactical missions. The planning

and organization of officer training in a unit are accomplished taking into
account their knowledge and know-how. prospects for develoment in combat
equipnent. and achievements in the field of tactics and educational methodology.

73
NR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Undoubtedly, know-how from the Great Patriotic Her is taken into account,

as this is our invaluable riches. an unending source for improving the
combat maturity of officers.

Class qualification is the highest degree of professional mastery of a
commander. The officer specialist (infantryman, tanker, artillery man,
communicator, chemical officer, and so on) must assimilate a complete
complex of knowledge, abilities. and skills! he must know manuals, in-
structions, and handbooks! he met be a good methodologist. skillfully
organize and control subunit combat: know the organization, armaments.
and operational tactics of subunits and units of foreign armies! skill-
fully and rapidly organize the defense of subordinate subunits against
enemy weapons of mass destruction! fire the organic weapon with a rating
of good and excellent, drive combat vehicles in accordance with driver-
mechanic norms as called for in general and supplemental requirements for

officers by class! be able to accomplish the norms on combat equiment,
and so on.

“I will never forget how I went on combat watch for the first time and
made an error," says young officer H. ”I tried, I did things as best

I could, but due to inexperience 1 could not avoid making mistakes. The
subunit comander considered this and did not pmish me. Instead, he
explained my error. A day later during comander's lessons, he discussed
this instance with all the officers and held a supplemental drill with me.”

Theoretical and Practical training obtained in the school, regardless of how
solid it is, does not free an officer from further refinement. It is the
basis, the foundation for honing and accumulating knowledge, skills. and
abilities and to further develop commander's qualities. Every officer has
a Period of adaptation. It is a case where, during the educational process
in school, the student worries primarily about personal progress. The
primary thing in troop units is to insure subunit results. Responsibility
is realized and increased here--here there are people, equipment, valuables.
educational organization. the combat watch, and so on. Therefore, great
organizational and indoctrinational work are required, as is the ability

to surround oneself with aides, to see the errors of subordinates, to con-
centrate on accomplishment of responsibilities to lead personnel. It is
the mission of both the school and the graduate's first unit to accelerate
the period of adaptation to troop unit service.

An important role in the commander's training system falls to field training,
the essence of which, as is known, is tactical training. The main thing here
is to unswervedly refine combat readiness of the collective entrusted to

the conmander. It is necessary to achieve that level of training for subor-
dinates in which each soldier assimilates modern weapons and combat equiment
to perfection. The foundation of a commander's tactically skilled and bold
actions in combat is his profound knowledge of regulations and the ability

to creatively employ them.

7!.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is necessary during comander's training to insure that officers
encounter various types of surprises. learn to quickly eValuate the
situation and make bold decisions. skillfully operate under combat
conditions using initiatiVe. demonstrate resourcefulness and decisive-
ness. and embark upon a justified risk.

During one tactical exercise a tank platoon was the first to make an
assault crossing of a water barrier and reached the opposite bank.
However, the "enemy” succeeded in stopping other advancing subunits.

As a result, the platoon was left alone. The platoon couander did not
panic under these complex conditions. He was able to rapidly and with
tactical skill organize a defense and skillfully set up a system of fire.
Combat lasted several hours. It was not easy for the tankers but they
persisted and were able to hold a very important line.

The platoon comander during this episode demonstrated excellent knowledge
of the nature of modern combat. the ability to rapidly orient himself in
a complex situation, and to make the correct decision. Success did not
imediately come to the officer and not everything went well for him after
finishing the school. Thus. his direct chief highly rated the young com-
mander's special training and at the same. time expressed dissatisfaction
with his practical training. As a result of the officer's conscientious

' attitude to his professional level and the desire on a daily basis to
improve it. experience was accumulated in educating and indoctrinating
subordinates and success followed soon thereafter.

Senior chiefs should pay special attention to individual officers who
overevaluate their own professional preparedness. who do not demonstrate

activeness during comander‘s training lessons, and who do not work toward
self-improvement.

Along with comander's training. methodological training facilitates refining
knowledge. skills. abilities. and all activity of s comander as he serves

in a unit. Continual refinement of the methodological mastery of young officers
and the search for new ways and means of organizing and conducting lessons

is a task of primary importance. Its successful accomplishent primarily
depends upon senior chiefs. Young comanders, especially platoon leaders,
still do not possess sufficient methodological skills that have been proven
in practice. And. at the same time, it is this very link of officers that
are directly occupied with the problems of education and indoctrination of
personnel. as well as with the combat cohesion of small subunits, which in

a decisive manner impacts upon company (battery) and battalion training.

The platoon comander conducts lessons on political training, tactical
lessons with the section (crew). tactical drill lessons by platoon, lessons
on studying weapons and firing fundamentals. on technical, drill, physical.
and engineering training, the weapons of mass destruction of the probable
enemy, defense against them. and other subjects. Platoon cot-sanders learn
methodological mastery from company (battery) cosmanders who, along with
conducting tactical lessons with platoons and tactical drill lessons with

75

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OIILY

the company (battery), personally takes up the comander's training of
sergeants. He compiles the cwpany lesson schedule, putting together the
foundations of a pedagogically goal-oriented sequence of company (battery)
personnel training.

Approval by the senior chief of lesson schedules and plans for their conduct
is an important link in raising the methodological mastery of commanders.
For example. approving the Company schedule for the week, the battalion
commander must determine how his young subordinate officer at the company
level proposes to organize a particular lesson and support it logistically.
Having noted lack of confidence or the insufficient preparedness of a
subordinate, the senior chief must explain the advisable methodological
sequence in which to develop the program theme on a given educational
subject and point out more effective methods of conducting lessons on
individual themes. The battalion combander approves the company schedule
only when he is convinced that the company commander has correctly determined
the sequence for covering the program theme and the methodology for working
out the training problems.

Some company (battery) and battalion commanders irresponsibly approve plans
provided to them. They do not check to see if the officer supervisor knows
the theory of the problems to be studied with subordinates and do not deter-
mine the degree to which the methodology and logistic support selected by
the junior comanders facilitate the purposefulness of the lesson and achieve-
ment of the indoctrinational goals. Prior to approving such a plan it is
recessary to check not only whether the officer knows what he will study
‘Iith the personnel, but also what methods he intends to use to work particu-
lar training problems. Achieving understanding on the subordinate‘s part
of the sequence for conducting lessons and the indoctrinational goals, the
senior chief facilitates a growth in the commander's methodological mastery.

For example, a lesson on defense against the probable enany's weapons of

mass destruction was planned in a company schedule. "hen approving the
schedule the battalion comander checked the knowledge on the part of the
company officer of the material which he was to teach to the personnel and
the methods he intended to use to work out the basic training problems. The
company leader determined the goal of the forthcoming lesson, evaluated the
conditions for conducting the lesson and the level of preparedness of the
subunit, determined the resources for accomplishing the mission, called in
the platoon commanders ahead of time, and instructed that by placing special
attention on the correctness in accomplishing norms No. S and 6. In
accordance with the agenda and the schedule, the company comander received

a report of one platoon comander, checked the readiness of the company for
the lesson, announced the thene, goal, and training problems, and the company
then began the lesson. The lesson was conducted with an increased load and
took into account the requirements of modern combat. The officers used varied
forms and methods of formation and developnent in the soldiers of speed of
perception, decisiveness, bravery, and initiative. Norm No. a was repeated
during the lesson and norms No. S and 6 were studied. The planned theme was
accomplished with an excellent evaluation. During the progress of the lesson
the company commander monitored the work of the platoon comanders and corrected

76

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR Ol’FlClAl. USE ONLY

their actions. lie held a critique after the lesson, analyzed the activities.

and evaluated the results of the group and individual actions of the subor-
dinates.

The direct opposite occurred in another unit. The schedule called for the
theme of defense against weapons of mass destruction. The battalion com-
mander approved the schedule formally. The company comander himself did
not instruct the platoon coMnanders and relied on their know-how. Taking
the company to the location, he ordered the lesson to begin. Of course.

there is nothing that can be said about the quality or moreover the speed

at which the norms were accomplished. in actuality the planned theme was
not studied.

t.mis-.-q-n.-ntly, approving any kind of training material, the senior chief
must be convinced of the readiness of the supervisor. especially of a
young officer. to conduct a lesson. in so doing it is possible to preVent
errors and deficiencies in the training of personnel on the theme being
dewloped. Therefore, it is necessary that the senior chief be attentiw:

and demanding of subordinates, especially if the supervisor of the forth-
coming lesson is a young officer.

Ltlm'atinn and indoctrination of personnel in the spirit of the requirements

of muiern warfare depend not only on high political training and profound
military knowledge on the part of officers, but also on their practical
pru-parminess. and methodological mastery. Monitoring of the exercises they
conduct is an important way of providing methodological assistance to officers.
This also applies to lessons conducted by experienced methodologists. A
systematic exacting check and monitoring execution are basic principles of
party supervision. These principles were concisely fomlated by V. l. lcnin.
the Wonder of our partyl "ICheck people and check actual execution/--

this, again this, only this now is the linchpin of our work, of our policy.”3l‘

The significance of checking on execution at the contemporary stage of
com-mist organizational developnent continues to grow. In the Smary
Report of the Cl: LPSU to the 25th CPSU Congress it underscores that ”moni-
toring and checking on execution of decisions made is a vital part of the
organizational work. This is a matter for every party, Soviet, and economic
leader, of o-vury party organ. of every primary party organization.”35

Th" party requirement completely applies to life in troop units. Hutually
visiting lessons, which provides officers the possibility of finding more
l'i'lectiw: methods of solving oiganizational problems involving the education
and indoctrination of subordinates, plays an important role in accumulation
of im-thodological knov-now and refining a comander's activity as a whole.

‘-I'"-'Il attention should so given to methodological training and refinement

of .11! officer's activity during comander's lessons, a. seating at least
«mu-hail oi the training time to platoon and company (battery) comanders.

it is. necessary to study in detail with them the sequence of organization

and the methodology for conducting forthcoming lessons with personnel. it

is important to widely implement instructional-methodological and demonstration

77

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
.‘0li OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lessons (exercises) and open lessons and methodological conferences.

They can be organized and conducted with officers on the scale of connander's
lesson groups or in joint collectives at the unit (subunit) level.

The examination and discussion of military training films on Varied themes
of combat training should be looked upon as a viable form of improving
oi‘i‘icers' methodological mastery. it goes without saying that any form.
any new method of raising methodological mastery and the effectiveness

of ofiicers' activities overall only are justified given one condition--
the sumrvisors' profound knowledge of tactics. weapons. regulations. and
military psychology and pedagogy. Skillful employment and combination of
all forms should be directed toward implementation of everything new and

progressive occurring in units and subunits into troop education and indoc-
trination.

llere no planned commander's training will achieve its goals given the
absence of an officer's desire to independently work to improve his political
and tactical outlook and his methodological mastery.

Then-torn. one of the most effective ways for a comander to refine his
person-titty and activity is independent work with himself. self-education.
and self-indoctrination.

"Without known lindemndent/ labor the truth will not be found in any

serious question and he who fears labor himself rules out the possibility
of finding the truth." v. 1. Lenin noted.36

Units in which officers are assigned individual tasks and where plans for
indep-ndent work are compiled taking into account the content of comander's
training are worthy of attention. Included in this plan are tasks involving
assimilation of new equipment and weapons. the study of changes in the or-
ganization of foreign armies. watching training films. and so on.

lndcllmdtillt work teaches a high thought culture which is the detemining
factor for the achievement of high results in a coulander's activity. It
develops in officers such qualities as organization. discipline. activeness.
initiative. and steadfastness in achievunent of the assigned goal.

One must always remember this simple truthi whatever the level of officer
training. such will be the quality of the education and indoctrination of
the unit and subunit personnel.

Conclusion

[Text] The further development of the Armed Forces and the fundamental changes which
have occurred in the means and conditions of armed struggle place new demands

on a comander's activity. As never before they are required to masterfully
assimilate all methods and forms for conducting contemporary war and combat,

to organize and conduct lessons. exercises. and maneuvers at a high level.

allocate duties to and indoctrinate people. and control their conduct.

78
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
V. l. Lenin's instruction that it is necessary to undergo "the tests of
knowledge of the foundations of the science of control"-'7 is especially
vital in our time. Victory in modern combat will accompany the contander
who best organizes cormnand and control and who is the most energetic in
his activities and far-seeing in his concepts and decisions. The role of
the commander and his responsibilities for decisions made are increasing
immeasurably under the conditions of modern warfare with the employment
of powerful responsive types of weapons.

The scientific and technical revolution. reduction in periods of service.

the new appearance of subunits and units. the growing volume and tasks of
troop comand and control have complicated the connander's activity. be-
coming all the more enmeshed in it are leadership. indoctrination. education.
and moral-political. combat. and psychological training. Accounting for

the human factor and the search for means to vitalize and improve the creative
capabilities of personnel have begun to acquire an ever greater share. There-
fore. under contemporary conditions. in order to correctly structure the
education and indoctrination process. officers must be not only well trained
in the political and military-technical sense. but must also assimilate firm
knowledge in the field of military pedagogy and psychology.

This knowledge aids a commander in determining ways of forming the requisite
moral-political. combat. and psychological qualities. create a high political-
moral state in subunits and units. more effectively solve the probl-s of
supervising the activities of subordinates under various service conditions.
refine his methodological mastery. and demonstrate pedagogical tact.

Psychological-pedagogical knowledge. habits. and skills allow the leader
to establish the optimal sequence and rhytm of work and to note. razove,
and prevent in a timely manner the unfavorable states of people. more pro-

foundly understand the reasons for errors made in critical situations. and
prevent misdeeds.

The leader of a military collective on this basis successfully implements
the principle of teaching troops that which is required in wartime and not

permitting divergences between the demands of combat and the know-how acquired
in peacetime.

Life in troop units shows that it is impossible to guarantee high combat readi-

ness if one does not see its dependence on the mental qualities and on the
moral and combat stability oi personnel.

Maintenance of combat readiness and vigilance is even more closely linked

with skillful influence on the mental state of the troops and taking into
consideration the factors which caused them.

An ever greater role in the activities of a chief is being played by military
sociopsychological knowledge which permits a comander to more profoundly study
and form military collectives and to more clearly visualize the role of opinions.

moods, traditions. and personal attitudes within the entire system of subunit
and unit comand and control.

79

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The success of an officer's activity is stipulated by many of his qualities.
know-how. and the combination of high responsibility and consciousness with
military-professional training. broad erudition. and culture.

The process of forming the Soviet commander's personality is initially com-
pleted at a military educational institution. One of the conditions for
effective preparation of students for serVice in troop units is arming
them with a system of psychological-pedagogical knowledge. skills. and
abilities which they require for indoctrinational and training work with
soldiers. sergeants. warrant officers. groups. and collectives. The
future commanders acquire within the walls of- the school professionally
important knowledge. habits. and abilities and the personal qualities
required for work with subordinates are formed within them.

It is considered in the schools that a commnder's activity is primarily
directed towards other people. Its goal is to provide them with knowledge
and to form comunist conviction. combat mutery. moral and psychological
qualities. and high combat capability and combat readiness. This activity
is also directed at the formation and consolidation of military collectives
and their discipline. steadfastness. combat readiness. and selflessness.

Assimilation of the foundations of psychology and pedagogy in a military
school and the further independent study of these disciplines facilitates
refinement of commanders' activity in its fundamental trends and functions
both during peacetime as well as in wartime.

A comander's activity does not permit triteness. it requires a creative
approach, curiosity. valor. initiative, and a continual search for new
methods. One cannot assume any prescriptions and advice that are suitable
for all of life's events. Each principle and method of leadership. indoc-
trination. and education is always employed taking into consideration
specific conditions and missions which are unique and previously completely
unknown.

The art of being a commander primarily involves the ability to teach and
consider in one's work the special features of specific conditions upon
which various material. moral. aesthetic. psychological. and other factors
relate. It is important to also keep in mind here the differences between
subordinates as far as their qualities. capabilities. and everyday and
service know-how are concerned and take into account the difficultires which
they encounter during their service. as they assimilate combat equipaent and
weapons. and the level of develoment and cohesion of military collectives.

The special features of the conditions and the success of a comander's
work depend upon the quality and the level of training of the officers.
warrant officers. and sergeants subordinate to him. on the mutual relation-
ships with them. and on their growth. V. I. Lenin always required that
party leaders carefully select and indoctrinate cadres and ”teach people
and search for [skilled] workers."38 That is one trait of the Leninist
style.- of leadership. Storming from Leninist behests. the 25th CPSU Congress
determined that the cadres policy is a powerful lever which can be used to

80

FOR OFFICIAL USE OhIY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

affect the course of social develoment. A careful and concerned attitude
towards cadres combined with demandingness upon them, promotion of young.
talented. politically mature people and capable organizers. improving the
level of training. and creation of a reserve within the leadership ranks--
these are the basic ways to further improve work with cadres and specifically
as concerns the Soviet Armed Forces.
This book does not pretend to provide an exhaustive solution for all
specific questions of leadership, indoctrination. and training encountered
in an officer's activity. It is only an attempt to show how. using
military psychology and pedagogy. a counander can achieve in a umber of
ways higher results in his work and an improvement in its quality.
FOOTNOTES

1. "Materialy XXV s"yezda xrss" [Materials of the 25th CPSU Congress--
hereafter Materials]. Moscow, 1976. p 83.

2. "Programs Komnisticheskoy partii Sovetskogo Soyuza" [Program of the
Comnist Party of the Soviet Union-~heraafter Program]. Moscow. 1976.
pp 111-112.

3. Materials. p 70.

a. KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 1976. 8 July.

5. Materials. p 170.

6. Marx, K., Engels. F. Horks. Vol 23. p 362 [hereafter Marx and Engels]

7. Materials. p 68.

8. KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 1976, 1 July.

9. "Ustav vnutrenney sluzhby Vooruzhennykh Sil 8888” [Internal SerVice
Field Manual of the USSR Armed Forces]. Moscow. 1975. pp 26. 27.

10. Materials. pp 75-76.
ll. Marx and Engels, Vol 16. p 195.
12. ”Leninskiy shornik xxxvx" [A Collection of Lenin, 036]. p 389.

13. Lenin. V. I. "Poln. sobr. soch." [Complete Horks--hereafter Lenin]
Vol 30, P 226.

11.. “an: and Engels, Vol 3. p 1460.

15. ibid, Vol 23,'p 337.
81

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
26.
25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Lenin, Vol 60, p 220.

Sec "Praktika partiynoy raboty v armii i flote” [Party Hork in Practice
in the Army and Navyuhoroaftcr Party Hark]. Moscow. 1977. pp 111-126.

Lenin, Vol 36, p 260.

Party Hork, pp 9-10.

KMNIST. 1977. No 3. P 18.

Lenin. Vol (.1, p 121.

See "Rckonendatsii po psikhologicheskoy podsotovke lichnoso soatava
Sukhowtnykh voysk" [Recomendationa on Psychological Training of
Ground Forces Personne1--hereafter Recomndations]. Hoscou, 1972.
pp 61-62.

lbid, pp 610-66.

Lenin, Vol 36, p 116.

Ibid, Vol 35, p 283.

Ibid, Vol 37, p 90.

Sec Oshurkov, 1.. N., Glushchets, V. S. "Sotsialisticheskoye sorevnovaniye
v armii i na flote" [Socialist Competition in the imay and Navy].
Moscow, 1975.

Lenin, Vol 60, p 215.

See Umanskiy. I... Lutoshkin. A. "Psikholosiya raboty komsorga”
[Psychology of a Komsonol Group Organizer]. Moscow. 1972. pp 36-56.

See "Rukovoditel' kollektiva” [Supervisor of a Collective] Moscow.
1971‘. p 50.

See lovlev, A. N. "Deyatel'nost' KPSS po podgotovke voyennykh kadrov"
[cvsu Activities in Training Military Cadres]. pp 230-231.

Sec lvanov. s. P. "0 nauchnykh osnovakh upravleniya voyskami" [0n the
Scientific Foundations of Troop Comand and Control]. Hoscou, 1975.
pp 51-52.

KRASNAYA ZVEZDA. 1976. 1 July.

Lenin, Vol 45. p 16.

Materials. p 69.

82

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NI OHICIAL US! ORLY

36. Lenin. Vol 2'), p 68.
37. Ibld, Vol (05. p 390.

3.0 Ibld. Vol h“. p 367-

Original Table of Contents

Inttwuctlon esassessors-sassOssaslbsssslsseasesssslsasessssssssssosss 3

Chapter 1 Special Features of a Comander's Activities ............. 8
l. The content of a comaander's activities ..................... ~-
2. The structure of a comander's activities ................... 16

3. Unity of training. indoctrination. and leadership in a
CWder'B ICCtVttieS IIIOsrosessssssnee'lassessessssssesses 20

Chapter 2. The Personality of a Subordinate and Its Formation By the

(:mnder easeasseeeaalssaaleseoeseeseesassoc-enclosesssaesesssse 28

l. The properties of personality ............................... 31
2a Mental cognitive "$28893 Is.ssssIssarsnbsslebslsassessor... 48
3. notional and volitional processes and mental states ........ 68

Chapter 3. The Comander's Role in Formation of the Military
collective 0.0'DIOIOOIOOOI...OOOOOOIOIOIOOOIOOIOOOOIDIIOOOOIODOOO 79
1. The special features of a military collective ............... 81
2. Sociopsychological phenomena in a Iilitary collective ....... 87
3. The comandar's register of the stages and degrees of
develomnt of tm miliury collective sssaeaseaseeseueaaasse 105
4. Formation of the sociopsychological stability of a military
collective 0.00..........CUOUCIOCCC'CCCC‘COIOOOCOOOOIIOIOOCCC 110

Chapter ’6. The Comander's Surety of High Military Discipline ....... 121
1. The basic traits of Soviet military discipline .............. 12!;

2. Psychological and pedagogical concitions for strengthening
Military discipline eseeeseassassessessassoseessseeeaseasaaae 127
30 The comnder.s disciplinary "lettie ease-eeeaaaseeesaseasse 135

Chapter 5. Formation of Soldiers' Combat Mastery By the Commander ... 1M
la The Content of C0.b.t “stew easessssasesseeeseseesessssssss 145
2. Conditions for forming combat mastery ....................... 150

Chapter 6. Moral-Political and Psychological Training of Personnel ... 165

1. Unity of moral-political and psychological training .......... 166
2. Tasks and trends in the moral-political and psychological
tr.1nins of Soviet troops Oesteesesessstssslessees-ssoessssss 168

 

‘ 83

m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Chapter 7 . The Coriander-Leader and Organizer of the Combat
Activitie’ of subordlnlte. oo-csaolootooaaaosoaaaoooaotoooasosooooo
l . Keane and methods of controlling the combat activities of the

troops II.CIOOctconcocteOoooooaolocsooeslooosososeltlolloooOol

2. Prevention of and overcoming negative mental states in combat

Chapter 8. Organizing Lessons on the Combat and Political Training
of SOVLet Troops oIoaa...a...nouse.oosoooeo-aaaaoo-uaooooaaasooooo
lo comblt tr‘inins lessons OIOOIOOOOOIIOIOOO.IOIIOOOCOIOOIIIOOOOO
2' Polittc‘l cr‘tnms lessons .‘OOOOOI0.0...O...‘O..I.'.O..C.....
3. Lesson critiques by the comander ............................

Chapter 9. Develoment and Formation of a Comander's Personality-nu
1. The basic traits of a comander's personality. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . .

2. Formation of a comnder's personality in a nilitary school...
3. Refining a commander's training through practical work in a

unit opp-oboeo05ooone-on0000000000900ooboooaov'ovpoeootoooooso

ConCIusion aaaooooo-ooos-aaas.osoaooosooasoooooaaoaoooeoooooooooooooaas

COPYRIGIIT: Voyeaizdat, 1978

7869
cso: 8166/0798 3"”

86

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

189

191
205

218
219
233
253

263
269
282

290