APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: ClA-RDP02-00050R000200030052-0
Near East/North Africa Report

No. 2062

FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION SERVICE
m

JPRS publications contain information primarily froa foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original inforntion was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation vas suuarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliteratad are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques'
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.8. Government.

PROCURMNT 0P PUBLICATION

JPRS publications may be ordered from the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Virginia 22161. In order-
ing, it is reconnended that the JPRS number, title, date and
author, if applicable, of publication be cited.

Current Jrss publications are announced in Goverment Marts
Announcements issued semi-monthly by the National Technical
Information Service, and are listed in the Monthly Catalog of
U.S. Government Publications issued by the Superintendent of
Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
20402.

Indexes to this report (by keyword, author, personal names,
title and series) are available from Bell 6: Howell, old
Mansfield Road, Wooster, (1110 “691.

Correspondence pertaining to utters other than procurement
any be addressed to Joint Publications Research Service,
1000 North Glebe Road, Arlington, Virginia 22201.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDP02-00850R000200030052-9

scan-u l

m" mmmm” ms 74838

I. MI. and Sol-I'-

NEAR EAST/NORTR AFRICA REPORT. No. 2062

        
       
   
 
      
 
   
   
   
   
   
 

 

I. "Pol? II).

1. MM“

5. MOM Gun-«Inno- quno on Aaron
.anI Publications Research Service
1000 North Clcbc Load

Arlington . Virginia 22201

  

Tl: {tome-in. annual-M um and Alan“

As above

  
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
    
  
     
     
     

_.—___——_———-_———_———

It. Mu?! (luM' m «an

 

This serial report contains intonation on socioeconomic. gov
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East

 

 

 

H. W AMer a. ”new."
Political Science _x_lnter—Arab Affairs Libya

l

Sociology __North African _Hauritania
Economi cs Af fairs __Horocco
Culture (Social .__Afghanistan __People's Demo-
Scicnccsz) __Algeria cratic Republic
Ethnology _x_Bnhrain of Yeocn
Geography _X_Bgypt __Persian Gulf
Tecluologicnl __XI ran Area
Military Sc icnccs _Iraq _x_Qatar
_Xlsrael ~_$:3u¢‘li Arabia
___Jordan __Span ish North
_XKwa i t Africa
_chanon __Sudan

0 locum-«Icon rm Ion-u

e CW'Ir-ddIG-m SD. 5‘3. 5K. 15

II. Mum-u, ”Mona-n! [9. Scum Cl!“ "N I“

llnl in I I ml Ava i 1 0111 l ity

. UNCLASSIFIED
51)!“ by “T’s .89. “CUM. I 7.61.» (ID-a Pal
Springlicld. Virginia 22161 UNCLASSIFIED

 

(5» NIH-IHJI) to. Jonathan at M

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007mm: ClA-RDPOI-OOWRM200030052-9
NEAR EAST/NORTH AFRICA REPORT

No. 2062

Cameras

INTER-ARAB AFFAIRS

Baha'-Al-Din Comments on Legal. Moral Aspects of Iran C
(Ahmed Bahauddin; EMIRATES NEWS, 3 Dec 79).......

Bahrain Causeway First Stage Contracted
(GULF MIRROR. 10-16 Nov 79)

BAHRAIN

Export Credit Mandate
(GULF MIRROR, 17-23 Nov 79)......................

Aluminun Bahrain Awards Power Station Contract
(GULF MIRROR, 17-23 Nov 79)......................

Record Aluminun Output Reported
(GULF MIRROR, 4-9 Nov 79)........................

EGYPT

Details on Foreign Investnents in Egypt
('Isam Rif'at; AL-ANRAM AL-IQTISADI, 10 Nov 79)..

IRAN

Ambassador to USSR Civea View on Crises
(KEYNAN. 21 Nov 79)..............................

Soviet Opposition to Oil Hell Occupation
lapse: of Islamic Revolution
ISRAEL

High Court Decision Challenges Settlement Policy
(Editorial; HANODI'A, 23 Oct 79)........................

Expansion of Settlenents Endangers Security
(Editorial; HAHODI'A. 16 Oct 79)

Govern-ent Paces Challenges in winter Session of Knesset
(Editorial; HAZOPEH, 23 Oct 79)

Elon Horeh Settlement Backed
(Editorial; HAZOPEH, 23.0ct 79)

Israel's Settlement Plans Call for 2,000 Units in Next 2 Years
(Yosef Tzuri'el; HA'ARIV. 16 Dec 79)....................

Origin. Aims of 'Sons of the Country‘ Movement Discussed
(Mahmud Huharib; AL-DUSTUR, 22-28 Oct 79) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ministry of Defense Colonization Program Discussed
(Ze'ev Shif; HA‘ARETZ, 21 Oct 79).

Poll Shows Israelis Willing To Cut Their Living Standards
(Mark Sega1;JP.RUSALBi POST, 27 Nov 79).. . . .. . . . . .. .

women Hill Quit Unless Income Tax Laws bended
(Michal Yudelnsn; JERUSALD! POST, 11 Nov 79)............

New Drinking Hater Plant for Bilat
(Ya'Acov Friedler; JERUSALEM POST, 15 Nov 79) . . . . . . . . . . .

Sharon Promises To Sell Land for Villas
(Yitzhak oked; JERUSALDl POST, 29 Nov 79)...............

Briefs
New Elon More Site
QATAR

Details of 1980 Budget Revealed by Emir
(GULF MIRROR, 24-30 Nov 79).............................

SULTANATE OF (MAN

Improvements Made in Con-unications Services
('UHAN, 18 Nov 79)......................................

UNITED ARAB mamas

Talks Opened with Hungarians on Trade Relations
(WIRATES NEUS, 210 Nov 79)..............................

Bedouins Resettled in Low-Cost Housing
(Haghazi Shuair; EMIRATES NEHS, 3 Dec 79)...............

Briefs
ADNPC Loan

Surplus Trade Balance
British Patrol Boats
Fujayrah Ceaent Plant
Aluminum Smelter Start-up

WESTERN SAHARA

Saharan Leader Says Spanish Policy Full of Contradictions
(Bachir Hustafa Sayed Interview; EL PAIS. 26 Oct 79)....

King. Opposition Disagree About Waging Saharan Har
(Domingo Del Pino; BL PAIS, 28 Oct 79)..................

AOSARIO Delegation Addresses Moroccan Horkers' Group in Paris
(HAP. 11 Dec 79)........................................
BAHA'-AL-DIN 00)“st 0N LEGAL. MORAL ASPECTS OF IRAN CRISIS

Abtt Dhnbi EMIRATES NEWS In English 3 Dec 79 D 3

[Article by Ahmed Bahauddln]

\
[Text]

By AHMED WMUDDIN

It the woven: "true: we Iotved
when they Wu" does not prove
tnntnulewdeymhenthemeene
m. on tuned oontltu It Ilntnlnent
W lid In home wey between
theUSendlren.Thtslemute
etetutooohetween the USth
annot contlnue for e Ion. tIrtte

It does not eeen that elther my I:
ready for-tyrelredltdmoreoverlt
mall the Iwouetrvlnetotpeed
up controntttton and candle. out.
eulrrty the pony whteh eon concede
more then In enemy. vIt. In;

I do not mean (M the my more
6M at gtvtn; moonstone I:
wrong. but reohdtly the other one Is
"on; When you catch a welt-pocket
redhended. you are the one to e more
mmenlent nothlon to drop the one
then the nlchooehet.

hook that the US In: adult red-
hnhded has med In the
contestant Severn! oorrewondem
heteoen the Athena-n Ian-on: In
Tehnm and WahIngton ten heen
Found In the Emu-my. These streets of
mutton-delta were delta wlth
woytendmeemtotettheMenler
the (hunt States. Am the um
mm In that eﬂ'eet was one hotel the
allrnent at the Shah The cones-
ttnndenoe \howod th-t the lambs”
advlted lI\ government to drop th-
cheetlm and "Mt Wot Caner w-
very near In hts Embassy‘s oolnlon.
but "It I-‘uretqn Mlnmry. under
«emu: trunt Ioeel Ametlunhbhyof
whwh lhch.‘ mam] to la Henry
KN‘W .rnd hanker Devtd
Rmhletler. wa wwtuttm the tdee
Ktwnyu um mteulany Involved In
the altar: rut-In; a reeIot Zlnnlet who It
keen to path the US Into tough
tunlruntuI-m wIIh Inn end the entire
Namh' world. In whleh Israel Is llvtn'

mleuulthedmaernnedhyeht.

blunt: country melt a Inn.

The lnnlen revolutton In thts
context I: wrong In “mane" heuuee It
has etteetted en ernheny hevtn; dtoto-
mnle Immunity In Intemettonl but
The Ameneen government quIIty In
“content“ bee-use !: tr Involved In it
the Sheh‘s on: lhmhout the 36
yemdtheSheh'eruIe-tdheoemeot
Its exototutron ot the lumen snuetton
and due to the tact thu an open
Inetotluathtemwtllheetrtdforthe
an ode at the American pollute and
heeluee It lorntuI-ted. In contonnton
wtth the Wmm wottd. the In:
whteh meet the batons ot deltas
robbed by dtctetots [rent the steeple:
under the western henllng systems
and heme: It matted to chum; In
the face of slutttn; the tonal“ to
e US hosptttt

The nutter ot “III-ye" end
“element" It entitle In every con-
ventton and very low.

Pollocmenteuhouteendnnda
luue outnmy 0! drop but the
delendnt may darn thu the voice
hed not had a warrant from the
poultry to Impeet the house. The
)tldoe wtll aeoult the defendant
been-tee the tent vrooeduree were not
fdlowed on entry and Imoeetlon ot
the house The delendlnt will he
otontmnoed Innocent ecoordtm to In.
huttotheyeopchouetyendlnreehy
he to I outnmdter.

In thIt my we would ay that the
US It nutty In redIIy (content) whle
the tram revolutmtee are
mm than.

The Irenl-n revolutlnn hes the key
to solve the present problem 0! the
enthuey end the hoetroee etnoe the
problem of the Anterior-t Buttons
wIth lmeootheentltereuonwlunot
he :olved tor thlly generation: to
come lnncatxoeehouultheteeu
for Mann. the US and an

oolhtutty uhteve the same sentence
ot‘thecodnendreleueonnsownlhe
home who are not more that e
token.huttheyuemttnheopylolten_
When we went: Mt low and sheer:
we no not toettttn. wlth mnvtettonot
lhelr nuke ltt m but tn lhtnh
thu In tulle at I the falsehood ot the
Intentutonelhwltetntheendnotln
the Interest of the emu ﬁne the
am (powers) are the ones who
eontlnuellyVIolete Inwovm.

The Iranian redto rephed very
shrewdly when eorne Art wnten
opposed the lrenlen out on the US
Elnhmy hy ulna; these ’wmers:
“Why hove'nt you opposed when we
amend the knelt EM? Is the
Itnmuntty ot the two m not
eon-term; from the tune
leutlnteey?“

Tho tnmtontt IuIttnteey ts ehle
twee stnee the Mt ol’the Haunt-n
people I: rnote legume 0-! the
mm 01’ beet whleh I!!!“ he
extaeme wtthm

Khomelnt’t rulme I: mote Iew.
metethen the “Matthew‘s
rule bee-use Khornelt-II he: come from
ulle whh no pml'ann other then the
IIII ol the people whtIe the Sheh wit
returned from Rome to Tehnn by e
ntlllluy ootto deﬁned by the Centrd
Milena Merry

whet are we to tandem-Id horn

thte? .
We undermno that the lamb-
ru low he: two truemretatmoneot‘
the um and the otherotthewuh.
Bullthsurethettheweehtelne
hetter «mun: mun when the
«tunnel: strnn. hut nothln more then
fume

There Is no dauot "III the amp-
IIon ut the enthuy It turned tn the
nut tmtence m lnthu the slum
mettle jolt III the US tutenttet ut
etlemptt to pint um the Khnntelnt
revolutton and It It not eluted at
rcturnlm the Shell.
In my \l‘h Ink aim hm tux-n
mun-d and Ike remaining pun ulna
an dame w: 31w this ﬁnch on
man Imm Ihe wmlm 0! IN:
cum

I Ihlnk Kmlnl B um I
nJhIII' Inm- uhpcuvcu. mud:

A mmduum mu u will“ «It
Inc “walnut u! the Shit.

Anothcv am am mum
thumb which Khunmnl Is Ivy” ‘0
”mo "99 !WW wﬂM..
mum“ um [noun «mlﬁ u nu.-
euumc n! 'W n! Inhale: I Iht
"mm: ul dmny. It I: to ma

comm an mum momma.

A "an! mam winch n [a mom
dllllwll a dining a mum
mum change In "It In of an
[ml-I nocluy In such I my all I
m what my mum.
man; to Khommo. Ira not
mammthednwlm
W (Pen: he upon Hull) Ind
KﬂuuAnbmAuTlu

W lbw "we mm Ihe
Khomeini mauuon an be and
Inummm-hlchmubnn‘m
wn nut in will)

C80: 1.820

Ill ..

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2001mm: cIA-RoPu-oomnooozoooaoosz-s
BMIRAIN CAUSEHAY FIRST STAGE CONTRACT ED

Hannna GULF MIRROR in English 10-16 Nov 79 p 35

[Text]

The Bahrain causeway

describedasthe
structionwoddtor

hasslsobeentheblggest

hasbeen
einthecon-

ea
nextdecade.8utit

headache tor

many companies who have In bids.
They have mbled time a

preparing

which. iinotaooepted.

will end In the westepapsr basket.
Mary Frinss reports

AS MORE than 20 inter-
national contractors await
the arrival of tender
documents at the end of
this month. one major firm
hasestitnated thecostof a
Saudi- Bahrain causeway
bid at 3| million — not
counting the one per cent
tender bond required
under Saudi Arabian con-
tract law.

Jens F. Nielsen. resident
engineer for Saudi-Danish
Consultants told me this
week? l'tisveryexpensiveto
prepare II tender like this.
especially with alternative

potais. and it would he
unusual ifall the invrted [Inns
were ﬁnally to pttl in a hid.

Drawings

“It needs extensive field
studies of the conditions both
in Bahrain and Saudi Arahia.
and a lot of planning."

Mr Nielsen was in Bahrain
Io rnalrc arrangements for

contractors‘ site visits and
in ‘ oisoif: sutures“u
' rst on
him mgfiit‘llh I974. and
he huwbeeh: stationed in
t twoyean.
mm hellﬁus'ipsto

other oi the proposed

causeway.

10M“

"We are just wlliﬂ‘ IlIe
ﬁnishing touches to the ten-
der documents.“ he said.
addIn; that the legal condi-
tions of contract were in
Arabicand English. thIe the
teclhnical part was in English

“he

invited contractors will

receive extensive reports on

ﬁeld investigations as well as
ciliations. a hill of quart

ttties and drawings.

Total IeII th of the cause-
way Istohe Simeornprisina
IO lIrn ol emhanlrments at
water depths less than 6m. [2
tun oi brid . over deeper
water. and km oi roadway
3.5: 5 :3 5.2.2
= m. 1:... .2662. 8 5....
v3.9: 33.3.0 .33 S...
can 5o 0:; =5 (9.8 13.
3. I! .c :3 3.3.3:.
@322: a ring?

:3» 2.: 55w :8. w :8
an: 8.53:... In 2.8.8:
ﬁend—no: v.33: Quanta
8 E3 . 3:38 ‘3} a
38:8 30.. R Eon-so“: :61
up: on 32.2 v3.8
:8. .rowquoii. r 8.2..

”bi—ul-
EXPORT CREDIT MANDATB

Manama GULF MIRROR in English 17-23 Nov 79 p 1

[Text]

MIDLAND Bank have.
the mandate to: up $0830

uu’lliouotsgoﬂaeditJo
covet Bti' cow
Wininlhe‘lm
milion Alb. expo-don

pro .
ﬂaawwm
“”00””?sz
0:61 Gum -
main-Mateo" pa
mun-dismal!”
MWsOOUthh.
Mud-HM
tic. («Item-a.
amt-nun amt»
Ina lot Ah M:
"mam pol b the non
utmivcovenllem."
WWMW

C50: #820

Abdul All: Al-Zonil.
“MM-mu.

[tom—and alto updated in
dune:

Mt You"! Shin-I,

' 0

said that the m: “The

new necks nil aria ti:

09ml rut lheit am no
'II "

He said the bond
ALUMINUM BAHRMN AWARDS POWER STATION CONTRACT
Manama GULF MIRROR in English 17-23 Nov 79 p 1
[Text]

ALUMINIUM Bahrain this week embarked on a new
era of expansion. with the signing of a370 million syndi-
cated loan agreement. and the award of a new power
station contract. wotth between! 16 and! I7 million. to
John Brown Engineering of CI debank.

A local conlvncltn‘t’omptn . Al- ardiTranapet-t.alaonon
stile clearing contract worth {oat under a quarter ol a million

1mm.

1M lmn. guaranteed by the State of Bahrain. was negoti-
ated on very "line" terms lor a 10-year period with awe!
l1 international and local banlta lt «assignedon heh l the

vernmettt by the minister of ﬁnance. Mr Ehrahint Abdul

tmrn.

S' hing ntt hehall ol Alba.
the c airman ol' the hoard ot
tlircctnh Sit Mahmoud
Al-Alnm. said despite earl
production dill'tcttlttet. 000 t-
denee in the future ol Alba
had been amply justified.

Dr Khulcd Al-Fa 1. gen-
.eralmanagerolGul Interna-
tional llanlt. who are lead
manage“ ol the lion with
National Westminuer. said
the loan agreement was a
demonstration at the banking
community's faith. both in
the tuture of Alba and in the
stabllity and EN manage-
ment of t e Bahrain
economy

He nlao apohe ol a heal-
thier approach to industrial-
isation by Gull States after
they had fallen into the trap
of thinkin "that too many
chimneys win; smoke in
the air is the way into the 20th
century."

He cited the participation
at Saudi Arabia to Allan. and

Bahrain'a joint petro-
chemical projeet with
Kuwait. as up: at note
rational development. .

An Alba spoken-n Iltd
alter the eeremon that the
oompanywassat' that!

ot a price on thesis-
ines. rec companion -
din; beloaISZO million are

on the short list — John
Brown at UK. Alsthotn.
Atlantiqoe ol Fran: and

' Maniheni of Japan.

Heﬂngded that 2am
and new ' ' vere
above the price level.

With tono tnilion at Brit-
ish ea «edit avainhle.
seven other om cont-
paniea are in the In“ for
small" eontneta.

Development Minister.
Mr. Youanl Shinvi add the
Bahrain Government had
directed Alba to pot W
as many small contracts as
possible on the dvl nice. to
give local contractor" better
chance.

DETAILS ON FOREIGN INVESTMENTS IN EGYPT
Cairo Ab-AHRAM AL—IQ‘I‘ISADI 10 Nov 79 pp 0-5
[Article by 'Isam Rif'st]

I Text] The number of projects approved by the General Investment Authority
[61A] up to 30 September of this year amounts to 1,072 projects with a cap-
ital of 2.578 billion Egyptian pounds, with investment costs of 5.315
billion pounds. These projects will provide jobs for 165,294 workers whose
annual wages will be 199 million pounds.

Prom another angle, a report prepared by the CIA on the situation of the
projects which have been approved during the third quarter of 1979 notes
that the number of projects approved in the period from 7 January 1979 to
30 September 1979 amounted to 50 projects with a capital of 13b.6 million
pounds in comparison with 26 projects with a capital of 69.7 million pounds
for the same period last year.

In the field of private and public free zones, 16 projects were approved in
the period from 7 January 1979 to 30 September 1979 with a capital of 17.9
million pounds as compared to 12 projects with a capital of 16.4 million
pounds for the same period last year.

The projects approved during the third quarter of 1979 were divided among
10 companies in the investment field with a capital of 37 million pounds;
banks [literally “a bank"] with a capital of 5 million pounds; five tourism
projects with a capital of 14 million pounds; two projects in transport and
communications with a capital of 860,000 pounds:

-—Two projects in health and hospitals with a capital of 308 million pounds;
--Two projects in the field of agriculture and animal resources with a
capital of 5.5 million pounds;

--Ten projects in contracting with a capital of 15 million pounds;

-Two projects in the field of investments with a capital of 3.9 million
pounds;

--Two projects in textiles with a capital of a million pounds;

--Three projects in alimentary industries with a capital of 2.6 million
pounds;
--Flvc projects in chemical Industries with a capital of 17.8 million pounds;
--0ne project in the wood industry with a capital of 6 million pounds;
--Three projects in the engineering industries with a capital of 6.8

million pounds;

--0ne project in construction materials with a capital of 8.1 million pounds;
and

--0ne project in the petroleum field with a capital of 18.6 million pounds.

The [afore~mentioned 61A] report adds that an analysis of the agreements [on
the projects] during the third quarter of this year shows the following:

1. Foreign capital registered tangible activities in the direction of in-
vestment and contracting projects and, in shedding light on the nature of
these projects and their fields, we find that they will serve the fields
of housing and construction.

2. The large amount of foreign capital means an increased confidence of for-
eign capital in the economic climate and the direction of capital toward
the production projects which require, in turn, relatively large capital.

3. The flow of capital toward engineering projects in the field of making
land reclamation equipment, the manufacturer of apparatuses used with solar
encrsY. the production of motorcycles and, likewise, the chemical projects,
[all this] has imprinted upon it the flow of technology into Egypt. Gener-
ally speaking, in 1979. these projects flowed in the direction of production
such as the fertilizer industry and chemical materials used in the iron and

steel industry and not toward the plastic industries as in the previous
periods.

In this period. there are nine companies which will move technology into
Egypt. They are:

l. The American Dupont Co [in English] for petrochemical oil.

2. The Crush [in English] Company in the alimentary industries.

3. The International Paint Co. [in English] for producing marine paints.
4. The Ford Co. for producing light and intermediate lorries.

5. The Schlumberger Co. for locating the locales and quantities of petro-
leum and gas reserves by [use of] computers.

6. The German H. Korf Industrie Und Haudel [in English] Co. for rolling
reinforced iron.

7. The [German] ﬂochst A.G. Co. for producing synthetically resin emulsions
for use in the textile industry and dyeing.

8. The French Hutchinson Co. for producing high pressure hoses and radia-
tors.

9. A permit from the Japanese Honda Co. to produce Honda motorcycles.

In regard to the free zones-~the number of projects approved during the third
quarter of this year is 16 as compared to 12 projects for the same period
last year--it is clear that 62 percent of those approved are projects for
storing building materials and projects for navigation services. This is in
keeping with the policy of limiting storage projects in the public free
zones to the storage of production commodities and strategic materials
which signals a proportional reduction resulting from limiting the approval
of storage projects in the private free zones. This has [in turn] led to
the proportional reduction in total capital in this area.

it should be noted that since the beginning of 1979 there has been an in-
crease in projects specializing in the field of building materials indus-
tries whose number reached 7 projects with a total capital of 31 [possibly

21] million pounds. In the sane period for 1978, there were 6 projects
with a total capital of about 5 million pounds.

In the field of alimentary industries note the increased number of projects
and the relatively large amount of their capital. Since the beginning of
1979 until now there were 4 projects with a capital of about 10 nillion

pounds whereas since the beginning of 1978 up to 30 September 1978. there
were 3 projects with an approximate total capital of a million pounds.

C50: 4802

10
AWBRSSADCR TO USSR GIVES VIEW 0N CRISES

Soviet Opposition to 011 Hell Occupation

ManminPersianZINuv‘mpn

[Tact] manintmiw, Hrnohumadnokra, Wefﬂelruum
Islamic Ramblic to the lBSR, declared: "me Iranian Involutim has hem
ecu-ting a growing inflame: an Islamic and eastern countries.”

Mrlbkraadded: ”Alﬂnsghmofﬂaeeommtrieehavespedalpolitical
systamandmighthavevlewedmmlutim withtarror,theyueuell
disposedmmsit,mpportit,atﬁevmwiahwjoinit. Md,inthel.ight
ofuus,uewesthasbeomeapprehmsivedutrslmmgovemtsmmmnmg
gaodx'elatimswithmewest (oratleastmtoppooingﬂﬁn).ndghtjoinueir
natimsard.forﬂnf1rsttimsimﬂmm,mewestmightloeeita
dankntion of Islanic cannula."

MerawtlinedinpermistpmpagamtacucainInn,deasthe
atablishmnt of various religious magnum. Asanillustra—
tim,hemtimedﬂmeaahaisandzimists,uying: "moognizedgzmpemoh
asﬂeBahaismmtmiduodaUmeathousaﬂﬂleRevolutim.ﬂ-erenl
threat lies inpolitical orreligimsgmpewhooperate secretly, whose
leadersresidemmidelm.mMDambeimgulddaMledbyodu-s.
www.mamseofnanmw stxongfaithandmictim. tacticsaimed
ataxhrerdmﬂunhavefailedwbonw.‘

Regardingmintarymsmwarereportedtobegoimminthemm
on: and the possibility that mm mightoocupy Iranian oil wells,
mMokrastated: 'Ooapyingoiluells ismtallthateasyandﬂielhihed
Statescannever takemalltheumld's oil wells: trepeopleaofoil
producing omntriamldblouupmeiroil wells and, asarault, thewest's
muiesvmldmmine. W,hothﬂelssauxdwestemmtriesmld
opposesdnamvebyulemtedsutee.

11
oil Crunch in the World

As to U.S. emerge on shimmts of goods to Iran, especially the boycott of
foodstuffs, "r Mona asserted: "At present the situation differs iron that
prevailing in the meadeq at whm our oil could have gone mpirchased: now
there is a worldwide oil crunch and all countries are seating to purchase
additional mounts of oil. Thus, there is not even the slightest apprelnension
that we might be fcrced to turn to the Soviets. Became eastern bloc countries

CamemingmeummoedrepealofSectims SandGofthelSZOSoviet—
Iranian Friendship Treaty, Mr Hokra affimed: "here has been {controversy

Comerning the Soviet people's reaction especially that of its Hoslan citizens
towards recent Iranian develognents, Mr’Mokra said: ”Vb are a Moslsn country I
sluring_spiritual, culhiral, and historical ties with a segue-at of CM'SOViet

12
Impact of Islamic Revolution

to prevent U.s. military intewentim in , KEYHAN's reporter animated
mmm,lranianaitasaadort032lssmwmhadrehmmmnn
for consultatim. Mr Mokra pointed out the effects of the Itaniax Islamic
Wham. We are reproducing below his inter-vied in the form of an article.

more @cpedxtimalyandmoreinaocordwithmrmeds. Pimllywehmld like
to see the Soviets (just like the western countries) refrain fran bolstering
geirprigsofgoodsetpgrtedtous. Wehavebeencmductingelaboratenego-

l3
away and halt all operations. Naturally those experts are erployees of the
Iranian government and are in no way involved militarily or politically. It
is \p to us to watch what we are doing and be able to attain self-sufficiency
in industrial and agricultural sectors. Merely apellirg U.S. expats
(although their situation in no way can ootpare with that of Soviet experts)
is not encmgh. We also wish to expeditiously rouse the spirit of the Revolu-
timand independence anong all the wcrld's downtrodden nations.

We trust prove ourselves in the tedimlogial field and damn-ate that
Iranian scientists can match Western scientists in every field, creating
and inproving upon their own scientific tradition.

Science is not a gift bestowed by the lord exclusively upon western peoples
ardthewrdhasmtcreatedusasweaklirgs . Soonwenmstnovefromthe
stage of sloganeering to the stage of performmce and production. It is
incunbmt upon our Revolution to fight all forms of colonialist and self-
deprecating culture in order to facilitate the paths to progress of our
scientific institutions. Under gesent W, the mited States
and Israel are conniving with sane western and even eastern countries
(Moslem countries secretly supporting an atheistic philosophy), especially
throughout the Near East, to plot against our Revolution, cause disturbances,
and make military threats. 'lhe bolstering of military bases in the Indian
Ocean andpossibly in thePersianGilf area isapotential threatagainst
our Revolution , all Islamic countries, and even countries whose leaders are
stooges of colonialist pwers. 'lhe U.S. entanglemt with the LSSR, even if
it were not openly military in nature, would lead to a political crisis
throughout Persian Gulf countries. The bolstering of military forces in
U.S. bases in man and especially the Strait of moz cannot be devoid of
danger for Moslem natims. We should forestall oolonialist provocations
and instigations within Moslen oountria and ensure that the Iranian
govermmtdoesnot interfere inanyvay in theiraffairs. It isthepeoples
themelves of Voslen camtries who gradually but inevitably erulate our
Islamic Rimlution and join its ranks.

At present, two distinct countries, Northern Yanen and Soithern Yanen,
although having different political system, have been coming closer

together every day and are increasingly supportive or our revolutiomry goals,
especially since Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and U.S. facilities and bases in man
have jeopardized their territorial integrity and independmce. 'lhe goverment
of Southern Yanen, although socialist and close to lbscw, is increasingly
becoming nore aware of its Islamic identity and has even incorporated Islamic
theology into its constitution. We an take advantage of certain rifts mng
these countries and maintain constructive contacts with nations and governments
which synpathize with and support our Islanic Revolutim. We do not fear the
U.S. military threat and, as you law, on the anniversary of the Soviet
October Revolution, during my visit with Chairman Leonid arezlmev, at the
Kremlin, in the presence of the Suprane Soviet Catmittee amines and

Mr Andrey Grutyko, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, I made it absolume

14
clear that the Iranian nadm does not fear the 110,000-strmg (Ls. military
force, that Iranians would fight the Americans until the last breadth. and that
if the limited States cannits the grave mistake of attacking our oil wells or
ocmpying a portion of our territory in the Persian Gulf, it wmld fail, and
that I did not believe that other melem countries would renain indifferent.

Chairman Brezhnev warmly and cheafully velouned my statements. His wage-
mmtslmed (orat least itmsxwimressim) thatintheeventofa U.S.
military intervaxtim in Iran, the Soviet govermem mum not stand still.
Ihavehadthat ingressiminmnyofmysubeeqlmttalkswithSovietpoliti-
cians. meIran-krerioaneomonicmrumldcreateafuroreinanArabam
oil prodming countries and would gradually mdermine such mtria' omfi-
demeincontiniirqtoholdtheirassetsinu.s.banks. 0.5. reaction
vis-a-vis Iran are childish and denonstrate the instability of 0.5. eoonanic
and political systan. Pahape it has been God's wish to reveal U.s. political
wealmesstothemolemrldanimbleamilimilyweakcmmtry anhaslran
to confront a military giant such as the United States, and expose the frailty
and debility of (LS. eoornnic and cultural fondatims.

8291
C80: 4906

15
MEASURE 3mm TAKE! T0 asvm AGRICULTURE
Ministry of Agriculture Reorganisation
TehranKMinPersianZLOct'nPB

[react] During the time or the previous regime, only agricultural palm
rose; agricultural ﬁnds fell. we hope that, under today's revolutionary
conditions, the country's agricultural funds will rise.

The agricultural system has been turned upside dean and the Agricultural Council,
the provincial agricultural organisations, and agricultural service centers
will play an executive role in the new a¢ricultural systo.

By virtue of the plan which the Ministry of Agriculture has prepared and is
about to execute, Iran will be divided into 10 agricultm'al regions, and each

region will be supervised by one fully-apowered deputy.

Thus, the centralization of agricultural affairs will be eliminated, and all
affairs pertaining to agriculture will be conducted in the appropriate place by
agricultural officials, in cooperation with agriculttn‘al councils and service
centers.

The plane for changing the agricultural systaa, the mlininaries or which have
already been provided, will be inlenented in two phases. The first stage is
the study phase; the second stage is the executive phase. The executive stage
will include the county agriculmral service centers, in cooperation with the
county aaicultxu-al council,and the district agricultural and rural develop-eat
service centers in cooperation with the rural district council.

The new agricultural system will have six deputy ministers and one alternate
and each one of then will have distinct and defined duties. The Minister of
Agriculture, in addition to supervising all agricultural organisations and
firms, will make use or the cooperation of the Supreme Agricultural Cmcil, the
Aaicultural Coordinating Council, the Agricultural and lhlral Develop-ant
Coordinating Council, the Rural Resecch Center, the Service Secretariate and
centers, and advisers.

16
The alprems Agricultural Council will consist of the deliberation of the
provincial councils, Tehran agricultural experts, and representatives of
various offices of the undersecretaries. Members of the provincial agriculwral
council will assist the Chairman of the provisional agriculttn‘al organisation,
and the chief of each organization, like a minister, will have one alternate

or deputy.

The county agricultural service center has a chief and the agricultural council
will cooperate with this center, and the chief of the county agricultm‘al
“nice center will be an assistant deputy. Moreover, an itinerant

group offering technical and infrastructure services and welfare facilities

of the county mal research center will function under the supervision of the
chief of the county agricultural service center.

In this plan, for the purpose of distributing responsibilities and tuning over
agricultural affairs to the farmers, thuaelvea, special attention has been
given to the expertise of the toners and cattlmn of the county and an effort
has been made to make the farms realise their true value and take advantage
of all resources in improving the country's agriculture.

New Land 'l'emare Regulations
Tehran mm: in Persian 23 Oct 79 p2

[Tout] Unutiliaed agricultural land will be turned over to all graduates in
the field of agriculture, herdsmn, pensioners, and government uployees.

Two years grace period will be given to owners of unutilised land to develop
their land, and applicants must sulnnit their requests to the Department of
Agriculture in each location.

The t‘inistry of Agriculture and lhn'al Development announced today the regula-
tions for inn-hing over unutilized lands: The Einistry of Agriculture and
Rural Development, in implementing the law entitled, Wanner of Turning Over
and Revitalizing Lands,” announced:

1. Since, according to Article IV-3 of the law, the rights of individuals over
utilized lands is linked with the responsibility and duties that they have
regarding the legitimate use and exploitation of that land and, if this land
remains fallow and unused for three years without good reason, the Ministry
of Agriculture is legally obliged to take action to reclaim the land and turn
it over to agricultural volunteers; therefore, the more of these lands
should take note of their legal. obligations and responsibilities to take steps
ingood time to cultivate andwork thelandand torefrain fmleaving farm
lands unused.

2. Regarding wastelands (outside of the legal boundaries of the cities) and
mutilizod lands and properties, with attention to Article VIII of the law,
which is quoted verbatim: "Unutilized lands and properties that have been

registered in the names of individuals, or are beirg occupied by them, non

17
the date of approval of this law, will be at the disposal of the registered
applicant: or occupiers for a period of two years in order that they might
take steps to reclaim and exploit those lands. The grace period will be five
years for registered applicants or occupiers of the lands. At the end of the
aforementiomd time periods, the lands that remain fallow or unutiliaed, and
also utilized lands which,according to Article IV, appear to be umtilized,
will belong to the government. The E’inistry of Agriculture will take action,
in accordance with the law, with regard to turning them our."

Revitalization and Exploitation

Occupiers and registered applicants of these types of lands will be invited

to take the necessary steps, directly, from the date of publication of this
comnique, to reclaim and exploit the aforementioned lands and, in order that
in subsequent inquiries their rights will not be violated, they should pay a
visit and submit to the local Department of Agriculture,within three months,

the specifications of the lands of occupiers with evidence of their registration,
in accordance with the torus provided by that depart-ant.

With attention to Article III, the law invites all individuals who, by

16 Septenher 1979, the date of legal approval, have taken action to develop
and revitalize government (unutilised), wastelands, and pastures and who are
exploiting such lands without contract or documents of transfer, to visit
the local agricultural departments within three months to complete and submit
the prepared forms in order that, after the investigation by the three-man
conissions (I mosed of representatives of the appropriate district council,
the county ar-icultm-al council, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Mal
Affairs), which will be formed in the counties, arrangements might be node
to transfer these lands to those reclaiming than.

Regarding the transfer of the rest of the the government lands for the purpose
of revitalizing and developing tho, the priorities described below will be
observed:

-Local residents who have lived at least three years in the locale
-v°lunteers who make a comitnent to live in the locale

-Graduntes or agricultural, veterinary, and cattle raising colleges, provided
that they are not employed by the government

-Government employees, provided that they leave their jobs through retirement
or redemption of service

Within three months following the date of publication of this commique,
while designating the locale of activities and the lands in question, and plans
and program pertaining to revitalization and development of the lands,
Volunteers can draﬁt their requests in accordance with the examples which the
agricultural departmnto in each locale will place at their disposal and suhit
them directly to the aforementioned departments so that action might be taken

18
by the three-amber cormission in each county in accordance with the regula-
tions provided for in the law, which is being prepared right now, regarding
the requests received and the pertinent plans at the time of investigation
and with respect to transferring the lands to qualified individuals.

Cooperation for Rural Centers

Tehran xenon in Persian 28 Oct 79 p 12

Dr 'Ali l-Zohsnned Aysadi, Itinister of Agriculture and Rural Developmt,
announced this news in a nesting held in Mashhad and attended by renters of
the Agricultural Councils and representatives of the cattlenen and farmers of
Ehorasan.

‘l'he :‘inister of Agriculture spoke at this meeting and said, "In these centers,
farmers can mice use of the services which will be provided with the cooper-
ation of the l'inistry of Power, Ministry of Trade, l’inistry of Education,
l'inistry of Health and welfare, Ministry of Roads and Transportation, and
I-iinistry of Posts, Telegraph, and Telephone.“

He added, "The deputies of these ministries will serve with me on a coordin-
ating council, and we will study problem from our respective viewpoints and
we will even install one telephone in each village, and establish a multi-
purpose mosaua in each village which the people can use for worship, education,
studvina traditional customs and perusal of books.”

He likewise said, "Service centers representing the Agricultural Cooperative
Bank will embark on the simplest method of granting loans; veterinary tech-
nicians will be established in cattle and livestock raising locales; and, in
the counties, too, agricultural departments will be linked with the organiza-
tional. headquarters for resolving problems. Moreover, the agricultural councils
in rural districts will function along side this organization, and another of
the duties of the service centers will he to purcluu agricultural products
so that the famers can, if they wish, sell their products at a fair price."

01‘ Aysadi added, ”In order to eliminate problems pertaining to agricultural
machinery, we have designated three companies for the purchase of three types
of tractors since they will establish well-equipped repair shops in the counties
and will import the neodod spare parts in sufficient quantity.“

The l-‘inister of Agriculture said, "I'any pe sple are speaking rashly about the
question of land ownership. Islam does not believe that, for example, one
takes a milk-producing cow nun one person and gives it to another; rather it
says that the milk nust be distributed among the people, and the nechanian of
tithing is the highest system and establishes the stimlus for public welfare.“

19
The E'inister of rrriculture and Run-e1 Development, during his speech, nbarked
on the details of the activities of the treasury fund and said, 'This kind will
be mnaged in the villages under the supervision of the council called the
'village council' and this council will be composed of six people, and one
clergyman, teacher, or literate person will be added to maintain the account
books and lodgers for that council and, in so far as possible, these six people,
who will be elected from among those local, trustworthy individuals who are
acceptable to tho people, will mags the ﬁnd and, once each year, after the
harvest, will review the living expenses of the village families, taking the
amber of family members and the minim standard of living into consideration,
and they will provide the necessary assistance to eliminate any financial need.“

He added, ”If the family income exceeds its living costs, it will pay into
this fund religious fees, and the Imam has given the necessary instructions in
this regard. It is to explain this same program that I am travelling to each
of the provinces.“

In this meeting, which the deputies of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Devel-
opment and the director-general of agriculture for Khorasan Province attended,

the hinister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs said, "Some of the agricultural
problems stem from the lack of resources for coming a living in the villages.

This problem will not be solved quickly, and, to some extent, we need a rational
and logical period of time to provide for these needs, because the system of
government during the past 15 years tried to exterminate agriculture. We do

not, however, expect you to wait another 15 years; but, it is necessary that

you give as a chance in order that we might solve the problems to your liking.‘I

The Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development said, “The first problem is
the lack of a guaranteed future for the tamer, and the former govennnent, with
the spontaneously generated laws that were approved and implemented, mde the
farmers lose hope and they did not know what tomorrow would bring. There are
also problems pertaining to difficulties arising from agricultural machinery
and its variety and, likewise, the lack of technical personnel. These problems
have been given Ml attention by the government. I am asking you to exercise
revolutionary patience and give the government a chance. So far, with the
passage of 80 bills, the government has remved restrictive regulations that
were impeling the farmers.“

The Minister of A'n‘iculture and Rural Development added, "With the formation
of the agricultural councils, you femurs can determine better than anyone
else annoyances and dissatisfactions and, when you are not in a position to
do anything about them, the l-finistry of Agriculture will rush to your aid.”

Dr Ayzadi pointed out, “The l'inistry of Agriculture has 60,000 employees and
workers who, for the most part, live in the cities, and more than 6,000

of them live in Tehran. While the basic work of this group is only in the
rural areas, you see very few of these workers living in the villages and,
thus, few inspections are possible."
Dr Aysadi said, "All of the farmers' grinvances must be eliminated, their
income mat be raised, their standard of living nust be improved by a)-
com-aging agricultural work, and resources must be provided to encourage the
farmers to stay in rural areas and to check their migration to the cities.
This objective depends on providing for agricultural needs such as seeds,
fertilizer, insecticides, agricultural machinery and agricul tural credits.
E'omovnr, agricultural products must bo purchased from the farmers at a fair
price and the necessary information and new training by promoters must be
placed at their disposal. All of these problems have been studied and, in
each case,the necessary plans have been drawn up; but, unfortunately, radio
and television is not controlled by the government and therefore we cannot

hear something on radio and television, you do not give the gOVernmsnt credit
for it because, with attention to the atmosphere that dosinntes society re-
garding freedom or speech, any university professor, or this or that indivi-
dual, will try to hold a meeting on the pretext of being an authority. Ion,
however, should not werry about any statements they make."

351/.
CSO: #116

21
HIGH COURT DECISION CHALLENGES SETI‘LHiENT POLICY
Tel Aviv HAMODI'A in Hebrew 23 Oct 79 p 2
[Editorials "Storm After Storm"!

[Text] Before the Israeli public had fully digested the resignation of
Foreign Minister Moshe Dayan, it was struck by the storm of the high Court's
decision which unanimously held that the Ellen Moreh settlement must be
evacuated within 30 days.

There is no doubt that this decision willrzaccompany public-political activity
for a long time to come, whether because of its far-reaching significance

in one of the most sensitive areas in which the government, and especially
the present one, has concerned itself 3 or because of the far-reaching rami-
lications in the sphere of clash between supporters and opponents of the
government. and even between circles constituting the government itself .

for it is no secret that several cabinet ministers received the judicial
svstem's decision with undisguised satisfaction, viewing it as a victory

for the line which they had followed for some time.

This decision is most far-reaching. for it attacks the very basis of the
government's approach, which always seeks to maintain that scttlanents in

the territories do not have an ideological basis, but rather, to the degree

to which they are built, they are built to respond to the security and

military needs of the country. Opponents of the government's policy in this
area have always claimed that the government's claim is merely a cover and
disguise for the real motive, which is ideological, but that the government

is forced to hide this for political purposes and harsh international pressures.

The judges of the High Court examined the issue from this point of View,

in conjunction with international law governing the status of conquered ter-
ritory. After hearing various testimony and opinions, they were not persuaded
of the correctness of the military and security justification, especially
because of contradictions between statutents of the Chief of Staff and the
Deputy Defense Minister. The Chief of Staff claimed that the strategic
importance of the area in which Elon March is situated remnires the eatablish-
ment of a settlement, while the Defense Minister, without challenging the
strategic importance oftthe region, felt that security needs could be satisfied
without establishing a settlement there.

22
This contradiction in the testimony of two persons holding the senior posi-
tions in the security area was the basic justification of the judges in
acc-pLing the claim of those who challenged the decree which ordered the
hei.ure of their private lands. The judges linked this to the added fact
lhnl lhv neLtlers themselves, members of Gush Hmunim, openly admit that
Lhuii nmtiw Inr settling in this place are not military and security, but
rather ideological and philosophical. It is impossible not to accept the
claim of the judges who say that if the defense minister is not persuaded
ur the security need, then judges cannot be persuaded.

Prrhnpu the response of Gush Emunim is correct, in saying that the decision
is not against them, but rather against the government, since the government
and not they adopted the security rationale, and that now the government

must decide what to do. It is reasonable to assume that it will not adopt

the position of Gush Hmunim, and decide that henceforth all of the "land

of Israel" is to be settled for nationalist reasons. The government cannot
but see the scope of the whole problem, its political isolation in the inter-
national arena, and the heavy pressures being exerted upon it otherwise.

Moreover, if the government should want to decide upon settlement for "national
reasons“ as deaanded by Cush Emunim, it will first have to decide on the
annexation of the territories into the area of Israeli sovereignty, for
witlwut this every settlement will be declared illegal by the high Court,

on the basis of yesterday's decision. If the security justification requires
greater effort, and this too was rejected in the case of Elon March, it is
obvious that merely establishing a settlement in an area under the law of
occupied territory according to international convention, will most certainly
be declared illegal by the High Court. Could the government, under present
circumstances, no as far as to decide on the annexation of the territories,
in open contradiction to the Camp David accord, and endanger the peace
.u'.i'm-hienl‘. vi LII Egypt?

Obviously, the decision of the High Court is accompanied by a bitter taste.
we are very far from the conception of Cash Emunim and the fervor with which
they invest their adventurist actions, even though they cloak them in one

of our most precious values -- the sanctity of the land of Israel. He see no
need to prove the love of Israel which burns in the heart of every pious Jew,
but the higher moral decree of preservation of life is very strong, and if
that imperative applies to the life of a single person, a fortiori the lives
of many, and endangering the peace process and so openly challenging every
international factor clearly endangers the lives of many.

Nevertheless, the decision of the High Court has a bitter taste in that it
is totally severed from any spiritual link to this sensitive matter, which
exposes the whole trafic contradiction of establishing a Jewish settlement
on land which God promised to us in the covenant. The decision was made on
:mrely Seoular judicial grounds, and views the right to settle only from the
point of View of international law, and not from the strength of our link

to the land or from the view of compelling forces of the reasons of preser-
vation of life which have a basis in religious law.

23
This decision will cast its shadow on political events of the country in the
near future, and we doubt that the leaders of the Alinaent will be able to
enjoy this development, since the decision also contradicts their approach
to matters of settlement beyond the Green Line to the extent that it is not
based on clearly provable military needs. Many of the settlalents which were
set up by the Alinanent government were set up close to the political-
territorial line accepted by them, but it was not always possible to prove
the clear military need which is now required by the High Court.

The government now faces a wave of storms from all directions, both from
within from opponents of this type of settlenent, as well as from the opposition
which will assault it against this background, and from nabers of Gush

Elmunim and those circles in the coalition which insist on continuing settlement
in the territories.

7075
C50 : (MOS

21¢
EXPANSION 0F SETI‘LI'HENI'S ENDAKIERS SECURITY
Tel Aviv HAMDI 'A in Hebrew 16 Oct 79 p 2
[Editorials ”Showcase Operation and Security Danger"]

[Text] Of all of the varied responses heard in the last two days regarding
the government decision not to expropriate private lands but rather to use
state lands for the expansion of settlements, the strangest and most damaging
was that of (Josh munim, which was not satisfied with condemning it by words
but accompanied its words with a showcase operation by establishing "outposts"
which required many IDF units to dismantle the: in enforcing the law against
violaters.

Of all of the elenents which awaited the government's decision, it is precisely
Gush Enmnim which can be most satisfied with it, because in spite of every-
thing, the decision gives a green light to expansion, in one form or another,
of Jewish settlements in areas beyond the Green Line. The Gush munim members
are well aware of the government's motives, as well as the pressures and limit-
ations upon it and within which it must operate, and they should be the last
to increase the burden on the government and make things so difficult for it
in such an extreme and damaging way.

No om- can accuse the deputy defense minister, Hr Hordekhai Zippori, of being
alien to the idea of settling the land of Israel. He is a Herut member, a
movement which has always maintained the idea of a greater land of Israel. If

he can come and say that the operation of Gush Bunnie is nothing but grandstanding
which constitutes a danger and damage to the army and security forces -~

then he has a reason for it.

Gush Emunim proclaims its concern for the security of the country, but in its
actions it does the opposite. The Israeli government has enough problems and
trouble in the international political response to its actions, in its increasing
political isolation, and in the growing hostility towards the country, not

only on the part of the traditional enenies of Israel, butaalso on the part

of those who generally take a favorable attitude towards Israel and those who
are considered friends of Israel. Is the concern for the future of the people

25
"1' Israel to be expressed only in isolated showsase settlements here and
tluzro? Isn't there any concern for other arenas and fronts? Must they
alienate all peoples from us, and increase the hatred of Israel in the
Hurld?

II. is no wonder that Israel's enemies were delighted with the government's
decision, [or to them this is "proof” of Israel's intent “to dispossess and
oppress" the Arab people. But that is not enough for the Gush Bunnie: people.
To the fire of hatred for Israel, which is growing in intensity, they add
those operations which contribute nothing, not even from their point of view.

The result is that army forces are required to expend their efforts in evac-
uating those who build "settlaients". And the deputy défense minister speaks
bitterly of the many wasted hours of training of IDF people who mst deal
with law breakers looking only for publicity, while causing significant
danger to our security.

There is much abSurdity in all of this activity by the Gush munim washers,
and this absurdity finds expression in the fact that their settlenent targets
are only beyond the Green Line, while there is much territory within the

Green Line which is exposed to the danger of an Arab majority, such as the
region of the Galilee which calls out for Jewish settlenent. If they are

so concerned about losing land in Israel, why don't they wt an emphasis on
land which is clearly under Israeli rule, instead of on places where Israeli
control is questionable. He speak of areas where the Arab population is large,
the security danger is great, and the political damage is inestinable, to the
point of damaging the peace agreement with Egypt. Why must they do all of this?

These actions, which increase external hostility towards us, as well as internal
hatred among the populations of the country, constitute a danger adventure

for which there is no justification. It is completely pointless to try to

hinge this action to an "ideology" which stems, as it were. from the heritage
of Israel. This is a superfluous challenge which causes only security and
political danger.

7075
C508 10805

26
COVERIHENT FACES CHALLEKJES IN “INTER SﬁSION 0F KNESSEI
Tel Aviv HAZOFEH in Hebrew 23 Oct 79 p 2
likiitnrial: "Knesset Session Opens']

[Text] Already at the beginning of the Knesset winter session, which began
yesterday, the opposition is planning several no confidence notions: its
slogan will be the last session before the dispersal of the Knesset. for
which there is no repair other than early elections.

Of Course the coalition factions will frustrate this trend, not only with
a majority of votes but also by implanenting a foreign and domestic policy
with-a reorganization of the cabinet.

The resignation of the Foreign Minister and the High Court's decision on the
matter of Elon horeh require that the government have new personnel to
improve its performance, as well as significant conclusions so--as to enable
broader settlement.

1n the next two years, the government's ability to implenent its policy on
autonomy, economic and social problem, and to show credibility worthy of
its name will be tested.

The religious representatives will certainly be imediately concerned with
implementing the agreement on religious affairs, such as the law regulating
kashruth, the anti-abortion law, the-expansion of the authority of the rabbin-
ical courts, laws enforcing Sabbath observance, and garnering a majority for
a law on religious conversion.

The Jewish state is struggling for the integrity of its land, and at the moment
the religious comunity within it is struggling to maintain the integrity of

the people and a Jewish state. The struggle is in ways of education, as witnesse<
by the growing younger generation in religious schools and seminaries. The
struggle is also in public means. There is no comnity like the religious-
nationalist comunity in toms of organization and public influence. This will
enable it to approach the goals of Judaism which determine the face of the state
This government must be strengthened so that it may implement its policies in
the next 2 years of its term. We do not need early elections. We need an ill-
proved administration which will lead the country to its essential goals.

7075
C50: 6805 27
EIDN HOREH SETTLDiENT BACKED
Tel Aviv HAZOFEH in Hebrew 23 Oct 79 p 2

[Editorials "Elan Horeh win Arise Again")

[Text] The unanimous decision of the High Court ordering the Israeli govern-
ment to raiove the settlers and their homes, within 30 days, from lands owned
by the Arab village of Rujaib, is a carefully reasoned legal opinion of serious
public-national significance.

The decision is directed against the government which, by means of the military
administration, seized the lands of Elon Noreh. AcCording to a menorandun of
the Chief of Staff, military considerations require the establisrnent of a
Jewish settlenent here on a traffic axis of great value in the regional
security system. The decision decides that the primary and principal active
for the settlanent was political and not military, and according to the law,
such a motive does not justify the seizure of private lands. One of the

judges emphasized the differences of opinion between the Cheif of Staff and
the Defense Minister regarding security considerations.

Justice M. Landau said in his opinion that the religious faith and devotion of
the settlers should be respected, but that had no place in the law of a

secular state, in which the private property of both Jews and non-Jews must

be respected. The scheue of Gush minim to settle in the heart of the land of
lsrael, since it uses private lands, must be rejected because of the prohibition

of taking the property of others. Zionism supports the right of return of israel
to its land, without the displacenent of other peoples.

Apparently, the opinion takes the position that Jews do not have the right to
settle Judea and Samaria, even on barren mountains and enpty lands for which
money is paid, because of the challenge of the right of private property.

State sponsored settlanent, which is an imperative for the Jewish state and
people, on the land of Israel, the patrinony -- is it impossible to remove
obstacles before hand by legislation which recognizes reality, in order to
satisfy the desire of Jews, tens of thousands of Jews, to settle on their land?

28
It should be noted that the govermnent has not given its opinion properly
with regard to legal conflicts prior to deciding upon Jewish settlements

in Judea and Smnaria, and setting out a map of settlements. It is not enough
In Inoclnim that dozens of other Elon Horehs will be established, and it is
not I‘ImurJI to stand on the principle that Israeli land will not be withdrawn
lrmn. Greater attention must be paid to the legal, military, and politich
aspects in preparing the territories for Jewish settlement.

This settlement has not expelled anyone from his land. It has prevented the
uxlmlsion of Jews from settling in their own land. It redeelns parcels of land
from those who never lost the: to begin with because they had no inclination
to till then. It expcls the wildernessand establishes productive Jewish
settlements. It is pure Zionism. This is how pioneering settluents have been
established in Israel.

The order of the High Court was a serious shock, and counsel should be taken.
First, a Jewish settlanent must be established at Elon Horeh, where God said to
Abraham: "i will give this land to your offspring.” According to the Deputy
Defense Minister, the settlauent at Elon Moreh can be moved to a nearby spot,
where the land is stateowned, without the complications of private property.
This proposal calls for careful study. It is reasonable to assume that future
settlement operations will be subject to careful legal research.

Also to be cox-sidered is retroactive legislation, which would deal with all
of the claims which compose the High Court's decision, a legal proposal with
a public political background.

Chief Rabbi Goren characterized this perverse decision as one which limits
the possibility of Jewish settlement in all of the land of Israel. He has
proposed enacunent of a law enabling Jewish settlcnent on state lands in all
arms of the land of Israel.

The govermient of lsrael must consider the decision of the High Court, both in
terms of the special case of Elon Horeh, as well as in terms of settlement in
general. Such a consideration is urgent and requires practical conclusions.
Its principled policy of unlimited settlement in the territories requires
some official decisions.

In spite of the obstacles, Elon Horeh will be re-established.

707':
CSO: 4805

29
ISRAEL'S SETTLEMENT PLANS CALL FOR 2,000 UNITS IN NEXT 2 YEARS
TAl61158 Tel Aviv MA'ARIV in Hebrew 16 Dec 79 p 4 TA
[Article by Yosef Tzuri'el]

[Text] About 2.000 housing units are planned for Judaea and Samaria during
the current and next fiscal years.

According to an agreement reached by the Finance Ministry, the Housing Min-
istry and the Jewish Agency Settlement Department a special appropriation
will be guaranteed to absorb 2,000 Jewish families according to the following
order of priorities: first in Samaria, then in Judaea and finally in Gush
'Etzyon. Qiryat Arba' is not included in the plan because it is not handled
by the Jewish Agency Settlement Department.

A letter recently sent to the Housing Ministry by the director general of
the Zionist Federation Settlement Department states that the planning of

400 housing units will be completed by the end of this spring. During the
coming fiscal year it will be possible to complete the planning of construc-
tion in 17 existing settlements in Judaea and Samaria.

it has been learned that this planning has been done with the approval of
the Housing Ministry and the Finance Ministry "and there is no problem
regarding funds or candidates wishing to settle in Judaea and Samaria."
Only one problem could hinder the implementation of the plan: lack of
land.

Some 3,500 families now live in Judaea and Samaria.

C80: #805

30
ORIGIN, AIMS 0F 'SMS 0? 1H3 COUNTRY' :10va DISCUSSED
London AL-DUS'NR in Arabic No 436, 22-28 Oct 79 pp 35-37

[Article by Mahmud huharib: "The 'Sons of the Country' Hovement in
Occupied Palestine: The Beginnings and the Travails of Formation”]

[Text] In 1972, the "Sons of the Country" movement appeared in Us: al-
Fahm. a small Palestinian town occupied by Israel since 1948. In the second
half of the 19709, the movement spread out into the following villages:
Kabul, Nahaf, Sakhnin, Kufr Kenna, Al-‘I‘aybah, 'Arah and Jit. Cells are
preparing to establish the movement in a number of other Palestinian villa-
ges which have been under Israeli occupation since 1968.

mm is the "Sons of the Country" movement? "hat is its raison d'etre?
What are its activities? The answers to these and other questions will be
the subject of this study. In this study, we have drawn on tens of publi-
cations and leaflets issued by the "Sons of the Country" movement since its
establishment, in addition to interviews with founders of the movement in
"I'll al-Fshm.

Before launching into the subject, it is necessary to point out that
another movement, namely, "'lhe Land" movement. is similar to the "Sons of
the Country" movement in terms of its raison d'etre. though not in its
ideologY. means of struggle and organizational setup. "'lhe Land" movement
appeared in the early 19603, but the Israeli authorities, considering it
an illegal organization, stamped it out by means of a military order, and
by arresting or deporting its leaders.

There are, however, many differences between the nature of the conditions
and circumstances which gave rise to the two movements. The following are
the most important distinctions:

l--The "Sons of the Country" movement emerged after the crystallization of
the Palestine national liberation movement represented in the resistance
movement groups. "The Land" movement, on the other hand, appeared at the
height of the Nasirite tide. As such, it was ideologically an extension
of the Nasirite movement, dedicated to the idea that liberation would be
undertaken by outside forces under the leadership of Nasirism.

31
2-—By virtue of its background, "The Land" movement emphasized the Arabism
of the Palestinians living under Israeli occupation since 19/08, and
asserted that their liberation can be accomplished through pan-Arab action.
11m "500:: of the Country" movement, on the other hand, emphasizes the
I'.|II-si llIi-lnlsm 0! those Arabs and the Intrinsic power of the Palestinian
Arab people and their ability to liberate themselves and achieve self-
determination.

3—-'l'he "Sons of the Country" movement appeared after a qualitative and
quantitative change in those Palestinian masses characterized by the
emergence of a sense of national consciousness. Added to this [is the fact]
that those half a million inhabitants have not remained isolated from their
Palestinian brethren. Following the 1967 defeat, they re—established con-
tact with their Palestinian brethren in the occupied Rest Bank and Gaza
Strip. Although the activities of the "Sons of the Country" movement are
confined to the 19108 Palestinians [i.e. Palestinians in Israel proper], the
form and level of the struggle and political struggle of those Palestinians
are greatly influenced by events in the areas Occupied since 1967.

4--'i'he "Sons of the Country" movement started at the grassroots level and
moved upwards, and was launched as a result of the daily struggle of the
masses. whereas "1he Land" movement started at the top.

S—Unlike the "Sons of the Country" movement, "'ilie Land" movement had no
organizational structure.

The last two points probably provide the answer to the question: why was
"The Land" movement not able to resist and stand up to the decision to dis-
solve it and declare it illegitimate?

The Local Conditions Which Gave Rise to the 'Sons of the Country' Movement

We will concentrate here on the conditions which led to the emergence of
the "Sons of the Country" movement in 0mm al—i-‘ahm, noting that those con-
ditions bear great resenblance to the conditions prevailing in other
Palestinian villages, thereby enabling the movement to spread to those
villages.

Umm al-Fahm is a sizeable village with a population of 20,000 people. Be-
fore the establishment of Israel, the village owned 175,000 donums of
land. Israel, however, confiscated most of this land. leaving Una al-Fahm
with only 16,000 donums.1 Like most Palestinians living under Israeli
occupation since 1968, the inhabitants of 0- al-Pahm turned from peasants
into hired workers working in Israeli factories and plants. in addition to
working in the Israeli public services. such as hotels and restaurants.
ﬂore than 10.000 such workers travel daily for tens of miles to Tel Aviv
and other leraeii settlements to work. On the eve of the establishment of
the "Sons of the Country" movement, those people were--and are still to
this day--leading a life which can be described as at least hard. Until

32
that year, they had no electricity and they were Subject to constant
water shortages and disruptions--disruptions which sometimes lasted tens
of hours.

To this day. llm al-i";ihm still has no town plan, because the Israeli
authorities haw.- refused to endorse it. There is constant shortage in
classes, classrooms and schools. In 1972, the shortage in classes came

to more than 1.0.2 That is to say that more than 1,200 students were forced
that year to receive their education outside the schools in rented rooms
located in various parts of the village. The nudaer of students using
rented rooms has recently doubled. Um al-Fahm also suffers from the lack
of medical services of any kind as well as the lack of cultural clubs.

This bad situation, including the humiliation to which the workers who have
contact with Zionists are subjected, not to mention the strenuous nature

of their work and the low wages they make in comparison to the Zionist
workers, led to a perennial state of resentment and restiveness and the

emergence of a national consciousness and public opinion responding to the
national problems.

This resentment. national public opinion and indignation against the
Israeli authorities could not in the past be channeled into a mass national
action because any such efforts collided with the "clannish" and familial
pattern of aocial—-and political—relations in UIII al-Pahm, and because
there was no organization or movement capable of ripping apart those familial
relations and turning the indignation and misery into organized national
action serving the goals of the Palestinian people. The social pattern of
relations in the village, especially among the older generation, has been
and still Ia characterized by an inter-familial and clannish norm, although
this norm has been somewhat shaken in recent times. In fact, the transi-
tion of the Palestinian masses from farming on the land. which is normally
owned by the head of a family, to paid employment in Israeli plants and
economic installations and establishments involves a process of undermining
the familial pattern of relationships.

But it takes an organized force to put an end to the pattern of "political
familialism."

Since the establishment of Israel and until this day, the Israeli authori-
ties have been strengthening and nurturing familialism and sectarianism by
providing facilities and assistance to familial and sectarian leaderships
so that those "leaderships" may become Israel's props in the Arab community.
The Israeli authorities discerned early on that it is fairly easy for an
individual to free himself from the influence of the family and its poli-
tical and social fetters--that is from its political tutelage--because of
his ability to work outside his own comunity and because of the breakdown
of the economic relationship between him and his family as a result of the
confiscation of land. To compensate those "leaderships" for their lost
influence-—due, as we noted, to the confiscation of land—the Israeli

33
authorities granted than certain privileges, mostly in the form of the
power to conduct and exercise "mediation and good offices."

n“ we on." hand. the "fa-11131" lomlershlps, in addition to their role

or preserving hnckwardness and corruption and arousing familial fanaticism
and chauvinism, associate the-selves with the Zionist parties in the form
of "Arab electoral tickets" to solicit votes for the parties they belong

to during Knesset elections as well as to control the Arab local (municipal)
councils with the aim of securing the chains around the Arab masses,
assimilating them into the Zionist society. tearing them away from their
own Palestinian people and imposing on them denial and renunciation of their
own national character.

Those local conditions which pervaded the Palestinian villages, the defeat

of the Arab regimes in 1967 which upset many previous notions and concepts,
and the emergence of the Palestinian resistance movement as a movement of
national liberation entailing a recrystallization of the fighting Palestinian
personality, convinced many that they could not attain their oppressed
national and daily rights if they did not join the struggle for the sake

of securing those rights.

The young people began to wonder about where they stand in the midst of
those events and what is their role in the general Palestinian struggle.
They did not see in the Israeli Connist Party—Rakah—a party which could
undertake the role to which they aspired or which expresses their national
aspirations as an integral part of the Palestinian Arab people.3 Although
the majority of its rank and file is made up of Palestinians, Rakah oper-
ates principally as a leftist Israeli party dedicated to the cause of
changing "the Israeli capitalist system into an Israeli socialist system.“
In the early 19703. Rakah saw the conflict in the Middle East as one among
states, that is as a conflict which can be settled through a peace agreement
among those states based on the implementation of UN Security Council
Resolution 262,5 without discerning that the Palestinian masses wherever
they may be have a role of struggle to play in the cause of self-determina-
tion. Rakah. therefore. confined its struggle to interpellating ministers
in the Knesset. mobilizing a press campaign against the Israeli government.
not the Zionist entity, and to distributing leaflets or holding rallies.

It rarely organizes demonstrations, and when it does. it always seeks
permission from the government first and holds the demonstration in an
Israeli city. never in Palestinian towns or villages. Rakah pins great
hopes on Knesset elections and regards them as one of the major battles it
must wage, inviting the Arabs to vote for its candidates.

Those considerations convinced many young Palestinians that Rakah cannot

be the vehicle of their struggle, since they want a struggling, collisionist
party toeing a revolutionary line. ‘lhey do not want to find themselves as
part of the lsraeli left, although there is a leftist majority among them,
because they see themselves as part of the Palestinian national movement.
They did not want to struggle as Israelis of Palestinian Arab descent
demanding equality but as Palestinians who have their national and daily
rights.

34
[1“: 'Sons of the Country Movement' in Unit al-Fahm

rin- lirst phase was one of search for an alternative. It was during this
”has.— :hal llw idea of establishing a movement was first entertained. Ii
group of young inhabitants of Um nl-i-‘ahm. prominently Chassan Ighbariyah,
liasnn .Ibarin and Muhammad Nahajnih, got together in 1969 and began to dis-
ms: the question of how to conduct the struggle and in what form. The
voung sen began their activities in the form of group sessions in which
tney presented their political ideas to their friends and stressed the
need 'or mass action to attain their oppressed rights. in addition to
their political activities among their friends. those young men also tried
to expand their activities by delivering lectures and presenting a national
play portraying the situation among the workers of Us. al-i-‘ahm. They
collided, however, with the familial-political system which held sway in
the village. As a result. no one agreed to give them a place in which to
prcsvnt their play, and they dinsolved the acting group which they had
set up. During that very period many of the nationally-oriented youth of
the village who were chafing under the prevalent conditions were active in
Ultra nl-Pahm, with each group going its own way. In 1971, for example, a
group of young men published a local magazine in Um al-Fahm under the
title of AL-FlKR [THOUGHT]. The magazine appeared three times only in its
bid to chart a course of its own.

With the passage of time, it became necessary to unify and bring together
all those national groups. Unification endeavors intensified in 1972 when
Chassan ighbariyah. Muhammad Mahajnih and iiasan Jbarin contacted the groups
of young nationals who had frozen their activities and their alliance with
Rnkah because of their opposition to its policies, as well as the group
which had published the mgazine AL-FIKR. and discussed with them the
political affairs and the conditions of Um sl-Paha and the way to get rid
of those conditions. The young men who accepted the idea of mes struggle
joined the main group and formed the nucleus of the "Sons of the Country"
movement.

The founders of the "Sons of the Country" movement applied a successful
teeth: in their bid to win over the largest possible nuwer of national
forces. They did not advertise themselves as an established movement with
a defined political program. institutions and so forth. Instead, they
announced in their leaflets that a political movement is being built and
that the proposed movement is open to the masses of Um- nl-Fahm and any
national who wishes to join. For more than 6 months. the movement put
out leaflets and pamphlets under the name of "The Proposed Sons of the
Country" platform. When the movement brought into its ranks the largest
possible number of nationals it became the "Sons of the Country" platform.

The founder.» have drawn up a simple general program for the "Sons of the
Country" movement. 1he prealble has this to say: "Taking as its point
of departure the present bitter reality.... a group of young men set out
to translate 'he current indignation and moaning into serious and constructive

3S
ﬂCClOn. taking LE UPC" lLﬁell LU Elli-1311‘!" Llle .HUNIULLHIILH lulu IECIULL
then into a popular organization representing their will and determination
and deriving from their very life. One look at the past and present is
enough to explain the reasons which have led to this bad and shameful sit-
uation. The exploitation and fostering of familial chauvinism in our
society were among the aajor causes which have set relatives apart and
steered them away from the right path. The authority has been actively
stirring up familial fanaticisns and setting up its associates in the name
of familialism.“9

Under the heading of "Principles and Goals“ it was stated that the movement
is independent. its aim is to mobilize the masses to defend their rights,
it does not believe in familialism as a social system which can develop the
village. and that it will "define its position very clearly on each ques-
tion in which our village has an interest, whatever it may be."10 The
movement also called for the emancipation of the Arab woman so that she may
take her natural place in society. and urged all the progressive national
forces to cooperate in the interest of the country, making it clear that
the movement will follow "a policy of action to attain our rights...not a
policy of begging. imploringness and appeasement."11

The movement's program involved several areas: 1) Education; 2) Hork and
land; 3) the organizational structure of the village. In all those

areas, the program described the situation, proposed solutions and explained
the course of struggle.

A perusal of the program reveals that it is a simple and clear prescription
for the unification of all the national forces that are not associated with
fanilialism and the lsraeli authority and its Zionist parties into a gen-
eral structure of struggle for the sake of the country.

ouc's attention is caught by Article 4 of the program, which says that the
"Sons of the Country" will define its position on each issue in which Umm
al-Fahm has an interest. This was so stated to stop all those who want to
turn the “Sons of the Country" into a local platform only. With this
article they put an end to a debate that was going on among some of their
supporters about whether the movement will be local or country-wide.

The second phase (1972) marked the beginning of intensive mass action. in
1972, Umm ai-Fahm saw new political activities and struggle practices, in
addition to political ideas and views that were unprecedented. 0n 1 May
1972, the "Sons of the Country" movement distributed a leaflet marking

that occasion in which it explained the conditions of the workers and the
villagers in general and the problems which they suffer. It prescribed the
course of action: "...but the problems cannot be solved by means of a one-
shot news conference, but by persistent work and persevering struggle
together with the masses of the village..."12

During that same period, the "Sons of the Country" called the workers to
a general meeting in one of the coffee houses for lack of another more

36
proper and suitable place. The movement distributed a leaflet signed by
"The Initiative Committee for the Defense of Workers' Rights“3 under the
title of: "Re Have Built Tel Aviv! Enough...Let's Build Urn al-Fahm."
[Addressing itself to the worker] the leaflet said: "...there are b.000
workers in your village, including 1,000 youngsters who are forced to work
before they reach the legal age. There are 500 peasants who are tilling
the land of others. It takes you 6 hours every day to go to your work and
back...You must know that your condition is a direct result of a predesigned
plan whose aim is to deprive you of your rights while making you carry out
all your duties...He urge you to work for the establishment of a local
workers committee that would seek by all possible means to eliminate the
sources of your problems."

The movement was unsuccessful. however, in its bid to set up a co-ittee for
the defense of the rights of workers. That was due to their numerical and
organizational weakness at the time, and to the priority they set to the
task of first building the “Sons of the Country" movement before setting up
other unionist organizations. Their failure to set up a committee for the
defense of workers' rights did not deter them, however, especially since
there was another sector which was suffering from a policy of suppression
and of keeping them ignorant, namely, the students. On lb November 1972,
the "Sons of the Country" organized a demonstration against a visit by the
then Israeli minister of education and culture, Yigal Allon, when he made
a tailored—for-television visit to open a secondary school.

Visits by Israeli ministers and senior officials to Palestinian villages
mostly occur as the Knesset elections draw near. Usually the purpose of
such visits is to open a street or a school or to promise to introduce
electricity in the village. The aim of such visits is clear, and that is
to support the [local] hirelings and try to win the largest possible nuaber
of Arab votes for the parties in power. On that particular visit. Allon
was received by all the agents and the familial leaders who are associated
with the authority, in addition to the nakah leadership in Urn al-Fahm.

In that kind of situation, the "Sons of the Country" stood alone against

a large front of enemies. They successfully managed, however. to express
their position and attack their enemies by using two methods. One was

the distribution of a leaflet in which they stated their position on the
[Allon] visit, and the plots which are being hatched against the people.
The leaflet said that "those associates swear. probably by all that's holy,
that Allon will contribute vast sums of money toward the building of a
regional secondary school. They have pretended to forget that they have
conducted a deal behind the scenes whereby they made a gift of more than 20
dounams of the village's remaining land to the Jewish Agency." The leaf-
let pointed out that "the authority's policy is designed to keep our

ions ignzrant on the scientific. civilizational level and the nationalist
evel.

The second method the "Sons of the Country" movement has used is to organize
a demonstration in which the main participants were young people and students

37
during the reception CBIQWﬂy 101' A110". in! urllllllaLlauua auuutcu
national slogans and slogans opposed to the authority and the agents, such
as the slogan. "Shin Beth, out out. we want our country free." (Shin

Beth refers to the Israeli intelligence service).

Actually, this and other national slogans were shouted in Ulla al-Fnhn
shortly before that time. specifically on the first of November 1972 during
the demonstration which was organized at the outset of the school year

when there was a shortage of 60 classes in the schools. In addition to

the shortage, a large percentage of qualified and eligible people were
deprived of employment, while employment was given to those who have yielded
to the authority. 6

It is noted that the "Sons of the Country" during that constituent period
was active on the local level in than al-Fahla and the country-wide level as
well. In that year, the movement. acting in cooperation with anti-Zionist
Jewish forces and some national personalities in the triangle, formed "The
Triangle Committee for Solidarity with the Inhabitants of Bur'uu and Iqrit."
11\is came during the period which witnessed an intensification in the struggle
to return the inhabitants of those two Palestinian villages to their villages
and lands. The committee distributed a leaflet calling on the inhabitants
of the triangle to support and help their Palestinian Arab brethren in the
Galilee and declaring that "our success there in the Galilee would be a
success for the triangle too, for the struggle is a eomon struggle for the
sake of a cannon cause." The leaflet called on the masses to participate

in a procession "to be held" in Jerusalem and to go to the villages of
Bur'un and Iqrit to express solidarity with their brethren there.17

it seems that the "Sons of the Country" movement was iﬂaued with energy.
vitality and new initiatives from the outset of its uses action. In addi-
tion to calling for the establishaent of local workers comittees and
joining "’lhe Triangle Comittee for Solidarity with the Inhabitants of
Bur'um and Iqrit," it formed a popular comittee for the defense of the land
in Um al-Fahm. I believe that this was the first time that the 1948
[Israeli] Arabs have formed a people's committee to defend their land.

These activities suffered a sudden and strong blow. however, following the
arrest of three of the movement's founders. Toward the end of 1972. the
Israeli authorities arrested Ghsssan Ighbariyah. Hasan Jbarin and huhamd
Hahsjnih on charges of uedeership in a fedayeen network. Chassan was
sentenced to 6 years in prison and Hasan to lo years. The charges against
Huhamad Hahajnih were dropped for lack of evidence, and he was released 2
months after his arrest.

38
5.
6.
7.

8.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

110.

15.

16.

17.

Pamphlet entitled "The Progressive National Movement," the "Sons of

the Country" novement and other popular circles of Um al-Pahu, 1978.

Leaflet distributed by the "Sons of the Country" under the title of
"From the Heart of the Schools."

Interview with three of the founders of the "Sons of the Country" move-
ment: Hasan Jbarin. Muhamd Hahajnih and Chassan Ighbariyah. Inter-
view conducted in Um al-Fahu in April 1979.

The constitution of the Israeli CP, Rakah.

Record of the 17th Congress of the Israeli CP. Rakah, page 161.
Interview with "Sons of the Country" Eomders, op. cit.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Booklet, "The Proposed Sons of the Country Platform." p 1.

mm. p 3.

Ibld.

Leaflet signed by "me Proposed Sons of the Country Platform" and
entitled "Enough of Expatriation."

A clear proof that the "Sons of the Country" was behind the leaflet is
that the leaflet was signed by persons who were active net-hers of the
movement during that period, prominently Hassn Jbarin, a founder of
the movenent.

Interview.

Untitled leaflet by "The Proposed Sons of the Country Platform." dated
16 November 1972.

Interview.

Leaflet entitled "From the Heart of the Schools," op. cit.

39
[The following, a leaflet of the "Sons of the Country" movenent, is an
inset in the above article:]

Statement on the Sadat Visit

The attention of the masses in the country and the world is riveted today,
and rightly so, on the Sadat visit to Israel. Many sincerely expect the
visit to blaze a path to the peace that everyone is talking about.

Can this visit fulfill those expectations?

We say no.

That is because the essence of the present conflict in the Middle East is
not the conflict between Egypt and Israel, but the result of the dis-
possession of the Palestinian Arab people of their hoaeland, their expul-
sion from their land and their deprivation of the natural right to live
and exist as a people, in addition to denying the. their national and
humanitarian rights.

The aim of the Sadat visit is to overcone "the administrative problems“ and
to circumvent the Palestine Liberation Organization (P10), the sole recog—
nized representative of the Palestinian Arab people.

Even if Sadat succeeded in his bid to gain Begin's consent to return Sinai
to Egypt, or conversely if Begin succeeded in extracting from Sadat strips
of Sinai, the Palestine question will relain unsolved. In other words,
there would be no peace.

The road to peace passes through the point of recognizing the right of

the Palestinian Arab people to self-determination and return to their home-
land and the exercise of that right. Any agree-ant that may be achieved
behind the back of the Palestinian Arab people or at their expense, and
without the participation of their recognized representative. the PLO,

will not bring peace to the region and would be a prelude to a new war.

As long as the living conditions of the sons of the Palestinian Arab people
who live within the framework of Israeli domination continue to be anchored
in land confiscation, the destruction of houses, settle-eat, the Judifica-
tion of the Galilee, suppression of basic human rights and the killing of
inhabitants, such as the seven victims who fell on the Day of the Land

and in Majd al-Kurum, then any talk about peace, either in Jerusalem,
Cairo, Geneva or any other place, will be no more than an act of deception
and of throwing dust in the eyes of the Iasses that thirst for peace.

The road to peace goes through Palestine, not through Sadat.
Date: 19 November 1977. A leaflet of the "Sons of the Country" Iovenent.

9254
680: 4802

40
MINISTRY OF DEFENSE COLONIZATION PROGRAM DISCUSSED
Tel Aviv HA'ARETZ in Hebrew 21 Oct 79 p 9
[Article by Ze'ev Shif]

[Text] What is unique about the Hinistry of Defense's colonization prograa
for Judea and Samaria, and how is it different from the program of Minister
Sharon and the Cash Elohim? Are the objectives of the two programs
fundamentally different. or just the aethods?

In conversations with the defense managers we hear definitions such as:

Our progras is unique because it is based on having more Jews in Judea and
Samaria. but fewer settlements. Instead of small mushrooming settlements
with their problems, it is based on centers. 0r: Our program is a kind of
enlarged Allon program, whose aim is to avoid penetrating the crowded
centers of the Arab population.

At first look it is clear that the colonization prograa of the Defense
Ministry. which is integrated with the deploysent programs of the 10?, is
striving for less friction with the Arabs of the region and for a ninimun
of expropriation of private land. The point of view of this program
includes more from the standpoint of economics and planning. It is a sore
"balanced" program than that of Gush Ehunio. But it would be a aistake to
attribute to it what it does not contain.

The Defense hinistry's prograa is also intended to perpetuate the Israeli
hold on Judea and Samaria. although by another aetPod. Although it wants
to stay away froa the Arab population centers. it cannot be said that it
reseables the Allon program. For the Defense Ministry's program speaks of
"a meaningful presence in the heart of Saaaria." According to the
evaluation of the program's proponents. there is enough government land to
achieve this goal, without settling at the entrance to Nabulus or in the
suburbs of Rau'allah.

Consolidation in Centers

The colonization program of the Defense Ministry did not come into
existence only when a Likud minister of defense was appointed. Already

41
during the time of Shim'on Peres. the planning wing of the general staff.
which had been entrusted with matters of national security. had prepared a
general security-colonization program. This program was subsequently
presented to Minister Weizmann, went through some modifications, and was
worked out in more detail.

The planners list several fundamental principles. First, they emphasize
that instead of dozens of small settlements. the program proposes to deal
with a limited number of large civilian centers, each numbering thousands
of inhabitants. The small settlements among them would be saved because
they could depend on the centers for employment and services.

Another fundamental principle is to avoid as far as possible entering
regions that are densely populated by Arabs. Apparently, this principle
was established because of practical needs. such as the need to minimize
political difficulties. This can be learned from the fact that one of the
two political aims mentioned in the program is, as we said, a meaningful
and stable presence of Jews in Samaria. The second political aim is "the
strengthening of the Jerusalem region."

From a security standpoint it is said that large centers are easier to
defend. and themselves contribute to the security of the region. The
program fits the security point of view. and dovetails with the deployment
of the military infrastructure.

From an economic standpoint the proponents of the program point to future
advantages. District centers will make possible a better and less
expensive development of the infrastructure (water. electricity,
coununications, roads. convenience services, transportation, employment.
and the like). During the first stage they will depend on the Israeli
polulation centers in the Jerusalem region and the coastal plain;
subsequently. they will develop independently. Large centers will. they
say. encourage private initiative in providing jobs and housing. Thus the
circle of people involved in the affairs of Judea and Samaria, and not
necessarily in political problems. will be enlarged. And finally, because
we are speaking of a limited number of districts, the proponents of the
program estimate that the land question will be less complicated.

in the first stage six such centers were mentioned. but after the update
last April a seventh in Judea-Samaria was added. How they speak of two
district centers in the Gaza strip. whose importance is increasing now that
it has been decided that Israel will withdraw from the Rafah salient. One
of the centers will be located in the Qatif region, and the other further
north, near Ziqim (Hahsom Erez).

Belts of Jewish Settlements
The centers in Judea and Samaria will be in two large blocks. Three will

be in the Jerusalem region. and with the update there will be an additional
center, named Ma'on Carmel, in the scuthern part of the Hebron hill country.

42
The second block. which will be in the heart of Samaria, will contain three
rvnicrs. The Jerusalem block will consist of the ﬂush Btzyon center; the
Mn'nlch 'Adumim center. on the Jerusalem-Jericho axis. containing tens of
thousands of dunnms of government land. and where a military industrial
enterprise is already operating; and the Civ'on center in the Jerusalem
area. west of Neve Ya'aqov. on the planned Ben Shemen-'Atarot axis.

Inspection of the map indicates that the planning and likewise the
implementation in the area are intended to surround Jerusalem with two belts
of Jewish settlements. The inner belt consists of greater Jerusalem.
'Atarot. ﬂeve Ya'aqov, Giv'on, and 'Azarya. The outer and broader belt is
that of Ha'aleh 'Adumim, Gush Etzyon. and Bet Horon.

The Samaria block consists of the Qarne Shomron center. about 20 kilometers
from Kfar Save: the Heres center, about 25 kilometers from Petah Tiqva.
along the main trans-Samaria road that runs from Petah Tiqva to Ha'ale
'Efrayim in the Jordan valley; and the Nebi Salah center, southwest of
Heres.

From the military geographical standpoint it is clear that the program
planners established the settlement blocks in several belts. The eastern-
most is that in the Jordan valley (the Allon program). which is joined to
the Judcan desert and the southern part of the Hebron hill country (Hs'on
Carmel). Then come the two belts mentioned above that encircle Jerusalem.
The western strip, bordering the coastal strip. is located almost entirely
in the extreme western part of Samaria. All the settlements are in the
region south of Qalqiliya, and to the north, partly in the Green Line area.
is the block of Gilbo'a settlements. These strips are joined by a network
of roads. many of which are of strategic importance.

The most important of these is the trans-Samaria axis, which as we have
said joins the center of the coastal plain with the center of the Jordanian
horder. This is not the only corridor that bisects Judea and Samaria.
North of Jerusalem is the Ben Shemen-'Atarot road, and near Gush Etzyon is
the 'Emeq ﬂa'alah-Teqoa' axis. The settlements are located mainly at the
two ends of the axis and near the important junctions.

In this way military control of the principal junctions would be attained.
In addition to the transverse (east-west) axes. there are also several
important longitudinal (north—south) axes; the most notable of these is the
Allon axis. almost the entire length of which can be traveled in the hills
that overlook the Jordan valley.

The Plan Has Not Been Realized

The program is being implemented piecemeal, depending on budgets and
manpower, just as the Allen program was implemented even though the govern-
ment never officially authorized its complete version. So far one may
count 57 settlements in Judea and Samaria, of which 23 are in the Jordan
valley. In spite of the controversy in the government concerning enlarging

b3
six of the settlements. it is clear that the subject has not thereby been
closed. 'The Ministerial Council on Colonization Hatters has already
authorized the establishment of additional settlements, although the

number and the locations have not yet been announced officially. when the
colonization program was prepared in the Defense Ministry it was estimated
that in 1980 the Jewish population of Judea and Samaria would reach 20.000.
This forecast has not come true. It is doubtful whether the other forecast
in the program, that the Jewish population in Judea and Samaria would reach
120.000 by 1988. can materialize.

This is the planning picture from the military and colonization standpoints.
The political problem is something else. Hill the Palestinians and the
inhabitants of Judas and Samaria be ready to conduct conversations on
autonomy with us when the Israeli government is implementing such a
colonization program? And if so, the demographic interpretation of this
program can only be a bear hug, the unavoidable outcome of which will be a
binational state.

9045
C50: 6805

64
at... $22.8...

4-28.: . up... 5: 5-3 ~35
(3:52.. two :3 3‘53 35.5w.
:9 3b.:- 2 I 33.2.2: .252...
v2. 23. 32. p .253 v2.85. :8...
p88: 8 co so 092. :3. 3:.
35:3 .2 3352 5.9.3....

<2.on .25.. :30 95.3.6. 8
8.5.0: .33. 5.9.25! 358:-
28 32...». on 23: 333 as :8
:12! v5... .83.... 3.. >932
.262 (so... can 8.. v2. as: 1.3
2:235. 3 302:»: r... :5
3:2... .89.

19:23... .3 En 2.002. .3-
2.?233 2.5:. St... .893.
5.2.3. 55 3:2. «318..- 28 :7 _
012.... 8335.23. _

.33 2...... :v :8 :52... 8....
5a 5.38.. :8 292.88 8 2: ..¢.
m- do you no“ [new u

"an. mum
I». III.
”I ’3.
% S
“and I“ "J u
Yn'uov WI u 0.!
“uh m M 0.!
Anal-- Ihvtl u u
0.4 I.“ u .-
10..“ M - 1..
II. U0 1M — u
own a 1..

”Wm m M I"

’06
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R000200030052-9

NONI-ZN HILL QUIT UNLESS INCGiE TAX LAHS AMENDED
Jerusalem JERUSALEM POST in English 11 Nov 79 p 2

[Article by Michal Yudclman]

[Text )
tilncometulevoorenotonuc- plenttedoobtytnod
ed. many women will be [mod to Inn depﬂve her oi on
leontheworliorcomdretm children-”WAN
house. the eecretory-generol oi income. which in «It!
No'unu. Nave And. wernod tut oi herhuoud'o ioeon

week.

the and thet the present income
to: ion discriminate against
worried romeo and divorced end
widowed ”then. end that Ne'mt
denondedthettheuiombeurgent-

uroel In mid], to
women workers. vi
nuke up only u not on
lone. while in Jena 1
meny. :- well u ot'
countrie- they can!!!

Iy unendtd. per cent. Untovmnhl
Ile'lnut In the root body oi onion. to hm! deter

more "nan-um. tron even W ‘0 I
The rim coat- of chiidcm and aid.

hominid W are mount
it inoreull‘iy ditﬂcuit for mother:
to keep A Job. And uid. She
denuded that working notherl

Other discriminate
elude the not that we
only on per cent 0! :
ﬂower promotion. I

receive tvo mdlt point- (netudot with uwu
um) tor every child inetud oi the women. A retire
one point now grated. end that yeonlowerthentorn

divorced or widowed mother-

recelve .- exm point.

income ton Iowa should mm
was between the pondoo and
work too-me receivod by widow.
And out

A men working with her No-
outdlntleirmmeeo. tumor

(:50: 1.820

1.7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00880R000200030052-9
Bonner. dcullnulcd wmr ﬂ
n.“ I cublc mom at um I. lull
loo upon-Ive tot «mun; "cowl
Mull“ In Add mum.

Iowa II My pnylu tor
ulu. Yncobovllch and“. The
motel (or out put comm vhlch
allowed maul you: 0! mm
(allowing "In, you. no not 0»-
mm. M sud.

Movnltwmuublnud
Irmu very “thumbculddho
dwell In our nu: ma «mod
by In! you-'- utlom mm wad
not be fully cm.

”Our pmcnl nu: me h
on on“ m In mom. VIII:
domandlncolu up. Iowan“:
summer In In, an to My
reduce on supply. And the W
um um hll the tumors. urlculum
commuuplollpcrccmolwuc
anal commpuou o! 1.. union cable
mum." Ymbovmh ma.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: CIA-RDP82-00850R000200030052-9

SHARON PROMISES TO SELL LAND FOR VILLAS
.Icrusnlcn JERUSALEM POST in English 29 Nov 79 p 3

[Article by Yitzhak Oked]

[Text]
TIL AVIV. — Agricullm ﬁlm-lot the "03"" “pun,
Arlcl Ohm ”My mull-«I lo The cool a .1.me
ocll l-rul und- Mmlnlnnllon “d ”m a. M ‘
9mm! n nomlul puc- hr 0* by on mum mum
amnion o! "villa-nonhuman" In the 15. PM“ n 0W to u
N'ﬂV- um M «the plan a
- All" mulln‘ um: "ﬂuen- “mm.” mu 'm. m
. alive. at the m Shh-nu "clonal 3"” hundf.‘ P"
council. Slum uld ll» Meals already w M pm
would be “he Omu nut Boot-hobo. "an”. gm an
The nelllomcnlu wlll not he 3_
agricultural and «all now!“ will
mclve about u am at land.
Baal Ihlmoa l- a w ecu-ell
Adjacent lo Beanbag. The propu-
cd development ill! he gonna: of
(ISO: L820

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00880R000200030052-9
BRIEFS

NEH ELON MORE SITE—Agriculture Minister Ari'el Sharon says that a large
Jewish town will be established on Jabal al-Kabir, which will make a con-
siderable contribution to peace. He said that he could tell the Knesset
that the transfer of Elon Note to Jsbal al-Kabir was proceeding as planned.
Sharon was replying to a question by Mr Uri Avneri. Along those listening
to the minister's reply was Deputy Prime Minister Yiga'el Yadin, who

returned to work this warning. [Text] [TA121039 Jerusales Dooestic
Service in Hebrew 1000 GMT 12 Dec 79 TA]

C80: 4805

50
BRIEFS

AMMONIA PLANT PRODUCT!“ LINB--Kuwait's plans to industrialise received
a boost this week with the signing of an agreement to instal a fourth
production line for ammonia at the Kuwait Petrochemical Company's plant.
when installed, it will put the country on a par with industrial nations
in output of chemical fertilisers. One Iillion tons a year will be
produced. mostly for export. The decision to build the new line came
after experts reported that worldwide desand for fertilisers would reach
record peaks by 1983, when KPc's plant will come on stream. Current
world production is 60 million tons annually, but another 40 million
tone will be needed within five years. Many mania plants will have
closed by then, Kuwait experts believe, because they are too far from
energy sources and the cost of fuelling them will be prohibitive. The
line will be a joint venture with a Danish company. which has agreed to
train young Kuwaiti engineers and technicians free of charge in Denmark.
[Text] [Manama GULF MIRROR in English 6-9 Nov 79 p 11]

C80: 10820

51
DETAILS OF 1980 BUDGET REVEALED BY EHIR

Manama GULF MIRROR in English 24-30 Nov 79 p 12

[Text]

QATAR is to increase
spending on basic and
industrial projects by 27
percent. it wasannouneed
this week in a record
budget. Details were

mind by the Arnir.
S ailth Khaltla bin Hamad
AIThani.

Basic and industrial 0-
jes1sgetthclion'sshareo the
budget funds: QR 4.928 mil.
littn asztguinst OR 3.882 mil-

him last yeur. Allocations l‘nr -

ltnancinu industrial rnjects
and building loans or civil
servants total 0R 6.6912
million

111:; budget is divided into
Clphi \L‘t‘lltllh:
Industry and Agriculture

(‘mh of state or state-
;mrslctl projects totalled
0R.2.ll42.2 million of which
OR ‘15!" 2 million was allo-
culc tocom te [Imjeetshy
Qatar Petro'l‘eeum Corpora-
tion and OR l.l35 million
was to repay industrial corn-
panit-s‘ Ilium.

Exploration

Money was earmarked lor
feasibiltty and economic
studies on light industries
which would be followed by
setting up the necessary
industries. The private sector
is ex cted to participate but
on 0 million ts allocated for
Government promotion and
development.

OR 377 million has been
allocated to complete basic
industrial services. These

include equi ngtheindtw
trialareaat mamm-
nin; it.aettin;upberthsand
uaygdeepenin waterways.
ﬂeveloping g: devsoes.

eting t shores and
uildinp for maintenance
andservices.

The Petroleum Affairs
Department received money
tomaintain roduetivityotoil
and as we . dove their
production and un rtalte
more exploration operations
which need seitmogriphie
surveys and studies.

Provision was' made for
extending gas pipelines to
supply factories. power
ﬁneratin; stations, and

salination stations with
:heir increasing needs for
use.

Allocations were made for
building materials and
organic rtiliaer industries.

Experimental farms are to
be set-up to improve Jgriwl-
rural production and an

agricultural survey will look
at ﬁnding more arable land.

A search will be made for new
water resources for irrigation
and is earmarked to

increase t green areas at
the country.

52

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOBSOROOO200030052-9

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000200030052-9

Maud
OR 958 l
marked lo:
public buildi
was for" m
yectsa e
tion. such
building:- lot
lnlortnatim
roleum. the
looking We-
ment residt
Said. 'armed
houscsforM
tion staff. I
and Electra
Ministry one
o/ 2.000 I
bruises

0R IOO l
cutcd tor h
state cm )
build hoes:
:nlc public 1
tnl'rastructur
sites at West

pleted.

New not
built throat
there are r
and butt '
buildin t
Cou '.the
cation. the
the'l‘echnicr
Said and a
compound
stores. civil
arsdhousesl
new hotel.
SocialServi
OR 229.5
l'tl ltt \e‘l up seven spans

uln in Doha and other
con. to addition to the
Equestrian Club. a shooting
club and a tourist marine
club.

Funds will go to the Doha
Tower. el't'andinf and
developin 'wdutu Khail
Pork andt wo. Protects lnr
licouttl'ving Doha. Installa-
lmlh lot the Ministry ul
Into run-n. including new
tt‘lcrtsmn .totl fudltl broad-
casting \tttttom. relay stations
.tttd .t nets lttlkltlllc lhtt'ulll:
were illul mcludcd itt Ihr:
budget this _\c.tr

lleztch cuhtns will hr built
to (‘tt.t\l.t| cities. Qatar
National Museum will he
cxlutidctl and other schemes
wil be carried out by the
municipalities ol Wuktah.
Khnr. Rayyun. Al Shamal
Tot-n. Umnt Slal Alt and
Jumttylizt

lm roventents will be
into uced in the park: ol
Waltruh. Dukhan. Jumaylia
Ktuhan. Eiv Hailctttn. Al
Shamnl Town. Wajbtt and
Thslthaitn. and to markets
and other lie utilities in
Kaaltarn khaira. SotIe-
isrna. Khnr. Waltrah. Rayyan
and Al Shamal Town.
uncalle-

Oatat has earmarked OR
527.2 million to upgrade
education. Oatar Untversity
will be com ted and new
schools esta ‘ hed lor vari-
ous educational stages in
Doha and other towns. in
addition to completing the
programme started by the
state lastyear.atueoslolOR

C50: £820

385 million. (or construction
ol new schools in all parts of
tile country.

Funds wtll be channelled to
the establishment ol new
ntitulues. pl: unds and
annexes to t Faculty oi
Education. to Qatar National
Lihmry and to the Vocational
Training Centre.

Healh

0R I67.l million will lie
med to complete and equip
llamad (icncrul l-lmpital and
to build new health centres.
Other schemes include
ctpttnsion and modiﬁcation
ol Rumailult llmpitztl. the
dental clinic. the medical
clinic in Wulrzth. the Mater-
rttty Hospital. Doha Hospital
and Utnm Said Hospital.
Electricity and Water

ORLZ‘JZ million was allo-
cated lot cleclricit and water
potions. OR 74...] million
will he directed to increasin;
the capnctt of Ras Ahu Fon-
tas and as (\bu Ahhoud
power stations. constructing
power lranslcrring stations
and e ruling the present
power istrihutin; stations.

A station for eetitral con-
trol ol water so ies will he
established a the system
genera“ improved.

0R 2 2.4 million was allo-
cated lor expanding the sow-
age network. Increasing the
capacity of rel'tnin I and
punt ‘ stations cost
on “amnion. A scheme to
use sewage water for irriga-
tion thrott h a distribution

network wt I cost OR 38 mil-
lion.

53

Tm.”
tlaa Id M _

OR 490 million wtll he
used to carry out postal
die-mes and plans lot har-
bours. civil aviation. enm-
ntttnication and telecom-
munications and berths. A
new somatic mail centre
will be installed next year at
Doha West Bay.

Doha harbour will receive
0R Ill .6 million [or
improvements. OR 64.5 mil-
lion is allocated lot expansion
ul Doha International Air-

_ port.

OR llll..‘l million will
finance the construction of :t
communications network
through the Gull marine
cable. the coastal slttliott lor
marine communications. u
car telephones network and a
microwave network with
Saudi Arabia.

The amount also covers
additions to the satellite sla-
tion and installing a new satel-
lite station.

The ca acity of Qatar
National elephonc Services
will be increased by adding
50.000 more lines tn Doha
and otttsidc the capital.

Qatar has allocated on
233.6 million to improve
existing roads and construct
new roads.

Other Admits
0118811 million has been
allocated to assist land own-

m {394 $335.3

and security ol the stale.
IMPROVEMENTS MADE 1“ COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Oman '0?!“ in Arabic 18 Nov 79 p 31

[Excerpts] During the past 9 years, the einistry of posts, telephone. and
telegraph has aade the following accouplishnentsl

It has increased the number of telephone lines from («16 in 1970 to 16,000
at the end of the 5-year plan in 1980.

A ground satellite station in the district of al-Hajir was opened at the
end of 1974. it has a capacity of 60 channels, which can be increased to
300. The station carries television and radio programs to and fro- the
sultanate and links the internal districts with the external network by
means of small ground stations. such as the satellite station in Salalah,
which was put into service in 1977. and is connected with the ground sta-
tion in al-Hajir by way of the satellite in the Indian Ocean.

The ainietry carried out the following projects last year:

It expanded the telephone services of the Greater hatruh central from
2,000 to 6,000 lines. The work will be finished at the end of this year.

It completed the space links for television broadcasting for Sur. Nazwa.
and San» by installing a ground station to receive the television broad-
casts froe the capital. It also installed equipaent in the ground station
in Salalah to enable it to trans-it its programs to the capital. It linked
the al-Burayni area with the town of al-'Ayn in the UAE by direct local

telephone service, so that charges through it are aade for local calls
instead of international calls.

A contract was concluded for the importation of equipoent and apparatus
to add 2!: new telephone channels to the satellite ground station in
al-Hajir. increasing its capacity Eton 72 to 96 channels. The equipment
is expected to arrive in Nave-her 1979. According to the report of the
international Union of Radio and Telegraph Con-unications. this station
is considered one of the 165 best stations in the world.

An automatic Telex central with 1.200 lines was installed to replace the

5/0
manual central. 1his new service will be linked by 550 lines with tele-

printers which are on hand at the present time. It can offer Telex service
in Arabic within the sultanate.

Future Projects

The ministry has a project to use solar power for radio and telegraph.
This project will provide the gas which is now being used to operate the
microwave towers. and will save the time and energy which are being used
to carry the gas to the towers by helicopter.

Posts

The ministry has increased the number of post offices and substations in
the country from 27 in 1975 to 106 at the present time. It has also

adopted a mobile postal service, special delivery service. and postal
money order service.

During the current year, the ministry participated in the world adninis-
trative conference for radio in Geneva and the world ad-inistrative con-
ferences for posts in Rio de Janeiro.

C50: 10802

SS
[Text]

Mu Dhnt. Nov. ZJIWANX UAE
Hut: and [Mann Mintmy
Under-Seaman Fem AI Mm: met
ha: madly with the vtstuu
um who led by mm
0! Flame: Lun- Finally.

The unmet-t Mtnhut armed
he: mt Walncully ftntn Kttutt lot
Uh wﬂh UAE oﬂkﬂs on "III:
vellum and tntenutloml ml:
mun

Mama! unlined to the vmm
tumult-tn vm mum at Indumhl
mu m the UAE. and outllned the
tellnmhlp between the mutt: ltd
me wants. In W In
watt-m lmm the "1an
«Mum

The "Met-Scurvy told the
limwtes New» Apathy (WAM) ltet
the nteetlng that the vhttln; deteu-
me had nut-tuned the catﬂbhmcnt
ul "Int vcnluh: tun-path wuh the
tutti. and the mum-m ul studtes
m pmltk' mammal path“ In! the
M".

Ilc added that the Human
We: hut enmeshed hh mum's
D-Ml‘lt.‘\\ tn tum lMli rum tn
alt-mm] technulmy. Int-loam. the
death-J. elcttttelty and transmit
Inhmes.

Watt-I t-lpltlnml III! N hut] ttttt-
llnnl tn' the VMIIB the UAE‘\
Intent III the devemtcnt ot Mm-
n-mml mum's. mull-1y lift-out.
mm. funk. x‘hnoh ltd other M
mus. nut that the all!!!" h. nov-
tden ellmvteptnthedemat
dlhc Ind-mud mu otthemny
ttmh the mun-union of the
Muir“ In

Thu. annulus thnt loci MW.-
nun In )otnt ventute «om: shook!
bcumlnmumolil macaw In
theme at ventutes whtdt I: mn-

(.820

TALKS OPENED WITH HUNGARIANS 0" TRADE RELATIONS

Abu Dhabi EMIRATES NEHS in English 21. Nov 79 p 3

«tent-ﬂuted. In which at the
mmhmutmntu
UAE end the other mmm
memutent.

Amneplhthetltmlw
of the Industtlu m. the

0mm dad. I: n ma!-
henstve survey of can". Muh-
menu. so that a plan to: Imus
Industnnt dew cut he
W-

56

BRIEFS

ADNPC LOAN-“Aim Dhabi. Nov. 10 (HAM)--Abu Dhabi National Pipeline Construc-
tion Company (ADNPC) has obtained under an agreement signed today with

a group of companies, a lS—million dirham loan supervised by the National
Bank'of Abu Dhabi. The loan to be repaid over four years. will be used
to purchase necessary equipment and machinery for the company. The
cxecut ivc President of "BAD Assad Samar, who signed on behalf of the
bank. said the loan is within the context of bank's policy to finance

not ional and local projects with Arab and national capital to consolidate
the UAF. economy. ADNPC has been established last year to construct and
maintain oil and associated pipelines and the pimping, injection and
pressure stations. Abu Dhabi National 011 Company (ADNOC) contributes
60 per cent of the company's capital and the remainder is contributed

by a French company. [Text] [Abu Dhabi EMIRATES NEWS in English

ll Nov 79 p 3]

SURPLUS TRADE BALANCE--Abu Dhabi. Nov. 110 (RAM)--The UAB had a surplus
trade balance of 10.31 billion dirhaas during the first half of this year
compared with 9.35 billion dirhams during the first half of 1978. according
to a report by the Currency Board. The Currency Board, the Economy and
Comerce Ministry and the Planning Ministry have compseted studies on the
development of UAE's foreign trade during 1978. including an assessment

of the balance of payments for 1978 and the first half of 1979. The
Currency Board's recent bulletin had indicated that despite a substantial
decrease of 6.2 per cent in the value of oil exports during 1978 compared
with I977. the value is expected to increase by about 38A per cent during
1979. This is attributed to the increase in oil prices rather than produc-
tion. Gas exports are not expected to achieve a quick growth due to the
expected increase in the local use of gas for industrial purposes. The
value of other exports and re-exports is expected to reach 6.88 billion
dirhams in 1979 compared with 10.22 billions in 1978. an increase of

15.6 per cent. The value of imports totalled 1.7 billion dirhams during
the first half of 1979 compared to 9.2 billion dirhams during the second
half of 1978. Invisible accounts which had registered a deficit of

10.74 billion dirhams in 1978. registered a deficit of 4.88 billion
dirhams during the first half of 1979. [Text] [Abu Dhabi EMIRATES "£115

in English 15 Nov 79 p l]

58
BR‘lTiSll PATROL BOATS-—The first 10 fast patrol boats. due to be delivered
to the U.A.F..'s interior Ministry by the end of the year. has been
Imnu-Iu-d In Britain. Built of GR? (glass reinforced plastic). the

i|.H nu-ln- diesel powered vessels are to be used for immigrnt ion control.
'l'lwy .m- brim: mmlv by watercraft of Sussex and are lmsed on the fira's
l’-1200 fast patrol bunt design and have :1 top speed of 21 knots. Fitted
with radar and VHF radio telephone. each host can accommodate four crew
and up to six innigrstion control officers. watercraft will provide
spares and after-sales support for the UAR boats. Other Middle East
orders include two Ill-metre patrol boats for the Omani police. [Text]
[Manama GULF MIRROR in English 5-9 Nov 79 p 105]

FUJAYRAH CWT PLANT--Pujeirsh's new cement factory--the sixth in the
UAE--will have a capital of Dh350 million. There will be 70 million
shares at DhS each. The factory, which is being built at Dibbs. will have
a yearly capacity of 530,000 tons. Fujeirah Amiri Court president

Sal iman Al Jassim. told the Emirates News Agency this week that the

Abu Dhahi goverment, the Fujeirah government and the Islamic Development
Bank will be taking big shares in the company. with the remainder offered
for public subscription. Work will start soon on the factory which is
likely to be completed within two years. Raw materials for production
will come iron the nearby mountains. [Text] [Manama GULF MIRROR

in English 10-16 Nov 79 p 39]

ALUMINUM SHELTER START-UP--Dabai's $1 billion aluminium smelter began
limited production last week. in preparation for next Januarv. when it
is due to start maximum output of 135,000 tonnes a year. Built by
British Smelter Construction. the plant is designed to employ 1.600
workers; it includes a 515W power station and s desalination plant
with .1 capacity of 25 million gallons of fresh water a day. The gas-
fuelled smelter. which uses are from a bauxite refinery in Uestern
Australia. is 80 per cent owned by the government of Dubai and

20 per cent by Alusmelter Holdings. which is joint owned by Alcan

UK and Southwire Co of Georgia. in the US. [Text] [Paris AN-NAHAR
ARAB REPORT 6 NE“) in English 19 Nov 79 p 7]

C50: 4820

59
SMIARAN LEADER SAYS SPANISR POLICY FULL 01' CONTRADICTIONS

Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 26 Oct 79 p 3

[interview with POLISARIO Secretary General Bachir Hustafa Sayed by 31.0.:
date and place not given]

[Text] Hassi Budjana (Western Sahara)--The POLISARIO Front deeply regrets
the tinidity and "contradictions" of Spanish foreign policy and appeals to
President Suarez "not to dirty his image." These were the words of
POLISARIO Secretary General Bachir Hustafa Sayed in an exclusive interview
granted to BL PAIS.

Bachir stressed the fact that neither the sun [Saharan Democratic Arab
Republic] nor the POLISARIO Front wish to interfere in Spanish affairs. "1
ask you," he said, "not to have my words interpreted as interference...."

The relations between the POLISARIO Front and the Spanish government party
and. therefore, with the administration of President Suarez, are really
strained. but the historic relations between the two peoples cannot be
destroyed. Bachir feels that the position of the Spanish Government is con-
tradictory. that it suffers from too many twists and does not take a fire
attitude.

Saharan leaders believed that President Suarez "who has a unblemished
record as a statesman." would have the courage to erase the blot made by
the previous cabinet.

"Spain changes directions constantly in its policy toward'us. It turns
from 180' to 90'. Spain wants to be friends with everybody, but its
friendship is defined by an interpretation of the trilateral agreement
and its consequences, which is the same as being in favor of Horocco...."

Question: why do you insist on this?
Answer: Perhaps because Spain is tied to France and the United States too

much and is not free in its movements. The proof that Spain "clings" to
the spirit of the trilateral agreement is that it has not changed its

60
outside action in this matter, even after the signing of a peace treaty
between our country and Mauritania.

Question: Does the POLISARIO Pront feel. affected by the recent vote in the
Spanish Parliament?

Answer: It has been a painful surprise for us to see this attitude of the
UCD [Democratic Center Union] and that these discussions were held precisely
when the United Nations is meeting, and we ask ourselves. why make these
statements if not to influence the debates on the Saharan problem at the
General Assenbly.

Question: Do you believe the President Suarez is personally responsible for
this policy?

Answer: Of course. Suarez is the head of this government that defines this
policy. The president of the Spanish cabinet is responsible for its

present policy. It cannot be conceived that he holds a different position
from the one expressed by his minister Marcelino Oreja, nor can it be
imagined that the latter when he speaks. does not state the latest Spanish
position.

Question: President Carter has decided to authorize the sale of weapons
to Morocco. This will create a new situation for the POLISARIO Pront....

Answer: Every time Morocco was on the verge of negotiating with us.
imperialist powers have found justification to force a new intransigent
position from Rabat. Washington tries to solve the Moroccan situation
"Zaire style" and this can only be explained by its deliberate desire to
exterminate our people. We shall never agree to negotiate under a threat,
regardless of what kind it is.

1163’.
C50: 41010

61
KING, OPPOSITION DISAGRBB ABOUT "AGING SAHARAN "AR
Madrid EL PAIS in Spanish 28 Oct 79 p 7
[Article by Domingo Del Pino]

[Text] Rabat--Some 4 years after the green march. the
"marriage Italian style" between King Masses II and

the Moroccan opposition forces begins to enter into real
"divorce proceedings." The way of conducting the con-
frontation in the civilian and military fields, and the
growing internationalization of the conflict are the
inediate reasons which seem destined to lead. in spite

of the seriousness of the situation. to a new period

of animosity between the Moroccan palace and the opposition.

Although in a general way socialists and comists accept the fact that
Morocco may get weapons wherever they are offered, both political parties
have violently reacted to what seems to them an attth of the government
to present the war in Sahara as the result of East-Heat confrontation and.
therefore, make the western world believe that to defend Morocco will be to

its advantage in the economic and strategic sphere.

The comunists in their newspaper AI. BAYANB said yesterday that the "war is
not won with 12 helicopters that fly at 300 km per hour and 6 planes which,
although they have sophisticated electronic equipment, do not fly faster
than 1.00 km per hour." As if completing this statmnt. the socialists
believe, according to an editorial in their weekly LIBERATION. that what is
needed is "firm political will.‘I

This political will, which is lacking according to the USP? [Socialist
Union of Popular Forces] made the socialist deputies withdraw from the
Parliament last Hadnesday when a proposal made by the group demanding a
serious debate about the situation in Sahara, the economic situation and
repression, was not taken into consideration.

The opposition has totally dissociated itself from the presentation of the
conflict made by the government. Official press in the last few days.
has pretended that what is happening is a communist plot and King Hassan

62
II himself has allegedly told a 0.5. navy officer that if the regime in
Morocco changes the United States would have to ground its Mediterranean
fleet.

The cot-unists and socialists radically differ from this interpretation

of the government. They not only feel that U.S. weapons-which for the time
being are nothing but a pronise--are not going to resolve the course of

the war but. added LIBERATION, Morocco cannot allow itself the luxury of
disregarding the entire socialist public opinion.

The socialist and comunist analysis is that in spite of the fact that USSR
supports the right of self-determination and has received an Algerian
military delegation, France, Spain. and even the United States also recognize
it. and weapons and equipment of these two first countries are also being
used by the POLISARIO Front.

Furthermore. while the BBC does not support Morocco, said LIBERATIOII, no
European socialist country has recognized the POLISARIO Front, although
Cuba. Vietnam. Madagascar and Mozambique do recognize it. as well as
Liberia. Panama, Mexico. Zambia. Kenya and Nigeria. "which have close
relations with the United States."

Chinese Weapons

This ambiguity that the Moroccan political parties allege in order not to
accept the idea that this is an East-Rest conflict. is to a certain degree
confimed by the attitudes of the countries that supply weapons and political
support to the belligerents. While North Korea, which is pro-china. recog-
nizes the SDAR [Saharan Democratic Arab Republic], Morocco has received

a shipoent of Chinese weapons this weekend. If the USSR supplies the
VOLISARIO Front through Algeria and Libya, Romania sells weapons to Morocco
with Moscow's approval. The United States at the sane time as it promises
to equip Morocco. sends to Algeria no less than its national security

adviser Brzezinski.

ll636
650: 1.410

63
AOSARIO DELHIATION ADDRESSES HOROCCAN WORKERS' GROUP IN PARIS
1.0111611. Rabat MAP in English 1219 GMT 11 Dec 79 Lb

[Text] Paris, Dec 11 (MAM—The Association of the Saharan Natives, formerly
under Spanish rule (AOSARIO), attended here a meeting organized by the rep—
:esentativea of the Moroccan workers' association established in France.

During this meeting, the delegation read a message addressed by its mili-
tants to all their compatriots forming the Moroccan colony in Europe. In
their message. the AOSARIO militants namely said that "the peoples smitten
with justice and freedom are now ware of the fact that the nilitary aggres-
sions of the Algerian army, helped by international mercenaries, financed
by Tripoli, are threatening peace and stability in the whole region.

"These same countries, added the nilitants, display active and nultilateral
efforts, urging the Algerian leaders to put an end to their escapade of war
and to release the hundreds of our families sequestered in the Algerian con-
centration camps."

"However. the militants went on, the Algerian leaders seen to prefer the
language of guns to that of uisdon and Arab and Islamic brotherhood."

"Thus, we must, of all of us, be united in order to face these known enemies,
and prevent them from sowing confusion in our ranks," concluded the message.

C50: 1.1.20

64