APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/00: cuA-nopoa-ooosonooo1oooaoou-o
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040044-8

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/e4os
20 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(FOUO 4/79)

4

ll S.J()ﬂ1T PtﬁﬂJCJNTKDOiS RESEAKRC]! SEEN/“CE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040044-8
NME

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[l are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original intonation was
processed. where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was aunsrized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Goverment.

COPYRIGH' MUS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WRSIHP OF
MATERIALS REPNDUCED HEREIN mum THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BB RESTRICTED MOFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR Ol-‘PICIAL USE ONLY

spas L/8408
20 April 1979

TRANSLAJIONS 0N USSR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS

(P0110 4/79)
CONTENTS Pass
Efficiency of New Technology Scmttnlzed
1

(VOPROSY WKI. Feb 79) 0000- toOooooooootoooocooooonoloc

Evaluation of the Technology, by}. Roman
Mouth of valuation of Equipment, by 1.. Gatovokty

Agrolnduurhl Cot-pier. Efﬁciency weighed
(L. Koontrov;,VOPROSY axonoutxx, Feb 79) ................¢... 28
NR OETICIAL USE ONLY

”910m 01’ m WOW! scmmsim
Bvsluetion of New Technology ‘

Hoscow vomoer mum in Russien no 2, reb'19 pp h7-56

[Kl-cm. by A. Konson, Leningred: “Bfﬂciency of museum lieu Bquip-
nent

[text] An evelustion of the econouic efficiency of new equipment nesting
quelitetively new needs of society is one of the nost coupler. urgent end
less elehoreted problems. Recently. the economic efficiency frm the intro-
duction of new equipment. in eddition to the swing of the expenditures of
netionel lshor. hes begun to include the setisfection of verious onelitsp
tivelv new needs of society. for exuple. the possibility of receiving e
color insge on television screens. or of neking nore scourste neesursnents
of sue phennnene, inprovaent in the quelity of output or services end so
forth. Therefore. verious quelitetive components of the econonic effect
iron the introduction of new equipsent begin to ecquire ever greeter in-
portence.

The further developent of science is one of the components of the economic
effect fra the introduction of new equipent. llew equipsent helps to deep-
en our understending of the laws of neture. The schievuents in col-unice-
tion engineering, computer technology. quentus electronics end nucl'eer
physics ere lei-gel: detenined by the dsvelopent of the nethods of end in-
struments for recording phenasene of short durstion. Specielists working

in these fields need reliehle methods of ohteining dots on the torn end dure-
tion of verious types of pulses (single. recurrent end step pulses chengim
in form. duretion, enplitude end delay). Opticsl nethods neking it possible

to expend the cepshilities of neesuring systan heve recently penetreted
more end nore into the techniques of redio neeeurenents. For eruple, in
strohoscopic neesurere. es s result of the use of losers. the dynenics renge
increeees end the degree of isolstion between signed end geting circuits
rises. The lergeet telescope, whose nein nirror is 6 neters in disaster.

in the world. developed in the Soviet Union. hes enehled our estroomers to
penetrete into outer spece up to distencee of severel billions of light yeers
l'he light gethered by this telescope brim previously insccessihle infer-ev-
tion from the depths of the universe.

1
FOR OFFICIAL 053 OIILY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

he applied to the same type of equipment the structure of the economic ef-
fect obtained fras its introduction can great]: change in the course of

time. Usually. the technical revolution is connected with the satisfaction
of sons qualitatively nev need of society. After the creation of such e-
quipment, as a rule. its subsequent developments are aimed at meeting this
nev need of society with the smallest possible expenditures. that is. at
saving expenditures. Furthermore. provision is also made for further im-
provement in the quality of output in order to best meet this new need of
society. This happens until a new technical revolution takes place in this

field. Then the purposes of their developments and the economic effect ob-
tained from their introduction again charge.

As an example. the table shows the change in the structure of the economic
effect obtained from the development of television broadcasting equipment.

Structure of Economic Effect Obtained

m of Develogents ’ From ‘l'hese Develogents
Development of the first transmit- Satisfaction of qualitatively new
ting and receiving black-and-vhite social needs
broadcasting television equipment
Subsequent developments of black- 1) Reduction in expenditures of
and-white broadcasting television national labor (reduction in
equipment the cost of equipment and in

the expenditures on its
operation)

2) Improvement in the quality of
output (improvement in the qual-
ity of black-and-vhite images
on television screens)

Development of the first transmit-
ting and receiving color broad-
casting television equipment

Satisfaction of a qualitatively nev
need of society (providing the oppor-
tunity of seeing color images on
television screens)

Subsequent developments of this 1) Saving of expenditures of up

equipment tionel labor (reduction in the
cost of equipment and in the ex-
penditures on its operation)

2) Improvement in the quality of
output (improvement in the qual-
ity of images on color televi-
sion screens)

Future developments. which vil) make Satisfaction of a qualitatively nev

it possible to make a qualitatively
nev leap, that is. to develop holo-
graphic color television

2

need of society (providing the op-
portunity of seeing three-dimen-
sional color images on television
screens)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subsequent future deVelopaents of 1) Saving of expenditures of nation-
holographic color television al labor (reduction in the cost
equipssent of equipment and in the expendi-

turns on its operation)

2) Improvement in the quality of out-
put (improvement in the quality
of images on color television
screens with three-dimensional
insges)

A new technical revolution is expected in this field in tine. Developnents
dined at saving expenditures and at further ingroving the quality of output
or services are carried out during the intervals between such technical rev-
olutions. For example, the development of a portable color television set,
which can be built into mobile facilities (such as a motor vehicle). opened
up new opportunities of meeting qualitatively new needs by means of teleVi-
sion. Obviously. after the appearance of color television a new technical
revolution in man's way of life will be brought ubcut by domestic video re-
cording end reproduction equipent, which has begun to be intensively de-
veloped and “proved recently. This equipment will make it possible to meet
a qualitatively new need. It has been suggested thst. when the price of
video recording and reproduction eqtiimsnt does not exceed the cost of a col-

or television set, new consumers will consider its purchase econuically
efficient for then.

The determination of the economic efficiency of newly developed equipment or
of a technological process should be preceded by a fuller description of the
structure of the econoaic effect from their introduction. For example. as
applied to airplanes the economic efficiency fro: the replace-out of wire
lines with optofiber lines lies not only in lowering their cost. but also in
reducing the mass of connecting lines.

Often new equipnent, ensuring the saving of expenditures. at the same tile,
gives a nunber of qualitative advantages, which as yet cannot be taken into
account in the calculation of the economic efficiency {run its introduction.
In a nuaber of cases new equipment makes it possible to gain several advan-
tages. For example, the economic effect iron the autouation of laboratory
equipment with the use of electronic digital computers includes the follow-
ing: reducing the cost of an experiment or of a series of measurements;
sore rapidly obtaining the end result; increasing the productivity of ex-
perimenters' labor; improving the quality of data as a result of the eliai-
nation of subjective errors; obtaining a large volt-1e of intonation during
a short period; organising experimental work, whose execution is ilposnible
without the automation of equipment with the use of electronic digital can-
puters.

Measurable and inneasurable indicators of economic effect are differentiated.
however, not all the measurable indicators of effect can be expressed in a
value for: and caspared with its other quantitative indicators. Along with

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quantitative characteristics it is necessary to take into account all the
components of effect that at this stage of scientific development do not
yet lend themselves to a quantitative expression. For exuple, in cases
where equipent gives a fundamentally different effect, meeting qualita-
tively new needs of society, for the selection of the most efficient var-
iant it is by no means always possible to linit oneself to the indicators
of reduced annual or specific reduced expenditures.

0n the basis of new equipment it is possible to solve probleas that could
not be solved by means of previous equipment, or problems that could be
solved. but less efficiently; could be solved, but more expensively; could
be solved, but less efficiently and more cxpensively. For example, by means
of artificial cos-unication satellites it is possible to solve a number of
problems. The solution of may of them was either completely inaccessible
with cable systems, or was less efficient and more expensive. Such prob-
lems include the following: navigation and control of air traffic; consu-
nication with airplanes, ships and mobile ground stations; cosmunication
through vast water spaces or through poorly developed areas of dry land;
radio and television broadcasting in sparsely populated regions. In such
cases it is necessary to take into account in the comparable variants of
equipment, in addition to expenditures, the qualitative differences in the
effect obtained from it, that is, the different structure of the problems
solved by means of it.

For example, it is impossible to determine the magnitude of the effect from
the use of accelerators in oncologicsl clinics. They guard people's health.
Il'he same also applies to the development of the artificial heart, which will
be implanted in the hmn bow and controlled by logic computer diagrams.
Nor can the new effect obtained from this be given a cost evaluation.

The automation of the process of tests of manufactured output makes it pos-
sible not only to save labor expenditures, but also to improve the quality
of tests (their accuracy and reliability), eliminating the. effect of un-

stable subjective factors affecting results with manual tests. The intro-

duction of developed forms of automation, in addition to saving expenditures.
contributes to a reduction in the proportion of unskilled labor and to an

increase in the proportion of skilled labor. The use of machine tools with
nmserical progr- control contributes to a reduction in the shortage of
machine tool operators.

The use of vertical and short take-off and landing airplanes will shorten
the time of air transportation over short distances, because passengers can
be delivered directly from the center of one city to another without the use

of ground transport. Furthermore, these airplanes make it possible to save
tine when passengers are transported from the airports of distant air lines
to the city center and back. Inch attention is now also given to reducing
the noise of subsonic Jet transport airplanes. llew integrated diagrams
have made it possible to increase the comfort of the color television set

(0
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

owing to the possibility of lighting up the channel number and the precise
time on the screen (or a separate indicator) and of realising the idea of
indication of fine tuning to meter and decimeter range channels by lighting
up on the screen a scale in the form of a green band, whose length changes
depending on the fineness of tuning. The installati'.) of emergency conu-
nioation telephones with automatic means of identification along roads will
enable operators at the regional petrol station to clearly determine the
location of the telephone from which a signal is received. Then they will

be able to urgently send a technical assistance vehicle or an emergency res-
cue team there.

It is possible to cite many examples showing that more end more equipment
making it possible to meet qualitatively new needs of society is now being
developed. or course, the following question arises: ﬂow to determine the
economic efficiency of such equipment? There are several approaches to the
solution of these complex problems. Each of the known methods can be used
only under certain conditions. In some cases it is sufficient to simply change
the umber of some devices so that the same solution by the system of its
technical (operating) problems may be ensured in each variant.

The unification in one system or instrument of functions previously per-
formed by several instrmnents (systems) is one of the new advanced tenden-
cies. For example, multifunctional laser systems both for welding and sew-
ing microopenings have been developed. 'i'he combined automatic laser welding
and drilling machine is used as follows: the welding part. for welding the
components of microcircuits and miniature outlets. which are destroyed when
other welding methods are used; the drilling part. for obtaining the tiniest
openings in earthenware and pottery and in other fragile materials, which do
not easily lend themselves to machining. Combined electronic wrist watches
integrated with an electronic calculator have appeared. A cubination of a
clock and pulse measurer in one article has been developed. A combination
of a calculator mounted in the body of a ball handle and a combined device
including a pocket calculator (front) and a pocket dictaphone (back) have
been manufactured. Radio receivers combined with magnetophones (combination
radio-tape recorders) and an instrument combining a solar battery and a ther-
moelectric generator have been developed. Models of color television sets
with built-in crystal clocks have been manufactured.

In cases where the expenditures on the operation of highly reliable articles
can be disregarded, it is sufficient to compare the price of the combined
device with the total prices of separate devices:

:q/m k (I! 'I' In).
(1)

where z...'.. is the price of the combined wrist instruent (high-precision
electronic watch-calculator); 2.. is the price of the electronic watch; :I
is the price of the pocket calculator.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

If the price of the combined device is lover than the total prices of the
separate devices. the saving of the reduced annual expenditures obtained
with the introduction of the combined watch-calctdator instrument will be

(rub. lyear) :
combined
instrument
Awnrs = (n N’s-4:311) - Isle]-

(2)

where ’u is the norm of efficiency of additional capitnl investments.
1 year.

If. however, for comparable variants it is necessary to calculate both cap-
ital investments and operating expenditures, the saving of reduced annual

expenditures in the variant of the combined device is determined as follows:

(rub . lyear) :
combined
device

AW", =2 “E: 'l' lch) + (Eu + “K!” ‘- (E' + t“K")' (3)

where Re are the annual expenditures on the operation of the automatic laser
welding machine; Kc are the capital investments in the automatic laser veld-
ing machine; E. are the annual expenditures on the automatic laser machine
for sewing openings; K1 are the capital investments in the automatic laser
machine for sewing openings; ‘1 are the annual expenditures on the opera-
tion of the combined automatic laser machine for welding and sewing open-
ings; K1‘ are the capital investments in the combined automs ic machine for
welding and sewing openings.

In some cases it is possible to reduce the comparable variants of equipment
to the same volume of output produced by means of it. Often, however. such
an equalization of variants is not necessary. To calculate the difference
in the annual productivity of equipent, the specific. not absolute, meas-
urers of expenditures can be compared.

Sometimes it is possible to equalize variants according to the parameter
that ensures the derivation of a qualitatively new effect. Indicators for
two c able variants of a design are presented in the table [see follow-

ingp .

As compared with the base ( first) design the expenditures in the new equip.
ment variant increased: K¢>K.: E1>El: Wm -= Es+an2>Jyan “-1 E.+ c..K..
However, i. does not follov true this that the new model of the instrtnaent
is less refined than the base model only because it requires greater reduced
annual expenditures Wm> IV...“ that is. Wm a min. After all. in the base,
cheaper, instrument the accuracy of menus-event is also lower A..'< A...

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Therefore, when evaluating the economic efficiency of a new design, it is
necessary to take into account both of the mentioned circulnstanoes. Some-
times this is possible when equalizing comparable designs according to the
numerical value of a certain parameter (in this case, the accuracy of meas-
urement). For this purpose the investments A on the development of a more
complex measuring scheme, by means of which a igher accuracy of measurement
"r! could also be obtained in this variant, are added to the capital invest-
nents K1 in the first variant of the design (less precise instrument). At
the sale time, the expenditures ABI resulting from the fact that the neu-
urement with accuracy (In with th use of the less precise instrument (first

variant) will require more time and. therefore. greater expenditures lust be
added to the operating expenditures 31‘

--—-—.——-—.——_———.———_ . ... a.--- ....-

I-I usual! manna.
Isl (neon)

       
  

(1) Die-masseuse resonance M ”m" I " "'

 

Cram-mun mummuue napaunp
«mum: is .1aulna)upmcpc—wso

not". usurpenusp . . . . . . An A"
Runaway: unmnus s} . . . K. K:
3mayntoummme were 93 . . . E. %
npuseacnuuc man-w.- mum-A .(q) . Vn.n-E|+¢-Kn I’nz- Hat-Ks

Key:
1. lane of indicators h. Important uslitative equipment
2. First variant of the parameter in this example, ac-
design (base) curacy of measurenent)
3. Second variant of the 5. Capital investments
design (new) 6. Operating expenditures

1. Reduced annual expenditures

The reduced annual expenditures on the variants equalized according to the
numerical value of the considered parameter An: total

(—13.1MLL__)=
instrument solving the same
qualitative problem

we}. " [(El‘i' 35]) +04!“ .‘ 5K7” h. run“ (E:+-'t..K2). ((0)

where Wm are the reduced annual expenditures on the base design of the
instrument equalized with the new Iodel in the accuracy of measuruent.
Thus. the selection of the most efficient design variant can be made on the
basis of a similar caparison oi‘ expenditures. The difference in the nu-
Ierical value of the qualitative parameter will be fully taken into consid-
eration in expenditures.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

When designing asynchronous electric motors. there is a need for an opti-
ma conhination of the efficiency n and «:95 w of a machine in cases where
the comparable variants of designs differ in these indicators, whereupon

m>mz cosm<cos¢n (5)

In designing practice attempts were made at solving this prohlea by deter-
mining the so—called energy coefficient of a machine equal to I] may. At
the sane time. the variant in which the value of the energ coefficient was
the greatest was considered the best in energy indicators:

noose n max. (5)

In reality, however, this coefficient given little for the solution of the

considered problem. The energy indicators for the two comparable variants
of the design of an electric machine are presented in the table:

 

8a see-em I I “'0 l 'l ““9
l l m 0.05 ‘ 0.58
1 0.55 0.” 0.53

Although the value of the energy coefficient in both variants is the sac
(0.68), nevertheless there is no basis for considering these variants equiv-
alent. The energy coefficient creates only a semblance of solution of the
problem. he considered prohl- can be solved correctly by equalising cous-

parahle variants in cow to the value that exists in the variant with the
higher “‘1'-

Por these purposes for the variant of the electric motor with a relatively
lower may, it is necessary to calculate the cost of caspensating devices
and the additional losses of electric energy in then. For this the cost 2.. of
compensating devices should he added to the capital investments of the
actor with a relatively lower C051“: and their depreciation and e losses
of electric pover- in then , to the operating expenditures 32. Then both
variants will he equalised a cow. to cosm. The reduced annual expendi-
tures on the second variant equalized in “w to cour- will be

( ruh.[nar )

electric actor
Vl'n a [(Erl- E.) + ¢s(K1+ 3:) 1- (7)

roe onrcm. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Then it is possible to compare:

Wu." 5 wlﬂ- (8)

If the new equipment (for example, an atomic reactor for an electric sta-
tion) affects the environ-ant, when reduced annual expenditures are cal-
culated, it is necessary to take the expenditures on environmental improve-
ment into account in capital investments and operating expenditures. In
cases where'comparahle equipment variants have a different level of reli-
ability the damage from the idle time of this equiplnent during repair must
be taken into consideration in the operating expenditures on these variants.

The infometion recorded in integrated circuit memory unite is usually lost
when the power supply is cut off. Therefore, when comparing the capital
investments on these memory units with the capital investments on ferrite
core memory units, it is necessary to additionally take into account the
cost of reserve battery supply and of the special disc accunulator. Then
the capital investsents in the variants of men-cry units equalised in their
effect can be compared as follows: ’

(237»: + 304: + 3M.) 5 lane - (9)

where 2m. is the price of the integrated circuit maory unit; low is
the price of reserve battery supply; 2a.. is the price of the special
disc accumulator; 2am is the price of the ferrite core manor: unit.

According to what technical parameters should comparable design variants

be equalised? Sometimes it is suggested that they be equalized according

to all technical parameters, which, in our opinion, is inadmissible. ‘Ihe
advantages of the overwhelming majority of the parameters of developed equip-
ment and often of all parameters are fully expressed in the calculation of
the saving of reduced annual expenditures. The differences of many and some-
times of all the parameters of newly developed equipment are generalized in
this indicator. Therefore, in each specific case it is important to cor-
rectly reflect in an economic calculation the difference of all the para-
meters of new equipment to which a monetary evaluation can be given. It

may seem that {a an economic calculation it is difficult to take into ac-
count an improvement in such a parameter as a reduction in the bulk of air-
craft or ship instruments. Meanwhile, such a parameter can be given a mon-
etary evaluation, for which it is necessary to calculate the additional an-
nual net incue (profit) derived tree the transportation of an additional
useful load as a result of the reduction in the hull: of an instrument.

According to what parameters should the variants of equipment, for example,
of electronic digital computers,be equalised? Should the comparable var-
iants of electronic digital computers be equalised according to the speed
of operation? If a new electronic digital computer is characterized by a
greater speed of operation, this will be reflected in the saving of specific

9

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

reduced expenditures ensured by it. Is it necessary to equalize equip-eat
variants according to the level of reliability of equipentf In nany cases
the saving of reduced expenditures is the object of the increase in the re-
liability of equipment. Therefore. the difference in reliability will be ‘
expressed in nonetary expenditures. More reliable equipent will ensure the
saving of specific reduced expenditures. Thus. when an improvement in some
equipment parameters (for example. speed of operation or reliability) is
reflected in the saving of reduced expenditures. it is not necessary to e-
qualize comparable design variants according to these parameters.

Recourse to an equalization of variants according to soae technical paran-
eters should be made only in cases where the difference of parueters makes
it possible to obtain a qualitatively new effect. which cannot be evaluated
in monetary terns. In such cases. in addition to reduced expenditures. for
coaparable variants it is also necessary to take into account the differen-
ces in the nunerical value of acne technical parameter. In order to lake
the co-parison of expenditures alone possible under these conditions. it is
advisable to equalize variants according to this parameter in advance.

Of course. it is by no means always possible to inplelsent the equalization
of variants in practice. Boaetines it is sinply inpossible to attain the
value of the considered paraneter (for example. the precision of an instru-
ent) that was obtained in the latest design. Therefore. in such cases the
advantages of the new instruaent cannot be evaluated by the ordinary indi-
cator of the saving of reduced annual expenditures or of the saving of spe-
cific reduced expenditures.

If sone operating para-star of new equipment. which is of great independent
importance (for example, the precision of a laboratory instruent or the
quality of an image on a television screen). is improved and it is impos-
sible to equalize designs according to the numerical value of this parueter.
it is advisable to calculate the indicator of relative efficiency to of
additional expenditures connected with an inprovensnt in this parneter in
the new design:

“=- -’—. (10)

6’1" a.."—’.‘_. [00% (11)
awn}: W",— Vun (12’

 

 

10

FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
POI OFFICIAL USE ONLY

where Mu ie the inprovenent in the coneidered operating paraneter (in
I of ita initial value in the previoua deeign); AW.“- ie the relative

increaae in reduced annual nditurea on an iaprovaaent in thin paranoter
(in 1 of their initial amount .

lnproveaent in the examined parameter M" will he Justified with
e. > teen. (13)

where o... in the nor- of relative efficiency of the additional expendi-
turea connected with an iaprovenent in the conaidered parameter.

The aaximn peniaaihle valuee of the magnitude of Con ahould he not with
regard to certain paranetera of varioua typen of equipaent on the haaie of
the atudy of factual data. The principlea of deteraining the naitudea
of a... need an additional etudy. however. even where an yet there are no
noraativea of (can. the calculation of the indicator 9, often nakea it poe-
aihle to diacloee caaea where new equipment ia ohvioualy efficient (the

magnitude of '9 in auch higher than a unit) or inefficient (the nagnitude
of -. ia nuch lower than a unit).

In a nuher of caaea the ainiann epecific price per unit of the Min
:qndpent para-eter- ia the criterion for the aele tion of a variant
8

unit ofnainparaleter 2
h---’

,P«' (in)

where r. in the price of a device; P" in the Iain technical parueter of
th‘. Med.

Thia indicator to need aucceeai‘ully in caeee where the mating expendi-
turea in cupaxahle equipent variante are inaignificant or the one and
capital inveaiaenta are reduced to the price of equip-eat. For inertial
aircraft navigation ayatue it in ilportant to mm a low nagnitude of
the ratio of the price of a ayetaa : to preciaione ( )

unit of preciaion
s ' 45— (15)

where r. in the specific price of the inertial navigation mt. per unit
of ita freciaion.

The outwt of inatruenta and devicea on acouatic eurface waves for apecial
uae (for ex-ple. coordinated filtera) in limited to elall hatchea. how-
ever, the high price of theee inetruenta ia often Jutified hy the unique
operating characteristica. In one caaea new equipent nakea it poaeihle
to ilprove the quality of articlea produced by neana of it (or of the am-
icee perforaed hy leane of it). If thia ilproveaent in quality ia reﬂected

11

m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
[OI ORIGIN. ”8! ONLY

in the prices of erticles (or of services). it is possible to celculete
the edditionel profit AD, ensured in this cese: (rub.[xgg):

AD. . (3n-e- ‘n-s) QM- (hn‘ﬁ-u) 4"“ (16)

where t... end 3m- is the price of e high-quelity erticle produced by
neens of s new nechine end of s lov-quelity erticle produced by seens of
s nschine of the previous model respectively (rub./uni.t); c... end c.._.. is
the production cost or e hish-quelity erticle end of e lov-quelity erticle
produced by Icons of nechines or co-pereble types respectively (in rub./
unit); 4” end 4”, is the ennuel productivity of s new (and end

previous (43:...) ssohine respectively. by neens of which different-quel-
ity erticles ere produced.

It the price (MD of the nev nechine by neens of which hish-quelity out-
put is produced is higher then the price (r...) of the nechine on which lov-
quslity output is produced. the period or moot! v... of sdditionel cepitel in-
vestments AK, in s new type of nechine with the sdditionel profit n03 ob-
teined true the sele of the output produced by neens of it et vholesele
prices will be (yeers):

, .. .959. .. 21.1“
" no. no. ' (11)
tn. is the mnitude of reverse profitsbility of the sdditionel cspitel
investaents 4p. in the considered Iechine (l/yeer):

I AD:

The result of celcule'cion depends on how correctly the prices I“ end
In... ere set for the erticles produced by scene of these whines. If.

for exnple. the price tn. is oversteted. this will be reflected in en
increese in “t" In this celculetion:

Yes = his (3e) (19)

vhere 2. is the vholesele price of en erticle produced by hem of the
considered machine.

A sinner celculetion cen elso be node with respect to the nev equipsent
thet improves the quelity of services net by teens of it. for exuple. the
edditionel profit brought by en eirplene (r:- the shortening of pesscncer
night. time will totel (ruthheer):

eirplene

AD; 8 n..a". e (3‘..3!3 9N. ' — A541“). (m)

12

m OFFICIAL USE OIL!
Nil OHICIAI. 088 ONLY

where AD; is the additional net incone brought by an airplane; "is is the
nunber of days' during the year when the airplane sakes flights; ﬂu is the
nunber of flights nade by an airplane in 2’: hours; Su- is the price of 1

hour of saved passenger tine. which the passenger is ready to pay in the

form of an increment on the previous rate, a price accepted in this calcu-
lation (rub./passenger-hour); Am, is the saving of time of one passenger
during one flight (hour/passenger); - N"... is the average nunber of passen-
gers transported during one flight; \r..,.- are the additional direct specific
operating expenditures on a new type of airplane as compared with the rewious
type (rum/kn); lg. is the average distance of one flight (In/flighty.

The period of pay-off r...’ of the additional capital investments AK: in a

supersonic airplane with the additional net income AD. obtained fro its
operation will be (years): K
A n

no. ' (21)

In practice it is not always possible to nathenatically solve all technical
and economic problens. Therefore. in the selection of the final design var-

iant various netth of a qualitative technical and econonic analysis also
have an inportant role. Sometimes it is necessary to caspare several var-
iants of devices, each of which is characterised by qualitative advantages.
At the same time. it is not possible to equalize such variants according to
qualitative characteristics. There are several paralseters in which these
variants differ. The price of the output produced by leans of the devices
under consideration does not differ in these variants. In such cases all the
qualitative paraseters of devices are first compared and a variant in which
their combination is the best is found. Afterwards for all the variants under
consideration reduced annual expenditures are caspared and the variant with
the lowest expenditures is detenined. In the end a generalizing conclusion
is made as to which of the variants ensures the best cubination of qualita-
tive parameters and expenditures. At the sue the, it is necessary to weigh
to what extent the corresponding qualitative parameters are better in this
variant and to what extent the reduced annual expenditures increase in it.

 

“u ‘3

In some cases there is no analog for comparison. For sxanple. in a nuber

of cases a laser saving of openings is the only possible technological proc-
ess of obtaining mall-diameter openings (fra 2.5 u to 1.5 II, the ratio of
the depth of an opening to the diameter being 50:1) in fregile ceramic mate-
rials. where drilling by other methods often leads to the canning of mate-
rials and to a distortion of sizes. Soviet contact aicroscopes do not have
foreign analogs. ‘i'hey make it possible to investigate the cells of a living
organist. 8y leans of these microscopes. in which special lenses with a zero
working distance are used, it is possible to observe and photograph the nicro-

structure of live organs. as well as to follow the circulation of body fluids
and of the substances introduced into it.

13

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIM. USE ONLY

In such cases, when there is no analog for comparison. the eoonaio sub-
stantiation of the design of a new device presupposes the following: cal-
culation of the production cost and of the expected price of the designed
device and a forecast of their reduction during various years of its out-
put; calculation of all the other eleaents of capital invest-ants with
which the functioning of this device is connected and of the total mount
of capital investaents; calculation of the annual expenditures on the oper-
ation of this device; description of the qualitatively new needs of society
that this device will note it possible to nest; conclusion as to whether
the satisfaction of the qualitatively new need of society under examination
can be considered acceptable with these expenditures and. primarily. with
the wholesale price of this device.

The further elaboration of methods of evaluating the efficiency of new a-
quipment producing a qualitatively new effect will contribute to the devel-
opment of an iaportant section of the theory of economic efficiency and will
help investigators and developers of new nachines. instn-ents. apparatus
and systems in a correct econasic evaluation.

Results of utilisation of. Bouipoeut
Moscow VOPROSY mom in Russian lo 2. Feb 79 PP 57-67

ﬁrticle by L. Oatovshiy. corresponding aenber of the USSR Acadcsv of Sci--
ences: "gocial and Boom-11c Efficiency of llew Equip-ant (Problem of Math-

odologyﬂ/

Eat] The national econuic saving effect from the utilisation of new e-
quipment-4n terns of its given socially useful result—foam the basis for
and source of the increase in this result. no increase in socially useful
results fro- the production and utilisation of new equipment is an overall
social and aconoaic category. This obJectively determines the existence of
the category "social and economic efficiency of new equip-ant.“ It is char-
acterised by the level of social and econonic and socially useful results of
the production and use of equipent, by the colbined expenditures on the at-
tain-ant of these results and by the relationship between results and expend-
itures. He will discuss the econonic couponents of soci useful results
of the production and use of new equipent and the social couponents that
have a direct econaaic content.

First. the production use of new aquiplsent affects the increase in the quan-
tity. ilprovenent in the quality and refine-ant in the structure of output
and the asterial services rendered in the sphere of production. which fully
applies to econcnic results. Second. the utilisation of new equipent for
consular purposes is expressed in the growth of the end nonproduction cc:-
st-ption by the public of the output of material predation and asterial
services (increase in their scale and ilprovasent in the quality and struc-
ture). These are social indicators, which have a direct sconuic content.

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY

This includes the eels of ell types of coneuer goods end public services
in the spheres of trede. public dining. housing end nunicipel fscilities.
trensport. conesunicetion. household repeirs end housekeeping. In this ones
the sphere of consumption eppeers es en elenent of the econoeio hesis of
society. entering es the concluding stege into the systen of ”production-
distrihution-exchengvconsuption of Interiel veelth.” The oonsmption of
the products of eeteriel production end uteriel services is oerried out in
the nonproduction sphere es the end result of asteriel production.

The other conponents of the socielly useful results of equipent both for
production end nonproduction purposes ere sociel end do not heve e direct
economic content. These ere prieerily sets of sociel results directly con-
booted uith th' protection of people's heelth end increese in their life
spen. Such er- the sociel pereeeters of eny equipnent expressgd in the in-
dicetoro of it's effect on the conditions end content of lehor.

the fevorehle neture of its effect. The effect of new equinent on the so-
ciel end econceic processes of reduction of heevy physicel lehor end on such
sociel phenaene es intensificetion of the el-ents of the creetive princi-
ple in lehor perteins here. In his speech et the 16th Congress of 0883 Me-
Unions 1.. I. Breshnev stressed the following: "The pert: considers the tech-
nicel retooling of industry. egriculture. construction end trensport. for

vhi ch vest sue ere elloceted. e decisive neens of ilproving vorting condi-
tions end of trensforeing ell production fecilities into sefe fecilitiee
convenient for men.” This is the netionel econonic spproech. which aenetes
free the interests of socieliet society. to the sociel neture of the devel-
opnent of equipent. technology end orgenieetion of production end lebor.

A syntactic reelieetion of such ergonceic requirements is en inseperehle
element of the reelitetion of the suprene goel of socielist production.

end felme end. hence. on nen's heelth end his living end working conditions.
on the production processes of the enterprises loceted in this end other
regions. on egriculture. the service sphere end so forth. An increese in
the proportion of expenditures in the totel elount of cepitel investlents
in sociel neesures in the field of ecology is e neturel process. A totel
of ll billion rubles heve been plenned for these purposes during the 10th
Pive-Yeer Plen. The tests of protecting the netursl environem ere reel-
ized in the sppropriste direction of the scientific end technicel police es
e whole end in the orientetion'of technoloy. ”lie ere end will be develop-
ing the netionel economy." A.- n. Kosygin pointed out in his report et the
festiVe nesting devoted to the 61st enniversery of the crest October Sociel-
ist devolution. "on the hesis of the highest ecologicel dennds correspond-
ing to the neture of socielisn."

15
m OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The verient of every equipeent selected for production nust elso be evol-
ueted from the point of view of the deeends for improving the conditions

end content of lebor end the environnent. In our opinion. the correspond-
ing indicetore must be reflected in epplied reseerch end toohnicsl design

problem. st ell the steges of plenning. design end experinentel work. in
technicel specificstions end prototypes. es undstory deteiled peremters

in the prectice of expert exuinetions end the certificstion of new equip-
Ilent end in etenderts.

Purthernore. the set of sociel results of the utilisetion of new equipment
is expressed in the indicetors of the growth of setisfection of the people's
spirituel needs end the crestion. disseninetion. utilisetion end consmption
of spirituel velues through the dewelopeent of the uteriel end technioel

bese of the spheres of science. educetion, enlightenment. culture end the
infomtion connected with then.

The effect of scientific end technicel progress on on increese in the popu-
letion's free tine es s fector in the growth of setisfsction of the people's
teeteriel end spirituel needs holds e speciel plece enong the sociel results
of scientific end technicel progress. Improvement in the technicsl bus of
teeteriel production end the nonproduction sphere end in the orgenisetion of
culturel leisure pleys s key role in en increese in free tine.

For greeter cleerness we will represent the generel diegre- of sociel end
econoeic end socielly useful results of the production end use of new equip-
lcnt in the following form:

Production of New Equipment end Its Use of new Equipent in the lion-

Deg in inter“; Mugtigg Mugtign M!!!

Bconasic results Socisl results not Sociel results heving Sociel results

heving e direct e direct econolsic not bowing e
economic content content direct econ-
oIic content
Production of Conditions of Public constlption Conditions end

new equipment work end its of the output of content of work.
es neens of content in the meteriel production sociel ecolo-
production end sphere of nete- end the consuption gicel results.
consmer goods. riel production of enteriel services heelth pro-
output by neens end the effect tection end

of new equip- of uteriel pro- effect on the

neat end pro- duction under the crestion. dis-
duction serw- influence of new selinstion end
ices in the equipent on the consuption of
sphere of nete- neturel enwiron- spirituel vel-
riel production lent use

16

'0! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIH. USE ONLY

Thus, the socielly useful results or the production end use of new equip-
lent cen be subdivided into three besic groups: s) econuic results i:
the sphere of nsteriel production; b) sociel results having s direct econ-
omic content. beoeusc they pertein to the reelisetion of the output of ne-
teriel production end neteriel services in the nonproduction sphere end c)
sociel results not hewing s direct econolic content reelisod both in Iete—
riel production (this epplies to lebor protection end to sociel end ecolo-
gicsl results) end in the nonproduction sphere. The lest two groups torn
the sets of sociel end econoeic results of scientific end technicel prog-
ress, which ere directly connected with the reelisetion or the supreme goal
or socielist production end cherecterize the specific volume end quelitetiwe
lswel or setisisction of certein neteriel end spirituel needs or the public.

Such is the coebinetion or the oconoeic end sociel components or ell the
types or socielly useful results of new equipment asking it sociel end soon--
oeic. This conbinetion is besed on the detenining role or neteriel produc-
tion. scientific end tecnnicel progress end the increese produced by it in
the cubined productivity or nstionel lsboo- es the besis for the sstisfso-
tion or the netsriel end spirituel needs of society. In the nonproduction
sphere itself the reelisetion of new equipeent es the output oi‘ meteriel

duction .

The developent or meteriel production end scientific end technicel progress
under present conditions presupposes e repid increese in the role or the in-
dicetors of reelisetion of new equipment in the sphere of nonnsteriel serv-
ices. This requires s growing utilizetion or new equipment in the processes
or sstisiying spirituel nee . ilprowing working conditions end the neturel
environment end protecting heel °. for exuple, quelitstively renewing led-
icel equip-ent. In perticuler. the following dete ettest to the urgency of
this problem In 1930 the retio between the amber of workers in the fields
of public heelth. sociel insurence. public educetion, culture. science end
scientific services end ell the working populetion (without students)wes 121?.
end in 1917. '1:6. During the indicsted period the proportion of the amber

students) in the totsl less of the working populstion increesed bra 11.1
percent in 19% to 25.1 percent in 1917 (with en eddition of the nuber of

workers in trede end public dining directly servicing the public. epproxi-
netely to 28 percent).

setion o! the supreme goel of socieliet production. effecting this reeli-

ution et e11 steges. beginning ﬁrm the inprowuent in the production of
uses of production for the nenutecture or asses of production end ending

’0‘ OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

naterisl and cultural (spiritual) standard of living and a constant is-
provement in their working and living conditions through an acceleration
of the processes of outfitting all the spheres of the population‘s and
production consumption with high-quality equipment. This has become one
of the main conditions for the social and economic progress of the mature
socialist society. As socialisn becomes more mature. the obJective need
for and possibility of more fully realising the supra-e goal of socialist
public production on the basis of scientific and technical progress becomes
stronger. II'his goal itself is expressed in meeting the growing material
and spiritual needs of society and in an all-around development of its nels-
bers. Therefore. it is of social and economic nature not reduced to the
sphere of the economy. which is reflected in the social and economic results
of scientific and technical progress.

For every given new equipment the combined expenditures on obtaining a so-
cial and economic. as well as socially useful. result. including the com-
bined expenditures on the attainment of new social parameters of equipent.
correspond to this result. The assigned s< :ial and economic result for
every technical seasure presupposes iteratively perforled calculations of
the needs and resources (their saving) disclosing the realistic possibili-
ties of meeting at the expense of the given equipment of specific volumes
and a qualitative level sons types of material and spiritual needs. This
requires the utilisation of the appropriate balances on the basis of a com-
parison of the envisaged improvements in results with minimised combined
expenditures of resources. In this connection the investigations and de-
velopments of methods of evaluating the social significance of this need and
of establishing the sequence and scale cf its realisation with due regard
for the entire system of ranking needs are of the greatest importance.

The need during the selection of a variant of new equipment for following

a single system of social and econasic criteria. which combines the deter-
mination of the socially useful results (economic and social) obtained fras
new equipment and of the expenditures on attaining tha. is objectively de-
termined in the socialist society. This discloses the increase in the so-
cial and economic efficiency of new equipsent. that is. its social and soon-
omic. as well as national economic. effect is determined. It has an our-
all content reflecting both the improvement in the social and economic re-
sult and the saving of expenditures. 0n the basis of such a premise. in
our opinion. the social and economic. as well as national economic. effect
of new equipent could be determined as the improvement in the social and
economic result (expressed in qualitative and quantitative indicators of the
growth of the volume of satisfaction of these types of society's needs) and
reduction in the combined expenditures in terms of this given improved result
obtained fru it.

Thus. the social and economic. as well as national economic. effect is rep-
resented as a comparison of the growth of the social and econaic result
(AC3'.-—~msx) with a reduction in expenditures on the entire given (im-
proved) result (Mr-mln) where gear. is the growth of the ooial
and economic result of new equipent as cupared with base equipment and
A3. is the reduction in expenses in terms of the entire given (increased)
result of new equipent. 1s

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The verient of new equipment eelected eccording to the ninieue xeduced ex-
penditures ie conpercd in expendituree with beee equipnent. The expendi-
turee for perticuler equipment ere celculeted (eccording to the principle

of the "identity of reeulte") for the eoeiel end economic. ee well ee eo-
cielly ueeful. reeult eeeigned for new equipment. including for the elimi-
netion or reduction of the negetive eociel reeulte inherent in heee equip-
eent (ectuelly exieting). The ennuel netionel economic effect ie oulculeted
eccording to the difference in reduced expenditures «H.540 .

The eociel end economic effect of new equipment (including the eelection
eccording to thie criterion) ehculd be determined in en overell unner.
eingling out end then caning up individuel components. Economic effect
(difference in the reduced expendituree on the eeeigned eocielly ueeful
reeult) ie ite firet component. Other. eubeequent. componente cherecterize
eociel reeulte in comperieon with the edditionel expenditures celculeted for
theee reeulte. Since the expendituree on verioue reeulte cen be capered
end eumed up. cuuletiwe reduced expendituree on the eeeigned eociel end
econonic reeulte ere toned. The eelection of e verient of new equipent
ie node eccording to the comperieon of the emuletive reduced expendituree
on beee end new equipment. Thie cen be depicted ee (30 .+3e,...3e .)

(3.. +3.,...3._) where 3-. end 3e, ere the reduced expendituree eccording
to the neeac economic Motion or heee 6) end new 64) equipment end 3... ...n
end 3e,.-- II b ere the reduced expendituree eccording to edditionel. eociel.
peremetere.

Thue. when capering the expendituree on beee end new equipment. it ie nec-
eeeery to uee the fonule of reduced expendituree. firet, without tehing
into eccount the edditionel eociel requiremente pleced on new equipment end.
eecond. with due regerd for them (the neceeeery edditionel expendituree ere
celculeted). Then the obteined enounte of reduced expendituree ere cued
up eeperetely for heee end new equipment end the difference in theee reduced
expendituree ie deter-ined. At the eeme tine. edditionel expendituree cen
he eubdivided into coete correeponding to the eccepted etenderd conditione
end eurpeeeing then.

Such e diecrininetion of eociel reeulte in caperieon with the expendituree
neceeeery for them ie of greet fundenentel end precticel inportence for the
eppropriete orientetion in deeigning. plenning. financing. controlling end
celculeting the development gf poeitive eociel reeulte end in reducing end
overcoming negetive reeulte. This plecee the increeee in the economic in-
tereet in the reelieetion of eociel reeulte on e definite beeie. beceuee the
voluee end quelitetive levels of theee reeulte ere deternined end the ear-
pendituree on eech of thu ere diecloeed.

The netionel economic effect of new equipment in celculeted for the ephere
of coneuption. Thie eleo eppliee to the reelitetion of equi-ent in the
nonproduction ephere. It in e metter of eerwicee for the public through
public form of coneuption (public dining. houeehold repeire. public heelth.
ouch types of culture). eervicee ee film lending end no forth). The celcule-
tion should eleo be mede in reduced expendituree (merdleee of the fect

19
FOR OFFICIAL 053 ONLY
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whether those units of the nonproduetion sphere are economically account-
able. or are entirely financed from the budget). This requires the orga-
nisation of investigations, methodological studies and experimental checks
of these problems. including systems of appropriate indicators. and regu-
lation of the practice of their recording and planning. The saving of ex-
penditures in the nonproduction sphere should be ensured by a rational or-
ganisation of the utilization of resources provided it is mandatorin com-
bined with an improvement in the quality of services and an increase in the
population's free time. li'he assignments for expenditures in this sphere
should be calculated for n constantly improved social result. The question
of taking into account the saving of expenditures on the operation of new
equipment in private consumption and housekeeping also deserves attention.
such saving should be taken into account in the calculations of the national
economic effect of the given equipment.

In contrast to the category of expenditures in which unified measurers in
value terms cosmensurable in natural and labor indicators actually exist,
social rcsglts. expressing various social utilities. do not have unified
measurers. Here the results represent combinations of various components
directed toward meeting a given need of society with the cc-ensurability

of the expenditures on obtaining these results and the possibility of suing
up the expenditures.

The social and economic results of the production and utilisation of new
equipment are expressed (separately for every model or group of technical
articles; for example, a system of machines) in volumes meeting the indi-
cated needs. for example. with regard to the given technical articles in
the simplest cases (meeting by means of this equipment one need for output
or services; for example. the roduction and use of new equipment for a
thermal electric power station the social and econaaic effect can be ex-
pressed in the following set of indicators: P“ correlated to 3‘. P0 to 30,
'po to 3- and so forth. where P‘ and 3‘ are socially useful results
pertaining to the basic direct function of the given equipment (the pro—
duction and utilisation of energy). 1’“ and 3“ are the results and addi-
tional expenditures on improving working conditions and PI and 3' are
the results and additional expenditures on the solution of ecological
problems.

Sometimes the formation of indicators of the social and econaic effect of
new equipment is even simpler; for example, when it does not make changes

in working conditions or in the improve-:ent in the environment. It is pos-
sible to comensurate and sum up the results in the spheres of consmption
of the output of material production. because the types of censured output
and their value can be expressed in unified indicators. It is not possible
to measure directly or indirectly the m1 content of the public utilities
of social noneconomic results. lherefore. it is a matter of systems of in-
dicators grouped according to individual types and directions of the social
and economic, as well as socially useful. results of new equipment.

20
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPPICIAL US! ONLY

The exceptional conplexity of the solution of all these problems is also
connected with the fact that the use of this type of equipaent often gives

a nunber of results. which sometimes are opposite in direction. This ap-
plies to changes in working conditions. when a variant of new equipssnt ia-
proves solos conditions and inpsirs others. The car. as the basic iunction.
leads to an increase in free tile. greatly isproving living conditions and.
at the sane tine. to negative ecological results and to the pollution of
the air basin. It is a question of naxinally increasing positive results
and reducing negative results. It should be stressed that we are only at
the initial stages of investigations. studies. cosparisons and evaluations
of the social results of the production and use of new equipment ( as of all
types of production). A great deal still has to be done for a scientific
substantiation of criteria then setting priorities and orders. ranking needs
and determining the scale and degree of their satisfaction. as well as for
the further developent of the netth of calculations of nocial results in
an iterative conparison with the expenditures of resources.

Thus. all the indicators of the social and economic results of the production
and use of new equipment. despite their differences. form a single complex
and a combination of systems of indicators. because they are objectively con-
nected as the components of the realization of the supreme goal of socialist
public production. Therefore. they should be considered both separately and
together in various groupings. The indicators of the growth of the social
result of new equipment are of independent significance directly connected
with the suprase goal of socialist production. This makes it necessary to
establish a clearly pronounced system of social indicators characterising the
volume of satisfaction of a specific need for every new equipment realised

in end nonproduction consumption.

A conparative analysis of the additional expenditures on base and new equip-
ment for obtaining a social result assigned for new equipment on the basis
of the fact that new equipment would require lower expenditures than base
equipment is a necessary factor in the conventional calculation in favor of
its selection. however. this does not eliminate another question: With the
limitation of resources is it advisable (and on what scale) for society to
incur these additional expenditures.

In the existing method of determining the economic efficiency of new equip-
aent social results are considered only as a given value, in terns of which
expenditures are calculated. The essence of this uethod lies in detenining
the econuic effect as the saving of expenditures (according to the formula
of the difference in reduced expenditures). However. this is only one as-
pect of the national econuic effect. Another aspect. which characterises
the social and econuic result reflecting the voluse of satisfaction of so-
ciety's needs. for the sake of which. in fact, the saving of expenditures is
attained. is also very important. Consideration of such social and economic
results obtained free new equipment and of their growth constitutes an in-
dependent problem. whose iaportance will increase. It is much more caplex
than the detenination of the effect m the saving of expenditures. This

21

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8! ONLY

does not at all mean that. along with the existing method of economic effi-
ciency. a special method of some "social efficiency" is necessary. It is
a question of conducting investigations and studies of the development of
the existing method in order that in the final analysis it may be trans-
formed into a method of social and economic efficiency of new equipment
with the presentation of both methods of determining the social and econ-
omic results obtained from new equipment and of organically connecting the
saving of expenditures with them.

The national economic approach to social and economic efficiency is broader
than the calculation of economic efficiency. because in the second case the
calculation is made for the manufacturers and consumers of equipment and in
the first case the effect of social results on other sectors and on the
population of whole regions is also taken into account. This circumstance
is taken into account when determining the social and economic effect. of
course, with the observance of the principle of the "identity of results."
In the interaction of the results of and expenditures on new equipment the
saving of expenditures appears as a potential source of the growth of econ-
omic and social results. At the same time, social results affect economic
indicators and the saving of expenditures (economic effect).

The problem of correlation of social and econqaic indicators has found var-
ious interpretations in our literature. For example. H. Vilenskiy. agree-
ing with the author that the social results of new equi ent become an in-
dependent source of increase in its economic efficiency. did not consider
his evaluation of the place and role of the effect of social indicators on
economic indicators correct. In our opinion, It. Vilenskiy in a certain sense
assigned too broad a role to this effect as some global measurer of the social
result. lie believes that the quantitative indicators of the effect of the
social results of utilization of new equipment on the economic effect of new
equipment (that is, in fact, on the saving of exprnditures—L.G.) are their
generalizing measure. .

His conclusion that these re sults are entirely exhausted by the amount of

the national income and its increase. whereupon pgsitive social results in-
crease the growth and negative results reduce it, inevitably follows from

this initial proposition, wtich. essentially. in large measure leads to the
identification of social results with their effect on the saving of expend-
itures. In our opinion, M. Vilenskiy, in this case makes unsubstantiated
abstractions twice. 0n the one hand. he disengages himself fr:- all the
other components of social results. noart from the effect on the saving of
expenditures. 0n the other hand, he dfsengeges himself fras a comparison

of social results with the additional expenditures on obtaining them, where-
as these additional expenditures very often greatly exceed the amounts of
savings from positive social results. ’i‘..~n the attainment of positive social
results is accompanied by a reducti'm in the saving of expenditures and there-
by by an increase in the national income. Taking into account all the social
utility of new equipment not measured by economic indicators alone. society
incurs such expenditures. It the same time. it also happens that with nega-
tive social results of new cquipment a relatively high scout-1c efficiency

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

is attained in connection with the lack of the appropriate expenditures.

All this reflects the existence of contradictions between the social and
economic indicators resolved by society.

lo matter how great the positive effect of social results on a reduction

in expenditures, increase in labor productivity and growth of output end

of the volume of national incone is. the extent of such an effect by no
leans reflects the entire public utility of these social results thuselves.
"net cost. physical and labor indicators can quantitatively measure the en-
tire sociel significance, for example. of the discovery of drugs capable of
curing a previously incurable dangerous widespread disease? 01‘ come., the
entire sociel significance of the protection of people's health cannot be ex—
hausted by the indicators of the effect of a decrease in norbi-iity on a re-
duction in expenditures connected with treatment. on an increase in the nu-
ber of work dnys end on other similar econoric indicators, although all of
then are important and should be taken into account as accurately as pos-
sible. The public utility of social reeul;s under socialise is detersinsd
by the fact that nan. his life. health end the satisfaction of his needs are
an end in itself, which, of course, cannot be reduced to the saving of the

expenditures of resources resulting tron a reverse effect of social factors
on economic factors.

‘Ihe problen of inedmssibility of reducing social results to the saving of
resources brought about by then is of great practicalinportance. narrow-
ing the content of these results, when only pert of the cosponents forming
then is taken, cannot fail to effect the underestimation of social results
during the selection of variants of new equipment. If the social (social
end economic) result of the production end use of new equipent is under-
stated. during a comparison with additional expenditures the social end econ-
omic benefit for society of the new equipment possessing high sociel paran-
eters is understated artificially. This will occur inevitably if an in-

complete socisl result, in which only pert of the casponents fox-ling it is
taken. is compared with expenditures.

Calculation of the vast and, moreover. increasing effect of social factors
on economic factors end the development of the methodology of such a calcu-
lation are of prinery scientific end practical importance. Such a-calcula-
tion still needs a significant intensification of the methodological base
and is used in an extremely insuf'ficientnenner. This calculation should be
utilized in a nt-ber of important directions--in the fcmation of the scien-
tific and technical policy. determination of the rates and proportions of
develop-lent of certain types of new equipment. substantiation of the selec-
tion of a variant of new equipment (comparison of the significance of its
social result, required expenditures and the positive or negative effect of
social factors on economic factors, including the national income).

nm, the indicated calculation should be used when establishing nor-stives

for social results (including labor protection and improvement in the nat-

ural environment), in planned calculations of all types of resources and
23

_.-POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OHICIAL US! ONLY

in the compilation of labor and material balances. It is inportant that
the effect of social results on economic indicators be sufficiently reflec-
ted in designing, standardisation and certification. in financial plans.

in the compensation of losses and substantiation of additional expenditures
on social nessures. in the calculations of their econuic ”return and in
the stinulation of overcoming negative social consequences and of increasing
positive consequences.

In connection with the problem of measurebility of the public utility of
social results we will turn to such an oVerall and generalizing national
economic indicator on the national income-mthis vital economic source of
resources for the growth of the social and economic result and the imple-
nentation of scientific end technical progress (as well as of the entire
public reproduction). The combined social and economic effect from scien-
tific and technical progress is embodied (on a national economic scale) in
the corresponding pert of the increase in the physical volune of the national
income (value tens in invariable prices). however. with all the exceptional
importance of the national income as an em rall indicator of the offset at-
tained by the national economy. as a newly created value expressing socially
necessary expenditures of labor. it cannot fully reflect the public utility
of combined social results obtained from scientific and technical progress
and from all public reproduction. This also applies to the physical vol-
me of the national income in value terns in invariable prices. 'l'he public
utility of social results that is beyond its value terms and is not reflected
at all in the physical volune of the national income reneins. The reali-
zation of social results is such more reflected by such a category as the
fund for the consunption of the national income uncovered in its plysical
and asterial structur-c. however. nor can a complete reflection of the pub-
lic utility of social results realised in nonproduction consuption be at-
tained here.

An absolute and relative increase in expenditures on obtaining social results.
which. on the whole. is by no means covered by the saving of expenditures
produced by these results. requires a corresponding increase in the economic
effect from scientific and technical progress. first of all. this should be
ensured by a significant increase in the proportion of highly efficient and
fundsnentally new equipment. At the sue time, it is objectively determined
that, as a rule. every new equipent should improve all the types of the so-
cial and economic result that are inherent in it in terns of specialisation
(including working conditions and ecological probl-s). Avoiding aw impair-
nent in social indicators is the minion- requirement.

Formulations of the so-called "averted deluge” in the sphere of scientific
and technical progress have received a certain popularization uong econuists.
It is recon-ended that the economic effect from nev equipment be sued up

with the economically calculated effect from the elininetion or reduction in
damage and the negative consequences of technical progress. Such race-lende-
tions are obJectionnble. During selection new equipent is culpared vith base
equipment according to the principle of the ”identity of results"u and all

210
FOR ORIGIN. US! ONLY
IO! OHICIM. USE ONLY

and base equipment (both emong manufacturers and conemra). Therefore.

no special. repeated. inclusion of the "effect from averted danege" during
the selection of a variant of new equipment is needed. Of course. as al-
ready noted. economic calculations for overcoming danage should be made for
aany purposes.

The tern ”averted duege" cannot be considered quite successml owing to
its lack of clarity. Boostines it scene that the planned. not actually ex-
isting. negative consequences of technical progress are overcone. Hith
such an approach. if one is to be consistent. any “noninclusion” in a plan
of any possible negative results is "averting danege." Often the advocates
of the position of ”averted duage" greatly inflate the econuic benefit
fron this "averting." raitting any conditionalities. especially in the
part of "underreceived output and profit. and often comparisons with addi-
tional. expenditures and with base equipment are not made at all. llot to
mention e recalculation, possibilities of creating a semblance of the ob-
tained effect open u . Instead of the term "averted damage.” apparently,
the term "eliminnted" damage would be more appropriate. next. the tens

”damage” is not applicable to many social indicators. The concept of in-
prove-ent in the social result is broader.

The selection of new equipment according to its social and economic effect
makes the problem of ensuring its economically accountable profit for len-
ufacturers and consuers (with due regard for additional expenditures on the
attaimsent of social paraneters. which often are not recovered during the
periods of the output and service of this equipment) and of the appropriate
organization of economic incentives especial]; urgent. The econasicalla ac-
countable social and economic effect obtained by nanufacturing enterprises
and the consusers of this equipment is based on the attainment of the es-
tablished socially useful result (including the given social parameters-
realisation of output. services and work according to volue. structure and
quality) while ensuring the saving of expenditures. The econanically account-

able effect is expressed in the indicators of the dvnaaics of profit and net
profit.

There is an urgent need for an organization of a well-set up system of com-
pencetion of additional expenditures and losses and for the utilization of
various forms of financing. stimulating and applying aeterial sanctions in
the field of protection of the industrial and natural environment. All this
requires the solution of e nusber of problem of the sources and nechanism

oysten of price foraation. It is important to establish a clear differen-
tistion of the sources of financing expenditures on the indicated social
neuurcs-deget sources. fro- thc centralized funds of ministries and the
funds of associations and enterprises. A systasatic differentiation of so-
cial aeesures and their provision with respect to various facilities (enter-
prises-onenufacturcrs and consuners of equipsent separately. their collec-
tiveo. workers in the nonproduction sphere. the population on a local and
wider scale and so forth) are needgg.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

It is necessery to systeneticelly toughen the stendsrds on the protection
of lebor end the neturel enviroment. When they ere violeted. neteriel
senctions not only egsinet enterprises (which is reflected in econonicelly
eocounteble indicetors). but eleo egeinst individuele guilty of these vio-
letions. ere edviseble.

A systematic solution of the problems of increasing the sociel end econosic
efficiency of scientific end technicel progress is one of the inportent
links in the econonie stretew of the Columnist Perty on the besis of the
decisions of the alcth end 25th congresses. These problens require en in-
tensive developsent of the sppropriete investigetions in e unity with
prectice.

WES

l. The concept "sociel" is breeder then the concept "economic." the letter
being e veriety of the former, which one. spesses the heels end super-
structure of society. however, there is elso e nerrower sociel concept
es s direct expression of the reelizetion of the supreme goel of sociel-
iet production. Bingling out the cetegory of the sociel result in this
sense is of greet fundenentsl end precticsl inportence. Such en inter-
pretetion is giVen in this erticle.

2. These indiceters reflect not only the effect on the physiologicel. but
else on the psychologicel conditions of men's vitel ectivity end. there-
fore. on the setisfection of spirituel needs so well (setisfection with
lebor. its ettrectiveness end on ever greeter trensfornetion of lebor
into e need connected with the development of personelity).

3. Equipment token for e comperison with new equipment eccording to the
criterion of sociel end economic efficiency is scent by ”bone" equipment
here end subsequently.

la. In speciel. equipment designed for the reelisetion of sociel prohlens
3-. end J.‘ become superfluous end edditionel expenditures on sociel
purposes becone besic.

s. The development of methods of singling out in the expenditures on the
nsnufecture of new equipment the elenents thet ere newly introduced for
the setisfection of the sociel require-eats reelised in the processes
of its production end operetion, methods differentieted eccording to
types of production fecilities, is of greet importence.

6. Here it is not e mstter of the results of the effect of sociel results
on economic indicstors. which. of course, one be caspered end sued up.

7. See ”Metodologicheskiye Voprosy Opredeleniye Sotsiel'no-nonomicheskoy
Bffektivnosti novoy Tekhniki" [isthodologicel Problems of sDeterIine-

tion of the Sociel end Economic Efficiency of New Bquipent .lioscow.

m OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M ORIGIN. USE ONLY

8. Ibid. p 3'.-
9. ibid, p 35.

10. Tho ottoot tron tho ooiontitio ond tochniool rovoiution inoiudoo in o

oianitioont ond ropidiy incroooinc nooouro tho oooioi culpononto or the
ootiotootion of pooplo'o noodo. which oonnot ho token into occount by
tho indicotoro of growth of tho phyoiooi voluno of tho notions: inculo.

At tho om tine. the rapidly occurring prooooooo of tho .orgonoo ond
ootiofootion of now noodo ohouid ho hoot in mind.

11. no problem of oooponootin; ond otinulotinc odditionol oxpondituroo on
overcoming tho motive oocioJ. conooquoncoo of tho utiiiootion or equip-
oont io or indopondont and vory croot inportonco.

comzon'r: rmm'otvo ”Prom", “Vopmy okonuliki”. 1979

11.539
080: 1820

27
M omcw. US! ONLY
POI ORIGIN. US! ONLY

AGROINDUSTRIAL COMPLEX BPPICIINCY HBIGIIBD
Moscow VOPROSY 3&0"le! in Russian No 2. Pub 79 pp llo-ZS

[Article by 1.. Xassirovx "The Efficiency of the National Bconoaic
Agroindustrlsl maples"!

[Text] As was pointed out in L. I. Brezhnev's report at the cm Central
Conaittee July (1978) Plenua. with the incressed scale of agricultural
production. the econoaic relations between the sectors of the agroindua-
trial couples have expended and become nore conplicated. which objectively
requires further isprovenent in the econoaic aechanisa. The plenua set
the party. planning and agricultural organs the task of paying sore atten-
tion to questions of increasing production efficiency and isproving the
econoaic relations between the sectors of the agroindustrisl conlex.
This task detersinee the urgency of working out the problea of indicators

of the efficiency of the national econoaic APR [egroindustrisl production
couples].

in forsing APR. in our opinion. one should take as the initial prerequisite
certain theories according to which the efficiency of social production is
aessured and planned on the basis of principles co-on to the entire
nstionsl econoay. by cospsring the results of the production (effect) with
the expenditures or resources used: the indicators of the econoaic effi-
ciency of agricultural production reflect the degree of use of the land.
labor. asterisl snd financial resources.1 Accepted as specific indicators
of agricultural production efficiency are: the ratio of the effect. gross
product (at cmarsble prices), not incoae and profit to the saomt of
land resources as the principal aeans of production in agriculture: the
ratio of the profit of the kolkhozes end sovkhoxes to the full production
cost or to the average yearly value of the production capital (profita-
bility). as well as the indicators characterising the use of the sain
factors of increasing production efficiency (labor productivity, capital-
labor rstio. etc.).2

The indicators enumerated are acceptable for the solution of current prob-
less of intrssectorial estiaates and planning. They are. however. clearly
inadequate under today's conditions of the dynaaic developaent of the

28
FOR OFFICIAL US! MY
roe OFFICIAL USB ONLY

national econony. inproving the economic nethode of regulating the rates
and proportions of expanded reproduction and raising the requiresents for
the criteria of qualitative growth. Under today's conditions the indicators
of agricultural production efficiency are above all called upon to take into
consideration the specific nature of the results stoning free the process
of interfere cooperation and agrolndustriai integration. Used to deteraina
the effect at all levels of the national econony are indicators of the
gross product and its eleeentsnthe net and surplus products. At the sane
tine. under the conditions of division and specialisation of labor. the
indicator of the value of the gross product and accordingly. other criteria
of the effect calculated on the basis of it overstate the actual result due
to duplicate comting of individual production of intermediate products and
services and actually characterise asounta of the gross turnover combining
the value of both the final and the intereediate output.

The developmnt of interfere cooperation and agroiaduatrial integration
leads to broadening the exchange of results of the work within the sectors
and associations. the scale of intraproduction turnover and to reducing the
degree of separateness of different stages of economic operations. A sub-
stantial part of the econosic relations that were earlier of a co-odity
nature are hsconing intraproduction relations; the values of the gross
product taken account of is relatively reduced; an ever-increasing part of
it goes into the production input of the coupler or association.

Under these conditions. orientation toward increasing the veins of the
gross product (essentially. the gross turnover) prevents concentration of
efforts in the decisive directions. “the gross product indicator charac-
teriscs the intersediate result as an independent eienent of the reproduc-
tion cycle. and it therefore does not provide orientation toward achieveoent
of the option proportionality in the correlation of the final and inter-
eediate product. Therefore, the cathode used for taking account of the
results of the work. with the present structure of coiiectivised production.

do not reflect either the objective content nor the actual dynamics of the
effect of the economic operations. -

L. l. Ireshnev noted in the Report of the CPSU Central Couittes to the 25th
Party Congress that. "Ad-inistrative. and especially planning work should
he aised at the final national econoeic results. This approach becoees
particularly urgent as the econosic systen grows and becones sore couples.
when these final results depend increasingly on a large number of inter-
nediate units and on the couples systea of intrsaectorial and intersec-
torial relations. Under these conditions. in the pursuit of intersediate
results. which still do not in the-selves decide the setter. it is easy to
overlook the coin thing—the final results. Conversely. if the proper
attenuon has not been paid to certain internediate units. the final. total
effect of great efforts and large investeents nay he mderlined." it foi-
lowe from this that detenining the effect under conditions of interfsrl
cooperation and sgroindustriai integration at all levels of this process--
fro- ths national econoeic are to the production units (associations and

29
FOR OWICIAI. USE ONLY
FOR 0??!CIAL 088 ONLY

interfere enterprises)-presupposea a clear-cut demarcation of the indi-
caters of the final and intermediate result. and ensuring the necessary
proportions between then is an important prerequisite for increasing the
efficiency of all social production.

A lack of each specific and substantiated indicators. differentiated with
respect to the degree of readiness of the product for consumption (final
or production-ovithin the cooperative spheres. sectors and units of then)
as a rule leads to an overstateaent of the part of the effect being taken
account of at the final stages of pro uction and reduces the aaterial
interest in the interacdiete results. thereby hindering the development
of the intcgrationai processes. These tendencies are characteristic of
both the structure of the entire national econoaic APR and of the inter-
sectoriai units of agriculture. in the latter they are intenaifiad by
separation and centralisation of the incomes obtained by the interface
enterprises and associations. Under these conditions. the fares lagging
behind and tluzcmprnfltahle sectors. which are in greatest need of using
the advantages of interfarn cooperation and agroindustrial integration for
uniting enterprises. prove to be the least desirable objects for
cooperation.

including the result of a certain specific unit of social production among
the final or intaraediate result depends. in the first place. on the func-
tional role of the corresponding use values in satisfying social demands
and. in the second place. an the position of this production unit in the
systeo of the national economy. “... whether a certain use value appears
as raw naterial. labor resources or a product." wrote Marx. "depends
entirely on its specific function in the labor process. on the place that
it occupies in it.and with a shift in this place. its definitions also
change." The specificity of the content of the indicator of the final
product lies in its relativity for different levels of economic operations.
In each completed cycle. at a certain specific level of the organisational
structure of production the final result is the volume of output that goes
beyond the limits of the intraproduction turnover at the given level and
the output used for nonprnduction purposes.

Since the actual national econoaic result is determined by the anount of
the final product. ascertainment of the real (free the standpoint of the
whole society) effect should exclude the possibility of a duplicate count.
The effect of a specific production unit is also expressed by its final
product; the effect of the preceding stages is for it only the intermediate
product (means of production). At each subsequent. higher level of the
structural subdivision. the magnitude of the intraproduction (at the given
level) turnover is again excluded. Therefore. the effect of the corre-
spending level of production is determined not by totaling the results of
the preceding stages. but by the final product of this precise. and only
this level. Consequently. in our opinion. the indicator of the final
product. calculated individually for each given production level. should
be taken as the initial value for determining the effect of production in

30
FOR 0P?ICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR ONICML USE ONLY

the present systes of eccounting end plenning. Pros the ntnndpoint of the
direct oconoeic tests of society it serves on the solo indicstor of the
result of the corresponding unit of the netionel econooy.

The fine! product of the notional econooic APR on e whole. in contrast to
the final product of its subdivisions (right up to the sector) hes its own
specific neture. determined by the structural content of the coupler so e
block of sectors of the netionel econooy with e specific terget fmction.‘
The indicstor of the finel product of the fsrs. the eseocietion end the
sector reflects so the einioue the entire voluee of coesodity production
going beyond the lieite of the given subdivision. Only the fineI product
of sphere Il (sgriculturs) belongs fully ssong the results of the APR. hov-
ever. .A considerehle pert of the work of the sectors of spheres I end III
is not subordihsted to the specific took of the egroindustridl coeplex end
therefore. their result is not included in either its interoediete or finel
product.5 The function of the egroindustriel coeplex is defined so the
tool: of providing the netionel economy with food end egriculturol rev
soteriels. vhile including reserves end export resources. In eccordence
with this. the eeomt of the effect of esch of its sectors end spheres thet

is roletod directly to the finel product of the coeplex should be regerded
es the effect of APR.

Therefore. without denying the purely econoeic significence of the gross
product indicstor. we consider it inexpedient to use this indicstor es s
criterion of the effect for conditions of interfere cooperstion end egre-
industriel integretion. thet is. et leest es the effect of the netionel
econoeic APR. Since the APK is not the only consueer of the output of the
sectors constituting sphere I. its finel product eey include only the
portion of the results of the production infreotructure of egriculture

thet enters into the production use of spheres II end III. The fineI pro-
duct of sphere I is reelised in the veiue of the scene of production eup-
plied to sgriculture end the units of sphere III end the production services
rendered then. In other words. it is used in the for- of resources within
the APR end serves es en inter-ediete product for it. The pert of the our-
plus product crested in sphere I thet is eebodied in these seas of produc-
tion end production services. just so the edditionsl incomes obteined
through increesed productivity of the scene of production (or conversely.
the possihle losses free their obsolescence). should be counted in the price
of the sole end reflected in the veiue (end this seene. elso in the eeomt
of the effect of pgoduction) of the egriculturel rev esteriel end products
of its processing.

In eddition. the pert of the news of production of industriel origin used
in spheres I! end III trmefers its veiue to the finel product of these
spheres grsduelly. in proportion to the deprecietion. in the course of e
series of production cycles. Therefore. their veiue is not fully included
in the yeerly finel product of the APR. but only in the enount of the yeerly
veiue used. end it is counted in the costs of production of the finel pro-
duct in the forts of eoortieetion deductions.

31
FOR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY

The amount of the final product of the national economic APR produced in
the course of the year. in value terms is thus the sun of: the net product
formed in agriculture: the final product of sphere l. entering agriculture
and the sectors of sphere III. in the amount of the actually used value
(that is. of the amortisation deductions from the value of the fixed capital
of industrial origin. as well as the value of the productively used objects
of labor obtained from the sectors of sphere I): the part of the newly
created value in the corresponding sectors of sphere 11! during the pro-
cessing and sale of ssrirulturel products end raw materials (the rest of
the final product of sphere ill is counted in the output of agriculture
received for industrial processing).

Planning and stimulating the obtaining of the effect by each (including the
primary) subdivision of social production necessitates allowing for the
indicators of the intensediate effect. The growth and optimisation of the
structure of intraproduction turnover is a compulsory condition for the
development of production, its specialization and concentration and an
increase in the final effect. in addition. as was noted above. the same
result may be both intermediate and final. depending on its place in the
system of social division of labor. L. l. Brezhnev. in the Report of the
CPSU Central Committee to the 23th Party Congress. indicated the need to
"give the coasrmnrw-whether it he a question of raw materials and materials.
machines and equipment or consumer goods--broader opportunities to influence
production." This signifies orientation of production toward the satis-
faction of the demands not only of personal. but also of production
consumption.

Carrying out this theory is urgent for all levels of social production.
including the spheres. sectors and individual production units of the
national economic APR. In particular. there must be more precise substanti-
ation of the correlation betveen the growth rates of agricultural production
and its material-technical provision; between the increase in purchases of
agricultural products and raw materials and the production capacities of the
procurement system and the processing industry; between the production of
the output of livestock breeding and the production of fodder and develop-
ment of the combined fodder industry: between the components of the fodders.
mineral fertilisers. etc.

Certain specific elements of the means of production may he used produc-
tively only in a certain mutual correlation. If this correlation is not
ensured. part of them. surplus and going beyond the boundaries of optimum
proportions. cannot be put to use in the production of the final product of
the corresponding period. in this case the production consumption volume
is determined with respect to the minimum of the components of the propor-
tion. The surplus part of the means of production may at best be regarded
as production reserves. and at uorst--if it is egpended outside the optimum
correlations-ss nonproductivs production costs.

32
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY
Nil omcm. USE ONLY

Balance in the volumes of the final and intersedlnte product is achieved
hy methods of planned and ccunanlc regulation of the growth rates with
rvupvct to the directions: units of production and types of products.

The disproportions arising at a certain specific level of available
resources and labor productivity say he eliainated by temporary stahilisa-
tins of production for some sectors and types of output and accelerated
developsent through freeing resources-~for others. within the lisits of
the proportions. established by the plan. hetveen the final and inter-
mediate product for a certain specific unit of social production. the
importance of the corresponding types of effect is equivalent. and their

evaluation and stimulation should in our opinion he based on unified
principles.

The ind'catur of the net product. the Iain advantage of uhich lies in the
fact that it reflects the sngnitude of the newly created value. is being
increasingly recognized in econosic literature as a generalising (complete)
criterion of the effect of socialist production. At the sane tine. as is
justly noted in a number of works.8 the indicator of the magnitude of the
net product does not characterise the degree of participation (share of
certain specific units of social production) in providing for the densnds
of the national economy for specific ssterial wealth and consuser values.
Therefore. the satcrisl result and the value effect of production should
be differentiated.

The snterial result is expressed by the final product and attests to the
satisfaction of the final national econosic demands for specific products
of the work of certain specific production sectors. Pros the standpoint

of satisfying these desands in the saterial. in-kind fern. and this means.
also for a description of the general material result. the correlation in
the products of newly created and transferred value has no significance:
hoth are embodied in the specific use value. It is another natter when it
is a question of the value effect of production. In this case. this corre-
lation is of decisive significance. since here one seat single out free the
value of the final product. in the first place. the results of the given
production period. not counting the earlier crested result (fund for replac-
ing the scans of production). which is a condition for the current and pre-
requisite for the succeeding stage of reproduction. and in the second place.
the direct results of each specific unit of the national economy. After
subtracting the quantities enumerated fros the total result. the remainder
is the econo-ic effect. and accordingly. iron the final product--the newly
created vaiue--the net product.

The need to differentiate the material result and the econosic effect is
caused by the dual nature of lahor and the difference in its abstract and
concrete content. The basis of the value of the final product is the
amount of labor (live and embodied) socially necessary for its production.
while the econonic effect of each given production process is based only

on the value newly created in this process by live labor. Equal live labor
input at an identical level of its ”skiilfulness and intensiveness..."9

33
FOR OFPICIAL 088 ONLY
P08 omcm. "88 0|le

nanuoea the equal econolic (value) effect of production: only live labor
in its ahatract content createa value. it. Marx noted that "The vnrher pre-
aervea the valuea of the name of production used or transfers then to the
product as coeponenta of the value of the latter. not by the addition of
his labor in general. hut as the result of the particular useful nature.

no the result of the specifically productive fora of this added'lahor....
by the aiaple quantitative addition of labor. a new value is added. and

as the result of the particular quality of the labor added the old values
of the naana of production are preserved in the product." 6

Live labor transfers to certain epeci fic uao values a different aaount of
peat lahor enbodied in the ocean of production. This difference affecta
the overall value of the final product. but has no relation to the for-a-
tion of the aagnitude of the effectnit is related to the specific nature.
”the specifically productive fora" of the labor. Therefore. with identical
live labor input. the aaterial result in the production of different types
of output is expressed in the different value of the final product. In
other words. the overall aaterial result is higher than the econooic effect
by the aagnitude of transferred value of the neana of production. This
nagnitude in not the sane for different type» of product. when. for
exanpie. ti. Bydel'san takes the final product as the indicator of the
effect. he thus. whether he wants to or not. excludes in advance the pos-
sibility of objective characteristics of efficiency hoth with respect to
the types of product and to the level of production integration. that in.
in both the horizontal and vertical aspects of the coapariaona within the
couple: (the cane thing is true of coapariaone of the efficiency of the
coaplex with other national econoaic sectors and for-ationa).

The indicator of the aagnitude of the net product and natf. 1al incoee
reflects the goal of socialist production-«he utnost rise in the aaterial
and cultural standard of living of the people-and characterizes the source
of the conauaption fund for the workers and resources for expanded repro-
duetion. In this sense, the category of the net product ahould. in our
opinion. be regarded as the criterion of the full effect. At the cane
tine. the present level of working out the prohlel being discuased ie Itlll
inadequate for foraation of the aectorial characteristics of production
efficiency on the heels of this criterion. There not be an additional
analysis of a nuaher of probleaa of a theoretical and aethodological nature.
particularly concerning the atructural content of the criterion of the
effect and the nethodoiogy for deternining its cleaenta.

The only source of ewandcd reproduction (the aaount of its exceeding ai-ple
reproduction). as is generally recognized in Hereiat-heniniat econoeic
theory. is the part of the newly created value that ia enhodied in the
surplua product. The efficiency of socialist production is expressed in

an increase not only in the. surplus. but also in the necessary product. but
an increase in the latter. juet as an increase in the entire consuption
fund. aleo occurs due to purposeful use. conforaing to the plan. of part of
the surplua product: drawing into production additional lahor unseen and

34
POI OPHCIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICRAL US! ONLY

increasing the expenditures involved in raising the people's standard of
living are inpleaentcd through distribution of the surplus product of
society.

The classical scholars of Harnise-lenioise pointed out that surplus labor
and the surplus product should always exist and "the excess of the product
of labor over the costs of supporting the labor. and the formation and
oceueulation of this excess of the social production and reserve fundo-all
this was and reeains the basis of any social. political and intellectual
progress." that "in any social production ... a distinction say always be
eade between the part of labor. the product of which is included in direct
individual coosuaption by the producers and senbers of their fandly and ...
the other part of labor. which is always surplus labor. the product of
which always serves the satisfaction of the general social daeands. no
satter how this surplus product is distributed and no matter who functions
as the representative of these social densnda."12

1hr enin proportion of expanded reproductioo--between accuaulation and
uunsusption--is detereined not only by the assent of the newly created
value (the level of the necessary product for a certain specific period--
the given eagnitude). but also by the sass of surplus product. if. how-
ever. the optimization of the distribution of the surplus product is the
objective condition for increasing production efficiency. and the national
incoee eserges as the net product in already distributed fore. then the
surplus product itself (this eeans. its converted fore too-the net incosa
of society) should be singled out in the structure of the entire not pro-
duct es the detersining elesent of the effect. as the final effect of
production.

working out by eleeeots the criterion for the effect also sects today's
practical desands of guidance of the developed horizontal and vertical
structure of the national ccono-y. At the ease time. for agriculture and
the entire national aconoaic APR it takes on prlaary significance. At
present. at all levels of productiono-fros the enterprise to the sector.
inclusivc--the result and. consequently, the effect (gross and net incoue.
profit) are expressed not by the sagoitude created. but only by the magni-
tude taken into consideration in the esti-ate with respect to the existing
wholesale (purchase) prices. Meanwhile. the specific foreational nature of
the effect of agricultuiol production is detersined by the considerable
ascent of excess surplus product (differential loco-e) created in this
sector. when the function of transferring the differential iocoee to the
state is fulfilled by the purchase prices. differentiated with respect to
zones. depending on the differences in the objective production conditions
of a certain specific product. part of the surplus product of agriculture
is suldntthe last stages of forsation of the value and price of the
finished product.

Therefore. port of the effect is related to the results of the sectors and
spheres of the national econoey that do not take part in creating it. and
in the fare of turnover tax on the. enters the centralised fund of the

35
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

state's not incose. Its separation and renoval from ownership by a specified
party with respect to the place of its creation results in the fact that the
national economic effect takes into account an asount considerably exceeding
the awe of the effect actually realized by all the physical production sec-
tors. The calculation of the total profitability as one of the indicators
r.- efficiency for the national econoay of the country as a whole and also
for the mien republics. the full asount of the surplus product (profit and
turnover tax) is included in the effect. but for the enterprises. associa-
tions and sectorsuonly the asount of net incose (profit) realised by then.
This is the reason for the lack of comparability of the national 'econosic
and the econosic accountability efficiency.

The asount of the surplus product of' the national economic APR as a value
indicator of its final effect is quantitatively expressed as the difference
hetueen the assent of the total effect and the proportion of it used to
compensate for the expenditures of the labor force in the ascent of sisple
reproduction. that is. it is part of the surplus product of society created
in the process of the production of agricultural goods. their processing
and sale. This indicator also has an independent significance. since it
characterises the effect of APR as a real source of fmds for the national
economy for the needs of production accunulation and expanded reproduction
of the labor force. the source of forming a centralized fund of the state's
net incense.

Hodern methods of accomting and distributing the necessary product and the
difference in the actual level of wages for the sectors of the national
econosy do not yet ensure the actual reflection of the ascent and inter-
secterial proportions in the costs of reproduction of the labor force.
Under these conditions the use of the indicator of the net product as an
indicator of the effect reduces the objective simificance of the charac-

' teristics of the efficiency in intersectorial comparisons. In addition,
agriculture is the only sajor sector of physical production in which. due
to the effect of technical progress. the nudaer of workers employed is
reduced not only relatively. but also absolutely. This process inevitably
influences 'the dynasics of the effect accounted for as the sagniude of the
newly created value (that is. including booh the necessary and me surplus
product).

If. furthermce. one takes into consideration the tendency toward a reduc-
tion in.tbe indicator of the finial product as the result of the process of
interfars cooperation and sgroindustrisl integration. the use of data on
the anoint of ”et product as the effect vill lead to a discrepancy between
- the dynamics of the indicator and the reality reflected by it: the pro-
gressive tendency of the priury increase in labor productivity as cospared
with the level of its wages. in itself attesting to an increase in produc-
tion efficiency. will begin to be accospanied by a reduction in the indi-
caters of the effect and the efficiency. Therefore. an indicator of the
econoaic effect is needed that is least subject to the influence of the

36

roe ontcm. use my '
FOR OPPICIAL USE ONLY

above-noted factors and at the same time will objectively characterize the
amount and dynamics of the effect at all levels of production. In our
opinion. at present the must acceptable for this purpose is the final
effect (net income).

It was noted above that the indicators of economic efficiency should

reflect the degree of use of labor. material and land resources. As is
known, the only source of the effect is labor. The capital-labor ratio

and fertility of the lands used, however. affect its productivity and the
magnitude of the effect. Therefore. in determining production efficiency.
the economic effect should be compared not only with the live labor input.
but with the entire aggregate of resources used. Because of this it becomes
necessary to devise an integral indicator of production resources.

The special features and principles of forming the indicator of the effect
of national economic APR determine the specificity of the methods of
including the elements of production resource; (by spheres of the complex)
in their integral indicator. The effect of using the resources of sphere l
is realized in the value of the means of production supplied to agriculture
and the units of sphere III and the production services rendered them.
Therefore. the final product of sphere l is used in the form of resources
within the coupler. that is. serves as an intermediate product for spheres
I and II. It may be taken into accomt only within the means of production
of these spheres and in the ascent that reflects their real production
potential. He will discuss the methods of including the components of the
integral indicator in it.

According to the methodological regulations approved by decree of USSR
Goaplan, the indicators of the ecOuomic efficiency of agricultural produc-
tion should reflect the decree of use of the land, labor, material and
financial resources.13 In this connection the question arises as to the
form of reflecting in the entire complex of resources an extremely important
element of them such as labor resources. that is the masses of live labor
used. If it is taken account of in the expenditure formula for determining
profitability as an element of the production costs (expenditures for usges).r
then in the present (resource) formula, this decisive factor of production
is essentially excluded from the calculation system. Calculation of this
sort is unfounded. since the accounting of the funds itself is necessary
only for the characteristics of the conditions of the functioning of labor
and its capital-labor ratio without the mass of live labor using these means
of production, and the indicator of available resources loses any real

economic content.

The need to use the resource formula for efficiency for intersectorial
formations. including for national economic APK, is logically substantiated.
As is knouni the transition from analysis of the intrasectorial relations
(in the capitalist system of economics-~competition) to intersectorial is
for Harx accompanied by an analysis of the modification of the value for
the price of production.

37
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

11w expediency of taking account of the wage fund. along with the fixed and
working production capital used. in the denominator of the formula for the
efficiency was substantiated by a number of economists. The sum of these
ﬂunk is used in calculations of the efficiency of the spheres of the
national evonnmy.|‘ Slave the mass of labor resources put into motion. in
linrx's wards. determines the asount of the wage fund.” it is expedient to
take. as n commensurable (value) indicator of the labor resources used for
agricultural enterprises. organisations and associations. the full sum of
the yearly wage fund at the normative or base (for kalkhates) level. as
applied to the corresponding period. minus the part of the net profit of
the enterprises distributed with respect to labor. At the some time. a
regular rise in wages (estimated per unit of labor input) above the given
level should be regarded as distribution and use of part of the surpluo
product for expanded reproduction of the labor force. For the sectors and
enterprises of sphere It. one should take as this indicator the portion of
the annual wage fund for their workers proportional to the relative propor-
tion of the newly created value in processing and selling agricultural raw

material in the total volume of the newly created value. or the net product
of the given sphere.

Material-technical resources are included in the integral indicator as the
sum of the value of the fixed production capital and the physical working
capital (analogous to the content of the resources taken into account in

the present formula for profitability). for agriculture--in the full amount.
for sphere lli-in the proportion calculated by the same method as the wage
fund. in our opinion. in the future there may be a transition to estimating
the fixed production capital with allowance for obsolescence and wear. that

is. according to the regenerating value and minus the sums charged extra
for amortization.

in estimates of the production efficiency of individual types of agricul-
tural output. in view of the lack of substantiated methods of determining
the actual capital-output ratio of the specific products. the value of the
fixed production capital and of part of the physical working capital for
the specific products may be calculated using the method of distribution of
alartisation charges adopted in the present practice of calculating the
production cost.

At the present stage of study of the problem of including natural resources
in the calculations of the efficiency it appears inexpedient to single out
of the aggregate of these resources land funds as the main means of produc-
tion in agriculture and the spatial basis of distribution of other sectors.
As a rule. two extremes predominate in the recommendations for methods of
determining agricultural production efficiency: in some cases the land
funds in general are disregarded and are not included among the resources
(for example. in the existing methodology for calculating profitability).

and in the others. as was noted above. the effect is included only among
thin type of resources.

38

FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The need for cor-ensuratioa of resources in an integrated (ore is determined
by the fact that the land resources take part in agricultural production in
a unified syutem with the rest of the production resources which have value
and price. The possibility of this interpretation areas from the qualitative
comparability of the means of production with respect to their functional
role in the production process. if the natural conditions of the applica-
tion of labor in agriculture and the quality of the lands are regarded
according to the plan as a condition for achiuving a certain specific magni-
tude of the effect. the lands themselves in their quantitative and quali-
tative characteristics emerge as a necessary element in the production
resources that determine the capital-labor ratio of the labor. and thus.

the level of production efficiency as well.

At the same tine. including the effect only in the amount of the land
resources is snadeauste for solving the problem. The land serves as the
main. but not the only means of production in agriculture. Therefore. the
efficiency should be determined by col-paring the effect not with any one
element of the resources. but with the entire couples of them. In addi-
tion. allowance should be made for the fact that the nonmiformity of land.
with respect to fertility. has an effect on the level of labor productivity
on different lands: while as estimated per hectare of more fertile lmds.
the same effect was obtained as on a hectare of less fertile lands. this

by no means indicates equal efficiency of the production in both cases.
Therefore. both the amount and the quality (fertility) of the land resources
oust be taken into consideration. The nest acceptable form of calculating
the quantitative and qualitative differences in the lands used for the
present say be their economic (value) estimate. comparable with the estimate
of other resources used in the production process.

The lands of agricultural enterprises. organizations and associations are
included fully in the integral indicator of the resources according to
their economic evaluation: the lands occupied in sphere Ill-according to
the data on the specific land-intensivenessl" of the capital investments
for the sectors of the given sphere and according to the level of the
evaluation of one hectare in the corresponding zone (or on the average for
the national economy-doc calculations on the macro-level). Therefore.
while the full accounting of the effect is the first prerequisite for
ensuring the all-round nature of the efficiency indicator. a complete
sccouMing of the resources. including the land resources. is the second
necessary prerequisite. The integral indicator constructed on their basis
with respect to form will be of the some kind as the profitability indi-
cator. it. however. the latter as the relation of the profit, that is. of
part of the effect. to the part of the resources used in production reflects
only a comparatively narrow (often distorted) content of the efficiency.
comparison of the full magnitude of the effect with the value estimate of
all the resources used will make it possible to obtain more objective syn-
thetic characteristics of the production efficiency.

39

FOR OFFICIAL 058 ONE!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The level of efficiency of APR. depending on the specific purpose of the
characteristics. may be defined as the ratio of the complete or final
effect to the integral indicator of the production resources. The indica-
tors of the complete or final efficiency are used analogously. The full
efficiency reflects the correlation of the values expressed in the actual
prices and estimates of their sale. At present the final product is sold
mainly by retail prices (food products and seafood commodities produced
from agricultural raw materials). and a substantial part of the production
resources (their material-technical element)-by (wholesale. procurement
prices. and according to the production cost (the agricultural output
received for production use within the sector). This situation causes a
certain violation of the principle of quantitative proportionality. but in
the process of improving the methods of taking count of the expenditures
and resources it is completely surmountahle. In addition. this lack of
proportionality in calculating the effect and resources is also charac-
teristic of other sectors of the national economy. and therefore it does
not exclude intersectorial compatibility and the dynamic characteristics of
APR as a whole. Therefore. the indicator of the full efficiency is appli-
cable for measuring the overall level of APR efficiency and studying the
dynamics and intersectorial comparisons (in the cross-section of the
national economy).

At the some time. intrasectorial comparability of the levels of efficiency
is of primary importance for optimization of the structure of the national
economic APK, planning and stimulation of the development of its subdivi-
sions. sectors and spheres. To solve these problems there must be an.indi-
ester of the final efficiency. in which the effect is expressed in the
actual amount of the surplus product created at a certain specific level of
production. not depending on the level of intermediate prices for sale and
distribution processes.

There is at present still no statistical accounting for the complex as a
whole and its spheres (with the exception of agriculture). which makes it
difficult to determdne a number of initial indicators for calculation of
the efficiency. The components and general level of the corresponding
Indicators. however, may be revealed on the basis of the estimative data
according to the present system of accounting. Given below are the form
and results of ascertaining the indicators of the efficiency of national
economic APR on the basis of the methodological theories set forth in
accordance with the data for the Ninth Five-Year Plan (average annual
indicators).

Improving the methodology. methodological bases and system of accounting of
the economic results of national economic APR will make it possible to ‘_
solve the fundamental problems of its formation from the standpoint of the

most important economic criterion-production efficiency.

40
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
nu“...

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APR as n including

whole agriculture
.mW

 

Net income (in billion rubles) . . . . . . . . . 62.3 62.3
including:
sold by enterprises (in billion rubles) . . . . 10.3 9.2

transferred to state through system of

zonal differentiation of procurement
pricaa and sold in the fore of turnover

tax* (in billion rubles) . . . . . . . . . . . 66.2 33.1
Aggregate vege fund estinated for final

product (in billion rubles) . . . . . . . . . 33.7 21.3
Net product (in billion rubles) . . . . .. . . 96.2 63.6
Integral indicator of resources

(in billion tabla.) e s s e e e e e e e e e e 673s? 599e3

including:

fixed production capital and physical

working capital (in billion rubles) . . . . . 260.0 180.0
economic evaluation of land.

(in b111‘m rate”) 0 I O I 0 O O I O O I O O ‘moo 39806
Efficiency:

total (in z) I O D O O O O O I O O O O O O O 1‘03 1006

final (in x) O I O O I C O O O O 0 O O l D I 9.3 7.1

 

Calculated on the basis of the methodological studies of the Department
of Agrarian Probless of Socialism of the Institute of Bconoeics of the
USSR Academy of Sciences. The other indicators in this table were deter-
mined from the date of the statistical yearbook "Narodnoye thatyaystvo
8888 as 60 let" [The USSR National Economy in the Course of 60 Years].
Izdatel'stvo Statistika, 1977.

FOOTNOTES

Sec "Hctodlchcskiyc uknsaniyn k raarnbotke gosudarstvennykh planov
rozvitiyn nnrodnngo khozynystva SSSR" [Methodological Instructions for
Drafting the State Plans of Development for the USSR Rational Economy].
lzdntel'stvo Bkonomika. 1976, pp 33, 205.

See "Hetodichcskiyc ukazaniye k razrabotke planov rnzvitiya sel'skogo
khozyeystva" [Methodological Instructions for Drafting Plans for the
Development of Agriculture], Izdatel'stvo Kolos, 1970. pp 267-250.

61
FOR OP?ICIAL USE ONLY
3.

6.
S.

10.

11.

12.'

FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

As an exaaple we may allude to the coaparatively low level of material
incentive for the production of foddera at a typical interlediate pro-
duct in agriculture; to the varying profitability of the stages of

-reproduction and fattening in livestock breeding; finally. to the lower

degree of stimulation for the production of the raw products of agri-
culture than with the finished (final) products, manufactured free
agricultural raw nateriala, where the excess part of the surplus pro-
duct is withdrawn for the budget in the fore of turnover tax.

K. Marx and F. Engels. “Soch.” [Works]. Vol 23, pp 193-19‘.

According to the unified classification adopted for the CEHA neaber
countries. included in aphere 1 of APR are the sectors of the national
economy that ensure the material-technical supply and service of agri-
cultural production: in sphere ll--atrictly agriculture; in sphere 111--
aectora carrying out the processing and delivering to the oonauner the
finished products of agricultural origin.

An analysis of the execution of thie theory goea beyond the fraaework
of the problems discussed here.

- For exaaplc. the noraative ratio of nitrogen, phosphorus and potasaiun

in ainernl fertilizers on the average for the USSR ie determined as a
proportion of l:1.1:0.8. In 1975 the actual auppliea of fertilizer to
agriculture provided a ratio of l:0.6:0.7. As a reault of the shortage
of phosphorus fertilizers. the voluae of effectively uaed fertilizers.
on the basis of the supplies was: for nitrogen-582. for potassium-
672. The rest of the nitrogen and potassium fertilizers could not be
efficiently used. There ie a aieilar ratio of power engineering and
operating aachinea, tractora and trailer inpleaenta to the ratio of
components in foddera. etc.

See. for example. 6. Kipernan; Yu.'Huntyen; and H. Polyahova.
"Methodological Aspects of Planning and Accounting of the Final Results
of Production" (VOPROSY EKONOMIKI No 2. 1977. p 3d). -

K. Marx and P. Engels. "Soch.." Vol 23. p 67. We are using this expres-

sion of Marx in order to avoid lack of precision in terminology in this
case: labor productivity. es is known. is not coaparable with reepect

to various use values. . -
K. Nprx and F. Engels, "Soch.." Vol 23, pp 211-212.
See VOPROSY-BKONOHIKI, No a. 197s.'pp sa-ss.

K. ﬁnrx and F. Engels. "Soch.." Vol 20. p 199; Vol 25. Pt 2. pp 669-650.

62
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

13. Son ‘Matodtchukiyo uluuniya k rnrabotke gooudurotvonnykh plunov
ruvttiyu nnrodnogo Rhosyayuva 888R." ndatnl'uvo “months. 197‘.
p 2050

1‘. 800 VOPROSY BRONOHIKI. No 11. 1974. pp 116-117: IZVBSTIYA WII
NAUK 888R. SBRIYA IKONMCIIBSKAYA. No 6. 1977. p 111. the.

15. 809 K. Marx and P. Snails. "8061.." Vol 23. Pt 1. p 157.

16. 8.0 V. A. Vuhanov. "bounds for Land. for Induatvy (no, No 3, 1976.
pp 95-99).

COPYRIGRT: ltd-tel'atvo "9er". “Voprooy chem-1M”. 1979

12151
680: 1820 m

1.3

108 OFFICIAL USE ONLY