APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040009-7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

FOR OFFICIAL USE (XILY

JPRS L/8373

4 April 19 79

TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(FOU0 15/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information prinarily from foreign
newspapers. periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[I are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item. or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. “here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was summarised or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied asappropriste in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
giVen by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudrs of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGlT MUS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WNERSRIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED KEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATIOU BE RESTRICTED MOFEICIAL USE ONLY.
TRANSLATIONS 0N NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
(rouo 15/79)

Courems

ASIA
sum

Briefs
Heroin Seizure in Msndsisy
Poppy Plsntstions Destroyed
Heroin Found in Car
Heroin Users Arrested
Opium Seizure in Msndslsy
Heroin Seized in 'i‘usnggyi
Poppy Suppression in Esenwi
Poppy Destruction in Kutksi
Two Arrested

mm

Nationwide Antinsrcotics Operstion Nets 231 Suspects
(sum mm, 3 Jon 79)

Msrihusno Crop Destroyed in Sumatra
(KOHPAS, 5 Jon 79)

WYSIA

62 Pounds of Morphine Seized in Kednh
(m max DAILY ms, 3 Feb 79)

Bight Heroin labs Pound Since 1976
(m scams was, in sm- 79)

Briefs
Heroin Peddler
!'OR ORIGIN. USE ONLY

comm (Continued)
mm mm

mug healing in Tom-Inge Celled 'Dieturbing'
(m mm m, 7 m 79) beeeoeeeeeeoooeoeoeeeo

Cnnnnbie Oil Smogler Rounded for Sentencing
(m mm ”3.2 m 79) eeeeeeoeooooeeeeeaeeeeo

Brien

Druge Reid
Bouthlnnd Cnnnebie Plentntion

Cennebie Oil Importing Charge
Heroin Conviction

mntprmis

Jail Officer, Cop Held for mug hashing
(PHILIPPINES DAILY amass, 10 hr 79)

Briefs
hrihuenn hm hunted
hrihuenn Plente Uprooted

sum

FOP Cracks Down cn 'mppie-‘rype' ‘rouriete
(mu Veemhinghe; sun, 16 m- 79)

mum

Briefs
' Pot' Fluent ion
Sailore Charged

CW

Pour lbn Admit. Guilt in Heroin Conspiracy
(m cmmmn, 6 Mn- 79)

Police Seize 625 Kilogram oi' Bunion no Mirebel Airport
(Hicbel Auger; IA mas, 6hr 79) ...............

Briete
Coeeine Smuggling Convict ione

-b-

FOR OFFICIAL USB ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

mam (Continued)
mm more
3014mm

New Form of Narcotics haggling Described
(nemnaur Vunev; room, 19 m 79)

LATIN AMIGA
DAMS ‘
Briefs
Capture of hrihuend Shipment
comm

DAB Quiet Responds to 'TIMB' Story on Drugs
(Luis Eduardo Carrillo; BL 3mm, 25 Jen 79)

Reach Correspondent writes on Antidrus Gempei
(Roger Boleindre; pears-mm, 9 Mn- 79

Milit Strikes Against 'i‘rni’fickere Described
ELTIEHPO, 10 Feb 79)

'i‘rnftickera' Arm Shipment Seized
(EL atom, 10 Feb 79)...

Recent Action Against Drug Traffic-ere Reported
(m. Tram, 19 Jen 79)

Drier.
polemic-Venezuela Joint Comic-ion
Cocaine Laboratory Seized

MEXICO

Details or 'Operntion Condor' mneuvere Described
(a. son as BINAIDA, 22 Feb 79)

Trafficking Ring Discovered in Mexicali Jeii
(m voz be. u mom, 11 m 79)

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

comm. (Continued)

Briefs
'Angel Dust' 'I'iu‘sat Cited
Cocaine Traffiokers Arrested
Antidrug Campaign Results
Heroin Trai‘i‘icker Denies Charges
Trstric to 0.8. Continuing
Jailed Offici s1 Released

PERU
Briefs
'I-‘inder' of Briefcase Actually Drug Dealer
URIBUAY
Doctors Druggist Involved in Psychotropic Diet Pill Case
(nmm,wr1md‘te.) D0.0QODOOOOOOOOOOO‘OCOOOOI
Pill Racket Discovered
Court Procudings
Argentine Doctor Investigated
Another Doctor Jailed
Additional Crime, More Arrests
mum
Briefs
Drug Traffickers Arrested
NEAR EASI‘ AND m AFRICA
mm
Drug Traffic Increasing, Addiction Treatnnt Centers
Necessary
(Msti )iuhanna; sosr mm, 25 Dec 78)
mu EUROPE
CYRUS
Briefs
Drug Carrying heighter in Port
WK

Seven Icelanders Arrested in Largest Cocaine Seizure
(WWD’6mn) 0.00000.0000IOOOOIOOO'OOO

- a .
FOR OWICIAI. US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

comm (Continued)

Rsrcotics Police Ori‘icisl Discusses Bsrd Drugs Scene
(Warm, 10 Rb ”) DICOODIOIIIOOIOOOOOI

mu

(hi-tons lsrcotios Seisures Ranch Record in 1978
(mm,7?§b ”) OOOD'OIOCCOUIUIOUOOOOOOO

'Snifting' Becomes Newest Youth Drugs Problem
(MW, 13 Feb 79) sessssessssseoesssoeess

8PM]!

Briefs
lbshish Shinent Seized

TURKEY

'HURRIYEI" on Former Deputy's Involvement in lleroin Csse
(mum. 25m”) 000000.000...0000000000000...

Briers
Hashish Seized

mm moms

Briefs
nesthrau Drug Find

"MGM

Berlin Collective Begun in Esrly 70's nelps Addicts
(Thoma Michelsen; mass m, 22 Jen 79) .....

70R OFFICIAL USE ONLY
BRIEFS

ﬂBwJIN SEIZURE IN MANDALAY-~Mandalay, 8 Marcho-Acting on a tipoff, Commander
U Kyaw Zen and some policemen of Mandalay's police station No 9 and ward
people's councillors yesterday searched and suited 23 pieces of jade weigh-
ing about 300 visses [l visa equals 3.6 lbs] from the house of U Kyaw Sein
of Uboktawkon on the 41st street. They also seized some packages of heroin
worth 10 kyats each--12 from Min Min of Daung-yo ward, 27 fron Tin Shwe

and Than Myint of East Maha-aungnye ward, l0 from Nyunt Hay of the same

Bast Mahs-aungnye ward and one from Po Taung of Mondisu ward-~and three
penicillin bottles of heroin from Ms Tin Son of Shwephoneshein ward. [Text]
[Rangoon nonraum in Burmese 13 Mar 79 p s n]

POPPY PLANTATIONS DESTROYED--Rsenw1, 8 March--A column of soldiers and police-
nen, led by party and council officials, destroyed more than 320 acres of
poppy plantations in Man Lin, “we Tawng, Na-tok, Shatua, Nawnghkio and Man
Rang village tracts in Usenwi township since the first week of February 1919
under a plan to eliminate poppy cultivation and to destroy poppy plants.
[Excerpt] [Rangoon LOKTHA PYEITHU NEZIN in Burmese 15 Mar 79 p 5 SK]

HERO!" FOUND IN CAR--Mandalay, 13 March--Acting on information, chairman

U Tun Kyi of tune township people's council and members of the heroin sup-
pression tea- for Kune township and Mandalay Division yesterday searched a
Datsun car with registration plate 8/6635 at the parking place at the en-
trance of Rune and seized two packages of heroin worth 6,000 kyats from
passenger Maung Maung of Sinwin ward, Mandalay. The car was travelling from
Taunggyi to Mandalay. [Text] [Rangoon BOTATAUNG in Bernese 17 Mar 79 p 6

BK]

MBROIN USERS ARR£STED--Rangoon, 16 Mnrch--Acting on a tipoff, Sub-Inspector
U Ohn Kyaing of Sanchaung Police Station, Sub-Inspector U Khin Maung Tint
of Bahan Police Station and sons policemen raided the house of 26-year old
hung Khin See at Ugwelayaung road, South Goodliffe quarter, Bahan township,
at 2300 [date not given] and arrested the house owner and three visitors
while they were injecting heroin. They also seized four packages of heroin
worth $0 kysts each, a syringe and a needle, and a basin. Bahan police has
arrested then and filed charges under Sections 6 (B) and lb (D) [of the
Narcotic Drugs Law]. Those arrested were: house owner Aung Khin Soe, and
21-year old hung Myint, Nin Lwin I! alias Paultsa and 22-year old Ne "in
Swa of Mahebandoola Park road, Kyauktada township. [Text] [Rangoon mm
ALIN in Burmese 17 Her 79 p 7 BK]

OPTIM SEIZURE IN WHY-mandala, 12 “arch-Acting an intonation. Com-
mander U Khin Naung Ntwe of police station No 8 and ward councillors
searched the house of Dew Li War at No 151;, Heymer Zala ward, Northeast
Mandalay township, yesterday evening and seized 3.25 visses of raw opium
worth about 5,000 kyats hidden underground in an earthern pot. Action has
been taken against the owners of the opiuulto Neung bun, Na Ywe Saing, new
Li War and He Khaung Zin--under Sections 6 (B). 10 (B) and ll [of the
Narcotic Drugs Law]. [Text] [Rangoon LORTNA mmm NEZIN in Burmese

18 an 79 p 4 BK]

NBROIN 88123!) IN TAUNGGYI-o‘l‘aunggyi. 13 March-oilnder the direction of the
State People‘s Police Force cannander residing in Teunggyi. Inspector 0 Ya
Nyint and Sub-Inspector U Tun Hyint of the State Drug Suppression Unit, some
policemen and ward councillors searched the house of Dow Shauk Her at

No bis/87 Thirmingele road, Ye-aye-gwin quarter. Taunggyi, [date not given].
They then seised 10.5 lbs of Na lo heroin worth over 15.000 kyats at local
market. Both the house owner and the owner of the herein were arrested.
The owner of the herein is new Wan Nay Kyu of U-yin ward in Hong Nai. It

is said that she brought heroin from Hang Nai to Taunggyi occasionally.

The police has taken action under Sections 6 (S) and 10 (s) [of the Narcotic
Drugs Law]. It has been learned that the State Drug Suppression Unit had
during a period of over 2 months seized heroin about 10 times, involving
over 30,000 kyats worth of the drug. [Text] [Rangoon Hm MIN in
Burmese l9 Nar 79 p 6 BK]

POPPY SUPPRESSIQ‘ IN ﬁSSNNl—llsenwi. 6 Nab-Under the project to eliminate
the threat of narcotic drugs in Naenwi Township, poppy plantations are being
J2; 'royed. Accordingly, township party unit chairman ll San Hyint and com-
mittee members. soldiers from the 69th infantry regiment. member of the town-
ship people's council and police personnel have destroyed 130.75 acres of
poppy along the boi-taa mountain range. Plans are underway to substitute

poppy with other crops. [Text] [Rangoon BOTATAUNG in Burmese 10 Mar 79 BK]

POPPY 0381106le IN KIWI—Kathi. 2 Her—Under the project to destroy
poppy plantations in Kutkai Township. camps have been established since

25 February to enable frontier military columns to rate poppy under the super-
vision and guidance of the township party unit and council. The No 1 mili-
tary colum has its base camp in Kutkai while No 2 column has set up camp in
Ta-Ho-aye and No 3 column in Namhpakka. It was learned that thein military
coJu-i has destroyed 35 acres of poppy in Ts-Ho-nye while the No 3 military

column has rated 30 acres of poppy in Nemhpakka. [Text] [Rangoon LOKTNA
mr'nm N221? in Burmese 9 Her 79 p 2 SK]
THO ARRESTED—Paws“. l Her-Acting on o tipoff. Subinapector U Ohn Haung
and police constable U Illa Khin tron Paungde Townahip people's police force
at 2200 yesterday waited at the hue depot on Paungde'a Shuedaung Street.
which in part of the Rangoon-Prone route. Later. when U Mung Khve of Okkan
tovn entered ”Svin Win" cale with two handbango. he wan aearchad. The north
uncovered .57 vine [1 vine - 3.6 pounds] of opiu from U Hauug tho'e hand-
bag. He wan charged under Sectiona 6.3 and 7.3 of the Narcotics Drugs Law.
0 Houng 10m teetified that he had bought the opiun fro- Haung Paul: 8a of
Tine Chit ward in Paungde. mung Paul: 8a was arrested for interrogation.
[Text] [Rangoon mm ALIN in Burneoe 7 Her 79 p 6 8K]

(:50: $300
NATIOh'!!!)lZ ANTINARCGI'ICS OPERATION NETS 231 SUSPECTS
Jakarta SINAR IMMPAN in Indonesian 3 Jan 79 p 3
[Article: "231 Narcotics Dealers and Users Arrested"]

[Text] Indonesian police arrested 231 narcotics dealers and users during
operation "Badai II/llarus Sari." These included six foreigners. and sev-
eral types of proscribed drugs were also confiscated.

Questioned on Tuesday, Police Col Dr Darnawan Soedarsono, chief of the
Information Service, explained that operation "Badai II/Han- Mania" was
shed at conbatting narcotics abuse and proscribed narcotics, along with
the crimes which result fro. then. It was conducted in Aceh. Su-ut, Riau,
Southern Sumatra, metropolitan Jakarta. Jabar, Jateng, Jati'n. Heat
Kalitsantan and the Lesser Sundas.

The operation. initiated on 7 September 1978, was conducted in three stages:
investigation. action and interrogation.

Dar! '3 the investigative stage. begun by operational units. 300 people were
targeted. but 6 of then had already died.

The four deceased were Chang PD (Jakarta); Ong DH (Tanjung Asahan, Smut);
Hrs Syan (Prapat. Siulungun. Susan); and Lien n1 (Se-rang).

The six foreigners wno were arrested were Tjan SH. alias Lie )1 (Chinese);
Deborah AI. (Australian); Anthony W (New Zealander); Frederic L (French);
and Jeffrey All (Australian).

Jakarta Police headquarters, which launched operation ”Hadai II/ﬂarua Heals"
with officers from metropolitan Jakarta. arrested eight suspected of selling
or using narcotics or proscribed drugs.

More in Riau

0f the 10 area cot-sands participating in the operation, Risu Area IV appre-
hended the moat suspects.
This area conlmnd caught 72 suspects with evidence comprising 34.000 milli-
grams of morphine. 556.100 nilligraaa of opium. 6,100 milligrams of processed
opium and a quantity of proscribed drugs.

Area Police in Ache I apprehended 3 suspects with 8 kg of opium; Sumut area
police caught 29 suspects with 5 ounces of opium and 39 packages of spine;
Sunbsgssl apprehended 10 suspects and confiscated a quantity of asrihuana;
Jabar caught 30 suspects, confiscating 63 kg of opium together with 199
sticks of narihuane; Jateng apprehended 13 suspects and confiscated a quan-
tity of narcotics ingredients; Jstin apprehended 23 suspects with 3 kg of
opium and 2,088 kg of proscribed drugs; Heat Kalimsntan captured 6 suspects
and confiscated a quantity of narihuana plants; the Lesser Sundae caught a
suspects. including 3 foreigners. and confiscated a gram of heroin. 18.9
grams of hashish. 3 anpuls of morphine. and 2 hypoderaic needles.

Host Conspicuous

Information Service Chief Soederaono also said that the police caught a gang

covertly selling narcotics. including morphine, in the area of Bogor (Jabar)
and Jakarta.

The gang, which sold foreign narcotics, was led by Frd. a Chinese in Bogor,
assisted by three from Jakarta: Str. Ab Rat and Sure.

The information chief said the activities were undertaken individually and
atealthily by the distributors, sellers and users.

But it was pointed out also that it is evident from other current develop-
ments that there is a plan and schedule for planting aarihuana on a grand
scale.

Prom several areas it is known that previously the youth used prohibited

drugs sparingly, but at the present tine it is apparent that they are used
without restraint.

The information chief said that the obstacles to continuing the operation
involve a lack of narcotics expertise on the part of the police and a lack
of data.

9198
680: 5300
NARIHLANA CROP DESTROYED IN swam
Jakarta KOHPAS in Indonesian 5 Jan 79 p 6
[Art lcle: "hectare of Harihusna Discovered in Bnggas Porest"]

[Text] About a hectare of narihuana was discovered by the 622 Police Cor-sand
Resort in a forest atop Engges Hountsin. sons 30 lea east of Curup. Bengkulu.
The urihuana field was located deep in the siddle of the jungle. about 2
hours uallt free Kampung Baru Mania. a nearby village.

Hith the help of the comunity. Cousnd 622 officers ripped up the pro-
hibited plants and burned then. The police confiscated S9 stalks of 2-eeter
long narihusna and sore than 7 kg of dried urihuana leaves as evidence.

In addition, 125 stalks of harvested narihuana. 708 stalks as long as 2
esters. and 350 newly planted seedlings. were burned in an action vitnessed
by the off .cials and local cos-unity.

A "mnd 622 stateaent signed by Police liajor Dr Soetiitno llsdiprajitno and
$ch to Ito-pas cited three people arrested as suspected of having planted the
nsrihusne. They were AB bin AH (30). An bin At (35) and Aer bin ll (27), all
farmers. Since 1976 the suspects had obtained seeds fro. the Kepahyang area
and the urihuana was planted for couercial purposes.

Comand 622 Goaltender Soctiltno took the opportunity to testify to the de-
struction of the nerihuane field.

9198
C50: 5300

m
62 POUNDS 0P mRPHINE 8512:!) IN mm
Selengor KIN MK DAILY NEWS in Chineee 3 Feb 79 p 1

[Text] Kuele Lunpur 2 l'eh—‘l'he enti-nercotice group of the police force
followed end intercepted e cer with Thei regietretion er. Shueng-chi 'l'e-lien.
Kedeh. end eeized 62 pounde of morphine hidden in e epecielly-mede conpert-
nent in the geeoline tenk. The bleck nerket Ivelue of thie illicit drug it

eetimeted et 913 million in heleyeien currency. No euepecte were erree-
ted.

The ebovementioned morphine. weighing e totel of 62 pounde. wee found in
15.5 here which beer the nerk "999." They cen be proceeeed into the eeme

weight of heroin. which cen be eold on the block merket for 13 million
heleyeien dollere.

Ihie ie the lergeet eeizure eo fer thie yeer. Deputy police chief lie-tu-
eh-tu-le-men. who in in che.ge of the crininel inventigetion group. eeid
et e preee conference thie efternoon thet on 25 Jenuery e equed of enti-
nercotice policemen followed e onote eeden with Thei regietretion in the
vicinity of the Aloreter etediun.

The police cer followed the eeden ell the wey to Shueng-chi ‘l'e-lien. end
did not etop it until it reeched e court houee.

A eeerch led to the eeizure of the morphine. The eeden wee driven by e
23-yeer old reeident of Shueng-chi ‘l'e-lien. He wee erreeted et the ecene.

In e follow-up of thie one 2 deye leter. the police. ecting on the beeie
of intelligence infomtion provided by the public. erreeted e 27-yeer old
unenployed youth iron Aloreter. end deteined e cer in Aloreter.

In eddition. the deputy police chief diacloeed thet the police. octing on
the beeie of en intelligence report. put e reeidentiel houee et liue-yuen

liiddle Roed in Kuele Luqur under eurweillence et 9:00 em on 19 Jenuery.

About en hour leter. two men emerged fron the houeu. The two end e women
ineide were erreeted for euepected poeeeeeion of nercotice.
A eeerch of the houee yielded 200 green of heroin in 18 peckesee. Ano-
ther 370 gran-e of. heroin vere found in e vineur barrel outeide the houee.

Another three nele euepecte vere erreeted et Penena on 23 Jenuery. M
ponde of heroin were e-aiud tron their Gouger eoden.

0f theee eix euepecte. the three deteined et Kuele Lulpur will he proeecu-
ted todey. end the other three deteined et Pecan; will he proeecuted on
5 Iehruery.

Thie ie the lergeet eeirure node by the police in recent yeere.

The deputy police chief diecloeed thet in 1978 the police eeired $6.1 kilo-
are. of norphine. 59.16 kilosrene of nerihuene. $29.85 kilogre-e of opium.
end 72.5 kilosrene of heroin. A totel of 6,669 pereone vere erreeted for
poeeeeeina or peddling nercotice. Anon; then. 188 edulte end 336 youthe
were proeecuted for poeeeeein; lore then 5 pounde of illicit druge. end

123 pereone vere proeecuted for peddling druge.
The police unite involved in the ehove ceeee were led by Pen Guocei.

1006
080: S300
I'IIGIIT IIHRMN LABS FOUND SINCE 1976

Kuoln Lumpur NEH STRAITS TIMES in English 1’4 Nor 79 p 9 UK

ITcxtl

SEREMBAN. ‘l‘uoo. -
Duh: undor round
heroIn-procooo u lob-
oroIoI-Ioo hovo boon
uncovend oInco 1m
and Ihon on Indloo-
um IhoI Ihon on
honor oqulppod onoo.
Pomodom prooldonI
Dunk Rolo Yotln

ooId Iodoy.

“gamut moth;

I? "W ‘: “3:323;
vo" woo

oomd ”tho now

one poIIco In Pm.

A hnooowollo
Won»
”In Ilwo Ih‘z‘gon

on Mon Ioho row
IoIonco ”f“:
{Sn-15'2““.u ‘0
pneooo drug-W .
"Only Ion o omen-Io

0! row oplum hove boon

nun oI Iho ecu-7 ”Into
Inn Iho homm.
one «hot dooIvo m

‘)

ulna on componIIvo—
Iy omoII In amount." Do-
Iuh Mo ooId

New oourcoo

Doluh RoIo. who Io
oI oo Iho NonI'I Boooo ol
{gall Iombluog 'o'o

"pa 9 .
ggmoJEegIlng a! mu
oIIvoo oI Ibo W'mm'
oIIon Room hon.

Hg oold "Numbn-
I‘Ivo ' hoo o econom-
Ilonono comhonIo.
compo IoYOpor com
In us nor conI Io
"Numbo from.

DquIx Roll ooIII tho
own! at dm‘oo
Iod Mo New ou‘uI
MMINI OIoIoo Ina!
Moloono hoe Wood.

"Dmnonmmoot
36:! Ma Iron tho
mWEI “mun“...

mm“ I not no.
BRIEFS

HEROIN PBDDLBRu‘tetptng, “Ouo"A 20-yeer-eld suspected drug pcdler ass
arrested yesterdsy by the police snct-drug out: at Pokok Aes- snd 25
straws of herein were recovered free: MI. Another 26-ym-eld suspect
use lsrer picked up in Jelen Levee Rude. Five screws of heroin uere
found on hu. [rm] [Reels Lupu- my mum nuns tn English

13 m- 79 p 9 and ‘

cso: 5300

10
DRUG DEALING IN TAURANGA CALLED 'DISTURBING'

wellington TIIE EVENING POST ln English 7 Mar 79 p 3

[Text]

TAURANOA. March 8 (PAL—Par too learn! to am
much drug-dealing was going on In the “m. u.“ “'0 '
Tnurangn ma. Mr D B Wilson. SM. said wanu-r M
in the Magistrate's Court today. “ﬁgm
*"mmvz‘wrmmr; mm

o .
$30M to of! dam m In may.
cannabis. O «a
My mph and In “Was
the Com tank) on m m w -‘
and lo dam and u- . t0 m d m
an d m vol-h In Tum m 8
«all w W to Mr M w
m“: mm mm up- mﬂg.
vb“: m le. all
m W“ M «In! Mk1 am!
«am Audi 3 ll’ 0 hr \almm vl
on tau-u! mm mm.
Jailed

A ”M M
W ‘I’al war. at
\kum M“. Nu m»
ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040009-7

2007/02/08:

0
0

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

CANNABIS OIL SHUCGLER REMANDED FOR SBN'I‘ENCING

Hulllngton THE uvantuc rosr In English 2 Bar 79 p 1

[Tut]

$me n.mmmmmxmmmmwmmm Wm

WWMMWW WNWMMMW “mm m

m. :m
Wham”. a m SWMM
m w
mm mmwmmm :mmm “w
mam“ ~ mm a
.mmmm Mumwmmmmmw
”mm mm. mmmmmw
”WWW umzwrwmrmwmm

mmﬂmmw»

mmmmuw

:m.

”mam“
M

MMMWWM

5 120

o
o

(230

I?

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7
BRIEFS

DRUGS RAID--Teurenge (PA)-Nine pereone. three of then women. were
remanded in cuetody when they feced druge-releted chergee in the Hegie-
etete'e Court et Tourenge yeeterdey efter e police raid on Tueedey. The
chergee included poeeeeeion. eupplying. end ueing heroin. Twenty-two
pereone were before the Court. Othere were cherged with the poeeeeeion
end eupply of cennebie. end were reeended on bail of $1000. ﬂeet of the
defendente were from Mount Neungenui. Othere were free Neikino end
Pepenoe. They were remanded to Pebruery 27. No pleee were entered
yeeterdey. [Text] [Chrietchurch THE PRESS in Englieh 22 Pub 79 p 2]

SOUTNLAND CANNABIS PLANTATION-otnvercergill (PA)-About 1000 cennebie
plente. the biggeet plentetion found in Southlend, were uprooted by
detectivee who went on to en ielend in the Neieu River. north of

Nonowei. efter the erreet of two wen in the eree on Hedneedey evening.

The plente would heve hed e etreet veluo of ”tens of thoueende of dollere."
eccording to the police. who hed kept wetch on the reeote eree in the
Flordlend Netionel Perk efter receiving information leet Noweeber. The
plente were growing in dense bueh. Detective Senior-Sergeent K. Schweee.
the heed of the lnvercergill 0.1.3.. eeid thet police reeourcee in the
eree hed been etretched to the lieit. in whet hed been one of the biggeet
ectione of ite kind in New Zeelend. Two nen eppeered in the Negietrete'e
Court et lnwercergill on Thuredey, one cherged with cultiveting cennebie.
end the other with poeeeeeion of cennebie. They were reeended to North 1.
[Text] [Chrietchurch TN! PRESS in Englieh 26 Feb 79 p 3]

CANNABIS 01L lHPORTlNC CNARBE--A 20-yeer-old euto-electricien woe cherged
in the Hegietrete'e Court leet Seturdey with ieporting cennebie oil the
dey before. The eccueed. grented interin euppreeeion of none, wee cherged
indictebly end renended in cuetody to eppeer egein in the Negietrete'e
Court on Nondey when epplicetion cen leter be node to e Supreee Court
Judge for bell. The prooecution wee brought by the Cuetoee Deperteent.
repreeented by Mr K. 0. Stone. Mr Mike Reed eppenred for tho eccueed.

The cherge wee leid under Section 6 (l)e of the Nieuee of Druge Act 1975
which deene the elleged offence to be in the deeling cetegory. In epply-
ing for interie euppreeeion of none, Hr Reed eeid thet he hed not hed tine
to gein full inerructione free the eccueed but there eight be grounde to
Juetify euch en order. [Text] [wellington TN! EVENING POST in Bnglieh

26 Feb 79 p l7]

l3
lmkom 'JNVICI‘ION—Aucklend, 2 Her (PA)-A 28-yeer-old nen. Berry 'rhonee
Bong (knoll. uneeployed. who twice eupplled heroln to en undercover
couetehle. wee reeended to the Supreee Court todey for eentence. lie
edeltted both chergee when he eppeered before ﬁre 6. c. P. A. Helleee. 8“.
The chergee were leld indictebly. hue Gee-ell elected to dlepenee with
depoeluone. He wee oonvlcted end regended in curody pending eentenoe.
[text] Wellington 1113 EVENING 9081' in Bnglleh 3 Her 79 p 4.)

C80: 5320

1'0
JAIL OFFICER, COP III-1L0 FOR DRUG PUSIIING

llnnlln PHILIPPINES DAILY EXPRESS In English 10 Mar 79 p 6

[Text]

(:50:

THE ADMINISTRATIVS omen
of tho main my lull and a
pollutant no alum! of am
am. sad phad um: cochnlql
mm l‘oc Illcpd a»; "menu.

Am.“ M m Itch. hallo
and on «dun on“; Goa m» V.
Ramon. I: cut! and pollen
dkmotosomnlmo Cpl. Edmdo
Cam. Mun oﬂlcu u
the “lib my Ind ht. RM
mum of human I InSu.

“ammonium-n *'

vellum who no npaudy
m of I)» an. v-mcﬂq
mm

was GAVI It, Gm Pm-
m A Ollm. “moan duct ml
dlmla o! the Houopollun Polio:
Face. In!“ Had: I) to comm:

5100

lull kwulpuon.

Culduon w Molina-d by
{emu Maul. my Jul unmet tot
am an. mmcklu Caldetoo'n

on madly : llod m. to
300?... of m 1.533;...“u ot the
city ﬁll

Mic-eye \m «dated muted
met a an polnlcdlohinudu
lulu of o diva-mun and M
m h on IMI boll.

Thouslampectlanhcﬂau.
told Jud. llmlnlo Muhoo of the
man. cum of am hams. Om
Ilamoyo Ml Mum! her villa
lmoln and Induce but to tml ml
all m

Samba la“ the com in vm
plebd up by mateyo l’ot away
In mouth. but an no! 6»:de
Inland um to the pdlam‘n
luau ml {mod to all yum.
BRIEFS

mum FARMS BUSTED--Sovon of the 77 ferns raided by operatives of the
constebulary nntinarcotics units in February yieldod nore then 6,000 uri-
hunna plants worth 680.000 pesos and narihuena seedlings worth nore then
150,000 pesos. 1n e report to Defense Minister Juan Ponce Bnrilo. Con-
stnbulery Chief Renae said tho Philippine constabulary elso conducted 37
reido resulting in the arrest 0! (.5 persons. [mm mac in English 2330

011' 27 Mar 79 OH]

Hummus M18 unwrap-4m 1.200 narihuane plants were uprooted by
govermnt agents during s raid Hednosdey at Corranglen. Nuovs Bcija. The
urihuene plants. worth 120,000 posoo, were brought to Cup wane for only-
sis. The reid in lsrangay (Tuition) in Carrsngien ass the third within this
nonth. [Manila Donoetio Service in English 0500 our 23 liar 79 09]

080: 5300

16
tor mucus com on 'HYPPIB-TYPE' TOURISTS
Colombo Sun in English 16 m 79 p 1 BK
[ﬁrticie by Ranil Reerashingbg7

[Text] Inspector General of Police Mr. Ana Sensviratne yesterday ordered
the Police top brass in the country to crack down on 'hyppie type' tourists
who are believed to be responsible for escalating the drugs menace in Sri
Lanka.

These orders come in the wake of intelligence reports that groups of these
hippies were found engaged in the use and sale oi‘ narcotics and indulging
in blatant nudism.

According to Mr. Seoeviratne, the Police have now discovered tint there

is an increasing flow of ganJa tron areas such as Hellawaya, Vavuaiya and
Moneragala to the Southern coast.

In View of these findings, the police "Task Force" which is presently
engaged in operation aimed at wiping out ganJa plantations in the island's
'ganJa belt' are to be deployed in the ﬂikhaduwa and Bentota areas for
special anti-hyppy operations. They will be assisted by Police narcotics
dogs 'Sentry' and 'Bright' .

Cementing on the hippie problem in these areas, DIG (Crimes) Mr.

R. Sunderalingam added that the Police were carrying out discussions with
the Sri IAnita Tourist Board in respect or opening up Police posts in
ﬂikkaduwa, Beruwala and Bentota.

It had also been noted. he added, that there was a sudden increase in the
number of local gangs touting ror mushroom tourist resorts in these areas.
This had resulted in clashes between these rival gangs.

080: 5300

17
BRIEFS

'porr' PLANTATION--Nong KhaiuA provincial police unit uncovered e lS-rai
narijuana plantation at Teﬂon Chunpon in Phon Phieai Dietrict here
yeoterdny afternoon, police reported. The diecovery wee made under e
narcotic auppreaeion operation to rid the province of narcotica. Police
erreated five peraone guarding the plantation and confiacated acne lSO

kilogram” of dry nerijuene hidden in a cottage. [Text] [Bangkok POST
in English 15 Mer 79 p a and ,

SAILORS CIIABGEDnThe public proeecutor yeeterday filed a charge of
poeeeeaing herein for eele againet two Spaniah eeanen arreeted on
December 19 last year with 220 grenea of No lo heroin in their poaaeeeion.
The euapecta, Joee Hence Reguart and Ricoa Mallach, who both admitted
being heroin eddicta, were caught in e Sukhunvit hotel with the heroin
hidden in a porcelain atetue. They eaid the drug was neant for their

own coneuwtion. Five ayringee, e eull ecale and 19 pages of a book
reportedly discussing the heroin trade were nice found with the two men.
The court wee told that Joae Henco pleaded guilty during police interro-
gation but Rico.- ‘tellach denied the charge. The court has scheduled a

nrelininary hearing for Monday. [Text] [Bangkok POST in Engliah
15 m 79 p s and

(:50: 5300
FOUR MEN ADHIT GUILT IN NEROIN CONSPIRACY

Toronto 'l‘llB GLOBE AND NAIL in English 6 Mar 79 p 9

[Text]

WELLAND — l-‘our Nlu-
gar: Valli: then“ pleaded
I too conspiro
:cuy tyo tnttlcmzheroin and
brought a will end to their
trial that began in Welland

yesterda .

.lohn ‘hor Widema. 16.
Dennis Feet. 25. "max
Eugene to. 13. and
Fortunate iguirl. is. will

r tor salience before

r. Justice Frank Callag-
han ot the Ontario Supreme
Counonhiarehn.

.A charge inst a ltlth
rnaa. Nornian triclt Frail.
21. also oi Niagara Falls.
was in court as the
c Pasaaag'dkggeo. 50 and
Nannie Mastroiani. 45. who
also were charged but tailed
to appear. are believed by
police to be in Italy. special
pron-cuter Barry Mathewn
said alter the trial. War-
rants have been touted tor
their artist. but Mr. Mathe-
aaa said no extradition tree.
ty exists between Canada
andlial .

Mr. astroianiisbelieved
my: lett mammhctore':

m na on t
charges. ich were laid in
i976. Hr. Rocco lett the
cmry billowing a pre-
terred indxtn'nt lll Octob-

er. MB. granted hy the then
Niamey-General ot Can».
do. led Bastard. A pre-
terred indictment allows
Mon to [broom to
trial withota a prellmlnary
hearin onthoevidenoe.

Mr. atheaon said charg.
ea were laid alter a year-
long investigation that in-
volved sophisticated elec~
ironic surveillance by a joint
d investigation squad
to up at tht RCMP. pro
vinclal ice and Niagara
R ioaa Police. id h

proaeetlaraa t nee
otatoea ot heroin were seized
during the investigation
trotn washrooms in two
Niagara Falls motels.
Members at the group who
werecharged wereubwrwd
entering and leaving the
washrmrns.

An RCMPspoltesman stud
alter the mat that the drugs
were tl'idtluted and had a
street value ot "36.0%. l'le
said otlicial speculatton rs
that the drugs are port at a
cache lelt over lrorn a dru
crackdown by 0.5. a
French agents in France
mm; the early tm The
drugs are believed to have
lound their way to Italy and
then to Tummto. lrorn which
they had been distributed tn
Ontario.
POLICE $8123 625 KILOGRARS 0P HASHISH AT HIRABBL AIRPORT
Montreal LA PRESS: in French 6 Her 79 p A 3

[Article by Michel Auger ”Phoney CIA Agent Arrested at Hirahle vith 62$ Kilos
of Rashish; Largest Confiscation at New Airport”)

[Text] A young American. 27, uho claimed to be a CIA agent. was apprehended
on the weekend at nirebel in possession of a dozen forged passports and 32
suitcases containing hashish worth $9 million on the black market.

it is thanks to the perspicacity of custoas officers at the airport that the
alleged trafficker, Garry Dela Hallie. vas first suspected of criminal activ-
ities. Investigation then led to the lost iapertant seizure of drugs aver
node at Hirahel.

carrying a forged diplomatic passport and various identity cards describing
his as a special courier of the American Depart-ant of Defense. Hallie pre-
sented himself to «rztoes officers Yves Berr and J. Duhsamel for the usual
lnsnertion. The suspicious appearance of the young man. vho declared that
he lived in San Francisco. prompted the officials to begin a detailed search.

Looking more closely at his dispatch case. they discovered a double bottom.
which, once opened. revealed a dozen forged passports and as many identity
cards in the names of different “diplomatic couriers."

RCMP

RCHP l Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. when first informed of the discovery.
initially thought they uere confronting an international terrorist. The
forged passports and the sun of $25,000, which the young son had on his
person. put the investigators on this track.

with remarkable coaposure. the suspect described himself as a CIA agent on
an ultra-secret mission. "You haven't had a call from Washington yet?“ he
asked them after his arrest. He squarely refused to answer prying questions.
finally. when the police showed hia the tags of 27 suitcases and five golf
bags consigned to the airport. Hallie siaply told than to be careful when
handling the baggage, which. according to him. contained electronic apparatus.
"it's dangerous." he told then.

625 Kilograas

Searching the suitcaaen in question. the police lost no time in discovering
625 kilograas of hashiah from Southeast Asia. This drug. which sells for
approximately $8,000 wholesale. is worth $9 million when resold in snail
quantities to users.

"That's a conservative estiaate." pointed out Sgt Raynond Ayotte of the RCMP
which is responsible for inVestigation of narcotic snuggling in the hirsbel
ill’ca.

Deepening the investigation. Cpl Robert Perrin and his colleague Jean Saint-
Cyr reconstructed the entire periplus perforaed by Hallie. The latter. ae-

companied by ll other persons. all holding forged diploaatic passports. had

left New Delhi in indie to go to Hirabel via London.

The final distination of the group, according to the air tickets. would have
heen Acapulco. Still, the police think that it is highly inprobahle that
this drug would have been sent to Mexico. since hashlah is produced in that
country in induntrial quantities.

Not to be Found

Despite an intense search, the ll courier» were able to escape police. The
investigators belieVe that by his composure their "alleged CIA fellow" was

able to perndt all his couriers to flee. and this even before the drug had
been discovered.

The young American. who says he is from Missouri, appeared yesterday before
Judge Stephen Cuddihy of Saint-Jerone. where he pleaded not guilty to the
charge of hashish snuggling. Ordering non-publication of the details of the
case, the Judge ordered the investigation held over on bond until 1hursday.

Meanwhile, with the help of agents of the American Drug Enforceaent Adminis-
tration (DEA). local police of the CRC tried to identify the couriers who
slipped through their fingers. They also tried to establish whether the

name of Garry Dale Hallie is indeed that of the suspect when they apprehended.
”With all the lies this fellow told us. we are not even sure if he gave us

his real name." one of the investigators of the federal police col-ented
yesterday.

21
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

 

WM"
(350: 3 30"

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA—RDP82-00850R000100040009-7
mm

MINI! smocuuc mimosa-manor» (CP)-Pour 0.8. rooidenta con-
victed Jan. 22 of amuling 10 pound- of cocaine into Cenada were given
eight to lS-year prieon aentenceo yeeterday. Augmtian Nadroau. 39. of
Lon Angelou. and Jean Jerooe. bl. of Miami. were oontenced in provincial
court to is year. by Judge Kenneth Langdon. Olga Dias. 31, of Corona.
N.Y.. and Jocelyn tam-lea. 25. of New York City. vcre given eight-year
oontenceo. The two ten and two wooen were convicted Oct. 27 of inorting
coceine with an eotinatad etraet velne of up to $5-uillion. [Text]
[Toronto ms 61.038 AND lull. in Bnglieh 6 Mar 79 p 10]

630: 5320

23
m FOR” 0? W03 mum WISE
Sofio POOLE in motion 19 fob 79 p 11

[mgicu w nommur Vunm "lbro About 'Iondor omv for tho oom-
bio"

[Tut] Tho 'poiito onoountoro" ot our honor ohookpointo hotwoon ouotooo
inopootoro on! com-Min tronoit puoongoro - tourioto ond guooto of our

country - oontinuo olthough tho wintoo: ooooon w now hoo loft ito Ark on
tho nulhor of thooo.

This tilo our homo: inopootox-o oooo oomoo o now voroion of oouuiing
which. indiootiono oro. win oooulo mm proportion in 1979. noooiy.
tho oouuling of odioinoo of ooot divoroo noturo mi loot divoroo origin.

Thoro m worninp in- tho intumtiomi hnlth orpniootion em. tho
Mi. mootioo oouuloro hvo rooontiy turnod now to tnmportin‘ mn-
ootioo oorooo hordon oooouno‘od oo union Iodioinoo for hoodoohoo.
totiguo. caido oto. Thooo ’oodioinoo.‘ put up in putty pong. with tho
initioio of o nnoboz of won-known oolponioo oxooo tho balm of tho
Vootorn countrioo ooro roodi]: mi no ukotod ooro upim. ooro offi-
ul~:.‘L¥ ond witbut opooioi fonolitioo. Along with thou. now ”Mini"
hvo on“ - this tilo ”Mm win Mo whoio ohipoonto of tho loot
divoroo unknown oodioinoo oorooo tho honioro on! oon thol oo tho 'htoot"
brookthmugh in tho phmooutini induotry.

Such o oooo woo rooontiy rooozdod in our country. A toroign tnnoit tour-
iot woo. roportodly. coming with hio in hio ou- o ouitoooo on-od with
tho loot divoroo Iodioinoos upouloo. pino in tho loot divmo pookogoo
Ind for tho loot divmo purpoooo. intorootinsLy ohpod 51m hottioo mu
of oodicinol amp for ulooro. potritio, ooiitio. nimino. My font.
you nono it. Tho vorbooo uplonotiono of tho ownor of tho ouitoooo woxo
onoworoli Iv our cuotolo inopootoro in o fu- ditforont oonm. ond quito
offoctivo st tint. M onlod tho ouitoooo uwi tho tnvolot ohtoinod tho
right to opon it only onoo poot tho Marion-mun honor. hovottho-
looo. ouch unknown Idioinoo do got into our county. Thor m not Just

nought in Iv forum oithor. but IV our touioto. too. bringing mth
'nootnno' non; with thoo.

2'6
Beeldee tret. we heve to eey tint ell the eedioinee ere not . . . meet
In the ﬂeet they etill reeeeber the terrible effect on people. end eoetly
on children. of the druge thelidoeide end ereldin thet beoeee e eynonye
for deeth. The veetern preoe pereitted the edvertieing of thee drum fer
end wide on wonder drugs. But efter e whole eeriee of gullible people peid
with their heelth end their lives for using it. the preperetion nee helted
De 5 deedly drug. The outoone. however. see 18 fetel oeeee. 600 people in
serioue condition. 100 on the opereting teble. 20 who loet their eight.

In the bueineu world. hueen dieeeoee ere beooninc e very reenneretive end
effective eouroe for the eooueuletion of profite. lb: theee huoketere it
ie ee oleer ee oen be thet even e poor pereon vill epend hie leet reeouroee
on eedioine to eevo hie heelth end life .. hie only poeeeeeione. In their
greet rivelny for enorbitent profite. the pluraoeutioel fir-e put huge
quentitiee of drug on the eerket in 1978. tiny of thee. eooording to the
world Beelth Orpniletion bulletin. ere ueeleee. nhile othere often oeuee
irrepenble tern. not to nention thoee thet oontein nercotioe. )bet of
theee euperprot‘ite go to oonoerne end pheneoeutioel flute end lehoretoriee
in \leet Omen. the United Stetee. rglend. Jepen. Sniteerlend end. to

e leeeem' extent. in Prenoe end Itely. Recently Chine. too. hee begun to
m in the reexportetion of euoh dubioue eedioinee.

A m dms eoendel ie thet of the notorioue Hen-ell phereeoeutioel plente.
They euooeeded in flooding the eerket with the leteet 'epeoe" drug "herrell"
which enppoeedly roduoee the oholeeterol content of the blood end prevente
oexdioveeonler dieeeeee. The drug. subjected to thorough enelyeie. coe-
pletely ruined the fire beceuee not only did it not poeeeee theoe quelitiee.
it eleo oeueed greet dense to the Man orginiee.

‘rhet ie why ell our touriete treveling ebxoed met teke e very oeutioue et-

titude touerde the verioue 'eirecle curee' tint ere offered to th- in the
Ierket-plece.

61m
£290: 5300

35
POI! OFFICIAL 088 MY

HMS

IRIBPS

CAPTURE 0! mm alum-omum. Bahama, 22 Mar mun-ma)"
Laurence hajor. apokoaaan of thc bahuaaa police. announced that 350 balea
of narihuana veto confiaoatod laat night. The balaa were found aboard the
voaaol Praaidontc Toaaa lioaquota. which vaa off the batty ialando. Eleven
Colombian citizena on board tho vaaaol wore arroatad. Tho ahipaont haa an
oatinatod value of $10 million. The police alto found aovotal outoaatic
weapona and nunitiona on the vaaaol, which uao being towed to Nauau today.
[Rama ital] [Monoa Airea um in Spaniah 0338“8 GMT 22 liar 79 PA]

630: 5300

26

M OHICIAI. US! ONLY
0A8 Cﬂ'EP RBSPONDS TO 'TIHB' STORY 0" DRUGS
Bogota EL SIOLO in Spaniah 25 Jan 79 pp 1-2
[Article by Luia Eduardo Carrillo}

[Text] Dr Rafael Poveda Alfonao. director of the Adlinietrative Departeent
of Security (0A3). coononting on the article publiahad by TIM! nagatine.
which waa excluaively reproduced in part by thia newapaper and which car-
rice the headline "The Colo-bian Connection.” an account of the growing.

procaaaing. tranaporting and uaing of oarihuana and cocaine in our country.
atated:

"Many coanenta can be made about a newa report. Alao it in iapoaaible to

lake auch categorical atateuenta about certain evanta aa waa done by thia
article."

"Naturally.“ Dr Povedu Alfonao aaaerted. “there are aany aapecta which can
in no way be denied. among the. all that Preaident Julio Torbay Ayala'a
government ia doiug with regard to crime in all ita for-o. particularly
d.c; proving and trafficking."

When he wae infor-ed that the Drug Enforce-ant Adoiniatration of the United
Statea ia preparing a conspiracy caae with reapect to cocaine involving four
countriea. including Coloobia. which will be made public and which iapli-

catea Iany peraooa. including diplo-ata and area buaineaa officiala, the DA8
director atated:

"if there are peraona who have coenitted a crime connected with thoae activ-
itiea. it in wall that their na-ea be aentioned and that they be brought to
public attention. provided there in aufiicient evidence. There in nothing
worae than unfounded state-ante."

OAS director Rafael Poveda Alfonso aaid that arreata are being made every
day and that draatic punlahnenta are acted out by local authoritiea. The
crininala are aubjectcd to the drug law which providea quite harah penaltica.
in addition to finea ranging into nilliona of peaoa.

2?
he aaid that Colombia in moving forward "full apeed" in ice canpaign
against that aituation. The 0A8. for enanple. with a veritable intelli-
gence tea- and the army and the police with their weapone are engaged in
a frontal and total attack and are operating under the acrutiny of the
nation on that their aucceaeee and failurea are known to the entire coun-

try.

Diacuaaing the aubject of Coloebian narihuane growera he atated that they
were not to bla-e for being teepted by drug traffickere. aa they were de-
ceiVed and given large auaa of noney to engage in other activitiea beaidea
the growing of earihuana.

"That ia." he aaaerted. ”they are node to ace that the growing of narihuana
ia more profitable than planting coffee. corn, garden vegetables and other
crepe.. Then the peeeanta chooee not to plant corn or coffee and grow eeri-
huana.‘

ha in known. it ie aleoet alwaya Americana who bring all that Ioney into
the country which in paaaed from one intermediary to another until it
reachea the grower.

he also aaid that the fight againet drug traffickere ia not being conducted
only on the Atlantic coaat but throughout the country. particularly in the
easte’n plaine where agenta of the Rural OAS are engaged in a vaat caopaign
to enter-inete Iarihuane fielda. lndividuala are being arreated continu-
ally for theaa illegal activitiee. Alao. large plantatione of Iarihuana
are deatroyed aa aoon aa they are diacovered.

Poveda Alfonao aaid emphatically. "The Adninietrative nepartnent of Security
with ite rural and urban forcea. the National Police and arly are conducting
a fight to the death againet crioinal ringa end organizationa which are
growing. proceaaing and tranaporting cocaine end earihuana."

"Hany agenta apecialized in the fight egoinet aarihuena growing and traf-
ficking are working tireleaaly around the clock throughout the country. ea-
pecially in places where it ia known that enrihuano ia being grown. with
the aole objective of eradicating this evil once and for all.” Povedo
Alfonso aaid.

0r Rafael Poveda Alfoneo. in hie consents about the Tlhﬁ oogaaine article.
recalled. "Deceeber waa deacribed aa one of the moat poeitive in the fight
against tinge of drug traffickera. due to the fact that four light planea
with Anerican regiatry were aeieed. one 00-) with Aleriean regiatry. one
nailing veeeel. one truck with ‘0 balee of narihuanat and eix U. S. nationala
were arrested.”

he also aaid that at tieea creahed planee are found that hewe been burned
drug traffickera. he aaid aa recently an yeaterday, "A plane woe found in

the aunicipality of Puerto berrio. Antioquia. Depart-ant. which waa totally
burned."
It in enough to note. Povede Alfoneo onid. "Plenoe with American registry
which treneport Iarihuene or cocaine crash when they ere oworlooded. in

noet eoeoo their occupente nonego to sec-pet however. in other inrtencoe
they are killed.”

At the Airport

A Judicial Police officiel It the Bldorodo international Airport who eehed
that he not be identified ooid. "We are doing the beet we ten. but we leek
the principel ole-onto noeded to coehet drug trafficking.“

81‘)
€80: $300
FRENCH CORRESPONDENT WRITBS 0N ANI‘IDNUO CAMPAIGN
Paris PARIS-MATCH in French 9 Mar 79 pp 40-47

[Article by P-M special correspondent Roger Noleindrot “The Co-
lombian Connection“]

[Text] In 1973, the “French Connection” died, brought
down, after making headlines for 8 years, by
a coalition of police forces in many countries
in Europe and America. Today, the United States
must cope with an equally serious threat: the
"Colombian connection," which ships, by boat or
by plane, dozens of tons of marijuana -- grown
by peasants in northern Colombia -- to 40 oil-
lion Aserican soft-drug saokers. The Colombian
aray has been mobilized against the Mafia-backed
traffickers. Roger holeindre was an eye-wit-
ness to the traffic and its repression, and he
gives us the story and the pictures.

Jet Tries To Down Pot-Snugglers' Plane

Flying at rooftop level over the city, a twin-engine light plane
draws curious citizens out of doors; in no time, the streets are
full of people. each of then consenting knowingly on the acroba-
tics the pilot perforns in his efforts to stay out of the line
of fire of the army helicopter vain): trying to force his down.

With a deafening roar, a 1-33 Jet fighter plane joins the dance.
0n the ground, they very quick to understand that the ssuggler
pilot has only one idea in aind: to wear the helicopter out and
to stay over populated areas at all tines so as to prevent the
Colonbian air force Jet's opening fire on him.

By now, the streets are black with people, arguments are well

under way, and the whole population is on the souggler's side,
to a nun. Because the news spreads fast. Soae sen drive into

30
town to explain what this air show over the roofs of Riohaoha

is all about. A few kilometers outside the town, in the open
desert, workmen were leading a ton and a half of marijuana into
the twin-engine plane when a patrol helicopter appeared. The
young American pilot, a Vietnam veteran, demanded that the load-
ing continue, then, once the cargo was all aboard and not until
then, while the armed helicopter was flying tighter and tighter
circles around him, he gave his plane full throttle and took off
like a madman, even fully loaded, maneuvering his aircraft with
a master's hand and thumbing hie nose at the helicopter, which
then called on the air force for support.

The airborne rodeo lasted almost an hour. At one point, though,
the Lilitary opened fire but, badly hit, the civil aircraft
stormed down the main street, skimming the chimneys, emerged
from the town in the direction of the sea and, with a deafening
roar from both its engines at the outside limit of their capa-
city, climbed into the clouds and vanished...

It was in the first few days of October that the Colombian go-
vernment decided that, starting on 1 November 1978, there would
be tight surveillance by air, sea, and land, against the drug
traffic and smuggling in the province of GuaJira. Lying along
the venezuelan-Colombian border, this region of northeast Colee-
bia has always been an area of heavy smuggling.

A semi-desert, swarming with snakes of all kinds, it is nothing
less than an aircraft carrier jutting out into the Caribbean,
constantly lashed by sandstorms reminiscent of the Djibouti
Khamein. Here and there a few Indian huts and little towns
like Meicao and Riohacha break the monotony.

Maicae is the ﬂeece for contraband traffic with Venezuela.

Every kind of radio equipment in the world is there, with toys
from Hongking, watches from Switzerland, cigarettes, liquors from
France, textilee from India, all the Junk, all the castoffe elbow-
ing the latest Japanese TV sets and cameras. The booze flowe

like water: 180 pesos for a bottle of Chivas -- around 20 French
francs, or 15 francs for a bottle of Ballantine‘s.

Everywhere you look, over square kilometers, amid the American
trucks or carrying contraband, are hundreds of thousands of empty
cardboard and plastic cartons, on which everybody walks, tramps.
or drives, giving the town the look of a gigantic trashean.

Riohacha, though was only a little fishing port whose name may
have meant something to Frenchmen who had read Papillon, since
that is where the fugitive from the prison at Cayenne was put

in prison by the Colombian authorities after he had slipped
across the Venezuelan border and lived for a long time among the
Indians of Alta GuaJira, who today are utterly ravaged by alcohol.

31
This grubby little town could have lasted a long time, with its
drunkards and its traditional Saturday night brawls, if it had
not been for the hurricane...

The hurricane, for this entire dirt-poor region, was drugs, mari-
Juana, what the people here call "marimba."

About 10 years ago, hippies used to come from Just about every-
where and quietly smoke the grass that grew on the foothills of
the Sierra Nevada do Santa Marta. It cost them practically no-
thing, and bothered nobody.

Then, all of a sudden, everything changed. The local peasants,
all of them poor, all of them in debt, never managing to get a
dime's worth of credit from the "Caja Agraria' -- the local

farm loan and extension bureau -- suddenly found themselves of-
fered hefty sums by people who would give them the seed, firm
orders, and substantial advances such as those poor people had
never dared imagine in their wildest dreams brought on by a

bout of aguardiento. This hurricane of dollars ushered in the
era of the "marimberos," the men who make their living by sell-
ing marimba, and who work hand in glove with the American Mafia.
Very quickly, immense fortunes were made. The American buyers
had large requirements, and would pay in cash. Some of the pea-
sants regularly harvested two crops a year, and, on request,
would grow a brightleaf variety known as 'mona," which is highly
prized and even more highly priced.

Then it was the Far West all over again... the day of the pater-
nalistic marimberos. These men, who had become immensely rich
in a very short time were and still are respected by the pea-
sants. With the peasants, they make up an entity, something:
one without the other would be nothing. The marimbero has the
money, the weapons, the contacts, access to protection. The
peasant furnishes his field, his labor, his harvest, and his
unshakeable loyalty.

Prom Llenos, from the Valle de l'Antioquia, the grass came in
in immense quantities. The vital transfer point was Guajira.
They had to set up an infrastructure of storage places, of clan-
destine depots; to map and build secret landing-strips. Month
by month, the marimberos watched their private army grow. It
was made up of people who owed them everything, to when they had
brought, if not wealth, at least a standard of living and sums
of money never before seen in this desert, where the only
"wealth" in the old days had been salt, until tomorrow, when
maybe there would be gas or oil...

Drivers, muleteers, leaf-strippers, dryers, pressers, balers:
by the thousands, they found well-paid jobs.

32
At night, in the starry skies, planes in over-increasing numbers
and i. over-larger size, came over more frequently seeking out
the secret air-strips which expert teams would light at the

right moment with flaming gasoline cans, while tank-truck drivers
stood by to provide fuel if needed. Directly and indirectly,
60,000 to 70,000 people now live on the fortune brought in by
marijuana or its fallout.

Arriving in Riohacha at night, I was given a room in a fairly
decent hotel, which was completely surrounded with barbed wire,
including its terrace overlooking the sea. At dawn I could
discern a dirty town, but one in which there were buildings going
up wherever I looked: here a l4-story building loomed grotes-
quely out of place in this landscape; farther off, another one
with a sign stating that it would be 12 stories high. Looking
out over the magnificent Caribbean Sea, an ll-story hotel rises
from the ground. All of this, according to public rumor, is
being built with ‘marimba' money.

Things could never be simple in a "macho“ country like Colombia,
but also in this coastal region, so unlike the rest of the coun-
try with its almost Latin customs, [there is] a kind of exuber-
ance unknown elsewhere, and a willingness to make easy money,
and above all, to let others know you've got it.

Already, the legend that was just waiting to be born grows richer
every day with new ”feats of arms." There are names that are
heard everywhere for a while, only to vanish just as swiftly

from human ken. A man known as I'I.ucho Baranquilla,‘ settling

in Santa Marta, was the very model of the paternalistic 'marim-
hero." He was a "public benefactor": gifts, loans, contacts --
he took care a? any little thing his "people" might require.

When the local police in Santa Marta began giving him some prob-
lems, he bought the building in which the police station rented

space and, while the delighted public looked on and laughed, he,

as the owner of the premises, summarily evicted the guardians of
law and order. Like many another before him, though, he came

to a tragic end, gunned down by a rival gang.

At Riohocha the shops would close on the stroke of 1700 hours,
and the marketplace would empty. At the drop of a hat, men would
draw their revolvers and shoot one another dead. In the tawdry
dancehalls, gunmen sprawled over tables, arms dangling, winding
up the evening before they were kicked out into the gutter, while
some of their colleagues, not quite so drunk, would dance alone
as they burned $5-dollar bills to the beat of the Cumbia.

Incredible scenes from the Wild West that might have come out
of the tallest western scenarios were everyday sights. Rival

33
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

gangs with scores to settle would chase one another even after
their leaders were dead, and the burial of one of them was the
occasion for a sensational chase scene between the laden hearae
and raving pursucrs who would fire into the coffin to kill the

occupant deader still -- and all this right in the middle of
town .

A US pilot, crash-landing his flaming plane, was hauled from
the fire in critical condition. He was immediately taken to
the Santa Marta hospital under military escort. A few hours
later, a gang of hoods snatched him out of the hospital as they
fought off police. Meanwhile, a hospital plane sent from Miami
by the Mafia was landing without authorization at tho municipal
airport at the very monent when, with the police in hot pursuit
and returning their fire, the ”kidnapers" came screeching in.
Ensued a full-scale battle to cover the transfer of the dying
pilot... The hospital plane managed to take off for the 08.

Around 9 months ago, Bogota sent a special "incorruptible' de-
legate to try to restore order... he arrested some traffickers,
some US pilots, and some delinquents, and preceded to clap
these fine fellows into jail. in broad daylight, the prison
was attacked and all the prisoners freed by their marimhoro
friends.

That same day, a few kilometers outside town, a bus was taken
hostage at 1500 hours, and the women and girls aboard it were
brutally raped in the middle of the highway.

Things could not go on like this. The government ordered the
army to take the matter in hand.

The second brigade, based at Baranquilla and commanded by Brig
Gen JOsé Maria Villareal Abarca, was assigned the Job. When
the brigade had been reinforced with air and sea transport, it
was, as it is now, up to division strength. Ita mission coVers
23,000 square kilometers, or around 5 percent of the total land
area of Colombia. Gen Villareal spelled out for me the ratio-

nale behind the civil governmenth request for the army to take
a hand.

"In Colombia, the army does not engage in politics. It is one
of the oldest armed services in South America, having been of-
ficially established on 23 July 1810. Since that day, aside
from one or two special cases, when it was all the civil govern-
ment there was, it has been faithful to the mission entrusted it
under the Constitution, and to the civil government. Its task
has been primarily to assure the stability of our institutions
and to maintain public order: the fight against subversion and
its armed supporters, the guerrillas, and the fight to stamp

out smuggling and the drug traffic along our 9,672 kilometers

of border....
a].
“The drug traffic has reached such dimensions that it threatens
Colombia's moral fiber, and oven the national economy. before
the current measures were adopted, people caught red-handed

in drug-dealing were liable to a fine for dealing in products
on which no entry duty had been paid.

”Cargoes have been loaded onto plains right on the Barenquilla
airport. At the economic level, we are seeing a cutback in

lands under cultivation, with many peasants abandoning their
traditional food crops. The traffickers had it too much their
own way. Newly rich, they thought they could do as they liked.
They bought, or tried to buy, everybody -- and then bragged about
it, shouted it from the housetops.

”Only the army could put a stop to the scandal."

Colombia's army is made up in large part of young dreftees from
the peasantry or the working class, who serve for 18 months.
The total strength is estimated at 46,000 mon: 1,800 officers,
9,000 non-come, 35,000 troops, and 5,000 civilian employees.
The basic unit in the Colombian army is the battalion. Its
strength is 32 officers, 11$ non-come, 750 troops, and ten or
so civilian employees. The battalion breaks down into three
combat companies, one command and services company, and one
training company.

All officers are graduates of the Military Cadet School, where
they serve 4 to 5 years. Some go for training to the United
States or to the Panama Canal Zone. The basic weapon is the
6-3 automatic rifle; its machineguns are Browning 7.62s and
12.7s. Although handicapped by a chronic shortage of vehicles,
the army is nary well disciplined and no order is ever dispu-
and.

I was able to find that, in this mission -- from tOp to bottom
of the military hierarchy ~- everybody obeyed orders to the let-
ter, not with much enthusiasm, but with determination.

Since 1 November 1978, the date when the blockade went into ef-
fect, military units of the second brigade have captured 2,623
tons of marijuana. That staggering tonnage gives one an idea

of the real extent of the traffic. A thousand people have been
arrested. 331 in flagrante. Second brigade troops have captured
271 weapons, 45 vehicles, including trucks and tankers, have
been seized; as well as 35 ocean-going vessels.

Also seized were 19 aircraft, DC-Js, DC-6s, and C-147s in flight
condition, and eight more aircraft were destroyed on the ground.
fifteen entire crews of US aircraft have been killed. Sixty-
nine aliens, most of them aircraft crew members, have been im-
prisoned. The marijuana problem has never once stopped grow-
ing since pot-smoking became fashionable in the United States.

35
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

. .istho. -. _ .for nintho
world, with its 40 million users of marijuana alone,

Thanks to its geographical position, Colombia, and particularly
the northeastern tip of Colombian territory, have become major
transit points for drugs of all kinds, including cocaine, which
is not produced here, but which comes in along the international
routes running through Colombia, Venezuela, Panama, and the is-
lands of the Caribbean. Marijuana is grown in countries other
than Colombia, but "Colombian" today is esteemed as the best
there is by millions of smokers.

It is the size of the foreign demand that poses such great diffi-
culties for Colombia. Marijuana is not a problem at home. In
Guajira, for example, although millions of tons of ”grass" pass
through the town, there are practically no local smokers. That
is why more and more people are beginning to believe, and to say
that it is wrong not to allow Colombia's peasants to make money
by selling a product the whole world is begging for, and w ich

i: sold to rich ”gringos" who live a hundred times better than

t ey do.

Widespread rumor sets the amount of land currently devoted to
growing marijuana at 300,000 hectares. Brig Gen Jose Maria
Villareal Abarca, though, thinks that should be no more than
100,000 hectares. Even that, though, is considerable, and, gi-
ven two or even three crops per year, represents incalculablo
tonnages and sums of money far greater than the budgets of many
South American nations.

Organizing the traffic and financing its flow between Colombia
and horth America is the American Mafia, beyond any possible
doubt. It is the Mafia that has invested the most money, but
apparently there are some rich Colombians who have put capital
into the trade. The traffic shows several patterns of organi-
zation: 1. US buyers come directly to Colombia and handle
purchasing and shipment; 2. 08 organizations provide funds to
Colombians who are commissioned to develop planting, harvesting,
and shipment; 3. Colombian marimberos handle the whole local
operation, and sell to US shippers; 4. Colombian peasants,
who have accumulated a little bit of capital of their own, are
now selling direct to US or Colombian buyers.

The regions where the drug is grown are hard to reach. The
peasants themselves can get there only on muleback. The harves-
ted plants are then brought back down to the plains by the same
primitive transport. One soldier told me he had stumbled upon a
convoy of 200 mules, escorted by anaed farmers. he took cover,
so to stay out of harm's way. Although there is war to the knife
among the various drug traffickers -- often leading to exchanges
of rifle fire -- the army, for its part, has no desire to make
war on the peasants.

Right now, Colombian farmers are selling marijuana for 20,000
pesos per 100 kilos, or around $500, which is $$n000 per ton.
After passing through Miami or along other routes, that same

grass will sellfor half a million dollars a ton on the street
in New York.

As of now, prices are still rising. Perhaps the shipments cap-
tured by the army are behind that trend. It would appear that
in back of the measures recently taken by the Colombian govern-
ment is the influence of the American government and of the
Narcotics Bureau. Very heavy penalties are now the lot of peo-
ple caught in possession of the drug. Sentences can run as high
as 10 years in prison. Those caught carrying weapons are liable
to even stiffer sentences.

Those arrested -- though not taken in the act -- are liable to
fines of 100,000 to $00,000 pesos (l peso - ll French francs).
If the guilty man cannot pay up, he must serve 1 day in jail for
each 500 pesos of the fine. As a rule, those sentenced pay the
fine. Any boats, trucks, or aircraft seized are subject to im-
mediate confiscation. But, in spite of the fines, the losses,
the deaths, and the seizures, the traffic goes on.

One clandestine test of defoliation has been run. The trouble is
that it is impossible to burn the marijuana without affecting
other crops; the peasants plant their fields in checkerboard
fashion, sowing marijuana in small plots entirely surrounded by
another c.op, such as corn or manioc. Given the wrath of Colom-
bia's peasants, it is certain that this operation, mounted
directly by the United States without the knowledge of the Colom-
bis- authorities, will not be repeated.

However, the army lacks the means required to wipe out the plan-
tations, all of which are difficult of access, particularly those
in the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. So it would appear that,

as they have done elsewhere with the consent of local governments,
the Americans are going to make a mighty material and financial
effort to help the Colombians themselves pu- a stop to this soft
drug traffic, which poses problems only to the US but which is,
in some areas of Colombia, including Guajira, an unbelievable
manna of dollars. These regions are in fact the only places in
the world in an underdeveloped country where the dollar is worth
less on the black market than on the official exchange.

Already the radar installations are in place, hidden in the moun-

tains and manned by gringos. Advisers from the Narcoticsnureau
often hang around in the hot zones.

37
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102108: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

Rumor has it that the Colombian army will be getting wheels and
helicopters to help it carry out its mission more effectively.

I believe, though, Just on a hunch, that the ordinary soldiers
from peasant families are not going to do anything to stop the
growers from getting Just a little bit prosperous. I think that
the tactics being used today and tomorrow will try hard not to
harm the little people, the families of the Colombian people.
Drugs are seized, and more will be seized, since the plan adop-
ted is to run for a period of 5 years; but any grass that is
captured is almost always found in the possession of gringos,
and that means that the peasant from the Sierra Nevada do Santa
Marta loses no money, or loses nothing at all. Whatever happens,
he stands to make ten times more this way than by growing corn
or cabbages.

0n the other side of the coin, what makes this such a hard fight
is that, so as not to lose by the decline of the dollar in their
transactions, the marimberos agree to take payment from the US
Mafia in the form of vehicles and raw materials. You oa- soc
Mercedes, BMW 600s, Cherokees, Jeep Renegades -- some of them
worth a million poses and more, parked in front of rough wooden
shacks er.inthe middle of squalid shantytowns.

In addition to these deliveries, which are, when all is said and
done, pretty nice, there are unfortunately others which are far
less welcome. Two million pills of a synthetic drug were seized
by second-brigade infantrymen. Analysis showed that this drug
is dangerous when taken with alcohol. According to military
sources, it was Mandrax 7/14. This drug, which can drivo people
mad, is allegedly often used as payment for loads of marijuana,
with Colombian mafiosi undertaking to get it into Europe. There
are two planned routes: one through Amsterdam, and the other
through Bordeaux. The drug is'said to be intended for a blasée
clientele that has already tried everything else.

Night was falling along the river in an out-of-the-way corner
of GuaJira. Kids of 18 were stacking up the 40 tons of mari-
Juana that had been seized that day, and which they were about
to burn. As I watched them working, I calculated in my head
that every bale they were carrying represented, for each one of
them, 10 years' pay at the going market price in New York.

Before they could burn the marijuana, they had to wait for the
arrival of the civilian authorities, in this case Dr Genaro

Peijo Pino, the ”judge" [fiscal] of Guajira: a little man of
sixty or so, flanked by his deputy, Renaldo Redondo Redondo,

the local district attorney. The little judge made statements

to me that were absolutely thunderous, dumbfounding in a country
where everybody shuts up when somebody starts talking about drugs
and the law.
"We are going to stamp out this drug, right down to the roots!"
he told me.

“But, Judge, aren't you afraid?”
”Afraid of what?” he retorted, bristling as he drew himself up.

Then, standing on tiptoe to make himself just a little bit taller,
he asked me, indignantly:

”Who would dare attack a representative of the law in this coun-
try?"

Then le ordered the soldiers to start the fire. Jerryoans of
gasoline were emptied over the bales heaped up there, some of
which had been weighed so as to assess the tonnage being burned.
Gigantic flames leapt skyward. A few minutes later, the drug
began to give off its special odor: a fortune was going up in
smoke. Standing on the riverbank, the little Judge contemplated
the spectacle. He had done his duty, once again, for a few
hundred pesos a month.

The army's latest fear is that subversive movements may get in-
volved in the drug traffic, and thus gain access to the financ-
ing they have always lacked hitherto.

Everywhere, on horseback, muleback, or donkeys, peasants rmed
with machetes, proud, tough men, ride the roads. Roaring past
them, buses driven by nachos who cannot conceive of anyone's
passing then drive the race that sometimes ends in a ravine.

Like the busdr‘vers in Bogota, they get no fixed wages, and are
paid only on a percentage basis: the competition for riders is
5169 open.

At almost every curve, little crosses with flowers at their feet
show thathsrea macho, a man, a real man, died rather than be
taken for a weakling, a ”pansy," a "women."

And yet GuaJira, for all this activity, is still a fairly calm
region in Colombia. It was kept completely out of the civil war
which, for 10 years -- up to 1960 -- drenched the country in
blood and killed tens of thousands of people, liberals and con-
servatives alike. In Guajira, the people want five contradic-
tory things at once: they want to raise marijuana, to get rich,
to have it known that they are rich, and, at the same time, not
to have their wealth and its source too widely known so as to
preserve their “honor" and respectability in the eyes of people
outside GuaJira, who might get the wrong idea and doubt the "re-
spectability of the native sons.

39
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02l08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7

Reading the paper aboard the plane back to Bogota, I learned
that 500 people die every year in Colombia solely in quarrels
involving the drug traffic.

back in Bogota, I hbppened upon an asbulanoe on the Avenida 100,
.one of theoapital'sbusiest thoroughfares, carrying heracic Mar-
tinez, a well-known mafiose, who had Just beenh t’ by seven bullets
from a machine pistol. Out of his pocket had fallen a bag of
emeralds, which was swiftly snapped up by a bodyguard. A passcrby '
who knew about such things told no! “There's at least 6 million
pesos' worth there!” Two lifetimes‘ wages for the little Judge
who had reminded no, as we were saying goodbye, not to forget
to put “doctor” in front of his name.

That same evening, thanks to acne help from friends, I disguised

myself as a nurse and managed to get into the Country Clinic,

where the madieso with the emeralds had been taken. In front of

the door to his roon stood three arsed guards. When the nurse

opened the door a crack, I counted seven sore sitting at the foot
' of the bed or looking out the window; in a corner were several
nachine pistols... I thought it wiser to wind up sy story right
then, and not to try for pictures.

In front of the clinic, as I made my way out, I spied a brand-new
Mercedes, and it too was crammed with armed men. Who would dare
attack a representative of the law in this country? Most assu-
redly, I could never forget my little Judge. I an still wonder-
ing whether he was mad or brave. Both, maybe.

Sometimes it is nice, at the crossroads of the world, to come

across aen who are still able to do their duty and risk their
lives for a few pesos....

to
PHOTO CAPTIONS

l. A young soldier guards a load of “narinba' seized by the
army on trucks in the Sierra Santa Marta.

2. Aircraft bought as American surplus (top) and old boats
flying flags of convenience (below) carry the drug to
the United States.

3. A patrol stops a bus. The soldiers search the passengers.
hoping to find bundles of currency of dubious origin.

4. In groups, nountod oarabinieri conb the mountains in search
of clandestine marijuana fields or convoys of pot-laden
mules.

S. It is these young soldiers from peasant families who are
fighting the drug traffic. They do it without enthusiasn,
but with deter-ination.

6. The "fiscal" (Judge) of GuiJara, Dr Genero PeiJo Pine, for
a paltry salary, brings scrupulous integrity into his war
on the traffickers.

7. A detach-ant of soldiers have just seized a truckload of
marijuana. Two of the. are waiting for the Judge, as they
sit atop thousands of dollars worth of nerchandise.

8. The order is given to destroy the drugs that have been
seized. After being sprinkled with gasoline (left), 40
tons of 'uarisba" goes up in cache.

6182

030: 5300

bl
MILITARY STRIKES AGAIRST TRAFFICKSRS DESCRIBED
Bogota EL TIBHPO in Spanish 10 Feb 79 p 7-3

[Text] ouajira--Authoritiea on the Atlantic coaat are dealing effective and
telling blowa egainat ringa of organized drug traffickers. within the franework
of the Araed Porcea' caapaign to repreaa thia criae.

More than 3.009 balea of aarihuana have been aelted. 65 peraone arreated and at
loaat 56 firearaa confiacatad ea the reault of aucceaefu! oparationa carried

out during the peat 7 daya. according to inforaation aupplied by the hiniatry
of Defense.

The Office of lnforaation and Prose of that niniatry releaaed a bulletin yea-

tordoy in which it reporta the operationa conducted. The bulletin reada aa
follows:

The hinietry of National Defense reporter

That in the period iron 2 to 9 februnry 1979, in the conduct of operationa on

the Atlantic coast to counter the activitiea of drug traffickera. the following
reaulta were obtained:

2 Feb 79: In a place called La Enea. troopa of the Cartagena Battalion aeiaed
250 balea of aarihuana and one acalea.

2 Feb 79: At a place called Nacho leyo. troopa of the Cartagena Battalion
aeiaed two San Criatobal carbinea and arreated one peraon in connection with
the criae.

3 Feb 79: At placee called El Totuao and Caracoli. Fueraa de Tarea Rondon
[Taakforce Surpriae] troopa aeited 160 balea of aarihuana. four revolvera.
three piatola and arreatcd three peraona.

6 Feb 79: Troopa of the Fuaraa de Tarea Rondon confiacated 60 balee of aeri-
huann. four revolvera. two ahotguna and arreated two peraona at the Riodulce
ranch, which ia located on the Ponaeca-Barrancae road.

6 Feb 79: Troopa of the Puerea de Tarea Rondon in luenavlata aeiaed two auit-
caaea containing aarihuana on a bua belonging to the COPETRAN toapany.

”2
6 Feb 79: The Puerta de Terea Iondon eeited S arrobaa of narihuana. one
revolver and arrested two persona.

3 lab 79I The loyaca. a Coloabien navy veaeel. captured a boat naled "neatleea"
with ‘00 balae of narihuana and erreatad ite (our crew neubera off Punte Ocho
Pol-ea. near Calaronea. The "neatleaa" in of American regiatry.

5 Peb 79: Troopa of the Cartngena Battalion aeited 181 balea of uarihuana and
a acalaa in a place called Doavanndoa. nunicipality of Ceracoli.

5 Feb 79: A rueraa do Taraa tendon patrol loving between Malta and Are-etain
waa attacked by a non with a revolver.

6 Feb 79: Troops of the Cartasena battalion aeited 22 balea of narihuana and
one lb-gause ahotgun at a place called Puente Beebe.

7 teb 79: In the pariernance of their dutiea. troope of the Pueraa do Tareo
Rondon arraated Sl pereone and tonfiacatad the following Interial at places
called Caecajalito and Tonarraton: 2.106 balea of narihuana: 3 piatola of
varioua calibara; 5 revolver. of diftarant calibera; 7 carbinea of different
calibera: l7 ahotawna of varioue gaugea; and 7 vehiclea.

7 Feb 79: Troopa of the Cordoba Battalion aeitad a leechcraft light plane of
Acetican recietry and arreated the two crew Icebere at the El lance airport.

8163
cso: 5300
TRAFFICKBRS' ARMS SHIPHZﬂT 831230
Bogota Bi. 810m in Spaniah 10 Feb 79 p 0

[Text] An airplane with American regiatry landed illegally at the city of
Santa Harte airport. and ita pilot waa inedietely captured. The airplane
bearo ragiatry nuaher 14-6011 and. according to authorities. cane fron Hie-i.

The plane landed at 0500 houra yaaterday: authoritiea inediately arraated the
pilot who haa been identified aa Peter Henry Philbrira. lle waa taken to MS
[Ad-iniatrativa Departnant of Security] inatallationa where he waa rigoroualy
interrogated.

The euthoritiea found a large quantity of area in the light plane. Preaunably
the area were daetined for the drug trafficking ringa which operate in thia

region of the country. particularly in Guajira Departnant. Our inforaant did
not apecify the under of weapona or their nodela. liniting hiuelf to eteting
that they were very aodarn.

The lending ae indicated took place at 0500 houra while the Simon Bolivar air-
port wee not in eervice; and becauee of thia, the lending lighta of the princi-
pal runway were not lit. The incident aurpriaed the authoritiea of the capital
of Magdalene who ehowed concern at the daring of the Anarican who wee piloting
the plane.

The aecret atate organizationa were au-oned to inapect the aircraft. The pilot
of the light plane waa unable to explain the reaaon he wee forced to land on the
principal runway of the Si.» Bolivar airport. liniting hinaelf to aaying thet
he had made a niatahe.

Police eourcca believe that the area were to have been exchanged for aarihuana
which probably would have been tranaported to Hiani. the plane'a point of
origin.

8143
050: $300
RECENT ACTIONS AGAINST DRUG TRAPPICKBRS REPORTED
Bogota BL TIEHPO in Spanish 19 Jan 79 p 3-A

[Text] Drug treffickers in Colombia heve suffered serious setbacks during
the paet few days with the confiecstion of four eirplenes. three boats.
eeverel tone of narihuene and the erreet of several drug traffickers.

According to e coenunique issued by the Ministry of Defense. in the 1aet
few hours a spectacular strike wee delivered against the eafioei. with the
seizure of two ships capeble of eeking ocean voyages end the confiecetion
of note then 15.600 pounds of eerihuene.

According to officiel sources. the operations took place in the waters of
the Atlantic: during these operations three nen end one wonen. e11 Alerican
netionels, were arrested.

The first strike occurred in the vicinity of Senta Harte where e luxury
yecht without e neee or registration wee discovered with eore then 10,000
pounds of nerihuene on boerd. The vessel wes without e crew.

The second positive ection took place off the coeet of Guejire where the
Co1oebien authorities seized the "Tohe," e ship with American registry.
The authorities found 112 belee of nerihuens on bosrd and four persons of
Anericsn netionelity. The prisoners included one women.

Summary

In e sunnory of the ections tsken against drug trsffickers, the Ministry of
Defense reported the: the operations of the pest few deys. between 9 end
15 Jenuery 1979. could be broken down as follows:

Persona arrested. 30: carbinee of verious celibere seized. 3; rifles used
exclusively by the eruy, 6: 12-geuge shotguns. 3; cartridges for different
fireerls. 1‘1; clips. 6: one telescopic eight; bales of pressed nerihuena.
1.150; e eirplenee of verioue kinds: 3 ships end one launch.

8163

cso: 5300
'05
BRIBFS

COLOMBIA-VENEZUELA JOINT COHH18810h--rhe government appointed five represente-
tives to the Coloshian-Venesuelsn joint coenission for the repression of drug
trafficking pursuant to the agreement signed by the two countries. The appoint-
ssnt document states that on 13 December 1978 an adsinistratiwe agree-ant be-
tween Coloebia and Venezuela was signed in Botota to prevent, control and
repress illicit trafficking in drugs and psycnotropic substances and that in
accordance with the terse of the agreement a joint commission was established
to be composed of representatives of the eppropriste organirations of the two
countries to act as the nechanism of cooperation and liaison in that sector.
To this end. Colo-hie appointed the following individuals to represent it on
the conmission: the chief of the 0-3 depart-ant of the Military Forces Joint
Staff. Brig Gen Carlos Guillereo ﬂervees Cesallse; the chief of the police
services. Brig Gen Luis Felipe Estupinsn Fuertea; the prosecutor delegate of
the Judicial Police. Office of the Attorney General of the Nation. Mario
Reatrepo Tafur; the psychologist of the mental health division. Ministry of
Health. Maria Teresa Caesrgo Ahello: and the chief of the legal office. Admin-
istrative Department of Security. heriberto Tameyo Medina. Dr Rodolfo Garcia
Ordonez. deputy secretary for administrative affairs. Ministry of Foreign
Relations. was appointed coordinator; and Dr Ramon Hentille Rey. an attorney
with the legal affairs division. Ministry of Foreign Relations. was naaed as
his alternate. [text] (Bogota FL TIEHFO in Spanish ll Feb 79 p 9-A] 8153

COCAINE LABOIAIORX SEIZED-oFopaysn. 12 Feh—-Folice agents seized a coeplete
cocaine laboratory worth 5 million pesos in the village of El Silencio.
municipality of Aleeguer. end arrested four persons. three of who. are
brothers. According to the police report. Fdil, Flinio and Ss-uel
Astudillo. 30. 25 and 24 years of age. respectively. end Herceliano Durhano
Nevis were arrested. An official source also revealed that 60 arrohas of
coca leaves. both untreated and in process. were confisceted. In a related
matter. this newspaper was told that a coca plantation about the site of
seven city blocks hed been discovered. It was also earned from a judicial
spokesman that the prisoners had been turned over to the civil-criminal
municipal judge who initiated the pertinent investigation. [Text] [Bogota
EL TIFNPO in Spenieh 13 Feb 79 p 7-A] 81£3

C80. 5300
DETAILS OF 'OPERATION OONDOR' W88 DESCRIBED
Culiacan BL 80!. DB SINALOA in Spanieh 22 Feb 79 pp 1. 5

[Text] We often hear that "Operation Condor" caused a certain number of ar-
reeta, that countlaaa poppy plantations were deatroyed. that the drug traf-
fic ie atill proliferating, etc., but, up until now, few (and we include
ouraelvea) of ua have really known the viciaaitudee and prohleaa experienced
by the individuela who are atriving aaaiduoualy to coﬁat the planting of
druge (urihuana and poppiea). Therefore, we naked Cruz Garza Lopez, the
coordinator of Zone 06 in the peraanent campaign againat the drug traffic,
to allow ua to accowany hia nan on a raid in the Heatern Sierra )iadre.

Yeaterday, we arrived at the hangar of the Office of Attorney General of
Justice. with our photographer. Octavio Marquez. and the reporter; and
that ia how our aiaaion began.

At an early hour, there waa an extenaiwe nova-ant of nan and aeohinea at
that location: technical pereonnal, pilota, navigatora, forcea froa the
Mexican Arey and countleae peraona loving all about in an atteapt to con-
plete their initial dutiee, ao that thoaa who were going out to funigaic
poppy plantationa would have everything ready and could atart another work-
day.

And we call it another, hecauae for 363 daya of the year (except for New
Year'a Day and 25 Deceeber each year), there are daily flighta of thia type,

to diacover poppy plantationa in the ateep aountaina.

But upon returning to the hangar of the Office of Attorney General of Jua-
tice. the coordinator for the air eervice area haa already for-ed the four
groupa of Inchinea (helicoptera) that will leave on the niaeion eaaigned for
today. which conaiata of locating. funigating and inauring that the previous
work hae had the deaired reaulta.

The repreeentativee free In. 801. or 31mm are told that they will he leav-
ing with the group deaignated aa nuder 3, whoee nieeion is to tour aector
072. which ia the area adjacent to the Iunicipality of Badiraguato. There-
fore, we inadiately take our aeata in the helicopter with regietration
under 1mm, and wait for the order to take off. The engines begin to
were up.

In
The Apparatus ls Inspected In Great Detail

There are people everywhere hastening to complete technical and sechanicsl
details. when it has been ascertained that all the equipment is in perfect
order. the order for departure comes.

The flight begins. and the weather conditions are pleasant. with little sun

and wind, and rather good visibility. Thus, we begin to learn the federal
airport in Bechigueleto behind.

The aircraft in which we are traveling arrives at Suruteto. after having
flown over Pericos. badiraguato end some other settle-ante; but we continue
to penetrate the rugged Western Sierra hadre. heading toward the border of
the state of Chihuahua.

The First Poppy Plantation ls Discovered

Our altitude at the nonent is between 7,000 and 8,000 feet. end we suddenly
encounter the hi'.l known as Toallanne. the highest in the state of Chihua-
hua. We pass many ravines, winding along the rocky crags of the nounteins.
and suddenly the helicopter's navigator indicates to the captain (with a
signal) the site on which the first poppy plantation can be discerned.

Captain Mosqueda heads toward the indicated location, makes a reconnaissance
flight and approaches the cultivated area to measure the height of the
plants and the terrain on which they are growing. Just then. the fuaigat-
ing helicopter goes into action, spraying at a distance of no sore then 2
meters the herbicide that will do its work within a maximum of 3 hours.

The Skill of the Helicopter Pilots

He lack sufficient space to describe the countless maneuvers that the skill-
ful cor-sander of the aircraft makes to surmount natural obstacles which
crop up in our path; because we are in a ravine, and at the top of a hill.
and we retrace our steps to check the visual inspection.

Nearly 2 hours have been spent doing this. and the fuel is barely sufficient
for our return to the base in San Jose del Llano; and therefore. we head for
that location. still running the same risks and dangers that we confronted
since we began our flight over the mountains.

The arrival in San Jose del Llano is a relief for those of us who are pae-
sengers in the helicopter: because we were sore than exhausted. since the
trip is very tiring. we still cannot understand the stamina of the person-
nel in command, and of the soldiers accoapenying us to protect the aircraft
and its occupants.

Refueling the engine takes only a few ainutes. which we use to stretch our
legs and rest from the deafening sound made by the aircraft while aloft,
and also to smoke a cigarette to calm our nerves.

1:8
while preparing to take off. we question the navigator about the documents-
tion (navigation chart) that he uses to recognize the exact location of
every piece of terrain. his response is concise: "He are provided with

the navigation charts by the DETBNAL (Directorate of Studies of the Nation-
al TerritOIY). which is responsible for leaking those reports in scale. This
allows us to obtain vast knowled e of every hill. every ravine and anything
that sakes up the. geography of Zone 06."

Aloft Again. Horking Untiringly

We are again orderd to board the aircraft. and we i-ediately take off for
the desolate mountain regioas. He gradually discover poppy plantations.

and the operations involving reconnaissance. fua-igation and confirmation

of the work that has been done are repeated. Nothing is left to chance;
everything is perfectly synchronised and calculated. because a mistake would
be stsl.

He spend another 2 hours aloft. tine that is used to destroy a total of 19
plantations over an area of approxiutley 200 square asters of plants. which
are grown on the mat difficult terrain and the nest isolated parts of the
mountains.

how difficult it is to combat the planting of drugs by air. although most
people think that flying in a helicopter is soaething comfortable and even
pleasant. But how mistaken we are. because one becones more tired after a
5-hour ride in one of these aircraft than when driving constantly day and

night.
They No Longer Fire at the 'Nitwita' Pron the Ground

Fortunately. the personnel perforaing this task no longer run the risks of
the past. when they used to be fired upon to prevent then from doing their
duty. Nevertheless. the dangers that they fact from the terrain. bad wea-
ther conditions and natural problem of a mechanical nature place their
lives in great jeopardy.

we were told by another ncsber of the group that. last month. they had to
land because of the bad weather. which forced them to remain with those
accompanying them for 4 days without food. and suffering from a fridttful
snowstora. fortunately. there was no personal injury. but they were very
such frightened. This occurred 60 miles east of the site of the San Jose
del Llano base.

It was on lbhinora hill. which remained frozen for a south and a half . owing
to its altitude above sea level (11,600 feet).

The Snsll and big Problems in the Operation

Probing into the technical aspects of the work done by these men who have
been ignored. we discover that they have to carry their own fuel in a

1.9
receptacle called a "boot." which is made of rubber and hen a capacity to
hold 3,500 pounds of fuel (about 1.800 liters of Jet fuel). as well as the
other iaplesents for the work which they must perfors efficiently.

when we have landed. Lopez Garza gives no additional information on the
coordination of Zone 06.

35 Pilots. the Crew of the Cruz Lope: Fixed Wing

Lope: Garca told us: "The coordinating entity consiste of the Air Services
Unit, which has 35 fixed wing (airplane) pilots and an equal number for he-
licoptera. Its equipment includes 16 helicopters: eight Bell 212 and Right
Bell 206; lb Cessna 185. 206 and 210 models; a Porter pilot. which we use
to carry personnel: and a Twin Otter. which aervea to transport nilitary
oeraonnel and suppliea.

"Then there is the Haintenance Unit, with 50 specialized mechanical techni-
cians. who give all the aircraft painstaking service. under the direction

of a supervisor. They are reeponaible for performing the 100. 200 and 1,000
hour service; beceuae the hanger is perfectly equipped for this.

“Next is the Reconnaissance and Checking Unit (which is the lost important
one. per so. without underestimating the others, because the activities de-
pend on it; and hence the national base for this unit. which is under the
command of engineer Sergio Zetate Ibsrra. has been set up in Culiacnn).

”This unit is experimenting with the new Scanner tracking system. which is
being carried out in conjunction with the photographic system. while the
former is being improved.”

The Growth of the Plants ls Caged From the Air

"The aain functions of the latter unit ie to asks the reconnaissance flights
to determine the height, bloom and density of the plantations. and the area
on which they are located. The apeed and priority with which action must

be taken to destroy them depend on this.

”The Logistical Backup Unit is responsible for supplying nll the fuel to
the various bases or sites where the work is done; as well as food. in the
event that they have to remain longer than the normal flight schedule sti-
pulates.

"Next is the Communications Unit. which is in constant contact with the
three fixed bases that the coordinating entity has, located in Choix. San
Jose del Llano and Topic, Durango. It also establishes iamadiate contact
with all the mobile bases which oust be established to meet the needs of

the campaign. .

"There is also the Administrative Unit, which is charged with preparing all
the necessary documents for satisfactory management of the entire coordination.

SO
in addition to eating purchaeee. preparing the checke for paying the eup-
pliere and paying the ealeriee of all the pereonnel.

"There are eleo 60 neebere of the Federal Judicial Police incorporated into
the coordinating entity. making a total of nearly 300 peraone who. in one
way or another. are fighting ageth the planting. cultivation and traffick-
ing of druge.

”It ahould he pointed out that. in addition to all the eleeente that have
been lieted in general. we eleo receive veet eeeietence iron the hexicen
Any. which. through Military zone 6 and "Operation Condor.' ie aiding ue
constantly in our ectivitiee. euﬂering equally with all of no vho ate en-
gaged in thie battle for the ueliere of eociety.”

2909
080: 5330

51
TRAFFICKING RING DISCOVERED IN MEXICALI JAIL
Hexiceli LA V02 DE LA FRONTtﬂA in spenieh 11 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 16

[Text] Hexicali--A aurpriee raid by agente of the State and Federal Judicial
Police on the public jail in Mexicali diecloeed a drug trafficking ring which
had created a wave of terror within the prieon. including attache eade on
guerde.

Five ineetee of the jeil were involved in the incidente. ae well as the wife
of one of thee and one guard. all of whee were arreeted and placed at the
diepoeel of the agent of the court of equity public einietry.

The director of the State Judicial Police. Prancieco Paleu Navarro, announced
the foregoing yeeterday. stating that thoee ieplicated are ineetee hernan
Moreno Hancillaa. Abdon Delgadillo Velazquez. hie wife Dara Moreno de Delga-
dillo. Carlee Medina Ruiz. Epifanio Garcie Perez and Manuel Ayala Garcia,

and guard Gerardo Lopez ﬂievee, aged 21.

Ineide the jail, they eeized 13 envelopee containing earihuana. valiue and
lorezanen pille, and 11.120 peeoa, reeulting froe thie traffic: all of which
wae in the poeeeeaion of Abdon Delgadillo.

In the latter‘e reeidence. located at 1191 Zacatecaa Street. they found a ehoe-
box containing earihuana and a plaetic bag with 500 pille, ae well ae e 1975
Chryeler car which had been reported atolen free Santa Ana, California. on

25 Septeeher 1978.

Ae LA V02 08 LA PRONTERA reported a few daye ago. federal prieoner Juan de
Jeeue Arballo, aliae "La Carla,” aged 30. wee attacked in a hellwey of ecc-
tion 1 of the jail. Soeeone threw a blanket over hie. ehot hie in the left
thigh and robbed hie of 600 peace in national currency and $150. The ineate
ie the hairdreeeer for the jail.

0n Thureday. the ineetea perpetrated an attack on the guards. The judicial
police ieeedietely eebilized and. at night. paid a eurpriee vieit to the jeil.
where they diecovered a large number of ineetee incarcerated for federal crieee
under the influence of druge.

52
The Connection Appeared

Ae e reeult of the inveetigetione. it wee leerned thet the dietrihutor of
the druge wee federel prieoner Ahdon Delgedillo Veleequer. eged 42.

To bring the druge into the Jeil. he ueed hie wife, Sere Horeno Cordove de
Delgedillo. eged M, who turned then over to guerd Gererdo Lopee Nievee.
eged 21. The letter hed then given to Ahdon through innate iiernen Moreno
henciilee.

Upon eeerching Ahdon'e cell. they found 13 envelopee conteining einiler

eeounte of nerihuene. end other envelopee conteining veliue end lorerenen pine.
which depreee the centrel nerveue eyeten, ee well ee the noney. which Ahdon
euheequently ednitted to he the product of the eele of druge in the jeil.

Abdon hiuelf confeeeed thet it wee hie wife who brought hie the druge. end
geve the police the locetion of hie reeidence. where the ehoebex wee found.
containing nerihuene end the peckege of toxic pille thet he intended to bring
into the Jeil vie the eene route.

Thie wee how the police erreeted hie wife. Sere de Delgedillo.

The innetee Cerloe lhdine Rule. Bpifenio Gercie Peter end Henuel Ayele Gercie
were identified on individuele preeuned guilty of ettecke on the guerd force.

2909
680: 5330

53
BRIEFS

'ANGEL DUST' THREAT GltED-Hexiceli--The public health inatltutione in the
etate and thoea involved in preventing drug addiction warned about the danger
poeed by the introduction of a new drug. celled ”angel duet.” which hae been
exacerbating the problan of drug addiction in the etate. Dr Guillermo Pi-
gueroa Velazquez. chief of the Mental health Depart-ant. confireed thie fact.
noting that the neceaaary eeaeuree for coping with thie eerioue problee have
been adopted. He raid that eeabera of that inetitution had been aeeigned to
attend lecturee to be held in El Centro. California. in which apecielieta
froe Loe Angelea and San Diego would participate. diecueeing the coneequencoa
of the uee of thie drug. end its effecte on the individual. [Text] [Mexicali
LA V02 03 LA FRONTBRA in Spanieh 17 Feb 79 Sec 3 p 16] 2909

COCAINE TRAFFICKERS ARRESTED--The individuale who have elwaye been regarded
on the czare of druge on thie border. nanely. Roberto Rodriguez Mendez. aliee
"El Beto." end Juan Guatavo Caepoe. were arreeted in Guadalajara. Jeliaco.

by forcee of the Federal Judicial Police and eeabere of the United Statea

DEA [Drug Enforceeent Agency]. and 1.5 pounde of pure cocaine were confiecated
from then. The foregoing announcement wee eade by unofficial eourcee, noting
that thie ie one of the eoet ieporrant actione taken on behalf of the entire
northern part of the republic. where theee individuale had eet up their ee-
tabliehnent and were conaidered eoeewhat untouchable. "El Geno" Rodriguez
wae elao regarded aa the neat eluaive drug trefficker. becauae he had been
aought and inveetigated conetantly by the federal Judicial Police in thie
port. but nothing had ever been found on hie. It may be recalled that he

waa involved in the dieeppeerence of the 1.5 kilograms of heroin fro. the
dietrict court. and that about 1 kilograe of that eeae heroin had been eeir-
cd from him at the tine of Marquina. But he later recovered hie freedoe
becauee. when the heroin wee replaced by powdered auger in the dietrict
court. thia excuae wee uaed to reieaee his. The eeee thing happened to
Gustavo Cunpoe. who had often eluded arreet by the Federal Judicial Police.
But, finally. both aen have been captured. [Text] [Piedrae Negrae 8L DIARIO
or PIEDRAS NEGRAS in Spanieh 26 Feb 79 Sec A p l] 2909

ANTIDRUG CAMPAIGN RfSULTS--The Coordination for Zone 06 of the Per-enent Cen-

paign Againet Drug Trafficking, headed by Cruz Lopez Garza. hea been intenai-
fying ita activitiee aiaed at preventing the proliferation of the planting.

5h
processing and distribution of drugs. and it has accrued excellent results
thue far this year. According to the inforaation provided to 8L 80L D3
SINALOA. as of 12 February. there have been 73 arrests. four involving fo-
reigners. and 9 tons. 90 kilogreaa and 610 grena of narihuana have been seie-
ed. as well as 65 kilogrens and 300 grams of narihuana seed. 2 kilograns and
923 grace of opiua gun and ‘00 grams of cocaine. Confiscatione were also
nsde of three vehicles. two long-barreled weapons. seven short-barreled
weapons and 155 rounds of aneunition of various calibsrs. which were being
carried or had been concealed in hiding places by those under arrest. with
regard to the plantations. quite successful operations were carried out to
destroy then. A total of 3.613 poppy plantations covering an area of
11.031.950 hectares were deetroyed. while 50 narihuana plantations on an
area of 11.270.000 hectares were devastated. The action was taken jointly
by nanbsrs of the Federal Judicial Police and Mexican Aray troops. which
afforded greater success in the ceapaign. because the areas of the western
Sierra Madra in the stats of Sinaloa end on the border of Durango end Chi-
huahua were being constantly searched. [Text] [Culiacan BL SOL DB SINALOA in
Spanish 17 Deb 79 Sec D p ll 2909

“BROIN TRAPDICKZR DENIES CHARGES--Yesterdey. in the district court. there wee
a confrontation between Federal Judicial policeman Francisco Javier Reyes and
the accuaed drug trafficker. David Alonso Ranirea. At the eeeting. the po-
lice-an upheld the inforaation contained in the report. while Alonso Ranirae
claieed that he only adaitted to having had in hie possession eoae syringes.
a scale for asking neaaurencnts of saall weights and other iteea used for
'kutting” druge. but he denied having any connection with the individuals

who identified his as being the heroin supplier. This nutter is related to
the arrest of two persons. a aarried couple. in the neighboring Eagle Pass.
Texas. who had a snail aaount of heroin in their possession. Upon being
questioned. they said that they had purchased the drug fro. David Alonso
Raairez. in the town of Sabinas. Coahuila. and that this was not the first
occasion on which it had happened. Various contradictions were noted between
David Alonso Raniree' atareaents in the confrontation; and it wee decided that
he would have to be subjected to proceedings wherein a series of details

eust be clarified. [Text] (Piedrae degree at DIARIO DE PIEDBAS NlGﬂAS in
Spanish 26 Feb 79 Sec D p l] 2909

TRAFFIC TD U.S. CONTINUlNG-Tijuana--Manny Najcra. head of the frontier cus-
tonhouse with headquarters in San Diego. stated that the trafficking of drugs

to the United States froa Mexico has not declined. and stands at the sane
level as last year. however. he noted that the cooperation between the Heri-

can and United States Govern-ante in their col-on battle against the drug
traffic has not only increased. but is taking place with nore hareony; yet
it has proven incapable of curbing the volune of drugs entering the United
States every day. however. Najera eeid that he is certain that. within a
short tine. the results anticipated froa these new efforts on the part of
both governaente to coebat this snuggling will be forthconing. Najera re-
narhed that the new efforts involve not only vigilance on lane, but in the
air as well. since it has been recently discovered that there have been an
alerting nuaber of snail planes landing secretly in United States territory.
{text} [Mexicali LA V02 DE LA PRONTtRA in Spanish l7 Peb 79 Sec I p 12] 2909

55
JAIL!!!) OFFICIAL minim-meted“. Sineloe. 22 Pebruery-d‘he Ninth Circuit
Unified Court in thie town revoked the order for officiel ieprieoneent ieeued
egeinet the foreer eunicipel preeident, Refeel ‘l'iredo Cenieelee. end Dietrict
Judge Reyeundo Veloe Segure ordered hie reieeee for ieclt of evidence with
which to try hie. hefeel 'l'iredo Cenieelee wee erreeted on 2& October 1978.
et thn order of the dietrict judge. on chergee of eecepe of prieonere end
crieee egeinet heelth coeeitted during hie edeinietretion. After the writ
for hie officiel ieprieoneent hed been ieeed by the dietrict judge. Refeel
‘l‘iredo cenieeiee' defenee eppeeled thie ruling. The reeult wee thet there
wee ineufficient evidence for trying hie. end the judge'e decieion wee re-
voked. The report of the releeee of toner Hmicipel Preeident Refeel 'l'iredo
Centrelee wee eede et ebout 1130 houre yeeterdey. The order for the officiei
ieprieoneent of Gilderdo eenieeiee lunjerret. Guillereo Peree Reperee. Ceeer
Delgedo ‘l'oeceno end Antonio Ayele Vege wee confireed. They hed eppeeled in
the eetee eenner ee the foreer eunicipel preeident. but there ie evidence to
try thee for crinee egeinet heelth. Moreover. Pelix Coronedo. who wee eleo
neeed in the proceedinge regerding the eecepe of ineetee end drug trefficking
in the Jeii. ee e co-defeodent. wee not notified of eny decieion in fewer or
egeinet hie: deepite the feet thet he. too. hed eppeeled the ruling of the
dietrict judge rcgerding hie ee guilty. lelix Coronado hed been jeiied in Be-
cuinepe. 3 nnthe prior to the diecovery of the preeuud drug trefficking
eeneuvere end the eecepe of ineetee free the eunicipel jeil. Refeel 'l'iredo
Ceniulee' return hoee wee en occeeion of en eeotionel celebretion of Joy

for hie reletivee. Accoepenied by hie wife end Guillereo Oeune Guerrero. he
errived hoee et ebout 1600 houre. In a voice choked by eeotion. Refeel ‘l‘i-
redo Cenieelee eeid thet he wee heppy to be et hole with hie feeily. [Text]
[Culiecen El. 80!. DB 81M in Spenieh 23 Feb 79 p 3] 2909

050: 5330
ERIN

'l-‘lNDBR' or BRIBFCASB AC'NALLY OM DMLBRnMuotln Acovodo Polo. tho
"lucky" nun who oold ho round o hxlotoooo oontolnlno 13 otlllon ooloo,
lo o drug txofﬂoko: ond tho oonoy woo tron tho oolo of oocolno pooto,
oocoxdlng to tho PIP (Pomvlon Invootlgotlvo Pollco]. Now tho dotoo-
tlvoo 1:0. tho Draco of Drug not!“ mvootlgotlon oro trying to and
out it tho oon'o oooolpllooo govo hln tho oonoy. rho pooolblllty thot
tho 13 ollllon bolong to ooooom oloo hoo not boon dloo-oxdod. mtough
lto lnvootlgotlono, tho PIP hoo loomod thot Aoovodo Polo. o drlvor
who llvoo in Chi-Into. trovolod o ohoct whllo ooo to noon Motto to
tlnollzo tho oolo o! cocolno pooto. Pto- thou ho tnvolod by xlvor
to anltoo out! thou flow to Lino. no no ottootod iron ho orrlvod

ot tho Intornotlonol Airpoxt. tho pollco oold thot Acmdo octod
ouoptclouo by trylng to hldo tho bulky brlolcooo oo thoy dotolnod

hlo. won ortootod. Movodo Polo oold thot ho round tho ulotoooo
with tho my on tho ohoxoo of tho moon Rlvox 1n lqultoo. [root]
tun Lo comm in mm: 14 Fob 79 p o] 7717

C80 5300

oo

57
DOCTORS. DRUGGIST lNVOLVBD TM PSYCMOTROPIC DIST PILL CASE
Pill Racket Discovered
Montevideo BL rats in Spanish 8 Feb 79 pp 1. 8

[Text] The seizure of 12.000 bottles of pills at an illegal laboratory

set up in a pharescy located in the Goes district and used as a front has

led to the arrest and trial of the pharaacy owner. he has been sent to
prison for the crime of supplying drugs. Mia record shows that he previously
served time in prison as the result of an arrest that occurred when he and
another individual tried to snuggle a large quantity of psychotropic drugs
into the country. The current arrest also involves the investigation of an
Argentine doctor who prescribed the eedicines in a nanner clearly deviating
from legal practice and from edninistrative procedures outlined by the Min-
istry of Public Health (MSP).

The place where the prescriptions were prepared is located in a back rooa of
the pharnacy at 2521 Avanida General Flores and does not even nest the lost
basic sanitary require-ante. In order to concoct the foreulas which the
prescribing doctor indicated. substances were taken fro- different bottles
of medicine. following which. by means of a coffee grinder and a blender.
they were mixed until the product was coepleted. The average price for

a bag containing five bottles was 120 new pesos. The labels bore fictitious
numbers not registered with the Ministry of Public Health.

The profits declared by the owner of the pharaacy eeounted to 300 nillion old
pesos last year alone. The doctor stated that by working six days a Ionth

in our country. he aade a net profit on the order of $8.000. 0n the average.
he handled 300 patients a week in Montevideo.

The clue that led to the downfall of the illegal laboratory and the indivi-
dual behind it was provided a few weeks ago when a young woean went to a

private clinic complaining of strong neuropeychiatric depression. She said
that her condition had possibly resulted from the ingestion of a diet medi-

cntion whose name she could not reeeeber. In her purse was a bottle bearing
an unfamiliar label. The doctors in attendance faced the dangerous situation

of not being able to prescribe any antidote for a drug whose coeposition they
did not know as such a step could be fatal.

58
Bernardo Cerstenbluth Pletamen [above]. owner of the pharmacy at 2521 Avenida
General Flores. where he had set up an underground laboratory where "diet"
drugs were prepared using undeclared narcotics. The pharmacy, which served
as a front. will certainly be closed because of its illegal activities.

when the case of the young woman was brought to the attention of the Narcotics
Squad. a patient investigation began which led directly to the Israelite
Pharmacy located at 2521 Avenida General Flores and therefore to the arrest of
a man already known to narcotics officials: merchant Bernardo Gerstenbluth
Platsnan. 46 years of age, married. and of Uruguayan nationality. living at
2369 2 de Mayo, Apt. 603. Shortly thereafter, the doctor was also arrested
and the enployees were questioned. It should be noted that despite the
fabulous profits declared by the owner of the pharmacy (and they obviously
must be much higher). the employee that mixed the drugs to be distributed

in industrial quantities and at sky-high prices was paid only 5 new pesos

per hour.

Using the statements made by all persons questioned. the officials of the
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Squad. a division of the National Information
and Intelligence Directorate. managed to put together a case against the

two principal suspects so that they could be brought to justice. They also
compiled a memorandum addressed to the Ministry of Public Health so that the
latter would be able to adopt the proper administrative neasures.

Various details have been learned about the operations in which the pharmacy

has been engaged for some time. The doctor, an Argentine citizen whose
university degree was accepted in our country although he is not a legal

59
reaident._outlined the ao-called "master" formula in which he specified the
quantity of each of the conponents of the medicine prescribed for those fol-
lowing his treatment in order to lose weight. but the prescription was sent
directly to the pharmacy and not given to the patient to prevent any compa-
titors from learning the formula. At the underground Geratenbluth labora-
tory. thousands of vials of medicines containing amphetamines (requiring
prescriptions in order to be shipped) were used. Under the meet unsanitary
conditions. every prescription was prepared. which involved the use of a
coffee grinder and a blender. The bottles of medicine were then made up
with a label not registered with the Ministry of Public Health.

The sales of the medicine were not recorded in any book. nor were the amounts
of amphetanines used. since the pharmacy owner would then have had to pay the
taxes he was avoiding. The master formulas were not registered. despite
administrative provisions governing pharmacies and drugstores.

In addition to his own fees. the doctor collected 50 percent of what the
pharmacy tech in for every prescription. Early on. he had set up his office
in the same building.

The owner of the pharmacy was tried and sent to prison. having been found
guilty of the crime set forth in Article 35 of the Narcotics Lew (16.294 of
ll January 1975): supplying drugs. The doctor was released since the
courts found no grounds on which he could be tried.

Court Proceedings
Montevideo BL PAIS in Spanish 15 Feb 79 p 16

[Text] A doctor of Argentine nationality and an individual connected with
him will once again be brought before the examining magistrate of the Fifth
Court Today. The Narcotics Squad arrested the doctor and seized a large
quantity of bottles containing "diet" prescriptions which it appears in-
clude five types of mind-altering drugs, according to chemical analysts.

As reported in our last edition and as a result of the investigation which
began with the arrest of another Argentine doctor and the owner of the Israelite
Pharmacy -- now on trial as the result of the discovery of an underground
laboratory in a back room of the pharmacy -- the Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs Squad was alerted when an abnormally large number of women were ad-
mitted to clinics complaining of severe depression. In all cases. they
reported having taken "diet pills." Nowever. when the containers or capsules
were found. no one could ascertain the contents because the brand was not
registered with the Ministry of Public Health and no pharmacy carried it.

The doctor in question brought the capsules into the country illegally

by means of the Uruguay River bridges and sold then himself in the different
cities in the interior. where he eventually set up offices.

In his luxurious gold. two-door Chevrolet 82. registered in Buenos Aires.
the doctor. who had his university degree validated in our country, brought

60
hundreds of bottles of the diet pills into the country. generally using the
Paysandu-Colon bridge. He began his profitable practice in the capital of

Payssndu.

It then extended to Mercedes. Colonia, San Jose and Montevideo, where he
was finally arrested. It has been learned that in the respective offices
in the interior. departmental police have seized a large quantity of the
smuggled drugs.

The flippancy of the individual was such that when he was asked about the
origin and brand of the capsules. he said: "That is not your business....
They were made in Argentina." To a certain extent he was right, although
once he has settled his accounts with the Uruguayan authorities, he will

have to answer to the Narcotics Division of the Argentine Federal Police.

The arrested physician said that in Buenos Aires. he had engaged in the

same operations as the one recently broken up at the Israelite Pharmacy in
Montevideo. In partnership with a pharmacist in Buenos Aires. he sent the
formula stating the quantity in milligrams of every substance used so that
every capsule could be made up with the ingredients listed. When the cap-
sules or bottles were sold. he naturally shared the profits equally with the
dishonest pharmacist, who also used psychotropic drugs in the preparation
process without properly notifying authorities.

It was learned yesterday afternoon, after the acting judge. Dr Manuel Antonio
Mercant had scheduled a new hearing. that officials were awaiting the results
of the analyses made of the alleged diet pills. It was reported that five
types of psychotropic drugs had been detected as ingredients of the capsules
involved in the treatment. If this story should be confirmed. the situation
of the doctor will be highly compromised sine. .he crime of smuggling will
not be the only one in question.

There is already solid evidence of smuggling due to the large quantity of
containers seized and because of the fact that the doctor himself was selling
them in Uruguay despite being of Argentine nationality. However, if psycho-
tropic drugs are involved, he may bu charged with violations outlined in
Article 31 of Law 16,294 (narcotics ”rafficking). in addition to Article 221
of the Penal Code referring to the use and supplying of substances harmful
to health. Proof of the latter is contained in the fact that several of his
patients had to be hospitalized as the result of the emotional trauma pro-
duced by the supposed diet pills. Today we shall learn the court's ruling
on the situation of the doctor who, while not paying anything into the
Professional Fund or any taxes. coupeMd with them by using his "foreign"
image, which for a certain type of pa. .ts has an element of snob appeal.

Argentine 2‘ctor Investigated

Montevideo BL PAIS in Spanish 16 Feb 79 p 13

[Excerpts] As the evidence continues to mount up. the Fifth Criminal Court
yesterday ruled that it would try the Argentine doctor arrested on suspicion

ofnarcotics trafficking and smuggling and the crime of "repeated smuggling."

61
Jacobo Nenezian Vartevanian [above]. the Argentine doctor tried yesterday.

The investigation was patiently continued until the nenbera of the Narcotics
Squad succeeded in arresting the doctor who was prescribing the so-called
"diet pills" that were causing so much horn in our midst. At the some time
they seized a large quantity of bottles with the unnamed capsules whose
analysis is now in the final phase. Unofficial sources report that the
capsules contain five types of psychotropic drugs as specified by the
formula given by the doctor now on trial. The capsules were prepared by
using psychotropic drugs put out by well-known laboratories. The operation
took place in a Buenos Aires pharmacy. The case is like one discovered some
weeks ago in Montevideo.

The individual arrested and now being held as a result of a ruling by the

acting judge, Dr Manuel Antonio Mercant. is Jacobo Eduardo Nenezian Vartevanian. ‘

39. married. of Argentine nationality. Me resides at 2168 "A” Calle Helian
in Buenos Aires and has his office in the federal capital at 2536 ”2d C"
Colle Viamnnte.

in addition to his national registration as a general practitioner. Nenezian
also had regional registration in buenos hires. Santa Fe and Entre Rioa pro-
vinces. He had validated his degree in Uruguay.

Hhile Nenezian was Jailed for "repeated snuggling." since all the "diet"
medications had been brought into the country in large quantities from
Argentine to be sold in Uruguay. he could also be charged for crises outlined
in Article 31 of Law 140.296 -- that is. narcotics trafficking - provided
there is confirmation of the results of the analyses of the capsules pre-
pared by the Argentine pharmacist who acted as a partner in the profitable
scheme. It should be noted that if the diet pills contain amphetamines or
psychotropic drugs. the charge of common smuggling would then become one of
narcotics trafficking. Nor must one forget the provisions of the Penal Code
(Article 221) concerning the supplying of substances harmful to health.

it will be necessary to await the results of the analyses and then the re-
quest for extradition (by the Republic of Argentina. since the Narcotics
Division of the Argentine Federal Police has become involved in the case and
is investigating all the operations of Nenesian and his pharmacist partner.
based on the statements of the doctor. who admits having committed "illegal"
acts. but not in our country).

Another Doctor Jailed
Montevideo EL PAls in Spanish 20 Feb 79 p 18

[Excerpts] Another Argentine doctor was jailed last night. although this
tine the crime in question is more serious and would point toward a new
hearing for his colleague who was recently tried by the crime of repeated
smuggling. The individual arrested yesterday is charged with crimes out-
lined by Article 35 of Law l4.294 of 11 January 1975 (supplying narcoticn).
The penalty ranges from 26 months in prison to 6 years in the penitentiary.
The Argentine physician was identified was Mario Guillermo Vindver. 60.
married. who resides at 2897 Sarmiento in Buenos Aires and coincidentally at
2369 Sarmiento. Apt. 403. in Montevideo.

The detained suspect was investigated when the examining magistrate of the
Third Court. Dr Ramon Lucas Reggiardo. scheduled the trial of the owner of
the Israelite Pharmacy. Bernardo Cerstenbluth Platzman. In an underground
laboratory located in a backroom of his business at 2521 Avenida General
Flores. the latter prepared the "diet pills“ under the most unsanitary
conditions. using large quantities of amphetamines which he did not declare.
Since there initially were no grounds for trying Dr Vindver. the judge
transferred the evidence to the criminal prosecutor and with the interven-
tion of the Ministry of Public health. specific analyses were made to prove
once and for all the direct connection.

A similar situation involves another recently tried Argentine doctor. Jacobo
Nenezian Vartevsnian. who was charged with smuggling by the examining magis-
trate of the Fourth Court while awaiting the results of tests from the
Technical Forensics Institute and the Office of Secretary of Public health.

if the results are positive, in addition to the charge of supplying narcotics.
Nenetian could be charged with crimes outlined in Article 31 of the Narcotics
Law (trafficking). given the fact that the processing of the supposed diet
pills (which did nothing but cause serious secondary reactions in the nervous

53
systems of the patients) took place in Buenos Aires and had been brought into

the country illegally. If it should be shown that the pills contained psycho-
tropic drugs. as stated in one of the reports. then the crime of smuggling

would be changed to that of narcotics trafficking. which according to the
low entails a sentence of 3 to [0 years in the penitentiary.

 

Mario Guillermo Vindver [above]. the Argentine doctor being tried for
supplying narcotics.

Israelite Pharmacy

In editions published at the beginning of this month. we reported at length
on the operation dismantled by the Narcotics Squad which led to the jailing

of the irresponsible owner of the pharmacy on Avenida General Flores and now
to that of the doctor associated with him. The two shared equally in the
profits which the credulity of hundreds of patients brought them.

When the pharmacy was raided. over 12,000 bottles of a medication not regis-
tered with the Ministry of Public Health were seized. The capsules were

sold as "diet pills." although they contained a certain quantity of amphe-
tamines taken from their original containers and ground up in a coffee mill

to be made into the “miracle drug" of patients wishing to shed excess pounds.

6h
The judicial ruling on the Argentine doctor was made known last night
shortly after 2200 hours. when the examining magistrate confirmed the state-
ments of the physician on trial and those of several witnesses who had been
summoned to testify. It is thought that the case will have even further

as yet unsuspected ramifications. Consequently. the tireless members of the
Narcotics Squad are still working on the case. although officials decline to
make any type of comment.

 

The Israelite Pharmacy [above] at 252i Avenida General Flores, where at the
beginning of this month, an underground laboratory was discovered. It was

here that amphetamines were used to manufacture "diet pills." The partners
in the operation. a doctor and the pharmacy owner, have both been jailed.

Additional Crime. More Arrests
Montevideo EL PAIS in Spanish 21 Feb 79 p 18

[Text] While new charges were brought against the Argentine doctor on whose

trial the last edition of BL PAIS contained an exclusive report, another
physician and a pharmacy owner were headed for jail as the result of an

operation carried out early this month at the lsraelita Pharmacy. where an
underground laboratory was discovered. The laboratory was used to prepare

"diet pills" containing psychotropic drugs and other elements.

In reporting on the trial of the doctor yesterday, EL rsts added that the
case would have as yet unsuspected ramifications. This has been confirmed
by the scheduling of three new trials.
The examining magistrate of the Third Court has added to the charges already
filed against Marie Guillermo Vindver Tclmaher. the 50-year-old Argentine
doctor. the cries outlined in Decree ASA of 20 July 1976: "practicing with-
out a license.” because while Vindver did have his degree validated in our
country. when he began hie profitable practice in our country. he had not yet
done so. Consequently. according to Uruguayan law. the Argentine physician
was practicing illegally. it should be noted that in the beginning. Vindver
had set up hie temporary offices in the residence of another individual al-
ready tried: Bernardo Gerstenbluth Plateman. owner of the Israelite Phar-
macy on Calle 2 de Mayo.

Jailed along with Vindver for violating Article 35 of Law 16,296 of 11 January
1975 (supplying narcotics) was Aquiles Manuel Torre Halinelli. a doctor and
pharmacist. 70 years of age. single. of Uruguayan nationality. and Romero
Jupiter Mensa Arena. 56. married. also of Uruguayan nationality.

Torre Halinelli and Monte Arena were both the victims of Gerstenbluth

since the former. as a technician. and the latter. a pharmacy employee. did
nothing more than cooperate with the dealings of the individual who. accord-
ing to his statements. pocketed over 300 million old pesos during one year of
illegal activity. The doctor-pharnacist was paid a wage of 900 new pesos.
while the employee received 1.300 new peeea. Torre Halinelli signed the
books "in confidence." which was the action that led him to prison. Monte
Arena prepared the prescriptions according to the orders of his employer.

but was fully aware of the elements he was using in the apparently harmless
"diet pills."

Based on the direction taken by the investigations connected with the case.
it is thought that important information will soon be learned concerning the
situation of another Argentine doctor already tried: Jacobo Nenerian verte-
vanien. who for the time being is only jailed for the crime of "repeated
snuggling.” However. the charge could be changed to that of "narcotics
trafficking" as provided by Article 31 of the respective law.

The cases heard in recent days once again point up an emission on the part
of the hiniatry of Public Health concerning the provisions of the Narcotics

Law because if it had been enforced. the discoveries made by police would
have been detected much sooner.

Hithout any further comment. we are reprinting Article lb of Law 10.296. pro-
mulgated on 11 November 1976 and in force since 11 January 1975: ”The Hinietry
of Public Healthraill.within a period of 90 days following promulgation of

the law. organize a registry of professional doctors. veterinarians and
dentists. with their names. addresses. private telephone numbers and office
numbers and will provide a copy authenticated by its signature.

"The pamphlet containing this information will be sold at cost price to all
laboratories. pharmacies and drugstores. who will be required to have it in
their possession so as to control the possible falsification of prescriptions
related to drugs specified in Article 5.

66
"This paephlot will be revieed in January of every year and dietributod be-
fore the contlueion of thin eane month in accordance with the tonditione eat
forth in the preceding paregreph. Uee of the preecription book by.techni-

ciane graduating following the latent publication of the profeeeionel regio-

try will be governed. until the time of the following publitetion. by the
regulation eet forth by the Executive Branch.”

11.666
080: $300
8W3

DRUG 1‘9).an Ammo-d'he Judicial Technical Police confiecated 400,000
boliwaroa worth of cocaine when they arreeted Canadian Shirley (Alpit) end
Dominican Eduardo Alberto nae: Alenar on charger of being drug traitickere.
The police are inventigatins their tiee with international drug trafficking
sense. [Caracas Radio Mboa Network in Spanieh 1530 our 21 Her 79 PA]

080: 5300
DMD TRAFFIC ”CHASING, ADDICTION WT cm «scream!
Cairo 1083 mm in Arabic 25 Dec 78 pp 37-hl

[Article by was Mahanna: ”Drug Mire Continues; Director of General
Drug Ahinistration: We will Continue the Blow Into Mctured Rubber Hater
Bottle, Unless ; Drug Control Division of Cairo security: Possession law
Is Obstacle in )‘ace of seizure and Control Agencies"!

[Text] It seems that the principle or direct proportion is applied effec-
tively to drug snuggling and to controlling the drug trade in our country.
Despite the continued drug control campaigns carried out by the ninistry of
Interior and its various drug control agencies and despite their escalated
and concentrated ceapaigns against drug slugglers and nerchants, the latest
statistics on the quantities seized this year in coaparison to previous
years indicate an increase in these quantities.

There is also an increase in the nuber of addicts using drugso-that effec-

tive weapon for destroying the mind and a weapon with which the addict buys

his inevitable end with his capletely tree will. This is why we should not
bury our heads in the sand end say that the empire of al-Datiniyah has col-

lapsed or ended. The collapse of al-Datiniyah cannot be brought about with

l, 2 or 1,000 campaigns. Al-Batiniyah will continue to be a center for the

sale or drugs until it is eliminated canpletely and then replanned.

Increase in snuggled Quantities

The words are clear and need no explanation. If there is an improvement in
the control operation, then there is on the other hand an increase in the
number of addicts and, consequently, an increase in the volume of the drugs
smuled. Zlhis mans that the drug empire continues and will continue to
live until we view the issue differently and until we couplets the links or
the chain so as to close the circle. Control, according to Maj Gen Semi
As'ad, is only one oi” three links represented in:

1. Control and seizing or “anglers.
2. Dissuading and educating people.
3. Treating addicts.
The three links cannot be separated from one another and if separated, as
is happening at present, then it means the pillars of the drug kingdom's
throne will continue to stand and will not be effected by the control
agencies.

Blowing Into Punctured Rubber Hater Bottle

The director of the General Drug Control Administration admits that we are
actually "blowing into a punctured rubber water bottle." When we close a
hole in the bottle, another appears. To put it simply, drugs are demanded
by the consumers and supply and demand have become the law of this illegal
trade. Hhere large quantities are seized with the drug emgglers, the
demand rises, and so does the price and so forth.

The director adds: Unfortunately, the demand is increasing and this makes
the drm smugglers and dealers increase the suppr to meet the demand.

This, adds Maj Gen 8ami As'ad, makes the adventurous among the smugglers

and dealers grow hashish and opium in Upper Supt, even though the Ministry
of Interior's control agencies have become aware of this and are lying in
wait for such people to prevent the spread of drug production through the
cultivation of drugs at home. his fact has speeded up presentation [pre-
sumably to the People's Assemly] of the bill. to confiscate cultivable lands
used for drug cultivation.

0n the other hand, the production of synthetic drugs and of hashish and
opium derivatives, such as heroin, morphine and pills, has made the control
and seizure operation more difficult. This is in addition to the fact that
the drug crime is difficult to prove because what is important is possession.
The dealers are always clever and they carry out their activity without
exposing themselves to danger or to seizure. Thus, young children who have
become experienced in this work sell the drugs and collect the money.

Why al-Batiniyahf

Even though al-Batiniyah is one of the main centers for the distribution of
drugs in Cairo, so much so that we have come to believe that it is the only
source of this disease, the fact is, according to Lt Col m‘at Mmsur of
the drug control section of the Cairo Security Department, that drug traf-
ficking spreads throughout the popular quarters generally. There are the
areas of sl-‘Assal and al-Miyah in Shubra and the areas of al-Sayyidah
Zaynab, al-Jamaliyah, al-Hayli, etc. lbwever, al-Batiniyah is distinctive
among all. these areas by its unique geographic character, in addition to

the fact that its inhabitants are either related or know each other and that
their fundamental trade is drug trafficking.

Lt Col Tol'at unsur adds that the law of possession and acquisition repre-
sents a hardship and an obstacle in the face of the control agencies. The
law says that as long as the item (drugs, for example) is not in your posses-
sion or in your hane, then you are innocent. If it is right to apply this

70
law to anything else, it is inadequate in the drug control operation because
the testimony of the drug officer in the court should be considered a proof.
For example, we may be certain that this or that person does actually traf-
fic in drugs, but because such a person is extremely carom not to have

drugs in his possession, he entrusts selling the drugs to young children
and thus escapes being caught. '

0n the other hand, despite hardening the legal penalty to temporary or life
prison term with hard labor, this increased penalty has led to increasing
the number of not guilty verdicts and to reducing the penalty. This has
happened and is happening in many sentences against drug smugglers and
traffickers. Therefore, it is my opinion that it would be better if the
legal penalty were reduced but implaaented strictly.

Another Gap

Col Ahead 'Uttnan, the deputy director of the drug control section of the
Cairo Security Department, adds that permitting pharmacies to sell some
drugs, such as pills, sedatiVes and injections, has led some pharmicists

to become greedy and to traffic in these substances for profit. Such drugs
are sold on the black market. EVen though there are controls for the sale
of such drugs, ewen though it is required that they be sold on a doctor's
prescription and even though each pharmacy is allotted a certain amount
which it should not exceed, large quantities of such drugs have been seized
in some pharmacies.

Col Ahmad 'Uthnan adds: Unfortunately, the legal penalty is stall and tanta-
mount to only a fine. Consequently, raising the penalty and implementing it
strictly will make contravening pharmacies think twice before peddling such
drugs, especially since this phenomenon is spreading gradually among the
youth and the addicts generally, while addiction to natural drugs, such as
hashish and opiun, is declining.

lb.) Husam Abu Sa'dah adds: Abroad, processed and synthetic drugs of all
kinds and forms have become prevalent among addicts. In the United States,
for example, hashish trafficking has become very limited, whereas other
drugs processed locally by individually owned laboratories have spread. The

most dangerous kind is the L.S.D. pills. This trend is also spreading in
the backward countries.

Maj Husem Abu Sa'dah mrther adds that the United States possesses advanced
means, such as telecomunications equipment and planes, to use in drug
seizures. Moreover, the drug control agencies there can engage in buying
and selling drugs to traffickers to catch them redhanded. his is due to
the availability of financial resources.

Finally, thj Husam Abu Sa'dah says that the highest penalty in the U.S. law,
reaching the death sentence is a great deterrent.

71
Social Aspect of Issue

while the methods of snuggling in Egypt arc advancing and reaching the
degree or the use of airplanes to transport and smuggle drugs from ports
and across the see, our control agencies are not as advanced and our
resources for drug seizure operations are modest. All this makes us ask:
what is the solution? Is it in enhancing the capabilities of the control
agencies? This leads us to another question: Where will the control lead!

Hill we be able to wipe out this disease through control? This nukes us
deal with the other aspect of the issue and urges us to approach the issue
with a new and comprehensive view and with a different philosopmr repre-
sented in treating the addicts, because this is the mndsment for containing
and wiping out this disease. Only thus will the chain's links be completed.

ma Gen Semi As'ad says that drug trafficking and addiction have becone a
top-level social problem. The demnd must be curbed, fought and reduced by

preventing new persons and consumers from Joining the ranks of addicts. At
the same time, the addicts must be treated and a big boost must be given to

the preVention and treatment agencies.

The General Drug Administration director adds that this is actually the new
philosophy which the Ministry of Interior will follow in cooperation with
various other ministries, such as the ministries of social Affairs and of
Health. This requires the establishment of hospitals to treat drug addicts.
The information media shoulder a major responsibility in this task.

Equations on Way To Being Solved
But what is the real picture regarding the treatment of addicts at present?

You may be surprised to learn that the budget of the Alcoholic: and Drug
Addiction Treatment Society is 2,000 pounds, half of which is paid by the
Ministry of Social “third and the other half by the Ministry of Health.
When we learn that the salaries of the society's 11 workers amunt to 137
pounds monthly, i.e. 1,650 pounds annually, it means that the rest of the
budget, totaling 350 pounds, is supposed to cover the society's other
expenses, including the rent for its prenises. The society now owes the
Religious Trusts Authority 500 pounds, i.e. one quarter its budget, in back
rent. The 350 pounds also cover the water, electricity, tea end coffee
expenses and the expenses for the treatment of patients throughout the year.
Naturally, this picture requires no ooment or explanation, because there is
no greater misery than this. The only society for the treatment of drug
addicts in the entire republic is supervised by two physicians, each working
3 days.

The second bitter fact is that the number of patients frequenting the society,

most or all of when do so voluntarily, reached 3,3516 patients as of the date
of openirg the outpatient clinic in October 1969 and until these lines were

72
written. You may be surprised to find that the number of patients is drop-
ping annually. For exawle, the number in 1970 was 1,5140 patients, i.e.
nearly one half the total number. In 1971, the number of cases amounted to
5'42, of whom h03 cases were treated. Taose returning for treatment numbered
1 cases.

In 1972, the nuber of patients dropped to on 2'83 cases. The nuaber
continued to decrease, amounting to 116 in 197 , to 122 in 1975 and to only
95 cases in 1976. In 1978, there was a slight increase and the mnber of
patients rose to 165. This is the second problem, namely the problem of
treating the drug addicts in Egypt.

Coffee Only

Instead of being transformed into a hospital for treatment, the society is
being used by patients as a coffee shop or a recreation place to kill their
free time. It is truly regrettable that this society lives on donations and
on the personal efforts of this or that person to be able to perform its
message at a time when there are rehabilitation clubs that are under the
control of the Ministry of Social Affairs, that have branches in Misr
al-Qadimh, in Hada'iq al-Qubbah and in Iaazughli. The only thing these
clubs do is to give those frequenting them 10 piasters each, which the
addicts take and go to the Drug Addicts Treatment Society.

The question is: Why shouldn't these clubs be annexed to the society to
strengthen its activity and to increase its budget at the same time?

If we examine the number of addicts frequenting the society in a certain
year, let us say 1971 when the number was 579 addicts, we find that they
included 12 unemployed, 61 white collar workers, 83 carpenters, 107 service
workers and 200 craftsmen [figures as published]. The areas with high cases
were: Shubra with 52 cases, al-Darb al-Ahmar with 31 cases, al-Sayyidah
Zaynab with 30 cases, each of al-Hayli and Bulaq with 2!: cases and Bab
al-Sha'riyah with 21 cases.

As for the ages of those frequenting the society, the highest percentage of
addicts was in the Ito-50 year age group, then the 50-60 group, then the 30-
to group. The lowest percentage was among ages 70 and above.

Naturally, a big change has happened in this age distribution as a result
of the spread of new modern drugs, such as injections and pills derived
from hashish and opium which are spread among the youth in particular at
present.

Latest Case
The latest addict to visit the society did so on 15 November 1978. He is

100 years old and hem sl-Qamnnah village in NaJ' ﬂsradi. He came to Cairo
without the knowledge of his family and is currently staying at his own

73
expense in a hotel for a period that may last a month or more. his addict
came to know of the society through a friend of his who was also an addict.
He works in trade and agriculture in his village and is married and has six
children. His monthly income munts to 150 pounds of which he spends 105
pounds on his drugs: 75 ”undo for opium, 15 pounds for hashish and 15
pounds for cigarettes.

He takes three doses of opium daily by mouth and smokes hashish once daily,
using a water pipe. He has been a hashish addict for 15 years and opium
addict for 10 years.

The reasons for his taking drugs were sexual weaness, even though he has
six children. The results of his physical checkup showed that he has
bilharzia, an ulcer, prostitis, sexual impotence and psychological disturb-
ance.

This is the latest case to come to the society.

Manned 'Abdallah, the society's social worker, says that the income or 90
percent of the addicts is not in proportion to what they spend [on drugs].
This is why some of them resort to smoked means to get money, especially
borrowing, selling house furniture and theft when things get really rough.
Ninety percent of the addicts use drugs for sexual reasons.

Solution in Tax

The solution, according to m can Semi Ahmad himself, can be achieved only
by treating the addicts and preventing others from Joining their ranks. This
admission by the top official in charge of drug control has a major and clear
significance. It urges us to speed up the establishment of hospitals for the
treatment of addicts, to supply them with equipment and resources and to open
branches for them in all governorates or the republic so that an addict may
not have to come from Aswan or al-Daqahliyah to be treated in Cairo, for
example.

0n the other hand, a 1 percent tax can be levied on each bottle of whiskey
or alcohol for the treatment of drug addicts. 'lhe revenues from such a tax
will be large, naturally. The sums made from the sale of seized opium, or
part of it, to the drug companies may also be used for this purpose.

These resources, in addition to the cooperation of the various companies and
agencies and their aid to the hospitals to realize this message, can contri-
bute tward solving this issue. This is in addition to the state's funda-
mental participation. l’eetings must also be held in factories and other

work places to explain to the workers the benefits accruing to the ‘ndividual
and to society from avoiding the use of drugs. At the same time, the addicts
must be treated without being made to feel ashamed. Each establishment should
take care of treating its addicts. All this requires great information efforts
on the part of the press, the television and the radio.

7%
The bitter fact of which we are were is that addiction is widespread among
the vorkors to help than keep wake and increase their activity. Even
though the wages of some categories of workers range from 5 to 8 pounds
daily, the addicts among then spend this money on their pleasures and addic-
tion. The Ministry of health must also participate effectively in this
regard, and the drug companies should supply the Drug Addicts Treatment
Society with medicines to treat the addicts. The Ministry of Social Affairs
should also prepare programs to rehabilitate the addicts. With these and
other means, we will save our society from this destructive disease.

8&9!»
cso: 5300

75
BRIEFS

DRUG ammo FREIGHTER 1N PORT-“the freighter which was apprehended in
New York harbour with a haul of (.0 million dollars worth of hashish did
stop at Cyprus, but it was only in January last and at the tins of its two
week stay it was anchored off Lurnsca harbour. According to New York des-
patches the freighter, under a Liberian flag with a crew of seven, three
Germans and four Americans, had arrived from Cyprus. After investigation
here it was confirmed that the freighter "Olaug" did stay off Larnaca for
two weeks from 7 to 23 in January. It entered harbour only twice, once

to take on water supplies and refuel and the second time for water only.
It had arrived from Cadiz in Spain and declared it had no cargo to unload
and did not take on any load. when it left on January 23 the captain, e
German did not declare the next port of call, saying they would receive
instructions from the owners while at sea. Cyprus authorities had observed
nothing suspicious about the ship while it was outside the harbour or when
it entered the harbour on the two occasiona. According to Cyprus records ,
the vessel was at the time found to be registered in the Caynan islands.
[Text] [Nicosia CYPRUS am. in English 21 Mar 79 p 1 NC]

680: 5300
SEVEN Icemuoms ARRESTED IN mom comm: SEIZURE
mum! mummunMoHu-wpa

[rm] emu Ioolandors and a emu-nu mm. m. boon moored we
watch in tho wako or tho mostdgatdon or oao of tho haunt narootdoo
oasos 1n Dow-ark. any woo-o mostod in tho “an 3mm“ Hotol on tango
atroot in Copdnazon, and uroouos vorth about 5 Illnon Daxdsh bonu- or
tho oquivalont of about 310 million Ioalauno know on tho blaok mat
in Dot-ark, woo-o found in thon- possosslon. Sosa-a1 othor it‘s now
found among thou holonglngs. such as a loadod mlvor in tho possooslon
of an Ioolauno oonplo uho woo-o mud, and about 13 zillion loom:- ln oath.
As nontlohod ahovo, this 1s onto of tho blunt narcotics can: «or in
mm,mmmuoopmou Coponhagon hasnovorsoaoodalargor
amount or oooamo, #85 grass.

It was w shoa- aooddont that poldoa got on tho right back mt Minot
ﬁght. no ponoo cot a phoho can at would 2000 hours oouplaiung a
noiso thou a m in tho m” Swans" hotal. no call.- also Wood that
ho mspootod that hashish was bong snokod 1n tho room.

A group of poldouon art-1nd on tho spot and arrostod ﬁrst a 27-yoar old
Marlon who has no passport. may sou-oh“ tho room and found M0 W
of ooosdno, half a Idlogvan of haslush and 70.000 Danish hour. in additdon
to two wlports. Onova! Hulda: an! tho othox- was Svodiﬂh. and both had a
pdotnro of tho Ramadan. Th also Mud a plooo of paper Which can polioo
diroouonstomambor 1161 1'62th sa-ohotol,whorothoyarrostoda
25-yoor old woman and a an of tho sano ago. moy soarohod tho root and
four! 50 anus of oooalno, 300 grams of hashdsh and 80 pass or

W in vat-1m: plaoos, for maplo bshind tho tonot tank. no
man had a unable gold ring in hor possosuaa, but sho assons that it
boloms to an Ioolandor tho was stung at tho sano hotol.

Did-1m tho soaroh a 28-yoar old Ioolardor oano an- a visit, and thoy found

half a grant of combo on his poo-son, which ho 801d ho had just bought in
“ammo

77
More people cone in while the police wore ooorcldng tho hotel noon. An
Icohndlc couple ouo w ulth hu‘hloh worth 600 how. 'nsoy odd
thwlndgomtcchnommtobwlt.vhlletholrcldld.uhotolno
cradle. hod been 111 the core or the noun 1n the oforoloontlonod room.

All those pocplo um mootod. the police then went to the tool ot the
owner of the gold ting. Imba- 2W 208 in the hotel. whoa-o thqy mooted
onothn- Ioohrdlo couple. vho hod luddon 19 gram or oocelno cad o Motcooo
contouring Beulah end Svodloh honor totoldm 215,000 Douala bomr. In
oddltdon, thow round o 7.65 «um revolvor. o um: ooot worth 50 000
Donloh 1am end Jewelry «ma ot 90.000 bonur. they no. hand my
oooloo with vodghto in the tool.

are mootod mamm- hovo on boon NW for motion trafficking.

Four of then Home coda-ed into cum for 2? «toys: one for 7 tvo for
6 am ond one for 3 W. W!

”This lnddootoo thot coo-duo do golﬁng nountu on tho donootdo not-Rot."
sold Hogono Imdh. A police dotootdvo in Cop-hogan. '11.. people in
custody hove oloorly boon dullng in cocaine worth Mndrodo or thcuoeulo
or know. We nova- acdood 8c and: occolno at cm time. Since mum.
people or o loom proﬁle use this drug. Cocoue to o ottmlont end
1mm“! the some]. drlvo. It does not dun tho Ionlel u dooo, for
maple, heroine."

As for as we know, the Icelanders dew ovum em or the urge quontlty of
cocaine vhdoh has been tonal. One of tho Icolondoro oddttod thot he
bought obout 20 you! of mm on! that ho uses it. he odd he bandit

it me o atrongexu Investdgotlono of tho uttor will oontdmo 11: mn
tome.

"do hove not been contacted in r rd to ﬁll! also," War Olgjo. A
police omcdol ot tho Wanna-taut of tho Reykjavik police. and
in o oonmudon ‘dth WWII) yeotozdv.

We hove suspected that o poop or Icolondon-o vac imlvod in o urge-scale
narcotics trade in Copomogon," Gdgjo and. mm: We govo the nos-cotton
police in Copmhogen tho antouutun we had gothorod. but I do not know 11'
it has boon or help in this cue. It 1o no secret that tho police
outhorltioo in tho 3oondlnovlon countrloo hove close cooporotion end
exchange intonation that they think might be or help."

Yootudoy, WNBMDID oontootod max-1a: Thorleoiuo, the secretory of the
Icolondlo Hobos” in Copenhagen, who sold thlt no one hod been in touch
with tho may in connection with this one on! thot tho Ioohrdm had ‘
not naked tho cub-88y pol-connol for help. Ho sold thot he had oollod thc
police [motion Deportlmt on sunrloy looming. vhon he read ohout the

one in tho popes-o, and thot he had golnod intonation on how things were
going. Mon-ore, he said thot the court mloh ondore'! tho Ioolnndu's
into «OW hot 5W, had the ordered a lumbar of Danish .
1m to handle their one.

horned“! nid 111 oomluoton that the bunch men had reported on this
m it. hoﬂt on Sundv m! on How.

87163
$03 5300

79
NARCOTICS POLICE OFFICIAL DISCUSSBS HARD DRUGS SCENE
Copenhagen BBRLINSKB TIDBNDE in Danish 10 Feb 79 p 5

11er§7 "There has been a considerable shift in the clientele receiving
drugs abroad with a view to sale in Denmark. At the end of the 1960's the
large dealers in hashish were mainly the children of well-to-do people.

but today, now that harder drugs have come on the market, it has spread to
all levels of society, because there is easy money to be had by the sale of
deadly dangerous drugs," said Police Inspector Mikael Lyngbo. deputy chief
in the Narcotics Police judicial section.

Mikael Lyngbo also said that it is known that hard drugs are pouring in
but that the total amount cannot be easily determined.

Number of Those Addicted to Injecting Drugs not Known

"He can develop many theories, but as long as we do not know how many people
there are who are addicted to injecting drugs in Denmark, we cannot determine
how large a percentage is being confiscated."

It is known that there are between 5,000 and 10.000 addicts in Denmark and
if they all must have a fix each day, which means a half a gram, this would
be a total of between 2 and 5 kilograms of drugs at a black market price of
1,000 to 10,000 kroner per gram.

"The big problem for the narcotics police is that there are many people who
cynically exploit those who misuse the dangerous drugs. It is a temptation

for many weak souls to start a career of crime with quickly and easily earned
money from the narcotics trade.

The clientele that we have arrested under suspicion in narcotics cases also
shows clearly that all levels of society and gradually also all age groups
from the 20's on up are represented." Mikael Lyngbo said.

Information on the Risk
"We often discuss the problem, and we believe that there is a danger in giving
too much information about the fact that there are new and dangerous materials

on the way. He must realize that there are those cynical types in narcotics
crime who will not shrink at anything to make money on the unhappiness of others.

80
Theee people will try to make money at every opportunity. no letter what
the coat in human life," Lyngho aeid.

There are no addicta who want to help find the eain nan behind the trade.
They think of the aeller of the drugs as a saving angel eho can help then
out of their niaery end need for the drugs.

There are very few addicta who coneider theneelvea to he victine of cynical
crieinela. The only tine they get angry ie when they nuet pay too euch for
the drugs," Lyngbo aeid.

Cooperation between ueera and police is therefore had.

9124
€80: 5300

81
CUSTGS NARCOTICS SBIZURES ma! RECORD IN 1978
Oslo ARBBIDBRBLADET in Norwegian 7 Feb 79 p 3

[Text] The Gusto-s Service confiscated 28.7 kilos of hashish and asrijusna
in 1978. That is a considerable increase froa the previous year when 16
kilos of the cannabis sustances were seized. In 1976 Norwegian custons
seized 5.6 kilos.

Custom director, Jens Sterri. informs ARBEIDBRBLADBT that the statistics
free 1978, which are now available. tell us that 5’. tablets and 136 gram
of asphetanines were seized. culpared to 62 tablets and 710.6 grens in 1977.

In 1978 there were 139 seizures of narcotic substances. i.s. almost dorble
to the year before. The Customs director explains these facts with the
srrong increase of inspections by the Custom Service. These seizures are
in addition to those nade by the police.

Host of the seizures by the Customs Service were trade on ferries between
Oslo-Kristianssnd and Larvik-Horten. A considerable amount was confiscated
at the airports of Gardernoen, Porneby, Stavanger. Kristiansand and Dodo.
Some were also seized on boat inspections, in the nails and on train-and
car inspections. Up to now there has been no statistical information as

to the nationalities of the snugglers, nor the age-grow they belong to.
but this is presently being considered.

"Our best resource in tracking down narcotics are the 'drug-dogs' with their
guides. About half of the seizures last year were made with the aid of dogs
trained to track down narcotics. ‘l'he Gusto-s Service has a total of 8

such dogs distributed between Oslo. Bergen, Scavenger, Kristiansand md Orje."
Director Sterri states that the Customs Service will tighten up the control
of drugs even further. especially at airport and on ferries.

9349
080: 5300

82
'SNIPPING' BECMS MST YOU'D! DRUGS PROBLEM
Oslo ARBBIDBRBLADBT in Norwegian 13 Feb 79 p M
[Report on Interview: "A Bright Spot Every Time it Ends Well")

[Text] 'lhe 17-year old who sits in front of me next to police officer
Iormod Boa in the district's police station is a gentle and open young nan.
But--ae he himself says--he is also rather nervous about having to talk
about himelf. Let us call him Patter.

"I can thank Boe for the fact that I‘s sitting here. He was the one who
helped me get away from the sniffing culture, and he was the one who got
me a job and a room when I was thrown out from home." Petter'e story comes
across in a powerful and painful way as he tells it here in the office of
the new police building. One's thoughts automatically go on: to all the
children and young people one has encountered in the areas near the subway,
all reeking from the odor of sniffing. How does the whole thing actually
get started?

As far as Petter is concerned, it started when he was 16 years old, and
a friend urged him to try the effect of inhaling the fume from contact
glue in a paper bag.

"In the beginning I found it disgusting. Couldn't get my breath. But when
I got high it was exactly as if I heard a sound in my head. Then I began
to laugh and after that I was comletely out. I didn't remelber anything
more until I came to again in a totally different place. Then I had a sore
throat and I felt dizzy. That‘s how it went each time. It was exactly as
if I were dreaming, and each tine I began to laugh a lot. By the way.

it wasn't always that enjoyable in the land of dreams. It also happened
that I had nightmares and someone knifed me. But when I woke up again

I would only remednr a flashback from my dream.

No Desire

"Actually I didn‘t want to sniff, but I still continued to do it. After
a couple of months I was arrested by the police. At that tine I lived
at home and the police called home and said that I had been sniffing.

83
Someone at work had also seen me in town when I was high and had called
ny home. After all. I had been absent from my job and when I showed up
one day I was fired."

"I had smoked hashish a couple of times before I started sniffing. end
when I had been sniffing for about three months I tried heehish again.

The high it produces is coapletely different and easier to describe than
the high produced by sniffing. You drift into the high produced by hashish
while laughing at all kinds of things that are nothing to laugh at."

[Question] how did you get money for drugs?

[Answer] I knew a few girls working the street and they gladly treated
me to a joint. Or I would get a day's work in between and get some money
that way. Sometimes you could only get three joints for a hundred crowns.
whereas other times you night get twice that amount. Then we started to
shoot it, i.e. we began to inject it. I got it fron a girl I knew. I
laughed from that too--but in a different way-an awfully strained laugh.
He would walk quickly. then sit down, but we couldn't sit very long. we'd
begin walking again. and that's what we kept on doing for the 6-8 hours
while the high lasted.

Pills from the Doctor

"I also tried amphetamines, valium and other tranquilizers. He got those
from a doctor. I was in touch with several doctors. My friends would
wait outside while I was in the doctor's office. I said I was nervous.
Of course I was a little nervous. but I made it out to be worse than it
was. So I would get a prescription for 50 or 100 tablets which I shared
with the others. He got high fron the pills. but it wasn't a pleasant

high."

"I was thrown out from home after taking a racket when I had been sniffing.
I thought that was wrong. But I had so much trouble with my old man that
they couldn't take it any more at hone. I was very sorry after each time
we had trouble. Oh yes, I've been quite a troublenaker. I started to
make trouble even in first grade. I never did like school very much, and
it didn't like me to well either."

[Question] But don't you know that often the guys who turn out best are
the ones who were troublemakers in school?

[Answer] I don't see myself as one of the best--yet. But I'm still happy
to have a job that I like. And there isn't going to be any more sniffing
and foolishness.

Petter remembers more: "I was sleeping outside for three months last

sumer before I stayed with someone else in the grow. Then I got to
know Bee and others of the district police.--But now it's your turn to tell,

8%
Tamed. because I don't remember," says Patter to police officer Bee. And
Boe describes how he found Patter as deep in the dusps as you can get after
a high. he just barely got him inside the office at the police station.
There the boy threw himself on the floor crying as though his heart would
break. Gradually he collected hiaself enough to engage in a conversation.
among other things for example. the health aspects and damage to the kidneys.
At that time he had severe pain in his kidneys.

0n the Right Track

"Then I began to straighten out sore and lore." Patter interrupts. "But

I didn't stop sniffing altogether. I was in contact with people at the
Child welfare Council. I received 1.0 crowns a day from them for food ex-
penses. If I was high I didn't get anything. During that entire period

I kept in touch with Boe who made an appoint-ant for me with a doctor. I
was worried about my kidneys because I had lots of pain. Fortunately there
was nothing wrong, but the doctor told me that I was well on the way to
destroying Iy kidneys, especially because of the sniffing. "

"This was the turning point for use. And I have to thank Bee for that.

He got me a job at a place where he told the- all about me. He also got

me a room, and later on he made it possible for I: to move back hose. I

am really happy about that. It's much better to live at hone than in a
rented room, even if it's like living at a hotel in many ways, where one

is awakened in the naming and eats and sleeps. As a rule I'- hone around
ten o'clock at night and I'a very busy in a club I've joined. Now I've
had a steady job for four months and I've cut all ties with the old environ-
nent. Never again will there be sniffing or joints for an."

Sorry for the Others
[Question] how do you react when you see others sniffing?

[Answer] I feel sorry for them. I have many friends who have cone into
this environment without sniffing. but who also now are into that. It
seems so easy to do. But fortunately, I have a chance to pomd into the
heads of a few of then just how silly it is to play around with that stuff.
I feel it's revolting to have to take that odor when I enter the subway
station where they are sniffing. But I don't think that people should
demonstratively turn away or make gibes at them. They don't need to get
involved in the affairs of the young people. I don't preach to them, but
several tines I've said how stupid it is what they are doing.

[Question] But do you understand how difficult it is my times for those
who work on the subway? Could you see yourself working there?
[Answer] No, I could never do that. But there are differences among those
who work down there too. Once an inspector told no that we could stay

there if we didn't asks a racket and disturb the public. men nobody trade
a fuss.

[Question] But what about when young people come into shops and threaten
those that work there with knives?

[Answer] Oh yes. of course I understand that they become fearful. I don't
defend anything like that.

Somebody Ceres for Then

[Question] Do you feel that anyone is concerned about the young people
who are caught up in the sniffing environ-ent?

[Answer] "The district police cares about then. All who want to can get
help there. But you have to want to get out of that environment yourself.
The longer you stay with it the harder it gets. It's no use to say: ’I'll
stop tonsrrow.’ You have to stop all at once. I used to say to nyself for
a long tine that I was going to stop. but not today. That's no use. But
I can thank Bee that things went so well for as, and I'm happy to stay in
touch with him."

The future looks bright to Petter. lie has a job he likes. But he finds
that he doesn't have enough knowledge in mathematics, so now he intends to
catch up in nightschool so that he can get his graduation certificate from
junior highschool. He dropped out right away after the 8th grade.

[Question] How does a police officer feel when everything works out well
with one of his "cases?"

[Answer] "These are the bright spots. It helps one to start with renewed
energy in dealing with other young people. I don't believe it‘s as hope-
less a task as it is lade.out to be by many. In any case, it's worth a
try to get young people on the right track. But in order to achieve better
results we need more people, and above all a more extensive cooperation
between the different agencies who work in this field. He all work toward
the sane goal. The fact that we are policenen should not be a barrier to
cooperate fully with us," says police officer Tor-nod Bee.

9369
C80: 5300
BRIEPS

HASHISR SHIPIIEN‘I SBIZBDuA haul of 115 kg of haehieh resin. worth 11.5 n11-
lion pceetae. has been diecovered by the civil guard on the cone: near
Algectraa. Two Moroccan eubjecte have been arreeted in connection with the
druge. [Madrid Doneauc Service in Spanieh 1700 an 23 Har 79 LD]

080: 5300
'HURRIYBT' 0N FORMER DEPUTY'S INVOLVEMENT IN NEROIN CASE
Istanbul HURRIYBT in Turkish 25 Her 79 pp 1. 11 NC

[Excerpts] The sad incident involving a former deputy has assumed new
proportions following a statement by the prime minister's office confirm-
ing and explaining the incident. It has also assumed new proportions
following reports that the Germans are not passing information to the
Turkish police because of mistrust and following a statement by National
Salvation Party INS?) leader Necmettin Erbakan to the effect that "certain
persons may have been involved in certain acts." The Turkish Government
has already sent a special official to the PRC to investigate the incident
and to "show its sensitivity." The Germans, however, are not passing
information to the Turkish police to enable the Turkish branch of the
heroin smuggling network to be uncovered. Even so, NURRIYBT correspondents
have managed to learn the names of seven members of the "former deputy
gang." Of these, Suleyman Tsnriverdi has been reported missing by his
family for the past b months. His family said that Tanriverdi has been
seen driving luxury cars recently.

According to reports from NURRIYET correspondents in the PRC, Istanbul
and Ankara the "heroin gang" incident stands as follows:

In the PRC, former NSP deputy Halit Kahraman, who was caught with 7.5
kilograms of heroin in his possession, reportedly faces a jail sentence

of 10 years. It is understood that aalit Kahraman-whose heroin is worth
200 million Turkish lirss on the market--and four of his friends had links
with a 17-man gang in the FRO which was captured earlier.

Despite the efforts of the Nest German police to keep the names of the
smugglers secret, the culprits are being revealed one by one. It has
been learned that a person named Hanan Alagoz, a resident of Gaziantep,
is among those captured. It has also been reported that “seen Alacoz
entered the PRC as a tourist.
It has been reported that lialit Xahranan and his friends intended to
take the heroin in their possession to Frankfurt and Stuttgart. American
troops stationed in these areas reportedly pay high prices for these drugs.

It has been detersined that the TUrks who brought the heroin to the PRC
are collaborating with Gernans. The German smugglers are helping the
marketing of the drugs.

It has been understood that Heat Gernan legal authorities are not publicizing
the names of those captured because they do not trust certain people in the
Turkish branch of INTERPOL and because they fear that certain contacts of

gang may escape. As a result of the insistence of the HURRIYET correspondents,
the FRO narcotics bureau chiefs revealed the following nsles only: “slit
Kahrasan. Hetin Suleynan Tanriverdi. Essen Alagoz. Cshit Hunir, Isnsil Kal

and Hustafs Sari.

The Rest Gernsn branch of INTERPOL did not give these names to the Turkish
branch of INTERPOL. Prime Minister Bulent Scevit is the only one who was
secretly infer-ed of the incident.

Meanwhile, "8? leader Necnettin Brbaksn, in a press conference yesterday,
said that the "N8? is the cleanest party." Erbakan said:

"Even if certain individuals have been involved in certain sets, it is
extremely vile to even remotely link the acts of such persons-on the
basis of Greek press reports and for certain known uotives-vith the NSP.
which is the cleanest institution in this nation. No one must be a tool
in such tricks.

CSO: 5300
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOOSOROOO“ 00040009-7
BRIEFS

HASHISH SEIZBbo-Thirtnen kilos of processed hsshish were found in the
Aleppo-Haydsrpass psssenger train. The sarket value of the hsshish is
558,000 Turkish liras. It was found in the suitcase of a Syrian during
a search of the train in Gssinstsp's Islshiyo district. The Syrian was
taken into custody. [Anksra Dooestic Service in Turkish 1000 GMT

8 Mar 79 TA] A total of S and l/Z kilos of powder hsshish has been
seized during searches conducted by narcotics units in Sassun and Konys.
One revolver and 6 and ll2 kilos oi ponder hsshish were found in s taxi
nesr n Ssusun cesetery. Three persons were token into custody and another
person is being sought in connection with the incident. Another kilo of
powder hsshish was frond during s search of a house in Kenya. One person
vas taken into custody. [Ankara Domestic Service in Turkish 1500 GMT

8 ﬂar 79 ?A]

C50: 5300
nuns

mm DRUG nun-A auitcaae containing haahiah and heroin valued at
lore than 500.000 pounde. ha been found at Heathrov by Ouatona. it vaa
diacloeed yeaterday. ‘l'he auitceae vea diacovered on Sunday in the
nuclei-ed luggage office at no. 2 Tar-inal and a watch vaa kept on it by
Custom hut no one had clained it by yeaterday. The drop. nine kilo-
gram“ of haahiah and three of heroin. valued at nore than 1/2 million
pounda at atraet level. had been (low in on a Turkiah Airlinea flight
fro- Ankara. [Text] [landon m DAILY TELEGRAPH ic T'ngliah 14 Mar 79 p 1)

C50: 5320

91
BERLIN COLLECTIVE BEGUN IN EARLY 70's IIELPS ADDICTS
Stockholl DAGENS WTER in Swedish 22 Jan 79 p 11
[Article by Thomas Hichelsen]

[Text] A self-governing collective for addicts is one of the soot success-
ful projects for treating narcotic addicts, particularly heroin were.

in Heat Berlin. There are not any educated experts in the traditional
sense at this collective, no doctors. psychiatrists or social workers.
Instead you find here the accululated experience of the addicts theuelvee
in regard to narcotics and aisuee.

Here narcotic addicts break the habit without the help of aedicines or
other drugs. Thus, the only thing available is the support of the collec-
tive.

This collective das fornsd at the beginning of the 70‘s. Now. it has two
large houses in Heat Berlin and an old tension in one of the few green
suburbs of Heat Berlin. At the aonent 66 people live at the collective.
including six children. Over the years about 500 people have been at the
collective and lived there for short or long periods.

In the beginning it was called "Release" but later it was renaud to
"Synanon." But it is. however. only this has which the collective has
in col-Ion with a noveacnt of the sane none in the USA.

Self-Governing

The fact that the collective is self-governing does not lean that ever one
in in on the decision-Iaking. Quite the contrary, there is a distinct
hierarchy. Those who cane first are the leaders in the collective.

Discussions in the collective take place in the form of a kind of "gene"
which occur regularly three tines a week. During these "genes” anyone can
criticize anyone.
The rules in the collective are strict. All drugs. without exception. are
forbidden; no alcohol or tobacco is allowed. An individual who Joins the
collective must sever contacts with all previous acquaintances. family

and relatives for a long time. In the beginning the new recruit can not
go out without being accompanied by another aesbcr of the collective.

The system can. of course. be regarded as coepuaion. but also a p up
which narcotic addicts need in order to break away from the narcotic

environment. the big problem is of course not detoxification. The diffi-

cult problem is rather to prevent relapse. keeping people from getting into
the same situation again.

Participation in the Synenon collective is. however. voluntary. Anyone
who does not like the rules can leave.

Apprentice

Ralph Uilk is one of those who has been in the collective a long tine.
He was an apprentice in an electrical firm before he started with hash and
later went over to heroin. he took injections for half a year before he

became completely ensnered. he continued for four years-with constant
unsuccessful efforts to atop.

He tried various hospitals. But that was the worst. for there he was com-
pletely surrounded by drugs. It was a continual temptation. He lost confi-
dence in social workers. The) offer only encouraging words and promises.

By chance he heard about the collective and decided to try there. here they
did not take seriously the agony of detoxification. abstinence. so seriously.
here everyone had been through it and knew it wasn't so bed. All know that
addicts put on an act in order to get help from the doctor.

He who wants to be admitted into the collective must come sober to a recep-
tion interview. There he wust promise to follow the rules of the collec-
tive. And he has to have his hair cut off. Big manea of hair are a kind
of status symbol. The collective maintains that the person who is not
ready to sacrifice the beauty of his hair in order to end his dependence
upon narcotics doesn't really wish to be free from addiction.

Close Cut

Ralph Uilk says that "in the beginning only new people cut their hair
short. But then we wondered why we who had been here longer should be
treated differently. Now we all have short hair. Perhaps it looks strange.
but it is not important. In time perhaps we shall let our hair grow.”

93
,,
The collective is on the whole self-supporting. Only 20 percent of the cost
is received free the city of West Berlin.

“Actually the authorities wanted to give us note. But we don't want it.
He don't vent to give up our independence." Hill: says.

The collective earns noney fron a trucking firn with several vehicles. In
addition there is e snall print shop where brochures. newspapers and for-s
are printed. A carpenter shop will be established soon. The first pernsnent
nenbor of the staff, a naster carpenter who can provide vocational training
for the ned>ers of the collective. is expected shortly.

In everything else they have nsnsged on their own. For exanple the person
responsible for the off-set printing loomed the skill on his own.

Dorni tories

In its houses the collective lives partly in dornitories and partly in
fanilyroons. In the beginning up to 18 people lived in a single dorni-
tory, and in the first house. an old factory. there was only one shower.

Over the years the collective has grown to include several houses. its
own well-equipped office, careful book-keeping for the print shop and truck-
ing business.

But Synanon is an exception in the trestsent of drug addition in West Ber-
lin. Host efforts are largely financed with public funds. These involve
different types of therapy groups and of course beds at not clinics for
detoxification and psychiatric care.

6893
C50: 5300 END
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040009-7

END II
FICHE
IATE Flll

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040009-7
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040009-7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100040009-7