APPROVID FOR NIL-AOI: 3007/03/00: CIA-RDPOZ-00000R0001000.00.0-3
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040059-2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS 1/8423
27 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 17/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040069-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports, and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. "here no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within itemw are as
given by source.

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT LAHS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING OWNERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED NEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSENTNATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED EOROFFICIAI. USE ONLY.
TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(9000 17/79)
CONTENTS

ALGERIA

Completion of Bethioua LNG Plant Projected
(HARCHBS TROPICAUX ET HEDITERRANEB'S. 16 Mar 79) . . . . . . . . .

Briefs
Guided Missile Patrol Boat
IRAN
Loyalty of Shah's Arny--The Crucial Factor
(Lionel van der Heulen; STERN. b Jan 79) .................
'KEIZAI SHINBUN' Interviews Iranian Deputy Premier Entezan
(A. Enters. Interview; NIKON KBIZAI SHINBUN, 9 Apr 79) ...
ISRAEL
Briefs
Israeli Secret Agents List
LIBYA
Briefs
Atomic Bomb
TUNISIA

Unity Appeal of Militant Opposition Issued .
(thUB-ASIB, 19 Hat-1 Apr 79) oosooosoooooasooaosoooooo
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ILGERIA

COMPLETION OF BETNIOUA LNG PLANT PROJECTED
Paris HARCHES TROPICAUX ET HEDITBRRANBBNS in French 16 Mar 79 p 680

[Text] The first technical tests with steam on the new complex for liqui-
faction of natural gas. the cut 2 at Bethioua (Arzew). will begin in July
1980. The first delivery of natural gas will be made before the end of
the same year.

The production from the new complex. with relation to that of GNL 1. destined
solely to the North American market (Sonatrach-Bl Peso) will be reserved to

a large extent for the European market (France, England. Sweden. Belgium.
Germany. etc.).

This is what the APS [Algerian Press Service]. the Algerian Agency. divulges.
This agency brings up to date its report on the work of out 2. whose first
stone was laid by President Boumedisne a year ago on 21 February 1978.

This was at the same time that the GMT 1 complex was inaugurated (cf.
HARCHES TROPICAUX ET MEDITEnRANBENS for 10 March 1978, page 711). The first
tank load of 100.000 cubic meters from the GNL 2 liquifaction complex needed
only nine months to be entirely finished. The whole number of the storage
tanks. seven in all including three for LNG and four others for butane,
propane and gasoline. will be delivered by the Japanese company responsible
for the works before November of this year.

The conception of the GNL 2 complex is identical to that of GNL 1. Since it
was put into operation. GNL 1 has already loaded 61 methane ships of 125.000
cubic meters capacity. including the Larbi Ben H'Hidi, through the port of
Arzew El-Djedid. the first unit of the CHAN [expansion unknown] to take part
in the freighting of LNG to the coasts of the United States.

According to Hr Bensaid. director of GNL l, the planning for this year anti-
cipates the loading through the port of Arzew of 125 methane ships of 125,000
cubic meters capacity or the rotating service of 11 ships, of which 9 belong

to the American company El Paso and 2. the Larbi Ben H'Hidi and the Ben
Boulaid. belong to the national company. the CHAN.

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The GNL 1 complex has a capacity of 10.5 billion cubic meters per year;
since the sixth train was put into service last December. the complex has
been working at 65 percent of that capacity.

The GNL 2 complex will also have a capacity of 10.5 billion cubic meters of
gas coming from the Basel R'Hel deposit whence it will be conveyed by a
62-inch gasoduct now under construction. The plant will operate six identical
liquifaction trains which have been designed for autonomous functioning. The
two first exchanges will arrive in April and will be unloaded for the first
time in the service port of Arzew El-Djedid. This operation. which was done
earlier in the oil port of Arcew. required an enormous mobilization of trans-
port without forgetting, of course. the study of routes for the purpose of
avoiding all the problems that might interfere with traffic. The unloading
of equipment which will be done as of next April in the port of Arzew 31-
chdid will ensure a considerable increase in the time available for
constructing the nearby dockyard.

with relation to GNL 1. after it goes into service before the end of the
year 1980, GNL 2 is scheduled to recover propane (380.000 tons per year).
butane (330,000 tons per year) and gasoline (220,000 tons per year). The
Bethouia installations. starting in the year 1980. will also permit chilling
the methane ships in the port of Arzew Bl-Djedid. specifically ships be-

longing to the CHAN. Formerly this operation required spending foreign
exchange in foreign ports.

The products derived from GNL 2 will be stored in three storage tanks of
100.000 cubic meters capacity each. two other storage tanks of 50,000 cubic
meters each for propane and butane. and finally two 16.500 cubic meter tanks

for storing the gasoline. The equipment for storing natural gas that GNL l
and GNL 2 have available will be closely connected among themselves.

(We recall that a third factory for liquifying natural gas. GNL 3. is pro-
grammed for Arzew. The equipment for the installations has been ordered
from a Franco-Italian consortium. Technip/SNAH [expansion unknown/National
Gas Pipeline Company] Projetti-France, cf. MARCHBS TROPICAUX ET
MEDITERRANBENS for 26 January 1979. page 189.)

COPYRIGHT: Rene Moreux et Cie.. Paris 1979

12.116
080: 6000

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

BRIEFS
GUIDED MISSILE PATROL BOAT-Jule Algerian Navy has just received delivery
of a fifth Soviet OSA-I class guided uiaeilo patrol boat; it therefore

has five OSA-I'a. three GSA-11's and six Komr'e. [Text] [Paris DEFENSE
CONJONCTURE in French 20 Mar 79 p 3]

C80: “00

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONE!

IRAN

LOYALTY 0F SHAH'S ARMY-4H5 CRUCIAL FACTOR
Hamburg STERN in German 4 Jan 79 pp 86-89

[Article by STERN reporter Lionel van der Heulen: "The Buyoneta of the
Shah" I

[Text] Only the army keeps the shah still on the
throne. ﬂigh pay and an ingenious system of informers
are supposed to prevent the soldiers from deserting to
the enemy--to the people. But now the enemies of the
shah are paying for every deserter.

Again and again ﬂak-at Yasdan looks at the door. He is always interrupting
his explanations, sometimes in the middle of a sentence. Time and again he
strokes his shiny black crew cut from front to back with his broad hand and
feels his 3-day growth of beard. Hekmat Yasdsn is afraid to be recognised
by members of the shah'a army: Hekmat Yasdan is a deserter.

we are sitting in a corner of a real: house along the street to 00m, alone
in the parlor of an inn that is at least 300 square meters. 0n the stone
floor are bread crumbs, cigarette butts. and now and then a gnawed chicken
bone. 0n the shabby RBSOPAL-TOP of our tottering table are plates with
sheep's—milk cheese and round flat bread. a pot of tea and glasses.

ﬂeknat Yasdan does not touch anything. He hides himself in his black
sportsjacket made of coarse material and too large for him. The 20~year-
old does not know yet whether to act proud and bold. Without concentra-
tion he tells his story: "I am fro» Shiraz, spent a year in the army and
was a shah-worshipper--a follower of the emperor. But I am a Shiite and
cannot shoot at my brothers. Shar'iatmadari and Khomeyni have forbidden
it. Our lieutenant said that they are playing into the hands of the com-
munists and that Khomeyni is a homosexual. But I believed my brothers in
the street more. Three days ago, I went to the Ayatollah* Shar'iatmadari
in Qom and gave him my rifle. It was a good German rifle."

* The "ayatollahs" (literally: "word of God") Ihomeyni and Shar'iatmadari
are the spiritual leaders of tne Shiite Muslims in Iran.

6
FOR 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The spiritual leader, who accepted the 6-3 rifle, gave the deserter 2,500
toman (DH 700)-as a premium for descrting. In Iran every deed has its
price.

The "mullahs," the learned men, during the past few weeks have had to reach
deeper into their pockets: About 100 soldiers and officers thus far have
refused to follow the orders of the military government and move with tanks,
rifles and bayonets against their demonstrating fellow believers and polit-
ical friends. It is the beginning of a wave of desertion whose extent can-
not yet be perceived. If it continues, the shah must fear for his throne.
For the power of the emperor, who is being wished to hell by his subjects.
stands and falls with the army.

For the time being the air force, the navy and ground troops represent im-
posing armed forces. bristling with weapons. As yet the officer corps
stands united behind its commander-in-chief. Mohammad Rezs Pahlavi. As yet
the overwhelming majority of the soldiers are keeping the oath of loyalty
to the emperor. As yet no one is visible in the ranks of the military who
could topple the emperor from the peacock throne and himself assume power--
in the way the shah's father himself did it in 1925. A Persian general,
who asked to remain anonymous, told STERN: "we soldiers are very powerful,
but as yet we don't know how to govern exactly. Perhaps that will be
another 2 years."

But even then it is not certain that they actually want to rule. For the
Iranian military have no reason to complain about the shah. 0n the con-
trary: He has spoiled theme-not without self-interest--more than his own
family. Within a period of the 37 years of his regency, the shah has made
the hopeless heap of soldiers who in 1961 suffered a crushing defeat at
the hands of an Anglo-Soviet army. into a troop that is 613,000 men strong
--equipped with the latest achievements of the international armaments in-
dustry.

To the ground troops, the ruler of the country gave 2,200 tanks, especially
the very modern Chieftain tanks from Great Britain. as well as DH 200 mil-
lion worth of trucks, jeeps and guns from the Soviet Union.

During the past two decades, the navy was equipped with 30 warships and the
largest fleet of hydrofoil boats in the world. The air force, the special
darling of the shah, has at its disposal the latest models. Resa Pahlavi,
who himself holds a pilot's license, cultivates a cordial friendship with
Tom Jones, the boss of the U. S. Northrop aircraft firm. Prom it and

other U. S. firms, the hobby pilot has purchased more than 700 fighter
airplanes and transport aircraft. The seven highly complicated jets of

the air surveillance system AHACS now on order alone cost approximately

DH 2.6 billion.

5
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Thanks to the oil revenues. the shah has made available more than DH 75
billion for military equipment during the last 20 years. Not infre-
quently he became the victim in this connection of low American salesman-
ship. Thus the helicopter pilots are now tormenting themselves with an
expensive and sensitive piece of equipment that was designed for bad
weather. which in this sun-spoiled country is completedly superfluous.
The American Rockwell International armaments firm palmed an expensive
electronic border surveillance system off on the "Light of the Aryans"
--a system which cost millions and was no good. The coup of the U. S.
salesmen had consequences: In August of 1976 three leading employees
of Rockwell International were driving through Teran. Suddenly a red
VH bud drove sideways in front of them. A group of terrorists leaped

from the vehicle and shot at the managers with Polish automatic pistols.
All three died.

The officers of the Iranian army are angry about the influence and arro-
sauce of the American allies. A farmer air force pilot to STERN: "In
my training camp in the United States. the Americans treated me like a
second-class human being." The "Yonkees" (the Iranians pronounce the

"a" like an "0"), to be sure, are still not hated as much as the former
occupiers from the USSR.

Training abroad is a matter of tradition with the Persian army. Hany old
generals were whipped into shape by the German Wehrmacht. many Persian ad-
mirals by Italian colleagues. Only during the last 20 years. officers of
all arms. were almost exclusively drilled in the United States-~to the
indignation of the of ficers. who possessed a high degree of national con-
sciousness and a strong orientation toward Europe.

But as yet the officers stand behind the emperor. Many of them come from
population groups which in the official statistics figure as insignificant
minorities: Armenians, Dahaia or Kurds. They are provided with high pay:
about DH 4,000 per month for a lieutenant, close to DH 12,000 for a general.
Modern houses, their own servants. their own hospitals and army stores in
which all the goods of this world can be purchased duty-free. are taken for
granted. The same goes for official cars and interest-free loans.

An Iranian officer lives well, even if he is carefully observed: All three
armed services are controlled by their own secret services. They in turn

are supervised by a special intelligence service which works only for the
shah. The emperor has forbidden all generals to meet outside of the service
without his permission. Every visit of a provincial coriander to Teheran

must be approved by him. Every promotion above major can only be made by

the Shah. This the father of the people does very thoroughly: he studies
every personnel file and invites the candidates for a personal interview in
the palace. A colonel to STERN: "I believe he has created the most elaborate
control system in the world. He has as fully in his grip."

6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The lower charges, too. are kept in check by the emperor following the
principle of "carrot and stick." In addition to free accommodation and
good food. a simple soldier earns about on 800 per month. a sergeant
about on 2.000. That is many times the average per capita income in
iron of approximately DH 370 per month.

In the infantry. which is composed of conscripts and professional soldiers.
the Shah-followers from the minority groups of the Iranian population can-
stitute the majority as well. although according to official statistics 66
percent of the Iranian population are Persians and 34 percent members of
other nationalities. "These statistics are falsified to justify the domi-
nating position of the Persians and thus of the emperor's family," a high
lranian official told me. "An honest census of the population would re-
veal that the Persiaas account for only 35 percent of the population. And
in that case their claim for domination would be endangered."

The lack of trust of the different tribes and races in the army is rein-
forced by additional religious differences. hekmat Yazdan. who deserted
in the city of Qom reported of leaflets circulating in the barracks which
warn ail non-Shiite soldiers: "If a Christian or Bahai dares to shoot at
a Shiite demonstrator, he will be executed by one of our brothers in the
armyﬂ

That is not an empty threat: A lieutenant who belonged to the Bahai sect
a short time ago was shot by an officer in Tabriz because he had ordered
his men to fire at approaching demonstrators.

Persians belonging to the Jewish faith. too. should have to serve in the
army. However. there are enough barrack commanders who will be persuaded
by an appropriate baksheesh to excuse the Jewish conscript from the serv-
ice.

On the other hand. the air force especially needs many lsraelis in order to
be able to take care of the maintenance work on the complicated fighter
planes. Thus absurd situations arise: Every day three El-Al planes leave .
Tehran Airport. packed full of Jewish refugees for Tel Aviv. In return.
three other Bl-Al planes land, filled to the last seat with technicians

of the lsraeii army. The experts are for the most part Persian Jews who
emigrated years ago and have perfect command of the language of the coun-
try. Farsi. "This is the dilemma with our army: We are still by far too
much dependent on the assistance of the Americans. the British and the
Israelis." a retired general in Tehran explained to STERN.

But the dependence on foreign knowhow does not diminish the power position
within the country. Even before martial law was proclaimed in some cities

in August and September and the military government was installed in
November. the generals had taken over all positions of governors. the most
important mayoral positions. the chief seat of the SAVAK secret service

and the key ministries. Military courts dominated the legal system.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The military have an Important influence on agricultural policy. the edu-
cational system. and the public health service.

As yet the soldiers of all three armed services repeat during every
reveille their vow to "Rhoda, Shah. Hihan" (God. Shah. Fatherland).
The deserter Hekmst Yuzdan. who has made a decision for “Rhoda“ and

"Mihan." is still the exception. In return he conduct: himself all
the more wildly. Hhen we said farewell in the rest house on the road
to Qom. he said: "Our commander told us again and again that there
are three types of enemies: First. enemies. second. the friends of

enemies. and third, the enemies of friends. For me this shah is all
three at once."

COPYRIGHT: 1979 STERN

8970
C80: 6403

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

'KBIZAI SHINBUN' INTERVIEWS IRANIAN PEPUTY PREMIER BNTEZAM

Tokyo NIKON KEI7\I SHINDUN in Japanese 9 Apr 79 Morning Edition p 5 0H

[Interview with Deputy Prime Minister A. Entezam by Konishi. on 8 April 1979]

[Text] Teheran. 8 Apr--lranian Deputy Prime Minister Entezom granted this
NIHON KBIZAI SHINBUN reporter (correspondent Konishi) an exclusive interview
on 8 April, during which Entezam expressed his views on various problems
facing the new post-referendum Iran. The deputy prime minister said: "The
first stage of the Iranian revolutiOL has just been completed, and we must
speed up the construction of a new state system. There is no cause for
misgiving about relations between Japan and Iran." The following is the gist
of his remarks:

-In the recent referendum, 99.5 percent of the people voted for the estab-
lishment of an Islamic republic. Despite differences in race and religion.
our people are united under Ayatollah Khomeyni. It is quite natural. in a
sense, for the minorities who have hitherto been oppressed to make various
demands. Most of these demands will be met.

-A body of religious leaders is now drawing up a general framework for the
new Islamic republic. When the work is completed, the government will
review it before making it public. The royal government under Pahlavi used
to say that there would be a conflict between religion and scientific
progress under an Islamic republic. But there is no such conflict. Islam
takes in everything. We intend to prove that Iran is such a brosdminded
country.

-The Iranian revolution merely has gone through its first stage. We are
hurrying to cleanse our country of the vices of the old rule. We will
shortly present the draft of s new constitution and plan to hold elections
for constitutional parliament on 1 June.

-A new economic policy will be announced in the near future. He will not
carry on the old policy: the new economic policy will be an Islamic one.
Issues concerning the entry of foreign firms and the introduction of foreign
funds and technicians will be covered by the new policy. We will allow in
whatever Iran needs. Recently, some false reports were circulating which

9
FOR OF?ICIAL U83 ONLY
Filli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

nuid that foreign workers would he required to leave iran by Zl June. The
new ronulnlinn requiring foreign workers to obtain work and domiciliary
pvrmllﬁ erieetIVe in June was thus mistakenly represented.

--Iu Ihe past A years. Iran spent $l5 billion in aid to developing nations.
eVeraeas investments. and credit to foreign countries. we are studying

the possibility ~i recalling part of our foreign investments. We are also
reviewing our aid progrun for developing nations. however. we will continue

to INVPNt in projects beneficial to iron. like our investment in Krwpp. a
West German firm.

At present. economic activities in iron are virtually at a standstill.
ueeeniuutiun the unelployuent problem. when the agricultural development
[den and the investment in public \nrks plan take concrete shape. they will
absorb u considerable number of unemployed.

--(Shnh) rnhlavl’s policy of making Iran play the role of "policeman of the
Persian Gulf" was quite futile. As Ayatollah Khoneyni said: He will abandon
our role of policer-n of the Persian Gulf. He will endeavor to strengthen
eur friendly relations with neighboring countries and achieve regional
stability and development. The Soviet Union was not a threat in the past.
and we will continue to maintain our friendly relations with it. He will

maintain our relations not only with the Soviet Union but also with the
tnlted States and China.

As for our relations with Japan. they have never been bad and we have never
been uneasy about then. He want to develop relations between our two
countries even further.

corrnicnr: ﬂihon Keizni Shinbunshe. 1979
(‘50: I. [05

10
FOh OFFICIAL USS ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ISRAEL

BRIEFS

ISRAELI SECRET AGENTS LIST--Khoneyni has given to Yoeir 'Arafet a list of

HOSSAD (Israeli Secret Service) agents working in the Arab countriee. The
list belonged to the SAVAK [Iranian Secret Service]. In the course of a
closed meeting of the National Peleetinien Council. the PLO lender promised

to revcnl the ngente’ neeer. [Text] [Paris JBUNE ATRIQUE in French No 953.
1) Apr 79 n 30]

080: 6800

11
Pm OFFICIAL USE MY
POI! OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

LIBYA

BRIEFS

ATOMIC noun-4m. presence of Pakistani atolic technicians in the Penn
Desert has started aone runora flying again concerning the chance of a
possible etonic bonb test by Libya. A date has even been mentioned: sene-
tine this month. Colonel Qadhdhafi has for several years been saying that
he wants to provide his country with the atonie boob. lie has suggested to
several Aslsn countries that an exchange be arranged: their technology

for Libyn's petroleum Moreover. Libya claims the northern parts of Chad
and Niger. regions that have uraniul deposits. The Aozou area of Chad

has been occupied for nearly 6 years by Libyan forces. [Text] [Paris
VALEURS ACTUBLLBS in French 2 Apr 79 p 35]

650: 6800

12
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OWICIM. US! ONLY

'I'UIISIA

1m ITY AI‘PEM. 0? MILITMT OPPOSITION ISSUED
Paris MRIQUE-ASIE in French 19 Her-i Apr 19 pp 26. 25

[Statement by militant group: "Tunisia: for Unity of Action”]

[Text] A group of Tunisian militants, disturbed by the evo-
lution of the situation in their country and the lack of co-
ordination of the different kinds of action in opposition to
the regiae, have issued the following appeal. in the hope that
it will amuse wide-ranging debate leading to unity of action
among different wings of the Tunisian opposition.

Although the Destourien regime in Tunisia retains—but for how auch lancer?"
the appearances of pour. it has surely lost the foundations of it. which
have been eroded by nearly a quarter-century of repression against the popular
movement as a whole and in all its component parts. The rupture has never
been greater or deeper within this regime which was born of violence and which
seeks to perpetuate itself only by violence against the Misian people. he
reassuring declarations by Hedi Iouira or Mohued sagah on the future and the
prospects of Bourguibisa will do nothing for them: they have neither future
nor prospects. They are feeling their say along, and they are living their
isolation like a Calvary. Their feigned assurance is only the reflection of
their real anguish, lived from day to day. in the face of a reality which they
are trying in vain to exorcise by words. In fact. authority is already slip-
ping avay from their government. which has resigned in favor of the rival
clans who are disputing the post-Bourguibisa.period along themselves in the
winch: ol‘ thelr harms and with total and contemptuous ignorance of the popular

masses and tneir aspirations. Each clan for itself-wand for its imperialist
backers.

The friends of the regime do not deceive themselves, and still less do its
enemies. To both. it appears a little like the Otto-m aspire at the begin-
ning of the century. the "sick man” of the Maghreb.

The outcome of this battle of clans remains uncertain. and its evolutions and
consequences. unforeseeable. Anything could come out of this upset Pandora's

13
”I OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I’OR OPI’ICIAI. USE ONLY

box: militarism. fascismnor at least, more distinct forms of it--civil war.
and one does not know what else. Foreign intervention. perhaps. 'Ihere is
no need to dranatise a situation which is alreaw highly dramatic in itself.
But it is important for all Tunisian militants to be aware of these possi-
bilities and to take account of the degeneracy of the Bourguiban political
system. so that all of them together—parties. groups. movements. tendencies.
and individuals in the Tunisian oppositim--can try to spare our people the
tragic shocks of this frantic race to power and of the ambitions of unscrupu-
lous men who have already proved what kind of repression they are capable of.

The massacres of Black Thursday. 26 January 1978. the first anniversary of
which we have Just celebrated-~each. unfortunately. within his own clique-
only confirmed the fact that the "liberal opening" attributed to Hedi Nouira
was conditioned on submission by the popular masses and their representative
organizations to the neocolonial strategy set in motion in 1970.

The Seeds of Fascism

They also confirmed, in the bloody way that we know. that the seeds of fascism
sown at the time of the 1969 coup de force had sprouted and that the formid-
able aachinery of coercion. compulsion and repression could thenceforth func-
tion at mu power. Ii'he political trials preceding Black 'lhursday. the many
operations by the police and the any against the schools and enterprises.
were only interaittent practices to break in the men and try out the assault
units.

What must be emphasised today. a year later. is that on that day. in the face
of the Destourisn armed force's deter-ination to nip the reviving trade-union.
movement in the bud. there could be no place either for "restrained behavior"
(the liberals' fixation) or for any form of adventurisli. It was necessary
quite simply to take one's part in these popular struggles which had Just
broken out on trade-union ground. The way events went was unsatisfactory for
both sides. who displayed singular indifference to or revolutionary scorn for
what seemed to them to be "battles of machines"-without realising that there
was a lot of action offstage: the struggles by thousands of workers determined
to seize their rights and confront the employers' power and its political ex-
pression in the government. even with empty hands. The lesson will be valid
for the future too. For this chapter of the errors of certain groups in the
Tunisian opposition will not be closed by their belated rallying to the trade
unionists in struggle, a rallying quite often camouflaged by irresponsibly
inflated criticism at the expense of all those who have died for having be-
lieved in the stmgle and those who are rotting in the Destourien power's
Jails because they did not desert the battlefield.

Something, in short. needs to be understood: support for the legitimate
leadership of the uc'rr [Tunisian General Federation or Labor] until flouted
trade-union legality is reestablished can be neither "tactical" nor "circum-
stantial." as was recently declared, as naively as can be imagined. by an
opposition group.

Us
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

While acchaniatic concepts of men and the environment in which they move some-
I.Inmn lead to crude nchemtiun. which no longer has any currency. it is neces-
sary to reaffirm unaabiguously that support for the legitimate leadership of
the [kink—presently in prison—must be the foundation of any unitary approach
to the combat which we aunt carry forward for autonm of the trade-union
organization and the overthrow of the puppet clique which has been installed
in P! ace thinned-Ali .

it in not a question of support for one aan or one group of aen, but of defense
of a principle which hna its peraancnt implications for the struggle which we
are carrying on. It is likewise necessary to affirm that the search for unity
of action--a necessary and urgent search. without any doubt-aust have no other
objective than to prepare the ground for an alternative to the regime in place
in Tunisia, with respect for political pluralism and submission to the popular
Verdict. and not. as some suggeat. for forming a front for dialogue with the
liestourinn power.

Staten General

[hispitc itu errors and its mistakes. its inexperience. the oubJectivisn. the
valunturiam and all the bleniahea which characterize the lack of preparation
of one group or another, the popular movement in Minis and its representa-
tive organizations have progressed considerably in the content and substance
or their political analyses and the foras and scans of their struggles. They
have a eonnon prograa. unwritten. which is explicitly articulated with the
idea that the continuation of Bourguibisa. with or without Bourguiba. has he-
rone a scandal which serves neither the oppressed Tunisian people nor the
national liberation struggles in the world. particularly in Africa and the
Arab world, nor the popular forces in the Maghreb. nor—even lore son
socialion wherever it may be.

They also have a minimal program of action for defense of democratic liber-
ties. general and unconditional amnesty for all political prisoners imprisoned
or convicted since independence, defense of the autonomy of all national organ-
izations. and political pluralism with all that it implies. Finally. they Join
in defense of national independence and sovereignty. This is a lot. but not
enough. It lot, because rarely. in the difficult conditions of struggle which
we know in 'Nnisia. has the opposition succeeded in defining so any points

in common. Not enough. because this program reasins written and because

the actions. although conceived from the sane point of view. are not carried
on coherently.

is it too early (or already too late) to propose a preparatory meeting which
would hrinw. together qualified representatives of political organizations or
individual: who would organize. in some way. the states general of the M1-
ninn national demcratic and progressive opposition. leading to a conson pro-

gram of unity and action? The idea is perhaps not a new one. but it is tine
for it to he headed in the right direction again.

COPYRIGHT: I979 Afrique-Iisie
i I267 8ND

can: “:00 15
FOR OFFICIAL use out?