APPROVID FOR NIL-ADI: 2007/02/00: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOBOROOO“00020022-0
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100020022-4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8277
13 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02108: ClA-RDPBZ-OOBSOROOM000200224
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines, editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given. the infor-
mation was sumarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Hords or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as apprOpriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

the contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the u.s. Government.

COPYRIGRT LAWS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING MERSHIP OF
MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
OF THIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAI. USE ONLY.
7. Auk-"(1) Io 'NI:I'WIiII‘ (human-en er.

.._.. ._.._...—_—.—____.
9. i'niumuu (ham-nun Nut IN Aunt“ l0. Ptolecll Tull/tour L'Im .\u.

Joint Publicntions Research Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington, Virginia 22201

 

I2. ﬁre-noun; Ovuniuiion Nose and Minn I). Type oi New: I: l’n-oJ
Coveted

As above

IS. Surplcncmuy Nous
l0. Abmuu

The serial report contains information on socio-economic, government, political,
and technical developments in the countries of the Near East and North Africa.

7. Kw '0ch and Document AMIY’I'. 7-. Descvipton

Pol iticnl Science __Inter-Arab Affairs _Libye __Sultanate
Sociology Luorth African _Hauritani.a of Oman
Economics Affairs _x_fiorocco __Syris
Culture (Social Sciences) _A fghanistan _Pe0ple's Demo. _x_'i‘unisia
Ethnology LAlgeria cratic Republic _x_United Arab
Geography _Bahrain of Yemen Emirates
Technological Egypt __Persian Gulf _X_Western
Military Sciences Elton Ares Sshsrs

_lraq _Qater ____Yemen Arab

'7‘. “tn'i"""°v‘“‘£”¢‘ 7"“ _lsrscl __Saudi Arabia Republic

__Jordan _Spsnish North

___!(uwsit Afr ico

_Lebanon __Sudan

We. (.OSATI FuLlIGcouy 50. 5c, SK, 15

II. Avllltblllly Sun-um . Sccwily Clan (The
For official Use Only. “WK." _
Lilited Number of Copies Available From JI’RS.

0

’°"‘ """“ "“" ""' nus sons um as senooucco

21. .\'o. o! Pa‘ct

59

2. Put:

 

v0¢0v0 D: “050-"!
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8277
13 February 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N NEAR EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

(FOUO 2/79)

CONTENTS PAGE
NOR'm AFRICAN AFFAIRS
Polisario Claim Morocco Caused Spanish Piehemen's Death
(MIC 16, 31 Dec 78)ssessooneseeeeeesessencesseeose'e 1
ALGERlA
Political Situation, I’oanible Succession to Housediene
Analyzed
(AL-QATAR AL-‘ARABI. 4—40 Jan 79) S
IRAN
Shah's Downfall Laid to Corruption oi Officials
(Lut: Bindernngel; STERN. 17 Dec 78).................. 17
MOROCCO
King's Actions on Saharan Iswe Denounced
(Hesscn chnti; APRIQUB-ASIE, 25 Dec 78-
7 Jan 79)....oo-os-cssoosso-oooososooo-osooosooooo-oso 22
Report on Storey Third USP? Congress
(Houaleh Ali; AVRIQUE-ASIE, 25 Dec 78-
7 Jan 79)....oooooooooosososooscsasoosooesoeooso-ososso 27
Austerity Measures Mean Difficult 1w Years Ahead
(THE MIDDLE EAST, Jan 79) 31
TUNISIA
Period of Some Uncertainty Foreseen for 'mnisia
(THE RIDDLE EAST. Jan 79)............................. 33
Export Outlets, Social Stability Closely Linked
(THE MIDDLE EAST. Jan 79).. 36
- a - [III - NE 5 A - 121 FOLIO]

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CONTENTS (Continued)

UNITED ARAB mums
Shaylzh of shat-jab Co-enta on Arab Problaa
(Shaykh Sultan ibn Inna-ad al-Qui-i Interview;
MT“ Mr'AmI. 7-13 DOC 78)Iooaoooooooooooooooao
mm SAHARA

Polmrio Secretary General Notes Saharan Peace Proapecta
(m "mu “ST, Jan 79)..noouooooooooooocooooooooon

Poliaario Official Soy: Only Horocco Rants Saharan Hat
(MIC 16, 10 Dec 78)....000noooocoooooootoooooooooo

Organization of Poliaatio Gaps
(“in min-B MST. Jan 79)....0...oooooooocoooouoouooa

Briefs
Spanish Fishing loot Attacked

-5-

POI! OM01“. USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

NORTH AFRICAN AFFAIRS

POLISARIO CLAIMS MOROCCO CAUSED SPANISH FISHERMEN'S DEATH
Madrid CAMBIO 16 in Spanish 31 Dec 78 pp 37-38

éText7 It was already getting late on the afternoon of Tuesday
8 Nﬁyember when one of the lookouts on the deck of the Cruz del
Mar shouted the warning: "Here come the Moors!" Taking no
special precautions, the Canary Island fishenmen helped to

moor the foreigners' Zodiac launch and in a few minutes, a dozen
men dressed as frogmen and armed with rifles boarded the fishing
boat anchored off the anharan coast.

During the long dinner hour together, no one suspected that
tragedy was near. Suddenly changing their demeanor, the invaders
rounded up the 10 crewmen on deck and began firing at them. But
three fishermen survived, and this is where the ambiguities and
contradictions begin.

Rescued by the Chico Grands, the three survivors--Higuel Angel
Rodriguez, Manuel Hernandez and Eusebio Garcia Rodriguez--reached
the Canary Islands. "We couldn't recognize anyone," maintains
Eusebic. "Everyone looked alike to us," was the first thing he
said.

A week later, the Canary Island press claimed the attack was
doubtless the work of the Polisario Front. Furthermore, a Madrid
morning daily published photos of two Saharans who are said to
have been identified by the survivors. Confided Eusebio to two

Spanish reporters, "Out of hundreds of photographs, they kept
insisting on the one of Hohammed Salem."

According to sources from the Canary Islands, Mohammed Salem and
Mohammed Embarec had taken part in the massacre. But after the
hasty accusation, new data began to arise. Mohammad Salem, a
member of the Polisario Front's Foreign Relations Committee, lived
on the Canary Islands for several years until his expulsion in
February of 1978. On 18 November he left Madrid, where he had

1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

come a few days earlier to take part in the World Conference
on Solidarity with Chile, and, on lb November, in ceremonies
organized on the occasion of the third anniversary of the
Madrid Tripartite Accord.

The night of the attack, Mohammed Salem was dining in Algiers.
Maria Agullo Canto--who showed her National Identity Card,
Document No. 21,29h.390 to CAMBIO 16 as proof of her serious-
ness, categorically states that the alleged participant in the
massacre had dinner with her and her family in the Algerian
capital. For their part, two Spanish reporters, Joaquin Eortillo
of Spanish National Radio and Alberto Miguez, a special envoy
from the dailies INFORMACIONES and LA VANGUARDIA, claim that

a couple of days after the massacre, Mohammed Salem was partici-
pating in a press conference in Algiers.

Moroccan Silence

The other person accused by the morning paper--Mohammed Embarec
according to the testimony of Ahmed Bouhari, the Polisario Front's
representative in Madrid--has been living in Havana, Cuba, where
he is doing university studies.

While theories were being formulated from different press
media about the possible author of the massacre, Transport
Minister Sanchez Teran asserted a few hours after the attack
that the Spanish authorities already possessed sufficient data
to clarify the act. Three weeks later, however, the official
silence continued.

Of necessity, the hypotheses pointed to two probable suspects:
Morocco or the Polisario Front. CAMBIO 16 tried by all possible
means to obtain a response from the Moroccan embassy in Madrid.
The attempts were fruitless. Neither did the Moroccan authorities
reply to the Spanish government's notes.

From the moment news of the Cruz del Mar massacre was received,
the Polisario Front discounted its participation, accusing
Morocco of wanting to obstruct relations between the saharan
peoples' representatives and the Spanish government.

On Thursday In December, DIARIO 16 made the accusation without
doubt: "Morocco implicated it the Cruz del Mar massacre." The
report, continued by inhabitants of the area, points out the
participation of a Moroccan convoy that left the coastal area
of Cabeza de Plays the day before the crime and headed south.

Reconnaissance Flights
That information--CAMBIO 16 was told by sources close to the

2
FOR OFFICIAL "SE ONLY
I-'()l( OFFICIAL "SF. (INLY

Democratic center Union--is considered highly reliable. Ahmed
Bouhari told this magazine that they also had those data
from Saharans who live in areas occupied by Morocco. Morocco
still did not reply.

All reports received by CAMBIO 16 coincide regarding the exis-
tence of the above-mentioned convoy, composed of six Land Rovers
and two AML 60's. At the same time, a Zodiac launch--like the
one that participated in the boarding-~was setting sail and a
small Moroccan plane was making reconnaissance flights over the
area in which the Cruz del Mar was attacked.

"According to what the inhabitants of the region have told us,"
said Bouhari, "the members of the patrol did not return to their
point of departure after the attack on the Spanish fishing boat.
The Zodiac launch was transferred to Field number 1, Elk

The sources from UCD consulted by this magazine said that they
were surprised about the doubts that have arisen about the
massacre: "Besides analyzing the facts-~which, on the other hand,
show that it is not the way the Polisario Front usually aots-~
it is necessary to make a political evaluation and ask ourselves
who would benefit from this action."

The answer is offered by Bouhari, who emphasized that "The first
result of the action would be a possible confrontation of the
government, the political parties, and the Spanish public with
the perpetrator. The Saharan representative also stressed that
all of the Polisario Front's diplomatic activity toward Spain--
even in the most difficult moments-~1s directed toward improving
relations. In this sense, Bouhari recalled the Joint communique
signed by UCD and the F? [ﬁblisario Front7 last is October,
"when we showed, once more, our willingness to have a dialogue
by freeing the crew of Las Palomas."

The Saharan representative stated that enterest existed in
certain Spanish sectors in blaming them for the massacre. "Other-
wise, how do you explain that not only the interpretations, but
also the facts are being falsified?" The news reports published
by the Canary Island press claimed that the boarding happened

in the Cape Cabino area, near Cape Bojador. "The crew of the
Mencey (which knows the area)," said Bouhari, “assures us that
heavy waves in that area and the presence of Horoccan ships make
the presence of an F? command unthinkable. The attack, he
asserted, actually occurred some 20 miles south of El Aalun, in
a place that was well controlled by the Moroccans. Besides, the
Moroccan army can only withdraw to a few kilometers from El Aaiun."

3

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Previous actions committed by the FP--the capture of fishing
boats--ocourred in the area of Cape Leven, far from El Aaiun,

and many miles south of where the boarding of the Cruz del Mar
occurred.

The ECO DE CANARIAS also got the confidential stories of the crew
of the Chico Grands, which rescued the survivors from the Cruz
del Mar. They claimed that they had been prevented from making
any statement about the acts. Two of the survivors were invited
to the television program "Fantastico" a week later. Upon their
return to the Canary Islands, they stated that they had been
prevented from freely telling what had happened.

Against Peace

"We assert that it was Morocco," insisted Bouhari, "and there
are several facts that prove it. In the first place, Morocco
remains alone and is trying by every possible means to blockade
the dynamic of peace initiated by us."

These attempts would be translated into different actions with
regard to different fronts. With respect to Hauritania--with
which the Polisario Front has been holding talks since the month
of July-~after calling a cease fire, a Moroccan patrol last
week attempted to attack the train from Xuerat, to blame the
Saharans, but it was caught in the act by Mauritanian soldiers.

“Regarding Spain." reasons Bouhari, "every time there are indi-
cations of a change in the Spanish position, ﬂorocco responds
with threats."

A few days after the signing of the UCD-FP Joint communiques,
Morocco reiterated its claim to Ceuta and Melilla.

"The government and the Moroccan political parties," explained
the F? representative, "launched a serious attack against the
UCD to annul that communique, which failed. The attack on the
Cruz oel Mar occurred Just as representatives of the Democratic
Saharan Arab Republic were praising the Spanish government's
attitude before the UN General Assembly, and when 90 UN counrries
were voting to support the self determination of the Saharan
people.

8631
030: A410

4

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ALGERIA

POLITICAL SITUATION, POSSIBLE SUCCESSION T0 BOUHBDIBNB ANALYZED
Paris AL-HATAN AL-‘ARABI in Arabic lo-lO Jan 79 pp 16-21
[Article: "Who Is Coming After Bomediene?"]

[Text] Snaps:

Syrian President Hafiz al-Asad was the first Arab president to arrive in

Algiers to attend President Bounedisne's funeral. lie was accompanied on
the plane by Yasir 'Arafat.

The last head of state to arrive was Col Hu'auaar al-Qadhdhafi, who was
accompanied by Dr 'Ali al-Turayki.

The brother of the departed was in deep mourning at the grave of the de-
parted. lie was wearing simple clothing, like all Algerian country
people. he lives in (Ghalma) where his another still lives.

There is disagreement as to Boumediene's actual age. The civil status
records which were under French ad-inistration show that he was born on
23 August 1932. But many of nomediene's relatives and acquaintances say
that he was born in 1925. Consequently, he was 53 when he died. In any

case, the physicians who have been treating him are inclined to believe
that he was older than his official age.

There was a record number of faintings among the crowds that accompanied

the funeral. A large number of the citizens pinned pictures of the de-
parted president on their chests.

The Algerian Revolution Con-and Council was advised by a number of Arab
circles to adopt the National Liberation Front {m} as a reference and
a fundamental base for its actions.

A wave of grief that swept through Algeria and turned the funeral of de-

parted President Houari Bomediene into what observers have described as
"the wedding of tears," has receded.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Everybody has truly wept for the departed president, beginning with Rabnh
Bitnt, the chairman of the People's National Assembly, who has assumed the

interim presidency for a period of 40 days, and ending with Abdelasia
Bouteflika, who delivered the final obituary in the name of the Revolution

Omand Council, to the can in the street who expressed his buried grief
with acclmation and tears, and who tried to show what he could not express
through the gatherings of young nen and wenen who tried to break through
the security barricades and to join the funeral.

Thus, Bouuediene's procession was not so Inch s funeral as it was a wed-
ding of tears. The wedding of tears began when it was announced on Rednes-
day norning that Bounediene had died nt 0355 and continued until he was
buried in the High Center-y to the right of Prince 'Abd-al-Qedir al-Jasa'iri,
the prince of strugglers.

The Algerian authorities made a great effort to prevent what happened in
'Abd-al-Nesir's funeral fro- recurring. Large forces of the arny blocked
the entrances to the route of the funeral procession fro- the People's
Palace to the great nosque and then to the high Cemetery. Meanwhile,
instructions were issued to the goverment and party officials in the vil-
lages end the cities to hold popular neetings with the sin of preventing
a huan march on Algiers. However, this did not do nuch good, and crowds
watched free everywhere. The base barriers set up by the police and the
gendsrnerie had greet difficulty in repelling the waves of human masses

and in preventing the crowds fru singling with the official funeral pro-
cession.

The phenomenon that has drawn attention is the fact that the youth elenent
was predominant in those crowds. This is not surprising, because official
statistics indicate that people below 20 years of age conprise 65 percent
of Algeria's population, and they reflect the Algerian aspiration to cope
with the facts and preblens of daily life.

A Hen for All Keys
The legacy left by the departed Algerian president is heavy, because the
logic of things presupposes divergence of views in interpreting his way of

running any of the vital affairs. lie held in his hands the keys to most

foreign and dowestic political affairs, and he alone handled nany vital
issues:

1. Foreign relations with the two cups.
2. The Algerian role in the Arab world.

3. The Algerian role in Africa.

a. The oil policy.

5. Algeria's policy in the Third World.

6
Iron orncw. use our
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

6. The economic and social policy.

7. The military policy.

8. The relations with Morocco and Mauritania through the special relation-
ship with the Polisario.

with his unique, dynamic character, Boumadiene was able to meet the require-
ments of these policies, which are overpowering tasks. The final decision
was in his hand. The others, especially Abdclaziz Bouteflika, tried to
understand him and to act accordingly. Boumediene was always the ruler

and the umpire. This is why a fearfully serious vacuum was left when he
became disabled by sickness.

There is no doubt that the Arab policies of the departed president have
unplantcd Algeria in the heart of the Arab homeland as an Arab country

participating in the confrontation against Israel and against the in-
perialist-Zionist plans.

It is no surprise that the Israeli comments have reflected some kind of

rude gloating. Israel cannot forget Boumediene's role in the 1967 and
1973 were and in the developments that followed.

There is also no doubt that his African policies have implanted Algeria
in the heart of Africa as an African state supporting those struggling
for liquidation of the colonialist and racist rule.

It is also indubitable that his economic policies have succeeded in build-
ing the base for an Algerian industrial edifice despite the conditions of
extreme austerity that they have imposed on the Algerian people.

But these policies, the keys to which Boumediene held solely in his hands,

are imposing on his successors, or successor, a heavy legacy and trouble-
some priorities.

In the list of priorities facing the new Algerian era, the problem of the
relations with Morocco in light of the ramifications of the Algerian policy
toward the Hestcrn Sahara issue features prominently.

This problem forms the base for relations in the Greater Arab Maghreb.
Fur example, Algerian relations with Tunisia are still cool because at
the outset Tunisia adopted the Moroccan and Mauritanian viewpoint. These
relations are suffering from a constant, but latent, crisis--namaly the
crisis of mapping out the southern borders between Tunisia and Algeria.
This crisis took the form of quarrels between Algeria and Tunisia when
Algeria received the Tunisian opposition leaders and when Tunisia coun-

turcd by giving the right of political asylum to Col Taher zbiri. Algeria

then retaliated by receiving Ahmed Ben Salch on his escape from his Tuni-
sian prison.

7
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OI'I’ICIAL USE ONLY

Proble- of Relations With Morocco

The fact is that the problea of relations with Morocco, resulting fro-

the Algerian policy toward the western Sahara problem. for-a an inportant
base that plays a decisive role in channeling the Algerian developents
after bot-edieno and, consequently, in deter-ining the quality of Moroccan-
Algerian relations in the new era.

Because of its donestic ranifications, this is the nain proble- facing
the successors.

Obviously . after Boilediene's death the latent disagreaent over this
prohlen song the Revolution Co-and Council where was brought out into
the openo-a disagraaaent which first led to dividing the Council into four
axes [factions] and then into tvo area:

An axis that calls for continuing the previously declared policy, because
it will lead to giving Algeria an outlet on the Atlantic Ocean.

An axis that says that this policy causes econonic attrition of the Alger-
ian econoay, enhroils Algeria in a conflict with lioroccoua conflict in-
coapatible in goals and nature with the Greater Arab Maghreb plan--end
involves Algeria in endless bloody disputes with lbrocco.

'l‘hia axis finds support, according to Bouteflilta, in the develop-ent in
bouediene’s thinking in his later dayso-develop-ent that nade somediene
inclined tovard an understanding with the tioroccan nonarch and toward
accepting Saudi, French and African aediation on this issue.

By the way, the Algerian aonarch has disclosed to Edouard Sabilicr, a
French colleague, that a secret seating was scheduled to be held between
his and President louediene on the 26th of the current nonth of January
in Brussels to find a scttlenent for the western Sahara problem.

Thus, perhaps it is no exaggeration to any that egreuent on a successor
to President Bouedienc vill cone through the agree-ant on the policy to
be followed tmrd liorocco and tovard the western Sahara problem by virtue
of its being the more urgent proble- and the problem with greater impact
on Algerian developments.

Hithin 15 days of the death of the late President Bouediene, Rabah Bitat,
the constitutional interim president, is required to hold, in cooperation
with the Revolution Oral-and Council, a general we congress so that he,
along with the People's National Assenbly. nay present the man of the sole
candidate for succession for a public referendua. 'lhs Algerian presiden-
tinl elections will be a race in uhich a single horse will run in accord-
ance ulth a planned program.

Even though any observers view what has happened in Algeria since the
nnnouncaent of lm-cdiene's sickness as sonething planned to serve the

8
FOR OPHCIAI. USE ONLY
FUR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

interest of the candidate that will be produced by the silent struggle within
the Revolution Command Council, many other observers believe that everything
is proceeding at present, and until further notice, in favor of Colonel
Yahiaoui. ﬂoweVer, these observers do not exclude a surprise. Everything

is possible at any moment, and there is nothing to prevent the rise of a

new de [acto situation deapite all the public solidarity among the Revolu-
tiou Command Council members, which is intended as a declaration of the
continued pursuance of the existing conditions.

EVen though the Algerian medical authorities have denied decisively that
the announcement of President nonmedlene's death (0355 on the morning of
Wednesday, December [978) was planned, and even though all the indications
support their denial, especially since Anisah, the departed president's
wife, did not leaVe the hospital until Hednesday night, i.e., until a few
hours before the death, evurything indicates that Yahiaoui's march to the

presidency is proceeding in accordance with a prograamed plan that has
coordinated the work between the army agencies and the FL“ bases.

The hand of the army agencies has appeared strongly since the present situa-
tion set in and since the Revolution Command Council realised that there

was no recovery for the late president, that the constitutional vacuum

has become a reality and that it had to act as the highest authority in

the country until a constitutional declaration is made announcing the presi-
dency vacant either as a result of death or of medical disability.

With the beginning of the late president's come, the observers expected a
race [or the presidency between the Revolution Command Council members.
The reverberations of their predictions which were circulated in the out-
side world has begun to be heard at the various levels in Algeria.

Yahiaoui and Dual Strength

But there has been since the beginning some sort of agreement that the
stronger man is Colonel Yahiaoui, due to his dual influence in the army
and in the FLN Party. Boumediene had entrusted him with reorganizing the
party, in addition to his military duties.

There has also been agreement that the rival to the "front runner" is none
other than Abdelaziz Bouteflika, the minister of foreign affairs and the
man most strongly connected with the departed president.

In view of the fact that Colonel Yahiaoui does not have exclusive control
over the army, and as a result of the traditional influence of Col Chadli
Bendjedid, Yahiaoui's colleague in the Revolution Command Council, in the
army, it was natural for Yahiaoui to demand that the Revolution Command

Council's work be placed under the supervision and control of the party
agencies.

Bouteflika spearheaded those opposed to this demand on the protest that
the party's final agencies and structures have not been completed yet, and

9
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OPVICIAI. ”8!! ONLY

will not be conpleted before convocation of the general congress at the
beginning of 1979, and that, consequently, the Revolution Co-and Council
should continue to be the legitinate representative until then.

It see-s that louteflika's opinion triupbed at the tine. and the Revolu-
tion Co-and Council issued the 3 Dec-her state-eat announcing continua.
tion of louediene's course and declaring that the socialist systu has
gone beyond the point of no return.

but this did not constitute a defeat for Colonel Ychiaoui. 'lhose the know
him have found the statuent's language to be clear, and have also found
that Yahiaoui was the one who wrote the statuent in this clear Arabic
(this is no surprise, because Yshiaoui received his higher education in
Arabic literature at (cl-zaytmah) lieseue University in 'mnisia). Yahiaoui
sounded even clearer in the statuent in mich the Council announced the
death of the departed president, stressing that he died reassured that the
revolution would continue its larch under the leadership of the Pill.

This cm as another indication that Yahiaoui has won the race for the
presidency initially and that the issue has becone nerely a routine to be
settled by Rabah Iitst, the interim constitutional president, the People's
National Assenbly, and the as general congress, within #5 days to appoint
the sole candidate, who will be elected in a general popular election.

This public indication supports seni-secret indications represented in the
activities of the nilitary intelligence agencies, in coordination with the
security agencies, under the leadership of Col Alued Draia, the current
ninister of transport,llevolution Co-and Council nuber and ally of Yehiaoui,
who has also guaranteed the support of his colleague Col Abdellah Belhouchet,
the co-andar of the nilitary Hilaya 1 (nilitary co-snder of the capital).

The party agencies collaborated with the nilitary intelligence agencies
under the canned of Capt Slinana Hoff-an in inposing conprchensive sur-
veillance on everything. This surveillance covered, in particular, accord-
ing to ruors, Abdclazi: louteflika and his wing. especially in the few
days preceding the president's death.

lnforned sources say that Capt slinana Bert-an, co-ander of nilitsry in-

telligence, has played a najor role in backing and supporting Colonel
Yshiaoui, who has cone to depend core and nore on his support.

louteflika's Axis

The other axis, which is led by Abdelazi: bouteflika, is presumed to in-
clude: ' '

Col Chadli Bendjcdid, the co-ander of the nilitary border area of Oran.

Col llohued Ben Al-ed (known by the one of Abdelghsni), the minister of
interior.

10

FOR OFFICIAL "$8 ONLY
I’llli OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Col Ahmed Ben Cherlf. the minister of environmental protection, who was
previously cmmuander or the gendarmerie. It has been said that he recently
faced the Revolution Cmmmnnd Cunncil with the dc facto situation, and
practically resumed command of the gendarmerie on agreement with Colonel
cheloufi, the :endnrmerie coanander who succeeded Ben Cherif in 1977.

Col Tayebi Larabi has remained outside both these axes. he is always a

candidate to be the sacrificial lamb for the failure of the agricultural
revolution and of agrarlan reform.

The informed sources add that Colonel Yahiaoui has perhaps found in the
plane incident something to support his planned march toward the presidency.
The sources find a strong link between the transient tension that emerged

3 weeks ago in the relations between Algeria and Morocco and the plane inci-
dent. This is the incident in which the Algerian sources accused the
Moroccan authorities of sending a Hercules aircraft loaded with weapons to
some rebellious elements in the tribal area led by Sadek Ben Yahia.

The Algerian authorities announced at the time that they caught those taking
part in the incident redhanded and while they were using torch lights to

guide the plane. They then showed the defendants on television to admit
their connection with Morocco.

However, there are unclear circumstances surrounding the issue, especially
in regard to the role of Sadek Ben Yahia. The official statements haVe
portrayed a dark picture of Ben Sadek and of his past by stressing that
one of the Algerian FLN courts had sentenced him to death during the revo-
lution for his participation in the deception campaign carried out by the
French army intelligence in Wiley: III to instigate the veteran revolu-
tionaries against the new volunteers in the revolution on the pretext that
they were "agents.” This led to bloody liquidations which claimed the
lives of tens of new strugglers before the truth was discovered.

These circumstances have materialized in questions that have highlighted
some perplexing facts, including the fact that despite his loaded past.
Ben Yahia occupied several important administrative positions. He was a
supporter of the late Ahmed Hedeghri, the former minister of interior who
was said to have committed suicide 3 years ago after his disagreement with
President Boumcdiene. Ben Yahia was also appointed governor of the city
of Setif and later of the city of El-Asnam after independence.

Horeover, everybody knows that Ben Yahia benefitted from official loans

and financial aid when he entered the field of ccammrce and free business
after Hcdeghri's death.

Results of Plano Incident

Even though these contradictions make the plane incident a perplexing
puzzle that requires further clarification, and even though circles of the

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL "8!! ONLY

socret opposition suspect Col Slimane lloff-nn of being behind the incident.
what is obvious is that the consequences resulting fro. the incident haVc
served Colonel Yahiaoui's political interests by creating tension in the
relations with Horocco and by portraying the incident as an external threat
to denestic security. These consequences have led to the following, ini-
tially:

l. Enabling Yahiaoui to consolidate his control over the party and over
the popular unions by uobiliaing the masses against external dangers.

2. Containing any hostile Dov-ant that nay be carried out by some lender-
ships of the Kabyle by exploiting the circustances of the political vacuum:
erected by the absence of President not-ediene fro. the political life.

This vacuum has given all the opposition forces the opportunity to partici-
pate in determining the political and social identity of the Algerian Govern-
nent after President Bocm-diene's death.

In any case, observers renenber previous incidents of tension in relations
with Morocco that enabled Ben Bella's goveruent in its last days to per-

suade the Kabylia to abandon its rebellion under the leadership of nocine

Ait Aimed (one of the nine historic leaders of the Algerian revolution) in
l963.

The truth is that this aspect of the issue brings up not only the importance
of the developents in Algerian-Moroccan relations as a decisive factor in
charting the course of events, but also projects on the sidelines of the
couplications of the plane incident the problaa of the special d-ands of
the Kabyliaua problee that will be one of the hardest facing the new regime
and testing its ability to preserve the futures and foundations of the
duestic unity.

Demands of Kabylia

It is veil known that the Kabylia includes a najority of the barber tribes,
which have preserved lost of their regional characteristics and their
special traditions and values throughout history, and that they started to
demand that their special characteristics be taken into consideration and
that they be given a fair share of the development and reconstruction pro-
grams. ﬂocine Ait Aimed moved away from lien Bella and led a rebellion
that failed as a cove-cut, but his d-ands have continued.

hen Bella then reached a settle-ent with the Kmbyles on 17 June 1965, i.e..

2 days before Bouediene's coup against him. Consequently, this settlaacntu
based on increasing tribal representation in the regime and its agencies and
on releasing the detainees and increasing the developer“ allocations in the
area-was not destined to survive.

Informed sources say that the tray to solve the labyles prole and the issue
of their participation in government use one of the nost important points of

12

roe OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

disamt't'tmtutll‘ llt'tWt'en “mum-(Ilene and Ben Bella. After the 19 June 1965
coup, Ait Ahmed left the country, choosing to liVe in France. whereas
Mohamed Ould el-hadj continued to be a member of the Revolution Command
Council until December I967, when he was ousted. Thus, there is no repre-
sentaLIVe for the Kahyles in the Revolution Canaand Council. Their main
representative in the government has continued to be Belaid Abdeaselam,
the former minister of energy. whose influence was curtailed by the 1917
cabinet reshuffle when he was appointed minister of light industry--a
ministry that was previously one of the directorates of the Ministry of
Energy.

Thus, the problem remained until attention was drawn to it by the compli-
cations of the plane incldent~-compllcationa which stressed the decisive
importance of the element of the Algerian-Moroccan relations in influencing
the course of events. This element has played its role in the emergence

of the two main axes in the Revolution Command Council:

1. Yahiaoui's axis, which calls for continuing President Boomediene's
policy of adopting the Polisario and. consequently, Eor exploiting the
tennlon in the relations with Morocco for local government goals.

2. The Bouteflika-Chadli axis, which advocates the need for achieving
dctente with Morocco and for ending the causes of tension, along with mili-
tary and domestic relaxation and international relaxation through improving
relations with France. Bouteflika had convinced President Boomedioae in
his last days of the latter part of this inclination (inproving relations
with France).

Coup in Cendarmerle Command

Informed sources say that the Bouteflika-Chadli axis. which is supported
by Col Ahmed Ben Cherif, the minister of environmental protection, does
not think that it has lost the first round. The influence of Col Slinane
Hoffnmn has been countered through a lightning-fast bloodless coup aimed
at gaining control of the gendarmerie forces in the interest of the
Bouteflika-Chadli axis.

The sources haVe disclosed that Col Bea Cherif, the minister of environ-
mental prutection, proceeded to the gender-aria forces headquarters on one

of the hills of the capital, Algiers, on the evening of Saturday, the 23rd
of last month, net with the gendsrmerie forces commanders and agreed with

them to resume his former position as gendarmerie commander. ﬂe carried
out this "bloodless coup" in a matter of minutes, relying on the historical
weight that he carries in this agency. he stayed at the headquarters to
carry out his new duties, and then informed the Revolution Cannand Council
of what had happened and told it that he had decided to abandon his post

in the Ministry of Environmental Protection.

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is known that Al-ed non cherif was renewed from the gendarnerie coauand
in April 1977 in the wake of the cabinet reshuffle, even though he is the
actual founder of this agency, which conprises 20.000 ole-eats equipped
with the latest weapons and is run by an independent contend. Inferned
sources have also revealed that Col Ben Cherif made it a condition when
Bowediene asked him to leave the gender-aria co-and and take over one
of the Iinistries. that his position be filled by Captain Cheloufi.
Betsecdieno accepted Ben Cherif'a condition, and Cheloufi was appointed
gendarnerie co-ander while Ben Cherif was appointed niaistor of environ-
Dental protection. With his "bloodless coup" Ben Cherif has returned to
the genderserie co-and on agree-ant with Major [sic] cheloufi.

Chedli Bondjedid'a Influence

Thus. the military weight of the louteflika axis. which relies funda-entally
on the influence of Chad“. Bendjedid, has increased. It is said that Chadli
was opposed to involvim the Algerian Anny in supporting the Polisario
operations in the Western Sahara, and that he constantly tried to apply the
brakes to such support in his nilitery area. which extends along an important
sector of the Algerian-Moroccan borders.

It is said that this opposition created a constant source of apprehension
for President Mediene, who tried with every means to renove chadli from
the co—and of the Oran border area where Chadli has established an enornous
base for his personal influence.

It has been said in this regard that chsdli strengthened his position after
the foams Anghala operation during which the Horoccan Aruy was able to
detain [sic] an entire Algerian battalion. The outcom of the battle was
a strong arguent in support of Chadli's viewpoint on the need to keep the
any clear of participation in the Polisario operations.

Hell-infoned sources have said that the departed President Bouari Domediene
tried another tine to transfer chadli fro- his position as co-ander of the
Oran area during the 1977 cabinet reshuffle. But Chadli refused any par-
ticipation in the new govcruent in return for abandoning his position as
co-nnder of the Oran co-and position. It was said at the tine that

Chadli told President Boulediene: "If you want to issue a decision to
change ny position on the tacit pretext that new blood nust be brought in,
then I can say: If I go, then let us go together."

Bouediene Strengthens lioffnan’s Position

That disagree-ant in opinion was the start of an inclination in President

Bow-ediene to strengthen the position of Capt Slinane Hoffman, co—ander
of military intelligence, who enjoys najor special powers and resources
through which he has been able to overcome Chsdli's opposition.

lloffnan was close to lm-cdiene free the time he was minister of defense
during Ben Bella's rule. In his capacity as an officer of the armored

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

corps. Hoffman played a pruninvnl rule in President Boumediene's coup
against Prunidont Brillkdla in 1965. Hoffman was appointed adviser to
I'l'u-Mldmll nutmedlene immediately after the coup. he was then given the
task of ontnbliahing the International Studies Bureau, which constitutes
the foreign wing of military intelligence. He was also entrusted with
the responnlbllity of concluding numerous weapons deals. Im also became
the main liaison officer with the Pollsario and the official entrusted
with coordinating aid. training and armament [for the Polisario].

Thus, Hoffman is considered one of those who are enthusiastic for
"Boumedlenism" whose continuation is represented by Yahiaoui.

Two Points of Disagreement

The differences between the two axus are confined. according to the informed
sources. to two basic points:

Polisnrio Issue

Even though it is premature to assess the ramifications resulting for the
Polisario leadership from the disagreement between the two axes over the
issue of the relationship with the Polisario, and through it, the issue

of the difference ovor the essence of the relationship with Morocco and
the essence of dealing with the Sahara problem, it is obvious, according
to some obserVers, that the recent operations carried out by the Polisario
during the sickness that disabled the departed president were not remote
from the disagreement between the two axes. The operations were meant to
exploit this disagreement in the interest of the Polisario, and to strengthen
Ynhiaoui‘s axis for fear that Boutefliko's axis might triumph--a triumph
which would inevitably lead to reconsidering the nature of the presence of
the Polisnrio forces in the Algerian border areas, especially in (Tendouf)
base, and, what is more important. to reconsidering the Algerian policy
toward the western Sahara issue.

As a result, observers believe that the inclinations that will materialize
from the Algerian developments concerning the selection of a successor to
Boomediene will determine to a large degree the future of Algerian-Moroccan
relations and, consequently, the future of stability and security all along
the Moroccan-Algerian borders.

This is why the Moroccan circles are following the Algerian developments
with interest, characterized by extreme caution, for fear that the differ-
ences between the Revolution Command Council may be reflected in measures
that will increase tension on the borders and may open the door to the
possibility of a war that Morocco is trying hard to avoid.

Even though the Algerian authorities' refusal to receive the Moroccan con-
dolences delegation has aroused many fears, Rabat prefers to resort to
self-restraint and to overlooking the incident as a transient and subsidiary

15

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

incident. because what is important is to give the Algorians the chance
to arrange the affairs of their house calmly and through being familiar
with the facts.

Meanwhile, the question concerning the degree of the Algerian opposition's
inpact on the present and future develop-onto continues to be asked. But
it is obvious that contacts are taking place, especially between enissaries
of the Revolution (lo-and Council and opposition leaders living in Europe
and Morocco.

The problem of the Algerian opposition lies in the fact that it is not in
agree-eat on a unified and detailed progr- even though it is in agree-eat
on general goals, especially the goal of a transfonation toward the deno-
cratic systen based on public liberties, the Iultiplicity of parties and on
staying within a reasonable and open socialist.

Information available to AL-HATAN AL-‘ARAII indicates that the leaders of
the external opposition held a 2-day secret conference in a Paris suburb

to draw up a joint action charter and to present to Rabah Bitst, the interim
preaident, a list of their demands, which will be later announced in the
fetus of an appeal to the Algerian people.

[Box on Page 21] Yahiaoui in a Few Lines

Col Mohamed Salah Yahiaoui:

Born in 1933 near the Aures, in Setif Suhdistrict.
Joined the Algerian revolution in 1956.

Entrusted in I962 with several political and nilitary tasks in the second
area of Hilaya I.

In 1965, appointed governor of the third nilitary area.

Appointed in charge of the Joint Military Acade-y in cherchel area in 1969.
where he carried out his duties in training several batches of officers.
he continued to hold this position for 8 years.

On 30 October 1977. he was appointed executive official in charge of the
party agencies. Since then, he has concentrated on organizing the general
congresses of the Algerian m.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 "Al-HAW AL-ARABI”

86910
080 : 10602

16

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

IRAN

SHNI'S WALL MID T0 CORRUPTION 0P OFFICIALS
Hamburg STERN in German 1'! Dec 78 pp 288-293
[Article by Lutz Bindernagel: "Baksheesh Even for the Mailman")

[Text] Nothing has caused more damage to the Shah of Iran than the corrupti-

billty of hir officials~~and the millions taken in by his own clique in this
connection.

An icy wind coming in from the snow-covered mountains whips through the
narrow alleys between the sun-dried brick huts of Damzeh Ghar in the poor
southern section of Tehran. It whirls up dense clouds of yellowish-gray
dust on a broad area or wasteland.

In an area where some little boys now play soccer, formerly there stood the
same kind of clay huts as those in evidence all around it. The city admini-
stration had them torn down because a building contractor with good connec-
tions with the authorities wanted to build blocks of residential housing
units on this tract of land. But to this day, years later, no ground has
been broken there, nor have the expelled former residents received a single
rial of the compensation promised them.

The people who are living in the small houses in this area are continuoust
and unanimously demanding that "an end must now be put to this corruption. '
One lndivldual complaint: that "even the police are collecting bribes and
threutening to put us in the clink ii‘ we don't come across. But now we have
had enough of this."

Corrpution is one of the min causes of the popular uprising which has for
months now been shaking up Iran. Dr Bakhtiar, one of the leaders of the
opposition "National Front," is of the opinion that "probably none of the

dictatorship practices and tortures have in the eyes of the people done as
much damage as this corruption."

To be sure, the custom 01‘ giving baksheesh has existed in Persia long before
Mohamed Reza Pahlavi ascended the throne there. But when the oil-price
boom channeled a stream of billions of dollars into the Iranian tills,

17
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OFFICIAL USE OIL?

corruption became a way ol‘ life in all areas of public life. ﬁveryhody
wanted to get his slice of the big pie. There is not a mailman in Tehran
who does not expect to get his obolus of about 50 pfennigs per delivery.

If he does not get it, the next letter frequently ends up on sous garbage
heap. The garbage, in turn, is as a rule taken away by the Tehran garbage
collectors only from the holes of those hoaeowners from whom they get a tip
of approximately 3 nrks.

Bribing is a totally indispensable practice for those who are in a hurry.

if one does not want to wait 38 days for an exit visa, one can get it within
2 hours by giving the pertinent passport official a lOO-nrk bill. And those
who think that 3 to 1; years is too long to wait for a telephone line can get
a line put in inediately by having it done "under the counter" for an extra
6,000 marks. .‘i Ger-en shipping coapany recently even had to pay a total of
50,000 marks to customs officials, drivers, and local agents to get a certain
freight ship-eat to Tehran on the agreed-upon date.

The homily of the Shah did some collecting of its own. Particularly the
shsh'n brother, Chole- Reza, and his nephew Shahram, the son of the shah's
sister Ashraf, received millions for procurement of licenses, or building

sites, for eliminating administrative hurdles, or simply as partners. Thus,
for instance, aore than 100 firms, among them the national Paykan automobile

plants and the Kurosh deparinent chain, are paying emissions or dividends
to the imperial clan. Gm, the 0.8. aircraft corporation which is
reported to have paid a zlo-ainion-aouor bribe in connection with its sale
of jet fighters to Iran, had turned to Princess Ashraf and her son Shahran
for help.

Hardly any significant business deal was concluded in the profits of which
the shah's clique had not participated. Sioux Zand, the former protocol
official at the ilperial court who had {led fra Tehran, reported in London
to STERN about the Black Sea island of Kish, which has been developed into
a luxurious vacation paradise, as follows: ”The project is reported to have
cost I400 million dollars, but the actual price amounted to only one-tenth of
this “I. All the rest was bribe money. Assadollah ‘Alam, who at the time
was a minister of the court, had secured the contract for his friend ihhnud
Mouser. The latter sent a Juniar-Pantera, a luxury sports car, from london
to 'l'-hran on an airplane of the iaperial air forceua small token of appre-
ciation for the crown prince. Firms for financing the prodect were then
founded in Paris, Iondon, and an Francisco, where the shah's friends received
lucrative salaries for doing nothing. [Wen today, 52 percent of the Kish
shares still belong to the daughters of the former court minister."

iiut it was not only blood relatives of the shah who profited. General
livelitollah Nassiri, one of hit: most powerful collaborators over a period of
many years who was dismissed last spring, is accused of having bad business-
men tortured when they refused to give him his tribute. He is reported to
have forced the Minister of Agriculture to transfer to him state-owned land

18

FOR OFFICIAL 083 my
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which Nassiri then sold for lJI million marks. For his own needs, Nassiri
simply confiscated a 10,000 square meter plot of land on the Caspian Sea.

Similarly, other high officials tried to profit from their official positions.
One Austrian firm complained that a former Iranian ambassador had demanded
from it about 1 million marks if it desired to win out in a bid for an

Iranian contract. A delegate in parliament accused former Information Mini-
stcr Manunchehr Azmun of having squandered away to friends and relatives land
belonging to an official component whose chief Azmun used to he at a price of
5 pl‘cnnigs per square meter. and of having transferred 1.5 million marks to
his private account in Switzerland. The former chief of the state-controlled
meat import agency, Mahmud 'Olumi, feathered his nest in the United States of
America: Having arrived destitute in Tehran 20 years ago, and having become
a millionaire via his Job as state secretary, he recently took off for his
own villa in California. According to reports from the Tehran central bank,

1'I'I pnrnons clone to the regime have transferred 2.13 million dollars out of
the muntry.

Within a few years, unscrupulous wheeler-dealers, thanks to such corruptivc
practices, had succeeded not only in amassing fortunes but also in manipu-
lating the supply and price situation, which was even worse for the popula-
tlon. For instance, one merchant alone acquired control of the entire
banana imports to iran. And since he had bribed the proper people in the
price control cosmissions as well as in the chamber of commerce, the ”banana
sultan" was in a position to fix his prices in any way he wished.

Using similar methods, a cartel of the most important textile manufacturers
was able to weave a certain kind of material is a width only half of what it
was before, but to sell it at its old, mu price, to buy up a competing
firm which charged lower prices, and to bring about an embargo on lining
material imports. As soon as the imports had been stopped, they increased
the price for their local lining materials by 65 percent. Their additional
profits are estimated at 700 million marks. And when the Ministry of Trade
pemitted imports of 30 million meters of textiles, one of the most prominent
domestic manufacturers also seized this business for himself.

This was the same nun who was feared as the "glas boss" throughout the coun-
try: parliament delegate Yassini. He had started out as a simple apprentice
glass worker and had opened up a small business which gave him an entry to

the powerful and the influential. In 1975, when the construction boom in

Iran approached its peak, Yassini had arrived at the point where the entire
glass production of the country passed through his hands, and he was in a
position to dictate the price of glass with the approbation of the authorities.

::tccp careers such as these are not isolated cases in Tehran's climate of
corruption. Through connections, the illiterate and former sheep raiser
IloJahr Yasdani was aided in getting a monopoly for asking deliveries to the
'l'erhran slaughterhouse, then in getting possession of national land worth
approximately 50 million marks and, finally, in getting control of the

19.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Badcrat bank. It is said that, thanks to his friendship with for-er Savak
chief Nassiri, this banker has managed to get for himself credits amounting
to 700 million dollars.

The incessant rise of MN: newly rich mbittercd the bassaris, the traditional
merchants of the Persian bazaars. To be sure, they too had profited from
their country's upswing, and some 5,000 of the approxintely 60,000 Tehran
basaaris are affluent people, and some of th- are mltimillionaires. How-
ever, whereas only one generation ago they had controled trade in Iran to a
far-reaching extent, they have since then been losing their influence stead-
ily. The new capitalists who were matted together with the new regime and
the state itself are taking over ever more expanding business spheres such

as banks, industries and even grain imports--the former domain of the bazaars.

The hasaaris, on the other hand, have in recent years frequently viewed them-
selves as the min target of government campaigns against inflation. House-
wives, studentn, and employees of ministries were called up to expose price
mnipulations and to recs-send the punishment to be meted out for them.

Vere than 250,000 basaaris in all of Iran were punished within barely one
year, respected merchants were put in Jail, and 23,000 store owners were
banished to remote areas. 01‘ course, many of these sentences were reduced,

But it was already too late. The basaaris looked for their salvation to
those forces who are by tradition tied closely to them: the religious
leaders of their country. One qualified connoisseur of this situation, the
Jounulist Amir Taheri, makes the following Judpent: "From a political
point of view, it is the bazaar which influences the Shiite priests, and not
the other way around." At the least, the basaaris can offer to the Mllahs

the best functioning organization for mobilizing the masses.

In Tehran alone, the merchants can put to work approximately 5,000 so-ealled
"procession leaders" and contact people who homily organize meetings and
festivities. Also, the thousands of leaders of pilgrim contingents going to
the sacred places of Islam are workim closely with the bazaars. Traders in
Tehran who stem from the provinces maintain-contact with the bazaars of their
home localities. At least twice in recent months the basaaris, who finance
the Shiite clergy at a rate of up to 80 percent, have shown that they can get
out several hundreds of thousands of demonstrators in Tehran. *

Mnharrum, the now beginning month of learning on the occasion of which Shiite
leader Mini has called for new demonstrations, could bring the decision.
The "King of Kings" therefore follows the advice of the person who currently
is his closest adviser: his wife, Farah Diba. The empress reco-ends flex-
ihility and readiness to negotiate. She herself had taken up contact with
ex-Premier 'Ali Amini, who had for years been at odds with the shah, and had

20

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

vlu him nought contact vi Lh the politicians of the opposition. The shahbnnu
recently made a demostrative pilgrimage to the city of Najnri in Iraq, which
Is sacred to the Shiites and which is the place where, until a few months

ago, Ayatollah 1010mm, the bitter enemy of her husband, had been living in

exile.

And Furuh's cousin and former television chief Rezu Ohotbi is said to have
drafted for the shuh a. speech for vhich, until recently, any other Persian
would have been seized by the savak. "I can only support the revolution. of
the Iranian people," the occupant of the peacock throne, against whom this
revolution is eimd, has now been heard to say.

He had 120 corrupt former ministers, senators, and industrial bosses arrested

and bus new mode the following pledge to his subjects: "I as: at your side in
your revolution against colonialism, suppression, and corruption."

COPYRIGHT: 1978 bTBRN

821::
cm: “:03

21
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

MOROCCO

KING'S MTI‘INS 0N SAHARA" ISSUE OENOHNCED
Paris MRIQUE-ASIB in French 25 Dec 78-? Jan 79 pp 110-16
[Article by llaasen Zenati: "liassan‘s Foul Deeds")

[Text] The following analysis by Ilassen Zenati. our
diplomatic correspondent in Algiers. is revealing in
sany respects. The man whose hands are stained with

the blood of thousands of Moroccan militants-warty”

to a policy of tyranny. torture. and surdernis trying
once again to stab in the back a nation in the throes

of one of the most distressing moments in its history.
to destabilize a people's regime symbolic of human dignity
and the uncaasing struggle of people to obtain freedom.
preservo their independence. and sai‘egusrd their revolu-
tionary gains. but Ilssssn ii. the assassin of liehdi

Ben Barks and his brothers in arms. will not succeed in
his foul schemes. Let him not delude himself. neither
the clandestine airdrop of weapons into lsbyiis. nor the
training of mercenary co-ssndos in his cusps. nor the
despicable usrmongering caspaign of deception waged
against Algeria-~a country that has given his decedent
monarchy so many examples of Arab and African heroism and
patriotism-will ever succeed in shaking the foundation
of a revolution that expresses the profound aspirations of
20 million Algerian men and women determined to continue
along the road they chose for themselves back on 1 Novem-
ber 1956. the road to socialise.

last-minute postponement of visits scheduled long in advance by King Reason 11
to this or that uorld capital is nou. of course. part and parcel of the well--
knouuuaud displeasing--tradition of Sharifisn protocol.

The king veil remembers the attack on the Boeing airliner in which he nearly
lost his life a little more than S yesrs ago. This memory undoubtedly ex-

plains his obsession vith asking sudden changes in his schedule. an ideo-
syncracy he inflicts upon his entourage and hosts. we know. for example.

22

FOR OFFICIAL USE OlILY
“0R 0F?ICIAL USE ONLY

that he still continues. even today. to have his secret service prepare
several different itineraries for his trips inside his own country. he
alone makes the last-minute choice of the actual route he and his retinue
will take. In the past 2 years. he cancelled a trip to Hashington five or
six times before finally going there Just recently. only to be given a
polite "brush-oft“ by Jimmy Carter who was m“"l|0t annoyed with llassan's
pretentious attempt to lecture him on geopolitics in the interests of Heroe-
co's cause. And now we learn Hasssn has postponed. again at the last moment.
a 9 December "private" visit-~previously twice deferred--to Paris where he
was scheduled to have lunch with Giscard d'Bstaing, as well as talks Just

as "private" as the visit itself.

Because he cannot carry too far the sovereign contempt he harbors for all
those commoners his position obliges him to meet in the best interest of his
affairs. the king does.of course. have to give some reason for such post-
ponements. In fact. he has no shortage of reasons--some good and some poor--
in his knapsack. Sometimes these are "urgent" problems that have arisen in
his country. problems demanding his personal attention. This excuse has

the advantage of being both plausible and occasionally disquieting. Some-
times they are reasons of health. The latter is the reason he officially
advanced for delaying his Paris visit.

Observers were still speculating about the real grounds for this postpone-
ment when on the afternoon of 16 December they learned that during the night
of 10 December a hercules 6-130 transport of the Royal Armed Forces had air-
dropped. in the Bejaia area not far from Cape Sigli. a load of l9l Hat-69
submuchine guns. 100 Pal rifles. three PH 2b-29's [1924 model of the “-29
automatic rifle]. with ammunition and explosives. These were immediately
recovered by Algerian security forces who had been informed of the airdrop

by residents of that small fishing port.

This time the king was caught in the act and so could not elude his respons-
ibilities as chief of state.

In a public statement released in Algiers during the night of 16 December.
the Council of the Revolution and the government. meeting together with the
president of the National People's Assembly. concluded that the gravity of
the act made it an operation seriously infringing upon national security.
The statement said: "The circumstances under which this operation was con-
ducted--at a tine when Algeria is going through a distressful period because
of President loumediene's illness--shows that Rabat is alert to all types

of adventure and does not shrink from any attempt to carry out the destabil-
ization designs it has on our country. This operation is a provocation.

The Algerian people are prepared to accept the challenge. If it was meant
as a test. the operation's failure highlights the state of vigilance main-
tained by our people throughout the national territory. Adventurers of
ewery stripe. agents of imperialism and reaction. may launch into all sorts
of speculative ventures. but they will not succeed in either forcing a
change in the Algerian revolution's principles and goals. or even less in

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE OMLY

undermining the unity of our people or infringing upon their sowereignty
and the invioiabiiity of their national territory."

Hence this was-but another dastardly act by King Hassan II who has. these
past few weeks. definitely stepped up his intrigues in all directions for a
purpose that is only too obvious. namely destabilization. he is an expert
in such natters. He has already demonstrated his talent as imperialian's
compliant enforcer in Benin. Zaire. and currently in Angola where his in-
structors are training UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola] troops. In addition. he very recently instigated the slaughter on
board the Spanish trawler "Cruz del Mar"--for which the Moroccan press too
quickly blamed the POLISARio--in an effort to discredit the Potisanto not
only in the eyes of Spain but also of the international coanmnity which at
the time happened to be discussing the Saharan issue in the United Nations.

This diVerslonary action-~innediateiy denounced by the POLISARlo as an act
of piracy-Owns most probably designed to check the course of events in the
United Nations and upset the debate which appeared to be progressing very
anspiciously for the Saharans. Madrid was not fooled. however. it re-
quested an official explanation. not free the POLISARlO ieadership--with
when it has maintained close relations since last Septeabcr--but directly
from the Moroccan diplomatic service. EL MOUDJAMID [Algerian daily] coa-
aented as follows on the trawler incident: "it would have been a perfect
crime had it not been for the Saharan denial and the clairvoyance of the
Spanish Govern-eat which lost no tine in approaching the right party." in
any case. the incident did not produce the desired effect in the United Na-
tions. The Decolonization Connission did not allow itself to be tricked
by Morocco's diploaatic anneuvers. Nor did the General Assembly.

Moreover. the euphoric relationship between the French chief of state and
llassan II has faded a bit since 1975. the year of the fanaus "ay pal
Giscard.“ After having supplied Morocco and Mauritania with a great deal

of weapons. ammunition. and aoney for use against the POLISARIO. France
apparently took ties to reappraise its policy following the overthrow of
Moktar Ould Daddah. This has produced a slight chill in the.still cordial.
relations between Unseen ii and Giscard. Especially now that the king real-
izes Paris is proaoting--for strictly French aotivea-the "dynaaic of peace"
between the POLISARIO and Nouakchott.

Contrary to its castes. France even abstained froa voting in the UN General
Asseably against a resolution. adopted by 90 countries to 2. reaffiraing the
"Saharan people's inalienable right to self-deteraination and independence."
This sane resolution was the first UN document to ever mention the POLISARIO
specifically by name. It also counended the POLISARIO for having unilater-
ally ceased fire in Mauritania since 12 July and confiraed the internation-
al organization's responsibility in matters relative to decolonisation in the
Western Sahara.

2‘

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

liaasan ll characterized France's abstention as a ”neutrality vote" by which
that country cast doubt--even though it was only for the duration of one
ballot-won the sacrosauct "novereignty of Morocco over the western Sahara."
Yet could he poaaibly have officially viewed it in any other way?

No doubt there are some who think the postponement of the king's visit to
Paris was not altogether unrelated to these "erring ways” of French diplomacy;

'l'en Accoaplices

The 10 countries voting against the UN resolution were: Central African
Fmpire. Egypt. Gabon. Guatemala. Indonesia. Israel. Mauritania. Morocco.
Nicaragua. and Zaire.

It is not innaterisl to note that two of these countries have territorial
claims: Indonesia on floor. Guatemala on aelize. Egypt. Gabon. lsrsel.
and Zaire all follow the same imperialist strategy in Africa and the Arab
world. As for Samara. the dictator of Nicaragua. and Bokasaa. the emperor
of the Central African Empire. their attitude needs no cement.

Mnur l tanlan lncons I atenc ice

The UN General Assembly resolution also clarifies. at a diplomatic level. a
situation that was getting muddled and bogged down in an endless procedural
debate imposed by Rabat. At the same time. this resolution confirms the
failure of the. aanifold hehind-the-acenes maneuvers by Moroccan diplomats.
and paradoxically. by Mauritanian diplomats. in an effort to have the inter-
national organization relinquish its consideration of the Saharan issue on
the (fallacious) grounds that it is within the exclusive purview of the OM].

Late this eraser [1978]. the current president of the Organization of Afri-
can liaity. the Sudanese Ja'far ~Mumayri. had even officially asked the African
group in the United Nations to defer the Decolonization Conission's
scheduled debate until the OAU rendered its verdict. Considering the well-
known fact that the DA". paralyzed by Moron“ «h-rwcrienim. was even an-
able to convene the special sun-it meeting initially approved at Port [outs
and confirmed at Lihrcville. Nuaayri's request meant purely and simply put-
ting off the issue indefinitely. But neither Algeria's "express reservations"
nor the POLISARIO'a protestations prevented the Sudanese president from
convening the ad hoc cmittce formed at the latest [annual OAU] sue-it meet-
ing in Khartoum. and from reportedly granting it full powers to investigate.
negotiate. and even arbitrate between the different opposing parties in the
western Sahara. whereas his function was supposed to be limited to making
necessary technical preparations for submitting the Saharan issue to the
highly-publicized special sunit meeting.

in anticipation of a possible investigation. Moroccans began transferring
people from southern Morocco into the Sahara. an operation already denounced
by the POLISARlo.

25

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

This is a strange procedure for a chief of state who. because of his present
duties as head or the GAO. ought to maintain a greater reserve when examining
on issue threatening the peace and security of Northwest Africa.

No less strange is Mauritania's behavior in the United Nations. Nouakchutt
did, in effect. vote against the resolution connonding a cease-fire of which
it is the principal beneficiary, a cease-fire which has set in nation that
"dynanic cf peace" Mauritanian leaders unheaitstingly and regularly panepyriae
with a few sibylline remarks. Aren't these Mauritanian inconsistencies

likely to increase the Saharan leadership's already extreae sistrust?

Fuzzy lungs

In fact. on 5 Deceabcr contacts maintained since last nus-or between Sahcrans
and Mauritanians were nearly broken off when the Mauritanian eaissaries 'for-
got"--without notice and without explanation-to appear for a scheduled tect-
ing they had Jointly agreed upon. A few days later, after the POLISARIO

had taken cognizance of this unilateral break in the Saharan-Hauritanian
talks. Nouakchott had second thoughts, confirmed its “policy of dialog" and
marked it with a gesture. one of sinor significance considering the attend-

ant circusstanccs. lt released sons 50 Saharan prisoners, but has since
plgccd the. under house arrest.

Basically. therefore. nothing has changed. Mauritania seems to be complacent-
ly projecting a fuzzy isagc. The dialog is making no headway. The Mauri-
tanian caissaries are beating around the hush. Is this an endurance test

or a tactical love they have been tricked into asking so as to gain a fes

more weeks or months? But time does not always work the way one expects.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Afrique-Asie

BOQI
C80: 6400

26

FOR OFVICIAL USE ONLY
l’Ol MICMI. USE ONLY

HOBOCCO

most Oil STORM? THIRD USP? MESS
Paris Amour-A313 in French 25 Dec 78-7 Jan 79 pp 16-17
[Article by Housleh Ali: ”The USPP‘s closed Door Heating")

[Text] For Abderahia liouabid. first secretary of the USP? [Socialist Union
of People's Forces). his organization's third congress on 8-10 Decesber was
even sore trying than its earlier regional congresses had led his to anti-
cipate, even though the latter had been lurked by frequently sharp clashes.

Throughout the debates and wrangling in cos-ittees. in plenary aaetings. or
behind the scenes. the seat heatedly disputed issue was clearly the role and
status of the party's first secretary. So such so that on at least twee-
caaions the letter finally lost the quiet self-confidence. often highly af-
fected. that had enabled his to enhance to his advantage the distinguished
iaage he had projected throughout s long political career. nevertheless,
although the congress was thus punctuated by a fev scenes and quarrels,
this isportant seeting's His interest lies in the high standard of poli-
tical debate asintained by the sore seasoned delegates.

ho setter how reluctant we say be to excessively personalise political life.
we are forced. however. to state that Abderahia bouabid—whose personal
initiatives and decisions. as such as the nature of his relations with the
palace. have decisively aarked the party's return to legal existence-«4s
currently causing a rank-and-file revolt in any sections of the party. n
revolt which the clashes during this third congress only served to exacer~
bate. 0n the eve of the congress. there had indeed been reports—end we
discussed these in these coluns-wto the effect that Abderahaan Youssefi was
returning and thus would take over as first secretory while Abdershia
Bounbid would be saved up to a sore honorary than effective chair-en‘s posi-
tion. Under this plan, an adroit process of change seeaingly could have
been initiated, a process capable of restraining protesters end dissidents.

But Abderahsan Youssefi cautiously preferred to further delay for sole tine
his possible return free exile. lie did. however. accept aesbership in the

political bureau. Ilia decision to retain in exile put an end to all
theorising and speculation about louabid's gradual retire-eat.

27

FOR OFFICIAL [138 MY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Delegates to the Third USP? Congress arrived in Casablanca knowing full well
that the first neerelnry would safely seek reelection to a new term as the
party's princlpal leader. The congress was held in the communal fair huild-
lnna located. as one delegate remarked. In a lunellunal area wheie Ihe uump
tuens villas and swimming pools in rerulvhe eeutuaul vlulenilr wlih the
working-class districts of Bourgogne and uhe old Medina. Organizers had.

moreover. spared no effort or expense to make this congress a vast interna-
tional forum.

The manager of this "caravansary" was Henley Mehdi Alaoui. a newly-elected
member of the political bureau and one of the USPP's former representatives
in France who had returned to Morocco after several years in exile. The
whole show was designed to hoodwinit more than to gain for the USP? pledges
of support that neither Soviet or ltaiian communists. nor Preach socialists--
with a large representation marked by the unexpected arrival of Michel
Rocard--. nor Mediterranean or African Arab progressive and anti-imperialist
parties or movements could give because they are all publicly committed to
support the POLISARIO Front.

The USFP leadership did. of course. flaunt its highly intransigent views
on the Saharan issue. when coupled with the recent intensification of acts
of provocation against Algeria. these views appear alarming.

For instance. the congress chaileneged the government and asked it "to put
an end to the war of attrition inflicted upon the southern part of the coun-
try. by ordering the Royal Armed Forces to check any unwarranted attack
against Morocco." This rcquest’s thinly veiled warmongering is especially
objectionable in that no reference is made therein to the methods employed
by the Moroccan expeditionary corps in the Saharan territories.

Political bureau supporters clashed with the party's radical wing over the
Issue of relations with the royal court and the monsrchal regime. and in
the debate on revising the forms. methods. and conditions of the organiza-
tion's mass interventions. There is no denying that the radical wing is
sympathetic to Mohamed Basri. nicknamed the "P'quih." a prestigious leader
Hi the patriotic movement. Basri had even sent an open letter to the dele-
gates. Evidence of the support for Basri is the fact that part of the
delegates chanted "Al-ikhtiyar ikhtiyaruna. sl-Bssri za'imuna" (The option
is definitely ours and Basri is our leader). The option in question is
actually Hehdi Ben Barha's revolutionary "Option." It is also the symbol
of the movement led by Hohamed Basri's supporters abroad.

It would be dangerous. however. to echo the allegations made by the USE?
leadership prior to the congress. but particularly during and immediately
after its deliberations. allegations naming delegates accued of being Basri
supporters and summoning them to explain why they engaged in splinter tac-
tics outside the organization's legal framework. In the USP? there are not
simply hasri supporters on one side and all other USP? members on the other.

28

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
I'Oil 0"“:th USE ONLY

lather there are disappointed and bitter radical silitsnts alined against
non of the party apparatus who are emitted to the dialog with the palace.

Likewise it is irresponsible. to say the least. for anyone to continue to
cast asperaioas-as certain highly cuddled guests «lid-«bout "alum-u Msri'u
conspiratorial activity. sspcrsims that grossly reduce his pullliuul
thinking to subversive obsessional inpulsee. A reading of his open letter
to the congress is sufficient in itself to totally discredit this salicious
and perfidious criticiu.

There is nothing surprising in the fact that liohased beari'e desand for a
sovereign constituent assesbly evokes a genuinely favorable response anong
rank-ond-file sesbers. ‘l‘his dessnd was also put forth by the till" [National
linion of People's forces] and then by the US". Nor is it any surprise that
the issue of political prisoners. those fros the W as well as fros the
extrese lei’t. plus the probles of the disappearance and assassination of
Ill-Abdi. iianousi. Bl-lialki. mar Benjelloun. Zeroual. and sany other victins
of the king's and Colonel blini's hired assassins or provocateurs are being
raised in desperation by silitants sore and sore convinced that they were
duped into accepting the agreesent concluded in their nase.

And lastly. the fact that the setter of the class nature of the regise is
now openly and explicitly at issue is consistent with the process of radical-
izatlon initiated at the prapting of liehdi Ben Barks, a process further
strengthened by the ordeals of the repressive episodes of 1963. 1965. 1971.
and 1972.

in preparing for the congress. the US" leadership found itself unable to
stes the flood of vehescnt challenges and questions fros all sides. Yet it
hoped that the solesnity of the congress proper. reinforced by the At'eopagus
of distinguished guests. would still the ardor of the sore seasoned sesbers.
Not to sentioa that the skillfully raised specter of possible police action
in the event of any indiscreet resarks was indeed likely to intisidate a
certain anchor of speakers. Consequently the leadership was caught unawares
by the dessnd for a secret session which was approved against the political
bureau's objections. Yet it was certainly behind the closed doors of this
secret session that the debate was able to really develop in candid and
vigorous fashion. Bouabid and his principal associates were put on the de-
fensive by questions raised about such issues as the dispatching of the
Moroccan Arley to Zaire. Sadat’s visit to Jerusales and Egyptian-Moroccan
collusion on Hachrek and Palestine. and the Shah's request that Rabat serve
as sediator (Khoneyni eventually declined iiassan It's offer to sediate).

Put back within the context of an effective strategy of liberation. the
question of Ccute, liellila. the Shafarin Islands. and Gibraltar was. of
course. discussed.

11w discussions on the need to desocratize institutions and public life
should be viewed against this background. In these discussions. the USP?
leadership was sost. sharply attacked on such essential points as political

29

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

prisoners, procedures for investigating political murders and kidnaplngs,
but above all. on the nature of the regime.

The congress did. in effect. call for transformation of "the present Nakhzanita
mounrchy"--nnd not the "presidentiallst" monarchy as reported by some news-
pnpers--"that protects the exploilalive classes. lulu u reustllullunul.

parliamentary. and democratic monarchy...iu which the king would exerrlue
nrhitrntional authority."

Obviously this is a compromise resolution in which the republican ideal is
expressed in an altogether new fashion. even though the monarchy (reformed
however) continues to be placed outside the field of class warfare. In
addition to the resolution‘s general tone. it was undoubtedly their explicit

reference to the Hakhzan's olignrehic class. reviled for its corrupt prac-
tices. that roused the king's anger.

Government Greatly Concerned

The palace's reaction was not long in coming. The party's main newspaper.
AL-HUHARRIR. was seized twice for having published the final political state-
ment. That heats all! it was allowed to resume publication only after making
the eoncession--fraught with consequence--not to publish the second part of
the condemned test. The leadership's inv01ved commentary expressing deep
regret that this initiative had possibly "tarnished Moroccan democracy in

the eyes of our guests” further stirred the membership's legitimate anger.

There is no ruling out the possibility that the king may not limit his re-
action solely to this warning shot. Another crackdown is not impossible.
The fact is that the government is greatly concerned about an organization
which. despite its leadership's compromises and concessions. and notwith-
standing some mistaken views on the Saharan question. does include among

its 10,000 members the most radicalized sectors of patriotic Moroccan youth.
This secret session of the USP? congress was not the one-man show the lead-
ership expected. as amply indicated by the urgagt appeal made by a large
number of delegates for a return to Hehdi Ben rka's Maghreb and Arab
ideals. and also by the formation of an administrative committee which in-

cludes some 10 young party leaders well-known for their dynamism and rigor-
ist views.

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Afrique-Asie

804]
CSO: 6600

30

FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00050R000100020022-4

I'OR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

mmnm mums um nxmcuur m ms mm
_‘ London me moons 21m 1n anguoh Jun 79 pp 123. as

[Text]
Mcmwm'n maid cupiul- Slum Juno In! m I an. folkmd l
Sum-in [Mm-Mal denier and all. of mic Pulhmen
mm! mmmm in Ha: M- m [In hen undev- plan (mi
«Immunity mind. Th- nu uh». Thu. ‘nclodo In ”cpl-n)
dcveknpmem thinking In ”Mil! pub.- am by an an
Hummumbemmcdupin Kin; Hanninmelmb (m.
the mick-plun- “null I. Wdlhncdlondualb meat km
henniil’d". «mum dcpendm an am-
The mutual. wad w. wmwmu- ..
mlmnrhihmk wwwhmlc “3.:
the lailmoluﬂinmlc macaw-m mm:
unlit-b. In fad the canal. cuvbmlmmmdlhoﬁno dual" «1
unmﬁlynmmmm wt of tho (Mum rid: th- mm»-
htluewrdndlthmdaryc-l Punch ﬁne. to m Thequ
State in!» Sunny Mini-m. Mm worka- In Pm to that mt!
:""'..a""" m?" ”'"MM‘" ""d “W 321% m“;
u uncut. dinguil mu cum c
mmmnmnbyu. Kin-Immaculate“ unﬁt-u
mnnﬂniliuﬁwycg‘phn." M W Mm rune“;
I m lime. mu lulu nylon 9"”
amt-ink m mad that. Mm W 1150 u
palm mat I“!- Oﬂ' “it" ‘0 plan Shandy afterwards ‘0 “‘0 00'
«Ii-I39 Wm arid in mania-numb: 1*an
mull-n. 0* mung MW Imp-u. Wﬁulkmuyd mu
“ﬂ'ﬂ ‘ Id" "I‘m"! “In! certain ileum (mulling "M u
'N'WU'MNMM Iiccmimﬁrodmmdohlﬂn Mm’
‘km‘hﬂwwm ﬁlm-tomato: calculate!
mmmauamm dopaitwnthoﬂhvclm Imam
"-2 fin-Mg «Ion-33mm to dlmpncudpodn. hm
m“ '0 ' '0 “NUD- ln om than we thaw
Winn undo! fa mutate W mm
mm. between I

Diurnal brunt that.
unit-uh «min slop In
'6” undid “shut In all”.
lzhlfh”. they any nil! do tho
‘ .

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-ROPOZ-00850R000100020022-4
“ﬁlm tn glut“ (hut-.thmlltut
Clr‘lll u-twlwtl nu .Nntmtlt'd
35h" last war. I119 tlt-ltl
urNit‘ill‘ tutin nut-unwlttle tuft
to annual 22'" lll “ml and wtll
mwh an estimated TI"; thle
\rnt.

' In tultliliun the mummy wne
hit by n writ-n of lmtl lllln‘l‘lll.
nmwllutinyt l‘mtl impel» and
int-inn a new-re hunk-n m the
lmlmweut tmle.

Amthef fondue mu the heavy
military mmmllmenl. largely
the mull u! the thnum war.
uhkh led to the ttehling ul_
tlt‘lﬂltf eutmuliture tn Wm".
Inst yen. l-‘innlly the mmmyl
was nllntnl hy the meltlwitle
tun-lain. which mullet cul Into
hnml t’ut mum hmmte.

'l1me parallel twublems
uuml gth in SN? to
«let—line [mm a lt'l‘tllll H93; in
1978 Ian mm: l.:l'.‘ in 11mm..-
tut-limimtry liume fut llﬂll le
24'; gu-wth. mumml with n
lunpulnl'uutt unmth mleul 2.97 It
year.

The tww year ellttle m an
uptim'nllc nute. lune-vet. n-
thrte nee already mme dens «l
imgumemrtll. 'lhc 1978 mule
tlvhn't is extmed to have
impart-«l {mm the alarming
Stilt" up registered the
gum-inn year. s-lnee ﬁnt~hnll
est-m nu- lry '.' mm the cor-
mtluling pent-ll u! I977 and
imp-m- tIn-litml by 8’: I! the
imp-ct enteittium hegnn tn
make an impact.

likeuN the I977-7ﬂ huh-eel
it up by unnmd :W.‘ mt the
Inn-inns met. and wat-oﬁ
living int-mun Me lulling.

The Goveentnent lo
media-lent ntill nmied about
inllntim. The Minister nl
Punt-nee. Abdel-[Mil GM.
tlttlllniﬂﬁ the than budget to
l’mlinmt. Mill that peleu
"pn-luhly" new: by only IV". in
I973. m "tan-ml tn I25!" in
l977. Thi- he linlml with the in-
tm-e in mmey nut-ply. which
haul l-mt «varietal tn lil'i- In

COPYR lllllT:

um t-mntmml \ﬂlh ll)"; the
yen helm. Ihtt. even en. the
war against inllnllun must no

net.

What In nnt yet clear II have
the. It at all. the burdens In-
llictetl by the mletity pelt
mill he dbldbuted a null:
mm; the mkthm u the
(hmmmmt tmlsee. Some
olmevm bellew that may
tell-nus In .mme huh.- metal
m‘ltn may he tunlpunnl and
that utmttplnymenl (mumrlll-
Iy utimttted nl nutund M)
mayhem-me.

Mum-wan ulllelola. lot thelt
tnn.hmuthm.u\tk am-
truly. hm ctnpluﬁ- will be
plat-ed Ion axle! gala. In fact
the genes ot’ strikes Inst yen
terms to have hmueht hume to
the Guvemment the need lot

urinltm.
Slimunl tuhl The Middle
East about the plane to

t'ttunlmxe lulnm-intemlve In.
than-in to map up emplnymenl
and elem the fatal undue. And
then i:- vemm to believe thll
three em-rte will he emtnined
ninee the Uni-n Ste-Hide «lee
‘ween thlnim. mlin‘
the most mime optnltion to
the Omemmt. he. gained
much mnd in the chatty-
town. when the run] un-
em loyedtendtoendup'.

urther evidence that
Mamet-n: ate maklng a
genuine elloet tn tackle
neglected well! even come.
I‘m the new 1979 budget.
Family allowance: ate incensed
to M030 ($9) a child [mm
MD24. ll an oven" (at of
MDIlemn. and allocation lot
hnepitele. uhooll. roads.
egneultwe Ind dune m in-
creased

At .the name lime defence
spendtnc will also continue to
mntnutd wildly. Indeed the
mat with»; est-ed ol the new

I978 lc Hognzlnca. Ltd.
l-‘lllt ill-'I’lillM. "SH ONLY

Till

PERIOD OF SON-2 UNtIl-illTMN‘l‘Y FORESEEN FOR TUNISIA

London 'l‘llli HIDDLl-Z EAST in ling] ish Jun 79 pp (.5. 1.6

After interviews in Tunis lit Orioh'er with Prime Minister Nettlrn.
party hend Soyah and opposition leader Meetlrl. Mark Bmzonshy
was in Wmhington in late November for the Prime Mlnlster'o visit.
The A met-leans. Bruzoneky concludes. have decided to back
Noulrn. hoping to help him to consolidate hie hold when Bourguibn
is gone. Still. our correspondent foresee: a period of some

[Text]

uncerteinty for 'l‘unlele'.

'Nnisinu l'rime Mini-tee I ledi Nunint'e visit
in “'eehinutm Mme “Nh‘ nan wee hut one
net In the [numeral-inn stntnle nirredy
heuntine'hmie.

'l‘hnt elntsgie-hn-lte wt in rental Int
Jammy when liehih Aehottr. heed of the
(intern! i'niun nt'Nnision Wither: and one
u! the inner circle in Tutti-inn pnlitire. celled
the tint camel unite in the hinting at in-
drtmlrnt Tun'uln.

in the thunder! ihni («ll-med et least I
huntlml male were uhot deed in the
etreete. and there «a themes that the
netnlry'r «ineie pnlitieel petty. the I’am‘
Surinlislr Dnlourlrn headed by
Mohnmmnd Snyeh. hed inetiuited the
rintine to dixmlit both the union and
Aehmr.

With Arhmr Imprinted ihﬂu‘h the
rhnrede at e n-reiel etete eeeunty nun.
Nnuire end Seyeh ere both preparing.

rtly nuinet eeeh other. tor whet eill he I

’tter intemnl eimlennee the oiling Presi-
dent Remihnuieeumh.

0m Smite Imidee «winded that the
Prime Minister my attempt in yum
Smh After he miidetee himvl In the
.mirirney. lie nailed Mili- I”
«china d the “mic merited“ Ahmed

33

BrnSe-lironiy e month alter he hed
publicly imieied that my eritlriem of Ben-
s'l‘llteh um entitle? at. the Preeldesnéhlmeell.
' eerne (no open to 1h." he
hinted. But Soyoh mmee met ee e tough.
reonurrehtl ﬁgure who rennet eeeliy he
gushed aside.

An Amerieen diphnet wee for more
enmitti. "Seyeh wente to be prime
minina." he sold. "but his heed will tell If
Natalie step into pone! eiier Who’-
deeth.“ Such epeeuletione ere wideepreed
thnmgheut 'Nniele In this time of
mtmnettion.

Surprisingly. wither Native conﬁdent
mgr-m thet ”Aimed Meetin' is e omihle
prune minintrr under Nooire“. Meetiri is e
former minieter of the Interior who wee
purged [mute penyinlgnendehomw
eiwnp'nne nnluim m e mill-petty
demmney. "Meetlri in now ope-kin; the
lawn of en ehemetive prime minioter.‘
it wee [tinted out. "Meetirl end Noulre
eren't thet for open” the conﬁdent noted.
the implication being otherwiee about

_With Artur. Sarah. and hieetiri ell
Wine for poiitieel poeitlon in emieipetlon of

Fill! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100020022-4

FOR tll’l’lCIAl. USE ONLY

nl‘ (Irma-racy," he aaitl. "Ml u! the “(hm-
ment'a pullt-lee - whether mammle, aurlal oe
«lucntiunnl are tltllt.‘ ln unmultatlm with
what we call the social pantie-n. 'na-ae m
ttntle nuluna. employed thanlmtima.
fanneta' mathetima and elm the nun-
aunm tepmeutatlvn and the puny. And
wllhln the party ltaell' we have Inn
temlendea. many teende. 'lhe mule apea
heer and npenly withln the party even In
the peeaenoe o! the hicheat uttlciale. Real
dean-racy la the true repreaentatlon u! all
there inteteeta and teenda. ..What la done
in the US or in Bun-p: la mt neeeawily
valid fut Ileveluplne mntriea auch ae
'ﬁmlala."

l-‘eatlnu the lnmtrhuivenm of the
nmmlach. Ntatlm atllled enmethlng u! an
emu-e the veatmlninx {lee pulllieal ea-
pmuim in 'l‘unlala: "(‘an yuu Imagine thla
small Ullm helm «llvlded up Into
tmdenrlea wtlnu ltaell' tn the weld
in amall hit: when. we have neighhuun
with very anlld molithlc leglmea?"

Dut'ln; Ntmlta'a viait 'hmlalan new-papa
advenlmnenta In the US pun-laimed:
"Nniaia'a pnlitleal uauulneea nntl \Ve-atem-
atyle mun-unit: phllmtphy" pmltle In-
u'ntnea with "a Ina-Inmmnn'atln-atn . . . the
way to him pmllta in Flume and the
Middle PM".

Bu an Awaken xhhu dkud a
aomewhat move restrained vlaion when the
Middle Seat lnatitute in Wauhlngtm held
lta annual confemce a few montha ago.
Mm Clement Monte of the Unlvenlty
of Michigan aumneed thing up this way:
"hints-la ia no longee a aimlebullet tegitne.
Bummlha hna not been numb: the county
the many yean. In a nnae 'anela haa
nheady been weathering ita «mien
akin. buttheteleamtentialfoethe
Nienmguuatlm of 'anala. 'lhe image of a
(“ha-Eve uamtty has been (ﬁnished. liven
the tum fun-lam has heen wed. and in a
technical aenee it can nwly. 'llmieia in not a
simple authotitanen regime; It ie a teyime
building on the {can of the middle ela-
u;ﬂnetuwtnuuu".

And in Wnle one middle-clan modeeata.
sensitive to the upirationa of the mesa.
wanu: “No lute expected the anny toattaek
laet January. Neat time the when (0 out
an the ateeet they may have their can
weapxma." . a

COPYRIGHT: 1978 [C Magazines, Ltd.

(:50: (.1020
35

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2001mm: CIA-RDP82-00850R0001000200224
FOR Oll‘PICIM. USE ONLY

TllﬂlSlh

EXPORT OUTLETS. SOCIAL STABILITY CLOSE“ LINKED
London Tlll’. ”IDOL! M51 in English Jan 79 pp 108. 109. 111. 112

l'l‘extl Tunisinns discussing their econonic performance over 1917-1918. the
f irst 2 years of the five-year developocnt plan. tend to attribute difficul-
tien not to social Instability but to the loss of export outlets in the Rest.
however. because of Tunisin's acute unsuploymcnt prohies. those export out-
let» and internal social stability are closely linked. Knoll Sskr spoke to
ministers. bankers and private investors in Tunis and wrote this report.

ﬁlmmrylﬂ‘ﬂmrbih ﬁrst with swim! 0! mm
anniversary «I! Mia‘s Bloch mm: ddﬁcuhy for M
'numisy. s dqy hi this... and the and. new}!
smuirsllusndsnuums W is s «pain .
ml: which Wm mks-hers m tam“ m’lhnldlhs W do Mall“. do
shawl into: ‘ Ronni-Al i' . . -

«i «hit they hsd W votes as W Gw‘: (UHCA).

W‘uudithul unhglhy. the mid!!! mic um AM the we drop in pro-

...m warm, m“ “M...“ ”a 3: m “mtg: '5:
I . ”I . o

mw-cmamum mouklhmilo’hlnishn “whim-trim

Genet-Ir do Travaillwrs mltmm'ﬂmoﬂho (which undid 1” In W".
'l‘IIIisinullKﬂ'D. torhispui Mp ham ‘Nmsisn Min to untied haul!)

in the January unmet um politlal and mic stability «can to have dun.
munnhﬁmvntunoaby add MWWM othdlhmthltnoﬁdllu‘
'I'unixisn «Mel. on the m . sink. m In th- whllc m
mutant of mallards politics] 0n the shalt. ‘Nnuls‘s mm. m an abundant}!
"Min; and W: W WWII! Mk WMMMWm
smhitiuu. subjeciv-Nthmiouoku «a mum» tap-ya.“
"at the mike and mum [sh amt of mm on not the Mask pnvsu
which militia-led in Block WMdthtb Mama .
'l'lmrvhy daily also coil-grid“! inhuman u the Plant!“ The m1, unis iMl hive hit
36

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

the [uh-ate inn-um ln let-rut
weelu lum‘ hem thee in French
pang, which lune pmrntnl me
mate-rink null [mm lhlm
rem-hing nw-emhly plants in
'l'uni-in. The French mellnsewl
«no eleelnulee than. hlt by the
rﬂ'lk'll strike! and mnilln‘ to
vein-ls. united wnnly when The
M'cldle East naked him how
much he mtied IlIIll the
Iiltehlvul "Neural nlilhee.

"When ln Blimp." he naked.
"would fnetmy wogheee
telephone their men «lune; e
melee-l mike to epelneue lee
theie nt-ence. due to lulu of
lean-M?“ Yet thle In what
happened to Me wentlm ln ‘
'l'un'ule lat Jnnunry.

mu. hindsight. Plnnning Minister lluotnfn Zannouni even goes no for as
to any that ltlnck Thursday "clenred the air." In its 20-odd fears of
Independence. Znnnounl said. Tunisia had periodically been subject to
diuruplloun cmmcd by neahltions men. But without such disruptions it
could be dismissed either as "dead" or no a "dictatorship."

n" ewnte M Junmzm

‘ -£.Mni'e punt .
31,: Ill! 3 "mild cold". Such a
dﬂrip‘ilﬂ might “menu? the
n,|u‘i‘f’ «ﬁll-‘1' I_'lll (litd m "It
"mm“ but ll may he
maul-Ry upper-plate in the
“M,“ of the investment
elnuuﬂ- Fae. ecu-«lung to
Znnllllml- the.I Hula-s dud mi
”.1, 12-min“ investment liming
in. [m [lid "0. ll“ hr"
”Mn. mien me aid they
Memnt the unrlnin; u! the
"“5.“ pad". the ﬁve year
v3.1;- uul immun agreement
I! «heel with the mime lit l976.

us" me“. humani med.
1... elﬂllmﬂd the peel. On the
“ﬂr- ry, amine and manage.
men! end I! munl In“ Anvil

and agreed on en "ti been»
in minimum “gee ln repulse
In mice Inmate. 'Ihla. heuld.
had e enlmiu elfeei and peeved
thecomnenent'ulmelty.
lnmtment Figures

UM““W. however. the
latent mtietlu en lavutment
and enmh men in the in-
duetriel Include not neeeuuily
mmmt these mm Scene
"ll" mum ﬁgme- on
Mute luvstment M wen
puhllshed wally by the
Am 6: Whit a.
Media-emu (API). the
helmet hweuneeu mien
W M tale eo-oedinetee d
ell newsman in induuiee let
up foe expat or the Intel MM
under the inveetment incentive
lend ”720ml l9“.

37

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
i'Oll OFFICIAL USE ONLY

These figures show that 552 projects. worth T098 on (3265 an) and representing
[5,694 new job opportunities. were approved during the first half of l978.

This compares with 5.639 projects. representing TDl.lS3 Iii worth of invest-
Itent and 185.000 John. approved during M’l's first 5 years (ending in
March [978) and thus falls not far below the 6-monthly average for those

5 years.

In soapsrison trith l977. however, trhen l,3l0 projects worth 11)][2 tan and
creating “.000 jobs were approved. the I978 figures appear rather less

encourng inn .

or a prolonged attack of flu is not yet clear.

The ileum mandrel In the
rlrnft lander-t timitnertt for 1910
are nituilnrly ripen tn inure than
"rte inleqlrelntinel. “tot t‘lucu-
ment. onrveyine err-rmmlc
Informant! over the that two

yearn of the lim-dl develop-
ment plan. reveaia reeulta which
are vane than the plan pro
iretinn hut are mneiheltrs
hrtter than prereding yeata.
firmih in nut-agricultural
rectum in the ”71-70 period
rmrhrd a rate of 0.3.7. a year.
which in Iran than the 0.65- r:-
prrted but a marked improve-
mmt I'll the nnnual 7.0%
' rmnrtlrd between i973 and
IMO. I! agriculture is talren into
consideration. reilaetin‘
ileum harlly hit by irmular
and imufiieient rainfall. the
overall aw youth in was
domestic lmvlnct ior tha two
years: falls to an estimated 6.1%.
Signiﬁcantly. however. thia
average mmprirea youth of
only M"; in I?” hut an
inttmnive 8.9!; last year.

The Mtiafaetitat with these
rratllta rapmwerl in the budget
[mutation in echoed by the
Dinette-General of the 9051'.
Mnithtnr Falthfalth. The mun
plan area undouhtedly
“atnlritivata”. Fnhhialth Mid.
lmme it vat meived in the
«min-tin that Hlmved the in.
arm in olive «ii and
pin-pirate price in Wit - both
In! which had immediate
mmnuiunafur'nmiﬁaainoeit

exp-eta tutti tit and pin-pinata

andmtatnh io hem-fit {rum
petnllullarm'd.

The aanrlrl mention aim
i...“ “from... mt."

‘ 0 ea . t
aim there war no obligation to
achieve the plan targets “there
was no need to amend the

an".
pl". general ’Nniaian officiala
new: in writing thon-
mminp in the country's
mavvnie performance over the
past two yearn not to trial
«are-t hot to world teeenaion or
what they call "tha inter-
national eetviornic aituation".
The problem. lmvever. b that.
for “raisin. toe-id atnhility and
the intemrtional econonuc
situation are elrnely linked. So
much of NiiIia'a development
ia geared to auppovedly ex-
mndhgnportmariletathatthe
“intemational riuration'cannot
hediomiaaedotfhand.

“miaia with ita ppulation of
limit repreaenta a remitted
mathet ‘tl’ hilt-trial pro-
Miamlnmmeperheadeftha

tion is a relatively

8&0. but since the
“““tcﬁm‘i‘. w.
pom t notaa
asitnouldhaveheentvroyeara
moi» mmtry' ' trnent in
ornven .
rentive Ina of em avg: me
an geared respetti y to
"Marinated induatrior and
thma serving the donatic
market. but the advantage of
theeepsrtindutriaoiathatthey
wwhm-inmu'mpro-
vidincnot oreiatexehanee
huthadiyneadediohaaaoell.

38
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

whether the lamina invest-eat effort signalled a ”mild cold"

'l'innnhenthedoorulaatm
elport outlets, a they did on
textile ral- to Europe in mid-
lm. 'Nniaia is left murdering
wheretoturn. -

Swim. the aisle milk

«annany with a rtaffol mm. is
attli nursing the bruit-ea from the
i971 iii-3C rebuff and wil con.
tinue to nerve them “11qu
they“: - keeping lta alalfMttl
paying them for a full time
ahrﬂafven W. a: a tenth of
the ac import quota. they
are at most working only ten.

Sogltea President
Saidana

provernent in
the noon Picture he will hm
toatanlayingmw

the PM "no flea: the
teatileintlutry,wmd.
heat M

390 We: were introduced
'l'hnequotao were lcula '
the Moleskin «:an
"’9 mature aimed: am
"at

Wow"; 1:; ""

one atill t ' .
lﬂl‘ltttml udder“? “3"“:
We slim-rd for the fact that
the ceiling find (or lune good.

horl already been reached. The
”“9"“ ﬂopped. leaving
puts. the 'i'unisinn cominny
Mt- foltﬂl to moral to the “"3
in “much for htrthcr tnllul.

‘I'he ups-ins still remain in
tone at trust uuttt Ititt.
isn‘t-wt. ﬁlls" ulsIti oi t'mu rli
in; mum-ts mih the liclmntt.
French and West German firms
whirh pnwide 1\tnisia uith
textile equipment in the that

POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY

stint 'nmi-inn products such I
Ihotphntrs tutti olive oil. l’artiy

use of the slump in the in-
trnmtioml pin-phtuc outlet
and partis- iwuusc it tun-Neut-
rtn'ututtrml m opt-hm; tit-s
mining ute'httis sud getting
trea'tnwnt facilities on attests.
'l\tnisia‘s phosphate output for
ms was only 3% up on tho-

plsce. there is not much 'i\misis mm ,9". reaching 3.76am

undo. tans compared with a target at
Then it not rnuch chance (Inn tons.

either at ﬁnding new outlets for

t’rodoction this year is projected at a.) on tons. but as raw phosphate
production capacity increases so will capacity of local processing plants.
enabling Tunisia to resist international market pressures by consuming
more of its phosphate at home.

As for olive oil. the problem of European import restrictions will not be
felt acutely this year. but only because Tunisian production will be nuch
less than in previous years. Because of the productivity cycle of the
trees. only £00,000 tons of olives are expected in 1979. representing a
drop of 36 percent on last year. This is all the more significant since.
according to the latest statistics. olive oil exports for the first 7 sonths
or 1978 earned 1018.5 on. staking than Tunisia's third tnost iaportant source
or export revenue.

11te budget document. discussing the outlook for exports, echoes officials
at all levels in stressing the vicissitudes of 'la conjoncture internationals."
The options open to Tunisia to fight the international system. however.

are relatively feta.

A:- Inclllﬂllli explained to
n..- .tliahllr East. it would
otsitr some to pnumtt‘ m-
.qu-mtion among developing
nut-titties. tint-retry gratlttully el-
I hitting the itulmtrinli-«I “'Nt.
as nt it-tt-t coming it to "think
twice". lint 'l‘uni-is has to he
uhlr to cell in Fanatic to hr- shit
to hoy from Europe; the option
of sailing tin-cl pulp to $3.31!.
(or nut-trio. is sltrtutive hot it
rams-t he thtI summit he
slquisd.

With "N limitations in
mind. 'f‘imi-iau ministers are
making a "exerted call for
lion-[hurt usttttlic to think

again an itnptxt tariffs - not
because ‘anrisn jobs and
nrrisi stability are at stake
(shit-ugh they are) hut because.
they say. the furtherance of
'hmisian cosmic dew-hp-
ment. like Third World duriopv
lttrltl as a whole. is in Futupc's
interests

Rmhitt Star. the Minister of
torts-try. Entry I: Mines.
sum-Iris that theory mat
(email!) with quotations from
the lien telot report drawn up
lry Frenc't Oumnrncnt otfitiais
last year That report came to
the mimics that industrial
detriopn ent in the Third World

39

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
lwl III-l'ul In "all! I M lulul
u! «mm m john In Ilu- In-
uthinlin-«Inmlln.
Elm-1m namin- lam In
ulw up clurlr “unull gnu-c mm-
lnlily". Slur uld. “Icy have to
- mm man; kalﬂully
abut them In 1%an
and put In ml to mo-
Imlmhm. They have In lull-e
Ilml «my “me lltllllu. lot a-
‘ Inuit. W the «my ol‘ I
pair at Misha-Madam!
(mun it in .mnmunc a
ﬁlm.
11.! «man: Ihlnlllnl". In
the Man view. main
«Initially MAM “Mu:
pun-hula 1m. M the

mum-M. ’hmkll Imam far
mm (even in India) than it

nun-m. ll “mill-nu am fully
empluyul Il-elt lam-lung:
um will remain blah
“ml-inn mu! donut! will In
nil-130ml.

Pm Tumhlm to any
unplug“! m Want in
«wind. in [um and:
Mn (validate. la upon
'ﬂcﬂllll. 1‘th coming-'0
| mm on naplwulnp‘ I t
the invrplmeul much in
llmvinlluAl’ludinlht
d um and ION. 'l‘ln Edd In.
valmem (limb. m - to!
inlet-related internal and
"until «an - b not.
llnummm a! I'm “0le will
ll. a alcp hunk imp-Vin.
Ill-l tﬁmﬂe. and the [mm to
do that in lmuuml in 1‘1"“...
Indium mnminlanm U

OOWRIGII‘I': 197$ 1c Magazines. Ltd.

(180: 0520

40
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPO2-00880R000100020022-4
FOR OFi’ICIAL USE ONLY

UNITED ARAB mums

SIIAYIOi OP SHARJMI CONMBNTS 0N ARAB PROBLEMS
Perla AL-NATAN AL-'ARABI in Arabic 7-13 Dec 78 pp 26-28

[Interview with Sheykh Sultan ihn Huhs-ead al-Qasimi. the ruler of Sherjeh.
by Main al-Siha'i: “0n Occasion of Convocation of UAE National Assembly.
Shaykh Sultan ibn Huhslmeed al-Qesimi Says: There Are Problems and Diffi-
culties But He Will Overcome Then with wisdom end Deliberation: New Consti-
tution Hill Pill Gaps free which Division Penetrates; Re Are Full of hope

al-Sadat Hill Stop Pursuing His Line Because Rights of Peoples Are Not Given
Over Tables"!

[Text] On the eve of the commencement of the new session of the UM! Rational
Assembly. the UAR capital turned into a beehive of eulti-level activity.

Perhaps the most active person was Shaykh Sultan ibn Hubs-mad el-Qasimi.

the Supreme Council med>er and the ruler of Sharjeh. who turned his suite at
the llilton hotel into an assembly room for a series of meetings with some of
the UAR ministers and with high-ranking officials. The aim of the meetings
was to discuss the aspects of the plan to form a higher economic and social
planning council with powers covering all the state services as a new unifica-
tion step to bolster the union's entity.

AL-HA‘I'AN AL-‘ARABI conducted this interview with Shaykh Sultan after he had
gone through e long meeting with Sa'id el-chahhaeh. the minister of planning.
and then with Ahmad ihn "amid. the minister of information. and 'Ahdelleh
"ways. the undersecretary of the hinistry of Inforletion. to discuss the

various aspects of the planning council plan which Shaykh al-Qesimi has
described as the state‘s main concern at present.

Shaykh Sultan spoke frankly and clearly to Ala-HAHN AL-‘AMBI in this inter-
view which proceeded as follows:

[Question] In light of the experience of the years passing since the esteh-

liehment of the UAE, what is your evaluation of the experience at the polit-
ical, economic and social levels?

61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
roe OWICIAL 088 ONLY

[Answer] There is no doubt that an an experimt, the "All is a unique step
in the Arab henelend-a step taken on the basis of understanding and cooper-
ation nong the enirates. 'rhe mien concept is a positive concept and is an
Arab gain on the path to the desired unity.

He proceeded fro- the zero point in creat lug and eelsblluhiug the union. He
had no establish-eats and no fire experience at the political level. when
we say that the enperinent has been a unique step. it is because it did not
only proceed fro. the zero point but also .idst a sea of conflicts inherited
free the colonialist are.

When we era-ins the phases through which the union has passed since its crea-
tion. we can notice the vast difference between the starting point and the
point that we have reached politically, econoaically and socially.

Politically. each curate had the power to taha independent positions in the
donein of foreign affairs and we have now been able to confine the adoption

of decisions and the holding of official contacts at the foreign level to
the “AB Ministry of Foreign Affairs solely. 'lhis in itself constitutes an
iaportant gain that bolsters the nsinstays of unity.

At the level of mifying the establislnents, there wasn't 0 single establish-
Ient reflecting the unionist inclination along the eniretes. except for the
hinistry of Education mose progress relied on partially unionist foundations.
This liniatry was centered in Abu Dhabi. In the other eairetea. there were
only education bureau. He proceeded to mify those bureau and to serge
then in the liinistry of Education. The sane was done in the arses of health.
donestic security and in the other establishnents.

Socially. the IIAB has followed a line that insures full social security for
all groups with the all of raising the standard of living. In this regard.
the state has increased wages aore than once to iaprove the conditions of
civil servants and it has insured the opportunities of work for the young
generation.

ParbSighted Policy

(he added) however. we do not disregard the presence of onerous critical
difficulties that met be handled and dealt with. But persistent efforts to
clininatc these difficulties and to deal with the- with all the loans available
to the official leaderships and cadres enables the realization of this goal
under the wise policy formulated by Shayhh Zayid ibn Sultan Al Nuheyyan. the
chief of state. This is a policy of deliberation, of a wise outlook and of
fraternal settlenents to deal with the traces of the colonialist legacy that
had planted the seeds of division between one enirete and another. one tribe
and another and .ong the were of the single family on the basis of"diwide
and rule. -

$2
'0! OFFICIAL 088 OIL?
The truth is that we have experienced and continue to experience from the

difficulties produced by these methods and we have had to overcoae these
difficulties to bolster the foundations of the union.

There in nu tluuht Ihul I-IsI of these difficulties are. (fut usuqthﬂ. the
problems ul emnuuu burderu between the emltnteu. newevet. in eut epiuleu
strengthening the foundations of the union can eliminate the causes of the
explosion of these problems and prevent then free turning into time-bonbs.

Fusion in Single Crucible

(he further added) We notice that the general representation of all the

groups and sectors of the emirates la in the interest of the state as a unified
constitutional institution. The emirates are fused in the crucible of the
single united state which is aware of the requirements of local government

to run affairs on the basis of the instructions of the state [UAR] ministries.
we hope that this will be applied in all the emirates of the union because

we notice that there are some emirates that have neglected the duties they
shoulder toward the union.

1 would like to underline here the prominent role that is performed by the
Ministry of Inﬁbrmation through the radio. television and the press to
strengthen the union's procession. to keep away the dangers of division free
the minds of the citizens and to fight the seeds of regionalism and of petty
conflicts. Infor-ation in the UAE is. as I have noticed. of an advanced level.
He hope that the other state ministries are up to the level of the task ea-
trusted to each of them so that the procession may continue successfully.

Our Herd Ia Sincere

[Question] With the national celebrations. there arises the question of the
practical results achieved at all the doaestic and foreign levels. what are
the most outstanding results?

[Answer] There are nuaerous problems and obstacles. as I have already said.
But the picture becomes clearer when the possibilities of a comparison be-
tween the past and the present are taken into account. In the past. the
tribal rule was predominant. There were no laws. no bonds and no unified
policy. But the creation of the union defined the rights and duties of
every citizen. The common will for unity had to be translated into laws
and into constitutional articles defining the rules of government and of
application and also defining the rights and the duties.

The difficulties emerged on application. whether at the level of the consti-

tutional articles or of the provisions of the law. This in itself was a con-
siderable problem.

At the political level. the emirates enjoy good relations at both the Arab
and international levels and their asset is the sincere word and wise posi-
tions. Do not forget that the emirates are new to politics and that we

‘3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
M OWICIAI. ”SB ONLY

do not Imow the trickery of politics but say the word of truth. regardless
of how they object to true words.

Ibreover. the “A! is a generous state. not only at the level of supporting the
developing Arab countries but also at the level of develop-cot aid to the third
world comrriee in Asia md Africa.

Blessed Step

[Question] Hut is your opinion regarding the chances of the success of the
mificatien resolutions that is to be reportedly issued shortly. especially
the resolution to mify broadcasting?

[Answer] I have already referred to the good efforts that are being exerted
by the Ministry of lnfornstion in the sphere of enlighteuent on mification
and to the ninistry‘s successful we of the radio and television facilities
that have proven their effectiveness and their inset on guidance.

As for the chances of the success of the uifieation resolutions, everybody
knows that every unification step feces nt-erous obstacles and gape that have
to be filled up with tine. Therefore. it is natural in this case to seek to
mite the broadcasting stations operating in the state and to nerge then in
a single station that speaks in the nane of the 0A8 and reflects the views
and positions of its citieens. Therefore. we have decided to units the

' Sharjah broadcasting station with that of Abu Dhabi out of our belief in our
responsibility before God and before the Arab people free the Gulf to the
ocean and out of our faith in the need to rise above all for. of regional
jingoisn. All we hope for is that everybody will follow our emle so that
we say achieve the goals that we all aspire for.

Toward New Constitution

[Question] what is your evaluation of the phases of the “Al's progress in
light of the systen of rule followed by Sheykh layid the Sultan Al Nuhayyen,
the chief of the state

[Answer] The HA! was fended on the basis of a provisional constitution.

The text of this constitution was drawn up at a tine when we were all subject
to violent currents of conflicts and problems created in the face of the
union. The constitution cans to take those conflicts into consideration

in preparation for elininating then and then for pleasing many of the parties
concerned. In this regard and in many other provisions. the word "any" was

used to satisfy sons people. to bypass the fields of danger and to exclude
the incentives for isolation.

Even though this word [nay] was the door through which soae circles pene-
trated to adopt private decisions. we noticed after a while that the con-
tinuation of this situation would further eoqalicate natters. that powers
had to be divided. that responsibilities had to be defined and that the

Us
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
decision must lie in one hand so that the account for both right and wrong
may be restricted to those in positions of responsibility. The state thus
started to proceed toward a new and pcnaanent constitution. We hope that
this constitution will be approved shortly because it is unreasonable for
the provisions of the provisional constitution to continue to be a means for
division and for weakening the UAE for which we care and which we tend with
our hearts and minds.

[n this respect. Shsykh Zayid was foremost among those who believe in the
union and in the importance of the unity of the emirates. even before he
became the nuaber one official in the union. Then came the responsibility
to reflect this faith in the union in serious steps and courses toward
completing the march of unity.

We have also focused all attention on the security situation and we have
defined the ways to safeguard the area from the hands of tamperers.

sluggishness Is Healthy Phenomenon

[Question] Sharjsh had lived under the canopy of noticeable economic pr.s-
perity. It has been said that the economy then became sluggish. ﬂow has this
problem been dealt with?

[Answer] when we speak about the emirates or about one emirate. we always
speak about the union as a whole. First I am responsible for the UAE and
then comes my responsibility for Sharjah. These are the sound foundations
of federal rule.

Concerning the reply to the basic question. I will say that the sluggishneas
to which you refer affected the entire Gulf area in the preceding period.
This was due to inflation and to the rapid growth undergone by the area. It
was an unbalanced and unnatural growth. Consequently. it spread fear and
caution among the officials regarding the consequences of the weakness of the
economic entity's absorption capacity.

I believe that the sluggishness that set in afterwards was the best cure for
the unhealthy situation prevailing at the time because it led to formulating
the controls and the means to deal with and to correct the procession at

the level of development and growth.

Imagine that in the past we dealt with establishments that had no bases and
no financial capital. To a large degree this led to confusion. But it also
opened our eyes to the reality and led to definite calculations and to a com-
prehensive evaluation and correction regarding the future. There are means

of approach and proposals intended to achieve a well-studied and comprehen-
sive boost that will affect the entire area.

[Question] It has been reiterated that new oil wells with commercial quan-

tities of oil were recently discovered in Sharjah. "hat are the details
of this issue?

65
FOR OFPICIAL USE ONLY
'0! OFFICIAL US! ONLY

[Answer] Nothing of the sort has happened and we hope that what you are
talking about will happen.

[Question] Having been faniliarieed with the outcone of the Baghdad Arab
s_it conference. what is your view of these results?

[Answer] before the lagth conference. I was afraid of the dangers of the
crack that afflicted the Arab line and that threatened the fraternal solid-
arity and cooperation at the national level. Even during tho baghdad confer-
ence. we had our hands on our hearts for fear of the radicalisa in acne ideas.
But God be thanked, reason. understanding and wisdo- prsvailed on the situation.

In sly opinion. the problea lies in driving Egypt away fro. the Arab group.
Ousting Egypt is not in the interest of the Arab citisen [sic] and a solution
out be found for the Palestinian problea through the Arab countries on the
frontline with the ens-y and with the support of all the Arch countries.

Acceptance of resolution 1‘2. for crawls. does not an squandering. relin-
quiet-ant or cepitulation. All these are rejected and are out of the question.
Wat is actually in the picture is to put the Palestinian Arab people's
interest ot the top of the Arab interests and to shoulder the come respon-
sibility in order to attain the full Arab right through participation and
cooperation nong all the Arab countries. including the fraternal lgypt. The
mity of the Arab ranks is what will achieve the co-on national goals.

[Question] [that have been the reverberations of the Arab Action Charter
which was recently concluded between Syria and Iraq and how do you view the
iapaet of this charter on the Arab arena?

[Answer] we in the "A! are crystallieing a funds-ental and significant ex-
perincnt. naaely the esperinent of unity and we support with all our strength
any concurrence and rapprocheaent along the Arab brothers. Us hope that the
scope of the experiaent will expand to include the entire Arab homeland.

Rapprochenent between Iraq and Syria is natural. [that is unnatural is con-
flict and estrangenent. I noticed in a television progrn the joy on the
faces of those who crossed the land borders between Iraq and Syria after
years of estrangenent. Hy joy was s part of theirs. I hope that what has
been done between Iraq and Syria will include the states of the Arab Maghreb
and of the Arabian Peninsula.

Iapaet of Iranian Events

[Question] The Iranian events have given rise to onerous questions regarding
their input on the security conditions in the Gulf. "hot are the linita of
this llpnct and how is it faced?

[Answer] Iran is a Iajor country in the area. Be as neighbors are naturally
affected by what happens to our neighbors. He hope that Iran will cross

66
FOR ONION US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

from the fraaework or the crisis to the framework of stability and that its
conditions will return to normal.

As for the impact of the irnnian events on the area and on how to face this
impact locally and regionally. l heiieVe that the issue must be viewed oh-

]ectivciy and realistically and that the bridges of cooperation must he as-
tended to us. avoiding independent actions and positions. In this way. it

is possible to devote the efforts for filling the gaps in the face of out-

siders coveting the area.

Advice to al-Sadat

[Question] Hhat are your expectations concerning the Arab future should a
separate peace be concluded between Egypt and Israel?

[Answer] I hope. rather I am full of hope. that al-Sadet will stop from
proceeding along this line even while he is holding the pen to sign. My
hope emanates from my concern for the unity of the Arab ranks and for the
cause itself. The path to salvation and liberation cannot but pass through
sacrifices and what has been taken with force cannot be regained without
force. The rights of peoples are not given over tables. The Arab homeland
needs a revolution against the self and not the revolution of arms and coups.
Revolution agains the self is what built the great nations. The most imme-
diate example is India. In India. there are various traditions. customs.
religions and languages. Yet. the Indian people. represented in Mahatma
Gandhi. were able to transform India into a single cultural entity and people.

Oil Prices

[Question] After the recent drop in the value of the dollar. the eyes have
turned toward the UAE and the other members of the OPEC. waiting for their
decision. "hat is your position toward the oil prices?

[Answer] we notice that the drop in the price of the dollar. or rather the
drop in the purchasing power of the oil revenues. has inflicted a big material
loss on many of the oil producing countries. within this framework. the

UAR minister of oil has toured a number of the oil producing countries for
consultation and coordination before adoption of the final decision concerning
the issue of raising the [oil] prices. Ha support any opinion agreed upon

by the majority of the oil countries.

[Question] There are complaints as a result of the lack of the elements of
firm and clear organization and planning for the entire UAB economy.

[Answer] The thinking is inclined currently toward the creation of a high-
level planning council for the state. The idea has been presented for dis-

cussion and examination. He hope to implement it if it meets the welcome and
approval of the brother members of the Supreme Council.

COPYRIGH': Paris AL-VATAN AL-‘AMBI 1978

saw.
cso: 4302 (.7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WESTERN SAliM

l’OLlSARiO SECRETARY GENERAL NOTES SAHARAN PEACE PROSPECTS
imtdnn Tllli MIDDLE EAST in lingliah Jun 79 pp 39-60. 1.1

What are the proapecta for a solution of the Sahara problem after
the negotiationa between Poliaario and Mauritania? How haa
Polisurio managed to organise a people of nomoda into a
homogeneous force? What la life like in the Sahrawi refugee campa
three years after King Hanan of Morocco launched his “Green
March"? iiounrd Schisael toured the area and spoke to Polisario

[Tent]

Secretary-General Mohammad Abdel-Aziz.

The Middle East: iiaa the illnraa of
Alxerian i’reaident Ilouarl
Iluuntedlennr and the «louhta it route on
the political future of hia eountry.
which in your principal nlly. affected
the aearch for a peaceful aulutlon of the
conﬂict In the Weatern Sahara?

.tIoharnm-vd Abdel-Arie: iioumetlierme la
a mi atateamon who has played an impor-
innt rule in theArnh wurld and on the Inter-
uatiunnl aeene. The Algerian State mann-
taina a clear line based on the .‘jatiunal
Charter. Algeria haa aulid ”lineal in-
atiluiita‘t! and ita voice «unto in Inter.
nntiunal wiitira. 11w Algerian people have
[ins-«i thnlugh the experience of I inn; war
ui’ until-rial liheration. The Sahram pmplc
are um manual in the name pron-v. Our
relations with Algeria are wry close and
innit «n a valid iraturiatim. Certain milieu
in Hun-pr and in the Arab vmrld have taken
mtvautage oi Prealdent Bournedreane’a
illntsa- to launch a campaign of unfounded
nun-III! and attack: against Algeria. A: all
inane, Alxcn'an foreign policy in batted on ill!
fort-mt surmount all whore strum.
inn: ﬁne their nationa indemuience. Presi-
rlmt limmmlit-nue his alwaya atmzacti the
fact that Aha-rim policy in thia domatn
marirl not he altered by a change in the

68

ountry'a leadership. We are thermal)!
convinced of the dncerity oi Algeria'-
umimourcame.

t:l During the fourth congreaa oi the
Poliaario Front you demanded that the
new Mauritanian regime of Lt-Col.
Ould Saich ahould recognise the
Democratic Sahravrl Itrah Republic
(RASD). return the rector oi the
Sahara it now oecuplea to the Poliaario
authoritiea. and withdraw ita troopo to

within ita pro-war houndarlea. Howe '

load are you willing to rnalntaln the
temporary ccaaedrc in Mauritanian
territory it the Mauritanian Govern-
ment dooa not mpond in a favourable
manner to your conditiona (or a return
to peace?

0 FiretotaltheOongre-oi'thoPollaal'io
Fronthaathepowertodeeideallilnportam
question oi a political and atomic nature.
The course considered the eeaaeiiu aa a
mieetural caution. Until the present the
eeaaeﬁre he. remained in force. Concoming
the recognition of the M80 by Mauritanig
it'naloricalmovaiorthemregirnein
Noualtchott to recmniae it. The RASD
uanta to maintain good relation board on
mutual respect and cooperation Between
the Mauritanian and Sahrawi people.
However. the fourth comma did not at {a
the mitionoi the ruse by Mauritania.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R000100020022-4

l’Oil OFFICIAL USE ONLY

in the framewrh dourditiona put forward
lomttutnlllm‘u’m. them
crave- aalted the Mauritanian to
WWW ottheRASDonall
the territory ot the en nith Sahara and
edit; the pert ot tit territory which it
adminieteratolheRASD. -

u in ms the ﬂrat amtm~mm:.$

“mo, Mort-pita cl-Oulll. It»

33' ”menu of oatabllehing a
tcderatlon with Mauritania once the
Weatcrn Sahara became inde pendent
under Poliaarlo’ a rule. la ouch a project
atlll a poaaiblllty or have three year. of
bitter deacrt war rendered it unlilreiy?
o in thin nartelt it 5 important to on.
tlrndatrtl that. Ouaii did not tallt of a
[retention un'lh Mauritania in lite atriet
more «I the maxi. inateati he e-puhc til unity
with the Mauritanian purple and other Arab
ciarntriea in the lieutenant ot' pnn- -Arab
unity. Given the situation smiling in the
rr-gittrt. the intuition of rarity with
Mauritania in not one of immediacy. When
the thrawi people reoovent lta tovereignty
om the Wutent Sahara in ita totality it will
he nanihle tar rethink thia question. We
cannot rpealt at unity or federation with a
natntry which still «topic- port of our
national territory.

u What wae the result of the
negotiations between representatives of
i'olitario and Mauritanian diplomate
which recently tooh place in Bamako?
Were negotiationa opened with the
Moroccana in the Malian capital?

0 It in a fact that negotiation have been
going on between the ltASD and the new
Mauritanian regime. The "kit recent round
u! tallta tnnit place in Bamako. Until now
then negotiation: have not proctor—ed any
paitive mlta. mainly became the
Mauritanian tletegatitlt h. not advanced
aigtu'iiuttrtly on the road to lilttlit‘ a
peaceful ovulation in the Saharan hue.
(‘teweming Morocco. 1 ran mire you that
there were no negrrtlatitan or even die
morima with them at Bamako. 'lhe Kind
hit-rum not a hi «whim delegation.
'i'hia delegation of meet a nrcmber o!
I‘ulirario hut he woe only I: simple militant
til our mgrutitatiun. We did thie out of
mint for Malian Pruident Mouse Thom
became he truncated tn to meet the
hit-rumour. liven thtargh the head of the
Marceau delegation conddered the
nnﬂingaaapuitivemoveintheaeneethat
itortcnrdupanewerainthenarchtor
pram King Hanan made a declaration
alter the meeting which indicated that he
has not abandoned Morocoo'e traditional
tuition art the Saharan notation Order-

69

tturetely we feel that the continua
arrned atruggle by the Sahrawi pt
only reaponee poaaible to Mon
tnnabent poaition.

0 France and certain Atrict
have reportedly put forward
plan which fomece the cre-
Saharan mlni-atate under
control in the portion ottbe Sal
under Mauritanian control.
willing to accept ouch a plan?
0 i can nature you tint we have
otBeialty contacted by l’ranoa or
African country awning thepo
accepting such a plan. We her
about arr-called roiutiotu thtoul

Weatenr whiicatiane. You must.
hoop in tntt‘td the M that the corn
arc aupraaedly behind loch a
who reviottaly durtibcd the
as not ontotituting the t:
viable atate. that it toray a tent:
euﬂiciently later population. 'l'trt
can now pure the quertinn dhou
prcaent a parade-solution which at

revolve tireprohlenrthroughthe c
a mitt-mimetataﬂowever theo

table aoiution for the Sehrawi pa
eatablishrnent and recognition of l
on the entire territory of what on.
Spanish Sahara.
D At the preeent time i? ate
recognised the RASD. Bcrldet
only South Yemen in the Arc!
among these countries. Why
Poiiaario cause ouch limited d
aueceaa in the Arab world?
0 AaytathaveaaidJiASDiarec
l7 atatea including tmfromtheA
Homer. this timid not be into
meaning that the M50 dots no
support of people in the Arab we
the other continente. it other Aral
have not formally remind the l
doe: not stop them front aid
different waye. For example, Lib:
crucial nipport and to door Syri
certain that at the rtnrggle of ti
pmple eprogrsaes other states in
world will accord diplomatic rec
the M80.
0 Do you maintain relations
PLO?
0 We support the right otthcl
to tell-determination en
rider that any rolution to the l
notation must necessarily have t
and partin'pation of the PLO.

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOSSOROOOIOOO20022-4
-. a...=~i.:l .Iﬂ ﬁiqa.ﬂ.1I-G= 6- I
3......5. e.. 2.3....- 3....a 3:... :3
2.... u. :5 «2...... 3:31.. 332......
..o v.2. ~31... =3 nus-3.2.. 2:33:83.
.3 52.2.33 :3 3.32.... 2.2.1..
3:21.32.— s.._n.. .- :5 .na... .3..- a2.
:3 9.262... 2... 9.2.1.2....3
v............ 92.... 3.3.2.: mgr-3..

.. ....... 33.1.5.5: i :3 ca... 3.54...
.....2. ... :5 .3. 11.5.... 3.52.1 s...-
=.r§... 5. :8 3.2.3.3: .5 .. E... 3....
............n .3 3.3.... 7.5:... 3...: .53
rigié. 1.55.! 3 =8 5.». 2.5.13.
.....<a 1:... $3.52... 22.2.... 5...... .u :53.
mi... .52 a... 3.32. 3 2.1.2... :5 1n... 0.
:5 .9931 .833 .o 5.26.. 3....
._1..:......._..... 3.... 5.3.3.933. £3. .5
.5... 3......75. :8 «a... :5. .233 1.. a...
5...... ... 3.... 35...: «1.7:... 33...... 5... =5
COPYRIGHT:

(:50:

FOR OH’IGIM. USE ORLY

mud lta Neruda“ and that l‘ollnado
m the my lilmatlnn mmmt
u thuthSnlw-Hm-katahonm-
' «lutatthquvatim Wham"!
dmﬁonhatkn. The Met tluu «lamina
uptn for internatk-ml aniaatima and: aa
theOAUandthaU .11uKIutoum
dcdnlnn ab took Into mam the

«pinion onhe lntamatlonal Court 0(me
which stated that than cal-tad no

lies of amen-inky between the Western
Sahara and Mme: Mauritania. I amld

1.1.20

Ilka to add that lately both Nmukchntt and
Rabat have mam-tuned In an “but!“
was: thy 0M) and the UN. 1119! va
Ilia! to pct-Wm the in» [mm lat-mg dia-
«ml at Il- Wt. 11‘? ““3" H "mm“
mlttubtomlan utt rattan 'wy
summit «dam to dim. tha Saharan
“mu-m“ "at: '- a:
vuwul man 'a act

MM. Jaalar al-Nlmairl. toconvene the
entrance. Illa mponalhﬂity in tﬂa matter
Input. 0

[978 1c Magazines. Ltd.

51

POR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
l’Oli Ol’l‘lClM. USE ONLY

"ESTER" SMIAM

POLISARIO OFFICIAL SAYS ONLY MOROCCO WANTS SAHARA?! UAR
Madrid CAMBIO l6 in Spanish 10 Dec 78 p 56

[Text] After almost 1 year of diplomatic exchanges. the POLISARIO FRONT is
returning to Spain to cultivate its recently inaugurated relations with the
000 [Demcrntic Center Union]. which promise a not very distant solution to
the Saharan War.

On 19 February something more than the cold and rain surprised Ahmed Douhari
at the foot of the plane which brought him back from Mexico. The liarajas
airport authorities had advised the POLISARIO FRONT representative that he
was not permitted to enter Spain.

Now. 9 math: after that incident and agln in Madrid, Bouhari hobnobbed with-
out problems with leaders of all Spanish political forces 3 years after the
signing of the Madrid Tripartite Accord by which the Spanish Government gaVe
up its sovereignty over its Saharan colony in Morocco and Mauritania.

"There is a new system and therefore a new analysis." the Hestera Saharan of—
ficial states in explaining the about-face made by the Spanish leaders in
recent months. "The tripartite accord offers Spain only difficulties.
worries and political tensions. leading to the conclusion. in public or

in private. that the solution offered by the accord is dangerous and does

not safeguard Spanish interests in that area."

Disadvantages. Thousands

The youthful POLISARIO FRONT leader lists the disadvantages which. in his
opinion. brought on the 16 November 1975 Accord. "First of all. the Bu-Crsa
phosphate did not reach Spain. because it belongs to a peoplenthe western
Saharan--from whom it was necessary to steal on behalf of that accord.

"Nor was the Spanish fishing fleet benefited." Bouhari states. "It is pos-
sible to fish in the waters of a rough river but not in a sea in which war
is being. waged." «voiding an admniahing tone. Bouhari continues. "In like
manner. from a mrul standpoint we cannot continue to close our eyes to the
genocide which certain factions are attewting to perpetrate a few miles
from the Spanish coast." Bouharu emphasized the ilportance of 15 June 1977.

52
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

“the date on which the Spanish dcmcratic process began." Respect for
peoples' right to self-detenination. according to his. is an essential
criterion of de-ocracy. "The doaocratiaatiun process in Spain.” he was
pleased to say. "opened new perspectives. snsewhat liaited in the beginning.
to restore what the 1'. Rove-her 1975 Accord wanted to destroy forever.

"As far as the Uestern Saharan people are concerned." Bodmri stated. "suf-
fering and war began with the tripartite accord. But it is no less certain
that this accord died on the field of battle; the reality is sosething dif-
ferent. and it is on that basis that we sust Jointly write a new page for
that area which will guarantee peace. haraony and cooperative relations
based on sutual respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
each of our peoples." An essential condition for achieving this solution
would be Spanish participation.

"Those responsible for Spain's foreign policy." Iouhsri recognizes. ”began.
jointly with us. to coapose a few lines of hope on ll. October 1978." On
that day. in the midst of the desert, the POLISARIO mom and the “CD. rep-
resented by Javier Rupcres. signed a joint co-unique on the occasion of
the release of the eight Canary Island fishersan whoa the POLISARIO FRONT
had seized in Hestern Sahara waters.

"Three principal clesents." louhari explained. "contributed to that happy
ending: the support of the Spanish desocratic forces. particularly the
P308 [Spanish Socialist Uorkers Party]. is said to have played an inortant
role; the struggle of our people. directed by the POLISMIO FRONT; and the
urgent need to put out this lake of fire. which is the Saharan liar."

lbrocco Relains Alone

"ﬂorocco is no longer interested in anything but war." Boulmri states in
explaining that Ilassan II periodically resorts to the recourse of keeping
the old expansionist desires of the Allsouite Regine alive in accordance
with the waverings of the lbroccan situation.

"Morocco reaains alone in its war of expansion. This policy now has few
friends. who at rises are victim of blackmail and of the big-stick policy
to get them to follow." he esphasiaes in a veiled allusion to the claim
which Iiassan I! is deter-ined to bring to light free the to tine in regard
to Ceuta and Helilla.

Dispensing with hyperboles. Bouhari states categorically: "The current war

in the Sahara is a problem of decolonisation whose solution is no dilem."

lie does not fail to adult i-ediately that soaething has changed. elphasizing
in this connection the great understanding shown by the Spanish Covernscnt and
the role played both by "influential persons within the 060" as well as by

the P808 and the res [Spanish Conmist Party]. "The solution." he su-arizes.

“is genuine respect for the Hestern Saharan people's right to self-dcternina-
tion."

53
POI OFFICIAL USB OIL!
FOR OFFICIAL I183 ONLY

Hurouco in nnnin the tame: of his attacks. "the only country which vnnta
war" and which in own attempting to revive .1 "colonial accord which would
like to inpuuu n cnioninl pence." lln cnnciudun cuthusiauticnny: "The
new viulon which exintu in Spain. together with the come-fire decreed with
Nuurlumiu by the I’OLISARIO FRONT. arc the beginning of 8 mm plume. a
peace effort which we mat support and encourage in order to guarantee a
definite and Just unlution to the problem."

(DI'YRIOIIT: [978 CANMO 16

8568
030: 6400

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007102100: ClA-RDP82-00050R000100020022-4

' FOR OFFICIAL 088 ONLY

ORGANIZATION OF POLISARIO CAMPS

London Tilt; MIDDLE EAST in English Jun 79 p 61

[Text]

'I‘lmsmnneekinellmnhmehedth
Gnu-n Much as a W to the pnetlttonol
the Walnut Mum with Mat-dunk. the
1.1mm Snlvnwl refugee. [Mm In the
l‘ulknrio ramps hated near the mathetn
Martin tmndWmme
unlit-ml «whine-that mold lend tothe
mahliahment d a «ea-M nndetnutete.
Since the .Inltitlm the Slhnvll people hm
muted out an menu It? to pin
ultltn' «f the M WW “0 “MI-
mtinnul witka of the Dem“:
Sinai Arab Republic (RASD).

Onee tuned: who wandered I’m eenturlu
meethetmitoryoltheWntemSehue-
welt a Smthem Mum and Meat: end
hteutitnnta. the thuwie have now been
«Incentnted intn me people Int the ﬁt!
time under «mam nl’ «faced cute.
Unda the "ritual kutenhtp a! the
hull-uh lite-rattan Put the telnet-I have
been implnnted in the. will: (Moot)
which heat the name- the Western
Sahen'e pint-int tome: BI Mom. Sm
mt nettle. Thu-e amp ale mated by
meal huntleed hilmnetlu in ode: to
(«mute «pnhthn. tin hygienic
nmditinns and avotd at! a my.“
tenet fut Moeueenn lit nib.

Bach pvt-vine. h divided into «ﬂame.
whkh an the but: edmhietnthe unite.
'the inhabitnnumhnm Mum lesion

and Independent. Now my I
membetohntt-etmcelu’ul
bmwﬂblet’uoueupeetot

one member to the camp's pawl:
which it tum tends «manta!
Nathan-t Ownetl. W heel
o! unanimity end In this we
euppott is wanted fat Polk-rte

The simple one new cleanly dc
well fed. Md naive medical can
we kept. clean and m net out
(“b.w. Mam
elude!!! WI
deity needs. The epidennta w
the u «(ups in 1975 and 19
just a Int-mow.

Each dim now has its m In
medical dink. Path wile” ht
«hook. A hishwhool foe metal
Itudenta is nearing comptettu
temnthb‘y wen-equipped hupitt
lunction'tn; lot the put. year. A:
inditulhtl of the mm the
learned thetr job on the e w

nuke-hilt tn {tun t In
who had ' medical mix
the denial resin».

55

70% OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007I02I08: ClA-RDPOZ-OOBSOROOO1000200224
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP82-00050R000100020022-4

l'OIl OFFICIAL USE ONLY

An Imlunmlln; («lute at life in the
ramp h the role played by Immen in thin
lmllllmnlly mnle-clominnml uncle-1y. Wllh
man at the men may ﬂulnim u the Inn“.
lhe lumen hnve hemme lll‘ driving font
lie-hind pollllrnl and mrlnl \W‘llllﬂllﬂll In
the ramp. In one diam l vlsilul Ihe 11w
member Maul" (‘mmll um mlltely mm-
plled of nmnen. Outing um (“mu-inns
lg?! n low-'[Illrhe'q'elfnhnrnn lent (Ion/mg;
l pninlu null mmmve um!
hive mule nlnre the day: «fen erred undu-
at (In and of I915. Not unly have mm
women lenml lo end and who: they have
nho undergone bole Inllllnry lrnlnlng. The
Faun). Polimlo mm nl the end 0/
Remember mud-led their rule by decline
I numb" ol the women'u omnnlulinn lo
the umllve unwell.

COPYRIGHT: [978 [C Hngnzlnca. Ltd.

C80: 10/. 20

56
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: CIA-RDP02-00880R000100020022-4
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"ESTER" SAIIARA

BR! 8P8

SPANISH PlSlllNc 00A? AﬁAcKBD-J‘He took cover with our hands held high and
they shot pointblank.“ Miguel Rodriguez related; he was one of the three
survivors of the fishing boat, "Cruz del liar." whose crew was machine-gunned
by unknown parties Tuesday night. 28 Nave-her. while fishing in western
Saharan waters. Bight other cospaniuns were less fortunate: they have died
or disappeared. The official version is that the fishing boat was approached
by a raft of the "Zodiac“ type. uroon in color. with 20 sen on board who
were wearing diving suite and carrying sachine guns. Sone of the attackers
boarded the fishing boat. placed a bonb on it and threw ll crew acnbers over-
board to machine-gun then. The hub soon exploded and the boat sank. The
Spanish authorities suspect that it was an attack by the POLISARIO FRONT.

but the western Saharana accuse lbrocco of having perpetrated this assassina-
tion in order to place the blue on then and disturb their friendly. though
incipient relations with the Spanish Govern-eat. [Text] [Madrid mm 16
in Spanish 10 Dec 78 p 56] 8568

050: 4600 END

57
m OFFICIAL I18! 0!“