APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00860R000100010030-6

1 K .1an 1 070
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010030-6

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8223
16 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(FOUO 2/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVICE

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010030-6
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspapers, periodicals and books, but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted. with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

Headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
[] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief, indicate how the original information was
processed. Where no processing indicator is given, the infor-
mation was summarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as

given by source .

The contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies. views or attitudes of the 0.3. Government.

COPYRIGHT [ANS AND REGULATIONS GWERNING WHERSHIP OF

MATERIALS REPRODUCED HEREIN REQUIRE THAT DISSEHINATION
0F TRIS PUBLICATION BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
0. Pamela; Oneselmlen kept.
_ ~~

- Pollen-Se. Oneal“: ea Name eel Address “I. l’lekct/Teek/ietb the Ne.

Joint Publications Research Service
1000 North Globe Road
Arlington. Virginia 22201

12. Spousal” Oueelaetlee lane eed Mdnee II. 23:33 Input a Period

The serial report contains articles on political and sociological developments
in major areas of Latin America. as reported primarily from Latin American
newspapers and periodicals. It also includes information on major cements
of Latin American economy. geography. culture. and ethnography.

eectiptots

Political Science Inter-American Affairs __Guyana
Sociology IArgentina ___llaiti
Economics ___Barbados Lilonduraa
Culture Bolivia _Jameica
Ethnology Brazil _uexico
Technological Chile .__Nicaregua
Geography Colombia Panama
Costa Rica Paraguay
Cuba Peru
Dominican Republic Trinidad-Tabago
Ecuador _Uruguay
El Salvador Venezuela
Guatemala

”8 Madmen/Oneida Teens

in. COSATlﬂeld/Gceup 50. 5c. SK
II. Availability Sun-m . ‘ -
For official Use Only. ' . . _ 17
Limited Xumber of Copies Available From JPRS. W“
3; . ’ D

'0” ”VI... ".90. mecca-roe CODlO-O’I
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/8223

16 January 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N LATIN AMERICA
(POUO 2/79)

ConreuTs

ARDENTINA

Noted columnists Focus on River Plate Basin
(Various sources. 4, 5 Dec 78).........................

Effects on Foreign Relations, by Estele Areujo
Need for Cooperation Stressed, by Rodolfo Psndolfi

French Hriters Discuss Political Prisons
(Gien Franco Vene; L'EUROPBO. 10 Nov 78)...............

RONDURAS

PCN Leaders Comment on Donestic SituatiOn, Cuban Revolution
(Pun, 31 NC 78)....0000000000000OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOO

VENEZUELA

Briefs
Engines for rsnks

- a - . [III - LA - 144
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

PAGE

16

16

FOUC
FOR OF'FICIAL USE ONLY

ARGENTINA

MED coumsrs FOCUS ON RIVER PLATE BASIN

Effects On Foreign Relations
Buenos Airea LA OPINION in Spanish 1» Dec 78 p 8
[Article by Batela Araujo]

[rm] At a dinner organised by the Colegio de Eacribanos in the city of la
Plata. Ada Emilio aluardo hassera announced a few goals in our foreign policy:

"Us will not obtain that wealth if we do not act in a systenatic, rational
way. united by cannon interest. He will have no connon interest as long as
we refuse to accept that production is a tool of geopolitics."

The geopolitical vision of Ar entins could become triangular (as in the plan
adopted by Gustavo Cirigliano I it could be based on a north-south axis inclu-
ding the River Plate Basin: it could be based on southern sovereignty; or it
could be centered in Cordoba-Tucuaan. Hhatever the priority region, it should
be based on a nodal in which geopolitical decisions take precedence over eco-
nonic decisions. The subordination of one to the other establishes the proper
nexus that will stimulate our nation to achieve greater heights. The economy
can never be the key to the fate of a country. Just as the economic well-being

of a faaily cannot have priority over the aoral destiny and unity of that
faaily.

The River Plate Basin is, m. the geopolitical point of view, one of the key
areas in international relations. Argentina's representation there aarks the
difference between a country that can only look on iron within its borders,
and a country that is open to the tree play of alliances and cannon interests
that began with independence.

The ﬂuvial policy of the Basin is the undeniable nexus eaong the five countries.
Brazil. tacitly, wants to cut it off. The Brazilian newspapers theaselves re-
cognise this when they say. as did the 50mm. no msn. (11/10/78) in the arti-
cle entitled "Itaipu And Navigation”: ”dill they conit the encraous error

of cutting off navigation in the Parana River, as has already been done in

other cases. on other rivers? Hill we always remain blind to the nature, see-

ing things only through the priest of present reality? Itaipu will be raiued
1

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
as a great barrier to impede the continuous flow of cargo, with the tremendous
problems that are inherent in any transshipment."

It seems. finally. that Argentina has decided to recall the old geopolitical
plans of the 1880's and use the navigability of the Parana to transform it
into a point of unionuae Sarmiento said-«that will connect us with Paraguay.
Uruguay and Upper Peru.

The present goal is no longer that of operating in favor of a single port
(Buenos Airos). as it was in 1880, but to utilise the vertebrae of a river
system that begins in Zanja dei Tigre. on the border with Bolivia, and goes
through the Canal of the Bermedo River. the Santiago del Bstero Canal. and

the Ibera Lake eyetes, with its outlet through the Corrientes River to the Pa-g
rana, to create a navigable complex enclosed in three triangles.

The first would be for-ed by the hiddle Parana to Yacyreta, and the outlet of
Ibers Lake into the Corrientes River, to the Parana.

The second would consist of the Bermejo Canal. the Santiago Canal and the Mid-
dle Parana.

The third would be formed by the Uruguay River. the Ibera system-~Corrientes
River-~Mirinay and the Lower Parana.

Brazil can close it off above the Parana and block off Itaipu instead of making
it a vein of communication. But the barriers that could prevent the circulation

of wealth will not be easily accepted by the trade that usually finds a way to
overcome obstacles.

According to Nicolas Boscovich in u opmow (9/30/78), "The countries with
common borders are not isolated compartments, nor can the influence of great
projects and of the plans to order the physical space in other countries be
ignored. Ferieriro Ratael. precursor of geopolitcs. said that the history

of a country is always part of the history of its neighbors. Argentina should
draw up and carry out plans for its basic infrastructure. bearing in mind the
transnational realities that will inevitably create a distorsion in the inter-
nal space if the necessary projects to maximize the use of its water basins
are not implemented. Uith efficient transportation methods at low cost and
with unlimited capacity, abundant energy at a low cost. guaranteed supply of
fresh water for human consumption, the use of factories and settlements. it
will be possible to fill the vast interior vacuums with industrial. mining.
forestry and livestock activity. and to integrate these backward regions not
Just economically but also socially."

The MVigability of the Parana as a system to circulate wealth requires the
implementation of the following projects:

a) The hiddle Parana. On 20 November in Moscow, an agreement with the Soviet
organization Technopromexport was signed in order to study the executive pro-
Ject for the multiple utilization of the Parana River in its middle stretch.

2

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The cont of the proJoct huh boon estimated at abcut $2.1; billion.

The Middle Parana product goes from Paso do la Patric (in the province of
Corrientes) to the subfluvial tunnel that Joins Santa Fe with Parana. Two ces-
plenentary frontal and lateral dates will provide hydroelectric energy: the
northern one with various alternate locations. and the southern one to be
located on the island of Chapeton. Both plants will how a capacity of

5,600 megawatts. which will put the Middle Parana System in sixth place in

the world.

Navigation locks are planned. to allow the ascent and descent of foreign ves-
sels of a draft of up to 21 feet. so that they nay enter Corrientes.

Santa Fe could accosodate vessels of a draft of up to 30 feet. and the sea-
going ships could go in as far as 1.000 kilometers from Buenos Aires.

b) Master Plan for the exploitation of the Bermejo River. In the city of
Oran (Salts). Argentine and Bolivian representatives signed an agreement in

mid November to draw up the energy and irrigation plan for the navigation of
the BermeJo.

The approximate location of the futire Zanja del Tigre dam was also established.
The lateral canal of the Bermejo could be ccmplenented with the Santiago del
Estero Canal. They will eapty into the river at Resistancia and Santa Fe.

respectively.

c) The Argentine-Paraguayan binational entity of Yacireta. It is estimated
that this project will generate as much as 2.? million kilowatts. but it was
designed to have a total potential capacity of ’6 million kilowatts. In addi-
tion to financing problems. the feasibility of achieving a greatu: utiliza-
tion of the navigation of this part of the Upper Parana is being discussed.

d) The mathematical model of the hydric balance of the There system. This
project dates back to 1970; it was designed by the Undersecretariat of Hydric
Resources. It presents various alternatives for the regulation of the Parana
by means of the Ibera Lake. with three basic variations: an outlet to the Pa-
rana through the Corrientes River in Argentine territory exclusively, and two
outlets to the Uruguay River, one in Argentine-Brazilian territory (Aguapey

River) and another in Argentine-Uruguayan territory (Mirinay River). almost
on the Brazilian border.

The Joint navigation and energy projects that propose a revitalizing geopoli-
tics of the Sniento vein must necessarily be complemented by a system of
superports which surpass the port of Buenos Aires, enriching the Argentine
part of the Basin. The superport of Punta. Hedanos will expand the maritime
coast of the Basin. as will the project for the Uruguayan super-port of Roche.
The superport of Rio (hands, on the other hand. will detract from the impor-
tance of the great riVer by means of transversal canals (the Ibicuy-Yacuy)
and horizontal routes.

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL UnE ONLY

But the fluvial policy will not be complemented Just by ports and naVigable
waterways. The transformation will emerge as a result of new forms of river
transportation. If the superports go hand in hand with large ships (super-
tankers for grains and petroleum) and superports for imports and exports, the
new river ports and navigable waterways hava found an intermediate system which
will reduce the cost of transporting large cargoes. Just as the superports do.
The lash ships, container ships and ro-ro systes will soon be seen on the river.

The container ships are normal sized vessels that have been adapted to trans-
port oontainers (which hold goods and are designed for repeated use in trans-

portation). These containers carry the products from the exporter to the im-
porter, from door to door, using either land or water transport.

The lash ships first arrived in the port of Buenos Aires in 1973. Their fun-
damental characteristic is a steam turbine that can tow as many as 71} baa... as
carrying up to 150 containers each, for a total of 160,000 tons. It is a veri-
table river railway, in which a vessel with a draft of 8 feet serves as a loco-
motive or tugboat, the barges being railroad cars.

The floating route, or ro—ro system (roll-cn/roll-off) is complemented with
highway routes. The ships that transport railway cars act as bridges or con-
nections between the two routes.

The ports that have been built and shall be built to complement the hydroelec-
tric projects on the Parana and the Uruguay, as well as the great fluvial com-
plex of the River Plate Basin, seem to be a geopolitical dress. The goods pro-
duced by the low-cost energy and the convenient means of cossunioation will

ensure that the wealth will flow through the magnificent Parana, recognised
axis of the River Plate Basin.

Need For Cooperation Stressed
Buenos Aires LA OPINION in Spanish 5 Dec 78 p 1
[Article by Rodolfo Pandolfi]

[Text] The Tenth Nesting of Foreign Ninisters of the River Plate Basin began
yesterday. As dusk fell on Punta del Este, the two main commissions in which
the five ministers have divided their functions (National Resources and Infra-
structure, and Economic and Social Issues) began work.

At that time the behind the scenes work in the corridors of the Hotel San
Rafael gave the first indications. In a conversation with the LA OPINION
correspondent. the Bolivian foreign minister indicated that the Southern
Cone "was experiencing a very special moment" and that this had accentuated
the urgency of a division of labor in his country between the political and
military teams. "The institutionalization plan," he remarked, "is now more
than ever linked to Bolivia's national defense needs." The foreign minister
of that nation repeated that Bolivia is in full solidarity with Argentina
concerning the southern conflict, indicating that there were some who wanted

to cut off Argentina's feet so that they could not rest on Antarctica. Later
the following dialog ensued:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] what is your point of view with regard to the work that is being
done by the Upper BermeJo River Basin Commission?

[Answer] The studies are progressing satisfactorily. I focus on the problem
through one of its aspects: our access to the Atlantic. For that reason.

I stressed the need to make the waters of the Paraguay River between Porumba
and merto Busch navigable.

LQuestion] what are the most important priorities established by Bolivia?

[Answer] The first connission is studying the plan for the Sucre-Villason
highway project, at Bolivia's request. I can also say that there is an agree-

ment with Argentina even on some aspects that cannot yet be revealed to the
public.

Earlier, the foreign sinister of Uruguay. Dr Adolfo Polls Martinez, had spoken.
He enphasized the importance of the multilateral function of the system. The
Brazilian foreign sinister, Antonio Amedo da Silveira, on the other hand,

in accordance with his well-known opinion, stressed the right to undertake
bilateral treaties within the aultilateral context. Eton the theoretical
point of view, Aaaredc's observation was obvious.

Azeredo emphasized that he personally went to all the aeetings of foreign
ainistere after the signing of the treaty. Referring to the Itaipu projects,
he said that he was convinced that the future would prove that the governments
were wise to decide to maintain the spirit of the commitments made.

The Argentine foreign minister. Carlos Hashington Pastor, recalled that the
Itaipu projects as well as the Corpus ones were undertaken in border regions,
which gave them a special significance. he strongly advocated that BoliVia's

land-looked status be ended. and stressed the need for dynaaic cooperation.
in the Basin.

Paraguayan Foreign Minister Alberto Rogues. in his speech. concentrated on
the need to ensure that all actions in the River Plate Basin be undertaken
within the framework of the increasing interrelation with the Amazon Basin.

The real topic of discussion in the corridors was undoubtedly Itaipu-Corpus.

Apparenth' the foreign ministers of Argentina, Brazil and Barag-uay had talked
informally, outside of the sessions, but it scene that no solution was reached.
Someone asked if that conversation was a aini-trilateral conference. The
answer was that there could be no talk of a trilateral conference nor of any
type of trilaterel negotiatons. since no negotiations had taken place.

5

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

 

pinion, 1"8

6
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

CUBA

FRENCH WRITERS DISCUSS POLITICAL PRISOIS
Milan L'BUROPEO in Italian 10 Nov 78 pp 72-76
[Article by Gian Franco Vane: "In Pidel's Prieons"]

[Text] For the 20th anniversary of the revolution, Castro
has promised to free the political prisoners. Here is the
testimony of a French reporter imrisoned in Havana with-
out knowing why.

In Havana a few months ago, I was with some non-Cuban friends in the home
of a young man. somewhat of a hippy, who wanted to read aloud some of his
unpublished poems. The young man was very angry because he had not managed
to get these poems published. He said that they differed too much from
the styles of official Cuban literature. lie had very hard words-which in
other circumstances would certainly have been foolherdy--against the "cul-
tural line" of the Cuban Communist Party.

On Other occasions also. I was in the homes of aspiring directors. aspiring
actors, aspiring painters: all unknown, and probably destined to remain
so.

The talk was the usual kind: against the discrimination by the party, by
the government, by the Ministry of Culture.

The easiest question-wrovocative, but also stupid-which one feels like
asking in certain circumstances is: "Gentlemen, are you really sure about
the quality of your talents and your products?"

I kept to myself this embarassing insinuation which has had and is having

so many victims among intellectuals not only in the socialist or dictatorial
countries but also in the liberal ones, where the unappealable Judgmnt

of a manuscript is the job of the private publisher.

7

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Instead, I asked those malcontents whether the cause of the lack of atten-
tion by the Cuban party and government might not be (among other things)
the absolute necessity to save paper and to administer carefully the
country's cultural expenditures, which are very high. (Paper is among the
most "difficult“ products in Cuba; the policy of instruction for literacy
and of Marxist education is an absolutely top-priority decision.) The
Cubans I spoke with replied wearily: "Then one cannot speak of freedom
of expression in Cuba."

Why do I relate all this? For two reasons. The first. among some young
Cuban intellectuals, it is normal to encounter discontent, frustration,
and to hear talk of "repression." But this view is damaged by the far
more striking spectacle of the lines outside bookstores by the crowded
theaters, by the very high quality of the cinema. The second reason: for
a foreigner with even the mildest curiosity, it is very easy--taken for
granted, I would say-to meet Cuban people who. without any fear, without
looking over their shoulders, state their own cases of discontent or
dissent. And this does not happen in any other socialist country. One
could say mischievously that the government itself has "organized dissenﬂ'
to demonstrate that there is freedom in Cuba-there is no Culag.

But here we have the French photographer Pierre Colendorf, formerly a
Communist Party member, recounting, in a book which is coming out in Italy
also (Sugar-Co editions), his own hard experiences as a communist morally
martyred "in Fidel Castro's prisons." Golendorf went to Cuba in 1967

with the announced intention of establishing himself there as a photograph-
er; he married. had a daughter, but was tremendously disappointed by the
illiberality and "repression" of Fidel Castro's regime. He asked to emi-
grate; instead, he was arrested, and convicted of "having injured the
integrity and security of the nation" and of having declared himself, in
a note probably facetious or prompted by fantasy, to be an "agent of the
CIA."

Golendorf naturally denies all. The material which accuses him is the
notes for a projected book-a critical book doubtlessly. And Golendorf,
after 3 years in prison, expelled from Cuba, did write the book: "Un
comunista nelle prigioni di Fidel Castro" (A Communist in Fidel Castro's
Prisons).

It is a book which, as a contemporary chronicle, cannot be ignored. No
one has the right to close his eyes to an individual testimony which deli-
berately aims to overturn the excessively optimistic impression of a
"different" Cuban socialism. As a political chronicle, Golendorf's book
has been overtaken by events: between 1971 and today, Cuba has actually
provided itself with a Constitution, it has held the First Congress of the
Cuban CP, and it has established a capillary system of control from the
bottom. neighborhood by neighborhood, district by district, city by city,
greatly resembling "direct democracy."

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

It is true also that Cuba lives more firmly than ever within the orbit of
the USSR and that no criticism of the USSR is tolerated. and least of all.
criticise of Soviet cultural repression. For Cuba. the Soviet writers of
dissent. like anyone who dissents froa the policy line of the USSR. are
traitors. agents of isperislise. and so on, abusively. In reading
Golendorf's book. if one wants to read it honestly. it is necessary to dis-
tinguish clearly between the author's painful personal experience. which
there is no reason to disbelieve. and the wealth of iwressiona. of judg-
uents on Cuba's situation and civil life.

we have to learn: that truth as seen froa a lssger or from a prison is an
essential coaponcnt in understanding conteaporary history. Nevertheless it
seems that Golendorf had prepared. predisposed hisself to going in search
of truth in prison. It emerges clearly from the book that Colendorf's
negative Judpant on Cuba. on Fidel. on Cuban secialisls. preexistad as a
longing at the aoaent of his arrest.

Now it is that preexisting judgment in Colendorf which is to be towered
with reality: not only with reality as it was in the "dark years" of Cuban
history (specifically. those of the second half of the 1960's. when the
aged Revolution finally died in Bolivia and "Institutionalieation" was
still in the incubator). but with the reality of now. in which the closest
bonds ever with the USSR are interspersed with spasmodic ettents to sake
Havana the socialist capital of the Third world.

The excerpt which we publish below from "A Comist in Fidel Castro's
Prisons" can lend itself to discussion precisely because it urges coweri-
son between Cuba as seen fron the outside and the view which one has of

it from prison.

And Debray Has Silent

Every 2 weeks. thanks to the story which Feline gives se. I can live with
my wife and say daughter and follow their ups and downs. the troubles which
they have because of Security.

Pros her also, who had it by chance free a boy. I learn that sees cablegrans
had arrived frou Paris. signed by friends and strangers asking the reasons
why I was in prison and protesting against this inrisonuent. Feline could
not obtain the exact text. but the cablegraas were nuaerous. More than
200, the boy had said. Has a solidarity novel-ant starting there? I

was not alone. I was not forgotten. Nevertheless. not everyone had taken
this position. A friend of nine from when Ragis Debray had requested a
painting to support the guerilla warefare in Latin America asked hits for
news of sue. whether he had intervened with Fidel Castro and what outcome
his action had had. According to this friend, Debray. during a visit to
Cuba. had noted the certitude of the state security officials. who said
they had proof that I belonged to the CIA.

9

POR OFFICIAL US! ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

"Those who know him know that it is not true."

"In any case. I told hia that he is surely a third-rank agent. he should
not get more than 3 years."

Astonishing for a foraer political prisoner. isn't it? I know well that
I am in a Cuban prison and that this influences people. but did he ask
to see the proof? Did they give his any? If so. was he satisfied with
it? The delicacy of "third-rank agent" is really precious--a kind of
tacit comromiae which makes it possible to file the truth away somwhsre
and leave the poor wretch in his cell. Which permits the authority to do
or not do as he likes. Because the problem is not to know whether I am
an agent of the first or third category. The problem is: an I an agent
or not? have I co-itted a crime or not?

A disturbing concomitant incident: Alain Jouffroy is said to have re-
ceivcd from the Ministry of Interior in Paris confirmation that I am an
agent of the CIA. The Cuban painter Hilfredo Lee, for his part. is said
to have urged silence. on the pretext that for as. it would be the most
useful move. Now if for Debray I am an unknown (which Justifies nothing).
it is not the same for Lam and Jouffroy. with whom I have friends in
comn. But they too seam to have been in favor of the tactic of silence
recon-ended by Lam. All the more so (isn't it true?) because there was
the APP dispatch of 2 Septewer 1971 which announces my sentence to 10
years in prison "for espionage against Cuba for the CIA." quoted from
PMSA LATINA. with the added report. still according to PRENSA LATINA,
that I had pleaded guilty to all the charges listed by the prosecutor.
etcetera.

Five Lines for the CIA

Thus the Cuban lie is sufficiently peremptory to become an obvious truth
in anyone's eyes.

The bigger the lie.... But Debray. Lam and Jouffroy could at least have
gone to the Hinistry of ?eraign Relations to ask to see a copy of the sen-
tence. They could have apprised themselves of the value of such a docu-
ment and made a basic Judgment. They could have been astonished that a
total of only five lines were devoted to my mastership in the CIA. That
is rather a small amount for people in possession of proof and confessions.
It is rather a small amount in relation to the sentence to 10 years in
prison. But here they are: "The accused was so aware of the object of
his activities and of the nature of the interests which he served that
aeong the documents seized in his apart-eat was found the one which was

to be the preface of his book and in which he named hi-elf as an agent
of the Aserican secret services. known by the initials CIA.” Iienoe in the
preface of a book which is. in a word. the result of my activities as an
agent. I intended to present myself as an agent of the CIA. Just two

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

quentluuuz m Hrut night. but nluu alter thlnklng about it. doesn't it
appear strange that a any should do espionage work. indicating his function
in the preface? Doesn't one ask what kind of CIA agent a person could be
who keeps along his docuaents a text written in his own hand in which he
nanes himself as an agent?

Jesus tells ne about the affair of the writer Padilla; he cells as that he
was present at the famous self-criticism session. and that he was inpressed
by it. At the beginning. the writer had in front of his a few sheets which
he was glancing at; then. aeticulously. he folded then up and. iaperturbsble.
continued the text. which he knew by heart.

“that could Padilla have done?”

It is obvious that he had no alternative. Rotting in a cell does not re-
present an alternative for anyone. As for international solidarity. he is
not so stupid as to expect anything. The intellectuals represent a force
in the world. but this force is dissipated by their refusal to organize.
The behavior of the intellectuals at the end of this century is totally
outdated. They still have in their heads the old idea of the outstanding
personality. of the weight of a name: Hrs So-and-So. hr Such-and-Suth.
the great writer. the great painter. the great philosopher, the great
scholar. with sedals and titles, if there are any. ‘lhey have this cult.
'l'hey defend individualism even though there are a great many of then in
the world and it hss been known for several decades that unity begets
strength. For a long tine now. there should have been national associa-
tions grouped in an international organism which would not only defend
intellectuals persecuted illegally or abusively but would also conduct

an ongoing cupaign to demand. as a ainiual prograa. the observance of
legality by all governments. so that pressure would be exerted on govern-
aents not spasmodically. on the occasion of some specific episode. but
methodically. so that an and could be put once and for all to the use of
torture. sun-nary executions by the parallel police forces. psychiatric
hospitals, closed-door sentences. imrisonnent without trial.

"But did you see? Among those who had signed the protest in Padilla's
favor. None retracted and Cortszar nurtured a poem of self-criticism."

"I didn't know this. Are you sure?"

"It was published."

A prisoner approaches and gets into the conversation.

"Your Nona. he is e Retaanr. Cortasar was afraid. As for the others who
have not retracted. within a few months they will let it drop. that does

Cuba aatter to then? what do they know about Cuba? Like all the invited
guests who are treated suaptuouely at the hotel National or at llavane

11

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OPVICIAL USE ONLY

Libra: receptions. cocktail parties. interviews; they have been feted.
courted. they have spent a dozen pleasant days. they see nothing and go
back enthusiastic. Abroad. people know about Cuba only what the propa-
ganda says."

"You pose the problen of information. It in a big mess. 'lhe isage which
you font of French society is as lsprccise as the one of Cuba which we

fern in France. You know us only through the publicity in those few saga-
rines which you get hold of. As for us. intonation about you is scarce.
generally partial. approxisatc. frag-entary; in brief. the reality as-
capes us. The current inage is that of the spontaneous. susical revolution
the cha-cha-che. of a pregnatic policy fros which one gathers theoretical
percepta which pre-suppose that the people push the revolution, the non-
existence of burocrncy and the machine. Fidel the good bearded one who.
between dialogs with the throng. scores a basket or plays ping-pong. ab-
sence of the cult of personality: a series of cliches which form the con-
ventional isage. Returning to the Latin Aserican intellectuals. it oust be
said that their position is difficult. To clash with the (Mean leaders is
no snail utter. The Cuban revolution exists. and it is up to the people
to acquire the scans to direct it. What they could be reproachad with is
abdicating. if they did so. from all critical thinking. including thinking
about the Cuban govern-cot. nut undeniably. their first task is to strugglv
against fascism. as it is the task for the Spanish and Portuguese intellec-
tuals. For us. the probles is different; we have solidarity with the anti-
fasciet struggle where it exists. but at present we do not have to defend
ourselves against fascists. He are not on the defensive but on the offen-
sive. for a new society."

One along 20.000

1 have tried to establish the nunber of political prisoners. l have put
the question to a large nusber of prisoners returning fro. the fields or
free the ”open fronts." and to those who case iron other prisons. it is
iwossible to present an exact figure. I do not believe the old prisoners
who declare that there are at least 00,000 political prisoners. and others
who even talk of 200.000. In any opinion. the nuﬂeer must be around 20.000.
including 8.000 or 9.000 for the province of Havana alone. Anyway. it is
a great sany. Such a figure gives an idea of the regime's repression and
shows the asplitude of its political. ideological and economic failure.

For Jesus. it is not a question of failure but only of errors. 1 find in
his the reasoning of some young people who are free and who at the tins of
the fighting in the Sierra were barely 15 years old. The epoch marked
then. and it is understandable. But the interesting thing is to see the
extent to which their ideological knowledge of the thought of her: and of

Harri is based on theoretical and practical ignorance of the concept of
desocracy. Alcott naturally. they give then a dogpatic content which. in
favor of the end. cancels out the problal of the uses. They base then-

12

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR (WHCIM. "SR ONLY

solves on tho apccific nature of the Cuban character. on Cuba'a balongins
to the Latin American continent and at the cane tine. on tho nan-noon of
the "anoint" and than arsunanta end up an an overall justification.

"Do not forget that tho unity of the Revolution in tho dacioivo olanant
in the continuity of tho process and that in the present hiatotical condi-
tions theta in no aubatitutc solution."

I an certainly faniliat with this arguucntl

COPYRIGHT: 1978 Riuoli Editor.

1126?
080: 3106

13

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010030—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010030-6
STATINTEL
PPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100010030—8
STATINTEL

 

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/08: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100010030-6
STATINTEL
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

VENEZUELA

BRIEFS
ENGINES FOR TANKS-“[110 Spaniah enterprise Pegeoo will install new enslnee
in 100 aux-30 tanke bought fro- France by the Republic of Venezuela. The
Spanish enterprise ie specialising in producing replecementa for this type

of tank. Spain haa bought an important consignment of these tanka from
France. [Text] [Madrid CAHBIO 16 in Spanieh 17 Dec 78 p 7]

030: 3010 3ND

16

PO! OFFICIAL USE ONLY