APPROVED FOR RELEABE: ZOOTIOZIOO: CIA-RDPOZ-OOOOOROOO‘IOOOQOM-Z
APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82-00850R000100040040-2

I'UK UI‘I‘ILIAL UbI'. IXILY

JPRS L/8404

". 17 April 1979

TRANSLATIONS 0N WESTERN EUROPE
(FOUO 23/79)

U. S. JOINT PUBLICATIONS RESEARCH SERVIG

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

APPROVED FOR RELEASE: 2007/02/09: ClA-RDP82—00850R000100040040-2
NOTE

JPRS publications contain information primarily from foreign
newspaperspperiodicsls and books. but also from news agency
transmissions and broadcasts. Materials from foreign-language
sources are translated; those from English-language sources
are transcribed or reprinted, with the original phrasing and
other characteristics retained.

headlines. editorial reports. and material enclosed in brackets
I] are supplied by JPRS. Processing indicators such as [Text]
or [Excerpt] in the first line of each item, or following the
last line of a brief. indicate how the original information was
processed. Hhere no processing indicator is given. the infor-
nation was susmarized or extracted.

Unfamiliar names rendered phonetically or transliterated are
enclosed in parentheses. Words or names preceded by a ques-
tion mark and enclosed in parentheses were not clear in the
original but have been supplied as appropriate in context.
Other unattributed parenthetical notes within the body of an
item originate with the source. Times within items are as
given by source.

'lhe contents of this publication in no way represent the poli-
cies, views or attitudes of the 0.5. Governent.

COPYRIGH' MUS AND REGULATIONS WEIRD“: WHERS‘HP 0F
mTBRIALS RBPMDUCED HEREIN REQUIRE TIIAT DISSEHINATION
0P TRIS PUBLICATIOR BE RESTRICTED POROFFICIAL USE ONLY.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

JPRS L/ﬂ
17 April

TRANSLATIONS 0" WESTERN EUROPE
(rouo 23/79)

Couteurs
mum mm FORCZS
BELGIUH

Air Force Chinf of Staff De Snot on Alpha Jet Performance
(be Snot Interview am a cosmos. 10 Mar 79)...........

COUNTRY SENIOR
PEDAL REPUBLIC- 0)‘ cm

Continuing Neo-ltui Activity in m: Reported
Wolfgang Barthel. Unmet Poolchnu; arm. 15 Feb 79)..

FRANCE

U‘LAT‘S Functions. Reopouibillttel Outlined
(Claude Mound Interview; mas D'AUJOURD'IIUI.

“‘1‘ 79)....ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooco

Navy's 1978 Acconpliohnnnto Ruined
(Jenn Lnnnnzol; mus D'AUJOURD'IIII, H“ 79). . . . . .. . . .

com! Minion. Strongth Outlined
(Philivpo Englinget; mums D'AUJOURD'IIUI. Hot 79).....
FOR OFPICIAL US! ONLY

7\
oou'rms (cénunucd)

ITALY

Constructor Sector To Create 139,000 Job Openings
(De-etude. De Stefano; CORNER! DELLA sum. 28 Feb 79)..

Pet's urea Interviewed on Patty's Scone-1c Policy
(u "MA, 3“! 79)...O...IDIOOOOOIOIOOOOIOOCOIOOOOOO

- b ..
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

THEATER NUCLEAR PORCBS BELGIUM

AIR FORCE CHIEF 0! STA?! DB sum 0!! ALPHA JET WW“:
Paris AIR 5 CW8 in French 10 liar 79 p 27

[Interview with Lieutenant General De Snet, chief of staff of the Belgian
Air Force. at Saint-Trend: "An Exclusive Interview with Air Force Lieutenant
General De Set, Chief of Staff of the Belgian Air Force"; date not given]

[Text] Air Force Lieutenant General be hot. naled chief
of staff of the Belgian Air force on 1 July 1977, known
well the problems related to the training and instruction
of future colbat pilots. Since 19105, he has been, succes-
sively, a pilot coach, director of training. chief of the
"Plans" section in SHAPE [Suprene Headquarters Allied Powers
in M90]. calender of the Air Force Advanced Training
Center, colander of the 10th Fighter-Mar Squadron.
chief of staff of the Tactical Air Force contend, assistant
chief of staff of the Air Force. and con-lander of the
Tactical Air Force. 0n the occasion of the presentation
of the Alpha Jet at Saint-Trend, General De Snot kindly
answered the questions of AIR 3'! comes.

[Question] You have Just flown in the Alpha Jet for half an hour. What are
your impressions?

[Answer] It was not w first flight in this type of airplane. In my first
flight, at Mont-de-Marsm in Deceaber 1978. I had already been able to ap-
praise all its qualities. his second flight has confined by first impres-
sions, and I noted with satisfaction the plane's good behavior in all the

maneuvers which I executed: loop. reversenent. slow roll and snap roll, then
tail spins to left and right at 15,000 feet once the wing tanks were empty,
and dive. In addition. the short tine for climbing to 15,000 feet indicates
the good perfomnce characteristics of the Larzac engine. During In career.
I have piloted some 20 training planes, sone of which have never been mass-
produced. I would say of the Alpha Jet that it is a remarkable training
plans. both for the student and for the coach. In particular, it offers a

1
FOR OFFICIAL USE Dill"
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

double advantage; its performance characteristics are close to those of a
combat plane, which nakes it easier to train the student in execution of the
procedures applicable to cubat planes, and besides, thanks to its excellent
flying qualities, it is a reliable airplane, one on which the student can
permit himself to make sane mistakes.

[Question] "hat is the maJor advantage which the arrival of the Alpha Jet
brings to the Belgian Air Force?

[Answer] For a small country with a necessarily limited budget. being able to
eliminate one airplane from a training "syllabus" which included three repre-
sents a cc.midcrable savings. This is precisely what we will be able to do
with the arrival of the Alpha Jet, since the only plane we will need before
we get to it will be the sr—26ow, from now on. Moreover. this reduction in
the number of types of airplane, with its advantages on the level of main-
tenance and replacement parts, will be accompanied by a decrease in the total

masher of flying hours for training the young student pilots: 215 hours in-
stead of 350. which is also considerable on the economic level.

I note. however. that although we certainly owe to the airplane we have chosen
this considerable reduction in the number of flying hours. we also owe it in
large part to intensive use of the simulator. which we will make extensive use
of for training our students.

[Question] Do the problems recently cited by the Luftwaffe-those relating
to the functioning of the engine. and the problem of the fragilization of the
canopy—have the same importance for the Belgian Air Force?

[Answer] Any newly developed piece of equipment goes through what must be
called "childhood diseases." Re are watchm. but we remain very confident.
It should shortly be possible to solve the engine problems which you mention.
The fragilization of the canopy is a fortunate innovation on the operational
level; for the Belgian Air Force, the problen is not posed in tne same terms
as for the Luftwaffe, since it is not planned ts exceed the speed of [000 knots
in training.

[Question] How long will you "hold out" with the 33 Alpha Jets ordered?

[Answer] We received our first Pouga Msgisters in 1960; we will retire the
last of then from service in 1980, 20 years later. He expect to last 20 years
with our Alpha Jets.

[Question] The French Air Force he also ordered Alpha Jets for the training
of its fighter pilots; does the Belgian Air Force have close contacts with it
as a user of the same plane?

[Answer] 'lhe contacts between the two air forces have always been frequent,
both as regards exercises or maneuvers and in specific firing programs, during

2
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

which the Solenzara base in Corsica houses our pilots, our mechanics. our
airplanes. The placing in service of the Alpha Jet rill doubtlessly be an
occasion for mu closer contacts. I add that I m the personal guest or
General Saint Cricq. chiei‘ oi“ staff or the heneh Air Force, a very short
tine ago. I was very interested by everything vhich I had hoped to visit
and which I saw, Just as I was very conscious of the warm welcome which he'
gave as.

[Question] What, in March 1979. are the naJor concerns of the chief of staff
or the Belgian Air Force?

[Answer] They are of two kinds. Like any chiei‘ of staff or an air force in

a vestern comtry, I an disturbed by the constant decrease in the total hmds
appropriated to defense. Furthermore,- the evolution of the social climate

along military men is a concern to me; I an in favor of a realistic social
evolution, but unfortunately. taught by the experience of pest conflicts. I

nust also remind melt that in order to be better able to defend his country.
every Iilitary man not train himself and be trained to carry out var operations.

COPYRIGRT: AIR ET cosms. Paris 1979

1126?
C80: 3100

3
FOR OFFICIAL USE ORLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUIITRY SECTION FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY

CONTINUING NED-NAZI ACTIVITY IN PRC REPORTED
ﬂeeburg STERN in Germsn 15 Feb 79 pp 126-131

[Article by Holfgeng Berthel end Herner Poelcheu: "The Friendly Nezis Next
Door"!

[Text] Stehle on the Heeer is e very ordinery villege: e church. e ceeetery.
s few dozen terns. e eportsclub. e bowling club, e volunteer fire depertment.
end e choir-the youth bend wee e cheepion of Europe once. Heny of the

2.700 inhebitents drive to work daily to Hoexter end hols-inden; in the
evening they neet et one of the four reeteurents. If shots were occesionelly
heerd in end eround Stehle they ceee mostly froe neebers of the riflenen's
essocietion or the tenente hunting on the neerby eountein "Riese."

Soeetimes, however. shots whizzed through the edjecent forest which did not
come either iron the rifles of the sports-en or the hunters. the forester
Kreto wes sure. The shooting wee pert of the treining progrse of the
"Netionel-Socielist Combat Group Ostwestfelen-Lippe."

when the lS-nen conbet group wes reided recently the police found 5 nechine
guns. 5 cerbines. e NATO sutonetic rifle G 3, 8 pistols end revolvers, 2

eir rifles. 8 kge of explosives. one grenede end 650 rounds of elmunition.

In sddition the officiels seized Nezi litereture. pictures of Hitler,
brochures end posters of the Aeericen NSDAP/AD (reconstruction orgenizetion)
end s peephlet composed by themselves stating along other things: "Denocrecy
ie intsrnetionel dominetion by Jews...it is the end of one's own culture...
the ending of one's own elite. dominetion by interiors. those who can be
bought...deetroys the unity of the people with pertiee...does not ellow e
reel netionel leedership stretue.”

The 26-yeer old Rolf Gebser. the leeder of the "co-bet group." considers
himself sbove ell as belonging to the "netionel leederehip stratus." This
worker. who liked to be celled "little Adolf" in the villege. is the only
one of the group who is still under errest. Nevertheless the people of
Stehle do not went to ssy enything egsinst their "Euchrer Rolli." The
berber end neilmen, the grocer end the resteurent owner. ell ere united:
”we will not sey enything.” At most they minimize the role of the werriors

enong thee: "Thet wee just children's fooliehneee. At most they nsde cemp
tires and beked potetoes."

4
FOR OFFICIAL USE OﬂLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Nothing can change the mind of a son like the former anyor of Stehle. liens
Hoenckeneier. about Gebser. neither veneration of hitler. nor the finding of
weapons. nor even the smears on the church. "Death to Jews-~Boloceust." he
says. "He is an energetic kid. a nice guy."

The people of Stehle will not abandon soneone like llolli Gebser. who is e
nesber of the choir. “worked herd" on the construction of the club. whose
father is the‘ standard beerer for the rifle-en's association and was once
the king of the junior rifle-en hit-self. Everyone knew. of course. that
the "coobet group" celebrated the "mehrer'e birthday" every year in a

hidden place on Gebser's property. cesoufleged by NATO nets. But if only
there was enough beer. his old school friends helped celebrate end sang

the ”Hesterweld" or the SA song "Raise the Flag.” Host of the people of r
Stahle consider the one Conunist in the village to be sentelly sick; they are '

very liberal. however. with the Nazis: "Surely. everyone can have his own -
political opinion."

The idea of one's own political opinion did not go very deep in the conbat .
group itself; the nodaers hnd rules prescribing even their looks: "Hair and -
beards ere'to be kept in such a way that they do not interfere in sport and
ailitery training." They the-selves said that training served for the .-
preparetion of "Day It." when an end would be put to "international Jewry"
end the "alley Desocrets." Gebser's sen copied coebat nethods fros the

"led Any Fraction": "He went the opposite. but we are not so stupid, that
we cannot take over their nethods end strategies."

.For Burkhard Hirsch (EDP). the minister of the interior of Nordrhein-
Hestfelen. who will confiscate even car jacks end nosedrops free leftist
nuclear power opponents, Gebser end his consorts are snall fish. In the
Duesseldorf Lendteg he celled the discovery of weapons "relatively un-
inportent"-e symptom of the tendency of teeny politicians to play down the

danger casing iron the right. Meanwhile Nazis are stocking up weapons all
over the m.

In Karlsruhe the 27-year old Herner Braun. the leader of the "German

Nationel Society" (0V6). was arrested because he had tried to buy four machine
guns and 2.000 rounds of munitionufros e plain-clothes seduer of the
criminal police! Three weeks later the police arrested three more DVG
senbera; at their place they found hand grenades. pistol e-aunition. and
explosives. The judges considered the buying attempt as a "less serious

case" and isposed a fine of DH 110.000. They did not speak of a crininel
conspiracy.

In Bonn police seized a sachine gun free a 19-year old. a gun, hoseude
boobs. and a large asount of a-unition. The young nan had built a kind '

of place of worship at his hose with a picture of Hitler and other Nazi holy
relics end celled hisself a follower of the NSDAP. The police let his go
after an investigation.

5 .
roe 0":an use ONLY -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

In Berlin a 17-year old had an accident on New Year‘s live while constructing
boebs. Two nonths before that two bonbing ettespts on a Jewish store and the
Jewish Conunity Center were stopped at the last uinute. The detonating
devices were filled with 600 grass of TNT and steel nails.

In Kiel Prank Stubbenann. the 23-year old student and "Gsufuehrer"

[district leader] of the Action Front of the Rational Socialists (ANS).

and two friends were arrested. A siseable collection of weapons was found

at their place and "sccoepenying conditions that could point to the establish-
nent of a terrorist organization" (according to the Schleswig-Bolstein
Verfassungaschutt (constitutional protectionl). All three are meanwhile

free again and active.

In lienau an “NS group liensu" was discovered and police seized among other
things a hand grenade and 750 rounds of anunition. In Braunschweig the Sl-
yesr old Paul Otte was arrested; he hes a previous record for bank robbery
and is understood to be the coordinator of the Rest Ger-an NSDAP groups.
This tine police discovered "only" a tube boeb--a year before this they had
found two detonating devices and a loaded gun.

In Hanover ueubers of the "cadet group freedon for Rudolf Hess" threatened
a passer-by with guns. Vitnesses testified later in court that the "co-bat
group unborn" had bragged that each of then owns n gun.

In Koblenz and near Muenster unknown rightist radicals blew up television
transnitters to protest the docunentary file "Final Solution” that was
intended to prepare viewers for the "Holocaust“ series. More and sore often
leftist bare and bookstores are attacked end destroyed; one bookstore alone
in Maine was attacked four tines.

Nevertheless rightist radicals are able to continue their harass-cuts

elmst without being disturbed. The "unitary-sport group Hoffaann" of
Nuernberg. for exasple. which goes on naneuvers with worn-out vehicles fro-
the Bundeswehr, was allowed to put up its nain quarters in the for-er
Gsufuehrer school of the NSDAP in Brareuth Castle. The 20 Hoffman followers
net in January in Brnreuth Castle for "winter combat training." The newerg
police directorate sinply had the exercise "properly observed" but saw "no
possibility for intervention." since it took place on private property.

In 1976 authorities dealt with 319 excesses of the rightist radicals. in
1977 it was already 616 and in the first half-year of 1978 379 crises. The
handwritten notes of bother Harald Schulte. 25, a for-er Bundsswehr
nonco-issioned officer. verify to STEIN that the new Nazis are acting in
an increasingly conspiratorial nenner and have an ever greater tendency to
use crininsl means of force.

Schulte describes how he found contact with the hamburg Action Front of
National Socialists (ANS): "End of 1977. hadmrg train station: Just now

a guy in black is running by ne. I can just recognise the Odalsrune of the
youth noveuent 'Viking Youth. ' Since I have belonged to the rightist scene
since my 16th year. I address his."

6
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

'5 ,
The person addressed was but: Hegener. 22, at that time the deputy chairman
of the Ilemburg "SA-Stun 8 Hey." Hegener introduced Schulte to the hamburger
"Senior Nazi" and ANS leader Michael Kuehnen. who is now being tried in
llaahurg because of NS propaganda. Schulte writes: "I had a lively
discussion with Kuehnen, at which time he spoke the name NSDAP/AO for the
first tine. Ila set the task that everyone who wants to become a meaber of
the NSDAP must carry out to prove himself for the movement. The type of
proof oust include a criminal political act."

Schulte and Heganer carried out their criminal act with an attack on the

Bismarck ceserne in Henrorf near llaaburg. where Schulte at that tine was

himself serving and had already celebrated the Fuehrer's birthday with other
soldiers. Schulte writes: "The attack began at 0030. I woke up the private
first class who was sleeping and demanded his automatic rifle 03. Since I

was alone he attacked me. Hith a punch in the muth I knocked his: out.

Heanwhile but: Hegener had entered the nonco-issioaed officers' area.

After this the opposition of the soldiers collapsed. Hith the captured -
weapon we disappeared from the military area. In the morning we drove with

the weapon to Michael Kuehnen in Henburg-Handsbek. In Keuhnen's apartment

the shoulder support was sawed off. Kuehnen was very happy. Hith this -
action I belonged to the hard nucleus of the "right."

Soon he also belonged to the "Hilitary-Sporta-Group Nordlend" which was
planned as an "organizational cadre for the reconstruction of 'Herwolf'"
Schulte writes: “ The training camp was in Doerpstedt/Holstein. The
Military Sports Group Nordland was the only such group in the no where all

lower officers were at least nonconissioned officers in combat units (of
the Buadeswehr, ed.)"

But the Doerpstedters soon were not satisfied with just exercises. Schulte .
writes: "Owe Rohwer, the Gaufuehrsr of the Viking Youth, executed with me ‘
and the herd nucleus of the Military Sports Group Nordland the attack on
Bergen-Hobos. the bivouac 'Landsberg' of the Dutch supply unit. Pour

machine guns and six magazines were captured in this action which were to

serve the armament of the military group and its training." '

The "military sportsmen" are also responsible for attacks on banks and

other thefts. Besides this plans had been made to blow up the memorial in
the former concentration cap of Bergen-Belsen. Rohwer had already found

out how many explosives were needed. The military "sportsman" Pula had in-
cited the "liquidetion" of the Klarsfeld couple. Schulte dreamed of the free-
ing of Rudolf Hess. They all agreed that "attacks on the line of demarcation"
(the GDR border) should be carried out and "occupation officers captured." -

It did not come to that any more; police arrested the kohwer gang
(STERN No 15/1978: “Gernany, awake").

This hardly weakens the rightist radicals. Federal Attorney Friedrich
Hecking said to STZRN: "He hardly nake any house searches of rightist
extremists where we do not find masses of weapons. explosives, and a-unition."
Hinister of the Interior Benn estimates the number of violent rightist
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

radicals at about 1.000. The nulber is probably much higher. ﬂau- adults:
"The Increnuinaly conuplrutoriel behavior makes it difficult to know."

No wonder. Beca'uue for the nee-Nexis tteoeon in dangerous. Kuehnen explained:
"The Lueneburser Heide is big; a person can easily be buriec. there.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Owner + Jnhr no 6 Co

9232
080: 3103

8
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONL‘.‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

D‘I’A‘I'S FUNCTIORS, USMSIBILITIES WTLINED
Paris MES D'AUJOURD'IlUl in French Her 79 pp 16-17

[Interview with Gen Claude Engerand. chief arnaments engineer. technical
director of ground ornaments. by Lt Col (air) Claude “grand: ”To Plan
end Build": place and date not given]

[Text] A "govement agency" charged with meeting the
weapons needs formulated by the ermed forces and more
particularly the army, the NAT [Technical Directorate of
Ground Arnansntsl prepares and directs the arms progrna
falling under its jurisdiction by calling on the resources
of private industry or its ovn industrial facilities.

In its position as "supplier" the MAT plans, develops,

end produce: the equipment and weapons systems by using
its technical end human potential ss well as possible.

Heir of the iron works operation established by Gribeauval
and then of the srtillery co-ittee, the DTAT has known how
to use its time and resort to useful and fruitful interna-
tionsl cooperation.

The review MES D'AUJOURD'WI asked engineer general
Engersnd, head of the DTAT, to be kind enough to uplsin
his agency to its readers.

Question: Hr engineer general, could you briefly raind us what is the
mission of the DTAT?

Answer: The nissionnsnd I would be inclined to say nissionsuof the out
are focused around two major poles: That of the so-called governmental
assignments and that of the so-celled industrial aseigmentn. This
distinction--rather than separation in the sense that this term can convey
the image of a null-appears fundamentsl to me, for the endeavors in these
two fields are essentially different end it is necessary. specifically ss
regards our foreign partners, that they be clearly differentiated. But
let us return to the two msjor types of ssaigxlsents.

9
FOR OFFICIAL US; OhuY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

For the exercise of its assignments of a governmental nature the DTAT is

in a way the agent for needs relating to ground combat as expressed by the
armed forces and more particularly by the army. Uhat is involved then is
to consider these needs expressed in terms of use and to convert them into
technical, economic, and industrial language. Also, to take the measures
that are necessary to realise the systems. Acting as a "partner" of general
staffs rather than as "supplier" at that point, the MM has a twofold role
to play: First, to draft future scientific and technical plans (notably,
by the initiation of uploratory studies on the organization of future
systems or the principle of new constituents of these system), but also at
the level of industrial structures in order to enable the latter to plan and
turn out future products. Then, in the evolution of the programs proper, it
is up to the DTAT to spell out the expected performance characteristics, to
draw up study and production contracts in due form, and to evaluate the

results obtained in the fr-ework of a national industrial organization or
in cooperation.

As for the MAT's industrial function, this involves planning and realization
which is that of a "supplier" of the same kind as any national or private
industrial company working in the field of armaments. This is an instrument
which last be managed as such, with the aim oi being productive, viable,
under competitive conditions. Its originality resides in being organically
connected with the goverllent, but this does not affect its fundamental
industrial mission. I am referring to the GIAT [Industrial Group of Ground
Armaments] whose legal identity is incidentally not distinct from that of
the DTAT.

Question: Hut are the relations that exist between the DTAT and the various
general staffs for specifying the characteristics and choosing a new weapon?
Hho decides whether to produce?

Answer: Very much upstream at the stage of general studies, notably of those
of the coqonents, there is an initial dialog between engineers and military
personnel to organize a studies program anticipating the future which it is
up to the UTAT to propose. Then or at the same time there is what i would
call the crucible in which military thinking on a given arms systaa is
elaborated. This is made up of standing consultative connittees which are
essentially military organs but with which the DTA‘I’ is associated. it is
there that the military characteristics of the prospective amred vehicle
are planned in operational terns, taking into account the nature of the
threat and foreseeable technical possibilities.

As soon as the military characteristics of the weapon are established, the
truly developmental stage headed by a program director falling under the
jurisdiction of the NAT gets under way. This program director initiates

a discussion frmaework between the army and the MAT, namely, the consultative
working group (or GTC). This structure brings together governsent officials
of the DTAT (representatives of technical departments involved from the
central administration and the coapetent technical centers) and officers of

10
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.a

the general ataff. of the Central Equipment Directorate, the technical
aection of the army. the lnapectorate of Armored Vehicles and the Cavalry

if an armred vehicle in involved considering that l have uaed that example.
This in really a diacuaaion and dialog atructure there each one offera hia
Men, and voicea hia criticiama, and hie obrorvatione. Naturally. the
diacueaion continues outaide the framework of the eoneultative working

group which nevertheleaa continuea to be the privileged dialog atructure.
Then. in the final developmental atage, a coordinated program of technical
and military evaluation in drawn up and then executed jointly by the 01A?
and the any. Ihe reault of thia lateat atage of cooperation in the drafting
of an evaluation report which maker it poaaible for the general ataff involved
to decide whether to adopt the ayatem or not in the lat analyaia.

Queetion: hhen a deciaion regarding adoption and then production in taken.
hov in the choice made regarding one or more producera of the new ayatem
(whether the buildera ahould be araenala or the private aector)?

Anawcr: Adoption does not mandatorily (nor neceaaarily) entail an immediate
decision to put a eyetem into production. Indeed, acveral different typea
of equipment meeting the aane need can be approved but in the last analyaia
only one of then will be produced: The one which in meat favorable econo-
Ideally even if all are technically equivalent. Thia being done. aaauming
that it in decided to adopt a weapon and then to put it into production,
hou ia the choice made regarding one or more nanufacturera?

The rulea of “industrial policy" which I shall euenarize briefly alro apply.
incidentally, further upatream in the choice of the induatrialiata to who-
the authoritiea will turn for development. mu problem of dividing
activitiea can in numeroua can be handled by applying without reatriction
the principle of making it aa competitive aa poaaible and this ia then the
beat aolution, for cowetition ia atimlating while monopoly ia deadening.
Indeed. I believe (to broaden the diacuaaion) that the development of

french induatry truly began on the day when the Co-on Market waa eatebliahad
becauae the latter involved the breaking down of euatome barriera and
conatrained French industry to adjuat itaelf to the atreaa of coqetition.
"any were frightened. but the experiment indicatea that extraordinary
progreaa haa been made from that time.

This being raid, totally unreatricted competition ia now alwaya poaaible,

at leaet at the national level, notably because of the coat for the govern-
ment cuatomer of the upkeep of diveraified planning or production capabil-
itiea to aatiafy some neada. mun, in the field of combat tanka. while a
new ayatem ia produced every 15 yeara, it would not be poaaible for no to
support two or three barely uaed industrial facilitiea. (he ia thua prompted
to deliberately reatrain the field of competition while the diatribution

of induatrlal activity peace a twofold problem:

11
FOR OFFXCIAL USE OICLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

1. That of the selection of one (or several) supplier(s) to satisfy future
anticipated needs. This selection of “industrial centers" is praised on
an «examination of a certain nunber of criteria (eenpetence. a conparisen of
capabilities and needs, etc.) which are carefully evaluated;

2. That of the distribution of real activity which is principally guided by
econonic, technical. or aploynent considerations with the concern of
avoiding the aystenatic saturation of cone centers (even if it is the

(EMT) coqleted by a distribution of the "rest" along the other facilities
unich would destroy all cowetition and all motivation. In case of a
deliberatedly accepted nonopoly, we apply a certain nuder of rules which
notably oblige the prine contractor to have subcontractors coupete so as

to linit the drawbacks of this nonopoly. Further-ore, the adsiniatration
has available leans of control to insure that even if there is no invitation
to bid, prices will be fair and reasonable.

In the last analysis the line of demarcation is the result of a coupronise
along different require-ants which involve nsinly the nintenance of nininsl
activities for each firn. concern for an econenic optimal, and that of usin-
taining a certain degree of balance between activity and available capabil-
ities. In fact this is negotiated and discussed step by step, too, as a
function of the ensleylent situation.

Question: What are the advantages and drawbacks of cooperation with foreign
arns industries?

Answer: The initial advantage-oand this is often the one which is placed in
the forefrontuis to reduce the costs of develop-ent borne by each of the
partners. This is true if the requirement is expressed in identical or very
sinilar terns. To be sure, the total cost of develop-cut in cooperation will
be slightly higher than for national developnent, but since the total "bill"
is divided into two or three shares, on the whole each partner does well.
Schematically, it can be said that if the development of a program is slated
to cost 100 units in a national setting it will cost 120 units under a
cooperative arrange-cut. however, dividing the cost between two or three
partners will reduce the share of each to 60 or even to (.0 units. The gain
is thus very substantial but on condition--l stressuthat the needs of the
partners be sufficiently sinilar. For if the preaise is faulty, that is,

if there are misunderstandings. the aggregate cost will grow excessively.

Let use elaborate: If one of the partners has in nind to build an internediate-
sized tank and the other a heavy tank, two different products will be involved
and the total will be such nore costly than originally planned. Even if the
"bill" were divided into two it is not certain that the quotient would not

be nore onerous for each partner. Hence the «tree importance of a sound
consensus about goals at the start.

12
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

The second advantage involves production. Cooperation makes possible an
econony of scale that is nuch more significant with an obvious benefit
under industrial production conditions. And the growing coat of some
conplex systens even leads one to wonder about our financial capability to
realize then within a strictly national framework in the future.

in addition, cooperation often has the advantage of allowing the use of
iqroved technologies or better components. Finally, it ndtes possible
(subject to reservations of political constraints) the coordinated pronotion

of these naterials in third countries instead of separate efforts for the
conquest of these narkets.

As regards interdependence it is necessary to nention, besides the preblens
of cost of which I spoke earlier. the risk that none of the partners nay be
coqletely satisfied with the final product to the extent that cenpreniscs
are struck. To be sure. it is possible to conceive of producing separate
versions of a weapon, but then what is the purpose of cooperation? Another
difficulty ate-s from the onerousness of govsruentsl and industrial
structures and of the decision-eating process. significant progress has
nevertheless been made in light of the initial efforts. The difficulty is
to find an acceptable ceapronise which should take account of the concern
for sy—etry and balance nong the partners but which does not sacrifice the

necessary unity of responsibility, both at the govementsl and the industrial
level. I shall also nention the problen of finding solutions asking it

possible to retain sufficient decision-tasking autoneny for each partner.
finally one last iaportsnt constraint, that of deadlines, inaa-uch as

progr-s drawn up in cooperation take longer than those involving national
developeent.

Question: Are French ground armaments industries conpetitive at the inter-
national level?

Answer: 1 shall answer your question very siqzly and very briefly by
specifying that a sizable part of the products of the cur is exported.

The some is true for acne industrialists associated with our arms production.
in this connection 1 shall note a nore specific but very significant indi-
enter: The United States has bought the license of our Roland antiaircraft
defense systen. i believe that this is a good eaanplc of our technical and
narhcting ceapetitiveness.

[Biographical note]

Born on ll August 1926 at R-irenont, Vosges Departnent, Claude fingerand.
engineer general of arnanents, is a graduate of the ”Boole Polytechniquc"
(Polytechnic Institute] and the Advanced National Arnanents School.

Assigned in 1956 to organize the Technical Directorate of Ground Arnanents

13
FOR OFFICIAL USE OnbY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

at the Tarbea facility. in 1965 Claude Engerand was appointed technical
adviaer in the office of the Hiniaterial Delegate i’or Ann-cute. ln l970
ﬁngerand became deputy to the chief of technical services in the central
administration of the Technical Directorate of Ground Armaments. In
October 1976 he won on loan to the Hiniatry of lnduatry and Reaearch where
he can appointed Director of Hetallurgical, Mechanical, and Electronic
Induatriea. Then, in July 1977 Buserand was appointed Director General of
lnduatry, replacing Hr do L'Eatoile. 0n 1 September 1978 Claude Bngerand
returned to the Hiniatry of Defence and assumed the poaition of Technical
Director of Ground Armament»

COPYRIGIIT: 1979 - Revue dea forcea arleea francaiaea "Aneea d'Aujourd'hui“

2662
080: 3100

ll.
POI! OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

cow-m! sac-non FRANCE

NAVY'S I978 ACMLISHHEN’IS REVIEWED
Paris was D'AUJOURD'HUI in French Mar 79 pp 8-9

[Article by M. Jean Lannuzel, navy chief of staff: "the Navy's 1978
Survey"!

[Text] In 1977 and 1978 the French navy published in was D'MJJOURD'IIUI

a survey for the year that had elapsed in the form of interviews with the
deputy chief of staff and the deputy chief of operations. It is thus with
the idea of following a tradition that I express these few thoughts on the
year just past. This was a year which for us sailors was very eventful and
imrtmt on more than one count. To draw up this survey I shall deal in
turn with the operational activity and public service aissions and then the
organizational problems connected with the reduction in the nud>er of craft
end shell finally conclude with budgetary questions, promises for the future.

In 1978 operational activity was slightly greater than in 1977 since the
average mater of days spent by a craft at sea was nearly 96 cowared to
92.5 in 1977 and considering that the fleet air ar- clearly exceeded 100,000
hours of flying tins.

Under water the navy's deterrent aission has continued without letup. The
discreetness with which it has been isplenented for nearly 7 years now should
not snake one forget the total count of effort on the part of both crews and
arsenals. This lashes it possible to secure the steady and effortless linkage
of operational patrols.

In surface operations the increase in the outer of days spent by craft at
sea, outside of the number represented by public service missions, has
especially aade possible the inproveaent of the group training of squadrons.
Such training, easily reduced at a tine of fewer sctivitieu, continues to
be indispensable so that codat units may be effectively able to becone
integrated in a naval force. The contribution of overseas France in this
activity is inortant since 30 percent of the total hours of naval craft

at sea is spent outside France's aetropolitan waters. This represents
considerable effort whose nest significant aspect continues to be the

15
FOR OFFICIAL USE OhLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

permanent detachment from Brest and Toulon of two escort vessels in the
Indian Ocean. In 1978 more discreet but significant all the same were
transportation missions in the interest of the FINIJL [Naval Task Force]
effected by the sac, the Dccan III operation for the verification of nine
clearance of a new access channel to the Suez Canal, and very recently the

Orage mission in Guinea to serve as logistical support for the visit of the
French president.

In the air the essential activity (38 percent) involved aircraft and heli-
copters on board vessels. The difficulties of take-off fro- naval platforms
justify constant refresher courses and more advanced training. But with
nearly 22,000 hours of flying tine of which one-quarter was effected abroad,
the year 1978 was that of the maritime patrol. Its planes, characterized
by their power of observation and by their capacity to remain in the air for
many hours, have proved to be the only means suitable for the surveillance
of desert areas. In Mauritania and Chad their assistance was essential.

The public service missions occu ied front stage in 1978. The "Amoco-Cadiz"
disaster, the "Rhum Route" race flantisnuggling drive], and the exceptional
storm early in Decclber 1978 in the Atlantic have sensitised public opinion
to the need of surveillance, police, and civilian task forces at sea. The
French navy has faced the growth of these tasks with its own means. Some
7,000 hours at sea were spent in the struggle against the pollution of the
tanker "Amoco-Cadiz." This represents a little more than three times the
annual activity of a "Foch" or "Clemenceau." Since early April 1978 the
navy has insured on a permanent basis the surveillance of navigation offshore
from Ouessant. let us note in passing that the maintenance for a year of a
presence at the three crucial points of Ouessant, Casquets, and the Pas-de-
Calsis represents one-tenth of the activity of the nevy's surface craft.
The increase in tasks raises the problem of the adapted means. At Ouesssnt
the navy's presence isrepresented by one-quarter of its escort vessels,
even frigatss, craft that are too large for this kind of work, and half of
it by minesweepers or tugboats whose maximum speed is much lowu than that
of intruders which they would have to pursue. Only dispatch boats, even
though a little too well armed in this instance, are suitable for this kind
of mission. The share of public service missions, which represented 16
percent of the navy's activity in 1976, now reaches some 21 percent. This
is a figure not equaled by other Hestern navies.

Less involved than the surface navy, the fleet air am also participates in
these nissions. First of all the maritime patrol, whose possibilities as
well as limitations were clearly evidenced in connection with the search
undertaken to find participants in the "Rhum Route" race, but also the
Super Frelon aircraft of Squadron 32-? based at Lanveoc-Poulmic. In
addition to its own activity of anti-submarine operations, this squadron
realized in the course of the last few years, most often under perilous
conditions, a number of rescue operations involving human lives which
certainly is not paralleled elsewhere. Very recently this was illustrated

by organizing in the midst of a storm a rescue team on a dock which was
adrift off Brittany.

16
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICML USE ONLY

The constant increase in public service missions and the necessary Isinte-
nance of nilitsry capabilities that we are entitled to expect free a

nilita _ navy raise the problem of craft availability. The addition of
nuncro vessels in the coming years, despite the planned conpenaation and
particu'l‘arly the naval plan, does not nitigate the problem. That is why

it is necessary to envision mandating that craft in service spend aore days
at sea. For this purpose dispatch vessels have been endowed with one-third
nore crevaen and rapid patrol boats (PATnA) with twice the nuder of cremen.
The goal is to reach 180 to 200 days at sea a year for these units. While
such a system was already in effect on the sums [Nuclear Missile-Launching
Sub-nines] and acne auxiliary vessels, this is the first tine that it has
been tried on surface codat vessels for which conditions are significantly
different, especially in the field of equipnent maintenance. This experiaent
will be analyzed in great detail because on the basis of the evidence it nay
provide a solution to the problems raised by the foreseeable drop in the
navy's tonnage in the 1900's. Our survey of 1978 would not be couplets
without nention of the budget. It can be said that this was a good budget
for two reasons. The first is that for the third tine it was slightly higher
than the figure which had been projected by the program-law (17.63 percent
instead of 17.3!» percent of the araed forces budget . The second reason is
the twofold increase compared to 1977 of progran authorizations for new naval
construction. This is the start of a anveaent to accelerate the rate of
such construction. which reverses the trend evidenced in the past few years.

Accordingly, 1979 opened on an optinistic note which will be characterized
by acne iaportant realizations: The entry into service of the 'Seorges
beygues" and of two dispatch vessels; the launching of the first nuclear
attack sub-arine and the start of construction on the sixth nuclear missile-
launching submarine; and the putting into operational service of the Super
Btendard aircraft and Lynx helicopters, initial stage in the organization
of our navy for the year 2000.

OOPYRIGRT: 1979 - Revue des forces arnees franeaises "Ar-eta d'Aujourd‘hui"

2662
C50 : 3100

17

FOR OFFICIAL USE OR!“
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION FRANCE

COTMI MISSION, 811181511! OUTLINE!)

Paris MES D'AUJOURD'IIUI in French Mar 79 pp 30-31

[Article by Lt Col (air) Philippa Bnglingsr: "The Transport and Liaison
Fleet of the Air Force and Its Haintenance"]

[Text] The mission assigned to COTAH (military Air
Transport Cos-rand) proIpts it already in peacetime to
carry out sustained training of its crews, to execute
logistical transportation missions for the sued forces,
and to undertake missions of general interest. In
operations, its principal missions consist of assuring

the logistical support of the armed forces and in parti-
cipating in the operations of surface forces through air
transportation of air drops. The accouplishnent of these
aissions not be secured by excellent availability and a
high level of sound operations of the equip-ant which often
has to nave far fro. its support base. In part, the success

of cmm'a mission depends on the caliber of the unintenance
in effect.

corm's flying equipment consists of transport aircraft (0-160 Transalls.
Nord 2501‘s, DC-G's, Caravellea, Nerd 262's), liaison aircraft (waters
20's, PG-760 Paris planes, Broussards), and helicopters.

The operating and maintenance of this equip-lent are assured for most of
the fleet by specialized air force personnel.

Only the 00-85, Ceravelles, and Mysters 20's owned by COIN! in small nuder
as well as the aircraft of the CW [ministerial Air Liaison Group] are
maintained by civilian companies (UTA [Air Transport Union] SOGERMA
[Specialized Equipment Maintenance and Repair Group Companyi, Air France,
SKCA [Air Studies and Construction Gowanyl, and so forth) on the strength
of contracts for operations and maintenance.

18
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

.\

Finally, general overhauls which are infrequent but call for a sizable

count of work are also entrusted to the civilian companies mentioned above '
or the AIA [Industrial Air workshop] at clermont Perrand (for the 0-160

aircraft and Alouette II helicopters).

Maintenance Organization in OMAN

To insure naintenance, that is, the periodic upkeep and reconditioning of -
the equipment for which it is responsible, (mm has available four technical
units known as GBRHAS [Specialized Equipment Maintenance and Repair Groups].
In contrast to the practice in the other major cos-lands of the air force
(CAI-‘DA [Air Consul of Air Defensel'orces], EATAC [Tactical Air Force]. CBAA
[Air Force Schools Conandl) were each squadron has its own GEMS available
at its hone base. MAM has adopted the centralised arrangement by means of
its four large, specialized technical units.

Accordingly, GEMS are found .'
1. At Orleans for the c-léo's;

2. At Toulouse for the Nerd 2501's;

3. At Villacoublay for the Nord 262's, Paris planes, and Broussards;

10. Finally at mastery for the helicopters.

This alternative arrangement has advantages in terms of economy in personnel,
equipnent, and infrastructural facilities. But it is especially justified by
the scattering of the aggregate fleet in snall units or detachaents.

Practiced Maintenance

COTAH's flying equipment consists of planes which are old by now (Nord

2501's, DIS-760 Paris, Broussards) or nore recent nodels (hord 262's, c-lGO's,
Pumas) to which modern maintenance concepts are constantly applied. The
policy of neintenance pursued by OOTAH has consisted notably in seeking

lower costs by a siqlifaction or expansion of the maintenance cycles while
guaranteeing the level of marinas security and great operational availability.

Each teams is organized on the basis of one maintenance and repair squadron
mich is itself made up of an "aircraft" workshop for planned maintenance
and reconditioning operations and a group of [other] workshops (power plant,
equipaent. electric system, radio radar, security and salvaging, etc.).

A technical office charged with the initiation and follow-up of work :
ems titutes the ”administrative" part of the GBRHAS.

19
FOR OFFICIAL USE NIX
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

As a function of the limits set (hours of flight or calendar dates), the
aircraft have to undergo on a regular basis planned period visits (or VP)
during which detailed inspections of the systems, structures, accessories,

and equipment, completed by tests, further repairs, or replacement if
necessary, take place.

Modern neans of diagnosis are used such as bench tests, spectrometric
analysis of oils, undifferentiated checks by endoscopy or ultrasonic waves.

All the operations effected are carefully recorded in reports which make it
possible to determine at each point the history of the aircraft down to its
most minute details. Finally, quality-control service insures the perfect
execution of maintenance work and guarantees the use of the equip-cut in
complete safety. For the repair of the aircraft away from the home base use
is made of GBRMAS support crews who are kept on permanent alert. It is
thrOugh the intermediary of the Operational Center of COT»! located at
Villacoublay and linked by mv/sw [lligh Frequency/3w] to the aircraft
involved (mainly Nerd 2501's and C-160's) that these operations are initiated.

Some units located overseas provide on the spot the planned maintenance of

their helicopters. For that purpose they use an original method which
consists in breaking down the visit into 10 sections so as to avoid an
extended grounding of the equipment.

Personnel Charged with Maintenance

This personnel are trained initially at the technicians' noncoanissioned
officers school at Rochefort. When they leave this school the young certified
servicemen opting to serve in "transportation" attend training internships
relating to the equipment on which they will be called upon to work. These
take place at the BT18 [Specialized Technical Instruction Complex] included
in each GERHAS, the latest being that for the c-160 aircraft at Orleans.

The GERHAS is the necessary place of transit for these young specialists who
complete their training on the job with their already proficient seniors
serving as their cadres.

The strictness put into the offering and follow-up of this training conditions
the safe use of the maintained equipment.

of the 3,000 nonconnissioned officers serving in OOTM 1,850 are technical

ground personnel who" Job is the mintenance of the air force's transport
fleet.

20
FOR OHICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .'

Technical Haint enance Units

1. The GERMAS at Orleans

Its job is the operation and maintenance of the c-160 aircraft with more
than (000 mechanic noneo-issioned officers. Periodic visits are nada every
720 hours of flight (or 110 nonths). mesa visits ground the aircraft for
one Ionth and call for acne 3,000 hours of work each.

Between two periodic visits an intermediate check representing 300 hours of
work grounds the plane for 3 or 6 days. Finally, najor checks whose 16-year
cycle is broken doun into four blocks lo years apart are the responsibility
of the an at Clement Perrand. A central naintensnce office near the GEM
does the following:

a. It handles critical supply problems;
h. It investigates technical facts; and
c. It updates the nsintenance process.

2. The cam at Toulouse

It is responsible for the asintensnce and reconditioning of the Nerd-2501
aircraft fleet. Periodic visits occur every 360 hours of flight or every
18 months mile general overhauls, now definitively phased out, used to be
entrusted to the AM at Clernont Parrsnd and took place after 3,600 hours
of flight or 10 years.

Each periodic visit represents approximately 1,300 hours of work. The L
flying equipment. uhose phasing out began in 1976, should he reduced to .
nil by 1985 or 1986. Until then, this relarkahle organization will still

provide innu-erable services to the air force.

3. The cam at Villacouhlay

This facility handles three types of aircraft whose minor naintenance cycles
are as follows:

a. 600 hours of flight or 19 months for the Nord 262's;
h. 360 hours of flight or 14 nonths for the BS-760's; and

c. 180 hours of flight or 15 months for the ﬁll-1521's.

21 .
90R OFFICIAL USE (all? -
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

lo. The GERHAS at chasbery

This facility is specialized in the maintenance of Alouette II, Alouette III,
and Puma helicopters whose minor maintenance cycles are 1000 and 300 hours
(or 15 months) respectively. Their general overhauls occur after 2,400
hours of operations.

11min to its flying equipment COMM constitutes an imposing air transport
company, but the particular nature of its mission does not make it possible
to compare it with an equivalent civilian transportation company. COTAM'a
fleet thus represents, thanks to its transportation capabilities, its flexi-
bility of use, and its operational efficiency, a remarkable mobile asset

for the armed forces. The success of the numerous outside missions entrusted
to COTAH testify to this. The excellent performance of equipment subjected
to harsh conditions in all parts of the world under at times extreme weather
conditions evidences the quality of the nintunance uhich it receives.

[Biographical note]

Lt Col Philippe Bnglinger is a graduate of the air force academy's class of
1956. Licensed in technology in 1973, he commanded in succession the mainte-
nance and repair group of the lord 2501 aircraft stationed at the Rheims and
Toulouse air bases. After a 2-year stint at the technical inspectorate of
the air force, Colonel Englinger is now stationed at the Advanced School of
Air warfare.

COPYRIGHT: 1979 - Revue des forces armeee francaises "Armeee d'Aujourd'hui"

2662
080: 3100

22
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION cram

BRIEFS

m ORDERS llOi'EDuThe Livnnos company is reported to have ordered tvo
80,000-ton oil tankers from the South Korean Bymdsi shipyards. The
tankers w voth 23 million dollars esch. In sddition, the Goulnndris
casually] is nesocinting vith Hitachi of Jo for the delivery of a ship

gunner-17 or the one tonnage. 'rexg m1. mans norm in French
6“” 79 P 627

(:80: .‘800

23
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COUNTRY SECTION ITALY

CONSTRUCTION SECTOR TO CREATE 139.000 JOB OPENINGS
Hilnn CORNERS DELLA 5m in Italian 28 Feb 79 p 9
[Article by De-etrio De Stefano:

Public Works Omission:
Openings in 3 Years"]

"CRESHE Forecasts to Chuber of Deputies
Construction Industry Hill Create 139,000 Job

[Text] Roar-The Public Horks Coulission of the Chamber of Deputies recuested
CRBSHE [Center for Economic. Sociological and Market Research in Construction]

to provide a detailed realistic forecast of realizable invest-eats for new
housing and public uorka based on the specifics of the 3-year plsn for 1979-

1981. CRZSHE's findings are authorized in the following table:
Key: ' ' ' "_—_— _
l.A) Itsly .

B) Southem ltnly

 

1m 1m 1m
2. Jobs 1) 8me m I.” m
(annual increments)
2) W
3. Public Rorks (human-I):
rent lire) 3) om! -
S. Residentisl mm
Housing Units 0 W_
6. Total Jobs "W“ 1mm):
Increment 5) sewn.“ ms 100 19st mu
mum
“ (NMCMM: m m
1300
1) 33:09am "00 ‘5“ "a
“unions
2) ‘32... ' 19m tum 1m moo
l) MW 10..” am ".0“ 38.000

 

_—_—————-—————'
TOTALS INCREUENI’O

5’ occupant
a m. um «son new mm
1’ a; W am mm mm 1m

2‘
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL 083 ONLY

The chair-an of the Chamber of Deputies Public Vorks Cow-lesion. Eugenio
Peggio (961). points out that the estimate of 138,500 new jobs in housing
and public works construction over the next 3 years-44.000 of which in
southern Italy (115.000.420.000 including induced new enploynant)-"sppears
less optisistic than others that have been presented to the governnent. but

is certain to be sore in line with the actual results the investuents can
generate."

Peggio asserts that in any case. "the importance of the contribution which
the investsent progress in housing and public works can oaks to the attenua-
tion of the unesploynent probles in southern Italy is evident. however. it
met be node clear that the realization of such invest-eat progress is by

no scans certain. in view of the condition in which the central and peri-
pheral edsinistrations find theaselves and of the sooner in which the govern-
aant has so far behaved toward that problem"

But. according to Peggio. there is more: "It sust be added that in regard
to possible projects in the field of the infrastructure and environoental
protection. which goverr-ent officials have so often talked about. the Pub-
lic Berks Co-ission of the Chamber. in the course of a visit to the EEC
co-ission early in rebruary. learned during its soctings with Conniesioners
Ortoli. Natali. Giolitti and Devignon that until new the Italian Coven-eat
has not presented any project. despite repeated assurances by the BBC Cos-
nissioners that Cor-son Harket financing is available for approved projects
which the Italian Government night present."

But what. in substance. can be done to put the housing and public works pro-
gress into effect? Peggio naintains that the problen "is fundamentally one
of policy. in that a table of priorities must be laid down. and the practice
of trying not to stake anyone unhappy abandoned. which until now hao been one
of the basic causes of delays and procrastination.” Aside fron this. the
chair-an of the Public Horks Cousission of the Chasber holds that from the
regulative and legislative viewpoints the following steps are necessary:

1) inediate approval of the law sodifying the regulations regarding renego-
tiation of contract prices. and establishing of premium for enterprises that
conplete work projects ahead of schedule;

2) issue of a directive by the goverment enabling wider use of conpetitivc
bid contracting. of contracts for standardized types of projects (above all,
in the fields of housing and schools). and of the syst- of "construction-
only" permits (general contractor). "By these scans." Peggio uplains. "it
is possible to partly eliminate and partly combine the technical and adsin-
istrative stages-always very long-which follow the decision to invest and
which have to do with choosing the designers. approving the designs. con-
petitive bidding based on the designs. frequent subsequent design changes
during the course of construction. and then. after cospletion of construc-
tion. the final inspection of the finished work. etc. Use of these contrac-
ting procedures places responsibility on the builder for the very cotspla task

25
FOR OFFICIAL 082 0:1?
FOR OFFICXAL USE “NLY

of preparing the actual construction plans and simplifies enorsoualy the
financial and administrative control procedures":

3) approval. within a reasonably short period of tise. of a new organic
law on public works. abrogating and replacing all existing laws with the
simplest possible clear modern text;

a) adoption of special procedures for intervention by appropriate organs
(substitute udsinistratora or other) in place of the regular administrations.
in cases of uerious nonperfermance or prolonged delay in the realization of
specific programs of expenditure. "Providing for such forms of subatitutive
intervention will apparently be useful. not so much because widespread appli-
cation of such procedures should. in practice. be necessary. but above all
because as policy they will stimulate the regular administrations to avoid
falling down on their jobs.”

From the operational viewpoint. Peggio advocates:

1) creation of a coordinating body for the carrying out of expenditures that
have already been approved in the various sectors of the public administra-
tion;

2) activation of a service agency for the planning and execution of public
works and coordinated on-site interventions. The Fund for Southern Italy
should already have done this in the southern regions based on the 1976
Law 183.

”In view of the Fund's failure to comply with this as well as others of

its functions. we must now see what can possibly be done in the short- and
medium-term periods ahead. The short-tern problem can be resolved by adopt—
ing extraordinary procedures in cases of conflict between the professional
designer associations and highly qualified construction companies or con-
sortiums. Obviously." concluded the chairman of the Public Works Commis-
sion of the Chamber. "this problem also presents far-reaching policy aspects
and can only be resolved by an approach truly befitting the critical and
urgent nature of the problem."

COPYRIGHT: 1979 Editoriale del “Corriere della Sers" s.e.s.

9399
050: 3106

26

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

coma-m storms m

PCI'S Hence IWVIW 0N Pam’s Emmluc mucr
Turin [A STAIN in Itelien 3 hr 79 p 3
[Interview with POI leeder Lucieno ﬁerce by Aldo Rina]

[Text] M different philoeophiee ere dieccrnible within
the P01 [Itelien col-uniet hrty] propoeelu on the one
heat. recognition thet the lechenieee of e developed
cepiteliet econon cennot be forced. end on the other.
the ideologicel need for en dtermtive Iodel. In the
interview Berce celle for "e genuine policy of inveet-
lent. uni reepomible plenning of delend.‘

ﬂour-The govern-entel crieie ie evolving towerd the
enticipeted electione. where thet other. lore objective
end eore eerioue aieieuthe generel crieie of the netion--
ie eweiting ue. Vhet ere the viewe of the conuniete on
thie eubject? Their herdened ettitude (towerd e be
[anxietien Deeocretic Phrty] thet ie eeid to be guilty
of "contradiction." end 'nonfulfilllent”) ie the beeic
come of thie difficult end extremely delicete pheee of
lulien politice. lf electione ere held, however. the
probleee will rennin unchenged or will perhepe becone
even lore eerioue.

lie heve eeen how, in epite of everything. the P01
leederehip ie preoccupied with yreeerving the etretegy
of the "hietoric colmeiee' (if it cen in feet be pre-
eerved. eeyeciell alter the foreeeeeble ecrieony of en
election cenyeigng. Thie reletee etrictly to politice-o
to politicel eligneente end the reletive etrength of
politicel forcee. however. more relein the problem of
eubetenceuthe problem of the economy-which together
with the problem; of public order ere the noet drentic
eylptoee of the ration-.1 crieie.

i had e convereeticn with Lucieno ﬁerce. one of the perty
leedere in cherge of econolic effeire. He bean our

convemtion by telking ebout the 3-Yea- Plen. nu. plnn

27
FOR OFFICIAL USE NLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

should put the so-csllod ”st-ester IsJority” to the test.
for it is one of the oporstivs sspscts of the energency
policy. lnstosd. no one--or slsost no one-~tslks sbout

it any sore. And yet with sll its strong points snd week
points. with sll tho nocesssry postponssonts snd sdJust-
ssnte. the dooulent will still be the heels {or discussion
when the tiso sasin oases.

[Answer] with respect to the question of s reduction in public expenditures.
I believe there is gsnsrsl saoesont thst the figures should be revised. It
is not s question of being sore precise or less precise; it is Just thst the
cslculstions ore incorrect. Sole dots sre sore poesisistic then reslity
wen-rents: projections were node on the bssis of incresses thst sre unoertsin
qusntities. such es the incresse in public esploylsnt. wheross public reve-
nuee were probsbly underestilsted. There is slso. however. s genersl resli-
sstion thst precision is oosontisl end thst the existence of s govermentsl

deficit does not sutosstioslly result in incresssd dolsni end inasssed
develop-ent. 'nm. would ssount to s pedestrisn vsriety of Koyneeisniss.

labor Costs

it is sn indisputsble fsct thst in the present situstion wsges csnnot be sn
independent vsrisblo. hturslly. it is eesontisl to see in whst wsy they
Isyusnd shouldube dependent. Should they be dependent on invest-eat in
tho South. seaming such invostsont to be on objective foot end of prise
isportsnce? I sues thot they should be.

[Question] But even if you sccept tho org-est with respect to the contsin-
sent of lsbor costs you hsvo to refer not to the cost of lsbor per hour but
to the cost of lsbor per unit of production. There's o difference.

[Answer] Indeed there 1.. I w odd thst even the no. in m m. express“
s sisilsr view. together with tho lsbor unions. The 3-Yesr Pun. however.
specks of contsinim wages in tens of hours worked. It is s deliberste.
sbrupt turn to the rignta it is on sntilAbor politicsl statesont.

Question] How csn you believe thst this was the objective at Andreotti end
ndolfi. in en sdsinietrstion thst governed by virtue of your support?

[Answer] we do believe it. me objective wss to desonstrste thst it

was possible to govern with the oossuniete included in the IsJority and yet
st tho ssse tlso take osre of the interests of other politicsl M1” end
socisl groups. He therefore told Alureotti. Pandolri slwi Horlimusnd I
personslly wrote in the 31 lbcesber issue of L'UNI‘i’A-~thst we would hsve been
sble to rssoh on sasssent with respect to the cost of lsbor per unit of
production but thst we would hsvs split over the issue of mass per hour of
work. 01' course. not even the question or wsgos per hour of work is tsboc.
but such s wsce soslo should be eslculsted in s brosdsr context thst will
provide for on incrsnnt in productivity (end the lsbor unions sre slensble
to this) end thereby sllow s crested- ssrsin for the psylent of the wsgee
the-solves. '

28
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Question] These are things that cannot be accosplished rapidly. however.
whereas the need for restoring strength to the private enterprises is an
inediate need. he halfa. in particular. contends that public invest-out"
eepecially in a country such as Italy. with the governsental apparatus
available to unis a slow process. whereas wivate investaent is a different
mm. For um reason the an [Italian Republican Party] has proaoted the
idea of a biennial extension of the contracts.

[Answer] I agree. as far as the governaental apparatu is concerned. ‘lhis
is. in fact. a basic refor- that lust be carried out. But where is it
written that by increasing the savings of private enterprise you auto-atl-
cally open the way to new investsents? ‘lhis would be pre-Keynesianisa.
pure and siaple. Another approach is necessary.

[Question] A restoration of profits is not of itself sufficient to induce
new investsent. but it is nonetheless a prerequisite for new investsent.

[Answer] hook: in 19?? we were genuinely anxious to have private enter
prise recover a angle of profit sufficient for self-financing. in order
that its indebtedness would not becoae excessive. but 1978 was a different
kind of yearna year not of decreasing but of increasing profits. more is
sufficient liquidity. and it has even benefited fro- foreign support. I

do not overesti-te the extent of the recovery that people are talking
about. however. for it is a precarious reeovea-y ad does nst'aeeta the
crtterla of stable developasnt--but neither do I underestisate it. I say
this. of come. in the knowledge that there are individual ”pockets” of
extrsssly serious crises. as for emple in the cheaical sector: crises
that are so serious. soreover. that what happens to wages once again
because a factor of secondary iaportance. The real probles is to conceive
and carry out a genuine policy with respect to investsentn in other words.
to offer concrete gut-ante“ of a aarket for the product of such invest-est.
Stated in another way. the proble- basically involves the planning of
deaand.

[Question] Iihat kind of planning?

[Amwer] In the aeantiae. it is essential to resist the telptation to
return to the financing of consmption: to high salaries and high wages
and a consequent resurgence of inflation. If discrisination should then
occur. it would produce intolerable social temions. Another negative
result would be a decline in faaily savings. which through the instrusental-
ity of the banks serves to finance industry. that we are proposing is the
creation of a deaand of a new type and new qualityo-one that will rely on
all the various articulations of the state and be based on verified collec-
tive and social needs. Just think of how Ianyuand what kindsuof oppor-
tunities even for private investaent could be created by a serious railway
plan. by a serious snvimnnental plan. by a seriom energy conservation
plan. and so on.

29
FOR OFFICIAL USE On‘ '.Y
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Hhat Klrd of Market?

[Question] This takes us to sore general topics. as for exasple the
proposals with respect to econoaic policy that are contained in the
”Proposed Theses" for your 15th Party Congress. i won't conceal the fact
that when I read stateaents that affir- the need for integrating planning
with the market; collective consulsrs with private consuers: the defense
of the econoaie eysten with the effort to supersede capitalism and so
forth. 1 get the iapreasion that this is an attsapt to lunp together a
nulber of dissiailar things in a sosewhat aedtanical and therefore soaewhat
abstract aanner. I agree that these arenas you ear-unexplored paths.

[Answer] Yes. they are unexplored paths; but a nunber of stages have
already been attained along then. its are opposed to all foras of adlini-
strativs planning. in accordance with our pluralistic concept of society
and our awareness that Italyna country which, along other things. is
lacking in raw aaterialsuaust function in a world Iarket. What I seen is
that if certain restrictions are placed on Piat's activities. we lust then
realize that we are thereby giving an advantage to a foreign corporation--
Renault. to be specific. Every effort on our part to aodify the doaestic
aarket aust inevitably take into account this free world Iarket. not only
in terns of the risk involved but also in terns of the foreign outlets it
provides Cor our enterprises. Another point that has been established is the
fact that every citizen has the right to produce whatever he wants to with
hie own aoney. but if he asks for Ioney iron the state he cannot exeapt
hlsself fro- conditiom and controls based on a systea of priorities.

[Question] There resains the fact that in your proposal one can discern
two dissinilar philosophies that are reconciled only on paper: on the one
hand. the recognition that the lechanisas of a developed capitalist econoay
cannot be forced beyond a certain point (that is to say. cannot be dis-
torted). and on the other hand the ideological need for an alternative

aodel that is collectiviet in concept. however watered-down that concept say
have becose. Horeover. since it officially abandoned the Soviet aodel the
PCI has continuously oscillated between these two poles of behavior: first.
a cautious. and at tines even benevolent. ”wait and see' policy with respect
to the reforaist hypothesis of the Center-Left; next. an endorseaent of the
"wild" labor unionisl of 1969-70: then once again. concessions to the aethod
of conserving a capacity for accuulatiom and so on.

[Answer] Us are working on the assuaption that the aarket should be pre-
served but that it should not be identified with the asrket of traditional
capitalisa. Throughout so any centuries and in so any different places.
how my diverse foras has the Iarket not taken?

Serious hanger

[Question] But in the period of transition between the existing Iarket and

this hypothetical aarket. there is the very serious danger of causirg a
crisis in the former while havirg little or no knowledge of the latter.

30
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

[Answer] “using a crisis in it...? A worse crisis then the present one?
its intend, on the contrsry. to reectivste the lurket by Iesns of s genuine
end effective planning which will Iske the mket reflect the sctusl needs
of society es s whole. 0n the other hand. the inediste problel fscing us
is one of‘nodifying not the Isrket but rsther the node of psrticipstion by
the stste. Stete psrticipstion lust be freed m. the spirit of welfsriss.
pstroneee end erbitrsrlness thst hes cheruterissd it to dste end thst has
been precisely the resecn why it has been sn uncertain end vsriehle point
of reference for those whose function it is to invest.

[Question] It is difficult to ding-cs with this View. However. there are
so any problem posed by the ruining-wot not inconsiderebleuideologicsl
suspicions. end by the scriIony of s political confrontation thst could
prohshly be swoided end that has only Just begun.

(LPYRIGRTI 1979 mm. M STAMPA 8. p. A.

10993
GO: 310‘}

31
FOR OFFICIAL USE 0t-'.Y